HEAVENLY Merchandise OR The Purchasing of TRUTH Recommended and the Selling of
it Dissuaded; As it was Delivered in Several SERMONS Upon Prove. 23. 23.

By SAMUEL WILLARD, Teacher of a Church in Boston.

Joh. 17. 3. This is life eternal, that they might KNOW Thee the only TRUE God,
and Jesus Christ who thou have sent. Boston, in New England; Printed by Samuel
Green and are to be Sold by Joseph Brunning, at his Shop, at the Corner of the
Prison Lane next the Town House. Anno. 1686.

TO THE Reader:
Courteous Reader;
I T is needless to Apologize for the seasonableness of emitting a Discourse of
this nature, which can indeed never be out of season. Where Truth is not
embraced, Goodness cannot be practiced, for without knowledge the mind of man
cannot be good. Where Truth does not lead, felicity can never be obtained, for
it is that which must lead us to God's Holy Hill. The putting out of this Light
makes a more dismal night than the taking away the Sun from the Firmament. They
that sit in this darkness dwell in the Region of the shadow of death. And yet,
how woefully contented are the greatest part of mankind without it? how little
solicitous to buy, how very forward to sell it? how much need therefore have
they of being industriously labored with to do themselves this kindness? As
for my self, I have nothing else to plead for my adventuring to give light to
these unpolished lines, but only that vulgar excuse of importunity, possibly
too easily complied with; some charitable Friends hoping it might be of public
usefulness, whose judgment I (preferring it before mine own) complied with; and
if it may but obtain the supposed efficacy, I shall have cause to rejoice. How
much of advantage God has afforded to this place, (where once, and not long
since, the father of lies had a throne, and no beams of Christian Religion were
to be seen) to make large acquests of this nature (the Gospel having had its
free course among us for so many Years) is well known. What welcome has been
given to this mercy, and what improvement has been made of this price; he that
searches all hearts can tell. If our negligence should provoke God to shut up
the Market, New-England's Glory is gone: If we sin away, and God take away the
Truth, we are undone. The Lord has more ways than one threatened us.

Here you have the only way to prevent so fatal a mischief: and the Father of
mercy s grant that this Solemn Advice may be successful to help (with the more
strenuous endeavor of others) to awaken all hi s People, to know in this their
day the things that belong unto their peace, that so the God of PEACE and TRUTH
may still delight to dwell with us.

So Prays, Thine, etc. S. W.

Proverbs 23. 23. Buy the Truth, and Sell it not.
THe Proverbs of Solomon (not to mention their independency (...) which we are
often told of; nor yet their singular excellency in couching of much matter in
a few words,) are for the manner of their composure, of two sorts: 1.
Doctrinal, being delivered in the form of Axioms or Sentences, for the
information of the Understanding in many weighty Truths. 2. Hortatory;
presented in way of exhortation, or dehortation, to engage the Will and
Affections, either to a closure with, or an avoidance of such things as are of
moment for them so to do. Of the latter sort of these, is this of our Text, and
it is compounded of a Counsel, and a Caution. There is something advised to,
viz. Buy the Truth; and something dehorted from, i. e. Sell it not. The words
are Metaphorical; a form of Speech which the Holy Ghost makes frequent use of
in the Holy Scriptures; therein dressing up of Heavenly Matter in Earthly
Language, and thus accommodating of himself to our capacity: A Metaphor being
nothing else but a contracted comparison, by which he represents the things of
God under the resemblance of things here below; with which our constant
converse among them gives us better acquaintance.

The allusion in our Text is borrowed from Traffic or Merchandise: a thing
that is well known to, and more or less practiced by all sorts of men. In it we
may observe, 1. The Ware or Commodity which is here represented to us, which is
Truth. The Spirit of God does (as it were) look upon the worlds market, and
observe how men are dealing for many sorts of Wares, and very buisy in their
Trading; and call out to them, and say, here is one Commodity that you are very
little mindful of, and yet I do commend it to you, as above all worth your
purchasing, viz. Truth. The Hebrew Word signifies, That which may be believed,
or to which Credit may be given. 2. The direction which is here given about it,
and that is double; 1. Positive, Buy it, or possess it, as some read the word,
it firstly and most properly signifies to get a thing into our possession; and
because that is usually done by making a purchase of it, hence it is often used
for buying: and this advice intimates to us, 1. That there is such a Commodity
as Truth, else it were a great cheat to advise us to seek for it. 2. That we
have it not of our own; that it does not descend to us by inheritance, but if
we would have it, we must purchase it. 3. That it is to be obtained by us, if
we will but go to the cost, that there is a market in which Truth is set to
sale, and offered to such as come there. 4. That it is not to be had for
nothing, but men must be at some expense for it. 2. Negative: Sell it not; the
word here used firstly signifies, to deliver a thing, and hence to sell, by a
peculiar appropriation; because that which men have sold, they are wont to
deliver up the possession of to him that has bought it; the meaning therefore
of it is, that we must never alienate, or deliver up the Title and Possession
of it out of our hands, thus intimating and plainly insinuating the
transcendent or incomparable value of it. 3. We may consider the Buyer, or the
persons who are invited to trade in this sort of Merchandise, though not
expressed, yet included in the expression, i. e. every one of what rank or
degree soever; Scripture Counsels, when directed indefinitely, are for the most
part, intended universally; where the Spirit of God does not set any
limitations, neither should we: Hence,

Doct Truth is a Treasure which every one ought to purchase, whatever it costs
him; and having once gotten it, never to forego it again. In pursuit of this
Doctrine we may enquire, 1. What we are here mainly to understand (...) Truth,
together with the evidence that there is such a thing? 2. What of duty is
recommended to us under the notion of buying it? 3. Why every one ought to buy
it? 4. What is the import of the phrase of selling? 5. Why it is not to be
sold. A few words to each of these in order.

1. What we are here mainly to understand by Truth, etc.

A. The right knowledge to this is the Key to the whole discourse; it will
therefore be worth the while to make some enquiry after it. There are many
notions about Truth, which have more of curiosity than common profitableness in
them, which I shall therefore designedly avoid, and only touch at such as are
more necessary. Concerning Truth in general, I shall only intimate thus much,
viz. That as there are two principal Faculties in the Soul of Man, helping him
in his rational closure with his objects; so there are two Affections in
things, (...) and accommodating of them, for the closure of these faculties
with them. These Faculties are the Understanding and Will; and those Affections
of things are Truth and Goodness: for as Goodness is the attractive of the
Will, so is Truth of the Understanding. Truth then is considerable in a treble
notion; either as it is rooted in the thing, or as it is taken into the
Understanding, or as it is communicated unto others. Truth in the thing is
nothing else but the distinct nature of it, considered as it is knowable, and
that either generically, specifically, or individually. It adds nothing really
to the nature of the thing; but is only a relative affection, by which the
Understanding may be helped to close with it, and discern it in its nature,
causes, and effects. Truth in the Understanding, is properly the right
conception which it has entertained of things: when it forms in the mind a
conception of the thing, just as it is in it self, that is Truth. Truth in
communication is, when having a right notion of things, we do rightly express
and impart them unto others; now according to these various notions which we
have of Truth, it has its various contraries: If we consider Truth as it is in
the thing, then its contrary is falsehood; if we look upon it as in the
Understanding, its contrary is error: if we respect it as it is held forth in
communication, then either a man speaks as he thinks, but erringly, and that is
a mistake; or else he speaks wittingly and wilfully otherwise then the thing
is, and with a purpose to deceive, and that is a lie; which is the thing most
directly and immediately forbidden in the Ninth Commandment,

I might here add many distinctions about Truth, but I shall wholly wave them;
only let us summarily observe, that Truth is manifold: So many Things as there
be, so many Truths we may suppose there are at least; and every Truth is
precious: There is no Truth but what is of worth; but yet there are some that
do excel: It is therefore worth the while to enquire, that we may find out the
best, and we may be sure that is it which is here recommended to us.

Some Interpreters observe, that the word ( Truth) used in the original Text,
is put without the usual emphatick prefix, and hence suppose him to understand
every kind of knowledge, both Natural, Moral and Divine: but this cannot be the
meaning, for God has not given to all men that advantage, nor yet is it
necessary that every one be acquainted with all the inferior Truths of
subordinate Arts and Sciences. Some again interpret it of Gospel Ordinances, in
which the great saving Truths are dispensed; and by buying of them, they
understand, a being at the charge of upholding and maintaining a Gospel
Ministry: but this is also too narrow an interpretation for the Text; for there
is many an one that does so, and is yet for all this a through stranger to the
Truth, though this may be included. Truth in the Scripture is used in diverse
senses, and it would be both tedious, and not necessary, to enumerate them all;
I shall therefore pitch upon this conclusion, viz. The Doctrines of the true
Religion, as they are delivered by God himself, and contained in the Holy
Scriptures, directing us the way to Eternal Life and Salvation, are properly
that Truth which the Holy Ghost here exhibits, and advises to be bought.

Truth primarily and eminently is a Divine Property; hence God is called a God
of Truth, P sal. 31. 5. and Jesus Christ as he is God, is the Truth, John 14:
6. Now God is not only True in his Essence, and hence called, The only True
God, John 17. 3. but he is also True in his Word and Works: and herein he makes
the creature to communicate in his Truth; but still, it is Firstly in him, and
in them only Derivatively. The Eternal Idea which God had in his own Infinite
Understanding, of all things that were to be in time, and all the several
managements of them, is the Exemplary Truth. That which they have in
themselves, is but a Copy of this: Truth in the Creature being its Conformity
unto that Idea which God had of it in himself. Now in this Idea there were
contained, not only the Rules of their Creation, according unto which they were
to be made; but the Rules also of Providence, by which the Creatures were to be
guided to their ends, which are therefore Eternal Truths: and among these, in
special there was that Rule by which man was to be led as a Rational Agent, or
cause by Counsel, to an Everlasting Estate: This is that which we call Divinity
or Religion, and is comprised in the Platform of sound words, showing to man
the way in which he may come to the favor of God, and a Kingdom of Glory. This
Rule is contained in the Holy Scriptures, which are therefore called the
Scriptures of Truth, John 17: 19. Col. 1. 5. Dan. 10. 21. the sum of what is
contained in it, Solomon gives us in Old Testament Language, Eccl. 12. 13. fear
God, and keep his Commandments, and Paul in New Testament words, 2 Timothy 1. 13.
Faith and Love*

That there is such a Truth as this I am speaking of, we must believe, or else
we must utterly despair of the happiness of man at all, much more of fallen
man's Salvation. If God had not found out a way for man's felicity, he had been
lest most miserable. If it were not a regulated way, (contained in sure Rules
and Precepts) he could never have known it, but must always have lived in the
dark about it; and if it were not drawn into infallible maxims, he could not
possibly have gained any assurance of knowledge, when he was in the right. But
God has shown unto man the way, Mich. 6. 8. and his word gives them sufficient
direction, whence* it is called, a Lamp, and a Light, Psalm. 119. 105. and it is
safe and secure to them that follow it, verse 165. In a word; if there were no
Truth, the understanding of man must needs want an object; and if there were no
Divine and Saving Truth, it would want an happifying object; but the Goodness
and Grace of God has plentifully provided for it, both the one and the other;
hence that Prove. 2. 10, 11.

2. What of Duty is recommended to us under the notion of Buying?

A. Buying in general refers to Commutative Justice; and is that wherein a man
purchases to himself the right and possession of one thing, by the exchange of
some other thing for it, with the consent of the former owner; which is
accepted as a valuable price. This Metaphor is here used by the Holy Ghost, not
by way of proportion, but merely of similitude; for man has nothing to give
for it, that is equivalent to its worth, and is therefore said to buy without
money, and without price, Isa. 55. 1. Only there is something to be done by the
man in this transaction, which has some little Analogy with, or resemblance to
such a thing among men; which what it is may be made to appear in several
particulars.

1. Buying of any thing intimates that a man has it not of his own; what a man
has already at home in his proper possession, he needs not go to the market to
buy it; and thus it is with fallen man, in his Natural Estate: Truth does not
fall to him by inheritance, but he is born a mere stranger to it; see Psalm. 58.
3. They go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies. It is not to be
denied, that there are some broken fragments of the ancient inscriptions of the
Law, which was fairly engraven upon Adams heart, to be found in the consciences
of his Posterity; and these are called Truth, Romans 1. 18. Who hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness. But they are but like to so many shattered pieces of a broken
vessel, that cannot be put together again, and do serve only to witness unto
the wofulness of his fall: But the Truth which contains in it the saving
knowledge of God in Christ, is a thing which the world is a stranger to, and no
natural man has it, Romans 3. 17. The way of peace they have not known; and he
must go wholly out of himself for it, if ever he hopes to get it into his
possession.

2. Buying argues the thing is to be sold, and that there is one that has it
to sell. A man may have a commodity, but if he resolves to keep, and has
purposed not to part with it, we can have no hopes of buying it: But Truth is
to be had, if men were but willing to come up to the price of it; for though it
is our duty to buy it, and then not to sell it again, so that one man cannot
buy it of another, (the Wise Virgins can spare none of their Oil to the
foolish) yet God has it for all such as want it, and are willing to hearken to
his advice, and take his direction about it. Neither does he only keep it in
the chambers, to bring down to such as are making enquiry after it, but he lays
it forth upon the Shop boards of the Ordinances, and offers it to all that
come; nay, more than so, he (in pity to poor man) sends out a Crier to proclaim
it in markets and streets, that if there be any among them that has any mind
to Truth, if they will come to him for it, they shall have it on fair and
rational terms; see how this is emphatically described in Prove. 8. begin. and
cap. 9. 3, 4.

3. Buying presumes a desire of having the ware, raised by the apprehension of
the suitableness, worth and excellency there is in it: though the natural man
be a very fool in spiritual things, yet he has a rational principle in him,
which teaches him not to be at cost for that which he has not any esteem of,
but reckons to be of no worth or use: The estimate which he sets upon any
thing, is that which inwardly prompts him to barter for it; and just up to his
esteem, so will his bidding be, rather than he will part with it: hence it is,
that till God sheds light into men's minds, and convinces them of the
preciousness of Truth, they let it lie by, and will not so much as cheapen it;
but when once they begin to have the right conceptions of it, and discern how
advantageous a thing it is to him that has it; now they will cry out earnestly
after it, and then there is like to be a bargain made, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5. if
thou cryest after knowledge, etc.

4. A prudent buyer will see his wares, and try them before he will buy them.
Men do not love to traffic in the dark, or take things upon trust, because
they know that there is a great deal of falsehood and deceit in the world, false
wares are sold for true, bad things are put off for good; they would therefore
know what they pay for, and are exceeding loath to be cheated; and thus (to be
sure) must he do that would buy the Truth, and not be imposed upon: for there
are no such cheats used again in the whole world, as there are in matters of
Religion. As God has his Factors (the faithful Gospel Ministers) who use their
utmost endeavor to set forth nothing to men, but the Saving Truths of the
Gospel, those undeceiving verities of Jesus Christ, and such as will bear the
trial, and stand before the exactest scrutiny: and hence they dare not deliver
any thing at random, but with greatest solemnity weigh before hand, all that
they make offer of unto men as Truth, proving all things: So Satan has his
broachers of false wares, his Merchants that have the balances of fraud in
their hands, who with a great deal of falsehood and cousinage, and with many
fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. They have an unknown deal of
hellish art, and take great pains to set a specious gloss upon their
commodities; hence Mat. 24. 24. if it were possible they should deceive the
very Elect. So that they who would be sure to get the Truth, and not be put off
with a lie in the stead of it, must not be over credulous, but exceeding wary;
and labor to be well skilled in the rules of distinction, and be able to make
application of them with great curiosity: Such is Paul's advice, 1 These. 5. 21.
prove all things; and it was the Bereans commendation, that they tried all by
the Scriptures, Acts 17. 11.

5. He that really intends to buy, will first cheapen; every one has such a
principle, that he would buy at the best rates; to have a thing good, and have
it cheap, is most men's ambition; a man may look upon a thing, and like it well
enough for the kind, and be desirous to have it, but may be afterward
discouraged, when he hears the price: he may either not be willing, or not able
to come up to it; and truly let men look, talk, and commend, yet he never
intends to make a real purchase of the true Religion, who does not first
compute the cost; he that takes up a profession on a sudden, and never enquires
what it must stand him in, never took it up sincerely; nor does he intend
either to keep it, or to pay for it. Our Savior Christ, when he had plainly
told them what the true Religion must cost them, he urges upon them to cast up
the account, and see whether they could be content to be at the expense,
intimating, that otherwise they might fall off from it with shame, and this by
the parables of a Builder and Warrior, Luke 14. 28. etc.

6. He that buys a thing, comes to a price, and indents for it; in buying a
bargain is driven home: It is not enough to cheapen; there are a great many
that do so, and after that, blow upon the commodity, turn their backs, and go
away; but the man who is resolved to have it, though at first he may for a
while stickle at it, yet at last he comes to an agreement, accepts the terms,
consents to the proposal, both in quantity and specie. There are many that lend
an outward ear to the tenders of the Gospel, and wait till they hear what
terms Christ propounds, but when they understand what they are, they cry out
this is an hard saying, with them John 6. 60. and so they soon go away, verse.
66. but those that are for Christ and Truth, stand by it, and say with Peter,
verse 68. Whether shall we go, thou only have the words of Eternal Life.

7. Buying is the parting with something in exchange for that which we buy:
that which a man buys, he is at cost for; so, though the Truth be not the
proper recompense of any expense that we can be at, (being infinitely more worth
than all that we can lay down) but is the mere free gift of God; yet there is
something that we must let go for it. Now in humane contracts, a man either
pays money or labor, or exchangeth one commodity for another; so here all
these are requisite in the purchasing of the Truth. It requires labor, and it
is an hard work to procure the Heavenly Wisdom, Prove. 2. 4. If thou diggest for
her as for Silver, etc. yea, and he must pay money too for it, if he will have
it, that which a man accounts his best, and is most loath to let go; he must
sell all that he has, Mat. 13. 44. yea, he is sometimes called to part with
all his Relations, all his Comforts of this life, his liberty, yea, and Life it
self for the Truth: and if this be the price that God sets it at, he must not
murmur at it, nor withdraw from his bargain, but venture upon it; as Luke 14.
26.

8. Buying gives interest and propriety in the thing which is bought; what a
man has bought, that he owns enjoyes and possesses. So the word ( Buy) in our
Text plainly intimates. Such is the buying of the Truth. Now a man then
possesses the Truth, when he can truly call it his own; and that is, when he
is come to the saving knowledge of it; Truth is not to be laid up in Chests,
and Coffers, as the worlds riches may; but it is the Understanding of man,
which is the only subject of Truth: we have it, when we know it; and it is here
to be observed, that knowledge is of two sorts; either literal, or saving; the
former of these alone, is not worthy the name of Buying; it does not really
impropriate or take possession of the Truth; it is only the latter that does
so; and hence is only honored by Christ with the name of knowledge; John 17.
3. This is Life Eternal, to know thee, etc: and the Truth is thus purchased by
a man, when the Soul, discerning of a transcendent beauty in it, and persuaded
of the incomparable worth of it, prefers it before all other things whatsoever,
and parting with every thing else, in heart and affection, closes in with it,
and Christ in it, as his only Soul satisfying portion: he that does so, buys:
every one else, who comes short of this, let him profess never so fairly, he
has but trifled.

3. Why every one ought to buy the Truth.

A. There are three things, which if they be put together, will sufficiently
clear up the Reason of this duty, and they are.

1: The necessity which all men stand in of it; the well being of every man
has a real dependence upon his having of it, without a spiritual and saving
knowledge of the great Truths of the Gospel, there is no Salvation to be
expected by any of the children of men, Hos. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for
lack of knowledge, without Truth in the Understanding, there can be no moral
goodness in the will; without the knowing of God and Christ, there can be no
believing on him; till the eyes of the mind be enlightened; the enmity of the
heart will still remain in it, and there can be nothing but estrangedness from
God: they, and none but they that know him, will put their trust in him, Psalm.
9: 10. where Divine Truth is not exhibited, there Perdition reigns and rages,
Prove. 29. 18. Where there is no Vision, the people perish. If a man could
gather together all the wealths and delights of this lower world, and enjoy
them in the fullest measure of content that he is capable of, if yet he be
without the Truth, he is for all this a poor and a miserable man. He cannot
live well without it; for his whole life can be nothing else but one perpetual
wandering out of the paths of peace, and straggling in the way that leads to
destruction. Truth is the only directrix of a man's life, so as to make it
regular, and guide it safely, hence that, Psalm. 86. 11. Teach me thy way, O
Lord, I will walk in thy Truth; without this no man can dye well: there is
nothing else that will stick by a man in the hour of distress, to afford him
any of the least comfort then, but this will; Hezekiah had happy experience of
it, Isa. 38. 3. I have walked before thee in truth. The dying man can see
nothing but darkness before him, except Truth enlighten him; this is that which
alone can discover to him the life after death, and the fullness of Joys that
is at Gods right hand, when all his earthly comforts are bidding him a final
adieu. This only will stand a man in stead for eternity; the man that has
lived a long while, and driven a great trade in this world, and seemed to gain
in it, if among all those many things which he has here bin bartering for, he
has neglected to deal for, and so has not made sure of this, that man has
laid in nothing for afterward, has no assurance of any thing that will
accompany him beyond the grave, and meet him in the next life.

2. That they who do intend to have it must buy it; no man is born into the
world possessed of it: no godly man leaves it as an unfailing inheritance to his
children; nor do any of the Sons of men come by it without pains and cost* it
is a pearl of a vast price, and all that a man has must go for the purchase;
all our lusts, all our lies, all our false opinions, and foolish confidences
must be relinquished; it is an hid treasure, and if we would come at it, and
find it out, we must dig for it; and it lies deep, and therefore great pains
must be taken before we can obtain it; the promise of it is Hypothetical, Hos.
6. 3. Then shall we know, if we fellow on to know; and Dan. 12. 4. They shall
run too and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. Though all grace be the free
gift of God, and a fruit of his mere bounty, and can no way come within the
reach of our merit; yet it is the pleasure of God to command men to buy it, if
they will have it; which is to let us understand, that it is not the negligent,
but the diligent and self denying person that is in the way to the obtaining of
it: hence buying is recommended, in Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 17. and Prove. 4. 4.
Get Wisdom, it is the same word with this which is read, buy, in our Text: and
Paul in a parallel expression, tells us that he suffered the loss of all for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, P hill. 3. 8. he sold every thing; he
parted with his esteem of, and renounced his right to all that he had sometimes
placed any value upon for this knowledge.

3. That God makes an offer of the Truth to all that live under the Gospel; or
come within the sound of it: and there are none of these but have a price in
their hand to purchase it, if they have but an heart to it. As there are none
in the world that are so rich and wealthy, as to be able to bring to God, and
lay down at his feet the full value of it, its worth being more than Crowns and
Kingdoms; and we have an illustrious and yet not in the least hyperbolical
setting it forth, and challenge made to find any thing fit to be given in
exchange, Job. 28. 15. to 19) so there are none so poor and despicable but they
have wherewithal to obtain it upon evangelical terms, if they do but embrace
them, Mat. 11. 5. The poor have the Gospel preached to them. It is a man's all
that God requires, be it more or less; he demands all of every man, and but all
of any man: and there is no person but has some high conceits of his own
wisdom and excellency, some carnal confidences and self-boasting, some vain
opinions, and foolish lusts, which they place a great deal of esteem in, and
set very much by; something or other, which though it be of no worth at all in
it self, but is mere dirt and dung; is yet in their own opinion of great worth,
to part with all for the sake of Christ and Truth. It is true, men hold these
things too fast, and are so glewed in heart and affection to them, that they
cannot part with them of themselves, except God affords them grace to do it,
and powerfully divide them from them, Hos. 4. 17. Ephraim is joined to Idols:
but yet every one is capable of this grace, and therefore ought not to reject
the offers of it which are made unto him, as a thing beyond his capacity and
hope; but to wait upon the Lord to enable him of his mercy, to drive this happy
bargain, to buy and get possession of the Truth.

4: What is the import of the phrase of Selling?

A. Buying and Selling are relates, and so they are contraries; the word (we
have observed) firstly signifies the delivering of a thing up. Selling,
according to the common use of the word, is properly the parting with a man's
propriety in a thing, for some other thing which is given him in exchange for
it: A man is both a buyer and seller at the same time, in diverse respects: that
which he purchases a right to, that he buys, and that which he parts with his
right in for it, that he sells: but a little more particularly.

1. Selling implies an intrest in a thing; a man must have a thing before he
can sell it: he must be some way or other possessed of it. Now men may two ways
be said to be possessed of the Truth; either,

1. When they have in an open profession owned and acknowledged the Truth of
the Gospel; when they have attained unto a literal understanding of, and give
an historical assent and credit to the Doctrines of life laid down in the Word
of God, and do declare for them openly. Or,

2. Which is the best and surest title; when they have received the Truth in
Love, and heartily embraced it by a saving faith; when they receive it, as it
is in Jesus; when they are really built upon it: for then the Truth is indeed
theirs by such a sure claim, as can never be justly questioned; they have
bought it, and it is their own; God himself has made it over to them, and
sealed up the Sale.

2. Selling imports our letting go or parting with our propriety altogether in
the thing; what a man has sold, he can no longer lay any claim to, or
challenge any right in it; he puts himself wholly out of the possession of it,
and alienates it to another: and hence from that time forward, he disowns,
disclaims, looks not after it, concerns not himself about it: thus a man has
then sold the Truth, when he has relinquished the Profession of it, which
sometimes he had made: when a man once comes to disown the Truth, as to an
outward Profession, and either will not stand by it, or openly renounceth it,
when he either will not own it, or is bold to deny it, though once he
challenged an interest in it, this man has sold it.

3. Selling imports a willingness to part with a thing. There are some things
which may be taken away from men by an hand of violence, and against their
wills; they that are too strong for them, may wrest them out of their hands
forcibly, and this cannot be called selling; for that is ever done by consent,
it being always acted in a contract which is made between two parties, to the
making up and determining of which the will must of necessity yield. There may
indeed be a lothness in a person to part with such a thing, and by reason of
this averseness, he may give a great many denials to him that is urgent upon
him to move him to sell it, but all this while there is a demurr, there is no
bargain made till it comes to this, for that always waits for consent; he may
indeed come to this with reluctance, yet he is prevailed upon to yield; and
truly the Truth is such a commodity, as no man that has it, can be robbed of
it, nor can he lose it, except he be willing to it; it must be a voluntary act
of his own: Men may lose their liberties, they may lose their estates, their
credit or reputation among men, their visible enjoyment of the Gospel and
Ordinances thereof, all these may be taken away from them whether they will or
no: but they cannot lose the Truth, except they deliver it up; they may indeed
be bewitched with enticements, so were the Galatians; Gal. 3. 1. but it is
their own folly that they are so, as he there gives them to understand. O
Foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the Truth?

4. Selling also intends that men receive something in exchange for that which
they part withal, and that they let it go upon that consideration; men always
take something for that which they sell, either in hand, or in a promise, or
else it is not selling; and the Spirit of God in this prohibition of his
presumes that there will be those who will offer to buy the Truth off men's
hands, and that will urge them with temptation to part with it, yea, and will
make them seemingly large and tempting offers to move them to consent and drive
up a bargain: not that they have any desire of having it themselves, or of
making any profit to themselves by buying it off their hands; but merely
because they envy others the possession of it; and there are two things which
frequently become Temptations to men to let go the Truth for them, viz.

1. Men's outward peace and quietness. There are times wherein Persecutions
arise for the Truth, and if men will own it, and stand by and maintain their
title to it, it will cost them a great deal of molestation: The Disciples of
Christ must look to be hated of all men for Christ and Truths sake; and
oftentimes there are pretendedly fair offers made unto them; that if they will
baulk the Truth but a little, and part with but a few, grains of this pearl,
they shall have peace and liberty in exchange for it; whereas, if they will not
give their consent, they shall suffer all manner of opposition, and be exposed
to violence and rage; and when the case is such, the heart of man, which
naturally loves ease and immunity from trouble, is too ready to be ensnared,
and give a most unhappy consent to such a proposal as this, and rashly to buy
their peace with the sale of the Truth.

2. The gratification of some fleshly lust; the truth is an enemy to all these;
and many times it is so, that men cannot hold the Truth in a conscientious
profession of it, but this will prevent the aims, and curb in the reachings of
carnal concupiscence: sometimes Covetousness craves after the world, and its
desires are so large and boundless, that they cannot be kept pace withal,
except a man remit some part of the Truth which concerns honesty, and some
rules of piety too, or Religious Duties; and now if he will get the world, he
must sell these Truths, so did Dem^s, 2 Timothy 4. 10. sometimes a man's ambition
reaches after preferment, and so much of honor and command, as may be
procured in a way of truth, will not content him: if he will rise in the worlds
favor, and climb to its dignities, he must let go some of the Truths of his
profession, or dissemble them, and not openly own them, nay, possibly (as the
times may be) he must renounce, and take upon him the contrary profession: and
the weak mind of man is often woefully exposed by such Temptations, as are so
suited to his carnal inclinations:

From the Premises we may gather this Conclusion, viz. That when we are bidden
not to sell the Truth, we are thereby enjoined to maintain the belief, and
answerable profession of it, and by no means to be prevailed upon to renounce,
or so much as dissemble it: neither to be tempted with the menaces on the one
hand, nor wound in with the flatteries of the world on the other, to part with
the Truth in exchange either for life, or liberty or favor, or grandeur, or
any Flesh pleasing error whatsoever.

5. Why it is not to be sold.

A. There need no other reason be rendered of it, but this; Because, for a man
that has bought the Truth, to sell it again; crosses all the rules and ends
of prudent Merchandise, and this may be exemplified in two or three particulars.

1. No Understanding Man will part with that which he cannot subsist without,
and if he put it out of his hands, cannot get it again; for by so doing he at
once undoes himself: such a thing is Truth; it is a man's life, if he have it
not, he is an undone man: without Truth no man can be saved; he who sells the
Truth, hates his own soul; he is guilty of destroying himself with his own
hands, it is utterly impossible that he should barter for any thing in exchange
for it, that can supply the necessary use of it to him; for the world has it
not to offer him: in the very same moment wherein a man parts with the Truth,
he parts with God, and Christ, and Heaven, and all grounded hope of happiness:
and if men will be so foolish as to sell the Truth, God is wont to be so severe
in bearing witness against them, as to give them up to believe a lie, to their
own damnation; as that Awful Scripture denounces, 2 These. 2. 9, 10. and what
will become of such an unhappy wretch, when he has sold the Truth that could
have saved him, and purchased a lie in the room of it, that will damn him?

2. The next end of buying and selling is to get gain; and no man would
willingly if he could avoid it, sell any thing to his loss, much less to his
irreparable loss. A man may possibly be a loser by trading, and it may be
unavoidable, but it is no man's proposed end so to be, but the contrary; but we
cannot sell the Truth upon any account, but our loss by this sale will be
incomputable: let the offer which is made for it look never so big, and that a
man gets by his parting with the Truth be in vulgar esteem of never so great
worth, yet this man that has thus sold, has sold to the loss; he puts off an
Oriental Jewel for a pebble stone, that gives the Truth for it: Suppose a man
should purchase the Lease of ten or twenty years in this world of quiet, and
freedom from molestation by forsaking of it, when possibly he must have been
cut off from life it self, if he would have kept the Truth: nay, suppose that
he should have had the whole world as a compensation for it, yet before a man
strikes up, it is good for him seriously to ponder and chew upon that of our
Savior, Mat. 16. 26. What is a man profited if he gain the whole world, and
lose his own Soul? this is certain, that one Truth has ten thousand times more
worth in it, than ten thousand worlds; what wise man then would sell it?

3. A man will deny himself in parting with something to do a friend a
kindness, but both to do wrong to himself, and really to gratify or advantage
no other, is nothing less then madness: and so does that man that sells the
Truth. They are not friends, but the worst of enemies (because they are so to
our Souls) who seek to get it from us; and that also to no benefit of theirs at
all, but only to satisfy their own malignity, and to do a spite unto us. He
that sells the Truth, grieves all that he had any reason to please, God and his
Holy Spirit are grieved, and Gods people are thereby scandalized: and whilst he
does no true good to any in the world, he quite undoeth himself; and this is
always the undoubted issue of such a bargain, Prove. 8. 36. He that sins
against me, wrongeth his own Soul.

USE I. For Reprehension; it serves to convince the folly and madness of the
greatest part of men that live under the light of the Gospel, and there are
multitudes that stand guilty in both the points here commended to us.

1. It is matter, as of lamentation, so of just rebuke, that the Truth has so
few Customers that are in good earnest to buy it: and there are two
considerations, which highly aggravate the blame of those men that have had
their lot cast in this corner of the world, viz.

1. That Truth has been brought to their doors, and offered to, yea, urged
upon them daily; and yet they do neglect it: there has been no need to fend to
the farthest Indies, to fetch it thence, and yet they will venture so far to
procure that which is but dirt and trash in comparison of it: they have not
been necessitated to go from Town to Town, and wander from Sea to Sea, for the
Word of God, but it has been brought home unto them, and God has had his
Criers in every place, who have called out unto men from Sabbath to Sabbath,
and upon diverse other market-days have exposed the Truth to their view; have
opened to them the great mysteries of the Gospel, and used many earnest
entreaties with men that they should give entertainment thereunto; and yet for
all this, how have they slighted and disregarded?

2. That it has been offered to them upon fair and easy terms; Truth was
hardly ever a better penniworth since the world stood, than it has been to us;
and whether even it will be so cheap again in our days, as it has been now for
these so many years, the Lord knows: Truth indeed can never be an hard bargain;
suppose it be attended with never so many disadvantageous circumstances, it is
still good, and worth our buying, though we must have shame, reproach, and
bloody Persecution as appendices to it: Truth and a Cross, Truth and a faggot
are not to be rejected by him who will approve himself wise: but yet such
appurtenances of it are wont to be a discouragement to flesh and blood, and
relucting nature is wont to misgive at the apprehension of it: but we have had
this precious pearl set in gold: Truth under all manner of advantages has been
offered unto us; peace, plenty, credit, preferment; and that notwithstanding
all this, it has still bin so slighted among us, and there have been so few
that have bought it, is a plain discovery of our woeful folly, and will stand
against all such as have not so done to their greater condemnation: and that
this use is no slanderous accusation, but a just and necessary reprehension,
and that I may withal point at such as do most of all deserve to come under the
conviction of it, let it be considered.

1. How many there are (especially in this place) that seldom (if ever)
frequent truths market; i. e. the Public Ordinances? Not to make mention of,
or bring into this Catalogue, these who pretend themselves born possessed of
Truth enough to serve their turn, and so greatly enriched with a treasure of a
L ight within, that they make it one principal article of their Religion, never
to come there where Truth is to be bought; it is said by some who have had
great advantage to make such an observation, that no Sabbath Day passes,
wherein there are not many hundreds in this very place, who have nothing of
necessary hindrance, and yet do not repair to any one place of Public Worship:
and of a great many more, it is too notorious to be called into question, that
if they can get forth to Gods House one part of the Sabbath, they have full
enough of the Public Worship, and think they have done some great matter: and
it is certain, that such as these are no buyers; they are only such as watch
daily at Wisdoms gates, and wait at the posts of her Doors, Prove. 8. 34.

2. The unsuitable behavior of many under them, who do come to the Ordinances,
proves them not to be in earnest: not to say, but that there may be reason
sufficient to think that there are many who outwardly profess, and make shows
of much reverence and attention, who may yet be such as the Lord complains of
to the Prophet, Ezekiel 33. 31. Come as the people comes, etc: and with their
mouth, they show much love, but their heart goes after their Covetousness.
What shall we judge of those who come to the house of God to sleep out the time
wherein they should be hearing the Oracles of God, or stand gazing up and down
to observe persons and garbs, or are whispering and laughing together, when
they should be yiedling attendance to the things that are spoken? All of which
are too notoriously common and observable, to be charged as fancies and
surmises. Or,

3. The woeful deficiency there is in many, in regard of the fruits of
profitable attending upon Gospel Ordinances: if men do really buy the Truth, it
will enrich them, and it will not be hid; but what shall we say, to,

1. The gross ignorance of such great numbers, even in the main and principal
points of Religion? those very staple truths of it; the most main and necessary
things of all? that of the Apostle is too true of them Heb. 5. 12. When for the
time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, which be
the first principles of the Oracles of God, and if in a place where there has
so much of light shone, and the Truth has been so easy to come by, men have
all this while gotten so little of it into their hands, what shall we then
think they have in their hearts? if they had any heart to it, it could not
possibly be so.

2. The vain and foolish conversation of multitudes: We may say of the Truth,
when men have indeed bought it, as Solomon speaks of Wisdom, which is the same
thing, Prove. 2. 10, 11, 12. When Wisdom enters into thy heart, and knowledge
is pleasant unto thy Soul, discretion shall preserve thee, etc. and therefore
wickedness is in Scripture called folly, and ungodly men fools; so that when we
see sin daily abounding among us, and men living without any care or regard to
their lives and ways, walking in the paths of death, and going in the road-way
to destruction, it is a clear witness against them, that they have rejected the
Truth; and our Savior tells us, This is the Gospel Condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men choose darkness rather than light, because their
works are evil, John 3. 19.

3. The little care there is to instruct and bring up children in the knowledge
of the Truth; if men had indeed bought the truth, they could not but be engaged
in heart and affection to it, and if so, they would desire that others might
get it too; especially their children, for whose wealth and prosperity nature
it self teaches them to be sollicitous, when therefore they can altogether
neglect them, and neither take any pains to instruct them themselves, nor send
them carefully to those places where they may be instructed, they grossly
discover themselves, to be at least strangers to the saving knowledge of the
Truth; else they could never rest content till they had brought theirs to the
market, and used their best endeavor that they might purchase it too; how
often is the wise man in the Proverbs calling upon his Son to seek after Wisdom?

Now for the greater conviction, give me leave to fasten this nail of reproof
with these three blows: Consider,

1. By this neglect you put an high affront upon the God of Truth: God accounts
that he has made you the greatest and most liberal offers that can be, when he
has set before you his Gospel* and published the great Truths of Salvation in
your hearing, together with the inviting you to come and get them for your own;
for you therefore after all this to neglect them, and have no regard to them,
is a carriage most contemptuous, and argues that you look upon them as not
worth the seeking after: and God looks upon himself to be set at naught by
these carriages, and hence you must needs thus irritate his anger, and engage
him against you, and how woeful a folly is that?

2. If you neglect to buy the Truth now, shortly it will not be to be bought;
not only will the price rise, as there is abundant likelihood that it will, if
Truths enemies may obtain their will; and how far God may permit it thus to be,
to make those who have thus slighted it, to see and feel their own foolishness,
I cannot tell: but the market will in a little time be quite over with you; see
Eccl. 9. 10. There is no wisdom in the grave whether thou go; you may live
to see the time when that complaint will again be verified, Psalm. 74. 9. We see
not our signs, there is no more any Prophet. However, it is certain, that there
are no offers made of it to those that are gone down into silence; hell is not
privileged with having the proclamations of the Gospel made in it, and the
spiritual teachings of the Truth there applied; when the present life ends,
there will thenceforth be no advantage to buy, for God will not then sell the
Truth to any: and least you should despise this motive, and think it no such
infelicity to lose the opportunity of purchasing it: Consider,

3. There will a time certainly come, wherein you will repent of this great
neglect; although you please your selves with lies for the present, yet they
will not do always: you will erelong be unavoidably convinced, that in all your
other dealings in the world, you have bin laying out your money for that which
is not bread. When a man comes to leave this world, and must then leave all his
worldly gettings behind him, and none of all his gain must descend with him
into the grave, then will he wish, (and it may be too late) Oh that I had not
fooled away my precious advantages! that I had not spent all my time about that
which cannot profit! had I but labored for the Truth as much as I have done
for these perishing things, it would not thus have deserted me, I should not
have gone thus naked into an amazing eternity. Scorn these warnings now as much
as you please, yet this I dare to pawn my credit, yea and life upon, that all
those who despite the saving Truths of Jesus Christ, will sooner or later be
powerfully convinced of their excellency, and their own desperate madness, in
contemning of them, and be enforced whether they will or no, with
heartbreaking ejulations to cry out of their own unhappy foolishness, so
carelessly to miss of heavens market, and triflingly to lose the once fair
opportunity of buying the Truth, when there was a price in their hands, and
there wanted nothing but an heart to it; but Oh that you were now wise, that
you understood this, and would consider the latter end.

2. They also do as deeply deserve this reproof, that are as forward to sell
the Truth as the other were backward to buy it. Truth does not only lie upon
Gods hands (as a neglected drug, and needless commodity) for want of customers,
but many that have bought it are ready to turn it upon his hands again,
beginning to repent of their bargain. Nor does this reproof only reach unto
such as have bought it no more than in a visible profession, and by a literal
knowledge, but even those that have savingly bought too: for although there is
no truly believing Soul that shall so fall from grace, as finally to relinquish
the great things of Life and Salvation, yet they may, and often do unhappily
pawn this or that parcel of Truth, and sometimes also come too near the making
of this undoing bargain; though the Holy Spirit of God does in great
faithfulness give them such a seasonable whisper, and so effectual as shall
make them to revoke it again before it be thoroughly driven; and it is to be
observed, that when the Gospel Truth has been embraced but in a profession, it
is very rare that any such do sell it again by whole sale; there are too deep
impressions of it made upon the Consciences of men, to suffer them to part with
it all at once: but how many such are there that retail it out in parcells,
till they have very little left behind? and for a more particular discovery of
those that are found guilty upon this account: Let us but observe,

1. How many there are that have been bartering of the Truth for Error? such as
have sometimes been Orthodox in their profession, how are they by degrees drawn
to believe Lies instead of the Truth, and have set themselves with eager
violence to oppose those things which sometimes they have resolutely
maintained? they have suffered themselves to be bewitched with the enticements
of error, and to drink of its poisoned cup: they have hearkened to a few fair
speeches, and cunningly devised fables, till they have been persuaded to let go
some precious Truth or other in their room; yea, and been so foolish as not
only to rest well contented with, but to make their foolish brags and boasts of
the happy exchange they have made; as though a gilded error were of more value
than a plain and solid Truth: how has that of the Apostle been too sadly
verified? Romans 16. 18. By good words and fair speeches, they deceive the hearts
of the simple; and it is to be taken notice of, as a thing most frequent, that
when men once begin thus to break bulk, it is very improbable that they will
stop till they have put off their whole lading.

2. How much baulking there is of the truth to gratify men's own lusts, and the
lusts of other men All Divine Truths are practical, and men then properly hold
them, when they walk in conformity to them, so that when men once begin in
works to deny the Profession which they have in word held forth, they do really
make sale of the Truth, and this is usually done to give content to some lust
or other: men's exorbitant courses are therefore in Scripture called Lies,
because they are a practical renouncing of the Truth; and that man that lives
contrary unto it, does as openly deny it, as he who sets himself to confute it
by arguments: and where ever a man does any thing which is contrary to the
light of the Word of God, and the Dictates of his own Conscience, he then
foregoes the Truth; and if he does not sell it outright, he lays it to pawn;
and how many such Mortgages may we see made in the world, from one time to
another? and it is plain, that there are many who run so deep upon the account,
that it is justly to be doubted, whether ever they intend to take them up
again. The covetous man, who to get gain, neglects the rules of honesty; the
voluptuous man who to please the cravings of his fleshly lusts, goes beyond the
set bounds of sobriety; the ambitious man, who to scrue himself into preferment
in the world, forgets the precepts of sincerity; when the fearful man to avoid
reproach and scoffs, and to preserve his Estate or Liberty, either dissembles
or suppresseth the Truth, these men are in all these things guilty of
transgressing this command, and are to be looked upon as barterers of the
Truth. In a word, every degree of Apostasy; all growing weary of the Gospel
Ordinances, all careless or slighty attendance upon the means of grace, or
neglect of performing the duties enjoined men in the Word of God, come under
this reproof: and if men once come to think the Truth a burdensome or a
dangerous thing to them, they are not very far from making a sale of it; when
it is as Mal. 1. 13. What a weariness is it? and in pursuit of this reproof, I
might reinforce the arguments used with the former, but to pass them over, let
me further urge two things.

1. Consider what a vile disparagement you do hereby cast upon the Truth: He
that does not prefer it above all things, does certainly greatly disparage it,
he that can but entertain a thought in his heart of letting it go upon any
account, must needs be supposed to undervalue it: yea, such a thought as that
consented unto, is a formal sale of it, for in that thought he has indeed let
it go: nay, he that makes a deliberate question about it, does in so doing make
a doubt whether there be not something better than the Truth, yea, and that
very thing, how vile and base soever it be, for which he thinks of selling it,
begins by his so thinking, to challenge in his understanding a preferrence to
the Truth: no man can so much as debate within himself about the selling of it,
until he has entertained in his heart, vile and unworthy conceptions of it;
and how high a provocation this must needs be to the God of Truth we may well
suppose, when we remember that his own name and glory is concerned in it, for
the vindication whereof he stands everlastingly engaged, and if men will so far
trample upon his honor, as to debase his Truth unto an unworthy sale, they
shall find him to be a jealous God, and one that will not so part with his
Glory.

2. Consider you will thus render yourselves not only miserable, but also
unpitied. You will not only be undone, but come under the deserved charge of
being your own undoers: who will show compassion to that man, that has a Jewel
of unconceivable value, enough to enrich him for ever, and yet goes and barters
it away for a trifle, a worthless toy, and a thing that will never do him a
real kindness? so the Lord charge them for doing, Jer. 2. 11. My people have
changed their glory for that which does not profit. But then, for a man to put
it away for misery, and that upon choice, is the most aggravated madness: so
does every one that sells the Truth, let him do it upon the most seemingly
rational considerations that can be imagined for a man to forgo that which
alone can guide, direct, and lead him up to the enjoyment of God, and Christ,
and glory, for nothing better or more valuable, than that which will perish in
a little time, and before he can well settle himself upon it, must forsake him
for ever, is such a piece of foolery as cannot be paralleled: and thus the
Lord himself paraphraseth upon the Apostasy of the Jews, Jer. 2. 13. My people
have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of Living Waters,
and hewed them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no Water, and what
could they do more, to undo themselves utterly?

USE II. For Information; and there is this only inference which I shall draw
from the Doctrine, viz. we may hence learn how greatly they are mistaken, who
take upon them to censure the people of God for being at too much pains to get,
and being so fixedly resolved not to part with the Truth. These are the two
main articles which ungodly men have to urge, and for which they pass so severe
a verdict against them, and upon the account whereof they stigmatize them with
many names of reproach: but the Doctrine before us will stand up for their
justification, and serve to vindicate their reputation from the merit of any
opprobry; let us bring them both to this touch stone.

1. The world judge it to be high imprudence in them, that they are at so much
cost and charge for the purchasing of the Truth. There are some who voluntarily
leave all outward advantages, which they might otherwise: have enjoyed, that so
they may dwell at Truth's Market, and possess the free liberty of Gods House
and Ordinances, and sit under the plain Dispensations of the Word; they do also
liberally expend for the upholding of the means of-grace among them, accounting
it a rich mercy to have the opportunity so to do; they take up a considerable
part of their time every day* in conversing with God and his Word; they
frequent on all occasions the public places where Truth is opened and
exhibited; and give all diligence to get more intimate acquaintance with it;
and because they thus do, they are accounted a company of half witted people,
silly Souls, that do not know what is for their own good: what a deal of time
do they unprofitably waste away for they know not what? how many shillings, nay
pounds, might they have gained in the time, whilst they were at such a Sermon,
attending upon such an Ordinance? and all this to acquaint themselves with a
few empty notions which they call Truth, that when they have gotten them, will
neither fill the belly, nor cloth the back: But stay a little, and don't run
away with all the cry, as if you were the only wise and prudent men in the
world, and wisdom or folly must needs take their measures from your vote: know
it then, that these persons have not only heavens approbation for wisdom, but
by your own rules also, if you will fairly and impartially apply them, you
shall be enforced to confess them to be men of the greatest discretion: For,

1. They drive the richest trade; they are poor and paltry things that other
men are dealing in, compared with what these men deal for: hear the wisemans
judgment in this case, Prove. 3. 14. The merchandise of it is better than the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold, and chap. 8. 19. my
fruit is better than gold, yea than fine gold, and any revenue than choice
silver. One Saving Truth really purchased, makes the man more than if he had
engrost the treasure of both the Indies; he has gotten a Pearl which has more
of intrinsecal worth in it than the whole world besides; that which will stand
him more in stead, and do him a far greater kindness, than if he had a whole
house full of gold: these be the men who are in the right way to inherit
substance, whereas all other men are but in the pursuit after mere shadows.
There are some men here that can make their brags how they have gotten some
hundreds in a bargain, that has not been many hours in driving* but he that
receives one beam of Divine Truth irradiating his Soul in an Ordinance, has
gained more than many Millions in that hour; and let him who has been so vain
as to spend the time of an Ordinance in his Shop or Warehouse with the best
advantage that can be thought of, compare with him who has been the same time
in the House of God, and well improved his time there, and he shall find upon a
true account, that this man has made incomparably the best bargain, for the
one has been trading for the things of time, while the other has been dealing
for those of eternity.

2. They drive the surest trade, as their gain is by much the greatest, so it
is the most certain, the Worlds Merchants run through great hazards, and deal
upon the highest uncertainties; all their expectations hang. upon mere
peradventures, and hence by a most proper name, they call that part of their
estate which they send abroad in way of trading, their venture, for it must
first run through unknown casualties, if ever it make a good return: it may be
shipped in good order and well conditioned, but one dash upon a Rock, may split
all his hope at once, and bury his whole treasure in a grave of Waters; one
Leak breaks violently in and spoils it, a Pyrate meets it accidentally in his
way, and makes a prize of it; or if it scapes all these dangers, and reach its
Port in safety, a bad market loses him all his gains at last; and therefore to
escape some of these inconveniences, men deal with Ensurers, and so hope to save
part; but sometimes they break too: But this man that is trading for the Truth
in good earnest, has heavens ensurance, and the security of a never failing
Promise, from an able and faithful God, for his success and continued gain,
Hosea 6. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, Prove. 2. 4,
5. If thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for bid treasures;
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lords and find the knowledge of God.

3. It is the most Honorable Trade: He that is engaged in this. Merchandise of
buying the Truth, is indeed one of the Royal Company. There are some
employments, which, though gainful, are yet counted sordid and base, and
generous spirits scorn to take them up in hopes of a little profit: there are
others which are of credit and good repute among men; but they are all of them
mean and contemptible, compared with this, and not the best of them can equal
it in honor. This man has the least need of any to be ashamed of his
Occupation: yea, and it is the way to honor and preferment: wisdom exalts her
Customers not only to wealth, but also to great dignity, Prove. 3. 16. In her
left hand are riches and honor; and chap. 4. 8, 9. Exalt her, and she shall
promote thee, etc. They are none but excellent ones that are in Partnership
with these men; and they are infinitely glorious personages whom they drive
their dealing with; God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

4. It is the most satisfying Trade. The great Truths of the House of God, are
soulcontenting things, Psalm. 36. 8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thine house. It is a very joyful thing to frequent this market,
Psalm. 122. 1. I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the house of
the Lord; and there is abundance of Reason for it for the dealing is in Soul
satisfying things: they are things full of marrow and fatness, and may
therefore well cheer the heart; Men make a great deal of bustle and do in this
world, trading and bartering, but it is all with abundance of disquiet: there
is a great deal of noise made, and but a little content taken, Eccl. 1. 8. The
eye is not satisfied with seeing, the ear is not satisfied with hearing. When
men suffer loss, it vexes them, and when they get gain, it does not quiet
them, and what is the reason, but because they are occupied about things that
have not the matter of satisfaction in them? They spend money for that which is
not bread, and labor for that which satisfies not, Isa. 55. 2. whereas the
very discovery of this Pearl of Truth in the Gospel Field, fills the man with
joy; how much more raised then must he needs be, when he has made it his own,
though in exchange for all that he had?

5. It is the most Necessary Trade. Men may do better without any thing than
Truth. It is an observation which some have made, that the bigger half of
trades and Merchandise in the world is occupied about trifles, or things of
which there is no necessity, but it would be as well, if not better with
mankind, if they were without them: and truly, if you please to add the other
half too, you shall find all little better than toys, if compared with the
Truth. As much as the life is better than raiment, as far as the soul excells
the body, as highly as eternity is to be preferred before time; so far is the
purchase of Truth more necessary than the gaming of every other thing in the
world. Job therefore prizeth this, not only above his conveniences but beyond
all his necessaries whatsoever, Job. 23. 12.

6. They trade for the most Durable Estate: It is that which, when once gotten,
will abide by them; hence that Pro. 8. 18. Riches and honor are with me: yea,
Durable Riches and Righteousness. The whole traffic of this world is occupied
about perishing things: there is a moth in their garments, and rust upon their
metalls, and a thief watches for both, ready to carry them away: all these
things have wings, and are every moment ready for the flight, Pro. 23. 5.
Riches certainly make themselves wings, etc. and no man ever yet had the art to
clip them, or if they did, they soon grew again: but Truth is a never failing
treasure; if once a man has gotten it for his own, it will never forsake him.
Truth is in it self Incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1. 23 and hence is incapable of being
corroded by moth or rust, and it lies out of the reach of the Thief, he that
possesses the Truth cannot be robbed of it. There are indeed some things here
below, that are more durable than others, and hence (comparatively) are more
desirable, on which account the worlds prudent men endeavor to convert their
estates as fast as they may with convenience, into them; such are Houses and
Lands: and the Psalmist gives us the reason for it, Psalm. 49. 11. Their inward
thought is that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places
to all generations. But the man who has turned his all into Truth, and settled
that as his proper in heritance, has infinitely outwitted these men. Truth is
an everlasting Treasure, and he that has bought it shall have something to
live on, when the other shall be like the beasts that perish; and is it so? Let
then the worlds Ishmaels mock on; and let pious souls bear it patiently, until
the happy time shall come, wherein all accounts shall be adjusted, and
even-reckonings made up: and if then, these Merchants shall be found fools, let
the wicked triumph for ever: but know it assuredly how scornfully soever they
now deport themselves toward the children of Wisdom, the Upright shall have
dominion over them in the morning.

2. The world is also no less prejudiced at Godly men for their tenaciousness
of the Truth, to see them hold it so resolutely, and being so unperswadable to
part with it, by all the utmost endeavors used to bring them off, and win them
to relinquish it; when they see how many, and what cunning attempts there are
made to draw them over to give consent, or to force them upon making a sale,
and after all, the one is rejected with an holy scorn, and the other is born
with an invincible patience, and the most politickly contrived, and
industriously prosecuted endeavors do finally prove unsuccessful: when they
see how many and grievous things they suffer for the Truth sake, and all cannot
prejudice them against it, but rather confirms their love to it, and adds
strength to their pious resolutions never to forget it; with how great
cheerfulness they can take the being spoiled of their goods, deprived of their
liberties, yea, and being robbed of their very lives, and all this because they
will not part with Truth; yea, they do the more closely hug and embrace it;
they hereupon do certainly conclude these men to be far gone of a frenzy:
especially when they take notice how firm they are in the maintaining of the
least Truth, so as rather to pull all the world about their ears, then let a
syllable of it go: will (with the Three Children) run the venture of a Fiery
Furnace; rather than bow the body to an Image; hazard the sufferings of all
manner of tortures before they will throw a little frankincense into the fire,
(as did the Primitive Christians) lose all the favors and preferments they
have enjoyed, and might otherwise have still possessed, rather than Worship God
otherwise than as he has appointed; yea dye the most cruel death rather than
deny any one article of Gods revealed Will; they either rail at them as
willful, turbulent, schismatical; the disturbers of Church and State; or else
commiserate them as men intoxicated with conscientious niceties, whereby they
become the unhappy disturbers of their own quiet; but hold; these men are
neither mad not drunk, as you suppose them to be, but in their right mind, and
very well able to give a truly rational account of what they do; yea such as
(if you will approve of the rules that wise merchants pretend to follow) will
clear up their discretion: For,

1. The world has not hitherto bid them a valuable price for the Truth, nor
any thing near one; and therefore no wonder if they blow upon it with holy
scorn (...) Satan either could or would have performed that offer which he made
to the man Christ, Mat. 4. 8, 9. All this will I give thee, etc. upon his
parting with the Truth, yet if he had accepted it, he had been undone by the
bargain. If men that come to you to buy your earthly merchandise, do proffer
you a price far short of that which you value the commodity at, it will greatly
incense you, and you will scarce vouchsafe so much as to give them an answer,
but turn your backs upon them and be gone, as looking upon your selves to be
mocked: and it is out of question, that when Satan and his Instruments have made
their largest offers to godly men to win them from the Truth; when they have
told them, they shall have their lives, enjoy their liberties, their estates,
yea, and be advanced to great honors and preferment, and made to enjoy
whatsoever the world can afford to make them happy, they have offered them but
a Counter for a Guiney, but a Bristow-stone for an Oriental* Pearl; yea, not so
much as that, but indeed has sought to impose upon them the greatest cheat
that they possibly can: and yet if they do not readily and cheerfully, embrace
the motion, and take in with the offer, they are fools, and sots, and what not?
in men's esteem; whereas if they should be induced to part with it on these
terms, it must need argue them either of gross ignorance, or in deliberate
folly; either that they have not a right understanding of the value of Truth,
or are surprised unawares with a deluding false opinion of the worth of these
worthless things. But he that has truly bought the Truth, knows its worth too
well to lay it in the balance against these things, and finds every day more
of experimental sweetness in it, then to put it off for such gewgaws and
childish fooleries as are here offered to him; and what a vile and injurious
thing is it for any to make offers to men to make fools of them, and when they
have so done, to rail at, and call them so, because (through grace) they have
been too wise to accept of the offer?

2. There would greater harm arise to them from parting with it, then all that
the worlds malice can bring upon them for keeping of it. They are too
precipitant who think that every thing is presently to be thrown away as
useless, which has some little inconveniences that attend it, for upon this
score men must sooner or later put themselves out of all: but all circumstances
and consequences are to be weighed, and men must set the advantage over against
the damage. The Merchant will bear many a puff of wind, and suffer great
difficulties and dangers before he will cast his Wares Over board, especially
if they be of great worth; and here are two points of wisdom which have great
sway with him in the deliberating on this case, viz.

1. That if he keep the Truth safe, it will plentifully reward him for all
these sufferings. Why did Moses prefer Affliction for Truths sake, before the
Egyptian Crown? see Heb. 11. 26. The man is well satisfied that earth and hell
can never undo him so long as he keeps the Truth, he can never be ruined whilst
this is his portion. This will pay for estate, credit, liberty life; make
plentiful amends for revilings, confications, reproaches, imprisonments, bonds,
and the cruellest tortures which the spiteful wit of man can invent or inflict;
hence none of all these things moved Paul, but his whole care was (whatever
bofell him) not to forgo the Truth, Acts 20. 22, 23, 24. and in the midst of
all fore: and bitter oppressions, the Church comfort her self with that,
that she had not forsaken the Truth, Psalm. 44, 17. (...) that is come upon us,
yet have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant.

2. That if he sells the Truth to buy his peace with the world, he lays down
too great a sum for it, and shall certainly purchase to himself the greater
misery, when God sold him the Truth, it was under the straitest and most solemn
engagement never to sell it again; this was one of the articles in the contract
which past between them and how shall be do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? he knows that by keeping of it (let the worst come that can) he
shall but purchase to himself a created malice, which can no farther vent it
self but by inflicting -- bodily sufferings upon him; he shall no more but
expose himself to their fury, whose farthest power can extend but to kill the
body, and he sees no reason to be amazingly affrighted at that, having the
prospect of an endless life in his eye; but he is certain that if he shall
cowardly or perfidiously betray his trust, and part with the Truth, he shall
procure to himself the sorest indignation of the great God, incurr his infinite
displeasure, and throw himself upon his wrath, who can destroy both Soul and
Body in hell for ever; and that he is with highest reason afraid of: he bears
it in remembrance continually who it is that has said, whosoever shall be
ashamed of me, and my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him
also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his
father, with the holy Angels, Mat. 8. 18. and he thinks it a thousand time more
eligible to undergo the worst that the world can do, rather than to throw
himself upon the woeful hazard of being disowned by the Lord of glory, in that
day when it will be nothing less than hell so to be: and hence he has drawn
up, and fixes himself upon this resolve, that he will leave himself to the
sovereign dispose of Gods Providence, and if he sees meet so to permit, let
them do their pleasure, and glut their rage upon this clay house, till they can
do no more, but when they have done all, the Truth they shall never pluck from
me, but I will live and dye by it; and if thus to do must be accounted to be
mad, and to play the fool, let every true Christian be resolute to be yet more
mad, and still to play the fool more, for the sake of Christ and the Truth.

USE III. F or Exhortation and Direction: and there are two branches of the
Exhortation; Buy the Truth, and Sell it not: which may be applied distinctly.

1. In the first place, let it be to invite customers to come and Buy. Truths
market is kept up in these Ordinances, which we are called to dispense; and
here are a great many lookers on that vouchsafe to come where this heavenly
treasure is opened, and exposed to their view; and you do well (so far) that
you do come; who knows but that God may persuade you to buy also before you go?
his preventing grace may meet with men unexpectedly. But let me ask what (I
pray) do you come for? is there any thing here to be had that you are
apprehensive that you have a need of, and are therefore making enquiry after?
if they be the worlds dignities and preferments that you would have, you are
more like to lose than get them by coming hither; you must go to Princes
Courts, or Kings Palaces if you hope to find them: it it be the Earths
Gallantry and outward Bravery, or any other thing which may afford content to
your carnal Lusts that you are inquisitive after, neither do we pretend to
offer such things as these, but counsel you to mortify such lusts, and to
exercise sobriety in the use of those things; but if you are resolved to have
them, you must go to the Worlds Market for them: here is nothing but truth set
out at this Fair, and if you have no occasion for that, you are like to lose
your labor in coming hither: But if that be it which you do indeed stand in
need of, here it is, and you shall have it good cheap: and why will you not Buy
the Truth? One would think that this Trade should never be dead, that Truth
should never have occasion to complain for want of Customers; that this Market
rather than any other, should be crowded so full of Buyers, that there should
be no room left for Gazers. But the truth is, the bigger part by far of the
Children of men have other Bargains in making, and are deeply engaged in
contriving and pursuing of them; and all their business in turning in hither,
is only for a little diversion, and yet so, they can hardly divert their minds
from that which they have in chase; but whiles their bodies are in the house of
God, their hearts are after their covetousness. But give me leave now to borrow
the liberty of a few words with you who never have bought the Truth, since you
seem for the present to have a little leisure to be spoken withal. It may be
some of you can call to your remembrance, that the best and most profitable
Bargains that ever you made in all your lives, were some that you lighted upon
unexpectedly, and never dreamt of them before: I am sure God himself has said
in our present case, I am found of those that sought me not, Isai. 61. 1. the
Grace of God evermore prevents the wills of men, and begins the happy Bargain
between them and him, for which they shall bless his Holy Name for ever: and
therefore, what though you are come hither on no such errand, nor had the least
intent of buying any thing that is here to be sold, but it was the furthest
thing from your thoughts; yet what if God and you should make a match before
you part? suppose you should buy up truth, and get a sure Possession of it as
your own before you leave this place; what harm? why may it not be so? I am
sure God (whose the Truth is) is willing to it; and I am resolved (by his help)
to do the utmost that I am able to set it forward: give me leave therefore to
do these two things. 1. To commend this Commodity to your buying. 2. To
instruct you in or about the buying of it.

1. By way of Motive: And here I might preface this commendation, by blowing
upon all other Commodities whatsoever, and telling you what poor, empty,
unprofitable trash they are in comparison with this: what childish Baubles and
Rattles all the Worlds Honors are; What Shells and Husks, and Chafe are all
its Riches; What Shadows and insubstantial things are all its pleasures; that
he who labors for them, does but labor for the East Wind; he that lays out
Money for the procuring of them, does it for that which is not bread; he that
purchases and possesses them, inherits nothing but vanity and vexation of
spirit: and he that has taken the greatest pains, and been followed with the
best success inquest of them, after all his toil, travail and expense, sits
down in the conclusion as unsatisfied as ever, and when I have said it, I might
make it all good (and a great deal more) as by the testimony of the Word of
God, which is full and clear in this point, so by the confession of a great
multitude of Men, who have found it to be so by unhappy experience; and let not
this consideration be neglected. But let me acquaint you, that Truth needs no
foil to set it off, it having sufficient worth and excellency in it self, to
commend it to the Children of men; though they observe it not by reason of
inadvertency, who if they did consider his Field, would surely buy it: and to
help you to this discovery, and to engage your Minds, and Hearts to it.

1. Let me advise you to ask of them that have bought the Truth, and that have
paid the dearest for it, how they like their Bargain, and whither ever they saw
cause to repent of it. Abraham left his native Land, and his Fathers House, he
turned a Pilgrim and Stranger in the Land of Canaan, where he had no possession
of his own, besides a Burying place; nor had he any fixed abode, but went to and
fro, dwelling in Tents, and all this for the Truth.

Isaak and Jacob continued in the same Land after him, and went through the
like hardships; and did they ever study after a return? The Apostle acquaints
us that they had the opportunity easily to have done it, if they had had any
mind to it, Heb. 11. 15. Moses was another, and he voluntarily forewent the
riches and glories of a Kingdom (and that one of the most flourishing then in
the World) for the Truth and that not in a pang of rain and heady zeal, without
deliberation; but he did it upon a free and premeditated Choice; he laid them
together weighted them in the balance, and he refused the one on purpose that
he might enjoy the other; and that was not when Truth was dressed up in outward
bravery, having power, prosperity and credit attending upon it, but when it was
beset with all manner of difficulties and afflictions, and he saw that he must
throw himself into a world of trouble for its sake, this hindered not his
Election, nor discouraged his heart in it,. ver. 24. and do we find that ever
he revoked it, or so much as befooled himself for being guilty of a mistake in
what he had done? No, neither he, nor any other that did as he, and with the
same sincerity ever repented them. The Truth has given unto all those that
have been possessed of it such plentiful satisfaction, that for sweetness it
outdid the Honeycomb, and for preciousness it went beyond the most refined
gold in their estimation, Psalm. 19. 9, 10. and they have both verbally and
practically acknowledged that it was so. If you can meet with but one true
Christian in the whole World, that will upon advice asked of him, give you
counsel against it, and tell you that it is to dear a penniworth; nay, if they
do not tell you that there is so much to be gotten by the purchase, and they
have already experienced so much of excellency and ravishing delight in it,
that they would not exchange it for the quintiscence of earthly treasures; and
that nothing repents them but only that they drove this Bargain no sooner, but
foolishly stood off trifling so long; then let it alone and say no more; but
this shall you never do. I have read the story of a Christian, who bound over
all his estate to a Heathen for security, assuring him that if he would embrace
the Truth, it should never repent him, but that he should be enforced to say
there was unspeakably more of soul satisfaction in at than in the whole world
beside: nor was it long before he returned him his Bond cancelled, assuring him
that he had enough in hand for his acquittance, and better security for that
which was remaining; and why will not you try too?

2. Listen to such as have the Truth offered to them, and they have been so
imprudent as to refuse to come to the price of it, and hear how they bewail it.
The Wise man brings in such an unhappy wretch thus bewailing and bemoaning
himself, Prove. 5. 12, 13. How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised
reproof? and have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine ears
to them that instructed me? Did you never take a turn with some forlorn
creature, that had so long despised the Gospel offers, till he was forsaken of
God, and given up to the rack of a tormenting conscience? or did you never
stand by the bedside of a profligate Prodigal, that had spent his market day in
buying trifles, in following of his lustful pleasures, and in hording up of
earthly treasures, and perceived his parting Soul stand trembling upon his
quivering lips, and groaning out this its last ejulation? Oh how wretchedly
have I outstood the happy advantage of Truths Market? how seriously, how
solemnly, how frequently did God offer it to me? at how easy rates might I have
been made the blessed owner of it? how long did he stand waiting upon me, and
knocking at my door? what pathetical and heartmelting arguments did he use with
me to have persuaded me? and oh how happy had I now been, had I but accepted of
it? but I slept out that precious harvest; I loytered out that opportunity of
the Market; I despised the offer that was made unto me; I entertained a vile
and low opinion of the Truth, and took delight in scoffing at counsels, and
quenching of the strivings of the blessed Spirit with me: and now the day is
over, the time is gone, the opportunity is lost: and I for this vile neglect of
mine am lost for ever: Oh for one of those Sabbaths, those Lectures, those
precious seasons of grace! That I had but known those things of my peace in the
day of them! but they are hidden from me; and because I despised them whilst I
did enjoy them, I must have them no more; and for want of that slighted Truth,
which once I might have been owner of, I am undone and must perish
everlastingly. And what impression does this make upon your hearts? let me tell
you these are no fancies, nor Romantic Stories, but realites; take them then
as rouzing hints to awaken you from your souldestroying carelessness, and put
you upon it to use utmost endeavors, whilst you may, to prevent such deadly
reflections of your own souls. But,

3. The last and principal motive which I shall urge, is this, viz. Consider
that if once you can make the Truth yours, it will certainly make you happy.
All men are naturally inquisitive about felicity; it being that which the
natural cravings of the rational appetite, put into man in his Creation, are
restlesly carried forth after: there is none of the children of men but are
saying, who will show us good? The great design which every man has on foot is
to compass it; though the greatest number of them labor of woeful
disappointments: now, I can assure you, that that Happiness which men are at so
much study in seeking after, and have been at so much labor and pains to
obtain, and have yet been so horribly cheated of their expectation after all,.
is in this way infallibly to be attained, viz. Buy the Truth and you without
doubt shall purchase felicity with it. Prove. 8. 34, 35. Blessed is the man that
hears me, watching daily at my gate, waiting at the posts of my doors; for
whosoever finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord. Truth
is it self the Blessedness of the Understanding, and it brings that good with
it which must needs happily the whole man. I have offered something already
under the former use, in the deserved commendation of Truth, in vindication of
the wisdom of all those that drive a constant trade in it: but such is the
great worth and most admirable excellency of it, that there cannot be too much
said in its praise here: therefore let me further say of it,

1. It will make you inchoatively happy in this Life. Buy the Truth and it will
bring you into acquaintance with the beginnings of glory, and that in these
several respects;

1. It will be a safeguard to you in your passage through an evil world. It
will keep and preserve you from all those uncountable mischiefs that lie
strewed in the way you have to go: no enemy can do you any harm, no Devils or
evils can prevail upon you, whilst you keep a firm possession of the Truth. It
is a well fortified Garrison, and as long as you keep your selves within it,
you cannot be wounded: do you but keep the Truth, and it will undoubtedly keep
you, Prove. 2. 10, 11, 12. and chap. 4. 5, 6. Forsake her not, and she shall
preserve thee; love her, and she shall keep thee. We shall therefore find David
when complaining of the Oppression of his enemies, making of such a request,
Psalm. 43. 3. O send forth thy light, and thy Truth, let them lead me, and let
them bring me unto thy holy hill: he looked upon it as his sufficient security:
his meaning is, that he would be under the conduct of Gods Word, or of those
Saving Truths of God, and that shall satisfy him, he desires no more; and Psalm
86. 11. Teach me thy way, O Lord! I will walk in thy Truth. It was a day of
sore trouble, as appears by the beginning of the Psalm; and this is the help
which he seeks against it. If you had all the world in combination against you,
and all the Devils of hell added to them, to strengthen the Conspiracy, yet
under this banner you should vanquish them all: this will make discovery of all
those secret designs that are contrived against you; it will point you to the
places where their ambushments are laid to entangle you, and help you to escape
them, yea it will give you the victory, and afford you a glorious triumph after
all the furious skirmishes that you have been engaged in; You shall see a
thousand to fall at your right hand, and ten thousand at your left, but it
shall not come nigh unto you: It was never yet known that Truth ever left any,
whom it undertook to be a convoy unto, till it had brought them clear through
the deserts, and set them beyond the reach of any mischief.

2. It will be a sure light to guide you through all the intricacies of the way
that you have to go in. David professes this concerning the Word of God, which
is the Truth I am now treating of, Psalm. 119. 1^5. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my
feet, and a light unto my path. If you will but follow the guidance of the
Truth, and hearken to its direction, you shall never wander: you have abundance
of the darkness of ignorance within you, and it is not in man of himself to
direct his own steps; but this will show you the right-way, and direct you to
the path you should go in: There are a great many of, stumbling blocks that lie
in your way, which Satan and his instruments are laying there, that they make
you to stumble and fall, but this shall help you over them all: There are a
great many by paths and cross ways which lead into danger, and will certainly
leave those that take them in a pathless wilderness, where they shall be in
peril of being lost; but this shall deliver you from them, and point you out
the right way, and teach you how to keep it: This shall be a voice behind you
saying this is the way, walk in it, when you are ready to turn to the right, or
to the left hand. Hearken to its voice, and you shall never go astray, take its
directions, and there is no danger of your being bewildred and lost; follow its
advice, and you shall not be drawn aside, Prove. 7. 4, 5. and chap. 2. 9. Then
shall thou understand righteousness, and judgments, and equity, and every
right path.

3. It will be a good companion unto you; it will stand by and stick close to
you, when all other of your friends and companions shall be removed far away
from you; it will be a friend at all times, and cleave closer to you than a
brother; when father and mother shall forsake you, then will it take you up: in
the house of mourning, it will be a comforter: the Psalmist found it so to him,
Psalm. 119. 50: as you are traveling through this sollitary and howling
wilderness, it will keep fast by you; so that you shall never be left alone, or
need to want good company; but shall have the benefit of this sweet counselor
to afford you direction and consolation; though you should be carried to
Prisons, and thrown into dungeons, there it will hold conference with you, and
give you its advice.

4. It will furnish you with sufficient supply in all your adversity. As it
will be a portion which you can never be robbed of, so it will be a full and
satisfying portion when you are stripped of every other thing: It will (in the
absence of them) be to you instead of father and mother, wife and children,
houses and lands, gold and silver, food and raiment, health and strength; these
may all of them be taken away from you, but. Truth never can: David prefers it
to great spoil, Psalm. 119. 162: This Truth contains in it great and precious
promises, with which, he that has them may live well enough upon a rock; here
is laid up that hidden manna, which will satisfy your hungry souls in the
desert; this is it which will give you your fill in the time of famine, that
will deliver you from all fear of evil, when there is nothing else but evil
encompassing you round about, and will carry you secure through a land of
drought.

5. It will be a Cordial to you in all your spiritual faintings; David
therefore prays for this in his deepest dejection, Psalm. 119 25. my soul
cleaves to the dust, quicken me according to thy word. This will give you
songs in the night, when all creature comfort is withdrawn, it will derive
secret and solid refreshment to your spirits, when they are under never so
great pressures: There are wonderful Consolations are wrapped up in this Truth,
such as are able to fetch a dying soul to life again, and restore it to vigor:
it will hold your heads, cheer up your hearts, and bind up your wounds; David
sound all this by plentiful experience, Psalm. 94: 19. In the multitude of my
thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul.

6. It will advance you to the highest communion in this life; even to
Communion with God himself. God has declared himself to be a God of Truth, and
therefore if Truth dwells with us, God also dwells with us: if we have Truth
for our Possession, then we have God for our portion, and if we abide by the
Truth, he also will abide by us. The Truth will lead us, and bring us to the
Holy Hill and Tabernacle where God dwells, as Psalm: 43. 3. nay, it is that
which will make us to abide in God, 1 John 2. 27. and hence one great end of
preaching the Gospel of Truth, is to promote this communion, 1 John 1. 3. That
which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye may have fellowship
with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. God loves the Truth, and all those that love it, and his secret shall
be with them: and what can this be less then happiness in this life, to live in
the fellowship of the Great God?

7. It will support you under, and carry you cheerfully through the agonies of
Death. Then to be sure (if not before) all other comforts will fail you, every
other prop that has sometime been a relief to you, will then slip from under
you, but then Truth will underset you, and keep your souls from sinking; this
holds up Hezekiahs heart in the very prospect of a grave and rottenness, Isa.
38. 3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in
Truth This makes Paul to clap his hands, when he apprehends the time of his
offering to approach, 2 Timothy 4. 7. I have kept the Faith. Look over all these
things, and now say, what would you have more of happiness, till you are landed
in the place of full enjoyment? why Buy the Truth, and it shall be all this to
and do all this for you: but then,

2. After it has been so advantageous to you in this life, it will also lead
you safe home into the fruition of perfect felicity in the other life; and here
observe,

1. It will bring you to the Beatifical Vision. All streams do naturally lead
down to the Ocean; and all Divine Truths do as certainly carry us home to God
himself, who is the Essential Truth. As Truth comes from God, so it leads back
to God; and although this vision be not the whole of Eternal Felicity, yet it
is both a main and principal part of it, (hence Heavens Glory is so often
expressed by it in the Scriptures; as in Mat. 5. 8. They shall see God, i. e.
be happy: So 1 John 3. 2. We shall see him as he is: and Heb. 12. 14. Without
which no man shall see God;) and also it implies all the rest, whatsoever can
be thought of with it; for all joys and pleasures accompany this vision, Psalm.
16. 11. In thy presence (or sight) is fullness of Joy. The purchase of Truth
gives us an imperfect sight here, and that is in order to perfection: Heaven
therefore may be included in that Holy Hill, which David prays that the Truth
may bring him into; Psalm. 43. 3.

2. It will place you upon an Heavenly Throne, and put upon your heads an
Everlasting Crown, Prove. 4. 8, 9. a Crown of Glory shall she deliver to thee.
This is contained in all those faithful and true promises, which all of those
embrace, and purchase for their own, who buy the Truth: and if these promises
are parts of the Truth, then they must of necessity be fulfilled, or else Truth
it self might become false, which is impossible. God himself has by his own
word and engagements, annexed an Eternal Kingdom, an Immortal Crown, an
Everlasting Weight of Glory to the Truth, and they go together inseparably; so
that he that Buys the Truth, has all this into the Bargain, and that fully and
inviolably confirmed to him in the same hour that he buys it: hence Believers
are called the Heirs of Salvation, because it is part of Truths Inheritance,
and is with it confirmed to them.

3. In a word, that I may sum up all in one; it will fulfill for you all the
promised good* and give you the full and everlasting possession of it. This
Truth is the security of the promise, it is the first fruit of the purchase, it
is the earnest of the Inheritance, and therefore in it he that buys it may find
all the good that is to be had in the Kingdom of Glory, secured to him: and who
can tell the vastness of the store, the infiniteness of the treasure that is
laid up there? if that saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not seen,
etc. may truly be applied to those things which the people of God have in hand,
which are but the sips and foretasts, but the esseys and earnests of glory,
what tongue then can express, or heart conceive, what are those reserves in the
Covenant, which are kept for the entertainment of those happy souls afterward,
who have had so much wisdom here as to sell all and Buy the Truth? Doubtless
those that are happifyed with the Fruition of these ineffable things, can after
a more ravishng manner use the words of the Queen of Sheba, and say; that they
had (in the Country of their former abode) heard glorious things reported of
those mansions of delight, and high happiness which was reserved for them, yea
so much as the credit whereof induced them to adventure their all upon the
hopes of enjoying it; but that the one half was not told them: Nor indeed are
the narrow souls of the children of men capable of making room enough to
entertain the apprehension of these things, so long as they are straightened in a
body of frail flesh; and now, what do you say to all this? will you blow upon
the Truth still? will you yet despise it? or will you not rather say, is this
the excellent profit of buying the Truth, what shall we do then that we may
become owners of it.

2. It now follows that I proceed to give some Direction about what is to be
done by you, if you would not fail of getting and possessing the Truth as your
own, or obtaining a sure and never failing title to it: and here,

1. In order to your making of this purchase, you must come to the Truths
Market, with a real purpose to buy it, and that you may thus do, it is
requisite that you apprehend, believe and practice such things as these;

1. You must believe that there is such a thing as Truth. Ignorance is an
unavoidable ground of negligence; many a man does therefore live contentedly
without a thing, and never so much as makes enquiry after it, because he knows
not that there is any such thing to be had, which if he were well informed of,
it would be the next thing that he would be laying out for: Now that there is
such a Rule by which fallen man be sufficiently directed to the attainment of
eternal life; that the sinner is not left under an absolute necessity of
perishing, for want of a clue to guide him in the right-way to escape the
wrath, and obtain the favor of God; that infinite mercy has not only provided
a remedy for all that misery which man's Apostasy has brought upon the world,
but also pointed out the way by which he may come at it, the Scriptures do
abundantly assure us; yea Christ affirms it of himself that he is so, John 14.
6. I am the way, the Truth, and the life; and all the counsels and
encouragements propounded in the Gospel, are given to this end, to persuade us
that this is attainable by us in some way or other.

2. You must also believe that you have it not in your own possession by
nature: it is a Rule which the Apostle lays down, and it is to be applied
universally, 1 Cor. 3. 18. If any man among you seems to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise. It is the everlasting
undoing of a great many men, that they are blown up with a fond conceit that
they are born possessed of the Truth; that they have in them naturally a
sufficient light to direct them in the right way, and guide them safely home to
blessedness, see Job. 11. 12. Vain man would be wise though man be born like
the Wild Asses Colt* Vain* Hebr. Empty; i. e. empty of wisdom, of knowledge,
and of Truth; viz. that which is Divine and Saving. Would be wise; i. e. he
would be thought so to be, he challenges it to himself as his privilege: Wild
Asses Colt; which are reported the most sottish, stupid and foolish among all
the sensitive creatures; and this is one great reason why so few came to draw
water at these wells of Salvation, to buy Truth at this Fair, because they are
conceited that they have it already: and who will lay out his money to buy that
of which he has store enough at home? This will either keep men from coming at
all to Wisdoms School (and some there be who have said, why should we go to the
Ordinances? we can hear no more there than what we already know as well as the
Preacher,) or else if they do come, because it is the custom so to do, it will
carry them forth, to carp, scoff, flout, and deride at every thing that is
there offered; and so they are far from being like to barter: they are the
thirsty that are invited to come; Isa. 55. 1. but he that is full cannot
thirst; the full soul loathes the honey comb.

3. You must apprehend that you do really want it: the former will be
insignificant without this be added to it. That which a man knows he has not,
if with all he is not apprehensive of a need that he has of it, but supposes
that he can do well enough without it, nay possibly would esteem it not a
favor, but a burden to have it, he will very contentedly let that thing alone:
I before intimated that Thirst drives men to the waters; now to Thirst there is
supposed, not only the absence, or not having of drink, but also a craving
appetite, filling us with a real sense of the want of it, and convincing us of
mischief and misery likely to ensue, if we cannot obtain it, and to such as
these it is that these waters are nextly offered on sale, John 7. 37 If any man
thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. You must see and find that you have
lost the way of peace, and are bewildred in the crooked paths that lead to
destruction, and be convinced that the more you seek to disentangle your
selves, the more you are beswampt in this desert place: that you are benighted
in this land of darkness, among the horrible pits, into which falling, you may
well reckon that you tumble into ruin; and that except it please God to
enlighten you with his Truth, and send that forth to guide and lead you, you
must inevitably be lost eternally: you must be deeply convinced that your
everlasting happiness depends absolutely upon your having the Truth to be your
Pilot to steer your course for you; your Lamp to enlighten your darkness, and
show you the path of life. It is fullness that gives encouragement to sloth,
and persuades men to fold their hands; but want, when once it comes to be
thoroughly felt, and the misery of it pincheth the man, it will drive him to
seek out for a supply.

4. You muts apprehend and believe where Truth is to be had: the want of a
right understanding of this has proved the ruin of many an one, they mist the
right place; and so were put off with a cheat. The Truth is not opened in every
mart, nor to be bought at every shop; but if you would know where you may find
it, and not miss of it, know, that it is laid up in the Word of God, and in
these chambers you may be sure to meet with it; and therefore your way is to be
much in converse with the Holy Scriptures, so you may be enriched with this
treasure; hear David, Psa. 119. 98, 99. Thou through thy Commandments have made
me wiser than mine enemies, for they are ever with me. I have more
Understanding than all my Teachers, for thy Testimonies are my meditation. God
by his Spirit sells the Truth, to those that seek it, James 1 5. If any man
lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives liberally. You must therefore be
much and earnest in prayer to God for it; so was David, Psalm. 119. 18, 33, 34.
It is to be found in our sequestered retirements from all other encumbring
affairs, and setting our selves to ponder upon it, Prove. 18. 1. through desire,
a man having separated himself, seeks and intermedleth with all wisdom. You
must therefore disengage from these distractions, and get liberty to make this
your business: It is to be had in the company and communion of the people of
God, Prove. 13. 20. he that walks with wisemen, shall be wise; you must then
choose such as these are for your companions, and forsake the society of the
worlds fools, i. e. of ungodly men, for it follows, but a companion of fools
shall be destroyed. It is especially to be gained in the house of God; and at
his Ordinances, in which (by Gods own appointment) the Truth is brought forth,
sometimes one part of it, sometimes another; and he has given to his servants
in charge, that they do present it before, propose the terms to, and use their
best endeavor to drive the bargain with men; these therefore must be
frequented; hence they are the persons who are declared blessed who wait at the
posts of the doors of Wisdoms House, Prove. 8. 34.

5: You must not only come hither, but it must be with a purpose to buy the
Truth: this ought to be your design, the very errand that brings you hither,
the business that you come about; and therefore you must ask and enquire after
it. It is true, Gods grace prevents us, and first begins with us, and he always
offers before we ask: but yet it is as true, that before a bargain be thoroughly
driven bebetween God and a Sinner, he is wont to make us to feel our emptiness
and want, and thereupon raise up in our hearts such a sense as drives us to
ask, to wait for, and to cheapen it: the man before that time, was wont to go
to the House of God; he frequented the Ordinances after a formal and customary
manner; and if a reason had then been asked of him why he went, and what he
went for, it would have put him hard to it, to have given a rational answer,
for indeed he went he well knew not for what, and thereupon he used to come
away again, as wise as he went, and this is the lamentable case of the greatest
number of those that live in places of Gospel Light, and sit under the
dispensation of the means of grace: But now the case is altered, and he can
resolve you, that it is the Truth he is seeking after, he feels a destroying
want of it, and has heard that here it may be gotten, and this makes him to
set himself to hearken with diligence, and bend his mind to receive the
conception of things, and to wait upon God for his Spirit to make application
of them to his Soul; and this is the first thing to be done, if you would buy
the Truth.

2. Beware of a cheat, and therefore endeavor, so be well persuaded that it is
the Truth before you buy it. If it be Truth that you come to the market for,
take diligent heed to your selves that you do not carry home a lie with you in
the room of it, and to put you upon it to be exceeding cautious here, let me
offer these considerations.

1. There are a great many of Cheats going up and down the World, seeking to
vend Falsehoods under the specious pretense of Truth. If all those that open
Shop, and hang out a Sign for the Truth, were indeed authorized, and set up by
divine approbation, the danger would be by much the less: but there are the
Locusts of the bottomless pit, the Spawn of Hell, the spirits of Devils,
Satan's Factors, employed by him, to go up and down seeking by all means to
seduce and draw souls away after them: and if they can but obtain to be
believed, they will persuade us that it is nothing but Truth which they bring
with them to put off: they set that mark upon the Doctrines of Devils, hoping
that by such an imposture simple and inconsiderate Souls will be drawn into the
cheat: and that they may make these to pass the better, and find the more ready
reception among men, they call themselves New-Lights, and they are new-Truths,
which they bring with them to impart unto us; Truths that have lain hid (in
some by corner) from the World for many Ages, and it has labored of great
unhappiness for the want of them, but they have by some strange and wonderful
way made the blessed discovery of them, and being loath to keep them only to
themselves, they are (in good will) greatly desirous to expose them for the
common benefit of man kind; these our Savior Christ would have us to beware
of, and that for this reason, Mat. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets, which come
to you in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

2. These Impostors have a wonderful art of palliating and settlng off their
false Wares: they have gotten such a strange faculty to make a ly to look so
like unto the Truth that without an exceeding diligent inspection into it, it
will not be discovered; they can readily and fearlesly father all their
falsehoods upon God, and call him in to patronize them, as they Ezekiel 13. 7. Ye
say, the Lord says it, albeit I have not spoken. They can horribly wrest the
Scriptures. and loudly plead them to be of their mind; 2 Pet. 3. 16. They that
are unlearned and unstable wrest, as also they do the other Scriptures. But
their main and most pernicious cunning of all is, by insinuation, and stealing
into the hearts and affections of men; and so to colloegue them into an
admiration of their persons, which (when obtained) will mightily draw them to
the approbation of their Doctrines`: they can cunningly carry before them a
great deal of seeming Mortification, and look as if they were the most zealous
men breathing for the keeping up to the highest pitch of Holiness and Worship,
Col. 2. 23. and they are often making very great pretenses, how much they are
concerned for the good of Souls; how grieved they are to see such numbers
deluded and misled by such as pretend to direct them; how mightily their
notions (if embraced) would tend to magnify God, and encourage sinners: thus
the Apostle describes them, Romans 16. 18. They that are such serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive
the hearts of the simple. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. Such are false Apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 6. Of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive
silly Women laden with sins And one main engine which they make use of further
to promote their design, is a strange faculty that they have gotten of
undermining and scandalizing the true and faithful servants of Jesus Christ, of
which sort Paul met with not a few, in the pursuit of his Ministry: there is
therefore need of a great deal of wisdom and caution to be used by all those
that would not be deceived.

3. Add to this, and that makes it of the more weight; There is a foolish
inclination in man's nature more readily to take up contented with a ly, than
with the Truth. It is not to be denied but that Truth is the proper and
adequate object of the understanding, which is therefore by its natural
inclination carried out in the enquiry after it: Hence it follows, that men do
not embrace a ly as such, but it must come to them under the notion and
consideration of Truth, if ever they give any credit thereunto: But this does
not make the present case any whit better, but if well considered it renders it
much worse; because if they who are so seduced could be but persuaded that it
is false, it were then an easy thing to beat them off from it; but because
they are confidently built on it that it is true, this makes them to hold it
tenaciously; and this still makes it the farther perilous, because the fall
has so crazed the mind of man, and confounded his apprehension of things, and
so rendered his judgment so perverse, that he naturally calls good evil, and
evil good, light darkness, and darkness light. His spiritual Optics are
strangely discolored, the principles of his natural reason are become corrupt,
the Rules by which he measures and weighs things are depraved: he has gotten
to him false balances, the balance of deceit. The Psalmist gives the right
character of a natural man in respect of his intellectuals, Psalm 58. 3. The
wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be born,
speaking lies. And (...) it follows, that a ly easier finds entertainment with
him than the Truth; he is more (...) to close in with falsehood than (...)
understanding, proceeding according to its false reasonings, is persuaded to
believe that it sees sufficient reason for it: and this plainly speaks that
there must needs be the greater reason for us to be exceeding wary to our
selves, when we consider that we must in our search after Divine Truth, go
against our own natural Bias.

4. Thus to be deceived will prove a very pernicious thing. If you buy up error
in stead of the Truth, the best of it is You lay out money for that which is
not bread; you lose all the labor and cost which you have been at in seeking
after it: and if this were all (though it is a great deal to much) it were not
so bad; but there is a worse thing in it than so; for he who buys falsehood for
Truth, buys a mischief instead of a blessing: and though all errors are not
alike poison, yet they are all of them infectious. All lies are of a kin, they
are directly opposite to the Truth, and therefore have a natural tendency to
subvert and destroy it: To be mistaken in circumstantials, is not so deadly as
for a man to be so in substantials; to err in the superstructure, is not so
dangerous as to do it in the foundation: but still, every ly believed, carries
a man so far away from God, who is Truth it self; and not only so, but it also
exposes men woefully unto more; as a man that is out of his way, is more like
to get further from it, than to return again, so long as he persuades himself
that he is right. A man cannot love an error, but he must consequently hate the
contrary truth, and that is of it self a most woeful thing; but that which is
far worse is, it is the ready way to be left to fall further, yea, till there
be no recovery: awful is that saying of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 19, 20, 21.
Because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved: and
for that cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a
ly; that they all might be damned who believed not the Truth. There are some
errors (though all are bad) which if they were stood at, and men made no
farther progress, we might have much charity for many that hold them, but the
great unhappiness is, that they have proved to be the postern, at which, such
as have made an eminent profession for a while, have gone back to the most
damnable Apostasy; and to have at length altogether lost so much as any
footsteps or marks of their former Religion: and this also says that there
cannot be too great caution used by men against their being seduced, since it
hazards their utter ruin.

Now because there is so much of weight in the right improvement of this
Direction, it being of all cheats the most notoriously mischievous, to be put
off with a gilded error instead of a shining Truth; I shall endeavor to give
some special help here, and that, 1. By way of Caution: 2. By way of Direction.


1. By way of Caution: and here in general, Beware that you judge not of Truth
by false Rules. Every smooth stone, is not to be counted a touch stone, nor
will it distinguish of Metals; there are many Balances that Men make, in
which a thing may bear weight, which when it is brought to the Standard will
there be found too light.

But more particularly, let me caution you in special against such things as
the generality of men are wont to suffer themselves to be abused by: And here,

1. Receive nothing for a Divine Truth upon the (...): And therefore have a
care of having men's persons too much in admiration; the Apostle complains of
such, Jude 16. Having men's persons in admiration because of advantage. That may
be true which men teach, but it is not therefore so because they teach it: it
derives not its verity from their authority: hence you have a description of a
right entertaining of the Word of God, in 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. When ye received the
Word of God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but
(as it is in Truth) the Word of God. That which is it self false, cannot alter
the property, or become otherwise, though it should come with the authority of
an Angel; hence, that, Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, should
preach any other Gospel than that we have Preached, let him be accursed.

And here in particular.

1. Make not great men your Rule. It is an evident note of a practical Atheist,
that will always be of the Court Religion where he lives, be it what it will;
I mean to make that the Rule of his Profession and look no farther: They put
the highest affront imaginable upon mankind, who bind them always to believe
as the Church believes, thereby, meaning their Rulers and Leaders; and how
rationally soever those Pharisees and Elders supposed themselves to argue
against the common peoples believing in Christ, I am sure they argued
irreligiously, Joh. 7. 48. Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed
on him? Great men are not always wise, I am sure not spiritually and savingly
so, and to Judge of Truth by them, is to try it by a Lesbian Rule, that will
bend it self to the mutable humors of men, and is the ready way to make Truth
(which of it self is immutable) every whit as changeable as the times and
fashions.

2. Make not Wise and Learned Men your Rule. Men may be intimately acquainted
with all the mysteries of Art and Nature, and yet be strangers to the saving
Truths of the Word of God: We should constantly carry about with us that solemn
expression of Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Not many wise are called; and that of our
Savior Christ, Mat. 11. 25. Thou have hid those things from the wise and
prudent and have revealed them unto babes; even so, Father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight. It is a worthy Observation of one, That all the Heresies
that have been so mischievous to the Christian World, were nothing else but the
trimmings and flourishes of humane Learning. Not that Learning and Knowledge are
therefore to be contemned; that of Solomon is observable, Eccles. 2. 13. Wisdom
excels folly, as far as light excels darkness. but withal we must
remember that many men while they have thought to be wise, became fools in
their imaginations; yea, how often does it sadly prove a Truth, that the Worlds
Wise men, improve their wisdom against the Truth; and counting the Doctrines of
Christ to be foolishness, do set themselves directly to subvert them?

3. Make not Holy Men, your Rule; I mean such as make the greatest show and
appearance of it. For as there is a feigned Holiness, which is the worst
iniquity, so the best of men are but men; and because they are so, must be
liable to mistakes: good men have had their errors, and those sometimes great
ones too; however, they are not of themselves infallible: those that were the
Penmen of the Holy Scriptures, wherein they were guided by an infallible
Spirit, and wrote as they were inspired; yet in other things they had their
mistakes; P eter himself was once at least to be blamed, Gal. 2. 11. how much
more then have we reason to suppose that others know but in part? and if we
take all their maxims for Oracles, we may easily be misled. When Paul himself
was the Preacher, yet the Bereans are commended, that they took not up his
Doctrine on trust, but searched the Scriptures to find out the truth of it,
Act. 17. 11.

2. Judge not of Truth by the reception that Doctrines find in the World, or
the number of followers which they have.

And here is a double danger to be avoided:

1. There are a great many that run with the multitude, and make a loud cry,
that which every one says must needs be true: but this rule will not hold
universally, if men trust to it, it will many times deceive them; the Scripture
tells us of a time, when the whole World shall wonder after the Beast, Rev. 13.
3. and when the Inhabitants of the Earth shall be made drunk with the wine of
the Fornication of the great Whore, Chap. 17: 1, 2. and this properly aims at
the time when there shall be a general Apostasy from the profession of the
Truth, and men shall be intoxicated with the false Doctrines of Antichrist: The
Scripture informs us that there was once a time when there was but one Elias to
maintain the Truth of Gods Worship against four hundred of Baals Prophets: and
Ecclesiastical History makes report, that once there was occasion for such a
speech, Unus Anastasius contra totum mundum; when there was but one Paphnutius
to withstand an whole Council in defense of the honor of Matrimony: when the
Church was driven into the Wilderness, Truth went with her, whiles error took
the Chair and ruled at pleasure. and it is too certain that Truth does not
always gain the major vote in the Christian World, but is many times
confronted by the greater part of pretenders to it.

2. There are others who think to find out Truth by the fewness of its
followers, and that which is consequent thereupon, the ill entertainment which
it finds with the greatest number of men: and though these may possibly come
nearer to it ordinarily then the others, by reason of the natural pravity of
Man kind; yet neither is this a sufficient Criterion to judge of it by. There
have been those happy times, wherein whole Councils have condemned the Heresies
of a few; when the Synod at Jerusalem could unanimously bear witness against
the Judaizing Christians, who would have subjected the connected Gentiles to
the law of Moses, Act. 15. When the Nicene Council bare a plump Testimony
against the Blasphemy which Arrius vented to the dishonor of the Son of God,
and many the like. God sometimes gives Truth a signal victory over falsehood,
and it triumphs: and it is certain that Heresies, at their first rise, have met
with but a few defenders or abettors, though afterward they have gathered by
rolling, like a Snowball; pride and ambition giving a lift to promote them,
till such time as the light and heat of Truth has melted them again.

3. Determine not of Truth according to your own natural relish: Sin that
dwells in men, has made them flesh pleasers, and the power of inbred
concupiscence has bribed their judgments, so as to persuade them to embrace
the dictates of their own senses, and according as that relisheth Doctrines,
accordingly, either to entertain or reject them: and this is none of the least
reasons why error makes its way so fast, and so soon into the hearts of men,
because there is never an one but what is cut out and adapted to give
satisfaction to one Fleshly Lust or other in the Soul: And men naturally have
entertained so good and charitable an opinion of themselves, and their own
inclinations, that whatsoever notion is broached, which gives the least
encouragement to any of these, goes down glibly, and has a good relish with
them: and hereupon Satan and his factors, easily espying the advantage, and
readily taking hold of it, have so accommodated false Doctrines, as to suit
every fleshly lust in men, in so much as all tempers and humors may have their
choice, and fit themselves with one or other to their great content. Well,
Truth is of a contrary nature, and is levelled directly against all these lusts
of the hearts of men, and mainly designs the battering of them down, or the
mortification of them, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting
down imaginations, etc. if therefore you meet with any Doctrine which
endeavors to gratify your corrupt part, conclude upon one of these two, that
either it is not the Truth, or if it be, that you do not rightly resent it.

4. Rest not in the Judgment of your own Reason: Determine not of Truth and
Falsehood by the ratiocinations, and comprehensions of your Judgments. There
are some who would be counted and called Rational Professors, and these lay it
down for a maxim, that nothing is to be received for a truth in Relegion, but
what our reason can fathom, and make a Demonstration of, so that this must be
made the very standard, and supreme judge of Truth: whereas the Word of God
acquaints us, that the Christian Religion is a great mystery, 1 Timothy 1. 3. 16.
Great is the mystery of Godliness. It is true indeed, that there is highest
reason to give credit to Divine Truths, because they are born witness unto, by
him who is the Truth: and the authority of Divine Testimony, carries in it more
force to command our credit to the things which it asserts, then all the
arguments which our invention can fetch out of the Topics of Reason, or borrow
from the observation of our senses, God being to be believed for himself,
because, he cannot ly: But to think to be able to sound the depth, and reach
the bottom of these things with the short plumbline of our Understanding, is
truly madness; our breath is lost before we have dived half the way; and for us
to resolve to believe no more than what we are able to grasp with our reason,
is distraction; and carries in it an implicit resolution to banish the most
necessary and Soul Saving Truths out of our Creed: Consider here, (...) Your
Natural Reason is prejudiced, for which consideration it cannot be a competent
judge. To talk of a Jesus Crucified no way agrees with a Grecians logic, and
therefore he counts it foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 23. We preach Christ crucified,
to the Greeks foolishness: and hear what a Commentary Festus makes of it, Acts
25. 19. and of one Jesus which was Dead, whom Paul affirms to be alive. The
Doctrine of the Resurrection, contradicts an Athenians Philosophy, and if Paul
himself preached it, he shall pass under the reputation of a Babbler, Acts 17.
18. some said, what will this babbler say? because he Preached unto them Jesus
and the Resurrection. Yea, indeed the whole counsel of God meets with enmity to
oppose it in a carnal mind, no wonder then if he cannot subject his reason and
judgment to it, Romans 8. 7.

2. Your Reason is too narrow to comprehend it. Truth is a Sea unnavigable, a
gulf that will not be fathomed by us; the length and breadth, height, and depth
of it pass our knowledge; Job. 11. 8, 9. It is as high as heaven, what can
thou do? deeper than hell what can thou know? the measure thereof is longer
than the earth, and broader than the Sea. Our Understanding will soon be
Non-plust in these contemplations; for Faith it self is rapt into the
transports of an astonishing admiration, Paul that had been admitted to take a
view of the glories of the Third Heaven, yet here he stands upon the brinks,
and cries out, Oh the Depth! Romans 11. 33. If our Savior Christ does but
discourse with Nicodemus about the A B C of Christianity, (the Doctrine of
Regeneration) this great Doctor and Master in Israel is put to a nonplus, and
demands how can these things be, Joh. 3. 9. Truths light is truly dazzling, and
the eyes of our Understandings are very weak and sore. Truth is Immense, and
our Reason is Finite; and however opiniated we may be of our selves, and
proudly presumptuous of our large reaches, yet it is certain, that we may as
soon comprize the Ocean in an Eg shell, as comprehend all Sacred Truths in our
Reason But,

2. Let it be by way of Direction, and here if we would not be mistaken;

1. In general, the Written Word of God is the proper and only touch stone by
which we are to try and find out the Truth. Whatsoever is needful to be known
in Order to our enjoyment of Communion with God in this life, and attaining
eternal felicity in that which is to come, is contained in the Holy Scriptures,
and there is no particular rule of practice for our guidance in the cases which
we can meet with, but the solution of it, is there, either expressed in so many
words, or implied by necessary and undeniable consequence. Scripture perfection
is one main Article of the Christian Religion, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All Scripture
is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, etc that the
man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works; whatsoever
Doctrines are not according to it, are to be repudiated as false, Isa. 8. 20.
To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this word it is
because there is no light in them. God, who knew his own mind best, has herein
communicated it to the children of men, and has limited our enquiry to it,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but those things
which are revealed, belong unto us and our children for ever. And he has
declared it as a dangerous thing for us to make any additions hereunto, Prove.
30. 6. add not unto his word, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.
Whatsoever therefore men may say; or their own thoughts dictate, be sure to ask
if the Scriptures say so too, and if not, count them for fancies in Religion.
But,

2. I may descend to lay down some more particular help for the finding out of
the truth, to which end take these following Rules.

1. Be much in prayer to God for the illumination of his Spirit: It is not
enough to be much in reading and studying of the Scriptures, though that also
must be attended; for if we go about it with a proud confidence, leaning to our
own Understandings, we expose our selves to be lost: It is easy for us to be
deluded, and we know that the vilest Heretics have sought to make the Word of
God to patronize their most absurd opinions and none that labor so much as
they to fill up their pages with Scripture citations, which they put upon the
rack, hoping to make them confess their lies to be true. None knows the mind of
God in the Scripture but his own Spirit, and such to whom he will reveal it, 1
Cor. 2. 12, 13. and such as would be best informed, must ask his Illumination;
Luther's been Orasse, been studuisse, belongs not to Ministers (...) but also
to all Christians. The Word indeed is a Lamp, and the Law is light, but the
misery is, our eyes are out, and it is not this light will open them of it
self, but only the author of it. As our dependence upon the teachings of the
Spirit ought not to encourage our neglect of the reading of the Word of God,
and attending upon those helps to acquaint our selves with it which God affords
us in the Public Ministry; so neither should we confide in our own pains, or
be satisfied with our skill: we have David here for a pattern, who professes
Gods Law to be his meditation day and night, and declares that this meditation
was an help to his gaining of more skill than the ancients; yet how often have
we him at prayer earnestly begging, for skill, teaching, illumination, so
acknowledging the subordination of his endeavors, Psa. 119. 18, 27, 33, 34.

2. Make use of and carry about with you some distinguishing marks of Truth,
whereby it may be known and discerned from falsehood and error: be sure to carry
them imprinted on your minds, and be always ready to make application of them
in your reading and hearing. I here shall purposely wave any discourse about
the logical Analyzing of the Scripture, the searching out of the scope of the
Text, and accommodating of all the arguments that are used to the principal
drift or design, which are of excellent use to such as are furnished with the
skill so to do, and also necessary for men of Learning, especially those who
undertake to be Teachers of others; and do require a great deal of time and
study, rightly to perform it; yea and the neglect whereof, is one great reason
why the Scriptures are often quoted impertinently, and besides the genuine
intention of them: But this is not a thing to be attained to by every
Christian, whom yet it concerns to be built upon the Truth, and warily to avoid
the infection of error: there are therefore some more easily observable
Criteria, the improving whereof will be of great use to prevent our being
mistaken in this matter; and here I shall in the first place lay down this
general Rule, from whence those more particular marks may be drawn; viz. Every
Truth of Religion, contributes to the great ends of it; which are, the
Glorifying of God, and the furthering of our Salvation. That these are the two
main ends of the Christian Religion, every Catechize will readily inform us:
Now the proper business of every Art, Science, or Doctrine is to lay down such
Rules, Precepts, and discoveries, as may be proper and suitable means for the
advancement of the genuine end of it: and whatsoever is not truly serviceable
hereunto, is in no wise to be acknowledged as belonging to that Doctrine, but
aliene from it; so that whatsoever Doctrine either robs God of his deserved
glory in any point, or is destructive to the Salvation of Souls; and no ways
tends to further them toward eternal life, is to be accounted falsehood; and if
this Rule be duly observed, it will afford us several particular inferences,
which will stand as so many differiencing notes by the which the Truth may be
known, viz.

1. Every Truth agrees with the whole, and with every other Truth. The whole
body of Divine Truths is Uniform: Truth is but one, whereas error is manifold:
Truth its self consenting, but error its self contradicting: there is a sweet
harmony in the whole Word of God; there are no contradictions to be found
there; if any shall judge that there are such, the mistake is not in the
Scriptures, but in their deceived Understandings. They do all come from the
same God, with whom there is no Variableness or Shadow of Turning* James 1. 17.
they are nothing else but the expressions of his mind, who is always of one
mind, Job 23. 13. and have been delivered in Holy Writ by him who perfectly
knows his own meaning, and is not at a loss how to express it. So that
whenever you meet with two Doctrines, between which you observe a manifest
inconsistency, you may and must conclude, that both of these cannot possibly be
true, and also that that must be so, which is consonant with the whole Analogy
of Faith, or the body of Saving Truths: such is the direction given by the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome
words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is
according to Godliness; he is proud, knowing nothing.

2. Every Truth pays some honor to God; if the great business of Religion be
to teach men how to live to God, as we are assured that it is, 1 Pet. 4. 2. i.
e. how to please him, to glorify him, to do that which is acceptable to him;
then every part of it must of necessity reflect some honor upon him, give him
some praise: it must either discover him to us in some of his glorious
perfections, or direct us to such courses wherein we may be fitted to advance
his declarative glory. As God did at the first make all things for himself, so
he particularly appointed reasonable creatures to glorify him actively; and
that they might not miss it in this design, he has directed them to the way
wherein they may rightly accomplish it, and this Direction of his, is that
which we do by way of pre-eminence call Truth: Truth therefore is our guide,
Psalm. 43. 3. Send forth thy Light and thy Truth, let them lead, (or guide) me,
from thence we infer, that every Doctrine which speaks of God unbecomingly,
which in any point derogates from his Prerogative, and Divine Perfections,
which reflects any dishonor upon any of his Works, and denies him his just
right in any one thing that is his due, is false: And such also is that to be
esteemed by us, that discharges man from any part of his homage and subjection
to God, and opens any door of licenciousness to him, or would give him the
least encouragement to do any of those things by which Gods Holy Name may be
dishonored by him; that indulgeth him in any sinful way or course.

3. Every Truth tends to empty and abase man. The infinite Wisdom of God,
having contrived the advancement of the Salvation of Man in such a way, as that
the whole honor of it should entirely redound to his own great Name, has
thereupon so ordered the way of bringing it about, as that there shall not any
room at all be left for man to crowd in any thing that may be an occasion for
his boasting, or leave him the least place to be seen, or any thing of himself
to be taken notice of in the management of this whole affair: Man by the Fall
(though it has given him no Cause at all for it) is become an exceeding proud
creature, and is very loath to be brought to shrink up to nothing in himself;
and this makes him always ready to hearken after any thing which may blow him
up with self conceitedness; such things therefore that tell him he is some
body, and would make his condition something better than it really is, less
dependent upon God, and more self sufficient, do wondefully tickle his fancy:
But such notions as these are, are directly contrary to the whole tenor of
Scripture Doctrine: That Doctrine therefore, which makes discovery of Man's
Guilt, Misery, Impotency, and represents him to himself, a creature every way
depending upon the Sovereign Grace of God, for his whole Salvation, that so God
may be acknowledged to be all in all, is consonant to the mind of God in the
Scriptures; whereas that which dares to pluck any one flower out of his Royal
Diadem, and divest him of any part of his Prerogative, rather than man should
lose the privilege of being considerable in his own Salvation, is directy
against the Truth. He that is acquainted with the Book of God cannot but
acknowledge that the whole current of the Word of God carries on the design of
making Fallen Man very low and vile; that no Flesh might glory in any thing of
their own, but that he who glories might glory in the Lord only, Jer. 9. 23, 24.

4. Every Truth leads to Jesus Christ: that great and comprehensive Truth: All
the Truths of Fallen Man's Religion are summed up in the Law and the Gospel:
That Christ was the great end and scope of the Law, is in so many words
affirmed, Romans 10. 4 For Christ is the end of the Law, for Righteousness to
every one that believes; and that the Gospel wholly centers in him is therein
manifest, because it is the Gospel of, or concerning Christ; and the abstract
of it is Faith in, and Salvation by him; hence when he sent forth his Disciples
to Preach it, he gave them that for their Text, Mark. 16. 16. He that believes
and is baptized shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned. Paul
therefore, who to prove his fidelity in the course of his Ministry among the
Ephesians, laid down that assertion, Acts 20. 20. I kept back nothing that was
profitable to you; does yet solemnly avouch that to his Corinthians, to whom he
had been alike faithful in his Preaching, 1 Cor. 2. 2. I determined to know
nothing among you but Jesus Christ and him Crncified: and if we put these two
together, we may safely conclude, that he who faithfully and fully Preaches
Christ Crucified, Preaches all the Truth which is profitable to the souls of
men. Examine therefore every Doctrine, and enquire, how does this tend to lead
men home to Christ, how does this center and rest in him? how does it direct
and lead me to fix my whole Salvation entirely upon him? and if there be no
such tendency as this is in it, but contrariewise it leads you away to some
other thing, and derogates from, or divides his honor, and will not yield him
to be the only Savior, it is a Doctrine of Devils, and comes not from above,
but from him who is a Liar from the beginning, and the Father of such.

5. All Truth tends to make us more spiritual and holy. Purity is an
inseparable property of the Truth, Psalm. 29. 8, 9. The Commandment of the Lord
is pure, enlightening the eyes: the fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for
ever. Filthiness and Defilement is proper to all error; every falsehood is
inpure. Truth must needs be it self holy, because it has for its author, the
most immaculate Being; it proceeds from that God who is holiness it self and as
it is holy in it self, it likewise tends to make all them so who embrace it
cordially: and therefore obeying the Truth, is said to purify the Soul, 1 Pet.
1. 22. Seeing you have purified p^ur Souls in obeying the Truth: hence that of
our Savior, John 15. 3. Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken
unto you. There is no Scripture Truth, but it either directs to, or encourages
Holiness, or diswades from Sin and Uncleanness: and therefore whatsoever
Doctrine savours of the Lust of the Elesh, or gives a latitude to men to live
as they list, and bolsters them up in their impurities, is contradictory to the
Truth, and destructive to the souls of men: and if we shall well apply and
rightly improve these few Characters thus laid down, we shall have a good help
to find out the treasure which we seek, and not be cheated in it, which is the
second general Direction.

3. Ask the price, and boggle not at it, but resolve to give it, he that only
looks upon a commodity which he has before him, or it may be speaks something
in its commendation, but does not go so far as to cheapen it, that man has no
intention to buy it: or if he does make enquiry after the price, and when it is
told him, he snuffs at it, and finds fault with it, it shows that he has but a
little mind to be at cost for the having it: and here in general, let me leave
these things with you as Truths to be believed, viz.

1. That if ever you come to be owners of the Truth, it will cost you
something; for though it is not to be denied, that every one that has it,
obtains it without money, and without price, yet notwithstanding he that so
offers it, tells us withal, that we must buy it, Isa. 45. 1. Come buy without
money and without price. Though we have nothing to give for it, that can in any
way obscure the freeness of Gods Grace in bestowing of it upon us, as being
never able, out of all our store to make up a valuable price for it; yet there
is something that we must lay down in order to our being made partakers in it
which is (in men's account) money's worth.

2. That God, who alone has the Truth to sell, and can only make a sure
conveyance of it to us, has set a stated marketprice upon it: God does not
first make the offers of it, to draw men in, and afterward when they are
engaged, come and tell them how much they must give for it; but he deals openly
with them, and as he has determinant within himself what it shall certainly
cost every one that has it, so in the sending it out in Gospel Tenders, he
has fairly written the price upon it, so that every one may be able to read
it, Prove. 2. begin. If thou criest after knowledge, etc. if thou searchest her
as Silver, etc.

3. Hence it is a vain thing for you ever to think to beat down the Market. God
is not like unto many men, who have their reserves and abatements, and may be
in time brought to take half so much for a Commodity as they did at the first
ask for it, rather than lose a good Customer: He is of one mind; He has
positively set the price, and he will never go from it; it is to no purpose at
all to use words and arguments with him, who is not to be moved from what he
has determined: if, when you hear what the Truth must cost you, if God and you
drive a Bargain, you do find fault with it, and cry out, it is abundantly to
hard, if you take a disgust and go away from him, refusing to come to his
terms, He matters it not. He has declared his wonderful good will to the
Children of men, in that he has made the offers of it freely unto them, but
yet he will not so undervalue the Truth, as to suffer himself to be beaten down
in his just demands, or vouchsafe to trade with such men as would go about to
cast the disparagement upon him of being an hard Dealer; he is under no
necessity, he wants not our Custom, all our cost enricheth not him at all: if
we go away and never buy of him he is never the poorer; its we only who shall
be the losers in the winding up: as on the other hand, if we buy, ours will be
the great profit; so true is that in Prove. 9. 12. If thou be wise, thou shall
be wise for thy self, but if thou scornest, thou alone shall hear it.

4. Hence your great business is to satisfy your selves in the infinite worth
of the Truth, that so you may be persuaded cheerfully to come up to Gods terms,
and drive this happy Bargain. The want of this information and consequent
satisfaction is the great reason why there are so many triflers, and so few
buyers, among the number of those who come to the Ordinances. There is nothing
that makes men to be more irresolute in a Bargain, holding them off, and
continuing them in suspense, than a fear of being overreached, and this fear is
for the most part occasioned, because they have not gotten an insight into the
true worth of the thing: but could you feel the Truth in its native colors,
and be able to discern its glorious excellencies, you would be discharged of
any such fears in this concern, and be satisfied that it never can be bought to
dear; that if it should cost you never so much, yet the possession of it would
pay for all, and reimburse you again with infinite advantage and usury. Be
therefore much and frequent in meditating of those commendations which were
given it in the former Use, and in the motives of this, and labor to get so
deep impression upon your minds by them, as may put you beyond all hesitancy,
and bring you plumply to draw up this Resolve; That Truth you must have upon
any terms; that if you put it away from you, when God is pleased to bring to
you, you are enemies to your own Souls; but if you accept it on Gods terms, you
are made men for ever: And let this conclusion put you upon it to do, as he in
the Parable, Mat. 13. 44. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a Treasure hid in a
Field, the which when a man has found he hides, and for joy thereof, goes
and sells all that he has, and buyeth that Field.

But I shall endeavor a little more particularly to apply this Direction; and
here let me say, that if ever you would come to be owners and possessors of the
Truth, there are two things to be done; consider and practice accordingly.

1. It will cost you hard labor and great pains to obtain it. It is true, all
our pains will signify nothing, without a Divine blessing to crown them with
success: but this blessing is not given out to the idle and negligent, but only
to such as are up and doing. If we shall look no farther than an head purchase,
which is the least and most easily gotten, yet it is certain that a clear
understanding and right conception of the form of sound words, and skeam of
saving Truths, which is to be gathered up out of the Sacred writings of the
Book of God, is not gotten without a great deal of sweat and travail; how much
more then will it stand a man in to make an heart purchase of it? It costs a
man a double Prenticeship, and many a weary day, and waking night to reach to
be Master of those hand maid Truths, which are the Servants of Religion, and
are called the liberal Sciences: how long time then, and how much labor must
it stand him in to get the mistress of these, I mean the saving Truths of
Religion? and the difficulty of getting a right acquaintance with these, will
appear to be far more than what concerns the other, if we shall consider;

1. That we are all of us by nature mere strangers, to the Truth; that is
spoken of all natural men, Romans 3. 17. The way of peace have they not known. As
to other inferior Truths, though there are none that are born Artists in them,
yet there are such common Principles, and natural powers in us, as are able to
grasp them, and receive them in by teaching or instruction; there is an inbred
or congenerate ability to receive these notions, and the reasons of them,
provided we have one skilled to inform us, and hence they are gotten with the
more ease, because there is in our Soul a receptivity of them, or a passive
principle that can entertain them: But as to these Divine Truths, we are not
only without them actually, or habitually, but are also incapable of them in
our natural estate, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives not the things of
the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. For though there are some Relics of the old Law or Covenant left
upon the Consciences of the Children of men; yet for those Truths which are
truly Evangelical and Saving, there is not to be found the least footstep of
them in us by nature; yea, they do indeed transcendently surpass the
comprehension of all our natural reasonings: so that there must be a change
wrought in our very powers or faculties before we can be capable of them.

2. That we are exceeding dull and hard of hearing and learning these things:
there may be not only a capacity in a man, but a great deal of promptness to
imbibe other Doctrines; a commendable docility, apt to take in the notions of
the precepts of them, and make them ours as fast as they are told us: but as
for the things of God, and the everlasting concerns of our immortal Souls, the
case is far otherwise with us there: the Ox and the Ass are in their kind more
docile than we are, Isai. 1. 3. The Ox knows knows his owner, and the Ass his
Masters crib, but Israel does not know. When a great deal of time, and pains,
and patience has been bestowed upon us, and all condescension to treat us in
our own language, and help us by little and little, yet it is but a poor
pittance that we arrive unto: what a blockhead did our Savior Christ find
Nicodemus to be in those things, though he was a Master in Israel, and one who
by his Office ought himself to have instructed others in the knowledge of them?
Joh. 3. beginning: and how does he up-braid Philip after he had been so many
years in his School? Joh. 14. 8, 9. Have I been so long time with you: and have
thou not known me, Philip? and the Apostle his Hebrews, Chap. 5. 11, 12. Ye are
dull of hearing: for when for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need
that one teach you again what be the first Principles of the Oracles of God.
Nay,

3. That we are naturally built upon contrary Principles, and hereupon are
averse and opposite to the Truth, We have sucked in lies from the Cradle, and
are greatly in love with them; it is one of the hardest things in the World, to
get false Opinions, that have been suited to men's Fancies, and drunk down with
abundance of delight, rooted out again, and rejected by the man; and yet this
must needs be done in order to the bringing of them to, and building of them
upon the Truth. If man's heart were no more but Rasa Tabula, a fair and clean
piece of Parchment, that had nothing at all inscribed upon it; if it stood in
an equipoise to entertain any thing that might be first offered to it, it were
then no great or difficult matter to fill it with the curious ingravings of the
Truth: but whereas it is a book blotted and blurred and all over deeply graven
with Fleshly Sentiments, which must all be erased and taken away before any
thing can be done to purpose of this nature, it speaks it a very great work,
the very clearing and smoothing of the Table, by which it may be fitted and
prepared to take the Impression of the Truth, requires abundance of pains, and
yet this must of necessity be done in this work; 2 Cor. 10. 5. Casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.
Hence therefore if you will purchase the Truth, it is requisite:

1: To be constant in the use of the means that are appointed to this end. God
has written his mind unto us in the Holy Scriptures, but we must be sure to
read it there, if ever we intend to come by the knowledge of it: he has also
set up his Holy Ordinances; and in them has appointed his Ambassadors to
present men with the mysterious Truths of the Gospel; but if we have a desire
to get any good by such an advantage as this, we must come to them, yea, we
must wait at the posts of his doors, such the blessing is pronounced upon.
Prove. 8. 34. which waiting implies constancy. The Truth is too bulky a thing to
be all set to view at once or displayed in one Ordinance, it is therefore given
Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, here a little, and there a little: Some
Truths at one time, some it another, and therefore if we would miss none, we
must come continually: Truth is bound up in several bails (there are diverse
heads to which the points of Religion are reduced) and if we would have the
advantage of seeing all, we must come when they are opened, Hos. 6. 3. Then
shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord.

2. We must add diligence and attention unto this constancy, if we will make
any work of it. It is not enough to be frequent in our coming to the means, but
we must take a great deal of pain with our selves when we do come, Isa. 15. 3.
Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear and your Souls shall live: and this is
an hard work, which requires labor. It calls for a wakeful body: God does nor
ordinarily in these days reveal his mind to his people in dreams, to be sure
not in his house where they are called to hear him speaking to them: It would
be a rediculous thing to find men sleeping in the market place and at market;
and yet how many such sights does this heavenly mart present us withal? as if
men expected visions instead of instructions; and there must also be an
attentive ear, and that accompanied with a mind intent upon the present
business: he that brings his body to the House of God, and leaves his heart
behind him, or sends it abroad from thence, to be wandering in the corners of
the earth, and roving after vain objects, is like to make but a poor purchase
of it, and might ever as well have tarried away, for any benefit that is like
to accrue to him by coming: the purchase of the Truth requires the intense
activity of the whole Soul about it, Psalm. 110. 10. With my whole heart have I
sought thee.

3. We must join earnest prayer to all the rest: and that not only that God
would keep us from the danger of being mistaken, and embracing of a Lie for the
Truth, (as was hinted under the former direction) but also that we may come to
the knowledge of the Truth as it is in Jesus: God is the father of Lights, and
from him is every good and perfect gift communicated unto the children of men;
it is he alone; by the influences of his Spirit, that must open our blind eyes,
and enlighten our darkness: all our own endeavors, in reading hearing,
conferring, meditating, absolutely depend upon his blessing for good success,
and except he come in with his illuminating grace we still remain under our
natural blindness; this therefore is the earnest request that Paul puts up in
prayer for his Ephesians upon their accounts, chap. 1. 16, etc. That the God of
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation in the knowledge of him, etc. and this is the direction given by
James, chap. 1. 5. If any among you lack wisdom, let him ask of God.

4. We must add meditation unto prayer: It is not all our hearing will profit
us, though we should attend constantly on Ordinances, in season and out of
season, if we go away and think no more of the things that have been told us:
the way to make the Truth ours, is by getting it fixed in our hearts, and that
is not done without serious musing upon it: Truth that is heard at an
Ordinance, and is not afterward taken and digested by meditation, is like meat
which is eaten, and presently vomited up again, which affords us no
nourishment: like the seed which was sown by the high way-side, that was
suddenly picked up by the Fowls of Heaven, and lay not long enough to take any
rooting. Meditation is that whereby we take possession of the Truth, and enrich
our Understandings; it was by this that David got the start of his Teachers;
Psalm. 119. 99. I have more Understanding than all my Teachers, for thy
Testimonies are my Meditation. Thinking hearers are like to be the most
profitable Hearers of the Word of God.

5. We must not rest satisfied in measures obtained, but restlesly pursue after
more: that which is a vice, and deserves a sharp reproof in the worlds trading,
is a commendable virtue in this kind of Merchandise; viz. the more we have, the
more to crave: and by the purchase of every parcel of Truth, to have our
spiritual appetite whet up to a greater sharpness and eagerness to be adding to
our purchase: it is a worthy frame of Spirit in him that has Truth in quest,
not to be contented with a little portion of it, but to be using all
endeavors, to lay field to field, till there be no room in the earth. I mean,
to be buying up of Truth as long as there is any to be sold, and studiously to
engross it all; and not to think himself rich enough, as long as he knows but
in part, though he may have gotten a great deal more than many of his fellow
Christians: this is P eters counsel, 2 Pet. 3. 18. grow in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and Paul professes it to be
his practice, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. Not that I have already obtained, etc.
leaving the things that are behind, and reaching forth unto the things which
are before, I press to the mark. It is a sordid spirit in spiritual things, to
covet no more Truth than what will bearly serve our turn as we suppose; and if
we think we have gotten some of the main and fundamental Truths, to neglect the
rest; and if Gods Servants are desirous to proceed further, and lead us up to
those things which are more deep and mysterious, we presently cry out, these
things are beyond our reach, and say, give us milk, and let them that can bear
it be fed with strong meat; and care not at all for being told any thing more
than what we think we know already; as if heavens wealth were not as desirable
as earths, or we might be burdened with too much store of this precious and
heavenly treasure: But the Truth is, we are too generally a lazy generation,
that are loath to be at the pains that the purchase of these Truths will cost us.

2. There is also something that you must part withal for the sake of the
truth, if you resolve to have it: and it is that which every natural man
places a very high esteem upon, and accounts to be of great worth, which
therefore makes so many break off, and not drive a through bargain; but you can
never be savingly possessed of the Truth till you have forgone it: And here,

1. There are some things which you must actually part with upon this score:
you must lay them down, and lose all claim and title to them, viz.

1. All your own carnal conceits, and fleshly wisdom: there is naturally in the
children of men an high and over-weaning opinion which they have taken up of
themselves, and their own understandings, then which there is not a greater
opposite or enemy to saving wisdom, and the Truth will never find room to be
entertained in such an heart, as long as that is there abiding: it sets it self
directly against the Truth, and endeavors to persuade the man that he has no
need at all of it, but that he has a sufficient light within, knowledge enough
of his own to direct his steps, and lead him right: yea, and besides that, it
raises in him prejudices against the Truth, and seeks how to render it
suspected of falsehood. He that will buy this wisdom that is from above, must
first let go that which is from below, which is earthly, sensual, devilish; and
must become a fool in his own sense and acknowledgment, 1 Cor. 3. 18. Let him
that thinks himself wise, become a fool, that he may be wise; and truly this is
an hard saying, and cannot readily be born by men of great natural Parts, and
rich acquired endowments; it is a debasing thing, and that which Flesh and
Blood cannot well resent, but looks upon with reluctance, to come out of all,
to come back after such a progress as they have made, and begin again at their
A B C, in the Spirits School: and without question, this is not the least of
the stumbling blocks that lie in such men's way, and makes it a sad truth, that
not many wise men of this world are made savingly wise unto God.

2. You must renounce all your worldly lusts too, if you would be savingly
possessed of the Truth. Not but that it is to be confessed, that men may be
Orthodox in Principles, and vicious in their life; a poisonous Toad may have ae
Jewel in his head of great worth; men may have great seize in Theoretical
Divinity, and Christ may advise his Hearers to do as the Pharisees say, though
he together admonisht them to beware of following their deeds: but so to know
God in his Son Jesus Christ as is Life Eternal; which is indeed the only
profitable purchasing of the Truth, is inconsistent with the harboring and
maintaining of fleshly lusts: the Truth can find no suitable lodgings in a soul
that is wedded to his concupiscence; nay such is the nature of Divine Truth,
that where it comes into the soul indeed, it will certainly shine down the
works of darkness, and the same word of Truth that does effectually turn men
from darkness to light, does at the same time turn them from Sin to God, hence
they are put to gether as inseparable fruits and effects of the Gospel, where
it comes with a saving efficacy, Acts 26. 18. To open their eyes, and turn them
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; and we find Paul
arguing from their learning, of the Truth, to the mortifying of their lusts,
Ephesians. 4. 21, 22. If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by him,
as the Truth is in Jesus, (...) ye put off concerning the former conversation,
the Old Man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts. Besides, every
Fleshly Lust is a Lie, and they are called lies, in the Scripture, Psalm. 40. 4.
Nor such as turn aside to lies, i. e. to sinful and deceitful-lusts: and (...)
every such lust entertained in the heart, must needs keep out the contrary
Truth from taking up a room in the soul; and he that will engage himself to
defend and plead for any foolish and hurtful lust, of what kind soever, must in
so doing set himself against the Truth, and whether such an one be in any
likely way to buy it, let any man judge.

2. And there are other things which you must part with in affection for the
Truths sake, and that is all whatsoever is precious and delightful to you in
this world. Love to the Truth, or our receiving of it in the love of it, is our
entering upon the possession of it, and the strongest evidence of an
indisputable title unto it; but it is not every pretended love that is so, but
it must be such as undervalues every other thing in comparison with the Truth.
I know that God does not always call men actually to part with and cast away
all these things, Houses, Lands, Relations, and going away from the company and
comfort of them, turn desolate Hermits, and dwell in solitary caves void of all
humane converse, that they may enjoy the fellowship and friendship of the
Truth, as if Truth dwelt only in a willderness, and were no where to be met
with but in caves and deserts; the good things of this life are Gods common
favors, and he has engaged them to such as fear him, so far as shall best
serve to his own glory and their advantage, Godliness has the promise of the
life that now is, and if God gives, his people ought with thankfulness to
receive these favors; but still he requires absolutely of us, that we withdraw
our affections from them to such a degree, as to be at all times in a cheerful
readiness, either to let them go one after the other by retail, or all at once
by whole sale, for Truths sake, if there be occasion for it. Neither is this a
lesson to be learned afterward, or by those that have been a great while
trained in Truths School, and have attained to be of the uppermost forms of her
Scholars; that have made a great proficiency in the learning of it: but it is
one of the entrance articles, it is a law of the School, and to be complied
with upon admission; it is one of the conditions of Discipleship, Mat. 16. 24.
If any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross and
follow me, Luke 14. 26. If any man come unto me, and hate not his father and
mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life
also, he cannot be my Disciple: i. e. if he does not set a less and lower
esteem upon them, than upon the Truth and ways of Christ; and there is great
reason for it; because he that buys the Truth, buys together with it the hatred
of Men and Devils; and although God is often pleased to curb in their rage, and
to tie up their mouths, so as that they cannot devour his people, yet this is
ever to be expected, that Truth and Persecution will go together; and God many
times does (for holy ends) permit Persecution to extend it self to the
depriving his people of all these things: and therefore he who does not buy the
Truth with such a supposal, and accordingly is so provided for it, as not to be
prejudiced at all these changes, had better to sit still and let it alone:

This may suffice for the Third Direction.

4. Finally, If you will buy the Truth, buy it Now, use no delays in the
business. There is now a fair advantage in your hands, Truths Shop stands open
all the day long; there is many a spiritual Market set open to you on the Lords
days, and on other frequent occasions; it is now a day of Grace with you, and
(I pray) let it not slip: God himself offers to you the Truth, and entreats of
you to buy it, and bids you, that if you have any purpose so to do, you will do
it quickly, to day, while the Market lasts, and a price is in your hands; and
to urge this advice, give me leave to offer these things to your serious
thoughts.

1. Truths Market will certainly be over with every one of us in a little
while, and then there will be no buying of it, though you should never so much
desire it. There was a time when the Prophet made that sad complaint concerning
Jerusalem, Lam. 2. 9. The Law is no more, her Prophets, also find no vision
from the Lord. And whither we may live to see the doors of Gods house shut up,
and public Worship interdicted, is with Him alone to determine, who has put
the times and seasons into his own power; But this is certain, that there is
none of us all shall long enjoy a season to be purchasing of this heavenly
wisdom in; there will a time come, and it may be before we think of it, when
our feet shall carry us no more to those places, where God has been wont to
come and reveal himself to the Children of men: unless therefore you are
resolved to be for ever without it, buy the Truth NOW. It is a solemn counsel
and caution which the wise man gives upon this account, Eccles. 9. 10.
Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave whether thou go.
There are no Lectures of wisdom preached to the Congregation of the dead: and
it is a solemn consideration to be thought upon, to consider, how seldom (if
ever) there is an assembly met in this place on such an occasion, but there is
some one or other of the company, that must come hither no more, but before
another opportunity comes about, are locked up in silence, and laid out of the
reach of soul saving means: and which of us all that stand before God at this
time, can tell but that we are hearing of the last Sermon, and shall never
again have one more offer of the Truth made unto us? and why will you die fools?
will not Repentance then come to late?

2. Your trifling will give God the provocation to pack up his precious wares
and be gone. Should a Merchant come among a people, and bring along with him
the richest and most necessary Goods (such as men cannot do without, and such
as no other has to sell) and offer them to people at the easiest rates, so
that every one, even the poorest, might be able to buy them, if he had a mind
to it; and when he has opened, and set them to view, yea, and given sufficient
notice to all, bidding them to come; and now, though a great many pretended
Customers do come to see them, and his Shop be full of such, yet here is one
that stares up and down, and never so much as minds the Commodities; there are
others smiling, and saying, this man has gotten an excellent faculty in
commending his own Wares; here are some huffing, and protesting that they can
see no such excellency in them, as they were commended for, they are dull
unsightly things which have no gloss upon them: others cry out, we looked for
something new, but these are nothing but a company of old worn things, and what
service can we expect from them? and here and there is one that speaks in their
commendation, professes the things are good, and begins to cheapen them, but
as soon as ever he hears the price, cries out it is an hard penniworth, and if
he is resoved to hold them up so high, he must even keep them for him; and it
may be once in a great while there is one or two that does come and buy would
not this man thus conclude within himself, and say, I see this is no place for
me to vend my Merchandise in, this people have no occasion for it, I do but
lose my labor and time in waiting for custom here; and will therefore pack it
up, and carry it away to some other place where I may find better acceptance,
and more encouragement; and truly I am very much out in my observations if this
be not too much New-England's case, in respect of the Truth: There is no need
for me to tell you what and how many awful Tokens there are amongst us of God's
being threatening to depart from us: it is a Subject that has been much and
often discoursed of, and great enquiry there has been made after the
provocation; and there is no doubt to be made of it, but that the Pride,
Vanity, Profaneness, Earthly-mindedness, Contention, etc. of a professing
People, have been highly provoking to the great God, whose Name has been
dishonored, and ways evil spoken of by reason of these things: but yet I am
fully persuaded, that the root of all these, and that which God has
principally to article against us for, is this, That the Truth has been a drug
among us; the Gospel of Truth has been woefully contemned: There has been a
long day wherein we have had the free enjoyment of it, but has not the Lord
been all day long stretching out his hand to a gain saying and disobedient
people! there have been indeed a great many boglers, but a few buyers; many
that have made fair offers as if they would have done something this way, but
when it came to the upshot, they have fallen off again; and may not God say
unto us as Christ did in a like case to those Jews, Mat. 21. 43. The Kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the Fruits
thereof. And let me say, God seems to be now in greater haste than ordinary,
let us be the more wary of putting him upon it.

3. Consider that buying is the only way for you to continue and keep this
Market up: if the Merchant comes to a place, and there finds full and free vent
for his Wares, he has his desire, and this will oblige him to fix his abode
there, and not to think of a removal; and if there were more of love to the
Truth among us, if there were more buying the Truth, and living by the Truth
practiced, God would never take it away from us: I am fully persuaded, that if
the Gospel and Ordinances of Jesus Christ were better prized, and the great
Truths of the Word of God more carefully improved; if we were more solicitous
to acquaint our selves with God, and diligent to make use of that acquaintance
to the promoting of holiness in our hearts and lives; that whatever other
trials God might exercise the graces of his people withal, we should never want
the clear and precious dispensations of the Gospel among us: Our Savior Christ
intimated thus much to them, when he gave that as the reason why these things
were hidden from them, Luke 19. 42. If thou had known even thou, at least in
this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! yea Paul and Barnabas
render that as the very reason why they went from the Jews, and turned to the
Gentiles, Acts 13. 16. Seeing ye put the Word of God from you, and judge your
selves unworthy of everlasting life, to we turn to the Gentiles: yea, when God
always in the Scripture, gives this to be the great provocation for which he
comes out at any time against a Professing people in the way of his Judgments,
especially to turn them out of his house, it plainly speaks thus much, viz.
that if it had not been for this, that His Word was slighted, and his Truth
trampled upon, they had never felt the fierceness of his indignation in such a
way, as to be stripped of the light, and left without people and vision.

4. Consider also that if you now buy, you shall then have something to live
on, when others must starve: how soon a Famine of the Truth (that worst of
famines) may come upon us, we do not know; there was a time when God threatened
it to the people of Israel, Amos 8. 21. behold the days come, faith the Lord
God, that I will send a famine in the Land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst
for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord: and there is great reason why
a people should be afraid of it, there where fullness has begotten loathing,
and plenty has produced carelessness: where men have put greatest slights upon
these best things, and grown weary of them: and if such a time does come, it
will be known who husbanded the harvest, who took the opportunity of the market
time to buy provision, and furnish themselves against (...) time of need; then
Truth (how low soever it is now esteemed) will be of worth, the vision will be
precious, and men shall seek or it in vain, as the Prophet follows it in verse
12. They shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East, and
they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it.
When the Merchant has trust up his fardels and is gone, it is then no time for
any to buy of him, they that did it not in the proper season, must now suffer
the want whatever it be. But when it is so, that all trading is ceased, and
every market is shut up, then that happy soul that had the wisdom and grace to
get Truth his own, in the season wherein it was to be had, and has laid it up
in his heart as a precious treasure, shall have the comfort of it indeed. The
Truth that is only deposited in the public store of Ordinances, and set to
sale in them, may be taken away from us, the market may be stopped, the doors of
Gods House may be shut up: but he that has gotten the Truth locked up in the
secret cabinet of his soul, can never be robbed of it, nor yet be hindered from
using and improving it for his spiritual refreshing and comfort; in the darkest
hours of oppression; take therefore your opportunity, and whilst you may,
secure this, and you shall be happy. This may suffice for the first branch of
the Exhortation; a few words to the second shall shut up this discourse.

2. Let it be a word of advice to such as have already bought the Truth; be you
advised to hold it fast, and never sell it again. It may possibly be accounted
superfluous to say much here by way of advice; in as much as those that have
only entertained a notion of Truth in their heads, have not driven a through
bargain for it; and therefore are not concerned in this, but are to be sent to
the former exhortation: and they that have indeed received it into their
hearts, will, can never relinquish it any more, it being a saving work wrought
in them, by the Spirit of God, whose gifts are unrepentable: But let me answer
to this, that God works by means, and that not only in bringing men over to the
Truth, but also in his keeping of them in it: no man is so resolved, but if he
should be lest to himself, he might easily be beaten out of those resolutions:
strong corruptions within, abetted by an hour of sore Temptation from abroad,
oftentimes shakes the weak faith of a Christian, and makes him to stagger in
his Profession: feeble knees had need to be strengthened, and hands that hang
down to be lifted up: and God is wont to do this for his people in the use of
means; and therefore the Gospel Ordinances are as well appointed for the
perfecting of the Saints, as for the converting of Sinners; how much therefore
of the Scripture shall we find to be spent in cautions, counsels and
encouragements upon this account.

The sum then of the Exhortation is: That you labor to be confirmed in an
unchangeable resolution, to maintain the Truth both in heart and profession, in
despite of all Temptations that may endeavor to draw you to part with it; what
are the Temptations, which any of us may be assaulted by, and to what an height
they may arise, is at the dispose of him who sits upon the circuit of the
Heaven; there have been sore ones that many of Gods faithful ones have
encountered withal; and we dwell in a world where they may be expected, nor have
we any charter that gives us special immunity from meeting the like.

To speak more particularly, there are two ways, or two sorts of Temptations by
which they who have bought the Truth may be endangered, viz. either of being
colloagued or else affrighted out of it: In the former of these we are invited
by the worlds honors, profits, and pleasures, which look upon us with a
smiling countenance, and bespeak us in an insinuating dialect: in the latter we
are seared with the Cross and Persecution, looking grim and ghastly upon us,
and speaking in Thunder and Lightning to us: The one makes an offer to us of
something in exchange for it, and would fain persuade us to believe that we
shall be no losers by the bargain: the other tries all it can to discourage us
from the keeping of it, and urge us to believe it our wisdom to part with it as
soon as we can, and how great a folly it will be in us to resolve to maintain
it, with these innumerable hazards and encumbrances that are the certain
appendices of it: Now one of these two Temptations do (for the most part) make
discovery of those that have made but a slghtly purchase, and bought the Truth
no further than in an outward professsion; and they are plainly and fully
charactarized to us by the Lord Jesus Christ, the one in the stony, the other
in the thorny ground, mentioned in that Parable, Math. 13. The former of these
did (at the first preaching of it) receive the Truth with a great deal of
seeming joy, but it was but an outside and flashy joy, which wanted good (...),
and it therein manifested it self to be so because when the Sun of Persecution
rose high, and beat hot upon it, all withered, which was because it had no
depth, verse 20, 21. The latter took some deeper impression, but together with
it there grew up thorny cares, and deceitful pleasures, and they choked all,
verse 22, 23. and it is very certain, that if men can either be persuaded that
they may put off the Truth to some considerable advantage, or that they cannot
maintain it without some notable loss, they are prepared to make this unhappy
bargain, to sell the Truth; I shall therefore essay to speak something which
may afford suitable help for your establishment against the prevalency of both
these Temptations, and that only in some few words of advice.

1. Endeavor to make sure and (...) title to the Truth. Man is a dependant
creature, and every one would willingly (...) something which they may live
upon, and whereunto they may safely trust: and that which is the great
engagement upon men to stand by a thing, hold it fast, and utterly refuse to
let it go, is (together with a persuasion in their minds of the excellency and
worth of it) an apprehension of an interest which they have in it; and ever the
more confident a man is in this particular, the more resolute may we expect
that he will be: A man may enjoy a goodly inheritance, be in the possession of
it, and be exceedingly unwilling to be put out of it; and yet notwithstanding,
if he suspect the validity of his deeds and evidences, and be afraid that he
shall never be able to make good his title to it in Law; and may so be put to a
great deal of trouble and expense, and lose all at last, this very suspicion
will make him very cold in the defending of it, and put him upon the temptation
to forgo it at some considerable disadvantage: many are in their judgments
persuaded of the inestimable value of this Jewel, Truth; and how happy a
portion they have gotten who are the true owners of it, but they are withal
afraid lest they have but deceived themselves, and have not driven a through
and full Bargain for it, they are doubtful whither the evidence they can
produce for their title to it, will stand good; and in the mean while, to think
of suffering the loss of all the outward advantages of the delights of this
world, and to undergo the troubles and hazards of persecution in standing by it
(and how far they may extend they know not) and after all this to be dispossessed
of the Truth too, this looks sadly upon them, and these fears do many times
make them to faint, and draw back, at least put them to such stands that they
know not what to do: and without question, it must needs be a fearful thing to
lose credit, liberty, estate, ease and life too for the Truth, and lose the
Truth at last, and the Soul by that loss, which is a possible case: That you
may avoid being reduced to such a Dilemma, and prevent this distress, your work
is not to rest till you see the Deeds signed, sealed and delivered; to follow
that advice, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all diligence to make your calling and election
sure, and if once you can say securely with Paul, You know whom you have
trusted, you may well build that upon it which he does, For this cause I also
suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed, 2 Timothy 1. 12. if you are
but well satisfied in that, that you do not labor at uncertainties, that the
Truth is really yours, and shall without sail recompense you all your cost,
with infinite interest; let the expense in maintaining of it be never so much,
this will certainly put life into your resolutions, and make you stand your
ground without flinching, entertaining with an holy scorn all the essays or
offers which can be made, either to cog or wrest the Truth out of your hands:

2. Beware of being ashamed to own, or persuaded through fear to suppress the
profession of the Truth. It is none of the least of the devices of Satan: and
lessons which he has thoroughly instructed his instruments in, to cast an odium
and obloquy upon the Truth, and the serious professors of it; and it is
grounded upon this presumption, that if they can once obtain to make it
infamous, they shall then with little difficulty draw men away from it, merely
to avoid that scandal which they shall otherwise expose themselves unto, by the
open profession of it. It is not seldom that the Truth comes to be quite out of
credit among the generality of men, when the Prophets complaint is verified,
Isai. 59. 14, 15. Truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter, yea
Truth fails, and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey: when
matters so stand in the World, that nothing shall expose a man to so much
opprobry and contempt as the lively profession of it; when a man's (...) shall
be more secure, and out of danger, in the commission of all manner of
debaucheries, than in the sober asserting of such a Profession; and such men as
do so profess, shall be so strangely charactarized, and represented to the
World as more dangerous to the civil interests, and more pernicious enemies to
the peace and safety of man kind than the most profane and profligate men: when
openly to own and assert the Truth, shall expose a man to be the ridicle of the
world and scorn of the generation: such things as these there have been many of
the people of God that have been experienced witnesses of: and now when it is
so, the greatest number of men that have sometimes made a profession, may be
ready to withdraw, and think it to be a great deal more safe for them to
suppress it, and keep in the Truth: they may be loath to lay themselves open,
and to have their persons vilified, and names bespatered with all reproachful
reflections: and when they have given way to such a shame as this is, it will
readily put them upon dissembling, and that they may shore up their reputation,
they make bold to imprison the Truth, to shrink in from it, and leave it alone
to plead for it self; (...) their own conferences, (which would else give them
woeful girds, and lead them a disquiet life) with supposing that if they do not
openly abjure it, but embrace and lodge it in their hearts, and keep them true
to it, such a course as this, is safest for the times; and sufficient for their
own security: But let us know that all Truth is practical, and God requires
also of us that we let the world know that it is our hope; and therefore the
Apostle Peter gives that advice to Gods people in respect of such times as are
under consideration, 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to give an answer unto every
man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and with
fear. He that is ashamed to make a profession of the Truth, is ashamed of the
Truth, and he that is ashamed of the Truth, is ashamed of Jesus Christ, who is
Truth it self; and if he be thus ashamed of Christ, Christ will be as much
ashamed of him in that day wherein it would be his only interest and happiness
to be acknowledged by him, Mark. 8. 38. and we may take it for granted, that
that man who is ashamed of the Truth, has at least made half a sale of it.

3. Take heed that you do not part with any one Truth. It is a vain and foolish
thing for us to let one go, and yet think to keep the rest: if once you begin
to be bartering here, it will be an easy matter to buy you out of the whole
stock; for let men palliate and excuse things as cunningly as they will, yet
this will prove certain, that by the same reason that a man may be prevailed
upon to give his consent in the alienation of any one, let it be supposed to be
the least Truth in the whole system of Theology, that man will in time be
wrought upon to sell all others which he has pretended to: There are some men
who think that if they do but keep to the fundamentals, and stand by them,
there is less danger though they part with such as are Circumstantials: They
applaud their own prudence, that they have taken up a resolution to keep Truth
enough to be saved by at last, and that they will (if need be) stand in the
defense of, and for all the rest, if they renounce and disclaim them, for their
present profit or security, to keep themselves in an whole skin, and make the
less disturbance in the places they live in, there will be no such great harm
in it: and when once the Devil has gotten this hold of men, he thinks that be
has gotten enough to undo, bankrupt and ruin them: Nay this is his own trick,
or way which he himself has contrived to take with men as the most likely to
whedle them out of their Religion. The Devil knows well enough, that such men
as have made a great Profession are not to be persuaded to stop into the depth
of Apostasy at one stride, that they (...) not sell Truth and Religion all in
one sale: and hence he accomodates the Temptations that he uses with them to
the best advantage, to which purpose he in the first place begin to cheapen
some Truth which he supposes they set the least by, and do not account to be
so momentous as they do some others; and if either by Flatteries or Menaces, by
fair promises, or (...) threatenings, he can but bring them up to a consent to
deny such a Truth, and profess against it, his most difficult talk is over, and
all the rest is gotten with more ease.

The Devil has learnt more wit at length than to ask men to throw themselves
down from the pinnacle of the Temple prostrate at his feet, at a leap, the very
sight and apprehension whereof would appear amazing and frightful; but he has
gotten fair and easy winding stairs, where a man shall neither see back from
whence he came, nor forward whither he is going; and has also many a Landing
where he may stand still and breath; and thus by slow paces and easy degrees
he draws men insensibly away from the Truth: And how many Professors have so
been brought to make shipwreck of their Faith? Hence Hells Factors and Cheats
would fain persuade men to hearken to them, and say, alas! these are but poor
niceties, disputable points, matters of no great moment whether you believe
them or no: they are things too small and inconsequential to disquiet the
Church with, or deprive themselves of favor and preferment for: But it is very
notorious, that men who have suffered their Consciences so to be bribed, and
have against the light of them, hearkened to the alluring invitations that have
been thus proposed to them, have not made any long time of it, ere they have
been deserters, and not staying there, grown to be zealous Persecutors of
Religion; except God has in mercy to their souls awakened and reclaimed them.
Know this then that as small a matter as it may look to be, and how high soever
the cunning of Seducers may persuade you to make of it, yet he that abandons
one known Truth, though it look to be of the least size, is a step to the most
fearful Apostasy, and if you are once stepped into the way of it, you are under
the greatest probability of being lost for ever:

Now for your help to the practice of these duties, take these two words of
Advice.

1. Be persuaded to believe what losers you shall be, if you shall exchange the
Truth for any worldly things whatsoever. Men that do buy and sell do aim at
some advantage by it, or else they had as good sit still and spare themselves
the trouble; but if you should let go any one Truth for all that is to be
gotten in the World, you would not only be no gainers, but inexpressible
losers: thus to do would be nothing less or better than to sell a substance for
a shadow, an enduring substance for a flying shadow: compare the highest offers
that the world is able to make, with the Truth, and see how incomparably they
fell short of having the worth and good in them which that has: is it wealth,
it tempts you with? (and so poor Demas was fooled out of his Religion) why they
are but the Treasures of Egypt, and the reproach of Christ is greater Riches
than all these, Heb. 11. 26. Gold it self is but perishing dust, Truth is an
everlasting Treasure. Are they earthly pleasures and carnal delights? Afflicted
Truth is upon a mature deliberation to be chosen before them: as being more
eligible, Heb. 11. 25. thus to part with it, is to give undefiled Delights and
everlasting, for the pleasures of sin which are but for a season. Is it favor
and respect in the World? it is to exchange the love of the eternal God, for
the good will of dying men, and to put your selves under their character, Joh.
12. 43 they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God. In a word, put
them all together, and make the most of them you possibly can, and they will
amount but to a fading felicity, upon which you shall never settle; but keep
the Truth, and it shall crown you with immortality and eternal life.

2. Beware of being frighted by the apprehension of the hazards which the
preserving of the Truth may expose you unto: They are unto Flesh and Blood
terrible and scaring things, but to a rightly informed and spiritual judgment
they are but bug-bears and scare-crows: they cannot of themselves make a
divorce between you and the Truth; and as long as they cannot do that, they can
do you no real harm; the Apostle Peter seeks to quiet the Spirits of those he
writes unto with such a consideration, 1 Pet. 3. 12. and who is he that will
harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good? they might readily reply,
Devils will, and the enemies of God and goodness will the rather do it for
this; Peter knew all this, but he would have you to understand that it is out
of their reach, that though they would, yet they cannot do it: do you but keep
the Truth and that will keep you; it will be a Garrison that can never be
subdued. There is indeed an evil in these things, and therefore it is lawful to
desire (if it may stand with divine counsel) that they may be kept from us; but
whither they shall or no is with him who knows what is best; and this is
sufficient for us, that the God of Truth has engaged his Word and Faithfulness
to turn it unto good in the operation; and you may safely trust him with it,
for he is able to do it. Be not slavishly afraid; what says the wise man,
Prove. 29. 25. The fear of man brings a snare, but whosoever trusts in the
Lord shall be safe. They are poor revenges that the World can wreak upon us,
and therefore, in the judgment of our Savior Christ, not worthy of a Christian
fear, Mat. 10. 28. Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul. When the three Children were threatened with a fiery Furnace, they
thought it not a thing worth the answering, Dan. 3. 16. O Nebuchadnezzar, we
are not careful to answer thee in this matter: the proud King thought to have
scared them into a ly, but he was greatly mistaken; the fear of God, and love
of the Truth, had put them beyond such puny fears.

Now for your furtherance, let me add a few special Rules, which may help to
strengthen you to this great duty, viz.

1. See that you do not place your hopes for happiness in this life or the
things of it. That is it which makes these Doctrines which represent the Worlds
grandeur as contemptible, and the afflictions of it as scarce regardable, to
seem Paradoxes to us, because we confine man's happiness too much to this
present time. The Apostle saw how incompatible these two were, to be a
Christian, and to ty up ones hopes to this life, when he laid down that
conclusion. 1 Cor. 15. 19. If our hope in Christ were for this life only, we
were of all men most miserable. If we think it an undoing thing, either to be
without the delights, or to suffer the afflictions of this World, it will be no
hard matter to make us put off the Truth as a cumbersome Commodity; yea, as
that the keeping whereof will endanger our ruin. And that is the reason why
carnal men account resolved Christians to be the veriest Fools in nature.

He must have his hopes fixed no where short of Heaven, who will stand by his
Purchase of the Truth against all the assaults that he may undergo for it upon
Earth.

That which made the primitive Christians so steady in this practice was, they
took their eyes off from Temporal, and fixed them upon Eternal things, 2 Cor. 4.
ult. yea, this was it that made the ancient Patriarchs to forsake all for the
Truth, because they confessed themselves Strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth, and
looked for a City which has Foundations.

2. Hence you must be much in the mortifying of fleshly lusts. So much of
carnal concupiscence as there is in us, so much there is of enmity against the
Truth; and hence, so much as there is of the activity and prevalency of it, so
much danger there will be of our yielding to the Temptation offered us: these
will be ever crying out, with Jobs Wise, how long will thou retain thine
integrity? Curse God and Dye; and with Peter, Master save thy self, these are
they which will be ever fighting against the Soul, and must therefore be
abstamed from, 1 Pet. 2. 11. these be they which know no other happiness, but
what is enjoyed in the pomps and pleasures of the world, and apprehend no other
misery but what is suffered by the loss of these things, and being subjected to
the trials of this life: if these therefore may be heard, and their pleadings
be any whit regarded, we shall be but wavering Christians, and tossed to and
fro with every wind of Temptations. If therefore you would not sell the Truth,
be sure to subdue your lusts, bring them to the Cross of Christ, learn to deny
your selves, labor to be crucified to the world, and get that crucified to
you: beware then of feeding and pampering of them, of gratifying their desires,
and giving them their scope, by pleading for, and defending of them in any of
their exorbitancies: if you give them the reins now, they will be masters when
an hour of trial shall come, and will carry you away to seek shelter under a
lie, rather than expose your selves by standing your ground in maintenance of
the Truth.

3. Hence also arm your selves to endure hardness; he that will resolve not to
sell the Truth, and never go from that resolution, must expect (and accordingly
prepare) to meet with a thousand hazards, and combat ten thousand difficulties
in the preservation of it; Paul knows not in particular, what things shall
befall him for the Truths sake, but this he is well aware of that bonds and
afflictions do abide him. After that we have bought the Truth, and been at
never so much cost for it, if Satan and wicked men may have their wills, they
will never suffer us to enjoy the quiet possession of it, but do all they can
to cast us out of this inheritance: and though it be not always actually so,
yet there is ever great reason to expect that it may so be, that if we will not
sell the Truth, we may dye for it: if Naboth will not part with his
inheritance, he must part with his life, and this is an hard chapter to Flesh
and Blood; nature relucts here, Skin for Skin, and all that a man has will he
give for his life. They are not the tender and delicate, but the hardy and
exercised Christians who are like to endure such a shock as this is, hence
therefore the Apostle gives Timothy that advice, 2 Timothy 2. 3. Thou therefore
endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ; he is a man indeed, who
when he sees all creature comforts going, his house rifled, his goods
confiscated, his family dispersed, his person siezed and laid up in Irons, and
his very life exposed to cruelty and rage, and all this for Truths sake; thou
can with a cheerful countenance, and undaunted soul, look upon all this, and
say with Paul, none of these things move me, nor do I count my life to be dear,
so I may but save the Truth, and we may live and die together: he who does but
read what this stood these Worthies of old in, recorded in Heb. 11. 3^ etc.
will say those were not tender chits, but hardy Soldiers of Jesus Christ.

4. Beware of being too much led by examples, he that will stand by the Truth
must resolve, not only conditionally, but absolutely; not only to stand as long
as this or that man whom he places great credit and confidence in, but he must
resolve as Peter, though all men forsake thee, yet will not I. If we will truly
obey this command of God, it must be no prejudice to us, if we see a thousand
fall at our right hand, and ten thousand at our left, though great Stars should
come tumbling down out of the Firmament, and those seemingly of the first
magnitude: tho this should be brought as an argument against us, and thrown in
our dish to upbraid us, yet we must not regard it, so as to be shaken in
Spirit, but when many go away and walk no more with Christ, we must make the
same answer that his Disciples did to him, when he asked them if they would go
also, John 6. 68. Whither shall we go? thou only have the words of Eternal
Life; and it is no unusual thing for an hour of Temptation to present us with
the ruins of many an Eminent Professor, who has forsaken the truth, and
embraced the world, these must be our monitors, and not our Presidents.

5. Beware of Carnal Confidence, and learn to be humble. It is Paul's advice, 1
Cor. 10. 12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall; there is
many a man that makes a great bluster with a Profession; and he sell the Truth?
No not he: here is this or that man they are afraid of, (and it is to be hoped
their Charity will engage them to pray for them) but for themselves they are
fixed, and say as Peter, I be offended? no, tho all be offended, I will not; I
deny thee? no, though I should dye with thee, I Will not deny thee; there are a
great many such boasters, whom (it is to be feared) if trials come indeed upon
them, God will put to shame: It is the humble self-suspecting soul, that is
like to keep his ground, and maintain the Truth, as his inheritance, with
unshaken resolutions.

6. Hence be much in the exercise of faith and prayer; believe in Christ, and
rely on his promise; Truths great rewards are in reversion, and received by
says; and our strength is not in our own hands but in Gods, and therefore to
be sought for by earnest supplications: If God do not help us we shall fail, he
only can carry us through; all that encouragement, support, comfort, and inward
relief which is requisite to the making us stable and unmovable, must come
down from him who is the Father of lights; his Promise must be our strength,
and his Spirit our assistor: and therefore let us study to be strong in the
faith, and spirited unto Prayer, so shall we never be deserted of that help by
which we stand.

7. Taste the sweet and contemplate the excellency of the reward which is laid
up in the Truth: What David said of God, I may say of Truth, Psalm. 34. 8. Oh
taste and see that Truth is good: were our life more spiritual, our purposes
would be more stable: one through savoury relish of the Truth, is enough to
make us to resolve to lose all rather than that: and when we have gotten a gust
of its incomparable preciousness, now let us contemplate these vast treasuries,
that immense and eternal fountain of this goodness, which is contained in it,
where there i s enough to sati sfie and fill the soul s of the people of God
for ever; that Kingdom and Crown, those glory s and pleasure s which the
purchase of the truth give s us an indisputable title to; and let us oppose
these things to the Temptations which assault us; and if we have any thing of
Truth really implanted in us, this will be enough to conquer them all; and here
is a work cut out for every one; you that have not already purchased, your
business is to buy the Truth, and you that have so done, your care is not to
fell it again; and in so doing, the Truth shall preserve us here from the harm
of every evil; it shall conduct us so as that we shall not be in danger of
losing our way; and it shall finally bring us to, and possess us of a Kingdom
of Everlasting Glory.

FINIS.
This Book is to be Sold by Joseph Brunning, at his Shop near the Exchange.
1686.

THe greatest Sinners exhorted and Encouraged to come to Christ, and that NOW
without Delaying: Also the exceeding danger of men' s deferring their
Repentance. Together with a Discourse about the Day of Judgment. And on several
other Subjects.

By Increase Mather, Teacher of a Church at Boston in N. E.

THere is a small Book Entitled A Wedding Ring fit for the Finger, which will
soon be out of the Press: And will be Sold by Samuel Phillips at the West End
of the Town house in Boston.

R Eader, You are requested heartily to bear with some few literal mistakes,
and mispointings, which are hardly avoidable; and to correct these more
observable Errata's.

Page. 76. Line 17. read may make. p. 84. l. 23. r. may be p. 86. l. 5. r to be
the. p 130. l. 13. for ever r. even. p. 146. l. 4. for People r. Prophet. P.
159. l, ult. for high to light.


