MEMORABLE PROVIDENCE, Relating to WITCHCRAFTS And POSSESSIONS.

A Faithful Account of many Wonderful and Surprising Things, that have befallen
several Bewitched and Possessed Persons in New England.

Particularly, A NARRATIVE of the mavelous Trouble and Releef Experienced by
a pious Family in Boston, very lately and sadly molested with EVIL SPIRITS.

Whereunto is added,

A Discourse delivered unto a Congregation in Boston, on the Occasion of that
Illustrious Providence. As also

A Discourse delivered unto the same Congregation; on the occasion of an
horrible Self-Murder Committed in the Town.

With an Appendix, in vindication of a Chapter in a late Book of Remarkable
Providence, from the Calumnies of a Quaker at Pen-silvania.

Written By Cotton Mather, Minister of the Gospel.

And Recommended by the Ministers of Boston and Charleston

Printed at Boston in N. England by R. P. 1689. Sold by Joseph Brunning, at his
Shop at the Corner of the Prison-Lane next the Exchange.

To the Honorable (...)
Sr. BY the (...) of the (...) now comes (...) a little History of (...)
astonishing Witchcrafts and Possessions, which partly my own Ocular
Observation, and partly my undoubted Information, has enabled me to offer unto
the public Notice of my Neighbors. It must be the Subject, and not the Manner
or the Author of this Writing, that has made any people desire its Publication;
For there are such obvious Defects in Both, as would render me very
unreasonable if I should wish about This or Any Composure of mine, O That it
were printed in a book! But tho there want not Faults in the Discourse, to give
me Discontent enough, my Displeasure at them will be recompensed by the
Satisfaction I take in my Dedication of it; which I now no less properly than
cheerfully make unto Your Self; whom I reckon among the Best of my Friends, and
the Ablest of my Readers. Your Knowledge has Qualified You to make those
Reflections on the following Relations, which few can Think, and it is not fit
that all should See. How far the Platonic Notions of Damons which were, it may
be, much more espoused by those primitive Christians and Scholars that we call
The Fathers, than they seem countenanced in the ensuing Narratives; are to be
allowed by a serious man, your Scriptural Divinity joined with Your most
Rational Philosophy, will help You to judge at an uncommon rate. Had I on the
Occasion before me handled the Doctrine of Damons, or lanched forth into
Speculations about magical Mysteries, I might have made some Ostentation, that
I have read^ something and thought a little in my time; but it would neither
have been Convenient for me, nor Profitable for those plain Folks, whose
Edification I have all along aimed at. I have therefore here but briefly
touched every thing with an American Pen; a Pen which your Desert likewise has
further Entitled You to the utmost Expressions of Respect and Honor from.
Though I have no Commission, yet I am sure I shall meet with no Crimination, if
I here publicly wish You all manner of Happiness, in the Name of the great
Multitudes whom you have laid under everlasting Obligations. Wherefore in the
name of the many hundred Sick people, whom your charitable and skilful; Hands
have most freely dispensed your no less generous than secret Medicines to; and
in the name of Your whole Country, which has long had cause to believe that
you will succeed Your Honorable Father and Grandfather, in successful
Endeavors for our Welfare; I say, In their Name, I now do wish you all the
Prosperity of them that love Jerusalem. And whereas it has been sometimes
observed, That the Genius of an Author is commonly Discovered in the Dedicatory
Epistle, I shall be content if this Dedicatory Epistle of mine, have now
discovered me to be,

(Sir) Your sincere and very humble Servant, C. Mather.

To the Reader.
THe old Heresy of the sensual Sadducees, denying the Being of Angels either
good or evil died not with them, nor will it, whiles men (abandoning both Faith
and Reason) count it their wisdom to credit nothing but what they see and feel.
How much this fond opinion has gotten ground in this debauched Age is awfully
observable; and what a dangerous streak it gives to settle men in Atheism, is
not hard to discern. God is therefore pleased (besides the witness born to the
Truth in Sacred Writ) to suffer Devils sometimes to do such things in the world
as shall stop the mouth of gain sayers, and extor^ a Confession from them.

It has also been made a doubt by some, whether there are any such things as
Witches, i. e. Such as by Contract or Explicit Covenant with the Devil,
improve, or rather are improv ed by him to the doing of things strange in
themselves, and besides their natural Course. But (besides that the Word of God
assures us that there have been such, and given order about them) no Age passes
without some apparent Demonstration of it. For, Though it be Folly to impute
every dubious Accident, or unwonted Effect of Providence, to Witchcraft; yet
there (...) some things which cannot be excepted against, but must be ascribed
hither.

Angels and Men not being made for civil Converse together in this world; and
all Communion with Devils being interdicted us; their Nature also being
spiritual, and the Word of God having said so little in that particular
concerning their way of Acting; hence it is that we can disclose but a little
of those Mysteries of Darkness; all reports that are from themselves, or their
Instruments, being to be esteemed as Illusions, or at least covered with
Deceit, filled with the Impostures of the Father of Lies; and the effects which
come under our consideration being Mysterious, rather Posing than Informing us.

The Secrets also of God's Providence, in permitting Satan and his Instruments
to molest His children, not in their Estates only, but in their Persons and
their Posterity too, are part of His Judgments that are unsearchable, and His
Ways that are past finding out; only this we have good Assurance for, that
they are among the All things that work together for their good. Their Graces
are hereby tried, their Unprightness is made known, their Faith and Patience
have their perfect work.

Among the many Instances that have been of this kind, That which is Recorded
in this Narrative, is worthy to be commended to the Notice of Mankind, it being
a thing in it self full of Memorable passages, a nd faithfully recorded,
acording to the Truth in Matrer of Fact, scarce any Instance being asserted in
it, but what has the Evidence of many credible Witnesses, did need require.
Among others who had frequent Occasions to observe these things, the Reverend
Author of this short History, was spirited to be more than ordinarily engaged
in attending, and making particular Remarks upon the several passages occurring
therein; and has accordingly written very little besides what Himself was an
eyewitness of, together with others; and the rest was gathered up with much
Accuracy and Caution.

Its needless for us to insist upon the Commendation either of the Author or
the Work; the former is known in the Churches, the latter will speak
sufficiently for it self. All that we shall offer to stay the Reader from
passing over to satisfy himself in that which follows, is only thus much, Viz.
That the following Account will afford to him that shall read with Observation,
a further clear Confirmation, That, There is both a GOD, and a Devil, and
Witchcraft: That, There is no out-ward Affliction, but what God may (and
sometimes does) permit Satan to trouble His people withal: That, The Malice of
Satan and his Instruments, is very great against the Children of God: That, The
clearest Gospel Light shining in a place, will not keep some from entering
hellish Contracts with infernal Spirits: That, Prayer is a powerful and
effectual Remedy against the malicious practices of Devils and those in
Covenant with them That, They who will obtain such Mercies of God, must pray
unto Perseverance: That, God often gives to His people some apparent
Encouragements to their Faith in Prayer, tho He does not presently perfect the
Deliverance sought for: That, God's Grace is able to support His Children, and
preserve their Grace firm, under forest and Continuing Troubles: That, Those
who refuse the Temptation to use doubtful and Diabolical Courses, to get the
Assaults of the Devil and his Agents removed; Choosing to Recommend all to God,
and rather to endure Affliction, than to have it Removed to His Dishonor, and
the wounding of their own Consciences, never had cause to repent of it the end.

And if these Observations, together with the solemn Improvement made of this
stupend Providence, in the pertinent and Judicious Sermons annexed, may but
obtain such an Impression on the hearts of such as shall peruse them, whether
young or old; as therein will be their profit, so shall their Labor turn to
the Praise of God, fully satisfy the Author for all his Care and Industry, and
answer his sincere Aims; for which good Success we Commend it to the Blessing
of God, to be followed with the importunate Prayers of us, who have been Eye-
and Ear-witnesses of many of the most considerable things Related in the
ensuing Narrative.

Charles Morton. James Allen. Joshua Moodey. Samuel Willard.


The Introduction.
IT was once the Mistake of one gone to the Congregation of the Dead,
concerning the Survivers, If one went unto them from the dead, they will
repent. The blessed God has made some to come from the Damned, for the
Conviction (may it also be for the Conversion) of us that are yet alive, The
Devils themselves are by Compulsion come to confute the Atheism and Sadducism
and to reprove the Madness of ungodly men. Those condemned prisoners of our
Atmosphere, have not really sent Letters of Thanks from Hell, to those that are
on Earth, promoting of their Interest; yet they have been forced, as of old, To
confess that Jesus was the Holy one of God, so of late, to declare that Sin and
Vice are the things which they are delighted in. But should one of those
hideous Wights appear visibly with fiery chains upon him, and utter audibly his
roarings and his warnings in one of our Congregations it would not produce new
Hearts in those whom the Scriptures handled in our Ministry do not affect.
However it becomes the Ambassadors of the L. Jesus to leave no stroke untouched
that may conduce to bring men from the power of Satan unto God; and for this
cause it is, that I have permitted ^^^ensuing Histories to be published. They
contain Things of undoubted Certainty, and they suggest Things of Importance
unconceiveable. Indeed they are only one Head of Collections which in my little
time of Observation I have made of Memorable Providence (...) with Reflections
thereupon, to be reserved among other effects of my Diversion from my more
stated and more weary Studies. But I can with a Contentment beyond mere
Patience give these rescinded Sheets unto the Stationer, when I see what pains
Mr. Baxter, Mr. Glanvil, Dr. More, and several other Great Names have taken to
publish Histories of Witchcrafts and Possessions unto the world. I said Let me
also run after them; and this with the more Alacrity because, I have tidings
ready. Go then, my little Book, as a Lackey to the more elaborate Essays of
those learned men. Go tell Mankind, that there are Devils and Witches; and that
tho those night-birds least appear where the Daylight of the Gospel comes, yet
New-Engl. has had Exemples of their Existence and Operation; and that not only
the Wigwams of Indians, where the pagan Powaws often raise their masters, in
the shapes of Bears and (...) and Fires, but the Houses of Christians, where
our God has had His ^nstant Worship, have undergone the Annoyance of Evil
spirits. Go tell the world, What Prayers can do beyond all Devils and Witches,
and What it is that these Monsters love to do; and though the Doemons in the
Audience of feve^^^ standers by threatened much Disgrace to thy Author, in the
let thee come abroad, yet venture That, (...) in this way seek a just ^^^venge
on Their for the Disturbance they have given to such as have called on the Name
of GOD.

Witchcrafts and Possessions.
The First EXEMPLE.
Section I. THere dwells at this time, in the south part of Boston, a sober and
pious man, whose Name is John Goodwin, whose Trade is that of a Mason, and
whose Wife (to which a Good Report gives a share with him in all the Characters
of Virtue) has made him the Father of six (now living) Children. Of these
Children, all but the Eldest, who works with his Father at his Calling, and the
Youngest, who lives yet upon the Breast of its mother, have labored under the
direful effects of a (no less palpable than) stupendous WITCHCRAFT. Indeed that
exempted Son had also, as was thought, some lighter ^^uches of it, in
unaccountable stabbs and pains nov^ and then upon him; as indeed every person
in the Family at some time or other had, exce^^ the godly Father, and the
sucking Infant, who never felt any impressions of it. But these (...) Children
mentioned, were handled in so sad and strange a manner, as has given matter of
Discourse and Wonder to all the Country, and of History not unworthy to be
considered by more than all the serious of the curious Readers in this
New-English World.

SECT. II. The four Children (where^^ the Eldest was about Thirteen, and the
young^^ was perhaps about a third part so many years of age) had enjoyed a
Religious Education, and answered it with a very towardly Ingenuity. They had
an observable Affection unto Divine and Sacred things; and those of them that
went capable of it, seemed to have such a Resentment of their eternal
Concernments as is not altogether usual. Their Parents also kept them to
continual Employment, which did more than deliver them from the Temptations of
Idleness, and as young as they were, they took a delight in it, it may be as
much as they should have done. In a word, Such was the whole Temper and
Carriage of the Children, that there cannot easily be any thing more
unreasonable, than to imagine that a Design to Dissemble could cause them to
fall into any of their odd Fits; though there should not have happened, as
there did, (...) thousand Things, wherein it was perfectly impossible for any
Dissimulation of theirs to produce what scores of spectators were amazed at.

SECT. III. About Midsummer, in the year 1688. the Eldest of these Children,
who is a Daughter, saw cause to examine their Washer woman, upon their missing
of some Linen, which it was feared she had stolen from them; and of what use
this linen might be to serve the Witchcraft intended, the Theef's Tempter
knows (...). This laundress was the Daughter of an ignorant and scandalous old
Woman in the Neighborhood; (...) hose miserable Husband before he died, had
sometimes complained of her, that she was undoubtedly a Witch, and that
whenever his Head was laid, she would quickly arrive unto the punishments due
to such an one. This Woman in her daughters Defense bestowed very bad Language
upon the Girl that put her to the Question; immediately upon which, the poor
child became variously indisposed in her health, and visited with strange Fits,
beyond those that attend an Epilepsy, or a Catalepsy, or those that they call
the Diseases of Astonishment.

SECT. IV. It was not long before one of her Sisters, and two of her Brothers,
were seized, in Order one after another, with Affects like those that molested
her. Within a few weeks they were all four tortured every where in a manner so
very grievous, that it would have broke an heart of stone to have seen their
Agonies. Skilful Physicians were consulted for their Help, and particularly our
worthy and prudent Friend Dr. Thomas Oaks, who found himself so affronted by
the Distempers of the children, that he concluded nothing but an hellish
Witchcraft could be the Original of these Maladies. And that which yet more
confirmed such Apprehension was, That for one good while, the children were
tormented just in the same part of their bodies all at the same time together;
and tho they saw and heard not one another complaints, tho likewise their
pai^^ and sprains were swift like Lightening, yet when (suppose) the Neck, or
the Hand, or the Back of one was Racked, so it was at that instant with to
other too.

SECT. V. The variety of their tortures increased continually; and tho about
Nine or Ten at Night they always had a Release from their miseries, and ate
and slept all night for the most p^^ indifferently well, yet in the day time
they were handled with so many sorts of Ails, that it would require of us
almost as much time to Relate them all, as it did of them to Endure them.
Sometimes they would be Deaf, sometimes Dumb, and sometimes Blind, and often,
all this at once. One while their Tongues would be drawn down their Throats;
anotherwhile they would be pulled out upon their Chins, to a prodigious length.
They would have their Mouths opened unto such a Wideness, that their Jaws went
out of joint; and anon they would clap together again with a Force like that of
a strong Spring-Lock. The same would happen to their Shoulder-Blades, and their
Elbows, and Hand-wrists, and several of their joints. They would at times ly in
a benumbed condition; and be drawn together as those that are tied Neck and
Heels; and presently be stretched out, yea, drawn Backwards to such a degree
that it was feared the very skin of their Bellies would have cracked. They
would make most pitteous outcries, that they were cut with Knives, and struck
with Blows that they could not bear. Their Necks would be broken, so that their
Neck-bone would seem dissolved unto them that felt after it; and yet on the
sudden, it would become again so stiff that there was no stirring of their
Heads; yea, their Heads would be twisted almost round; and if main force at any
time obstructed a dangerous motion which they seemed to be upon, they would
roar exceedingly. Thus they lay some weeks most pitiful Spectacles; and this
while as a further Demonstration of Witchcraft in these horrid Effects, when I
went to Prayer by one of them, that was very desireous to hear what I said, the
Child utterly lost her Hearing till our Prayer was over.

SECT. VI. It was a Religious Family that these Afflictions happened unto; and
none but a Religious Contrivance to obtain Releef, would have been welcome to
them. Many superstitious proposals were made unto them, by persons that were I
know not who, nor what, with Arguments fetched from I know not how much
Necessity and Experience; but the distressed Parents rejected all such
counsils, with a gracious Resolution, to oppose Devils with no other weapons
out Prayers and Tears, unto HIM that has the Chaining of them; and to try first
whether Graces were not the best things to encounter Witchcrafts with.
Accordingly they requested the fo^^ Ministers of Boston, with the Minister of
Char^^^ town to keep a Day of Prayer at their thus haunted house; which they
did in the Company (...) some devout people there. Immediately upon this Day,
the youngest of the four children was delivered, and never felt any trouble as
afor^. But there was yet a greater Effect of these ou^ Applications unto our
GOD!

SECT. VII. The Report of the Calamities of the Family for which we were thus
concerned, arrived now unto the ears of the Magistrates, who presently and
prudently apply themselves, with a just vigor, to enquire in^^ the story. The
Father of the Children complained of his Neighbor, the suspected ill woman,
whose name was Glover; and she being sent for by the Justices, gave such a
wretched Account of her self, that they saw cause to commit her unto the
Gaolers Custody. Goodwin ha^ no proof that could have done her any Hurt but the
Hag had not power to deny her interest in the Enchantment of the Children; and
when she (...) asked, Whether she believed there was a God? her Answer was too
blasphemous and horrible for any Pen of mine to mention An experiment was made,
Whether she could recite the Lords Prayer; and it was found, that tho clause
after clause was most carefully repeated unto her, yet when she said it after
them that prompted her, she could not possibly avoid making Nonsense of it,
with some ridiculous Depravations. This Experiment I had the curiosity since to
see made upon two more, and it had the same Event. Upon the Commitment of this
extraordinary Woman, all the Children had some present ease; until one (related
(...) her) accidentally meeting one or two of them, entertained them with her
Blessing, that is, Railing; upon which Three of them fell ill again, as they
were before.

SECT. VIII. It was not long before the Witch thus in the Trap, was brought
upon her Trial; at which, through the Efficacy of a Charm I suppose, used upon
her, by one or some of her Crew, the Court could receive Answers from her in
none but the Irish, which was her Native Language; although she understood the
English very well, and had accustomed her whole Family to none but that
Language in her former Conversation; and therefore the Communication between
the Bench and the Bar, was now chiefly conveyed by two honest and faithful men
that were Interpreters. It was long before she could with any direct Answers
plead unto her Indictment; and when she did plead, it was with Confession
rather than Denial of her Guilt. Order was given to search the old woman's
house, from whence there were brought into the Court, several small Images, or
Puppets, or Babies, made of Rags, and stuff t with Goats hair, and other such
Ingredients. When these were produced, the vile Woman acknowledged, that her
way to torment the Objects of her malice, was by wetting of her Finger with her
Spittle, and stroaking of those little Images. The abused Children were then
(...) sent, and the Woman still kept stooping and shrinking as one that was
almost pressed to Death with a mighty Weight upon her. But one of the Images
being brought unto her, immediately she started up after an odd manner, and
took it into her hand; but she had no sooner taken it, than one of the Children
fell into sad Fits before the whole Assembly. This the Judges had their just
Apprehensions at; and carefully causing the Repetition of the Experiment, found
again the same event of it. They asked her, Whether she had way to stand by
her: She replied, She had; and looking very pertly in the Air, she added, No,
He Is gone. And she then confessed, that she had One, who was her Prince, with
whom she maintained, I know not what Communion. For which cause, the night
after, she was heard expostulating with a Devil, for his thus deserting her;
telling him that Because he had served her so basely and f^^sty, she had
confessed all. However to make all clear, The Court appointed five or six
Physicians, one evening to examine her very strictly, whether she were not
crazed in her Intellectuals, and had not procured to her felt by Folly and
Madness the Reputation of a Witch. Diverse hours did they spend with her; and
in all that while no Discourse came from her, but what was pertinent and
agreeable: particularly, when they asked her, What she thought would become of
her soul? she replied You ask me a very solemn Question, and I cannot west tell
what to say to it. She owned her self a Roman Catholic; and could recite her
Pater Noster in Latin very readily; but there was one Clause or two always too
hard for her, whereof she said, She could not repeat it, if she might have all
the world. In the up-shot, the Doctors returned her Compos Men^^s; and Sentence
of Death was passed upon her.

SECT. IX. Diverse days were passed between her being Arraigned and Condemned.
In this time one of her Neighbors had been giving in her Testimony of what
another of her Neighbors had upon her Death related concerning her. It seems
one Howen about Six years before, had been cruelly bewitched to Death; but
before she died, she called one Hughes unto her, Telling her that she laid her
Death to the charge of Glover; That she had seen Glover sometimes come down her
Chimey; That she should remember this, for within this Six years she might have
Occasion to declare it. This Hughes now preparing her Testimony, immediately
one of her children, a fine boy, well grown toward Youth, was taken ill, just
in the same woeful and surprising manner that Goodm^^s children were. One night
particularly, The Boy said he saw a Black thing with a Blue Cap in the Room,
Tormenting of him; and he complained most bitterly of a Hand put into the Bed,
to pull out his Bowels. The next day the mother of the boy went unto Glover, in
the Prison, and asked her, Why she tortured her poor lad at such a wicked rate?
This Witch replied, that she did it because of wrong done to her self and her
daughter Hughes denied (as well she might) that she had done her any wrong.
Well then, says Glover, Let me see your child and he shall be well again.
Glover went on, and told her of her own accord, I was at your house last night.
Says Hughes, In what shape? Says Glover, As a (...) thing with a blue Cap.
Says Hughes, What do you do there? Says Glover, with my hand in the Bed I
tried to pull out the boys Bowels, but I could not. They parted; but the next
day Hughes appearing at Court, had her Boy with her; and Glover pasting by the
Boy expressed her good wishes for him; tho'I suppose, his Parent had no design
of any mighty Respect unto the Hag, by having him with her there. But the Boy
had no more Indispositions after the Condemnation of the Woman.

SECT. X. Whole the miserable old Woman was under Condemnation, I did my self
twice give a visit unto her. She never den^ed the guilt of the Wittchcraft
charged upon her; but she confessed very little about the Circumstances of her
Confederacies with the Devils only, she said, That she used to be at meetings,
which her Prince and Four more were present at. As for those Four, She told who
they were; and for her Prince, her account plainly was; that he was the Devil.
She entertained me with nothing but Irish, which Language I had not Learning
enough to understand without an Interpreter; only one time, when I was
representing unto her That and How her Prince had cheated her, as her self
would quickly find; she replied I think ^^^lish and with, passion too, If it he
so, I am (...) for that! I offered many Questions unto her, ^^to which, after
long silence, she told me, She would fain give me a full Answer, but they would
not give her leave. It was demanded, They Who is that THEY? and she returned
that They were her Spirits, or her Saints. [so, they say, the same Word in
Irish signifies both] And at another time, she included her two Mistresses, as
she called them in that [They,] but when it was enquired, Who those two were,
she fell into a Rage, and would be no more urged.

I Set before her, the Necessity and Equity of her breaking her Covenant with
Hell, and giving her self to the Lord Jesus Christ, by an everlasting Covenant;
To which her Answer was, that I spoke a very Reasonable thing, but she could
not do it. I asked her whether she would consent or desire to be prayed for; To
that she said, If Prayer would do her any good, thee could pray for her self.
And when it was again propounded, she said, She could not unless her spirits
[or angels] would give her leave. However, against her will I pra'yd with her,
which if it were a Fault it was in excess of Pity. When I had done, she
thanked me with many good Words; but I was no sooner out of her sight, than she
took a stone, a long and slender stone, and with her Finger and Spittle fell to
tormenting it; though whom or what she meant, I had the mercy never to
understand.

SECT. XI. When this (...) (...) going to her Execution, she said, the Children
should not be relieved by her Death, for others had a hand in it as well as
she; and she named one among the rest, whom it might have been thought Natural
Affection would have advised the Concealing of. It came to pass accordingly,
That the Three children continued in their Furnace as before, and it grew
rather Seven times hotter than it was. All their former Ails pursued them
still, with an addition of (it is not easy to tell how many) more, but such as
gave more sensible Demonstrations of an Enchantment growing very far toward a
POSSESSION by Evil spirits.

SECT. XII. The Children in their Fits would still cry out upon, [ They] and [
Them] as the Authors of all their Harm; but who that [ They] and [ Them were,
they were not able to declare. At last, the Boy obtained at some times, a sight
of some shapes in the room. There were Three or Four of 'em, the Name s of
which the child would pretend at certain seasons to tell; only the Name of One,
who was counted a Sager Hag than the rest, he still so stammered at, that he
was put upon some Periphrasis in describing her. A Blow at the place where the
Boy beheld the Spectre was always felt by the Boy himself in the part of his
Body that answered what might be stricken at; and this tho his Back were
turned; which was once and again so exactly tried, that there could be no
Collusion in the Business. But as a Blow at the Apparition always (...) him,
so it always helped him too; for after the Agonies, which a Push or Stab of
That had put him to, were over, (as (...) a minute or 2 they would be) the Boy
would have a respite from his Fits a considerable while, and the Hobgoblins
disappear. It is very credibly reported that a wound was this way given to an
Obnoxious woman in the town; whose name will not expose: for we should be
tender in such Relations, left we wrong the Reputation of the Innocent by
stories not enough enquired into.

SECT. XIII. The Fits of the Children yet more arrived unto such Motions as
were beyond the Efficacy of any natural Distemper in the world. They would bark
at one another like Dogs, and again (...) like so many Cats. They would
sometimes complain that they were in a Red-hot Oven, sweating and panting at
the same time unreasonably: Anon they would say, Cold water was thrown upon
them, at which they would shiver very much. They would cry out of dismal Blows
with great Cuogels laid upon them; and tho we saw no cudgels nor blows, yet we
could see the Marks left by them in Red Streaks upon their bodies afterward.
And one of them would be roasted on an invisible Spit, run into his Mouth, and
out at his Foot, he lying, and rolling, and groaning as if it had been so in
the most sensible manner in the world; and then he would shriek, that Knives
were cutting of him; Sometimes also he would have his head so s^rcibly, tho not
visibly, nailed unto the Floor, that it was as much as a strong man could do to
pull it up. One while they would all be so Limber, that it was judged every
Bone of them could be bent. Another while they would be so stiff, that not a
joint of them could be stirred They would sometimes be as though they were mad,
and then they would climb over high Fences, beyond the Imagination of them that
looked after them. Yea, They would fly like Geese; and be carried with an
incredible Swiftness through the air, having but just their Toes now and then upon
the ground, and their Arms waved like the Wings of a Bird. One of them, in the
House of a kind Neighbor and Gentleman (Mr. Willis) flew the length of the
Room, about 20 foot, and flew just into an Infants high armed Chair; (as it is
affirmed) none seeing her feet all the way touch the floor.

SECT. XIV. Many ways did the Devils take to make the children do mischief
both to themselves and others; but through the singular Providence of God, they
always failed in the attempts. For they could never essay the doing of any
harm, unless there were somebody at hand that might prevent it; and seldom
without first shrieking out, They say, I must do such a thing! Diverse times
they went to strike furious Blows at their tenderest and dearest friends, or
to fling them down stairs when they had them at the Top, but the warnings from
the mouths of the children themselves, would still anticipate what the Devils
did intend. They diverse times were very near Burning or Drowning of
themselves, but the Children themselves by their own pitiful and seasonable
cries for Help still procured their Deliverance: Which made me to Consider,
Whether the Little ones had not their Angels, in the plain sense of Our
Saviors Intimation. Sometimes, When they were tying their own Neck-clothes,
their compelled hands miserably strangled themselves, till perhaps, the
standers-by gave some Relief unto them. But if any small Mischief happened to
be done where they were; as the Tearing or Dirtying of a Garment; the Falling
of a Cup, the breaking of a Glass, or the like; they would rejoice extremely,
and fall into a pleasure and Laugh^^^ very extraordinary. All which things
compared with the Temper of the Children, when they are themselves, may suggest
some very peculiar Thoughts unto us.

SECT. XV. They were not in a constant Fortune for some Weeks, but were a
little quiet, unless upon some incidental provocations; upon which the Devils
would handle them like ^igres, and wound them in a manner very horrible.
Particularly, Upon the least Reproof of their Parents for any unfit thing they
said or did, most grievous woeful Heartbreaking Agonies would they fall into.
If any useful thing were to be done to them, or by them, they would have all
sorts of Troubles fall upon them. It would sometimes cost one of them an Hour
or Two to be (...) in the evening, or dressed in the morning. For if any one went
to unty a string, or undo a Button about them, or the contrary; they would be
twisted into such postures as made the thing impossible. And at Whiles, they
would be so managed in their Beds that no Bed-clothes could for an hour or two
be laid upon them; nor could they go to wash their Hands; without having them
clasp't so odly together, there was no doing of it. But when their Friends were
near tired with Waiting, anon they might do what they would unto them. Whatever
Work they were bid to do, they would be so snap't in the member which was to do
it, that they with grief still desisted from it. If one ordered them to Rub a
clean Table, they were (...) to do it without any disturbance; if to rub dirty
Table, presently they would with many Torments be made incapable. And
sometimes, ^ho but seldom, they were kept from eating their meals, by having
their Teeth sent when they carried any thing unto their Mouths.

SECT. XV. But nothing in the World would so discompose them as a Religious
Exercise. If there were any Discourse of God, or Christ, or any of the things
which are not seen and are eternal, they would be cast into intolerable
Anguishes. Once, those two Worthy Ministers Mr. Fisk and Mr. Thatcher, best
owing some gracious Counsils on the Boy, whom they then found at a Neighbors
house, he immediately lost his Hearing, so that he heard not one word, but just
the last word of all they said. Much more, All Praying to God, and Reading of
His word, would occasion a very terrible Vexation to them they would then stop
their own Ears with their own Hands; and roar, and shriek; and ^olla, to drown
the Voice of the Devotion. Yea, i^ any one in the Room took up a Bible to look
into it, the the Children could see nothing of it, as being in a crowd of
Spectators, or having their Faces another way, yet would they be in wonderful
Mrseries, till the Bible were laid aside. In short, No good thing must then be
endured near those Children, Which ( while they are themselves) do love every
good thing in a measure that proclaims in them the Fear of God.

SECT. XVII. My Employments were such, that I could not visit this afflicted
Family so often as I would; Wherefore that I might show them what kindness I
could, as also that I might have a full opportunity to observe the
extraordinary Circumstances of the Children, and that I might be furnished with
Evidence and Argument as a Critical Eyewitness to confute the Saducism of this
debauched Age; I took the Eldest of them home to my House. The young Woman
continued well at our house, for diverse days, and applied her self to such
Actions not only of Industry, but of Piety, as she had been no stranger to. But
on the Twentieth of November in the Fore-noon, she cried out, Ah [They] have
found me out! I thought it would be so! and immediately she fell into her fits
again. I shall now confine my Story chiefly to Her, from (...) Case the Reader
may shape some Conjecture (...) the Accidents of the Rest.

SECT. XVIII. Variety of (...) fiex'd upon the Girl* in which besides the fore
mentioned Ails returning upon her, she often would cough up a Ball as big as a
small Egg into the side of her Windpipe, that would near choke her, till by
Stroking and (...) ^^inking it was carried down again. At the beginning of her
Fits usually she kept odly Looking up the (...), but could not say what she
(...). When I bad her Cry to the Lord Jesus for Help, her Teeth were instantly
set; upon which I added* Yet, child, Look unto Him, and then her Eyes were
presently pulled into her head, so far, that one might have feared she should
never have (...) them more. When I prayed in the Room, (...) her Arms were with
a strong, tho not see^ force clap t^ upon her ears; and when her hands, were
with violence pulled away, she cried out, [ They] make such a noise, I cannot
(...) a word! She likewise complained, that Good'y Glover's, Chair^ was upon
her Leg, and when she essayed to go, her postures were exactly such as the
chained Witch had before she died. But the manner still was, that her Tortures
in a small while would pass over, and Frolicks succeed; in which she would
continue many hours, nay, whole days, talking perhaps never wickedly, but
always (...) beyond her self; and at certain provocat out, her Tortures would
renew upon her, till we had ^eft off to give them. But she (...), that if she
might but steal, or (...) drank, she should be well immediately.

SECT. XIX. In her ludicrous Fits, one while she would be for Flying; and she
would be carried hither and thither, tho not long from the ground, yet so long
as to exceed the ordinary power of Nature, in our Opinion of it: another-whilt
she would be for Diving, and use the Actions of it toward the Floor, on which,
if we had not held her, she would have thrown her self. Being at this exercise
she told us, That They said, she must go down to the Bottom of our Well, for
there was Plate there, and They said, They would bring her safely up again.
This did she tell us, tho she had never heard of any Plate there! and we our
selves who had newly bought the house, hardly knew of any; but the former Owner
of the House just then coming in, told us there had been Plate for many years
at the Botttom of the Well.

She had once a great mind to have eaten a roasted Apple, but whenever she
attempted to eat it, her Teeth would be set, and sometimes, if she went to
take it up, her Arm would be made so stiff, that she could not possibly bring
her hand to her Mouth: at last she said, Now They say, I shall eat it, if I eat
it quickly; and she nimbly eat it all up. Moreover,

There was one very singular passion that frequently attended her. An Invisible
Chain would be clapped about her, and she, in much pain and Fear, cry out, When
[ They] began to put it on. Once I did with my own hand knock it off, as it
began to be fastened about her. But ordinarily, When it was on, she would be pulled
out of her seat with such violence toward the Fire, that it has been as much
as one or two of us could do to keep her out. Her Eyes were not brought to be
perpendicular to her feet, when she rose out of her Seat, as the Mechanism of a
Humane Body requires in them that rise, but she was one dragged wholly by other
Hands: and once, When I gave a stamp on the Hearth, just between her and-the
Fire, she scream'd out, (tho I think she saw me not) that I Jarr'd the Chain,
and hurt her Back.

SECT. X X. While she was in her Frolicks I was willing to try, Whether she
could read or no; and I found, not only That If she went to read the Bible her
Eyes would be strangely twisted and blinded, and her Neck presently broken, but
also that if any one else did read the Bible in the Room, tho it were wholly
out of her sight, and without the least voice or noise of it, she would be cast
into very terrible Agonies. Yet once, Falling into her her Maladies a little
time after she had read the 59 th Psalm, I said unto the standers-by, Poor
child! she cannot now read the Psalm she readd a little while ago, she listened
her self unto something that none of us could hear, and made us be silent for
some few Seconds of a minute. Whereupon she said, But I can read it, they say I
shall! So I showed her the Psalm, and she rea^d it all over to us. Then said I,
Ch^^, say (...) to it? but (...) she could not do* I added, Read the next? but
no where else in the Bible could she read a word. I brought her a Quakers Book;
and (...) she could quickly read whole pages of; only the Name of GOD and
CHRIST she still sk^pt over, being unable to pronounce it, except sometimes
with stammering a minute or two or more upon it. When we urged her to tell what
the (...) was that she missed, sheed say, I must (...); They say I m^st not,
you know what (...) G and O and D; so she would Spell the Name unto us. I brought
her again, one that I thought was a Good Book; and presently she was handled
with in^^sterable ^orments. But when showed her a Jest-Book, as, The Oxford
^^pts* or the Cambridge Jests, she could read them (...) Disturbance, and have
witty Descant's upon them too. I entertained her with a Book that pretends to
prove. That there are no (...); and that she could read very well, only the
Name Devils, and Witches, could not be uttered by her without extraordinary
Difficulty. I produced a Book to her that proves, That there are Witches, and
that she had not power to read. When I readd in the Room, the Story of (...) in
my Fathers Remarkable Providence, and came to the Exclamation which the
Narrative says the Demons made upon her, [ Ah she runs to the Book!] it cast
her into inexpressible Agonies; and she would fall into them whenever I had the
Expression of, Running to the Rock, afterward. A popish Book also she could
endure very well; but it would kill her to look into any Book, that (in my
Opinion) it might have bin profitable and edifying for her to be reading of.
These Experiments were often enough repeated, and still with the same Success,
before Witnesses not a few. The good Books that were found so mortal to her
were chiefly such as lay ever at hand in the Room. One was the Guide to Heaven
from the Word, which I had given her. Another of them was Mr. Willard's little
(but precious) Treatise of Justification. Diverse Books published by my Father
I also tried upon her; particularly, his Mystery of Christ; and another small
Book of his about Faith and Repentance, and the day of Judgment.

Once being very merrily talking by a Table that had this last Book upon it,
she just opened the Book, and was immediately struck backwards as dead upon the
floor. I hope I have not spoil (...) the credit of the Books, By telling how
much the Devils hated them. I shall therefore add, That my Grandfather Cottons
Catechism called Milk for Babes, and The Assemblies Catechism, would bring
hideous Convulsions on the Child if she looked into them; tho she had once
learned them with all the love that could be.

SECT XXI. I was not unsensible that this Girls Capacity or incapacity to read,
was not Just for Truth to be determined by, and therefore I did not proceed
much further in this (...) Business, not knowing What snares the Devils might
lay for us in the Trials. A few further Trvals, I confess, I did make; but what
the event or'^m (...), I shall not relate, because I would not offend. But that
which most made me to wonder was, That one bringing to her a certain
Prayer Book, she not only could Read it very well, but also did read a large
part of it over, and calling it Her Bible, she took in it a ^elight and put on
it a Respect more than Ordinary. If she were going into her tortures, at the
offer of this Book, she would come out of her fits, and read; and her
Attendents were almost under a Temptation to use it as a Charm, to make and
keep her quiet. Only, When she came to the Lords Prayer, (...) now and then
occurring in this Book) she would have her eyes put out, so that she must turn
over a new leaf, and then she could (...) again. Whereas also there are
Scriptures in that Book, she could read them there, but if I showed her the
very same Scriptures in the Bible, she should sooner Die than read them. And she
was likewise made unable to read the Psalms in an ancient ^^eter, which this
prayer book had in the same volumne with it. There were, I think I may say, no
less than Multitudes of Witnesses, to this odd thing; and I should not have
been a faithful and honest Historian, if I had withheld from the World this
part of my History: But I make no Reflections on it. Those inconsiderable men
that are provoked at it (if any shall be of so little Sense as to be provoked)
must be angry at the Devils, and not at me; their Malice, and not my Writing,
deserves the Blame of any Aspersion which a true History, may seem to cast on a
Book that some have enough manifested their Concernment for.

SECT. XXII. There was another most unaccountable Circumstance which now
attended her; and until she came to our House, I think, she never had
Experience of it. Ever now and then, an Invisible Horse would be brought unto
her, by those whom she only called, them, and, Her Company: upon the Approach
of Which, her eyes would be still closed up; for (said she) They say, I am a
Tell-Tale, and therefore they will not let me see them. Upon this would she
give a Spring as one mounting an Horse, and Settling her self in a
Riding-Posture, she would in her Chair be agitated as one sometimes Ambleing,
sometimes T rotting, and sometimes Galloping (...) furiously.In these motions
we (...) not perceive that she was stirred by the stress of her feet, upon the
ground; for often she touched it not; but she mostly continued in her Chair,
though sometimes in her ^^rd Trott we doubted she would have been tossed over
the Back of it. Once being angry at his Dullness, When she said, she would cut
off hic head if she had a knife, I gave her my Sheath, wherewith she suddenly
gave her self a stroke on the Neck, but complained, it would not cut When she
had rode a minute or two or three, she would pretend to be at a Rendezvous with
Them, that were Her Company; there she would maintain a Discourse with them, and
asking many Questions concerning her self, (for we gave her none of ours)
she would Lis^en much, and Received Answers from them that indeed none but her
self perceived. Then would she return and inform us, how [They] did intend to
handle her for a day or two afterward, besides some other things that she
enquired of them. Her Horse would sometimes throw her, with much Violence; but
she would mount again; and one of the Standers-by once imagining [ them] that
were Her Company, to be before her (for she called unto them to ^ay for her) he
struck with his Cane in the Air where he thought they were, and tho her eyes
were wholly shutt, yet she cried out, that he struck her. Her Fantastic
Journeyes were mostly performed in her Chair without removing from it; but
sometimes would she ride from her Chair, and be carried odly on the Floor, from
one part of the Room to another, in the postures of a Riding Woman. If any of
us asked her, Who her Company were? She general^ replied, I don't know. But if
we were instant in our Demand, she would with some witty Flout of other turn it
off. Once I said, Child, if you cannot tell their Names, pray tell me what
Clothes they have on; and the Words were no sooner out of my mouth, but she was
laid for dead upon the Floor.

SECT. XXIII. One of the Spectators once asked her, Whether she could nor ride
up stairs; unto which her Answer was, That she believe'd she could, for her
Horse could do very notable things. Accordingly, when her H^^s^ came to her
again, to our Admiration she (...) (that is, was tossed as one that r^de up the
stairs: here then stood, open the Stuay of one belonging to the Family, unto
which entering, she stood immediately upon her Feet, and cried out, They are
gone; they are gone! They say, that they cannot, -- God will not let 'em come
here! She also added a Reason for it, which the Owner of the Study thought*
more and than true. And she presently and perfectly came to her self, so that
her whole Discourse and Carriage was altered unto the greatest measure of
Sobriety, and she fatt Reading of the Bible and Good Books, for a good part of
the Afternoon. Her Affairs calling her anon to go down again, the (...) were in
a quarter of a minute as bad upon her as before, and her Horse was Waiting for
her. I understanding of it, immediately would have her up to the study of the
young man where she had been at ease before; merely to try Whether there had
not been a Fallacy in what had newly happened: but she was now so twisted, and
writhen that it gave me much trouble to get her into my Arms, and much more to
drag her up the stairs. She was pulled out of my hands, and when I recovered my
Hold, she was thrust so hard upon me, that I had almost fallen backwards, and
her own breast was sore afterward, by their Compressions to detain her; she
seemed heavier indeed than three of her self. With incredible Forcing (tho she
kept Screaming, They say I must not go in!) at length we pulled her in; where
she was no sooner come, but she could stand on her Feet, and with an altered
tone, could thank me, saying, now I am well. At first she would be somewhat saint,
and say, She felt something go out of her; but in a minute or two, she could
attend any Devotion, or Business as well as ever in her Life; and both spoke
and did as became a person of good Discretion.

I was loath to make a Charm of the Room; yet some strangers that came to visit
us, the Week after, desiring to see the Exporiment made, I permitted more than
two or three Repetitions of it; and it still succeeded as I have declared. Once
when I was assisting 'em in carrying of her up, she was torn out of all our
hands; and to my self, she cried out, Mr. M, -- One of them is going to push
you down the stairs, have a care. I remember not that I felt any Thrust or
Blow; but I think I was unaecountably made to step down backward two or three
stairs, and within a few hours she told me by whom it was.

SECT. XXIV. One of those that had bin concerned for her Welfare, had newly
implored the great GOD that the young woman might be aable to declare whom she
apprehended her self troubled by. Presently upon this her Horse returned, only
it pestered her with such ugly paces, that she fell out with her Company, and
threatened now to tell all, for their so abusing her. I was going abroad, and
she said unto them that were about her, Mr. M. -- is gone abroad my horse will not
come back, till he come home; and then I believe (said she softly,) I shall
tell him all. I staid abroad an hour or two, and then Returning, When I was
just come to my Gate, before I had given the least Sign or Noise of my being
there, she said, My Horse is come! and intimated, that I was at the Door. When
I came in, I found her mounted after her fashion, upon her Aerial Steed; which
carried her Fancy to the Journeys end. There (or rather then) she maintained a
considerable Discourse with Her Company, Listening very attentively when she
and propounded any Question, and receiving the Answers with impressions made
upon her mind. She said; Well what do you say? How many F^^ more am I to have?
-- pray, can ye tell how long it shall be before you are hi^ god for what you
have done? -- You are (...) Witches to my knowledge, I shall s^e some of you go
after your sister; You would have Killd me; but you cannot, I don't fear you --
You would have thrown Mr. Mather down stains, but you could not. -- Well! How
shall I be Note, on Tomorrow, the Ministers of the Town were to keep a day of
Prayer at her Fathers House
Tomorrow? Pray, What do you think of Tomorrow? -- Fare ye well. -- You have
brought me such an ugly Horse, I am angry at you; I could find in my heart to
tell all. So she began her homeward-paces; but when she had gone a little way,
(that is a little (...)) she said, O I have forgot one Question; I must go back
again; and back she rides. She had that day been diverse times warning us, that
they had been contriving to do some harm to my Wife, by a Fall or a Blow, of
the like; and when she came out of her mysterious Journeys, she would still be
careful concerning Her. Accordingly she now calls to her Company again, Hark
you, One thing more before we part! What hurt is it you will do to Mrs Mather?
will you do her any hurt? Here she list'ned some time; and then clapping her
hands cried out, O; I am glad (...), they can do Mrs* Mather (...) hurt: they
try, but they say they cannot. So she returns and at once, Dismissing her Horse,
and opening her eyes, she called me to her, Now Sir, (said she) I ll tell you
all. I have learned who they are that are the cause of my trouble, there is
three of them, (and she named who) if they were out of the way, I should be
well. They say, they can tell now how long I shall be troubled, But they will not.
Only they seem to think, their power will be broke this Week, They seem also to
say, that I shall be very ill To morrow, but they are themselves terribly afraid
of to morrow; They fear, that to morrow we shall be delivered. They say too,
that they cannot hurt Mrs. Mather, which I am glad of. But they said, they would
kill me to night, if I went to bed before ten a clock, if I told a word. And
other things did she say, not now to be recited.

SECT. XXV. The Day following, which was, I think about the twenty seventh of
November, Mr. Morton of Charlestown, and Mr. Allen, Mr. Moody, Mr. Willard, and
my self, of Boston, with some devout Neighbors, kept another Day of Prayer, at
John Good win's house; and we had all the Children present with us there. The
children were miserably tortured, while we labored in our Prayers; but our
good God was ^igh unto us, in what we called upon Him for. From this day the
power of the Enemy (...); and the children, though Assaults (...) this were
made upon them, yet were not so cruelly handled as before. The Liberty (...)
the Children increased daily more and more, and their Vexation abated by
degrees; till with in a little while they arrived to Perfect Ease which for
some weeks or months they cheerfully enjoyed. Thus Good it is for us to draw
near to God.

SECT. XXVI. Within a day or two after the Fast, the young Woman had two
remarkable Attempts made upon her, by her invisible Adversaries. Once, they
were Dragging her in to the Oven that was then heating, while there was none in
the Room to help her. She clap^t her hands on the Mantle-tree to save her self;
but they were beaten off; and she had been burned, if at her Outcries one had
not come in from abroad for her Relief. Another time, they putt an unseen Rope
with a cruel Noose about her Neck, Whereby she was choked, until she was black
in the Face; and though it was taken off before it had killed her, yet there
were the red Marks of it, and of a Finger and a Thumb near it, remaining to be
seen for a while afterward.

SECT. XXVII. This was the last Molestation that they gave her for a While; and
she dwelt at my house the rest of the Winter, having by an obliging and
virtuous Conversation, made herself enough Welcome to the Family. But within
about a Fortnight, she was visited with two days of as Extraordinary
Obsessions, (...) any we had been the Spectators of. I thought it, convenient
for me to entertain my Congregation with a Sermon upon the memorable
Providence which these Children had been concerned in. When I had begun to
study my Sermon, her Tormentors again seized upon her; and all Friday and
Saturday, did they manage her with a special Design, as was plain, to disturb
me in what I was about. In the worst of her extravagancies formerly, she was
more dutiful to my self, than I had reason to Expect, but now her whole
carriage to me, was with a Sauciness that I had not been used to be treated
with. She would knock at my Study Door, affirming, That some below would be
glad to see me; when there was none that ask't for me. She would call to me
with multiplied Impertinencies, and throw small things at me wherewith she
could not give me any hurt. She Would Hector me at a strange rate for the work I
was at, and threaten me with I know not what mischief for it. She got a History
that I had Written of this Witchcraft, and tho she had before this, readd it
over and over, yet now she could not read (I believe) one entire Sentence of
it; but she made of it the most ridiculous Travesty in the World, with such a
Patness and excess of Fancy, to supply the sense that she put upon it, as I was
amazed at. And she particularly told me, That I should quickly come to disgrace
by that History.

SECT. XXVIII. But there were many other Wonders behold by us before these two
days were out. Few tortures attended her, but such as were provoked; her
Frolicks being the things that had most possession of her. I was in Latin
telling some young Gentlemen of the College, That if I should bid her Look to
God, her Eyes would be put out, upon which her eyes were presently served so. I
was in some surprise, When I saw that her Troublers understood Latin, and it
made me willing to try a little more of their Capacity. We continually found,
that if an English Bible were in any part of the Room seriously looked into,
though she saw and heard nothing of it, she would immediately be in very dismal
Agonies. We now made a Trial more than once or twice, of the Greek
New Testament and the Hebrew, Old Testament; and We still found, That if one
should go to read in it never so secretly and silently, it would procure her
that Anguish, Which there was no enduring of* But, I thought, at length, I fell
upon one infirior Language which the Doemons did not seem, so well to
understand.

SECT. XXIX. Devotion was now, as formerly the terriblest of all the
provocations that could be given her. I could by no means (...) her to own,
That she desired the mercies of (...) and the prayers of good men. I would have
obtained a Sign of such a Desire, by her Listing up of her hand; but she
stirred it not: I then lifted up her hand my self, and though the standers by
thought a more insignificant thing could not be propounded, I said, Child, If
you desire those things, let your hand fall, when I take mine away: I took my
hand away, and hers continued strangely and stiffly stretched out, so that for
some time, she could not take it down. During these two days we had Prayers
oftener in our Family than at other times; and this was her usual Behavior at
them. The man that prayed, usually began with Reading the Word of God; which
once as he was going to do, she called to him, Read of Mary Magdelen, out of
whom the Lord cast seven Devils, During the time of Reading, she would be laid
as one fast asleep; but when Prayer was begun, the Devils would still throw her
on the Floor, at the feet of him, that prayed. There would she lie and Whistle
and sing and roar, to drown the voice of the Prayer; but that being a little
too audible for Them, they would shutt close her Mouth and her ears, and yet
make such odd noises in her Throat as that she her self could not hear our
Cries to God for her. She Would also fetch very terrible Blows with her Fist, and
Kicks with her Foot at the man that prayed; but still (for he had bid that none
should hinder her) her Fist and Foot would always recoil, when they came
within a few hairs breadths of him just as if Rebounding against a Wall; so
that she touched him not, but then would beg hard of other people to strike
him, and particularly she entreated them to take the Tongs and smite him; Which
not being done, (...) cried out of him, He has wounded me in the Head. But
before Prayer was out, she would be laid for Dead, wholly s^nsless and unless
to a severe Trial) Breathless; with her Belly swelled like a Drum, and
sometimes with croaking Noises in it; thus would she ly, most exactly with the
stiffness and posture of one that had been two Days laid out for Dead. Once
lying thus, as he that was praying, was alluding to the words of the
Canaanitess, and saying, Lord, have mercy on a Daughter vexed with a Davil;
there came a big, but low voice from her, saying, There Is Two or Three of them
(or us!) and the standers-by, were under that Apprehension, as that they cannot
relate whether her mouth moved in speaking of it. When Prayer was ended, she
would Revive in a minute or two, and continue as Frolic some as before. She
thus continued until Saturday toward the Evening; when, after this man had
been at Prayer, I charged all my Family to admit of no (...) by her Frolicks,
from such exercises as it was proper to begin the Sabbath with. They took the
Couns^l; and tho she essayed, with as witty and and as nimble and as various an
Application to each of them successively as ever I saw, to make them laugh, yet
they kept close to their good Books which then called for their Attention. When
she saw that, immediately she fell asleep; and in two or three hours, she waked
perfectly her sely; weeping bitterly to remember (for as one come out of a
dream she could remember) what had befallen her.

SECT. XXX. After this, we had no more such entertainments. The Demons it may
be would once or twice in a Week, trouble her for a few minutes with perhaps a
twisting and a (...) of her eyes, or a certain Cough, which did seem to be more
than ordinary. Moreover, Both she at my house, and her Sister at home, at the
time which they call Christmas, were by the ^^amons made very drunk, though
they had no strong Drink (as we are fully sure) to make them so. When she began
to feel her self thus drunk, she complained, O they say they will have me to
keep Christmas with them! They will disgrace me when they can do nothing else!
And immediately the Ridiculous Behaviors of one drunk, were with a wonderful
exactness represented in her Speaking, and Reeling, and Spewing, and anon
Sleeping, till she was well again. But the Vexations of the Children otherwise
abated coutinvally.

They first came to be always Quiet, unless upon Provications. Then they got
Liberty to work, but not to read: then further on, to read but not alond. at
last they were wholly delivered; and for many Weeks remained (...),

SECT. XXXI. I was not unsensible, that it might be an easy thing to be too
hold, and go too far, in making of Experiments: Nor was! so unphilosophical as
not to discern many opportunityes of Giving and Solving many Problemes which
the pneumatic Discipline is concerned in. I confess I have Learned much more
than I sought, and I have bin informed of some things relating to the invisible
World, which as I did not think it lawful to ask, so I do not think it proper
to tell; yet I will give a Touch upon one Problem commonly Discoursed of; that
is,

Whether the Devils know our Thoughts, or no.?

I will not give the Reader my Opinion of it, but only my Experiment That they
do not, was conjectured from this: We could cheat them when we spoke one thing,
and meant another This was found when the Children were to be undressed. The
Devils would still in ways beyond the Force of any Imposture, wonderfully
twist the part that was to be (...), so that there was no coming at it. But, if
we said, (...) and the parties bidden, at the same time, understood our intent
to be, county his Shoe! The Nicholosh, and not the shoot, has been made
strangely inaccessible. But on the other side, That they do, may be conjectured
from This. I called the young Woman at my House by her Name, intending to
mention unto her some Religious Expedient whereby she might, as I thought much
relieve her self; presently her Neck was broke, and I continued watching my
Opportunity of say what I designed. I could not get her to come out of her Fit,
until I had said aside my purpose of speaking what I thought, and then she
revived immediately. Moreover a young Gentleman visiting of me at my Study to
ask my advice about curing the Atheism and Blasphemy which he complained, his
Thoughts were more than ordinarily then infested with; after some Discourse I
carried him down to see this Girl who was then molested with her unseen Fiends;
but when he came, she treated him very coursly and rudely, asking him What he
(...) to the house for? and seemed very angry at his being there, urging him to
be gone with a very impetuous Importunity. Perhaps all Devils are not alike
sagacious.

SECT. XXXII. The Last Fit that the young Woman had, was very peculiar. The
Doemons having once again seized her, they made her pretend to be Dying; and
Dying truly we feared at last she was: She lay, she tossed, she pulled just
like one Dying, and urged hard for some one to die with her, seeming loath to die
alone She argued concerning Death, in strains that quite amazed us; and
concluded, That though she was loath to die, yet if God said she must, she must;
adding something about the state of the Country, which we wondered at. Anon,
the Fit went over; and as I guessed it would be, it was the last Fit she had at
our House. But all my Library never afforded me any Commentary on those
Paragraphs of the Gospels, which speak of Demoniacs, equal to that which the
passions of this Child have given me.

SECT. XXXIII. This is the Story of Goodwins Children, a Story all made up of
Wonders! I have related nothing but what I judge to be true. I was my self an
Eyewitness to a large part of what I tell; and I hope my neighbors have long
thought, That I have otherwise learned Christ, than to ly unto the World. Yea,
there is, I believe scarce any one particular, in this Narrative, which more
than one credible Witness will not be ready to make Oath unto. The things of
most Concernment in it, were before many Critical Observers; and the Whole
happened in the Metropolis of the English America, unto a religious and
industrious Family which was visited by all sorts of Persons, that had a mind
to satisfy themselves. I do now likewise publish the History, While the thing
is yet fresh and New; and I challenge all men to detect so much as one designed
Falsehood, yea, or so much as one important Mistake, from the Egg to the Apple
of it, I have Writ as plainly as becomes an Historian, as truly as becomes a
Christian, tho perhaps not so profitably as became a Divine. But I am resolved
after this, never to use but just one grain of patience with any man that shall
go to impose upon me, a Denial of Devils or of Witches. I shall count that man
Ignorant who shall suspect, but I shall count him downright Impudent if he
Assert the Nonexistence of things which we have had such palpable Convictions
of. I am sure he cannot be a Civil, (and some will question whether he can be
an honest man) that shall go to deride the Be^^ of things which a whole
Country has now beheld an house of pious people suffering not a few Vexations
by. But if the Sadducee, or the Atheist, have no right Impressions by these
Memorable Providence made upon his mind; yet I hope, those that know what it
is to be sober, will not repent any pains that they may have taken in perusing
what Records of these Witch crusts and Possessions, I thus leave unto Posterity.

POSTSCRIPT.
YOU have seen the Trouble and the Relief of John Goodwins Children. After
which the Damons were let loose to make a fresh Attacque upon them, tho not in
a manner altogether so terrible and affictive as what they had before
sustained. All the Three Children were visited with some Return of their
Calamities; but the Boy was the Child which endured most in this New Assault.
He had been for some While kindly entertained, with Mr. Baily at Watertown
where he had enjoyed a long time of ease; the Devils having given him but
little Disturbance, expect what was for a short while after his first coming
there. He no sooner came Home, but he began to be ill again, with diverse
peculiar Circumstances attending of him. There was this particularly
remarkable; That the Boy dreamed he had a Bone within his skin growing cross
his Ribs; and when he awaked, he felt and found a thing there which was
esteemed a Bone by them that handled it; only every one wondered how it should
be lodged there An expert Surgeon, Dr. John Clark, being advised with about
it, very dexterously t^^k it out; and it proved not the imagined Bone, but a
considerable Pin; a brass Pin which could not possibly have come to ly there as
it did withont the Prestigious Conveyance of a Misterious Witchcraft. Another
time, ^^on a Lord's Day his Father would have taken him to Meeting with him;
and when his Father spoke of going to some of the Assemblies in the Town
(particularly both the North and the South) the Boy would be cast into such
Tortures and Postures, that he would sooner Die than go out of doors; but if his
Father spoke of going to others of the Assemblies in the Town, particularly the
Quakers, the boy in a moment would be as well as could be. The trial of that
was more than five times repeated, and we^e it fully related, would be more
than ten times Admired.

Our Prayers for the Children were justly renewed, and I hope not altogether
unanswered. Upon one Prayer over two of them, they had about a Fortnights ease;
and their Ails again returning, Prayer was again awakened; with some
Circumstances not proper to be exposed unto the World. God gave a present
Abatement hereupon to the Maladies of the Children, and caused their Invaders
to retire; so that by degrees they were fully and quickly Delivered. Two days
of Prayer obtained the Deliverance of two. The Third, namely the Boy, Remaining
under some Annoyance by the evil spirits, a third Day was employed for him, and
the Toon found the blessed effects of it in his Deliverance There were several
very memorable things attending this Deliverance of the Children, and the
Vomes, and the Pleas, used in the Prayers which were thereby answered, but they
were all Private, yea, in a sort, Secret; Non est Religio ubi omnia patent; and
I understand, (for I have some Acquaintance with him) That the Friend of the
Children, whom God gave to be thus concerned and successful for them, desires
me not to let Reports of those things go out of the Walls of a Study, but to
leave them rather for the Notice of the other World. I think it will not be
improper to tell the World, that one thing in the Childrens Deliverance was the
strange Death of an horrible old Woman, who was presumed to have a great hand
in their Affliction. Before her Death and at it, the Almshouse where she live^
was terrified with fearful noises, and she seem'^ to have her Death hastened by
dismal Blow^ reveived from the invisible World. But having mentioned this: all
that I have now to publish. (...) That Prayer and Faith, was the thing which
drove the Devils from the Children; and I am to ^ear this Testimony unto the
world. That the Lord is nigh to all them, who call upon him in truth, and, That
blessed are all they that wait for Him*

Finished, June 7th, 1689.
MANTISSA.
TO the foregoing Narrative, we have added an account given us, by the Godly
Father of these Haunted Children; who upon his Reading over so much of our
History, as was written of their Exercise before their full deliverance, was
willing to express his Attestation to the Truth of it; with this further
Declaration of the Sense, which he had of the unusual Miseries, that then lay
upon his Family. It Is in his own Style; but I suppose a Pen has not commonly
been managed with more cleanly Discourse by an Hand used only to the Trowel;
and his Condition has been such, that he may fairly have Leave to speak.

IN the year 1688. about Midsummer, it pleased the Lord to visit one of my
children with a sore Visitation; and she was not only tormented in her Body,
but was in great distress of Mind, Crying out, That she was in the dark
concerning her Souls estate, and that she had misspent her precious time; She
and we thinking her time was near at an end Hearing those Shrieks and Groans
which did not only pierce the ears but Hearts of her poor Parents; now was a
time for me to Consider with my self, and to look into my own heart and and
life, and see how matters did there stand between God and my own soul, and see
Wherefore the Lord was thus contending with me. And upon Enquiry I found cause
to judge my self, and to justify the Lord. This Affliction continuing some
time, the Lord saw good then to double the affliction in smiting down another
Child, and that which was most heart breaking of all, and did double this
double affliction was, it was apparent and judged by all that saw them, that
the Devil and his Instruments, had a hand in it.

The consideration of this was most dreadful: I thought of what David said, 2 Samuel 24. 14. if he feared so to fall into the hands of Men, oh! then to think
of the Horror of our condition, to be in the Hands of Devils and Witches! This
our doleful condition moved us to call to our Friends to have pity on us, for
Gods Hand (...) touched us. I was ready to say, that no ones affliction was
like mine; That my little House that should be a little Bethel for God to dwell
him, should be made a Den for Devils; that those little Bodies, that should be
Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in, should be thus harrassed and abused by
the Devil and his cursed Brood. But now this twice doubled affliction is
doubled again. Two more of my Children are smitten down, oh! the Cries, the
Shrieks, the Tortures of these poor Children! Doctors cannot help, Parents weep
and lament over them, but cannot ease them. Now I considering my affliction to
be more than ordinary, it did certainly call for more than ordinary Prayer. I
acquainted Mr. Allen, Mr. Moodey, Mr. Willard, and Mr. C. Mather, the four
Ministers of the Town with it, and Mr. Morton of Charlstown; earnestly desiring
them, that they, with some other praying people of God, would meet at my house,
and there be earnest with God, on the behalf of us and our Children; which they
(I thank them for it) readily ^^tended with great fervency of Spirit; but at
for my part, my heart was ready to sink to (...) and see those do^eful Sights.
Now I thought that I had greatly neglected my duty to my Children, in not
admonishing and instructing of them and that God was hereby calling my sins to
mind, to slay my Children, Then I pondered of that place in Numb. 23. 23.
Surely there is no Enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any Devination
against Israel. And now I thought I had broke Covenant with God, not only in
one respect but in many, but it pleased the Lord to bring that to mind in Heb.
8. 12. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their Sins and
Iniquities will I remember no more. The Consideration how the Lord did deal
with Job, and his Patience and the End the Lord made with him was some support
to me. I thought also, on what David said, that He had sinned, but what have
these poor Lambs done? But yet in the amidst of my tumultous Thoughts within
me, it was Gods Comforts that did delight my soul. That in the (...) of Luke,
and the Beginning, Where Christ spoke the Parable for that end, that men ought
always to pray and not saint. This, with many other places bore up my spirit.
I thought with Jonah that I would yet again Look toward God's holy Temple; the
Lord Jesus Christ. And I did greatly desire to find the Son of God with me in
this Furnace of Affliction, knowing hereby that no harm shall befall me. But
now this solemn day of Prayer and Fasting being at an End, there was an Eminent
Answer of it: for one of my Children was delivered, and one of the wicked
instrument of the Devil discovered, and her own mouth condemned her, and so
accordingly Executed. Here was Food for Faith, and great encouragement still to
hope and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord; the Ministers still
counselling and encouraging me to labor to be found in Gods way commiting my
case to him, and not to use any way not allowed in Gods Word. It was a thing
not a little comfortable to us, to see that the people of God was so much
concerned about our lamentable condition, remembering us at all times in their
prayers, which I did look at as a token for good; but you must think it was a
time of sore Temptation with us, for many did say, (yea, and some good people
too) were it their case, that they would try some Tricks, that should give ease
to their Children: But I thought for us to forsake the counsel of good old men,
and to take the counsel of the young ones, it might ensnare our Souls, though
for the present it might offer some relief to our Bodies; which was a thing I
greatly feared and my Children were not at any time free for doing any such
thing. It was a time of sore affliction, but it was mixed with abundance of
mercy, for my heart was many a time made glad in the house of Prayer. The
Neighborhood p^^ied us, and were very helpful to us: Moreover, though my
Children were thus in every Limb (...) Joint tormented by those Children of the
Devil, they also using their tongues at their pleasure, sometimes one way
sometimes another; yet the Lord did herein prevent them, that they could not
make them speak wicked words, though they did many times hinder them from
speaking good ones; had they in these Fits blasphemed the Name of the Holy God,
this you may think would have been an heartbreaking thing to us the poor
Parents; but God in his mercy prevented them, a thing worth taking notice of.
Likewise they slept well a nights: And the Ministers did often visit us, and
pray with us, and for us; and their love and pity was so great, their Prayers
so earnest and constant, that I could not but admire at it. Mr. Mather
particularly; now his bowels so yearned toward us in this sad condition, that
he not only pray's with us, and for us, but he takes one of my Children home
to his own house; which indeed was but a troublesome guest, for such an one
that had so much work lying upon his hands and heart: He took much pains in
this great Service, to pull this Child, and her Brother and Sister out of the
hand of the Devil. Let us now admire and adore that Fountain the Lord Jesus
Christ, from whence those streams come. The Lord himself will requite his
labor of love. Our case is yet very sad, and does call for more Prayer; and
the good Ministers of this Town, and Charlstown readily came, with some other
good praying people to my house, to keep another Day of solemn Fasting and
Prayer; which our Lord faith this kind goes out by My Children being all at
home, the two biggest lying on the bed, one of them would fain have Kicked the
Good men while they were wrestling with God or them, had not I held him with
all my power and might; and sometimes he would stop his own ears. This you must
needs think was a cutting thing to the poor parents. Now our hearts were ready
to sink, had not God put under his everlasting arms of Mercy and helped us
still to hope in his mercy and to be quiet, knowing that He is God, and that it
was not for the postheards of the earth to strive with their Maker. Well night
David say, that had not the Law of his God (...) his delight, he had perished
in his Affliction. Now the Promises of God are sweet; God having promised, to
hear the prayer of the destitute, and (...) despise their prayer; and He will
not fail the expectation of those that wait on Him; but He ^eareth the cry of
the poor and needy. These Jacobs came and wrestled with God for a Blessing on
this poor Family, which indeed I hope they obtained, and may be now worthy of
the Name Israel, who prevailed with God, and would not let Him go till He had
blessed us. For soon after this, there were two more of my children delivered
out of this horrible p^t. Here was now a double mercy, and how sweet was it,
knowing it came in Answer of Prayer! Now we see and know it is not a vain thing
to call on the name of the Lord For He is a present help in the time of
trouble; am we may boldly say the Lord has been our helpe^ I had sunk, but
Jesus put forth His hand and bo^^ me up. My Faith was ready to fail, but this
was a support to me that Christ said to Peter, I have prayed for thee that thy
faith fail not. And man other Promises were as Cordials to my drooping soul.
And the Consideration of all those that ever came to Christ Jesus for Healing,
that He healed their bodies, pardoned their Sins, and healed their Souls too;
which I hope in God may be the fruit of this present Affliction. In God be
pleased to make the Fruit of this Affliction to be to take away our sin, and
cleanse us from iniquity, and to put us on with greater diligenc^ to make our
Calling and election sure, then, happy Affliction! The Lord said that I had
need of this to awake me. I have found a prosperous Condition a dangerous
Condition. I have taken notice and considered more of God's Goodness in these
few weeks of Affliction, than in many years of Prosperity. I may speak it with
shame, so wicked and deceitful, and ungrateful is my heart that the more God
has been doing for me, the less I have been doing for Him. My Returns have not
been according to my Receivings. The Lord help me now to praise Him in heart,
lip, and life. The Lord help us to see by this Visitation, what (...) we have
to get shelter under the wing of Christ, to have to the Rock, where we may be
safe. We see how ready the Devils are to catch us, and torment our Bodies, and
he is as diligent to ensnare our Souls, and that many waies^ ^ut let us put on
all our spiritual Armor, and follow Christ the Captain of our Salvation; and
tho we meet with the Cross, let us bear it patiently and cheerfully, for if
Jesus Christ be at the one end, we need not fear the Heart of it: if we have
Christ we have enough; He can make His Rod as well as His Staff to be a
comfort to no; and we shall not want if we be the sheep of Christ. If we want
Afflictions we shall have them, and Sanctified Afflictions are choice mercies.

Now I earnestly desire the Prayer of all good people; That the Lord would be
pleased to perfect that Work He has begun, and make it to appear that Prayer
is stronger than Witchcraft.

John Goodwin.
December. 12. 1688.
This is our First Example; and it is This which has occasioned the Publication
of the Rest.
EXEMPLE. II.
AMong those Judgments of God, which are a great Deep, I suppose few are more
unfathomable than this, That pious and holy men suffer sometimes by the Force
of horrid Witchcrafts, and hellish Witches are permitted to break thorough the
Hedge which our Heavenly Father has made about them that seek Him. I suppose
the Instances of this direful thing are (...); but that they are not Never we
can produce very dismal Testimony. One, and that no less Recent than Awful, I
shall now offer: and the Reader of it will thereby learn, I hope, to work out
his own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

SECT. I. Mr. Philip Smith, aged about Fifty years, a Son of eminently virtuous
Parents, a Deacon of the Church at Hadley, a Member of our General Court, an
Associate in their County Court, a Select-man for the affairs of the Town, a
Lieutenant in the Troop, and, which crowns all, a man for Devotion and Gravity,
and all that (...) Honest, exceeding exemplary; Such a man. In the Winter of
the Year, 1684. was murdered with an hideous Witchcraft, which filled all those
parts with a just astonishment. This was the manner of the Murder.

SECT. II. He was concerned about Relieving the Indigencies of a wretched woman
in the Town; who being dissatisfied at some of his just cares about her,
expressed her self unto him in such a manner, that he declared himself
apprehensive of receiving mischief at her hands; he said, he doubted she would
attempt his Hurt.

SECT. III. About the beginning of January he began to be very Valetudinarious,
laboring under those that seemed Ischiadick pains. As his Illness increased on
him, so his Goodness increased in him; the standers-by could in him see one
ripening apace for another world; and one filled not only with Grace to an high
degree, but also with Exceeding Joy. Such Weanedness from, and Weariness of the
World, he showed that he knew not (he said) whether he might pray for his
continuance here. Such Assurance had he of the Divine Love unto him, that in
Raptures he would cry out, Lord, stay thy hand, it is enough, it is more than
thy frail servant can bear! But in the midst of these things, he uttered still
an hard suspicion, That the ill Woman who had threatened him, had made
impressions on him.

SECT. IV. While he remained yet of a sound mind he very sedately, but very
solemnly charged his Brother to look well after him. Though he said he now
understood himself, yet he knew not how he might be; but be sure (said he) to
(...) care of me for you shall see strange things, There shall be a wonder in
Hadley! I shall not be dead when it is thought I am! This Charge he pressed
over and over; and afterward became Delirious.

SECT. V. Being become Delirious, he had a Speech Incessant and Voluble beyond
all imagination, and this in diverse Tones and sundry voices and (as was
thought) in various languages.

SECT. VI. He cried out not only of fore pain, but also of sharp Pins, pricking
of him sometimes in his Toe, sometimes in his Arm, as if there had been
hundreds of them. But the people upon search never found any more than One.

SECT. VII. In his Distresses he exclaimed very much upon the Woman
aforementioned naming her, and some others, and saying, Do you not see them;
There, There, There they stand.

SECT. VIII. There was a strong smell of something like Musk, which was diverse
times in the Room where he was, and in the other Rooms, and without the House;
of which no cause could be rendered. The sick-man as well as others complained
of it; and once particularly it so siez'd an Apple Roasting at the Fire that
they were forced to throw it away.

SECT. IX. Some that were about him being almost at their wits end, by
beholding the greatness and the strangeness of his Calamities did three or
sometimes in one Night, (...) an give Disturbance to the Woman that we have
spoken of: all the while they were doing of it, the good man was at ease, and
slept as a weary man; and these were all the times they perceived him to take
any sleep at all.

SECT. X. A small Galley-Pot of Alkermes, that was near full, and carefully
looked after, yet unto the surprise of the people, was quite emptied, so that
the sick man could not have the Benefit of it.

SECT. XI. Several persons that sat by him, heard a Scratching, that seemed to
be on the Ticking near his feet, while his Feet lay wholly still; nay, were
held in the hands of others, and his hands were far of another way.

SECT. XII. Sometimes Fire was seen on the Bed, or the Covering, and when the
Beholders began to discourse of it, it would vanish away.

SECT. XIII. Diverse people felt something often stir in the Bed, at some
distance from his Body. To appearance, the thing that stirred was as big as a
Cat: some tried to lay hold on it with their hands, but under the Covering
nothing could be found. A discreet and sober Woman, resting on the Beds Feet,
felt as it were a Hand, the Thumb and the Finger of it, taking her by the side,
and giving her a Pinch; but turning to see What it might be, nothing was to be
seen.

SECT. XIV. The Doctor standing by the sick man, and seeing him ly still, he
did himself try to lean on the Beds-head; but he found the Bed to shake so,
that his head was often knocked against the Post, though he strove to hold it
still; and others upon Trial found the same. Also, the sick man lying too near
the side of the Bed, a very strong and stout man, tried to lift him a little
further into the Bed; but with all his might he could not; though trying by 'nd
by, he could lift a Bed-stead, with a Bed, and man lying on it, all, without
any strain to himself at all.

SECT. XV. Mr. Smith dies. The Jury that viewed the ^orpse, found a Swelling on
one Breast, which rendered it like a Woman's. His Privities were wounded or
burned. On his back, besides Bruises, there were several pricks, or holes, as
if done with Awls or Pins

SECT. XVI. After the Opinion of all had pronounced him dead, his Countenance
continued as Lively as if he had been Alive; his Eyes closed as in a slumber;
and his neither Jaw not falling down. Thus he remained from Satureday morning
about Sunrise, till Sabbath Day in the Afternoon. When those that took him
out of the Bed sound him still Warm. though the the season was as Cold as had
almost been known in an Age. On the Night after the Sabbath, his Countenance
was yet as fresh as before; but on Monday Morning, they found the Face
extremely ^umified and discolored; 'twas black and blue, and fresh blood
seemed to run down his Cheek in the Hairs.

SECT. XVII. The night after he died, a very credible person, watching of the
Corpse, perceived the Bed to move and Stir, more than once; but by no means
could find out the cause of it.

SECT. XVIII. The second night, some that were preparing for the Funeral, do
say, That they heard diverse Noises in the Rooms where the Corpse lay; as
though there had been a great Removing and Clattering of Stools and chairs.

Upon the whole, it appeared unquestionable that Witchcraft had brought a
period unto the life of so good a man.

EXEMPLE. III.
THe man of whom we have been Writing, is not the only good Christian whom
evile Witchcraft has given Annoyance to. We shall add a Second Instance,
wherein I shall Relate Something that I do not Approve; and that is, The
Urinary Experiment. I suppose the Urine must be bottled with Nails and Pinns,
and such Instruments in it as carry a Show of Torture with them, if it attain
its End. For I have been told, That the bare Bottleing of Urine with Filings of
Steel in it, which can be better (tho scarce well) accounted for, has bin found
insignificant. Now to use a Charm against a Charm, or to use a Devils shield
against a Devils Sword, Who can with a good conscience try? All Communion with
Hell is dangerous; all Relief and Succor coming by means whose whole Force is
founded in the Laws of the Kingdom of darkness, will be ready to leave a sting
on the Conscience of him that obtains it so.

SECT. I. There was one Mr. St. -- n of North-hampton, who upon Complaint of an
abused Servant unto him, had in plain and close Terms rebuked the Master of the
Lad, for his too great Severity. He was a man of good Repute, and as good
Courage; but within as little a while as the man whom he had reproved could
return to inform his Wife, who was a person under Suspicion for Witchcraft, he
was taken with many Ails and pains that increased on him to great Extremity.

SECT. II. He languishes, decays, and dies: but before it came to That,
strange sights were in the house. A black Cat appeared in the night, with very
affrighting Circumstances; and then a Pigeon; both of which they pursued in
vain, tho both of their were in the house

SECT. III. They went to the Traditional Experiment of Botteling Urine; but
they could get no Urine from him, a strange Hole through the Vrinary Passage,
shadding the water before they could receive it into the Vessel.

SECT. IV. The Corpse was viewed by the Jury; an Hole was found quite through his
Yard, which hindered their Saving of any Urine, and and gave a Terrible Torture
to him. About the small of his back, there was a multitude of small spots, the
callous out side of which, being taken away, underneath were Holes, as tho made
by small Shot. Upon which all concluded with good Reason, the Occasion of his
Death to be something preternatural.

EXEMPLE. IV.
SO Horrid and Hellish is the Crime of Witchcraft, that were Gods Thoughts as
our thoughts, or Gods Ways as our ways, it could be no other but
Unpardonable. But that the Grace of God may be admired, and that the worst of
Sinners may be encouraged, Behold, Witchcraft also has found a Pardon. Let no
man Despair of his own Forgiveness, but let no man also Delay about his own
Repentance, how aggravated soever his Transgressions are. From the Hell of
Witchcraft our merciful Jesus can fetch a guilty Creature to the Glory of
Heaven. Our LORD has sometimes Recovered those who have in the most horrid
manner given themselves away to the Destroyer of their souls.

SECT. I. There was one Mary Johnson said at Hartford, in this Country, upon
and Indictment of Familiarity with the Devil. She was found Guilty of the same,
chiefly upon her own Confession, and condemned.

SECT. II. Many years are past since her Execution; and the Records of the
Court are but short; yet there are several Memorables that are found credibly
Related and Attested concerning her.

SECT. III. She said, That a Devil was wont to do her many services. Her Master
once blamed her for not carrying out the Ashes, and a Devil did clear the
Hearth for her afterward. Her Master sending her into the Field, to drive out
the Hogs that used to break into it, a Devil would s^o^re them out, and make
her laugh to see how he seaz'd 'em about.

SECT. IV Her first Familiarity with the Devils came by Discontent; and Wishing
the Devil to take That and to other Thing; and, The devil to do This and That;
Whereupon a Devil appeared unto her, tending her the best service he could do
for her.

SECT. V. She confessed that she was guilty of the Murder of a Child, and that
she had been guilty of Uncleanness with Men and Devils

SECT. VI. In the time of her Imprisonment, the famous Mr, Samuel Stone was at
great pains to promote her Conversion unto God, and represent unto her both her
Misery and Remedy; the Success of Which, was very desirable, and considerable.

SECT. VII. She was by most Observers judged very Penitent, both before and at
her Execution; and she went out of the World with many Hopes of Mercy through
the Merit of Jesus Christ. Being asked, what she built her hopes upon; She
answered, on those Words, Come to me all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will give you Rest; and those, There is a Fountain open for Sin and for
Uncleaness. And she died in a Frame extremely to the Satisfaction of them that
were Spectators of it.

Our GOD is a great Forgiver.

EXEMPLE. V.
THe near Affinity between Witchcraft and Possession, invites me to add unto
the Foregoing Histories, One that the Reader, I believe, will count worthy to
be Related. It is but a Fragment of what should have been Suffer Story; but I
cannot without some Troub^^ or delay inconsistent with my present Designs put
my self in a way to perfect it: and I was of the Opinion that, Let nothing be
lost, was a Rule which I might very properly extend unto it. The thing happened
many (perhaps Thirty) years ago, and was then much discoursed of. I don't
Remember that (...) what became of the Boy concerned to that attractive, but
what (...) now publish, (...) among the Papers of my Grandfather, of Whom the
World has had such a Character, that they cannot but judge, no Romance or
Fully, nothing but what should be seririous and weighty could be worthy of his
Hand and it is in his own Hand that I have the Manuscript, from whence I have
caused it to be Transcribed. It runs in such Terms as these.

A Confession of a Boy at Tocutt; in the time of the Intermission of his Hits:
and other Passages, which many were Eyewitnesses of.
THe Boy was for his natural Parts, more tha^ ordinary at seven years old. He,
with many others went to see a Conjurer play Tricks in Holland. There it was
strongly suggested to him. He Should be as good an Artist as he. From thence to
eleven year old, he used the Trade as inventing Eye, and Stealing many, Running
away from his Father, spending of it at Dice, and with the vilest Company and
this Trade he used in that space (he confessed) above Forty times at least, and
many strange Instances he gives to it. His Father following him with constant
Instruction, and Correction, he was despertely hard nod under all, and his
heart set in a way (...) Malice against the Word of God, and all his Father
did to restrain him. When he was about ten or eleven years old, he ran away
from Rotterdam, to D^lp^; and the Devil appeared to him there in the shape of a
Boy, counselling him not to hearken to the Word of God, not unto any of his
Fathers Instructions, and propounding to him, to Enter into a Covenant with
him. Being somewhat fearful at first, desired that he would not appear to him
in a shape, but by a voice, and though his heart did inwardly consent, to what
the Devil said, yet he was withheld, that he could not then Enter into a
Covenant with him. His Father not knowing this, but of his other Wickedness,
being a godly Minister, procured many Christians to join with him in a day of
Humiliation; confessed and bewailed his Sins, prayed for him, and sent him to
New-E. and so committed him to God. From that time to this being now about
Sixteen years old, the Devil has constantly come to him by a voice; and he
held a constant Discourse with him; and all about Entering into a Covenant with
him: and still persuaded to have it written and sealed, making many promises to
assure him, and telling him many Stories of Dr. Fan^^^s and other Witches how
bravely they have lived, and how he should live deliciously, and have Ease,
Comfort, and Mo^^y; and sometimes threatening to tear him in pieces if he would
not. But ordinarily his discourse course was as loving and friendly as could
be. He has been strangely kept, by an hand of God, from making a Covenant to
this day. For he still propounded many Difficulties to the Devil which he could
not satisfy his Reason in: and though, he faith, he was never well but when he
was Discoursing with the devil, and his heart was strangely inclined to write
and seal an Agreement, yet such dreadful horror did seiz upon him, at the very
time, from the Word of God and such fears of his Eternal Perishing, that he
could not do it then. He put off the Devil still, that he was not in a fit
Frame, but desired him to come again that he might have more Discourse, and he
would consider of it. The Devil appeared to him, a second time at New Haven, in
the shape of a Boy, and a third time at Tocutt i^ the shape of a Fox; at which
time, at first, they had loving discourse, as formerly; but at last the Devil
was urgent upon him, and told him he had baffled with him so long, now he must
enter into an agreement, or he would tear him in pieces he saying, How should I
do it? would you have (...) write upon my hands? No, (faith the Devil) Look
here, and with that, set Paper, and (...) and Ink like Blood before him. The
former horrors, from the Word of God, and special passages, which he named,
set in upon him so that he could not do it. Only before they parted, the Devil
being so urgent upon him, telling him had baffled with him, he set a year and
half time for Consideration. The last quarter of a year is yet to come. The
Devil told him, if he let him alone so long, he would baffle with him still: he
answered, if he did not yield then, he would give him leave to torment him
whilst he lived. Still the Devil would not away, nor could he get from him.
Then out of Fear he cried out, Lord, Jesus, rebuke the devil! at which, the
Fox, Pen, Ink and Paper vanished. Yet he continued in his course of unheard of
Wickedness, and still his Will was bent to write and seal the Agreement, having
his Discourse yet with Satan by Voice. His Brother with whom he lives at Tocut,
having Convulsion Fits, he laughed and mocked at him, and acted the Convulsion
Fits. A while after God sent Convulsion Fits on himself; in which time, his
former Terrors, the Wrath of God, Death, Hell, Judgment, and Eternity were
presented to him. He would fain then have confessed his sins, but when he was
about to do it, the Devil still held his mouth, that he could not. He entreated
God, to release him, promising to confess and forsake his Sins, and the Lord
did so; but he being well, grew as bad, or worse than ever. About six
weeks-since, his Convulsion Fits came again three times most dreadfully, with
some Intermissions, and his former Horrors and Fears. He would have confessed
his Sins but could not. It pleased God to put it into the heart of one to ask
him, Whether he had any Familiarity with the Devil? he got out so much then as,
Yes. He fetching Mr. Pierson, the Convulsion Fits left him, and he confessed
all, how it had been with him. That very night the Devil came to him and told
him. Had be blabbed out such things. He would teach him to blabb! and if he
would not then write and seal the Agreement, he would tear him in pieces, and
he refusing, the Devil tool a corporal Possession of him, and has not ceased
to torment him extremely ever since. If any thing be spoken to him, the Devil
answers (and many times he barks like a F^x, and bisseth like: Serpent)
sometimes with horrible Blasphemy against the Name of Christ; and at some
other times the Boy is sensible. When he has the Liberty of his (...), he
tells what the Devil faith to him, urging him to seal the Covenant still, and
that he will bring Paper, Pen and (...) in the night, when none shall see,
pleading the God (...) him off, that Christ cannot save him That When He was
upon earth He could cost on devils, but now He is in Heaven He cannot. Some
times he is ready to yield to all in a desperate was Sometimes he breaks out
into Confession of (...) former sins, as they come into his mind; exceedingly
Judging himself, and Justifying GOD (...) His for ever leaving of him in the
hands of Satan. Once he was heard to Pray in such a manner so suitable to his
Conditition, so Aggrvating his Sin, and pleading with God for mercy, and in
such a strange, high, enlarged manner, as judicious godly persons then presen,
affirm they never heard the like in their lives, that it Grew abundance of
tears from the eyes of all present, being about twenty persons. But his torment
increased upon him worse after such a time; or if any thing were spoken to him
from the Word of God by others or they pray with him. The last week after he
had confessed one strange Passage, namely that once in Discourse he told the
Devil, that if he would make his Spittle to scald a dog, he would then go on in
a way of Lying and Dissembling, and believe that he should, do it, which he
said, he did with all his heart, and so spit on the dog, and with that a deal
or (...) Water did pour on the Dog. In pursuance of his Promise, he went on in
a way of ^^ing and Dissembling: That when (...) about it, that he had done
(...) dog, then he fell down into a (...) had been dead. As soon as he had
confessed this, the Devil went out of him with an (...) Noise, to the terror
of those then (...) and so he continued (...) much troubled in himself If for
one special passage in his Discourse with the Devil when he appeared to him as
a Fox; faith he to he Devil, I have formerly (...) near unto me: With that the
Devil (...) said unto him then, What, are you got hither and fell to Threatening
of him. He said to him again, But I find no such Thoughts now, but do and will
believe you now more than the Word of God which faith in Isa. 55, Seek the Lord
etc. and said further, What comfort you shall afford me, I shall rely upon you
for it. Remembering this Passage the Devil appeared to him, ready to enter into
him again. Thereby much astonished, having the Bible in his hand, he opened it,
and, as it were of it self at that place of Isai. 55: his Eye was fixed upon
it, and his Conscience accusing him for abusing the Word a year ago, his heart
failing him, and the Devil entered into him again a Second time, railing upon
him, and calling him, Blab tongue, and Rogue I he had promised to keep things
scores, he would teach him to blabb, he would tear him in pieces. Since, he
has kept his Body in continual Motion, speaking in him, and by him, with a
formidable Voice: sometimes singing of Verses wicked and witty, that formerly
he had made against his Father's Ministry, and the Word of God etc. When the
Boy is come to himself, they tell him of them, and he owns them, that indeed
such he did make. Mr. Eaton being his Uncle sent a Letter to him, which he told
of before it came saying also, it would be goodly stuff! Scering at him. By and
by the Letter came in, and none of the people knew of it before. He ^psan^ in
Sight: and once two being with him, their Backs turned, the Devil carried him
away, they knew not how, and after search they found him in a Cellar, as dead,
but after a little space he came to Life again. And another time, threw him up
into a Chamber, stopped him up into a Hole, where they after sound him. Another
time he carried him about a Bow-Shot and threw him into a Hog-Stye amongst
Swine, which ran away with a terrible noise.

Here is as much to be seen of the Venom of Sin, the Wrath of God against Sin,
the Malice of the Devil, and yet his limited Power, and the Reasonings of Satan
in an ocular Demonstration, as has fallen out in any Age. Also the strange and
High Expressions of a distressed Soul, in a way of Judging himself and pleading
for Mercy, such as may be wondered at by all that hear of it; and more very
observable passages could not be written for want of Time, which will after
appear.

Advertisement
OF what did after appear, I have no Account; but what did then appear, is so
undoubtted and so wonderful (...) will sufficiently alone for my Publications
of it.

EXEMPEE VI. and VII
HAd there been Diligence enough used by them that have heard and (...) amazing
Instances of Witchcraft, our Number of Memorable Providence under this Head,
had reached beyond the Perfect. However, before have done Writing, I will
insert an Exemple or two, communicated unto me by a Gentle man of sufficient
Fidelity to make a Story of his Relating Credible. The Things were such as
happened in the Town whereof himself is Minister; and they are but some of more
which he favored me with the Communication of. But, it seems, I must be
obliged, to conceal the Names of the parties concerned, lest some should he
Offended, the None could be Injured by the mention of them.

In a Town which is none of the youngest this Country, there dwelt a very
Godly at honest Man. who upon some Provocation, received very Angry and
Threatening Expression from two women in the Neighborhood; so upon this,
diverse of his Cattle in a strange manner dyed; and the man himself sometimes
was haunted with lights of the women as he thought encountering of him. He grew
indisposed in his Body very unaccountably; and one day repaired unto a Church
Meeting then held in the place, with a Resolution there to declare what he had
met withal. The man was one of such Figure and Respect among them, that the
Pastor singled out him for to pray in the Assembly before their breaking up. He
prayed with a more than usual measure of both Devotion and Discretion, but just
as he was coming to that part of his Prayer, wherein he intended to petition
Heaven for the Discovery of Witchcrafts which had been among them, he sank down
Speechless and Senseless; and was by his Friends carried away to a Bed; where
he lay for two or three hours in horrible Distress, fearfully starting, and
staring and crying out Lord, I am stab'a! and now looking whilst to and fro, he
said, O here are wicked persons among us, even among US; and he complained, I
came hither with a full purpose to tell what I know, but now (said he) I ly
like a Fool! Thus he continued until the Meeting was over, and then his Fits
left him; only he remained very sore. One or two more such Fits he had after
that; but afterward a more private sort of Porture was employed upon him. He
was advised by a worthy man (...) apply himself unto a Magistrate; and warned,
That he would shortly be murdered, if he did not. He took not the Counsil;
(...) languished for some Weeks; yet able to Wolk and Work; but Then, he had
his Breath and (...) suddenly taken taken away from him, in a manner of which
no full Account could be given.

The man had a Son invaded with the like Fits but God gave deliverance to him
in answer to the Prayers of His people for him.

In the same Town, there yet lives a very pious Woman, that from another Woman
of ill Fame, received a small gift, which was eaten by her. Upon the Eating of
it, she became strangely altered and afflicted; and hindered from Sleeping at
Night, by the Pulls of some invisible Hand for a long while together. A Shape
or two of, I know not who, likewise haunted her, and gave her no little
Trouble. At (...) a Fit extraordinary Violent came upon her; wherein she
pointed her Hand, and fixed her Eye, much upon the Chimney, and spoke at a rate
that astonished all about her. Anon, she broke forth into Prayer, and yet could
bring out scarce more than a Syllable at a time. In her short Prayer she grew
up to an high Act of Faith, and said, (by Syllables, and with Stammerings)
Lord, Thou have been my Hope, and in Thee will I put my (...): Thou have been
my Salvation here, and wilt be so for ever and ever! Upon which her Fit left
her; and (...) afterward grew very well; still remaining so.

There were diverse other strange Things, which from the same Hand, I can both
Relate and Believe, As, Of a Child bewitched into Lameness and recovered
immediately, by a Terror given to the vile Authoress, of the Mischief; but the
exact Print, Image and Color of an Orange made on the Child's Leg, presently
upon the sending of an Orange to the Witch by the Mother of the Child, who yet
had no evil design in making of the Present. And of other Children, which a
palpable Witchcraft made its Impressions on but Manum de Tabula.

I entreat every Reader, to make such an Use of these things, as may promote
his own welfare, and advance the Glory of God; and so answer the Intent of
the Writer, who,

Haec scribens studuit, been de Pietate merers

There now remain two Discourses, for the Reader to be entertained With; the
Latter of which was delivered unto my own Congregation; on the Occasion of what
befell Goodwi^'s Children: but the Former of them was delivered unto the same
Congregation on the Occasion of a norrible Self-murder committed by a possessed
woman in the Neighborhood. The Discourses were suited unto a popular Auditory;
but things that are not accurate may be profitable, if the Blessing of God
accompany them.

A Discourse on the Power and Malice of the DEVILS
1. Pet. V. 8. Your Adversary the Devil, as a Roaring Lion walks about,
seeking whom he may devour.
IT is a Relation made by David of an Encounter by him once met withal in 1.
Sam. 17. 34. Thy Servant kept his Father's sheep, and there came a Lion and
took a Lamb out of the Flock. There is an horrid Lion by which your souls are
pursued and endangered: This Lion fetched away, after a very dismal manner,
one, that was with us, when this Flock was last before the Lord; and he seeks,
he longs he roars, in that or same way to make a Prey of all. I am keeping my
Father's sheep, and would labor to ^es^ne from the hellish Lion every (...)
that may ly in his way. Accept therefore the Text now readd, as, The (...) of
the Lord.

Multitudes of Jews, dispersed in diverse Countries, being Converted and
Baptis^a by the Ministry of the Apostle Peter, at Jerusalem; he writes to them
an excellent Epistle to for fie them against the Persecutions which their (...)
might expose them to. He advises them, first, unto the (...) general, and then,
unto the more special Duties of the Christian (...). The last of his divine
Counsils is. To resist the temptations of the devil. And the Text before us
contains the Argument whereby we are to be excited thereunto; it is drawn from
the Disposition of the Devil; who is here exhibited, First, as an Aversa^y.
Secondly, as a potent Adversary, a Lion. Thirdly, as a cruel Adversary, a
roaring Lion. Fourthly, as a restless Adversary, a Lion seeking whom he may
devour. This then is the Doctrine to be now attended unto,

The Devil is a potent, a cruel, and a restless Adversary to the souls of men.

Prop. 1. There is a Combination of Devils which our (...) is filled withal. A
Devil is a spiritual and a (...) Substance, full of all Wickedness, confined by
God unto our Air as his Gao^, for his Apostasy from the Company and Employment
of the only Angels. His Title is that in Ephesians 6. 12. a spiritual wickedness;
that is a wicked spirit. A Devil was once an Angel, but Sin has brought him to
be a Father Angel; an Angel full of Enmity to God and man; an Angel made a
(...) within the Atmosph^^e of the Earth which we tread upon

The Scriptures of Truth allow us these Conclusions about the Devils of He^.

We may first conclude, That the Devils are not mere (...), or Qualities or
Distempers, as has been by some absurdly enough conceived. The fond Saddu^^
derides the Doctrine of Devils, which we all embrace. But I pray, What things
were those that left their first estate, being now reserved in chains of
darkness to the judgment of the great day? What things be those that besought
our Lord for liberty to enter into the swine? But we have among our selves
lately seen plain Demonstrations, That there are Spirits, which understand, and
argue, and will; and which are the enemies of all that is holy, and just, and
Good.

We may, Secondly Conclude, That these Devils are an Army in our Air. They are
called in Ephesians. 2 2. the power (or the Army) of the air. There are diverse Miles
of Air encompassing of this Terraqueous Globe; to that space it is that the
Devils are limited, since their High Treason against the God that made them.
Here it is that they have a Playhouse, as well as a Prison; here they play all
their devilish Pranks until the everlasting Fire shall begin to flame. Indeed,
some Devils may keep more constantly to one country, and some to another.
Hence we read of some in Marc. ^. 10. They besought our Lord much, that He
would not send them away out of the Country. But still the High Places of our
air be the Receptacles of all the wicked Spirits.

We may conclude, Thirdly, That these Devils are an Army under a Leader too.
There is a Government, a Monarchy in the dark Regions; and hence in Matthew. 12.
24. we read about Beelzebub, the Prince of devils. There you have the Name of
the Grand-Segniour who is King over the children of pride. Probably, the Devils
in their first Conspiracy and Rebellion against God, had a notorious
Ringleader; there was one of greater dignity and influence than the ^est, by
whom they were headed; and they are all now under his Command. We have Mention
in the Sacred Oracles, of, the devil and his angels. This cheef devil is called
by way of eminency, the Devil; but he has innumerable Slaves, and Officers, and
Emissaries, which are under an entire Subjection to him. His Orders they all
observe; and therefore, when we speak of the Devil, it includes each private
Soldier as well as him that is principal Commander. We say, The Devil, as we
say, The Turk, or The Spaniard; it means any or every part of that infernal
Rendezvous. As itis said in Ps. 34. 6. The Angel of the Lord encamps, i. e. the
Whole Host of Angels are as One in it.

Prop. II The Devils are the great Adversaries of humane Souls. It Is here said
about the devil, He is your Adversary; or as the Article intimates, he is that
your Adversary.

If it be asked, How the Devils are our Adversaries? In general they labor to
do us all the mischief they can devise. They pursue our Hurt in all way, and
by all (...). Yet in (...) sense they cannot come at us unless according (...).
Know, That the Greek word here notes properly an Adversary at Law; it is a
law-Ter^^ that is used here. Thus First, the Devils are our Adversaries as
Accusers. It Is the Character of the Devil in Rev. 12. 10. The Accuser of our
Brethren, which accuses them before God, day and night. He is called a Satan,
and a D evil for this very Cause. The Devils are first our Tempters, and then
our Accusers. They complain to God against us, that we do not fear Him, that we
do not love Him, that we do not seek Him, as we ought to do: they represent our
faults before the Lord, as things that make us unfit for any Mercy at His
hands. There is a Court kept somewhere in the Invisible world, at which Devils
endeavor to prefer as many Complaints as they they can against us. They first
get and then bring matters of Accusation which we might be Indicted and
Condemned for.

Secondly, The Devils are our Adversaries as Destroyers. They plead and pray as
so many Attourneys, that a Judgment may be granted against us all; and then
they petition that they too may be the Executioners of it. It Is illustrated in
Job. 1. 11. and 2. 5. Satan urges upon God against Job, put forth thine hand
now, and touch his bo^ and his flesh. They would fain have all manner of
Miseries to be inflicted on us; and they try all they can to gain Opportunities
for doing their part that we may be miserable. A D evil is called a destroying
Angel. They are D evils usually (...) are the Instruments of Divine Vengeance
on the world. If it be asked, Why the devils are our Adversaries? There is a
double Reason to be Assigned of it. One Reason of it is,

Their Hatred of God. The Devils have shaken off the Law, and the Rule of God;
and they cannot bear that the Name of God should be acknowledged in the world.
GOD and the Devils are sworn enemies to each other; and the Lord may say of
them as in Zeh. 11. 8. My soul loathed them, and their soul also abhorred me.
Now the poor Children of men, both do the Service of God, and have the Image of
God. We do the Service of God* Man is the Priest of the whole visible Creation.
It Is by our Thoughts, it is by our Words, that all things else pay their Homage
unthe Lord. The Devil, that would be in the Throne of God, would ruin us, that
God may no more have the Honor of a Father, or the Fear of a Master in the
world. We also have the Image of God. In our Nature there is much, in our
Virtue there is m^re of God's Likeness. The Devil is a Tigre; they report of
that wild beast, it will tear the picture of a man, when it cannot reach the
person of a man: There is a lively shadow as it were, of God, upon us; and this
the Tigres of Hell cannot endure.

A Second Reason of it is, their Envy at Man. The Devils behold Man exalted and
advanced above themselves. It Is said of the Leviathan in Job 41. 34. He
beholds all high things. It Is fulfilled in the Pope also, and lastly in the
Devil. He cannot brook it, that any should be higher than himself. The Apostle
intimates, that Pride was at first, the Condemnation of the Devil. It Is
conjectured, that the Devil being informed of God's decree to have a Man
subsist in the Second Person of the Trinity; this provoked him and his
Accomplices to their Disobedience. However the Devil now sees Man Saved and
himself damned; Man in the Bosom of God, and himself is the Bottom of Hell;
Well now thinks he, I will do this Man all the spits I can.

Prop. III. The Devils are potent Adversaries of our Souls.

The Devil is a Lion, and as it was said in Judg^ ^4. 18. What is stronger than
a Lion? He has a Power, an Interest, that may make us all to tremble at his
Roaring. Hence we read in Luc. 10. ^9. about The power of the enemy: and he is
compared in Cap. 11. 21. unto, A strong Armed man.

There be three things that show the power of our Adversaries.

First, The power of our Adversaries the Devils, lies in the Nature of them.
It Is said in Ephesians. 6. 12. We fight not against flesh and blood only but against
principalities, and Powers, and spiritual wickednesses. They are spiritual, and
therefore powerful. The Spirituality of the Devils enables them* to (...) us
when we cannot see them; I makes 'em ready to attack us and surprise us at
unspeakable Disadvantages. The Devils are Spirits, and hence they count Iron
but straw, and bras^ as rotten wood; they are Spirits, and so they excel in
strength; when they seem afraid of little Spells and Charms, it is only a
stratagem by which they seek to decoy us into their dreadful Power more than
before. One of them let loose, perhaps could slaughter an Army of an hundred
thousand in a night.

Secondly. The Power of our Adversaries the Devils, lies in the Number of them.
Even such little things as Mice, yea, and Lice have proved horrible plagues by
becoming numerous. What then may the Devils be, whose Troops amount unto many
Legions! How many devils can sometimes be spared, for the Vexation of one man!
In the bowels of one afflicted child, I have heard that murmur made, There are
two or three of us! Yea, we read in Luc. 8. 30. of a Le^ion that kept a
Garrison in one single person a a Legion contained twelve Thousand and five
Hundred in it. Doubtless, there are far more Devils than there are Men in the
world. They swarm like the Frogs of Egypt in every chamber of our houses. We
can go, we can stir no where, but those wild Arabians will be upon us.

Thirdly. The Power of our Adversaries the Devils lies in their Conf^ederacies.
The Devils are all as one among themselves; their Unity their Agreement in their
designs makes them formidable. We are told in Mat. 12. 26. Satan (...) not
divided against himself. But more than so The devils have of their party among
our selves, yea, within our selves. Devils have Men on their side. All wicked
men promote the ends of the devils. It Is said, The lusts of the devil they will
do it is said. The devil works in the Children of disobedience. And the Devils
have Hearts on their side Our wicked hearts will favor and humor the devils
in their attempts, and betray us into their hands. When they made their assault
on our Savionr, it is said, They sound nothing in Him. But they find something in
us, they find in us, an I^mate by whose Treachery we become their prey This is
the Power of the Enemy.

Prop. IV. The devils are also cruel Adversaries of our souls. The Devil is not
only a Lion but a roaring, an hungry, an angry Lion. Yea according to that in
Rev. 20. 2. he is not only Lion, but a D ragon too. He will have no more mercy
than a Lion, he will have no more mercy than a D ragon upon all that comes in
the way of his cruel Clutches. 'Twas the description of the Chaldaans in Hab.
1. 6. That bitter and have nation. To the devils does it much more belong they
are a Bitter and a cruel nation. Never was there such a merciless and a
pittiless Tyrant a^ the devil is; nothing so much pleases that bloody monster,
as the pain and the death of our unhappy souls; and he has no Masick like the
groans of a deadly wounded man. What a Prodigy of Cruelty was that Roman
Emperor, who wished that all his people had but one neck, that he might cut it
off at a blow! Why the cruel Devil not only wished, but in Paradise he had and
he did such an horrid thing. And it is he that inspires vile men with all the
Cruelty that their Inquisitions, and their Tortures give exemple of.

Prop. V. The Devils are likewise Restless Adversaries of our souls. They go
about, they are always in Action, always in Motion, that they may undo the
souls of men.

The Devil goes about. So could he say of himself, in Job, 1. 7. I come from
going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. This Prince
goes in Progress, rides the Circuit through his whole Dominions to see how his
work is carried on. And all that are under the Inspection of this Prime Vister
are continually traveling and laboring too for the destruction of immortal
souls. They go about, but how? We read in Jude 6. they are kept in chains; It Is
by some rendered, they are kept for chains: but suppose them in chains; their
chains are so lengthened, and yet so limited that they go about, just where and
when, and how far the Permission of God shall give them leave. As they are not
now in all the Torment, so they are not now in all the Bondage intended for
them. It Was the Sentence of wicked cursed Cain, in Genesis 4. 14. A Fugitive and a
Vagabond shall thou be upon the earth.

It Is the Case of every devil; he is A Fugitive and a Vagabond in our Air. They
go about] but Why? For no good, you may be sure. It Is with them as it is said to
be with their Vassals, in Psalm. 59. 15. They wander up and down for meat, and
grudge if they be not satisfied. They go about upon the Catch; they go about,
that they may (...) out objects to work upon; they go about, with a raging
appetite after Sin, and the Wages of it on the world. You shall see what the
Postures and Methods of the Devil are; they are drawn with a Pencil of the
Sanctuary, in Psalm. 10. 4. He lies in wait secretly, as a Lion in his den; he
lies in wait to catch the poor; he does catch the poor when he draws him into
his net. Such a devil^ish Adversary ha^^ we to deal withal.

USE. 1. INFORMATION.
There are two Lessons that we may learn from these things. We may say after
the Apostle in 1. Joh. 3. 15. In this the children of God are manifest and the
children of the Devil.

First. We may see from hence, who the children of the devil are. Roaring Lions
that go about seeking whom they may devour, what are they but the creatures
whom the Devil is a Sire unto? We read of one in Ezekiel. 19. 6. Who became a
young Lion and learned to catch the prey, and devoured men. Such Lions there
often are in the world; sometimes there are men whose business, whose delight
it is to devour their Neighbors; men who go about to impair the Estate, who go
about to blemish the esteem, who go about to debauch the souls of other men.
What shall be said of such men? Alas, the Devil is the Father of them all. I
have no Blessing for any of them; but yet I may say to them, This is a (...)
whelp, to the prey, my son, thou art gone up. This is just like the great old
Lion; with him, even with him shall they one day be punished, and undergo the
doom in Jer. 51. 38. They shall roar together like Lions, they shall yell as
Lions whelps. The great and the terible GOD will one day make the Sires and the
Whelps together to roar under the direful impressions of His everlasting wrath.

Secondly. From hence we may also see who are the Children of God. It Is said of
our Lord Jesus Christ in Act. 10. 38. He went about doing good. There are some
that go about seeking whom they may instruct, that go about seeking whom they
may convert, that go about seeking whom they may relieve. The Lion of the tribe
of Judah, is a Father to these holy men; Not the D evil but the Savior is
their pattern. The blessed, the glorious Angels, and not the outrageous D evils
do thus improve themselves. Go on, Soul, go on thus to go about. I remember old
Mr. Latymer in a Sermon, has that sharp Reflection upon the lazy Bishops of his
Time, that seldom or never preached in any one Pulpit of all their Di^cess, For
shame, (said he) you negligent Prelates, if you will not learn of God, and
Christ, and good men, then learn of the Devil, learn of the Devil, who is
always at work in in his Diecess. Truly, we may learn of the D evil, to go
about seeking the welfare of those whom he goes about seeking the Ruin of.

USE. II. EXHORTATION.
We have two things now incumbent on us.

1. Let us Avoid the Roaring Lion, who goes about seeking whom he may devour.
Let us not be willingly in the way of D evils, who are ever aiming at our
Confusion.

First. Let us get from the Roaring Lion, by a sincere Turning to God in
Christ. Hear and quake all you that are yet in your unregenerate estate; you
are in the mouth of the Roaring Lion: Oh, how can you be satisfied or contented
there? In Conversion, we are told in Act. 29. 18. men are turned from the power
of satan unto God. Man, thou art under the under the power of satan, until thou
art born again. O save thy self before it be too late. One once being ready to
be devoured (...) a Lion, cried out, Help, help, I am yet alive! whelp, I am
yet alive! O thou are yet alive, but if thou art not quickly redeemed from the
Lion, it will ere long be All too late! All too late! Quickly then Renounce the
service of the D evil; Quickly loath, quickly leave all your Sins; Quickly run
to God in Christ, and say unto Him as in Isa. 26. 13 O Lord our God, other
lords besides Thee have had dominion over us, but now we will make mention of
Thy Name alone.

Secondly. Let us Keep from the Roaring Lion, by a sincere Shunning of what
will peculiarly bring us within his teach. Indeed every Lust, as it were
surrenders us up unto the Devil: every time a man gratfies a Lust, a Devil is
invited into the soul of that man; and by every show Act of it, he takes a new
Hold of the soul. But some Vices there are which give the Devils peculiar
opportunities to devour us Of these take heed with a more than ordinary
Caution. Particularly,

First. Beware of Discontent. The devils are are wonderfully discontented
Spirits; and none more than discontented Persons, ly open to their Invasion and
Annoyance. The discontented man is angry at God; it is a rage at God, it is a
Fret at God, which discomposes him. We are told about the man that is angry at
his Neighbor, in Ephesians. 4. 27. He gives place to the devil. How much more may
this be said about the man who is angry at his maker? The devil finds a place
in the soul of such a man. Be not Angry at any Poverty, be not Angry at any
Calumny, be not Angry at any Affliction whatsoever. D iscontent opens the doors
of the soul for all the devils of Hell to enter in.

Secondly. Beware of Idleness, If thou, art Idle, know that the devil is not
so; the Idle soul is an empty House; there happens to it that thing in Mat. 12.
44. The unclean spirit walks to and fro, and comes and finds the house empty,
then goes he and takes with himself seven other spirits, more wicked than
himself, and they enter in. When the Devil finds an Idle person, he as it were,
calls to more of his crew, Come here! come h^re! A brave prize for us all! When
was a D avid made a prize for a devil? It was when he rose from his Cou^h in
the Afternoon, and walked in his Balcony, as one that had nothing at all to do.
Of Idleness comes no goodness.

Thirdly. Beware of Bad Company. That is, (I had almost said) the greatest
engine the devil has, to trepan the children of men withal An evil Companion is
a Gin for a soul. The devils will have thee fast enough, if thou walk in the
counsil of the ungodly, and stand in the way of Sinners, and sit in the
seat of the scornful. The Devils, nay, and the Gallows too, at length often
devour those that bad Company shall seduce. It Was said to them of Old, D epart
from the tents of the wicked men, lest the earth swallow you up. Even Even so,
Depart from the Knots, depart from the Cups of wicked men, lest the Devil
swallow you up. It Is said in Prove. 13. 20. A companion of fools shall be
destroyed.

II. Let us Resist the Roaring Lion who goes about seeking whom he may devour.

Do you find the Devil ready to devour you? Be you as ready to oppose him. It
is mentioned as a sore calamity in Psalm. 109. 6. Let Satan stand at his right
hand. Alas! This is the condition of our souls; we have Satan at hand, seeking
to gripe us in his hideous claws.

How many Temptations does the Devil seek to to devour your souls withal?
Temptations to Uncleanness and Worldliness are devouring of many. Temptations
to Atheism and Blasphemy are devouring of others. Perhaps, Temptations to
Self-Murder have near devoured some unhappy souls. O Remember whence all these
Temptations do arise. These things are the Roarings of the Hellish Lion; and
will you hearken to him? Is there any thing in these cursed Roarings to
persuade your Harkening thereunto? What Benefit, what Advantage, do you think
these horrid Roarings can propound?

Come then, Resist the Temptations of this roaring Lion. It Is said in Jam. 4. 7.
Resist the devil, and he will flee from you. If you fly, he will be a Lion, if
you fight, he will be a Gnat before you. Est Leo, si fugias; si stas, quasi
musca recedit.

Your Encounters call for two Things.

One is, your Watch. Hence it is here said, Be vigilant, because your adversary
the devil, as a roaring lion walks about. When it was cried out unto the
Champion of Israel in Judge. 16 20. The Philistines be upon thee, Sampson; Then
he awoke out of his sleep. Thus it may be exclamed, The Lions are upon thee O
soul. O how watchful, how wakeful should this cause thee to be. Be watchful
against all the devices of the devil. Be watchful in every place, be watchful
in every thing; be jealous always, Has not the devil now some design upon me?

The Second is your Faith. It Is recorded in heb. 11. 33. some by Faith stopped
the mouths of Lions.

Tho thou should be in a Denful of them, yet Faith, true Faith would muzzle
them all. By Faith repair to Christ, who is the true Sampson, which meets and
slayes the Lions that roar upon our souls. By Faith repair to the Rock, even to
the Rock that is higher than I! Where you may sit and shout and laugh at all
the Lions that roar in the Wilderness, and say, Where I am, there you cannot
come.

There are particularly two sorts of devouring Temptations, which I would
conclude this Disourse with some suitable R eflections on.

Temptations to Atheism and Blasphemy, perhaps do molest some among us;
possibly, Terribilia de DEO, and Horribilia de Fide: Diabolical Suggestions
about our God and our Creed, may cast some of us into grievous Agonies, these
things make many a good man to say, I am aweary of my life! What shall in this
case be done? My Advice is.

Do not so much dispute, as deny the Injections of the wicked one. Don't give
the devil so much honor as to argue and parley about his sewd proposals.
Refuse them presently, refuse them peremptorily; so you silence them. When once
an Atheistic or Blasphemous Thought appears within your Minds, immediately hiss
it away, as the Priests did Uzziah, when they first saw the Leprosy in his
Forehead. Let such Thoughts, immediately occasion in you the savory and
gracious Thoughts that shall be just contrary thereunto. If the devil would
have you think, There is no God, then without any more a do, spite the devil by
such a Thought with an Ejaculation contradicting of it, Lord, I believe that
thou art, and that thou art a Rewarder too. Don't object, What if there be no
God? But suppose for once, That God is. It Is by far the safer Supposal of the
two. And then try whether to Weary the devil be not the best way to Corquer
him. Let every Fiery dart of Satan fetch an holy dart of Prayer and Grace from
thee, and the devil will soon be weary of his Methods.

Temptations to Self-Murder, may likewise be fierce upon some unhappy people
here. It Is almost unaccountable, that at some times in some places here,
melancholy distempered Ragings toward Self-Murder, have been in a manner
Epidemical. And it would make ones hair stand, to see or hear what manifest
Assistance the Devils have given to these unnatural Self-executions when once
they have been begun. It Is too evident, that persons are commonly bewitch't or
possess't into these unreasonable Phrensies. But What shall these hurried
people do? My Advice is,

Don't Conceal, much less Obey the motions of your Adversary. Failing in this,
made a poor man, after a faithful sermon in a Neighboring Town, presently to
drown himself in a pit that had not two foot of water in it. If you will not
Keep, that is the way not to Take the Devil Counsil. Let not him tie your
Tongues, and it is likely he will not gain your Souls. Complain to a good God
of the Dangers in which you find your selves; cry to Him, Lord, I am oppressed,
undertake for me. Complain also to a wise Friend. Let some prudent and faithful
Neighbor understand your Circumstances: It Is possible you may thereby escape
the Snares with which the cruel Fowlers of Hell hope to trepan you into their
dismal Clutches for evermore. Your Neighbors may do much for you, and may
prove your Keepers if God shall please. It may be the unkindness of some
Friend, may have thrown you into your present Madness. Now the Kindness of some
Friend may prove the Antidote. Many times, a Natural Distemper, is that by
which the Devil takes advantage to get the souls of Self-Destroyers into his
bloody hands. In this case, for the tempted persons to disclose their Griefs,
will be the way to obtain their cures. Their Neighbors ought now to consult a
skilful Physician for them; and oblige, yea, constrain them to follow his
Directions. When the Humors on and by which the Devil works, are taken away,
perhaps he may be starved out of doors. Many times, again, The sin of
Slothfulness gives the Devil opportunity to procure the Self-Destruction of the
sluggard. In this case too, the Tempted person may be succored by the
standers-by becoming sensible of their Circumstances. Their Neighbors may now
compel them to follow their business. A Calling, the Business of a Calling, is
an Ordinance of God, sanctified by Him to deliver us from the evil spirits that
enter into the empty house,

But most times, There may be some old and great Sin unrepented of, where
Temptations to Self-Murder have a violence hardly to be withstood, There was
once a man among us, who in the horrors of Despair, uttered many dreadful
speeches against himself, and would often particularly say, I am all on a light
Fire under the wrath of God! This man yet never confessed any unusual sin, but
this; that having gotten about Forty pounds by his Labor, he had spent it in
wicked Company: but in his Anguish of spirit he hanged himself. There was once
a woman among us, who under Sickness had made vows of a New Life; but
apprehending some defects in her conversation afterward, she sell into the
distraction wherein she also hanged herself. And the Sin of Adultery and
Drunkenness has more than once issued in such a destructive Desperation. In
case of this or any such Guilt, Confession with Repenance affords a present
Remedy. To fly from Soul-Terrour by Self-Murder, is to leap out of the
Drying Pan into the Fire, Poor tempted People, I must like Paul in prison, cry
with a loud voice unto you, Do your selves no harm; all may be well yet, if you
will hearken to the Counsils of the Lord.

Now, Do Thou, O God of peace, bruise Satan under our feet world without end,
Amen.

A DISCOURSE on WITCHCRAFT.
1. SAM. XV. 23. Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft.
AS it is the Interest of all Christians to Consider the wondrous Works of God,
so it is the Duty of all Ministers to study those of His Words, with a peculiar
Application, at which His Works like Hands in the Margin thereof do point, with
Endeavors to make their Hearers understand what Lessons of the former the
Voices of the latter do more especially direct unto.

A pious Family in this Town has lately had befalling of it, a Providence full
of many Circumstances very astonishing; a Providence, wherein the Power of GOD,
the Success of Prayer, and the Existence with the Operation of Devils, has been
demonstrated in a manner truly extraordinary; a Providence, whereof you have
heard much, but (...) have seen more, and whereof neither you nor (...) can
take a due Notice, without a solemn Discourse at this time upon it. It Is a
Tribute owing to Go^ that I Dispense, and it is a Revenge due unto Satan that
you should Attend the Truths proper to be delivered on an occasion so
remarkable.

When some poor people fell into the hands o^ a Pilate, our Savior saw cause
to preach a Sermon about Repentance thereupon: What less than a Sermon can be
called for when some poor Children have lately fallen into the hands of a
Devil? though thanks be to our David, the Lambs are like to be delivered from the
Hellish Monsters to which they were become a Prey. And this may seem the rather
convenient, because the godly Father of the Children has desired it. For which
cause the Text before us may be proper to be insisted on.

The Great GOD had three several times declared that the Nation of the
Amalekites was to be destroyed and extirpated forevermore. King Saul was now
employed in an Expedition against them, to accomplish that Prediction, and to
execute the Vengeance of Heaven upon the present Generation of them, not only
for their own Cruelty and Villainy, but also for the Wickedness o^ their
Ancestors four hundred years before. The Sovereign God had Anathematized every
living thing among them, and ordered that both M^^ and Beast should fall in the
day of Slaughter. The Army, on I know not what pretense, did not ^^serve this
Commission, for which reason Samuel (...) now sent unto their Leader with
dismal Rebukes and heavy Tidings for his Disobedience. In the Text before us,
the Prophet aggravates the Sin of Saul;

1. By Describing of the Sin. The right Name ^s here put upon it; and it is
called Rebellion against God.

2. By Comparing of the Sin. It is resembled into Witchcraft it self: not an
Equality, but a Similitude between them is intended. It (...) ^ot affirmed to
be as great an Evil, but as tri^^ an Evil ^s Witchcraft is. That Witchcraft was
a Sin far from venial, must be owned by Saul, who had lately scow'red all the
Witches out of Israel: It is ^ow said, Such a Fault is thine. The following
Expression carries on the same sense; and the meaning of that is, That they who
adored an (...) (for so I would rather translate the word ^re rendered Iniquity)
or they who consulted a ^eraphim, which was a sort of little Image from whence
Doemons gave Answers to Enquirers; ^ven these are not more unquestionable
Sinners, ^han those that add Stubbornness to Rebellion against the Lord.

But ^he DOCTRINE which we have now before ^s, is,

That Witchcraft is a monstrous and an horrid Evil, which yet all Rebellion
against GOD may be too much compared unto.

By the ensuing Propositions we may state and shape this Truth aright in our
minds.

PROP. I.
Such an Hellish thing there is as Witchcraft in the World. There are Two
things which will be desired for the advantage of this Assertion. It should
first be showed, WHAT Witchraft is;

My Hearers will not expect from me an accurate Definition of the vile Thing;
since the Grace of God has given me the Happiness to speak without Experience
of it. But from Accounts both by Reading and Hearing I have learned to describe
it so.

WITCHCRAFT is the Doing of Strange (and for the most part III) Things by the
help of evil Spirits, Covenanting with (and usually Representing of) the woeful
Children of men.

This is the Diabolical Art that Witches are notorious for.

First. Witches are the Doers of Strange Things They cannot indeed perform any
proper Miracles; those are things to be done only by the Favorites and
Ambassadors of the LORD. But Wonders are often produced by them, though
chiefly such Wonders as the Apostle calls in 2. These. 2. 9. Lying wonders.
There are wonderful Storms in the great World, and wonderful Wounds in the
little World, often effected by these evil Causes. They do things which
transcend the ordinary Course of Nature, and which puzzle the ordinary Sense of
Mankind. Some strange things are done by them in a way of Real Production. They
do really Torment, they do really Afflict those that their Spite shall extend
unto. Other Strange Things are done by them in a way of Crafty Illusion. They
do craftily make of the Air, the Figures and Colors of things that never can
be truly created by them. All men might see, but, I believe, no man could feel
some of the Things which the Magicians of Egypt, exhibited of old.

Secondly. They are not only strange Things, but Ill Things, that Witches are
the Doers of. In this regard also they are not the Authors of Miracles: those
are things commonly done for the Good of Man, always done for the Praise of
GOD. But of these Hell Hounds it may in a special manner be said, as in Psalm.
52. 3. Thou love evil more than good. For the most part they labor to robb
Man of his Ease or his Wealth; they labor to wrong God of His Glory. There is
Mention of Creatures that they call White Whitches, which do only Good-Turns
for their Neighbors. I suspect that there are none of that sort; but rather
think, There is none that deeth good no, not one. If they do good, it is only
that they may do hurt.

Thirdly. It is by virtue of evil Spirits that Witches do what they do. We read
in Ephesians. 2, 2. about the Prince of the power of the air. There is confined
unto the Atmosphere of our Air a vast Power, or Army of Evil Spirits, under the
Government of a Prince who employes them in a continual Opposition to the
Designs of GOD: The Name of that Leviathan who is the GrandSegniour of Hell, we
find in the Scripture to be Beelzebub. Under the Command of that mighty Tyrant,
there are vast Legions and Myriads of Devils, whose Businesses and
Accomplishments are not all the same. Every one has his Post, and his Work; and
they are all glad of an opportunity to he mischievous in the World. These are
they by whom Witches do exert their Devilish and malignant Rage upon their
Neighbors: And especially Two Acts concur hereunto. The First is, Their
Covenanting with the Witches. There is a most hellish League made between them,
with various Rites and Ceremonies. The Witches promise to serve the Devils, and
the Devils promise to help the Witches; How? It is not convenient to be
related. The Second is, Their Representing of the Witches. And hereby indeed
these are drawn into Snares and Cords of Death. The Devils, when they go upon
the Errands of the Witches, do hear their Names; and hence do Harms too come
to be carried from the Devils to the Witches. We need not suppose such a wild
thing as the Transforming of those Wretches into Bruits or Birds, as we too
often do.

It should next be proved THAT Witchcraft is.

The Being of such a thing is denied by many that place a great part of their
small wit in derideing the Stories that are told of it. Their chief Argument
is, That they never saw any Witches, therefore there are none. Just as if you
or I should say, We never met with any Robbers on the Road, therefore there
never was any Padding there.

Indeed the Devils are loath to have true Notions of Witches entertained with
us. I have beheld them to put out the eyes of an enchaunted Child, when a Book
that proves, There is Witchcraft, was laid before her. But there are especially
Two Demonstrations that evince the Being of that Infernal mysterious thing.

First. We have the Testimony of Scripture for it. We find Witchcrafts often
mentioned, sometimes by way of Assertion, sometimes by way of Allusion, in the
Oracles of God. Besides that, We have there the History of diverse Witches in
these infallible and inspired Writings. Particularly, the Instance of the Witch
at Endor, in 1. Sam. 28. 7. is so plain and full that Witchcraft it self is not
a more amazing thing, than any Dispute about the Being of it, after this. The
Advocates of Witches must use more Tricks to make Nonsense of the Bible, than
ever the Witch of Endor used in her Magical Incantations, if they would evade
the Force of that famous History. They that will believe no Witches, do imagine
that Jugglers only are meant by them whom the Sacred Writ calls so. But what
do they think of that Law in Exodus 22. 18. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to
live? Methinks it is a little too hard to punish every silly Juggler with so
great S^^^rity.

Secondly. We have the Testimony of Experience for it. What will those
Incredulous, who must be the only Ingenious men say to This? Many Witches have
like those in Act. 19. 18. Confessed and showed their Deeds We see those things
done, that it is impossible any Disease, or any Deceit should procure. We see
some hideous Wretches in hideous Horrors confessing, That they did the
Mischiefs. This Confession is often made by them that are owners of as much
Reason as the people that laugh at all Conceit of W^^chraft: the exactest
Scrutiny of skilful Physicians cannot find any Distraction in their minds. This
Confession is often made by them that are apart One from another, and yet they
agree in all the Circumstances of it. This Confession is often made by them
that at the same time will produce the Engines and Ensigns of their Hellish
Trade, and give the standers-by an Ocular Conviction of what they do, and how.
There can be no Judgment left of any Humane Affairs, if such Confessions must
be Ridiculed: all the Murders, yea, and all he Bargains in the World must be
mere Imaginations if such Confessions are of no Account.

PROP. II.
WITCHCRAFT is a most Monstrous and Horrid Evil. Indeed there is a vast Heap of
bloody roaring Impieties contained in the Bowels of it. Witchcraft, is a
Renouncing of GOD, and Advancing of a filthy Devil into the Throne of the Most
High; it is the most nefandous High Treason against the MAJESTY on High.
Witchcraft, is a Renouncing of Christ, and Preferring the Communion of a
loathsome lying Devil before all the Salvation of the Lord Redeemer; it is a
Trampling under foot that Blood which is more precious than Hills of Silver, or
whole Mountains of Gold. There is in Witchraft, a most explicit Renouncing of
all that is Holy and Just and Good. The Law given by God, the Prayer taught by
Christ, the Creed left by the Apostles, is become Abominable where Witchcraft
is embraced: The very Reciting of those blessed Things is commonly burdensome
where Witchcraft is. All the sure Mercies of the New Covenant, and all the just
Duties of it, are utterly abdicated by that cursed Covenant which Witchraft is
Constituted with. Witchraft, is a Siding with Hell against Heaven and Earth;
and therefore a Witch is not to be endured in either of them. It Is a Capital
Crime; and it is to be prosecuted as a piece of Devilism that would not only
deprive God and Christ of all His Honor, but also plunder Man of all his
Comfort. Witchcraft, it is an impotent, but an impudent Essay to make an Hell of
the Universe, and to allow Nothing but a Tophet in the World. Witchcraft, --
What shall I say of it! It is the furthest Effort of our Original Sin; and all
that can make any Practice or Person odious, is here in the Exaltation of it.

It was the speech of Jehu to Joram, in 2. King. 9. 22. What peace, so long as
the Withchcrafts of thy mother are so many? Truly, as Witchcraft would break
the Peace of all Mankind, so it is a thing that should enjoy no Peace among the
Children of Adam. Nothing too vile can be said of, nothing too hard can be done
to such an horrible Iniquity as Witchcraft is.

PROP. III.
REBELLION against God has very much like to Witchraft in it. Something like to
Witchcraft there is in an Act of Rebellion; But a Course of Rebellion has much
more like to Witchcraft in it. Some persons there are whose way is is that of
wickedness, whose work is that of Iniquity. Those persons do what is like
Witchcraft every day.

For, First. In Rebellion, men cast off the Authority of God: The Witch
declares a Will to be no more disposed (...) ordered by the Will of God; she
says, God shall not be my Governor. Such is the Language of Rebellion. When
men rebel against God. They say like him in Exodus 5. 2. I know not the Lord,
and I will not obey His voice. They say like them in Jer. 44. 16. As for the
word -- spoken -- in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken thereunto. There
is indeed a sort of Atheism in Rebellion The Sinner is a Fool that wishes, O
that there were no God! that resolves, God shall not be Lord over me.

Secondly. In Rebellion men Refuse the Salvation of Christ. The Witch contemns
all the Offers of the Gospel, and prizes the dirty proffers that Satan makes
before them all. This is the plain English of Rebellion; it says, What is
tendered by the Devil, is better than what is tendered by the Savior. The LORD
said about Israel of old in Psalm. 81. 11. Israel would none of Me. Thus it is
when men rebel against God. A Jesus may say, Those poor creatures will have
none of Me, nor of My Blood. A Pardon may say, Those guilty creatures will have
none of me. A Kingdom may say, Those undone creatures will have none of me.
Where Sin is committed, there Christ is despised. This doleful Phrensy is in
all Rebellion against the Lord.

Thirdly. In Rebellion men choose and serve the the Devil as their Lord. The
Witch makes an horrible Agreement with Devils, to be theirs alone. This is the
intent of all Rebellion too. It in short says, Let the Devil rule; it says,
Let the Devil be humored and gratified. As that cowardly King said unto the
Syrian, 1. King. 20. 4. My Lord, O King, I am thine and all that I have. Thus
the ungodly man saves unto the Devil; Thou art my Lord and my King. All
Rebellion against God, is in Obedience to the Devil. When men rebel, they lay
their Wit, their Love, their Strength, and all the Instruments of that
Rebellion before the Devil, and they say, This is thine, O Satan, and all that
they have. They do even sell themselves to the Devil! as we read of one, He
sold himself to work wickedness.

Fourthly. In Rebellion, Men cast the Bond and the Good of their Baptism behind
their Back. Among the Customs of Witches, this is one, They Renounce their
Baptism in a manner very Diabolical. The same thing is done in the Rebellion of
a wicked man. We are told in 1. Pet. 3. 21. that the thing which renders
Baptism available is The answer of a good Conscience. But in Rebellion against
God, men give the answer of an Evil Conscience, and so make a Nullity of their
Sacred, Baptism. The Demand of God is, Will thou Believe as Baptized persons do
profess to do? The Rebel answers, No, I will continue shutt up in my Unbeleef.
The Demand of God is, Willt thou put on Christ, as the Baptized profess to do?
The Rebel answers, No, I will put on the old man. The Almighty God puts that
Question, Will thou forsake the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, as thy Baptism
dos oblige to do^ In Rebellion the Answer of sinful man, is, No, I will serve
them all; they shall all be the Idols of my Soul. With what Conscience can they
answer so! But thus their Baptism is nothing with them.

Fifthly. All that rebel against God, are very Mischievous in doing so. They are
Mischiefs that Witches are delighted in. Thus it is the end of Rebellion to
bring destruction upon all that are near unto it. It Is said in Eccles. 9. 18.
One sinner destroys much good. It is the ill-Hap of Sinners like Witches to
do hurt wherever they come; they hurt the souls of their Neighbors by the
Venom of their Evil Communication; they hurt the Names of their Neighbors by
their slandrous Defamation; they hurt their Estates by bringing down the fiery
Judgments of Heaven upon all the Neighborhood. Unto Rebellion against God, are
owing all the Distresses and Miseries of a calamitous World. This is the Achan,
this is the Troubler of us all.

The Improvement of these things now calls for our Earnest Heed; and unto each
of our Three Propositions, we may annex Applications agreeable thereunto. I
begin with

The USE of the First Proposition.

1. By way of INFORMATION.

There are especially Two Inferences to be drawn from this Position, That, Such
a thing there is as Witchcraft in the world.

[First.] Since there are Witches, we are to suppose that there are Devils too.
Those are the Objects that Witches converse withal. It was the Heresy of the
ancient Sadducees in Act. 23. 8. The Sadducees do say, That there is neither
Angel nor spirit. And there are multitudes of Sadducees yet in our days;
Fools, that say, Seeing is Believing; and will believe nothing but what they
see. A Devil, is in the apprehension of those Mighty acute Philosophers, no
more than a Quality, or a Distemper. But, as Paul said unto Him of old, King
Agrippa, Beleevest thou the Prophets? Thus I would say, Friend, Beleevest thou
the Scriptures? I pray, What sort of things were they, of whom we read in Jude.
6.? Angels that kept not their first estate, but left their own Habitation, and
be reserved in chains unto the judgment of the great day. What sort of things
were they, who in Matthew. 18. 16. Besought our Lord, If thou cast us out, suffer
us to go into the herd of swine? What thing was that, which in Luc. 4. 33.
cried out unto the Lord Jesus with a loud voice, Let us alone? Surely, These
things could be none but Spiritual and rational substances, full of all
Wickeness against God, and Enmity against Man. We shall come to have no Christ
but a Light within, and no Heaven but a Frame of mind, if the Scriptures must
be expounded after the Rules of the modern Sadducees. Perhaps though the
Scriptures are Fables to that sort of men. Come then, thou Sadducee, What kind
of thing is that which will so handle towardly ingenuous well-disposed persons,
That if any Devotions be performed, they shall roar and tear unreasonably, and
have such Noises and such Tortures in them, as not only to hinder themselves
wholly, but others too much from joining in the Service; and strive to kick or
strike the Minister in his Prayers, but have their hands or feet strangely
stopped when they are just come at him, and yet be quiet before and after the
Worship? That if any Idle or Useless Discourse be going, they shall be well,
but at any serious Discourse they shall be tormented in all their Limbs? That
If a portion of the Bible be readd, tho they see and hear nothing of it, and
tho, it may be, in Greek or Hebrew too, they shall fall into terrible Agonies,
which will be over when the Bible is laid aside? That they shall be able to
peruse whole Pages of Evil Books, but scarce a Line of a good one? That they
shall Move and Fly, and Tell secret things, as no ordinary mortals can? Let me
ask, Is not the hand of Joab in all this? or, Is there not a Devil whose Agency
must account for things that are so extravagant? I am now to tell you, That
these eye, of ^ine have beheld held all these things, and many other more, no
less amazing. Christian, There are Devils: and so many of them too, that
sometimes a Legion of them are spared for the vexation of one man. The Air in
which we breath is full of them. Be sensible of this, you that obey God: there
are Troops of Tempters on every side of thee. Awake, O Soul, Awake, Those
Philistines of Hell are upon thee. Upon the least affrightment in the dark,
many simple people cry out, The Devil! The Devil! Alas, there are Devils
thronging about thee every day. O let the thought of it make then a careful and
a watchful man. And be sensible of this you that commit Sin: the Lord Jesus
has said of you, Ye will do the lusts of your father the Devil. How often do
many of you make a Mock and a Jeer of the Devil while you are drudging for him?
But know, that there are dreadful Devils to seize upon thy forlorn forsaken
soul, at its departure hence. O become a new man at the thought of this.

2. Since there are Witches and Devils, we may conclude that there are also
Immortal Souls. Devils would never contract with Witches for their Souls if
there were no such things to be come a prey unto them. One of the Popes when he
lay dying, said, I shall now quickly know whether I have an Immortal Soul or
no. Within less than a hundred years, you and I shall be convinced of it, if we
are not so before. We may truly say, Devils and Witches bear a witness against
them that have any scruple of it. There are some dreaming Heretics, that hold
Man wholly mortal: I am sure the Apostle Paul was not of their beastly Opinion,
when he said in Phil. 1. 21. I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ.
Nor was the Martyr Stephen of their Opinion, when he expired, saying, in Act.
7. 59. Lord Jesus Receive my spirit. Nor was our Lord Jesus Himself of that
opinion, when He said unto the Thief on the Cross in Luc. 23. 43. This day thou
shall the with Me in Paradise. It Is an Opinion unworthy of a man that is owner
of a Soul. The mistaken Indians, when first they saw a man on Horseback, did
conceit the Man and the Horse to be one Creature: it is as soul an Error to
conceit that it is but one thing which man consists of. No, It Is a right
Anatomy of man, in Genesis 2. 7. The Lord God formed man out of the dust of the
ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a
living SOUL Remember, Thou have in thee a living soul; or a Spirit, able to
know, and will, and argue so asnothing else in the visible Creation can. This
living soul is the Candle of the Lord within thee, and no Wind, no Death can
ever extinguish it. O make much of this living SOUL. Save it, and don't sell
it: It is a Jewel too precious to be thrown away. Do not sell thy soul for a
(...) Take heed that the Devils make it not their (...) by any sollies of thine.

II. By way of Exhortrtion.

There is one thing to be now pressed upon us all.

Let us wisely endeavor to be preserved from the Molestations of all Witchraft
whatsoever. Since there is a thing so dangerous, defend your selves, and
shelter your selves by all right means against the annoyance of it.

Consider the Multitudes of them, whom Witchcraft has sometimes given Trouble
to. Persons of all sorts have been racked and ruined by it: and not a few of
them neither. It is hardly twenty years ago, that a whole Kingdom in Europe was
alarmed by such potent Witchcrafts, that some hundreds of poor Children were
invaded with them. Persons of great Honor have sometimes been cruelly
bewitched. What lately befell a worthy Knight in Scotland, is well known unto
the world. Persons of great Virtue too, have been bewitched, even into their
Graves. But Four years are passed since a holy man was killed in this doleful
way, after the Joy as well as the Grace of GOD had been wonderfully filling of
him. This Consideration should keep us from censuring of those that Witchcraft
may give Disturbance to: but it should put us on studying of our own security.
Suppose ye that the enchanted Family in the Town, were sinners above all the
Town, because they have suffered such things. I tell ye Nay, but except ye
repent, ye may all be so dealt withal. The Father of Lies uttered an awful
Truth when he said through the mouth of a possessed man, If God would give me
leave, I would find enough in the best of you all, to make you all mine.

Consider also, the Misery of them whom Witchcraft may be let loose upon. If
David thought it a sad thing to fall into the hands of men; What is it to fall
into the hands of Devils? The Hands of Turks, of Spaniards, of Indians, are not
so dreadful as those hands that Witches do their works of Darkness by. O what a
direful thing is it, to be pricked with Pins, and stabbed with Knives all over,
and to be filled all over with broken Bones? It Is impossible to reckon up the
Varieties of miseries which those Monsters inflict where they can have a Blow.
No less than Death, and that a languishing and a terrible Death will satisfy
the Rage of those formidable Dragons. Indeed Witchcraft sometimes grows up
into Possession it self: the Devils that are permitted to torment, at last do
possess the Bodies of the bewitched sufferers. But who can bear the thoughts of
that! who can forbear crying out, O Lord, my flesh trembles for fear of Thee,
and I am afraid of Thy Judgments.

What shall then be done for our Preservation? Away with all superstitious
Preservatives; about those Confidences the Word of God is that in Jer. 2. 37.
Thou shall not prosper in them.

But there are Three admirable Amulets that I can heartily recommend unto you
all.

The First Preservative is, A servent PRAYER. Pour out that prayer before the
Lord, in psalm, 59 2, 3. Deliver me from the workers of Iniquity, and save me
from the bloody ones; for lo, they ^e in wait for my soul. And be much in
Prayer every day. The Devils are afraid of our Prayers; they tremble and
complain, and are in a sort of Anguish while our Prayers are going. There was a
house of a Renowned Minister in France infested with evil Spirits; who though
they had been very troublesome, yet when the good man was betaking himself to
prayer, they would say, N^w you are going to Prayer, I Will be gone. Let us Pray
much, and we need fear nothing particularly, Let Ejaculatory Prayers be almost
continually in our minds, and so we shall never ly open to the ^^ry darts of
the wicked one.

The Second Preservative is A lively Faith. The Psalmist well said, in Psalm.
56. 2, 3, Mint enemies would daily swallow me up; At what time I am afraid I
will trust in thee. Be not afraid of any Devils; If you are, turn the Fear into
Faith. By Faith resign your selves to the Custody of Him that is the Keeper of
Israel. By Faith persuade yourselves that He is able to keep what you have
committed unto Him. Thus, Run to the Rock, and there triumph over all the
powers of darkness. Triumph and say; The Lord is on my side; I will not fear:
What can Hell do unto me.

The Third Preservative is, A Holy Life. There was a very Holy Man of old, a
man, that feared God and eschewed evil; and the Devils murmured in Job, 1. 10.
God has made on hedge about him. The same have the Devils confessed, when they
have plotted against other holy men. Do not thou break the hedge of God's
Commandment, and perhaps he will not let any break the hedge of His Providence,
by which thou art secured. The holy Ang^ls are the Friends, the Guardians, the
Companions, of all holy men; they may open their eyes, and see more with them
than against them. A Camp, an Host of Angels will fight against all the Harpies
of Hell which may offer to devour a Saint of GOD.

Use these things as the Shields of the Lord; so you shall be preserved in
Christ Jesus from the assaults of the Destroyer. Suppose now that any Witches
may let fly their Curses at you, you are now like a Bird on the Wing, in such
Heavenward Motions that they cannot hitt you. Now the Devils and their
Creatures cannot say of you, as the Demon said of the Christian woman whom, at
a Stage Play he took possession of, and being asked, gave this reason of his
taking her, I found her on my own ground.

We pass on to the USE of the Second proposition.

And that must be a Counsel from God unto us all. particularly, Since
Witchcraft is an Evil so horrible.

1. To them that may be Enticed unto the Sin of Witchcraft. To them we say,

1. Take heed that you be not by any Temptation drawn into this monstrous and
horrid Evil.

The best man that ever breathed was tempted hereunto; that man who was more
than a mere Man, was assaulted by the Cheef Devil of the lowest Hell with this
Temptation in Mat. 4. 9. Fall down and worship me. But by the Sword of the
Spirit our Lord Kept him off. If any of you are by any Devil so solicited,
thus resist, thus repel all the Motions of the wicked one. Do n't give your
selves away to those Deceivers that will become Tormentors of your souls in
another world.

It may be the proposal of this Counsel may make some to say as he in 2. King.
8. 13. What (...) is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing? I
answer, Alas, we should every one of us be a dog and a Witch too, if God should
^eave us to our selves. It is the mere Grace of God, the Chains of which
restrain us from bringing the Chains of darkness upon our Souls. The Humble and
(therefore) Holy Martyr Bradford, when he heard of any Wickedness committed in
the Neighborhood, would lay his hand on his Breast and say, In this heart of
mine, is that which would render me as wicked as the werst in the world, If God
should leave me to my self. When we see a forlorn wretch executed for
Witchcraft, you and I may say the same. They that are Witch^e now, once little
dream (...) of ever becoming so. Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall.
If we would not fall into that horrible pit, Let us follow these Directions.

DIRECTION. 1
Avoid those Ill Frames which are a Step to Witchcraft. There are especially
Two ill Frames which do lead people on to the worst Witchcraft in the world,
Shun a Frame of Discontent. When persons are discontented with their own state;
When persons through discontent at their Poverty, or at their Misery, shall be
always murmuring and repining at the Providence of God, the Devils do then
invite them to an Agreement. with, and a Reliance on them for Help. Down right
Witchcraft is the up-shot of it, We find in Luc. 4. 2. our Lord hungered, and
then the Devil came in an audible or a visible manner to Him, tho he had been
more spiritually long before assaulting of Him. They are needy persons whom
Devils make the most likely attempts upon. And some persons are not only
Hungry, but Angry too; but then every Fret, every Fume is as it were a Call to
the Devils; it calls to them, Come and help me. Shun also a Frame of
^^^-Wishing. There is a Witchcraft begun in the Imprecations of wicked people.
Many profane persons will wish the Devil to take this and that, or, the Devil
to do this and that; and when they call, at last he comes, or at least the
Devil does what they wish Observe this, We are by our Sins worthy to have
Mischiefs befalling us every day; and the Devils are always ready to inflict
what we deserve. I am also apt to think that the Devils are seldom able to
hurt us in any of our ex^eriour Concerns without a Commission from some of our
fellow-worms. It is intimated in Genesis 4. 9 That every man is his Brother's
Keeper: We are by our good Wishes to keep our Brethren from the Inroads of Ill
Spirits. But when soul-mouth'd men shall wish harm unto their Neighbors, they
give a Commission unto the Devils to perform what they desire; and if God
should not mercifully prevent it, they would go thorough with it. Hear this,
you that in ^oild passions will give every thing to the Devil; Hear it, you
that will bespeak a Rot, a Pox, and a Hague upon all that shall provoke you. I
here Indict you as guilty of hellish Witchcraft in the fight of God. It Is the
little Wapping of (...) dogs that stirs up the cruel Mastives to fall upon the
sheep in the Field.

DIRECTION II.
Avoid all those (...) which are a piece of (...). The Devils have pretty
Ra^^les, as well as fiery Arrows: they that use the Ra^^tes, will come at
length to use the Arrows too. Donot play on the Brink of the pit, lest you
tumble in. It was complained in 2. King. 17. 9. The Children of Israel did
secretly those things that are not right against the Lord their God. Even so it
may be said, that people among us do secretly and frequently those things that
have a sort of Witchcraft in them

There are manifold Sorceries practiced among them that make a profession of
Christian^^^, against which I would this day bear a witness in the Name of the
most holy Lord.

First, There are some that make use of wicked Charms for the curing of
Mischiefs. It is too common a thing for persons to oppose Witchcraft it self
with Witchcraft. When they suppose one to be bewitched, they do with Burnings,
and Bottles, and Ho^shoes, and, I know not what, magical Caremonies endeavor
his Relief. Mark what I say: To use any Remedy, the force of which depends upon
the Compact of the Devils, with the Witches, is to involve ones self in the
cursed Compact: it is, as it were, to say, O Devil, Thou have agreed with such
a person that they shall be exposed unto Torments by the use of such or such a
Caremony, we do now use the Caremony, and expect thy blessing upon it. This is
the Language foamed out by this foolish Magic. Does not thy Conscience trouble
at such Iniquity and Impiety? This may be to heal a Body, but it is to destroy
a Soul. These persons give themselves to the Devils to be delivered from the
Witches. And the people that are eased and helped by such means, they say, do
usually come to unhappy Ends. Let me say as in 2. King. 1. 3. Is there not a
God in Israel, that you go to Beelzebub? What? will not Prayer and Faith do, but
must the Black Art be used against our enemies?

It is likewise too common a thing in almost every Disease to seek an unlawful
Medicine. Thus for the Ague, for the Toothache, and for what not? a Mumbling of
some words must be made, or a P^^per of some words must be worn. From what can
the Efficacy of these words proceed, but from the Consent and the Action of the
Devils The Witches have their Watch-words, which I list not to recite: upon
those Watchwords the devils do their Commands. These kind of Spells are
Watch-words to the Devils; and when a man has any Benefit by them, he cannot
say as in Psalm. 103. 3. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, who heals all thy
diseases. Man, First leave off the name of a Christian,, before thoudost thus
make thy self a Conjurer. I hope the Churches of the Lord Jesus will not bear
it, that any in their Communion, should have this Fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness. But this is not all; Turn we yet again, and
^^^hall see greaten abominations. For,

Secondly. There are some that make Use of wicked Charms, for the Finding of
Secrets. The Lord has told us, in Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Secret things belong to God.
But these impious people must needs have a Taste of them. They will ask the
Devils to inform their minds, and resolve their doubts. This is the Witchcraft
of them, that with a Sieve, or a Key will go to discover how their lost Goods
are disposed of. This is the Witchcraft of them that with Glosses and Basins
will go to discover how they shall be Related before they die. They are a sort
of Witches that thus employ themselves. And this is the Witchcraft of the
Judicial Astrologer. That Astrologer is a Cousin-German to a Conjurer. I think
I know his Rules, and I am satisfied that his Judgment must at last be
determined by his Impulse, or it is not worth an hundredth part of what the
silly Enquirer pays him for it: and from whom, from what shall that Impulse
come? Behold the Energy of Devils in it. It is likewise a sort of Sorcery, for
persons to let their Bibles fall open, on purpose to determine what the state
of their souls is, from the first word, they light upon. And some among us,
they say, are so extremely sinful, as to consult one whom they count a
Conjurer, when they would understand what they know not otherwise. It Is
horrible, that in this Land of Uprightness there should be any such Prank of
wickedness. I do earnestly testify unto you that these things are abominables
the voice of our God is (...) not, my soul hates them. I do warn and charge
you, Shun these execrable things, lest you be left unto the furthest Witchcraft
committed by the abhorred of the Lord.

2. Take heed that you do not wrongfully accuse any other person, of this
horrid and monstrous evil. It is the Character of a Godly man, in Psalm. 15. 3.
He (...) up a Reproach against his Neighbor. What more dirty Reproach than
that of Witchcraft can there be? Yet it is most readily cast upon worthy
persons, when their is hardly a shadow of any reason for it. An Ill-^^ok, or a
cross word will make a Witch with many people, who may on more ground be
counted so themselves. There has been a fearful deal of injury done in this way
in this Town, to the Good-name of the most credible persons in it. Persons of
more Goodness and Esteem than any of their calumnious Abusers have been defamed
for Witches about this Country, A Country full of lies. I beseech you, Let
all Backbiting, and all Evil-surmising be put away from among you: do not, on
small grounds (...)-blow the precious ointment of the (...) that thy Neighbor
should have. On the least provocation, I will never believe but such an one is
a witch -- that is presently the Sentence of some that might speak more warily
than so. Alas, thou might with as much Honesty break open the House, or take
away the purse of thy Neighbor: His Good Name is of more Account. They that
indulge themselves in this course of Evil-judging, are usually paid home for it
before they die; the just God (...) them in an Action of (...), and makes their
Names to be up too, before they leave world.

We Will suppose the most probable presumptions:

Suppose that a Person bewitched should pretend to see the Apparition of such
or such an one, yet this may be no infallible Argument of their being Naughty
people. It seems possible that the Devils may so traduce the most Innocent, the
most praiseworthy. Why may not spiritual Devils, as well as devils Incarnate
get leave to do it? There was at Groton, a while since, a very memorable
Instance of such a thing; and what should hinder them that can Imitate the
Angels of Light but that they may likewise personate the Children of Light, in
their Delusions?

II. To them that have been seduced into the sin of Witchcraft. And under this
Rank there are two sorts of persons to be addressed unto.

First. Let them that have been guilty of Implicit Witchcraft, now repent of
their monstrous and horrid evil in it. I fear that I speak to some Scores, that
may lay their hands on their mouths, and cry, Guilty, Guilty! before the Lord,
in this particular. Let these now Confess and bewail their own sin in the fight
of God; and as it was said in Hos. 14. 8. What have I any more to do with
Idols? Thus let them say, What have I any more to do with Devils? The things
that you have done, have been payments of Respects unto Devils; and it becomes
you to abhor your selves in dust and ashes for your Folly. The great and
terrible God says of you, as in Deuteronomy. 32. 21. They have provoked me to anger
with their vanities. Let the things that did Provoke Him to anger, now provoke
you to sorrow. Retire this evening, and humble your selves very deeply, in that
you have been so foolish and unwise. Lament all your Acquaintance with Hell;
and let your Acquaintance with God be more. Let your Lamentations be more than
ever your Divinations were.

Let them that have been guilty of Explicit Witchcraft, now also repent of
their monstrous and horrid evil in it. If any of you have (I hope none of you
have) made an Express Contract with Devils, know that your promise is better
broke than Kept; it concerns you that you Turn immediately from the power of
Satan unto God. Albeit your sin be beyond all Expression or Conception Heinous,
yet it is not unpardonable. We read of Menasseh in 2. Chron. 33. ^6. He used
Enchantments, and used Witchcraft, and deal^ with a Famillar Spirit, and
wrought much Evil in the sight of the Lord. But that great Wizzard found Mercy
with God, upon his deep Humiliation for it: Such a Boundless thing is the Grace
of our God! The Prey of Devils, may become the Joy of Angels: The Confederates
of Hell, may become the Inhabitants of Heaven, upon their sincere Turning unto
God. A Witch may be penitent in this, and glorious in another world. There was
one Hartford here, who did with much Brokenness of heart own her Witchcraft,
and leave her Master, and expire depending on the Free Grace of God in Christ,
and on that word of His, Come to me, ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest; and on that, There is a fountain open for sin and for
uncleanness. Come then, Renounce the Slavery and the Interest of the Devils,
Renounce your mad League with 'em Come and give up your selves unto the Lord
Jesus Christ, loathing your selves exceedingly for your so siding with the
black enemies of His Throne. O come away from the doleful estate you are in.
Come away from serving of the Devils that have ensnared your Souls. What Wages
have you from those Hellish I ask-masters? Alas you are here among the poor,
and ^ile, and reg^d Beggars upon Earth. When did Witchcraft ever make any
person Rich? And hereafter you must be Objects for the intolerable insolence
and Cruelty of those Cannibals, and be, broken sore in the place of Dragons for
evermore. Be take your selves then to Instant and Constant Prayer, and unto
your old filthy Rulers now say, "Depart from me, ye Evil Spirits, for I will
keep the Commandments of God.

But we must now Conclude with the USE of the Third Proposition.

And that may be a Caution to every one of us. This in short, Since Rebellion
is like Witchcraft,

O Let us not make light of any Rebellion against the Almighty GOD.
Particularly,

First, Let not a Course of Rebellion be followed by us. It is the Course of
unregenerate men, to be daily doing those things, for which the wrath of God
comes upon the children of disobedience. When God requires; Repent of Sin, they
do rebel and reply, No, I have loved Idols, and after them I will go. When God
requires, Believe on Christ, they do rebel and reply, No, I will not have this
man to reign over me. They rebel against all the divine Commands of Love to
God, or Love to Man. They rebel against all the Precepts of the Lord, which are
to be esteemed concerning all things to be Right. And they love every false
way. O Consider of this, ye strangers to the New Birth; Consider what you are
doing, consider where you are going every day. I would now say, alluding to
that in Dan. 4. 27. O soul, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break
off thy sins. You have been doing of Iniquity; O now say, I will do so no more.

Consider. First, There is a sort of Witchcraft charged on you. You shall as
undoubtedly perish as any witch in the world, except you reform. Can you
imagine that an obstinate Witch will have Admission into the Kingdom of God?
Behold, and be astonished, ye unrenewed ones; as impossible it is for you to
see the Lord. It is said in Joh. 3. 3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, That verily verily,
which like a flaming Sword, stands to keep the vilest Witches out of Paradise,
the same there is to keep every unbeleever out. The Lord said unto some
confident pretenders of old, Ye are as AEthiopians unto me. This does God say
unto all them that obey Him not; this does He say to every one of you that do
not fear Him and keep His Commandment; He says, Ye are as Witches unto me;
though thy Birth be of godly or genteel parents, tho thy Parts and Gifts may be
extraordinary, though thy Prayers may be twice a week, and thy Alms enough to
fill a Trumpet, yet become a new creature; otherwise ye are as witches unto me,
says the Lord

Consider, Secondly, There is a sort of Witchcraft come on you too. All that
leave the way everlasting, and take a way of wickedness, they are bewitched; a
grievous Witchcraft has siez'd upon them. The Apostle said to some in Gal. 3.
1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
Truth? This may be an Expostulation as'd with all ungodly men; O foolish
Transgressors, who has bewitched you? I Will tell you who: Not an H^g, but a ^ust
has bewitched 'em. They that are bewitched, have a mavelous variety of
calamity upon them. One while they cannot see; that is thy case; Thou art
wretched, but thou can not see it; Christ is lovely, but thou can not see
him. One while they cannot hear; that is thy case; God calls; Look unto me and
be saved; but thou hear nothing of it. Another while they cannot stir; that
is thy case; The Lord Jesus calls, Come unto me, but thou movest not. Sometimes
they are as it were, cut, and pricked, and distorted in their Limbs; the very
same art thou in all the Faculties of thy soul. At othertimes they are pulled
into the Fire, or into the Water, or thrown with violence upon the Ground; the
like happens to thy unhappy soul; it is hurried thither, where the fire is not
quenched; it is hurried thither where they groan under the waters; it is also
made to pant after the dust of the earth. The Drunken man is bewitched with
strong Drink; the unclean man is bewitch't with strange Flesh; the tongue of a
Swearer is acted worse than the tongue of a bewitch't man; the covetous man is
hideously bewitched with Bags and Lands.

O pity thine own soul; and give no sleep to thine eyes nor s^^mber to thine
eye lids, until thine immortal soul be delivered from thy natural state. Let
not Witchcraft it self be a more frightful thing to thee, than thy own present
Unregeneneracy. Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye?

Secondly, Let not an Act of Rebellion be allowed by us. When Joseph was
incited unto an Ill Act, he said, in Gen, 39. 9. How shall I do this wickedness
and sin against God? Thus, when we are urged unto any Ill Act, Let us refuse it
so, No, this is like Wicthcraft, shall I by such wickedness make my self as a
Witch before the Lord?

Three Things are to be Recommend here.

First. Arm yourselves against all the Devices, with which the Devils would
hook you into any Rebellion against the Lord. For Rebellion against God, there
will be that clause in our Indictment, They were moved by the Instigation of
the Devil. Now furnish yourselves with Armor to keep off the Dint of the
Devils Instigations; in short, put on the whole Armor of God. There is
specially a double Care that will be of great use in your Encounters.

First. Use your Watch well. We read in Ephesians. 6. 11. about, the Wiles of the
Devil. When the Devil would engage us in a Rebellion, there are certain Wily
Methods by which he does accomplish it. He works more by Fraud than by Force;
and there is a cryptic method by which he does gain us over to himself. A
crafty Sophistor has a threefold Method with which he prevails upon his
Auditors; and such the Method of the Devil is. Watch, First, against the
Deficient method of the Devil. The Devil will show us the Sin without the
Curse, the Bait without the Hook: So he says Eat the pleasant Fruit; but he
says not, Thou shall dye if thou do it. The Devil will represent unto us the
Difficulty of a Duty, but conceal the recompense of it. So he says, It Is a hard
thing to pray in secret every day; but he says not, Thy Father will Reward
th^e. And he will represent unto us the Excuse of a Sin, but conceal the Ill
shape of it: So he says, Many others have done this and th^^, but he says
not, God was Provoked at it. These are Tricks to be watched against.

Watch, Secondly, against the Redundant Method of the Devil. Sometimes the
devil will use a Digression. He will seem to give over his Intent in one thing,
but make sure of his Intent in another. Such a Stratagem he uses as what Joshua
took Ai withal; he retires, and so he conquers. He will make Haughtiness and
Security undo the soul, that he could not make of his party for grosser
Wickedness. Sometimes the devil will use a Commoration. He will dog a man, and
bring Persuasion upon persuasion, as Delilah did with Sampson; and like a
^nuning Fencer, he repeats blow after blow, till he smite home. These are
Dangers to be Watched against.

Watch, Thirdly, against the Inverting Method of the Devil. One while the Devil
will endeavor to carry us on from Lesser sins to Greater sins. He will go to
make our miscarriages like Elijah's cloud; at first as an Hands-breadth, but
anon so as to hide the whole Heaven from us. So Solomon multiplies first
Horses, and afterward worse things against the command of God. Another while,
the Devil will decoy us from lawful things to unlawful things. Thus from a
Good-husband, a man shall grow a mere Muck-worm. Now and then also, the Devil
will try to spoil Good works with Ill ends: Thus the Pride of Jehu shall be
swelled by the Zeal of Jehu. He will try to make our Duties Interfere; the
general Calling shall be regarded in the season of the particular, and the
particular calling shall be attended in the season of the general. He will try
to lead us from one Extreme to another; We shall be excessively merry, and ore
long excessively melancholy, if we hearken to him. O keep up your Watch. Well
did the Apostle say, in 1. Pet. 5. 8. Be vigilant, for the Devil as a roaring
lion, seeks whom he may devour.

Secondly. Use your Sword well. It Is said in Ephesians. 6. 17. Take the Sword of the
Spirit which is the Word of God. The Devil cannot stand before the Brandishings
of this Two-edged Sword. Our Savior overcame the devil by making that Return,
It is written, and It is written, against all his lewd attempts. Would he get
you into any Rebellion? One Text well managed will make him fly before you.
Would he have you be unjust? Then answer, It is written, The unrighteous shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God. Would he have you be unclean? Then answer, it
is written, God reserves to be punished them that walk in uncleanness. Would he
have you be immoderately careful? Say then, It is written, Cast thy burden on
the Lord.

This Warefare is directly contrary to that Witchcraft which the Devils are
daily driving or drawing us unto.

Secondly. Beware of th^^ Rebellion against God particularly, which the Devils
are most gratified withal. It is said in Ephesians. 4. 40. Grieve not the holy Spirit
of God, The unclean devils are pleased most with such things as that Holy
Spirit is most grieved with. Sometimes the Devils have been forced as it were,
to discover their own Inclinations: through the mouths of possessed persons, they
have declared what was very grateful to them. The Children that have lately
been under a diabolical Fascination in this Town, have given us diverse
intimations, which we might make useful Observations on. I observed, that tho
they had much delight in prayer when they were well; yet when they were ill,
they could not endure it. The Damons would make them sing, and roar, and stop
their ears, and plague them, and at last lay them for dead, if any prayer were
in the Room. Whence it may be inferred, That you who can go without Prayer from
day to day, do just as the Devils would have you. The Devils have an horrible
Rendezvous in that Family, in that Closet, where Pray is not maintained. I
observed, that tho the Word of God were their Companion and Counselor at other
times, yet now they would fall into Convulsions, if one did but look into a
Bible. Whence it may be supposed that you who read not the Scripture, for the
most part every day, do humor the devils in it. The Devils are glad to see the
Bibles that have dust upon them. I observed, that Haeretical, or Superstitious
or Profane Books, might be perused by some of them, when serious and Orthodox
Books would put out their Eyes. Whence it may be suggested, That you who
converse much with ill books, do as the devils would: The Devils would
willingly be where Jest-books and Play-books, and Romances, and Haeresies or
Superstitions are made a Library. I observed, that (...) they were exemplary
for Honesty and sobriety, yet now their Wishes to steal and be drunk, were
frequently expressed; and sometimes they were made very drunk tho no
intoxicating Drink had bin in the least an occasion of it. Whence it may be
gathered, That the Drunkard has a devil in him, the Stealer has a devil in him.
The Devils have sport enough, when they see a man Reeling in the streets; the
devils are the Comrades of them that go to take what is none of their own. I
observed, That tho few in the place were so diligent as they, nevertheless in
their Fits they might not do any work at all. Whence it may be concluded, That
of Idleness comes no goodness. The devils are the Play-mates of them that are
Gaming when they should be working. An idle person is a Prentice of a devil.
These things have been observed; and now let these Vices be avoided. There is
Witchcraft in them.

O that the Devils might be out-shot in their own Bow, and that these Vices
might be made odious by their Affection for them.

Thirdly. Instead of Rebellion against God; let Obedience to God fill your
lives. Make unto God that vow in psa. 116. 16. O Lord, truly I am thy servant,
etc. And accordingly serve God with all obedience. Yea, often ask yourselves,
What service may I do for God? And let a respect of Obedience to God make even
the meanest of your Actions honorable: even when you eat and drink and trade
and visit and recreate yourselves, let there be some Obedience to God in it
all. The Employments of a poor Carpenter or Shooemaker will hereby be rendered
more noble things than the Victories of an Alexander or a Caesar. Not the
devils but the Angels will have a most intimate Fellowship with a man thus
obedient. Not witchcraft, but rather Inspiration will be in the man who does
this, and the son of man who ^^yeth hold on.

NOTANDUM.
SInce the Finishing of the History which concerns Goodwin's Children, there
has been a very wonderful Attempt made (brobably by Witchcraft, on another
Family in the Town.) There is a poor Boy at this time under very terrible and
amazing Circumstances which are a Repetition of, with not much Variation from
those of the Children formerly molested. The person under vehement Suspicion to
be the Authoress this Boy's Calamities, is one that was complained of by those
Children in their Ails. and accordingly one or two of those Children has at
this time some Renewal of their Afflictions also; which perhaps may be
permitted by the Great God, not to dissappoint our Expectations of their
Deliverance, but for the Detection and the Destruction of more belonging to
that hellish Knot, that has not yet perished as others of the Crew has done,
before the poor prayers of them that Hope in God.

The Booksellers not being willing to stay the Event of these New Accidents,
cause the Bridles, here to be taken off.

APPENDIX
THere are one or two passages in the first of our foregoing Histories, which I
foresee, (those usually no less Absurd) than Angry people) the Quakers, will
come upon me with great wrath, for my writing of* and the Incivilities lately
shown to my Father, for a piece of one Chapter in his Book of Remarkable
Providence, by one Keith, in sort of a thing newly published at pen-silvania,
have made it necessary for me, not only to explain my self, but to defend him,
upon the occasion that is now before me.

As for what I have related concerning the strange liberty which the Devils
gave unto John Goodwin's Children, to enjoy both the Writings and the Meetings
of the Quakers, when offers thereof were (it may be too needlessly) made unto
them, I need only acquaint the world, that I shall produce good, legal, and I
sufficient Evidence to (...) what I do Affirm, whenever any man shall demand it
of me; And that the Books with which the Trial happned to be made, were more
than one, and such, as the Quakers give as general an Allowance to, as to their
own Primers and their Catechisms. But undoubtedly, the matchless Candor and
Sweetness of the Quakers will inspire them, with Inclinations to give me some
of their public Thanks for the notice I have taken of them; and in the mean
time I must let my Neighbors understand, what ridiculous as well as odious
Calumnies the Quakers have bestowed upon my absent Father, for his being an
Historian (they think) unto their Prejudice.

One would think. That if an Historian, did but secure his Veracity from being
Impeached, most of his other faults were pardonable; and so truly they would be
accounted, by any, besides Quakers, who are a people by themselves. But my
Father had published a Book entitled, Illustrious Providence; in one part of
which, he has a Narrative of several very mavelous Occurrences, that certain
deluded and possessed Quakers, in this Country were concerned in. The matter
of Fact, never could be disputed; yet one Keith a Quaker, who had been
compassing (...) to make proselytes, visits New-Eng. in his Progress, where
meeting with small Applause, and less Success, instead of Converts, he picks up
what Quarrels our Country could afford him, and among the Rest, this book of
Providence. At his Return to Pen-silvania, he blesses the world with a (...)
Volumn of Haeresies and Blasphemies against the Protestant Religion, the
principle Articles whereof, he endeavors to undermine, with some further
Improvements of Nonsense, than the Abilities of the Quakers had heretofore help
of 'em to; but, tho it is almost pity that any Eagle (pardon the Comparison, he
himself calls us Night-birds) should lose his time, by attending the motions of
such a Fly; yet I suppose, he will not be long, without the Castigations of a
full, though short Answer to the Impertinences with which he has been craftily
assuming to spoil out vines. He entitles his Harrangues, The Churches in
New England brought to the Test; and it might be expected; that one so willing
to be a Servant of those Churches as Increase Mather, would not escape the
Vengeance of those whom these Churches are an eyesore unto. Accordingly, the
Title Page of his Discourses (for trulyReader,) he will not now give us a
Silent Meeting) promises to us, An Answer to the gras^ Abuses, Lies and
Slanders of Increase Mather (...) which he afterward detects, just as one of
his producessours after a Con^errat on with (...) Trampled upon Hate's pride;
while (...) instance in any one Abuse Eye, o^ stander of Increase Mather,
without committing more than a few himself. However, he is pleased to say, when
he comes to talk, Let any of his kindred answer for him in his absence; and
because I am somewhat a kin to the said Increase Mather, whom the
Ani-mad-versions of this Keith have made such an Assault upon, that were I more
dumb than the Son of Croesus himself, yet I must have spoken at the
Provocation, I am willing to satisfy our little Author so far as to Answer
these Three Things upon him: Yet I would so far observe one of Solomon's Rules
in my Answer, as not to use upon him some Terms of his Art which as a Specimen
of his breeding he bestows upon Increase Mather; but offer a few just
Reflections on this new Apostle (no doubt a Successor to one of the old ones)
unto the world.

First. He charges my absent Father, with Gross Abuses, Lies, and Slanders; and
yet he denies not the Truth of the Stories, the Relation of which flings him
into this foaming Rage. He charges him just as last year he did the rest of the
Ministers of Boston. He sent us a written Challenge, which begins, I being well
assured by the Spirit of God, that the doctrine ye preach to the People is
false -- and he then reckons up Twelve Articles (he says) of our Doctrine, the
Twelsth of which is directly contrary to what we assert, and maintain and
preach every day. This was his Inspiration then! and such is his Narration now.
Increase Mather penns Truths, and yet, it seems writes Lies But where is
Increase Mather's Crime? Why, our Animadvertor tells us, I. M. relates these
stories on purpose to abuse the honest and sober people called Quakers, without
making any Distinction -- But what Metal is this man's Forehead made of?
Reader, you shall find my Fathers introduction to his Histories to be, All wise
men that are acquainted therewith, observe the blasting rebukes of Heaven upon
the late SINGING and Dancing Quakers. And his Inference from them is, That The
Quakers are SOME of them undoubtedly possessed with evil spirits; and his
Conclusion is, We may, by this, judge whose servants the Singing Quakers are.
Behold how carefully he has Repeated the very Distinction which this waspish
man complains at the Omission of! Besides, he had no need of making any
Distinction at all. That the Quakers fall out among themselves, is but a
natural Consequence of their Tempers and Errors, which cannot be otherwise
than Incohaerent; and sometimes, their Credit forces them to Explode in one
another, what they (wish they could but) cannot Excuse. Tho it seems if a Woman
dress her self like a Devil, and fright some of her Sex almost out of their
Lives, on a Lords Day, in one of our biggest Assemblies, ^. K. can here (...)
her for a Saint. Case's Crew are (...) of the same Drove with (...) Crew; (...)
Mad, tho with some variety of Application in their Phrensies What if those
(...), and these Quakers be shaken together In a Bag? It Is a more allowable
method of Sorting, that of this G. K.'s, who would make us a Crew of Ranters,
because we hold, That God has foreordained infallibly and unchangeabley,
whatever comes to pass. And whereas our Answerer tells us, that when those
horrid monsters were whipped at Plymouth, for their wonderful hideous Devilism,
Some of the honest people ^oalled Quakers, openly declared before the people,
that the Quakers did not at all own them to he of their Sverely, I am to ask
him, Who of this honest people then it was, That then declared them to be, The
dear Children of God? But Reader, pray observe, Tho he will not leave Urging,
that for a Quaker to be Possessed, is no more than for a Presbyterian or an
Independent so to be; There is Difference enough, where our notable Disputant
would contrive a Parallel. Because a Possession by evil Spirits, may besal one
of our Communion, What then? The Possession does not move any to (...) that
Communion: we see the contrary. But the Stories Recorded by my Father, (plainly
enough) demonstrate, That Diabolical Possession was the Thing which did dispose
and incline men unto Quakerism; Their Quakerism was the proper Effect of their
Possession; and not an unconcerned Consequent. It Is our Logicians Fault here,
that he cavils without making any Distinction; if he would have pleased to
distinguish a little, he might have spared the pains of his tedious Excursions,
about Charging the innocent with the crimes of the guilty. But from such a G.
K. what better Dealing might have been looked for?

Secondly, I think, I may rather charge this G. K. with Gross Abuses, Lies and
Slanders, by him offered unto that Increase Mather whom he shows himself so
much (beyond the cure of Hellebore) inflamed at. He says, Increase Mather has
showed his Rashness and Folly in some other passages of his life, if not
Malice, that has occasioned him for some time past to abscond, and depart from
the place where he preached at Boston, I am sorry that this man obliges me to
trouble the World with Stories about such Domestic and personal matters as
these are. For me to Commend my yet living Father would perhaps he counted an
Indecency. But if I should not now Defend him from such unhandsome Imputations,
I were worse than the worst of the Sons of Noah, and it must be a greater
Malice than what G. K. ever pretended to discover in Increase Mather, that
shall criminate my Vindication of an absent and a wronged Parent. My Reader's
Patience must then permit me to tell him, that all New England well knows, That
Increase Mather never departed from hence, through any Rashness or Folly of his
ewn, but through the Malice of unreasonable men. Our Charter being unjustly
Vacated (which even G. K. reckons among the Judgments of God upon us) the
Government of this Territory was fallen into the hands of men that immediately
took all sorts of measures to make us miserable. A knot of people, that had no
design but to enrich themselves on the ruins of this flourishing plantation,
were placed over us, and our Land strangers devoured in our presence. The sight
of our Calamities made my Father willing to undertake a Voyage unto England,
for no other cause but merely to endeavor the Service of his afflicted
Country; and not a few among the principal Gentlemen of the place, did both
Advize and Assist his Undertaking. His Intent in Going he did not publish, but
his Intent of Going he did; and he had no sooner done it, but one Randolph, the
late Secretary, whom (like a Scavenger) our late Oppressors chiefly used in
their more dirty Businesses, gave Trouble unto him to obstruct and prevent his
Voyage. The Circumstances of it were these: This Randolph some time since,
carried unto Sr. Lionel Jenkins, a Letter which he assured him was Mr.
Mather's; Tho the Letter was a most Villainous Forgery, Filled with Treason and
Madness in the Exaltation of it, and never was one line of it written by my
Father. The Letter-Forger had so foolishly drawn it up, That Randolph could not
get the Blood of the Gentleman, whom he (after his manner, that is) falsely
Charged with being the Author it, yet care was taken thereby to blast his
Name: The Observator, (whom one calls The Father of Lies) here became Nurse,
and printed it, with not a few scurrilous Observations on it. So that in all
the Taverns and Coffee-houses throughout Three-Kingdoms, this innocent Person
was made a Ridicule, and Barbados too, with other of the Lee-ward Islands, took
this opportunity to spit their venom on one who had never done any thing to
deserve it, bu^ by being (in the account of some that are Both) somewhat of a
Learned and Honest man. My Father to Vindicate himself, while our old
Government yet lasted, wrote a Letter to Mr. Dudley, who had from White Hall,
Received a Copy of that bloody Forgery; and in this Vindication, he intimates
that several shroud things would make him suspect Randolph himself to be the
Director of it. It was Evident unto him That the whole forgery was contrived
for Randolph's advantage; it is almost all of him and for him; but could any
rational man imagine, that he was then wholly a stranger to it? Besides there
were in it several other Expressions, which (it was then thought no man in his
Wits can dream that any without (...) should have. But Randolph upon his
arrival here with our New Government getting a Copy of my Fathers Vindication.
dos after to many months now sue him in an Action of (...), to Embarass the
Affairs he had before him. The Jury which consisted partly of Church of E.
Gentlemen, Found for my Father against the Plaintiff. And yet just within a
Week or two before his Voyage, Randolph renewed his Action; his Abetters
resolving (as I am credibly informed) That having laid the Arrest upon him,
they would have secured his Person in the Goal, as the worst of Traitors; for
what illegality would they stick at? He happily understanding, what they would
be at, by the counsel of his Friends withdrew, for about a week; and then, tho
both by Day and Night, both by Land and Sea, the late Spirits among us waylaid
him God carried him safely through them all; and when he came to Whitehall, what
Favors the Greatest Men in the Kingdom have heaped upon him, it is not proper
for me to tell. Whereas our Caviller now says, It wants to be in (...) in his
Book, that what has befallen him of (...), is a Remarkable Judgment of God
upon him, for his Injustice to the Quakers. I join issue with him, and beg the
Reader to insert it, if he be owner of that harmless Book. Reader, inasmuch as
none of Increase Mathers enemies were able to attain their ends upon him; and
inasmuch as this Increase Mather has in his whole Negotiation for New England,
been favored by the merciful God, beyond he imagination of our fondest hopes
pray count it. A Remarkable Judgment of God upon him, for his Injustice to the
Quakers. This G. K. has this Book of his bound up in Canvas; because I suppose,
like one of the Witnesses, he would (...) in (...) I confess, Fire proceeds out
of his mouth; but it is another sort of Fire than that which our Lords
Witnesses are used unto; and there is one (...) Qualification of a Witness
which you see he wants, that is, Truth; the Contents of his Books require some
other Covers for them, he perpluat.

Thirdly, Not Increase Mather alone, but all New England, especially the
Shepherds of the the Churches here, must through the Lycanthropy of this man, be
Barked at. One while his False Histories misrepresent us to the world; and he
raises dismal Tragedies upon the Persecution which his Friends here have met
withal. For my own part, I have long wished, That the Civil Magistrate would
never inflict a Civil Penalty, on an Here^ick, until Humane Society receive
such a Disturbance from him, as in one of mine, or any other persuasion were
Intolerable. Yet there is more, far more to be said for the Justification of
our ancient Severities on two or three Quakers here, than the world has yet
been acquainted with. Oliver Cromwell himself, whose Toleration of Sectaries was
notorious enough, yet would speak in the justification of what was here done to
them. Since our Jerusalem was come to such a Consistence, that the going up of
every Fox would not break down our stone wall, who ever meddled with 'em? And
since That, Though a Quaker-woman came (as sometimes they have) stark naked,
into some of our Solemn Assemblies, declaring her self to be a Sign; yet the
Bruit has not been thought fit to be Hanged up: but the Generality of the
people are enough, and always were, averse to the inflicting of Saecular
Punishments on these doting Hareticks. Indeed a Grave Magistrate once (it is
said) propounded unto the General Court at Plymouth, a Law that every Quaker
might have his head shaved; because they were distracted, and this would both
shame and (...) them. I believe this is all the Law that ever will be offered
for the Suppressing of them here; by long experience, we find, They perish by
being let alone. But whereas, he twits the Ministers here, for their Accepting
of Maintenance, with goods unjustly taken from the true owners; I may inform
the world, the Ministers here are of another Spirit that so; their voluntary
Poverty and transcendent Self-Denial, has scarce its parallel in the Christian
world. If any maintenance extorted from Quakers has ever been paid unto them,
I am confident it was without their Knowledge or consent. The chief Complaints
of this kind are in (...) mouth Colony; but let the Reader consider, That the
Grants of Lands there made by the Court, have still been with an Express
Condition and Proviso that the allowed Ministry be therewith supproted. Quakers
come and Accept and Improve these Grants, and there refuse the Duty annexed
thereunto Let all ^^nkind judge whether they might not justly, be ^^^pel'd unto
the payment of it? yet how (...) as it ever done? G. K'/s. Barnstable Story is
((...)) a Romance of the same piece with the rest. But we must be terrified
with his False Prophecies too. He pretends to Inspiration and foretells the
utter Removing, Undoing, and Destroying of all our Babylonish Buildings; that
is, our Churches; and he adds, The time hastens, and blessed shall he be who
receives the Warning; and some pages after he praedicts, that In due time our
Meeting Houses shall no more receive us into them. Ay, no doubt of it, in due
time! But, I pray Friend George, when is this due time to be? Our late
persecutors, who did last year admit thee to so much familiarity with them, did
not so wisely to let thee know what they were driving at, for it seems thou art
a (...) of thy tongue. When thy private Conversation with 'em, as well as their
public Administration here, gave thee cause to g^ess, That, our Churches were
quickly to be over turned, and (...) Meeting houses made too hot for us,
tw^^easie to prognosticate much more than this; l'le assure thee, it was not for
this that I put thee into my Book of Witchcrafts, there was no Witchcraft in
it: but some late things have a little altered our Omens. I humbly beg of God,
that he would (...) us good for this Cursing this day; and that the malicious
Vaticinations of men that have his Truths and Ways, may rather help to procure
for us those happy Revolutions, which may cause our enemies to be found Liars
unto us. I do also ^ntreat the Reader, that he would not mis-interpret my
approaches (if I have made any) toward Levity in my treating of the Adversary
(...) at my Fathers right hand to resist him; T^^ almost impossible to look
upon the Generality of Quakers, without applying to them the Humor which a
Gentleman long since thought proper for the creatures contrived on purpose, to
be made (...) with. I shall only add, That (...) Keith has given sufficient
cause thy his own Sect should be ashamed of him, if Shame were compatible to
such a perfect People. But as he thinks my Father wants, The (...) opened in
him, so I suppose he will tell me, That I am in the dark; and therefore it is
time for me to bid him now, Goodnight. I am not willing to contend any further
with him, For ^ae seio pro certo, quando cum stercore (...)
Vinto, sen vintor, semper ago maculor.


FINIS.

