The General Courts Answer to Joseph Dudley Esqr. etc. This was Pas'd by the
whole Court, Nomine non consentiente.
Gentlemen,
WE have perused what you left with us, as a true Copy of His Majesty's
Commission, showed to us the seventeenth instant: Impowring you for the
Governing of His Majesty's Subjects Inhabiting this Colony, and other Places
therein mentioned. You then Applied your selves to us, not as a Governor and
Company, But (as you were pleased to term us) some of the principal Gentlemen,
and chief of the Inhabitants of the several Towns of the Massachusetts: among
other Discourse, saying, it concerned us to consider, what therein might be
thought hard or uneasy.

Upon the Perusal whereof we find (as we Conceive)

1. That there is no certain determinate Rule for your Administration of
Justice, and that which is, seems to be too Arbitrary.

2. That the Subjects are Abridged of their Liberty as English Men, both in the
matter of Legislation, and in the laying of Taxes; and indeed the whole
unquestioned Privilege of the Subject Transferred upon your selves, there
being not the least mention of an Assembly in the Commission.

And therefore we think it highly concerns You to consider, whether such a
Commission be safe either for you or us.

But if you are so satisfied therein, as that you hold your selves obliged
thereby, and do take upon you the Government of this People, Although we cannot
give our Assent thereto, yet hope shall demean our selves as true and loyal
Subjects to His Majesty; and humbly make our Addresses unto God, and in due
time to our Gracious Prince for our Relief.

May 20 th. 1686. Per Order, Edward Rawson Secr.
To Joseph Dudley Esquire. And the rest of the Gentlemen Named in His Majesty's
Commission.




