Our Dying Savior's LEGACY of PEACE To His Disciples in a troublesome World,
from John 14. 27. My Peace I give unto you, etc.

Also a DISCOURSE On the Two WITNESSES: Showing that it is the Duty of all
Christians to be Witnesses unto Christ, from Rev. 11. 3. I will give to my two
Witnesses, etc: Unto which is added, Some Help to Self-Examination.

By John Higginson Pastor of the Church in Salem.

2 Pet. 1. 14, 15 Knowing that I must shortly put off this Tabernacle, I will
endeavor, that after my decease you may have these things always in
remembrance.

Boston, Printed by Samuel Green for John Usher near the Townhouse, 1686.

To the Church and People of God at Salem; also at Guilford and Say Brook:
Grace unto you, and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
WHen the Lord was pleased in the Year 1629- to bring over my Reverend and
Godly Father into this Wilderness, as one of the first Ministers to begin the
work of God here at Salem; I was then but a Child of thirteen years of age: It
seemed good unto God, only wise, to take my Father unto himself in the year
following, Then was my good Mother left as a desolate Widow, with eight small
Children (my self being the eldest) in a mere Wilderness, with a very small
Estate; and in a condition very like unto that Ministers Widow and Children
mentioned, 2 King. 4. 2. etc. yet such was the abundant goodness and
faithfulness of the Lord our God, who keeps Covenant and Mercy with his
Servants and their Children after them, Deuteronomy. 7. 9. that he moved the hearts of
many pious Christians (who them lived wholly on the Stock the brought with
them) out of their great respect unto my good Father, to express such a charity
and liberality to his Widow and Children that my Fathers Family was as well and
comfortably provided for, as if he had been in our native land.

Amongst the rest, it pleased God, then and afterward, to stir up the hearts
of the Honored and godly Magistrates, Mr. Winthrop, Mr. Nowel, and Mr. Dummer
and the Reverend and Godly Minister Mr. Wilson, Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Hooker, to
take special care of me, that I might be continued in my Learning, and bred up
unto the Ministry: and for the end (as David in Relation to Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 9. 3. etc.) they did show the kindness of the Lord unto poor Me, for my
Fathers sake; and some of them were at a considerable charge for my future
Education in Learning (long before there was any College) in the best manner
that could be then attained in the day of small things here. (The like care was
taken by others, in relation to another of my Brethren, who was also bred up
unto the Ministry in the same way.)

When the forenamed Honored Gentlemen and Ministers saw meet, I was in the
Year 1636. sent and employed by them, in the work of the Ministry (in the time
of the Pequot War) at Say-Brook Fort, where I continued above four Years: and
after I had been sometime a Schoolmaster at Harford, where I enjoyed the
public Ministry, and private helpfulness of the Learned and Godly Mr. Hooker,
and Mr. Stone, which was an invaluable mercy to me; I was by the good hand of
God settled in the Ministry at Guilford, as an Assistant to that Reverend Pious
and aged Minister Mr: Whitfield, where I continued sixteen years after which,
in the year 166^. I was by a strong hand of Providence (beyond my own
intention) brought unto and settled in the Ministry at Salem, the place of my
Fathers Sepulcher, after so many Years to succeed him in that work, which he
had laid the Foundation of; and here by the mercy of God I have continued, now
almost twenty seven years.

These things I desire to leave upon Record as a thankful Remembrance of the
gracious dealings of God with me, in the midst of all the changes of times that
have passed over me, in this my Pilgrimage upon Earth: Also, as a due
acknowledgment unto the memory of those good men who were Benefactors to me in
my low Estate, wishing and praying for a Blessing upon their Posterity, and
that New England may never want such men (like those in the first times) of
public Spirits, caring for the things of Christ, and zealous of good works,
especially relating to the propagation of Learning and Religion to after times.

Having been moved by diverse Brethren at sundry times to leave something
behind me, that might be of use when I was gone. I confess I have been long
averse from it for several Reasons; yet at last considering that their motion
might be of God, and I am now full of days, being under the infirmities of
Age, and not like to live long, being 70. Years old, which in Scripture-account
is the ordinary period of man's life, Psalm. 90. 10. I am therefore willing to
leave with you my Brethren in the several places where I have lived, and
amongst whom I have served the Lord in the Ministry of the Gospel; I say to
leave these few Sermons, such as they are, and as they were preached in my
ordinary course this last Winter, as my last Legacy to your selves, and to my
Relations and Friends: And although in regard of my place and mean way of
expressing, much of my weakness may appear; yet in respect of the
Subject Matter, the Gospel Truths contained therein, I, hope that through the
blessing of God, they may not be altogether unuseful, nor unprofitable to those
that shall peruse the same,

I may now say as he did, with the alteration of one word Vixi, and quem
dederat cursum Jehova Perdegi. Or in the Apostles words, I have finished my
course; the time of my departure is at hand, henceforth I will wait all the
days of my appointed time, till my great change come. And now when I look back
upon my life past: though I cannot but with all thankfulness acknowledge the
wonders of Gods mercy to my unworthy self, in this Wilderness for so long a
time, and the undeserved kindnesses of many of his People; yet I must needs
confess I have been a very unprofitable Servant, and do humbly beg pardon from
God in the blood of Christ, for all my sins and failings that have accompanied
me in the course of my Ministry and Conversation: I also crave the forgiveness
of his People. My hearts desire and prayer to God for New England is, That the
Lord would continue in those Churches the Truth and Power, and Purity, and
Peace, and liberty of the Gospel of Salvation from one Generation to another,
till the 2d. coming of Christ; and that the Ministry of the Gospel therein may
be constantly blessed to the Conversion, Edification, and Salvation of Souls;
and that the blessing of Heaven may go along with this poor Script of mine,
that it may be a means of some good, when I shall be gone from hence and be
seen no more.

So I commend you to the Grace of God in Christ Jesus, and conclude with that
Apostolical Valediction, and Benediction, so often used by the Apostle Paul, in
his Epistles to the Churches, and at last expressed by the Apostle John in the
last words of Scripture, Rev. 22. last, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all Amen.

Salem August, 6. 1686. John Higginson.

Christian Reader,
IT is the Wisemans observation, Prove. 25. 25. as cold waters to a thirsty
Soul, so is Good news from a far Country: i. e. it is comforting and
refreshing. How welcome then must it needs be to hear good news from Heaven in
an evil world? and what better report can there be made to them that have been
harrased and almost tired out with manifold trouble s, then that of peace? and
of all peace there is none like Christ's. The following Treatise being the
happy tidings to Gods laboring people, of a peace which Christ having
purchased and procured for, bequeathed unto them as a Legacy upon his
departure, a peace which as the world cannot give, so neither can it deprive
them of; a peace that will settle their souls in quiet amidst all tumults, and
keep them unwearied when the Seas roar, and their Waves, rage: It directs them
that want it, where they may find it, and how to get it; and those that have
it, how to live upon and suck the sweet out of it, and a word spoken in good
season, how Good is it, Prove. 15. 23. It is now a shaking time, and there is
little peace to be expected in or from the world; but happy those Souls who are
got into this Rock.

It I s needles s to say any thing in commendation either of the Author, or of
his work; Read and Judge: Thy s Reverend Servant of Jesus Christ is an Old
Disciple, and one who has had the experience as of the many tossings and
disquietments of an Evil World, so of the joys of Spiritual Peace, and has
therefore given us a taste of that himself has had the proof of; and truths
that have been felt, carry warmth in the recommending of them to Men. That this
may not be labor in vain, and that the Author may yet live to be a further
blessing in his Generation, shall be the importunate prayer, of him who is a
Well-wisher to Isreal's Peace.

Samuel Willard.

John 14. 27. Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you, not as the
World gives, give I unto you; let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be
afraid.
THis Chapter contains a part of the last and dying words of our dear
Savior. Knowing that his hour was come, wherein he must leave the World, and
go unto the Father; He acquainted His Disciples with it (as in the foregoing
Chapter) and observing that their hearts were full of Sorrow at the thoughts of
his departure from them, and what should become of them when He was gone: He
applies himself by many heavenly Instructions and Consolations, to support,
encourage or comfort their hearts, as ver. 1. Let not your Hearts be troubled:
And therefore in the first place, He does direct them to the right way of
removing the troubles of their hearts, i. e. Faith in God, and in Himself as
Mediator; Ye believe in God, believe also in Me, ver. 1. He would have them
believe in himself as their alsufficient Lord and Savior: and in all time to
come to exercise their Faith in those gracious promises, which he was now about
to make to them; assuring them that He would make them good, and that they
should be a sufficient Antidote, and Soverain Cordial to preserve their hearts
from the malignities, venom and poison of all the troubles of the World.

As 1. He tells them, He was going to Heaven, to prepare a place for them, and
that he would come again and receive them to himself, to be with him where He
was, as ver. 2.

2. He assures them, (...) himself would be to them, the way, the truth, and
the life, ver. 6.

3. That (...) take order for that, That all their prayers should be answered,
ver. 13, 14.

4. That His Father and himself would manifest their love to them, ver. 11.

And 5. That He would send the Spirit as a Comforter to abide with them for
ever, ver. 16, 17. and ver. 26.

Now after all these, here in the Text is another gracious Promise,
comprehensive of all the former, and of all the good their Souls can desire,
Peace, I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you, etc. and it is a concluding
promise; for although after this He continues His Discourse; yet He proceeds in
another way: but here, after He had promised to give them His Peace; He repeats
and redoubles his first Exhortation; Let not your heart be troubled, nor let it
be afraid: and so concludes the first part of His Speech.

I shall make way for the Doctrine by opening the words, and showing you the
meaning of our Savior in this Text.

Peace I leave with you] By Peace in general, we are to understand Prosperity
and Happiness, consisting in the absence of all Evil and presence of all good.
It was the custom amongst the Jews, at their coming to, and parting from their
Friends, to wish them Peace, saving, Peace be to you, or Peace be with you,
Judges 19. 20. 1 Samuel 25. 6. and so the Apostles in their Epistles to the
Churches in their Salutations, they begin with Peace, and in their valedictions
they end with Peace And thus our Savior Christ being now to take his Farewell,
He alludes unto that custom, not only wishing but leaving Peace to His
Disciples: therefore he adds, My Peace I give unto you] wherein our Savior
speaks in the language of a dying person, making his last Will and Testament;
by which he does actually give and bequeath his Peace as his Legacy to his
Disciples; a rich Legacy indeed! containing their freedom from all real evil,
and the presence of all true good; and from thence a quietness and rest unto
their Spirits, in the midst of all the troubles of the World, Not as the World
gives] showing that the peace which he give to them was of another kind than
the Peace of the World; As Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, so his Peace
is not of this World, but quite of another kind. For

1. Worldly Peace is but an outward Peace, reaching only to the outward man;
But Christ's Peace is an inwaad and spiritual Peace, reaching to the Soul or
inward man, removing and preventing the troubles of the heart.

2. Worldly Peace is an effect of the Absence of worldly Evils, and presence of
worldly good things, but Christ being the Lord from Heaven, He gives unto His
an Heavenly Peace, consisting in their freedom from spiritual evils, and the
enjoyment of spiritual and Heavenly Blessings, as Ephesians. 1. 3. He has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings, in heavenly places and things in Christ Jesus.

3. Worldly Peace is a changeable thing: the good things of the World give it,
and the evil things of the World take it away again; but the Peace which Christ
gives is a durable and solid Peace, such as the world can neither give nor take
away, John 16. 22. Your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from
you: Also in Isai. 9. 7. Of His peace there shall be no end. Let not your heart
be troubled, nor let it be afraid: which words are an inference from the
former; as if he had said, when you enjoy my Peace in your hearts, as you need
not, so you should not, nay you will not be troubled at any present evils, nor
afraid of any future evils you shall meet with in the World; For as my Grace so
my Peace shall be sufficient for you until you come to Heaven.

The Words thus opened, the Doctrine is plainly this;

DOCTRINE,

The Peace of our Lord Jesus Christ is given by Him as His Legacy to his
Disciples in the midst of a troublesome World.

For so in the Text, He does not say, He will give them peace in another World,
but even in this World, wherein they were to meet with much tribulation: they
might be afflicted with troubles for the present, and afraid of more and worse
for the future; but in the midst of all our Savior Christ gives them an inward
spiritual and heavenly Peace to be enjoyed by all Penitent, Obedient Believers,
such as his Disciples were.

For Explication I shall only answer two Questions:

Quest. 1. What this Peace is which Christ gives unto his? What kind of Peace?

Answ. It is a Divine Peace, really distinct from all other sorts of Humane
Peace; and quite of another kind then Worldly Peace: It is the same which in
other Scriptures is called, The Peace of God, Col. 3. 15. Let the Peace of God
rule in your hearts, Phil. 4. 7. The Peace of God shall keep your minds and
hearts in Christ Jesus. Mark it, the Peace of God; it is a Divine Peace
consisting in such a tranquillity of the mind, and rest of the heart, as arises
from the sense of a Reconciled Estate, wherein we stand before God, under the
influence of his Favor toward us in Christ Jesus. This is that grace wherein
we stand, Romans 5. 2. which is the Fountain of this Heavenly Peace and Safety we
are speaking of. Hence it is that Grace and Peace from God the Father, and from
the Lord Jesus Christ, are so often joined together in those Apostolical
Salutations and Benedictions to the Churches of Christ: That is the true Divine
Peace, which flows from, and is accompanied with the Grace of God in Christ
Jesus; and this appears from a threefold Scripture Expression concerning this
Divine Peace.

1. It is Peace with God, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by Faith* we have peace
with God; the greatest trouble of the Soul is from Sin, and the wrath of God,
that God has a Controversy with a man for Sins unpardoned, and unrepented of;
while it is thus, the Soul has no peace; but when the Sinner is brought to
Repentance, and Faith in Christ Jesus: now being justified by Faith, we have
Peace with God. Because the Lord Jesus was made Sin for us, and suffered the
wrath of God as a Sacrifice for our Sins, and has brought in a Righteousness
to the Satisfaction of God, and has procured his Mercy, Grace and Favor in
behalf of all that believe in him. Hence Gods Controversy is ended with the
penitent believer, that is no wrath from God, no condemnation to such as are in
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 6. He has made us accepted in his Beloved Son, not in our
selves, but in him; and verse 7. In him we have Redemption through his Blood,
even the forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace, and so God
being Reconciled and at Peace with us, we come to have peace with God.

2. It is Peace from God. So in the beginning of all the Epistles you have read
of Grace and Peace from God the Father; this is that created peace whereby God
being Reconciled to us in Christ, he sets in the sense and feeling of peace
with him in the Conscience of a penitent believer, Isa. 57. 19. I create the
fruit of (...), peace, peace, to him that is near, and to him that is afar off.
This Peace from God is the blessed effect of peace with God, it is expressed in
Romans 5. 2. This is the Grace wherein we stand. For now we stand before the
Throne of Grace, pardoned and accepted, and in a state of grace and favor with
God, having the sense and comfort of Peace with God in our own Souls and
Consciences, and that we rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and rejoice in
tribulation, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost given to us: And this is the second expression of this Divine Peace,
namely, Peace from God.

3. It is also peace in God, as John 16. last. In me you shall have peace: In
me as opposed to the world in which you shall have tribulation. This is a
higher degree of peace, than mere peace of Conscience; it is peace and
quietness of the Heart, Will and Affections, resting in God through Christ, as
its last end and chief good, according to that in 1 Pet. 1. 21. Who by Christ
do believe in God, that your Faith and Hope may be in God: when the weary Soul
comes away from Sin, or Self and World, and comes unto Christ, and by Christ
comes unto God as the utmost end of all the souls motions, here it finds rest
and Peace. Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul, Psalm. 116. 7. God is the resting
place of the soul of man, when the soul is returned and reconciled to God by
Christ, now the Conscience is pacified, the heart quieted, the Will Satisfied,
the Affections well pleased, and the whole soul at rest in God; Thus you see
that the peace of God, is peace with God, peace from God, and peace in God;
this is that Divine peace which Christ gives as his Legacy to all that are His.

Quest. 2. But why is it called Christ's Peace? My Peace I give unto you: There
is an Emphasis in that pronoun My Peace, why is it called so?

Answ. There is a threefold reason of it.

Reas. 1. Because Christ is the purchaser and procurer of this Peace, therefore
it is said, He is our Peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. i. e. He is the great Peace maker,
between God and us; for this end he undertook that Office of a Mediator 1 Timothy
25. There being a controversy, a distance and enmity between God and man, and
no possibility on our part to pacify the Anger of God; Christ interposed
himself as our Mediator, and the Work of his Office is to Reconcile and make
peace between God and us; by his Priestly Office, He reconciles God to us, and
by his Prophetical and Kingly Offices, he reconciles us to God, and so he was,
and is for ever the Maker of our Peace.

1. By his Priestly Office he reconciles God to us, and because there are two
things in God relating to us, Justice and Mercy, Christ applied himself to
both. By the Sacrifice of himself, he gave satisfaction for the Justice of God
for our sins, Coals. 1. 20. He made our Peace by the Blood of his Cross; and by
his Intercession he prevails with the grace, mercy and favor of God toward
us; so that now the Name of God is proclaimed the Lord gracious and merciful to
all penitent believers, Exodus 34. 6.

2. By his Prophetical Office, he teaches us inwardly and truly the right way
of Reconciliation and peace with God, i. e. by Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 21. and then by his Kingly
Office, makes us his subjects, and subdues our Hearts unto Gods terms and
conditions of Peace, Psalm 110. 3 Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
power; by his Kingly Power, he makes us willing and able to repent, believe and
obey according to his Gospel, and so to enjoy this heavenly peace between God
and us.

Reas. 2. Because Christ is the Possessor and Keeper of this Peace. The Man
Christ Jesus, in the state of Humiliation, though for our sake he was a man of
Sorrows, acquainted with Griefs, yet in himself he was a man of peace, he
enjoyed this Divine Peace in a most eminent manner, for he always did the
things that were pleasing to God, and God was ever well pleased with him, Math.
3. last* but much more in the state of Exaltation now in Heaven, he was, and is
for ever made full of joy by the light of Gods Countenance, Acts 2. 28. and as
he is the Prince of Life, Acts 8. 15. so also the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6.
and the King of Peace, Heb. 7. 2. So that as a King of Peace does firstly enjoy
that peace which he gives to his Subjects, so in a transcendent way this peace
with God, peace from God, and peace in God, is firstly and fully possessed and
enjoyed by our Lord Jesus Christ in the highest Heavens.

Reas. 3. Because he is the disposer and giver of it, as in that Text, My Peace
I give unto you, if any ask how come penitent Believers to enjoy this inward
Spiritual and Heavenly Peace? the answer is, it is from the gift of Christ;
this divine peace is the Royal Gift of Jesus Christ as the King of Peace to all
his Subjects.

1. For first, he gives them a right and title to it in his Gospel of peace.

2. He gives them the possession and use of it. He gives it in to the hearts
and consciences of his people by his Spirit the Comforter, that we shall enjoy
it in our selves, Gal. 5. 22. Peace and Joy are fruits of the Spirit.

3. And thirdly, he gives it in that manner and measure, as it pleases him, as
to every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. so to every one of us is given peace according to the
measures of the gift of Christ.

Let us now gather up the sum of the Reasons.

If our Lord Jesus Christ was the purchaser, is the possessor and Disposer of
this divine peace then it may well be called His Peace. He procures it, he
keeps it, and he gives it, and therefore He might well say, My Peace I give
unto you.

This may suffice for the Explication of the Doctrine.

Now for the Application of it to ourselves in several Uses.

USE 1. Of Reproof and Terror to all those that seek their peace out of Christ.
All men desire peace, most men have some kind of peace; but if your peace be
not the peace of Jesus Christ which he gives to those that are His* it is then
a false peace, you are deceived, and will be destroyed by it, for it will end
in everlasting trouble: There are four sorts to be reproved.

1. Those that bless themselves with Peace in sinful ways, here as in Deuteronomy.
29. 19. He that blesses himself in his heart* saying, I shall have Peace,
though I walk in the imaginations of my heart, adding drunkenness to thirst;
the Lord will not spare that man, but the Anger of the Lord will smoke against
him until he be destroyed.

Let all men hear, and fear, and tremble at this Word of God: That if any man
live in a way of known sins, that thy Conscience tells thee, thou do walk in
the imaginations of thine own heart, satisfying the lusts of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, or the pride of Life, that thou art guilty of the sins of
Drunkenness, and idle Company-keeping; or the sins of Whoredom, or Thieving,
or Lying or unjust Dealing, or any such like sins; and yet do thou bless thy
self, and say, thou shall have peace in such evil ways? Know it for thy
terror, thy peace is a false peace: It is not Christ's peace; for Christ never
gives peace to them that are at war with God; nay, it is so far from being
Christ's Peace, that it is the Devils peace, who keeps wicked men in a false
deluded peace, till they be destroyed by it, Luke 11. 21. for it is certain,
the great God of Heaven and Earth has proclaimed War and destruction against
all impenitent Sinners, Isa: 57. 21. There is no peace says God to the wicked.
If thou art either secretly or openly wicked, walking in ways of known
wickedness, there is no peace from God to thee, nothing but the wrath of God
and destruction at thy latter end. Though such may seem to themselves and
others to have a calm time and freedom from trouble, yet the Word of God tells
us* verse 20th. The wicked are like a troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose
waters cast out mire and dirt; The Sea (...) its calm times till the wind
rises, and then it is troubled; so wicked persons may be at quiet till their
guilty Consciences are awakened, and the storm of Gods wrath fall upon them,
and then their peace is at an end, For Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and
Anguish, is denounced from God against al Evildoers, both here, and for-ever
in another World, Romans 2. 9.

2. It also reproves all such as content themselves with a worldly peace; not
minding nor caring to make their peace with God, and provide for the salvation
of their Souls: But if they prosper in the world, they satisfy themselves with
that as the rich man, Luke 12. who blessed himself in a peaceable enjoyment of
a confluence of earthly blessings without any thing of grace or peace from God,
verse 19. He said to himself, Soul take thine ease, eat and drink, and be
merry, thou have much goods laid up for many years; but mark what follows,
verse 20. but God said unto him, Thou fool, this night shall thy Soul be
required of thee, i. e. when thou die the Devil shall seize upon thy Soul,
and where shall those things be that thou have provided, they will all depart,
and thy worldly peace and prosperity will be ended, but thy troubles and misery
will continue for ever; world without end. So shall it be with every one that
contents himself with worldly peace, not minding to make his peace with God.
Such are men of this world, who have their portion in this life, but no portion
in God, no peace with God, no part in Christ here, nor Salvation by him
hereafter in another World.

3. Here is also a scourge of Rebuke unto all such as place their peace in
their carnal security; when the carnal rest of the Soul in its natural
condition was never broken, but a man continues blinded and hardened in the
state of sin and death wherein he was born: Such neither see, nor feel, nor
fear the danger their Souls are in. Hence they settle themselves in the
security of their Sinful Estate, not apprehending any need of a Change, nothing
troubles them, nor they will not trouble themselves, nor seek to be any other,
or better than they are. Now this is so far from being Christ's peace, that it
is apparently the Devils peace, as Luke 11. 21. Satan as a strong man armed,
keeps house in the Souls of such, and keeps them in a brutish and blockish
peace and quietness; but mark what is said in 1 These. 5. 3. when secure sinners
shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction shall come upon them, and
they shall not escape.

4. It reproves those that seek their peace in some conceited Righteousness of
their own, as those in Romans 10. 3. that went about to establish their own
Righteousness; that so they might have peace. When the guilty Conscience of a
Sinner is awakened to apprehend the danger he is in by reason of his sins, and
the wrath of God against him for them; and a man finds by experience that
worldly things will not pacify the conscience; now its the next and natural
way of a man's heart, to humble himself, confess his sins, resolve against them
and pray, and reform his life as well as he can; and then to reflect upon his
good duties, and make up a Righteousness of them wherewith to quiet his
Conscience, and settle his peace; and this without any interest in Christ or
his Righteousness, wherefore this self-righteousness being a false
Righteousness, the Peace that is grounded on it, must needs be a False Peace
which will end in Eternal Trouble.

USE II. For admonition to warn all men to beware of Seducers, and of such
opinions as mislead people from the right way of obtaining the peace of Christ,
and have a tendency to settle the Souls of men in a false peace; the Prophet
Jeremy lamented this that there were such in his time, Jer. 6. 14. They have
healed the hurt of my people slightly saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no
peace; and the Lord himself complained of this, Ezekiel. 13. 10. They have seduced
my people, saying, peace, when there was no peace, and they builded a wall, and
daubed it with untempered Mortar. As it was then, so in aftertimes, so in the
days of Christ and his Apostles, they gave warning against Seducers and false
Doctrines: So in this our Age, there have been many Seducers, and many that
have been seduced into a false peace which is dreadfully dangerous to the Souls
of men: I shall mention three or four instances, and give warning against them.
I intend not a set confutation, but only a brief warning, according to that,
Ezekiel. 33. 10. I have made thee a watchman, and thou shall warn them from me.

1. Some pretend unto immediate Revelations from Heaven as the ground of their
peace, they were greatly troubled in their minds, and they heard a voice, or it
was immediately revealed to them, that their sins were pardoned, etc. and this
they say was the witness of the Spirit, by which they have received much
comfort, and now their souls are settled in Peace.

But the Lord has said that his Word and Spirit shall always go together,
Isaiah 59 last. v. therefore such a Revelation is not of the Spirit of God, but
a delusion of the Devil, who transforms himself into an Angel of light; by
Revelations and Voices, misleading people from the Word of God, and Gospel of
peace. And therefore all men are to be warned that they keep close to the Word,
and try all Revelations by the Word, it is not the Witness of the Spirit, if it
be not in, by or according to the Word, therefore believe not every Spirit, but
try the Spirits, whether they be of God, 1 John 4. 1.

2. Others affirm, that though the Spirit witnesses according to the Word, yet
it witnesses pardon and peace without respect un to any condition or
qualification wrought in us.

This also is as false as the former; for the Word never witnesses Pardon and
Peace to any but such as are qualified with the graces of Faith and Repentance
wrought in them; therefore the Spirit of Christ by the Word witnesses so too;
as our Savior Christ in his dealing with that penitent woman, Luke 7. who
believed in Christ, and he loved her much, He said unto her, thy Sins are
forgiven, thy Faith has saved thee, go in peace, verse 47, 48, 50. Here our
Savior speaks pardon and peace to her Soul, with a respect unto those gracious
qualifications of Faith, Repentance, and love which he had wrought in her
heart; even so all Christians if they would not be deceived, must find the
witness of the Word and Spirit together, clearing up the peace and comfort unto
their Souls with a respect unto the same.

3. A third sort have affirmed that Christians need not trouble themselves
about the graces of Faith and Repentance to be in themselves, because (they
say) Christ has done all for us, Christ has Repented for us, and believed for
us, and therefore we need do no more but only to be persuaded and assured, that
our sins are pardoned, and that we are in a good estate of Peace and Safety.

Now this is as false and as dangerous as either of the former. For though its
true, Christ has performed all that legal obedience (both active and passive)
which the Law required of us, by which obedience of Christ we are made
righteous, Romans 5. 19. Christ's legal Obedience for us is the material and
meritorious cause of our justification: but for Believing and Repenting these
are Evangelical Duties required of us in the Gospel of peace, as conditions of
our interest in Christ, and his Righteousness: and therefore they must be
performed by us. It Is true Christ by his spirit works Faith and Repentance in
us; but then its as true, that we our selves must exercise these Graces.
Repentance is the gift of God, but the Act of man, and so is Faith, Ephesians. 2. 8.
Faith is the gift of God: and Acts 5. 31. Christ gives Repentance as well as
remission of sins; thus in respect of the Graces of Faith and Repentance
wrought in our hearts. But then the actual exercise of these Graces, that must
be performed by us, Act. 26. 31. Believe thou in the Lord Jesus and thou shall
be saved, Act. 3. 19. Repent ye of your sins that they may be blotted out. It
is man a sinner that must repent of his sins, and believe on Christ as his
Savior. To say that Christ repented and believed is a kind of Blasphemy; it is
as much as to say that Christ was a sinner in himself, and that he needed to go
out of himself to another to be saved from his sins; in a word, He that Repents
and Believes in Christ shall be pardoned and saved; this is the right way of
peace according to the Gospel of Peace. But for any man to depend upon Christ's
believing and repenting for him, and not to repent and believe himself, is
contrary to the Gospel: it is one of the Devils ways of false peace, whosoever
goes therein shall never know peace.

4. The last false Opinion which I shall instance in, is, that of the way of
Quakerism, in hearkening to the Light within as sufficient to guide men to Peace
and Salvation. This is the Sink or Sodom of all the other Errors of the times:
and sad experience has proved it, that very many of those that have held the
former false Opinions have by degrees fallen into this: having forsaken the
Word and Spirit of Truth, and being hurried by the Spirit of Error, and
following the Fools fire of the Light within, they have been led into this way
of darkness, wherein if a man walks he shall never know peace; for as our
Savior says, Mat. 6. 23. If the light in thee be darkness, how great is that,
darkness? it is true there is a light in every man: The light of Nature, of
Reason, of the relics of the Law, and of natural Conscience, Romans 2. 14, 15.
Jude ver. 10. Notwithstanding this Light, all men are naturally in a state of
spiritual darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 Pet. 2. 9. But if men be so deluded by Satan,
as to set the Light within them in the room of the Light of the Gospel, and to
set it up instead of Christ the true Light of life, then it becomes a great and
a dreadful darkness, and how great is that darkness! it leads men to the
darkness of Heathenism, and therefore whoever walks therein shall never see the
light of life, nor the way of true peace.

Thus I have briefly given warning against these erroneous ways which are
contrary to the Gospel of peace. It may be remembered that when these Churches
were infested with such like erroneous Opinions which were condemned by the
Word of God in the first Synod at Cambridge in the year 1637. It was then
agreed on by all the Orthodox as a great Principle of Truth in opposition to
the former Errors: That

1. The Being of Faith and Repentance in us, is necessary to our Being in a
state of Reconciliation and Peace with God. And that,

2. The seeing of Faith and Repentance in our selves is necessary, that we may
see and know that we are in such a state: that so our peace and comfort may be
of the right kind, according to the Gospel of peace. The Lord grant that this
divine Truth may continue and prevail for ever in New England, even unto all
Generations to come: And so I pass from this, and come to the main Use of this
Doctrine which is;

Use 4. Of Exhortation and Direction, to a four fold Duty.

1. To make our Peace with God by Jesus Christ.

2. To settle our Peace, and see that it be well grounded.

3. To receive this Peace as the Legacy of our Savior Christ.

4. And lastly, To improve it as a Soverain Cordial, and sufficient remedy,
against all the troublesome and formidable things of this World.

In the handling of which four particulars I shall endeavor (by the help of
Christ) to discharge something of that Duty, which is one main end of the
Ministry of the Gospel of peace, viz. by Scripture light to guide your feet into
the way of peace, as it is expressed in Luke 1. 77, 78, 79.

To begin with the first of these:

Exhortation:

If the Peace of Jesus Christ be that Legacy which Christ has given to his
Disciples: Then the first Exhortation is,

1. To call upon all men to make their peace with God by Jesus Christ: for
though its true that this Divine peace is actually given by our Savior unto
penitent Believers, and to them only; yet its as true, it is graciously offered
unto all men to whom the Gospel comes. Therefore when our Savior sent his
Disciples to Preach the Gospel, he said unto them, Luke 10. 5, 6. Whatsoever
house ye enter, say Peace be to this house, and if the Son of peace be there it
shall rest upon it. If not it shall turn to you again; they were to offer the
peace of Christ unto all men to whom they came; as the Lord spoke even to those
Rebellious sinners, Isa. 27. 4. If they will make peace with me, they shall
make peace with me, ver. 5. It was the Message which the Angels brought from
Heaven to men upon earth at the time of the Birth of Christ, Luke 2. 10, 11.
Behold we bring you glad tidings of great joy unto all people, that unto you is
born a Savior, Christ the Lord: upon this ground, a multitude of the Heavenly
Host did glorify God, saying, Glory be to God in the Highest, on earth peace,
and good will toward men, verse 14. Here then is glad tidings to all people,
declaring the good will of God unto men, and offering peace with God by Jesus
Christ, unto all people upon Earth, even to whomsoever the Gospel comes. And it
is the very reason why the Gospel is called the Gospel of Peace, Romans 10. 15.
and Ephesians. 6. 15. because it not only reveals Christ the great Peace maker
between God and us; and makes known the conditions upon which any sinful man
may enjoy this peace; but it makes a real offer of Christ and his Peace unto
all and every man that is within the sound of the Gospel; that, whosoever will
Repent, Believe and obey the Gospel, they shall have peace with God, peace from
God, and peace in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Hearken to this all you that are yet in your natural, and therefore in a
damnable condition, that live in your sins, and under the wrath of God, and in
a state of enmity against God, and therefore the great God is an enemy to you,
Christ is none of yours. It is certain, that in this condition you are far from
peace, and if you live and dye so, you will be damned eternally, and perish
everlastingly from the presence of the Lord. Yet from the Gospel of Peace, here
is an offer of peace from God through Christ unto you that are such, and in so
sad a condition: that if now in the day of Grace you will return unto God, and
seek reconciliation with him by Christ, and accept of his conditions of peace
propounded in the Gospel; God will then be reconciled to you, and Jesus Christ
will give you his Peace, and you shall be amongst the number of the reconciled,
pardoned and saved ones of our Lord Jesus Christ. Mark and consider well the
sure Foundation of this offer of peace which is now made unto you, 2 Cor. 5.
18, 19, 20, 21. That God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, and
has committed unto us the Word of Reconciliation, etc.

What remains then but that All you, whose Consciences tell you, that you are
as yet Strangers from God, and from peace with him, you are to be exhorted in
the Name of the Lord, and in the words of the Holy Ghost, Job 22. 21. Acquaint
now thy self was God, and be at peace with him. Do not bless your self with
Peace in any sinful way; nor content your self with worldly Peace, nor suffer
your self to he deluded with any false peace; for this will be your
destruction: but apply your selves with all speed and diligence making it the
great business of your life to make your peace with God by Jesus Christ,
according to the conditions of the Gospel of Peace.

Quest. If you ask what are the conditions of Peace propounded in the Gospel?

Answ. They are plainly declared by our Savior Christ himself, when he called
upon all men to Repent and believe, Mark 1. 15. Repentance toward God and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And in a multitude of other Scriptures.

Quest. If you ask again, what is required of us with respect unto these
Conditions* of Peace?

Answ: Your willing acceptance of these conditions; with a suitable practice:
thus in Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Isa.
1. 19. If ye be willing and obedient, Rev. 22. 17. whosoever will, let him come
and take of the water of life freely, Phil. 2. 13. It is God that works in
you, to will and to do of his good pleasure.

For this end, let me propound unto you, two or three motives to persuade you
to be really willing to be Reconciled unto God by Christ upon these terms, and
then a few means to direct you in the practice of Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, that in this way of the Gospel you may
obtain Peace with God. And in the first place,

1. Consider I beseech you whoever you be, that God is really willing to be
reconciled unto you. I might here bring in the Commands, the Promises, the
threatenings and the persuasions of the Gospel, as convincing Arguments of the
Lords willingness on his part. I shall only mention two things here.

1. That Christ Jesus came from God on purpose to declare his willingness by
preaching peace to the children of men, as Acts 10. 36. The Word which God sent
to the children of Israel, preaching Peace by Jesus Christ: as Ephesians. 2. 17. He
came and Preached Peace to you that were far off, and to them that were nigh:
And how did he Preach it? You may see it in Mark 1. 14, 15. He began and went
on to Preach the Gospel saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Repent ye and
believe the Gospel, and John 6. 38, 39, 40. He tells the People there, I am
come down from Heaven to do the good will of my Father, and this is my Fathers
Will, that whosoever sees and believes on the Son of God shall not perish but
have everlasting life. Mark the word, Whosoever, i. e. what ever thy sins have
been, whatever thy case is, though thou should be in as bad and sad a
condition as any in the World ever was; yet it is the will of God, and thy duty
to repent and believe, and then it is his will also, that in this way of
Believing, thou shall not perish but have everlasting Life.

Our Savior Christ came into the World not only to make our Peace with God as
our High Priest; but also as the great Prophet of his Church to Preach and make
known this Peace from God unto all sorts of sinners, that He is willing to be
reconciled upon the terms of the Gospel, and should not we be willing then?

2 When Christ had finished his work upon Earth, He gave Commission to his
Ministers to Preach the Gospel of Peace unto the World in his room, and in his
Name, and so to carry on the treaty of Peace between God and sinners: Thus when
He was ascending to Heaven, he said unto His Apostles, Go ye into all the
World, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature; i e. to every man, to every
reasonable and sinful creature, and in Luke 24. 47. He commanded that
Repentance and Remission of Sins should be Preached in his Name. Upon this
ground the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5. 19. He has committed the Ministry of
Reconciliation unto us; therefore in verse 20. he applies himself to it,
saying, Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye Reconciled to God. As when a great
King that could easily destroy all Rebels and Traitors, yet being graciously
inclined unto mercy, He sends Messengers to offer terms of Peace, and to
persuade them of his willingness to pardon them, He gives them Commission to
proceed so far as to tell them, that he does stoop so low as to beseech them to
be reconciled unto him. So it is in this case, we are all by nature Traitors
and Rebels against the great God and King over all; He has us at an infinite
advantage, and could easily glorify his Justice in our Eternal Destruction;
but intending to magnify his Mercy toward all that will submit and return to
him by Christ; He has sent Jesus Christ as his great Ambassador of Peace, and
Christ has employed under him, all the Ministers of the Gospel to carry on
this treaty of Peace, and to give us the utmost assurance of the Lords real
willingness to receive and pardon Sinners that come unto him by Christ: nay
that he condescends so far as if he did beseech vile Sinners that they would be
Reconciled to Him. How should this Condescendency of the Great God melt and
break our hearts, and not only make us willing but cause us to fall down in the
dust adoring the Riches of his Mercy, and beseeching him to be Reconciled unto
us: being restless till we have made our peace with God. In the next place,

2. Consider the great good you shall get by making your peace with God. For if
you be willing and obedient, you shall eat the good of the land, Isai. 1. 19.
the Land of Canaan being then a Type of Heaven, and of all the good thereof, as
Heb. 11. 16. and therefore as in Job 22. 21. Acquaint now thy self with God,
and be at peace, for thereby Good shall come unto you; if you say, what Good: O
Brethren, I want words to express it, and thoughts to conceive it: O how great
is that goodness! For all the good of the Promises of the Gospel shall be
yours: You shall have a general pardon of all your Sins past, you shall have
the Acceptance of your persons, and Audience of your prayers; and grace to
help in the time of need: You shall have the Holy Ghost the Comforter to abide
with you for ever; Grace and Peace shall be always coming to you from God the
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ; and the goodness and mercy of God shall
follow you all the days of your life; and when you die, you shall dye in peace;
and when you go into another world, you shall enter into peace, everlasting
peace, rest and blessedness in the Heavens shall be your portion for ever. O
how great is this goodness! Methinks it is enough to move the most Adamantine
Heart, and make us all to be not only willing, but earnestly desirous of it, to
be at Peace with God, that thereby all this good may come unto us.

3. In the last place consider, That if you will not be persuaded to be
Reconciled to God, if you will not accept of Gods Terms of Peace, this will be
your everlasting ruin, both in the loss of all the forementioned good, and
suffering all the contrary evils and miseries that will come upon you. For if
you refuse and Rebel, you shall be destroyed for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it Isa. 1. 20. Now that there is such a thing in the Spirits of many
that live under the treaties of Peace between God and Men, that they will not
submit to Gods terms of Peace, but will stand out, and go on in the Rebellion
of their hearts and lives, this is evident in many Scriptures, as in Jer. 18.
11. When the Lord called upon them, saying, Return ye now every one from his
evil way; the refusing answer of many desperate Sinners is expressed in v. 12.
they said, there is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and we
will every one do the Imagination of his own evil heart; and in Jer. 44. 16.
they speak it out as it were in plain English to the Prophets face, As for the
Word of the Lord which thou have spoken unto us we will not hearken unto thee,
but we will certainly do whatsoever comes out of our own mouths; and the Son
that was commanded to go and work in the Vineyard, said plainly, I will not go,
Mat. 21. 20. and those that were called to the Wedding, returned their answer,
That they would not come, Mat. 22. 3. and our Savior Christ charged this upon
the generallity of the Jews, John 5 40. You will not come to me that you might
have life. Hear and consider this with fear and trembling, least thou should
be amongst the number of those that say, they will walk on in their sins still,
and will not accept of Gods terms of Peace. For these multiplied will not
break off the treaty of peace between God and such Resolved Rebels, the Lord
commonly (after some time of waiting) leaves such to themselves, and delivers
them up to the dominion of Sin and Satan, and then they run riot in ways of
Sin to their own ruin, as in Romans 1. 26 for this cause God gave them up unto
vile affections; and in Psalm. 81. 11. the Lord there complains, They would not
hearken to his voice, and they would none of him: but mark what follows in the
next verse, v. 12. So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, to walk in
their own Counsels, to have their Sins, and to have hell and damnaton with them
at their latter end. And this was the reason why our blessed Savior in the
days of his flesh mourned and wept over such in the foresight of the
unavoidable destruction coming upon them, Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem how often
would I, but you would not: therefore desolation is coming upon you, and Luke
19. 42. If thou had known even thou, at least in this thy day the things that
belong to thy peace! O how happy had thou been; but now they are hid from
thine eyes! and becasue thou knew not the time of thy visitation, therefore
thy destruction is coming fast upon thee. It is indeed from the abundant
goodness of God, that He gives unto Sinners a day wherein they may know the
things that belong to their peace, for the good of their Souls; and then they
have a golden opportunity of making their peace with God. But if men know not,
if they care not, and if they will not improve this time for that end; the
issue is, the day of peace is done, the treaty of peace is ended, and the
things of their peace are gone, and they are undone forever, if they had a
thousand Souls.

Quest. If any say, God forbid that we should be unwilling to accept of Gods
terms of peace, we hope we are willing; but how may we be directed in the
right way of making our Peace with God?

Answ. I answer in these following seven Directions.

If indeed you would be Reconciled to God, and make your Peace with him: Then
in the first place,

Direct. 1. You must confess your Sins and Wrongs against God, as the cause of
that controversy which God has against you; the Lord looks for this before He
will make peace with us, that we give glory to Him by an humble acknowledgment
of our sins, justifying God, and taking the blame and shame of all our sins to
our selves; this the Lord himself directs us too, in Jer. 3. 12, 13. Go and
proclaim these words, says the Lord, Return thou (...) Israel, and I will not
cause my Anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful says the Lord, and I will
not keep anger for ever; only acknowledge thine iniquities that thou have
transgressed against the Lord thy God, and that ye have not obeyed my voice.
Art thou afraid of the Anger of God, and that He will not be merciful to thee?
mark what the Lord says, only acknowledge thy transgressions, and I will be
merciful to thee; thou should therefore take the Lord at his word, and apply
thy self to a free and full confession of all thy sins against the Lord? What
ever thy Conscience tells thee of, and troubles the for, thou should
acknowledge them with shame and sorrow, and self-loathing, and self judging,
for if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged of the Lord, 1 Cor 11. 31.
therefore what ever sins thou art afraid thou shall he damned for, be sure you
accuse and condemn your self for them before the Lord. And do this especially
with respect unto your special sins that have been most natural and habitual,
where the power of Original Sin has vented it self most, knowing the plague of
thy own heart, and finding thy sins to be thy greatest evils, confessing as
David did, Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee, against thee, (a God so great, and yet
withal so good) have I sinned, (and then tell him in what: and how thou have
sinned) have done these evils in thy sight; (and then say also as he did) that
thou may be justified when thou judge, etc. So we should justify God, and
condemn our selves, confessing we deserve to be eternally condemned for the
least sin.

Direct. 2. Unto your Confessions, you must add supplications for the mercy of
God in Christ, to forgive your Sins, and subdue your iniquities and heal your
backslidings, that you may not return to folly any more. This was the counsel
of the holy Ghost, Job. 8. 5. Thou should seek unto God betimes, and make
thy Supplication to the Almighty; and it was Jobs resolution, Job. 9. 15. I
will make my Supplication to my Judge; and thus the penitent Publican in the
sense of the great evil and danger of his Sins, he cried unto God for mercy,
Luke 18. 13. and saying, O God be merciful to me a Sinner, and so it was with
David, in Psalm. 51. he begins in the first verse, saving. O God be merciful to
me according to the multitude of thy Mercies, and then in the following verses,
he begs for pardoning mercy, and healing mercy, and cleansing mercy, and
comforting mercy, and saving mercy. Thus also Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. He
humbled himself greatly, and made Supplication to the God of his Father, and he
was entreated of him, and Paul tells us of himself, 1 Timothy 1. 13. that though he
had been a great Sinner, yet he obtained mercy, but first he did seek mercy
before he did obtain it, as Acts 9. 11. Behold be prays; when the Spirit of
Grace and Prayer was poured upon him, it both filled his heart with praying
matter, and opened his heart, and gave it vent, and then he pours out his Soul
in importunate prayers for mercy, and was restless until he did obtain it. And
so it must be with you and me, and with every one that desires to find mercy
with God, we must seek it in humble Prayer and in earnest Supplication for his
mercy in Christ, and that as earnestly as a condemned man would beg for a
pardon, and a dying man for his life, pleading with God that for Christ's sake,
and for his Name sake, he would have mercy upon us, as Psalm. 25. 11.

Direct. 3. You must humble yourself in the sight of the Lord, and submit
yourself to God, James 4. 7, 10. God will have his mercy to be honored by
those that seek it before they do obtain it. As it is with Traitors and Rebels,
when they seek mercy from an Earthly King, they acknowledge his Justice if he
should destroy them, and submit themselves unto his free mercy. So in this case
we must give unto God the glory of his Sovereignty, which is, his absolute
power, to show or not to show mercy according to his good pleasure, Romans 9. 15.
For as he said unto Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I
will have Compassion on whom I will have Compassion.

His mercy is altogether free, He may give it ordering it as He please, He has
power to dispose of us, and of his own mercy also, as the Lord said, Mat. 20.
15. M ay I not do what I will with mine own. Now this is that which every
humbled sinner must and will submit unto, as in Isa. 64 8. thou O Lord art the
Potter, we are the Clay, we are the work of thy hands, thou may do with us,
and dispose of us as it pleases thee. And therefore the penitent Sinner that
seeks mercy, must lie down at the feet of the good pleasure of God; giving to
God the glory of his Justice if he should proceed against him according to Law,
as Levit. 26. 41. (mark it) the humbled Sinner must accept of the punishment of
his iniquity, even whatsoever the Lord sees cause to inflict, saying as the
lamenting Church did, Lam. 3. 1, 18. The Lord is righteous, but we have
rebelled against him. Nay, that we have deserved Hell it self, and if the Lord
should have inflicted the damnation of Hell for the least Sin, he would be just
in so doing, and we justly miserable; but then also we must give him the glory
of his mercy, that though there is nothing but Sin and misery with us, yet
there is forgiveness with him, as in Psalm. 130. 3. nay, that unto the Lord our
God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him, Dan.
9. 9. and that his mercy is altogether free without respect to any good in us
to deserve it, or any evil in us to hinder it; and therefore whatever thy case
be, lie down at the foot of the Lords good pleasure, eying of his mercy,
confessing thy self unworthy of it, yet crying and pleading for it, resolving
(by the grace of Christ) never to give over, but if thou do perish, thou will
perish in this way of seeking of, and waiting for the Mercy of God in Christ.

Direct. 4. Above all the rest, you must accept of Jesus Christ as the great
and only Peace maker between God and you, For though you must confess and
forsake your Sins, and submit to God, and seek his mercy; yet its not in the
power of these, its only in the infinite value and virtue of the blood of
Christ to reconcile us to God. For He made our Peace by the blood of his Cross,
Col. 1. 20. and we are reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10.
and therefore you must get Faith, and use Faith in Jesus Christ, making use of
him as your only Mediator and Advocate to plead your cause with God. We must
close with him in his Priestly Office, that by the Sacriffce of himself, has
given Satisfaction to the Justice of God for our Sins, and by his Intercession
has procured the Mercy and Favor of God toward us; again we must close with
him in his Prophetical and Kingly Offices, to teach our minds, and to incline
our hearts to the (...) of the Gospel of Peace; and in special, we should
accept of Christ as the Prince of Peace, Isai. 9. 6. was the King of Peace,
Heb. 7. 2. and if we do indeed cordially receive Christ as the Sovereign Lord
of our Souls and Consciences, then we must show our selves his Loyal Subjects,
by accepting of, and submitting to the Laws of his Kingdom, both his
Fundamental Laws of Faith and Repentance; and his Statute Laws in the Ten
Commandments as the Rules of the our hearts and lives, so that every thought in
us be brought into the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. and it is observable
in Isai. 9. 6, 7. where Christ is called the Prince of Peace, in the same place
his Government and his Peace, are joined together: We cannot have his peace
except we be sincerely subject to his Government; but then, in him and from
him, as the King of Peace, we shall have the forgiveness of Sins, the Adoption
of Sons, the renewing of Gods Image, the Audience of our Prayers, and in a
word, all saving good from him contrary to damning Evils in our selves, and
therefore then we shall have grace and peace continually coming to us from God
the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, as in the beginning of all the
Epistles.

Direct. 5. You must also remember to forsake, turn from, and depart away from
all the sins you have confessed, and do beg for the pardon of: For it is an
everlasting truth, not he that confesses only, but He that confesses and
forsakes his sins shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. and whoever he be that names
the name of Christ, so as to make use of him, and rely upon him for pardon and
peace, let him depart away from iniquity or he shall have no benefit by Christ,
2 Timothy 2. 11. thus also Ezekiel. 18. 30. Repent and turn ye from all your
transgressions, and so they shall not be your ruin. This aversion and turning
from sin must be seated and rooted in your Will, that you may say of every sin
you see, it is the evil that I would not, as Paul did, Romans 7. 19. Again, this
turning of your heart must be from sin as sin, as it is offensive or
displeasing to God, as Joseph said, Genesis 39. 9. How can I do this great evil
and sin against God! and as David said, Psalm 51. 4. Against thee, against thee
O Lord, have I done this evil in thy sight. And therefore it must be from all
sin, one as well as another, so as not to live in the practice of any known
sin, nor to allow a man's self in the least sinful infirmity whatsoever; as Rom
7. 15. What evil I find, I allow not, but hate the same, and then indeed we do
turn from out sins aright, when we hate them and loath our selves for them.

Direct. 6. You must also remember, to be always returning to God from whom
you have departed by sin, as Jer. 4. 1. If you will return, return unto Me,
says the Lord. We must return unto God in opposition to all the creatures, and
as the only resting place of our Souls; it is true the next immediate object we
must return unto is Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 25. You were as sheep going astray,
but are now returned unto him the Shepherd and Overseer of your Souls: but then
by Christ we return unto God that made us for himself as the ultimate object
and end that our Souls aspire after and rest in: That our Faith and Hope may be
in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. That the infinite, eternal God may be the infinite
eternal good of our immortal Souls: and that we enjoy the favor of God in
Christ, may love him above all, fear him more than all, serve him in sincerity
and truth all our days. And therefore this turning to God must be a returning
to him with the whole heart, Jer. 3. 10. Joel 2. 12. and to God himself as our
chief good, to the will of God as the Rule, and to the glory of God as the end
of our lives, that we may live unto God here, and live with God for ever in
another world.

Direct. 7. Last of all, You must get into, and walk in the ways of Peace: It
is said in Isai. 59. 8. That all the ways of sin are crooked ways, whoever
walk therein shall never know Peace; and though wicked men know it not, yet
there is a way of Peace, and it is the way of true Godliness, and sincere
keeping the Commandments of God; the ways thereof are ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths are peace, Prove 3. 17. So that when by the Grace of God a
Christian is resolved, and does accordingly practice to walk in the way of
sincere Obedience according to the Gospel of Peace* in this way you shall
assuredly find and enjoy this divine Peace which Christ gives unto His* For
great Peace have they that love the Law of God, and nothing shall offend them,
Psalm. 119. 165. and Gal. 6. 16. Peace be upon all them that walk according to
this Rule, and upon all the Israel of God.

Thus you have heard the seven directions, that guide us into the right way of
making our Peace with God by Christ, according to the Gospel of Peace, viz. by
a sincere exercise of Faith and Repentance; for though these are distinct in
respect of their Doctrine yet in practice they are ever together, working in
the hearts of sinners that seek to be reconciled to Christ, after the manner
now showed in these Directions: So I have done with the first Exhortation, and
now proceed unto the second;

Exhortation 2.

The next Duty you are to be Exhorted to, is, to settle your Peace, and see
that it be wellgrounded.

This Exhortation is directed in a special manner to all such as have been
under the Word and Spirit of God, and have applied themselves in the practice
of the former Directions to make their peace with God, and yet find not this
Divine Peace, which out Savior Christ has left as his Legacy unto those that
are His: but instead thereof they are haunted with doubts and fears, about
their Spiritual State, and sometimes filled with Soul troubles; and why?
Because (they say) though they cannot deny but they have found many workings in
their hearts like unto Faith and Repentance, yet they doubt whether they have
these Graces in sincerity and truth, they are afraid they have but common
Grace, and not the special Grace of Gods Elect; and they fear that (after all
they have done) they are but Hipocrites, and not of the number of true penitent
Believers, to whom only our Savior has promised to give his Peace; and this
is very common in Experience, that the Lord is pleased to make use of these
doubts and fears about Hypocrisy, as a means to fright and fire many of his
People out of that Security, Sensuality and Formality, which are so dangerous
unto their Souls, and to make them restless until they get some evidence of the
Truth and sincerity of their Faith and Repentance; and then they shall not fail
to have the sense and comfort of this Divine peace then (and not before) they
shall have Experience of that of the Apostle, Phil. 4. 7. The peace of God
shall keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

Therefore all you that are yet in the Dark about your Spiritual Condition, and
unsettled in your Peace, you are to be Exhorted in the Name of the Lord, and in
the Words of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 3. 14. Give diligence that you may be found of
him in Peace; i e. In a State of Reconciliation and Peace with God, having a
right Title to the Promise of our Savior Christ: In the Text, wherein he has
promised to give His Peace to all penitent Believers, such as His Disciples
were. But that you may enjoy this Peace, and find the sweetness of it in your
own Soul, you must give all diligence by a continual Exercise of a Penitential
Faith, both to remove the causes of your Soul trouble, and to get from Jesus
Christ the next and immediate Causes of His divine Peace: then your fears and
doubts will be overcome, and the peace of God will rule in your hearts (as the
Apostle says, Col. 3. 10.) And then shall you find our Saviors Legacy made
good to your Soul; that, although you should live in a time when all other
peace is taken from the Earth, and you may meet with many tribulations in the
World, yet you shall have peace with God; you shall enjoy this inward,
spiritual and heavenly peace of Jesus Christ in your own Soul and Conscience,
with assurance of it that you shall die in peace, and so enter into everlasting
peace and blessedness in another World.

For some help unto this end, I shall endeavor to show you,

1. What are the Causes of Soul-trouble, and how to remove them.

2. What are the Causes of Soul-peace, and how to procure them.

For the first of these, there are three inward Causes of Soul-trouble.

1. The guilt of sin in the Conscience.

2. The power of corruption in the heart.

3. Guile of Spirit.

Let all Christians that want an inward settled Peace* search their own hearts,
and they shall assuredly find these three particulars to be the causes of their
trouble, and hindrances of their peace.

1. The first cause of Soul-trouble, is, the guilt of sin lying upon the
Conscience, as Romans 1. last. Knowing the Judgment of God that those that commit
such sins are worthy of death. Hence, when a man remembers his former sins
wherein there has been a special vent of Original Sin, that has left a sad
mark and memorandum in the Conscience, and finding the daily stirrings of
sinful distempers, and being enlightened to see that the least sinful thought
deserves eternal death. Now if a man have not thoroughly repented, and got the
pardon of all his sins; Conscience will be unquiet and clamorous, and that must
needs cause trouble in the soul. As we see in David's case, Psalm. 25. 7. Lord
remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions. A sign that he did
remember them, and was troubled about them; and in Psalm. 51. he bewails his
Blood guiltiness, and other sins: and Job complains, that God did write bitter
things against him, and made him to possess the sins of his Youth, Job. 13. 26.

Quest. Now the Question is, How may the guilt of Sin be removed from the
Conscience?

Ans. I answer, Nothing can pacify an awakened Conscience, but the Application
of the infinite value and virtue of the blood of Christ; whereby the Justice of
God is satisfied, and his Anger pacified toward us. For the chastisement of
our Peace by the blood of his Cross, Col. 1. 20. by which blood of Christ as
the only Sacrifice for our sins, the wrath of God is removed from him, and our
sins removed from us, in Gods account.

But it is the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus upon our Souls, that brings in
a sensible peace in the Conscience of a sinner: This phrase [ The sprinkling of
the blood of Christ] which you may find in, 1 Pet. 1. 2. and Heb. 12. 24. it
relates to those passages in the Old Testament, which were typical of that
blood of Christ.

As 1. The Blood of the Passover Lamb, which by Gods appointment was sprinkled
on the doors of the houses of the Israelites, that the wrath of God might pass
over them, when the Egyptians were destroyed, Exodus 12. 13, 22, 23.

And 2. The Blood of the Sacrifice sprinkled on the Book of the Covenant, and
upon the People, Exodus 24. 8. and Heb. 9, 19, 20.

And 3. The Blood of the Sacrifice sprinkled on the Mercy Seat, making an
Atonement for the sins of the Children of Israel, Levit. 16. 15, 16. By all
which is meant the the Application of the value and virtue of Christ's blood
unto us, for the remission of our sins: For without shedding of blood is no
remission, Heb. 9. 23. Therefore Christ as the Antitipe, and Truth, and
Substance of all the former shadows; He appeared once to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself, and by his own blood he entered in once into the holy
place, having obtained eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. Now the
Application of all this to us is done by Faith in the blood of Christ, as the
Apostle shows, Rom 3. 25. God has set forth Christ as a propitiation, that
through Faith in his Blood, we may receive the Remission of our Sins; for
whosoever believes on him shall receive the forgiveness of sins, Acts 10. 43.
And when we receive the forgiveness of our sins then as the Apostle tells us,
Heb. 10. 22. Our hearts are sprinkled from an evil Conscience, i. e. from a
Conscience witnessing the guilt of our sins to ly upon our Souls, which though
they did before, yet now they do not, for now our very Consciences are purified
from our dead works, Heb 9. 14. And so our Consciences come to be pacified,
that the same blood of Christ that has taken away the Wrath of God from him,
has also taken away our sins from us; and then the Conscience is quieted, and
peace follows in the Conscience.

Quest. But how should we exercise Faith in the blood of Christ, that the guilt
of sin may be removed from the Conscience.

Answ. I answer in three Directions.

1. You must lie down before the Throne of God, confessing your self to be a
guilty Sinner, owning the fault and guilt of all your sins, as David, in Psalm.
51. 3. I acknowledge my Transgressions, and my Sins are ever before me: so must
you acknowledge your sins in particular, what they have been with the
aggravations of them, as it follows in verse 4. against thee have I sinned, and
done this evil in thy sight, that thou may be justified, etc when we come to
beg the mercy of God in Christ for the pardon of our sins, we must give him the
glory of his Justice, confessing that we are guilty Sinners, that our
destruction is of our selves, that we are unworthy of any mercy, and have
deserved death and damnation for our sins, and if the Lord should inflict it,
he would be Righteous in so doing.

2. You must confess your sins (not only in a penitent way, but) in a believing
way; so as to bring all your sins to Christ Crucified, laying them upon him,
and leaving them with him, that the guilt of them may be taken away by him. For
the Lord laid on him the iniquities of us all, Isa. 53. 6. and He did bear our
Sins on his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and 2 Cor. 5. last. He was made
Sin for us, i. e. a Sacrifice for Sin; the guilt of our sins was so far imputed
to him, as that he offered up himself a Sacrifice to God for our sins, Ephesians. 5.
2. therefore when we desire the benefit of his death, that we may be Reconciled
unto God thereby, and receive the Remission of our sins there from, we must lay
and leave our sins upon Christ as Crucified for us, relying wholly upon the
Meritorious value and virtue of his blood to take away the guilt of our Sins
from us. This we are directed unto by the practice of Aaron, in Levit. 16. 21.
He laid his hand upon the head of the Sacrifice, confessing over it the Sins,
iniquities, and Transgressions of the children of Israel, putting them upon the
head of the Sacrifice, etc. So must we when we come to seek mercy from God in
the forgiveness of our Sins, we must confess our selves to be the guilty
sinners, who should our selves suffer the punishment due to our sins, and so to
be made a sacrifice to the fire of Gods wrath for ever: but because God has
ordained and accepted Jesus Christ to be the Lamb of God in our stead, and for
our good; therefore we confess our sins, putting them upon him and leaving them
with him, depending upon him, and trusting wholly unto him to take away our
sins.

3. You must pray much, and beg earnestly this mercy from God, that for Christ's
sake he would pardon your sins; for the Lord forgives our sins only for Christ's
sake, Ephesians. 4. last. and for his sake also it is that our persons and prayers
are accepted of the Lord, Ephesians. 1. 16. Gods Justice being satisfied for our sins
by the blood of Christ, He does graciously grant unto us the forgiveness of our
sins, whereby we are absolved from the guilt and punishment of them.

But we must obtain the sense and comfort of this great mercy, by humble and
earnest prayer, Isa. 26. 16. Lord in trouble they have visited thee, they have
poured out a prayer when thy Chastisement is upon them; every tittle of the
102. Psalm is a prayer of the afflicted, when He is overwhelmed and pours out
his Complaint before the Lord. If thus in the case of outward afflictions, much
more in the case of soul affliction and soul trouble about the guilt of sin.
You must pour out your hearts before the Lord, in humble confessions, and
importunate supplications, and earnest pleadings with God, as David, Psalm. 25.
11. For thy name sake, pardon my sins, for they are great, and as Dan. 9. 17,
18, 19. For thy name sake, for thy mercy sake, and for the Lords sake forgive
our sins, and cause thy face to shine upon us, and so in Psa. 51. 8. make me to
hear the voice of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice, and in Psalm. 80. four times one after another that request is made,
Cause thy face to shine upon us, and turn us unto thee and then we shall be
saved; when these and the like Scripture Petitions for the manifestation of
(...) mercy are got into the heart, and dwell in the heart, and frequently
arise out of the heart, and are poured out before the Lord in fervent prayer:
the God hearing prayers has engaged himself by many promises to Answer such
Prayers, and to grant such requests. So that we may conclude with confidence,
the Lord will speak pardon and peace to his repenting, believing and praying
people, as it is in Psalm. 65. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, for
he will speak peace to his people, and to his Saints, but let them not return
to folly.

2. The second Cause of Soul-trouble, is the Power of Corruption; this is every
whit as troublesome as the former; for where Sin Reigns, it Reigns unto
death, Romans 5. 21. the power of any Corruption predominate in the Soul will
bring a man to death and damnation at the last; and this power of Corruption in
the soul is called the power of darkness, Colos. 1. 13. there is a sovereign
captiving power of Corruption in the Soul, which all the Saints are delivered
from, when they are translated into the Kingdom of the Son of God, as the
Apostle there speaks: but its long before some of Gods people find themselves
delivered from the power of dakness, and long before they find any sensible
experience of subduing the power of those Corruptions that have had dominion
over them. Hence they have fallen again and again into the same Sins, and that
after they have confessed and bewailed them, after they have prayed and
resolved against them, this must needs cause trouble in the Soul: For when a
man finds that after all his prayers and endeavors against his Sins, yet they
live and are mighty to this day; this makes them cry out with the Psalmist, O
thou that hear prayers, iniquities prevail against me, Psalm. 65. 3. and with
those in Jer. 14. 7. Our iniquities testify against us, and our backslidings
are many; and though a man be preserved from the out breakings of scandalous
sins, yet if he finds the prevailing power of any Corruption in the heart in
evil thoughts, vain imaginations, and disorderly affections, with a secret
averseness from God, and ready inclinations to evil; I say, experience of such
things will cause much trouble in the Soul, and raise doubts and fears, whether
a man be right or not, it will make such cry out with Paul, O miserable man
that I am, who shall deliver me, Romans 7. 34.

Quest. How shall we be delivered from the power of Corruption.

Answ. Nothing can do this, but the Redeeming power of Christ coming in upon
the Soul, He it is made of God Redemption to unto us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and 1 Cor.
5. 57. thanks be to God that gives us the victory over Sin and Death through
our Lord Jesus Christ, and I beseech you mark that expression in the foregoing
verse, that the Law is the strength of Sin, the meaning is, the Lord in Justice
according to the Covenant of the Law broken by Adams Sin, and by our Sins, has
inflicted this punishment upon Sinners, that because they will be sinful,
therefore they shall be so, and be under the power and dominion of their Sins,
this is the forest of all Judgments, that because they will have their sins,
they shall have them, and have hell with them, as Romans 1. 26. For this cause
God gave them up unto vile affections. And Psalm. 81. 11, 12. They would not
hearken to my voice, they would none of Me (says God) therefore I gave them up
to their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels. Here is the
revenging Justice of God against Sin and Sinners; and hence men are delivered
up to the power and authority of Sin and Satan, which take possession of, and
have dominion over the Souls of men; for while a man is under the Law sin has
dominion over Him, Romans 6. 14. and hence, the power of corruption becomes so
strong, as that it is beyond all created power; yea, it is impossible to be
delivered from it by men or means.

But now, Jesus Christ, the Lord Redeemer, I say,

1. Christ as Redeemer of his People does first redeem us by the price of his
blood, as 1 Pet. 1. 19. We are redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, by
which he satisfied Divine Justice, and purchased the persons of his Elect, that
they should be His, as 1 Cor: 6. last. You are bought with a price.

2. And then in the second place, He redeems us by the power of his Spirit,
which is indeed above all the power of Sin and Satan that is in us, Tit. 2. 14.
He redeems us from all iniquity, not only from the condemning power, but also
from the commanding power of all the Corruptions that are in us: When the Soul
receives Christ, he gives a man power to be one of the Sons of God, and
therefore power against whatsoever is contrary to their Sonship. Christ gave
his Disciples power over unclean Spirits, and when he will send the power of
his Spirit into the hearts of his people, then they find shall themselves
delivered from the power of all their Corruptions, and not till then. For its
He only that says to the Prisoners go forth, Isa. 42. 7. 49. 9. and where that
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 32. 17. the Soul is now freed
from the bolts and fetters of its Corruptions, so that it is no longer under
the power and dominion of them.

Quest. But the great question is, How shall we get the Redeeming power of
Christ to come in upon our Souls.

Answ. I answer in three Directions.

1. You must ly down before the Lord, confessing your utter inability ever to
get power against your corruptions of your self; and if Christ do it not for
you, you are undone for ever. For we can never do it: according to what Christ
himself said, Mat. 19. 26. when the young man there mentioned came to Christ,
and yet he was under such a strong power of his Corruption, that he neither
would nor could part with the world at his Command, nor trust to his Promise
for treasure in Heaven; whereupon our Savior said, With Man it is impossible,
mark it, it is not only difficult, but impossible for a man by any power of his
own to disengage his heart from the secret strong Corruptions he finds in
himself. Now if you find it so by experience, ly down before the Lord Jesus,
and tell him, you have found his words to be true, and tell him what your
Corruptions are, and that all the means you have used cannot subdue them, that
all your Confessions and Prayers, and Tears, and resolutions, and endeavors
have been all in vain, and that we find it impossible; that except the Lord
Jesus subdue our Corruptions for us, we shall perish for ever.

2. You must go to Christ, and receive him as Lord Redeemer, that he would be a
strong Redeemer unto you, and that we may have the good of his Redemption in
our selves, that by the powerful application of his Blood and Spirit, we may
find our selves redeemed from all iniquity, and from a vain Conversation, etc.
The Redeemer shall come, and he shall turn away ungodliness from you, Romans 11.
26 and Acts 3. last. He shall bless you by turning every one of you from your
iniquities. It is he that must do it by giving us his grace to enable us
thereunto. Thou should therefore come and lie down before the Lord Jesus,
and show him thy sinful Distempers and Corruptions which are too hard for thee,
and which thou can not overcome, and as the Leper said, Mat 8. 2. Lord if
thou will, thou can cleanse me, so do thou say to him, Lord Jesus if thou will, thou can easily turn my heart from and against my special sins; thou
can loosen my Will and Affections from them, and give me power against them;
we should ever believe his Power; and enquire after his will, that he will do
this great thing for us, that none can do but He, 1 John 3. 5. it is said,
Christ came into the World, to take away our Sins, and verse 8. for this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, that He might destroy the works of the
Devil; thou should show unto Jesus Christ, what spoil Satan has made in thy
Soul, and say to him still, O that thou would destroy these works of the
Devil in my Soul.

3. Follow the Lord Jesus with Requests and Petitions for the power of his
Grace and Spirit to be Communicated unto us, that. He would indeed take away
our sins, subdue our iniquities, and enable us to mortify our most secret
Corruptions; there are many Scripture Petitions that are upon record for our
direction in this case, as Hos. 14. 12. take with you words turn to the Lord,
and say, take away our iniquities, and receive us graciously. So do thou say to
him, Lord these and those are the iniquities that have prevailed over me, I
cannot put them away, and they will not go away of themselves, do thou take
them away from me, take away the guilt of them, that they may not condemn me,
and the power of them, that they may not rule over me, and say again with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 19. 12, 13. Cleanse me from secret, and keep me from
presumptuous Sins, let them not have dominion over me, then shall I be upright.
And that also in Psalm. 119. 133. Order my steps in thy way, and let no iniquity
have dominiou over me. As David said, Psalm. 63. 8. My Soul follows hard after
thee, so our Souls should (as poor Petitioners) follow hard after the Lord with
importunate prayers to the God that hears Prayers, that He would grant our
Petitions, which if he do, we may have great encouragement from Paul's Example,
2. Cor. 12. 1. to 10. When He was greatly distressed by a thorn in the flesh,
and a Messenger of Satan to buffet him, i. e. (as good interpreters conceive)
He was vexed with violent stirrings of Corruptions and Temptations, in which
case he besought the Lord often, to be delivered from them; the Answer was from
Christ, That his Grace should be sufficient for him, and his Power should rest
upon him. Even so, if the Lord help the Soul to make such Requests unto God
through Christ as Paul did, we shall have the same answer that he had, the Grace
of Christ shall be sufficient for us, and his power shall rest upon us, and
then by the Power and Grace of Christ we shall be enabled to get such power
against all our Corruptions, that they shall not disturb the peace of our Souls.

3. The third and last cause of Soul trouble is Guile of Spirit. Of which David
had woeful experience, when after He was delivered from it, he said, Psalm 32. 2.
Blessed is the man whose Spirit there is no guile, David had greatly sinned,
and brought guilt upon his Soul, and for some time he did lie under the power
of his Corruption, but the worst was, he had a guilefulness of Spirit in him
that hindered his Repentance, he was (for a while) not willing to acknowledge
his Sin in the exceeding vileness of it, nor to renounce the same so thoroughly
as true Repentance did require, this prevailing guilfulness of Spirit in him
did break the peace of his Soul as he tells us, verse 3, 4. while he kept
silence (from true repentance) the hand of God was heavy upon him day and night
his bones were broken, his comfort was gone, and in Psalm. 38. 3, 4, 6, 8. there
was no soundness in him because of Gods Anger, nor any rest or peace, because
of his Sin, he was troubled and bowed down, and mourned all the day long, by
reason of the disquietness of his heart, v. 8. And so it will be with any Soul
under the prevailings of a guileful Spirit.

This guilfulness of Spirit may be known by such marks as these, when a man
has a slight esteem of some sins, looking upon them as small matters, or sins
of infirmity, that he need not trouble himself much about them; when there is a
secret hiding and excusing a man's sins, also when a man tollerates himself in
the secret workings of any Corruption in his heart, with sinful musings and
some delight therein, and though it may be he does oppose them, yet it is but
faintly. Also when there is a secret willingness in the Soul to have Corruption
gratified and satisfied, rather than mortified and destroyed, and though a man
(...) against his Sins, yet there is a secret unwillingness in the Soul that
God should hear a man's prayers, and take away a man's Sins wholly and thorougly,
so as utterly to destroy them. In all these (and such like) there is an
evidence of guile of Spirit and Treachery of heart in our dealings with God;
which cannot choose but break the peace of the Soul. For such a one regards
iniquity in his heart, there (is at least) a truce with Sin, and then God is at
war with the Soul, and it is certain, a prevalling deceitfulness of the heart,
spoils a man's Repentance, Faith and Prayers and all, and if there be any thing
of grace in the heart, it is so darkened that a man cannot see it in himself
because as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard iniquity in my heart,
God will not hear my prayers, and then he will not pardon a man's Sins, nor
subdue his iniquities, nor speak peace to him:

And therefore the Question is,

Quest. How may this Guile of Spirit be expelled? how may the spirit of a man
be cleared and cleansed from it?

Ans. Nothing can do this but the truth and power of the Grace of Christ
prevailing in the Soul; this was David's meaning, Psalm. 51. 6. Thou love truth
in the inward parts, and thou soalt make me know wisdom in the hidden man of
the heart; and thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110.
3. when the truth and power of the Grace of Christ comes into the heart, and is
settled therein; there will then be a discovery of all the secret iniquities of
the heart, and withal a real conflict against them, with an irreconcilable
hatred against them, and seeking the destruction of them: and because we cannot
attain to that, but sin and corruption will have its being and working in the
Soul still, therefore the truth of Grace in the soul keeps up the conflict
full, that no sin shall have any peaceable profession in the Soul, Gal. 5. 17.
and because we cannot help our selves against our sins, there is a real
willingness that Christ should help us, and do that for us that we cannot do
for our selves; now here is truth in the inward parts; then shall we be able to
say, as Paul did, Romans 7. 15, and 19. These and those corruptions I find
stirring in me, are the evils that I would not, I allow them not, I hate them,
I would not have them live, nor to have any being in my Soul. And the Apostle
saying, of himself, ver. 18. To will is present with me. And our Savior saying
of his Disciples, Mat. 26. 41: The spirit is willing though the flesh is weak;
it shows that the truth of Grace lies in a real willingness to part with a man's
sins, and to have Christ and his Grace in the room of them, when the Soul says
(and that truly) I cannot destroy these and those Corruptions, yet I am willing
that Christ should do it for me; this willingness is a sign of some truth of
Grace in the heart. And although there will be still the relics of sin for the
exercise of Grace, yet there will be no prevailing guile; such a one will be
like David's blessed man, and like unto Nathaniel, of whom our Savior said,
John 1. 47. Behold, an Israelite indeed in whom is no guile, i. e. no
prevailing guile.

But then the main Question is;

Quest. How shall we get this Truth and power of a gracious willingness in our
hearts?

I Answer,

Ans. 1. By a free and full Confession, not only of our special Corruptions,
but of all the guile of Spirit and deceitfulness of the heart which we find in
our selves about our sins, and a through acknowledgment of the corruption of our
wills, for there lies the malignity and venom of our sins. David was brought to
this at last, Psalm. 32. 5. I acknowledged my sin to thee, and mine iniquity
have I not hid; I said I will confess my transgressions to the Lord, and thou
forgavest the iniquity of my sins. If the Lord help the Soul to this humble and
through acknowledgment of his special sins, and guilefulness of spirit, without
any hiding or excusing, but with aggravating a man's sins, just as they are in
themselves, and all this with a heart broken for and from sin; such a one shall
have experience of the same effect as David had; the Lord will forgive the
iniquity of our sins. And it is a certain truth if we would judge our selves we
shall not be judged of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 31.

2. You must come to Christ for Truth and since my of heart from him; we must
exercise Faith in Jesus Christ, that we may receive Truth in the inward parts
from him. For He is Holy and true, Rev. 2. 17. He is full of Grace and Truth,
John 1. 14. He is the way the truth and the life to us, Joh. 14. 6. therefore
we should be always coming to him, closing with him, and cleaving to him, that
He by His Word and Spirit of Truth may communicate the Truth to us that it may
dwell in us, and that we may be made sincere and without offense till the day
of Christ. It is certain, that our own (...), and false-heartedness would
destroy us if we should be left unto it; but when we see it and confess it unto
God against our selves, and cry out, O the guile of Spirit that is in met and
then come to Christ for this end, that the same truth that is in him may be in
us; then He will make and keep us true and faithful to God in the great
concernments of our Souls, and we should especially close with Christ for the
truth of Grace in our wills, that it may be the day of his power upon us and in
us, and keep us amongst the number of His willing people, Psalm. 110. 3. it may
be His good pleasure to work in us to will and to do Phil. 2. 13. there is
nothing wherein a man's heart may more easily and dangerously deceive him, than
in this thing, that a man is willing to part with his sins, when he is not; for
the will is more corrupt than any faculty, of the Soul, the heart is deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked, there is no hope of it, Jer. 179.
when you confess your sins and pray, and resolve, and watch against them, and
thereupon think you are willing to part with them; remember even then when you
find your heart in the best frame; He that trusts his own heart is a fool,
Prove. 28. 26. stay but a while and observe your self in times and cases of
trial, and you will find many contrary frames of spirit, and much unwillingness
to that which is good, and willingness to that which is evil; when you find it
thus, fall down before the Lord, and tell him that you are so, and can be no
otherwise of your self, but you bring your heart to him as it is, that it may
be the good pleasure of His will, to work in you to will and to do.

3. Get and keep your heart full of Scripture Petitions, for truth and
sincerity of heart. There are many of these, I shall mention some of them,
Psalm. 25. 4, 5. Show me thy ways, teach me, and lead me in thy truth, Psalm.
86. 11. Unite my heart to fear thy name, that I may walk in thy truth; and
Psalm. 26. 2. and 139. ult. Examine me O Lord, Starch my heart, and see if there
be any way of wickedness in me. O discover it to me, deliver me from it, and
give me power against it: when such petitions as these are wrought into the
very frame of the heart, when they dwell in the heart, and frequently arise out
of the heart, that a man is habitually prayerful and careful about sincerity
and Truth in all his ways; this will gradually clear and cleanse the Soul from
all prevailing guile of Spirit, and then it will not trouble the peace of the
Soul.

Having done with the first thing propounded. viz. Showing you the Causes of
Soul-trouble, and how to remove them: I proceed unto the second, and that is,
to show you what are the next and immediate Causes of Soul Peace, and how to
procure them.

Now the true Causes of that inward heavenly Divine Peace, which our Savior
Christ gives unto His; are these three.

1. The Righteousness of Christ made ours in our Justification.

2. The Grace of Christ communicated to us in our Sanctification.

3. The Spirit of Adoption, divelling in us as our Comforter.

There must be a concurrence of these three Causes in producing and settling
the Peace of our Savior Christ in the Souls of all penitent Believers.

For the first of these;

1. The first Cause of Soul peace is, The righteousness of Christ made ours in
our Justification, as Romans 5. 1. Being Justified by Faith we have peace with
God. For the righteous God loves righteousness, and hates iniquity, Psalm. 11.
7. Therefore we must have a Righteousness that is every way satisfactory to the
righteous Nature and Law of God, or else we cannot have peace from God. And
because we have no such Righteousness of our own, therefore we must have the
Righteousness of Christ to be made ours: For it is Christ alone who has
wrought out, and brought in everlasting righteousness for the use and good of
all that believe in him, Dan. 9. 24. He is made of God Righteousness unto us,
and He was make sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him, not in our selves, but in him, 2 Cor. 5. last. When therefore we have
obtained this Righteousness of Christ to be ours, then we are accepted as
righteous before God; and so being justified, we have peace with God, being
under the influence of the love and favor of God, then shall we find the truth
of that by experience, that the Kingdom of Christ in us, is Righteouss, peace
and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. and that also in Isai. 32. 17. the work
of righteousness shall be peace, and the Effect of righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever.

Quest. But how may this Righteousness of Christ be made ours?

Answ. By Faith in Jesus Christ accepting Gods gracious imputing and accounting
Christ's Righteousness unto us. Now it is observable in the fourth chapter of
Romans this Imputation of Righteousness is mentioned no less then ten times in
that one chapter; and it is exemplifyed in the two instances of Abraham and
David, as verse 3. Abraham believed God, and it was accounted unto him for
Righteousness, and verse 6, 7, 8. As David also describes the blessedness of
the man unto whom God imputes righteousness without works; saying, blessed is
the man whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; blessed is
the man to whom the Lord will not impute Sin. Now this is written for our sakes
to whom the same Righteousness shall be imputed also, if we believe with a
Penitential and Obediential Faith as Abraham and David did, as the Apostle
argues, verse. 14. then shall we come to have the sense and comfort of the Lords
not imputing our sins, but imputing righteousness unto us for Christ's sake, and
this will settle a divine peace in our Souls as it was with David in Psalm: 32.
the effect of this Righteousness, will be quietness, peace and assurance for
ever, as in that Isa. 32. 17.

Quest. But how should we exercise Faith in Christ and his Righteousness, that
we may find this blessed peace in our selves.

Answ. By a threefold act of Faith.

1. By denying our selves, and renouncing all concert of any righteousness of
our own, as Paul said, Phil. 3. 9. Not having my own righteousness, he
renounceth that, and Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of righteousness which we have
done, he throws them all away, as of no worth, of no use in the matter of our
Justification before God: always acknowledging our own sinfulness, guiltiness,
unworthiness, and unrighteousness in the sight of God; saying as the Church
does, Isa. 64. 6. We are all as an unclean thing, and all our Righteousness are
as filthy rags before thee. Alas they are so far from covering the nakedness,
that they increase the filthiness of our souls, they are an abomination to the
holy God and should be as dung unto our selves, Phi. 3. 1. our confessions and
pravers, and tears, and resolutions, and reformations, and all our duties of
every kind, being all polluted with Sin, should be always abhorred by us, not
having the least relyance upon any thing we have, are, or can do as the matter
of our righteousness before God.

2. As we must thus renounce our own righteousness, so we must Accept and
receive Christ and his Righteousness, as given, to us of God for this end, that
we may be justified in his sight, for this is very observable; that Christ and
his righteousness, is in the fifth Chapter to the Romans, and five times
together called, either the gift of God, or the gift of Grace, or the free
gift, as you may see in ver. 15, 16, 17, 18. and ver. 19. by his Obedience we
are made righteous. That is, Jesus Christ having performed all that active and
passive Obedience, which was necessary on our behalf, God accepted of it, and
gives it by Imputation to all penitent Believers for their use and good in the
matter of our Justification before God: Only as its given on Gods part, so it
must be received on our part (for giving and receiving are Relatives, that one
cannot be without the other) if it be not received, it is but a mere offer;
therefore I say it must be received on our part, and so says the Apostle, Romans
5. 11. We have received the Atonement through Jesus Christ, and verse 17. We
receive the gift of righteousness by Jesus Christ.

Here then lies the great work of Faith, in causing the Soul to go out of it
self to Jesus Christ, accepting of him, and receiving him and his Righteousness
as the gift of Gods free Grace for our Justification and Salvation. For He is
made of God righteousness unto us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and He is the Lord our
Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. therefore it is the Person of Christ himself,
clothed with the Office of our Mediator, which is the first object of our
'Faith, that must be received by us; For that Righteousness whereby we must be
justified, it was performed by him, and is inherent in him; His active and
passive Obedience was a transient thing accomplished by him in the fullness of
time, but the infinite worthiness, value, and virtue of that Obedience of his
is permanent for ever, and inherent in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ;
therefore our great business is, by an unfeigned Faith, and with a sincere
heart to receive Christ himself as he is offered in the Gospel; for then Christ
becomes ours and we are his, and his righteousness is ours for our
Justification in the sight of God. And this was the reason of that most
significant expression of the Apostle which is as it were the Motto of every
sincere Christian, Phil. 3. 8, 9. That I may win Christ, and be found in him,
having his Righteousness, etc.

3. We must not only receive, but continually make use of Christ and his
Righteousness; and this was part of Paul's meaning in that forementioned
expression; that I may be found in Christ, not only found in Christ at the day
of Judgment, but every day of our lives, and in all the actions of our whole
Conversation; especially in all our Addresses to God in all our prayers, and
all acts of divine worship; that we may appear before God, not in our own, but
in the Righteousness of Christ, being covered and clothed with it as with a
Garment, our own filthy garment being taken from us, the long and large Robe of
Christ's Righteousness being put upon us, as in Zech. 3. 4, 5. by this means
alone we shall find our sins covered and pardoned, our persons accepted, and
our prayers heard in heaven, and all for the sake of Christ and his
Righteousness made ours. So likewise when we observe our many sins and failings
in our daily course, and in our holy duties, that there is a mixture of sinning
in our believing, and repenting, and praying, and in all that we do: Yet still
have recourse to Jesus Christ the Righteous One, as our Advocate with the
Father, and the Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2. finding it sensibly
and feelingly by our own experience every day of our lives, that our own
righteousness is but filthy rags, but Christ and his Righteousness is that only
Foundation that we rest upon, for pardon, and peace, and acceptance with God.

2. The Second Cause of our Peace con: current with the former, is the grace of
Christ communicated to us in our Sanctification; this is included in that
Apostolical Salutation and Benediction so often used by Paul in his Epistles to
the Churches; Grace and Peace unto you from God the Father and from the Lord
Jesus Christ, wherein he wishes and prays for Grace as the cause of peace, and
peace as the effect of Grace; it is true indeed, grace in its latitude
comprehends the the effects of the free favor of God in Christ, but in a
special manner that work of grace in us whereby we are sanctified and qualifyed
with inherent holiness dwelling in us, as Heb. 13. 9. It is a good thing that
the heart be established with grace, and 2 Pet. 3. last. we are exhorted to
grow in grace. Hence it is Christ is said to be made of God sanctification unto
us, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is made Righteousness to us, by the imputation of his own
Righteousness to us for our Justification; but is made Sanctification to us, by
the Communication of some kind of grace and holiness to us, that is in himself:
both are necessary as con current causes of that peace which Christ gives unto
His, for that is the only true peace which arises from the being and the
seeing of the work of sanctifying grace dwelling in our hearts, and expressed
in our lives, as that proper effect of our Justification.

Quest. How may we get this grace of Sanctification?

Answ. By Faith in Jesus Christ, for as we are justified by Faith, so we are
sanctified by Faith, Acts 26. 18. amongst them which are sanctified by Faith
which are in me; for the fullness of all sanctifying grace is in the man Christ,
He is the first subject of all grace since the Fall of Man, John 1. 14. He is
full of grace and truth, and verse 16. from his fullness have all we received
grace for grace, there is a fullness of all kinds, and of all degrees of grace
in him, for this end that He may communicate the same to us, and we may receive
it from him.

Quest. But how shall we exercise Faith in Christ, that we may receive it from
him.

Answ. 1. Be always humbled under the sense of the great evil and danger of the
corruption of nature that is in us; that we are naturally empty of grace, and
full of Sin, as Paul complained of it, Romans 7. 18. I know that in me, that is
in my flesh there dwells no good thing, and Eccles. 9. 3. the heart of man is
full of evil; there is not only a privation of that goodness that should be in
the faculties of our Souls, but a succession of the contrary vicious qualities
that indispose us to good, and incline us unto evil; and there are in all some
natural habitual corruptions wherein Original Sin vents it self more than in
others, and when God has made a man to know himself, he will find this true in
his own Soul, it must and will be perpetual matter of Humiliation and
Mortification to us all our days, even as Paul complained of it, Romans 7. 24. O
miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Sin and Death.

3. Be always going out of our selves to Jesus Christ, receiving him and
closing with him for this end, that we may receive grace and holiness from that
fullness of grace that is in him. For John 1. 16. From his fullness we receive
grace for grace, implying that Christ out of his own fullness gives unto all
true believers, the very same kind of grace and holiness that is in himself in
that manner and measure as he sees fit; for unto every one of you is given
grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 7. and that even
the particular graces of Sanctification, such as humility, sincerity, meekness,
the fear of God, love to God above all, and love to our brethren, are given out
from himself unto us, and that we are made partakers of these in a way of
receiving. Here then lies the great work of a Christian in the sense of our
want of grace in our selves, and need of grace from Christ, we should exercise
Faith in him, bringing our Souls to him, and leaving them with him, as empty
vessels, to receive from him all those graces that are any ways needful to our
Salvation. And then,

3. We must make Conscience of a continual acting of the graces of
Sanctification in the whole course of our lives; and this both in the way of
Mortification, opposing the stirrings of any Corruption, not suffering the
least Sin to have any peaceable possession in our Souls, Romans 8 13. and also in
the way of active and passive Obedience to the whole will of God; that we may
please God, and live to God, in observing his rules and aiming at his ends in
all. So as we may glorify God, and enjoy him both here, and for-ever in another
world, as our last end, and chief good, wherein our true blessedness stands,
Rim. 6. 11. reckon yourselves dead unto Sin, but alive unto God, and Gal. ^^
19. that I may live unto God. This is certain, the grace of Sanctification is
the principle of our Spiritual Life received from Christ, whereby we are
enabled to live unto God; the habit of grace is for the act of it; and life is
for life actions, therefore by the Activity of the grace of Christ in us, we
come to discern it, as the Apostle speaks of himself, 2 Cor. 1. 12. this is our
rejoicing, the testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly
Sincerity we have our Conversaion in the world by the grace of God, and so by
discerning the grace of Christ in our selves, we come to have peace also, from
God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

3. The third Cause of true Peace in us: the Spirit of Adoption:

For this Divine Peace which Christ gives unto His, is the very same which is
called Peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. because the Holy Ghost
sent down from the Father, and the Son is the immediate worker of it in the
hearts of the faithful, and therefore at the same time, when our Savior made
this promise of Peace to his Disciples, He promised to send unto them the Holy
Spirit, the Comforter to dwell in them, and to abide with them for ever, as in
ver. 16, 27, 29. of this Chapter. And for the same reason, the Apostle says
unto Believers, Romans 8. 15, 16. You have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father, ehe Spirit himself bearing witness with our
Spirits, that we are the Children of God. The same Spirit, who as a Spirit of
bondage works Humiliation, and as a Spirit of Faith, works Faith in us to
receive Christ, and keeps the Soul at work in making our peace with God, by a
continual exercise of Faith and Repentance: it is the same spirit that (after
believing) becomes a Spirit of Adoption, causing us to discern the gracious
work He has wrought in us, and so witnesses with our spirits sanctified, that
we are not only in a state of Reconciliation and Peace with God, but in a state
of adoption and Sonship, that we are not only the Friends but the children of
God, and that He is our God and Father in Christ. In which way of the Spirits
witnessing with our Spirits, He lets in the sense and sweetness of the love of
God in Christ into our souls, whereby our peace is established, and our souls
are comforted in that manner and measure as He sees fit, Romans 5. 5. The love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost given to us, and Gal. 5. 22.
The fruits of the Spirit are Love, Joy, and Peace, etc.

Quest. How may we obtain the Spirit of Adoption?

Ans. By Faith in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1. 13. After ye believed in Christ, ye
were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, i. e. the Spirit promised by our
Savior in this 14 th of John, to be sent as a Comforter to dwell in the souls
of true Believers. For the regenerating work of the spirit causing the Soul to
believe in Christ, and receive him as our Lord and Savior; this goes before
Faith, and is the efficient cause of the grace of Faith in us, as John 3. 5.
and 1. 12, 13. but after the Souls beleiving and living in the exercise of
Faith on Christ, the Lord fulfills this promise in his own good time and way,
and gives his Spirit as a Comforter, and so we come to be acquainted with the
witnessing, sealing, and comforting work of his holy Spirit, for the
establishing of our peace.

Quest. How should we exercise our Faith in Christ, for the obtaining of the
Spirit of Adoption?

I Answer in three Directions:

Ans. 1. By humbling our selves for our many sins against the Spirit of God.
For though Gods Elect are preserved, so as never to fall into that unpardonable
Sin against the Holy Ghost; yet alas, there are many other sins against the
Spirit, which those that are true Believers (for the main) are too often guilty
of, which greatly obstruct the consolations of the Holy Ghost. For the Spirit
of God and Christ, is the immediate worker of all Grace or Peace in our Souls;
Hence, when we grieve the Spirit by doing that which is contrary to his will:
and when we quench the Spirit in his holy Motions in our Souls; this causes
the withdrawing of his witnessing and comforting operations in our hearts; and
therefore the Apostle gives that direction, Grieve not the Holy Spirit whereby
you are sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. and Quench not the
Spirit, 1 Thessalonians 5. 19. And therefore we should observe all the times and cases
wherein we have grieved and quenched the Holy Spirit: we should mourn and
grieve with godly sorrow for the same, begging pardon in the blood of Christ
for our sins, against the Spirit, as well as any other sins.

2. Pray much for the Spirit of God to be sent from the Father and the Son, as
the Spirit of Adoption, and as our Comforter, according to the promise made,
and so often repeated by our Savior, in his last and dying words, as Job. 14.
16. I will pray the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever; and ver. 17, 26. and Chap. 15. 26. I will send unto
you from the Father, the spirit of truth, the Comforter: and to the same
purpose again, in Joh. 16. 7, 8, etc. We should not let these promises lie by
unimproved; but exercise Faith in Christ the Maker of them, believing the truth
and reality of them as the true savings of God and trusting to his ability and
fidelity for the performance of them; we should pray and plead with him to make
them good unto out Souls. We should ask the Father daily in the name of Christ,
that he would make us acquainted with the witnessing, sealing and comforting
work of his Holy Spirit: and put our blessed Savior in mind of these promises
of his; and what need we have of the performance of them on his part, and that
without the immediate work of the Spirit of Adoption, as our Comforter, we
cannot enjoy the good of that Legacy of his Peace, which he has left unto us.
Our Lord Jesus, has given us great encouragement that our prayers for the gift
of his Holy Spirit shall not be in vain, Luke 11. 12. If ye that are evil know
how to give good gifts to your Children; how much more shall your heavenly
Father give the Holy Spirit unto them that ask him:

3. Learn we to maintain communion and fellowship with the Holy Ghost. We read
of the fellowship of the Spirit, Phil. 2. 1. and the communion of the Holy
Ghost, 2. Cor. 13, 14. which does imply, that as there is a communication of
any degree of Grace and Peace unto us from the Spirit of God on his part, so
there should be suitable returns on our part; which is expressed in those
Phrases of our living in the Spirit, Gal. 5. 25. and walking after the Spirit,
Romans 8. 2. and 14. that is now; by our continual beleiving in, and trusting to
the Spirit, as our sanctifier and comforter; by giving divine Worship to the
Holy Ghost, together with the Father and the Son; by waiting for the breathings
of the Spirit in every Ordinance of the Gospel; also by yielding Obedience to
his holy Motions in, and by his Word, and in a continual exercise of the Graces
of the Spirit in our daily course. Now in this way of keeping our communion
with the holy Spirit, we shall be preserved from grieving his Person, and
quenching his operations; and by this means we shall grow to be spiritually
minded, and so we shall have life and peace, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 8.
6. For to be spiritually minded is life and peace: and then He will not fail to
make us acquainted with his witnessing, sealing and comforting work in our
Souls whereby we shall have peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, as Romans 14. 17.
nay, this is the way to be filled with all joy and peace in believing, and to
abound in hope, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as the Apostle tells us, Romans
15. 13.

And so I have done with the second Exhortation and Direction; showing how the
causes of Soul-trouble may be removed, and how the causes of Soul-peace may be
procured and settled in our selves. What remains but that we be diligent in the
practice of the forenamed Directions, which do show unto us the way of peace
revealed in the Gospel of Peace.

I proceed now to a third Exhortation.

3. To all penitent obedient Believers such as Christ's Disciples were, to whom
the peace of Christ belongs: You are to be Exhorted to accept of this divine
peace, as the Legacy of Jesus Christ given unto you. For so we are to look upon
these words in the Text, [ Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you] as
the Legacy given by our Savior Christ in his last Will and Testament, the
night before he died.

And therefore it is the unquestionable duty of all the faithful with all
thankfulness to receive this gift of Christ's peace as worthy of all
acceptance, containing deliverance from all real evil, and the sum of all
saving good, in the enjoyment of which we shall be truly blessed, both here and
for ever in another world. And for this end you must do as those that have a
rich Legacy bequeathed to them, if they meet with any difficulty they put their
case in Suit, they sue for their own at the Court, and they do these three
things,

1. They prove their Title to such a Legacy.

2. They plead for the possession of it.

3. They wait upon the business until they obtain it.

So must you and I if we are in good earnest for this Divine Peace, we must
apply our selves to the Throne of Grace, and sue for it in the Court of Heaven.

1. And first, we must prove our Title to it, that we are the very persons
intended by our Savior Christ in the gift and grant of his Peace, i. e. that
we are indeed true penitent believers, such as Christ's Disciples were, to whom
his Promise in the Text, was immediately made, as Gal. 6. 7. Let every man
prove his own work, i. e. the work of saving grace which God has wrought in
his heart, and then shall He have rejoicing is himself, i. e. he shall have
matter and cause of rejoicing arising from the sight and sense of saving grace
in his own Soul, and consequently that He is a true Disciple of Christ, a
sincere penitent Obedient Believer, according to the Gospel of Peace, and
therefore that the peace of Jesus Christ does belong to him.

Here then we see the benefit of Self-Examination, and the great need of the
Spirits Assistance therein, to help us in discerning the infallible signs of
Faith and Repentance in our selves; and so from Conscience and Experience, to
conclude that we have a just and right title to the peace of Christ and all the
good contained therein. For we know that we are of God, 1 John 5. 19. and this
is our rejoicing the testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly
Sincerity we have our Conversation in the world by the grace of God, 2 Cor. 1.
12. And the Spirit himself witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the
children of God.

2. We must plead for the Possession and Fruition of this Peace; I say, we must
plead for this at the Throne of Grace, that this inward spiritual and heavenly
peace, may be given into our hearts, that we may find and feel the sweet and
good of it in our own Souls.

For if the condition of the promise be wrought in us, then the spiritual good
of the promise belongs to us, and then we may and ought to lay claim to it as
our own, and plead for the sensible communication of it unto our selves; and
that by a vigorous exercise of faith in fervent prayer, as the Psalmist did, in
Psalm. 143. 1. Hear my prayer O Lord, and give ear to my Supplication, in thy
faithfulness answer me and in thy Righteousness, and verse 6. I stretch forth
my hands to thee, my Soul thirsts for thee as the thirsty land, and verse 7.
Hear me speedily O Lord, my spirit fails, hide not thy face from me, cause me
to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, and for thy Name sake quicken me;
etc. In this way of pleading with the Lord we shall be sure to obtain, because
He has engaged himself in his faithfulness, Psalm. 83. 33. I will not suffer my
faithfulness to fail and therefore blessed are these that believe, for there
shall be performance of those things that are promised by the Lord, Luke 1. 45.

3. Unto our pleading we must add waiting upon the Lord Jesus, until our Souls
be satisfied with the good promise, i. e. until we do sensibly enjoy this
divine and heavenly peace in our selves. Thus our Savior after He had made
this promise of Peace to his Disciples, and after He was dead and risen again,
a little before He ascended into Heaven, He commanded them to wait for the
Promise of the Spirit which (says he) you have heard of me, Acts 1. 4. which
relates to the Promise of sending the Spirit as a Comforter to fill their
hearts with comfort peace and joy which he often repeated in the 14 th, 15 th,
26 th. Chapter of John. Now at his parting from them by his Ascension to
Heaven, He commanded them to wait for the performance of this Promise.
Accordingly it is said, verse 14. they continued together with one accord in
Prayer and Supplication; and the issue was, that after some time of waiting in
that way, they were filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts 25. which though it
includes something extraordinary and peculiar to the Apostles, yet it certainly
intends the pouring out of the Spirit of God promised to all believers, verse
16. to 22. the immediate effect of which was they were filled with joy and
peace in believing by the power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15. 13. and therefore
this is affirmed not only of the Apostles, but of the generality of the
Primitive Christians of those times, they walked in the Fear of God, and in the
Comforts of the holy Ghost, Acts 9. 31.

So that we are clearly directed to take the same course that they did, viz. to
wait upon the Lord Jesus in the way of his Commandments and Ordinances, both
public and private, and to continue in believing, and pleading with him, in a
patient and earnest expectation of the fulfilling of his promises of peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost, which He will undoubtedly perform.

1. For our Lord Jesus Christ lives in the Heavens to be the executor of his
own Will, and to see that his Legacy of peace be given to all those that come
to him, plead with him, and wait upon him for the same.

2. It is with him to Create this Peace, Isa. 57. 19. as in the first Creation
God said, let there be light, and it was so, even so when he please He can say
to any penitent believing Soul, let there be peace in that Soul, and it shall
be so.

He can easily bless either Public Ministry, or Private Counsel, or the word
read remembered and meditated on to be a means of sending home to the hearts of
his people that inward and spiritual peace by the holy Spirit the Comforter as
shall make their Souls rejoice and be glad all their days.

3. And as He can, so he will do this for all his people sooner or later, in
some degree or other, Psalm. 85. 8. The Lord will speak peace to his people, to
illustrate this by one remarkable instance, Luke 7. verse 37, to 48. there was
a Woman in the City that was a Sinner, i. e. a notorious and scandalous Sinner;
she came to Christ with her eyes full of tears, and her heart full of sorrow,
in a repenting, and mourning way for her many Sins, she comes also in a
believing way with her heart full of Supplications for the forgiveness of her
Sins, and for peace with God through Christ; she came also in a way of love to
Jesus Christ, her whole behavior did speak in the language of the Spouse to
Christ, O thou whom my Soul loves! and so she lies down at his feet for a
gracious answer. What the issue was may be seen in verse 48. and 50, our
blessed Savior said unto the Woman; Thy sins are forgiven thee, thy Faith has
saved thee, go in peace; and no doubt but it was a creating word, filling her
Soul with peace and joy, by the power of his Spirit which He gave unto her as
her Comforter to abide with her for ever.

Object. Now if any doubting, sincere heart shall say, Ay, if I could but hear
such a word from Christ himself, speaking peace to me, (as that woman did) that
would satisfy my soul indeed.

To which I answer,

Answ. Whatsoever thou art that have such thoughts, let me tell thee in the
Name of Christ, and from the Word of God; that if thou have the same kind of
Repentance, and Faith in Christ, and love to him, and waiting upon him, as was
in Her, then thou should accept of those words of our Savior as spoken to
thee as well as to Her: thy Sins are forgiven thee, as well as hers, and he
bids thee go in peace, and enjoy his peace, both here and for ever in another
world.

Object But how shall I know that I have the same kind of Faith and Repentance
that was in her; for Christ himself told her so, when he said, (thy Faith has
saved thee) but alas, I am often doubting and fearing least I should be
mistaken in that.

To which I answer.

Answ. Christ has promised his Spirit with his word to supply the place of his
bodily absence, nay, to be better to his Disciples than his bodily presence,
(as diverse times in these Chapters of the 14, 15, 16 th of John) when therefore
the Lord Jesus shall please to send his Spirit of Truth as a Comfortor to thy
Soul, He will by the Word let in such a light of discovery, showing thee both
the truth of his grace in thy heart, and of his peace belonging to thee; that
thou shall feel the condition of the promise wrought in thee, and find the
Spiritual good of the promise given in to thy Soul; that thou shall be as well
satisfied, and thy peace established, as if thou had heard the Man Christ
Jesus speaking peace to thee as that Woman did.

Here therefore lies our great work, to be always repenting, believing, and
praying, and waiting on the Lord in his own way, and then be assured of it, the
Lord will speak peace to his people, though in desertion he withdraw, and for
the trial and exercise of our graces He may delay, yet for the thing it self
[forgiveness of sins and peace to the penitent believer] it is most sure, that
sooner or later they shall enjoy it, in such a manner and measure as shall be
sufficient for our Consolation here, and Salvation for ever, Psalm. 37. 37. Mark
the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace; For
Lam. 3. 25. The Lord is good to the Soul that seeks him, and waits upon him;
Isa. 30. 18. The Lord waits to be gracious, blessed are those that wait for
him. I conclude this with Isa 64. 4. compared with 1 Cor. 2. 9. Eye has not
seen, nor the ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive,
what things, what Peace, and Joy and Comfort both here and for ever God has
prepared for those that love him, and wait for him.

Exhortation 4. The last Exhortation is to all that enjoy this Peace of our
Lord Jesus Christ in their own Souls; you are to be exhorted to improve it as a
sufficient remedy against the troubles and fears of the World. For so it is
intended by our Savior Christ, therefore after he had said to his Disciples,
My peace I give unto you, he presently adds, Let not your heart be troubled,
neither let it be afraid; as if he should have said, you shall find my Peace in
your Souls, to be a soverain Cordial to remove the troubles of your hearts, and
to preserve you from the venom and poison of the troublesome and formidable
things of the World, that they get not into your hearts: and so the Apostle
informs us, Phil. 4. 7. That the Peace of God which passes all understanding,
shall keep your minds and hearts in Christ Jesus; where the Peace which Christ
gives unto his, is commended unto us in a four fold respect:

1. In regard of the excellent nature and virtue of it in himself, being the
Peace of God, a divine, spiritual and heavenly peace, which passes all
understanding, i. e. it cannot be fully, either understood or expressed by us,
until we come to Heaven.

2. In regard of the excellent effect of it in us; it supplies the place of a
strong Garrison (as the Greek word signifies) to keep the principal Forts of the
Soul from being surprised or annoyed, either from insurrection from within, or
by Invasion from without.

3. In respect of the parts of the Soul, which are kept by this peace of God,
they are the heart and mind; by heart is meant the Will and affections, and by
the mind, the power of thinking and understanding: For this divine peace does
so fill the heart with joy and comfort in believing, that it keeps it from
heart-aking, and heart-vexing griefs and fears; it also fills the mind with the
apprehension of God's love and favor, keeping out the dominion of doubting and
distrustful thoughts, that the Soul is at rest; it rests secure in God, as the
Psalmist said, Return unto thy rest O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt
bountiful with me, Psalm. 116. 7. And

4. In regard of the strength of this divine peace, whereby it keeps our minds
and hearts, it is impregnable; for it is derived from the Grace and Strength of
Christ, therefore it is said, it shall keep your hearts and minds through
Christ Jesus, i. e. through the power of Christ's spirit which he has promised
to give unto his People as their Keeper and Comforter, to dwell in them, and
abide with them for ever.

And therefore in a way of subserviency to that comforting work of his Spirit,
the Lord has commanded his Ministers to comfort his people, Isai. 40. 1, 2.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, speak ye comfortably to my People, tell them
their warfare is accomplished, their sins are pardoned, etc. He has also
commanded his people to comfort themselves and one another with his gracious
promises which contain that sovereign good which is able to preserve our souls
in peace and comfort in the midst of the worst things we may meet with on this
side Heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18. Comfort ye one another with these words. What
remains then, but that all penitent Believers, who have obtained this divine
peace, and do enjoy it as our Saviors Legacy; we should comfort our selves in
his grace and peace, and improve it unto this end for which he gives it; which
he signifies in these words [ Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it
be afraid] which is intended by our Savior, not only as a word of command or
direction but as a word of comfort and encouragement. Our Savior did well know
that his Disciples in the World should meet with many things that would be
matter of trouble and fear; and through their own weakness their hearts would
be subject to be too much troubled and afraid: therefore he would have us so to
exercise Faith in himself and his promises, that our comfort, peace and joy may
outbid and prevail over all our troubles and fears, as he said in John 15. 11.
These things I have spoken to you that my joy may remain in you, and that your
joy may be full. That this end may be attained, let me show you the comforts
which this Doctrine affords.

1. Against the troublesome, And

2. Against the formidable things of the World. For so they are distinguished
by our Savior in the Text.

1. Let not your heart be troubled.

Now the things which cause trouble to the hearts of the Saints while they are
in this World, may be referred to three Heads, viz. the trouble that arises;

1. From Indwelling Sin.

2. From the tribulations of the World,

3. From the Churches troubles.

Let me speak something shortly and particularly to these;

1. The trouble that arises to the Saints from the spiritual conflict they are
engaged in against indwelling sin: for no sooner is the Soul at peace with God
but it is at war with sin, For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh, and these two are contrary, Gal. 5. 17. there is both
Grace and Corruption in a regenerate man, and such a contrariety between these,
that the spirit of Grace in the Soul is always opposing the motions of sin
that are stirring in the Soul, and seeking the destruction of them. Hence no
small trouble arises to the Saints from this conflict, which they find in
themselves, both how to manage it, and how to get a victory over their
corruptions; as we may see in Paul Romans 7. where he bitterly complains of it,
that Sin was present with him, and dwelt in him, and that he found the law of
Sin always warring against the law of his mind, verse 20, 21. and 23: whence
he cries out as in distress and trouble of Spirit, O miserable man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of Sin and Death, verse 24. And there are
none of all the Saints but have experience of the same conflict in themselves;
yet here is comfort against this trouble in three respects.

1. That an irreconcilable enmity against Indwelling Sin, is one of the
clearest evidences of our peace with God, that when we observe any secret
Corruption stirring in our hearts, we presently say as Paul did, Romans 7. 13. I
allow them not, I hate them, and verse 19. They are the evil that I would not;
when we dare not entertain any terms of agreement, or any time of truce, but
with a lively quick hatred, we seek for the destruction and not being of our
most secret Sins; and then, not only cleaning our selves from all filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, but aiming at, and seeking of the perfection of holiness, 2.
Cor. 7. 1. this is an infallible sign that our Souls are garrisoned with the
peace of God keeping our minds and hearts in Christ Jesus, as good and faithful
Soldiers unto him.

2. That we have and shall have the Assistance of Jesus Christ, and supply of
his Spirit in maintaining this War to the last. Christ as the Captain of our
Salvation has made many gracious promises of help in our times of need, Heb. 4.
15, 16. and we have assurance given us, that we shall be more than conquerers
at last through him that has saved us, Romans 8. 37. besides the many
encouraging promises made and repeated seven times over by our blessed Savior,
in the second and third Chapter of the Revelations, To him that overcomes will
I give the white stone, and new name; and he shall not be hurt of the second
death, etc. And then Thirdly,

3. Although this conflict be grievous to Flesh and Blood, yet it shall not
last long; for when we come to dye then sin shall be abolished out of the Soul,
and Grace shall be perfected in the Soul, then the spirit of the just shall be
made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. and whatever disturbance of our peace we have met
with before, yet then there will be none, Isai. 57. 2. The upright walkers
enter into peace, i. e. into a place and state of everlasting and perfect
peace. We shall then enjoy perfection of Holiness and perfection of peace
together in the highest Heavens.

2. The second kind of trouble in our hearts, is that which is caused by the
tribulations of the world, of which our Savior said to his Disciples in John
16. last, In the world yeu shall have tribulation, which includes all kind of
afflictions, but especially Persecution for Christ and his Gospel sake; and
they are called Tribulations, because they are as it were threshing
afflictions, such as are driven in as with a flayl upon the Spirits of men, and
cause troubles in their hearts; yet here is Comfort against this trouble also,
in diverse respects.

1. That these tribulations of the world are but outward things, they reach but
to the outward man* the soul and inward man of a true believer is preserved
from the hurt and mischief of them by that inward and heavenly peace that keeps
their minds and hearts in Christ Jesus; therefore at the same time when He told
his Disciples that in the world you shall have tribulation, he also informed
them that in and from himself they should have peace, and that peace will
preserve you from the malignity of all the troubles of the world, John 16 upon
this ground the Apostle said, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17. For this cause we faint not,
for though our outward man is perishing, yet our inward man is renewed day by
day; for our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding eternal weight of glory.

2. That all the tribulations of the world are ordered by the wisdom and love
of Christ for his holy and good ends, as himself said, Rev. 3. 19. as many as I
love, I rebuke and chastize, and Heb. 12. 10, 11. He chastizeth us for our
profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness, and though afflictions are
not joyous but grievous to the flesh, yet after we have been exercised
therewith and are more mortifyed and sanctified thereby, they bring forth the
quiet and peaceable fruits of righteousness; and therefore they are so far from
hurting our peace, that they are a means to increase or establish it in our
Souls.

For,

3. The greatest and sweetest joys and comforts of the Holy Ghost are commonly
bestowed most on his afflicted and suffering people, especially when they
suffer for Christ's and his Gospels sake. So the Apostle, Romans 5. 1. having
peace with God through Christ, we glory in Tribulation, and rejoice in hope of
the glory of God, because Tribulation works Patience, and Patience,
Experience, etc. We have heard of Jacobs Troubles, of David's Troubles, and of
Paul's Troubles; none more afflicted than those, none more comforted, especially
Paul, who tells us, 2 Cor. 4. 8. that he was troubled on every side, and his
Sufferings for Christ are unparralelled as they are described, 2 Cor, 11. verse
23. to the end. Yet he tells us he was comforted in all his tribulations, 2
Cor: 14. and verse 5. As the Sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
Consolations abound by Jesus Christ. So true is that of our Savior, and really
made good unto all his true Disciples, John 16. last. In the world you shall
have Tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace.

3. A Third Case wherein the hearts of the Saints are apt to be troubled, is in
the time of Sions Troubles. When the Church and Cause of God are endangered in
the Storms of Persecution; when it is a day of trouble, of rebuke and
blasphemy, as Isa. 37. 3. when the Adversaries are very high, and the Church of
Christ brought very low that in respect of man and means, it is a helpless
case, and a hopeless time.

Yet in this case also there is matter of comfort to support the hearts of all
that are truly godly.

1. For first, a sympathizing with, and a fellow-feeling of the Churches
troubles and sufferings, is a good sign of Sincerity, and that we are living
members of the Body of Christ, because it is the property of such to prefer
Jerusalem above their chiefest joy, Psalm. 137. 6. when the welfare and
prosperity of the Church of God in the world is matter of rejoicing above all
worldly joys and the Calamities of the Church matter of mourning above all
worldly sorrows. Eli^ heart trembled for the Ark of God; and Nehemiah though in
a good condition himself, yet when he heard of the great affliction of the
people of God at Jerusalem, he mourned and wept, and fasted and prayed in their
behalf, and his countenance was changed from the sorrow of his heart as we read
in the first and second chapters of Nehemiah; and Paul tells us that all his
other Sufferings were but as things without, but the care of the Churches
welfare lay nearest to his heart, 2 Cor. 11. 28. if thou art so afflicted, it
is a sign of the same grace and peace in thee that was in them.

2. Let not your heart be overmuch troubled, for God is in the midst of Sion,
it shall not be moved, for God shall help her, and that right early, Psalm. 46.
5. Nothing befalls the Church of God but his permission. When Rome and Hell,
when men and Devils conspire against the Church of God, they can go no further
than God will suffer them; as our Savior said unto Pilate, Thou could have
no power against me, except it were given thee from above. It should calm our
Spirits that it is the will of God to suffer his Church and People to be in
such troubles for a time, for his holy ends; this consideration quieted the
hearts of Job, Eli, David, and Hezekiah that God had a holy hand in bringing
and ordering those afflicting changes udon them and theirs: It is the Lord that
has done this; that was enough to them; and why should it not be so to us.

If the Lord will have Sion plowed as a field, and all the pleasant things
thereof be laid wast, if it be his will that there be a day of trouble, of
perplexity, and treading down in the valley of vision, that the way of the
wicked shall prosper, and they shall devour the men that are more righteous
than themselves; and if it be his pleasure tha Antichrist shall scatter the
power of the holy people; who are we that we should contest with God; we should
rather admire and adore the infinite wisdom and good pleasure of God, who
suffers and orders all these things, as our Savior told Peter, Job. 13. 7.
What I do thou know not now, but thou shall know hereafter; but the Lord
himself know what He is doing, and when he has performed his whole work
upon Mount Sion, Hos. 10. 12. then it will appear that (...) is wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in Working, i. e. in working all about for his own
secret and glorious Ends.

3. For Thirdly, it is most certain, That though the Church and Cause of God in
the World should seem dead for a time, yet it shall arise and live again. As
sure as Christ the Head of his Church arose from the Dead, so surely shall the
Church the Body of Christ arise out of all its troubles, and flourish again.
The Bush burning not consumed, Exodus 3. has been a lively Emblem of the
Churches condition in all generations; the deliverance of Israel from their
Egyptian Bondage, and Babilonian Captivity were great Examples of it, in those
ancient times, and since the time of our Savior Christ, the experience of all
the ages before us for almost 1700. years, has confirmed the same, the
Christian Church and Cause has suffered either under the Heathenish, or the
Arian, or the Anti christian Persecutions; and the design of Satan and his
Instruments (many a time) has been to extinguish the light of the Gospel, and
root out the Church of Christ from the face of the earth, and yet it has been
wonderfully preserved, supported and delivered out of all its troubles unto
this day: And the blood of the Martyrs has been the Seed of the Church; and is
it not as dear to God as ever, is he not as able and willing to save it now as
formerly, and therefore we may conclude with Mordecai, That deliverance shall
come, though we know not how, nor from whence, yet the Lord knows, and can and
will do it in his appointed time, for the Scriptures must and shall be
fulfilled, Rev. 11. chapt. and that should be enough for us.

2. Let not your heart be afraid:

In which words our Savior does not forbid that natural fear which is planted
in the nature of man, viz. an affection of the mind arising from the
apprehension of approaching evils, there is no man made like the Leviathan
without fear: This natural fear was in a sinless manner in the Man Christ Jesus
himself, Heb. 5. 7. he was heard in that which he feared. Nor yet does he
forbid a fear of Caution, in a prudent way to foresee, and by lawful means to
prevent approaching evils, such was Jacobs fear, Genesis 32. 7, 13. and Prove. 22.
3. a Wise man foreseeth the evil and hides himself.

The fear that is here forbidden, is that tyrannical passion of Fear, and
perturbation of the mind, which is wont to invade and be predominant in the
hearts of men in times and cases of danger; distracting and distrustful fears,
which do both weaken men's Spirits, unfit them for duty, and drive men upon
unlawful means: This is a servile and a sinful fear, very unsuitable to
Christians who have the peace of God ruling in their hearts. This is the Fear
that is forbiden here by our Savior Christ: He would have the minds and hearts
of all his Disciples to be so garrisoned with his peace, and so comforted and
encouraged with his gracious promises, that whatever the case be, their hearts
should not be afraid with any amazement, as 1 Pet. 3. 6.

Now the Objects or Causes of their Fear may be referred unto three Heads.

1. The fear of danger.

2. The fear of man,

3. The fear of Death.

1. The fear of danger, when there is a common distraction of men's minds, in
regard of a dismal appearance of threatening dangers; and a doubtful expectation
of men know not what afflicting changes of Providence are coming upon them,
when as in Luke 21. 11. there have been fearful sights, and Ominous Signs from
Heaven; and verse 25. upon the Earth, distress of Nations, with perplexity, the
Sea and the Waves thereof roaring, and then it follows, verse 26. men's hearts
failing them for fear, and for looking after the things that are coming upon
the earth; therefore Luke 21. 9. our Savior said to his Disciples. When you
shall hear of Commotions, and Wars, and Rumors of Wars, see that you be not
terrified: though Paul himself tells us, that he found sometimes when there
were fightings without, there was fears within, 2 Cor. 7. 5. therefore it is no
wonder if others of the servants of God are afflicted with such fears in such
times.

But from the Doctrine delivered, here is comfort against these Fears in three
Respects.

1. That all the formidable things in the World are but outward things, they
reach but to the outward man: and indeed, they are but possible things (as yet)
many of them may never be: sometimes Christians find afterward they have been
more afraid than hurt: but suppose the worst that can befall a child of God in
this World, it reaches not to the inward man, it cannot hurt the Soul, which
is secured and safe in the hands of Christ, upon this ground the Psalmist said,
Psalm. 49. 5. Why should I fear in the evil day, for God will redeem my soul,
ver. 15. and Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3. God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble, therefore we will not fear though the Earth be removed, and
the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea, though the waters thereof
roar and be troubled, though the Mountains shake at the swelling thereof.

2. That all things are in the hands of God, He reigns over all, determining,
limiting, restraining the motions and events of all the Creatures, according to
his good pleasure, for his own holy and glorious ends: this is often mentioned
in the Psalms as a quieting and comforting consideration to the people of God
in the most tumultuous times, that the Lord reigns, Psalm. 93. 1. and 99. 1. and
146. ult. especially in Psalm. 97. 1. The Lord reigns let the Earth rejoice,
Clouds and darkness are round about him; justice and judgment are the
habitation of His Throne. And its yet more comfortable to consider that this
God who rules all the World is my God and Father in Christ, and therefore
nothing shall come to pass but what shall be for his own Glory, and for the
true spiritual and eternal good of all his people, Romans 8. 28. upon this ground
David said, Psalm. 27. 1. The Lord is my light, and my life, and my salvation,
of whom, or what should I be afraid.

3. That the exercise of Faith in Christ, and trust in God and his promises
will expel the malignity of these fears, and settle confidence in our Souls.
This appears from the reproof given by our Savior to his Disciples for their
over fearfulness in a storm at Sea, Mat 8. 14. Why are ye so fearful O ye of
little Faith, implying, had they exercised their Faith, it would have subdued
their fears; therefore David said, Psalm. 56. 3. What time I am afraid I will
trust in thee. Now to trust in God is to commit our selves and all our
concernments into his hands, relying and resting wholly upon his wisdom, power,
goodness and faithfulness engaged to us in his promises, being contented to be
disposed of in all things according to his good pleasure; if we thus do
sincerely betrust our All with God in Christ, we need not doubt but he will
secure us in the most perilous times and cases, that all shall be well at last.
Such a one shall not be afraid of evil tidings, because his heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord. And Isai. 26. 2. Thou will keep him in perfect peace,
whose mind is stayed on thee, because be trusts in thee.

2. The second kind of fear, against which we ought to comfort our selves is
the fear of man. When men, especially great men frown upon us, and breathe out
threatenings against us; or a multitude of men rise up against us, intending and
endeavoring our destruction. Of this the wise Man speaks, Prove. 20. 25. The
fear of man brings a snare, whereby the Saints are subject to be discomposed,
discouraged and drawn too much from the fear of God, and to sinful compliances
with men.

But against this also there is comfort in three respects:

1. That our Savior Christ has particularly warned his Disciples to beware of
the fear of Man, as in Mat. 10. 28. Fear not them that can only kill the body,
and when they have done that, they can do no more; which words are to be looked
at, not only as a command, and therefore to be regarded for the authority of
the Speaker, but as an encouragement from our blessed Savior to all his
faithful Servants in the way of their duty to God, not to be afraid of men;
because the most and worst they can do is but to kill the body, they cannot
hurt our souls which are safe in his hands, and so the Apostle, Phil. 1. 28. Be
not in any thing terrified by your Adversaries, because they can do you no real
harm. So likewise Isai. 51. 12, 13. I even I am be that comfort thee, who
art thou that should be afraid of a man, that shall die, and the Son of man
that shall be as the grass, and forgettest the Lord thy Maker, etc. We cannot
fear man sinfully till we have forgotten God: did we remember who God is, and
what he has said, and what he has done, and is able to do we should not be of
such low Spirits, as to be afraid of sinful and mortal men.

2. The Exaltation of the fear of God will deliver us from the slavish fear of
Man: therefore in Luke 12. ver. 4. after he had bidden his Disciples that they
should not fear men, then in ver. 5. he tells them, I will forewarn you whom
you shall fear; Fear God who has power to cast into Hell, I say unto you fear
him, implying that the fear of God will swallow up the fear of man; a
reverential awe and dread of God, so as to make it our great care to please
him, and our great fear to offend him, this will extinguish the fear of the
Creature, that it shall not have power upon us to draw us from our duty to God
unto sinful compliances with men: so likewise, the Prophet Isaiah, in Chap. 8.
when the minds of the people were greatly possessed with distracting and
distrustful fears of their enemies coming against them, in ver. 12, 13. he
prescribes the right remedy against those fears saying, Fear not their fear,
but sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, let him be your fear, let him be your
dread; as if he had said, be sure to get in with God, and keep in with him,
that you enjoy the favor of God, and then you may set his wisdom, power and
faithfulness against all the power of your Adversaries, you need not be afraid
of them.

3. The exercise of our Faith in Christ, and trust in God and his promise will
set us about the fear of man, and secure us in all dangers; for so the Prophet
shows, Isa. 8. 13, 14. that if we fear God, and trust in him as the Lord of
Hosts, relying upon him, and giving glory to him as God over all blessed for
ever: And then He will be to us for a Sanctuary, He will sufficiently provide
for our Safety, we should leave our selves with him; again, Micah 5. 5. This
man shall be the peace when the Assyrian shall come into our land. The
Assyrians and Babilonians, were the ancient enemies of the People of Israel,
under their names is meant all the Enemies of the Church of God in all
generations following; (by this Man is meant the Lord Jesus Christ, as is
evident from the foregoing verses, the meaning is, that when at any time, in
any place, God shall suffer the proud adversaries of his people (like the
Assyrians) to come into the land, and domineer and bring great affliction upon
the Church of God; that even then Christ Jesus shall be our Peace, i. e. though
outward peace may be taken away, there may be no peace to him that goes out or
comes in, but great affliction and distress every where, yet then all the
faithful shall have and enjoy an inward heavenly and divine peace, in and from
Christ Jesus, and He will take care for the restoring of the outward peace and
prosperity of his Church and people in his own good time, as he sees fit: So
likewise in Isa. 43. 1, 2, 3. the Lord speaks comfortably to the hearts of his
people, Fear not I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by name, thou art
mine, when thou passest through the fire, and through the water, I will be with
thee; and again, verse 5. Fear not for I am with thee; the acting of Faith on
such promises as these, will support and comfort our hearts in times of trouble
and fear; we may conclude as the Apostle does, Romans 8. 31. If God be for us,
who can be against us, and as Heb. 13. 5. We may boldly say, the Lord is my
helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me.

In the third and last place.

3. The fear of Death is another thing which our blessed Savior would have all
his Servants comfort themselves against; for naturally all men are subject to
bondage, through the fear of Death, Heb. 2. 14. there is indeed a natural fear of
death planted in the nature of man as man; because Death is an enemy to nature,
as it makes a Separation between the Soul and Body, which therefore Nature it
self flies from, and would avoid. This natural fear of Death was in the Man
Christ Jesus, and is in all the Saints: But now there is a sinful and a slavish
fear of Death, whereby men are affrighted and terrified at the approach of it,
that they are very loath and unwilling to die; this is that which our Savior
forbids, He would not have any of His Disciples be afraid to die, and therefore
He has given sufficient comfort to all His against the fear of Death.

1. As first, That the death of the Saints is a harmless thing; though we read
of the terrors of the shadow of death, Job. 24. 17. and death it self is called
the King of Terrors, Joh. 18. 14. yet it is so only to the wicked, who have not
made their peace with God; because it reigns over such to eternal Death: but to
the Saints it is not such a formidable thing, for our Savior Christ has said,
they shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2. 11. they having nothing to
fear beyond the grave. It is true also, we read of the Sting of death, 1 Cor.
15. 55. but its only to such as die in their sins; as Christ said to the Jews,
Joh. 8. 24. If you believe not in me, you shall die in your sins; if a man live
and die in his sins, to such indeed their death will be of a stinging nature;
it will strike them down to eternal death; but Christ having taken away the
sins of all penitent Believers, he has disarmed death, and taken away the
Sting of it as to them: Death to the Saints is but as a Serpent without a
Sting, it can do them no harm: therefore the man or woman to whom the Lord
Jesus has spoken Peace saying, thy sins are forgiven thee, they not only need
not fear death, but they may and ought to triumph over it, as Paul did, 1. Cor.
15. 55. O Death where is thy Sting, O Grave where is thy victory, thanks be to
God, that gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Death is of great advantage to the Saints, as Paul affirmed it was to him,
Phil. 1. 21. To me to dye is gain, for Christ is to me advantage both in life
and death; it is true, Death in its nature is the same to all, but not in its
end and use; for to the Saints the Commission of death is changed; to the
wicked it is, Take him Jailor, carry him down to hell, but to the Godly it is,
Take him, Porter, and give him entrance into Heaven, so that as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 2. 21. if we are Christ's, then death it self is ours, it is not
against us, but for us, it is not an Enemy now, but a Friend and Servant; it is
very serviceable to the Saints in two Respects.

1. In putting an end to all the evils of Sin and Sorrow, that the Saints have
been conflicting with all their days: It Is true, Death is the end of all men
in this world, but then it puts an end to the Indwelling of Sin, and to the
temptations of Satan; to all bodily distempers, and to the various troubles and
afflictions of this world. God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes, and
therefore then the days of our mourning shall be ended.

2. In putting us into the possession of all the good and glory of Heaven. When
the Saints dye, the time of their perfection is come, Heb. 12. 23. The Spirits
of the Just are made perfect in Heaven, enjoying perfect holiness, and perfect
peace, and joy, and rest for ever. In a word, the Saints departed this life, do
enjoy an eternal blessed life in immediate vision and fruition of God,
Communion with Christ, and Fellowship with the glorified Saints and Angels in
the Highest Heavens for ever. Well may it then be said, Blessed are the dead
that dye is the Lord, Rev. 14. 13.

3. Last of all, by the exercise of Faith in Christ, and his promises, we shall
not only overcome the Fear of Death, but be able to give it welcome
entertainment when it comes; for he has promised to all penitent believers,
that they shall not see death, they shall not be hurt of the Second Death, they
shall not dye eternally, they shall not perish, but have eternal life, John 8.
51. Rev. 2. 11. John. 11. 26. John 6. 40. and in John 14. 2. he tells his
Disciples, I go to prepare a place for you in Heaven, and I will come and
receive you to my Self, and you shall be with me in Heaven, when your time is
ended in this World: Now then, if we believe in Christ as our All-sufficient
Savior, and trust unto his faithfulness, in making good these his promises
unto us, this will not only free us from the fear of Death, but make us willing
rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord, and to say with
Paul, I desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is far better, Phil.1.
23. and with good old Simeon, Luke 2. 30. Now Lord, let thy Servant depart in
peace, for nine eyes have seen thy Salvation.

Revelations II. III.
And I will give power to my two witnesses, and they shall Prophecy a thousand
two hundred and threescore days, clothed in Sackcloth.
IN mine ordinary course on the first Epistle of John, Chapter five. We have
lately insisted on the Witnesses to this great Truth, That [Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God, and Savior of the World.] This is the sum and scope
of the six first verses; and then verse 7. There are three that (...) record in
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these Three are one; and
verse 8. There are Three that bear Witness in Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and
the Blood, and these three agree in one; that is, they all agree in this
Testimony, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and Savior of the World.
At this time I shall speak a few words of the Two Witnesses here mentioned in
the Text which I have now read unto you, because these also witness to you
something. In the close of the last Sermon concerning the Three Witnesses upon
Earth, it was one of the Exhortations then but briefly expressed; that we be
sure to be found amongst the number of Christ's Witnesses here upon the Earth.
Now because of the great importance and concernment of this Truth, being so
necessary and seasonable for us in these times: I shall therefore insist upon
it a little more fully and particularly, from the words of this Text. And for
Introduction, it will be sufficient if we observe, that this Chapter (according
to the concurrent judgment of the generality of good interpreters) contains a
Prophecy of the state of the Church of Christ, witnessing for Christ, and
against Antichrist, during the whole time of the reign of Anti christ. All the
time that the holy City is trodden down by Antichristian Gentiles, the Saints
and People of God do bear witness for the Truths and Ways of Christ, against
all Antichristian Errors and Ways.

I shall briefly show you something of the meaning of the Text, answering a few
Questions: And first,

Quest. 1. Who these Witnesses are?

Answ. First in general; all sincere Christians; all that are Followers of the
Lamb; are to be understood as Witnesses of Christ, for look as Rev. 13. 17.
also the Followers of the Beast are said to receive his Mark or hit Name, or
the number of his name; So in Rev. 14. 1. All the Followers of the Lamb are
also said to be marked with his Fathers Name written in their foreheads, in
respect of a sincere public Profession, that they are for Jesus Christ, his
Truths and Ways, and that in opposition to all Anti christian Ways; but the
verse after the Text, tells us more particularly who these Witnesses are* these
are the Two Olive Trees, und the two Candlesticks standing before the God of
the Earth, which is a manifest allusion to Z each. 4. in the third and eleven
verses you read of Two Olive Trees, and in verse 24. these two Olive Trees are
said to be the Two Anointed Ones, and by the course of the third and 4 th
Chapter it is evident by the Two Anointed Ones is meant Joshua and Zerubbabel,
the Magistrate and the Minister, both were Anointed to stand before the Lord of
the whole earth, as public instruments under God, for the good of his Church
and People in the World. So that the Two Olive Trees are the Godly Magistrate,
and the Godly Minister; but then what are the two Candlesticks? mentioned with
the two Olive Trees in this Rev. 11. 4. we may observe, in Zech 5. there was
but one Candlestick; noting the Jewish Church, which was but one; but in Rev.
1. There is a Vision of seven Candlesticks which are said to be the seven
Churches, because the Christian Church is more than one, and at sometimes a
multitude of Churches, which yet in Antichristian times are reduced unto a
smaller number, as here, but Two Candlesticks, i. e. Two Churches, and Two
Witnesses: So that if you put all these together, then by the Two Witnesses we
are to understand, a godly. Magistracy and Ministry in Conjunction with the
Churches of Christ and all sincere Christians.

Quest. Why are they called Witnesses?

Answ. Because it is their work and buisiness to bear witness to the Truth and
ways of Christ in opposition to the ways of Antichrist; this is expressed in
the Text by the word [Prophesying] which is a declaring and making known the
mind and will of God out of his Word (as will appear by comparing Rev. 19. 10.
and 22. 9.) So that this [ Prophesying] and this [ witness bearing] so as to
carry on the Testimony of Christ in the world, against Antichrist, these are
all one: and it it the work and buisiness of all the Witnesses of Christ
according to their several capacities.

Quest. 3. But why are they called Two Witnesses.

Ans. Because two are but few, and yet enough to bear witness; for God has
ordained, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be
established. (as in diverse places both of the Old and New Testament) and the
meaning is, that although at some time Christ's Witnesses may be reduced to a
small number, yet the Lord Jesus will always preserve a sufficient number to
bear witness to his Truth in the darkest times. Sometimes they are but as a
Remnant left, but a few names in Sardis, as Rev. 3. 4. yet these shall be
enough to bear witness for Christ against Antichrist all the time of the
Gentiles, treading under foot the holy City.

Quest. 4. What is meant by this, That they shall Prophecy in Sackcloth? Why
in Sackcloth?

Answ. It signifies, the sad afflicted and mournful condition, that the
Churches and Witnesses of Christ shall be in at several times, and in several
places in the world, during the long time of Antichrists Reign.

When the Jews of old mourned and were afflicted, they put on Sackcloth, the
Princes, the Priests, the People in great Calamities, put on Sackcloth (as
might be showed in many Scriptures) so the Witnesses here are said to Prophecy
in Sackcloth, what does this mean but the afflicted and mournful condition of
the Churches of Christ, and People of God in Antichristian-times.

For is it not a sad thing for the holy City to be trodden under foot by
Antichristian Gentiles: Is it not a sad thing that the Heresies, Idolatries,
and Superstitions of the Popish Religion should spread and prevail up and down
in the world. Again, is it not a mournful thing that the Churches of Christ to
be hidden and driven into corners, for the Faithful Ministers and Servants of
Christ to be Persecuted, Imprisoned, and killed all the day long, and counted
but as Sheep for the Slaughter: Thus it has been, thus it is, and thus it will
be in Antichristian times; sincere Christians shall be in a sorrowful and
suffering condition.

Qu. 5. What is meant by this; I will give power to my Witnesses, etc.

The word [ Power] is not in the Original, for though the thing is included as
one particular; yet that word Power is to narrow to express the full meaning.
The word in the Greek is (...) etc. and I will give to them; i. e. as if he had
said;

1. I will give it to them as their duty to bear witness unto me.

2. I will give them Grace to enable them to this Duty.

3. I give them Authority to do their duty, they have their Commission from me
and my Word. And

4. I give it them as their great honor and privilege both to do and to
suffer as witnesses for me, thus in Phil. 1. 29. Unto you it is given in the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.

And then.

5. Further implies, that so long as he has any work for any of His Witnesses,
He will maintain, them, accept, them, and succeed them in their witness-bearing
unto him, until he calls them away to himself; and then He will raise up others
in their stead, until the time appointed that their witnessing in Sack cloth be
expired.

Qu. 6. What is meant by the one thousand two hundred and threescore days, as
the time of the Witnesses Prophesying in Sack cloth?

Ans. By the concurrent judgment of the Divines: these days do signify so
many Years, a day being put for a year, as might be showed from such Scriptures
as mention the prophetical numbers of time, as Ezekiel. 4. 6. compared with other
places. And these one thousand two hundred and threescore days of the
Witnesses prophesying in Sack cloth, are the same number with the forty two
months of the Beast, that is, Antichrists reigning and treading down the holy
City, which does seem to intimate, that when this one thousand two hundred and
threescore days shall be finished, then Antichrists reign shall expire, and
the suffering time of the Church come to an end.

Qu. 7. The seventh and last Question may arise from the former; Some may
desire to know (if it were possible) when did this time begin; and shall it end?

Ans. All I say in answer to this question is, as our Savior Christ said unto
his Disciples, Act. 1. 7. It is net for us to know the times or the seasons
which the Father has put in his own power. And the mistakes of such as have
given their conjectures in this matter may deter us from being too inquisitive,
and too positive therein: Only from the Text and Context, there are two things
may safely be concluded:

1. That there is a certain period of time determined by God, and known unto
him, when these times shall come to an end. It is a day known to the Lord,
Zech. 14. 7. and when the Prophecies are fulfilled, and the times expired, then
they will clearly be understood by us, and known to us, but (it may be) not
before.

2. That so long as Antichrists reign continues in the World, so long the
Witnesses and suffering time of the Church and People of God must and shall
continue; and it being very clear the time of Antichrist is not yet expired; it
is as clear that the time of the Witnesses, Prophesying in Sack cloth is not
yet at an end.

Thus I have showed you (as briefly as might be) something our Saviors meaning
in the words of this Text.

I might propound unto you this Doctrine, and enlarge upon it;

DOCTRINE,

That it is the indispensable duty, and great concernment of all Christians in
all places that live in the times before the destruction of Antichrist to be
found amongst the number of the the Witnesses of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

But I shall wave the prosecution of such a Doctrine, and shall only reassume,
and reinforce the Exhortation mentioned the last Lecture day.

O Brethren, let us all be moved and warned from the Lord, to look diligently
to our selves, that we be found amongst the number of the Witnesses of Jesus
Christ.

To set on this Exhortation, I shall set before you,

1. Seven Motives to persuade you And then,

2. Seven Directions to gaid us, how and wherein we are to be Witnesses unto
Christ.

In the first place,

1. Consider the excellency and glory of the cause we are called to bear
witness unto. It is indeed the cause of our Lord Jesus Christ that he is the
only Christ, the only Savior the great Prophet, the high Priest, the Soverain
Lord and King, of his Church; nay that He is the Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings, and of all the Kingdoms of the World: that his Gospel has a right
paramount, all rights to be received and subjected unto in every Nation of the
World; and that the knee of Magistracy should bow at the Name of Jesus,
confessing to the glory of God, that He is Lord of all.

Again, it is the cause of the one true Religion, that all things in all the
Churches of Christ throughout the World, both in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline
and Manners should be according to the Gospel of Jesus Christ: and this in
opposition to the mixtures, inventions and additions of men, especially in
opposition to the damnable Heresies and vile Idolatries of the Popish Religion:
this is that glorious cause we are called to bear witness to (All the
particulars mentioned might be abundantly confirmed from the Scriptures, but
that my designed brevity will not permit such enlargement.

2. Consider that all sincere Christians are appointed by our Savior Christ to
be witnesses unto Him; thus in Luke 24. after he had told his Disciples the
substance of his Gospel, and commanded them to Preach Repentance and Remission
of Sins in his Name unto all Nations, he adds verse 48. Ye are my Witnesses of
these things; and in Acts 1. after he had fully instructed them in all things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God, he tells them, verse 8. Ye shall be Witnesses
unto the utmost parts of the earth; so so that if we be amongst the number of
his true Disciples, we must look at our selves appointed by Him, to be
Witnesses unto Him.

3. We are not alone, but have a great and honorable multitude of Witnesses
gone before us, going along with us, and coming after us: as now,

1. The Three Witnesses in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Spirit;

And 2. The Three Witnesses on Earth, the Spirit the Water and the Blood, 1
John 5. 7.

And 3: The Man Christ Jesus himself, when he was upon Earth, He witnessed a
good Confession before Pilate, 1 Timothy 6. 13. when he professed saying, To this
end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness to the Truth, John. 18. 17. and since he ascended into Heaven, in his
Epistles to the seven Churches, Rev. 1. 5. he styles himself the Faithful and
True Witness, and we are to follow him as the Captain of our Salvation.

Again 4 All the Apostles and Christians and Martyrs of Jesus have carried on
this work of witness bearing in all the ages before us, and are to be followers
of them as they have followed Christ.

And 5. There are in this Age, and at other places of the world, a great
multitude of godly Ministers and Christians that an faithfully witnessing and
suffering for Christ, and against Antichrist; therefore as the Apostle says,
Heb. 12. 1, 2. Being compassed about with such a Cloud of Witnesses, let us run
with Patience the Race that is set before (...) looking unto Jesus for his
Example to guide us, and his Grace to enable us that we also may be found
amongst the faithful Witnesses in this our age; and since it is the Will of God
to appoint us our lot to live in a time when the People of God are generally
called unto Witnessing and Suffering Work for Christ, let us not only be
willing to it, but rejoice in it that we are counted worthy to be enrolled
among such a blessed Company of Witnesses unto Christ.

4. Let us also consider of it; that the Churches of Christ and People of God
in New England are engaged by the special Providence of God, in this duty of
bearing witness unto Christ against Antichrist, and that more than any people
in the world that we know of.

For,

1. Our Fathers came into this Wilderness merely and purely upon this account,
viz. for their Testimony to Christ and his Gospel, and against Humane
Inventions and additions in the Worship of God.

2. We their Children and Successors are engaged in the same cause, their
Witnessing work is now devolved upon us and committed unto us; we that are now
living are accountable to God for his Cause and Gospel in our time.

3. We have enjoyed a long time of the liberty and peace of the Gospel above
these fifty years, and that more than most other people in the world, we have
had liberty to be as good as we would be or as we should be, with many things
to help us, and nothing to hinder us to this day.

4. Also there has been amongst us a higher profession of a practical
Reformation in all things relating to Religion then in most other places:
insomuch that New England has been in this respect as a City set upon a hill
which cannot be hid: but has been observed and eyed by all sorts of friends
and enemies, and by the whole Popish Party, and therefore we had need look to
our selves that we acquit our selves well, in this perilous hour of the Passion
of the Gospel.

5. Let us further consider, that this work of witness bearing to Christ is not
an indifferent thing, but absolutely necessary to our Salvation; when God calls
a Christian there unto; as Romans 10. 10. With the heart in an believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation; the first
of these to believe with the heart is necessary at all times, and the second
confession is also necessary at such times and in such cases, when a man is
called to confess Christ, and any of his Truths and Ways in opposition to
Antichristian ways; therefore our Savior Christ has said, Mat. 10. Whosoever
will Confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father which is in
Heaven, and and ver. 33. Whosoever will deny me before men, him will I deny
before my Father which is in Heaven, the like we find, Mark 8. 88.

6. This is the end why the Lord sends an hour of Temptation upon the world to
try the sincerity of those that make profession of the Truth, Rev. 3. 10. for
He the great God changes the times and seasons (according to his good
pleasure, for his own holy and secret ends) from a time of peace to a time of
trouble, from a time of liberty, to a time of restraint and Persecution for the
Gospel sake; and commonly after a time of Profession, there comes a time of
Temptation to try all the Professors of the Truth. Such an hour of Temptation
is already upon the Churches and People of God in many other parts of the
world; and if the Lord see fit (...) it upon us in New England also, we should
not think strange of the fiery Trial which is to try us as the Apostle speaks,
1 Pet. 4. 12. but look diligently to it, that we approve our selves as true and
faithful witnesses unto Jesus Christ and his Truths and Ways, in opposition to
all Antichristian Ways.

7. Last of all consider this, That either you must be amongst the witnesses of
Christ, or else be Apostates from Christ, and be the branded Followers of
Antichrist. For in the Christian world there are two Heads, Christ and
Antichrist: and there are two Parties and sides of men, and whatever men seem
to be in times of Peace and Profession, yet when the hour of Temptation is
come, and when searching trials are long and strong, men must of necessity be,
and appear to be, on the one side or on the other, either on Christ's side or on
Antichrists side; for so in this book of Revelations (besides in other
Scriptures) these two sorts are mentioned as in opposition one against another,
as Rev. 13. 17. the followers of Antichrist either have the mark of the Beast,
or his name, or the number of his name and who are those but such as profess
the Idolatries, Heresies and Superstitsons of the Popish Religion, and adhere
to the Pope as Head of the Church: and this either in whole or in part. On the
other side, Rev. 14. 1. The Followers of the Lamb the Lord Jesus, are marked
with hss Fathers Name written in their foreheads; to signify their professed
cleaving to Christ, only as the Head of his Church, and his written word as
the only Rule of all things that belong to the Christian Religion, and
therefore witnessing against all Antichristian ways, in the face of opposition,
and in the face of the most threatening danger whatsoever.

Now then, as Moses said unto Israel, Exo: 22. 26. Who is on the Lords side?
Who? So when God by his Providential dispensations in searching trials, says,
Who is on Christ's Side? Who? Then if you fall off from Christ, his Truths and
Ways, you will by degrees fall to and fall in with the Antichristian Party, so
as either to bear the mark of the Beast, or his name, or the number of his
name; by sinful compliances, contrary to your duty and fidelity to Jesus
Christ: Now what Godly Soul cannot but fear and tremble at this, and say, Lord
save me from being amongst the number of the Antichristians: Lord Jesus let me
be on thy Side, and amongst the number of Sincere Christians that are thy
faithful Witnesses, whatever be the issue, and what ever become of me in this
world.

Now if the Question be demanded,

Quest. How and wherein should we approve our selves to be the true and
faithful Witnesses of our Lord Jesus Christ?

Answ. I Answer in the seven following Directions;

1. Let us look to our selves, that we have that which is essential to the
constitution of a Witness of Christ; and that is, by a penitential and
obediential Faith to receive the witness of God concerning Christ, and to have
that witness in our selves. Thus in 1 John Chap. 5. after the Apostle had
enumerated the Witnesses in Heaven, and on Earth to this great Truth (That
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and Savior of the World) ve. 6, 7, 8. he
then applies it, ver. 9. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God
is greater; and then he shows what the witness of God concerning Christ is,
ver. 10, 11, 12. That eternal Life is in Christ, and that whosoever believes in
him shall have that eternal life. So that when by the effectual work of the
Spirit and Word of Faith, we are enabled to receive this Witness of God.

And that,

1. With a firm Assent of our understanding, we believe the Gospel of Christ to
be infallably true; resting on the supreme Authority, Veracity and Fidelity of
God the Witnesser: And also,

2. With a true consent of our Will, and with the well pleased affections of
our hearts we do receive the thing witnessed, that is, we do receive Christ
himself, in all his Offices (as our chief good) with application to our selves,
unto all the ends and uses for which God gives him.

Then it is, that we come to have the witness in our selves, as ver. 10. He
that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself. For by this means
the whole Soul comes to be fashioned and framed by the Truth and goodness of
the Gospel; and Christ comes to be formed in us, to live, and dwell, and reign
in our hearts and lives by Faith in him, Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians. 3. 17. and so we our
selves are made witnesses unto Jesus Christ. Therefore we had all need to look
diligently to this; for although many may seem to be amongst the number of
Christ's Witnesses in a time of the peace of the Gospel; yet when Persecution
arises for the Gospel sake, and when searching trials come, experience has
often proved it already, and may do again, that the number of Professors come
to be thinned, and but few in comparison that are found to be faithful
witnesses of Christ: the reason is for want of a divine Faith, receiving Christ
into the heart upon the witness of God in his Word; for that is it does
essentially constitute and make a man to be a sound Believer, and a sincere
witness of Christ, accepted and approved of him: For of such, of all such, and
only such he says, Act. 1. 8. Ye shall be witnesses unto me; and in the Text,
They are my Witnesses, and Rev. 2. 13. Antipas my faithful Martyr.

Direction,

2. Rest not till we find these Properties in our selves whereby the Witnesses
of Christ are described in this Book of the Revelation;

As to give instance in some of them,

1. They are called Chosen and Faithful, Rev. 17. 14. let us look to that then,
that we be effectually called, that we have sincerely answered the call of God
in his Gospel, and do still answer it by a continual exercise of Faith and
Repentance; and that we be his chosen ones, having the special Grace of Gods
Election, and the choice Graces of the Spirit, that accompany Salvation. And
that we be faithful to Jesus Christ and his Gospel, approving our selves so to
be in all times and cases of trial.

2. They are such as have and keep the Faith of Jesus, Rev. 13. 10. and 14. 12.
so must we keep the Doctrine of Faith uncorrupted, and the grace of Faith
always in exercise; and we must keep it to our lives end.

3. They have the Testimony of Jesus, Rev. 19, 12, ult. which implies both the
whole testimony that is given of Christ in the word of God in all things
relating to him; and the Testimony which Christ himself gave, and for which he
suffered, 1 Timothy 6. 13. Joh. 18. 36, 37. So we must have and hold forth, and
carry on the same Testimony in our time.

4. They are such as keep the Commandments of God, Rev. 14. 12. and 13. ult. So
it must be with us; we must with evangelical sincerity keep the ten
Commandments of Gods Law, as the way wherein we are to walk to the kingdom of
Heaven; and as the rule of our lives and all our actions, and especially in
matters of Religion, Mat. 28. ult. that the only reason why we cannot consent
and comply with others in this or that, is, because we see not how they do
agree with the commands of God.

5. They are without guile, Rev. 14. 5. In their mouth was found no guile, and
they are without fault before the Throne of God To signify the sincerity of
the Witnesses of Christ in opposition to the Hypocrisy of the times wherein
they lived; they did not dissemble with God or men, nor counterfeit a Religion,
but all their words and actions did convincingly evidence, they were truly and
really such as they professed themselves to belike to Nathanael, of whom it is
said, Joh. 1. ^^. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile, i. e. no
prevailing guile: so it should be with us; our great care should be, to be
sincere and without offense till the day of Christ, Phil. 1. 10.

6. They are such as have Christ and His Fathers Name written upon their
foreheads, Rev 14. 1. as a mark of their avowed profession, signifying to whom
they do belong, that they are for Christ and his Gospel in opposition to
Antichrist, and all his ways.

7. They follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, Rev. 14. 4. which notes their
firm adherence to Christ himself and his Gospel whatever be the issue: and that
they acknowledge Christ alone to be their Leader and Commander following him,
with their eyes and hearts toward him, to teach them by his Doctrine, to guide
them by his Example, to enable them by his Grace and Spirit unto all well
doing, and well suffering for his Name sake taking their Lot with him for
better or worse in this World as he shall dispose of them, looking for their
great reward in Heaven with him; and so they persevere to the end of their
days, as the sincere followers of Christ.

And these are some of the properties by which the Witnesses of Christ are
described; and its certain, that you and I must have all these properties, or
we shall not be accepted of our Lord Jesus Christ to be Witnesses unto him.

Direction, 3.

The third Direction is concerning the things of Christ, wherein we are to bear
witness unto him. We must care for the things of Christ, as Phil. 2. 21.
Although Christ now in Heaven be invisible to us, and the blind World do not
see his glory; they hear talk of one Jesus, but few believe him to be such a
one as he is, yet the Saints of God that see and believe, and are sure that He
is the Christ the Son of God and Savior of the World, and that He is their
Lord and Savior; having no other way now in this World to express our sincere
affection to him, we must do it unto all those things of Christ which he has
left below here upon Earth, even whatsoever is owned by him, or does any way
stand in relation to him.

I shall briefly instance in ten Particulars.

We must bear Witness to;

1. The Image of Christ by expressing all the forementioned properties in our
whole conversation; showing that we do indeed bear the Image of Christ in the
World, as 1 Cor. 15. 49. that we have Christ formed in us, and that we are
anointed with his Spirit, and in our measure like unto him, walking as he
walked and purifying our selves as he is pure, 1 John 2. 6. and 3. 3. and so
approving our selves to God and men that we are Christians, not in name only,
but indeed and in truth.

2. The Name of Christ, that a; God has given him a name above every name,
Phil. 2. 9. So we exalt the name of Christ above the names of all the Kings and
Emperors in the World, that he is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and
that he has a Kingdom over the Souls and Consciences of men, and that in all
matters of Religion, we must be subject only to the supreme authority of him
who is head of his Church, and Lord over all, Isai 33. 22. The Lord is our
Lawgiver, the Lord is our Judge, he will save us.

3. The Word of Christ, as Col: 3. 16. The word of Christ should dwell in us
richly teaching and admonishing our selves and one another, that the written
Word of God is the only Rule of Faith and manners, and the only Judge of
controversies, as Joh. 12. 40. therefore cleaving to the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ as the words of Eternal Life, we should hold forth the same to all
men upon all occasions, Phil. 2. 16.

4. The Doctrine of Christ, as its called Heb. 6. 1. that is, That all the
Doctrines that are contained in the Written Word of God, these are of God, and
are the Doctrine of Godliness, teaching us the way of living to God unto
Eternal Life; and that all other Doctrines that are different from, or contrary
to the Word of God, that these are not of God,

5. The Worship of God in Christ; both the inward Worship of God in Spirit and
Truth; and the outward means of Worship the Ordinances of Christ, they must all
be appointed by him in his Word; in all matters of Divine Worship we must
observe all and only what he has commanded, Mat. 28. 20. and Deuteronomy. 12. last.
What thing soever I command you, observe to do it, thou shall not add
thereunto, nor diminish there from, and Isa. 29. 13. and Mark 7. 7. in vain do
they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men.

6. The day of Christ; the Lords day, as it is called, Rev. 1. 10. that it is
to be observed as the Christian Sabbath, and kept unto God, with the highest
strain of inward and outward holiness, according to the fourth Commandment, and
that without the addition of any other holy days appointed by men, as the Feast
which Jeroboam ordained and devised out of his own heart; 1 Kings 12. 33.

7. The Church and Churches of Christ, that is the Universal Visible Church
which is the Kingdom of Christ in the World containing all that profess
Christianity: and the Mystical Church of Christ consisting of all and only true
believers, and sincere Christians, contained in the Visible Church; as also
particular Visible Churches, professing to walk in, and according to the order
of the Gospel; over all which Christ alone is to be acknowledged as the Supreme
Head, Ephesians 5. 23. He is the Head of the Church, and Savior of his Body, Ephesians. 1.
22. He is Head over all things to his Church.

8. The Government and Discipline of Christ in his Church, for the Government
of the Church appertains to him, Isa. 9. 6. as Head of his Church, to appoint
his own Ordinances, and Officers to manage all the affairs of his Kingdom, and
dispensing his Rewards and Punishments according to his Laws, Who is the only
Lawgiver, Jam. 4. 12

9. The Ministers of Christ, who are under him, and in his stead to dispense
his holy things, 1 Cor. 4. 1. they are to be accountted as the Ministers of
Christ, and as the Stewards of the Mysteries of God, and as the Lord solemnly
charged it upon the people of Israel that they should not forsake the Levites
all the days of their lives, Deuteronomy. 12. 19. So the Ministers of the Gospel
should not be forsaken by the People of God, but owned especially then when
they are called forth to answer and suffer for Christ and his Gospel sake, the
injuries of men do not break the relation between a Minister and People, nor
release them from the relative duties enjoined by the Word of God, so far as is
possible for them to perform the same, Mat. 10. 40. shows that the receiving
and owning, or the despising and forsaking them, Christ takes it as done to
himself.

10. The People of God and Servants of Christ, for in the forecited place, Mat.
10. last. Our Savior shows, what is done to any Christian in the name of a
Disciple, or because he belongs to Christ, as Mark 9. 41. he takes it as done
to himself, also Mat. 25. 34. 42.

Thus you see in these Ten particulars, in what we are to bear witness unto
Jesus Christ.

Direction. 4.

Concerning the duty of witness bearing it self, wherein it does consist, and
how it is to be performed by us, viz. in these following five particulars.

1. By our professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ in a practical way, as
you read that expression of a professed subjection to the Gospel, 2 Cor. 13.
which imports an open, free and public profession of the true Christian
Religion according to the Gospel, in the whole circumference of it, and all
things contained therein; Christians must not conceal and keep their Religion
to themselves, but make it known to the world, both by their words and actions
that they are of the number of the resolved Followers of Christ. Hence as Paul
after his conversion joined himself to the Church at Jerusalem, Acts 9. 26. So
all sincere Christians should even in perilous times join themselves to the
Churches of Christ; and as it was said of those Primitive Christians, Acts 2.
42. they continued steadfastly together in the Apostles Doctrine, and
Fellowship, and Breaking of Bread, and Prayers; so there ought to be a steadfast
continuance of Christians together in Church-relation, and in observing all the
Commandments of Christ in matters of Religion; and this profession ought to be
adorned by suitable Conversation such as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1. 22.

2. By witnessing a good confession; as our Savior Christ did who is gone
before us, and has led us the way as the true and faithful witness, 1 Timothy 6.
13. how He did that, is showed, John 18. 37. when he was called to it by Pilate
the Roman Governor, he professedly Witnessed that He was a King, and had a
Kingdom though not of this world, and said moreover, for this end I was born,
and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness to the
truth; and further, every one that is of the truth hears my voice. So that
when we are called to it by Authority, if we be the sincere Followers of
Christ, we also must own and bear witness to the truths and ways of Christ,
that belong to his heavenly Kingdom, whatever be the issue.

And in this confession of Christ we must remember the Example of John Baptist,
John 1. 20. He confessed and denied not, but confessed, etc. that is, he did
express himself both negatively and affirmatively without recanting or
contradicting the witness that he gave in concerning Christ. So it should be
with us in witness bearing to any of the things of Christ. Christians ought to
express themselves plainly and fully, so as to be understood, that we are the
sincere Followers of Christ, not saying or doing any thing that may revoke or
obscure our testimony of Jesus Christ, a faithful witness speaks constantly,
Prove. 21. 28.

3. By our willingness and readiness to suffer for any of the truths and ways
of Christ, as in the Acts of the Apostles, the Christians then were called unto
Sufferings which they willingly underwent for the name of Christ So it has
been ever since, although the Lord has been wont to give some breathing times
to his Church in the world, and has sometimes privileged some of his people
in some places, with a longer enjoyment of the Gospel of Peace, and peace of
the Gospel then others; yet in all ages hitherto, ever since the time of our
Savior Christ, it has not been long before Christians have been called unto
Sufferings for the Gospel sake, Rev. 13. 10. Here is the Patience of, and Faith
of the Saints; and Rev. 14. 12. Here is the Patience of the Saints, here are
they that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus, so that we see
that Faith and Patience, keeping the commandments of God, and Patience go
together. So that if we are resolved for the one, we must resolve upon the
other; and choose patienly to endure any sufferings, rather than deny the Faith
of Christ, or break any of the commands of God; those that cannot, or will not
suffer for the truths and ways of Christ, they will not be found amongst the
number of such as keep the commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus.

4. We must also be companions with those that suffer for Christ's sake, as the
Apostle John professed himself to be, Rev. 1. 9. I John am your brother and
companion in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ; and
the Apostle in the Hebrews, chap. 10. 33. acknowledged that they were not only
Sufferers themselves, being made a gazing stock by reproaches and afflictions,
but they were companions of those that were so used for the Gospel sake. It is
true indeed, that all serious christians at all times should remember that of
David, Psalm. 119. 63. I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them
that keep thy Precepts; though in ordinary conversation a christian may have to
do with those that are not such, yet the men of our choice and delight should
be only such as fear the Lord: and then especially when any such are called
forth to witness and suffer for Christ and his Gospel sake, it is our duty to
own them and their cause, to stand by them and be with them, to appear for
them, yea, and to suffer with them, and for them, as we are called to it; the
Apostle Paul complained, 2 Timothy 4. 16. that at his first answer no man stood
with him, but all men forsook him; and this was at Rome where there was such a
famous Church of Christians at that time; but this implies, it was their duty
not to have forsaken him in the cause of Christ; and it was their Sin that they
did not, therefore he prays God that it might not be laid to their charge:
Where we may also observe in Paul's example, if any or all men should forsake
us, and no man stand with us, we must be willing to stand alone, and suffer
alone in a cause of Christ, being contented with this that the Lord stands with
us, as he did with Paul, ver. 17, 18. not withstanding the Lord stood with me
and strengthened me, that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that
all the Gentiles might hear, and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion;
and the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto
his heavenly Kingdom to whom be glory for Ever and for Ever AMEN.

5. In all that we say, or do or suffer in witness-bearing to Christ, be sure
to keep close to the Word of God: hold forth that and hold fast that as
containing the matter and ground of our Testimony: Thus the Primitive Witnesses
and Martys of Jesus are described and commanded, Rev. 1. 9. John was in the
Isle of Patmos for the Word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, Rev.
3. 8. Thou have kept my Word, and have not denied (...) Name, and Rev. 6. 9. I
saw under the Altar the Souls of them that were stain for the Word of God, and
for the Testimony which they held, and Rev. 12. 11. They Overcame by the blood
of the Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, and they loved not their loves
to the death; they lost their lives, but kept the Word of God, they lived and
died upon that, and so should we, and if we be sincere Christians, it cannot
but be so.

And this may be a great relief to the Spirits of Christians, who are not
acquainted with, or not skilled in the controversies of Religion, or have not
the ability of disputing for the Truth against Errors; or not knowing before
hand in what particulars we may be called to give our Testimony about: it is
sufficient if we keep to the written Word of God; because all things pertaining
to the true Christian Religion, are contained therein, and Authorized thereby;
if any thing be required or imposed that is different form or contrary to the
Word of God, we ought not to accept of it, nor submit to it, but renounce it,
and bear witness against it; as contrary to the Will and command of our Lord
Jesus Christ the Head and King of his Church: It is enough for a Christian to
say, this or that is not agreeable to the written Word of God, therefore I
cannot, I dare not, I will not consent or yield thereunto, whatever I suffer,
or whatever become of me in this world; this has been the Spirit and Plea of
the Confessors and Martyrs of Jesus Christ in all the ages before us, and must
be ours, if indeed we would be found and accepted amongst the Witnesses of
Jesus Christ.

Diriction 5.

The next Direction is, concerning the duty of Christians in relation to the
civil Government and Magistracy we live under.

The Rule is this, in changeable times keep close to the unchangeable Rules of
Gods Word, which guide us in the way of our duty, toward any Magistracy which
God by his Providence sets over us: it is true indeed, if the Lord has
privileged his people with such a Magistracy as he has made to be Nursing
Fathers to the Church of God and the true Christian Religion; there is no
question of it, but we should highly prize it, and bless God for it, as an
invaluable mercy, and use all means that are lawful for the continuance of such
a blessing to our selves, and our posterity after us; but if it be the will of
the great God ( who changes the times and seasons, who removes Kings and sets
up Kings, and gives the Kingdoms of the Earth to whomsoever he will, Dan. 2.
21. ver. 77.) I say if it be his pleasure, for his own holy and secret ends to
bring upon us, such a change of the civil Government, that those that are in
place of Authority, are not so friendly and fatherly affected to the Church of
Christ, and the concernments of Religion as formerly; who are we that we should
reply against God, and say, why have thou done this? Is not he the Potter and
we the clay? Shall we receive good from the hand of God and not evil? Job. 2.
10. ought we not to submit our selves to God, and be content to be at his
dispose? James 4. 7, 10.

And then should we not also remember those unchangeable rules of direction in
the Word of God concerning our duty to such Magistracy as God by his Providence
has set over us, and are not these three duties very plain in the Scripture?

1. Prayer for them, 1 Timothy 2 23. For Kings, and all that are in Authority,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, fer
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior

2. Subjection to their Authority?

And,

3. Obedience to their Laws and Commands, These. 2. are joined together in many
Scriptures, as Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject unto the Higher Powers;
for there is no power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God,
whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, etc.
and ver. 5. You must needs be subject not only for wrath but also for
Conscience sake, 1. Pet: 2. 13 14. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man
for the Lords sake, whether it be the King as Supreme, or unto Governors sent
by him etc. and ver. 15. for so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may
put to Silence the ignorance of foolish men, and ver. 17. Fear God and Honor
the the King, Tit. 3. 1. put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and
Powers to obey Magistrates, etc.

Now then, do not these Commands of God belong to us as well as Christians in
former ages? and is it not a part of our Christianity and Obedience to Christ
himself to observe these commands of his as well as any other?

Quest. If the Question be propounded, What is that obedience which God
commands us to yield unto Magistrates?

Ans. It is obedience not in sinful but in lawful things, in things not
contrary to the Word of God: for in all matters of Religion, We must obey God
rather than man, Act. 4. 19. Whether it be right in the sight of God, to
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. And Acts 5. 29. We ought to obey
God rather than men. If God command us one thing in his Word, and the
Magistrate command another thing, that is not consistent with our duty to God;
there is no question of it, but we must obey God rather than men, and to choose
rather to suffer, than to sin as the primitive Christians did; as we read both
in the acts of the Apostles, and in the history of the Church in all ages ever
since: And as the three Worthies, Dan. 2. they chose rather to be cast into the
fiery Furnace than to obey the Kings Command in Worshipping his Golden Image,
And Daniel Chap. 6. chose rather to be cast into the Lions Den, than to omit
Prayer to the true and living God, and to pray to a man instead of God blessed
for ever: These great and good Examples of passive Obedience to Authority, when
they could not yield active obedience to unlawful Commands) are left upon
Record for our imitation; that in any case, or matter of Religion we must obey
the commands of God, and not the commands of men, rather choosing to suffer from
men, then sin against God: But that which we are to consider of is, that the
Lord now seems by his providential dispensations to be recalling his people
every where to the good old Principal of the godly Non-conformists in the
former ages; namely to yield subjection and obedience (either active or
passive) to Magistrates, and that, for the Lords sake, that we may show our
selves to be the sincere Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
commanded, saying, Render unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God
the things that are Gods. Which is the more to be noted, because in our Savior
Christ's time, and in the time of the Apostles and primitive Christians, there
were no other Cesars or Kings than such as Tiberius Claudius and Nero: and no
other Governors sent by them into the Roman Provinces, than such as Pilate,
Festus, Foelix and Gallio; and yet then did our Savior Christ, and his
Apostles give the forementioned commands concerning the duty of Subjection and
Obedience to Magistrates, and that for the Lords sake.

That it might appear that the Kingdom of Christ in his Church, is not of this
world (though in this world) and that it may consist with any kind of civil
Government, and Governors in the world; the being and well-being of the Church
and true Religion depends not upon men, but upon him who is the King of Kings
and the Lord of Lords who did preserve his Church for three hundred years in
the time of the ten Persecutions, under Heathen Magistrates; and has preserved
it ever since under such Magistrates as for the most part gave up their power
to the Antichrist at Rome, for many hundred years, etc.

Object. But are there not many Promises and Prophesies that Kings shall be
Nursing Fathers to the Church, Isa. 49. 23, and verse. 7. Kings and Princes
shall worship the Holy One of Israel; and that Kings shall come to the
brightness of the Churches rising, Isa. 60. 3; and verse 10. There Kings shall
Minister unto thee, and verse 16. Thou shall suck the breasts of Kings, and
Rev. 21. 4. The Kings of the Earth shall bring their glory into the New
Jerusalem, and that the Kingdoms of the World shall become the Kingdoms of the
Lord and of his Christ, Rev. 11. 15.

Answ. All this is true; but we must know that not the Prophesies but the
Precepts of Scripture are the Rule of our Actions.

The Prophesies do show what the Lord himself will do and bring about in his
own time, by ways and means known unto him, but unknown to us, but they are
the Precepts of Scripture that show unto us what is our duty of Subjection and
Obedience to Magistracy (as God's Ordinance) in that manner showed before, Let
us do what the Lord shows to be our duty in his Word, and let the Lord in the
ways of his Providence, do with us, with his Church and with the whole world
as it pleases him. All Christians in these times must be brought unto that
frame of Spirit that David was brought unto, in that great change of afflicting
Providence that came upon him, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. If I shall find favor in the
sight of God, He will bring me again and show me his Ark and his Habitation;
but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold here am I, let him do to
me as seems good unto him. So if we shall find favor in the sight of God, he
will either continue to us, or give to us, or restore to us such a Magistracy
as shall be Nursing Fathers to his Church and Religion, but if he have no
delight in us in that respect, let him do to us as seems good to him.

Direct. 6. The sixth Direction is, concerning the whole manner of our
Christian Behavior as Witnesses of Christ, and that in seven particulars:

We should behave our selves.

1. Wisely, This was the first counsel our Savior gave his Disciples when he
told them, that he sent them forth as Sheep among Wolves, therefore (says he)
Be wise as Serpents, Mat. 10. 16. i. e. be wise to prevent and avoid such
dangers as you lawfully may; therefore in the next words he adds, beware of
men; the Apostle advises Christians to walk in wisdom toward those that are
without, Col; 4. 5. and Ephesians. 5. 15. walk circumspectly, not as fools but wise,
neither on the one side by sinful compliances to be ensnared, nor on the other
side by inconsiderate rashness to provoke and exasperate the enemies of the
Truth, but by the exercise of godly wisdom, to discern when God calls us to the
duty of witnessing or suffering for his sake in any case: Hence its added in
that Ephesians. 5. 17. Be ye not unwise; but understanding what the will of the Lord
is, Prove. 14 8. The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way. Those (...)
the excellency of the wisdom which is from above, by comparing the Word and
Providence, and all the Circumstances of a case to find out, and conclude this
is Gods Will, and Gods Way, and my duty, and that now; to speak or do, or
suffer (...) that for the Name of Christ, this godly wisdom will greatly adorn
the profession of Christianity in the eyes of all men, as when David behaved
himself wisely, those that were good, loved him, and those that were bad feared
him; and in 1 Samuel 18. 15. When Saul saw that David behaved himself wisely, he
was afraid of him; we should earnestly beg this wisdom from the Lord who has
promised to give it unto them that ask him, James 1. 5.

2. Innocently; according to the counsel of our Savior, Mat. 10. 16. when he
had said in the first place, be wise as Serpents, he adds in the second place,
be innocent as Doves; and as the Apostle expresses it in Phil. 2. 15. that you
may be blameless, and harmless, as the Sons of God without rebuke in the midst
of a crooked Generation, amongst whom ye shine as lights in the world, holding
forth the word of life, being hurtful to none but doing good to all, as they
have ability and opportunity; Christians should carry it with a dove-like
simplicity, giving no offense nor occasion for any to speak evil of us or the
ways and truths of Christ, which we profess; ever keeping in the ways of
well-doing, and looking diligently to it, that we never suffer as evildoers,
as the Apostle gives a special direction concerning that, 1 Pet. 4. 15, 16, Let
none of you suffer as an evil-doer, but if any suffer as a Christian, let him
glorify God in that behalf. Now to suffer as a Christian, is when the cause of
our suffering is merely for Christ's sake, for righteousness sake, for any of
the ways and truths of Christ contained in his Gospel, and because we keep the
Commandments of God, and dare not sin against him, this will be honorable to
Christ, when we carry it so as Paul did, as to be able to say as he did, Acts
25. 8. Neither against the Law, nor against the Temple, nor against Caesar have
I offended any thing: and as chap. 24. 14. but this I confess unto thee, that
after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers,
believing all things which are written in the law and the Prophets. So likewise
it is said of Daniel, chap. 6. 3. there was an excellent Spirit found in him,
that his adversaries though they sought occasion against him, yet they could find
no error nor fault in him in the matter of the Kingdom, ver. 4. therefore ver.
5. They concluded that they should find no occasion against him, except it was
concerning the law of his God. Now this is for the imitation of all Christians
in these times, to be so innocent in all other respects, that the Adversaries
may have nothing against us but what concerns our duty to God and Jesus Christ,
for which we may and ought to suffer comfortably, and upon a clear account for
the Gospel sake, and nothing else.

3. In humility Paul did, Acts 20. 19. Serving the Lord in all humility, in
many tears and temptations, and so in lowliness of mind, we should walk humbly
toward God, and be clothed with humility amongst men, without any show of
pride, ostentation or vain glory: the same mind should be in us that was in
Christ Jesus, Phil. 2. 5, 8. He humbled himself, and was obedient unto death
for our sakes that he might redeem and save us; even so we also should humble
our selves and be obedient unto the death for his sake, that we may testify our
love, service, and thankfulness unto him.

4. In sincerity and Truth; whatever we say or do, or suffer, let it be in
simplicity and godly sincerity, as Paul said of himself, 2 Cor. 1. 12. not with
respect to any by or base ends, not out of stomach or stoutness of Spirit, but
out of true love to Christ, and zeal for God, for the glory of his Name, the
credit of his cause, the honor of his truth, the propagation of his Gospel,
the encouragement of his friends, and conviction of his Enemies when our
Spirits are fixed upon such high and holy ends, and our hearts moved out of
mere love to Jesus Christ, this will prove us to be the sincere followers of
Christ, when we can truly say with Paul, 2 Cor. 2. last. as of Sincerity and as
of God, and in the sight of God, so we speak and do and suffer in Christ, and
for his sake.

3. With holy boldness and Christian confidence, for when a man knows that he
has a good God, a good cause, and a good conscience, why should he be ashamed?
or of whom should he be afraid? fear and shame are great impediments to the
Confession of Christ, these made Peter deny his Master, and Nicodemus to come
to Christ by night; but when they had got more strength of grace, they were
more courageous in the cause of Christ, as we see in the fourth of the Acts ver
8, etc. Then Peter filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye Rulers of the
People, and Elders of Israel, be it known unto you, and to all the people of
Israel, that by the Name of Jesus Christ crucified, we have done this Miracle,
and there is no other name given under heaven, whereby we must be saved.

Now in verse thirteen it is said when the Council saw the boldness of Peter
and John, and perceived they were ignorant and unlearned, they marvelled and
took knowledge of them that they had been with Jesus.

Thus when Christ's Witnesses do confess him, his truths and ways with undaunted
and invincible courage, and with an holy magnanimity of Spirit, not fearing the
faces of men, nor the worst they can do, this is greatly for the honor of God,
for the encouragement of the godly, and terror to their adversaries; as in the
case of the three Worthies that professed their Faith in God before King
Nebuchadnezzar, and their resolution not to bow to his Golden Image for fear of
his fiery furnace, Dad. 3. Therefore Christians should pray much for this holy
Courage, as Paul did, and desired also the prayers of others in his behalf,
that he might bear witness unto Christ, that Christ might be magnified in him,
either in life or death, Phil. 1. 19, 20. and all the Apostles join in the same
prayer, Acts 4. 29. Now L ord behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy
Servants that with all boldness they may speak thy word.

6. With meekness and fear; we should give a reason of our hope, or an account
of our Faith with meekness and fear, 1 Pet. 3. 15. ult. with meekness, without
animosity passion or bitterness of Spirit in us; for the wrath of man as it
works not, so it witnesses not the righteousness of God, James 1. 20. it
does not any thing, either advantage the cause, or adorn the profession of
Christianity, which meekness of Spirit does: and then also with fear, i. e.
with a holy fear of God, showing that our fear of offending God, and our care
of pleasing God is all that we aim at; and also with reverence to men, giving
all due honor and respect to any that we have to do withal: making it appear
to all men that we both fear God and regard man.

7. Lastly, With Constancy and Perseverance to the end, till we have finished
our Testimony, as its said of the Witnesses, I have kept the Faith, 2 Timothy 4.
5. So should it be with us: We should remember how we have heard and received,
and hold fast; and then speak, and do, and suffer all according to the Word of
God, even to the end; For so our Savior has said, Mat. 24. 13. He that
endures to the end shall be saved And Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful to the
death; and I will give thee the Crown of life.

Direction 7.

Last of all, In the practical observation of all the former Directions, we
should take in all the encouragements and comforts which our Savior Christ
has given to his faithful Witnesses, as they are contained, either in his last
and dying words, in the 14, 15, 16, 17, Chapters of John, or in this Book of
the Revelation, or in any other gracious promises of his Gospel; I say, we
should take them all as belonging to our selves, for our consolation, both in
life and death; as also in relation to our eternal blessedness in another
World: I refer you to your Bibles to find out these encouragements. Consider
what has been said, and the Lord give unto you and me such understanding to
apply all to our selves, that we may be found amongst the number of the true
and faithful Witnesses of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory
for ever, Amen.

SOME HELP TO Self-Examination, Which I drew up for my Self, in the Year 1652.
But may be of like use to any, that shall peruse the same; with Meditation and
Self Application, and earnest Prayer,
As Psalm. 139, 23, 24. Search men, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know
my thoughts.
And see if there be any wicked way in me: and lead me in the way everlasting.

SElf Examination, 1 Cor. 11. 28 2 Cor. 15. 5. is an enquiry into the inward
Acts of one Souls; trying by the Word of God, whether we have the truth of
Saving Grace in us or no? and accordingly judging of our spiritual Estates
before God.

The things to be tried are;

Unfeigned Faith, Sound Repentance, and sincere Obedience; because these are
saving Graces, viz. such as God in his Word has made conditions of the
Covenant of Grace; these do accompany Salvation, Heb. 6. 9. and to every one of
these Salvation is expressly promised in the Word of God, John 12. 48. and 15. 7.

To Faith, Mark 16. 16. John 3. 16. Acts 16. 31. Luke 7. 50.

To Repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 10. Luke 24. 47. Acts 3. 16. and 5. 31.

To Obedience, Heb. 5. 9. Psalm 50 ult. Rom 6. 7, 18, 22.

The principle Subject of these Graces is Will, Phil: 2: 13. Psalm: 110: 3: Rev:
22: 17: Rom: 7: 18, 19.

Therefore we should try our selves, not by our knowledge, nor by passionate
fits of affection but by the main bent of the Will.

Infallible Signs of Saving Faith.
I. From the Root of Faith; which is an humbled, broken, Self-denying frame of
Spirit settled in the Soul, Isai. 57. 15. Ephesians. 3. 17.

1. When my heart is broken for and from all sin as my greatest evil, Jer. 2:
19: and 4: 18: Rom: 7: 13, 19: Job 36: 21:

2. When my Soul is humbled, lying down it the feet of Christ, under all my
sins and miseries; despairing of any help from my self and all creatures,
submitting to the good pleasure of God, Luke 15. 18, 19. and 18. 13. Act. 9. 6.
Rev. 1. 17.

3. When my Soul denies it self in regard of any inherent ability to the least
spiritual good. The voice of Self-denial is, [Not I but Christ] Gal, 2. 20. 1
Cor: 15: 10: Tit: 3: 5: 2 Cor: 12: 11: Here is the root of Faith, when as Luke
8: 13, 15: The word of the Gospel takes deep rooting in an honest and good
heart, i: e: in a broken, humble, selfdenying heart. Here is the root of the
matter, Job 19: 28.

Here is the beginning of Faith in Christ, Heb: 3: 14:

II. From the right Object upon which my Soul looks and rests in believing, and
that is, God in Christ in the promises of the Gospel.

1. The promises of the Gospel, Mark 1: 15: wherein I consider the infallible
truth, and incomparable good; and the good will and meaning of God to me in
this or that promise, 1 Timothy: 1: 15. John 3: 14, 15, 16. Jer. 3. 21, 22. Mat:
21: 28: Rev: 3: 20: Jer: 31. 18, 19, 20.

2. Christ in the promise is, the next immediate object of my Faith. Hence we
read so often of Faith in Christ, and Faith on Christ, Acts 26: 31: and 20: 21:
and its Christ as a Lord and Savior to me, Col: 2: 6: Phil: 3: 8, 9: 2 Pet: 1
2 and 11.

3. God in Christ is the last and full object of my Faith, 2 Cor: 5: 19: Gal:
3: 17: 2 Cor: 3: 4: 1 Pet: 1: 22:

Hence my Soul believes in, and makes continual use of Christ as Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 5: between the holy blessed God, and such a guilty and polluted sinner
as I am. And as my way to God, Joh: 14: 6: Heb: 10: 20: the journeys end of my
Soul is to come to God, Heb: 7: 25: 1 Pet: 1. 21.

III. From the subject or seat of Faith which is my heart, Romans 10. 9, 10. all
my heart, Acts 8. 37. my whole heart, Psalm, 119. 10. that is, my soul, with all
its faculties of Understanding Will and Affections.

1. My understanding assents to the truth of the Gospel, Mark. 1. 15. 1 Timothy 1.
15. and looks Christ with a single fixed mournful delightful eye, Isai. 45. 22.
Zach. 12. 10. John 8. 56. Luke 2. 30.

2. My will consents to the good of the Gospel, Ephesians. 1. 13. refusing all sins
as contrary to Christ, and all Creatures when they are set in comparison and
competition with Christ, making an absolute choice of Christ and God in Christ,
in his Word as my Alsufficient sufficient chief good and portion for ever,
Phil. 2. 13. Phil. 3. 8, 9. Romans 7. 19. Lam: 3. 24. Psalm 73. 25, 26. 27, 28.

3. My liking, well-pleased affections move toward Christ, Col. 3. 12. hope
longs with great expectation for Christ, 1 Timothy 1. 1. Jer. 14. 8. desire
breath's and reaches after him, Isa. 26. 8, 9.

Love embraces and closes with him, Cant. 1. 7. John 20. 17. joy delights in
him, Cant. 1. 4.

IV. From the Acts of Faith, chiefly these three.

1. Coming to Christ, John 6. 35, 37. Heb. 7. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 4. which is the
Spiritual and perpetual motion of my whole Soul going out, and getting away
from Sin, and Self, and the Creature, and going unto Christ, and to God in
Christ, or unto God by Christ.

2. Receiving of Christ, John 1. 12. Col. 16. 1 Cor. 11. 24. as given of God
unto me, Isa. 9. 6. John 3. 16. by a consent of my whole heart, that Christ
shall be my only Lord and Savior, and resigning up my self to him, to be
wholly his, and for ever, Cant. 2. 16. Psalm. 119. 94.

3. Trusting in the Lord, Isa. 26. 3. 2 Cor. 3. 4. Ephesians: 1: 12: by committing my
Soul, and the success of my Ministry, and every way of mine, and then my wife
and children, honor, life, chastity, estate, truth, prosperity, and my All: I
say committing my All to, and leaving my All with the mercy of God in Christ in
the promises (in the way of his Commandments, Psalm. 119. 66: and 116. venturing
my present and future state in this world, and my eternal state in another
world, in the hands of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet: 4. 17: 2 Timothy: 1: 12. Psalm. 37. 5. 7.

V. From the end which Faith aims at, and propounds to its self in Believing,
that is, that God may have the glory of the exceeding riches of his Grace in
Christ, in saving such a poor miserable Sinful Creature, who have damned my
self a thousand times over.

1. The next end my distressed Soul looks at in believing, is the Salvation of
my Soul, Heb. 10. last. 1 Pet. 1. 9. viz. Union and Communion with the chief
good, this is the end and good my Faith would have.

1. Union to, possession of God and Christ, as my God, my Christ, Phil. 3. 8,
9. Psalm. 42. 1. 2, 6, 9. Psalm. 73. 25. John 20. 28. Gal. 2. 20,

2. Communion and Fellowship with God and Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1 9: 1 John 1:
3. Ephesians. 1. 3. Ephesians. 3. 19.

Hence the fruition of Christ, and not only of some but all his benefits is
that which Faith aims at, and chiefly at these three.

1. Justification, or the forgiveness of sins, Acts 26: 18. Phil. 3. 9. Psalm.
51. 1, 2. etc. Psalm. 25. 7. 11. 2 Cor: 5. 9.

2. Sanctification and power against Sin; Phil: 3. 10. Psalm: 51: 10, 11, 12.
Psalm. 119. 133. Psalm. 19: 12, 13; 2 Cor: 12: 8.

3: Glorification or Eternal Life, Psalm: 73: 24, 25: Luke 23: 42: Jude, 2. 20:

2: The last end which my poor soul aims at in believing, is, that God may have
the glory of the riches of his grace and mercy in Christ in the saving of such
a lost and perishing Sinner as I am, Ephesians: 1: 5: 6, 12: 2 These: 1: 10. Ephesians: 3:
17: 21.

These two [Gods glory, and my Salvation] though they are thus distinguished,
yet are so answerably joined together, as they make up one and the same end,
which God aims at, which therefore Faith aims at in our believing in Christ:

VI. From the effects chiefly these four.

1: Faith purifies the heart, Acts 15: 9: I John 3: 3: Faith brings in a living
active principle of holiness into the heart, which as a living Spring, John 4:
14: is ever working and working till it clear and cleanse my heart and inward
man from the most secret corruptions and pollutions which I observe in my Soul,
2 Cor: 7: 1:

2: Faith works by love, Gal: 5: 6. love is the commanding affection of my
Soul, which way that goes all goes, Faith sets and carries the love of my
heart and affection to God above all, Mat: 22: 37: to Christ, and the things of
Christ, as the house and Ordinances of God, Psalm: 26: 8: 1 Chronicles: 29: 3: and to
the Saints, 1 John 2: 14: 23:

3: Faith overcomes the world, 1 John 5: 5: so as to use the world and not to
abuse it, to make every thing serviceable to us, (and no Creature to be our
Master) in our serving of God, Acts 27: 23;

4: Faith gives a serious fixed affectionate eye to the perfect state of
blessedness in Heaven, it overlooks the visible and temporal things of this
world, fixing upon those invisible real and eternal things of the glory of
heaven; drawing the scope of my whole course heavenward, 2 Cor 4: last: and 2
Cor: 5: 1, 2: Mat: 6: 20; Phil: 3; 20: Heb: 11: 10: 26:

Infallible Signs of Saving Repentance.
The first part of Repentance is,

1. In sacred humiliation, James 4: 10: 1 Pet: 5. 6. which includes,

1. Soul-affliction under the sense of Sin and the wrath of God, Levit. 29. 31.
Mat. 11. 28. Psalm. 35. 13.

1. If sin as sin be my greatest burden, then nothing but Christ can ease me,
if sin as sin wound my Soul, nothing but the blood of Christ will heal me;
because none but Christ can take away the venomous guilt and power of Sin, John
1. 29. Mat. 1. 21. 1 John 3. 5.

2. If I feel sin aright, I am in good earnest willing that God should by any
means remove it from me: he feels his burden truly that would be eased of it
thoroughly by any means, 2 Samuel; 24: 10: Psalm. 119. 29. Hos 14. 2.

A real willingness to part with Sin is the immediate effect of those
afflicting affections of fear, shame, grief and hatred which are included in
sound Humiliation.

2. Self judging, 1 Cor. 11. 31. when I do accuse my self of all the sins I
know, condemning my self for them, and accepting the punishment of my
iniquities, Dan: 9. 7, 8: Ezra: 9: 6: Levit. 26. 41.

3. Humble confession of Sin, and supplication for mercy, Job 7. 20, 21. Job.
9. 15. when I do with shame and sorrow, and selfloathing, confess my special
sins, and earnestly beg for the pardon of them, Psalm: 32: 5, 6. Psalm. 51. 1, 2.
etc. Luke 18. 13.

4. Self-submission, Jam: 4: 7:

1. When I lie down before the Lord, acknowledging the sovereign power of the
good pleasure of God in the disposing of his own mercy, and of me also and my
Eternal Estate, Mat: 20: 15: Luke 15: 19. If: 64: 8. Rom: 9 ver: 15: 16; and
20, 21.

2. When I give him the glory of his justice if he should procced against me
according to Law, Lam: 1: 18: Mic: 6: 49: Psalm: 51: 4.

3: When I give him the glory of his mercy in Christ which he has revealed in
the Gospel, Dan: 9. 9: Psalm: 130. 2: seeking of it, and waiting for it at the
throne of grace, Heb: 4: last: venturing all my hopes of good in this and in
another world upon what God has said concerning his grace and mercy in Christ,
in the promises to repenting Sinners that come to him by Christ.

The second part of Repentance is,

2. A through Reformation, L evit: 26: 23: this has two great Acts.

1. Aversion or turning from Sin, Ezekiel. 18. 30. and 33. 11. a departing from
iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. a forsaking of Sin, Psalm. 28. 13. Isa. 55. 7.

1. This Aversion, must be rooted and seated in my Will, Rom: 7: 19: 2 Cor: 6:
17. Hos. 14: 8:

2: This turn of my heart must be from Sin, Psalm: 51 4 Neb: 9 28 because it is
offensive and displeasing to God, Gen: 39 9

3: It must be from all Sin, Ezekiel: 18 30 31 So as,

1: Not to live in the practice of any gross sin, Gal: 5: 19, 20 24

2: Not to allow, or have regard unto, but to oppose the least sin, Job: 26 21
Psalm: 66. 18 Rom: 7 15 so as to admit of no terms of toleration, no secret
reservation, no case of exception:

4: Especially from my special sin which has been most natural and habitual
where the power of Original Sin has vented it self most, Psalm 18 23 Psalm 139
last Psalm 41: 2

5: When I loath my self for my sins then I loath my sins aright, loathing my
mind and heart that ever they have been acted by Sin, and been instruments
under Sin to wrong God, Job: 42: 6: Ezekiel 36 31 hence there will follow a
loathing of any the least distemper that is bubling in a man's bosom tho it
never come into act, Psalm 119: 113:

6: When no evil of affliction shall draw me willingly and deliberately to side
with sin, no outward good in the world persuade me to close therewith, Dan 1 9
Gen 14: 33

7. When my soul turns from the occasions and lesser degrees of Sin, Gen 39 10
1 Samuel 24 5

II. Couversion or turning unto God, Act. 20. 21. Jer. 4. 1.

1 This turn must be in my heart and will: the settled bent of my Will must be
that way, Jer: 3: 10: Joel 2: 12: Rom: 7: 18, 10.

2 To God himself, as the chief object and scope of my life, Gal: 2: 19: Acts
27: 23 Psalm 73: 25:

3 To the Will of God, revealing myduty, as the Rule of my Will and Life, Acts
9 6: 1 Pet: 4: 2 Psalm: 143: 10:

4. To the glory of God, as having a due and dear respect unto that in all, 1
Cor. 10. 31 John 12. 27, 28 1 Pet. 4: 11

5. To the Ordinances of God, Ezekiel. 43. 11: Luk: 1: 6.

6. To the People of God, Psalm: 16. 2 and 119. 63. 1 Job. 3. 14.

7. To be for the Truth and holy ways of God, 2 Cor. 13. 6. Zech. 14. 20. viz.
To be against Error, Sin and Wickedness every where but in my self first and
most of all: and to be for the practice and power of godliness in my self first
and most of all, and then every where else Psalm: 7: 3, ult. Josh. 24: 14, 15 1 Samuel: 12: 22, 24, 25. Psalm. 101. throughout.

Infallible signs of sincere Obedience.
1 To take the Ten Commandments (in their full Latitude, commanding all Duties,
and forbidding all sins according to the explanation of the Prophets, Christ
and the Apostles in the rest of Scriptures) for the Rule of my Life, Psalm 18 22
Psalm 119 6 66 166 1 Cor 9 21 Gal 6 16

2. To get and maintain an inward inclination and disposition of love to, and
delight in the Law of God in my very heart, Isa 5^ 7 Psalm. 119 97 112 265 Rom 7
16 22

3. To get and keep a good Conscience in all duties of Holiness toward God and
Righteousness toward Men, Luk 1 74, 75 Act, 24 16 2 Cor 1 12

4 To make Conscience of conforming my thoughts and affections to the Obedience
of Christ, 2 Cor 10 5 Gal 5 24 Rom 7 15 17

5 When the Supremacy of God and Christ in revealing and commanding my duty,
does prevail with me more in times and cases of trial then the Temptations of
Satan's allurements; or the stirrings of Indwelling Sin, Rom 6 16 17, 22 Rev 2
and 3 chapt. to him that overcomes seven times over: So that the sincerity of
my Obedience appears in the prevailing degree of my Obedience to God and Christ
more than to any thing else, and that especially in cases of temptation
comparison, and competition, Psalm 73 25 Mat 10 37 2 Timothy 3 4 John 12 43

Rules for the Practice of Self-Examination.
1 Keep the former (or such like) Signs and Scriptures in your mind as Rules to
try your self by, Job: 12: 48: Isai: 8: 20.

2 Constantly reflect upon thy self; watch and observe the inward actings of
Grace and Corruption in thy heart, 1 Cor: 2: 11 Gal. 6: 4.

3 Make choice of time and place, for this duty often, especially before the
Sacrament, 1 Cor: 1 1: 28: 2 Cor: 13: 5:

4 Do it by putting the question to thy self concerning any of the former signs
according to clear Scripture. Ask thy self carefully and strictly, whither thou
have Faith? whither it be so rooted in thy heart? whether thou have observed
such acts of Faith? and such effects? and so of the rest.

5 Force thy self to an Answer, as when you examine a slippery fellow, that
either will give no answer, or a slight impertinent answer, and would fain be
gone; you ask him and urge him again and again; so deal with thy deceitful
heart, Jer: 17: 9: Psalm: 44: 4 and 77: 6:

6 Observe what thy answer is, what the sentence of thy own heart and
conscience is, record and remember that,

1 Either thou do find such and such evidences of Grace, 2 Cor: 1: 12:

2 Or thou art yet without saving Grace.

3 Or thou art yet doubtful, 1 John 3: 19, 20, 21:

7 Keep thy heart kindly affected with thy condition as thou have found it upon
trial. If signs of Grace, rejoice and be thankful. Psalm: 103: 1, 2, 3, etc: If
not; or if yet thou art doubtful, mourn over thy own Soul, and mourn after
Christ; thy condition being sad, contrary to 2 Cor: 13: 5: 2 Pet: 1: 10, 11.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is now ready for the Press, and will shortly be Printed a small Treatise
about Justification, by the Reverend Mr. Samuel Willard, Teacher at the South
Church in Boston.


