A Narrative of the MISERIES of NEW ENGLAND, by Reason of an ARBITRARY
Government Erected there. Under Sir Edmond Andross.
To Which is added, Some Account of the Humble Application of the pious and
noble Prelate, Henry Lord Bishop of London, with the Reverend Clergy of the
City, and some of the Dissenting Ministers in it, To the Illustrious Prince
William Henry, Prince of Orange on Friday, September 21. 1688.

Also The Address of the Nonconformist Ministers ( in and about the City of
LONDON) to His Higness the Prince of ORANGE.

The Narrative of the Miseries of N. England, etc.
THat a Colony so considerable as New England is, should be discouraged, is not
for the Honor and Interest of the English Nation; in as much as the People
there are generally Sober, Industrious, Well-Disciplin'd, and apt for Martial
Affairs; so that he that is Sovereign of New England may by means thereof, (
when he pleases) be Emperor of America: Nevertheless, the whole English
Interest in that Territory has been, of late, in apparent Danger of being lost
and ruined, and the Miseries of that People by an Arbitrary Government erected
amonst them, have been, beyond expression great.

The Original of all which has been the Quo Warranto's issued out against their
Charters, by means whereof they have been deprived of their ancient Rights and
Privileges.

As for the Massachusetts Colony (whose Patent bears date from the year 1628)
There was in the year 1683, a Quo warranto; and after that, in the year 1684, a
Writ of (...) against them, and they were required to make their Appearance at
(...) in October, when they knew nothing (...) the month before, so that it was
impossible for them to answer at the (...) appointed; yet Judgment was entered
against them.

(...) alleged) had all their Privileges at once taken from them. There was a
Quo Warranto against Connecticut Colony (whose Charter was granted to them by
King Charles the Second) only Letters were sent to them in the King's Name,
signifying, that (incase they did resign their Charter) they should take their
Choice of being under New York or Boston. Several of the Magistrates there
returned a most humble and supplicatory Answer, praying, That their former
Government might still continue; but that if it must be taken from them, they
had rather be under Boston than New York: This was by some at Court interpreted
a Resignation of their Charter, and a Commission sent to Sir Edmond Andross,
who went to Hartford, (their principal Town) and declared their Charter and
former Government to be void. As for Road-Island, they submitted themselves to
His Majesty's pleasure.

Before these Changes happened, New England was, of all the Foreign
Plantations (their enemies themselves being Judges) the most flourishing and
desirable.

But their Charters being all (one way or another) declared to be void and
insignificant, it was an easy matter to erect a French Government in that part
of the Kings Dominions, (no doubt intended by the Evil Counselors) as a
specimen of what was designed to be here in England, as soon as the times would
bear it. Accordingly Sir Edmond Andross (a (...) man) was pitched on, as a fit
Instrument to be made use of; and a most illegal Commission given him, bearing
date June 3, 1686. by which he, with four of his Council, (perhaps all of them
his absolute Devotees) are empowered to make Laws and raise moneys on the Kings
Subjects, without any Parliament, Assembly, or Consent of the People.

It was thought by wise men, that the Remembrance of Dudley and Emp^son, who in
the days of King Henry the 8 th were executed for acting by a like Commission,
would have deterred them from doing so, but it did not, for Laws are made by
few of them, and indeed what they please: nor are they printed: as was the
Custom in the former Governments, so that the people are at a great loss to
know what is Law and what (...). Olny, one Law they are sensible of, which does
prohibit all Town-Meetings, excepting on a certain day once a year; whereas the
Inhabitants have occasion to meet once a Week* for the Relief of the Poor; or
other Town-Affairs. But it is (...) to penetrate into the Design of this Law,
which was (no Question) to keep them in every Town from Complaining to to
England, of the Oppression they are under: And (as Laws have been establishst)
so Moneys have been raised by the Government in a most illegal and Arbitrary
way, without any consent of the People. Sir Edmond Andross caused a Tax to be
levied of a Penny in a Pound on all the Towns then under his Government: and
when at Ipswich and other places, the Select Men (as they are styled) voted,
that inasmuch as it was against the common Privileges of English Subjects to
have money raised without their own Consent in an Assembly or Parliament; That
therefore they would petition the King for Liberty of an Assembly before they
made any Rates; the said Sir Edmond Andross caused them to be imprisoned and
Fined, some 20 l. some 30 l. as the Judges, by him instructed, should see meet
to determine; yea, and several Gentlemen in the Country were Imprisoned and
bound to their Good Behavior, upon mere suspicion, that they did encourage
their Neighbors not to comply with these Arbitrary Proceedings. And that so
they might be sure to effect their Pernicious Designs, they have caused Juries
to be picked of Men who are not of the Vicinity, and some of them mere
Strangers in the Country, and no Freeholders; which actings are highly illegal.
One of the former Magistrates was committed to prison without any Crimes laid
to his Charge, and there kept half a Year without any Fault; and though he
petitioned for a Habeas Corpus, it was denied him. Also inferior Officers have
extorted what Fees they please to demand, contrary to all Rules of Reason and
Justice. They make poor Widows and Fatherless pay 50 s. for the Probate of a
Will, which under the former easy Government would not have been a Tenth part
so much. Six Persons who had been illegally imprisoned, were forced to give the
Officers 117 l. when as upon Computation, they found that here in England their
Fees would not have amounted to 10 l. in all. And yet these things (tho bad
enough) are but a very small part of the Misery which that poor people have
been groaning under, since they have been governed by a Despotick and Absolute
Power. For, their new Masters tell them, that their Charter being gone, their
Title to their Lands and Estates is gone therewith, and that all is the Kings?
and that they represent the King; and that therefore all Persons must take
Patients from them, and give what they see meet to impose, that so they may
enjoy the Houses which their own Hands have built, and the Lands, which at vast
Charges in subduing a Wilderness; they have for many Years had a rightful
possession of, as ever any People in the world had or can have; Accordingly the
Governor ordered the Lands belonging to some in (...) to be measured out, and
given to his Creatures, and Writs of (...) to be issued out against others: And
the Commons belonging to several Towns have been given to some of the
Governors (...), who begged them, to the impoverishing, if not utter ruining
of whole Townships: And when an Island belonging to the Town of Plymouth was
petitioned away from them by one Nathaniel (...) whom Sir Edmond Andross made
his Property (...) because the Agents of the said Town obtained a voluntary
Subscription to maintain their Title at Law, they were compelled to come not
only out of their own Country, but Colony, to (...), to answer there as (...)
the next Assizes, and bound to their good Behavior: The Officers in the mean
time extorting 3 l. per Man for Fees, These were the miserable Effects of
New-England's being deprived of their Charters, and with them of their English
liberties: They have not been altogether negligent. as to endeavors to obtain
some relief in their sorrowful Bondage; for several Gentlemen desired Increase
Mather; the Rector of the College at Cambridge in New England, to undertake a
Voyage for England, to see what might be done for his distressed Country, which
Motion he complied with; and in June the 1st 1688: he had the favor to wait on
the King, and privately to acquaint him with the enslaved and perishing Estate
of his Subjects in New England. The King was very gracious and kind in his
Expressions; then, and often after promising to give them ease as to their
Complaints and Fears; amongst other things the said Mather caused a petition
from the Town of Cambridge in New England to be humbly presented to his
Majesty; which because it does express the Deplorable Condition of that People,
it shall he here inserted.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty
The Petition and Address of John Gibson, aged about 87, and George William,
aged about 86 years; as also on the behalf of their neighbors the inhabitants
of Cambridge in New England.

In most humble wise shows,

THat Your Majesty's good Subjects, with much hard Labor and great (...), have
subdued a Wilderness, built our Houses, and planted Orchards, being encouraged
by our (...) (...) Right to the Soil, by the (...) granted unto the first
(...), together with our Purchase of the Natives; as also by sundry (...) and
Declarations sent to the late Governor, and Company, (...) His (...) Majesty
Your Royal Brother, assuring us of the full enjoyment of our (...) and
Possessions, as is more especially contained in the declaration sent when the
Quo Warranto was issued out against our Charter.

But we are necessitated to make this our Moan and Complaint to Your Excellent
Majesty, for that our Title is now questioned to our Lands, by us quietly
possessed for near 60 years, and without which we cannot subsist. Our humble
(...) to our Governor Sir Edmond Andross, showing our just Title, (...) and
peaceable Possession, together with the claim of the (...) of Your Majesty's
Letters and Declarations, assuring all your good Subjects, that they shall not
be molested in their Properties and Possessions, not availing.

Royal Sir, We are a poor People, and have no way to procure money to defend
our Cause in the Law; nor know we of Friends at Court, and therefore unto Your
Royal Majesty, as the Public Father of all Your Subjects do we make this our
humble Address for Relief, beseeching Your Majesty graciously to pass Your
Royal Act for the Confirmation of Your Majesty's Subjects here in our
Possessions to us derived from our late Governor and Company of this Your
Majesty's Colony. We now humbly cast our selves, and distressed Condition of
our Wives and Children; in Your MAJESTY's feet, and conclude with the Saying of
Queen Esther, If we perish; we perish,

Thus that Petition,
Besides this, Mr. Increase Mather, with two New England Gentlemen, presented a
Petition and humble Proposals to the King, wherein they prayed, that the Right
which they had in their Estates before the Government was changed, might be
confirmed; and that no Laws might be made or moneys Raised, without an
Assembly, with sundry other particulars; which the King referred to a Committee
for Foreign plantations, who ordered them into the hands of the
Attourney-General to make his Report. The Clerk, William (...) sent to the
Attorney General a Copy, wherein the Essential Proposal of an Assembly was
wholly left out: and being spoke to about it, he said the Earl of Sunderland
blotted out that with his own hand. Likewise a Soliciter in this Cause related
that the said Earl of Sunderland affirmed to him, that it was by his Advice
that the King had given a Commission to Sir Edmond Andross to raise moneys
without an Assembly, and that he knew the King would never consent to an
Alteration, nor would he propose it to His Majesty. When of late all Charters
were restored to England, it was high time for New England to expect the like;
for if it be an illegal and unjust thing to deprive good Subjects here of their
Laws and Liberties, it cannot be consistent with Justice and Equity to deal so
with those that are affar off. Applications therefore were made to the King,
and to some Ministers of State: It was urged, that if a Foreign Prince or State
should, during the present Troubles send a Friggot to New-E ngland, and promise
to protect them as under their Former Government, it would be an unconquerable
Temptation; yet no Restoration of Charters would be granted to New-E ngland,
which has opened the Eyes of some thinking men. Thus has New-E ngland been
dealt with: this has been and still is the bleeding state of that Country:
they cannot but hope that E ngland will send them speedy relief; especially
considering that throw the ill Conduct of their present Rulers, the French
Indians are (as the last Vessels from thence inform) beginning their cruel
Butcheries amongst the E nglish in those parts. And many had fears that there
is a Design to deliver that Country into the hands of the French-King, except
His Highness the Prince of Orange, whom a Divine Hand has raised up to deliver
the Oppressed, shall happily and speedily prevent it.

The humble Application of Henry Lord Bishop of London. etc.
HE declared in excellent Words that they came to pay Him their humble Duties
and most grateful Respects for His very great and most hazzardous Undertaking
for their Deliverance, and the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the
Ancient Laws and Liberties of this Nation. He adds, That they gave up daily
many Thanks givings to Almighty GOD, Who had hitherto been graciously pleased
so wonderfully to preserve his Person, and prosper and Favor his good Design:
and they promised the continuance of the serventest of their Prayers to the
same GOD, and to use all concurrent Endeavors in their Circumstances for the
promoting, yet further, that Work which was so happily begun; and also for the
perfecting of it, not only in this Kingdom, but in other Christian Kingdoms. He
likewise suggested to the Good Prince,

That some of the Dissenting Ministers and their Brethren were there present,
who having the same sense of His Coming hither with themselves, adjoined
themselves with them, by him, to render their humblest and most grateful
Resentments.

His Highness was pleased to declare, That

He thanked them for their Attendance, and acquainted them very briefly with
the chiefest ends of His Difficult and Chargeable Expedition.

That indeed it was to preserve and secure the protestant Religion, (His own
Religion, and their Religion) and assureing them, He should not think any thing
(not Life it self) too (...) to hazard in promoting and Perfecting so good a
Work. Also He offered up (with great Devotion) his solemnest Acknowledgements
to Almighty GOD for His Presence with him and Blessing upon his Endeavors and
Arms hitherto. And asked the Continuance of all their Prayers to God for him,

The Address of the Nonconformist Ministers etc.
WEdnesday, January the 2 nd. Diverse of the Dissenting Ministers in and about
London, that go under the Denomination of Presbiterial and Congregational, to
the Number of (...) or upwards. Attended His Highness the Prince of Orange, at
St. James's, being introduced by the Earl of Devonshire, the Lord Wharton, and
the Lord Wiltshire, their Sense was represented by one of these Ministers to
this Effect. Viz.

That they professed their grateful Sense of His Highness's hazzardous and
Heroical Expedition which the Favor of Heaven had made so surprisingly
prosperous.

That they esteemed it a common Felicity that the worthy Patriots of the
Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom had unanimously concurred unto His
Highness's Designs, by Whose most prudent Advice, the Administration (...)
Affairs devolved in this difficult Conjuncture into the Hands which the Nation
and World (...) to be apt for the greatest (...), and so suitable to the
present (...).

That they promised the utmost (...) which in their Stations they are capable
of affording for (...) promoting the excellent and desirable Ends, for which
his Highness had declared.

That they added their continual fervent Prayers to Almighty, (...) for the
Defense and Propagation of the Protestant Interest throughout the Christian
World.

(...) (which some of them (...) and which (...) to make mention of to His
Highness) had their Notice of that intended Application been so early as to
make (...) more general Attendance possible to them at that time.

That therefore tho they did now appear in a distinct (...) they did it not
(...) distinct Account, but that only which common to them and to all
Protestants.

^ LONDON, printed for Richard (...) in Queen's-Head-Court, in Pater
Noster-Row. And Reprinted at Boston in New England, by Richard (...). 1688.


