To my Loving and Dearly Beloved Christian Friends, in and about Limerick.
Most Dearly Beloved,
FOR so I can in much Truth call you, notwithstanding my going away from you;
it having been my serious Resolution this great while to lay, and leave my
weary Bones amongst you, and so I may still for ought I know, either through a
common Calamity suddenly happening, or by a wonderful hand of Providence
afterward restoring. There were many strange Providence at work, to bring me
at first to you from afar, which are tedious to relate (I being at present in
no good writing case, besides that writing Letters has been burdensome to me
from a child) and I have (all things considered) been as marvelously preserved
amongst you, especially considering how long we have kept together.

For you (tho it was a great act of self-denial) was I ordained, you have I
most dearly (above all People) loved you have I with some care, and much hard
study (notwithstanding bodily weakness) Taught, and with you have I comfortably
and contentedly lived, and with you could I have died; nothing but want of work
amongst you, (not Wages) unless it had come to starving, and the probable
likelihood of its continuance should have parted us; but it has been my
resolution of old, rather to wear out than rust out, and it would quickly kill
me, to go on in spending Sabbaths as of late I have done; and I suppose the
offer of a thousand pound Per Annum, to lead such an idle life, would signify
little to me; many offers and invitations have I had elsewhere; yea, to places
that might seem at the first blush to please me, but for your sakes they were
in vain, and took me up few thoughts. The World (through mercy) has not
hitherto been a prevailing temptation to me, but I dare not engage that it
never shall. The World neither brought me hither, nor kept me here, nor the
want of it sends me away; for I am taking the most likely way (according to
outward appearance) to go from the comforts of it, being besides every way
unfit for so great an undertaking: but Oh the sweetness of Christian Gospel
Liberties, though in a Wilderness! is not Communion with God, and his People,
in Gospel Ordinances worth venturing by Land or Sea? Yes verily.

Though the Providence of God has singled me out of the whole Kingdom, and
thrust me from poor Lymerick, (which I most dearly love, and shall I fear
sinfully hanker after) yet I have already made many liars, both of seeming
friends and open foes, who often both to my face and behind my back, said, I
would make but a short stay in Lymerick; yet you see though other worthy men,
even in times of peace, left you, yet notwithstanding troubles at my first
coming, and all along, it has been my desire, and full design, to stay as long
as you have any thing for me to do.

I ndeed I know in many cases, it is a Ministers duty to stay with a people,
(as many in these Nations will, I blame them not for it) though there may be no
present work for him, when there is some comfortable probabilities, that the
Clouds will fly away after a while; but when I see (in an ordinary way) a
Deluge unavoidably coming, and God upon his way, who has already done Terrible
Things in Righteousness; and is going on thoroughly to purge his Floor: I say,
whilst I see and believe this, how far it is my duty (especially considering
those circumstances I lie under, which in diverse particulars, none other in the
Kingdom does, which I now name not) only to stay, to do nothing for you more or
less, except to be a witness of your Trouble as well as my own, whilst I might
(at least for a while) be of use elsewhere: I leave to serious and impartial
minds to consider.

There ever has been, and I suppose will be different apprehensions amongst
all men, about Removes. It being indeed in it self, one of the hardest things
in the world, for a man to know where God would have him be; however, there is
comfort in this, that if any, whether Minister or People, do in any dark and
difficult case or undertaking; use all Gods appointed means seriously and
sincerely, in order to the knowing of his mind, and the duly approving their
hearts to him all along in what they do, they may confidently on good grounds
expect one of these two things, viz.

1. Either that God will most graciously and sensibly lead them into the way of
truth. Or else,

2. If through blindness or weakness they should miss it, God will certainly
forgive them. I am singled out by Providence, and once more in my sickly age
turned into the wide world, I hope not to shift for my self, for the Earth is
the Lords and the fullness thereof. I was cast upon him when a Child, and hope
all things shall work [together] for good.

I have peace in what I have done, whatever constructions at home or abroad may
be put upon it by godly and learned men, whose judgment I much reverence, and
whose Books I am not worthy to carry after them; for I am at present wholly
laid by the walls as useless, and likely so to be: besides, I know God has
many Servants, and variety of work for them; some are resolved to stand, yea to
ly by it. ( I blame them not, but suppose it is their duty) God very likely
intending himself glory by their sufferings, others are inclined to remove (all
doors of usefulness, not only being shut but bolted) God having work for them
elsewhere: an instance of which you have in these two Disciples, Peter and
John, Joh 21. 18, 19, 20, 21, verses, Peter was told by Christ he must suffer,
which was the work he was to mind: but he asking Christ what should become of
John, met with a sharp reproof from Christ, telling him, what was that to him?
Christ is both infinitely wise, good and sovereign.

Let all of us, both you and us, see well to our end, either in staying by the
stuff (worldliness and presumption being sometimes at the bottom) or in
plucking up the stakes in order to a remove: for I would not willingly remove
either,

1. From novelty, for I am not naturally disposed that way; or,

2. From the bare example of others, for they are but few to encourage me: nor,

3. From discontent with my place work, or want of wages: nor,

4. From Cowardice and carnal Fears of trouble, for I expect them wherever I
go: Nor,

5. Lastly (Though many more might be named) For vain hopes of profits and
preferments: I steer not a course that promises that: but in a word (next to
the glory of God) I would remove.

1. That I might be a little useful the latter part of my days for the good of
Souls.

And 2. That I might enjoy God in his pure Ordinances, though but for a while.

3. and Lastly, That I might be kept from soul pollution: all which things are
not so weighed by the Professors of this age as I think they ought: for some
(nay very many) can be contented to live without the Gospel, and the pure
Ordinances of it, having lived so many years before without it; and not only
so, but they can fall into a compliance with their Neighbors in point of
Worship; which some I know of cannot do. I do my (dear souls) beseech you in
the Lord, to look well to your Worship, and to your walking; be nothing like
this Generation in either of them.

Now at parting (my dear hearts) in reflecting and looking back: I have some
comfort as to three things, though as they lie strictly betwixt God and my own
soul, I have cause enough of shame and confusion of face. And the first is,

1. As to twelve years liberty past, that in some measure I have in season, and
out of season, revealed unto you the whole counsel of God, to the outmost of my
poor ability, the salvation of all your souls. I have earnestly prayed, longed,
and labored for, and am sorry I am forced to leave so many souls in a natural
estate, as I found them, and so many half beginnings, that I fear will come to
nothing. O Lord, undertake for them, and send whom thou will send, for the
perfecting of them: I could say much more, but I forbear, yet hope in God I am
free from the blood of Souls. And,

2. I have comfort in the latter end of my time, when my liberty was daily
threatened, in that I used all the means I well could with a good conscience for
the prolonging of it; yea, though I was reproached for it, as if it was done
out of cowardice and fear of a Prison, when alas, it was only out of true love
to you my dearest Friends having a mind to be of use to you any way, tho never
so obscurely in private, rather than be laid aside as an useless vessel; which
made me sometimes charge some of you, wisely to husband your Liberties; for if
nothing were to be done, neither in public nor private, in Prison nor out, I
would be gone. Then,

3. When I was in Prison, and my public liberty quite gone, I have comfort in
two things.

1. In the forwardness of my very soul, and well-pleasedness in seeing you, and
Preaching to you once every day (though at Deaths Door, being sick most of the
time) much rather than in being at my own comfortable home, where that Liberty
would not be granted me.

2. In that I used all means possible for the recovering of my liberty again,
which in former times succeeded, but now came all to nothing: what shall I say?
it was the Lord: those I too much leaned to, brake under me, and wholly
disappointed me, so that at last I was forced to this unhappy choice, either to
remain a sickly, useless Prisoner, or to withdraw from them that I most dearly
love. But though it be one of the saddest Providence that ever I met with, and
has all most cost me my life; yet I would say, the will of the Lord be done.
Give me leave now in a word (for I am quite tired already) to do these five
things, viz. to beg of you, to advise you, to thank you, to pray for you, and
to bless you in the Name of the Lord.

1. I n the first place, let me beg of you, and that for my self, often have I
begged of you for your selves, that you would be reconciled to God in Christ,
using all Arguments for that purpose; but that day is over, and the night is
come upon poor Lymerick: but now at last I beg for my self no outward thing,
but these two things, viz. your pardon and your prayers.

1. Your pardon, i. e. of whatever you have seen amiss in me at any time, in
any place, or upon any occasion whatsoever; poor Ministers are subject to like
passions as others are: I have not been so exemplary as I ought to be, though I
bless God it has been my daily Prayer, and care, in some measure to adorn the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ my Savior in all things: but alas, we infinitely fall
short of our glorious pattern. Oh my dear Souls, set the Lord Jesus Christ
before you always, and walk as he walked; whatever good things you have
learned, received, heard or seen, in me* do, and then the God of peace shall be
with you: whatever good word have been dropped to you in public or private,
whatever Rules, Motives, Comforts; whatever Sabbath-discourses,
Funeral-Sermons, or Sacramental Speeches you have heard. I beg you treasure
them up and suffer them to dwell richly in you: but whatever evil or weakness
you have seen in me, let it be buried from your practice for ever; only so far
follow me, as I have followed Christ. I do desire to humble my self before God
and you his People, and do heartily beg the mercy of God in Jesus Christ for
all my miscarriages. My poor sickly body has sometimes stood in the way of
some duties toward you, which yet otherwise I should have delighted in. Pardon
and excuse my sudden anger sometimes, it was rather seeming than real; and when
real, it was nothing but a concernedness for you and your liberties, which I
saw were forfeited and a going, by our secure and negligent and unworthy
attending and walking.

2. I beg your Prayers; let not that Plough stand still, in Closet. Family,
Night nor Day, whatever does besides. Brethren pray for us* the ablest Minister
may be, and daily is beholden to the poor breathings of the meanest Believer. I
know my dear Brethren, I know that you can pray, blessed be God for it; Oh,
fail me not: pray I may be sensibly and thoroughly sanctified in soul, body and
spirit; pray I may be thoroughly emptied out of my self (for I find it very
hard) pray that God would in a special manner be with me both by Land, and Sea,
and make me a rich mercy wherever the soles of my feet may tread; pray that
God would direct me, incline me to, enable me, and own me in whatever may be
his blessed will and pleasure; pray I may be fitted for dong and suffering, and
be made and kept faithful to death; Oh! strive together with me in your
Prayers; pray I may be delivered from them that may not believe in America;
that I may find an open, and effectual door there, yet before I dye: That I may
be accepted of God, and the Saints; Oh! what a mercy is Prayer; the thickest
walls, the broadest Seas cannot hinder the mutual visits of our Prayers: though
we may never meet more betwixt these old pleasant walls of the Abbey (which
grieves my very soul, to turn my back on) yet let us often meet at the Throne
of Grace, and you may be sure of, and reckon on my poor Prayers: I doubt not,
but where I ride, where I lie, when I stand to preach or kneel to pray, will
testify how much my Soul loved Limerick.

2. Let me now Advise you, and though in a few Particulars, yet especially in
the first place:

1. Make your Calling and Election sure: Oh, my dearly Beloved, see to a saving
work of Grace upon your own heart, make sure work for Heaven. If there be a
flaw in your choosing of God, and closing with Christ, you are lost for ever.
You may be assured of this, from the experience of your poor Minister, who has
often waited on you with the glad tidings of the Son of God; that it is no
easy matter to be a Christians True Religion lies in nothing short of Christ
living, breathing, fighting, conquering and reigning in the Soul. I must not
enlarge here, I refer you to the many thousand serious, sweet and searching
Truths you have heard: Oh, read, remember and practice them, and read them one
to another. That which is the ruin of thousands (as one well faith) of
Professors, is first an imperfect work of the Law, producing only some fears
and Affections; then afterward an imperfect work of the Gospel, producing some
imperfect hopes and joys; but all this while they are not humbled at their
very heart, nor emptied out of themselves: they do not see Sin, nor believe in
Christ after a saving manner; Oh my Dear People! give the infinite God no rest
night nor day, till you find sin an intolerable burden, and be brought to a
full rest, and satisfaction in Christ, living upon Christ only, wholly and
always* Most under the Gospel are convinced, but not humbled, they know every
thing, and can talk of any thing, but feel little or nothing with life and
power upon their Souls, many seem to be burdened with the sense of their sin
and misery; but yet can bear it, and are contented to live without deliverance
from it; Oh* get from under the old Covenant, come from under Adams Covenant;
take heed of fetching life and comfort to your Spirit at any time, by any thing
besides Faith in the blood and promise of Christ; let Faith, Love, and a spirit
of Gospel Obedience do all you have to perform: I beg that you in whose hands
these Lines may come, would be at the pains to tell the men and women, that
formerly attended on my Ministry, and their Families one by one, that I do most
earnestly beg; nay, most seriously Charge you and them, that not one of you
venture to meet me at the last day in a state of Nature: Oh let me see you
smiling in that day; Oh, let me find you my Joy and Crown then, very likely
when I now part with you, I shall never meet you more in this World; Oh fare ye
well my dearest hearts, till the morning of the Resurrection. The good Lord
grant us a merry meeting beyond the Grave. I then advise, charge, and take my
leave, my last leave of those eight sorts of Persons.

1. You Rich and Worldly Persons, in and about Lymerick; I take my leave of
you, begging you would yet lay up your Treasure above, cease from things below,
do every thing with an eye to Eternity; look on all things as you would when
dying: beware of the unlawful use of lawful things, what you love most, fear it
most; if any man love the World, etc. Do Gods Promises, or Men's Bargains favor
most with you? come let me meet you wealthy at the last Day. Many have wealth
without weal. Write small gains on all your Prosperity: where there is much
Labor, with checks of Conscience, Gods curse is all the portion you can look
for. Oh turn your faces upward, heavenward, drive a Trade for another World,
and if you do it in good earnest, and do not find it a better Trade than
toyling in the World, then send your curse after me.

2. You that are poor and low in the World, in and about Limerick; I take my
leave of you: do not you meet me out of Christ at the Resurrection of the Dead.
I am sorry I cannot come at you to speak, but I have often done it already:
Grow rich toward God, rich in Faith; let not cares for your Body sink your
Soul. Oh, the worth of your poor Soul: though you are not worth the ground you
go on: the Poor receive the Gospel, how is it, that you have slighted and lost
it? Christ in the Parable compels the poor to come in, why have you stood out
all the twelve years? You have time for every thing, though poor, and yet can
find no time to make your peace with God in, and to live in Divine communion.
Know God is no respecter of persons. Beware of two Hell s, one here, and
another hereafter: it is not lack of money, time, or trade, or any such thing
that damns men, but lack of saving-Grace. I would not have thee damned poor
man. Oh lift up thy eyes and enquire after Christ, and eternal things: once
more I take my leave of thee; the Lord grant I may bless thy happy Lot at last.

3. You Old Men and Women of the Congregation, I take my leave of you, though
sore against my heart; do not venture ( I charge you) to appear at last without
a saving work of Grace: yo I have spoken to, but alas! how much laboring in
vain is amongst Ministers? you are dropping into your Graves; you must quickly
know (and that fully) what you have often heard in that old Abbey; Oh, come in
at last, better late than never; become Old Disciples: take heed of Youthful
Sins in Old Age; watch against the evils of Old Age, which are many: but now I
have not time to name them; you have had time to prepare experiences, are they
ready? can you hope (on good grounds) to look God in the face, when the breath
is gone out of your body. Oh, throw not away Old Age after Youth; lay hold on
Christ: you know there came in one at the eleventh hour, and one saved on the
Cross, who knows what free Gra c e may yet do for you: Farewell Old Man, let me
see thee well at last. If I were to stay here yet our being together would be
short, for you are Old and I am sickly.

4. You Young Men and Women, I now take leave of you, at your peril; let me not
see one of you out of Christ at last; if you do, know, your blood is upon your
own soul; for unto you frequently and solemnly have I spoken: you have I
Catechized, and Expounded it too, and prayed for. I now say nothing, but refer
you to the many Sermons on Eccles. 12. 1. I have (through mercy) prevailed with
many such to turn to God, and they never repented it: but I am sorry I must
leave so many unconverted young Folks behind me, in such a day of vile Examples
a s this is, but I cannot help it; the Lord pity you: thou have had a day on
which depended eternal life, what have thou done with it? as sure as God lives
thy Dalilah will be thy death and devil. That which thou now takes in with joy
shall be cast out again with groans, and breakings of heart: Oh what might thou
now have been possessor of, if thou had well husbanded thy youthful day: the
Lord bring to remembrance by his Holy Spirit, Old Sermons for thy Conversion
and Humiliation; for now I must say no more, I leave thee to thy Judge

5. You Convinced Unconverted Ones about Limbrick: you that are almost
persuaded to be Christians; that are Cakes not turned; I do (with an aching
heart) take my leave of you: Oh what will become of you through all eternity!
can you? will you? dare you meet me at Gods Tribunal in that old, carnal,
cursed Estate, that I now leave you in, notwithstanding many hopeful
convictions I do in the Name of the great God, as a Minister of the Gospel,
charge you not to do it: how have these abounded in Lymbrick which has argued
Gods presence in his Ordinances? how many have gone out of their own doors
fully convinced and resolved for a godly life, but yet taken off afterward? Oh
this cursed diversion is the damnation of thousands: there were many of my
knowledge, that durst not attend in that place, being afraid of their own
trouble; but alas, they are never like to be disturbed in their carnal security
any more by me. Oh, what a Preacher will they meet with at Death and Judgment!
how many of my Congregation had lusts too strong for their light, and
corruptions for their convictions: what shall I say or do for them that have
light but no life; that goes to Hell just by Heaven: that have been near to the
Kingdom of Heaven, yet fall far short of it: Know, that God by his Spirit has
waited on you, and wooed you, both in the heat of the day, and the wet of the
night; how will thou ever bear the remembrance of those thousands of sweet and
serious Truths that thou have sat long under, and been often affected and well
pleased with, though still to no purpose to this day; after a while it will be
in vain to cry, call time again, or my poor sickly Minister again, who has
often (...)ntreated me with all manner of words to (...)e saved: know there
has been a Prophet amongst you; Oh bring it to some issue, yet it is not too
late; your conversion will yet prevent your condemnation: come seriously to it,
either to receive or reject Christ: it grieves me to think how many hopeful
beginnings will (by this angry Providence) come to nothing, that might (in
time) be something. I fear you will grow asleep under the present Preaching,
and if Satan should have a Commission from God to rock you, then you are lost
for ever. I forget my self, I must say no more to you, if thou miscarriest,
know, I gave thee warning: Oh than I could breath life into you; the Lord God
do it for these miserable Souls.

6. You the poor doubting and disponding Souls of my flock, I must take leave
of you, and that goes most near unto me. I ts true, mostly I had to do with
others in my public Ministry, conversion rather than consolation being the
work I (...) at but yet, you have frequently met with words of comfort, and
sweet baits in your way home. I beg you would get these Sermons read to you,
that became food to your Faith and Comfort. You know I Preached an hundred and
ten Sermons on the Covenant of Grace, for your I nformation and Consolation;
get them read: there can be no comfort got or kept with a good understanding
of, and settled meditation upon the rich, free and well ordered Covenant: Oh
call to mind those many Sermons at days of Prayer, and Speeches at the Lords
Table. When I set my self to encourage you in the ways of God, and to answer
your Cases of Conscience. You must now take a little pains to rub up your
memories, for I cannot repeat old Truths, nor press new ones; I have run out
beyond bounds already: alas, what will you do my poor afflicted Souls? you ly
near my heart; who shall now comfort you, when he that first wounded you is so
far from you? The Lord Jesus Christ himself send the great Comforter, and that
to abide with you for ever: I hope he will now do it himself, and none can
comfort like him, indeed none but him: but I hope Jesus Christ will not leave
you comfortless, but come to you, though you now cry out, the Comforter that
should relieve your soul is far from you: The good Lord raise up some Barnabas,
some Son of Consolation for you: Though my door has been ever open, night and
day, to receive your Soul-complaints; yet know, Gods will not be shut. Ah my
poor hearts! look off from poor man, whose breath is in his nostrils, and look
up to and pour out your complaints before your heavenly Father, sitting on the
Throne of Grace more freely and frequently than ever. Be of good cheer I hope
we shall have a good meeting another day, where all tears shall be wiped away:
the lesser comfort you have now, I hope the more lies in Bank for you at death:
Look continually to Jesus, the Author and finisher of your Faith: live and dye
waiting: be not (...) down; if you have dealt faithfully with me in opening of
your case (as I have good reason to think you have) I am fully persuaded you
shall do well, and dye in peace. Take heed of Unbelief, and give God the glory
of what he has done for you. I must stop my pen: Farewell, my poor afflicted
People, I leave you with that Shepherd in Isai. 40. 11.

7. As for you Careless and Profane Ly^^ricians, I have nothing more to say to
you, than bid you Farewell; for I suppose this Letter may not fall into your
hands: I am now incapacitated of treating with you about eternal things. Once I
had an opportunity publicly to do it; and you know I did it in season, and
out; making it my daily business to deal with poor, careless sinners, choosing
rather to convert one sinner, than comfort ten Saints. Conversion has been the
business of my life these twenty years by Conversion I do not mean turning men
to an Opinion, but from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God.
You have often heard me say, That I had rather turn one to Jesus Christ than
ten to my Opinion: but I have done with entreating, beseeching, pressing and
compelling of you; I leave you to him that made you, who is wise in heart, and
mighty in strength. I f I should charge you not to meet me out of Christ, it
may be you would laugh at me: but I do solemnly charge you not to do it, and
lot them laugh that wins. You must in good earnest betake your self to the
love, and practice of a godly life, in order, to eternal life, or be damned for
ever; and remember I told you so. I f God should (after my departure) open any
of your eyes, you may come to long for those helps that now you have loathed: I
do beseech you by the excellency of God, the preciousness of Christ, the
Glories of Heaven, the beauties of Holiness, the unspeakable worth of a Soul,
and the confounding amazements of the damned; that you open your eyes, bethink
your selves, and cry to God for mercy whilst it may be had: I f you will not,
this Paper, and the Writer shall rise up in judgment against you. Farewell
Careless Sinners, Farewell unkind and persecuting Neighbors: who have forbidden
me to speak to the Gentiles whereby they might be saved, that have been very
unneighbourly to him that never meant nor did you hurt, but have studied
always, of doing you good. I forgive you, the Lord first give you Repentance,
and then forgiveness.

8. And lastly, You Upright and Soundhearted Souls. I take my leave of you: you
will persevere through Grace to the end: you are my joy now, and will be my
crown hereafter; be not discouraged at this evil day, you shall do well in
spite of all opposition. Oh make it your great business, to please God, and
honor him in that place and station he has set you; whether old or young,
rich or poor, Husband or Wife, Parent or Child, Master or Servant: be good in
your Relation; for he that is not good in his place, is good for nothing;
though you are upright and past the worst, yet walk with a holy jealousy over
your selves: be not contented with a little Grace, but let it be your daily
ambition to grow in Grace: let not the Name of God suffer at any time through
you: Remember what was said on 2. Tim. 2. 19. are you indeed upright, you have
cause to be thankful; for God has done more for you than thousands: it grieve
me to see how many amongst us carries the plain marks of unsoundness, even
under talking Profession: some giving way to the love and immoderate pursuit of
worldly things, and others taking to themselves a godless liberty, as to strong
Drink spending much precious time amongst vile, vain men to the dishonor of
God, and their own certain and eternal undoing. O Lord, gather not my soul with
Sinners: hold up your heads you upright-hearted men, your Redemption is nigh:
Oh, it is not to tell what is laid up for us against the time we meet next; eye
has not seen, etc. though we part now, we shall meet again, and never part,
but be forever with the Lord: nay we shall know each other in Heaven, and be
filled with all the fullness of God: let all the Clouds that now hang over your
head make you only mind our home, and mend your pace: know there is good and
comfort to be got out of the worst of conditions; you may be assured (you
upright hearts) affliction or suffering shall either miss you or mend you: but
I forget my self, I must, take leave, The Lord guide you by his counsel till he
bring you (...) glory.

I have done with the first Advice; the rest I will but name: I only say this
before I come to them, that if I had opportunity and liberty to have preached
my Farewell Sermon, it would have been from those words, in 2 Cor. 13. 11. I
would have spoken specially to that fourfold Exhortation that is in them,
passing by other things in it as a constraining compellation, viz. [Brethren]
and a brief Conclusion [Finally] and a heartbreaking valediction [Farewel] and
hearty benediction [That the God of Love and peace might be with them] nay a
rich Promise [he shall be with you.] The first Exhortation is to be perfect,
and that you ought to press after perfection all you can, if a little of any
thing will serve turn, it is a sign you are not right; to be perfect signifies
to piece again; and so do you when ever you fall out with God, Conscience, or
the people of God. Oh piece again; The next Exhortation in that Text is, to be
of good comfort; the third is to be of one mind, but it must be a good mind:
and the last Exhortation is, to live in peace. But have no time to hint further
at that Text Oh read it often over for my sake. So much for the first Advice,

2. I advise you to be deeply humbled under, and affected with this dark and
dismal dispensation under which you lie at present for you are the first in the
Kingdom (or at least the part of it) that are gone into captivity, which is an
aggravation of your trouble; though every persecution must begin somewhere, I
could wish we might be the last, as we are the first: but it is to be feared it
will not be, but rather the beginning of sorrows. This is a very angry
Dispensation let men make as light of it as they will. Oh that Jesus Christ
(who alone can) would take up this quarrel. Deep Humiliation self and
Soul-abasement is your present and most proper work; Oh buckle close to that
work, God calls you too: your Sun is gone down at noon ( i. e. when you least
looked for (...)) God has turned all your Songs into Lamentations, and your
Feasts into Mourning, and yet there is worse news in the verses after, as you
may see in Amos 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. Certainly God sees something, nay many things
eminently amiss amongst us, that makes him proceed thus against us: Oh what
has sin brought us to? let us search our selves, one by one, and see wherefore
it is that God contendeth with us: let us every one put away his own sin. I say
to you as once God said, Put off our Ornaments that I may know what (...) do
unto you. I am afraid it is almost forgotten already, and no small mischief
will happen upon that forgetfulness. Oh Lord, pour out a spirit of deep
humiliation and mourning upon poor Limbrick, for it has most heavily sinned
against thee: you are as sure to have your opportunities mentioned to you in
Eternity, with Joy or Sorrow, as ever you saw the Sun shine.

3. I seriously advise you, to prepare, and lay in for sore, and sinking
Sufferings: I expect them wherever I go, and I think you have reason also. I
desire not to go from trouble for whither shall I fly from Gods Presence? but I
desire to go for work, having none here; and to be better fitted for trouble
when it comes: I say little to this, I refer you to the many Sermons of late: I
have hitherto proved a true Prophet; but should be glad for your sakes, if
free grace would make me a liar as to that heavy Cloud, which is hanging over
these Nations, as once he made Jonah as to Nineveh.

I say once more lay in, and that in good earnest, for Suffering Times, for
they will if not most certainly, yet most probably come: put not away the Evil
Day: Security has almost undone us already: Sore Exercises are at the Door:
Oh! keep your souls in an undisturbed expectation of Suffering: it is an easy
thing for men to speak light of suffering, but when they indeed come if God
give not Suffering Grace, on suffering ground: there will be nothing but
Denying, and Betraying the Lord Jesus Christ: Oh! be fast and faithful to God
this evil day: my soul Trembles at what I see this sad hour of Temptation will
produce on thousands of Professors: how will they fall like Leaves in Autumn?
for though men live by a form of Godliness, they cannot suffer, nor dye by it,
I see the beginnings of a fear and alteration in this place already: not only
as to men's Worship, but their walking: some are growing loose already: Oh that
I had the wings of a Dove, that I might quickly be at rest, from seeing that
Security, careless walking, forgetfulness of God, neglect of Duty, immoderate
minding the world, frequent vain Company, Tippling, prating, unprofitable
talking; with many more evils, that might be named; which are here covering the
face of Limbrick. I only say, That if your Foundation be not well laid on
Christ, only in deep humiliation, you will never stand: I refer you to those
few Directions I gave you, how to dye safely, though suddenly; I confess your
troubles, i. e. the thoughts of them, have much more affected me, than my own;
but upon better consideration I am quieted, because I think but few will hazard
any thing for Christ, his Gospel, and a good Conscience, but do what men
desires them; we are reaping the fruit of our vain attendances: now wrath has
it is day, and your mirth it is night.

4. I advise you to a serious, constant, and punctual observation of the Lords
Day, the Christian Sabbath: be found in the duties of it: watch your thoughts,
words, and wa^s that Day. I fear the want of this, has had an hand in our
Sufferings: Professors do not rule their tongues on the Sabbath as the Puritans
of old did: you might do well to repeat old Sermons, and call in others for
their edification, especially the weaker sort; for some cannot read, Oh invite
them, and help them all you can: many of you took Notes, let them not lie by
you rusting: but some in one place, and some in another; be doing all the good
you can: Oh, abound in Closet and Family Duties, give God his twenty four
hours; know it is Sacriledg to meddle with any part of it: make bold with your
own things, and not of Gods: keep repeating and praying one with another on the
Lords day, lest the Sabbath be forgot in Zion. I might say many things as this:
but for some reasons forbear it. I refer you to what was said lately to it,
from John 20. 19. The Lord God of Sabbaths so sanctify every one of you, that
you may sanctify his day, and his Name every day; so as God may have glory,
and you the comfort at last, and every body edified about you; let God say Amen.

5. I advise you in case peace and liberty in other places be continued, that
you do not content your selves without the Gospel: Oh, the worth of the Gospel!
if there be any thing under Heaven to be valued, its the dearly purchased
Gospel of Jesus Christ, I can never tell you (though I should set my self to
it) what the worth of a learned, godly, plain, powerful and exemplary Ministry
is: Oh, what a sweet thing is communion with God, and with his People in pure
Ordinances! Oh, how vile must Sin needs be, that has a main hand in sending
away the Gospel! Men are naked without the Gospel, it is the glory of any
place: Oh the Curses that follow its removal! I beg you would be concerned in
this particular; you were too much formerly contented without it, let it be so
no more. I was brought hither after a wonderful sort (all things considered)
and my removal is not without a wonder. Some godly young man might be had,
whose charge is small, and might be less taken notice of than I was, O Lord,
take not away thy Spirit from Limerick, but restore thy precious Gospel to it,
lest it sleep the sleep of death: Oh the temporal, spiritual and eternal
plagues that fill up the room of a removed Gospel!

6. I advise you not to be strangers one to another: this has been an old
fault all along notwithstanding my many public (especially private)
Admonitions to the contrary See one another, Pray one with and for another: you
may without hazard (I hope) keep days of Prayer together. Shall these fail and
come to nothing? God forbid. Be stirring up one another, be glad to see each
other, and be useful one to another, both to Soul and Body as there is
occasion. Away with this strangeness and selfishness; let your communion be
profitable. It grieves me to think that you here, that have heard together, nay
prayed and sat down at the Lords Table together, should grow mere strangers one
to another, as I greatly fear you will. I can do no more than wish you to your
duty: the Lord unite your hearts to himself, and one to another, causing you to
live in peace and Oneness of mind, that the God of love and peace may dwell
amongst you.

7. And lastly, I advise you to beware of Seducers and Errors: Remember Acts
^0. 29. Keep close to your Bibles; to the Law and to the Testimony when any
thing is started: Beware of such as cry up the Light within, shun their Books,
and all unnecessary communion with them, pitying their being out of the way. I
might say more here, but a word is enough to the wise. I might without blushing
say, as Gal. 1. 9. Be ware of any Doctrine that makes Christ the favourer of
sin, or man the Savior of himself.

But I have done with Advising you and go on to the next:

3. Give me leave to thank you: I thank you for all your care and love from
first to last. I thank you for your great importunity for my settling amongst
you, when you were acquainted with me by my providential passing through the
Town. I thank you for your kind receiving me at first, notwithstanding my great
bodily weakness, and soul unworthiness. I may in some measure say; as Gal. 4.
14. that my temptation that was in my flesh you rejected not, but received me
as an Angel of God. I thank you for your serious, cheerful and constant
attending upon my Ministry: and for your care, kindness and tenderness in my
sicknesses. I thank you for your ready compliance with me in any lawful thing
that at any time I desired of you; and for your standing by me to the outmost
of your power in those many troubles and trials that I have met with from first
to last. I thank you for your kind Tokens in secret, for your pleading my cause
in public, and excusing my weakness as you had occasion. I do most heartily
thank every one, any one in City or Country that ever did me any kindness less
or more, by word or deed. I thank any that would hear me, and I more thank them
that did heed me, and I thank to them yet more that I did any saving good as a
Nurse, but most of all them that got their first saving good from me. I hope
whether I be your Nurse or your Father, you will not forget to love and pray
for me, though at a great distance. Lastly I thank you for your desire of my
longer continuance with you: the Lord supply you better; I have already
acquainted you with the grounds of my removing. I n one word, I thank God for
your love, and heartily pray it may be returned manifold into the bosom of you
and yours.

4. Give me leave to pray for you; As for this I shall say little; I hope that
Study of mine may bear witness for my concernedness for you. You may guess at
my Prayers in secret ( i. e. as to what I prayed for) by what you have known in
public and private. I pray you may be filled with all the fullness of God: that
you may know the love of Christ which passes knowledge. Oh that you may be
filled with the knowledge of his will, and may walk worthy of the Lord to all
well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, strengthened with all might,
according to his glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering with
joyfulness. Oh that you may be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
the Saints in light, and may at last have an abundant entrance into the
everlasting Kingdom of God. The good Lord make all Grace abound toward you,
that you always having alsufficiency in all things, may abound to every good
work. The Lord sanctify you wholly, in Soul, Body and Spirit, and grant I may
at last see you every one presented without spot, or blemish, or any such thing
before the Father, with exceeding joy.

Now when I am taking leave of all, bidding Farewell to Sabbaths, Sacraments
Lectures, days of Prayer, and Expoundings, and Catechisings; saying Farewell to
my Relations and Friends in England, Dublin and Limerick: Farewell to my Study,
and that old Abbey, etc.

I do most cordially pray that you all may Farewell in your Bodies, but
especially in your Souls. Oh, that you may Farewell in your Basket and Store, in
your Children, Servants and Neighbors: the Lord grant you may Farewell in your
Trade and Traffic, especially Heavenward. Oh that you may Farewell in
Prosperity and Adversity, in all your desertions and afflictions. I wish your
welfare at home and abroad, by night or day, in a single or married condition,
by Land or Sea, at Bed or Board. Oh that you may Farewell in the troubles of
life and pangs of death; and at your solemn appearing at Judgment. Oh that you
may Farewell both in time, and through all Eternity. Yea, let mine Enemies
Farewell for ever, thorough true Repentance and saving Grace, given to them now;
So be it, my heart says Amen.

5. And lastly, Let me bless you, and that in the Name of the Lord: seeing
Jesus Christ (the great Head of His Church) has empowered Ministers so to do.
Now the Lord bless you, and keep you; and the Lord make His face shine on you,
and be gracious to you: the Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon you,
and give you peace. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father,
which has loved us, and given us everlasting Consolation and good hope through
Grace, comfort your heart, and stablish you in every good word and work. The
God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great
Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you
perfect in every good work, to do his Will; working in you that which is
wellpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever. Now
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God the Father, the sweet and
comfortable Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with you all now, and evermore,
Amen and Amen.

Thus Prays your very Affectionate and greatly Afflicted Minister for you All,
and will (through Grace) hold on so to do, whilst

John Baily.
May. 8. 1684.
Postscript
I Present You (my dear and much endeared Friends) with this small Token and
Legacy of my Love, hoping it will not only meet with a kind Reception, but a
Christian Improvement amongst you. It was but very lately I put pen to paper,
having many Debates within my self whether I should do thus or no, not knowing
what Construction might be put upon it, either by Friends or Foes: but my
strong Affection to you would not suffer me to be silent, and when I had begun,
the same Affection would not suffer me to be short; for I fully designed only
half a Sheet, but writing to you the People of my Love it roundly run without
stop or stay to this length: and at last in much peremptoriness I forced my
self to conclude, resolving it should look nothing like a Book (though with
much ease it might) but like it self, viz. a parting Letter* I confess I am
sorry it is so large, lest it prove tedious, and seldom read, and thereby I
lose both my end and labor; and yet withal I am sorry it is no larger, seeing
I cannot Preach my Farewell Sermon amongst you, the substance of which is not at
all in this Letter. Such as it is you are welcome to it: read it (I pray)
together and alone, and that frequently, seriously and impartially; communicate
it to the men and women of the Congregation as you have opportunity. The
plainess of its dress I take for granted will never offend you; for I only now
write to you, just as I used to Preach to you, and Talk with you. It is the
Market Language that must save Souls. You stand more in need of a skilful and
faithful Physician than an Oratorical one. There are some mispointings and
small Errata's in the writing (I writing badly my self got others to Transcribe
it) which I beg you would excuse and mend; for I am not at leisure through
manifold distracting occasions to attend it. I am not concerned at the many
faults I foresee, and could name that very many persons will find in and with
this Letter. Its enough to me that Uprightness has boldness, and a good man is
satisfied from himself. Many more things I would have said, but for some
Reasons leave them to some better opportunity. If God get any glory, and you
good by this Friendly Letter, I have enough; if it falls out otherwise I cannot
help it, there is but so much labor lost to the many Months and Years before,
The Lord renew you in the Spirit of your Minds. The Lord keep you from
Hypocrisy and Apostasy, and heal all those Miscarriages that I see growing on
the face of Limerick; but cannot (to the great grief of my heart) help, by
reason of my present circumstances. The Lord be with you all, Amen.

This is the Prayer of him for you who once was your Minister, and still
remains the Lords Witness either for you or against you.

Acts 26. 16. John Baily.


