THE GREATEST SINNERS EXHORTED and ENCOURAGED To Come to CHRIST and that NOW
Without DELAYING.

Also, The Exceeding Danger of men's Deferring their REPENTANCE.

Together with a Discourse about The DAY of IVDGEMENT. And on Several other
Subjects.

By INCREASE MATHER Teacher of a Church at Boston in N. England.

Eccles. 12.13. Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter, fear God and
keep His commandments, for this is the Whole duty of Man.

Act. 20.21. Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, Repentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by R. P. for Joseph Brunning at his Shop near the
Exchange. 1686.

To the Reader.
IT is, as the Practice, so the Duty of every Scribe which is instructed to the
Kingdom of God, to bring forth things both New and Old. The Law must be
preached, inasmuch as thereby is the Knowledge of Sin, without which men will
never be duly sensible of their need of Christ. But it is the Gospel (and not
the Law) which is the word of Faith. Sinners will never come to Christ except
they be persuaded of His Ability and Willingness to save* This the Gospel does
make known, as also that the gracious God is ready for His Son^ sake, to pardon
all those that truly repent, tho their sins are as Scarlet, though they be red
like Crimson. The Holy Spirit does sometimes bless encouraging sometimes
awakning Considerations for saving good to the souls of the Elect of God*
Nothing (...) a greater tendency to awaken unto Repentance than serious
Thoughts about the great DAY of JUDGMENT, and (...) Infinite Danger which is in
men's* Delaying their Conversion. A late Writer says that he had enquired of
some whose Ministry had been emine^^y blessed as to Converting work; and They
assured him, that they found greater success in preaching about the Danger of
Deferring Repentance, than in their Discourses on any other Subjects. What can
be more desirable than that such as are indeed brought home to Christ, should
be abundantly fruitful in good works, and grow into greater Intimacies of
Communion with God? Such Considerations as these have induced me first to
preach, and now to consent to the Publication of the Sermons emitted herewith.

There are Thousands in the world better than I am, Whose Opportunities for
Service are taken from them: If a great door and effectual is as yet opened to
me, all that know my Circumstances will say I ought to thank God, and not the
world. I must and do (not altogether without shame and Sorrow for my want of
wisdom to improve them) acknowledge that the Lord Jesus has entrusted me for
many years with rich Opportunities more ways than one; but how soon they may
be all gone I know not. That Satan and his Instruments have been designing to
deprive me of them, is manifest from that foolish and Treasonable Letter
pretended to be written at Boston in N. E. 3d. of 10th. M. 1683. whereunto my
name is most injuriously affixed: which Letter was Published in Barbados, and
part of it Printed by Le Strange in his Observators November. 26, 27. and December.
1. 1684. as if it had been really mine, whenas I never wrote so much as one
Line of it, nor had any more hand in the Composure of it than the Observator
himself had. I find in the History of Shamplots, page 16 that some of far
greater worth than I am have suffered the like abuses. Dr. Owen, Mr. Baxter,
Dr. Conant and others had Treasonable Letters imposed on them by wicked men.
Who am I, that I should not bear such wrongs with Patience? Hitherto I have not
published any thing for my Vindication, and it was in my thoughts never to have
done it, but to have left all to the Discoveries of the great DAY, in the mean
time being mindful of the old Saying, Magnum Contumeliae remedium
NegNegligentia. But having been informed that some have made an ill use of my
Silence, I thought it my Duty to take this occasion to notify to the world
what I have now declared.

I cannot but see my self concerned to Redeem the Time, and in all ways
wherein I am capable, to be doing for Christ, whilst it is Day.

INCREASE MATHER.
Boston, in N. E. Feb. 24. 1685/6.
John 6.37. -- And him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.
IN this Chapter we have the sacred Story of Christ's feeding five Thousand men
with five Loaves and two Fishes, together with the Consequents of that Miracle.
One Effect of it was, that many followed Christ, hoping that He would have fed
them again in a way extraordinary. The Lord Christ did reprehend them for their
vanity, in desiring to live an idle life, and then hoping that they should be
fed by Miracle. He also took (...) to exhort them to labor after meat for
their souls: He does therefore set forth the excellency of spiritual bread,
showing how much it does transcend the Manna which the Children of Israel lived
upon in the WilWilderness; thereupon the Jews desired that they might always
feed upon that bread ver. 34. Then said they to Him, Lord evermore give us this
bread. It is evident that they had carnal imaginations in their minds still,
dreaming of bread for their bodies, which might cause them to live a long time
in this world. Therefore in answer to that request of theirs, the Lord Jesus
Christ does both inform and reprove them.

1. He informs them, What that Bread of life which He spoke of, is, and what it
is to eat thereof, viz. that He Himself is that Bread, and that to believe on
Him, is to eat thereof, ver. 35.

2. He reproves them for their Unbelief, ver. 36. But I say unto you, that you
also have seen me and believe no^. They had seen Christ with bodily eyes, and
they had seen his Miracles too, and yet they had not seen Him with an eye of
Faith; they did not close with Him as the true Messiah, as the Son of God, and
the Savior of the World.

In this verse there are two things asserted,

1. The Reason why some that have the outward means of Faith, yet never
believe. It is because they are not by the Father given to Christ. All such
shall first or last believe on Him. But if men be not given to Christ, let them
hear never such sermons preached, nay, tho never such Miracles should be
wrought before their eyes, they will not believe.

2. Another thing asserted in this verse, is, the great benefit which does
follow upon coming to Christ as in the words before us to insist on; the
meaning of which may be spoken unto under the (...) from them, which is,

Doct. That if any m^n, whoever he be, shall indeed come unto Jesus Christ, He
will in no wis^ cast him out.

For the clearing of this Doctrine, three things may be enquired into,

1. Who are Comers unto Christ.

2. What is implied in this expression, that Christ will in no wise cast him
out that (...) to Him.

3. How it does appear that Christ will in no wise do so.

Quest. 1. Who are Comers to Christ (...) what is meant by coming to Him?

Answ. The Comer to Christ is the same (...) the Believer. In the thirty fifth
verse of the Chapter, Christ says He that comes to me shall never hunger, and
he that believes on me shall never thirst. So in ver. 44, 45, 65, Believing on
Christ, is called a coming to Him. Ther^ are various Metaphors whereby Faith is
set forth in the Scripture: There is the Eye of Faith, hence Believing is
called a Looking on Christ Zech. 12.10. There is the Ear of Faith, so Believing
is called Hearing; Hear and your souls shall live. there is the Mouth of Faith,
thus Believing is expressed by that of eating Christ, Ioh. 6.57. He that eats
me shall live by me. There is the Hand of Faith, thence Believing is said to be
a Receiving of Christ, Ioh. 1*12. And there is the Foot of Faith, thence
Believing on Christ is said to be a Going to him and Coming to him: As
Unbelief is expressed by that of not coming to Him Ioh. 5.40. Ye will not come
to me that you might have life. i. e. you will not believe. And Unbeleif is
said to be a Departing from the Lord, Heb. 3.12. so Faith is Coming to Him; Not
a mere bodily Coming to Christ, for so these Capernaits and many others came to
him, who had no true faith; but a coming (...) him with the Soul. The Gospel
calls upon men to forsake all for Christ, he whose heart and soul does obey
that Call is a true Believer. Particularly,

1. The Believer Comes to Christ as the most excellent Person his soul can
desire. 1. Pet 2.7. To you that believe He is precious. The Jews followed
Christ for his Loaves, and not for his Person, Ioh. 6.26. Notwithstanding the
Miracles done by Christ, which were enough to convince any one that he is the
Son of God; yet they did not believe Him to be so, and therefore were not right
Followers of him, or Comers to Him. When God brings a man home to Christ, He
lets him see that surpassing Excellency in his Person, as to cause the soul to
fall in love with Him, and to choose Christ rather than any other person. Cant.
5.9, 10, 16. What is thy beloved more than another beloved? my beloved is the
chiefest among ten thousand, yea he is altogether lovely. This is the Language
of the real comer to Christ* The believing soul sees Christ to be a lovely
Christ indeed, and therefore comes to Him as being enamoured with Him. Ioh.
6.4^. He that sees the Son and believes on him. M^n must see a beauty and
excellency in the Son of God, or they will not believe on Him.

2. The Believer comes to Christ for Salvation. He sees that Christ is in
himself lovely; and from that consideration goes to Him. Moreover, he sees
all that life and Salvation in Christ which his soul stands in ^^eed^ of, and
therefore comes to Him. It Is true (as (...) intimated) that in closing with
Christ, respect is to be had to His Person, and not to His bebenefits only.
Nevertheless a man in Coming to Christ may and should have respect to his own
Salvation. It is a very needless scruple which some have concerning their
Coming to Christ, as if it were not right, because Desire of Salvation puts
them upon it; so it may be, and so it should be. Christ Himself calls upon men
from that very Consideration to come unto Him. Ioh. 7.37. If any man thirst let
him com^ (...) me and (...). A man may and should come to Christ that so he may
drink, that he may from and by Christ receive the waters of life for his soul.
The Believer comes to Christ as to a Priest, who has by the Sacrifice of
himself purchased life for every comer to him. He looks for Reconciliation
with God only by the Sacrifice which Christ has offered for that end: He casts
his soul and all the eternal Concerns thereof, upon the Merit and Mediation of
Jesus Christ. He looks for all Acceptance with God, for the Pardon of all
sins, for eternal life in another world, for the alone sake of Christ and His
Righteousness; thus does he come to Him.

3. The Believer comes to Christ to be Instructed by Him. Unto this the words
of my Text have a peculiar respect. He that comes to me (says Christ) b. e.
he that comes to me to be my Scholar, my Disciple, as long as he is really
willing to learn of me, I will not turn him out of doors. When the woman of
Samaria acquainted the Citizens that she had met with one who told her all
things that ever she did, they went out of the City and came to Him. Thus it is
with the Believer; he has heard report of Christ's being the great Prophet of
God, and therefore he comes to Him for instruction: he believes that Christ
knows the mind of God fully, and he is willing that Christ should reveal unto
him whatever God would have him to believe or to practice in order to
Salvation. His soul thirsts after the wholesome waters of Truth, and he comes
to Christ that he may receive thereof. ^sa. 55.1. This then is employed in
Coming (...) Christ, even a Closing with Him in respe^t of His prophe^ical
Office, a being subject to the Teachings of His Word and Spirit.

4. A Believer comes to Christ to be ruled by him* Many are ready to declare
their willingness to have Christ to be their Savior, who have no mind to have
Him to be their Ruler; They do not desire to be under the strict and holy
Government of Christ, whereas true Faith implies a closing with Christ in
respe^^ of his Kingly Office. Hence it is expressed by (...) of receiving Christ
Jesus the Lord. Col. 2.6. He that comes to Christ with an unfeigned desire to
be His Servant, and a Resolution to comply with all His holy commands, is such
a Comer to Him as He will in no wise cast out. Luke 6.46. Whosoever comes to
me, and hears my sayings and does them. Hence believers are styled the
Servants of Christ. 1. Cor. 2.22. Gal, 1.10. There is a Covenant between Christ
and them, as there is a Covenant between Master and Servant. Believers are
under a Promise, yea, an Oath of Fidelity to Christ, to be His, and His only,
and His forever.

We proceed therefore to the second Inquiry, VIZ.

Quest. 2. What is employed in this Expression, that Christ will in no wise cast
him out that comes to Him?

Answ. There is more employed than is plainly expressed in these words. Tho the
expression is negative, yet positive Good is contained therein. In general when
it is said I will in no wise cast him out, the meaning is, I will give him all
the kind entertainment which his soul can desire. He shall have all the Good
which a Disciple of Christ can expect.

More particularly,

1 He that comes to Christ, the Lord Jesus will r^concile him to God. He
undertaketh for any man, for every man that shall come to Him, to make his
peace with God. Suppose a sinner to have been guilty of never so many Crimes
and Provocations, if he comes to Christ, He will bring him into God's Favor*
For He has by his death made Atonement for sins, and obtained Reconciliation
for Sinners; and whoever comes to Him, has an Interest in all the Mercy
purchased by His Death. And Christ by his Intercession does commend the Comer
to Him, unto the Favor of God. He says before God the Father, This sinner is
one of them that I dyed for, and therefore do Thou for my sake forgive all his
Sins, and ^e reconciled to his soul.

2. If men come to Christ, He will accept them under His Instruction. He will
not refuse to admit them into His School, He will in no wise shut the doors of
His House against them in that respect. Therefore He says, Come to me and
learn. Mat. 11.28, 29. They that come to Him, He will learn them. Christ
speaks by David, saying, come to me, you Children, and I will teach you the
fear of the Lord. Psalm. 34.11. It is a blessed thing to be received into
Christ's School, to become the Disciple of such a Master, the Scholar of such a
Teacher; yet this blessedness belongs to every one that comes to Christ. Hence
WisWisdome speaks as Prove. 8.32. Hearken to me O ye Children, for blessed are
they that keep my ways, hear Instruction and be wise, and refuse it not,
blessed is the man that bears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the
posts, of my doors. They that come to Christ with A sincere desire to be
instructed by Him, He will teach them all things which are needful for them to
know in order to Life and Salvation. 1. Ioh. 2.20.

3. If men come to Christ, He will take them under His Protection. They that
have a true desire to be His subjects, and to have their souls secured under
the wings of His Power, it shall be so. He will gather them under His wings,
Mat. 23, 37. He will defend them against the Birds o^ prey which seek to devou^
their soul^. When once a man is in the (...) of Christ, his soul is safe for
ever; (...)* Satan, Earth, Hell, do the worst the* (...)* Hence Believers are
said to be preserved in Christ Jesus. Jude. 1. As the Children of Israel having
the blood of the Paeschal Lamb sprinkled over their doors, were preserved, when
the destroying Angel killed the Egyptians; so they that are in Christ, are in
Him preserved from eternal destruction. Christ is a Protector to them that
resort unto Him. When A^iather came to David, he said to him, Abide thou with
me, fear not, with me thou shall be in safeguard. 1. Sam. 22.23. They that fled
to David were safe from the fury of Saul; so they that come to Christ, are safe
from the rage of Satan, who does persecute their souls.

4. They that come to Christ, He will never cast them out of his favor, but
bring them safe to Heaven at l^st. Hence Christ does not only say, I will not
cast him out that comes to me, but I will in no wise do it. In the Greek there
are 2 Negatives, Cast him out that comes to me? (says Christ) no, I will never
do it. Therefore He says of his sheep which hear his voice, and follow him, I
will give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, Joh. 10.28.
Nothing can ever alienate his mind and heart from them tho he sees a great
deal of weakness and frowardness in them, yet as long as they have a heart to
cleave to him he will never reject them. Ioh. 13^1, Jesus having loved his own
in the world, He loved them to the end. He has made an everlasting Covenant
with the Comer to him. Isai. 55.3. And the^ (...) he wlll in no wise shut the
door of Heav^^ against any such If a man come to him, (...) will never cast him
out of Paradise. To (...) that overcomes all Temptations and objectObjections
against coming to Christ, to him will he give to eat of the tree of Life, which
is in the midst of the Paradise of God.

Quest. 3. But how does it appear that Christ will in no wise cast him out that
comes to him?

Answ. 1. If Christ should cast any out that come to him, he should act
contrary to the will of his Father, which he never did, and we may besure he
never will do. If a man comes to Christ, it is the Father that draws him.
Ioh. 6.44. No man can come to me except the Father which has sent me draw him.
Now if when a soul come^h to Christ, he should be rejected by him, the Father
would draw one way and Christ draw another way, which can not be. Christ
speaking to God the Father, says, Thou and I, we are one. Ioh. 17.22. The
Father, and Christ as Mediator are one in respect of Will and Design; they
both will and design the same thing. Therefore Christ himself does by this
Argument pro^e that he will not cast him out that comes to him Wherefore in
the next words he says, For I came down from Heaven not to do mine own (...),
but the Will of him that sent me* and this (...) the Fathers Will which has
(...) me, that of all which he has given me, I should l^se nothing. If Christ
came into the world to do the Will of God, and this be the Will of God, that he
should not lose so much as one of them that are given to him; we may conclude,
that no Comer to him, shall be rejected by him.

2. The Grace of the Lord Jesus, the goodness of his nature is such, as that he
will in no wise cast out them that come to him. He is of a most gracious
Disposition, and therefore ready to accept of returning sinners Joel 2.13. Turn
ye unto the Lord your God, for He is gracious and merciful. Hence if the
greatest sinners in the world should come unto the Lord Jesus with an heart
really desirous to be his Disciples, he will not cast them out. Paul before his
Conversion had bin a Blasphemer and a Persecutor of Christ and his Church, and
very injurious both to God and man, yet when he was brought to submit himself
unto Christ, and to say, Lord what will thou have me to do, the Lord would in
no wise cast him out. why? The Grace of our Lord (i. e. of our Lord Jesus
Christ) was exceeding abundant. 1. Tim. 1.13.14. There is Grace and abundant
Grace, yea exceeding abundant Grace in the Lord Jesus. Therefore if any man
come to him, he will in no wise cast him out.

3. Christ did never yet cast out any that came to Him. We read of many in the
Gospel that came to Christ for help and healing as to their bodies, but we do
not read of so much as one whom he would not have compassion on. Indeed he made
as if he would have rejected the Woman of Canaan when she came to him, but he
never intended it, only was willing to try her Faith: And why was this? but to
let us know that if men come to Christ with their souls, they shall surely find
acceptance with him. Many have come to Christ, yea, many thousands but he never
rejected any one of them. Tho some of them which came to Christ, were such as
one would have thought he would never have given entertainment to, having been
the vilest wretches in the world; yet when they came to Christ with a true
desire to be his Disciples, he never did reject so much as one of them;
therefore we may conclude he never will do so.

4. Christ dyed for those that shall come to him. Therefore he will in no wise
cast them out. If God has given to a man a heart to come (...) Christ, he may
be sure that Christ has dyed for him. Ioh. 12.32. And I, if I be lifted up
from the earth, will draw all men unto me. If a soul be drawn to Christ, it is
certain that Christ was lifted up on the Cross, there to bleed (...) die for
the salvation of that very soul. And ^f Christ has loved him, so as to dye for
him, he will never cast him out. Sinners may look upon Christ dying on the
Cross, and see him with his arms open, ready to embrace them.

5. Christ does invite and call upon Sinners to come to him. If a man does
invite another to come to his house, will he thrust him out of doors when he
does come? And shall we then think that the blessed Lord Jesus will do so? When
he was on the earth, he did personally invite Sinners to come to him. See a
glorious Scripture for this, Ioh. 7.37. In the last day, the great day of the
feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto me
and drink. If any man (says Christ) be he who he will, if any man desires the
waters of life for his soul, let him come to me he shall be welcome. Christ was
willing that all should know this; therefore he went into the T^mple to
proclaim it, and that on the feast, and on the last day of the feast, when
there wa^ the greatest Concourse of People, and he stood that he might be seen
of all, and cried, that he might be heard of all, Come to me, says Christ, any
man that has a Thirst, a desire after Salvation. And now Christ is gone to
Heaven he calls from that Temple, and bids Sinners come to him* Heb. 25. See
that ye refuse not him that speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him
that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him
that speaks from Heaven. He inviteth and calls Sinners to come to him by his
written Word, the holy Scriptures which are the Word of Christ. Therein he
says, Look unto me and be ye saved, all ye ends of the earth. Isai 45.22. The
Scriptures are a gracious Letter which Christ has sent from heaven, inviting
who will, to come to him, and be saved by him. And he concludes the letter
with a most sweet and blessed invitation to come to the waters of life. Rev.
22.17. Christ also does still continue to invite sinners to come to him, by his
Messengers whom he sends to preach the Gospel in his Name. Wisdom has sent
forth her Maidens, she cries upon the highest places of the city, whosoever is
simple let him turn in hither, come eat of my bread, and drink of the wine
which I have mingled. Prove. 9*3, 4, 5. Who are we to understand by the Maidens
of Wisdom, but the Ministers of Christ; who are likewise called the
Bridegroom's Friends, Io^. 3.29. In that their great work is to woo and win
souls for Christ, and they rejoice in nothing more, than when they can persuade
men to forsake their sins, and come to Jesus Christ for Salvation. But the
strength of this Argument will appear further, if we consider the Properties of
this invitation, whereby the Lord Jesus does call upon sinners to come unto him.

1. It is a real, earnest Invitation. Christ's heart is in it. Hence he is
troubled and grieved at the heart when Sinners will not come to him. When he
had often Invited the Jews to come under his wing and they would not, he wept
over them, saying to Jerusalem, O that thou had known in this thy day the
things that belong to thy peace. He does most affectionately call upon sinners
to come to him. Ioh. 7.37. He cried and said come unto me. A loud cry argues
earnestness. Christ is mavelous importunate in his urging sinners to come to
him. He is not willing to be put off, or to take denial. See else, Isai. 55.1,
2. -- Come ye to the waters, -- come ye, -- yea come. Hearken dilligently unto
me, incline your ear, and come unto me. (mind how earnest the Lord is in his
invitation, Come, come, yea come, come unto me) Yea hear, hearken diligently,
q. d. by all means hearken to me, if ever you would hear good counsil hear it
now. That men may see Christ is in earnest with them, he sets before them the
most alluring promises of the Gospel, he tells them, they shall have all the
good their souls can desire, if they will but come unto him: and denounces
more dreadful Threatenings than ever were thundered upon mount Ebal, against
those that shall neglect so great Salvation.

It is an often renewed and long continued Invitation. Mat. 22.37* -- how often
would I have gathered you under my wings! Where is the Sinner that lives under
the Gospel, that can say how often he has been invited to come unto Jesus
Christ! Behold he stands at the door and knocks, Rev. 3.2. He does not give one
knock at a sinners heart, and away, but he stands there; and knocks again, and
calls again. He knocks at a sinners heart by Mercyes, by Afflictions, by
Sermons, and by manifold dispensations. There are some sinners that Christ
continues Inviting of them, all their days. He stretches out his hand, i. e.
he beckens to them that they should come to him all the day long. Isa. 65.1. As
long as the day of Grace lasts, so long does Christ continue calling the sinner
to come to him, Now there are some that the day of Grace lasts as long as life
in this world (tho it is not so with all) continnueth.

3. Where the Gospel comes, this Invitation is universal. Isa. 55.1. Ho (see
what a gracious Proclamation is here) every one that thirsts, come to the
waters! So that the Gospel contains a general proclamation of mercy to all
comcomers; Christ excludes none that will come. If men do not by their
impenitence and unbelief shut the door against their own souls, Christ shuts
the door against none; but says to every one, come to me and welcome. Rev.
22.17. The call of Christ reaches every particular soul. Yea, thee in
particular as truly as if he should from Heaven call thee by name, as he did
Saul. If Christ should call from Heaven and say, thou, John such a one, or thou
Mary such a one, why do thou not come to me, to be saved? would thou not do
as he did, fall down trembling, and say Lord, what will thou have me to do.
Why, the Call of Christ in the Gos^^^ is no less than this comes to.

USE. Let sinners be exhorted to come to Jesus Christ without any further
delay.

To awaken hereunto.

Consid. 1. That this is a matter of Infinite Concernment. What are all thy
worldly concernments which thy heart (...) taken up with, to this which I am
now speaking of? For what is a man profited if he gain the whole world and lose
his own soul? Mat. 16.26. Thou will lose thy soul for ever if thou do not
come to Christ. All other things which thou can do are nothing without THIS,
What is thy Praying, Hearing, Sabbath-keeping, without this? They are indeed
good things and necessary to be attended, but without Christ they will never
save thee. So that intruth all the everlasting concernments of thy immortal
soul depend upon this one thing, of thy coming or not coming to JESUS CHRIST.
Remember that Scripture, Luke 10.42. There is one thing needful. Care about an
Interest in Christ is the one thing needful: he that makes sure of that one
thing will be a happy man for ever; but he that shall continue to neglect that
one thing (be he high or low, rich or poor) he will be a damned creature to all
Eternity. So that there is nothing of greater nor of so great concernment as
this one Thing.

Consider. 2, The great evil that is in not coming to Jesus Christ. This is the
great damning Sin of Unbelief, concerning which the Scripture speaks so
dreadfully. By that unbelief which the Scripture speaks of as a damning sin,
is not meant a man's doubting whether Christ dyed for him, or whether his sins
are pardoned, many a believer has such doubtings, and some hypocrites have
deluding confidences, they are persuaded if any in the world be saved they
shall: But by Unbelief is meant, The not coming unto Christ when called when
Invited. This is a most heinous Sin. Christ says the spirit shall convince the
world of sin because they believe not on me. Ioh. 16.9. h. e. he shall convince
them that they have bin guilty of grievous sin in not believing. Whoever thou
art; this is the greatest sin that ever thou wast guilty of in all thy life.
Sins against the Gospel have more of evil in them, than sins against the Law
only. It may be some of you have bin guilty of great sins: guilty perhaps of
Drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking, Disobedience to Parents, Theft, Lying, these are
fearful sins indeed: But thou have been guilty of another sin worse than all
these, that is, Unbelief. This is the most God-provoking sin in the world. As
nothing pleases him so much as Faith so nothing provokes him like unbelief. If
a man would be so wicked as to sit down and study how he might grieve and vex
the soul of God. he could not do it more than by unbelief. The unbelief of the
Children of Israel provoked God to swear in his wrath against them, that they
should never enter into his rest. Heb. 3.18, 19. To despise a great gift* is
highly provoking: now Christ is the greatest gift. Ioh. 4.10. He is the gift of
God. God could not make a greater offer, or bestow a better gift than that. Now
the Unbeliever slights, and makes light of this offer. The preci^^^ blood of
Christ has been offered to thee in the Gospel, to wash thy soul, and to purge
away thy sins, but by unbelief thou despisest it, as tho it were nothing worth.
Men think the sin of the Jews, in crucifying the son of God was exceeding
great, and so it was: But thou an unbeliever art guilty of that Sin. As it was
said to Jerusalem, thou have justified thy sister Samaria. Ezekiel. 16.51; Thus
thy unbelief is a practical Justification of the Jews in their crucifying
Christ. so that indeed there is Blasphemy in this sin. What greater Blasphemy
than to say, The Jews did well to crucify Christ? And thou by continuing in
thy unbelief do say no less. And in another respect there is Blasphemy in
this sin, for it gives the Lie to the blessed and holy GOD. 1. Joh. 5.10. He
that believes not God, has made him a liar because he believes not the
record that God gave of his son. God said from heaven conc^rning Jesus Christ,
This is my son, but the unbeliver says that is not true. By his unbelief he
practically declares that Christ is not the Son of God. O what a horrid thing
is this! and therefore it will bring the sor^st judgment upon all that shall
dye under the guilt of it. It will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha
than for such sinners as have refused to come unto Christ* Mat. 1.0 15. O think
sadly of this. If any man or woman in this congregation, who have had Christ
offered them in the Gospel, shall dye in their sins, it will in the day of
judgment be more tolerable for Sodom than for that man, than for that woman.
Know also that unbelievers will be of all sinners the most inexcusable when
they shall stand before the Judment seat of Christ at the great DAY. Joh.
15.22. If I had not come and spoken to them, they had not had sin, (h. e. they
had no sin in comparison of what is now upon them) but now they have no cloak
for their sin. They have no excuse to make: they might have been saved but
would not. O sinners! you have had miracles to make you believe, you do see it
in the Gospel* and yet will you not believe? will you not come to Christ? O
think what thou will say to Christ for excuse of thy not coming to him, when he
did so graciously invite thee. If thou continuest in thy sins and unbelief, He
will say to thee as David did to the Amalekit^ condemned by him, 2. Sam. 1.16.
Thy blood be upon thy head* When the Lord Jesus shall sit upon the (...) of his
glory and call thee before him, and say^* Did not such a Minister of mine
preach to thee, that if thou would believe on Christ thou should be
saved, but if not thou shoulds^ be damned, and thy heart shall answer, Lord, he
did tell me so, then will the Lord Jesus say The blood of thy soul be upon thy
own head, I, and my Throne will be guiltless for ever, but thy blood shall be
upon thy own head.

Consider 3. They that will not come to Christ now when they may, shall not
come to him another day though they would. O that men who live under the Gospel
would remember and lay to heart, what the Lord Jesus has spoken, Prove. 1.24.
etc. Because I have called and you refused, I have stretched out my hand, and
no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all my counsil, and would none of my
reproof; I will also laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes,
when your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirlwind: when distress and anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call upon
me but I will not answer, they shall seek me early but they shall not find me.
Now sinner, thou art fairly offered, but thou shall not always have Christ
preached to thee, nor his Spirit to strive with thee always. Now he op^ns the
doors of his House and bids you come in; but hereafter the doors of his House
will be shutt ^ and then sinners will cry unto him, Lord, Lord open to us; but
He will say, you come too late now, you cry too late: had you come and cried
thus sooner, you might have come in; but now away with you, none of you that
were invited, but slighted the Calls of the Gospel shall taste of my Supper.
Luk^ 13.29. At the day of Judgment those two words, Come, and Go, shall divide
all the world. As for such as did* come to Christ by Faith whilst they were in
this World, Christ will say to them at the last Day, Come you blessed, come,
and be with me in Heaven for ever; but as for them that did not come to Christ
whilst they were living on the earth; He will say to them, go, depart from me,
out of my sight for ever, go and suffer with that Devil whom you chose to
serve, rather than to obey the Gospel and to become the servants of Jesus
Christ.

O let the consideration of such things as these are, awaken and persuade
sinners to (...) unto Christ. But it may be there are some di^^couraged Souls,
that have secret Objections in their hearts, which make them afraid to come to
Christ. Let Us hear what they (...)* For I would fain prevail with souls to
(...) unto Jesus Christ; and the Lord grant (...) much success therein. O let
nothing (...) you. I am sure no soul among you has sufficient reason to be
discouraged from coming to the Lord Jesus.

But 1st* One objects, I am a poor unworthy creature, and should I come to
Christ?

Answ. Christ never rejected any that came to him for their unworthiness. Nay,
he bids them come to him. Rev. 3.17, 18. Thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked. I counsil thee to buy of me gold that thou may be
rich* Especially if poor creatures be sensible of their own unworthiness, then
Christ invites them to come to him. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden. -- As for such as are burdened with the Sense of sin
and guiltiness and misery, that sin lies as a heavy burden upon their souls,
to them Christ says, Come to me. He offers Himself and all his benefits upon
Free cost. Rev. 22.17. Let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will, let
him come and take the water of life freely. Christ will not sell his blood, but
he will give it freely. What tho thou art as poor as a Beggar, yet come to
Christ, and (...) make thee exceeding rich and glori^^^* Therefore he says,
Come, without money (...) without price. Isa. 55.1. Some that have (...) money,
yet they have a price, h. e. Something instead of money, but he that has neither
is a poor man indeed. Tho thou art thus poor as to have neither money nor
moneys-worth, yet come to Christ. What manner of persons were those that cam^
to David, and were kindly entertained by him. It is said Every one that was in
distress, and that was in debt, gathered themselves to him, and ^e became a
Captain over them. 1. Sam. 22.2. So art thou in debt, and art thou in distress
of soul; then go to David, go to Christ, go poor, a beggar, and hard bestead,
and He Will receive thee and pay all thy debts for thee too, and make thee rich
besides, O who would not go, to Jesus Christ.

Object. 2. Another says. You don't know what a Sinner I have bin; I am a
great Sinner, and an old sinner, an old Swearer, and old in Adulteries; and
shall I dare to come to the Holy Son of God, would you have such a one as I to
go to Christ?

Answ. Yes, Thou have so much the more need to come to Christ. If a man should
say, I am very sick, and therefore I am afraid to go to the Physician, what a
strange Saying were that! It is just so when any one shall say* I have been a
grievous sinner, therefore I am (...) to go to Jesus Christ. He, and He (...)
can recover thy guilty dying soul. If thou (...) indeed go to him with a
desire to be his servant, He Will accept of thee, notwithstanding thy many and
great sins; Such is his gracious nature as that he will forgive all the wrongs
thou have done to him. Tho thou have despidespised him, tho thou have killed
him by thy sins, yet he will, accept of thee. Remember how Joseph received his
Brethren when they came to him humbly confessing the wrong they had done him,
and begging for pardon, he comforted them and spoke kindly to them Genesis 50.4.
So will Christ do much more; for He came into the world to save the chief of
Sinners. 1. Tim. 1.15. Who did the Lord Jesus first appear to after his
Resurrection? was it not to Mary Magdelen, out of whom he cast seven Devils,
and more Devils out of her Soul than out of her Body? As great sinners as thou
have been, when they have come to Christ, he would in no wise cast them out.
What think you of the Woman of Samaria who had lived in Adultry, but when she
came to Christ with a penitent heart He gave her living Water. What do you think
of the Woman spoken of Luke 7.37. which was a Sinner, h. e. a notorious,
infamous Sinner, whose name rung in Town and Country for her wickedness, yet
^hen she came to Christ, and washed his feet (...) her tears, her sins which
were many were forgiven. And what say you to the Corinthians, who had, some of
them been Thieves, Drunkards, effeminate, Adulterers, Sodomites, (horrid sins)
but they were w^shed and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 6.9,
10, 11. Is not murder a crying sin? But to murder the Son of God! is a crime
beyond parallel: Yet those very men that embrued their hands in the blood of
Christ, when they came humbly to him for mercy, believing on Him whom they had
crucified, he received them and obtained their peace with God. If thou do
come to him, He Will wash thy soul in his Blood. That Soul of thine, which sin
has made as black as Hell, if washed in the blood of Christ, shall be made as
white as Snow. Psalm. 51.7. Purge me with hyssop* (h. e. with the blood of
Christ* signified by the blood sprinkled with Hyssop) and I shall be whiter
than the snow. O come to Christ, and he will sprinkle his blood upon thee, as he
speaks Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my reproof, behold I will pour out my spirit
unto you. So he says turn unto me, and I will pour out my blood upon you. The
Lord Jesus Christ never did reject any that came to him, merely because their
sins are many and great; Therefore he will not reject thee.

Object. 3. Another objects, I am afraid that I have committed the Sin against
the Holy Ghost, and therefore it will be in vain for me to go unto Christ.

Ans. The Reason why they that commit that sin perish, is not because Christ is
not able to save them, or that their is not merit enough in the Blood of Christ
to obtain forgiveness for so great a sin as that is, but because they have not
an heart to come to Christ. The Unpardonable Sin is always attended with final
Impenitency, and everlasting Hardness of heart. And this Objection is a mere
Temptation of Satan, who seeks thereby to discourage souls from coming to
Christ, He uses to tell those who never did nor ever shall commit the great
Transgression, they have been guilty of it. Tell me, have thou any desire to
come to Christ? Do thou prize his blood? then it is certain thou never wast
guilty of the unpardonable sin, for such trample under foot the Son of God, and
count his blood an unholy thing. Heb. 10.24. Art thou a malicious persecutor of
the ways and People of God? if not, I dare pronounce unto thee, that thou wast
never guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost; for there never was any man
guilty of that sin, but that he was given up to a spirit of persecution; He is
filled with rage against the Servants of God, because they fear his Name, and
dare not sin against him. Yet again, Did thou ever maliciously blaspheme or
speak evil of that which thou know was the work of God's Spirit? If thou
have not done despite to the Spirit of Grace, thou have not committed the sin
against the Holy Ghost. I must confess it is to be feared, that many of the
malignant adversaries of the Truth in these late days, have bin judicially
given up by God to commit that sin; yet I will say, I am persuaded there is not
one soul in this Congregation this day* that ever was guilty of it. O yet let
not this, nor any other Objection discourage any one among you from coming to
Christ.

For Direction here.

1. See thy absolute need of Christ. Without this no one will come to him. For
men are naturally averse to nothing so much as to this, so that they will not
come to Christ, except sense of extreme necessity compel them to it. Will a man
that thinks himself well, run to a Physician for help? The whole have no need
of a Physician but the sick. Mat. 9.12. But if men see their absolute need of
Christ, then they will be willing to go to him. When the sons of Jacob saw
themselves like to perish by the Famine, they would go to Joseph for bread,
that they might live and not dye. An Israelite when he saw the Avenger of blood
pursuing of him, was made willing to betake himself to the City of refuge.
Behold sinner, the Avenger of blood is at thy heels! if thou do not make
haste to the City of refuge, he will overtake thee and slay thy soul. Know that
without Christ, thou have a soul within thee that must perish to Eternity. If
thou had been guilty but of one sin in all thy life, thou must lie and dye
for ever under the wrath of God, if Christ save thee not. But what will thou do
then having been guilty of so many and great sins? thou can not save thy
self* all thy own Righteousness, all thy Prayers, Sorrows, Tears, if thou
could weep Seas of blood cannot save thee. Nay Heaven and earth cannot save
thee without Christ. None but Christ can deliver from the Wrath to come.

2. Beware of those things which will keep thee from closing with the Lord
Jesus Christ. Inordinate affection to the world, keeps many a man from Coming
to Christ: So it was with the young man in the Gospel, his heart was so set
upon the world that he neglected to close with Jesus Christ. Thus in the
Parable they (...) were bidden to the Wedding of the King's, son but would not
come; what hindered them? Mat* 23.5. they went their way one to his Farm and
another to his merchandise. Again, Love to some Sin, keeps men from (...) with
Christ. Ioh. 5.44. How can you believe, which receive honor one of another? If
a man has a lust of Pride which he loves, a lust of Drunkeness, a lust of
Uncleaness, or any other lust which he loves so as not to be willing to part
with it for Christ, how can he believe? And evil Companions keep many a soul
from going to Christ. The Scripture therefore says, Forsake the foolish and
live. Prove. 9.6. And again, Arise from the dead, (h. e. come away from thy dead
Companions in sin,) and Christ shall give thee light. Ephesians. 5.14. Why do not
Young men come to Christ, when the Gospel calls them? Alas some of them have
thoughts about it, but this or that vain Companion hinders them* As ever thou
do desire an Interest in Christ, or Salvation by Him, thou must break off thy
Companionship with those vain persons that will prove the Ruin of thy Soul.

3. When thy Heart is made willing to part with All for Christ, venture thy
soul upon Him. Let this Scripture him that comes to me, I will in no, wise
cast out encourage thee. Many of the Elect of God have at their first
Conversion been much encouraged by it. Cast thy self and soul into the arms of
the Son of God. Venture all thy everlasting Concerns upon the Lord Jesus.
Remember how it was with the Leprous men whom we (...) of 2. King. 7.4. They
said one to another* (...) sit we here until we dye, if we sit still here (...)
dye; and therefore come. let us fall unto (...) Host of the Syrians, If they
save us alive we shall live, and if they kill us we shall but dye. So think
with thy self, If I sit still and keep at a distance from Christ, I shall
certainly dye, if I go to him, I shall but dye, and it may be I shall live,
therefore I Will venture and go to Christ. Resolve as Esther did, If I perish I
perish (said she) yet I Will go into the Kings presence. so say thou, I Will go to
the Son of God, and if I perish* I Will perish lying at his feet: Nay, then thou
shall never perish.

4. Be often Coming to Jesus Christ. Is not thy heart dead? go to Christ to
quicken it. Is not thy Spirit too often out of Frame* go to Christ to help it.
There are many that complain, they know not whether they have true Faith or
not; The best way in the World to put it out of Question, is to go to Christ
again, and give thy self up to Him. By often Believing, a Christian shall feel
in his Heart that he does believe. By often comComing to Christ, and rolling
thy self upon Him, Thou will see thy self in the Arms of the SON of GOD for
ever.

O then Come to Him* and He will in no wise cast thee out.

SINNERS ought to Repent NOW.
Jer. 25.5. They said, turn ye again NOW every one from his evil way.


THis Chapter contains the substance (...) a Sermon preached by the Prophet
Jeremy, Wherein he declares that Destroying Judgments were coming upon the
Jews: and mentions the reason of it* namely, Because of their Impenitency and
obstinacy in Sin. That they were obstinate in their evil way, appeared by their
Refusing to hearken to the good Counsils and Admonitions of those whom God had
sent to them. And this evil was aggravated,

1. In that the^ had been a long time spoken to The Prophet tells them that at
the day when he delivered that S^rmon, He had himself bin preaching to them
three and twenty years, and all that time urging them to Repentance, but they
would not regard what was spoken to them in the Name of the Lord, (...)* this
was great contumacy.

2. Their Obstinacy was yet more aggravated, in that God had told them of their
sins, and what would be the Consequent thereof, not only by Jeremy, but by
many other Prophets. ver. 4. the Lord has sent unto you all his servants the
Prophets, rising early and sending them; but you have not hearkened, nor
inclined your ear to hear. The Lord speaks after the manner of men, and says
his heart was upon it, (as a man whose heart is engaged in business will rise
early to see it done; thus God did earnestly endeavor) to reclaim them from
their evil wa^es, but they would not hear, tho Prophet after Prophet was sent
unto them for a long time together. This argued great hardness of heart, to
contemn such persons, as the holy prophets were, and not one of them, but many
of them, yea all of them.

The words which have been read, express the Sum of the Doctrine taught by
the Prophets, viz.

1. That every man should turn from his evil way*

2. That men should not delay that work. They did not only say, Turn, but turn
NOW. The Doctrine therefore at present to be insisted on is,

DOCT. That every sinner unto whom the word of the Lord comes, is bound to
turn from his evil way, and that NOW without delaying.

The Explication and Confirmation of this Truth may be expressed (...) 4
propositions, all which are Comprehended in the Doctrine delivered.

Propos 1* Sin is an evil. In the Scripture sin is often compared to a way, It
is therefore (...) in the 1st. Psalm and the 1st. verse Blesse^ (...) the man
that stands not, (h. e. that remains not) in the way of sinners. h. e. in
Sin, which is the way that sinners delight to abide in. Hence men are said to
walk in sin, Ephesians. 2.2, And to go on therein, Psalm. 68.21. And it is an evil
way* Wisdom says, The evil way do I hate. Prove. 8.13. h. e. the way of sin:
which is also called the way which is not good, Psal^ 36.4. Sin is said to be
an evil way especially in 2 respects,

1. In that men thereby go from God the Chief Good. That which leads men from
God the chief Good must needs be an evil way. Now is this true of Sin. Men by
Sin turn from God; and the more they sin the further do they go from God.
Ier. 2.5. They are gone far from me. A sinner has bin doing nothing else but
departing from God all his days; so that there is an infinite distance between
God and him. Ephesians. 2.13. You were sometimes far off. h. e. far off from God,
and from Heaven. And the longer a man lives in sin, the greater is the
separation between God and his soul. For his back is turned upon God. Ier.
32.33. They have turned to me the back and not the face. And therefore the
longer a sinner shall go on in his present way, the further will he be from
God and from Heaven, and from all Happiness. Sin then is an evil Way. It
appears to be so,

2. In that it is a way which if continued in, will bring to misery at last.
All men look upon Punishment as evil: Now Sin if it be not turned from will
certainly be punished at last. Ier. 2.18. Know therefore and see, that it is an
evil thing and bitter that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. Bitter
Punishments are sometimes inflicted on sinners in this world. Temporal
Judgments on the Bodies, Estates, Names, Families; and spiritual Judgments on
the Souls of sinners use to follow upon the going on in sin. To be sure if sin
be not turned from, it will end in death. Romans 6.22. The end of these things is
death. Hence sin is compared to a way, because it leads men to destruction.
Prove. 7.27, Her house is the way to Hell, going down to the chambers of death.
Hell is an undesi^able place; therefore Sin which is the way thither, must
needs be an evil way.

Propos. 2. Every sinner has a way of Sin. That Is employed in the Text, when it
is said, Turn you every man from his evil way. Every man that is in a state of
Sin and unregeneracy, does walk in some way of sin or other which he must turn
from. This is the Difference between a Regenerate and an Unregenerate man* A
Regenerate man may inde^^ fall into into sin, but then he is out of his way
which he uses to walk in. Psalm. 119.128. I hate every false way. And in verse.
101. he says, I have refrained my feet from every evil way. Hence Sin is said
to be unto the Lord's people, a way not cast up. (i. e. not frequented) Ier.
18.15. Never since the world began did a godly man walk in that way. There Is a
dif, ference between sinning and having a way of sinning. There is no man that
does good and sins not, and there is no good man that has a way of sinning.
Psalm. 139. ult. See if there be any way of wickedness in me. But every
unregenerate man has a way of wickedness which he chooses to go in. A Way of
sin implies a Track a Course of Sin; when a man shall make sin his Trade: so
it is with every ungodly man. He is a worker of iniquity. A committer of Sin* a
Doer of it Ioh. 8.34. Some sinners live in more Sins than one: In Pride, in
Drunkeness, in Uncleaness, and all at the same time. Serving diverse lusts. Tit.
3.3. But every sinner has at least one Sin, which he loves and lives in, and
will not be persuaded to forsake that evil way. It is sweet in his mouth. He
spares it and forsakes it not, but keeps it (...) his mouth. Job. 20.13. A
Hypocrite (...) far: He may fore-go many sins (as (...) did) yet there is some
sin or other which is an evil way that his soul is going to destruction in.

Propos. 3. Every sinner unto whom the Word of God comes, is bound to turn from
his evil way. The first thing which God required of man was that he should not
sin at all. The Law required that: nor does the Law speak any thing of
Repentance, but the Gospel does. The Law requires that men should not turn
from God; The Gospel requires that men having turned from God, should turn to
him again. Faith and Repentance are the great duties required in the Gospel.
This was the Scope and sum of all the Apostles preaching. Act. 20*21.
Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God,
and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And this Commandment reaches every
sinner where the Gospel comes. Chapt. 17.30. Now God commands all men every
where to repent. True Repentance consists chiefly in Turning from sin. Hence
it is sometimes called Conversion. When a man is gone out of the right way, and
turns back again, that is Conversion. So it is with sinners: They are all gone
astray; but God in the word of the Gospel calls aloud to them that they should
turn back again. And that turning from sin which the Word of God requires, is
to be both External and Internal. It is necessary that a Sinner should lead a
new life, that his outward Actions, and Conversation should be Reformed. Ier.
7.3. Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your
doings, but that's not all which God requires. He calls for the Heart. Many a
man turns from sin outwardly for fear of Punishment either from God or man, who
yet loves it in his heart still. But the Word of God requires that men should
hate sin. Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil. When a man's heart within him is
turned and set against sin* as sin, then he has truly experienced that
Conversion which the Word of God requires. Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away from you all
your Transgressions, and make you a new heart. That's a new heart which hates
Sin* and lovet^ Holiness. And that Sinners might be persuaded to this turning,
the Word of God is full of gracious Promises unto repenting, returning sinners.
God in his Word assures them, that they shall find mercy, whatever their
Provocations and Rebellions have been. Isai. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his
way, and let him return to the Lord and he will have merry on him, and to our
God, and he will abundantly pardon. God promises the Sinner his life if he
will return. He says, turn your selves and live you. And if the wicked be
warned from his wicked way, he shall save his life. Ezekiel. 3.18. and 18.32.
Heaven is promised to returning sinners. Thus in my Text, Turn every one from
his evil way -- and dwell in the land for ever and ever. There Is something
Spiritual ultimately intended in those words* viz. that every one that truly
repents of sin shall dwell in Heaven for evermore, of which dwelling in the
land of C^naan was a Figure. And the Word of God denounces no less than
Eternal Death to every Sinner that will not turn. Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto them,
as I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked:
but that the wicked should turn from his way and live. Turn you, turn you from
(...) evil ways for why will you dy^, O house of Israel. This is the great
voice of God in his word to every Sinner, the great design of the Scriptures
both in the old and new Testament is to declare this, that the Sinner who shall
turn from all his Sins shall live, but the Sinner that will not turn from all
his Sins shall dye for ever. Thus says God to every soul of of man, unto whom
his Word comes, thou must either turn from thy evil way, or burn for ever in
the fire that shall never be quenched.

Propos. 4. Men ought not only to turn from ^very evil way but to do it Now,
and in no wise to delay that matter. Thus did the Prophets with one voice
declare, as is in the Context intimated. And indeed this follows upon what has
bin spoken. If God command men to turn, it is necessary that they should do it
now. For every Commandment of God ought to be immediately complied with. There
ought to be no delaying, or disputing whether what the great GOD requires
should be obeyed or no. When the Lord commanded Abraham to circumcise his
Family, it is noted that in the self same day he did as God said to him. Genesis
17.23. And when he was required to Sacrifice his only son, its recorded of him,
that he rose early in the morning, and went to the place of which God had told
him. Cap. 22.3. When the Lord Christ called his Disciples to follow him it is
said, that straightway they did so. Mat, 4.20. And when Paul was called to the
Apostleship, he did not consult with flesh and blood, h. e. he did not ask
counsil of any man whether he should do what God required of him, but
immediately fell about the work, Gal, 1.16. Thus every divine precept ought
presently to be complied with. So should this of turning from every evil way.
And there is Infinite Reason that men should turn now; as we cannot but see if
we duly mind, either what they are commanded to turn from, or whom they are to
turn unto.

1. What is it that sinners are to turn from? It is from Sin, which is an
unprofitable thing. Men don't use to stand considering whether they shall
retain a thing which they are sure they shall never gain any thing by: Now they
may be sure they shall never gain any thing by sin. Rom, 6.21. What fruit had
you of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? There is nothing but shame and
Sorrow to be gained by sin. Yea, it is not only an unprofitable, but a hurtful
thing. If a man were running into the mouth of a bloody serpent ready to devour
him, would he stand pausing upon it whether he should turn back? No, he would
presently turn about. Sin is a cruel Serpent which devoureth immortal souls,
and therefore it is the greatest madness in the world for men to make a
question whether he should not presently turn from such an evil.

2. Who is it that sinners are to turn unto? It is unto God in Jesus Christ.
Joel. 2.12 Turn you even to me with all your heart, says the Lord. Even unto
that God who is the Fountain of Living water. He in whose favor is Life, and
whose Loving Kindness is better than life it self. He who will give Grace and
Glory, and will withold no good thing from them that shall turn unto him.

USE. Let it be a word of earnest Exhortation. Oh that every Sinner would be
persuaded to do as the Doctrine says, To turn from his evil way, and to do it
Now without Delaying.

Consider 1 st. The Sinner that will turn Now shall be happy. Whatever thy Sins
have been, suppose they were never so many, or never so great, if thou do
turn now, God will pardon thy sins and save thy soul. It may be that there is
some sinner that has secret fears and Questionings with himself, If I should
(...) from my evil way, would God accept of so ^^eat a sinner as I have been? I
Answer, If thou will turn now, I do assure thee in His name, God will accept of
thee. For His Word says, Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the
day of Salvation. 2. Cor. 6.2. Now, Now, is your time to turn to God if you
would find Acceptance with Him, or desire to be saved. If thou do not turn
now, just now, its more than I or any man living can assure thee that ever thy
soul shall be saved* (...) do you find in Scripture that He that turns to
morrow, shall be accepted? Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know
not what a day may bring forth. The Apostle says in the 3d. Chapter to the
Hebrews, To day, if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. And again
to day, and a third time to day. But he that will harden his heart against the
voice of God in his Word calling him to Repentance to day, it may be will think
of Repentance when it is too late.

Consider. 2. That no man ever repented him that he turned to God too soon, but
every man in the world either has or shall be sorry that he turned no sooner.
There never was an Instance of a man truly converted, who wished he had not
been converted so soon. There have been some that have turned from Sin in their
youth, yea, in their Childhood; ask any such, do you repent of your early
Conversion, they will say no, but we wish we had turned a great deal sooner.
Austin, I remember says, Nimis sero Te amare cae^i! Alas O Lord, I began to
love Thee later than I wish I had done. And there is no unconverted sinner in
the world, but he will one day wish that he had turned from his evil ways
sooner. If ever the Lord give him Repentance unto life, then will he be sorry
in his heart, that he was so long before he had any saving acquaintance with
God and with Jesus Christ. Paul speaks sorrowfully of his late Conversion. 1.
Cor. 15.8. And last of all he was seen of me, as of one born out of due time.
He was troubled to think that he had lived so many years in the world before he
knew Christ Or if a sinner shall be so unhappy as to dye in his evil way, he
will for ever wish, when it is too late, that he had hearkened to the Call of
the Gospel requiring him to turn Now. Prove. 1.28. Then shall they call upon me
but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me.
When the day of Grace is past, and when the day of life is spent and gone,
Sinners will reflect upon themselves with infinite anguish, and say, What Fools
were we that did not turn from sin in time, but now the sun is set, and the day
is become dark over us for ever. Had we sought after Reconciliation with God
sooner, we might have obtained it: but Woe and Alas for us, now it will never be.

Consider 3. In other matters men are unwilling either to delay, or to be
delayed. There is many a poor foolish sinner, that if he does but hear of a
Play to be acted, or any thing which is a matter of sport and pastime, he will be
early at it: He will not let slip the time, but rather be too soon than too
late. But when he is called upon to look after the Salvation of his own soul,
he puts that off from day to day, as if that could never be too late. In
worldly matters, especially if they be of moment, men have so much wisdom as
to dispatch them out of hand. It was said of Boaz when an affair that did
greatly concern him was to be issued, The man will not be at rest until he has
finished the thing this day. Ruth. 3.18. And yet as to the work of Repentance,
and making their peace with God, than which nothing can be of greater
Concernment, Sinners can be at rest from day to day; nay, from year to year,
tho that work be not finished, nor so much as begun: How sad is it to consider!
You cannot bear Delays from others, yet must the great God bear Delays from
you? If any of you should command his servant to do such a work presently, but
he says he will take his own time and not yours, how would you bear it! But when
God commands you to turn now, will you take your own time and not God's to do
it? You cannot bear delays from God himself: If men be in any distress, they
are ready to say, Lord make have to our help! Hear us speedily! Make no
tarrying; Why then when God calls to you to turn from your evil way, make have
and make no tarrying. If any amongst you should be in grievous tormenting pain,
and should cry unto God for help, but he should put you off, and say, Twenty or
thirty years I Will consider about the matter; how impatient would you be! And
will you then say to God, I Will turn from my evil ways 20 or 30 years hence,
whenas the Lord says, Do it NOW.

4. Let Sinners sadly Consider Whom they Gratify, and whom they grieve by
delaying their Conversion. They please their greatest enemy, and displease
their best Friend. You cannot gratify your Adversary the Devil more: who is it
that says to you, Will thou think of turning from thy sins? it will be soon
enough for that hereafter. No one but the Devil or such as are stirred up by
him, will suggest such a thought unto thee. He knows that if he can but
persuade thee to delay thy Conversion a while longer, he shall make sure of thy
soul. He always tells sinners either that it is too soon for them to turn unto
God, or else that it is too late. If he should see thee in earnest about that
matter, he would say it is too late now: But as long as thou art careless about
it, he says it is too soon; thereby hoping to persuade thee to delay until it
be too late indeed, and then he will deride thee for thy Folly. So that if a
man would study to gratify the Devil, he could not do it more than by
Deferring his repentance. But then, whom do you greive thereby? All the good
men that know thee are grieved for thee: thy nearest Relations are so if they
fear God. It may be thou have a Godly Father, or a godly Mother: They are
grieved to see that thou do continue still in thy natural unconverted estate.
And the Angels of Heaven are grieved by thee. There is joy in the presence of
the Angels of God over one sinner that repents, Luke 15.10. So that Sinners who
delay their Repentance hinder the joy of Angels. And that which is yet sader
is, thou grievest the heart of God by thy delaying to turn again from thy evil
way. The Lord (to speak of Him after the manner of men) thinks the time long,
and is grieved that thou should slight his Calls, and disregard his Commands
for so long a time. He says, Wash thine heart from wickedness, -- how long
shall vain thoughts lodge in thee? Jer. 4.14. And again will thou not be made
clean? when shall it once be? Chapt. 13.27. Yet again, hear another Scripture,
How long will it be, e're they attain to innocence? Hos. 8.5. How long! When?
How long? The Spirit of God is grieved by thy long delays. He looks upon thy
Delays as Refusals and flat Denials. He says thou art unwilling to return,
and that, that's the reason of thy delaying so long. This must needs grieve and
provoke Him. And why will thou displease that God who has been so kind to thee?

Consider 5. The Infinite danger which is in men's Delaying their Conversion.
Every Sinner had need make haste about this matter, because a little Delay may
cost him his Life. The Angel said to Lo^ (Genes. 19.17.) Escape for thy Life,
look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the
mountain les^ thou be consumed. So I say to thee, O sinner, don't stay in thy
present estate, but make have to Christ as for thy life, lest if thou lag and
linger the fire of Hell take hold on thee suddenly, and thou be consumed. It Is
a dangerous thing for a man to deferr his Repentance tho but for one day. One
days delay may cost a man the Life of his soul. When Michal told David, saying,
If thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shall be slain, He went and
^led and escaped. 1. Sam. 19.11, 12. Thus O Sinner, If thou do not turn from
thine Iniquities this day, it may be to morrow thou shall be slain. So that it
is a very dangerous thing for any man to put off his Repentance a day longer:
because of the uncertainty of life it is so. When once Death has given the
fatal Blow, it is too late for the Sinner to think of turning and making his
peace with GOD. Isai. 38.18. They that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy
truth. The Sinner whose Body is gone down into the pit of Death, and whose soul
is gone down into the pit of Eternal Darkness, cannot hope that he shall ever
be Converted, or that ever his soul shall be saved. And who knows how soon
the Arrow of Death may strike him! The Thunderbolt of Death may kill thee
before another morning. Then turn from thy sins now. I have diverse times put
you in mind of an Expression of that famous Minister of Christ, Mr. Bolton, who
would sometimes say, I would not be in my unconverted estate again one day, tho
I might have all the world for it, lest happly death should come upon me that
day, and so my immortal soul be lost for ever. And it is a dangerous thing for
men to delay their Conversion, because the longer they delay it, the more
unlike are they ever to be converted. Sinner it is possible and most probable
that now or never is thy time to repent in. The longer thou do delay, the
more unwilling and the more unable to turn art thou like to be. For Satan will
get faster hold on thy soul; and the longer he has held his Possession the more
difficult will his Departure be. We read of one in the Gospel, that the Devil
was cast out of him with exceeding Difficulty, and when it was asked how long
is it ago since this came to him? Answer was made, of a child. Mar. 9.21. Thus
where the Devil has a long time held his possession of a soul, its a hard
matter to get him out. And SIN as well as Satan will have deeper rooting and
stronger hold on the soul, if Conversion be delayed. The sins of men are like
Bonds upon their souls, It was said to Simon Magus, Thou art in the bond of
iniquity. Now the longer men continue in sin, the stronger do they make that
woeful bond: they will find their souls so fettered in the bloody chains of sin,
as that it will be a wonder if ever they get loose Ier. 13.23. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good
that are accustomed to do evil. Can it be? it would be strange if it should:
Such a thing will be a kind of a Miracle. The sinner is in a grave: Every Sin
he does commit is as it were another stone cast upon that grave which will make
his Resurrection the more difficult. And there is infinite danger in men's
delaying their Conversion, lest God should say of them as He did of the old
world of ungodly ones, who deferred their Repentance. Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall
not alw^yes strive with man. Or as it was said of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 24.13.
Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. It
may be thy delays may provoke God to inflict spiritual Judgments upon thee; to
give thee up to judicial Blindness and Hardness of heart. There is a most awful
passage in the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, which Scripture is often mentioned
in the New Testament, to show that Sinners under the Gospel are greatly
Concerned in it, Viz. that Chapt. 6.10. Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert and be
healed. If God should say of thee, There Is such a sinner, I have a long time
called upon him by the Ministry of the Word, to turn from his evil way, but he
has delayed his Repentance from one year to another; therefore I am now
resolved that he shall never be converted, and that my Word for the future
shall have no other effect upon him but to harden his heart and aggravate his
eternal Condemnation. I say, if God should thus resolve concerning thee, He
would be just, and thou for ever miserable. O tremble lest thy sinful delays
should provoke the Lord to say of ^hee, as He did of the barren ^ig tree Mat.
21.19. (...) g^ow on thee hence forward f^r ever.

Consider, 6. (...) been eternally ruined (...). We read of Felix what
Convicti^n^ and what an awakned Conscience he had under (...) Preaching: He had
sad thoughts with himse^f that except he did repent, and turn from his
Intemperance and his unrighteous way, it would go ill with him at the day of
(...); But Delays proved the Ruin of his (...) He said go thy way for this
time, and (...) have a convenient s^ason I will send for thee. Act. 24.25. And
thus it is with most of them that perish under the Gospel. There are few men
that live under the powerful dispensation of the Gospel, but they have
Convictions: They know they must repent of sin, but they purpose to do it
hereafter; and so by deferring the matter, their souls are eternally ruined
e're they are aware. Hell is full of delaying Sinners. The Devil has not a
greater stratagem to ruin souls by than this. He that will never repent while
to morrow, will never repent at all. Therefore the Devil's great Design is, to
persuade the Sinner still to deferr his Repentance until tomorrow, that so it
may never be.

Let these Considerations awaken every one that is in a State of Sin, Now to
turn and live. There are some of you that have continued a long time in a
natural unregenerate estate: Perhaps you have lived in the world, 30, or 40, or
it may be sixty years, and in an unconverted estate to this day. It is time to
seek the Lord. It Is high time for you to consider your ways and to look about
you. Think not with thy self, I Will repent when I come to lie down upon my sick
bed. How do thou know that thou shall lie upon a sick bed at all? It may be
some sudden Stroke will take thee out of the world, and where will thy soul be
then? Or if thou should be visited with Sickness, that's no suitable time to
repent in* perhaps thou will then lie unto God with thy mouth, and flatter him
with thy lips. Sick-bed-Repentance is very seldom true. How often do we see,
that Sinners on sick beds make fair promises, to God and man, but when they are
recovered they become as bad or worse than ever they were before. Yes, and it
may be then thou will cry out, it is too late now. Did you never hear of a man
who delaying his Repentance till he came to lie upon his sick bed, when he was
told he must repent of sin, replied, all too late: and when he was exhorted to
pray unto God for pardon of his past transgressions, he made the same reply,
All to late! If I had hearkened to this Counsil sooner, it had been happy for
me, but all is too late now! If thou delayest thy Repentance till then, perhaps
this will be thy bitter Cry when thou shall feel thy departing soul going into
the other world.

And You that are young, Remember what the Scripture says, Thou shall not
delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits. Exodus 22.29. I besheech, I exhort,
I charge every soul of you, who are yet in your sins, that you Turn NOW* Sa^
not, but then I must never see merry day more. Suppose that were true* Is it
not better to live a mournful life in this world for a short time, and then to
be in fullness of joy, and to have pleasures for evermore, than to live a short
life and a merry, but afterward thy soul to smoke for it in the ever-burning
lake* I have read of a man who when he lay on his Deathbed, uttered this
Expression, I have enjoyed the pleasures of Sin for a short season, and now I
must be in torment for it, for more than millions of millions of ages. Oh
consider of it. And remember also, that no man has any true joy or solid
Comfort, in any thing until such time as he has turned from his sins, and made
his peace with God, through Jesus Christ.

To Direct and Help you here,

1. Practice that great Duty of Self-Examination. Look into thy heart and way,
and see if there be not some sin, which thou must of necessity turn from, or
dye for it. Some, their Sins are so notorious that they ca'nt but know that
they live in sin. Swearers, Sabbath Breakers, Drunkards, unclean persons and
such like, they cannot but know that they must Repent or perish. But then there
be others, who are of a civil, blameless Conversation before men, and these are
more apt to be deceived. But search thy heart, and perhaps thou will find that
Sin reigns there. It may be there is some sin of Commission which thou live
in, which thy heart delights in. Or some sin of Omission, perhaps thou do
live in the Neglect of Prayer from day to day, Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try
our ways, and turn again to the Lord. If men would search impartially, they
would be more likely to turn. Alas many do not turn, because they think that
work is done already; whenas they have turned only from some sins, and not from
all. Take heed left some secret unknown sin which thou art unwilling to see
prove the ruin of thy soul. O for the Lords sake be not deceived: And therefore
examine your own hearts and estates before the Lord.

2. Set your selves to consider seriously of those things wherein your souls,
and everlasting estates are concerned. Sinners are apt to put off all good
Exhortations, by saying, they cannot convert themselves. True, but you may use
the means; of which Serious Consideration is none of the least. You may
Consider and Ponder of things between God and your own souls if you will; and
who knows but that the effect of it may be Conversion. David mentions this as
the reason of his Turning into the ways of God. Psalm. 119.59, 60. I thought on
my ways and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies: I made haste and delayed not
to keep thy Commandments. If men would think, belike they would turn. Serious
ConConsideration would cause them to make hast^ and not delay their Repentance.
The sinners in Samaria persisted in their evil way, why? it is said, They
consider not in their hearts that I remember all their wickedness, Hos. 7^2. If
a Sinner would go alone and consider i^ his heart that God has taken notice of
al^ (...) sins, and will one day Call him to an account for every one of them,
without Repentance; it may be that would awaken him so, as that he would
immediately turn from his evil way. Oh that you would go alone, and think with
your selves, every one of you that are yet in your sins* If I should die this
night what would become of my poor soul? If a sinner would but consider the
danger that he is in; and that his immortal soul is hanging over the mouth of
Hell only by the rotten thread of a frail life, if that break, (as it may the
next moment) down falls his soul into the Bottomless pit. I say, if sinners
would but consider this, they would surely make as great have out of their
sins, as ever Lot did out of Sodom.

3. In the Lord's Name and strength, take up a firm Resolusion now to turn from
sin. There are many that have faint purposes that way, but they do'nt come up
to a full Resolution. Austin in his Confessions acknowledges that it was so
with him; He had thoughts of turnTurning from his evil way, but still put it
off, until GOD came in mightily upon his heart, as he read that Scripture Romans
13.11, 12. Now it is high time to awake out of sleep, the night is far spent
the day is at hand, etc. And then he said, Why not NOW Lord? I have thought
with my self many a time, I would turn from my evil way, sometime hereafter,
but why not now Lord? and from that hour he was fixedly and for ever resolved
against every sin.

O let thy heart within thee resolve so too. And therefore resolve now upon
Prayer to God that it may be so. Resolve to continue praying as Ephraim did,
Turn thou me O Lord, and I shall be turned.

There shall be a Day of Judgment.
MATTHEW. X.15. It shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom and Gomorrha in
the Day of Judgment, than for that City.


IN this Chapter we have both the Commission, and the Instructions which the
Apostles received from the Lord Jesus Christ, when they were first sent forth
to preach the Gospel. The Lord instructed them unto whom they should first go
and make a tender of the Gospel: Only to the Jews, and not to the Gentiles,
until such time as it would be seen whether the Jews would accept thereof or
no. In the preceding verse the Lord directs them how they should behave
themselves totowards such as would reject them and their Doctrine, viz. that
they should shake off the dust of their feet against them; and we find that in
after times the Apostles practiced accordingly. Act. 13.51. Whereby they
declared that they looked upon such Persons though Israelites, as profane and as
abominable as any Heathen, and therefore such as they would no more hold
Communion with; but that they would go away from them, and carry the Gospel to
others who would give it a better Reception. The Jews looked upon the very
earth or dust which was brought out of Heathen Lands to be impure, yea, as
unclean as the Ashes of a dead Carcass which they might not touch. Hence by
shaking the dust of their feet against them, they would signify that they were
such Sinners as did defile the very ground they trod upon, and so as abominable
as any Heathen.

In this verse there are Two Things contained,

1. A Declaration of the grievous punishment which shall come upon them that
despise the Gospel. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha than for
such. Sodom and Gomorrha are instanced in, because they were made the most
terible Example of Divine VenVengeance that ever was in the world.

2. When this punishment shall be inflicted, viz. At the Day of Judgment. Hence
the words are spoken in the future Tense: It Is not said, it is, but it shall be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha, so that a Punishment yet to come on the
Sodomites is spoken of.

The Word^ afford unto us several Doctrines, I shall only mention Three as
being the principal.

DOCT. 1. That there shall be a day of Judgment.

Doct. 2. That at the day of Judgment all sinners shall not suffer alike, but
some will have a far more intolerable Punishment than others shall.

Doct. 3. That they who have despised the Offer of the Gospel shall at the Day
of Judgment fall under the heaviest CONDEMNATION.

At present only concerning the first of these Doctrines, Viz. That there shall
be a day of Judgment.

For the clearing of this Doctrine, there are three things to be enquired into.
1. How it does appear that there shall be such a day. 2* What kind of day it
will be. 3. The Reason why there must be such a day.

Quest. 1. How does it appear that there shall be a Day of Judgment?

ANSW. 1. The Scripture does abundantly bear witness to this truth. In the Old
Testament there are many Testimonies concerning a Judgment to come. So in the
Book of Psalms* as in Psalm. 50.3, 4. and 96.13. not to mention other places.
And the Prophets, in special Isaiah, Daniel, Malachi speak expressly and
distinctly of this Judgment. Hence the Jews themselves acknowledge that there
will be a general Day of Judgment. But in the New Testament this (as well as
many other great Truths) is more clearly and abundantly made known. Yea, the
Form of Judgment is there described, as in the Latter end of the twenty fifth
Chapter of Matthew we may see*

2. The Light of Nature, and that Conscience which is in men, shows that
there must needs be a Judgment to come. Conscience is a man's judgment of
himself, as subjected to the Judgment of God. The Apostle shows that the
Gentiles do by nature the things contained in the Law; their Conscience
bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing in the mean while h.
e. until the day come that God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ.
Romans 2.15.16. Before the great day of Judgment come, they are judging and
impleading themselves, There is a day of judgment kept in the Conscience,
which proves that God will have a Day of Judgment for all men. If men were
not to be judged by God, they would never enter into judgment with themselves.
Hence there are secret, awful fears upon the spirits of Sinners with respect
unto this Day: Yea sometimes in the worst of sinners. When Felix heard Paul
reasoning co^^erning Righteousness and Temperance and IVDGMENT to come, he
trembl^d. Act. 24.25. Especially when Sinners ly upon sick-beds, and
Deathbeds, Conscience tells them they must appear before the Judgment seat of
the GREAT GOD and answer for all the evils they have done. Or if men commit any
great sin, conscience tells them they must to Judgment for that sin. He that
shall tell a Lie against his Conscience, or commit any such grievous sin, has
that in his own breast (a Conscience) which is a Preacher of Judgment to him,
because of that Sin.

3. The Providence of God does so order matters in the World, as that we may
from thence conclude that there will be a Day of Judgment. e. g. He permits
wrong Judgment to pass among men in the world. Guilty men are here acquitted,
and innocent men are oftentimes condemned. Psalm. 44.21. Solomon did from that
Consideration conclude, that things will one day be called over again, and
another Judgment be passed by Him who is the Supreme and righteous JUDGE of all
the world. Eccles. 3.16. Great and Heinous sinners do sometimes escape
punishment, not only from men, but from the Hand of God in this world. Though
some such are punished to show there is a Providence, yet others escape to show
that there is a Judgment to come, 1. Tim. 5.24.

Quest. 2. What kind of day will the Day of Judgment be?

Answ. 1. It will be a great Day. Jude speaks of the Judgment of the great
day. ver. 6. Hence it is called that day. 2. Tim. 1.12. There never was such a
day before, and there never shall be such a day after this. It is styled the
day of God. 2. Pet. 3.10, 12. Great and eminent things are expressed by the
Name of God in Scripture.

It will be a great day, 1 st. In respect of the great Multitude which then
shall be judged; The whole world: God has appointed a day wherein He will
judge the world. Act. 17.31. Whole Nations, yea all Nations shall be gathered
before His Judgment seat. Mat. 25.32. Not only such as shall be found alive on
the earth, when the Judge shall come down from Heaven, but such as are dead,
whose souls have been Thousands of years either in Heaven or Hell, must then to
Judgment. 2. Tim. 4.1. What a great day will that be, when all the men that
ever were in the world or that ever shall be, must every mothers Child of them
appear before the Judgment Seat of the great GOD! All good men shall be judged
though not condemned. Mat. 25.34. And all wicked men, Rev. 20. The sea gave up
the dead which were in it, and death and hell delivered up the dead which were
in them, and they were judged every man according to their works. Nay, the
Angels that have sinned shall then be judged. They are reserved for everlasting
Chains unto the judgment of that great day. Therefore it is that the Apostate
Angels tremble at the thought of this day: When they saw the Son of God they
cried and roared and said, Art thou come to torment us before our time? Mat.
8.29. They know that there are hotter chains reserved for them, than those
which at present they are in; and the dismal thought thereof makes all the
Devils in Hell to tremble. 2. The day of Judgment will be a day of great
Discovery. Hence it is called a day. In the Night things ly hid, but in the day
they are discovered: So in the dark night of this present world, many things
are unseen and unknown* which then all the world shall see and know. Lue. 12.2.
It will be a day of great discovery in respect of the works and Dispensations
of God. Hence it is called a day of Revelation. Romans 2.5. The Works of Creation
and the Mystery of Redemption, and the strange Mysteries of Providence, and
Wisdom, and Righteousness of God in all, will then be revealed to the
Admiration of men and Angels for ever. There will also be a great Discovery of
men in that day. The Spiritual and Eternal estates of all (which are now known
to God only) will then be made manifest to the whole world. It will be seen
who were sheep and who were goats: who were Wheat and who were Tares: who were
wise and who were foolish Virgins. Many that have made a great Profession, that
walked in Fellowship with the people of God, that sat down with them at the
Lord's Table, will then be found standing at the left hand of Jesus Christ, and
their Hypocrisy discovered. And it will be a Day of great Discovery, as to the
Works of men. Eccles. 12.14. For God shall bring every work into Judgment,
with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil. Secret
Thefts, secret Uuncleanesses, Secret Adultries, all will come out, and the
whole World shall hear of those things at the day of Judgment. Yea; the very
thoughts of men will be discovered. The secrets of all hearts will be disclosed
in that day 1. Cor. 4.5. The good Designs and gracious purposes which have
been in the hearts of holy men, the Lord Jesus will then reveal them and speak
of them to their praise, before all the World. And the evil purposes, and
wicked thoughts which have been in the hearts of ungodly men shall then be told
of, to their everlasting shame.

2. The Day of Judgment will be to the Unbelieving world a most terrible day.
Hence it is expressed in the Scripture by that of the terror of the Lord, 2.
Cor. 5.11. There have bin terrible Types, and forerunners of this dreadful day.
Those lesser days of judgment, which have been in the world, when God has
called whole Nations to an account, and executed Judgment upon them, were Types
and forerunners of the General Judgment; and thence are in the Scripture set
forth by Expressions which are most proper to the great and last Judgment. The
Terror of this day no heart is able to conceive, nor tongue able to express.
But it appears especially in 4 particulars.

1. In that it will be a Fiery day. This vivisible World is subject to a
twofold Destruction, one by Water, the other by Fire: that by water was
accomplished on the old world in the Days of Noah; the other by Fire will take
place at the day of Judgment. 2. Pet. 3.7. The Heavens and the earth are
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment. and ver. 12. Looking for the
coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved,
and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat. The Scriptures both of the Old
and of the New Testament speak of this fire. Psalm. 50.3. Is^i. 66.15, 16. The
Day of Judgment will begin with flaming fire. Dan. 7.9, 10.2. These. 1.8. Yea,
and end so too, Rev. 20.9. Now what a terrible day will that be* when all the
earth shall burn at once, and the Heavens be all on a light flame also!

2. There will be the most terrible, amazing noise that ever was heard in the
world. 2. Pet. 3.10. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night,
in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise. The very noise of
the fire which then shall prevail every where will be terrible to hear. If a
Town be on fire, what a noise does it make! The Rattling of the Flames is
terrible to hear. But what then will it be, when all the World shall be on
fire* What an amazing noise will those rattling flames make all the World over!
And ther^ will be then the most terrible Thundrings and Lightnings that ever
were known. If when the Lord came down to publish the Law on mount Sinai, there
were Thunderings and Lightnings, so that all the people in the camp trembled;
how much more when He shall come to judge the breakers of that Law. And what
fearful outcries and roaring Lamentations will amazed Sinners make in every
Corner of the world! As undoubtedly they did in the Old World, when they saw
that the windows from on high were opened, and there was no escaping that flood
of death which was round about them. So it will be much more when Sinners shall
behold a flood, a River, a Sea of FIRE and Brimstone that they cannot go from.

3. At the Day of Judgment there will be the most terrible Destruction and
Devastation that ever was. All the wicked in the world shall then be destroyed.
Mal. 4.1. For behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the
proud* yea and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes
shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts, Therefore the day of Judgment is
called the day of Perdition of ungodly men. 2. Pet. 3.7. And there will be a
terible Destruction, not only of men but of other creatures in that day,
wherein the heavens b^ing on fire shall be dissolved, and the ele^^^ts shall
melt with fervent heat. ver* 12. The Greek word translated Elements is
stoikeia, which signifies Hosts: All the Host of creatures which are in this
lower heaven shall at the day of judgment be no more able to live than if they
were (as indeed they shall be in) a ^urnace of fire, whose fervent heat cannot
be endured. And the Apostle says, that the earth also, and the works which
are therein shall be burnt up. There are living creatures thereon, Beasts of
the field, and creeping things. There are works of Nature, Trees, Herbs etc.
And there are works of Art, Houses, Towns, Cities, etc. These shall all be
consumed at the last day. What a terrible day will that be when there shall not
be a house left standing in all the world!

4. The Day of judgment will be concluded with the Pronunciation and Execution
of a most terrible Sentence upon all Christless Sinners. The man whom God has
ordained to to judge the world, ( h. e. his Son Jesus Christ') will then
pronounce a Sentence of eternal death upon as many as shall be found in their
Sins. How will their Hearts ache, and every joint Tremble* when they shall hear
that Sentence wherein every word does breathe forth Death and fire Mat. 25 41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his
angels. There will be no appealing from this Sentence, nor shall it ever be
reversed. And the Sentence will no sooner be pronounced, but Execution will be
done immediately. For the Angels of Heaven will be all standing by, and see it
done forthwith. The Sentence is, That sinners must be burnt to death for ever,
that they must be thrown alive into the lake which burns with fire and
Brimstone. The Holy Angels will see this done. They are the Reapers that shall
gather the Tares together, and bind them in bundles to burn them. Mat. 13.30.

3. The day of Judgment will be unto true Believers on Jesus Christ a good
Day. It will be to them a day of Rejoicing Phil. 2.16. A comfortable day, 1.
These. 4.18. For,

1. It will be to them a day of Salvation Heb. 9.28 And indeed, The Salvation
of believers is not consummated before that day. Its true, that their souls are
in perfect Blessedness as soon as they depart out of this world. Therefore the
Apostle speaks of the Spirits of just men mad^ perfect. Heb^ 12.23. But their
Bodies are not glorified until the Day of Judgdment, not till the Resurrection
at the last day; which is therefore called the day of Redemption, Eph^ 4.30.
Romans 8.23. When that blessed day shall dawn upon the world, the Saints of God
shall never more be subject to any misery. It will be a time of refreshing from
the presence of the Lord, Act. 3.19. A time of Rest. 2. These. 1.7. And there
shall be no more sorrow. Rev. 21.4.

2. Believers shall at the Day of Judgment be publicly absolved and acquitted
from the guilt of all their sins. A sentence of Absolution will be passed upon
them. They will be pronounced blessed; and there are none blessed but they
whose sins are forgiven. Mat. 25.34. Hence the Scripture speaks of Sins being
forgiven in the world to come, h. c. at the Day of Judgment. Mat. 12.32. It is
Controverted amongst Divines, whether the secret sins of Believers will be at
all spoken of at the day of Judgment: Some think they shall not, because that
would tend to their Reproach and shame. But there is much to be said for the
Affirmative, that they shall some of them be spoken of: For some of the Elect
of God did commit their sins with such as are Reprobate; now if the sins of
these Reprobate must be spoken of, then must the Sins of the Elect, who had
Fellowship with them in their wickedness; but then they shall not be condemned,
nor any reproach cast upon them for what they have done. In point of
condemnation they shall be as if they had never sinned. There is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1. There was
Condemnation to them before they were in Christ, but since that, there neither
is nor ever shall be any Condemnation to them. They are without fault before
the Throne* before the judgment seat of God. Rev. 14.5. The Lord will in the
day of judgment, (...) that their sins are blotted (...)* They c^n't remain
upon record in God's book against them Act. 3.19. The Lord Jesus will then say
to the true Believer, Though thou wast guilty of many and great sins, yet because
I dyed for thee, and thou did believe on me, thy sins are all forgiven, and
therefore do thou rejoice for ever.

3. Believers shall at the day of judgment be as so many Kings with Crowns on
their heads. Know you not that the Saints shall judge the worl^? 1. Cor. 6.2. A
Scepter shall be put into their hands Rev. 2.26, 27. to him that overcomes
will I give power over the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron.
i. e. with a scepter, They shall reign on the earth then, (...). 5.10 There are
great disputes concerning the reign of Saints on the earth: Nothing is more
clearly expressed in the Scripture than that the Saints of God shall one day
possess a glorious Kingdom Luke 22.29. And their Kingdom they shall not have in
heaven only, but in this lower visible world* under the whole heaven* (...).
7.27. In the place where they served God and where they suffered for his Sake
there they shall reign. But they must not look for a Temporal Dominion in this
world: They must stay till the Resurrection, and the day of judgment, and then
they shall reign. In the morning. i. e. in the morning of the day of judgment
or at the resurection the upright shall have Dominion Psalm. 49.14. In the
Regeneration (whereby the Resurrection is intended) they shall sit upon thrones
Mat. 19.28. Tho Christ only shall pass the Sentence of death upon the reprobate
world, yet the Saints shall sit with Him upon Thrones of judgment, as
Assistors and Aprobators of that judgment.

Quest. 3. Why must there be a day of Judgment?

ANSW. 1. Reas. That so the glory of the Divine Attributes may be cleared and
vindicated. To vindicate the HOLINESS of GOD Because He is patient and
long-suffering sinners conclude that He is not so Holy as he is, that he does
not hate Sin with such an infinite hatred and indignation as indeed He does:
Therefore the Lord will have a day of Judgment that so all men might (...)
that He is glorious in Holiness, Psa^. 50.21. And to clear the Justice of God;
^reat sinners do sometimes prosper in the world. But therefore a day of
Judgment must come wherein God will bring them forth and deal with them for all
their wickedness. Job. 21.7. Wherefore do the wicked live, yea become mighty in
power? Ver. 30, The wicked is reserved to the day of destruction, they shall be
brought forth in the day of wrath. If they escape punishment here, they shall
have the greater punishment in the day of judgment, which is called the day of
wrath. So will the Just^ce of God be cleared for ever. Hence it is called a day
of the revelati^n of the righteous j^dgement of God. Romans 2.5. q. d. The
Righteousness of God is not yet clearly revealed, but it shall be at that day.
Then also will the Truth and Faithfulness of God be vindicated. There are many
Threatenings in the Word of God against wicked men, and many Promises to the
Righteous. The Sum and Scope of the whole Bible is declared in those few
words, I^ai. 3.10, 11. Say to the righteous, that it shall be well with him;
Woe to the wicked it shall be ill with him. whenas for the present we see it
not so: As to outward concerns it goes well with the wicked, and ill with the
Righteous. Should good men have nothing but what they receive in this world,
they would many times be of all men the most miserable. 1. Cor. 15.19 Therefore
there must be a Resurrection and a day of judgment. Things at present are very
much out of order. The proud are called happy; and such as fear God are
trampled upon by the foot of Pride. Hence there must be a day of judgment when
all things shall be set to rights: which may be the reason why the day of
judgment is called the time of the restitution of all things. Act* 3.21. Thus
will the glory of God be vindicated, in the sight and hearing of Heaven and
Earth.

Reas. 3. There must be a day of judgment that so Jesus Christ, the son of God
may be glorified before all men and Angels. For Christ is the person whom God
the Father has appointed to be the Judge of the World. Act. 17.31. He has
appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that
man whom He has ordained, whereof he has given assurance to all men, in that
he has raised him from the dead Christ's Resurrection is an evidence of this.
His Exaltation began in his Resurrection: we may from thence conclude that the
last degree of His Exaltation* which is in His sitting to judge the world at
the great Day, will in the appointed time take place. It is said concerning
Ioshuah, (who in that as well as in many other respects was a Type of Christ)
On that day the Lord magnified Ioshuah in the sight of all Israel. Chapt. 4.14.
So on the Day of Judgment, God will magnify His Son Jesus Christ in the sight
of all the world. God will have all the world to know, that His Son ^s more
than a man; that the honor due to God shall be given to him. Therefore has He
made Him the Judge of all. Ioh. 5.22, 23. The Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment to his Son, that all men should honor the son, even as
they honor the Father ^her. Moreover, Christ will come to judge the world in
greatest State, Majesty and Glory that ever was, or that can be conceived. Mat.
24.30. They shall see the Son of man coming in power and in great GLORY. Hence
His second Coming is called His glorious appearance, Tit. 2.13. He will command
an Herald to blow the Trumpet, and to summon all the world to appear before
Him; and this Herald shall be no less than an Angel, yea an Archangel, 1.
These. 4.16. For the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
the the voice of the Archangel and with the trump of God. A most glorious
Retinue will then attend and wait upon Him. All the Angels in heaven shall come
down from thence to wait upon the Son of God in that Day, Mat* 25.31. The Son
of man shall come in his glory and all the holy Angels with Him. Hence Daniel
in his Vision of the Day of Judgment, beheld a Thousand Thousand ministr^ng to
Him, and ten Thousand times ten Thousand stood before him. Yea, and all the
Saints in heaven shall come down from thence to wait upon the blessed Son of
God. 1. These. 3*13. At the coming of our Lord Jesus with all H^s Saints. Yet
more, All the Saints then found alive on the Earth, shall be miraculousl^
caught up into the Air, to meet the Lord at His coming, Chapt 4.17. As when a
great Person is coming to this or that place, many go out to meet him; so when
the Son of God shall visit this lower world with His Personal presence, all the
Saints on Earth shall meet Him in the Air. And this may be the true meaning of
that Scripture Luke 17, 34. where Christ says In that night there shall be two
men in one bed, the one shall be taken and the other left. One shall be taken
and caught up by the holy Angels to meet the Lord Jesus in the air, and the
other shall be left to perish in that Fire which shall then consume the world.
Moreover, At the Day of Judgment, the Son of GOD shall sit upon a most
glorious Throne, Matthew. 25.31. Then shall He sit upon the throne of His glory,
that is to say, His most glorious Throne: So that He will reign then visibly
before the world. It is most true, that Christ reigns now in Heaven, but the
greatest part of the Children of men in this world, do not know nor believe
that: But therefore at the Day of judgment He shall reign in the visible, lower
world. Ier. 23.5. A King shall reign and prosper and execute Judgment and
justice in the earth. Christ's Judging the world belongs to his Kingly Office,
Math. 25.34. Hence the Dispensation of Judgment is called His Kingdom, 2. Tim.
4.1. The holy Prophets of Old have spoken magnificently concerning the Reign
and Kingdom of the Messiah. At the Day of Judgment the Truth of all those
divine Predictions shall be manifest to all men. Then will Christ appear to be
the greatest and most glorious Monarch that ever was. The world has looked upon
the King of Persia as a mighty Monarch, because he reigned over a hundred and
seven and twenty Provinces, Est. 1.1* But Christ shall reign over all Nations,
from one end of the earth to the other. There shall be given to Him Dominion
and glory, and a Kingdom that all People, Nations and Languages should serve
Him, His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion which shall not pass away. The
Lord shall be King over all the earth, in that day there shall be one LORD, and
His Name One.

Reas. 3. There must be a Day of Judgment with respect to the Saints of God,
That so they may be vindicated from those Reproaches which are cast upon them
in the world The best of men, and those that are most dear to Christ, are
oftentimes most reproached and abused. Wicked men speak all manner of evil
aginst them falsely. And it may be their names are never cleared in this world;
but therefore the Day of Judgment must come to clear all, Psalm. 37.6. Commit
thy way to God, and He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and
thy judgment as the noon day. This is one reason why good men are so patient
under those vile reproaches which are cast upon them; it is because they know
that at the day of judgment, the LORD whom they serve will vindicate them.
With me (says the Apostle) it is a very small thing that I should be judged of
you, or of man's judgment; He that judges me is the Lord. 1* Cor. 4.3, 4. And a
Day of Judgment must come that so the Lord's faithful Ones may be rewarded for
all that they have done or suffered for God and for the Lord Jesus Christ. For
then God will give Reward to them that fear His Name, small and great. Rev.
11.18. And they that have suffered for His sake shall then reign with Him.

USE. Let every soul endeavor to be prepared for this Day. A Day of Judgment
will come. All that are wise will make it their chief endeavor to give up
their Account with joy and not with grief in that Day.

Consider. 1. That all and every one of us must make our personal appearance,
before that dreadful Tribunal. 2. Cor. 5.10. We must all a^pear b^f^re the
judgment sea^ of Christ. O do you think of that! All in this Congregation,
ever. Mothers Child; and throughout the whole world, High and Low, Rich and
Poor, Old and Young they must all to judgment. Rev. 22.12. I saw the dead
small and great stand before God; and the books were opened, and the dead were
judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their
works. Whoever thou art, God will have thee to judgment, Eccles. 11.9. Know
thou, God will bring thee to judgment. Therefore it will be a vain thing for
any sinner to think he shall escape. If God that made Heaven and earth will
bring him into judgment, how shall he escape? Not a soul of man shall escape
the Trial. The Great God has resolved, and said, and sworn, that every one
shall come before His Tribunal. Romans 14.10, 11, 12. We shall all stand before
the judgment seat of Christ; For it is written, as I live says the Lord,
every knee shall bow to me and every tongue shall confess to God: So then
every one of us shall give account of himself to God. If but one man should
escape apearing, the Oath of God must be broken, which is impossible. O man, as
sure as the Lord lives, thou shall stand before his judgment seat, and be
tried and judged, either to everlasting Life, or everlasting Death.

Consider, 2. That at the day of judgment, men must be called to a very
particular and strick Account. All the Actions of their Lives must then be
looked over. The things which they did whilst their souls continued in their
bodies, they must be accountable for them. God shall bring every work into
judgment. Eccles. 12.14. Yea, they must be called to account for their words:
So has Truth himself declared, Mat. 12.36. I say unto you, that every idle word
that men shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the Day of
judgment. How much more shall men give account for wicked words, for unclean,
filthy words, for lylying words, for Oaths and Curses, and Blasphemies which
they have poured forth out of an evil mouth. And what a dreadful account will
many Sinners have to give up for these things in the day of judgment* Yea, men
shall be called to an account in that day, not only for all that they have
done, but for all they have received. It is said in the Parable concerning the
Talents, after a long time the Lord of those servants comes and reckons with
them. Matthew. 25.19. Whatever Talents God shall entrust any man withal, first or
last a day of reckoning will come. The Lord Jesus will say to some at the great
Day, You had such Estates in the world, but what did you do with your Riches?
did you improve them for God, or did you not abuse them for sin and to
dishonor His Name? He Will say to another; Thou had a Talent of understanding,
thou had Wit and Memory and Learning above many others, but how did thou
make use of thy parts? He will say to another, You enjoyed the means of grace,
you heard many Sermons: Did not you live in New England? and whose Ministry did
you live under there? What account can you now give concerning all the Sermons
which you have heard? Did you repent of Sin and believe on the Son of God, and
deny all UnUngodliness and worldl^ lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and
Godly in the world?

Consider. 3. That as death leaves a man, so judgment will find him. All the
time which men have to prepare for Judgment is only (...) they are in this
world. There is no (...) gra^e whither thou go. For there is a particular
Judgment passes upon every soul at death, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men
once to die, but after this the judgment* When once a man's soul is out of his
body, it appears before the Judge of all, and is sentenced, either to Life or
Death for ever; which particular judgment will be published at the Last Day.
If death find a man unprepared, so will Judgment. Therefore it highly concerns
every man to prepare now. Miserable Sinner, thou know not how soon death may
come upon thee like an armed m^n, and dragg thy soul before the Judgment seat
of GOD! It may be this night it will be so. Death sometimes gives no warning
before it comes. Remember that Scripture, Amos. 4.11. I have overthrown some of
you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrha. And how was that? verily by Thunder
and Lightning from Heaven. And has it not been so amongst us also? There have
been (to my observation) about Twenty persons in this Land, who have at several
times, and places been killed with Lightning: some such very lately. Therefore
if God fell upon them, and struk them dead in a moment; how do thou know but
that it may be so with thee? If thou continuest unprepared for Death and
Judgment, thou know not but that the next Thunder-storm that comes, may
prove to thy soul, as snares, and fire, and brimstone, and an horrible Tempest.

Consider. 4. As Judgment shall find a man so it will be with him to all
Eternity. Eternity will fasten its iron Teeth upon thy soul then. Hence the
Scripture speaks of Eternal judgment. Heb. 6.2. because men shall then be
judged to an eternal estate either of weal or of woe. The wicked shall then go
away into everlasting punishment, and the Righteous into Life eternal. If
Judgment find a man in a good estate he shall be for ever with the Lord, he
shall be where there is Fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore. But if
judgment find him in his sins, he shall be cast into a dungeon out of which he
shall never come, even into blackness of darkness forever. O think of this one
word, If Judgment and thee in thy sins; after thou have been in misery as many
millions of Ages as there have been (...) minutes since the world began, thou
art no ^earer to an end of thy misery than thou wast the first hour that the
Son of God passed on thee a sentence of eternal death.

For Direction here,

1. Think often on the DAY of JUDGMENT, and what will then become of thee.
Often set the Thought of that come into thy heart. One of the Ancients has
such an Expression as this: Wherever I go, whether I am at home or abroad,
alone or in Company, Meethinks I am still hearing the last Trump sounding, and
that heaven^sh king voice of the Son of God, Arise you dead, and come to
IVDGMENT. Think what will then become of thee Must I then go to Heaven or
Hell? If the Lord Jesus should come to Judge the world this night, what would
He say to me? what Answer can I give to Him concerning my Time in this world,
how I have spent it? Would the Lord say to me, Come thou blessed! or will He
not say, Go thou cursed.

2. Make through work of it, in the matter of Repentance. Thoughts of the Day
of Judgment should awaken hereunto. Act* 17.30, 31. Now God commands all men
evry where to repent, because he has appointed a Day in which he will judge
the world. As for impenitent sinners that live so, and dye so; the longer they
live the worse it will be for them at the Day of Judgment. Romans 2.5. But after
thy hardness, and impoenitent heart, treasurest up wrath against the Day of
wrath. -- An impenitent Sinner adds to the heap of Wrath by every sin which he
does commit. Those Treasures of wrath which he has been heaping up for hi^
miserable soul will never be spent. O therefore confess Sin: Enter into
judgment with thy self now, if thou would not have God enter into Judgment
with thee at that Day. And forsake Sin: He that confesses and forsakes shall
find mercy. Nor is it enough to forsake some sins only, but all known sin. If
thou have been a Swearer, confess that sin before God, and forsake it. If thou
have been a Drunkard, confess that sin and forsake it. Or if thou have lived in
Wantonness, Uncleaness, Self-polution (the sin which young men are commonly
damned for) confess it to God and forsake it. Or if thou have lived in any
other sin, O turn from it unto God with thy whole heart. If thou should
continue to live but in one sin, at the Day of Judgment thou will wish that
thou had never been born. Repent and turn from all your Transgressions, so
iniquity shall not be your ruin.

3. Make sure of an Interest in Christ. When the Flood came, they in the Ark
were safe, but all others perished: So at the day of Judgment, they that shall
be found in Christ, will be happy, but all others must into the fire that never
shall be quenched. Verily an interest in Christ will be thought worth more than
a Thousand worlds in that day. Make sure of it then now. Let no man please
himself, that he is of a civil blamless Conversation; that may be, and yet thou
a stranger to Christ: and then woe to thee at the day of judgment. Neither thy
civility nor thy external Privileges, nor thy performance of Religious duties
can save thee without an interest in Christ. Therefore it was the Apostles
greatest Care, that at the Judgment day, he might be found in Him. Phil. 3.9.
Let that be the greatest Care of every soul.

4. Be fruitful in every good m^rk. The more good any of us do with a sincere
heart, the more comfort and glory shall we have in the Day of Judgment. Now
sow plenplentifully in works of Charity, and you shall reap the fruit of all
a^ that Day. God is not unrighteous to forget your work and ^abour of Love,
which you have showed toward his Name, in that you have ministered to (...)
Saints, and do minister. Heb. 6.10. Not the least deed of Charity but shall be
remembered and honorably rewarded. Whoever has given but a cup of cold water,
to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, shall be rewarded for it in that Day:
How much more shall great Services for GOD and for his People be highly and
Eternally recompensed! Be likewise abundant in works of Piety. O be much in
prayer, especially in Secret prayer, and you shall be rewarded openly in the
Day of Judgment. Alas, there is many a wretched man that will think with himself
at that day, Oh if I had spent that time in secret prayer and Communion with
God, which I (...) in vain Company, in unprofitable discourses, in Taverns, in
mad merry meetings; my soul might have been saved* and my Reward great in
Heaven; whenas now, because I have been an unprofitable Servant* I must be cast
into outer and Eternal Darkness. Oh then, Let every man practice (...), as he
will at that DAY wish he had done. Christians may live so, as that every thing
they do shall be Fruit, and so add to their Crown in the Day of Judgemnt: so
it shall be, if they have respect to God and His Glory in every thing they do.
Let us then labor to become like unto Jesus Christ, who did always the things
that please the Father. And if as He was, so are we in this world; we shall
have boldness in the DAY of IVDGMENT.

Fruitful Christians glorify God.
JOH. XV.8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bea^ much fruit.


THese Words are part of a Sermon preached by our Lord Jesus Christ to His
Disciples. He does therein compare Himself to a vine, and Believers on Him to
vine branches; showing that they can no more bring forth fruits of acceptable
Obedience unto God of themselves, than a branch that is separated from the Vine
can bear grapes.

In the preceding verse, our Lord exhorts His Disciples to abide in him, i. e.
to continue constant and steadfast in the way of Faith and ^bedience. And the
Motive whereby he urges that Exhortation is, because then God will hear their
prayers. If you abide on me, and my words in you, ask what you will, and it
shall be done unto you. which is to be understood with this Limitation, so far
as they should ask things agreeable to the Will of God. The words now before us
are a Confirmation of that Assertion. If Christians that bring forth much fruit
glorify God, then we may be sure that he will hear their prayers, I shall not
insist on any Observation from the Contextural Consideration of the words, but
from them as in themselves considered, the Doctrine is.

That fruitful Christians, especially such as are abundantly fruitful glorify
God.

For the clearing of the Truth before us, 3 Things may be enquired into. 1.
What Is employed in this Fruit. 2. When Christians may be said to be abundantly
fruitful, or to bear much fruit. 3. In what respect such are said to glorify
God

QUEST. 1: What is employed here in fruit?

ANSW. 1. It does imply a work of Grace in the soul. All those Graces which are
wrought in the souls of believers are compared to fruit in the Scripture: yea,
unto pl^sant and savory fruit Cant. 4.13, 16. Thy plants are an orchard of
pomegranates with pleasant fruits. -- let my beloved come into his garden, and
eat his pleasant fruits. Faith is compared to fruit. When the Colossians
believed, it is said, the Gospel brought forth fruit amongst them. Chapt. 1.6.
And all graces are called fruit* Ephesians. 5.9. The fruit of the Spirit is in all
goodness. Thus Gal. 5.22, 23. But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. Hence godly
men are compared to good trees which bear good fruit, Mat. 12.33. They are
called trees of righteousness, Isa. 61.3.

2. As the Habit of grace, so all the Actions thereof are fruit. All Graces
motions and operations, whether internal in the heart, or externally
manifested, are Fruit. Where there is true grace, it will surely discover it
self. Grace is compared to Life in the Scripture, Ephesians. 2.9. You has be
quickened. Now Life discovers it self, at leastwise by breathings; So does
grace in the soul always discover it self by breathing after Christ, and after
Holiness. Now all discoveries of a gracious frame of heart, are the Fruit here
spoken of. Therefore

3. Holy and gracious Thoughts are fruit. All gracious workings in the minds of
true believers on Christ ere Fruit. A good Desire is so. A godly desire and
purpose in the heart is so. When a man is thinking and contriveing with himself
how he may promote the Glory of God and Good of men, those thoughts are fruit.
As David when he was thinking to build an House for the Name of God, that godly
intention was pleasant fruit* And the Apostle Paul had many gracious purposes
and designs working in his heart, which Timothy* who was intimate with him knew
much of. 2. Tim. 3.10. Thou have fully known my doctrine, manner of life,
purpose, -- God sees, and delights to see holy purposes, and sincere real
intentions in the hearts of His servants to glorify His Name.

3. Gracious words are fruit. It is said of Christ, that gracious words
procceeded out of his mouth. When it is so with Christians then they are
fruitful. A good tree is known by such fruit as that, Mat. 12.^3, 35. Make the
tree good and his fruit good. -- Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good
things. Gracious Speeches which may tend to the Edification of the soul of the
Speaker or of the hearers, are compared to fruit. Pro. 10 31. The mouth of the
just brings forth wisdom. and Chapt. 11.30. The fruit of the righteous is a
tree of life, and he that winne^^ souls is wise. and Chapt. 15.4. A wholesome
tongue is a tree of life. Hence also we read of the fruit of the mouth. Prove.
12.14. In a word, that man is a fruitful Christian, who is duly observant of
that excellent Rule laid down by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouths, but that which is good, to the use
of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers.

5. Good Works are fruit. Col. 1.10. Being fruitful in every good work. Works
of Piety if done from a right principle, and for a right end are fruit Praying,
Hearing the Word preached, Setting days apart for Prayer or Praise, are holy
fruit. And when men do by their Estates encourage the work of the Gospel, or
promote public and pious designs, they are truly said to bear fruit. Hence the
Apostle says to the Philipians that he desired fruit which might abound to
their account, Cap. 4 17. Works of Charity are fruit, Alms^eeds ar^ so.
Especially when men do with their Estates relieve and refresh the needy
Servants of God, that's fruit and very pleasant fruit before the Lord. Heb.
13.16. But to do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased. When the Churches among the Gentiles relieved the poor
Saints at Jerusalem, the Lord was delighted with that fruit. Some who look upon
the Song of Solomon as a prophesy, suppose works of Charity to be intended by
those Expressions, Cant. 4.10. How fair is thy love, my sister my spouse* How
much better is thy love than wine, and the smell of thine ointment than all
spices! However, it was pleasant fruit. When Chistians carry it one toward
another as the rule of Charity requires, they are said to bring forth fruit,
And this is in a special manner intended in (...) Text: When Christ says to
his Disciples, bring forth much fruit, His meaning is, Love one another much.

We come then to the 2 nd. Enquiry, viz*

When may Christians be said to bear much fruit? And the Answer to that is
clear from what has been said in showing what the fruit here spoken of is. In
two words,

1. They that have much grace, bear much fruit. There is a mavelous
difference among true Christians as to degrees of grace. Though every Believer
has every grace in some degree, yet it may be he has no grace in that eminent
degree which some others have. Hence some Christians are compared unto Babes,
others unto grown men. 1. Cor. 3.1. Some to children, others, to fathers 1.
Joh. 2.13. As there is a Difference in spiritual gifts, that one Saint does
very much excel another; so there is in grace. The grace of one does exceed the
grace of another, as much as the strength of a man is above the strength of a
child. Now inasmuch as grace is fruit (as was showed) the more grace any man
has, the more fruit does he bear.

2. They that do most good are most fruitful. Grace will prompt a man to be
doing good. Hence the more grace he has* the more good will he desire and
endeavor to do. The Lord Jesus Christ, who is in this Chapter compared to a
vine, was the most fruitful vine that ever was. Like Iotham's Vine, and like
his Fig Tree* which had good fruit, whereby the heart of God and man was
c^eered. Judge. 9.11, 13. He was always doing good, Ioh. 8.24. I do always
the things that please Him, Now nothing pleases God but that which is good.
When a Christian is in some measure like Christ, that all that have occasion to
converse with him, are, or may be the better for him, then he is one that bears
much fruit. As (I remember) Iunius says concerning that Learned and holy
Vrsin, that He never went to converse with him about any matter, but he was the
better for it, he heard something from him that was for his edification. This
is to bear much fruit. When a Christian shall be very instrumental for the good
of others, he is abundantly fruitful. It was said of Iehojada, that he had done
good in Israel both toward God, and toward his house. 2. Chron. 24.16. So
they that have done much good in their Generation, have brought forth much
fruit. And the truth is, A man cannot do greater good in this world, than to
promote the good of the souls of men: Therefore to be abundantly instrumental
in the Conversion, and Edification (...) souls, is to be very fruitful. That
some take to be especially intended in the words of my Text, If you bear much
fruit, h. e. by private and public endeavors for the good of immortal souls,
then God will be glorified. Hence in the ^6 th verse of this Chapter Christ
says, I have ordained you* that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that
your fruit should remain. The fruit which the Apostles brought forth by the
Sermons which they preached, and by their Writings, remains to this day unto
the Edification of the Church of God.

We proceed then to the 3 d. Enquiry* viz*

In what respects, or upon what accounts fruitful Christians are said to
glorify God?

Answ. 1. Because fruitful Christians do make it appear that God is a glorious
One. Men are not said to glorify God, as though they made him more glorious
than he was before, for that is impossible: Their goodness does not extend to
Him: God's Essential Glory is infinite, and therefore its impossible that there
should be any addition thereunto: But when Christians bear much fruit, they
delare His glory before the world. They make it manifest that the LORD is a
Glorious GOD. 1. Pet. 2.9. That you should show forth the ^raises of Him, or
the virtues of Him. The Virtue, the Power of God is showed forth, when his
people are made fruitful. When grace is wrought in the soul, the mighty Power
of God (which is his Glory) is exerted and manifested. And so it is when they
act and exercise grace. e. g. When a Christian does exercise much patience
under affliction, the power of God is thereby magnified and manifested to the
praise and glory of his Name. Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all might according
to his glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering with Ioyfulness.
Its wonderful to see with what patience some Christians endure their
Temptations and Afflictions: but it is from the glorious power of God
strengthening their hearts and spirits. Again, That such poor, weak creatures as
the children of men are, should be enabled by Faith to encounter with and to
overcome sin, Satan, and the world! this shows the glorious power of God.
Besides all this, The more a Christian does abound in fruits of Charity and
Holiness, the more like he is unto God. The Lord is good, and He does good:
Therefore they that do much good are like to Him. do good (said Christ) that
you may be the children of your Father which is in heaven. Mat. 5.44, 45. that
is to say, that you may be like to Him, as children resemble their Father: That
the world may in you and by you see som^^thing what God is, what glorious
perfections are in his Nature.

2. When Christians bear fruit as they ought to do, they cause the Name of God
to be blessed and praised. That may be meant by these words, Herein is my
father glorified. h. e. this will tend to his praise. Isai. 60.21. Thy people
shall be all righteous, -- the branch of my planting, the work of my hands,
that I may be glorified. h. e. by means of whom I shall have praise and glory.
As for fruitful Christians, there are many that do bless them, and bless God
for them. All the Churches in Judea, when they understood what a fruitful
Christian Paul was, they blessed God for him, Gal. 1.23, 24. They heard that he
which persecuted us in times past, now preached the faith which once he
destroyed: and they glorified God in me. By means of him and for him they
praised God. Titus also, was a fruitful Christian, and the holy Apostle blessed
God for him, 2. Gor. 8.16. But thanks be to God who put the same earnest care
into the heart of Titus for you. And he exhorts the Corinthians unto
fruitfulness from this consideration, that then many would bless God for them.
If you (says he) be serviceable unto others, they will glorify God* and there
will be many Thanksgivings to God, 2. Cor. 9.12.13. Yea, The F^^itfulness of
Christians does sometimes cause the world to think and speak well of the Name
of God; that the world will say, surely God is a good God, whose servants are
thus good, and that God is a holy God whose servants are thus holy. Hence
Christ said to his Disciples, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men
that the may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

I pro^eed to make some Aplication of this Doctrine. 1 st. By way of
Instruction or Information.

Instr. 1. Hence fruitful Christians are dear to God. His Glory is dear to him,
and therefore they that are active instruments in glorifying his Name, must
needs be dear to him. They abide in his love, as Christ here speaks. and thence
it is that their prayers can do much with God. Whatever they ask, he is ready
^o grant them. They no sooner speak, but speed. It is because God has a special
delight in the persons of such as love to glorify his Name, and so in their
prayers. The Lord Jesus Christ said, Therefore does my Father love me, because
I laid down my life. Ioh. 10.17. So God does therefore love some Christians
above others, because they are more fruitful, and He has more glory to his Name
by them than he has by others. Not that God's love of Good Will does at all
depend upon the works or goodness of men: Nor was He at all moved from the
foresight of any fruit or gr^cious Qualifications in them, to set his (...)
upon them; but because He has loved t^^m, therefore they become fruitful. Only
His love of delight in them, is more or less according to the measure of the
fruit which they bring forth to his praise and glory. Men if they have Vines or
Trees in their Orchards which are very fruitful, they take a peculiar delight
in them. So does the Lord do. Job was the most fruitful Saint in the world in
his time; and how was the Lord taken with him! Cap. 1.8. Have thou considered
my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth! The Lord seems to
glory in having such a good and useful servant as Job was. Moses was a most
fruitful man, and brought more glory to God than any one in the world in the
Age wherein he lived, and God delighted in him: yea, he was so dear to God as
that He could not bear to have any one speak an ill word of him, Numb. 12.7, 8,
9. But especially when Young men are abundantly fruitful, the Lord does
exceedingly delight in them: As we see in that instance of the Apostle John, of
whom Ecclesiastical Story reports that he was the youngest of all the
Disciples, but one and twenty years old when he began his public Ministry and
Apostleship: and he was the disciple whom Jesus loved. To see a man so young so
set upon glorifying God, was very pleasing. If a man has in his Orchard a young
tree laden with fruit, he takes delight in looking upon it: A young man that
is always doing good, the Great God never looks upon him but with delight.

Instr. 2. Hence it is a very great mercy to have an opportunity of being
fruitful. there is no creature capable of a greater happiness than to be an
active instrument of glorifying God. Therefore opportunities that way are
singular mercies. I remember an eminent Divine that was wont to say, My
opportunities are my greatest riches. To be improved in public Service for
God amongst his people is a wonwonderful favor; and it is a very evil thing to
decline all such advantages for Service to the Name of God. Not that a man is
always bound to make use of every opportunity: For God may be so gracious to
him, as to put many great opportunities into his hands, more than he can make
use of. And then he must consider with himself, In which of these shall I be
like to bring the greatest and most lasting glory to the Name of God? and let
him be sure to do that. But when men shall out of passion or discontent, or
for any carnal ends, decline all public Service for Christ and for his
People, it is certain that their hearts are not set upon glorifying God as they
ought to be, and that they don't act grace but corruption. Moreover, It is a
great happiness to be called to Suffer for God's Name and Truth. Phil. 1.29.
Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but
to s^ffer for his sake. Not that Sufferings are in t^^mselves desirable, only
as then and thereby we have an opportunity to glorify God. In that respect if
you be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are you, for on your part He is
glorified. Its then a great mercy to have an opportunity to be either doing or
suffering for Christ.

Instr. 3. Hence they that call themselves Christians, and yet bear little or no
fruit, are a dishonor to the blessed Name of God. And yet alas how many such
are their! Christians who are barren fig trees, or barren Vines in the Lord's
garden, that have the leaves of Profession growing on them, but not the Fruits
of practice: That when the Lord comes to them looking for fruit, He finds
nothing but leaves, a mere formal profession, of whom He may justly say cut
them down, why ^umber they the ground? There are others that have blossoms
only. Convictions of sin and Duty, and beginnings of Reformation are Blossoms.
Many have had these who never brought forth the fruit of true Repentance, and
Faith, and Holinass. Oh how have they dishonored God, and what a (...) case
are their souls in! Naturalists (...) that if a tree blossom, and yet does
(...) bear fruit, it is many times a sign that it will dye; So when persons
have Convictions, and Troubles of Conscience, and begin to set upon the
practice of holy Duties, but notwithstanding these illuminations are not
thoroughly converted, it is a sad sign that their souls shall dye forever. The
Apostle speaks of trees whose fruit withered, without fruit* twice dead, Jude.
12. They that have had convictons, and some external Reformations; and after
that return to their former evil ways again, are twice dead. And don't we see
some withered prosessors of Religion! The time was when they made a fair show,
a glorious profession, but all is withered away into sapless Formality. Such
may well fear that they were never truly implanted into Christ, and therefore
are they cast forth and withered.

And there are many true Believers, which though they bear fruit, yet but little
fruit comparatively to what they should and might do. What barren hearts have
they! Not so many holy thoughts therein as ought to be! what barren lips, that
are not filled up with profitable discourse! This, verily is the great sin of
many professors: They spend whole hours in Company with one another, and yet
not one edifying word all that time. Nay, it may be their Comunications such,
as they would be ashamed to say what they had bin speaking, if the holy Lord
Jesus should suddenly break in upon them and demand what their discourses were
about. As he did when his Disciples were in a house at Capernaum, the Lord
asked them, what was it that you disputed among your selves by the way? And they
held their peace, for they had been disputing who should be the greatest. Mark.
9.33.34. They were ashamed to tell what discourses had passed amongst them. Is
there not a great deal of unfruitful Discourse amongst Christians when they
meet occasionally? On a time there happ^ned to be a number of Christians
together, and their Discourse being frothy and fruitless, a young man in the
room who was of a more serious and holy temper than the rest, took his pen and
ink and for a while in Shorthand wrote down what every man said, and having so
done, he prayed them to tell him what every man of them had spoken since they
came together, but if you cannot (said he) I Will read to you what has passed in
discourse: You (said he) spoke these words, and you (said he to another)
uttered these words, and you (said he) to a third, had these Expressions: and
when they heard over again what foolish talk had been among them, they were all
ashamed. Certainly many good people are not so mindful as they should be, that
of every idle word they must give an account to Christ in another world. Such
dishonor God by their unfruitfulness.

And are men duly careful to glorify God with their outward Estates? Do they
bear much fruit in that respect? Some that have considerable estates, how
little good do they do with them! They can lavish out of the bag to serve an
Idol, to gratify a Lust: would they with a sincere heart do as much for God
who has given them all they enjoy, what blessed Acknowledgments should they
have from Jesus Christ at the great Day! But if they be put upon a good Work,
how little have they to spare! Such Christians dishonor God.

USE. 2. EXHORTATION.

Let us Endeavor to be abundantly Fruitful.

The Motive in the Text, is enough if there were nothing else to be mentioned.
Where is there a man that has the heart of a Christian in him, but above all
things in this world, he desires to glorify God? So shall you be my
Disciples, says Christ. It is the spirit of a true Disciple of Christ to
desire that God may be glorified, and therefore to endeavor to be fruitful.
But moreover,

Consider, 1. We may bear much fruit, if the fault be not our own. Some indeed
are advantaged thereunto above others, namely, They that are in a public
capacity (as many before the Lord in this Assembly are.) A Magistrate is put
into a capacity of bearing fruit in such a Degree, as that the whole Country
shall fare the better for him: By being Zealous for God, in the Execution of
Justice, and the Suppression of Vice. He may stand in the Gap* and save a whole
People from Ruin. When Sin is Duly punished, all fare the better for that fruit
of Righteousness. And They that minister in the House of God, have an
opportunity put into their hands of being abundantly fru^^ful. He that converts
a sinner, and so saves a soul from death, bears much fruit. He tha^ builds
up many in Faith and Holiness, bear^^h much fruit. That Minister who shall be
an Example of the Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in
Faith, in Purity, bears much fruit, and many souls will seed thereon, and
bless God to eternity that ever they knew such a one. But Private Christians
also, may bear much fruit: They may set such an Example as many others may be
the better for: And by their prayers they may do much good. A prayerful
Christian is a fruitful Christian. I will suppose a poor man, or a poor woman
that is little taken notice of by the world, but is much in prayer, and is upon
all occasions getting others together and inciting them to Prayer, and
provoking them to love and to good works; I say the whole Town and Land fares
the better for that poor man, for that poor godly woman

Consider, 2. The Lord expects much fruit from us. As He speaks in the 5 th of
Isaiah, He planted His Vineyard in a very fruitful hill* and then looked that
it should bring forth Grape^. Truly so has God dealt with us, He has planted
us in a very fruitful soil. What Liberties do we enjoy! Mention, if you can, a
People in the world, so priviledg'd as we are! So that the Lords Expectations
are great concerning us, and woe unto us if we utterly fail him! What Sermons
do men hear* what Sacraments do they enjoy! What Sabbaths, what Lectures! Yea,
and what Providence have passed over us! What Afflictions! What Reproaches I
What Sicknesses! God's end in bringing such Afflictions upon His servants, is
that so they might bear yet more fruit. Ioh. 15.2. Every branch that bears
fruit, He purges it that it may bring forth more fruit. And how does God purge
fruitful branches, but by bringing afflictions upon them, and sanctifying those
afflictions to their purgation, that they bring forth yet more fruit to His
glory? And what Mercies, what Deliverances have we had, public and personal!
Some of us have been pulled out of the Jaws of Death. Perhaps* we have been in
eminent Dangers at Sea; and what does God expect now but more fruit? Or
Sickness has brought us to the gates of the Grave, only God has said, Return
again into the world, and let me see you bear much fruit that I may be
glorified.

Quest. But what shall be done that it may be so?

Answ. 1. We must in the first place make sure of our Union with Christ.
Remember that without Him we can do nothing, as in this context the Lord has
declared, Ioh. 15.4, 5. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it
abide in the vine; no more can you, except you abide in me. I am the vine, and
ye are the branches, he that abides in Me, and I in him; the same brings
forth much fruit. And the Apostle says We must be married to Him that was
raised from the dead, that so we might bring forth fruit unto God. Romans 7.4.
Though a man should do never so many good works in the account of men, tho he
should pray never so often, tho he should give his Estate to the poor, if he is
not in Christ, all that he does is no fruit unto God. It was a truly christian
Reply of that Pious Minister, who when some told him of the good Works he had
done in the time of his health, and that therefore in case he should dye, his
Reward in Heaven must needs be very great; These (said he) are good works, if
they be sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ. If a man be in Christ, then
his good Works will be fruit, otherwise not. Hence the Apostle speaks of being
filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the
praise and glory of God. Phil. 1.11. No man did ever bring forth fruits of
Righteousness, but it was by Christ Jesus, and therefore no man will be full of
those fruits, Except he be in Christ.

2. Let us labor for a Public spirit, and for much of such a spirit. The
reason why men bring no more fruit to the Glory of God, is because they have so
much of a private, selfish spirit prevailing in them. All seek their own, not
the things which are Christ's. The Prophet complained Israel is an empty vine,
he brings forth fruit to himself. Hos. 10.1. The man that is all for himself,
will certainly be an empty, fruitless vine. the most fruitful Saints have
always been eminent for a public Spirit. David was one that did bear much
fruit, and he was of a public spirit. He served his generation. He had great
Advantages to have served himself, but his heart was set upon serving the
generation wherein he lived. And Solomon brought forth much fruit: He also was
of a public spirit; wherefore he built God's House before his own, and made
quicker dispatch with it. Nehemiah, and Mordecai were fruitful Servants of God,
and they were men that denied themselves much out of respect to the public
interest. Amongst the Apostles there was none did bear so much fruit as Paul*
(In labors more abundant than they (...)) And he was of a very public spirit.
He made it the chief design of his life to do good to many. 1. Cor. 10.33. Not
seeking my own profit, but the profit of many that they might be saved.

3. Let us be always bearing fruit. That Is the way to bear much fruit. He that
bea^s fruit every day, will at last bear much fruit. A Christian should not let
one day pass, without some good. And therefore it is good for a man, as duly as
the day passes over his head, when night comes, to call himself to an account
before he goes to sleep, and to ask, Where have I been this day? How have I
spent my time this day? Have I gained any spiritual good to my self, or done
any good to others this day? Thus do, and if upon Examination, you find that
your time has been spent unprofitably, Oh fall down and mourn in the presence
of God, and say, Alas O Lord, I have lost a day! I have read of a great
Moralist, that would do not much less than this comes to. How much more should
a Christian be careful to spend his time well every day! And he should
endeavor to do good wherewherever he comes. He may do good in whatever
place he shall be. If he be in Company with others, he may do good with his
Tongue. Some have said concerning Dr. Preston, that he was the most fruitful
Christian in the world in that respect. He would upon all occasions set on foot
Edifying Discourse, either something that should tend to promote Knowledge, or
should be helpful as to the practical part of Christianity. Or, If a man be
alone; he may do good with his head and heart, he may be contriving for God's
glory. He may be often thinking with himself, What shall I do for God? Is
there nothing that I may yet do for God and His people, more than I have
hitherto done? Yea, a Christian should endeavor so to walk, as that all he
does may be fruit unto God. Therefore holy Thoughts of GOD should be still
running in his mind. I could name a man to you, that could say, For the space
of these ten years, excepting when I have been asleep, Thoughts of God ^ave not
been out of my heart a quarter of an hour together. We should have thoughts of
God, in our Eating, Drinking, Buying, Selling, and in all that we do. And
explicit aymings at His Glory, should be in our hearts and thoughts very
frequently every day. So will all that we do become fruit, and then we shall
bear much fruit.

4. Let us set before us the most holy and fruitful Examples for our Imitation.
Take, my brethren, the prophets for an Example Jam. 5.10. Such as we read of in
the Scripture who were Eminent for God, we should consider their Example, and
endeavor to become like them. Or such of the Saints as we our selves have
known or heard of. And hence the reading of the Lives of holy and eminent
servants of Christ ^s certainly a good, and profitable thing: It may (by the
blessing of God) be a means to cause us to become like to them in Holiness and
Fruitfulness. But above all let us set the Example of JESUS CHRIST before us,
and learn of Him. The best of men have had their failings, and so are not a
perfect Copy to write after: But Christ did all things well, and never did
amiss in any thing. He went up and down doing good. Act. 10.3. He came no
where, but He did some good, brought forth some fruit there. We should remember
that example. And if a Christian be exercised with any Temptation, suppose him
to be persecuted, made the reproach of the world, slandered, and his life
fought after! let him think with himself, How did Christ carry it under such
Temptations? Let me demean my self as near as I can as He did. Or if he be put
upon any Service, Let him consider, If Christ had been called to such a
Service, how would He have managed that work to the glory of the Father? And as
He was, so let me be in this world. Every one of us here, calls himself a
Christian: He that says he abides in Him, ought himself also so to walk, even
as He walked. So shall we bear much fruit, and glorify God.

It is good for every man to draw near to God.
PSALM. LXXIII.28. But it is good for me to draw near to God. --


THere are two great Truths asserted in this Psalm, from both of which these
words are an Inference.

1. That God is good to his Servants, notwithstanding all the evils which may
befall them in the world. ver. 1. Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as
are of a clean heart. Though such may meet with many afflictions, yet God is
good, yea and good to them in all. He intends them good and not hurt by the
Temptations which they may at any time be exercised with. Now if God be so good
to His People, it must needs be good, and the best Course they can take to draw
near to Him.

2. Another thing asserted in this Psalm, is, That though wicked men who are
strangers to God may be in present prosperity, yet it will not be long before
they utterly perish, ver. 27. For lo, they that are far from thee shall perish,
thou have destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee. And therefore he
concludes that it is good to draw near to God. If they perish that are far off,
the Best and safest course is to get and keep near. Inasmuch as it cannot be
ill with those that are with Him, nor well with those that are without Him, its
a Rational and a necessary conclusion that it is good to draw near. And whereas
the Psalmist says, It is good for me, Two Things are employed,

1 That for his own part he was resolved to practice according to what he here
makes Profession of. 2. That tho the generality of men did not draw near to
God, yet it would be good for them so to do. He does not intend that it would
be good for himself only, but it is equally true of all other men, and so they
should find it, would they be persuaded to make the Experiment.

The Doctrine then is,

That it is good for every man to draw near to God*

Drawing nigh to God is not not only in it self a good thing, but its good for
them that sincerely do so.

Here two Things are to be enquired into. 1. When a man may be said to draw
near to God. 2. How it does appear that it is good so to do.

QUEST. 1. When may a man be said to draw near to God?

ANSW. 1. When he is brought out of a state of Nature into a state of Grace, he
is brought near to God. There is a drawing nigh to God in respect of a man's
state, as well as an actual drawing nigh to Him. A Sinner is in a state of
Separation from God. Therefore men in a state of sin are described to be a far
off. Ephesians. 2.13. It is said of the Prodigal, that he was a great way off. Luke
15.20. Sin has made a vast and woeful distance between the blessed God and the
souls of men: it has set their souls at an infinite distance from Him: But by
true Conversion they are brought near to Him again. The Prodigal Son, when he
came to himself, said, I will arise and go to my father. A repenting sinner
goes to God. Hence Repentance is sometimes called a drawing nigh to Him. Jam.
4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you, cleanse your hands you
sinners and purify your hearts you double minded. The Apostle having showed the
evil of several vices, he prescribes one Catholic Remedy for them all, viz.
Repentance, which he calls a Drawing nigh to God, a Cleansing the hands, a
Purifying the heart, an Humbling of themselves etc. There must be Union and
Reconciliation before there can be Communion. Amos. 3.33. Can two walk together
except they be agreed? You and I (says God) are not agreed, and therefore how
can we hold Communion? A sinner is an e^emy to God, but a Converted sinner is
become reconciled to Him. He is made nigh by the blood of Christ, and so has
access unto the ^ather. Ephesians. 2.13.18. Men by being (...) nigh, they draw nigh:
being by Faith and Repentance brought ne^r to God through Jesus Christ, they
ever after draw near to Him. This lays the Foundation of all that Communion
which we have with God. It necessarily implies Union and Reconciliation with
Him.

2. When men enter into Covenant with God, they draw near to Him. Such are said
to join themselves to the Lord. Jer. 50.5. Isai. 56.6. As they that are wholly
strangers to the Covenant are said to be without God Ephesians. 2.12. and to be far
off Act. 2.39. So the Lord's Covenant people are said to be near to Him Isa.
57, 19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, to him that is far off
and to him that is near. That is, to the Gentile and to the Jew. Paul has
respect to that Scripture in Isaiah, when he says, Christ came and preached
peace to you that were a far off; h. e. to the Gentiles who were strangers to
the covenant: and to them that were nigh, i. e. to the Jews, who were nigh to
God in respect of the Covenant. Ephesians. 2.17. On this account the Children of
Israel were nearer to God than any other Nation in the world. Psalm. 148.14. The
Children of Israel, a people near unto Him. There is an external Covenanting
with God, such may be really far from God, yet they are as to their visible
state near to Him. Ier. 12.2. Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their
reins. And there is an Internal Covenanting with God, when men give not their
names only, but their hearts to God, devoting themselves entirely to His fear,
and renouncing all other Lords and Lovers in Comparison of Him, and for His
sake. They draw near to God, who can truly say as His people do Isai. 26.13. O
Lord our God, other lords have had dominion over us, but by Thee only will we
make mention of Thy Name.

3. When men worship God, they draw nigh to Him. Thus the Chaldee Interpreter
paraphraseth upon the Text, It is good for me to come to the worship of God.
There is a special Presence of God where He is worshipped; especially in His
Public Worship. Exodus 20.24. In all places where I record my Name, I will
come unto thee. When men come to worship, they are said to gather round about
the holy God whom they serve, Psalm. 89.7. God is greatly to be feared in the
Assembly of His saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are about
Him. Hence the Priests of old were said in a peculiar manner to draw nigh unto
God, because they were constantly employed in holy Ministrations, Exodus 19.22.
-- the Priests which come near to the Lord. Their whole employment was a divine
Service. Ezekiel 44.15. They shall come near to me, to minister to me, and they
shall stand before me, to offer unto me the fat and the blood, says the Lord
God. When men come to hear the Word, they draw near to God: They approach into
His special presence, and must therefore attend with all humility and
reverence, because in coming to hear, they present themselves into the presence
of the Infinite MAJESTY. Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot, i. e. Be reverent in thy
behavior; For among the Eastern Nations, Uncovering the foot did signify the
same that uncovering the head does with us, being a Testification of humble and
reverend respect, when thou go to the Mouse of God, and be more ready to
hear than to offer the sacrifice of fools. Which words show that in hearing the
Word, men have to do with God. They come into his House, and approach into his
solemn Presence. In Prayer also, men draw near to God. Heb. 10.22. Having such
an high p^iest, let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith.
The Apostle's meaning is, let us in sincerity of heart pray unto God, being
fully assured that He will accept of us for the sake of Jesus Christ. Prayer is
called a visiting of God, Isai. 26.16. A knocking at His door, Mat. 7.7. Knock
and it shall be opened to you. By Prayer men knock at heavens door. Prayer is
nothing else but the souls Going up to God. Psalm. 25.1. Unto thee O Lord do I
lift up my soul. When the Psalmist says it is good for me to draw near to God,
Part of his meaning is, it is good for me, that I should hear the Word of God,
and that I should pray to Him.

4. When men join themselves to the Church and and People of God, they draw
near to him. For there is a special presence of God in His Church. The name of
that place is Jehovah Shammah, h. e. The Lord is there. Ezekiel. 48. (...). His
Church is his House. That particular Church in Ephesus, was the house of the
living God. 1. Tim. 3.15. Every Church is a Sanctury. Therefore God dwells
therein Psalm. 26.8. I have loved the habitation of thine house, and the place
where thine honor dwells. His Honor i. e. GOD Himself, (Who is expressed by
the Name of Honor, as also by the Name of Majesty and of glory) dwells in His
Sanctuary. He is to be seen there. Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired, (h. e.
one thing in a more peculiar manner) that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in
His holy Temple. So that the Lord appears in His Beauty to those that are in
His House, and there make enquiry after him. Psalm. 63.2. To see thy Power and
glory, as I have seen Thee in the Sanctuary. Every true and pure Church is
Sanctuary, where much of God is to be seen. He walks in the midst of his Golden
Candlesticks. Rev. 2.1. Those holy Ordinances whereof the Church is the proper
subject have much of God in them. Hence the Spouse speaks as in Cant. 1.4. The
King has brought me into his chambers, and Chapt 2. ver. 4. He brought me to
the banqueting house. The holy Ordinances of God, are Christ's Chambers* and
his Church is the Banqueting house where He does feed and feast the souls of
his people. It is in a very peculiar manner true with respect to that Ordinance
of the Lords Supper, which is not regularly Administered but in a Church
Assembly, Believers draw near to God therein, as near as is possible for men to
do in this world. There the Lord is wont to show himself after a gracious
manner to the souls of his people, who do by Faith attend upon Him. When Joseph
and his Brethren did eat and drink together in the same room, there was an
intimacy of Communion between them, so there is between Christ and Believers in
that Ordinance of the Lord's Supper. Christ, Himself is in the same Room, yea,
and at the same Table with them.

5. When men exercise Grace, then they draw near to God. This is the best
drawing nigh to God; that which is most acceptable to Him, and most profitable
to the souls of men. And it is peculiar unto true Believers. There is a drawing
near to God externally; so Hypocrites may draw nigh unto him. Mat. 15*8. Ye
hypocrites, well did Isaiah proahesy of you, saying, This people draws near
to me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, bu^ their heart is
far from me. There is more, over an Internal drawing near to God* which
Hypocrites are strangers unto. They may have Communion with duties, but they
have not real Communion with God in Duties. This internal Communion with God,
consists in those inward actings of Grace whereby the soul is carried out
toward God. As now, When the Affections which are as it were the the feet and
wings of the soul, are earnestly carried out after God. The soul that does
indeed pant and breathe after Communion with God draws near to him. Psalm.
42:1, 2. As the heart pants after the water brooks; so pants my soul after
Thee O God: My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come
and appear before God? The soul which loves and longs to be where God is,
has Communion with him. Isai. 26.9. With my souul have I desired thee in the
night, yea with my spirit within me will I seek Thee early. When there are
actings of love and delight in God, the soul draweh near to Him Love is a
mavelous uniting affection. 1. Ioh. 4.16. He that dwells in love, dwells
in God, and God in him, Therefore the more a Christian does exercise that grace
of Love to God, the nearer will his Communion with God be. So when a man does
renew and exercise Repentance toward God, he draws near to him. Wherefore
the Psalmist says, The Lord nigh unto them is that are of a broken heart. Psalm.
34.18. He that confesses sin, with a broken heart for it, draws nigh unto
God, and God draws nigh to Him. The like is to be said concerning the Actings
of Faith: As the wotkings of Unbelief in the heart, are a soul-departure from
God, Zeph. 3.2. She trusted not in the Lord, she drew not near to her God. So
when the soul does indeed act faith upon Jesus Christ, when there is not only
prayer but Faith in prayer, then there is a drawing near to God.

6. This drawing near to God, implies constancy in the way of Obedience. The
Hebrew word [ Kirbath] which is here used, signifies to cleave unto. Some read
the words, Bonum est mihi adhaerere Deo, It is good for me that I should cleave
unto God. This is called a walking with God and an abiding with God 1. Cor.
7.24. They that are constantly careful to walk so, as not to displease the
Lord, He delights to meet them, and to hold Communion with them. Isai. 64*5.
Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and works righteousness. And therefore the
Lord Jesus Christ has said, If a man love Me, he will keep my words, and My
Father will love him, and We will come unto him, and make Our abode with him.
Ioh. 14.23. But thus for the 1 st. Enquiry* We proceed 2 ly to enquire, How it
does appear that it is good for every man to draw near to God?

ANSW. Several things may be mentioned which are clear Demonstrations of the
Truth and Doctrine now before us.

1. To be separated from God, is the greatest Evil. Therefore to draw near to
Him, must needs be good. Its a dismal thing to be banished out of the Lord's
presence. Hos. 9.12. Woe unto them when I depart from them! A greater woe than
that there never was, nor can there be. When the Sun withdraws nothing but
darkness follows. A great Part of the Punishment of the of the Apostate Angels,
is in their being Eternally separated from the face and favor of that God
which made them. Guilty, trembling Cain thought his punishment intolerable in
this respect. Genesis 4.13. Cain said unto the Lord, my punishment is greater than
I can bear. Why, how so? ver. 14. From Thy face I shall be hid. Verily, The
damned in hell have not a greater punishment than that inflicted on them. Mat.
25.41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire. The first and sadest
word in that dreadful Sentence is, DEPART from ME. There is more of Terror in
that, than in all the Fire and Brimstone of hell. In God's Favor is Life, and
His loving kindness is better than life: Therefore to be cast out of his Favor
is worse than any Death. And if so, To have Communion with Him is the greatest
happiness. For,

2. God is the Chief Good. There have been great disputes among those whom the
world has accounted wise men, about the Chief Good. Austin observes that there
were no less than two hundred eighty eight Opinions amongst the old
Philosophers about the Chief Good. But we are are sure, that there is no Chief
Good but God only. The young Nobleman in the Gospel did not know that Christ
was God, and therefore when he called Him good, the Lord said to him, Why
call thou me good? there is none good but One, that is God. Matthew. 19.17.
There is no Chief Good but God. He is infinitely good: He is an alsufficient
good. His Name is El-Shaddai: h. e. the God who is sufficiency. He has enough
in Himself to satisfy his own infinite Self: And therefore more than enough to
satisfy all creatures, whatever the wants, whatever the desires of of the
souls of men may be; there is enough in God to satisfy them all. God is a
Universal Good; so that it is impossible for a man to be miserable, if he has
God. This, doubtless was the reason why Jacob said, I have all. Genesis 33.9. It
is translated, I have enough, but that was no more than Esau said: The Hebrew
Expression is, Ieshli-Col, h. e. To me there is all. viz. because of his
interest in God. Though a soul should have nothing else, If he has God, he
has enough, he has all. All outward losses are easily made up in God. Hence
our Lord said, There is no man that has left house, or Brethren, or Sisters,
or Father or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for My sake and the
Gospel's, but he shall recieve an hundred fold now in this time. Mar. 10.30.
Why! he shall have that Comfort in GOD which all these Creatures could afford,
and a hundred times more. The Chief good is eminently all good. So that tho a
man should loose all his worldly possessions, if he has drawn near to God, he
may truly say, I have lost nothing: he may stand upon the ruins of the whole
world, and say I have lost nothing. And therefore may rejoice in all afflictive
Changes and Bereavements. Hab. 3.17.18. Although the fig tree shall not
blossom neither shall fruit be in the vine, the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the field shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the
fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls, yet I will rejoice in the Lord,
I will joy in the God of my Salvation. Observe how full and particular the
Prophet's Expressions are: here is the Fig tree, and the Olive tree, and the
Vine, and the Field, and the Flock, and the herd, if one of these should fail,
relief might be hoped for from another of them; nay, Nay but, says he, though
they should all fail, though all creatures in the world should fail, God will
never fail, and there is Comfort enough in that: happiness is in the Fruition of
HIM.

3. To draw near to god, is the way to be delivered from evil. The NAME of the
LORD is a strong Tower which the Righteous run into and are safe. In evil Times
God is good to Israel. Let what will happen in the world, they that draw near
to him are safe. The Wiseman says, surely I know that it shall go well with
them that fear God. Eccles. 8.12. Such as are very careful to walk with God, do
sometimes experience wonderful Temporal Preservations: As we see in Noah, unto
whom God said, Come thou and all thine house into the Ark, for thee have I seen
righteous before me in this generation. And in the Prophet Jeremy, whose very
life was struck at and sought after, and that by the great Ones of the world,
but God hid him: he appeared for God, and God appeared for him. So He does
often for his servants that keep in with Him. He is to them a very present Help
in the time of Trouble. He shall hide them in the secret of his Presence from
the pride of men, and keep them secretly in a Pavillion from the strife of
tongues. However they shall have Spispiritual Preservations: The Lord will
deliver them from every evil work, and will preserve them to his heavenly
Kingdom. And if a Christian be grieved with inward, perplexing Thoughts, by
drawing near to God, he may obtain help against them. This was the case of the
Psalmist* as the Context shows: he was almost gone: his unbelieving thoughts
had like to have been too hard for him: but he went into the Sanctuary, and
there by drawing nigh to God in prayer, and hearing of His Word, he got the
victory over his Temptations, and a further Establishment in the ways of God.
All his Temptations issued in this, that he was made more sensible of his own
infirmity, and had a more clear Discovery of Divine grace. This did he get by
drawing near to GOD.

4. Communion with God, is a most sweet and comfortable thing to a gracious
soul. Indeed Unregenerate men do not think so, because they never had
Experience of it, but they that know what comunion with God means, have found
Sweetness and Delight therein which cannot be expressed. Hence David could say,
One day in Thy Courts, is better than a thousand elsewhere. Psalm. 84.10.
Excellent was the Reply of a Noble Protestant, when the Papists tempted him
with offers of money to forsake the Truth, and to turn Papist, Let that man's
money perish with him, that does not prize one hours Communion with God, above
all the gold and silver in the world* Communion with God in hearing his Word is
sweet. Hence the Church says of Christ* His mouth is most sweet, Cant. 5.16.
When a Promise is set home upon the soul by the Spirit of God, how sweet is it!
Or, when a man has been in great doubts and darkness about his spiritual
estate* or concerning his way and Duty, but some word of God does enlighten and
direct him, how sweet is it! what refreshing does his soul within him find! The
statutes of ^he Lord are right, rejoicing the heart, sweeter also than the
honey and the honey comb. Psalm. 19.8, 10. And Communion with God in Prayer is
sweet, Isai. 56.7. I will make them joyful in my house of prayer. Some of God's
Children have found that Joy and Comfort therein, as to make them forget their
outward Afflictions. A holy man once having buried a Child who was dear to him*
after he had gone and poured out his soul before God in secret, was cheerful,
an intimate Friend enquirng the reason, he gave this Answer, I could be content
to bury a child every day, on condition that I might meet with as much of God
every day as I have done this day.

5. The soul that draws near to God, is betterd thereby. Many times
consolation follows thereon, but if not, that which is better than Comfort h.
e. More Holiness is the fruit of sincere approaches unto God. Never any man did
draw nigh to God after a right manner but he was the more holy for it. The more
Communion men have with GOD, the less Communion they will have with Sin. Every
Act of real Communion with God tends to mortification of sin. This is one
reason why the Saints in glory become impeccable. The Beatifical Vision makes
them that they cannot sin. The more intimacy of Communion with God any soul
shall attain unto, the more like will he be to God. Amongst men, he that shall
converse much with another, will be apt to be like to him, and to drink in
something of his spirit with whom he holds a free and familiar Conversation; So
they that converse much with God, will surely become more like to him than what
can be said of any other men. When Moses had near and intimate Communion with
God in the mount, Divine Impressions were left upon his face: So are there upon
the face of that soul which shall be much in Communion with God. 2. Cor. 3.18.
Beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same
image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

6. All the Saints of God have found it good for them to draw near to Him. So
that Universal Experience proves the Truth* of my Doctrine* As it is said in Job.
To which of the Saints will thou turn thee? So I say, ask any of them whether
it be not so, and they will every one of them answer and say as the Psalmist
hero does, It is good for me to draw near to God. Enquire of them, You have
been at the Lord's Table, but did you ever find it good to be there? they will
say, we have met with God there, and we never met with him, but we found it
good for us. Enquire again, Have you not found it good to draw near to God in
the word and prayer? and they will give the same Answer. Some of them have
spent many ^hole days in secret prayer to God, and some of these have they
found to be like days of Heaven. How has the great God condescended to reveal
Himself to His servants after a wonderful manner, when drawing near to Him in
that Duty! It is related concerning that eminent Saint Mr. Brewer, that not
long before his death, he had such enlargements in his Closet-Duty as made him
wholly regardless of this lower world. Once when his near Relation told him she
feared he had injured himself by his rising so early, he replied, If you had
seen such glorious things as I saw this morning in private praer with God, you
would not have said so; for they were so wonderful and unspeakable, that
whether I was in the body, or out of the body with Paul I cannot tell. This
indeed was extraordinary: But where is there a godly man, but he can truly say,
he has found that of God in Secret Prayer which he would not be without for
all this world? And if we could speak with the Saints in glory, They would
every one of them say It is good for me to draw near to God. As Peter said when
he saw Christ transfigured on the holy Mount, It is good for us to be here. So
do the Saints in heaven say, Here we have our fill of Communion with God, It is
good for us to be here. This is the Heaven of Heaven it self. A life of
uninterrupted Communion with God, that is Heaven. Phil. 1.23. To be with Christ
which is far b^^ter. There Is mavelous Rhetoric in that expression: [pollo
mallon kreist^r*] It is much more better: The Apostle uses Comparative upon
Comparative, which rises higher than the superlative degree. Nothing is
better, nothing is so good as to live a life of everlasting Communion with God
and with Jesus Christ. One well says, that The Saints in glory are always
experienting, and yet ever learning this Truth to Eternity.

USE. 1. It is matter of heart-bleeding Lam^utation, that there are so few who
draw near to God. Alas, how many are there that content themselves to live in a
state of estrangement from God! They are Aliens to the Life of God, yea to a
life of Communion wirh Him. The natural man knows not what it is to have
Communion with God: All our Communion with God in this World is in some
Ordinance or other, either Prayer, or Meditation, or Hearing the Word, or
Reading, or in some other Ordinance, but are not these neglected?
Church Fellowship and the Lord's Supper are Divine institutions* It is
lamentable to consider that so many of the rising Generation, do neither prize
nor prepare themselves for such enjoyments, they sin grievously against the hope
of their Fathers. For our Fathers came into this Wilderness for no other end,
but only that so they might build a Sanctuary for the Name of God, and enjoy
Communion with Him therein. Now that their Children after them should so many
of them be careless about things of this Nature, is a Lamentation and shall be
for a Lamentation. And are there not more than a few, that live in the neglect
of prayer? Ah ungodly souls! The Scripture says, every one that is godly shall
pray. Psalm. 32.6. He then that lives without prayer, has no godliness, no
grace in his soul. Are there not some that don't so much as pray in their
Families? Men may make excuses for such neglects if they will, but there is a
Scripture which falls upon them like a Thunderbolt of Death, and they cannot
escape it, I mean that in Ier. 10.25. Pour out thy fury upon -- the Families
which call not on Thy Name. If there be a prayerless Family in Boston, if there
be a prayerless Family in New England (as alas there are many) let them look to
it, for the Fury of the Almighty is ready to be poured out upon them. Others
there are who neglect Closet Prayer. Verily, I cannot see how such a man can
have the true fear of God in his heart, that does in his ordinary Course live a
whole day together without secret Communion with God.

USE. 2. For Exhortation

Let men, yea, let every man be so good to himself as to draw near to God.
Consider the present Times call for this. It Is a dark and cloudy day: Without
doubt there is a gracious day of Mercy and Salvation to the Church o^ God near
at hand. It may from Scripture and History be demonstrated that the Twelve
hundred and sixty years allowed for the Beast's Continuance is almost expired.
But a little before break of day, how dark is it like to be* Now a child is not
afraid though he be in the dark, if his Father has him by the hand. No more
need we be afraid o^ evil Tidings, if we draw near to GOD. It is now a great
Question, What shall we do that we may be accounted worthy to escape those
things that are coming on the world? The best Answer which I can think of is
this, Let us draw near to God and one another in the Lord. And then God will
either keep the storm from coming to us, or if it do come, it will but blow us
the sooner to Heaven.

For Direction.

1. Take heed of sin. A great Sin is like a violent blast which blows the
soul far from God suddenly. Sin and guilt upon the Conscience makes a man
afraid to look God in the face. When Adam had sinned he endeavored to run
away from God, and to hide himhimself (had it bin possible) from His holy
presence. Therefore watch against sin. Especially against such sins as will
break peace with God, and interrupt Communion with Him. All scandalous Sins
will do so; yea, and sins of Infirmity, if they be not mourned for.

2. In all our approaches unto the holy God, Let us be sure to bring Jesus
Christ with us. Let every soul make sure of an Interest in Him, without Whom
there is no drawing near to God. When the Law was given at Mount Sinai, the
people stood afarr off: So Christless Sinners who are only concerned in the
Covenant of Works, are afarr off. The Lord says to them as sometimes Joseph to
his Brethren, Except you bring Christ with you, you shall not see my face. And
Believers must depend upon Christ for all acceptance with God, and that as to
every Duty. The Apostle speaks of a better hope by which are draw nigh to God,
Heb. 7.19. what is that Better Hope but the priestly Office, the Merit and
Mediation of Jesus Christ? were it not for that we should have no hope. How
should Sinners come near that God who is a consuming fire, without a Mediator?
Christ is is the way, and none can come to the Faher but by Him.

Tibi Domine,
THE CONTENTS
I. If any man come to Jesus Christ, He will in (...) wise cast him out. II.
Every Sinner to whom the Word of the Lord comes, is ^^und to Turn from his
evil way, and that NOW without Delaying. III. There shall be a Day of Judgment*
IV. Fruitful Christians glorify God. V. It is good for every man to draw near
to God*
ERRATA.
PAge 23. line 15. after believer. Men think if they could see Christ working
Miracles they should believe. p. 31. l. 7. for yet r. then. p 39. l. 12. r.
evil way. p. 79. l. 20. for Assistors r. Assessors. p. 36. l. 10. after
endeavor, r. that they may be able. p. 98. l. 15. r. actings. l. 16. for
Graces, r. gracious p. 101, l. 3. after suppose, r. the mentioned. p. 111. l.
16. dele up. p. 136. l. ult. dele nay. p. 142. l. ult. r. Kreisson. p. 143. l.
7. r. Experiencing.

Books printed for, and sold by Joseph Brunning at his Shop at the Corner of
Prison Lane next the Exchange.
A Discourse Concerning Comets, wherein the Nature of Blazing Stars is enquired
into, by Mr. Increase Mather. -- An Essay for the Recording Illustrious
Providence. -- The Doctrine of Divine Providence opened and applied. To which
is annexed A Sermon wherein is showed, That it is the Duty and should be the
Care of Believers on Christ to live in the constant Exercise of Grace. by Mr.
Nathaneel Mather, Minister of the Gospel at Dublin in Ireland. Self-Employment
in Secret, containing Evidences upon Self-Exmination, Thoughts upon Painful
Afflictions, Memorials for Practice, by Mr. John C^rbet. An Arrow against
Profane and Promiscuous Dancing. Drawn out of the Quiver of the SCRIPTURES* by
the Ministers of Boston.

