Mercy Magnified ON A PENITENT Prodigal, OR A Brief DISCOURSE, wherein Christ's
PARABLE of the Lost SON found, is Opened and Applied, As it was Delivered in
Sundry SERMONS,

By SAMUEL WILLARD Teacher of a Church in Boston in New England.

Luke 19. 10. For the Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which is
lost.

BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND

Printed by Samuel Green, for Samuel Philips, and are to be Sold at his Shop at
the West end of the Townhouse. 1684.

Christian Reader,
I F the skill in handling of it had any way answered the excellency and
utility of the subject handled in the following Sermons, there would have
needed no Apology for the publication of them. The Parable under consideration
comprizeth (in most lively and heart-affecting allusions) many precious truths.
Here are diverse Mysteries of Providence cleared, pointing to those secret ways
wherein God carries his Decree of Election under ground* a great while, before
it rise and break out in effectual Calling: here we learn how far a chosen one
may run from God before he turns: here we are instructed in the methods God
uses to bring wanderers home, and recover the most profligate Sinners by
Repentance: the nature of true Repentance is here curiously limned, and the
transactions between God and a Sinner in his Conversion pathetically described:
yea, how miserable a thing it is to be a Sinner, how happy to be a Saint is
wonderfully illustrated. The fountain of Grace is here opened, and the deep
streams in which it runs revealed: and all this accommodated to the most
feeling apprehensions of the soul. I confess* I have but drawn a veil upon the
picture, and am deeply sensible of my own insufficiency to Display these
Mysteries: all the account which I can give of the publishing this imperfect
thing, is, knowing it the desire and duty of those that fear God, as they have
opportunity, to do all the good they may in their places; and God having so far
afforded his Presence and Blessing with these Sermons in the Preaching, that
many Souls have born witness to the benefit received by them, some of whom have
desired they might have the further advantage of their being made public; I
was therefore induced for this reason to consent to it; hoping withal (if God
sees meet) that it may be further beneficial to some or other, to show them to
themselves, and instruct them in the way of lise: to give light also to, and
help some to prove themselves and their own state: only let it be (for caution)
adverted, that I have not here undertaken to confine the Spirit of God in his
ways and methods with his Elect, in bringing them home; but only have
signified that something of all that is herein expressed is one way or other
done in the Soul that is savingly brought over to Christ. The work of
Conversion begins to be thought a small thing; and a matter of little
observation or wonderment for a Sinner to become a Saint: Many Commence
Believers before they were either convinced or humbled; and that is the reason
why so many prove Apostates: The great design of the Parable, and aim of this
Discourse upon it, is that proud and secure Sinners may be awakened and
humbled, and brought off from their empty and undoing courses; and that abased
and self-loathing Sinners may be encouraged, notwithstanding all their profuse
and prodigal ways, to return to God in Christ for his mercy, and so may taste
of the Royal Feast, and be entertained at that noble Table, which God has
prepared for them who come home from their far Country, by true Repentance. My
encouragement is, that out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings God has
ordained praise; to his blessing I commend this work; and may his Name have the
Glory, and your Souls be made so to partake in benefit by it, as to give him
his due acknowledgment, I shall have reached the utmost of my aims,

Who am the Unworthiest Labourer in Christ's Harvest, S. W.

Mercy Magnified ON A PENITENT Prodigal.
SERMON I.
Luke 15. 11. etc; And be said, a certain man had two Sons, etc.
THe Riches and Freeness of the Grace of God, manifesting it self in the
Conversion and Salvation of undone self-ruined Sinners (having by the same
Grace first provided for this in the glorious Redemption wrought out by Christ)
is one of the great designs of Gospel discoveries. Proud nature slights it it
self, and envies it to others. The self-conceited Pharisee deems none to
deserve favor but himself, and thinks he has reason to find fault with a
merciful God, if he reveal and apply his mercy to any other. A notable Instance
of this, the Chapter before us does afford: our Savior Christ is recorded, ver.
1. (and it was not the first time that he had so done) to condescend to teach
Publicans and Sinners in the great concerns of their Souls, and instruct them
in the way to eternal li^e: [ Ver. 2.] The Pharisees and Scribes (those
self-admiring Justiciaries) take great offense, and when almost did they
otherwise than find fault with the spotless actions of Christ? but when offense
is taken and not given, the woe denounced falls upon those that take it: Christ
therefore does not for this abstain, lest they should be prejudiced, but
strenuously maintains and justifies that which he has done against all their
cavils. The main things which we aim at in this vindication are the discovering:

1. That the Subjects of Gods Grace are not Pharisees but Publicans, not men
righteous in their own vain Opinion, but such as are sinners both in their own
and others account.

2. That God is the first in this great work, he seeks up lost sinners before
they seek after him.

3. That the greatest distance which sinners have set themselves, at from God,
can neither hinder their return, when he comes to convert them, nor give
obstruction to his merciful and kind acceptance of them returning. This our
Savior Christ illustrates in three Parables; the two former more brief and
succinct, and (being taken, the one from a sensitive, the other from an
inanimate thing) not so full; the third more ample and large, as carrying in it
a very great Analogy to the thing; which last is the subject of the ensuing
Discourse.

In order to the entrance upon this Subject, give me leave to premise a few
words touching the nature and use of Parables in general.

Parables are properly AEnigmatical or Allegorical comparisons, wherein, under
the representation of other persons, actions or things, some other like thing
is intended, and commended to our consideration. The word Parable is variously
used in Scripture, in Heb. 11.19. it is used for an exchange, in Heb. 9.9. for
a pattern: but in the Gospel usually for a representation of heavenly truths
under earthly similitudes: The Scripture makes mention of two ends of the
using of Parables, which indeed seem to be contrary, which contrariety chiefly
arises from the different way of expressing them.

1. They are to wrap up, mysterious Truths in obscurity: they are a kind of
Riddles which require great Study to enode them. Christ to this end spoke them
to the multitude, of the Jews, Mat. 13.10,11. it was not given to them to
understand the mysteries of the Kingdom; they were to break their teeth upon
the shell, and not come at the kernel: Hence they are called dark savings,
Prove. 1.6. and this is their nature, when there is only the proposition, or
parable it self proposed, without its illustration.

2. They are to explicate and clear up a Truth to the understanding by the help
of the senses. They speak of sensible things, such as are obvious to our eyes,
ears, etc. and so lead us to a conception of spiritual things; and this is done
when the Reddition or Interpretation of them is given: see Mat. 13,18. When a
Parable is opened, it brings more light to men's understandings, then plain
enunciations of Truth, and adds to be very useful for the moving of the
affections.

Now if we would make a genuine improvement of Parables, we must carefully
attend unto these two Rules.

1. That Parables are not so much for Argumentation as for Illustration, or the
opening of our understandings to the conception of things; we do no^ so much
argue by a similitude (though there be something of Argument in it too if it be
pertinently framed) as clear up the matter we are upon to the apprehension of
those to whom we are speaking.

2. That we must not strain the circumstances of Parables beyond the purpose or
intent of the similitude, but rest in the main scope of them: for, because they
are Similitudes, that which we have to mind is the thing which they are
improved to shadow out unto us. The neglect of this Rule runs men into many
errors: we must carry this (...) a certain truth. That such things as are
condemned by plain Scripture prohibitions, are in vain sought to be justified
by Parables.

But to come to the Parable it self: Let it not be thought vain or needless
that Christ uses so many Words, and diverse Parables to insinuate the truth of
Gods free Grace; but let it inform us of our stupidity and Christ's rich
condescendency to us, so as to take so great pains to instruct us in the
matters of our Souls welfare.

The main scope of this Parable is to set forth the rich Grace of God (...)
miserable selfundone sinners, and the great pleasure which he takes in their
Conversion: it therefore presents us with the pattern of a grievous sinner; and
discovers to us, both what he is before Conversion, and how he is converted,
and what welcome he finds with God upon his return unto him: this is that which
is principally intended, unto which there is added a discovery of the malice of
carnal Professors against sincere Converts: all of which is shadowed out to us,
under the comparison of a Father and his two Sons, and the carriage of each of
them. This Parable, amongst Ecclesiastical Writers, bears the title of the
Prodigal, because such an one is the primary, and principally intended Subject
of the Discourse. The Parable may be divided into four principal parts, besides
the introduction to them, in ver. 11. viz. 1. The Prodigals goings away from
his Father, with the consequences of it, ver. 12, to 17. 2. His return to his
Father, with the motive and manner of it, ver. 17, to 20: 3. The entertainment
which he finds with his Father at his returning, ver: 20, to 25: 4. The
carriage and deportment of his Elder Brother, with the circumstances depending,
ver: 25 to the end: I shall endeavor (as God shall assist) to speak to each of
these severally and in order.

The Introduction you have in ver: 11: in which we have the persons and
relations used in the Parable intimated, viz: A Father and his two Sons:
Interpreters variously assign the intent or meaning of these persons: That God
himself is here represented under the title of a Father, is without any just
reason of being doubted; for although spiritual Adoption is not here aimed at,
(nor, possibly, is there any respect had to the visible and external relation
of men to the visible Church, which is a sort of outward Adoption, Romans 9.4.)
yet herein our Savior intends to express the carriage of God toward men, by
that of a Father to his Children: and it is certain that God is in the
Scripture, with respect to his Creation and Providence, called the Father of
all Flesh. Some by the two Sons understand the Jews the Elder, and the Gentiles
the Younger: but I rather close with their judgment, who refer the Parable to
the present case and question: Doubtless Christ's design here is to lay matter
of conviction before these Jews, and to vindicate himself from their injurious
aspersions, of having undue commerce with Publicans and Sinners. By the Elder
Son then is intended these Scribes and Pharisees, those strict Orders of the
Jews, that made a show of zeal and rigid austerity in legal performances, and
so counted themselves the deserving Heirs and Inheritors of the promises: and
by the younger is intended Publicans and Sinners, who seemed to be excluded
from a right to this Inheritance, men that were self-condemned, and could
pretend to no such hopes. It is not my purpose or business to insist on these
things only let us by the way observe, That there is many a Man calls God
Father, who is yet either a profane sinner, or at least an hypocritical
Professor. The challenging of such a Relation, so built, will stand men in
little stead. If we will call God Father profitably, let us carry our selves as
becomes his Children: let not men boast of then Privileges, and for that count
themselves Elder Brethren, knowing that there may come those from the East and
West, the North and South, that shall sit down with Abraham, with Isaac, and
with Jacob in the Kingdom of God, when the Children of the Kingdom are shut
out: and on the other hand, it may encourage convicted sensible sinners, to
come humbly to God, and to wait upon him in hope; for those that so do are in
the most likely way to find him a Father to them.

But I proceed to the parts of the Parable.

Verse 12. And the younger of them said to his Father, Father give me the
portion of Goods that falls to me, and he divided unto them his Inheritance.

The first part describes to us the Prodigal's going away from his Father,
with the circumstances and events. We must not seek for mysteries in every
word: the general scope of it is to show us how far sin leads us from God,
how many provocations it has in it, and to what miseries and straits it
reduces us: and this is set forth by the pattern of a foolish ungrateful Son,
dealing most unworthily by a kind and indulgent Father; meriting by his
carriage to be rejected, and bringing of himself to all miserable exigencies by
his so doing. Of this part of the Parable we may briefly take this partition;
it consists of two parts, or holds out to us:

1. The folly of the younger Son.

2. The misery which ensued upon it.

1. His folly displayeth it self in two Particulars.

1. His unreasonable demand of his portion, to have it in his own hand and
dispose, ver. 12.

2. His improvident and wastful misimprovement of it, ver. 13.

1. His unreasonable demand; this is the first thing we have to take notice of
in the twelfth verse: in which description we may observe.

1. The person making this demand: the Younger Son.

2. The person of whom he makes this demand, his Father: He said to his Father,
Father:

3. The demand it self, Give me the Portion of Goods that falls to me.

4. The Fathers conceding act; And he divided unto them his Living.

1. Touching the person that makes this demand, he is called the younger Son;
whether the Opinion of some will hold, that would have him called the younger,
to note his folly and childishness, I cannot well see; though it be a
proverbial speech in some Nations, to call a giddy shallow witted person a
younger Brother, yet that it was so used among the Jews, I find not: the scope
of it may rather seem to be, that our Savior would here (to make way for the
illustration of Grace) represent this Son at all disadvantages, whereof this is
one. If a Father had no Son but one, he might have greater seeming reason to
bear more with him, and pass by many and great offenses, as having no other to
confer his love upon; and if he have more than one, the elder Son might promise
himself most of his Fathers patience and connivance, as looked upon under
greater advantages, and often carrying away the best portion, not of Goods
only, but of Affections also: but for a younger Son thus to abuse his Father,
this aggravates his fault; and for him after this to find favor, and obtain
acceptance when there was an elder Brother, this enhauncheth the kindness: and
may teach us thus much;

DOCT. That Gods Grace oftentimes obuseth the vilest and worst of men to make
it self known upon.
Such as men would least regard, God has many times the largest favor for:
Hence that of our Savior, Mat. 21.31. The Publicans and Harlots go into the
Kingdom of God before you: and here the Fathers special love is expressed to
the younger Son: all Jesse's elder Sons are refused by God, and David, the
youngest is appointed and anointed King: and many that are last are first.

Reas. For the exaltation of free Grace, and manifestation of the Sovereignty
of Gods good pleasure. Should God make application of his saving mercy, only to
men of a sober profession, and civil conversation, and such as are more
outwardly advantaged, me^ might begin to think, that there was some worth in
their persons, some merit in their civil carriage, some obligation on God by
their visible relation, to give them the Kingdom of Glory: but now when he
chooses such an one, here appears to be nothing of the creature to obscure his
Grace: this Peter acknowledged when he saw the Holy Ghost was given to the
Gentile Believers, Act.10.34,35. Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter
of persons, etc. and on this account is our Saviors doxology, or thankful
celebration of Gods Grace, Mat. 11. 25, 26.

USE. 1. To refute the Arminian Doctrine of something in us foreseen, as that
which directs the Counsels and purposes of God about our future good. How
contrary this is to the freeness of Gods Grace, and the ordinary way of his
dealing with the Children of men, is very obvious: let the pattern of this poor
Prodigal stand for ever to confront that Opinion: look upon him in all his
disadvantages; he had no law to pretend to the righteous observation of, and
make a plea from thence; he had no good works to enumerate, and challenge
acceptance for; he had no Covenant whence to pretend an interest in, and
heirship to the Kingdom: he was a younger Brother, a Prodigal, a riotous Liver,
and all that was evil.

USE 2. To encourage such poor Souls, who being under deep conviction, do find
nothing of advantage in themselves to rely upon, and are hereupon ready to say,
I have nothing to do with the Covenant, I am a poor abject, a Publican, etc.
why be assured, that you are for this never the further off from saving Grace,
nor ought you to be any thing the more discouraged from going to God: though
you are a younger Son and a Prodigal too, yet if you go to him in Faith and
Repentance, he will own thee for a Son, as the Father did such an one: be not
then daunted, or beat off with frights and fears, but venture into his
presence, he knows how, Where sin has abounded, to make Grace more than
abound. But I pass.

SERMON II.
2. TOuching the Party of whom he makes the demand, and title which he puts
upon him, Father, whiles he studies ingratitude and proud self-dependence, he
puts on a cloak of submission, he acknowledges his Father by his title,
although he is not willing to be at his dispose; Hence we may observe.

Doct. I. That the most wicked inventions are sometimes clothed with the
fairest pretenses.
Men are not content to dissemble one with another, but with God too. The name
Father, is a name of honor, and when the Son calls him Father, he makes a show
of acknowledging him in all that dignity, power, privilege which a Father has
of his Children: he comes mannerly, as if he would not grieve him, while yet he
is plotting his greatest disgrace, and how to carry himself most unworthily.

Reas. From the naturally remaining activity of Conscience which is in men, and
has in all some power, excepting such consciences as are cauterized. men have
something in them accusing or excusing, Romans 2.15. Whence it comes to pass,
that though the hearts and wills of fallen men readily close with and approve
of Wickedness, yet their natural shame, fear, self-condemnation makes them to
palliate and shadow it under self cheating and deceiving pretenses: thus they
hide their sin from themselves, and think they do so from God too.

USE. To Admonish us to look to our own hearts, and in special to beware to our
selves in our Prayers: we often seem to go fairly to God and call him Father,
to ask things of him which to us may seem rational: thus the younger Son
thought it but fair, that being (as he supposed) at age and discretion to
dispose of his own, he might without fault demand his Portion: we many times
ask these and those things in prayer mannerly in expression, but let us beware
lest for all that the wickedness of our hearts be in it: we ask gifts, but
possibly to be proud of, and get applause by, and not to serve God with them;
we ask comforts of this life, but not to encourage our cheerful serving of God
with them, but to spend them upon our Lusts; and when it is so, it is Gods
greatest love to deny us: Jam. 4.3.

DOCT. II. Wicked men are apt to challenge a special propriety in God.
The Prodigal accosts his Father with a title of nearest relation: the
degenerate and profane Jews, that had cast off the fear of God, yet must needs
challenge him to be their Father: Job. 8.41. We have one Father, even God.
Oftentimes there are none more confident then such; God is their God, they
profess him, own and acknowledge him.

Reas. 1. From the conviction which every natural man carries upon his mind of
his Absolute dependence upon God, and that he alone can make him happy or
miserable: for, although this be a truth which man by his sinful courses
practically contradicts, and a light which he is not unwilling to extinguish,
it is yet so riveted in the mind of man, that he cannot wholly evade it; it
sticks as close to him as his being; and hence it follows that though he
neither loves, nor cares for serving of God, yet he would maintain an hope,
which may uphold his spirits from sinking, though it be but a rotten hope.

Reas. 2. From the carnal confidence that is in the hearts of many ungodly men:
they are not willing to believe themselves such and so bad as they are, but
presume that they are as much as any in the favor of God: the Jews thought
themselves the Temple, though fallen into the depth of Apostasy, Jer. 7. 4. Men
build upon false Grounds, and place their trust in lying words; and suppose
that if they can but fairly dissemble with God, he must needs believe them.

USE This may put us upon it to try our hopes, and prove what it is that our
confidence is grounded upon: we say we call God Father, and if we would do so
rightly, Consider 1 Pet. 1.17. If ye call on the Father, -- pass the time of
your sojourning here in fear. It will little avail us to challenge him to be
our Father, if he refuses to own us as his Children: and let us be assured,
that if we do not bear his image, we shall notwithstanding all our pretenses be
looked upon as Bastards and not Sons: it is not verbal calling of God our
Father, but a careful doing the will of our Heavenly Father, that will render
us blessed.

3. We come to consider the demand it self: Give me the portion of Goods that
falls to me. This I call his unreasonable demand: for though at first blush
it may look as if it were rational, he asks but his Portion, his Share, that
which falls to him by the right of Sonship, and (...) says give, seeming (...)
acknowledge his Fathers power, and that it is his bounty which he depends upon:
although the word [Give] does not always intimate a free favor, but sometimes
a delivering of a thing out of our hands to another, which is his by right: but
the unreasonableness of the demand appears in these things.

1. The positiveness of it: Though he calls him Father, yet he asks in a way of
challenge, as though his father had stood obliged to do it upon his asking; as
though the Estate were his during his fathers life: he does not beg, but as it
were command.

2. His asking is under the notion or consideration of an interest in it, he
callsit therefore the Portion falling to him: the word (...) signifies, quod
contingi^, that which befell him of it self, q. d. that which providence has
made mine, as if he were not beholen to his fathers courtesy; yea, as if it
would have been an injury in his father to have denied him.

3. His discontent in being at his fathers disposal and providing, and desire
to be at his own pleasure: he seeks to shake off the yoke of his fathers
Government, will be ordered by him no longer, and proudly thinks himself wiser
than he; he can order things better for his own benefit than his father has
done: The substance is, he would be from under command, and have all in his own
hands.

4. In stead of relieving his father in his old age, he would not only leave
him, but leave him as poor and bare as he can, would ^ake and scrape all from
him that he can come at, but do him no service at all. What our Savior alludes
to by this portion is the main enquiry. Some there be who referr it to all that
furniture of Grace which God bestowed upon man when he created him: but this
interpretation cannot suit to the state of Publicans and sinners, which is here
alluded to, though we had all in Adam, and bear the woeful punishment of his
loss. I rather judge it to aim at all that which God* bestows upon natural
men, to some of whom he gives more, and to some less: It may include all God's
common favors, all but saving Grace; whatsoever it is that does providentially
fall to their share, in God's sovereign distribution, as Wit, understanding,
good natural dispositions, and all the comforts of this life, as health,
strength, wealth, honor, etc. For such things as these is God pleased to make
the portion of unregenerate men in this life, Psalm. 17 14: The men of the World
which have their Portion in this life. See how large it sometimes is, Job 21.
begin. Psalm. 73. begin.

Hence then we may observe.

DOCT. I. That all the common gifts and graces, and worldly favors which men
enjoy in this life, are the gifts of God.
The son, however otherwise wicked, yet in this did express that which was
true, by acknowledging that his father had his portion in his hand, and at his
dispose, and that by a power of sovereignty, although he did not acknowledge
the justice of it, as will be seen in the next Doctrine. And truly nature it
self teaches this lesson, and the providence of God in the arbitrary and
unaccountable disposal of these things, evidently affirms it; so that a man
must first blot out the remains of the Law of nature, and put out the eyes of
his experience before he can deny it. It is God who gives to men all their
natural faculties, and the power of them, he makes not only the eye, but the
seeing eye: Men's understandings and affections, wits and wills, parts and
dispositions, and all the benefits and blessings that in this world they are
accommodated withal, are the proper fruits of God's bounty to the Children of
men. They are God's gifts in several respects.

1. They have their Original from his power and goodness: God formed the eye,
he planted the ear, etc. Psalm. 94. 9: God was under no natural obligation to
the creature, he owed him not so much as his being, nor any either internal or
external ornament of it; he stood no more engaged to give Wisdom to the
wiseman, than he did to the fool: Nabal had as much right, and as good a claim
to counsel and understanding as Achitophel, etc. Whatever men have they had it
of him, and it was his bounty that bestowed it; it is he that gives life,
breath, and being to all; and he gives it as he will: He gives men their Songs
in the night, i.e. their conveniences and comforts, and he teaches them more
than the beasts of the field, though they practically forget, or do not regard
whence all this comes, as Elibu complains, Job 25. 10, 11.

2. They are preserved and upheld in being by him: It is he alone who maintains
that which he had before conferred upon us: He keeps our soul in life, eye from
tears, foot from sliding, Psalm. 116. 8. He is called the preserver of men, Job
7. 20. Men's wits, abilities, powers, comforts and delights last no longer than
he. sees meet to maintain them, it is his hand underneath that keeps them up
from sinking, and when he plucks it away, they die and perish, nor can they draw
breath one moment longer than his susteining providence supports them, Psalm.
104. 29. Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled, thou take away their
breath, they die.

3. The power of improving or making use of any of them is from him: Observable
is that passage of the wisemans, Pro. 20. 12. The hearear, and the seeing eye,
the Lord has made even both of them. Both the faculty and operation wholly
depends upon him; we not only live, but move also in him: If he at any time
suspend his concourse, that very suspense gives sufficient check to our
operations, Pro. 16. 1: The preparations of the heart, and the answer of the
tongue is from the Lord. A man may have a great estate, but without him a man
has no power to make use of, or take any comfort in it, Eccl. 6.2:

4. God is by no natural necessity bound to give or continue these favors to
the Children of men: Whatsoever he does upon this score is mere bounty; though
men may call it the portion of goods that belongs to them, and seem to
challenge it as due debt, yet God might, had he so seen meet, have given it all
away from them, and done them no wrong: He cannot owe the creature any thing,
except he voluntarily become a debtor by free promise, which puts upon the
thing promised the proper quality of a gift.

5. And he either withholds or takes them away according to his Sovereign
pleasure; yea, and bestows them too in what degree he sees meet, without being
accountable unto us: Hence proceeds the various distribution of these gifts and
favors of God: One is born a natural, another with excellent endowments; one
is rich, powerful, highly honored, another poor, ignoble and despised; yea,
and the same men are now up and then down; Job in the morning the most opulent
and flourishing of the East, at night, poor to a Proverb: Yea, and we can give
no reason of the distribution, wicked Dives is rich, and abounds in all worldly
delights; honest Lazarus, is a beggar and full of sores; and if a reason of all
this be demanded, Solomon will give us the answer, Eccles. 9.11. yea, and our
Savior Christ in Job. 9.3.

USE, 1. This affords us a wholesome caveat, that none of us pride our selves in
our inward or outward, natural or moral endowments; these are not things to be
gloried in, Jer. 9.23. Remember you purchased them not to your selves, you have
nothing but what you received: Are you tempted to despise others? Reflect and
think who it is that has made you to differ: Have you excellent wits and
parts? Remember that it was of God that you and the veriest fools did not
exchange places: Have you wealth? Had God seen meet, this might have been the
beggars portion, and his yours; God made both; it is Solomon's note: Pro. 22. 2.
And if once you come to pride your selves in these things, God can blast them
in a moment, and put a disgrace upon your glory: Be not high minded, but fear.

USE, 2. Here see what great reason there is why we should improve all that we
have and are to the glory of God: as also the greatness of their sin that
misuse them to his dishonor. Be we then exhorted to beware to ourselves what
improvement we make of them. It was a convincing reproof which God gave unto
them, Hos, 2. 8,9. She did not know that I gave her Corn, etc. I will therefore
return and take away my Corn, etc. God claims all the common gifts which you
have received, as his; he says it is my corn, my flax, he counts your
knowledge, your good natural dispositions, your wealth, your power, to be his,
and expects that you use them for him; and if you shall do otherwise, he will
let you know of it, and it will be a sad reckoning that he will call you unto.
God's goodness leads men to Repentance, Romans 2. 4. And withal know that God
designs his own Glory by whatever he does and if you do not so do too in your
improvement of all, he will in a judicial way recover it at your hands, and get
himself a great name upon you: God will not be a loser by any of his Creatures:
Let this humble and awaken such as have a more liberal portion than others,
considering that where much is given, much is expected.

DOCT. II. Sinful man counts all those natural and acquired favors which God
bestows upon him, to be his own, and would have them at his own dispose.
There are two assertions contained in this Doctrine.

1. He reckons upon them to be his own: the Son claims a Portion as due to him,
he pretends such a right thereto as by the rule of equity he may challenge, and
though upon Sovereignty he may withhold it, yet he deems it injustice if he
deny him: Thus, whatsoever God is pleased to do for sinful men, they are so far
from acknowledging his immerited beneficence therein, that they account it a
debt. I know there is something Connexively or Hypothetically belongs to the
Creature, but still the whole depends upon God's good pleasure. If God will
have such a Creature, serve to such an end, there must be a capacity and
sutableness put in to it unto this service and end, else it can never reach it,
but all this is only Hypothetical, for God properly ows to the creature neither
its being nor its end: and yet vain man thinks he holds all in capite, that he
is a natural and rightful heir to all the Wit, Wisdom, Wealth, etc. that he
has. Thus Nebuchadnazzar, boasts of his Babylon, he made it, and for his
glory, Dan. 4.30. and thus they, Psalm. 12. 4. Our lips are our own, who is Lord
over us? Reason for this there is none, for if men knew themselves, or would
eye the work of Creation and Providence, they would find full conviction of
their low and depending estate, and deep obligations unto God for
distinguishing undeserved favors: But the Reason of it is from the pride which
is in the heart of man, and has been there ever since he aspired to be as God,
whence he does not willingly acknowledge any subordination or dependence; and
is so far from owning of that condition which Creation placed him in, viz. of
a subordinate depending Creature, that he counts himself a Lord, and beholden
to none, much less then will he yield the merit of that miserable state which
sin has reduced him unto, in which all the subordinate Covenant-right,
whatever it was which before the fatal Apostasy he had, is forfeited. And that
men do thus account of these things appears in this one invincible
Demonstration; viz. That as they do not thank God for these things, so neither
do they aim higher than at themselves in the improvement of them. Have natural
men Wit, Wealth, etc. they seek their own glory and not God's: Thus did Herod,
Act. 12. 21. Hence they ascribe all to themselves, Hab. 1. 16. They sacrifice
to their net* and burn incense to their drag.

USE. To convince and reprove this folly in the Children of men: Are these
things your own? how came you by them? what did they cost you? whence had you
to pay for them? did you put them into, or procure them for your selves? who
was it that taught you more than the beasts of the field, you your selves, or
God? what did that little piece of common Mass or matter merit of God to be
made into a man, and not a bruit? have you anything which God did not bestow
upon you? and what obligation had you laid upon him to do it? wherein stood he
more engaged to you than to others? can you keep them as long as you please? or
can you entaile them upon your posterity? nay, can you say they shall be yours
the next hour? if you can do none of all this, why then do you boast and pride
our selves in these things? be assured if you are grown too proud to confess
them to be God's it is the ready way not to have them long yours: If
Nebuchadnazzar will not give God the honor of making him a man, he can soon
let him know how easily he can change him into a beast.

2. He would fain have all these favors at his own dispose: He is not content
unless he may have them in his own hands; like a child, who, when he begins to
grow up to years, presently grows weary of Family Government, and cannot bear
to be limited or controlled in any thing by his Parents, but must have his
Estate given him, and set up for himself: This truth is evident by the lives of
men; For,

1. They are not content to be restrained and directed by the Laws of God, in
the improvement of these gifts; the bounds of the precepts are too narrow for
them, they must walk at large; tell them of the Command, they regard it not,
and their lives say as they did with their tongues, Jer. 44.16. As for the word
which thou have ^poken to us in the Name of the Lord we will not hearken unto
thee.

2. Men do not manage themselves in the use of these things to the advancement
of the honor and glory of God in the world: They do not serve God with their
gifts, and estates, but serve diverse lusts; they make panders of them for their
corruptions: Great Wits are usually loose and licentious, great Estates are
men's security to sin against God with the more boldness: It is a rare thing to
see men that have the greatest visible advantages for it, to be very zealous
for God-

Reas. 1. From the rebellion of the nature of fallen man: Man in his Apostasy
shook off the yoke of obedience, and cannot endure to take it on him again:
Ephraim professes himself as an untamed heifer, that, not being accostumed to,
knew not how to stoop under the yoke, Jer. 31. 18. Man is therefore said to be
born as the wild Ass-colt, Job 11. 12. which never keeps in the enclosures, but
has the Wilderness for his range: Man's heart is become rebellious, and filled
with a principle of enmity against, which makes him hate subjection to the law
of God, Romans 8. 7:

Reas. 2. From the mistaken opinion which he has taken up of liberty. Liberty
is, if truly known, a most desirable good, and a great part of a Believers
happiness, but the heart of sinful man has foolishly put that glorious title
upon the worst of licentiousness, and hereupon he accounts himself to be under
intolerable restraint, so long as he may not take his swindge in the world: and
hence he esteems the law to be no better than a prison, which is indeed a
perfect law of liberty.

Reason. 3. For Man's fond apprehension of of his own wisdom, Job 11. 12. Vain
man would be wise. Every natural man is fondly opinionated of his own
discretion, though he is indeed a mere fool and Child, yet he thinks he knows
better than his Lord and Master: Gods Laws are not suited with men's carnal
principles; they apprehend they see a great deal of weakness in them, and
needless hazards in obeying of them; they are impolitick, and they can
prescribe to themselves a better way to attain their ends than that which God
has laid out.

USE, 1. We see here the reason why men of large parts and abilities use them
so little to the glory of God, the most part of such men improve their wit to
invent sin, and find out vain, carnal, and fleshly devices, and worldly
stratagems to advance their own by-ends: others use their estates to feed and
humor their lusts, to pamper their pride, voluptuousness, or covetous humors:
the reason of all this is, because man being turned away from God, and fallen
upon other objects, is not willing to be ruled by God: Had men been free to
have lived like Children, and kept their own place, God would have taught them
to have better improved his gift. By this therefore you may discover a natural
man, he is like a young novice, that is broken away from Family Government, with
his reins on his neck, and lives like one that has none to rule him.

USE, 2. To admonish us that we beware of giving way to this inclination: Our
nature is prone to it, and we have therefore reason to be the more watchful
against it* and there are two things which if well weighed, will be helpful
here:

1. That we cannot of our selves order any thing well, Jer. 10.13. I knew that
the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks, to direct his
steps. Man ever, when left to himself, proves himself but a fool; he is like a
poor young Child, who, if he be not carefully watched by his vigilant Parents,
will run himself into every mischief that is before him.

2. That except God guide and rule us, we shall but provoke him, and, the more
he lends us of his favors, the more exorbitances we shall run into, and
thereby make our account the greater and more dreadful; let every one then
receive this conviction, and be there upon awakened to go to God and submit to
him, entreating him to take us under his watch, care and rule; then only are we
safe when he undertakes to manage us by his fatherly counsel.

SERMON III.
4. WE are in the next place to consider of the Fathers conceding act, or
yielding unto the unreasonable demand of his Son; in these words, And he
divided unto them his living. To argue from hence that there is a Portion due
from God to any men, is a straining the Parable beyond our Saviors meaning:
This action of the Father is brought in here, only to express and signify to
us, Gods bounty, that by comparing of it, we may thereby be better advantaged
to discover the greatness of man's impiety, and withal to give us to see and
consider, how far the Providence of God can, without deserving any just
imputation, indulge wicked men, and forward them in their sinful ways. Hence,

DOCT. God sometime grants wicked men large Portions of common favors, and
lea^vs them to use them at their own pleasure, without control.
He gives them their Portion, and lets them go and do what they will with it:
gratifies their sinful desires by giving them what they would have, and leaving
them to take such courses in the improveing thereof, as their own cursed
inclination leads them to. In the Explication of this truth, we may consider.
1. The evidence that it is so. 2. Answer some doubts about it. 3. Give the
reasons of the Doctrine.

1. For the evidencing of the truth we may Consider.

1. That all the affairs of the world are ordered and disposed of by Divine
Providence. Whatsoever any of the Children of men have or enjoy, it is of God.
The universal extent of the Providence of God to all affairs, and things in the
world, is a principle whereof there is no liberty for any man to make a
question, the denial whereof, even in the sound judgment of Mere Ethnicks was
branded with the deserved note of Atheism: and the confirmation of this truth
is fully establisted in Scripture, assigning to all Creatures an absolute
dependence upon the disposal hereof: See Psalm. 145. 15,16. The eyes all wait
upon thee etc. and in many other places.

2. That in the course of this Providence many wicked men enjoy all favors in
abundance. This is so notorious a truth, that the so frequent, and almost
constant observation of it; has sometimes dazzled the weak eyes of the People
of God, and put them to a demurre in their thoughts. In Job's time it was not a
thing so obscure as his friends would have made of it; hence Job in his own
vindication amply describes it, Job 21. begin. David or Asaph, gives no less a
pathetical description of it, and his own imbecility in those offenses which
he had taken at the observation of it, Psalm. 73. begin, Jeremiah also seems to
be in some suspense about it, Chap. 12. 1. What power, honor, and and dominion
had Nebuchadnezzer conferred upon him? What an oracle of Wit and Policy for his
time was Acbitophel? What eloquent curious language had Herod and Tertullus;
yea, and we may still observe men to be fullest fraught with these common
favors, who neither glorify God, nor have any desire to glorify him
therewithal.

3. That these men are left of God to use these, or rather abuse them, at their
sinful pleasure, is evident in those diverse ways wherein he so leaves them.
For though it is true that God does restrain wicked men unto such limits as he
sees meet even such as shall make all serviceable to his Glory at last, yet
they are in very high measures given up by God; For,

1. That they do abuse them is manifest, by the evil improvement which they
make of them: Observe but what course men of greatest advantages do usually
steer in this world; does not all drive at the advancing of the interest of
Satan's Kingdom, and not of Christ's? And how few great men improve their power
for his Glory? the most do it for his dishonor; hear the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.
16. Not many wisemen after the flesh, not many mighty, etc. These carnal things
for the most part serve but to strengthen the enmity of the heart against God;
poor, weak, and base things are they which for the most part follow Christ:

2. Gods leaving them thus to do discovers it self in three things.

1. His withholding his spirit, and not affording to them his renewing or
assisting Grace, without which no man can improve any thing to the Glory of
God. When God does not give a man an heart to be for him, he thereby leaves him
to himself, and it is a Judgment; Moses bewails it, Deuteronomy. 29 4. The Lord has
not given you an heart to perceive, etc. And there needs no more but this
suspension, the consequent upon which is for men to go in the ways of their
own heart, and sight of their eyes: When God intends that a People shall go in
his ways, he promises them his Spirit, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my spirit into
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes. The spirit of God is the inward
guide of the Children of God, they that are deserted by him, are consequently
given up to their own guidance.

2. His laying no outward check or restraint upon them to hinder them, or stop
their course. When God would no longer leave Israel to himself, he hedgeth up
his way with thorns, that he shall not find the way to come at his lusts and
lovers, Hos. 2: 6,7: But when (...) men have a large range, liberty and
opportunity, when he afflicts them not, but they prosper and have all at will,
and there is no outward control, this is a leaving men: thus God did to
Ephraim, Hos. 4.7. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone:

3. His turning of these favors into snares and provocations of their lusts,
(...) allure and draw them after them: There are many lusts in the heart of man
and these outward mercies are suitable matter for them to work upon: and when
God lets it be so; yea, judicially orders it to be so; when he gives them their
table to be a snare, their wealth a snare, their health and strength a snare,
their wit and knowledge a snare; when pride, profaneness, and sensuality are
promoved and nourished by these things, then God gives men up to their own
hearts lust, and lets them walk on in their own ways, Psalm. 81. 12. He puts
their Portion into their own hand, and lets them go whither they will, and do
what they please with it.

2. To answer some doubts which may here arise;

1. Whether this does not cast imputation upon Gods Holiness, in giving men his
favors, and leaving them to themselves, when he knows they will both abuse
them, and dishonor him by their so doing; whereas his Holiness engages him to
seek his own Glory in all his works of Providence?

Ans. That God will be no loser of his Glory by any of his Creatures, in any of
his works which he does to or for them, is a truth not to be questioned; but
the ways in which he will be a saver, and no loser, are to be commended to the
management of his own infinite wisdom, which doubtless will not fail in the
execution, and though he may for a while seem to be on the losing hand, whiles
men are running on the score with him, and meditating nothing of payment; yet
if we can let God alone till his day and time of reckoning with men, he will
then make it to appear that he will be glorified in all the Pharaoh's and
wicked men of this world, whom he has raised up, and suffered at present to
abuse his manifold mercies to their own ruin; and were it not that God knows
how to get his pennyworths out of them, he would never credit them so far as he
does: God will be glorified in Zidon, as well as in Zion.

2. But God seems by this to be an encourager of wickedness, and promoter of
man's vile designs: Is not this to put a Sword in a madmans hand, that he may
destroy himself therewithal? And if God hates sin, why would he thus give men
advantage to sin against him?

Ans. The wisdom of God in ordering of althings according to his own counsels,
is not for us mortals to call in question: God has other Attributes besides
his Justice to make known, and they are his bounty, patience, goodness, long
sufferance; and this he can do upon the vessels of wrath, and thereby makes way
for the glorious manifestation of his Justice upon them that are not led to
repentance by: but abuse his goodness, Romans 2. 4, 5. Neither does God by this
encourage sin, since by his holy Law (which is man's rule, and a discovery of
his righteous Judgment) he strictly forbids, and severely denounces
threatenings against all sin: Neither is God's bounty the moral cause of
promoting of sin, but has argument in it to p^omptmen to holiness and
obedience; but it is man's corrupt heart abusing it to such ends; whereas an
holy heart is encouraged by all God's benefits to study his Glory and praise,
Psalm. 116. 12. And yet God may righteously leave man to follow his own wicked
heart, and so to misimprove all his beneficence to his own just condemnation;
yea, he may raise up Pharaoh to that very end, Exodus 9. 16. But I come to the
Reasons of the Doctrine, which will serve further to clear the truth from
imputation; and they are taken from the ends which God designs in thus doing;
which though they are at present secret in regard of the individual persons who
are thus left, till God of his Providence shall be pleased to make more full
and clear discovery of them, yet in themselves they are always one of these
two, for all Gods dealings with mankind do ultimately center in the one or the
other viz. either.

1. That thus way may be made for the more illustrious manifestation of
revenging Justice, in the destruction of sinners: They are thus made vessels of
wrath f^^ted to destruction, Romans 9.22. Where much is given, there is much
expected: The more that men have abused, the more wrath awaits them: Doubtless
a man of great parts and understanding, has more to account with God for than
a fool, the rich and wealthy man, then the poor, a Magistrate, or a Minister,
then a private Man: The more advantage Men have put into their hands to serve
God withal, the more they have to answer for, you may see what endictments God
draws up against Babylen, Isa. 14. Tyrus, Ezekiel: 27. which had the advantage of
other Nations, of worldly pomp and wisdom: For such God has wonderful plagues:
This patience, and goodness, as they are largely displayed before such at the
present, so they, by men's abusing of them, open a way for the more notable
executions of Justice.

2. That he may prepare a way to make his Grace notably appear to be Grace, the
truth is, Gods ways are very mysterious, and past man's finding out; and
oftentimes, when we may have reason justly to fear, that such a sinner is
mounted on Horseback, to run the swifter to his own utter ruin, yet even then
God has gracious designs in all this: God sometimes allows a sinner a long
Tender, and lets him run to the end of it, and then pulls him back: God suffers
him to lay a scene for his own ruin, and then displayes his riches of his
grace in saving him from it, when he has used all possible means utterly to
have undone himself: Manasseth in the old, and Paul in the New Testament stand
for eminent examples of this, and the latter of these speaks thus of it, ^ Tim.
1. 13, 14. Who was before a blasphemer. etc. But I obtained mercy, etc. and the
grace of our Lord Jesus was exceeding abundant, etc.

USE, 1. To teach us not too much to bless our selves in our enjoyment of
outward favors. God's love is not from hence to be positively concluded: It is
the wise man's observation, Eccl. 9. begin. No man knows love or batred by all
that is before him. And yet there is nothing more common than for men to be be
proud and self conceited in these things whereas they are indeed nothing else
but some of the offals of God's favors, which he can spare to the swine of the
world, and often throws out to them in a plentiful measure: Things common to
the Elect and Reprobate are not just matter of boasting; if you have all these
blessings, and are wicked in the enjoyment of them, you are not happy but
miserable in that enjoyment.

USE, 2. It may also teach us not to grudge at, or envy wicked men, for their
great parts, and large estates, or whatever other worldly blessings they enjoy
in a more liberal measure than other men: and the more we ought to beware of
this, inasmuch as good men have sometimes been prone to be envious at these
things, Psalm. 73. begin. Yea, the Prophet had a mind to have impleaded God
about it, Jer. 12. 1. If God leave them to themselves they will but abuse and
foolishly squander them away, and then you know; the more Talents any have
received, the more are to be reckoned for; and if he fared so ill that did but
hide his one in a napkin, what account shall he be called to that squanders
many away upon his lust, and dishonours God with them? It would have been
better for such men if they had been the veryest fools, and the most obscure
persons in the world: And as you have less of these things, so you have the
less to reckon for; besides, this will not hinder your happiness in the end,
but if you have the grace to be faithful in a little, you shall surely enter
into your Lords joy.

USE, 3. It may afford encouragement not to despare of unregenerate men,
although they may at present be left to themselves, and wickedly to abuse all
God's favors which they enjoy: God knows how to take them in their months: The
poor Prodigal, left to himself, went for, but yet he returns at last, and is
graciously welcomed by his Father: If men are bad at present, it does not hence
necessarily follow that they shall never be good: Hence be not put out of
heart, do not think your prayers and tears are thrown away, which are laid out
for their conversion; yea, but be the more earnest, by how much you see that
they may be more serviceable to the glory of God than many others; how much
their rich parts, abilities, advantages would bring into the Treasury of the
Temple, if God should be pleased to convert them.

USE, 4. It may counsel us all to beware how we desire to be at our own will
and dispose; to be left to our selves, to have our own portion in our own hand:
God may grant such unreasonable desires, but if he do, we shall smart for it:
Know therefore that every Child of Adam left to himself, will prove a Prodigal:
If we are not willing to be under the direction of Gods Law, and conduct of his
spirit, he may righteously leave us, and then we shall certainly do as this
younger Son did, which is the next thing we are to enquire into.

Verse. 13. And not many days after, the younger Son gathered all together, and
took his journey into a far Country, and there wasted his substance with
riotous living.

In which words is described to us the second point of his folly, appearing in
his improvident and wastful missimprovment of his Portion; and this discovers
it self in two things. 1. His getting as far as he could, with his Portion,
from his fathers care and inspection. 2. His improvident and foolish expense of
his Estate there, where he was out of sight as he hoped.

1. We are to observe his getting as far away, with his portion, as he could,
from his fathers care and oversight, in which there are three things
observable. 1. The have that he makes expressed in these words, not many days
after. 2. that he takes all with him: He gathered all together. 3. The place
whither he carried it, into a far Country. I begin with the first.

1. The have that he makes, as soon as he has gotten his Portion, now he will
be gone; he gets as much as he can out of his father, and when he can expect no
more, now he leaves him, makes all speed to be gone, not many days after.

DOCT. Natural men will serve God no longer than may answer their own carnal
ends.
Religion is to an unregenerate man nothing but a pander to his lusts: As long
as men hope they can get any thing to further their worldly interest, they can
be (with Jehu) zealous for God: Jehu could destroy Ahab's wicked house, and
plead prescription from God for so doing, as though he was afraid to come a
whit short of the command and threatening: but now when he has what he would,
all the competitours for the Crown are by this means removed out of the way,
now he grows cold in Religion at once, and Gods precepts neglected, a further
reformation refused, Jeroboam's politic sin adhered to: and if we observe, we
shall find that many there are who for by-ends make fair pretenses, and are
huge sticklers for God and his ways for a while, who, when once they have
gotten some worldly advantage or advancements by it, of a sudden they become
other men.

Reas. Because the most Religious natural men have chosen the service of God,
not as their end, but only as a medium to attain some other end by: Now a mean
is useful but in order to the end for which it is used, but the end is good for
it self: Religion was appointed to be man's end, who was designed by the will of
God, for his Glory: But carnal men have gotten some other end, which they think
better than that which God has appointed them, and finding (many times) that
Religion is a needful step thereunto, they use it as a man does a Ladder to
climb upon, but when they are gotten up it is now of no more service to them,
and now Religion is as easily thrown off again as ever it was taken up: It was
an imputation which Satan would have cast upon Job, but the event proved it
evidently a slander, after he had been upon the greatest trial, that he did not
serve God for naught but it will be found a truth concerning multitudes of our
outside Professors: There were many of Christ's followers, that were so for
nothing but the loaves, Job. 6. 26.

USE, 1. This may discover to us a Reason of the Apostasy of many in these
times and places. It is not to be doubted, but that here where Religion has
had the precedence, and men have been esteemed of according to the Profession
which they have made, that may have taken it up clearly upon this account, viz.
to get into credit, favor, privilege, preferment, and hence no wonder, if
either when men have been frustrated of what they expected, or have gotten as
much as they can probably hope to get by it, it grows an out-dated and useless
thing with them: This is an hour of trial, and he that can maintain his
Profession, when to all appearance of sense, it is a losing bargain, gives us
reason to hope that that man is built upon a more stable foundation.

USE, 2. It may put us upon it to take a strickt account and trial of our
profession, to see what foundation it is built upon: If it be Sandy, a shock of
temptation will overthrow it: If it be for by and carnal ends, those ends,
either hoplesly disappointed, or obtained as far as we can hope, will turn us
off it: Such a Profession is dead indeed, and moves only by external weights;
and if they be either taken off, or run down to the ground, it will cease. The
Vitals of Religion consist only (...) heart thoroughly persuaded of the glorious
(...) of the waves and fear of God, and this (...) that which will hold out to
the end; whereas the other will last but till men have tried to the outside how
much they can get to satisfy their lusts with, by professing God and his
Service, and when their expectations on that score cease, it will not be many
days ere we hear of them, that they have trussed up all, and are gone: see
then to the foundation upon which you are built, if ever you hope to stand.

SERMON IV.
2. HE takes all with him; He gathered all together; He leaves nothing behind
him: What this all is, we have already heard, viz. All the outward blessing,
favors, privileges which God bestows upon the Children of men, be it more or
less. Hence,

DOCT. Sinful Man left to himself, denies God the glory of all his goodness.
Let God bestow upon him whatever he pleases, for him never so much, yet he
takes it not as any engagement upon him to serve God, or glorify him, but
dishonors him with all: This was the sin which the Prop^^^ said to the
charge of that wicked King, Dan. 5. 23. The God in whose hand thy breath is,
and whose are all thy ways, thou have not glorified. And this P aul declares
to be the guize of men who are strangers from the grace of God, Romans 2. 4, 5.
The evidence and ground of this truth will appear if we lay together these
particulars.

1. The heart of every natural man is estranged from God: they are born so,
Psalm. 53. 3. They go astray as soon as they be born: there is an estrangement
in the understanding, they know him not, though God be near them, they see him
not; though he does all for them, they do not observe, it, Hos. 2. 8. She did
not know I gave her Corn, etc. There is an estrangement in the Will, they care
not for God, they are his enemies; yea, enmity it self against him, Romans 8.7.
They are estranged in their affections, hence they are called haters of God,
Romans 1 30. Now by virtue of this estrangedness, they are wholly indisposed, and
utterly averse to the fear and service of God.

2. There are many lusts in the heart of every unregenerate man to which he is
enslaved; man, by seeking an unbounded liberty, has; changed one good Lord,
for many tyrannical ones, that have usurped the Dominion over his soul, Tit. 3.
3. Serving diverse lust and pleasures: The word intimates one that is addicted
unto, or wholly at the devotion of another, and is used to express our serving
of God: Men's lusts rule them, their work and business is to gratify them, and
it is not one single lust, but there are many of them, and he is at the command
of them all; each claims an empire over the soul, and sets him on work to make
provision for it, there is the lust of the flesh, or carnal concupiscence, the
lust of the eye, or covetousness, the pride of the life, or ambition, these
must all be obeyed.

3. The lusts of an unregenerate man are insatiable: Like the horse-leeches two
daughters, or like the barren womb, they never say they have enough, or like
the grave, which is still gaping after more, hence so compared, Romans 3. 13.
Their throat is an open Sepulcher. all concupiscence labors of a dropsy, the
more it has, the more it craves. When a man has done his utmost to make
provision for, he can never give content to his carnal desire, Pro. 27.20. And
there is great reason for it, because concupiscence has diverted the heart of
man from the only soul-satisfying object, to empty things.

4. The outward favors which God bestows upon men are the proper objects
upon which their lusts are placed, and from which they seek their satisfaction.
Every carnal heart has (with Demas) embraced the present world: When man left
God he went to the Creature, and what God had provided to express his bounty to
him in, that has he abused to serve his lust withal: It is the world and the
things of the world that his heart is in love with, which is opposite to the
love of the father, I. Joh. 2. 15. God ha^h in just judgment set the world in
men's hearts, for that they know no other good, nor seek any other content; not
God himself, but his common favors are their portion, whether natural
endowments, or occasional blessings.

5. The natural man can spare nothing of these from his lusts: The truth is,
all is too little; every thing is lost that does not feed some lust or other:
every lust is like Nabal, only generous and noble to it self, but churlish to
David: It may be said of every lust, as was said of great Alexander. Unus
Pellaeo juveni non sufficit orbis. Hence then it is no wonder if so many lusts
think themselves straightened; the natural man is bound to please all his lusts,
and there is not enough in a whole world to give them content, and then it is
not to be thought strange, if he cannot spare any thing in the world from them.

6. The serving of God and serving a man's lusts are things directly contrary
the one to the other; and hence a man cannot do them both. That man who seeks
his own glory, cannot seek the Glory of God; they that mind their own things,
cannot mind the things which are of God: And this is the very reason why men
can allow God nothing of glory at all, because they think they shall then wrong
themselves, dissatisfie their own lusts: If men should sincerely improve their
wit and parts for God, they should then lose their own commendations from men;
if they should lay out their health, and strength, and power, and wealth for
God, their lusts would want it: and, it being so that they are full resolved in
it to deny their concupiscence nothing, hence they gather all together, and
leave nothing behind, and resolve that they will not part with so much as an
hoof for God and his service.

USE. 1. Hence we see one great reason of the vanity of the creature: The
Apostle tells us, It is subjected not willingly, but by reason of him who has
subjected it in hope, Romans 8. 20. The reason of it lies here, sinful man has
gotten it into his hands, God has providentially given him a Portion of these
things, and he through the vanity of his mind, having it at his own dispose,
has carried it away from God, and diverted it from its native and proper use,
which was for the service of God, to his own wicked and sinister ends, by
virtue whereof it comes to be in vain. The creature has in its self its
usefulness, every creature of God has a natural capacity of being improved to
his glory, man might as well honor God with his wit and parts, and substance
as dishonor him; they are Talents which might be traded withal for him, but a
wicked heart having seduced him, he turns them into another stream, and so in
application they lose their end and become vain.

USE, 2. Here also see the reason why persons of greatest abilities and
advantages, are many times the most averse from doing any thing to the glory of
God: We often see it is so, and wonder whence it comes so to be, we think, oh,
what, and how much might such and such a man do for God, if he would but
propound it to himself as his business to live to him? but alas, as they have a
great portion of Gods blessings, so they have great lusts to gratify, and they
live at their devotion; hereupon, let God call for their service, let their
consciences tell them they wrong their own souls. Let the name and interest of
Christ call never so much for their assistance, lust countermands, sin that
reigns there will not have it to be so, and men have taken it up as a practical
resolution, that they will sooner displease God than their lusts.

USE. 3. Let this serve to convince unregenerate men of their great wickedness,
and show them what a dreadful account they will have to give in to God at the
great day: Consider of it solemnly, is it not enough for you to go away from
God your selves, but must you needs carry away the whole creation of Gods
goodness with you? Shall God gratify your desires in giving you a large
portion of his bounty, and can you not give him one hearty acknowledgment for
it all, but because he gives you in abundance, do you therefore say to the
Almighty depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways? Job 21.
14. Be convinced of folly and madness, and hence consider.

1. This is a most ungrateful requital of God; it is a most shameful abuse of
his goodness: he may well expostulate with you, as he did with them in, Deuteronomy.
32. 5. Do ye thus requite the Lord, Oh foolish people and unwise? Do ye not
know that goodness leads unto Repentance? Romans 2.4. And will you resist that
leading, and instead of it lead goodness into rebellion? cannot Jesurun wax
fat, but he must presently kick? out of doubt a merciful God is grievously
provoked by such things as these.

2. Do you not know that by thus doing you are laying up treasures of wrath for
your selves? And will not your account be fearful and tremendous, when the fuel
of that fire in which you shall burn eternally, shall be made of abused
goodness, and your torments shall bear proportion to the favors which you have
now enjoyed; when the creatures, which are now groaning under the pressure of
violently imposed vanity, shall come in as witnesses against you, and be
earnest pleaders that the wrong which you have done them may be righted upon
you? Be therefore awakened to see the vileness of your own hearts, bewail your
grievous folly, seek repentance and pardon, that you may be cleared of this
dreadful charge in the great day of account.

3. We come to consider of the place whither he carried his substance, into a
far country: i. e. to get as far out of his fathers sight, and care, and
counsel as he could: Hence observe this.

DOCT. The more God does for sinners, the further they seek to get away from
him.
The Prodigal could not be content to live by himself, near his father, where
he might have been advised and directed how to improve or husband his estate to
profit, but he goes inanother Country; yea, a far Country: Thus wicked men
(like Cain) go out of the presence of God; hence they are said to be far from
God, Psalm. 73. 27. The wickeds Apostasy is here compared to a journey, men go
step by step, they grow worse and worse, by abusing of all the goodness of God
afforded to them. In the explication we may consider, 1. What it is to go away
from God? 2. The evidence that sinners, especially prospering sinners so do,
and the reason of it.

1. What it is to go away from God?

Ans. There is an essential, and a providential Omnipresence of God, from which
no creature can withdraw it self, for in it we live, move, and have our being;
this presence fills heaven, earth and hell; it is the preservative of all
beings, it is the godly man's joy, and the wicked man's prison. Neither is this
going away from God a local motion, but a spiritual withdrawing. We may
therefore observe, that besides the general presence of Gods common and
universal Government of the world, by which he is intimately present with all
creatures, and besides that presence of special and powerful Government, by
which God leads all reasonable Creatures to an everlasting estate, and in which
he drives wicked men to their end, and gets Glory by them, there is also a
presence of special Grace, often pointed at in Scripture, by which God guids
and leads his own people by his Word and Spirit, in all their way affording
them counsel and support, and guiding them to Glory, inwardly by his spirit,
outwardly by his Ordinances, and Providence: Now when men refuse to be under
this conduct, and withdraw themselves from it, now it is that they do both say
unto God depart from us, and do also themselves depart away from God; and this
is done.

1. When men do all they can to put God out of their thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4.
absence is a great help to forgetfulness; But wicked men desire not to think of
God, or his Word, of his promises or threatenings: Men live without God in the
world, Ephesians. 2. 12. They live at such a rate as if there were no God to Judge or
call them to an account for their ways: There is a practical Atheism in the
heart of all natural men, Psalm. 14. 1. And they are gone far from God, having,
as much as they are able, shaken off the thoughts of his being, power,
holiness, Justice, etc.

2. When men indulge themselves in wickedness on presumption that God is a
great way off from them, they take it for granted that he intermedleth not with
their affairs, sees not, nor takes any notice of their ways and doings; they
may sin, and live according to their own pleasure, and God is not at all
concerned in it; such were they, Ezekiel. 8. 12. They say, the Lord sees us not,
the Lord has forsaken, the earth. Men would fain have it to be so, and as they
would have it, so they presume, and please themselves that it is so.

3. When men, by falsely interpreting of Gods patience and benignity, do presume
him to favor and approve of their wicked ways; so they argued, Psalm. 50. 21.
These things thou have done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtest I was
altogether such an one as thy self. Prospering iniquity is in their account,
Piety; sin unpunished, settles their resolutions, and fortifies them in their
courses, Eccl. 8.11. And what is this but to go far from God, when men make
such a God of him, that if he were ^o, he should cease to be God? Make him to
be one that loves your sin, and approves of your iniquity, and you do
manifestly deny the Godhead.

4. When men go on in evil ways adding sin to sin: all sin sets the creature
at a distance from the holy God; sin is of a separating nature, Isa. 59. 2^
Your sins have separated between you and your God. Every transgression is a
step from God, when men throw themselves into vain courses they are upon their
journey; and as they grow more bold in wicked ways, they get further off from
him: Sin is called a going a whoring from God, and what is that but a going
from the lawful husband, to the bed of a stranger? Apostate Judah is therefore
said to be gone far from God, Jer.2.^5:

5. When men put away from them the fear of God: this is the character of a
wicked man, Psalm. 36. 1. There is no fear of God before his eyes. This is
interpreted a forsaking of God, Jer. 2.19. God dwells in men's hearts by putting
his fear into them, when he causes them to delight in his ways, to love his
commands, and to be afraid of his Judgments: but when instead of this, they
thrust away his law, refuse to hearken to his counsel, and are not awed by his
Judgments, their will cannot submit to his, when conscience is stifled, or
lulled asleep, and men sin securely and without any dread, now they are gone
far from God.

2. For the evidence of the Doctrine that it is so, the Scripture is plain; it
is the very character of wicked men, as we heard, Psalm. 73.27 They that are far
from thee, shall perish. And that their prosperity emboldens them to it, the
Psalmist also ascertains us, Psalm. 55.19. Because they have no changes,
therefore they fear not God. And he that observes the boldness, security,
confidence, fearlesness, irreclaimableness of wicked men, especially if the
providence of God smiles upon them, will easily conclude these men are far from
God.

Reas. 1. From the natural rebellion and enmity of the heart of man against
God: Men hate God, they abhor his holiness, his Laws disrelish their carnal
aims and ends, cross and contradict their natural desires and concupiscences;
his promises savor not with them, his threatenings irritate and provoke them:
the sum is, proud and sinful man would be at the greatest possible freedom to
take his own course without any control; and knowing how contrary Gods
Government is to his wicked will, how opposite Gods grace is to his impiety,
hence he desires to be from under it: Men cannot so quietly and securely sin
whiles God is near them: The Prodigal knew that if he dwelt near his Father, he
must expect to be disturbed by wholesome counsels and admonitions, and that would
mar a great deal of his mi^th, he should not with so much liberty and content
follow his mad courses.

Reas. 2. From the natural tendency there is for the sinful heart of man to be
strengthened in this rebellion by outward prosperity: When men have their
Portion large and great, they hope they can now vye it with God: the Prodigal
had no more use or need of his father, now he had his Portion, and therefore as
long as that lasted he regarded not to come at him: If God speak to
back-slidden Judah in her prosperity, She will not hear: prosperity makes men
proud, Psalm. 73.5,6. They are not in trouble as other men, therefore pride
compasses them about as a chain. Men can now do well enough without God, yea
best when he is furthest off from them; and they must be reduced to an
afflicted and distressed condition before they will think of a return, Hos. 5.
15. We hear nothing of the Prodigals returning to his Father, till his folly
had laded him with insupportable misery.

USE. 1. This serves to discover the great wickedness, and horrid ingratitude
of the Children of men, that strengthen themselves in rebellion by that which
should soften and break their hearts. That those cords of kindness by which God
would bind and engage their souls to love him, must be turned into cords of
vanity to bind their hearts more strong in rebellion against him. It is a very
sore charge which God draws up against Judah, to the observation of which, as a
thing most unreasonable, and horrible, he calls heaven and earth as witnesses,
Isa. 1. 2. I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled
against me. How righteour is the condemnation of sinners, that God's kindness
should set their hearts more against him, that goodness should engender hatred?
This is a strange Antiperistasis. Let it then convince us what wicked hearts we
have naturally, and humble us before God, that it should be so.

USE. 2. It plainly discovers to us that the conversion of a sinner is not of
himself, nor from any leading motion or inclination of his own heart: for the
very Bias of a man's heart does naturally draw him to turn away from God, yea to
run as far from him as possibly he can, and he would never return any more, if
God did not draw him by his Almighty power: There must be the irresistible
attraction of the Spirit of God to incline the soul to seek him, before it will
look after him: If all Gods outward favors make him worse, there is no hope
till there be something inward to change his heart, that he will ever be
better: Wonder not then if we see men growing worse under the best of means and
outward mercies, for the sinful nature of man takes advantage by these things
to be so; but let us pray earnestly to God for the pouring out of his spirit
and workby his power.

USE, 3. To teach us that it is sometimes a great favor of God to withhold
from men the enjoyment of a great Portion of outward blessings, or take them
away from them: Augustin's Periissem, nisi Periissem is observable; whither
would some men have gone, how far had they run away from God, had he not laid
chains of affliction upon them, and bound them in fetters? David was going
astray before he was afflicted, and how far might he have gone if God had let
him alone? think not your selves then to be hardly dealt withal, because you
are held under the restraints of Providence, the day may come when you may
bless God for it.

USE, 4. For trial; It may put us upon it to examine our selves, and see what
improvement we make of those blessings and favors which God indulgeth us with.
Much of our true spiritual condition is to be known by this: Have you Gods
blessing? have you parts, or worldly comforts? and do they make you weary of
Gods ways, more careless of his fear, and more secure in sinning? these are
the notes and characters of a Prodigal, only a rebellious Child will do so: But
if Gods favors are thankfully received, and his cords of love engage your
hearts to love him and to study his fear; if they make you more to delight in
his ways, and diligent in his service; if they oblige you to improve them to
his glory, this is indeed a fruit of his spirit and grace in the soul, and to
be acknowledged as an evidence that his spirit dwells in you. They only are
godly men who do carefully honor God with all his gifts; and if you so do, you
shall be acknowledged by God, and he will never repent of what he has done for
and bestowed upon you.

SERMON V.
WE have thus heard of the place whither the young son carried his estate,
telling us that wicked men love to have the greatest advantage to sin without
any restraint: We might also have taken notice of the comparison which is used
in the text to illustrate his Apostasy, viz. a journey, he took his journey:
or went a Pilgrimage: whence we may take notice of this.

DOCT. That wicked men grow to the height of profaneness by degrees.
Men conversing in the region of sin are upon a Journey, every step they take
sets them at a farther distance from God: Wickedness grows upon men by
degrees, there are few men that commence high profane per saltum: from but a
visible and sober profession to the top of wickedness there are diverse steps a
man has to take, he must first leave a great deal behind him before he arrives
at it: he must root out the efficacy of good education, he must suppress the
activity of a stirring conscience, he must put off and get rid of his
accustomed modesty, he must lay by the aw and dread of Gods Judgments; and all
this requires time, and travail, and pains: it will cost a man something to be
flagitiously wicked, that has been formerly professedly religious: you may see
this exemplified in Saul and others.

USE, 1. This may tell us one Reason why men, though grossly degenerated, are
yet so hard to be convinced of their wickedness: they fell into it gradually,
and by consequence insensibly: Apostasy comes fair and softly, and men take no
notice of it, but think themselves as good as ever.

USE, 2. It may be a warning to men, especially young men, to beware of the
first steps of sin: carefully avoid the first temptations of giving way to
loose and vain courses: You may think to stop at pleasure, but it is a cheat,
and if you are drawn in, you thereby step into a way which leads far from God,
and will, in a while, arrive to such an high degree of profaneness, as you would
at present abominate the very thought of, if wonderful mercy do not hedge up
your way, and give check to your progress.

2. But I pass to the next particular, or the consideration of the improvident
and unfrugal expense which the young man employed his Estate in; And there he
wasted his substance with riotous living. In which take notice: 1. What he did
with his Estate, He wasted it: 2. What it was he wasted, his substance: 3.
Where he wasted it, there, viz. in that far Country: 4. how he consumed it, in
riotous living.

[He wasted] The word [(...)] signifies the most prodigal and unprofitable
throwing away of a thing that can be: Beza thinks it to be a Metaphor from a
whirlwind, that scatters and throws the chaff hither and thither: it intimates
such an expense as knows no measure, nor regards any end or use, minds neither
how much is, nor for what it is laid out.

[His substance] The word signifies either ones being, or that which should
uphold ones being, in which latter sense it is here intended: It was that which
he should have improved for his livelihood, for his comfort, which was given
him to improve, and trade with for the upholding his life.

[In riotous living] The word signifies all manner of intemperance,
lasciviousness, prodigality, all the ways which profuse men can take to bring
to naught that which they do enjoy: It signifies both excess in experiences,
and excess in delights; and therefore it is variously translated [Profusely,
Prodigally, Luxuriously, Lewdly, Ungraciously] The word [(...)] according to
its derivation, intimates, a rese^^ing of nothing, but making all fly, as our
vulgar expression is; under which is shadowed to us the course which every
ungodly man takes with, and the use unto which he puts all God's favors. Hence,

DOCT. Unregenerate men are the greatest spend-thrifts; for they unprofitably
wast all their substance upon their lusts.
It is not only a wast, but a riotous wast, which is the worst sort of
unthriftiness in the world: We may take up the Explication of the Doctrine in a
few Propositions.

1. The common favors of God are unregenerate men's substance: their wit, their
health, their wealth, their privileges, etc. are their portion, which they
have in hand: I mean,

1. They are that which they place their dependence upon, the things in the
improvement of which they hope to get their living; they place their confidence
and trust in them, Pro. 10. 15. The rich man's wealth is his strong City. They
have nothing else that their heart relyes upon, they call them their goods,
because they expect to have their whole good from them, they take up their rest
and content under the shadow of these things.

2. They are the Talents which God has lent them to improve for his Glory, and
for their souls good: God has put them in their hands with a command that they
should trade them for him, and in his service: The Lord expected that
Belshazzar should have glorified him with his Power, and Kingdom, and great
glory which he had advanced him to, Dan. 5.23. He counts that men have by these
things an advantage in their hands to do him service, that they have a price,
and if they are not wise in the improvement thereof, for the exaltation of his
name, he reckons it for an unexcusable transgression, Romans 2. begin.

2. Ungodly or unregenerate men do spend all these upon their lusts. This is
the nature and guize of every man in whom the fear of God is not, not to honor
him, but to sacrifice them to his fleshly desires: What else did degenerate
Israel do with God's favors? Hos. 2.8. For she did not know that I gave her
the (...) etc. which they prepared for Baal. An (...) Reason of this is,
because, as men place their happiness in satisfaction, so the natural man's
satisfaction consists in giving content to the carnal demands of his own mind;
if these be not satisfied he is discontent: sin has so blinded the eyes, and
deluded the judgment of fallen man, that, till Grace comes in to inform him
better, he knows no blessedness but in pampering and cherishing the craving
concupiscence of his soul: The rich man, Luke 12. places his whole happiness
in his souls ease, and that by giving himself full scope to eat, drink, and be
merry; and that is a real description of the frame and opinion of every son and
daughter of Adam, before the work of conversion passes upon them.

3. For a man thus to do with the favors of God, is to wast and spend his
substance most unprofitably. When a man uses his wit, wealth etc. to maintain
his pride, his sensuality, to encourage him in profaneness, etc. this is to play
the greatest spend-thrift. for,

1. Man's great business which he has in this life to trade for, is happiness:
It is that which every man ought to aim at, and is indeed the thing which all
the Children of men do propound to themselves, Psalm. 4.6. Many there be that do
say, who will show us good? They differ indeed in the way and means (and there
are almost as many courses taken to obtain it as there are men that seek it)
yet all naturally agree in this one end; viz. that they may do and be well: and
the right improving of suitable means to this end, is the great thing wherei^
man's wisdom (...) properly consist: If a man misseth of happiness in the end,
all the labor that he has been at here in this world is lost, this is the
very thing which the wise man so often, in the book of Ec^lesiastes calls
Vanity, which is nothing else but a man's losing his propounded end, viz. his
ultimate end, i. e. Blessedness: it is only the loss of this which can prove a
man to have lived in vain, and spent his time, and cost, and care unprofitably.

2. The only way for us to improve the favors of Gods unto the enjoyment of
happiness, is in the service of God. As happiness is our subjective, so is the
Glory of God our objective end; and God has tied these together so
inseparably, that man cannot possibly make a separation of them, without his
unspeakable loss: The way to Glory is to glorify God, our glorifying of him is
to be expressed in our improving of his bounty, to us aright, in honoring of
him; those that honor him, he will honor. There is nothing we can do
sincerely for God, but it redounds to our well-being; parts, power,
privileges, and all other creature enjoyments used for God, do help forward
our everlasting salvation. Hence

3. All is utterly lost which is laid out upon our lusts: whatsoever men use to
the service of their own desires ultimately, it is abused; it is wasted in riot,
it is grossly thrown away. For,

1. God is hereby dishonored, and so greatly provoked against us. It is the
highest affront which we can offer to God to serve his enemies with his
favors, and hither do all the corrupt inclinations of our hearts lead, so much
as we allow to them, so much we rob God of, we take it from him when we give it
to them, and this he will not bear at our hands: it is the great quarrel which
God has with the world of sinful men, that he is forgotten and disregarded
while they seek and serve themselves, Hos. 1. 16, 17.

2. Man's happiness and everlasting wellbeing is no way promoted or furthered
by it. A man is never the nearer happiness by all that he bestows upon himself,
he may bless himself, and others may bless him, Psalm. 49. 18. But he is not in
the way to true blessedness: He may swim in pleasure boast himself in his
delicacy, and count himself an happy man, but he is not nearer Heaven and
Glory. Nay,

3. Hereby he obstructs and woefully hinders his own salvation; in stead of
helping it foreward, it is the great obstacle to it; it sets him further off
from true good: When once the Prodigal is gotten into his far Country, and is
now fallen to wasting his Estate in riot, he is in the most hopeless condition
of all. A sinner settled in any course of sin, is most unlikely to return to
God, whiles he is gratifying his lust, and tastes a great deal of sweetness in
his beloved sin, now he cannot endure so much as to think of the state of his
soul, and thus his heart is hardened; he is in his heaven already, and regards
not any other, his stakes are pitched down, and his pleasant ditty is, Soul
take thine ease: Every sacrifice offered to his lusts sets God further from
him, and him at a greater distance from God; nay, his account is increased, and
his reckoning will be so much the more dreadful; what he thought should have
done him good, does him the greatest hurt; treasures of wrath are heaped up,
out of the treasures of abused goodness, and all that which is so abused for
the gratifying of his lusts, is turned into so much fuel for hell: And
therefore may all that which is used in a way of sin be well called wasting and
spending, Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts.

USE, 1. For Information, learn we hence,

1. What man is like to come to if once he be separated from Gods gracious
presence. If God leave men, they wast all: That every unregenerate man is not
as vile and profligate as ever any was, is of God's restraining grace; if be
but withdraw, and that man be left to himself, all goes to rack; let God do
never so much for him, put never so fair a price into his hands, he but abuses
and squandereth it all away: It is therefore a dreadful judgment of God for any
man to be left to himself: See, Psalm. 81. 12. Romans 1. 16. Every distance that
man stands at from God, is one step to his ruin and undoing.

2. That every natural man is a very fool: For what is folly if this be not,
for a man to wast away his substance unprofitably, to spend away profusely what
he should have improved for his eternal benefit and good? How well might this
young man have lived if he had traded with his Stock, and improved it in a way
of commerce? whereas by living on it, and laying it out lavish he wastes all:
And what might many men do for their souls, had they the prudence to trade with
their Stock in heavens market, and exchange their outward blessings for
spiritual benefits? but herein lies their folly, the young man thought his
Estate would bear him out, thus men outwardly favored of God, think they may
live as they list, and this their way is their folly.

3 That every unregenerate man is in the high road way to misery. The young man
while he lives high upon his Stock, is bringing it apace to that bottom, it is
wasting. The common favors of God are of a spending nature, and, if laid out
upon men's lusts, will quickly be gone, and come to nothing: There is nothing
but saving grace that will increase by the expense, every thing else wears out
and decays: If you see a man giving up the rains to his cor^uptions, and
pleasing himself in his vain and profligate courses, you may easily read that
man's misery in his life.

4. That man himself is the blameable cause of his own undoing. The young man
may thank himself if he has nothing left him to live upon, his own prodigal
wasting brought his Estate to ruin. I am far from their opinion, who think
that a natural man, by his improvement of his best gifts, abilities,
opportunities, can lay any engagement upon God to give him saving grace; but
this is certain, that God will charge upon sinful man every abuse of any part
of his goodness, and this shall leave him without excuse: that men spend their
time, and strength, and estates in the service of sin, shall bring them under
great condemnation in the last day, Hos. 13. 9. Oh Israel, thou have destroyed
thy self. Though fallen man cannot of himself save himself, yet it is his own
folly that undoeth him: If men had used what they had to Gods glory, they might
have done well, that they have done otherwise is of their own sinful
inclination: If men would yield themselves up to the guidance of God's holy
spirit, they might obtain eternal life; if they will (with the younger Son) get
away from God, and follow their own corrupt genius, and by so doing they undo
and ruin themselves for ever, let them thank their own foolishness.

USE, 2. For expostulation with unregenerate men, and those especially upon
whom God has bestowed much of his common bounty; I would plead with such as
these in the words of the Prophet, Isa. 55. 2. Wherefore do you spend your
money for that which is not bread? See and be convinced of your desperate folly
and madness: God has given you understanding, health, strength, comforts of
this life, the Gospel of grace, and the means of spiritual good; why do you
spend all this in riot, lay out all in that which will do you no good at all?
wherefore is all this wast? but more particularly.

1. See and be convinced that whatsoever you gratify any sinful lust withal,
is mere riot; all is lost that lust gains: The covetous man boasts that he is
no Prodigal, he saves, whiles the other spends, he lays up whiles the other
lays out, and does not lay out unnecessarily; but know it, whiles you are
feeding your covetous humors, and satisfying that eager desire, and greediness
of gain, you do but consume it. The voluptuous man thinks nothing is ill spent
that may afford his sensual part any satisfaction, and whereof he may taste the
sweet: but know it, a life of pleasure is but death, I Tim. 5.6. She that
lives in pleasure, is dead while she lives. The ambitious man reckons it a
glorious purchase, if with all his wit, policy, and advantage, he may obtain
favor and esteem, applause and credit among men; but what has he bought for
his money but smoke, and the East wind? We may say the like of every other
lust. There is no purchase but that of Salvation, but is dearly bought with the
expense of our precious time, thoughts and care; all this sets you further from
heaven and glory, and if you could purchase the whole world at the hazard, much
more than with the sale and loss of your souls, you would deservedly procure
the name of shamful unthrifts.

2. Seriously ponder and consider with your selves what these courses will lead
unto: Remember therefore that your times and advantages are given you to trade
for eternity withal, whereas that is nothing which you are now taking care for
less than that: Are you not building a rotten fabric that will tumble down on
your heads? Are you not laying a sandy foundation which will be washed away with
the flood? and then what will become of all your expense? What emolument, what
comfort will you get by all? Do not these ways make you forgetful of Eternity?
Do they not harden you hearts from the fear of God? and what but misery will be
the fruit of such things? Think what an exchange you are making, what it is you
part with, and for what; it is Heavens Glory, the love of God, everlasting
blessedness which is set before you, and all things are to encourage you to
embrace and make sure of it; this you part with, this you sell, this you put
away from you for Esau's mess of Pottage.

3. Consider what is the reason of all this, how it comes to pass that you are
in a way to such a loss; is it not because (with the Prodigal) you are gone
from God, and gotten into a strange Country? there he wasted his substance; If
you had kept with God, you might have done well enough: the very root of man's
misery is departure from God, thence all his lewd and riotous courses derive
their original: Let it then serve to convince you that you are at a distance
from him.

4. Learn hence to account your selves truly miserable, so long as you remain
in this separation from God; and let it be an awakening consideration to drive
you to be diligent in seeking after, and serious in returning to him: Know
then, that all God's Talents must be reckoned for; what you wast away
riotously, God will call you to a strict account of it, and we will be to him
in the great day of Judgment, that has thrown away God's ravours upon his own
lusts: If the man that hid his Talent in a napkin was so severely dealt withal,
what then will be done to him that cannot say here is thine own, but shall be
enforced to this confession, I nourished my pride with thy favors, I sought
mine own credit by the parts and understanding which thou gave to me, I
cherished mine own applause by the honor and power which thou did afford me
among men, I fed my lusts with the creature comfort I enjoyed, my visible
privileges and Churchmembership made me secure and careless of my soul, I
boasted my self in my wisdom, strength riches, Gospel-favours, and did not seek
to make my boast in God alone; will not this be a sad and doleful account? What
need have we then to be now very solicitous in endeavoring to get our account
cleared, whiles, in way of true Repentance we may obtain this favor through
the blood of Jesus Christ, and, whiles we have time and opportunity, to get
into a better way of improving our selves? Could men but lay out that time, and
strength, and heart for God, which they do upon their lusts, that would turn to
their account, and that which is now justly accounted wast, would be found to
be the best thrift: this would be the way to be happy in another world; then
should we have a Portion to live on, when the foolish worldling has spent his,
we should never be brought to want: Beg then of God to grant you this wisdom,
and labor with so much the more diligence to redeem the loss that you have
already sustained, who have hitherto been spending away so much without profit,
knowing that if you wast and expend all now upon the vanities of this life, and
the carnal delights of the present time, you will have nothing to live upon in
the days of eternity, and then your present wastfulness, will be (too lat^^)
found to have laid that unhappy foundation of your utter and eternal undoing.

SERMON VI.
Verse. 14. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that land;
and he began to be in want.
IN the younger Son's departure from his Father, there were two things proposed
as observable. 1. His folly. 2. His misery. Hitherto we have been considering
the former of these, the words read bring us to the latter, hence

It follows to consider of the misery which enfued upon this folly: As it
is^described, verse. 14, 15, 16. The spiritual entendment of this part of the
Parable, is to show us to what miserable exigencies God brings a sinner, and
what distressing difficulties he reduces him unto in order to his recovery and
return to the true way of blessedness: As also to discover the miserable shifts
that poor sinners will make to redress their misery, before they will think of
seeking the grace of God: these things will more fully appear in the
prosecution.

This misery of the Prodigal is described by three things. 1. By the leading
cause or occasions of it, with an awful effect: verse. 14. 2. The sordid course
which he took for the relieving of himself in his distressed condition, verse.
15. 3. The utter failing of all relief and supply, even the poorest of all,
verse. 16. of these in order.

1. The leading causes or occasions of it, etc. verse. 14. 1. The causes or
occasions here mentioned are two. 1. The first is from himself, or his former
prodigality, when he had spent all. 2. The other is from the place which he was
then in, there arose a mighty famine in that land. 2. The effect of this noted
in the verse. is, the distress which he was now brought to, He began to be in
want. His misery began from himself, his own riot had wasted his substance, and
now all was gone. It was a sad alteration which befell this poor young man, a
few da^es ago he was swaggering and spending with the best, his Coffers full,
and ^e scattered it by handfuls, but now nothing remains, all is gone, and that
not by some unforeseen inevitable providence (there had then been some room to
have pitied and excused him) but by his own improvidence; he had lived to be
his own Executor, He had spent all. The Word in the Text signifies to consume a
thing, not in a way of prudent and frugal expense, but in foolish prodigality.
That poor man is the blameable cause of his own misery; though it be a plain
conclusion from the words, yet, having hinted at it before, I pass it over
here. The main thing I would now take notice of in the words is, that his own
stock failed him, all his portion came to nothing. Hence,

DOCT. All that which natural or unregenerate men place their confidence in,
will fail, and leave them short of Salvation.
Let men have never so much of Gods common favors, without saving grace all
will come to nothing in the end: Man may make a flourishing show with these
things for a while but they will not last: There are things which the Scripture
tells us perish with the using; such are all the common gifts of God. For
clearing this truth, observe.

1. That is properly said to be spent which is laid out unprofitably. What men
lay out for advantage, is not spent but improved; but that which brings in
nothing again, is not only expended but mispended: The Scripture expresses it
by laboring for the East Wind, by laying out money, for that which is not
bread, by laboring in vain, etc. For a man to give his Gold or Silver, in
exchange for Cockles, Pearls for Pebbles, Substance for Shadows, this is that
which is deservedly accounted spending.

2. Nothing is profitably laid out, but what is expended for Salvation: This is
the only saving purchase that any of the Children of men can trade for: A part
in Christ is the only Riches, a Crown of Glory is the only honor, a place in
the Paradise of God is the only pleasure which is worthy a Man's laying out of
cost and care for; and other purchases are empty, and will be found loss, Eccl.
1. 3. What profit has a man of all the labor which he has taken under the
Sun?

3. Though all mankind are (in some sense) trading for Salvation or Happiness,
yet the greatest number are there trading for it where it is not to be found;
they are seeking the living among the dead; they are seeking heaven in hell,
happiness among an heap of miseries: One man's wealth is his God, another
pleasures are his felicity, another climbs the Pinacles of honor to seek for
the seat of happiness: Nature leads men no higher than something under the Sun,
and therefore such as see no higher must of necessity spend their time, their
wit, their estate, their all.

4. The best improvement that nature can make of Gods common favors, cannot
bring them to find and enjoy blessedness: Let men use them never so frugally,
and prudently, according to the measures which they take of prudence, and
frugallity, yet they will fall short: Nature could never by its own strength
arrive at saving grace, nor by the outward help of all the common blessings of
God: A man may have health, strength, understanding, ordinances, many
advantages, but let him make his best of them, all will fall short: It is not
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, Romans 9. 16. these all are either but
nature which is in a man, or but external things which he enjoys, and man
cannot climb up to Heaven on the rounds of such a Ladder.

5. Hence when the natural man has done his utmost, and taken the greatest
pains in laying out his time, strength and estate, he loses his soul: Nay, it
is very certain, that though a man be never so proud and confident in those
many blessings God which he has conferred upon him, yet sooner or later, he
shall have a through and sensible conviction of his poverty; that he has
nothing which is saving, that he has wasted and missimproved that which he had
to unprofitable mispense Job. 27. 8.

USE, 1. Here we see what a poor Portion unregenerate men have, and therefore
what little cause have they of pride, or the people of God of envy. God gives
his enemies a great deal, but alas, what is it? Poor perishing stuff, spending,
wasting substance, not indeed worthy of that name: Think of this you that are
proud of your wits, your wealth, your honor, your privileges; what it is that
you pride your selves in? or what will you do when all is spent? and such is
the miserable exit of all that you are boasting your selves of: you now
flourish and spread your selves, ere it be long all will be gone, and no where
to be found, Psalm. 37. 37, 38. There are thousands of casualties to which the
object of your trust is daily exposed, you are sure of nothing; nay, there
needs no more but your selves and your own folly to spend it: You may for a
while carry before you a breadth in the world, and bless your selves in what
you have, but it will not be long ere your mouths shall put upon you the name
and title of fools, Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13, Your wit will not direct you to
happiness, your wealth will not purchase you honor and glory; if not before,
yet certainly in a dying hour they will all leave you, and then your naked soul
passes into eternity with nothing to live upon for ever: But if God intend
your souls good, you shall, before that time, have your eyes opened to see that
all this is nothing: your dependence upon these things shall be broken, and
your hopes vanish: Lift not then up the horn on high, nor speak with a stiff
neck. And you that are the Saints of God, be not envious; go with the Psalmist
into the Temple, see their end, and then shall you find all that, which your
mistake has called happiness and prosperity, to be nothing better than painted
misery; yea, woeful infelicity. Little reason has that man to make his brags,
of the love of God, that has no better an argument to ground his title upon.
It had been well for some men if their Portion in this world had been less,
some hopes there would then have been, that they would have been persuaded to
have sought a durable portion in another.

USE, 2. Let it teach us all not to content our selves with any thing but
saving Grace. Be not satisfied with no more but a Portion of outward favors;
it is a great misery to think we have enough when we have nothing else: Let us
not be well pleased to sit down with things that will not last or hold out:
Remember thou art an everlasting creature, and must endure for ever, and what
good can a perishing portion do thee for eternity? Think with your selves, what
will all these things avail me, which will not last out those infinite ages in
which I must have a being, and without a Portion, must needs be miserable? It
is our Saviors advice to think of this when we are about laying up our
treasures, Mat. 6. 20, 21. All Gods common gifts and favors are liable to the
moth and rust and thief; the present enjoyment of these things is so far from
being an happiness, that it will be an aggravating circumstance of our misery
when they are gone, that once we had them, when we shall have nothing left of
all, but the sorrowful remembrance: Learn therefore Luther's resolute prayer,
Lord, I will not be put off with these things. Remember the worlds wisemen
with their wisdom go to hell, wicked men will ere long be stripped naked; let
this put you upon it, to seek for your selves a Portion which endures for ever.

USE, 3. For encouragement and comfort to the People of God; I mean such as
have gotten a part in saving Grace, you may want, or be scanted in all outward
blessings, you may have but a little of worldly wisdom, a little Estate here,
little favor among men, but be not discouraged with these things; have you
saving Grace? you have the better Portion; and therefore better, because it
shall never be taken away; this is durable riches; the hypocrites shall perish,
but yours shall endure: All the wit, good nature, moral righteousness; specious
profession, vain hopes and confidences of ungodly men shall all perish; they
live now jovially upon them, but all will shortly be spent, and then where are
they? or what shall they do? but your Grace, though little, shall not wast but
increase, your hope, though languid, shall endure; saving Grace shall never go to
decay; you shall live by your faith here in this world in despite of all
adversity and temptations, and this faith shall never leave you, till having
accompanied you in death, and waited upon you to eternity, it has brought you
to the possesion of the Kingdom of Glory. That man is a rich man indeed, that
has believed in Christ; he is rich in possession, he shall never want; and he
is infinitely rich in reversion, for Jehovah is his portion, and all the
glories of Heaven are his heritage: bless God then for his grace; if wicked men
owe God thanks for a spending portion, how much more do you owe him of
gratitude for that which endures unto eternal life?

2. The other cause of his misery, was from the place that he was in; there
arose a mighty famine in that land. Here are three circumstances observable
which made his misery exceeding great. 1. The time when the famine came, it was
in conjunction with his poverty, when he had spent all. 2. The measure of the
famine; a mighty famine. The word signifies strong, powerful, prevailing: It
was far greater than ordinary. 3. The place where it was, in that land: which
was in a far Country, where he was a stranger, at a great distance from his
Father and Friends. Hence,

DOCT. The World then most of all deceives and fails, when men have the most
need of help.
If the young man had now had a good Estate in his hands, as he sometimes had,
he would not have been so pincht with the famine: Rich men usually rub through,
it is the poor that are most oppressed in times of scarcity: or if the famine had
been more moderate, he might with more ease have scrambled for some supply, but
when all fails, who should relieve him? or if he had been among his friends and
rich kindred, they would have so far pitied him, as not to have suffered him
to starve: but he is poor, and in a far Country, and a famine raging, and now
what shall become of him?

The famine deciphers to us the deficiency or of spiritual supplies, or of
Soul-food: Where as it is said, that then it arose, we must take notice that
things are many times described according to appearance, and not reality: This
spiritual famine was there before, but the young man, as long as he had
something of his own, minded it not, but now when all was spent he began to
feel it: The substance of this Allegory is, that a distressed sinner shall find
that the world has no relief for his soul; if a man feel anguish and misery
coming upon him, and go to the world for help, he shall find nothing there but
want and distress; all the world cannot ease an oppressed soul. For further
Explication, Consider.

1. The natural man, standing at a great distance from God has no other hope
or help to take to in his distress but the world: This far Country is the place
which this sinner dwells in, and therefore here he must look for his succor; he
has by his own grievous folly, put himself under the necessity, either to find
relief from the world, or else to perish; i.e. he knows no other way.

2. Nay, he has chosen and preferred the friendship and presumed fidelity of
the world, rather than to have his dependence upon God, he went himself into
this far Country; he was not driven to it by necessity, but went to it by
choice, it was the place of his desires; he had rather trust in the uncertain
world than a living God; this is a thing so natural to fallen man, that Paul is
fain to give a strict charge against it, 1 Timothy 6. 17.

3. Hence in all his straits and wants he goes to the world, and seeks his
redress there, (...) hopes to find supply: This is described by men's wandering
from mountain to hill: The sinner concludes that if it be not here to be found,
it is no where; he knows of no other content or soul-satisfaction, but what
arises out of the dust, and is to be gotten by the worlds favor.

4. There is an hour of distress which the riotous sinner shall bring upon
himself: It is certain that he shall find himself at a loss and undone;
conscience will sooner or later speak, and tell him that he has wasted all;
hope will in a while fail, carnal confidence will shrink up to nothing, and his
soul be filled with perplexing sorrows.

5. Now the world in which he trusted will without doubt leave him at a loss:
The Magazene from whence he hoped to fetch his livelihood, will be found empty,
the Cistern will appear to be broken, and have no water in it; he shall be far
from finding it able to direct him to true and solid comfort, or so much as
point him to that which can indeed give him life. If a sinner be perishing, he
must needs perish for all that the world can do to save him; here is not one
morsel of the Bread of Life to keep a soul from Perdition; if he could gain it
all, that would not save his soul, Mat. 16. 26. If he ask for bread, it gives
him a stone, if a fish, a ^^^pion; he may wander from sea to sea, seeking the
bread of life, and find none: Hence the wiseman, in answer to the great
question, where good is to be found, or where a man may fill himself with
substance, and find content, returns it in the Negative, respecting the world
and all that is in it, and that because it is empty, vain, and vexatious, in
the proof whereof he spends a whole Book, viz. that of Ecclesiastes. If a man
wants eternal life, he may ask every creature for it, but all answer no, it is
not in me: he that does for the present rely here, and hopes it shall be well
with him, does but feed upon ashes, and cherish him self up with false
expectations. As man cannot find his life in himself, so neither shall he mend
himself in the world; he goes but from one want to another, from a famine
within doors to a famine abroad; if he goes to the world he dies, and if he
rests in himself he dies; he does but rise to fall, he does but go abroad to
meet with that death which was coming home to him.

USE, 1. To teach us the certain necessity of the perdition of all those souls
that have no thing else to trust to in their need, but this world and the
vanities of it. What fools are the sons and daughters of men, that lay out
their time, and thoughts, and care to get into the worlds favor, and secure to
themselves a refuge here? What will you do when the day of distress comes upon
you? Men think they shall inherit substance, but they purchase nothing but
famine. The world seems full to a carnal mind, he thinks it affords all that
heart can wish, if he can have this to friend, he fears no want: but the soul
shall to its cost find that it is empty, void, and wast. The soul of man must
have something to live upon, or else it is undone, this is the great want, and
for this want the creature has no supply; whiles it feeds the body the soul
starves: It is not it self soul-food, it cannot be the happiness of any man,
neither can it be the price of the purchase of it; earths Money will not pass in
heavens Exchange; riches profit not in the day of wrath, Prove. 11. 4. What is
it then that the Children of Men are doing, whiles they digg deep, and labor
hard to build up a fabric for themselves with such materials, with which they
cannot ward themselves from wrath, buy themselves out of the hands of death,
nor brible the flames of hell? he that has laid in nothing else to live upon
to all eternity but this vanishing world, must needs famish: and therefore,

USE, 2. Let it be a loud and awakening Call to all unregenerate sinners, if
you would not suffer the utmost distress of the most pinching famine, to get
away from the world: Make have out of your natural state, live no longer in
this far Country; your distance from God is your misery, return to him and you
shall be happy: You that live jocund and pleasant, you that think all is well,
and shall be so though you add iniquity to sin, be persuaded to take this
warning: As much pomp and splendour as you now live in, as satisfied as you are
at present, ere it be long a famine will come, a mighty famine, and what will
you do then? O^, fly from it before you come to the utmost distress: Did
Abraham go to Egypt, the Shunamite to the Philistines, being warned of a
temporal famine? Do not you then despise this warning, to come out of Egypt and
Philistia, to escape a spiritual famine: Be assured, it will be a sore and
distressing thing to feel wrath and misery siezing upon you, and have nothing
but a vain world to go to; miserable comforters shall you find all these things
to be; they will not afford you one dram of consolation, nor give one morsel of
quiet to your souls: you may cry and roar in your distress, but there will be
none to help you; God whom you have forsaken, it may be will not, and to be
sure the world in which you have trusted cannot: It will be a complicate misery
to be a bankrupt, and in a far Country, and there to be siezed with a mighty
famine; now you are called to avoid this: All you want is with God, for though
the world be empty, he is full; that can supply no spiritual necessity, he can
satisfy all; there you must needs perish, here you may be saved and satisfied:
There is bread in Egypt when all other countries have none, but look one upon
another, and pine and die: There is no want with God, there is nothing else but
want every where else: Do but open your eyes, the Lord open them for you; the
famine is upon you now though you discern it not; see and be affected with and
fly from it: and let this be your encouragement, that though you have provoked
God by going from him, and abused his goodness, yet, as there is with him
enough and to spare, so upon your penitent return you need not doubt or fear,
but to find relief and welcome with him, as will also appear in the sequel of
the Parable: Only do you know your misery, and fly to God in time to get a
redress of it; so shall you find in him, all that which is in vain and to no
purpose you have been seeking in an bowling wilderness, in a famishing world.

SERMON VII.
2 THus of the causes of, or leading occasions to this young Man's misery; it
follows to take notice of one great effect arising from it, according as it is
expressed in this verse. He began to be in want. The word that is used in our
Text signifies to be, or to fall behind, and is wont to be used of such as come
too late to a Feast, as the five foolish Virgins, Mat. 25. 11. or of men that
are left behind in a Race, as Heb. 4. 1. The meaning of it in our Text is, that
he now began to be pinched with indigence, now the sense of the misery of his
condition came upon him: Such is our English phrase, to fall behind, and to be
brought into straits. Things are here expressed (as we heard) according to
appearance, a man is not pinched with want till he feels it, and is oppressed
with it: Hence,

DOCT. When God intends saving Grace to any, he first makes them effectually
sensible of their own miserable and undone state.
God, in the ordinary and usual method of converting sinners under the means of
Grace, begins with the discovery of their empty, needy, poor and miserable
condition: Here began the ground and motive of the young man's returning to his
Father, though it did not presently work to this end; had he not been reduced
to the greatest straits, he had never thought of returning; his being in want
was that which set him to seeking relief, and this is it which did at last
(though not immediately) drive him home.

Among the works ascribed to the spirit of God, there are some which are called
common and preparatory; common, because they may be found in Reprobates;
preparatory, because they are wont (in the Elect) to be steps toward
conversion, or works preparing the soul, as a rational Agent to entertain
Christ as he is tendered in the Gospel.

The first of these works is Conviction, which has two things for objects,
viz. Sin and misery; one is the cause, the other the effect, Conviction usually
proceeds Analytically, it first discovers the effect, and from thence searches
after the cause. The conviction of misery is that which here has its
consideration, that of sin follows afterward. The first remove of the young
man was, he felt himself to be in want, he found when the famine came and
increased, that now he had nothing to live upon. In the Explication we may
consider, 1. What is this conviction of misery? 2. How it is wrought? 3. The
reasons of the Doctrine.

1. What is this conviction of misery?

Answ. It is the first legal work that is usually wrought in a sinner, making
him to apprehend his present state of perdition, notwithstanding all that is
either in himself, or in the world. It is, though not the full of a lost
estate, yet leading to it, or a step toward it. In the Description observe,

1. I call it a legal work; now Divines are wont to call those works legal.

1. Which are usually wrought by the application of the Law, in which is the
curse, and by which is the knowledge of sin, Romans 7. 8. Misery arises out of
the curse, and the curse comes upon the breach of the Law, Gal. 3. 12. The Law
therefore firstly discovers it.

2. Which are common works, and not in themselves saving; and so the word legal
is often used in Divinity, of which nature is this before us: Conviction of
misery may befall hypocrites, Isa. 43. 14. Yea, of it self this is hell begun in
the soul, or conscience.

3. I call it the first legal work: my meaning is that God usually begins here,
and so man for the most part is made to look upon the effect, before he
discovers the cause, yea is led by it thereunto: he first sees and feels misery
upon himself, and thence is led to see sin as the blameable and meritorious
cause of all this misery: Man usually apprehends that he is condemned, before
he apprehends sin to be the just condemnation, he feels himself miserable,
before he justifies God: for though it be sin which the law condemns, and
hence he must so far see sin, as to know that he has broken this law, yet he
is not made to know sin in its just merit, but rather counts it a rigor of the
law which makes him angry, with that and not with sin, Romans 7. 5.

3. The proper effect of this conviction is to make him know and feel his
perishing condition at present, that he is now going to perdition, viz. that he
is under the curse of the law, bound over to eternal death, and that he is in
the way to it, being held under the curse; the young man found himself
perishing with hunger.

4. The efficacy of this conviction is that it unmasks the former delusion
under which he lay, making him to see that he has no remedy against this
misery either in himself, or in the world. In respect to himself, he finds that
he has spent all, in regard to the world, he finds that there is a famine in
that land, and the conclusion that arises from hence is, that he is sensibly
in want: i.e. he still wants that freedom from the curse, notwithstanding all
God's favors, or his interest in the creature, this is the sum of this
conviction: in which though we must confess that there is a change now made in
the sinner, yet it is not a saving change of his state. For,

1. His state was as bad before, only the difference is, he then saw it not,
but now he does, he thought himself rich, and the world a trust friend: both
these were mistakes, and now he finds them so to be; so that the substance of
this charge is, now he is convinced that before he cheated himself: Hence,

2. His state is not properly mended by this conviction; for though he sees his
misery in some degree, yet this sight does not free him from it: Conviction is
not Conversion, though God can, when he pleases, make it a step toward it:
Conviction does not make any man really better, though it does give us hopes
that where the spirit begins he may carry it on; for Cain and Judas fared never
the better by it, though many souls have, by Divine Grace.

2. How this conviction is wrought?

Answ. 1. If we speak of the Author or ef^^^^^ C^^se of this work, it properly
belongs to the spirit of God, who (in a work of common grace) brings the
creature to the sense and apprehension of this misery. I deny not but that
rational conviction may be gathered and applied from the rational consideration
of things, but that this sensible conviction depends on a special work of the
spirit, appears.

1. Because the same means of conviction are used with others, who yet are not
thus convinced: We preach sin and misery to a great many; discourse with them
of the distressed condition of the poor prodigal man; but it is but now and
then one that is touched with remorce, and cries out of it, or acknowledges it
sensibly.

2. Because the same means may have been formerly used with this person, and
yet did not gain their effect: It may be he had heard the same thing many a
time, and his judgment assented to it to be truth, but yet he regarded it not,
nor was affected with it: yea, possibly he had had it more urged, with more
strength of argument, and pressed with more morally persuasive motives by
others, but yet it never gained upon or got within him till now; and why now
rather than at any other time? there was as much to have driven if home before;
it must needs therefore proceed from the power of the Holy Ghost working when
he sees meet. But,

2. If we speak of the means by which it is wrought, I answer, God's spirit
does it sometimes by the ministry of the Word, sometimes by the concurrence of
wisely ordered Providence, speaking in them to the soul; and it is a very
frequent thing for God to back the Word in his providence for the bringing of a
sinner under the power of this conviction: yea, providence sometimes begins and
gives a general conviction, the Word then sets in and more particularly points
out his condition: Providence many times tells a man that he is miserable, and
then the Word comes and tells him how he came to be so: More particularly.

1. The Word of God gives a (...) demonstration of the natural state of all
mankind; it tells us both what we are, and how we came to be so; it declares
the wrath of God, and shows how man came to be subjected (...) it; it
convinces by clear and plain evidence; it is a Glass in which a natural man
may see his own face, without those paintings wherewith carnal reason is wont
to varnis^ and hide it. It is one of the ends for which the Scripture is given,
2 Timothy 3. 16.

2. Divine Providence concurrs to the setting home of this truth, thus.

1. God often brings secure sinners into an afflicted condition, who were
before that prosperous, and whiles prosperous, they were secure; but now Gods
begins to open their eyes: Thus it was with this younger son, Text, and Context.

2. In this afflicted estate men are apt to ponder and think of their
condition: Affliction puts men upon consideration, and makes them usually more
ready to hear, and take into their meditation such things as may concern them,
Hos. 5. 15.

3. Now God many times brings home the Word to them, and moves them to a more
serious and particular consideration of it: Their own concerns are now in it,
whereas they looked at themselves as unconcerned before: In prosperity they
would not hear, but now the Word is made more to affect them than formerly.

4. Now the spirit of God takes and opportunity to make many truths which
before were very unwelcome to them, and they had put them away, to be thought
upon, and credited, so that,

1. They now feel that they are mortal, and must go shortly to another world,
they could not endure to think of this formerly, nor did practically believe
it, but now they apprehend it as a reality, and matter of concern.

2. They are made to discern that trust in themselves and in the world is vain,
and that by reason of the foregoing truth: They now rememher that they have
been hitherto thinking of time, and providing for that, but had forgotten
eternity: They thought of no heaven but in the enjoyment of the world and
favous of it, but now they see that all this will not avail them for an
everlasting state.

3. They now remember the curses of the Law against such as do these and those
things, or against all the progeny of fallen Adam in a natural condition, and
are convinced that they are the men against whom they are denounced; and now
apprehending themselves hasting to eternity, and to have done nothing in way of
providing for it, this becomes a terrible thought in them; and they are
extremely ^ertified with the thought of a future state, for which they have
been taking no care: The severity of the word, and the fears of death oppress
them, and they know not how they shall do to go into another world, and now
they begin to be in want, all is leaving them, and they are naked and have no
portion, and the world cannot keep them alive, for there is a famine. The
thoughts of dwelling with everlasting burnings, possesses them with
fearfulness, Isa. 35. 14.

Reas. From the usefulness there is of this conviction in order to Conversion:
It is useful*

1. For the seasonableness of it: God intending to advance himself in man's
Salvation, and his Glory being declarative (for his essential Glory is
incapable of any advancement) hence the more gracious he appears to be, the
more Glory redounds to his great Name: Now the greatness of grace herein
appears in one discovery of it, viz. the greatness of the misery from which the
subject of this grace is delivered: For the illustration whereof, this work is
very fit and seasonable: For, 1. Man must see his own misery, or else he will
never admire God's mercy. 2. The best knowledge of this misery, is by a
sensible apprehension of the distressing efficacy of it. 3. The sense and
apprehension cannot be so well after conversion, because then the apprehension
of God's mercy, applied to faith in the promise, cannot but afford some relief
against the sense of misery: Thought it is true, the right improvement of this
is after mercy has been apprehended; yet still the remembrance of this
distress is a main help to fill the soul with admiration, Isa. 53. 6.

2. For the necessity of it in order to the receiving of Christ in the tenders
of the Gospel. For, 1. Christ's work is Salvation-work. Hence he is called
Jesus, the Savior, and said to come on this errand, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Christ came
to save sinners. 2. Hence this work is for none but such as need Salvation, and
that is such as are miserable: What should a Physician do among men that are
hail and sound? Luke 5. 31. 3. Hence till men feel this misery, they will
certainly despise Christ; till then they will bid the Almighty to depart from
them, Job 21. 14.

USE, 1. For Information hence learn,

1. That they make more have than good speed, that are great Professors of
Faith in Christ, before ever they were made thoroughly sensible of their own
misery. A Faith that antedates Conviction may justly be suspected: He that
never knew his own distress, never went to Christ as a Savior. There are
indeed diverse steps from this conviction to true conversion, but yet this is
one step from natural security, and usually the first: Though a man cannot see
sin sinful (which is the true conviction of sin) but by an eye of faith, yet,
by the common work of Illumination, he may see the woeful estate of it. God,
like a wise builder, digs for a foundation, before he lays it. Conviction of
misery is not our foundation, Christ is the only foundation, Faith is that
which only builds us upon him; but by Conviction, the loose and unstable earth
is removed, the false and failing hopes of men are dug up. God is not wont to
give hope, before he has brought the soul to despair; he applies not comforts
antecedent to conviction. It may therefore put us upon it to enqiure whether
ever it were thus: It may be now you are rich in your own conceit, like
Laodicea, but did you ever know your selves to be poor, and miserable, and
blind, and naked? if not your riches are but a fancy, and your hopes are empty.

2. That there are some grounds of hope for those whom the spirit of God brings
into a needy and destitute condition; whom he convinces of their want and
misery; who feel the curses of the Law, and can find no help in the world: I
say, there is some hope, for there may be reason for fears and jealousies too,
For, 1. This is but a common work, and therefore is no sufficient evidence of
God's special love, no sure Character of an Elect Vessel. 2. There have been
many under it, who yet through Satan's temptations, and God leaving them, have
lost it again; yea, and manifold experience gives in a sad testimony to this
truth. 3. The curse and condemnation is still as really upon them as ever it
was: That is not taken off till believing. 4. There is no special promise made
to them that God will carry on this work in them to effect: He may or he may
not, and if he do not it will leave the man short of Heaven and Glory. But
still there is more hope than there was before; for while they lay secure in
sin, and felt no wrath, they were in no order to Salvation, but now they are in
such as way as God brings home his own by; and we may say they are a stop
nearer to the Kingdom than before: Though they are not under saving Grace, yet
they are under the means to it: A man that is without the City gates, though
just by them, is as really without, as one an hundred miles off, but yet he is
nearer to it.

3. We have here a rule how to begin with men in our endeavors, for their
spiritual good: Let us labor to show them their misery by sin: We must wound
before we can heal, instrumentally: Be not afraid to fhew men their sins and
the wrath of God for them: Misery is the first thing a secure soul is like to
be affected withal, and that is preparatory to the rend^ing of Christ precious
to them: We should indeed encourage all to go to Christ, but encouragements
without convictions, are but the laying a foundation for presumption, and not
the way to bring men truly to believe. Peter, in Act. 2. First preaches his
hearers to remorce, and then he directs them to Christ.

USE, 2. For Conviction; let every unregenerate sinner see here (as in a Glass)
his own miserable state: This young man's condition is thine spiritually: Thou
have nothing of thine own to live upon, there is nothing in the world to
relieve thee, thou art perishing if no help appear; and art not thou then in
want? here take these Considerations:

1. Thou art a cursed creature by nature: Wrath is upon all the world of
mankind, who are condemned before they are born, who are enemies from the
birth, and come into the world Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3.

2. Thou have nothing with thee which can help thee out of this cursed
condition, all the Portion of God's common favors which thou enjoyest, will
not redeem thee out of the hands of wrath, they cannot afford thy soul one drop
of relief or supply; nay, all thy natural and providential enjoyments are
themselves under a curse as they are thine, Romans 8. 20.

3. Thou have by a vain and sinful life, abused all the favors of God, and
thereby made thy accounts the greater; thy condemnation is augmented: thou have
laid out all upon sin, and that is the worst sort of spending that can be, for
thou art by it not only made poor, but greatly in debt also, and God will call
thee to an account for all his goodness, and thy riot will inflame thy
reckoning.

4. Thou have been in vain seeking thy Salvation among creatures; the world
thou go to is under the curse too for man's sin, and can yield thee nothing
but briars, and thorns, which will scratch and wound, but not relieve thee:
They are but the shadow of a bramble, which will but mischief him that betakes
himself thither for shelter: nothing but what will reconcile thee to God, and
bring thee in to his favor, give thee a part in Christ, pay all thy debts, and
save thy soul from hell, will do thee any good, and this thou can not find
here.

5. Death and Judgment and Hell are coming upon thee: Thou art a mortal
creature, thy day is coming, and may be nearer than thou art aware of; thou
must ere long go down to the pit, and then Judgment calls thee to an account,
and if thou art not better bestead, hell receives thee for ever, from whence
all thy vain trust shall not be able to deliver thee, Isa. 28. 17,18. Know then
and consider that it is an evil thing and a bitter, that thou have gone so far
away from the living God, Jer. 2. 19. Thou think thou want for nothing,
but I can assure thee that thou art oppressed with every want: There is a great
deal goes to the eternal life of a soul, and thou have none of it; thou want
the love of God, which is better than life; thou want grace which is indeed
the inward principle of life in the soul; thou want the promise which is the
support of the soul here in this life; yea, what is it thou want not? Oh
that thou knew it! thou would not then be so secure and contented, thou
would bestir thy self, and seek for some remedy: Thou shall find these words
to be realities one day, God grant thou may be persuaded of them, and so
persuaded as not to rest content till thou have gotten good security about
them: Were thou but once stirred up to make inquiry, there is hope that God
would of his rich mercy, in his own time point thee to the right way: This is
certain there is no expectation that thou should ever return to God, except
thou first begin to be in want.

SERMON VIII.
Verse. 15. And he went and joined himself to a Citizen in that Country, and he
sent him into his fields to feed swine.
2. WE are now to consider of the sordid course which the young man took for
his relief, expressed in these words. When once he felt his want, he sat not
still: Sense of misery will readily drive the creature to seek supply: and so
far he did well: God would not have awakened sinners to sit still: but yet he
takes a very wrong course, and therein he discovered his folly: As good sit
still as rise to fall. The course which he took is here expressed emphatically,
and set forth notably; in two things does the misery appear which he brought
upon himself by this course.

1. The servitude or slavery which he voluntarily put himself upon, illustrated
and aggravated in two circumstances. 1. It was his own act, He went and joined.
2. It was to one of that Country, to a stranger.

2. The ignoble and sordid manner of life which he was put to, to feed swine,
which was among the Jews accounted the basest life of all, men of that
occupation were contemned, none would have any communion with them: Shepherds
were of good account, but Swineherds were not admitted to the society of men.

That by this Citizen, Satan is to be understood, is the received
interpretation, and his setting him to keep swine, intimates the contemptible
employment and service which he occup^eth sinners about. We may gather up the
substance of this verse. into a few brief notes.

DOCT. I. Those that will not serve God, shall serve a worse Master.
The Prodigal was weary of his Father's Government, and what comes of it? he is
fain to put himself under the Government of a stranger: Man was not made for
sovereignty, but for service, and properly for the service of God; if therefore
he shake off this service God righteously provides him cruel and Tyrannical
Lords, that shall bear rule over him, 2. Chron. 12. 8.

USE, This may teach us to beware how we count the service of God irksome and
tedious. If Christ's easy yoke will not be born, but we will pluck out our
necks, and draw back our shoulders, Satan's iron yoke shall be prepared for us,
and then we shall sooner or later know the difference.

DOCT. II. Man when convinced of his misery, had rather take any course to
redress it, than go to God for his help.
He will first try all ways to repair his loss, and quite weary himself out in
so doing; he had rather to enslave himself to Satan than become Christ's
freeman. And the Reason of this is.

1. Negatively.

1. Not because there is indeed any help to be had elsewhere, for indeed there
is none: Man's misery is such as the whole creation cannot repair it, it is vain
to look any where for salvation, Jer. 3. 23. Man may try many conclusions, but
it is a certain truth before he tryes, that he shall be wholly disappointed,
they who forsake God, follows lies.

2. Nor because there is not help to be had with God for such: Fallen,
back-slidden, wandering Prodigals may have hope with him in returning, Hos. 13.
9. Oh Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. Hence the
following invitation, Chap. 14. 1. The Prodigal when he came home found it so.
God is both able and willing, hence he never casts off a true penitent, but
always gave to such the best welcome.

2. Affirmatively.

1. From the pride of heart which is in natural men: There is a proud shame (as
I may call it) when a man knowing that he has ill deserved at the hands of
God, and greatly provoked him to anger by sinful departing from him, whereby he
has become his own undoer, is now ashamed to come in God's sight, such was in
our first Parents upon their Apostasy, Genesis 3. 10. Man is ashamed, i.e. in
truth he is too proud to take that shame to himself, which he must, if ever he
hope to find acceptance.

2. Because his former Conviction has not taken away all his hopes; nay,
although he feels his misery, and is convinced that the worlds help fails him,
and will not supply him voluntarily, yet he hopes that he may do something
whereby he may help himself. The young man thought if he could but put himself
out to service, he might be in a way to earn a living; so convinced sinners
hope they may, by their own pains taking, get some ease, some relief; and if
they can but make and shift to silence conscience, or cheat their own souls, so
that their present terrors need not to make them afraid, they are satisfied.

USE, 1. Here we have one reason why it is oftentimes so long after notable
convictions of misery, before many are truly brought home to God: why the
convinced sinner has many courses to try, he sots his wit and invention to
work, and though he has lost his estate, lost the worlds favor, yet he has
his fingers ends; if he have it not in himself, yet notwithstanding he may earn
it by his industry: Proud man is loath to come upon his knees, he is not willing
to turn beggar; he may be stung with Conviction, and yet not killed with
despair, he may be at some loss, and not a lost creature in his own
apprehension; he has some hopes that he may shift, and if he can catch at any
straw, he will not swim to the Ark; nay, never expect as long as men have any
project of their own, that ever they will come to God: And hence the Scripture
speaks of going from mountain to hill, Jer. 50. 6.

USE, 2. To teach us what is to be done to and with such as are under these
convictions: they are not yet fit for Christ, not perswadable to go to him; no,
but they must be yet driven farther; they must have their hands knocked off from
every hold, and yet fall into the ocean of distress, before they will look to
the Temple: our endeavoring therefore, and our prayers must be, that they may
be shaken out of all: a despairing soul is, though a sad, yet an encouraging
sight, there is then hope, Isa. 41. 17.

USE, 3. It may teach us to pity the empty designs that many are driving,
after that they have had conviction of their misery: Some there be that seek to
repair it by their reformation, others to forget it by involving themselves in
vain and secular business, and many there be that would sooth themselves up
with a general notion of God's mercy, and by these and the like fancies, poor
miserable man takes pains to make themselves more miserable, for all this that
they do is to no purpose, Jer. 46. 11.

DOCT. III. The folly of sinful man brings him into a state of necessary and
voluntary bondage.
The Prodigal binds himself out for a servant. The two terms used in the
Doctrine may seem contradictory, but they are not: His bondage is necessary;
when he had spent all, and there was no friend to relieve him, what could he
now do? he saw no other way, but either he must bind himself out or starve. The
curse that fell upon Cham literally, fell upon all mankind spiritually: This
servitude is therefore necessary, because, being a part of the curse, it falls
upon the natural man undoubtedly, being a punishment inflicted upon man by God
for sin, Joh. 8. 3. Whosoever commits sin, is the servant, of sin. And ye it
is.

2. Voluntary; men give themselves up to this slavery; they will do it, Joh. 8.
44. You are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do.
This bondage is man's own choice: Had this son been willing to retrun to his
father, the necessity had been taken away; but men give themselves up to satan;
and the ground of this lies in the very nature of sin, which is a relinquishing
of the service of God and enslaving a man's self to satan. Now this bondage is
not bodily so much as spiritual; it is an enslaving or binding of the soul to
his service, and consists in these things.

1. He is now at Satan's beck, and ready to hearken to; and attend every hint
from him, to come and go at his pleasure; he has given him the lordship of his
soul, and bids him to take him under his government; hence he is said to rule
in the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.

2. He is ready and forward to do all Satan's commands, let them be what they
will; he refuses none, though never so base; if he sends him into the field to
keep swine, he goes readily, and willingly about his business, so sordid and
slavish a spirit has he gotten.

3. He is devoted to his own lust; for Satan rules in the unregenerate, by
leading them after the lusts of their own hearts, which are also in the
Scripture, called the lusts of Satan, because he busily sets them on work, and
serves himself and his own ends by them.

4. Here he has his whole dependence or relyance for relief, this is the
utmost essay he has to make, it is his last shift, and if this course fails
him he is undone: As a servant expects (at least) food and raiment for his
work, so the sinner hopes to get quiet and settlement in the service of Satan.
Now the reason why men do thus oftentimes, after they have been convinced of
misery, lies here, because this conviction does not so properly put man upon it
to get rid of sin, but to get his terrors removed, to get off his fears; and
now Satan persuades him with many wiles to yield to him, and he will effect it,
but how poorly he performs it for them, we shall soon hear.

USE. Hence we may learn what to judge of all those who are remaining in a
state of nature; they are in most servile slavish condition, and let every
unregenerate man lay it to heart, consider therefore.

1. Whom it is that you are enslaved to, it is Satan himself, he is that
Citizen the Prodigal bound himself under.

2. What a manner of bondage you are in, viz.

1. It is necessary; I mean that which you have made so by your folly, for your
natural condition leads you to it uncontrolably, and Satan has gotten the
possession of your wills, and all your faculties; and hence natural men are
said to be led about by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

2. It is your own doing and choice: thou wentest and joynedst thy self to him,
hoping so to advance and meliorate thy condition, but all to no purpose, as
will anon appear; and let this humble thee, to think that thou have given Satan
that possession of thy heart, that thou have indented with him, and joined thy
self to him: Learn hence also th^^ thou can not lay the blame of thy misery
upon any but thy self; it is the course thou have deliberately taken to rid thy
self of misery by, but will be found a delusive project, and that which will
involve thee in the greatest distress. Ah, what poor shifts are they which
wretched sinners are driven to, when God makes them know themselves miserable,
but reveals not to their souls the only way to recover out of it.

DOCT. IV. Satan exposes his Vassals to all mean, ignoble, and sordid services.
This our Savior aims at, by the Citizens setting him to keep swine: Swine
were of old by the Ceremonial Law reckoned among unclean beasts, and still they
are of brutes the most brutish: A swineherd among men is accounted the most
low, sordid and contemptible employment: Such and so vile; yea, and
incomparably more base are those services which Satan imployes wicked men
about: we may conceive of thi^ if we consider wha^ (...) is he puts them upon
doing: It is called in the Scripture, a fulfilling of his lusts, Joh. 8. 44.
and those are vile lusts so called, Romans 1. 26. If we should examine in
particular, what it is that wicked men do, in obedience to Satan's will, we
shall find it all to be filthy and swinish: What is the drunkards employment,
but swilling himself, and turning his body into a living cask, and so losing
that little of man which he had in him, and wholly becomes a beast? What does
the lewd and voluptuous man follow, but the giving scope to his lustful
humor, and so throws himself into the perpetration of those base and obscene
actions of which it is a shame to make any mention? As for the Epicure,
Philosophy it self calls him not a swine-herd, but a very swine: Epicuri de
grige porcum. And in truth all lusts are brutish; it has its seat in the
sensitive part of man, and its highest aspirings are but to give content to the
body and senses, with a total neglect of the soul. Let us but consider what man
was made for, viz. the service of God, those high and noble employments which
Angels delight in, and account their glory, and then look and see what a world
of men are doing, one courting his pleasures, another chasing after honors, a
third heaping up wealth, a fourth studying his revenge, etc. unto any of which
(in a true judgment) keeping of swine is a noble and honorable employment: And
yet these are the things with which Satan seeks to divert men, and in the
pursuit after which he makes them to hope that they shall get a living in this
famine.

Reas From the malice which Satan bears against the Children of men: Who can
expect favor or fidelity from an enemy? It is true, Satan promises men fair,
and pretends to be a sure friend in a time of need, and makes them believe he
proffers to do them a kindness, and thus with many fair words and deceivable,
he draws them after him; but in truth, he hates the whole race of mankind, and
all his contrivance is to compass their utter and unavoidable ruin: He undid
himself (as is thought by diverse judicious) that he might undo man, and having
by this horrid attempt of his lost his own felicity, without any the least
glimmering hope of any retrival for ever, how is it possible we should believe
that he can study man's welfare,? And the truth is, Satan's Kingdom is most
properly a Tyranny, and it comes to pass through the righteous judgment of God:
Satan being, of a fellow servants, risen to be a master, and man having forsaken
God, and joined himself to him, choosing rather to be at his courteousie, than
under God's directions, the Devil now in stead of a subject makes of him a
slave.

USE, 1. See from whence we are fallen by sin, and learn to be ashamed of our
selves: Every unregenerate man has reason to hide his head with shame: If one
of his fathers family had come to this young man, as he followed his swine,
ragged and tattered, and put him in mind of his former condition, how tenderly
he was brought up by the care of a loving father, etc. how think you would he
have looked? would he not have hid his head in some bush? what blushing and
stupefaction would he have been siezed withal? Why this is the very condition
of all men out of Christ: Remember therefore what you once were, look back to
your former state, when you were favorites of God, adorned with his Image,
shining with his Graces, and dwelling in his Paradise, living in good fashion,
and fitted for the best and most honorable employment: But how are you now
changed into a company of swine-herds; yea, rather into mere swine? and that
which makes it the more wonderful, is that we see men are proud of this
employment.

USE, 2. Here we see a reason why it often fall out that men, after terrible
awakenings, and convictions of wrath and misery, grow more loose, more vain,
more addicted to folly and vanity than before: It shows us that they have been
using of foolish courses, they have gone to Satan for advice, and not to the
Spirit of God; and the truth is, Satan is now more bu^ie, and urgent with the
soul to hearken to him, and if it do, this is that which always comes of it.
Satan evermore directs men to some ignoble course or other; sends Cain to
build Cities, that the noise of the hammers and and ^axes may silence or drown
the voice of Conscience, sets the drunkard to his cups, the wanton to his
harlots, the vain man to his merry company, etc. and God often permits this, to
the end that his Elect may be the more convinced of their own folly and
impotency, and of the wonderful riches of his grace in bringing of them home:
And as long as men will afford an ear to Satan, it is not to be hoped that ever
they should do better. Let us therefore pity such poor souls, and yet let us
hope and pray for them: Conviction may be a seed of conversion, and though God
suffer it to die, and seem to be utterly lost, in its good time, it may revive
again to efficacy, after they have unprofitably made themselves the Devils
drudges, and wearied themselves in their way; they may be taken in their
months, Jer. 2. 24.

USE, 3. To awaken poor enslaved sinners to think, and seriously to consider of
their miserable and ignoble drudgery: Had thou one spark of that noble spirit
of man in his creation, left in thee, thou would rather choose to die, than
live in such a service: Art thou poor and famishing? and do thou think Satan
can relieve thee? Alas, the best that he can promise thee is but that poor
world, where thou have once already found there is a famine, he does but paint
it over in new colors to cheat thee: And for it thou must keep swine, be a
drudge to the vilest of his lusts, and he will never give thee any better
preferment; nay, his very design is to make thee a miserable slave here, that
thou may be a damned wretch hereafter. Stay then and consider before thou
go and joynest thy self to him; what can thou promise thy self at his
hands, who never did any thing but undo all those that have placed themselves
under him, and put their trust in him? God is a better Master, and if thou will
come to him, he will give thee a better service, and high-calling; he will give
thee a clean and not a dirty service, thou shall be a freeman and no longer a
slave, it shall be a Glory for thee to serve him, the service it self shall be
thy honor and felicity, and in the end of it, thou shall be advanced to a
throne and a Crown.

SERMON IX.
Verse. 16. And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the
swine did eat; and no man gave unto him.
WE now come to consider the miserable issue of all his endeavors, and the
utter extremity which he was reduced unto, intimated in this verse, and is
considerable in two things.

1. The base and sordid spirit he was reduced unto, the Citizen sent him to
keep swine, but he would fain have made a swine of himself, and give himself
leave to be a fellow-comoner with his hogs: Husk, and draff would now have
contented him, if he might but have had his belly full of them: And would fain
have f^^ed his belly, etc.

2. That even this poor and contemptible succor failed him: No man gave him.

[He would fain] the word signifies to covet, to lust, to long earnestly for a
thing, noting the reachings and desires of carnal corruption.

[Have filled his belly] i.e. answered his desires, or satisfied his wants, or
gotton content to his soul.

[With the husks] The word signifies, the rinds or parings of fruits, the pods
of beans, pease, etc. with which in those countries they fed their hogs: and
afterward Acorns, and such like course things were called by the same word: it
here intends the things of the world, earthly things, things of this life.

[That the swine eat] i. e. Such things as earthly minded men (who are here
called swine) did feed themselves withal.

[And no man gave to him] i. e. He failed in all his endeavors, he could find
out no way to attain them. Hence,

DOCT. I. The things of this world are bu^ husks.
I know some by these husks interpret to be meant, the Doctrine of the Scribes
and Pharisees, who would persuade a man to rest in his own righteousness: but I
choose the former interpretation; and our Savior uses this mean and
opprobrious word, to show us what a low and little esteem we ought to set upon
earthly things. Now the things of the world may be called husks.

1. Negatively, not that they are things in themselves to be contemned
undervalued, or in their place and use to be despised. For,

1. They are the creatures of God, and therefore good in their place and use
for which he appointed them; God made nothing in vain, Genesis 1. ult.

2. They are outward blessings and so to be acknowledged by these that enjoy
them; they are called his hid treasure, Psalm. 17. 14. Yea, such blessings as
God will call men to an account for, and if he takes them away, it is a
punishment, Hos. 2. 8,9.

3. They are things by which the people of God are in this life sustained, and
comforted, and by the want whereof they are afflicted: They were made for the
supply of their bodies, and when God chasteneth his Children, he sometimes
takes them away, 2 Samuel 14. 13.

4. They are such things as we are to pray for in their place, and to deprecate
the want of them, Mat. 6. 11. But,

1. They are husks when they are propounded to the soul as its adequate object:
They are not food for souls, they cannot give satisfaction nor refreshment to
the spiritual part of man; they are neither suitable nor sufficient for that,
Mat. 16. 26.

2. They are husks; i. e. they are the object of low, mean, and vile spirits,
they are only carnal and sensual appetites, that place their contentment in
them; the basest spirited men are they that do most prize and pursue them.

3. They are husks, i. e. a truly illuminated, and savingly informed mind puts
a low and inconsiderable account upon them, in comparison of those better
things which the soul finds in Jesus Christ: and they plainly discover
themselves in all these respects to be but husks.

1. Because they are not fitted to the soul of man; they are too mean for it:
that is a spirit, but these are carnal things, that is a durable substance, but
these are things that perish in the using, Col. 22. 22.

2. Because they are unsatisfying: The soul of man is of a large reach, and the
desire of it aspire after more and greater things than this lower world
comprizeth in it; many men complain of too much of the world: i. e. Of the
cares, and burdens, and perplexities that it brings upon them, but no man was
ever yet satisfied with it: They are poor empty things, Pro. 21. 5.

USE, 1. Hence see their folly, who spend their whole time about the world, and
the things of it: They spend their money for that which is not bread, Isa. 55.
2. Is it not an horrible debasing of a man's nature, to aspire no higher, nor
seek for any thing better, than that which can neither suit nor satisfy him?
To gather husks, and more especially, such as, enjoying the Gospel, have a
better trade opened to them? Such before whom the way is presented in which
they might come to inherit substance? And what are such as are full fraught
with the things of the world? shall we count them rich and happy? I pray what
is a Ship-load, or a Warehouse full of husks worth? True grace, though it
makes but a little show, is a Jewel more worth than a whole world of such
pitiful lumber.

USE, 2. Let it then awaken us all to lay out our time, strength, and care
about better things; be not content with this world: If these things are no
better than husks, leave them to swine, if you are men, seek man's meat.
Consider,

1. There are better things: There is a better happiness to be had from God in
Christ, tendered to you in the Gospel, than all you can hope for in the world,
Psalm. 144. ult. Happy is that People, whose God is the Lord.

2. We are commanded to make these better things the object of our pursuit,
Joh. 6. 27. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures
to everlasting life. Hence there is hope that we may obtain it, if wediligently
seek it.

3. Ere long there will be no husks: The things of this world will certainly
fail in a very little time, and then woe will be to him that has (...) thing
better to trust to; distress and anguish must need sieze upon him; he only is a
wise man that now takes care to be provided against these things fail, Luke 15.
9.

DOCT. II. Natural man would fain find content and satisfaction in these mean
things of the World.
The young man, if he could have had his fill of husks, would have thought
himself happy. It is an hard matter to persuade a blind sinner that his misery
is any where else to be repaired, his great longings are to be filled with
husks, to have his desires answered in the things below. This is evident,

1. From the restless endeavors which natural men use for the obtaining of the
things of this life: That which a man's utmost desires and endeavors are laid
out about, that is that which he builds his hopes upon, and such is the world
to the men of the world: All men's projects, aims and endeavors run this way,
their heads are always roling, their hands and feet always moving to this;
for this it is they rise up early, sit up late, wear themselves out in restless
labor, that they may grasp in as much as they can of these things; yea, the
Psalmist undertakes to tell us what are their inward thoughts, Psalm. 94. 11.
Their inwards thought is that their houses shall continue for ever.

2. From the confidence which worldly men place in their enjoyment of the
things of the world: If once they prosper, they presently grow high, and proud
and self-conceited, though formerly they carried themselves low and humble:
yea, now they begin to be become regardless of convictions, and too good for
reproofs; yea, they are strongly confident, and presumptuously take up their
rest here: They are upon this account called their strong City, Pro.18.11.

3. From the miserable complaint which they make when they lose these things:
they are presently undone, their gods are taken from them, their hopes vanish,
and they begin to despair; they now think all joy is departed, and they must
never expect to see good day more; their bladders are pricked, and now they
sink: And did not men lean their weight upon those things, they would not so
anxiously perplex their souls at the loss of them.

Reason. 1. From the sensuality which possesses the heart of every natural
man: Man is become a slave to his sense, whence it comes to pass that he is
persuaded to judge these things to be most suitable for him: sin having thrown
all out of order; sense is now gotten above reason; hence, as swine run after
husks, because they suit their nature, and are proper for their kind, so
natural men find and taste a sensitive sweetness in the things of the world,
and that makes them to say, Happy is the People that is in such a case* Psalm.
144, ult.

Reas. 2. From the natural ignorance which there is in unregenerate men of
better things: Man by sin has lost the knowledge and apprehension of spiritual
and heavenly things, he understands not what they mean, I Cor. 2. 14. The
natural man receives not ( i. e. into his understanding) the things of the
spirit of God. The highest reach of his understanding is to find and apprehend
some seeming outward repast in the comforts and conveniences of this world,
and hence he aspires no higher. As a beast is not acquainted with the
excellency of a rational life, and hence he accounts his own the best, looks
after no better: Now every man i^ become brutish, as the Scripture informs us.

Reas. 3. From the delusion of Satan and the World, who promise to vain man
more from the enjoyment of these things, than ever they can perform for him;
and the credulous soul is ready to believe them, and the rather, because these
things are seen, whereas spiritual things are not seen: Satan presents the
world in a fine and fair dress, and the heart of man is easily deluded; he
thinks it to be all out as good as it looks for, and so his affections are
stolen away, Isa. 44. 20.

USE, I. Hence wonder not to see the men of the world carried out so instantly,
and with such eagerness in pursuit of the things of this life: their poor,
hungry, starving souls want supply, and they hope to fill their bellies with
these things; they are their happiness: could we but see the inside of the
greedy worldling, and know what conceptions he entertains himself withal, how
he promises himself all peace, comfort, content and felicity in the creature,
(our savior characterizeth him to the life, in, Luke 12. 17, 18, 19.) We would
no more wonder at his violence, his eager and immoderate pursuit after them,
every man loves life, is loath to perish, and is therefore (in distress) ready
to say, who shall show me good, and now through his own mistake, increased by
the devils delusion, and the worlds flatteries, he conceives that he has found
it: Oh! thinks he, could I but have my belly full of these husks, I should be
well of it: he envyes the very swine their draffe, and could he but be
quartered with them, he would desire no more.

USE, 2. Here we are informed that an eager, resolute, and insatiable pursuit
after the things of this world, is an argument of an unregenerate man; or an
evidence of one that is not as yet truly converted unto God. It is clear and
undeniable, that a man's chief good is his highest pursuit; and hence if he
makes those things his utmost reach, it is a proof that he never knew better,
and that is the very reason why he is so violent after them: Wonder not then
that covetousness is so often in Scripture branded with the odious name of
Idolatry; it being a resolved and not to be questioned Truth, that the World is
the covetous man's God.

USE, 3. Let this consideration be an incentive and strong persuasive to the
people of God, to stir them up to the more eagerness in pursuit after heaven
and heavenly things, and to look for your souls satisfaction in them: When you
see the men of the world so eager and busy in seeking to load themselves with
thick clay, how should it fill you with an holy emulation, and excite you with
utmost endeavor to labor to outstrip them in this more profitable pursuit?
And it may encourage you to be as diligent as; yea more follicitous than they,
to consider.

1. That they labor for the things that perish, but you are an enduring
substance: When they have gotten it (if ever they do get the World) it soon
vanishes away again; but what you have in your eye and aim, is a treasure that
endures, and never will wax old or go to decay: With this argument the Apostle
stirrs up his Corinthians, I Cor. 9. 25. They do it to obtain a corruptible
Crown, but we are incorruptible.

2. They seek that which shall never fill their bellies, never give them
satisfaction: Their eye is never satisfied with seeing, etc. But God has
promised you to satisfy your most enlarged desires, Psalm. 81. 9. Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it. He has told you that he will give you durable
riches and righteousness, you shall be abundantly satisfied and filled: This is
the way to enjoy abundance, to inherit substance; your labor shall never be
lost, nor shall you ever see cause to repent of your care and pains, when you
shall find, not your hands full of husks which satisfy not, but your souls
replenished with grace and glory.

DOCT. III. Wicked men are mere swine.
It is certain that our Savior by this term aims at these, and indeed they are
very much alike, for,

1. Swine love to live upon husks and draff: The coursest and meanest things
best content them: Thus, give a natural man the things of this world, and let
who likes it take heaven, hence it is said, their names are written in the
earth, Jer. 17. 13. they aspire no higher; how like a hog did he express
himself, that protested he would not change his part in Paris for a part in
Paradise?

2. They are most unprofitable as long as they live, they do no good all their
life time, they cloth us not as the Sheep, nor labor for us as the Ox, etc.
but are a mere charge without service: and as little good do ungodly men whiles
they live in the world, Romans 3.12. They are altogether become unprofitable.
They bring God no honor, but dishonor him all their days, only, as swine
when they are dead are for our service, so when wicked men dye God will get
Glory upon them in the eternal triumphs of Divine revenge.

3. They are a very mischievous creature, they are always doing damage, except
carefully looked after; rooting up the ground, and breaking into the Corn, etc.
Such are the ways of them that know not God, they are ever provoking him,
dishonouring his Name, and doing mischief to his People, Psalm. 58. 3, 4.

4. They are a nasty, brutish, filthy, loathsome creature, always wallowing in
the mire^ defiling themselves, and polluting of all that comes near them, if
you should wash them clean they will presently fall to wallowing in the next
slough they meet withal: And such is the whole life of wicked men, a mere
pollution, they are always defiling themselves with unclean lusts, wallowing
in the mire of sin, and never content but when they are entertaining themselves
with filthiness: hence called corrupt and abominable, Psalm. 14. 1, 3.

USE. Let this humble every unregenerate man: Are you out of Christ? you here
see, that though you think your selves of worth and excellency, persons of
merit and account, yet it is a (...) account which Jesus Christ sets upon you;
how low and base you are in his eyes: and let it teach all those who desire to
pass a right judgment on persons and things, not overmuch to admire, or set
too high an esteem upon those that are out of Christ: It cannot be less than
the basest Idolatry, to worship and adore a nasty filthy swine.

DOCT. IV. God many times, when he intends a Soul true good, withholds from him
the thing of this world, though he long for, and lay out after them never so
earnestly.
Men labor hard, take a great deal of pains, weary themselves in pursuit, and
think why may not they obtain it as well as others? their opportunities are as
fair, their understandings as pregnant, their endeavors as prudent and
diligent, and still there is an unseen obstacle, a remora that is put to their
endeavors, that they prosper not: That this is of God, the Prophet tells us,
Hab. 2. 13. and he oftentimes makes it to be thus in order to their conversion
and best good. And the reason why God takes this course is,

1. From the natural tendency which there is in outward prosperity to hinder a
sinners conversion: for it is an occasion of making him proud, self-conceited,
deaf to counsel, Jer. 22. 21. I spoke to thee in thy prosperity, and thou
would not hear. When men are settled upon the world and their hearts are at
ease, they like not to be disturbed.

2. Because the natural man will never go to God as long as he has any hopes
elsewhere: If he can but have his belly full of husks, he cares for seeking no
farther; he must therefore be taken off from every thing here, before he comes
to rest upon Christ, who is the only foundation of true rest.

USE. 1. To teach us not to interpret God's providence in the worst sense: Do
not be too ready to conclude that he hates you when he strips you of all, but
observe the issue; be not angry if he hides all created good from you, that he
may make way thoroughly to reveal all his own increated excellencies to your
souls; for know it, this is the best love of God you are capable of.

USE, 2: To advise such as are ceduced to the utmost straits what to do; i: e:
betake your selves to God: Can you not get your bellies full of husks? are
your enterprises defeated in the world, let that stir you up to think where
there is bread to be had: It may be you have no husks to feed on, or if you
have yet they give you no satisfaction: Let this put you upon it to enquire for
that which is better, something which you may have to live upon in the famine,
that when the men of the world, for all its draff, must famish and starve, you
may have that bread to live upon which endures to eternal life.

SERMON X.
Verse. 17. And when he came to himself, he said how many hired Servants of my
Fathers have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger?
THe first part of the Parable, containing the Prodigal's departure from his
Father, with the effects following thereupon, has been briefly handled: The
second part containing his return to his Father, with the motives to, and
manner of it, is next to be considered, and is described from verse, 17. to 20
The prime and general intent whereof is to express the ordinary way and manner
of the conversion of a sinner unto God: In which there are two things to be
observed.

1. A solemn and serious deliberation with himself, verse. 17,18,19.

2. His putting of this deliberation in execution, verse. 20. begin.

1. In his deliberation we may consider: 1. The season or occasion of it,
verse, 17. When he came to himself. 2. The things deliberated by him, which
are, 1. Motives and encouragments to his return, verse, 17. 2. A strong
conclusion or firm resolution built upon those arguments, verse, 18, 19. I shall
begin with the first, viz.

1. The season or occasion of this deliberation, in these words, When he came
to himself: This is the proper English of the words: Piscator renders it, quum
in se descendisset; when he descended into himself: i. e. by serious reflection
and consideration, how profusely he had wasted his Patrimony, and what
miserable exigencies he had brought himself to: Beza reads it, quum ad se
rediisset; when he had returned to himself: in which sense the generality of
Interpreters understand it, as intimating that he had been all this while not
himself, or besides himself, by which phrase we express a mad man, or one
distracted, one that has not the use of his reason: And the phrase, ad se
redire, or to come to ones self, is among the Latins used to express a
recovery from a frenzy, and restoring a man to his right mind. Hence,

DOCT. 1. The natural man, whiles he is wandering from God, is beside himself.
As long as a man seeks happiness and soulsatisfaction any where else but in
God, he is spiritually distracted, out of his wits, a mere madman: Hence the
Scripture call every natural man, a fool, Psalm. 14. 1. a madman, Eccl. 9. 3.
one that is without knowledge, Jer. 4. 22. It is the natural, habitual, and
hereditary distemper of all Adam's posterity. Man got a fall in the Cradle of
his infancy, which has not only lamed his feet, but crazed his brain, which
craziness runs in the blood, and is propagated to his Children. Folly, dotage,
and madness, are but the diverse degrees of one distemper and are indifferently
used in Scripture to hold forth the same thing. Now the evidence of the
Doctrine will appear, when we have considered what are the symptoms and notes
whereby a fool and frantic are to be known, and have seen the like to be in
the unregenerate and secure sinner, and they are such as these.

1. An ignorant preferring of the worst things before the best: because he
knows not the worth of things, but follows his own fancy, therefore his bauble
is of greatest worth and excellency: If things shine, and make a fair show,
they are the things in his account: He judges of things not by their worth,
but by appearance: Such are unregenerate men, the little things, the trifles of
this world, the shining glories of it, only win credit with them, and they
incomparably prefer them to the glory of another world: A little earthly pelf
is better than all the treasures of Heaven, a little frothy pleasure is more
worth than everlasting joys, the worlds applause out-weighs the Crown of Glory
in their esteem: They call good evil, they see no excellency in God and his
ways, Isa. 5. 20. Job 21. 13, 14.

2. In the choice which they make: And this follows upon the former: a crazed
understanding, accompanied with a perverted will, makes a madman. It was a
rule of old to try a fool by his choice, presenting him some gay nothing, and
some other thing of worth: Thus every unregenerate man sitting under the
Gospel, has Heaven and Earth set before him, fading vanities and everlasting
mercies; and he chooses these poor things, and leaves those other, he runs away
with the world, and the contemptible things of it, and scorns the pross^^s of
Grace and Glory, chooses a lump of earth ather than a Crown of Stars: The great
things of the Law are counted strange things; the little things of the world
are excellent things, Isa. 66: 3: They have chosen their own ways.

3. They are indiscreet and inconsiderate in all they do; fools deliberate not
of their actions; they neither ask a reason, nor ponder of the event, but go
headlong and precipitant into all, Pro. 27. 12. The simple pass on: just so do
unregenerate men; they ponder not any of their paths, but are led blindfold
after their lusts, Isa. 1. 3. Israel does not know, my People does not
consider. Hence that expostulation, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. They never ask that question,
what they are doing, or whether their ways are tending, Pro. 7. 22,23. He
g^eth after her, -- as a bird hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is
for his life.

4. They are very bold and hardy, they fear no dangers that are before them,
and will therefore run themselves upon any mischief: If their way be through
fire and water, they are not daunted at it, hence our proverb, foolhardy. So
are sinners; warnings, threatinings, terrors of the Almighty fright them not;
though the sword of Divine vengeance hang over their heads, though God's
judgments are abroad in the world, and their wicked companions are swept away
thereby, yet still they hold on their course, hence compared to the horse, Jer.
8: 6: Every one turns to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. Of
whose rashness see, Job 39.21: etc.

5. They are incapable of receiving counsel, or being convinced of their
foolish and mad ways: There is no persuading a fool or madman with reason, for
wisdom and counsel is out of his reach: If you fetch all the Topics in Logic,
and all the Tropes and figures in Rhetoric, you may move a stone sooner than
him from his notions: Thus unregenerate men are unteachable; you may teach an
Ox and an Ass sooner, Isa. 1: 3: Tell them of the evil of their ways, the
unreasonableness of their courses, bring the witness of natural conscience, the
testimony of reason, the light of Scripture, and all will not move or persuade
them: Plead, entreat, woo, solicit by all that can be said or thought of,
surdo canis. They are deaf adders, Psalm. 58: 4,5: Which will not hearken to the
voice of charms, charming never so wisely.

6. They are easily cheated and imposed upon: though they will not hear reason,
yet they are readily begulled and abused by fair and fallacious pretenses, they
may be cogged to give all they have away for a trifle: Truly thus does Satan,
that great jugler, abuse unregenerate men, he leads them about at his pleasure,
rooks them out of all that is good, persuades them to neglect God's day of
grace, turn their backs upon heaven, despise a Savior, trample upon the pearl
of price, and all for the sake of a few fading, perishing shows of carnal
content, and vain delight: Thus he beguiled our first Parents with an Apple,
and daily gulls multitudes of sinners, with rattles, and noises and poor empty
gay things to the eternal loss of their souls.

7. They mischief themselves and all they come near when let loose, and left to
themselves: It is a property of madness to be mischievous: Fools throw
firebrarnds and say they are in sport: Thus unregenerate men delight in nothing
but mischief, undoing their own souls, and the souls of all they have to do
with as much as in them lies; they run themselves to everlasting ruin and
destruction, and draw as many after them as they can, they will entise, allure,
persuade others to be their companions, Pro. 1. 10. Cast in thy lot with us.

8. They are most angry at those that endeavor to do them the most good: He
that binds or stops a madman, though he loves him, yet he vexes him: he
accounts them for his greatest enemies that would give him any hinderance in
his mad pranks; it is as safe meeting a Bear robbed of her whelps, as standing
in his way: Thus unrenewed men cannot bear to be told of their ways and
courses, they will count a Paul their enemy if he tells them the truth;
endeavor never so gently and compassionatly to persuade them that they are
going away from good, and bringing mischief upon their own heads, it is the way
to be ha^ed, back-bitten, reviled, and spitefully used by them: Ahab hates
Micajah, and thinks he never prophesies good to him: And takes Elijah to be the
troubler of Israel, because he reproved his wicked courses.

9. Correction or punishment will not reclaim them, and bring them to better
frame, but rather make them more mad, Pro. 17. 10. A reproof enters more into a
wise man than an hundred stripes into a fool. An hundred, nay if it were a
thousand, his folly would remain with him; yea, you may separate his soul from
his body, but not him from his folly; although you reduce him to atoms, yet
his foolishness abides still, Prove. 27.22. Thus are unregenerate men so
rivetted to their sin, it is so intrinsecally seated in them, and diffused
through them, that all the awful judgments of God make no impression upon them
to reclaim them; God may smite till he is weary of smiting, but they are as bad
as ever and worse, Isa. 1. 5. Why should ye be smitten any more, ye will revolt
more and more: Like Ahaz, in their affliction they will sin more than ever.

10. Folly and madness discovers it self in all they do: A wise word or action
may steal unawares from them, but this is the tract of their life, you may read
it in the tenor of their course: so spiritual madness is in all that
unconverted men do; what is the life of the proud and ambitious, but a pleasing
and priding themselves in a gay Coat, an handful of dirt, a cap and (...) knee
an empty title? which is mere foolery. How looks the covetous man, who like a
boy spends his time in rolling up a great snow ball, which melts before the
sun? What but madness are all the actions of the voluptuous, who put off man,
and put on beast, being brutish in all their prosecutions? what does the
passionate man, but scatter coals, and throw about firebrarnds, as if he had
nothing else to do, but set the world in a flame?

USE, 1. It may teach us not to wonder at all the exorbitanci^s and confusions
which we see acted in the world: when fools and madmen have gotten the reins in
their necks, and act all their own pleasure without any control, what better
can be expected? The workers of iniquity all of them have no knowledge, no
marvel then that they act so foolishly: Nay, much rather have we cause to
wonder at the power and wisdom of God, that so wisely orders, and powerfully
manageth this great Bedlam, as to carry on his own ends and designs in it
without control or let, causing even the folly of men to pay tribute to his
wisdom.

USE, 2. Here we see a reason why the moans of Grace, where they are never so
powerfully dispensed, are yet so ineffectual to the conversion of sinners; why
convictions fasten not, threatenings take not place, promises allure not the
Children of men, but they continue senseless under all: the wise man gives the
reason of it, Prove. 24. 7. Wisdom is too high for a fool. The saving knowledge
and spiritual improvement of these things is out of their reach: It is labor
lost to go about to instruct a man that is beside himself: hence it is not in
the power of means to work it; none but God who can restore lost man to his
wits again, and bring him to himself, is able to give efficacy to any
endeavors of this nature, and till then, line upon line, and precept upon
precept, are but as so much water spilt upon a rock.

USE, 3. It may also teach us how to carry it toward unregenerate sinners in
their unregeneracy, viz. as we would do to a man that is beside himself: i. e.
First, pity and pray for them; we are not wont to be enraged at a frantic,
though he play mad tricks, because we know it comes from his distemper: Thus
our Savior, Luke 23. 34. Father forgive them, they know not what they do: And
so Stephen, Act 7. 60. Lay not this sin to their charge. They need your pity
and prayers who can do nothing for themselves. 2. Be not afraid to anger them,
so you may but do them good: Think it not hard to be scorned, reviled, when you
rebuke and entreat them: Alas, if we should say or do nothing to them but what
they like, we should let them undo and destroy themselves, and become guilty of
their blood. 3. Choose them not for your counselors and companions: Who would
account it his commendation or profit, to associate with a fool, or make
himself the intimate of one that is out of his wits? None but fools delight in
fools.

USE. 4. It may exhort the people of God, (true Believers) to great
thankfulness to God for his wonderful love to you, that you are by his grace
restored to a sound mind: as, when we look upon one that is distracted, and see
what strange, imprudent, misguided, foolish actions he performs, it is a lesson
to all that look on, showing them how deeply they are bound to thank God, and
how much they ow him for their wits and understandings: so when we see what mad
courses prodigal sinners drive, how they are carried headlong after their own
lusts; go from God, spend all in riot, enslave themselves to Satan, and wast
away their time in the midst of restless and unsatisfying vanities, neither
knowing nor regarding an higher happiness; laboring for husks, and not filling
of themselves, and yet presuming that they are in a way to do well; Oh, how
should you acknowledge that Grace, from whence you have received more noble
principles, and are disposed to higher employments? That he has given you a
judgment and spirit of discerning between good and evil; especially remembering
that you had been once of that society, and had lived in their Bedlam still, if
he who alone is the great Physician of (...) not applied his grace, and so
cured you of this distemper.

USE, 5. It may also serve for a word of convicton to such as are in their
natural estate, let such be persuaded that they are beside themselves. Were you
but willing to consider of it, there is enough to make it evident: 1. In your
departing from God, and bidding him to go away from you, who only can make you
happy, and who can make you miserable: You forsake the fountain of living
water. 2. In your resolutely continuing in a course of sin; which is nothing
less than running upon a swords point, and exposing of your selves to fearful
plagues. 3. In placing your hope and confidence in the creature, which is empty
and deceitful, a broken cistern in which is no water, Jer. 2. 13. 4. In laying
all out upon your lusts, which fight against your souls, and are but fed and
nourished to your utter undoing. But I pass.

DOCT. II. God, in order to the conversion of a sinner, first works upon the
understanding.
The first step to true conversion is Divine (...). The Prodigal, before he
thinks of returning to his Father, first comes to himself: The ground of this
is in three things.

1. Man is a reasonable Creature, and a cause by counsel of his own actions:
The understanding in man is the light in him, by which he regulates all his
ways, and as he sees so he practices. The reason why sinful men place their
hopes in perishing things, is because they call evil good: This therefore is a
main part of man's misery, that his understanding is perverted, Psalm. 53. 2,4.

2. Faith, which is wrought in conversion, is grounded upon knowledge, Psalm. 9.
10. God deals with his creatures according to the manner of their being and
acting: Faith is a choosing, and so a closing with God; but every choice arises
from a rational and convincing discovery of the sutableness of the object
chosen, and preference which it is conceived to deserve above others: now this
discovery is made to the understanding, which is the eye of the mind whereby it
sees and judges of things. Hence,

3. It is impossible that the heart of man; which is naturally glewed to the
vanities of the world, and has been deeply settled in his high opinion of it,
should ever be made to renounce, cast off, and utterly to refuse to have any
thing more to do with them, or to place any more confidence in them, and make
choice of God in Christ, and prefer him above all, till he be thoroughly
enlightened in, and fully persuaded of his own misery, the creatures emptiness,
and the glorious fullness that there is in God: The things which he has so
loved must appear to be evil, and the God whom he has forsaken must appear to
be good: an unknown evil is not forsaken; an unknown good is not chosen: Hence
the absence of saving knowledge is the ground of destruction. Hos. 4. 6. Hence
conversion it self is often Synechdochically, called knowledge, and
understanding, because that is a main ingredient in it: And then a man begins
to come to himself, when he becomes to have a discerning of the truth of things.

USE, 1. Here we have a rule directing us what course to take for the
conversion of sinners; we must imitate God in this, if ever we would do sinners
any good; we must endeavor their conviction; we must first deal with their
understandings; to raise the affections, without informing the mind, is a
fruitless unprofitable labor, and serves but to make zeal without knowledge:
Man must first see before he will repent of his evil; he must first know if
ever he will love God, Psalm. 9. 10.

USE, 2. It tells us that there are great hopes of men when they begin to come
to themselves: If God begins once to cure men of their frenzy, to take them off
their wild opinions, and vain conceits of happiness, in the profits, pleasures,
and honors of this world, to make them see the emptiness of these things, and
their own misery for want of a better stay to trust to, these are in an hopeful
way to conversion. hence,

USE, 3. To teach us what to pray for in behalf of unregenerate sinners: i. e.
that they may come to themselves: that their eyes may be opened, that God will
illuminate their understandings, and give them to see things in their nature,
truths in their plainness: It may be they may think you beside your selves for
so doing, but it is the greatest love you can show them, and the blessing which
they nextly stand in need of. Would God be pleased but to settle men's minds,
and open their eyes, we should soon hear them cry out of their own madness and
folly, and condemn their prodigality and riot, and be earnestly enquiring after
God and Christ, and seeking something better than the world affords, to save
their sinking souls from perdition, Act. 2. 37.

SERMON XI.
2. WE are to take a view of the things deliberated, which are two.

1. Motives and encouragements to return to his father, in the rest of the
verse, 17. in the which we have both the motives themselves, and the way in
which they became beneficial to him. The general truth contained in these
motives was before a matter of conviction to him, it was that which made him to
be in want, but it wrought not kindly upon him, till he came, by serious
consideration, to apply it more closely to his own condition. Before I speak to
the motives themselves, we may a little consider how he came to improve them,
intimated in that word, he said: there is a speech of the tongue, and a speech
of the heart: the young man had none to discourse with in that far country, he
therefore communes with his own heart: the meaning is, he pondered of the
matter, considered and weighed in his mind, concluded of the truth, and made
application of it to his own condition. Hence,

DOCT. Consideration is the first step toward conversion.
The first thing we find, this young man does after he came to himself is, he
begins to consider, and discourse with himself: he first ponders, then
concludes, then acts. Conversion is properly the returning of a sinner from sin
unto God, emblemed to us by the Prodigal's return from a far country, to his
father's house: The sinner, before conversion, was going away from God, now he
is returning to him. Conversion is considered either passively or actively; the
soul is said to be passive in conversion, in as much as he can do nothing
savingly, till he has received a principle of saving grace: but still we
mistake, if we think that Gods deals with men as with stocks and stones, and
brute creatures: The will of man, which is the first mover in him, must not be
forced, but led: The spirit, though he deals irresistably, yet not violently
with it; hence he does not compel but persuade: which persuasion is a rational
conviction, whereby impression is made upon the understanding, and will, the
one being to see and approve, the other to embrace the object, which may be
called active conversion; when the soul viewing and discerning the force of
those arguments used by the spirit, and imprinted upon him, turns from sin to
God: and thus, though the Spirit of God be the author or efficient of this
work, yet he makes use of us in the working of it: This is that which I say
begins at consideration, and this will appear in a sew things.

1: The natural man's sinful way is right in his own eyes, unregenerate men,
though fools themselves, and foolish in all they do, yet think they are the
only wise and prudent: They call evil good; i. e. they so judge of it. The
Prodigal, in his vain humor, thought it the only happy life to get abroad into
a far country, and riot it among strangers, where he might live at large:
Sinners think the way to hell a fair, large, broad, pleasant way; here they
promise themselves to find pleasures, profits, preferments; they see no hurt in
their courses, and can laugh at the ways of God and godliness, as foolish and
unprofitable. Of these the wise man speaks, Prove. 14. 12. There is a way which
seems right to a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death. The truth is,
the greatest number of sinners think they sin with a great deal of reason.

2. Nay, the sinner has many strong engagments lying upon him to follow his
own ways and courses: his heart is naturally set upon them, sin is connatural
to him; he has all his dependence for happiness upon these designs, Ever since
man went away from God, and forsook him, he has had his dependence upon lying
vanities, and in those his hopes are laid up: Nay, there are many entising
promises, fair words, and deceiving flatteries which draw his heart away; his
lusts do as Prove. 7. 21. With much fair speech she caused him to yield, with
the flattery of her lips she forced him. The carnal concupiscences of the heart
of man, are no otherwise to be satiated, but in the prosecution of their sinful
ways.

3. More then this, he is deeply rooted in his way: He is practically fixed in
it by custom; it is the trade which he has lived in all his days: He took to
it naturally, learnt it readily, and has lived in it long. Now custom is a
second nature, and therefore of much difficulty to after or remove: Men's
essays in it are like the washing of an Ethiopian to get off his blackness, as
Jer. 13. 23. It is an hard matter to persuade men to leave off old customs,
though never so bad: but besides this, he is also rooted in it by the
approbation of his misperswaded judgment; it has gotten room in his heart, and
is high in his opinion, and that opinion is strengthened by observation and
experience: He has found it a profitable way, as they, Jer. 44. 17 It has
been very pleasant to him, Prove. 9.17. Stolen waters are sweet: Hence it must
needs be exceeding difficult, if not impossible, to make him out of love with
it, or think other than well of it: The covetous man finds a sweetness in gain,
the voluptuous man in his amorous embraces, the ambitious man in his
adorations, etc.

4. Besides this he has taken up strong prejudices against the way of
conversion; and that partly through the contrariety of his heart and nature to
it, in which there is a congene^^^^ aversness to all which is good; and partly
through the temptations and misrepresentations of Satan, who endeavors to
exhibit it before his thoughts in the blackest and ougliest colors that may
be; and that both against the beginning and progress of it; Godly sorrow,
mourning for sin, forsaking of our evil ways, turning into the strict ways of
God, and living a life of Godliness; these are harsh lessons, and hard sayings,
not readily entertained by a soul that loves jollity, and cares not to be
molested: the thoughts of such a work and way are frightful, and set him
violently against conversion in the very first motions of it: These are dull,
dark, strait, melancholic ways; besides the cross and persecution that is in
them: Hence the natural man is persuaded to think that there are none who live
so miserably and unhappily as the People of God, and if they should be
converted, farewell to joy and quiet, they must ever after be men of sorrows and
contention, and good days must be at an end with them.

5. To true conversion is necessarily required the full and free consent of the
will: for God regards the heart, and judges of men's actions according as
that is in them; so, the will is the regent in man, and the first mover to
every action: If that be true in it, the work is real, if that be deceitful,
the work is hypocritical: Conversion is a turning of the whole man from sin
unto God, it is a leaving off the old ways of sin, to take up a new life of
holiness; and how can this be done, so long as the heart loves to wander?
besides the will of man never stands neuter, though it may hault a while, till
the understanding has pondered and weighed things, yet it always comes at
length to a conclusion: Men will either love God or Sin, they will either serve
God or Mammon: Man is a traveller, he will keep some way: Hence you shall find
in the Scripture, that unconversion is ascribed to the will: Psalm. 81. 11.
Israel would none of me. But when the will is turned the work is done, when the
heart is given to God, all is his.

6. The Will will never be gained till all the forementioned obstructions be
taken away. For they are so many fortresses in which it setleth and secureth it
self: As long as the heart remains deceived, it is also unperswadable, Isa.
44. 20, A deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his
soul. Whiles men call good evil, and evil good, whiles a man's own way is right,
and pleasant, and accustomed, and God's ways are uneasy and unprofitable,
whiles he finds substance in a way of Sin, and fills his house with spoil, and
he sees no profit in praying to God and serving him, how can he desire the
knowledge of his ways? Nay, he will say to the Almighty, depart, 44.16, 17,
18. And till he finds Sin to be bitter, the way of it dangerous, the end death;
till he grows weary of this way, and sees the beauty in holiness, he will never
reject his old, and make choice of a new way.

7. The way wherein the spirit of God works this conviction, is by bringing
man under serious considerations; nor is it to be expected other ways to be
effected, for,

1. There, is no truth any further affects us, or moves with us, than as it is
applied particularly to our minds and consciences. The truths of the word of
God are ever the same, for they are everlasting truths: It was ever a truth,
that the ways of Sin lead to that chambers of death, that they are bitterness
in the latter end; that the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and
their latter end is peace: but these are general truths, and the reason why men
practice not accordingly, is because they never applied these truths to
themselves, or compared their ways by them; hence that complaint, Isa. 1. 3.
My People does not consider. And hence that is the first direction of the
Prophet, Hag. 1. 5. Now therefore, thus says the Lord, consider your ways.

2. This particular application of the truth to our selves, is the work of
consideration; this lets in the first distinct light into the soul, whereby it
is made privy to its own state, and stirred up to seek the bettering of it:
Consideration then may be thus described,. It is a deliberate pondering of such
things as nearly concern us, giving credit to them, and drawing useful
practical conclusions from them. All this is employed in the word, He said:
Consideration is an inward discourse, or ratiocination: but more particularly.

1. The act it self is a deliberate pondering in the mind: called Communing
with the heart, Psalm 4. 4. The mind of man is naturally roving, consideration
fixes it; it is compared to chewing the cud, wherein the food is turned over
and over: It is a looking upon, and into a thing with diligent inspection, it
is called, a laying a thing to heart, Isa. 42. 25. which is a close and serious
minding and weighing it.

2. The matter which it is conversant about, is such things as nearly concern
us: It is every ones work to look to the concerns of his own soul; if thou be
wise, be wise for thy self. Our conversion is not advanced in being busy in
other men's matters, but in our own, thy ways, and thy doings, is that which
the Scripture directs us to be thinking of.

3. That which gives weight to these things within us, is that we give credit
to them; If we do not believe the things, they will be of no moment in our
consideration; many a man hears weighty and seasonable truths spoken in the
ordinances, but he believes them not, and so rejects them: Truth must be
believed before it can be improved: Hence that Psalm 106. 24. They despised the
pleasant land: they believed not his word.

4. The improvement of it, is to draw useful practical conclusions from it. All
truths lead to practice; and that consideration that issues not here is
fruitless: The work of consideration is to say, what have I done, or what have
I to do, if these things be thus or so? Now, till the soul comes unto this, it
is not so much as in the way to conversion; for, though the spirit draws, yet
the soul follows, and that not as a blind or dead thing, but as it is affected
or persuaded by the efficacy of that which leads it sweetly after, and whereof
it can give an account, and render a reason for what it does: Thus Lydia's
heart was touched, and she hearkened etc, Thus the Prodigal, comes to himself,
and then he reasons within himself.

USE, 1. For Information; we may hence learn.

1. The reason why there are so many under the clearest Gospel dispensations,
that live and ly in Sin: It is not for want of light, for Scripture truths are
written with Sunbeams; it is not for want of evidence, for they are full of
demonstration; it is not because men are not concerned in them, for their
everlasting concerns are therein contained; but it is for want of due
consideration: Men come and go, they hear the Word the most pertinent and
profitable truths; but few make personal application; few enter into their own
souls and debate the matter with themselves: It is God's complaint, Jer. 8. 6.
No man repented of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? Men rush into the
ways of Sin, and are bold and fearless, though God sees and threatens, and
why? Because they do not consider of this, Hos. 7. 2. They consider not in
their hearts, that I remember all their wickedness. Jerusalem is obstinate,
till she be ruined, and why? see, Lam. 1. 9. She remembers not her last end,
therefore she came down wonderfully The young fool follows his harlots, till
a dart strikes through his liver, and how is this?. Prove. 7. 25. He knows
not that it is for his life: The sons and daughters of men are wilfully blind,
because they shut their eyes, and will not receive counsel. If men would look
into their sinful ways, and compare them by the word of God, they might find
enough to terrify and fright them therefrom; but they cannot abide to think of
it: If they would enquire into the ways of God, they might discover the purity
and pleasantness of them; but they will not suffer their thoughts to dwell
there: Hence they are called sottish children: Nay, if the spirit of God begin
to touch and prick them, they are never well till they have banished all the
thoughts of seriousness, or sense of regret; hence they are compared to men
that are drunk and asleep, that cannot abide to be awakened, and if they are
made to rub their eyes, they soon fall asleep again: Hence also it is that they
cannot endure soulsearching truths, left they should be disquieted; and thus
men go on till they drop into hell for want of consideration.

2. The reason why Satan, especially under powerful means, so much endeavors
to keep men from consideration, and to divert their minds from pondering the
truth; why, if he sees a soul once come to this, he is afraid that he shall
lose him: Nothing more afrights this politic enemy, than to see souls begin to
be serious: he knows his kingdom is maintained by fallacies, kept up by
darkness; hence when a beam of light flasheth upon any conscience, he labors
to extinguish it, by drawing the mind off; and therefore in the house of God,
and in the dispensation of the Ordinances, he seeks to stop their ears, divert
their thoughts, occupy them some other way; some he lulls asleep, others he
invites to private discourse, to others he presents some object on which their
eyes may be fixed, and he fills others with fancies, which occasion roving
thoughts, that they may not attend: And if any are touched by the word, and
begin to be affected, he hurries them away, not to their closets, but either to
their vain company, or secular business; he finds something or other to employ
their minds, and fill them with diversion, that so (if possible) they may not
have no more serious thoughts of those matters: This is Emblematized to us by
our Savior, in the high way ground, those fowls of the heaven which pick up
the seed, are Satan; and by those means it is that he keeps up his authority in
the hearts of men.

3. The reason why worldly occasions or delights, are to carnal hearts so great
an obstruction to their conversion; why they choke good thoughts, good motions,
and this is discovered in the thorny ground: Cares and deceitfulness of the
world are these thorns; alas! men have so much to do in the world, that it is
a wonder if they do not (with those ghuests, Mat. 22.) desire to be excused
from coming at the Ordinances; but if they do in complement attend them, yet
they have no time or leisure to improve what they hear, by consideration: Men
have so much to do here in this world, that they cannot find a convenient time
to think of the affairs of their souls: The clamor of outward business, speaks
so much that they have no time to say a serious word to themselves about
eternity and the things of another world: they are always in a crowd and
hurry, and there is no room for meditation; one has his Shop to look after,
another his Ship to fit out, lawful things, and duties in their time and place;
but it is great pity that there should be no thoughts mean while of those
greater matters: And hence no wonder that our Savior speaks of it as a
difficult, and miraculous thing for a rich man to be converted, because his
mind is so taken up, his heart so fixed, his thoughts so occupied here, that he
hears not the trumpet sound, nor takes the alarm of the word, nor ever so much
as seriously thinks of an after state, and how much he is concerned in it.

USE, 2. For a word of Counsel and Exhortation unto sinners: Oh, be persuaded
as you love your souls, and desire their good, as ever you would be converted
and healed, that you would be entreated to call your hearts to an account, and
put your selves upon serious and solemn consideration; consider your state,
your ways, your end, and for Motive.

1. Consider, your misery is not less, but your danger is greater, because you
do not mind it. Naturalists tell us of a great (but foolish) creature, which,
when danger is near it, thrusts its head into a bush, and presumes, because she
sees not, she is secure: Just thus it is with poor sinners, when God threatens
wrath, and declares Judgment against them, they shut their eyes, or stop their
ears, will not mind it, and now they think all is safe: But know it assuredly
that God will be as good as his word, and what he has spoken shall come to
pass, Whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear: He that sleeps at the
top of a Mast, is not in less, but more danger of being thrown into the Sea and
drowned, because he is asleep: And be sure, hell will be no whit easier to
bear, because you drop into it unawares.

2. Know and assure your selves that you are laboring under dangerous
mistakes: you think you are safe and all is well, but you are under the wrath
of God, and condemnation of hell: You think your way is your wisdom, but this
way, and this thought is your folly: you conceive a way of sin to be a gainful
trade, but you shall find it the greatest loss, when you shall know that ^t
has lost your souls; you account God's ways, those ways of holiness to be
unprofitable, but it is nothing so; and if you would rightly consider, you
should find all these to be great and gross delusions, and very dangerous for
they are undoing: It Is certain that on these principles you must needs perish
for ever.

3. Seriously consider, that there is yet hope that you might do well: Though
you are in the way to destruction, yet there is an opportunity to withdraw your
foot, and take hold of the way of life: This the poor Prodigal found though he
had run far; and indeed there is nothing that hinders your conversion and
salvation but your ignorance, inadvertency, and thence proceeding obstinacy and
wilfulness; all that obstructs is in your selves: There are better ways than
those you are going in, think of them: The wise woman considers a field and
buys it, the wise Merchant considers a Pearl of great price, and purchases
it: What if you part with all for it? it will recompense all your cost.

4. It is great rashness in you either to commend the ways of Sin, or condemn
the ways of Godliness, before you have well considered of both: Why should you
take up things upon trust? Why should you say of Godliness, This way is every
where evil spoken of? How know you but (...) it is done injuriously (...) by
such who do as little know, and have as little considered of it as you have
done? The Apostles counsel is to prove all things, and hold fast that which is
good: Prove them by consideration, hear what each can say for themselves; what
God has to say for his ways, as well as the pleading of Sin and Satan for
theirs.

5. Think, it will shortly be too late to consider to any comfort or profit:
They that will not consider now, shall consider at the last, Jer. 23. 20. But
it will be a sad consideration, when all the fruit thou can reap, by the
reflections, will be only the accusations of Conscience, retorting thy
incurable and irreparable follies upon thee; when its best language shall be to
upbraid thee with precipitancy, and tell thee thou would have thine own
ways in despite of admonitions, warnings, counsels; thou wast told of this,
what would be the end of these ways; how undoing a course thou wast taking;
thou wast entreated to be a little serious, and open thine ear to instruction,
thou wast proffered better things; thou might easily have seen, plainly have
discovered, and so prevented that which now thou feel; they were words of
weight which were spoken to thee, but thou would not hear, nor consider, and
art therefore justly fallen into that pit from whence there is no recovery, and
drowned in that destruction, from which thou might have been delivered: And
is it not better to consider now, than to deferr it till then? If now thou will
consider, it may tend to life, and the saving of thy soul, and so (...) thy
happiness; but assure thy self, hells considerations will be torments, and
fiery reflections; yea, that eating worm that dies not, but shall pray upon the
soul for ever: Be wise then in time. The matter of this consideration is the
next thing to be taken notice of, in the following words of our Text.

SERMON XII.
HAving thus considered of the Prodigals deliberation in general, we now come
to look upon the motives themselves, by which he argued himself into a
resolution to return to his father; and these are two, which do comprize under
them in general, the two main heads of consideration; the one respects his
father, the other himself: The order of them is Rhetorically propounded, where
the first argument is last placed, in the deliberation: for doubtless man's
necessity first drives him, or else God's goodness would never draw him. Proud
man will live at home as long as he can. The motives are joined together,
because neither alone will do, but both together are needful to make a full
persuasive to a Sinner to return to God. Man's misery thoroughly apprehended,
without the discovery of Gods mercy, would drive to despair; and Gods mercy
propounded to a man that is insensible of his need of it, would be slighted and
refused: But where these two meet in one, the former drives a man out of
himself, and the latter draws him to God. I shall endeavor to speak of them
severally.

1. The first motive is taken from the consideration of his own condition, in
these words, I perish with hunger. As the word bread, is Synechdochically used
to express all manner of necessary supplies, so is hunger for every want of
what is needful for the comfort of man's life; and here, in a spiritual sense,
it intends the absence of all that might save the soul from destruction: Hunger
also is, by a Metonymy of the effect, put for famine, which produces hunger,
by taking away that which should prevent it. The words express the deep
distress which the young man was reduced unto, sensibly apprehended by him, and
is Emphatically set forth. 1. By the cause of it, hunger or famine, he has
nothing whereon to live ((...) deficere) there was a failing, or want of
provision. 2. By the effect of it, sensibly felt, and personally applied, I
perish. The word in our text is of an harsh signification, the best sense of it
is, to die; but it signifies not death barely, but Destruction; it is q. d.
this hunger will certainly destroy me; I have no hopes to live in this famine;
I might here observe.

DOCT. I. The Soul of Man, without suitable spiritual supplies must needs perish.
There is a natural consequence of dying, upon a famine, if no relief come; and
if the soul have nothing to live upon, it must needs die for ever, which might
learn us.

USE, 1. Their folly who take care only for their bodies, and neglect their
souls: and truly every unregenerate man is such an one; he takes heed to
provide for the feeding and clothing of his body, but lays in no provision for
his better part: and so much the greater is this folly, in as much as ten
thousand bodily deaths are not comparable to the death or lost of a soul, Mat.
16. 26.

USE, 2. To teach us to prize the means and supplies which God affords for the
relief of our souls: That is a terrible famine mentioned, Amos 8. 11, 12. Not
of bread, nor of water, but of hearing the word of God. Deprecate it as the
forest evil: And having such provision made for your souls as God is pleased to
give you in a place of such plenty of the means of grace, labor to love, to
prize, to feed and live upon it; starve not in the midst of plentty, lest you
be found wilful self-murderers. But I shall not insist on this, the main thing
follows, therefore.

DOCT. II. In order to the conversion of a sinner, God makes him deeply
apprehensive that he is perishing with hunger.
We must carefully distinguish between the reality of a man's state, and the
sense that he bears of that state: The famine was all over that land, but none
feels the distructiveness of it but this poor Prodigal: All mankind, whiles in
a state of nature are famishing creatures, but it is but some few among, them
that feel it, the rest perish insensibly.

The work we are here speaking of, is that which Divines call a lost state, and
it comprehends in it the first part of preparatory humiliation, which is
properly the beating of a sinner wholly off from himself, and all that is in
himself, in point of sufficiency. In the Explication of the Doctrine we may
consider, 1. Some thing of the nature of this work. 2. The necessity of it in
order to Conversion.

1. Concerning the nature of this work, or what it is for a Soul to be sensibly
perishing with hunger, and how he is brought unto this sense, observe; The
Spirit of God raises in him a manifest and irresistible conviction of three
things, which laid together do reduce him to this exigency or distress; and all
this is the work of the Spirit in the means, for; all men's conditions being
really one and the same by nature, why else should not all that enjoy the same
means of Conviction, be alike apprehensive of it, but the spirit imprints it
upon some and not others? Now the things are these;

1, He kindles in him an eager and pinching hunger: note that besides that
spiritual and gracious hunger of the Soul after righteousness mentioned, Mat.
5.6. there is also a preparatory hunger, which is oppressive to, and grievously
distresseth the soul, see Isai. 65.13. My Servants shall eat but ye shall be
hungry: Now this hunger is made up of these two things, Viz.

1. A deep apprehension of distressing misery lying upon him, and making his
spirits to fail, and heart to faint. God opens the Sinners eyes to see and find
that which before he neither knew nor believed; that the wrath of God is upon
him, that he is a cursed creature, that he has lost all grace, and is in
danger of the miseries of Hell: he finds his Soul to be in a condition
extremely dangerous, exposed to the executions of divine Vengeance, he now
believes because he feels, that wrath is upon him, sees a Sword of vengeance
drawn against him.

2. An earnest longing to be rid of, and free from this distress: as the hungry
man longs that he may have some food; so does the Sinner wish earnestly that
his misery may be eased, the cause taken away, and the wrath of God impending,
removed: he is fearfully amazed at the apprehensions of the anger of God, he
cannot tell how to bear it, or to be able to endure it, and fain he would, if
there were any possibility, be delivered, Isai. 33.14. Who among us shall dwell
with everlasting burnings? although he does not know whither to go in
particular for a redress, yet in general he says, Who shall show me good? yea
he cannot satisfy himself, he is restless, his soul is disquieted and filled
with tumultuations, these terrors make him afraid. 2. He makes him to find and
discover that there is no relief to be had in any of these ways and courses
which he has been taking; and this makes his hunger to be the more
distressing: when an hungry stomach meets with a well furnished Table, it is a
pleasure to have a good appetite; but when hunger and penury meet together,
this is tormenting: When the cravings of the soul are insatiable, and there are
no supplies to be gotten for it, this is terrible, such is the condition of the
soul now, where it thought to have meat, there it can find nothing but husks,
and that both,

1. In the world, in which he formerly trusted, and in the enjoyment whereof he
was wo^^ to say to his soul, eat, drink, and be merry, for thou have goods laid
up for many years. This world cannot satisfy him now; it will not still the
cry of Conscience, it will not comfort him against the anger of God, and fears
of hell, Riches cannot profit him in the day of wrath. H^ cannot feed and
refresh himself upon its fair promises, and glossing insinuations. It will not
ease his troubled mind; but like Belshazzar, he cries out in the midst of his
cups and companions; his hiding place of deceit is washed away, and he sees that
the world is empty, and void, and wast, Nah. 1. 10.

2. In himself, and his own duties and righteousness: He was wont to please
himself in them, and feed himself with vain hopes, thinking to appear with
them, and hold up his head before God; but now he finds that these will not
suffice, they cannot atone God, appease his anger, turn away his fury, or
procure him happiness: They are unprofitable, he has now no more
self-sufficiency, he cannot do what the Law requires, nor pay the debts he ows
it, nor pick up any resolution out of his best services, Conscience now tells
him all this is nothing, Number. 17.12,13.

3. He causes him to draw this positive and sad conclusion, that in this
condition he must certainly perish: He is now shaken out of all his vain hopes,
fond expectations, wherewith he was wont to feed his fancy, and cherish his
soul: There is now nothing but misery, hell and destruction in his eyes and
thoughts: The Law is rigorous, and will be satisfied; God is holy and will be
glorified; he is by this Law condemned, and has no satisfaction to make to it;
the world is a priceless thing, and if he had it, it would not be taken in
exchange for a soul; and thus, between longing and despair he is ready to faint
and die: This whole condition is amply described to us in apt and pertinent
metaphors, Isa. 41. 17. The poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and
their tongue fails for thirst.

2. Touching the necessity of the work in order to conversion, we may observe.

1. That conversion is the turning of a sinner from sin to God: Now Sin is
properly the relyance of the creature upon something else which stands in
competition with, and opposition to God, which therefore it must leave, or else
it is impossible that it should come to him: he that goes to one contrary, must
in so doing go away from the other; the Apostle opposes these two, I Tim. 6.
15. That they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God.

2. In Conversion the spirit of God comes into the Soul, and fills it with his
Grace; in order to which filling it is needful that the Soul be first emptied,
for as long as a Man is full of himself, of the World, of his carnal hopes, of
his legal righteousness, there is no room for the spirit of God, hence he comes
to the poor and needy, Isai. 41.17.

3. In active Conversion, there is a voluntary motion of the Soul: the will of
man is that which does first renounce Sin, Satan and World, and lay hold upon
Christ; now a voluntary action is the action of a reasonable creature, applying
himself to his object, not upon compulsion, nor by the force of instinct, but
by the inclination of his own mind; so that as he does it willingly, he also
(and therefore) does it rationally, or upon some apprehended grounds: and from
this it will appear, how needful it is that a Sinner be made thus sensible in
order to his Conversion: For,

1. Man by nature is a proud Creature, and loath to go or be beholden to any
other as long as he has any hopes to do well of himself: This appeared before,
in the consideration of the sordid course the needy Prodigal took to supply his
want.

2. Man is naturally most opposite and contrary to God, and will not (be sure)
come to him until he be driven: It is very evident, that he will try every way,
turn every stone, use all means to do well otherwise, before he will betake
him ^^fe to God: the Prodigal will live meanly, fare hardly, scramble, and
debase himself if that will do rather than return to his father's house: as
long as a sinner has any hopes that he can make a shift to keep up himself
from sinking, he flies not unto God: (the ^^ven; if he can have carrion to
light upon and feed of, returns not to the Ark:) for till now he has no need
of God: A man must be sick before he will send for a Physician, and dangerously
sick, heart sick, before he will send for one whom he hates, other Physicians
must first fail him.

4. In Conversion there must be a whole reliance upon God, and that must
presuppose an better rejection of all other helps and props, Hos. 14. 3. Ashur
shall not save us, etc. Now man has naturally such an opinion of himself, and
of the creature, that till he be thoroughly convinced of its emptiness, he will
not forsake it, and till that he cannot close truly with God, who will not be a
divided trust, or part glory with another, Isa. 42. 8.

USE, 1. For Information, here we see,

1. The reason why Jesus Christ and his salvation are no more welcome and
acceptable to the most of men, and so why the work of conversion is so rare and
infrequent even there where the Gospel comes with most clearness; it is because
the most of men have yet something of then own to live upon; they have not
spent all, they are not nipt with the famine. Though all natural men are
prodigals, yet they have not as yet made away with their portion, they still
have something to support them; they do not feel themselves poor perishing
creatures; but are like Laodicea, Rev. 3.17. Rich and want for nothing. Tell
them of the riches of grace in Christ, the full supplies that are with him,
that he has wherewithal to satisfy the hungry soul, what care they? they need
it not, the are not hungry and pincht; the most of the children of men think
they can do sufficiently without Christ, therefore they say to him depart from
us, Job 21. 14. The Gospel invitations are presented to poor, blind, sick,
perishing sinners, and therefore men do not take it to themselves, they hope
they are not such: and therefore, till we see men distressed, till we find them
despairing, till we hear them crying out sensibly of their woeful misery, we
must not expect they should do any other then complement with Jesus Christ,
and, with them that were invited to the Gospel feast, Mat. 22. to frame
excuses, and use delays.

2. What need there is of preaching the Law, or legal truths in the days of
the Gospel: It is true, Christ is the end of the Law, and Christ only ought to
be preached: i.e. as the ultimate scope of all Divine truths: But, as the Law
was of old, so it is still, a Schoolmaster to Christ, i. e. to make men see
and feel their need of Christ: And truly, without it men will never give him
that true welcome which he deserves in their souls: This is the right class in
which man is made to see his own condition, and to understand his misery; this
is it that discovers man to be a bank-rupt, the world an empty, hungry place;
this displayes man's sin, Gods Justice, and our own utter inability, and all
this is the very groundwork of bringing us to feel our selves perishing: God
will humble sinners before he will save them; he will make them come to Christ
for need, and not in complement. They are therefore strangers from the methods
of God's grace, that brand this with the aspersion of legal and opposite to the
Gospel, whereas it is necessarily introductive.

3. The usefulness of affliction in order to the conversion of sinners, and the
reason why God is many times pleased to lay these chains upon them; why they
are very suitable for the helping forward this great affair in the soul: Hence
when God would do Ephraim good, he afflicts him, Hos. 5. 15. with 6. 1. and see
for this also, Job 37. 16. etc. Man is high minded, and self-conceited, when he
has his health, strength, wealth and honor in the world; he is too good to be
spoken to: but affliction depresseth him, it helps to bore his ear, it puts him
upon consideration, which we heard is the first step to conversion: Affliction
is a School in which a sinner is set to study, here is his folly and vain trust
anatomized; here his misery begins to appear, and he finds how he has deceived
his own foul. Not that affliction of and by it self will open a blind eye, or
soften and hard heart: There are many that are hardened, and made worse by it,
but when God is pleased to set in with it, it has that in it which is of use
to help man to see something of himself: Be not their angry with afflictions.

4. That a soul sensible of, groaning under, and ready to die by reason of the
oppression of his spiritual distress and want, is not far from the Kingdom of
Heaven: I know their is a despair through the weight of horror, that sets a
soul further from good, and drives him to hell with violence, such was Cain's
and Judas's. And truly, separate this state from the sweet invitations of the
Gospel, and it is the clearest Emblem of hell upon earth that can be: But yet
in the Gospel-way Christ is near to such a soul to tender himself to him, Isa.
4. 17. Yea, his special invitations are to such, and all encouragement is set
before them, Isa. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come to the waters. Mat.
11. 28. Come to me ye that are weary and heavy laden. Rev. 22. 17. Let him that
is athirst come. Till it comes to this, our hopes for man are built but upon
general propositions, God may call them, it is possible, because they live
under the Gospel, and under the means, etc. But now there is hope that God is
doing the work: And, as when the pain of a traveling woman increases, there
is expectation that she will ere long be delivered, so these cries give
encouragement, that it will not be long ere Christ be formed in such a soul.

USE, 2. For Exhortation, let it serve to call upon and invite every
unregenerate sinner to serious and solemn consideration of this truth, viz.
that he is perishing, starving, famishing, dying: It is the saddest sight in
the world to see poor miserable men and women dying, and they ignorant;
dropping every day into hell, because they have nothing to live upon, and yet
not consider. If you ask me who is intended by this perishing Prodigal; I
answer, if thou art unconverted thou are the person; and that thou may be
convinced of, and made to apprehend it, take into thought these things.

1. Thy poor soul must have something to live upon, or else it will perish
everlastingly: This is a truth that man little thinks of, hence he cares only
for his outward man; but it is evident, man is every way a dependent creature;
if the soul have not spiritual food to live on, it must needs die: as the life
is lost without food, so is the soul lost without Christ, hence called. our
life. Col. 3. 4.

2. Thou have nothing in thy self to live upon, and therefore in thy self art
certainly perishing: Such is the condition of every soul out of Christ, he is
going to destruction: Look upon thy self and thou shall find in thee all the
symptoms of a perishing creature: all thou had to live upon is spent, or, I
am sure, will be spent without thy profit: Original righteousness and holiness
thou have lost already, and thy vain and carnal hopes thou will lose sooner or
latter: thou art a law breaker, art under the curse, sentenced to die
everlastingly; God, in whose favor alone is life, is thy Enemy; the Law, in
obedience to which thou might have lived, is broken by thee, and calls for
thy destruction; thou have nothing to redeem thee from the efficacy of it; thou
have no power to obey it, no price to satisfy with for thy violation of it;
thou have lost the Image of God, thou have lost the favor of God, thou have
lost strength to obey him, thou art fast bound in cords of vanity, Divine
vengeance is pursuing hard after thee, the mouth of the pit is open to receive
thee; and who then is ready to perish, if thou art not?

3. The things which thou seek to and relyest upon for thy relief, they are
not bread: They will not feed and support a dying soul: the worlds fairest
banquets are but a show, and have no substance in them, they are husks, Swines,
but not man's meat: Do thou trust in riches? They will not profit in the day
of wrath. Do thou rely upon friends? They cannot by any means redeem thy
soul. Do thou content thy self in pleasures? Thou art dead alive. Do thou
feed thy self with honors? neither they nor thou can abide, but thou art like
the beasts that perish. Strip thy self out of these things, for God will else
strip thee shortly; and then see what a forlorn estate thou art in: Thy hungry
soul is put off with a stone for bread, and for a fish, a serpent; and all thy
hopes here are perishing hopes, and when they leave thee, thou must perish too.

4. Jesus Christ only has that bread which can satisfy thy hunger, and save
thy life; but thou art at an everlasting distance from him, thou art in a far
Country a great way off: In particular

1. Thou art far from having any will or desire to go to him for it: The
unregenerate sinner, though dying, yet will not come to him for life, Job. ^.
40. It is the great misery of sinful man, that he will die, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Why
will ye die? i. e. he will do so rather than repent and return to God, and seek
his grace in his way: There is bread in Egypt, but you will not go thither for
it, eternal life is only for comers, but you refuse to come that you may have
it.

2. You are far from having any power or ability to come to Christ; that rock,
which is the Magazene or Storehouse of bread for famishing souls, is out of
your reach, higher than you are, and, without an Almighty arm to lift you up
into it, you will ever fall short of it: God must draw before ever the sinner
can come: Your Pit, as it has no water in it, so it is deep, and you have no
ladder to climb upon, nor legs or hands to ascend withal, if you had one, ^hus
it is with you, and now what will you do?

3. God is under no engagment or obligation to you, to do this kindness for
you, viz. ^o bring you this bread of life to save you from famishing; nay, he
has many provocations to refuse so to do: You have undone your selves, your
riot has brought this poverty upon you; yea, you have been putting of this
Grace away from you; you have loved lies and deceits, embraced lying vanities,
and hated your own mercies. Think of these things, and now say whither it is
good, a safe, a desirable condition you are in? So are all unconverted ones;
let this affect your hearts: One would think it should make men's souls die
within them, to think and consider of the death which they are dying; a death
of hunger, the very worst, and most oppressing and calamitous sort of death: Oh
that men felt this now! there were then hopes that they might have relief,
whiles the bread and water of life are exhibited in Gospel tenders: but if you
will not know nor believe it now, you must be made sensible of it in a more
amazing hour, when you shall tire heaven with endless and fruitless cries, and
shall not be able by them all to prevail so far, as to obtain, in that
everlasting famine, so much as one drop of water to quench the heat of your
torments.

SERMON XIII.
THe second Motive is taken from his Father, in whom he observes two things.
Viz. Plenty, and bounty: for he had enough and to spare: Bounty, for so much
was allowed to his hired servants, from whence he argues, he will not, if I go,
suffer me, who am a Child to perish; and therefore joins to these, his relation
to his plenty, it was his father that had it.

The main difficulty in the words is to know what is meant by, or alluded to in
these hired servants that were so well provided for; some by these understands
visible Members of the visible Church, that were only outward professors, and
not sincere, who, like hirelings, only serve God for sinister ends; and then by
bread they understand Ordinances, as Prayer, Preaching, and the Sacraments, of
which they have enough and to spare, more than they would care for: The word
is, do abound, a Metaphor from a fountain that runs over; no^ does I wholly
reject this interpretation from being part of the meaning, and may teach as
thus much; That an enlightened soul expects his spiritual food in and by the
Ordinances. But it seems to come nearer the condition of a sinner in such a
state as we have been considering, if we look upon the phrase to have no
particular allusion, but only to be a comparative illustration of Divine
bounty: Hired servants in great houses are not wont to be greatly cared for; he
is a bountiful houskeeper indeed that feeds such plentifully. Or it may be an
allusion to the general care which God takes of all his creatures, as he is
Lord of the world and provider of the great family of the earth, even the worst
and meanest of creatures, Job 3 8. ult. but I shall not be over curious. Hence,

DOCT. The consideration of Divine sufficiency and bounty, are great
encouragments to the soul, tha^ feels it self ready to perish.
It is wondrous relief to a despairing dying soul, to consider and believe that
God has enough to answer his wants, and is a God very bountiful to his
Creatures. In the Explication consider. 1. What manner of encouragement this
affords? 2. What of encouragement arises therefrom? 3. That it is proper for
perishing sinners.

1. What manner of encouragement this affords?

Answ. We are here to consider that the Prodigal was not yet returned, nor
returning to his father, but only upon deliberation about it; nor yet come to a
resolution in the thing; in which resolution may be observed (when we come to
it) the first working of saving Grace, so that the encouragement which is here
denoted is that which helped him to a preparatory hope, and was a mean to keep
him from utter despair. That there is such an hope, is asserted to by our
Divines; an hope before faith, keeping the soul from falling into deadly
discouragement, or utterly refusing to attend upon any means for his good,
which must needs be the fruit of utter despair. Hope of obtaining the end, is
the very motive to using the means: Did not the perishing sinner conceive some
hope that he might find good in the ways of Gods appointment, he would
certainly reject them. Now this hope is not an effect or fruit of justifying
faith, but precedent, and oftentimes in order to it. And if we carry in mind,
that the spirit of God deals with sinners after the manner of reasonable
creatures, we may the better conceive of this hope, and the encouragment
arising from it; which may be in a few things.

The soul of man absolutely needs some object to rely upon; man's dependence
for soul as well as body is out of himself; that must have something to live
upon, or else it cannot do: Man was made for an end, and the attainment of his
end is the fruition of his object, hence the Church calls God the portion of
her soul, Lam. 3. 24.

2. Hence the soul can hold up no longer than it has some object to depend
upon, either really or imaginarily able to support it: The soul therefore sinks
when it has nothing to trust to; and that is the proper nature of despair,
viz. the sinking of a soul for want of a stay: and the reason why every sinner
is not a desponder, is only because he stays upon the things of the world, and
hopes they will support him; hence they are said, to trust in them, Psalm. 49. 6.

3. God and the creature cannot both be a man's stay: These are set in
opposition in the Scripture, and will alone be our confidence, or not at all,
Deuteronomy. 32. 12. Therefore the Apostle opposes these two trusts to each other I
Tim. 6. 17.

4. Hence in order to conversion the soul is broken off from his hope, trust,
or reliancy upon any created being; he is made to find himself, with the
Prodigal, a bankrupt creature living in a famishing world, which has nothing
in it but husks, and he cannot feed upon them: he sees Ashur cannot save, he is
in a pit wherein no water is, and now he is ready to die, perish, can find no
comfort here.

5. In this state there is nothing but hope can sustain the soul from utterly
despairing, and without this the heart would certainly break: For, that man who
knows that he must certainly perish without help, and all help which he relied
on utterly fails him, has only this to relieve him, to hope that help may come
some other way, else his heart must sink and die within him. Now this hope must
be preparatary, for,

1. It flows not from an interest in Christ, for it is the encouragment of a
soul that has been estranged from him to go to him; for God allures the soul
to Christ, by setting this hope before him, and effectually persuading him to
embrace it; and it is the usual method, of the spirit to come in with it into
the soul; so Ephraim, Jer. 31. 18.

2. It arises only from a possibility, or at furthest a probability that he
may here find acceptance, and obtain a full supply of all the good he needs,
and not from a certainty, or promise, or covenant in which he may claim it: you
have it expressed in Janah, 3. 9. Who knows but the Lord may be gracious? The
sinking soul hears news that there may be a redress had for him, that there is
one who not only can do, but has done as much for such as he, which makes him
to bear up, and puts him upon waiting in the use of means.

What of encouragment arises from these considerations?

Answ. Here is the only Rational encouragment of an humbled sinner: He can find
none with looking elsewhere: if he look upon the world he sees nothing but
famine; if upon himself, he has spent all, and is utterly undone, it is only
in God that he can expect to find any relief. Now the Soul is not first made to
believe, and then see the reason of it, but the spirit of God draws the soul to
believe, by making it see the excellency of the object, and so persuading it;
he is first made to see the ground of hope, and then to follow, as the Prodigal
here. Now both of these Attributes are full of encouragement.

1. The sufficiency of God; it cannot but animate the Prodigal, to think that
there is bread enough and to spare in his fathers house: Starving beggars are
not wont to ask relief of beggars like themselves, but they go to the rich: Men
account it vain to ask an alms where they know there is nothing to be had; but
where they understand there is enough, they will be very importunate, because
they know such an one can, if the has an heart to it, do them a kindness: So,
here the soul discovers a possibility that he may have succor, because God is
able; there is all fullness in him, he can save him from hell, and wrath, and
misery, and bestow life and salvation upon him if he sees meet: When Jacob
heard there was bread in Egypt, he said to his Sons, Why do you sit still and
look one on another, and die? So, when a soul hears there is all Grace with God,
it prompts him to say, why do I tarry here then, and perish? God therefore thus
propounds himself to destroyed Israel, Hos. 13.9. In me is thy help. And Christ
propounds it as a question to them in order to their cure, Matt. 9. 28. Believe
ye that I am able to do this? Now possibility apprehended gives ease to extreme
necessity, and when a soul hears of it, it will not cast off all hope, till it
has made utmost proof, and hence the soul is helped to come to Christ
believing, hence the poor Leper makes this his argument, and comes with it:
Mat. 8. 2. If thou will thou can make me clean.

2. The bounty of God added to his sufficiency gives further strength to hope,
in that it discovers more than a possibility, viz. some probability: The
Fathers bounty to hired servants, made the son think, he not only has enough,
but is very free of it, why then may not I, who am a son, though a Prodigal,
make proof of it? Beggars go more cheerfully to, and knock more liberally at a
bountiful man's door, because they are ready to promise themselves relief; not
that they deserve more of him than of another, but because he is more ready to
communicate his favor than a churl is: When a poor sinner considers how kind
God is, how full of mercy, how liberally he distributes his favors, how he
deals his kindnesses undeserved; and scatters them, not with a sparing but
bountiful hand, now, thinks he, why may I not speed? why may not I come as well
as another, and hope to find him kind to me, as well as others have done? Hence
God puts this argument into their mouths, Hos. 14. 3. With thee the fatherless
finds mercy. You find David makes a plea of this, Psalm. 86. 5. Thou, O Lord,
art good, and ready to forgive. Now, though the soul have never a promise to
rely on (for that is received in believing) yet he has a support against
despair, and argument to drive him to go to God for his mercy.

3. That this encouragment is of use only to perishing sinners: The Prodigal
comes not to this thought till he is at an utter loss, and he joins it to that
consideration, I perish with hunger: And there is great reason for this, for,

1. As long as a sinner has any thing at home, he minds not nor regards God,
but says to the Almighty, depart; men that have supplies within doors will not
go abroad, and knock at other doors for relief: Hence, to a proud and carnally
confident sinner it is no encouragement, that God has bread enough, and is
ready to distribute it to such as come and ask it, for what is that to him who
needs it not, who is full, and wants for nothing? He feels himself well and
lusty, the Physician may go about his business he has no need of him.

2. Hence also these encouragments are not nextly and immediately exhibited to
sinners, till they come to this stare and sense: The Gospel is not properly
preached to men till they are prepared for it by the Law: Christ therefore
says, that he did not come to call the righteous: i. e. men rich with the
opinion of their own sanctity; but sinners, i. e. such as were sensible of sin.
It is the hunger-bitten soul that longs for bread, the faint and thirsty that
hearkens after springs of water. Christ propound his Grace to souls when it is
like to be welcome: these therefore are wont to go together, sense of utmost
distress, and a discovery of the riches and readiness of Christ for succor;
the first of these without the second breeds despair, the second without the
first meets with scorn and contempt,

USE, 1. For Information;

1. That he that would have any encouragement to wait on God for grace, must
seek it in God alone and not in himself. The thoroughly awakened sinner must
indeed look both on God and himself too; but he must see in himself nothing but
ground of despair, and all his hope in God, Hos. 13. 9. This therefore dasheth
their hopes, who would fain find in themselves that which may encourage them;
and are therefore made to despond, by their unworthiness, the greatness of
their sin, etc. this also may encourage those that see the worst in themselves,
none like them for sin and misery; why God is the same.

2. That they lay blocks in the way of their own conversion, that only sit
poring upon their own misery, and look no further: What good would it have done
the poor Prodigal, to have only sat, and wrung his hands, and cried, I perish,
I perish? If he had looked no farther he had perished indeed. Though we must
begin here, yet we must not end here, but look further for encouragement. The
distressed man's enquiry is, where shall I have help? and so must yours, and now
the spirit of grace is ready to direct you to one that is both able and full.
therefore,

USE, 2. Let it be for a word of encouragement to those that are at the point
of death, who feel themselves miserable, but neither in themselves nor
elsewhere can find deliverance, and are (possibly) ready to pass a sad sentence
upon themselves, that there is no hope for their souls. Thou have seen an end
of all created perfection, thou have come to the bottom of thine own
confidence; thou have found an empty world, felt an empty soul; but did thou
never hear of God, or have thou never tried him? If not, do not yet despair;
first see what he can and will do for thee: you will say, I have tried many
courses and they fail, and I am dis-heartened; well, but this is a way never
yet frustrated thee, and let these Attributes put a little comforting hope into
thy soul; consider then and believe.

1. That God is able to help thee: He has all that, and more than all that
which thou need: He has eternal life with him to give to all those that ask
it of him; thou art starving, but he can feed thee, thou art perishing, but he
can save thee: God loves to commend his power to us, that we may take hold of
it, Isa. 27. 5. Let him lay hold of my strength, that he may make peace with
him. Look upon him,

1. As he is God: That word is enough to tell thee he is able; God thinks it a
word big enough to encourage his desponding, and almost despairing people, Isa.
45. 22. Look unto me, for I am God. The reason why thou can find no help
among the creatures, is because they are not God, Isa. 31. 3. The Egyptians are
men, and not God. And that you may know what he can do as God, look upon the
work of Creation: when God would hearten his people to rely upon him, he calls
up their consideration hither, Isa. 44. 24, 25. 12. 15. What cannot he who made
a world out of nothing, do? Could God call for a world, and it answered his
call, and can not he save a poor sinner from perishing? doubtless he can: what
serve all the Divine Attributes for, but to display the greatness and immensity
of the power of God?

2. As he is God in Christ: And there you shall see how he is not only
absolutely able, but also sutably laid in with sufficient supply to save the
perishing souls of prodigal sinners from perdition: Christ is a great
Storehouse, in whom is laid up all provision needful for the famishing
posterity of fallen Adam: the great discouragement of a convinced sinner is,
how can God do it and be just? Though there be a fountain of goodness in God,
able to satisfy the soul that enjoyes it, yet sin has stopped up the channel,
and Divine Justice interposeth, condemning the sinner to die: But now in Christ
all these Channels are opened again; he has satisfied Justice, and so broken
open a new and and living way to God, and presented him sitting on a Throne of
Grace; and thus God is able, notwithstanding his Justice, to open treasures of
many to sinners, and fill every hungry soul with good things. Divine
sufficiency is by this means rendered communicable to the Children of men: And
it is in this sense the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 3. 20. He is able to do more than
we can ask or think. Otherwise it had been a mockery put upon dying sinners, to
have told them of abundant store of Grace and good, which it was no ways
possible for them to come at. Now it is your work and business to apply this to
your condition, and say, though I am perishing, yet there is a possibility that
I may be supplied; though the world cannot relieve me, yet God can, and that
not only by absolute power, but in a feizable way of his own finding out: I may
then live and not die: And the very belief of this probability has driven many
a soul to him; and thou may, as well as the poor leper, frame a petition and
argument out of it; If thou will, thou can. Out of doubt it opens a door of
hope, for a soul to know and believe, that if God will, he can both save him
and be just.

2. That God is bountiful, and ready to relieve such as are in want: This may
add to thy encouragement and hope, though thou art not certain that he will
help thee: The Prodigal did not know that his father would look upon him, but
he knew him to be kind, and that put him foreward; so it should do thee; hence
God has written his Name in letters of goodness, Exodus 34. 6, 7. And to help
here,

1. Consider how much God does for such as never return to him, nor ask mercy
of him: God's general goodness, should lead sinners to repentance, Romans 2. 4.
When you see how God spares profane and wretched sinners, and suffers them to
live; yea, provides liberally for them; fills them with hid treasures, gives
them more than heart can wish, and the waters of an overflowing cup are wrung
out unto them, so that their hearts are filled with food and gladness, they
crown their heads with Rose-buds, and spend their days in wealth, and leave
theresidue to their babes: Argue from hence, what goodness has he then in
store for them that humble themselves, forsake their sins, repent, and return
to him with their whole hearts?

2. Consider how many repenting Prodigals have upon their return been
entertained and made welcome by him, who once did as thou have done, run
themselves out, spent all, and were ready to famish, but, betaking themselves
to him, they were fed, and saved alive, and this may give you hopes to find the
like favor at his hand; Consider therefore,

1. They were such who as little diserved this favor as thou: they had nothing
of merit for which they should be ^id welcome, and relieved in their distress,
for all mankind stand guilty before God, Romans 3. 19.

2. They had gone away from him, and wasted all in riot, as thou have done:
What a Prodigal was Manasseh? how miserably had he run himself out? yet he
obtained favor: What a great sinner had Paul been? yet he was accepted,

3. They were such as had as little to plead for themselves as thou have: They
had nothing to plead but mercy, condescending mercy, undeserved mercy: they had
no more to say for themselves than the poor publican had, Lord have mercy on me
a sinner. For themselves; or of themselves, all they could say, was only to
make this poor Prodigal's acknowledgment, verse. 19. and yet were not rejected,
but found mercy.

3. Consider what relentings there are in the hearts of men, especial of
Parents toward their Children: for, that is the scope of the Parable, to argue
from the less to the greater; q. d. If a father can have so much mercy, a poor
man, that has but a little kindness, a little pity with him, what may we hope
then that God will do? Can a Prodigal so argue from his fathers bounty, and
encourage himself by it? how much more a poor guilty sinner from the bounty of
God, with whom are everlasting mercies?

4. Consider how richly God has entertained returning sinners. The poorest,
meanest Believer has enough and to spare, no Believer in Christ's family wants
for any thing; that promise is fulfilled, Ps. 34. 10. God has done for them
more than they can express; and though they sometimes seem to complain, yet it
is their infirmity and infidelity: What can a Believer want which he has not?
Pardon of sin, title of inheritance to all good things, favor with God, grace
to serve him, a fatherly care for him; yea, and to spare, he has joys,
consolations, ravishings of soul; he may, not only feed, but feast it by faith
on Jesus Christ: If you say, what is all this to me, who have no lot or share
in this matter? I answer, it is this to thee, it should encourage thee to hope,
and not utterly to despare of finding mercy; and from hence to animate thy soul
to go to God, and wait upon him for it, to seek him diligently in the use of
means; and to resolve not to sit still and die of the famine silently, but to
make thy moan to God, and pour out thy complaint before him; to arise and leave
this far country where there is nothing but famine and death, and, with the
Prodigal, take up a resolution to return to God, and ask gracious entertainment
with him for a poor dying perishing sinner, who is he alone with whom the
fatherless finds mercy.

SERMON XIV.
Verse. 18. I will arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I
have sinned against heaven, and before thee. Verse. 19. And am no more worthy to
be called thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants.
IN the former verse we had the Prodigal quickening and encouraging himself to
return to his father, which is the first part of his deliberation.

2. In these words is set down his deliberate conclusion, or consultation and
determination what improvement to make of these arguments, which is, in sum to
make proof of his fathers love in the most penitent and humble manner. More
particularly, he resolves upon two things: 1. That he will return to his
father, I will arise, and go to my father. 2. How he will demean himself when
he comes to him, viz. in the most submissive and self abasing manner that is
possible, and this appears, both in his confession and petition. 1. In his
confession, in which he acknowledges, 1. His sin, aggravated in two things. 1.
The object against whom, against heaven. 2. The presence in which, before thee.
2. The merit or desert of his sin, I am no more worthy to be called thy son. 2.
His petition, submitting to his fathers disposal, Make me as one of thy hired
servants. Before I enter upon particulars, it will be needful to enquire, to
what head in Divinity this is to be referred; whither to a preparatory or to a
saving work: and I suppose it may be made evident that it refers to a saving
work, and that true conversion is here deciphered, and set forth in these and
the following words, verse, 20. begin.

It is true we have in these words only his deliberate purpose expressed; but
we must remember that the will is the first subject of Religion, and when that
is truly turned to God, there is a saving work wrought, and the whole man will
follow, and so it did in this, verse. 20 he has now renounced his far Country
and made choice of God. The work here described is Repentance, but not a
separate from, but joined with and flowing from saving faith: for it was the
spirit of Grace working faith in him, and acting of it who made him to draw
this conclusion from the premises; that enabled him to adventure his soul upon
God, and withal taught him how to do it in a penitent manner.

Hence those that place true Repentance in order before Faith, mistake: Though
Faith usually first discovers it self to us in act of Repentance, and the
comforts of it are sensibly felt after Repentance; yea, the greatest and
noblest actings of faith are those that are exerted in Repentance; leading the
soul in deepest sense of sin and unworthiness, to adventure it self upon the
mercy and power of a justly offended God, in returning to him.

Furthermore, we are not to think that because this resolution is ascribed to
the Prodigal as his act, therefore our Repentance prevents the Grace of God:
Our Saviors design being not to describe conversion by its Author, but by its
subject, and by the effects on the subject. If it be enquired whence Repentance
comes, there are other Scriptures which point us to the Author; but if we ask
how Repentance works, here we have it.

But I come to look more particularly into the words, and here; If we consider
when and how the Prodigal came to draw up this conclusion, by referring it to
the verse, foregoing, we shall find that it arises from the discoveries made of
his fathers fullness of benignity: whence we might observe this,

DOCT. 1. The goodness of God, is the great motive to true Repentance, Rom.2.4.
God wins the soul to himself nextly, not by terrors, but his benignity. It is
true, God prepares them to entertain his kindness, by terrible discoveries,
that so he may make it the more welcome; but still, these do but terrify,
amaze, make afraid; but this is that which wins the soul, breaks the heart,
encourages hope, and by this way the spirit works the soul to Repentance.
Hence that, Job 13. 20, 21.

USE, Thus may teach us that for Ministers to preach nothing but terrors, or
for poor awakened souls to look upon nothing but terrors, is not the way to
promote the work of the Gospel, or conversion of Souls: This drives only to
despair: All our Doctrines, and all our hopes, must center in the free Grace of
God. But I come to the words themselves.

1. The first part of his resolution is general: viz. that he will return to
his father; I will arise, and go to my father. In this the work of Repentance
is generally, and comprehensively intimated, in which there is;

1. The terminus a quo: the place from whence he came, viz. his far Country:
where he was, though not locally, yet spiritually distant from God, far from
him in heart and life; this is it he will leave:

2. The terminus ad q^em: or whether he will go, to his father: How God may be
said to be his father, who is an unregenerate profligate sinner: I here intend
not to make particular enquiry; though it may possibly be intimated to us by
this words, being so often used in the parable, that by virtue of the
Everlasting Covenant of Redemption, every Elect Person, in his greatest
degeneracy and Prodigality, is looked upon as a Child, chosen in Christ to the
Adoption of Children: But it here mainly intends his going to God as a Father
of Mercies.

3. The form of Repentance it self; I will arise, and go: Where is the
beginning of that motion, I will arise, and the progress, and go? or the
respect that it bears to both the terms; to the far country, I will arise, i.
e. I will fit or tarry no longer here, I will leave it: to his father, I will
go to him: In the Greek it is, rising, I will go: And the word [ rise] properly
signifies, rising again: q. d. after some fall: and hence the nown is used for
a resurrection, either from sin, or from the grave: and because this Anast^sie,
presumes a former Apostasy, hence,

DOCT. 1. If ever the perishing sinner hopes to be saved, he must rise again,
and go to God.
As he formerly went away from him, so now he must return to him: Hence God in
the proclamation of his Grace thus invites, Jer. 3. 12, 13. and 4. 1. Hos. 14.
1. In the Explication we may consider. 1. The import of this rising and going
to his father. 2. The reasons of the Doctrine.

1. The import of this rising and going: we heard in general, that it denotes
the act of Repentance, not as separated from, but as the first fruit of saving
Faith, and therefore both implying and including of it: Faith and Repentance
are propounded in the Gospel as conjunct, Mark 1. 15. Repent, and believe the
Gospel. Because they are practically inseparable: Now this Repentance of Faith
is sutably expressed by these two phrases, and if they be well pondered, they
will give light to the nature of it: Repentance is of two sorts, Legal, and
Evangelical; it is the latter of these we are now speaking of, which is a
saving turning from sin to God. Of the motives and means of it: I shall not
here speak, only of the act resembled by these allusions of rising an going.

1. Rising implies these things.

1. Rising being an Anastasie, implies the sinner before conversion to be in a
state of Apostasy, or a fallen state: it speaks that man was once in a good
state, but now has lost it: God therefore uses this as an argument to quicken
them to Repentance, Hos. 14. 1. Thou have fallen by thine iniquity. A man that
never was up may rise; but he was once standing that rises again: God made man
upright, in our first Parents we once had a standing in God's favor, but have
lost it by Sin, and now the whole race of mankind, till Grace raises them, ly
grovelling in iniquity; nay, they are dead in Sin, for this rising is a
resurrection, Ephesians. 2. 1. And this shows that it is not a man's own strength,
but the Almighty power of God that gives Repentance.

2. It implies that in order to true Repentance, the soul must be furnished
with a new principle of spiritual life: Self-motion, such as rising is, is a
life act, and supposes a life habit: It is the property of dead things to ly
still and move no further then they are forcibly moved; they are only living
things that move by a power implanted in them: It therefore presumes that the
Spirit of God has been at work, moving upon the dead soul, and breathing into
it the breath of life: our Savior says, it is the spirit that quickens: He
gives life to dry bones, and then they rise and walk, else they had never
forgone their Graves: A dead carcass cannot so much as will to arise.

3. It implies that in true Repentance there must be a forsaking of all Sin: we
must not ly in Sin, if we will return to God: those are directly opposite
terms, Sin and God are contraries; the far Country in which the Prodigal, was,
is the Kingdom of Sin, which he must leave, else he can never come to his
father; nor can a sinner ever come to God, till he has rejected and abandoned
his sinful life and way: Hence that counsel, Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake
his way. There is no salvation to be had by sitting still.

2. Going to his father implies these things.

1. That every natural man, in his unconverted state, is at a great distance
from God: Sin is therefore said to make a separation, Isa. 59. 2. This means
not a local distance, for Gods Omnipresence fills all places, and is with the
sinner to eye and observe diligently all his ways: but it intends a distance
in heart and affection, an alienation; that God and the sinner are enemies; he
hates God's law and ways, as God hates his way and course; God is therefore
said to see the proud afar off, Psalm. 178. 6. And the sinner is said to be far
from God, Psalm. 73. 27.

2. That in Repentance it is not enough to leave off sinful ways and courses,
but we must also put holiness in practice: rising out of sin is neither true
nor sufficient, except there be returning unto God, hence they are both put
together, Isa. 35. 7. This is but like the Pharisee's negatives which could not
declare him justified: we must not only cease to do evil, but we must also
learn to do well.

3. That God alone is the object of true Repentance: He goes to his father. It
is vain for an awakened sinner to go any where else,; it is but to wander from
mountain to hill, from one vanity to another; hence that restriction, Jer. 4.
1. If thou will return, return to me. The distressed soul is full of projects,
and would try many conclusions, but the repenting Believer is resolved in this,
that he will go to God, and no whither else, Jer. 3. 23. Joh. 6. 68.

4. That in the work of conversion, there is not only a passive reception of
grace, but also an actual improvement of it unto active Repentance. If God gives
us life we must stir; if he gives us legs we must go, Cant. 1. 4. God so calls
a sinner in conversion, as that he makes him answer his call, rise and come
away.

Reas. 1. From the nature of saving faith, which is a trusting in God for life:
Now such trust of the soul necessarily requires repentance in both parts of it;
for, if God be trusted in, all other trust must needs be forsaken and rejected:
to dwell by Cisterns argues the fountain is relinquished: He that will find
mercy, must say Ashur shall not save; and if God be trusted in for life, then
the soul must needs go to him for it, Isa. 55. 1. Faith without exercise is
dead, and the working of faith and love is the exercise of Repentance, as
without faith there is no salvation, so faith cannot be, but it will bring
forth fruit in Repentance.

Reas. 2. Because, as happiness and misery are contraries, so the way to the
one and the other must be contrary: Now the way in which man brought himself
into misery was by departing from God and falling into Sin. The Prophet
describes it, Jer. 2.13. and as long as the cause of misery remains, the
continuance of it must be: As long as a sinner lies in Sin, he must needs be
miserable: the foundation of happiness is laid in saving us from Sin, Mat.
1.12. He shall save his People from their sins. And therefore the way to
Salvation must be retrograde: i. e. by rising from Sin, and coming back to God.
Man's felicity consists in his enjoyment of God; he cannot enjoy him till he
comes to him; every distance from God is a misery: Sin is contrary to God, he
therefore cannot in that sense come to us, his holiness forbids. Christ does
not save us in our sins, but from our sins, and that is by working

USE, 3. For Examination; it may put us upon it by this Rule to try our hopes
of Salvation, whither they be rightly grounded, and hopes that shall not
perish: Thou art by nature a Child of wrath; thou have been a poor Prodigal,
have destroyed thy self, and in this state there is nothing but misery to be
expected, Romans 3. 16. Destruction and misery are in all their ways. In God
only is help, and that is only to be had in going to him, and thou can not go
to him, except thou risest and forsakest thy vain and carnal trust in lying
vanities: Where art thou? what have thou done? art thou pursuing lies? art thou
sitting still and despairing? or art thou going upon thy return to God? art
thou yet deliberating, or art thou resolved? art thou consulting with flesh and
blood? or have thou said resolutely I will arise and go to my father? If thou
art in the full purpose of thy heart set against sin, and for the glory of God,
resolving by his grace so to do, it is well; this is accepted of God, and he
that gives to will, will also give to do: But if it be not so, what is thy hope
built upon? what are thy comforts but delusions? what are thy assurances but
undoing deceit?

USE, 4. For Exhortation; and let me direct it particularly to such as, being
under the sense of perishing in themselves, have made discovery of the great
power and goodness of God, and received some preparatory hope by it; he hence
encouraged and counseled to arise and go to God: Do you feel your selves under
a condition so miserable, and have you discovered an object so glorious and
suitable? take heart, and resolve to adventure into his presence, and throw your
selves upon him. Consider, God therefore reveals himself to be such an one to
such as you are, to this very end that you may be wooed and won to him; and if
now you put him away by unbelief, you will slight Mercy. Remember withal,
though there be so much supply with God, as is enough to make you completely
happy, and to spare, yet it is only for comers: If you will taste of this Feast
you must accept of the invitation, and come and be ghuests; you must come out
of those hedge-rows, and highways in which you ly starving, you must go to
the waters, if you will have wine and milk, Isa. 55. 1. Halt no longer between
two opinions; if it be good perishing, sit still, but if it be good to be saved
arise and come away; come to a resolution, draw up your conclusion. If you
object and say, I can resolve nothing of my self, except God put his Grace and
resolution in me; I answer, It is true, but remember also, that as God is a
free Agent, so we are obliged by duty, and the ty of it is such, that we must,
except we will bring guilt upon our selves, set about it; and this is our duty,
to believe, and resolve, not in your strength, but in the strength of God; nay,
it is one of Satan's cheats, to tell us we must wait before we resolve, till we
discover Grace coming in, whereas the habits of Grace come in undiscerned, and
the first fruit of Grace is to be found in the resolution it self: If God helps
us to this resolution, we must by that know that his Spirit is come into us;
and it is our duty, in the use of means to stir up our selves to believe.
Resolve then in the strength of God; here thou art perishing, there is mercy
with him that he may be feared: he says, if thou come he will not upbraid
thee: he says, The hungry ^e will satisfy with bread, and give the longing
soul the desires of his heart: he says, he will give the weary rest; in a
word, if ever you obtain Salvation it must be with him; hills, mountains, all
created beings will not afford it: Thou have tired thy self to no purpose in
seeking it there already, and why should thou again make a vain essay? if
God will he can; and he is a merciful God; the fatherless have found him so: Do
thou but resolve to leave all for him, and make choice of him for thy trust,
and he will do it for thee, what ever it be that thou want, grace, glory,
and every good thing will he bestow upon thee.

SERMON XV.
THus of the Prodigals resolution to return:

2. His purpose how to demean himself on his return follows to be considered:
in which are shadowed out to us diverse necessary concomitants of true
Repentance, or qualifications wherein the truth of it does appear; and serve to
instruct us in the true and genuine working of saving Grace, to the humbling of
the soul; and rendering him vile in his own eyes: And this is in two things,
viz. his Confession, and his Petition: In the one he makes himself as bad as he
can be, as little, as low, and sinful; in the other he yields himself to be
what ever his father would make him. To begin with the first.

1. In his confession he acknowledges his sin; and the merit of it:

1. In the acknowledgement of his sin: 1. He makes it his own, I have sinned.
2. He aggravates it, 1. By the object against whom, against heaven: 2. By the
presence in which, before thee. The phrase [ against heaven] means against God
himself: the word, Heaven is used both by Hebrew and Greek writers for God,
either as one of his names, or else Metonymically, because heaven is the place
where he most gloriously appears. Diverse useful truths may hence be gathered; I
shall draw them all up into this one.

DOCT. Where God gives true Repentance, such an one will confess his sins with
the greatest aggravation.
He will not mince or extenuate, and go about to make them look little and
small, but acknowledge them in their height and greatness; present them in
their blackest and ugliest colors: so does this Prodigal son resolve to go to
his father, and so did.

Though every sin in its proper nature nakedly considered, as it is a
Transgression of the Laws of God, an affront offered, and an offense given to
the Majesty of Heaven, is on that account great; yet there are several
circumstances with which it is clothed, which, if truly looked upon, do
exaggerate or heighten the vileness of it: these the Hypocrite endeavors to
cover over, and hopes thereby to excuse himself a tanto, as the Pharisee, I am
not thus and so: but contrariwise, in sound Repentance, when the sinner comes
to humble himself before God, and confess his sins, he makes himself as vile as
he can: Sin is made exceeding sinful. An hypocrite hopes to plead that he has
not been so bad, therefore he may hope for mercy; but Paul was of another mind,
1 Timothy 1. 25. Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am chief. And David, Psalm.
25. 11. Pardon mine iniquity, for it is very great. Now the aggravations in our
text are three, under which heads the most that can be said may be ranked;
these let us a little look into.

1. He takes the whole blame upon himself: I have sinned; it is I have done
this thing; so David calls it his own sin, Psalm. 51. 9. q. d. Whatever blame or
guilt there is in it, I take it all to my self: He confesses it roundly, and
plainly, without any excuse, or extenuations, or putting it off to any other
cause, occasion, or tempter. And this is one difference between the repentance
of an hypocrite and a true penitent; the one would put off his sin as much as
he can, seek excuses, find others to lay it upon, and bear as little of the
blame as possibly he may; he would divide the fault, that he may leave the
least part of it to himself; and he finds many occasions, or causes to change
it upon.

1. He throws it upon everlasting decrees, and would make the holy counsel of
God to have a causal influence into his wickedness; and will say, if God had
intended me so to have been, I should have been as holy as the Angels, but if
he purposed me to be such a sinner, how could I help it? Such the Apostle
confronts, Romans 9. 19. Thus Hypocrites, like Spiders, suck poison out of the
precious Doctrine of predestination.

2. He will charge God himself for the Author of his Temptations: will say,
Divine allefficiency is the first mover, and if he had not assisted, I had not
committed the sin: He presented the object or I had not followed, such the
Apostle James sets himself against, Jam. 1. 13. etc.

3. Nay, he will blame the very goodness and kindness of God to him, and a
curse, or at least a reason of his sin, and so God, in stead of being
acknowledged for his favor, shall be upbraided: So Adam, Genesis 3. 12. The woman
whom thou gave to be with me, etc. God had given her for a meet help to him,
he could not have done well without her, and yet if he abuse this favor, God
is charged for it; and why then did he bestow her upon me?

4. He will turn it off upon those that were his Tempters; they solicited me,
persuaded me, drew me in: This Adam lays the fault upon the Woman, and she
upon the Serpent; and thus men are often ready to say, I may thank such an one,
who drew me in, who would not let me alone, but followed me, and prevailed upon
me with importunity; if it had not been for him, I had not been drawn away.

5. He will excuse and mince it with all deminutive circumstances, to make it
look like a very little fault, as, 1. He did it ignorantly, he knew no sin
there was in it but, thought that he had done well enough: Thus Saul excuses
himself for sacrificing, 1 Samuel 13. 11, 12. 2. He did but follow his natural
inclination, it was, at worst, but a trick of youth, etc. 3. It was no great
matter, a thing of no great consequence, and others frequently do the like. 4.
He was provoked to it; yea, had many great provocations which bare him down.
These, and many the like excuses, the corrupt heart of man is ready to frame:
But when God sets sin home upon the soul with the right conception of it, he
then lays the blame upon himself, and that with greatest aggravation, in which,

1. He acquits God; lays it not in the least to his charge, but declares him
to be altogether blameless: David takes his sin to himself, that God may be
righteous and justified, Psalm. 51 4. q. d. I have nothing to accuse God of, he
is holy and righteous.

2. He looks not too much upon instruments and occasions; he lays not his own
blame to another; does not charge it as Satan's fault, that he yielded to the
Temptation, but counts it his own; Peter blames Ananias, that Satan had tempted
him, Deuteronomy. 5. 3. It was Satan's fault to tempt, but his to be tempted.

3. Charge it upon his own vile heart and nature, that fountain and originial
of all actual Transgression: he is therefore led up to it, and made to bewail
that before God, as the root of all, Psalm. 51. 5. I was shapen in iniquity. q.
d. Hence comes all this, here it is fountained; thus the Prodigal, Father, I
have sinned, I asked my Portion, and was not content till I had it in mine own
hands; I took at and went away into a far Country, and washed all there in
riot,; I dishonored my original by becoming a slave to a stranger, keeping
swine, and feeding with them upon husks: I did all thus voluntarily without any
compulsion; I did it against the law of nature, and bond of filial obedience;
he does not say, it was a trick of youth, and these good follows, pot
companions, gamesters and harlots, drew me in, and so I did it. The truly,
penitent, so sees his own guilt and wilful obstinacy, that he can look no where
else: what ever his occasions or temptations were, yet still he sees that the
Law of God was against it, which he ought to have hearkened to notwithstanding
all Temptation; and his heart was in it, else they could never have prevailed;
he gave his consent, or else it had never been.

2. He aggravates it in that it was against God. q. d. Had I only wronged a
creature, it had not been so much, but this is it that renders it heinous; it
was against Heaven: All sin is against God. Wrongs are valued according to the
person wronged: A thing is counted Treason when done against a Prince, which
would be a little fault if only done to a subject. It is remarkable, that in
the Parable it self, the younger Son is brought in acknowledging his sin to be
against Heaven, rather than against the Father: Nothing, that the wrongs we do
to others are therein mostly to be bewailed, in that they are against God.
Hence David Confesses it with an emphasis, Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee, thee
only. It was against Uriah, against Bathsheba, etc. but that was little
compared to, and therefore swallowed up in this. True Repentance runs sin up to
the last object against whom it is, now all sin is against God in that it is,

1. Against the Law of God; for that is it which makes it to be sin, 1 John 3.
4. It is not the hurt which another receives, nor what we our selves suffer,
but what we do, that firstly demonstrates it sin; but it is the contrariety it
bears to the precept, and holy revealed will of God: He that breaks thy King's
Laws, wrongs the King himself.

2. Against the love of God; his good will, his bounty and beneficence to his
creatures, by which he does invite and engages all men to serve and honor
him; it is therefore called a despising of his goodness, Romans 2. 4. The Fathers
bounty made the Sons sins the worse, he had readily given him a plentiful
Portion, and yet he spends it in riot.

3. Against the promises and threatenings of God; they slight the one, and
contemn the other, are not in love with the promises, nor afraid of his wrath:
There are great promises made to obedience, but they forsake these mercies,
count them as worthless things: See Psalm. 81. 9, to 13. God has fearfully
menaoed, and denounced heavy judgments against sin and sinners, and bids them
beware of sin because of them, Jer. 6.8. Be instructed, left my soul depart
from thee. And because these are from God, who is able to honor his servants,
and to make inexpressibly miserable his enemies, this is a sore aggravation.

4. Against God's earnest and heartbreaking calls and counsels; yea, strongest
Motives and persuasions: What stronger plea can God use against sin, than to
declare that it is abominable to him, and his soul hates it (...) yet it is a
grief to his spirit, and will oppress him? and yet thus God pleads with
sinners, Jer 44. 4.

5. Against his Honor and Glory: There is nothing so much against the
declarative glory of God as sin is; yea, nothing at all is against it, but sin:
Every sin dishonours his Name; by secret sin we dishonor him in our hearts, by
open sin, we do it in our lives (...) God is an holy God, and it is only
holiness that honors him. Now this is to see sin sinful, ^hen we are brought
to see that it is against God, wherein properly the sinfulness of it does
consist: Nor can a soul ever know how great an evil sin is, nor the
meritoriousness of it, not the equity of the penalty threatened against it, till
he be fully persuaded and made to acknowledge that it is against Heaven.

3. He aggravates it, in that it was not only against, but before his father:
Thus also David aggravates his sin, Psalm. 51. 4. and done this evil in thy
sight. The word [(...)] signifies, in the sight: and Sin is committed in the
presence of God; he stands by and looks on; not only such sins as are committed
in the sight of sun, but such also as are done in the dark, and out of the
sight of mortal men: he sees into every corner, Psalm. 139. 12. Divine
Omnipresence ^lls all places: and this is a great aggravation of Sin; it argues
either,

1. Great heedlesness; that men do not regard the presence of God; and that
shows much of Atheism: Did men know or believe that God stood by and
over-looked all their actions, would they dare so to do as they do? This was
that which made them so impudently bold, in Ezekiel. 9. 9. They say, the Lord
s^^th not. And thus men deny that glorious Attribute without which he were not
God, Or,

2. Horrid profaneness: If men do acknowledge, and yet regard not that God
sees them, it argues that men have cast off the fear of God from them, that
they have lost the aw of his Judgments, and are not afraid of his wrath. It is
the aggravation of Sodoms Sin, Genesis 23.13. They were sinners before the Lord,
God comes to men and presents himself in his strict commands, and severe
threatenings, tells them in his Word and Ordinances that his wrath shall burn
against such Sins, and such Sinners; and yet they care not: God speaks by his
Word, and speaks by conscience, but to no purpose; this proves men's obstinacy.

2. The reason why God makes the true penitent thus see and acknowledge Sin is
not to drive the soul beyond hope of mercy, but it is.

1. To make the creature so touched with the sense of his own sin, that he may
thus see it in its worst colors, and thence learn to loath it, and himself for
it: that he may see Sin hateful not only in its consequents, but in its self,
and thence what reason God has, and how just it is for him to be so severe,
and bear such a dreadful witness against Sin, as he does in his word and works,
Ezekiel. 36. 31.

2. That the greatness of the riches of his grace may appear, and be known to
be unsearchable: that every believer may experience the meaning of that, Romans
5. 20. Where sin has abounded, grace did much more abound. Hence Paul shall
not only acknowledge grace, but with an emphasis, 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16. The blacker
the Sin looks, the brighter will grace appear, and the more intense will the
love of the soul be to God: It is our Saviors argument, Luke 7. 47. To whom
little is forgiven, the same loves little. That believer that has seen and
known the worst of himself, ever has the most precious thoughts of Christ.

USE, 1. Here we see how far those are from true Repentance, who instead of
aggravating, do mince and extenuate their Sins, and endeavor to make them look
as small as they can, that they may be little affected with, or humbled for
them. Many pretend they have come to God, and believed in him, but how did they
come? Why, as the Pharisee, with their proud boastings, not as the Publican,
with a Lord have mercy on me a sinner. They have looked for Grace and Mercy,
not on the account of Christ alone, but their encouragement has been, they
have been better than others, have a good nature, have not been tainted with
such Sins, nor so dishonored God, etc. This is not the way of
Gospel-Repentance; such as these are far from true convevrsion; there is yet a
great work to do for and upon them if ever they come to be made sharers of
saving mercies.

USE, 2. This may serve to answer that usual objection or discouragement which
many a wakened sinners are exercised withal, and deterred by, from coming to
Christ; viz. the greatness of their sins, their hainousness, their amazing
aggravations, they have not finned at the ordinary rate, but exceeded, and none
have sinned like them; they have gotten to speak terribly against themselves:
and hence they are ready to draw a desperate conclusion, there is no hope for
me: This you see directly contradicts the Gospel method; whereas you ought thus
to argue, therefore there is the greatest need for me above all. Let those that
think their wounds small, that hope to cure them themselves, or to out-grow
them, let such tarry away; but for me, I must perish if I go not to the
Physician; yea, this may animate you to this, to consider, this is the way of
Christ; he makes sin very bitter, Jer. 2. 19. Where he intends to afford his
grace and salvation; and till you find it to be so, you are not fit for mercy:
there is no plea for mercy more acceptable to or prevalent with Christ, than
that which is framed from the sensible acknowledgement, of its Sin in its
greatest aggravations: The worse we count of our selves, the better he likes
us, and the fitter we are for his grace to work upon; let this then drive thee
the more resolutely to him.

USE, 3. From counsel to such as are encouraged with the hopes of mercy, and
would go to God for it, how to go so as to find acceptance, i. e. in sum,
labor to be as vile in your own eye and esteem as can be: get the deep sense
and apprehension of the greatness of your sin: charge Sin as God charge it,
aggravate Sin as the word of God aggravates it; judge your selves by the
righteous law of God; feel the weight and burden of Sin, and groan under it as
those that are weary and oppressed with it; such are encouraged, Matt. 11. 28.
Come to me ye that are weary and heavy laden. Add every proper weight to Sin
that may make it the most burdensome and insupportible thing in the world: In
particular;

1. Make it your own, and take the blame to your selves, Sin ever affects us
more or less, according as we find our selves interested in it, so much as we
fault others, so much of self Justification will follow; and the less we have
known Sin to be our own, the less will the grace of Christ be sweetened in our
apprehension: When Cicero would set forth Caesar's great clemency, he makes his
own fault every way his own: Nulla vi coactus, judicio meo, and voluntate mea,
ad ea arma profectus sum, quae sumpta sunt contra te. Pro Ligar. Thus must you
do, and thus shall you bring glory to pardoning mercy; See and say, it was your
own choice, your heart was in it, you were not compelled, but acted freely,
resolutely, and therefore have justly deserved to be rejected when you have
nothing to plead for your selves, then you are fit to plead mercy. Remember
therefore that God made man upright, it is he that has sought out many
inventions. God has given to no tempters, either Men or Devils, power over
your wills to compel them.

2. See how vile your Sin must be, in that it has been against God: you never
look aright upon it until you bring it up hither. It is true, Sin cannot rob
God of his essential glory, which is out of the reach of the creatures
malignity, but his declarative glory is thereby abused: you have not only
wronged man that is a worm, but you have injured the God of Glory: It is his
holy Law that you have broken, else it is not Sin; you have preferred a base
lust, a lying vanity before him; you have rejected the rule of infinite wisdom,
which only can direct man to his end: you have despised and trampled upon the
great reward of happiness, which was propounded to you: you have cast off the
yoke of supreme sovereignty, under which you ought to have put your selves: You
have placed Sin in God's Throne, and given it the precedence; you have slighted
the gracious and precious invitations or the Gospel, which have been set before
you; you that are worms of the dust, have risen up against an infinite Majesty:
And is not this a sore and grievous thing? Can you be too much affected for
that Sin which is of so deep a dye? this is the true and kindly sense which
every penitent Soul, enlightened by the Spirit of Grace, has of his Sins.

3. How bold must that Sin needs be, which has been committed before the face
and presence of God. Would you not have been afraid and ashamed, if sinful men
like your selves had stood by and looked on when you committed these and those
Sins? how then were you not afraid to do them when God looked o^t? if you did
not consider it, was not that an Atheistical Spirit? or, if you cared not for,
nor regarded it, was it not a brazen face? you were not afraid of his terrors,
nor awed with his judgments, you either forgot God, which is desperate
security, or you despised him which is high Profaneness: Thus confess your
Sins to God, if you hope to find mercy: hide not, cover them not under your
tongues, be not afraid to make the worst of them; you cannot confess worse than
God knows: judge your selves if you would not be judged of the Lord: if you now
hide your Sins, God will unmask them before Angels and Men; but if you thus
confess, God is just to forgive. Be not afraid to confess your selves the chief
of Sinners, this cannot set you beyond the hope of mercy, since Christ is more
able to save, than we are to destroy our selves, since it is before a God who
can abundantly pardon; since Christ's business is to save Sinners, labor to
know and confess your selves to be really and truly so: and the more you know
and feel your selves to be such, the more encouragement you have to go to
Christ. Remember Sin has taken away all other Pleas from fallen man, and left
no room for him to say any thing more or other, for, or of himself, but that he
has sinned, and thereby exposed himself to wrath, and has no other thing to
fly to, but the Grace of God in Christ Jesus; on which account it is that he
has this one plea left him humbly to present. For thy Name sake, O Lord!
pardon my iniquity, for it is very great.

SERMON XVI.
2. THus of the Prodigal's Confession of his Sin; it follows to consider his
Confession of the merit of it, expressed in these words, I am no more worthy to
be called thy Son. The Words are a Meiosis, or a diminutive expression, in
which less is said than intended. The thing here aimed at is Gospel
Humiliation, an ingredient into Repentance, and concomitant of saving Faith;
and is consequent upon the right apprehension of Sin, and the aggravation of
it; and he that has known what Sin is indeed, cannot but acknowledge himself
unworthy of mercy, and worthy of misery: and so this negative comprizeth the
contrary affirmative. Hence,

DOCT. Where God gives true Repentance, he makes the Sinner to see and confess
himself to be utterly unworthy of any mercy, and worthy of all misery.
The Grace we are here considering of is true Humility, a fruit and discovery
of Faith, and concomitant of sound Repentance. You shall see that our Savior
finds and acknowledges true and great Faith in it, Mat. 8. 8. with 10. It is a
Grace which God requires and earnestly calls for in Scripture, and is made the
end of many solemn dispensations of God to his People, Deuteronomy. 8.14, 15, 16. now
this Humility has two things in it: viz. 1. A low and vile esteem of one self.
2. Which follows, a yielding one self up to Gods dispose: the former we have
now consider; the latter follows in the next words: This first is an utter
renouncing of self-excellence. Man by nature is very proud, he thinks himself
to be of some desert and worth; hence he counts all the evil that befalls him,
an injury, and all good, a debt: the Soul is not fit for Christ, but God, when
he draws him home to himself, makes him know that he is the most worthless
creature in the World to receive any good, and worthy of all evil. And that we
may make some particular discovery of this Grace, we may consider it in two
things, viz. 1. The root of it. 2. The fruit proceeding from it.

1. The root of this Humility, and that which influenceth each part of it, is a
deep sense and apprehension of his own vileness. The Spirit of God gives him to
see, find and feel himself to be a vile creature: this is Job's Confession, Job
40.4. I am vile, the word signifies contemptible, or worthy of no esteem: he
finds and confesses himself every way vile.

1. Vile as he is a Man, a piece of Clay, a little dust of the Balance. God
made man so as that he might ever see cause to have low and little thoughts of
himself, Genesis 2.7. his body a lump of dirt, his breath a blast, himself a
Brother of worms: God must stoop to take notice of man in his greatest
excellency; hence the Psalmist thinks of it with admiration, Psalm. 8.4. What is
man, that thou art mindful of him?

2. Much more, because he is a sinful creature: the sense and apprehension of
his own Sin, renders him unspeakably abominable in his own eyes: he sees Sin to
be a vile thing, and himself, being a Sinner, to be defiled with it. Sin is not
only vile in it self, but it renders every one so that is polluted by it: the
best of creatures are vile, if compared with God, but sinful Man much more, Job
11. 14,15,16. this has rendered Man loathsome to God, whose pure eye hates Sin;
and shall render him so to himself, when God shall do him good, Ezekiel. 36.31.
this has pulled off his Scarlet, and thrown him upon a Dung hill: this has
defaced his beauty, and covered him with deformity; degraded his Glory, and
filed him with Ignominy; yea, overspread him with wounds, ulcers, and
putrefying sores; so that now he can see nothing in himself that might attract
love, but justly cause loathing.

3. Vile in all that he does: Such as is the principle, such are the acts: Like
tree, like fruits, Mat. 7. 16. see Job 14. 4. If he look on none but his best
actions that he does, yet here he sees his own filthiness so deriving it self
into them, that he cannot place any esteem upon them, but declare them vile
things, Isa. 64.6. Filthy rags. Filthy; the word is variously translated, and
by all to set out loathsome vileness. The like you have of Paul, Phil. 3.8.
dung. The truly humbled soul sees no excellency in himself, which he can call
his own, nor any thing done by him which is not polluted. So Paul, Romans 7.18.
In my flesh dwells no good thing. So that he dares not put his actions upon the
trial, but deprecates it, as David, Psalm. 14. 3. 2. Enter not into Judgment
with thy servant. This is the root of Humility.

2. The fruit that proceeds from this root, is the debasing of him in his own
esteem, and firstly, the sensible acknowledging his unworthiness of mercy, and
defect of misery.

1. His unworthiness of any mercy: the Prodigal confesses that he deserves no
kindness from his father; so does the truly humbled soul see that he deserves
nothing at the hands of God. In particular*

1. He acknowledges that he is unworthy of the least outward mercy, so far
from being worthy to be treated as a son, as not to deserve to be treated as a
creature: and here he acknowledges,

1. That he is unworthy of his life, that he is a Child of wrath by nature, and
does not deserve that God should suffer him to breath in his world, it is a
great kindness that he is not consumed, and destroyed from off the face of the
earth, and turned down into the pit long before this, Lam. 3. ^2.

2. That he is unworthy of livelihood: he cannot challenge, as a debt from God,
so much as the least bit of bread, or draught of water, but if he do bestow it
upon him, it is a condescending favor, Genesis 32. 10.

3. Unworthy that God should condescend to step aside to do him the least
courteousie at all; that he should visit him with any mercy, Matt. 8. 8. Hence
he wonders at all, says, as David, Who am I? or as Mephibofheth, 2 Samuel 9. 8.
What is thy servant, that thou should look upon such a dead dog as I am? The
ungrateful sinner is quarrelling with God, let him show him never so much
kindness; but the humble sinner wonders at God, let him show him never so
little kindness, because he judges that none can be little to such a worthless
creature as he.

2. He acknowledges that he is much more unworthy that God should pardon his
Sin, and take him among the number of his Children, that he should relieve his
famishing Soul, and bestow his Grace upon him: it is such a thing that he
dares hardly speak of, Luke 18. 14. when Paul speaks of his calling to the
Ministry, how does he set it forth? see Ephesians. 3. 18. To me, who am less than the
least of all Saints: how much more may every one say so of his Conversion? he
will acknowledge, that if God refuse to come and save him, he does him no
wrong, Romans 9.19,20. if he do it, it is mere Grace, Ephesians. 2.8.

2. He acknowledges his worthiness of all misery: that he is not only
undeserving, but ill-deserving; that he has not only forfeited all mercies,
but procured to himself all woes; is not only unprofitable, but is also a great
provocation to God. In particular,

1. He acknowledges that all the sorrows and sufferings of this life, are not
only his desert, but less than his desert, Ezar 9.13. Job 11.6. He will not
only justify Gods anger, but magnify his mercy in all the sorrows that befall
him here in this World, Lam. 3.22. if God take away his Estate, comforts of his
life, strip him naked of all, yet naked as he is, he charge not God, but
blesses him, Job 1.20,21,22. the threatenings of God are just, his executions
of them righteous, and his moderation of them merciful.

2. That the utmost of the wrath and curse of God is duly and truly his merit:
that he has done things worthy of Death, and that it belongs to him as his
wages, Romans 8. ult. Dan. 9. 8. he sees Hell to be a place proper for him, and
confesses that it is mere patience that has hitherto kept him out of it, else
he had been there ere this: he sees weight enough in his Sin, to sink him down
into the nethermost Hell, and that he is not there as well as others,
undergoing endless, easeless, remediless torments, is not because he is better,
but because God is more merciful to him.

Now when the humbled Soul is thus made sensible of his own worthlessness,
hereupon these further fruits of it discover themselves.

1. He is really taken off from all confidence in himself: he now dares to rest
no longer upon any thing that is his, whether of nature or grace, to give him
favor with God, and plead for him in his presence. He now dares not to rely
upon his duties, though done with never so much seriousness and sincerity; no,
they are Loss, Dung, Rags to him; they are not to be trusted in, or accounted
of.

2. He is taken off from exalting himself, and his own duties: all self
conceits are beaten down; and his business is to undermine them, and undervalue
them; he denies himself, this is true humility, Mat. 16. 24. He despises his
own services, they are nothing, nor is he ever she more worthy for them.

3. He comes before God with self-abhorrence: comes not as a proud man, that
thinks he comes for nothing but what he may expect and challenge, and it will
be an affront to deny it him, as they did, Isa. 58. 3. No, but he lays all his
excellencies, and all his moralities, and all his good duties in the dust,
under God's feet, and acknowledges that he may, if he sees meet, trample upon
them, and do him no wrong, Job 42. 6. If he had thought a thought or spoken a
word in defense of his own worth or deserving, he loathes himself for that word
or thought; he eats it again, and professes he will speak no more, and
condemns himself for what he has spoken already.

Now the Reason why God works this grace in conversion, is because his great
design in the New Covenant, is to bring about man's Salvation in a way of
Grace, the Glory of which Attribute is the bottom end of his counsel concerning
his Elect, Romans 9.23. Now then grace appears to be grace, in respect of the
subject, it is applied to, when this subject is made to appear the most
undeserving; and every circumstance lowering the creatures desert, heightens
the excellency of this Grace: Hence you shall find the Scripture loves to set
it off with this, Deuteronomy. 26. 5. etc. Ezekiel. 16. begin. Ephesians. 2. begin. And,
inasmuch as man is actively to give God the glory of this grace, it is
therefore needful, that he see and feel in himself, that which may put the
Emphasis upon it: Thus the Apostles argument was, Romans 5. 7, 8. To see good,
honest, innocent men taken to heaven, would be no such great matter to be
spoken of, but to see such as had been wicked, had provoked God, were sinners
of the Gentiles, etc. saved, this is matter for heaven to ring of to all
eternity: none will so wonder at their own salvation, as those that have been
deepest apprehensive of, and humbled for their own sinful unworthiness of
mercy, and provocation of God to wrath; they will glorify God indeed, who see
that he has saved them fro^^ lowest hell, in which he might have left them in
chains, prisoners, to have suffered wrath for ever.

The more full application of this truth will fall under the following
Doctrine; containing the other part of Gospel humility, it may suffice to hint
at one here.

USE. To convince and persuade poor sinners of their worthlesness: If ever you
would come unto God acceptably, you must come unto him empty of all
self-conceits, renouncing all worth or excellency in your selves: so long as
you think you deserve any thing so long Christ will refuse you: He will have
you to cast your selves upon mere mercy, unto which you have no claim of your
own, but sue for it as beggars, who can no way oblige their benefactors to do
them a kindness. See then and view how unworthy you are that God should do any
thing for you; unworthy of common favors, much more unworthy to be called his
Sons or Daughters: For motive, consider,

1. None but the humble soul can expect acceptance with God: He sees the proud
afar off, but the humble he will exalt: When you ly lowest, you are nearest the
height of happiness: it is from the dungeon, from the lowest pit, that Christ
fetches those whom he makes him Nobles; it is the meek he will teach his way.

2. None but the humble soul takes a right scantling of himself: this man only
is he that knows himself: and we can never know God aright in the Covenant of
his Grace, till we have a right apprehension, of our selves. Now that you may
clearly understand your own unworthiness. Consider,

1. That you have never done any thing in all your lives, that can render you
worthy in God's account: the Godly themselves must say of all they do, they are
unprofitable, Luke 17. 10. The best deeds of sanctified men call for
forgiveness; yea, for the merits of Christ to render them acceptable unto God,
which makes them so far from boasting, that it puts them upon it to ask
forgiveness. According to the first Covenant, those works were accounted worthy
of acceptance and reward, whereby God was glorified in perfect obedience;
wherein the heart and life were exactly conformed to the mind of the Law of
God, that was given man for his rule; but since the fall, the best of men
cannot thus do: And as for thee, thou have been a sinner, how justly may thou
take that to thy self, which the Prophet charged that wicked King withal?
Dan.5.23. Thou have kept no command of God, but fallen short of all, and what
worthiness can thou plead? those services which thou think thou have done,
even they are worse than filthy rags; for the Church concludes hers to be no
better, Isa. 64. 6.

2. How much thou have done to render thy self unworthy: Thou have not only
done nothing for God and his Glory, but but have been doing very much against
it; nay consider.

1. What an unworthy creature thou art in thy natural state; so far from being
amiable in Gods eyes, that thou art by nature a loathsome object: Thy p^degree,
original, state, all speak all against thee: thou may see what thou art,
Ezekiel. 16. begin. Though thou had done nothing against God, yet thy very being
is hateful: Who counts toads and snakes worthy of preservation, but rather of
destruction?

2. Thou have carried it unworthily toward God in the whole course of thy
life: all the days of thy vanity and unregeneracy, all thy course and
carriage, has been to set thee out of his favor. If vile and profligate
abuses will give a man worth, thou might claim it, for such has all thy
life been. Consider,

1. What God has been doing for you: how many ways he has been expressing
kindness, pity, favor to you: The being he has given you, the preservation
afforded to you, the provision he has made for you, the bounty he has heaped
upon you; but above all, the precious Salvation he has set before you, and all
the means given you for the promoting of it: innumerable have been the
obligations, strong the cords that he has laid upon you.

2. What you have requited him with; in one word, Ingratitude ( andsi ingratum
dixeris, omnia dixisti.) Nay, opprobrious contumity: For,

1. You have driven a trade of sinning against and provoking him all your lives
long: it has been your custom from your youth upward; nay, you have done it
with delight; you have made nothing to break his holy commands; yea, it has
been a sport and recreation to you, you could not sleep without it.

2. You have abused and mis-improved all his mercies, taking encouragment by
them to sin against him: with his own you have dishonored his great Name; with
his flax, and his wool, etc. Hos. 2.8,9. You have spent that substance which he
lent you in riot, have made his creatures to serve your sins, and so armed them
against him, and thereby made the creation to groan under your oppression.

3. You have sought for succor, relief, comfort, to other things, and not to
him, have trusted in creatures and not in the Creator, you have lived upon
husks, and fed on the air, and have made your selves servants; yea, slaves to
Satan and the World, and thereby disgraced your Original, and forgotten your
end, which was to serve God, and depend upon him for all.

4. You have despised his Redemption and Grace, that has been tendered to you
in the Gospel: Jesus Christ, that precious Savior, has been less esteemed by
you than your vile lust, and filthy pleasures; his patience has been slighted,
and grace refused; you have turned a deaf ear to his counsel, the back and not
the face to his proffers of Salvation; thus has he been of no worth in your
eyes. And now say, What are you worthy of? Ask your own Consciences, and they
will tell you, that you do such things as are worthy of death: An heathen's
Conscience will say so much, Romans 1. ult. You are worthy to have all those
mercies that you have thus abused, taken from you, and to be turned down into
the place of woes and miseries: Hell is a place fit for* you, and the torments
of it a due reward. Thus thou art unspeakably unworthy that God should show
thee any mercy: Get then to be deeply abased, and ashamed of thy self; hang
down thy head with the Publican, and so go to the throne of Grace, and ask
mercy of God for his own sake, for Christ's sake; this is the way in which God
is to be found, and entertainment to be had with him: God is not wont to send
such away ashamed, but contented.

SERMON XVII.
2. WE have heard of the Prodigals confession, now follows his petition: Make
me as one of thy hired servants. True humility (as was hinted before) has two
things in it, viz. 1. A low esteem of one-self: 2. A yielding one-self to God's
dispose, this latter is here presented to us. The world is much altered with
this younger son; time was when the place and condition of a son in the family
would not content him, but he must have his Portion and take his liberty; but
now he would be glad so he might but fare as a servant in his Father's house.
God, in the work of Conversion will hide pride from man, and make him very low.
There is naturally a self-soveraignty in every Child of Adam; though beggars,
they would yet be chusers; and if they may not have their will, they will rise
up in rebellion: This God breaks him off from, whom he takes to himself. Make
me, etc. i. e. handle me, treat me: as one of thy hired servants: hired
servants are, 1. Members of the family. 2. The meanest sort of members, except
slaves. It intends two things. 1. The son desires admission into his fathers
family, under his favor and care. 2. Submits to be disposed of as he sees
meet, and will not repine, but account it a favor. Hence,

DOCT. In true Conversion a sinner is brought to a voluntary resignation of
himself to God's dispose.
He voluntarily throws himself down at Gods feet, and leaves him to do with him
as he sees meet. This is the highest part of self-denial, which Christ requires
in those that come unto him, Mat. 16.24. And this will follow upon a true sight
and sense of our own unworthiness; and both of these are rooted in the right
apprehension of our own vileness. It will not be amiss to look into the nature
of this Grace, and its operation in an humble soul; and there is in it something
Negative, and something Positive.

1. The Negative part of it is, that he will be no longer at his own dispose:
He finds that he has been so long enough already to his cost: The Prodigal
found that it was the taking upon himself the Government of himself, that
brought him to all his misery, and this taught him, to see how unable he was to
rule and guide himself. He has no wisdom, no discretion, but is a mere
childish thing; hence resolves against it, as they, Hos. 14. 3. He confesses
himself to be brutish and ignorant; readily consents that it is not of man of
himself to direct his own way, or make a good choice for himself.

2. The Positive part of it is, that he is willing God should do with him as he
sees meet; to place and order him according to his wisdom and pleasure. But me
thinks, in the very front of this discourse, a great and puzling question seems
to assault us, viz. Whether in this part of Humiliation, God requires the souls
to be so low as to be willing to be damned if he sees meet? Some have been
troubled about it, else I should think the question unnecessary: But lest any
may think themselves not humbled enough for want of this, I shall answer it,
and I may safely lay it down as a positive assertion, That no man is bound to
be willing to be damned. You see how the Prodigal, though he yields to his
Father's wisdom and will in disposing of him, yet he begs for a place in his
family, and be as one of the household; he would be there where he may have
bread and not famish. Thus ought every son and daughter of Adam, to labor to
escape damnation; to use utmost diligence in it, and to pray, and weep, and
strive against it: For.

1. A desire after happiness, and an abhorrence of misery are naturally seated
in a man by a concreated principle: Now such principles as God put into man's
nature in Creation, and stamped indelebly upon his being, not capable of being
obliterated, were therefore put in him to be helps to lead him right to his end
for which he was made: and therefore to be willing to be damned, is a
transgression against the nature of man; it is a violence offered to his own
being and inclinations.

2. God has made it the duty of all men to seek after, and use means to obtain
happiness: yea, all that duty which God has laid upon men in the first and
second Covenant, it is with an eye and aim at happiness: This is the motive in
each to spur man on to his duty: God promised life to Adam if he obeyed, for
life therefore was he to obey: and Christ also promises salvation to him that
believes, he is therefore to believe for salvation, or that he may be saved, 2
These. 2. 10.

3. Man was made to glorify God: i. e. the end of the precept for which man
was by duty obliged, was that he might serve, honor, and glorify him: and
having lost this power by the fall, it is every man's duty to labor after true
Grace, whereby he may again please God; for without this Principle, we cannot
do it, and where this principle is, it necessarily includes, or involves
Salvation in it. We cannot desire to be converted, but we do withal desire to
be saved. We are to pray for Grace, without which we can do no service for God:
Now Eupraxy is happiness formally; to be willing to be damned therefore,
includes in it to be willing to be without Grace, and consequently dishonouring
God for ever, as the damned do.

Object. But no unregenerate man knows whether he be Chosen to life, and he
ought to be willing to be disposed of according to Gods Decree.

Ans. This Objection labors of great ignorance. For,

1. Not God's Decrees but his Commands are the rules of men's actions, Deuteronomy. 25.
29. It is not for us, in enquiring after our duty, so much as to propose what
is decreed, what not: For though God has made it a rule of his own works, yet
he has given us another of ours.

2. No man can know whether he be elected or no, till he can make his calling
sure, 2 Pet 1. 10. As for reprobation, there are no ordinary infallible notes
known to a man of it, nor does God reveal the other but by drawing the soul
effectually home to Christ.

3. The invitations of the Gospel are to all where the sound of it comes; and
all such are bound by the precepts to obey them, except they will bring guilt
on themselves, and increase their condemnation, Job. 3. 29.

4. Men are not damned under the Gospel because they are reprobated, but
because they slight the Gospel, and wilfully refuse to accept of Christ and his
Salvation, ibid.

5. It is both lawful and a duty to pray for things that God has never
purposed to bring to pass: Stephen else have sinned in his last words, Act. 7.
ult. Nor could we ever know whom to pray for, lest we should sin.

Quest. If it be then enquired how far the soul should resign itself up to Gods
dispose; I answer, He does in this act submit himself to the Sovereignty,
Justice, and Mercy of God: He throws himself down at the feet of these
Attributes; not one alone, but all of them.

1. He submits himself to the Justice of God, acknowledging him to be righteous
in all his dealings with him; yea, that he cannot in any wise do him the least
wrong: He is incapable of injury from the Almighty.

1. If he bring long, sore, and heavy Judgments upon him, wasting and
perplexing calamities, such as make him groan, yet he is righteous, Neh. 9. 33.

2. If he should delay to hear him, or give him any answer of peace, though he
have prayed and begged, yet it is no affront; it is right, and it is his duty
to wait till he will, let it be whenever he pleases, Isa. 8. 17.

3. If he should judge and condemn him, by passing a sentence upon him, and
declaring his reward to be with sinners, still he must be justified, Psalm. 51.4.

4. If he please to damn him everlastingly, to harden his heart against him,
yet even this also has he truly deserved; and it is at his liberty whether he
will do otherwise with him yea or no, Dan. 9. 8. He has but that which does
properly belong to him, it is but his wages, Romans 6. 23. Thus, though the poor
creature is loath to be damned, and earnestly deprecates it, and cannot think of
it without trembling and amazement; yet he yields this to God, that he may with
all equity do it, and if he do, he shall for ever have cause to be silent, and
not in the least to complain against him as unjust.

2. He submits himself to the Sovereignty of God; acknowledging it to be his
prerogative, to dispense himself to his creatures at his pleasure. And hence,

1. He owns and yields himself to be at the Sovereign dispose of God, being one
of his creatures, and he may appoint him to what he will, without wrong: If the
Potter may order his mass of clay (though his fellow creature) to make vessels
of the same lump, for several uses, some honorable, some dishonorable; much
more may God dispose of him, who gave being to the lump it self of which he was
made, Romans 9. 21.

2. Hence he lays himself down before Gods Sovereignty, and yields himself to
become a subject of it: he puts himself into God's hands as a Sovereign; as a
rebel yields himself up freely to his Prince; resolving with himself that God
shall do with him what he will, whether it be in judgment or in mercy: He will
not strive, contend, or make any rebellious resistance against him. Thus did
Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. and David, 2 Samuel 15. 26. Here I am, let him do to me as
seems good unto him.

3. Hence (...) resolves not to reply against any of God's dispensations, be
they never so sharp or severe upon him. There is a great difference between
being willing to be damned, and being willing that God should be Sovereign: God
commands us to fly from hell, and yet he expects of us, both to acknowledge
that we have deserved it, and also that we cannot lay claim of title to any
such favor at his hands, as Salvation, till he does freely bestow it upon us;
and that if he does, we ow the acknowledgement of it to his Sovereign good
pleasure, Romans 9. 18. He has mercy, on whom he will have mercy. We must desire
and seek to be saved, but we must submit those desires to him who has the Key
of David, and unlocks heavens doors, to none but to whom he pleases.

3. He submits himself to God's free mercy; to which alone he repairs, and on
which only he depends for acceptance: and be submits to this,

1. By a free and constant acknowledgement that all that he has ever received
of God, has flowed from this fountain; his life, his livelihood, the proffers
of Grace; and if ever he obtain Salvation it must be from mercy: If God should
deny him Grace, he should be just; but if for his own names sake he will take
him up into everlasting arms, this is mere mercy; and every inviting call,
every encouraging promise, every smile of his countenance is undeserved mercy.

2. By a free, ready, willing, earnest desire to be saved in a way of mercy,
and (...) no other way: he now looks no more for any merit in himself, or any
righteousness of his own by which he might please God, satisfy the law,
deserve favor; he no longer sticks at any of these things, but would have
mercy to reap the whole honor and praise of his salvation, Psalm. 115. 1.

3. He takes up a firm resolution to ly and tarry at the door of mercy, to
repair to this fountain for all good, and to expect and wait for all here.

1. He (...) not, nor will he make use of any other Attribute, or plead for
acceptance by; and this hope is in God's Grace, and all his pleading is, For
thine own Name sake. As far as mercy may be moved to look favorably upon him,
so far his hope reaches, and no further.

2. Hence he resigns himself to mercy's disposal: Text. Let God but accept of
me, take me into his house, and now let mercy do what it sees fit: May I be but
a subject of saving mercy, I will trust that for the rest.

3. Here he will wait God's time for the discovery of himself in his love: He
knows he is at the foot of mercy, and here he will not limit the holy one of
Israel, but will tarry his leisure, Isa. 8. 17. He remembers it is mercy he
has to do with, and therefore it must not be commanded, but waited for.

4. If mercy seem to turn from him, and indignation to burn against him; if
mercy seem not to regard (as Christ to the Canaanitish woman) yet he will bear
all this, and still wait. If mercy seem (like that unjust Judge) to stop its
ears, anger to sit in the countenance of the the most high, he will submit, and
yet throw himself upon the mercy of an angry and offended God, Mic. 7.9.

4. He is resolved that if God will accept him, witness his love to him, and
acknowledge him in Christ, his free mercy shall have the full and whole Glory
of it, and he will engage his heart to magnify mercy, by degrading himself,
and keeping in mind his own unworthiness: God shall have the praise of all, his
heart shall echo, grace, grace, through all his life, and heaven shall ring
with these glorious acclamations to all eternity.

This is the true Gospel humility, which the spirit of God works in every
soul whom he draws home to himself: This is a true qualification of Repentance
of Faith, and the modification of it in respect of the term to which the sinner
returns, viz. God: and those that so come shall find mercy. For the Reasons
why God brings the soul thus to his foot, they are such as these.

Reas. 1. To take away all boasting from the creature: that the soul may have
nothing at all before it to confide in: man is emptied of himself as long as
there is any self-soveraignty remaining in him: he does not, cannot acknowledge
all to come from God, till he utterly relinquish the disposal of himself: He
cannot see that his Salvation is wholly out of himself, as long as he think she
may capitulate with God about it. Now God will hide pride from man.

2. That his glorious Sovereignty may be fully subscribed to: Hence God will
save none till they do yield that he might damn them, and has no obligation
from them to do otherwise: God will be seen in his royalty, to dispense grace
from a throne, or not at all, hence we are to go to a throne of grace, Heb. 4.
16. God's Sovereignty is a most precious pearl in his Royal Diadem, and he will
not suffer it to be plucked out: Job shall be convinced of this before he
returns his captivity.

3. That the grace of God may not lift them up, but keep them low and humble:
That they may not despise others, no^ think of themselves beyond what is meet:
that they may not be high minded, but fear; that they may always remember who
has made them to differ from others, and may dwell upon that, that it is by
Grace they are saved, and not of themselves.

USE, Give me leave here to improve the former and present Doctrine, in a
serious word of Exhortation; as you would prove your selves true penitent^, to
get and keep humble before God: Ply this work of humiliation, and exercise the
grace of humility; get humble, walk humbly before the Lord: Renounce
self-sufficiency, and cast off self-soveraignty. For Motive.

1. Consider how acceptable an humble soul is to God, and how displeasing pride
is to him: God takes great delight in those that are humble, he dwells with
them, Isa. 57. 15. If any are like to have more of Gods refreshing and
comforting presence than others, it is those that are humble: where this grace
is in exercise, God will give more grace. Their services are highly esteemed by
God, Psalm. 51. 17. he has a peculiar respect to them, Isa. 66. 2.

2. Consider how much reason, and how many causes you have to be humble, to see
and count your selves vile creatures, and to ly low before God:

1. Your sins should make and keep you humble: The sin of your heart, the
leprosy of your nature, the body of death, that heart-full of filthiness and
corruption: your daily sins of act, in omission of duty, in transgressing the
command; especially your particular enormities, Psalm. 51. 1. This evil. It will
be a truth for ever that you have committed things worthy of death, and are not
worthy to be called sons and daughters of God, an hired servants place is too
good for you.

2. Your duties should humble you: Have thou done any thing for God? it was not
thou did it of thy self, but the spirit in thee. And in all your duties you
may see humbling considerations; how cold your affections? how little
impression had they on your hearts? of how little continuance, even as the
morning dew? How little sincerity, how much hypocrisy? How little grace, how
much corruption?

3. All your afflictions should humble you: God has hung many weights on thy
heart to crush thee, and thou should be ashamed that they have brought thee
no lower: All personal, and all public rebukes of God's Providence, all
Wilderness Trials, are to humble the people of God, Deuteronomy. 8. 1.5, 16.

4. All God's mercies should humble you; you have not deserved them, but the
contrary: The mercies of your being, preservation, special deliverances; above
all those saving mercies, the grace of God in Christ, and the promise of
eternal life: In a word; whoever thou art, whether Believer or unbeliever, thou
have abundant cause to be always affecting thy heart unto a low frame, and to
bring thee down to (...) foot of the great God, and ly there as a poor
d^spicable nothing, resigning thy self up to, and placing all thy hope upon his
mere love and mercy in Christ, and endeavoring that that may have the praise
and glory of all.

SERMON XVIII.
THe Directions may be: 1. To the awakened sinner to come humbly to, and wait
humbly upon God for his grace. 2. To the believer to carry humbly all his days.

1. Art thou one, who finding thine own misery, and hearing of God's plenty,
art thinking to make proof of it: Would thou speed? then, in a deep sense of
thy own unworthiness Throw thy self down at his feet: would you find God
merciful, be you sure to be humble: And for help,

1. Remember how much you have done to provoke God to reject you, and hide his
face from you. Think what manner of lives you have led; and in special how you
have slighted the Gospel, despised the Calls, counsels, reproofs,
encouragements that have been given you; how often you have refused to accept
of tendered Grace and Salvation; and therefore well may God refuse to hear you
when you cry unto him, and bid you go to the Gods that you have served, Jer. 2.
28.

2. Think how useless and unprofitable creatures you are in your selves; no
ways fit to be active in glorifying of him: The whole world is become
unprofitable, Romans 3. 12. Have neither will nor power of their own to glorify
God till he restore it, Philip. 2. 13. What can you do for him, till your
enmity be taken away, your rebellion subdued? Nothing but his grace can fit you
to do him any the least service.

3. See that you have nothing by which you can challenge the least favor from
him. It is true, the Gospel says, If you believe, you shall be saved; but is
also tells you, this believing is not of your selves, Ephesians. 2. 9. Till you
believe you are under condemnation; the first grace must come from him; and it
is at his pleasure whether he will give you to believe or no. He has indeed
freely engaged himself in promise to believers; but he has not promised to you
that he will make you such, and if he do not, you cannot. since then the case
is such, that without Faith no Salvation, and you no way deserve that God
should give it you, but have many ways provoked him to deny it; what remains
but that you cast your selves do (...) at his feet, and ask it, not only as
beggars that deserve no alms, but as traitors that have forfieted your lives,
and stand to the courtesy of their Prince of his own free favor to pardon and
restore them.

2. You that are believers, here is that which may teach you to carry it humbly
all your days, and in all respects: There is none has more reason to be humble
than a child of God, whose all is of grace, has nothing but what he has
freely received: in particular, walk humbly toward God, and toward man.

1. Carry it humbly toward God; and that both in respect of his special and
spiritual grace, and in respect of his outward Providence.

1. In respect of his special and spiritual grace; and the both in regard of
the first gift of saving grace, and progress of it.

1. In respect of the first gift of saving grace; let the constant remembrance
of it serve to make and keep you humble. And therefore remember: 1. Who thou
wast to whom God brought this grace? Ezekiel. 16. begin. One in thy blood. 2. That
thou did nothing to the working of this great work, Ephesians. 2. 9. Not of your
selves. 3. How much thou did to obstruct it; how often thou did resist
God's calls and counsels, were obstinate, rebellious, not hearkening to his
Spirit, shutting thine eyes, stopping thy ears, rising up against reproofs,
etc. God often came to thee, and entreated thee, but thou had no mind to hear
him, but did all thou could to have undone thy soul. 4. The patience which
the great God used with thee; how long he waited upon thee, pitying thine
obstinacy, bewailing the hardness of thy heart, and would not let thee alone,
though many a time thou baddest him departfrom thee. 5. Much meditate upon the
distinguishing grace which was revealed in thy conversion. 1. How few are
saved, and that thou should be one of them. 2. That thou art no better than
they, have nothing more to commend thee to God than Cain or Judas had; nothing
out of God could move him. 3. Thou did many ways more dishonor God before
thy conversion than any of them did; that young man, Mat. 19. might shame thee.
4. That the same means which hardened others converted thee. And when thou have
laid all these things together, put thy mouth in the dust, and let God's
converting grace make thee nothing in thine own eyes: and let this grace never
be forgotten, but always magnified by thee: only by humility is converting
grace glorified.

2. In respect of the progress of grace in your souls: the people of God meet
with many changes, exercises, temptations; and in these, diversities of
our-lettings and withdrawings of grace, and without humility cannot carry it
right in these interludes: in particular.

1. Limit not God to such a measure or manner of the dispensation of his grace:
as we should desire all grace, so we should be thankful for every portion of
it: Beggars must not be chusers. Paul would have grace to vanquish temptation;
God would have him content with grace sufficient to keep him from being
vanquished by it: If you have any Grace, it is a gift, and if you would have
more, you must be humbled, 1 Pet. 5. 5.

2. Be humble when God denies thee the special communication of grace: Whether
it be of enlarged assistance; though ragged and poor, and can scarce do any
thing, but art ready to slip and fall: thou have earned nothing, and God knows
what is best for thee: Or in respect of consolation, thou have not those
ravishing apprehensions which thou would, but he seems to hide the light of
his countenance, complain not, he is sovereign and just, resolve to wait, Isa.
5. 17. Be not discontented: Thou take much pains, waitest diligently on all
means, and their seems to be but little coming in; let not this make thee
weary: thou art sowing, it is not yet harvest: grieve but fret not; pray, but
pine not, and know the harvest will come in God's time, Gal. 6. 9.

3. Be willing to follow hard after God, though through many difficulties: We
are forward, while our way is fair, but if grace comes to a trial, now we
shrink, and are discouraged: But this is a time that calls for us to be humble:
we must now follow God; as good soldiers we must endure hardship: God is
worthy to be followed; it is his mercy thou have any grace which may be
exercised, and the end shall be happy, 1 Pet. 1. 7.

4. Humbly depend upon, and go to God for all supplies of grace in every work
you have to do: Proud man would have his stock in his own hand, to make use of
when and as he pleases; but God will have us to come and ask for every Grace,
and wait on him for it, and the humble soul will do so: If you consider that
you deserve nothing, you will be glad that you may have it for asking: Remember
you are but Children, and have not wisdom enough to manage your own stock, but
would soon prove bankrupts: this should animate you, that whatever you want,
God is ready to give, if you ask, Mat. 7. 7.

5. Carry it humbly toward God though he does not bestow so much grace upon
you as on others: We are sometimes ready to say, though I deserve nothing at
God's hands, yet I am as deserving as another; God can afford such an one so
much wisdom, faith, patience, comfort etc. and why may not I have it as well?
This spirit of envy and emulation is contrary to Humility: and this very
argument, rightly improved might make thee silent: is God a free disposer? Is
it his own that he gives? and may he not deal it out at his liberty? is thy eye
evil, because his is good? does not poor man challenge as great a liberty as
this is, and will you deny it God? nay, because thou art unworthy, thou have
cause to be thankful that thou have any at all, when there are so many millions
that have none, and who has made thee to differ from them? yea, call thy self
to an account, how have thou husbanded thy little? if ill, that should humble
and silence thee; if well, then comfort thy self, that he who improved his two
talents well, had his master's Euge, and entered into the Lord's joy. yea, how
know thou, but that their work and temptation is greater than thine, and
therefore stand in need of more?

2. Carry it humbly in respect of Gods outward providence: We live in a world
of change, and there are varieties of conditions in which we are thrown up and
down, and shall never carry it right in them without Humility. And here,

1. Carry it humbly in respect of affliction: there are many changes passing
over our heads, God brings many cloudy and mournful days upon his people; he
sees meet ever and anon to chasten them, and it is fit that a vale of sin, be a
vale of tears, All calls us to be humble: The Child should stoop, when his
father is correcting him: Humble sense of our vileness is a fit posture to meet
afflicting times in: For help,

1. Justify God in all the trials that he brings upon us: Hence labor
feelingly to acknowledge our desert, Dan. 9. 8. Accept of the punishment of
your iniquity; say the Lord is righteous: You are Believers; what then? Christ
has satisfied God as a condemning Judge, yet he will lay his fatherly
chastisements upon his faulty Children, and they have no reason to complain of
being beaten.

2. Bear affliction with meekness, patience, and self-abhorrence, Mic. 7.9.
With patience, be in subjection to your father, when he does nothing but right,
we should be silent, Job 40 4. 5. He that is vile, has nothing to say: and
with self-loathing, the more we loath our selves, the more we shall love an
afflicting God: It is the Lord, etc. Look on thy self as a poor inconsiderable
thing, and that will teach thee meekness: What wonder if a worm be trod on?

Quest. But why does God deal worse with me than with other sinful men?

Answ. 1. Possibly some are in a worse condition than thou. 2. Do thou know
any one by nature worse than thou art. 3. Can thou say thou art afflicted
more than thy deserving, or indeed up to it? 4. Is not he the Potter and thou
the clay? let him alone, if he be Sovereign thou must be silent.

3. Let every affliction help to embitter sin to thee: that is one great end of
it, to wea^ us from sin, and make us know it evil and bitter; and we shall bear
out afflictions the better, when we know and confess that our iniquities have
procured them: trouble for sin will swallow up other sorrows.

4. Think not worse of God or his ways because of the afflictions you meet
withal, but be willing to wait on him through all: Break not with God, nor
leave him, nor abate of your love to him: believe that he can take away the
affliction: and believe that he will sanctify it to you: and resolve with Job,
that though he slay you, you will trust in him.

2. Carry it humbly toward God in regard of his mercies. There are many
mercies which God bestows upon us, and if we would carry worthily under them,
we must carry humbly: Therefore,

1. Acknowledge your unworthiness of the least outward mercy; join with Jacob
in his Confession, Genesis 32. 10. A sinner is not worthy of a piece of bread, or
a drop of water; all our daily refreshments are mere mercy; yea, put very life,
Lam. 3. 22. You never earned your meat or drink, all the work you do is not
worth a farthing.

2. Wonder that God should do any thing for you: David makes a great wonderment
at it, Psalm. 8. 4. Art thou a Believer? that is Grace; in thy self a wretched
man: There is not the best man upon earth, but has cause to stand admiring
that God should condescend to look so low as to take any notice of him, or to
do him the least kindness.

3. Be exceedingly thankful for all God's mercies: Humility only is thankful:
That God should give to us, such as we are, such mercies, this makes it
exceeding great mercies: to see a sinner, one that deserves nothing, eating,
and drinking, and compassed with mercies, this changes gratitude.

4. Let these mercies break thy heart, and quicken thee to obedience: If we did
but know our selves, the least mercy would do this: That is a proud heart, that
is not softened by mercies, and quickened to duty too: The humble souls
language is, What shall I render to the Lord? Psalm. 116. 12. How should I live?
What manner of one should I be who enjoy such favors, who might have been a
back-log in hell, or ground between the milstones of Divine revenge? See
therefore that you are unspeakably in debt to God for every favor, be it never
so little, yet if the soul be humble as it ought to be, it will point us to
God, and put us upon obedience.

5. Be content with the portion of mercy that you enjoy: It it pride that
acknowledges not God in what we have, because we want our wills in something
that God denies us: An humble soul is content with any thing: though he be
poor, despised, afflicted, yet that he lives, has any health, strength, etc.
sets him down quiet: Learn to be humble, and that will teach you to close with
all God's dispensations.

2. Carry humbly toward men: As true apprehension of our own vileness will
make us little in our own eyes. Hence,

1. Beware of despising any, we mistake, if we think it an effect of true grace
to carry it contemptuously to any: Are they unworthy? so are you, Are they
Prodigals? so you have been.

2. Think better of others than your selves, Phil. 2. 3. He that sees himself
vile, will think these cannot be worse than I, it may be they are better, it
may be they have better moral excellencies; or have never finned so fearfully,
so scandelously and against such means as I.

3. Think it not hard to be in low esteem with others: We are ready to be
dejected when men look with low and little respect upon us: But he that reckons
himself a worm, will not think it strange, if every one treads on him, but
wonder he is no more contemned.

4. What ever esteem God gives thee among men, assume it not to thy self; let
God have the whole honor of it: Boast not of thy excellencies, or graces, but
choose rather to be speaking of thy infirmities: and if thou have the praise or
acclamations of others, take it not to thy self, but say, It is by the Grace of
God that I am what I am; who of my self am noting. Thus are we in all respects
to carry over selves humbly, and this is the way to obtain grace and favor
with God; the way to grow in Grace: yea, by this we shall give God his glory,
and shall enjoy his presence here; and when he has dwelt (...) while with us,
to comfort and establish us, he will translate us to dwell with him in his
Kingdom of Glory for ever.

SERMON XIX.
Verse. 20. begin. And he arose and came to his Father.
WE have considered the Prodigal's deliberation: In these words we see him
putting it in execution: where it is to be observed that his practice
corresponds to his purpose. He resolved to leave his far Country, and return to
his Fathers house; and so he did: Such also is the practice of every true
penitent. True Repentance begins at the heart, but it ends in the life: It
rests not in thoughts and purposes, but proceeds to practice, Hence,

DOCT. True Repentance is practical Repentance.
In the work of Conversion, there are not only deliberate purposes but real
acts. In order of nature, there must be first resolving before doing; yet where
true grace is, when men are resolved, they will do. Although the will be the
first mover, yet it is not the sole mover, it rests not in Elicite, but
proceeds to Imperate acts. Of the nature of rising and going, I have before
spoken, that which we have now to enquire into, is the inseparable connection
between grace in the heart, and grace in the life. We saw before the Prodigal's
resolution was gracious, and the Reason given was, because it was the root and
spring of practice; it was the beginning of the work in the superior
faculties, which was to influence the whole man: And the sincerity of it herein
discovers it self, because, as he said, so he did, as he resolved, so he acted.
It gives us a note of difference between false and true Repentance: Here then
we may consider. 1. The evidence of the truth of the Doctrine. 2. What is this
practice of Repentance?

1. For the evidence of the truth of the Doctrine, take these Conclusions.

1. There may be some kind of deliberations and purposes in the heart of a
sinner that is unconverted, about repenting and returning to God. Every purpose
is not an evidence of sincerity. A man held under the sting and lashes of an
awakened accusing Conscience, may be made to vomit up his morsels, and (in a
fright) to make forced promises of leaving off his sinful ways; and upon the
hearing of the Gospel, may resolve (as John's Generation of Vipers) te flee
from the wrath to come: distressed Consciences are often hurried to it, rashly
to throw themselves upon such resolutions; and some visible practice, and that
violent for the while.

2. That which discovers the falsehood of these resolutions is, that they are
very short-lived; they soon expire: many of them do not live long enough to
make any visible show in practice, but die in the womb; many a sick man in
horror, promises Reformation, if God will spare him: but he recovers not so
fast as his resolutions decay and die. Others that have had a more forcible
impulse, do a little seemingly, but are like the stony ground, Mat. 13. they
are often too violent to be permanent, and by this discover, that they are
acted by external force, and not an inward principle.

3. The whole man is gone away from God by sin, and therefore the whole must
return by repentance, Not only the heart is defiled, but the life is polluted;
not the inward man alone, but the outward too is gone away from God, and must
return to him: now true Repentance is not a partial, but a whole turning: we ow
God the whole man, Soul, Body and Spirit, I These.5.23.

4. The declarative glory of God is the great thing which all our doings should
aim at. In Conversion therefore, we are not only to praise him, but to show
forth his praise; and how is this done, but in life Repentance? God only sees
the heart, men observe and judge of our lives.

5. The Will, being commandress over the whole man, is not only to resolve for
it self, but for the whole man. Purposing or resolving is properly an act of
the will, but it is for the whole, it being representative of all, and being
able to indent for all: thus the young man promises for himself, I will arise,
true purposes are an obligation laid on the whole man for the performance of
them.

6. Hence, if the Will be indeed sincere in purposing, practice will follow.
This is unquestionable to him who knows what power it has in man. You shall
find in Scripture, that impenitence, or unconversion is charged here,
Ezekiel.33.11. Job. 5.40. Psalm. 81.12. and why? but because where the Will leads
the whole man naturally and necessarily follows, at least in true and real
endeavors. A Believer may indeed fail in the manner of performance, when his
Will is intense: but yet, where purposes have been taken, and promises made of
Repentance, and not put forth in endeavor, but men sit still where they were,
those promises were made with a deceitful heart, Isai. 44.90. and this hinders
thorough repentance, Psalm. 78.37. their heart was not right: where the he^^t is
truly given to God, such an one will not sit still, but be up and doing.

2. What is the practice of Repentance which is requisite?

Ans. It is a speedy, constant, and industrious endeavor in the mortifying of
Sin, and quickening of Grace, by the help of Gods Holy Spirit. When the Spirit
of God has wrought the habits of Grace in the heart, he always adds the
bringing of them forth into act, which is their end and use: He that works the
Will, works the Deed too, Phil. 2. 13. so that the Soul no sooner is furnished
for its work, but it sets about it: when Christ raised any, or healed them,
they rose and walked: so that practical Repentance is nothing else but
improvement of Grace.

1. The business of this Grace, or that about which it is conversant, is the
mortifying of Sin, and quickening of Grace: rising out of Sin, is a rejecting,
relinquishing, casting it off, which is done in mortification. Sin (...) the
power of a Prince in a natural man, commands him, Reigns over him, Romans 6. 12.
It must therefore be vanquished, its dominion cast off, by such as rise out of
it: Sin so dwells in us, that it is no more left than it is mortified:
returning to God, is an exciting of Grace, a quickening of it, it is an
exerting of faith in him, and love to him, in these Repentance consists, Romans
6.11.

2. That which is to be done in this business, is,

1. To be using all means to strengthen hatred of Sin: the more we hate Sin,
the more we are gone from it; he whose heart most abhors it is gotten furthest
off from it: Hence, there is an using such helps as may make it loathsome:
which are a viewing the evil nature of it as discovered in the Word of God,
viz. its pollution, its contrariety to God, the wrong it does the Soul: and
also the cross of Christ, on which we should crucify the World and its Lusts,
Gal.6.14.

2. To be by all ways engaging our hearts to God, to love and fear him; and
hence to get more and more persuaded of his goodness, of the riches of his
Grace in Christ, of the great happiness of those whom he admits into favor
with himself: the better we are acquainted with, and persuaded of God, the more
intense will be the actings of our Grace, Psalm. 9.10.

3. The qualities of this act are these three,

1. It is a speedy work: if repentance be begun in the heart, it cannot rest
there, but presently breaks forth, Psalm. 39. 3. the young man no sooner
purposed, but he practiced, his resolutions were no sooner sealed, but he falls
upon them; the Soul that is thoroughly persuaded, sees so much reason, and feels
such urgent necessity; Sin is made so bitter, and God represented so
desirable, and his present state so dangerous, that he cannot be at rest till
the thing be done.

2. It is a constant work: the practice of Repentance is not a transient but a
permanent act: he that begins right in the work of Repentance, holds on all his
life: Paul quickens his Colossians to the work of Mortification after a long
standing in Christ, Col.3.5. there is Sin in Believers all their life, and so
much Sin, so much distance from God; they had need then to be turning all their
days. The true Christian is in his way, traveling out of his far Country,
and he cannot sit still till he be gotten to Heaven.

3. It is an industrious work: when a thing is difficult, he that is in good
earnest will take pains: it is not light skirmishes, but a warfare that must
accomplish this business: his life therefore is an agony, he attends on the
word (...) diligence, prays with all importunity, as one that is oppressed,
Isai. 38. 14. sets a strict watch over his heart and life, looks to his ways,
flies from temptations, endeavors that every step of his life may be a step
farther from sin, and nearer to God, and in this race he runs as fast as he can.

4. The fruit of all is, Sin dies, and Grace grows daily; I mean in the
progress of his Christian course: he hates Sin more, loves God more, gets more
strength against temptation, and more agility in Gods service; thus the renews
his strength, mounts up with wings as Eagles, runs and is not weary, walks and
does not faint, Isa.40. ult.

USE 1. For Information:

1. Here see how vain it is for men to rest in empty and impracticable purposes
of repenting and returning unto God, as if therefore their state were good.
True Repentance indeed begins at the Will, but it is as certain that if it be
true, it rests not there but proceeds farther, and the whole man will be
exercised in it; if the heart be really turned to God, that man is right; but
then his life will be changed too.

This Doctrine does not blame men for resolving and promising, but for doing no
more, for sitting still and thinking they have done sufficient: beware then of
resting here: ask your hearts on what grounds they purposed, and if good, why
then do they not perform them? Heaven will not be won with a few empty wishes,
and faint promises; but there must be wrestling, striving, overcoming: the Son
promised his Father to go and work in the Vineyard, but went not, and what did
that promise come to? God will not be so mocked.

2. It plainly condemns such as have relinquished or abandoned their
resolutions: they promised Repentance, and practice impenitence: how many in
affliction have engaged to God, to leave off their vain courses, and no longer
follow foolish things, they would arise and return to God, and if he would give
opportunity they would make it appear; but after a little while they get the
mastery over their convictions, still their Consciences lick their wounds
whole; now are their resolutions buried, their promises forgotten, their old
ways please them again, and so the Dog returns to his vomit. Let such consider,

1. God takes notice of, and keeps a record by him of all those purposes and
promises and will one day call you to an account for them.

2. This is the way to be more hardened in Sin, and make your conversion the
more hopeless; this is to quench the Spirit, and provoke him to strive no more.

3. It will be a sad remembrance in the bottomless pit, to think, how near you
once were to Heaven, and yet thus thrust your selves away from it.

USE 2. For Exhortation: to such as are distressed under the weight of
oppressing evil, and have taken up purposes, and made promises of arising and
going to God; would you have the comfort of them, follow them with serious
practice. For motive, consider;

1. Else they will come to nothing; they will prove but the Fools Dream, and
Sluggards Wish: God will one day say to you, why did you not do as you thought?
why did you stand still, or go backward?

2. These resolutions are the suggestions of the Spirit of God, calling you to
your duty, and if you neglect them, you quench the Spirit, and so provoke him
to forsake you.

3. These are resolutions not to be neglected or repented of: they are the best
purposes that ever you made in your lives; they have a right object before
them, and there lies a necessity on you, if you will ever do well to practice
them: For 1. Something must be done, or else you perish: there is no lying
still where you are, where there is nothing but Famine and misery. 2. If your
return to your old ways and courses, it is but to act over your old miseries:
the World will never be better than a desolate Wilderness; if you go to it, you
do but return to Famine and destruction. 3. Jesus Christ, and no other, can
save you; and he is willing to save you, and is grieved to see you halting so
long between two Opinions, faintly resolving, and dubiously promising: he waits
to see you do at last as you have often said. For Help,

1. Beware of Delays: men say they will, but when? Satan is politic, our
hearts are deceitful, and these seek to while off the work, and make us believe
it is enough to promise now, and practice at leisure: rise and go while your
resolutions are hot, they will else cool by degrees, till they have no heat nor
motion in them.

2. Enter not upon debates about the business; Satan will plead, Flesh and
Blood will reason; you can no way more gratify your Enemy than to enter a
review, and bring the matter into question and deliberation again: thus they not
only gain time, which may be an irreparable loss, but have also many advantages
to break off and disanull the thoughts of your hearts.

3. Entertain not discouragements from going to Christ: Satan will say, your
Sins are too great and many, or your time is past, or it is a desperate
venture, being uncertain whether you shall find entertainment: and many the
like stumbling blocks he will throw in your way: But fortify your resolutions.

1. By considering your own necessity: that one thought is enough to stop the
mouth of every Objection, I must go or die.

2. By seriously pondering the Gospel encouragements: does not Christ bid thee
come? has he not said, those that do come he will not cast off? he is the
fountain of living waters, has enough to satisfy the hungry soul: mercy is
above our unworthiness, as high as the heavens above the earth; he can and will
abundantly pardon, what needs more? If then thou have thoughts to return to
God, fix these thoughts, and rise, and do so; if thou sit still, faint, or give
back, all is lost, and thou art more miserable than ever: but if thou rise and
return, this will evidence the truth of thy resolutions: and thou shall find
all kind welcome, and soulsatisfying entertainment with God; which is the next
thing that follows.

SERMON. XX.
Ver.20. But when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and bad
compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.
WE come now to the third part of the Parable, expressing the entertainment the
Prodigal found with his Father, which was with all kindness, and highest
expressions of greatest love. The purpose of it is to set forth the riches of
Gods Grace, and inexpressible bounty to repenting Sinners; and so expresses
the great benefit that come by believing, described, ver. 20, to 25. and here
are two things to be noted: 1. The meeting and greeting between him and his
Father, ver. 20, 21. 2. The Provision made for, and entertainment afforded to
him, ver. 22, 23, 24. In their meeting and greeting there are two parts: 1. His
Fathers carriage toward him, ver. 20. 2. His deportment toward his Father,
ver. 21. In his Fathers carriage toward him we are to observe, 1. The time of
it, when he was yet, etc. 2. The manner of it, in several circumstances.

1. To begin at the time when this entertainment or treaty was, it is expressed
by the circumstance of place, at such time as he was at a great distance from
him: the right meaning of which Phrase is of weight to be understood, for the
confirming of the forementioned Doctrine of Repentance. Some understand it to
be spoken by way of anticipation, and that this part of the Parable does not
follow the foregoing in order of time; but that as in the second part he had
described the Sons repentance in the order and method of it as it was done by
him; so in this third part, setting forth the Grace of God, by the Fathers
entertainment, he begins it at the first discoveries of it, and that before
(being the leading cause of) his Repentance, q. d. before he could rise and
come to his Father, he came to himself Others suppose the order of time is here
observed, and so account that here are the beginnings of saving Grace, and so
put over the former to preparatory work, q. d. whiles he was resolving, and
practicing to use means with a preparatory hope, God comes in with saving
Grace. But I close rather with the first of these: for doubtless this arising
and going, must express true Repentance; and the expression in our Text
discovers the preventing Grace of God, and shows the original of his favor to
be of himself, and the beginning of the application of it to be before any
Repentance of ours: we might be ready to think that the Sons Repentance was
that which mored his Fathers bowels, and his acknowledgement had broken his
heart: Our Savior tells is no, God comes first, his Bowels outrun our
Repentings. Hence,

DOCT. In the work of Conversion Gods free Grace prevents, and so becomes the
first and leading cause of our Salvation.
The first expressions of Gods saving love meet the Sinner when he is a great
way off: nature does not prevent Grace, but Grace nature: it is not with God as
with humane Fathers, whose hearts are turned with their Childrens humble and
submissive subjecting themselves to them. Gods Grace indeed appears in
receiving the truly penitent, but it is neither moved by their penitence, nor
does it here begin; but it is the first, and leads all the causes of Salvation.
By the Grace of God, I here understand all that special good will which he
bears to any of the Children of men, in appointing them Heirs of Glory; which
Grace first appears to any in particular, when it effectually works for their
Salvation: Grace neither is tied to, nor waits fort nor is consequent upon the
natural operations of men. A brief opening of this Doctrine may be couched in a
few Propositions.

1. The natural man cannot by his natural power move one step toward God: the
highest improvements of nature by our own Principles, bring us not one foot in
our way toward Heaven: the Scripture expressions of man's being dead, impotent,
dry bones, a carcass, etc. though Metaphors, yet are not Hyperbole's. If by the
image of God on man, we understand the sanctification of his nature, fitting
him for the service of God, that image is wholly defaced, and there are not so
much as any relics of it left: Man is Blind, Deaf, Dumb, Dead.

2. As God has appointed his unto Salvation, so has he appointed a way in
which he will bring them thereunto; and this way becomes by his ordmation, a
necessary medium to the attainment of it: Faith and Holiness are the way to
glory: the Psalmist speaks of a Path of life. Psalm.16. ult. out of this way
none over come to Heaven.

3. Hence man's Salvation is wrought appl^^catorily, by bringing him into and
keeping him in this way: Eternal life is ascertained to it, Gal.6.16. they that
find it, and follow it, and lose it not, never miss of Glory: the promise is so
firm that it cannot fail, all the difficulty lies in the performance of what is
in order to the receiving it.

4. That the discovering of this way, and appointing Salvation in it is of
Grace, is evident, for God and man were fallen out, and God might choose whether
ever he would accept him any more: nor is there any proportion between what is
required, and the consequent Salvation: besides, Christ, by whom alone we have
access to it, was freely given to open this way.

5. That the bringing of any into, and keeping of them in this way is also of
Grace, is the thing which we have now to prove, and will clear the truth of the
Doctrine; and indeed this alone is that which removes all legal respects from
the Gospel; and the truth of it will hence appear:

1. That before the Spirit of God begins to work upon him, there is nothing in
an elect person to distinguish him from another: he is dead as well as he, a
child of wrath even as others, Ephesians.2.3. One has not a better nature, or better
dispositions than the other: Abraham was an Idolater, Rahab an Harlot, Mary
Magdalen no better, Paul a Blasphemer and Persecutor, and in his rage the
spirit met him.

2. The very common work of preparation is not of nature, but of grace. There
is common, and there is special grace: the Sinner does not so much as convince
himself: it is not Conscience alone, but it is Conscience awakened, and
improved by the Spirit of God, that brings a Sinner under sense of sin and
misery, Joh. 16.9. man is naturally stupid, a convinced Sinner is nearer the
Kingdom than another, this is not of himself.

3. Saving Faith whereby we are entitled to Salvation, is not of man himself,
but of grace: ^e that believes shall be saved, but God gives men to believe,
Ephesians. 2.8. it is the gift of God. Men would live and die in unbelief, did not he
exert his Almighty power: Faith is a creating work, 2 Cor.4.6. and the
operation of the same power which raised Christ, Ephesians. 1. 19,20.

4. The saving efficacy of all the means of Grace is of God: it is not in them,
they have not power in themselves to produce this grace in us, but that is
according to his pleasure: it was he that touched Lydia's heart, Act. 16. the
virtue of the means, lies not in the skill, grace, good will of instruments,
nor all their industry but in him, I Cor.3.6. some are converted at the first
Sermon they ever heard, others have heard a thousand, and are yet in their
Sins: Sermons are but the Prophets staff in the Servants hand.

5. Though Gods ordinary method be, first to prepare the Soul for Faith, before
he infuseth it, yet, not only the preparation is of Grace, but the soul thus
prepared, is, before believing, a great way off from God, he is still in a
state of nature, has nothing in him that can challenge this Grace; but if God
bestow it upon him, it is his mere favor: there are many who have a common
work, and it proceeds no farther: they have had many awakenings, shakings,
terrors; taken up many resolutions, made many promises; and yet never past from
death to life, but have either staid here, or gone back again: nay, God is here
Sovereign, the Sinner is dead still, and has not a promise that God will give
him life: God when he passes by, may either look upon him, and say to him
Lvie; or he may pass away.

USE 1. For Information:

1. Of the absoluteness of the Grace of God: it must needs be every way wholly
free: the first cause has no dependence upon any other, or any other but a
voluntary obligation to them: hence they undertake a vain task, that will give
any reason of man's Conversion beyond Gods will; or why these and not those are
converted and saved: if there were any to sway that, it were not the leading
cause.

2. Of the infallibility of the conversion and salvation of Gods Elect; because
it flows from Grace as that highest cause of it. If it did firstly depend upon
any thing in us, our mutability would expose it to hazard, and thence it would
be dubious, and always questionable: but if Grace lead, all is certain; for
who or what can be able to frustrate Grace, or disappoint it in all that it
has designed for our Salvation? of Grace, to the end the promise might be sure
to all the seed, Rom.4.16.

3. The reason why the means convert at one time, and not at another; and one
man and not another. Many a powerful Sermon, awakening Providence, etc. pass,
and the man still goes on frowardly in his ways, but at last, that which
seems to be in it self of less efficacy, awakens, melts, humbles, heals the
Soul: but this is when Grace begins to work, and that, only that, is
irresistible, man's sinful heart is too hard for every thing else; and this is
done when and where God pleases, John 3. 8.

4. That no man can lay any engagement upon God to do him any good. No man can
be too soon for him: we cannot stir till he moves us; we can do nothing for
him, till he first does for us, and in us: and hence those whom God passes by,
and leaves in their sin, have no just ground of complaint, which if they could
do any thing first to oblige God, they might have a show for.

USE 2. For Exhortation:

1. To the unconverted; be hence advised,

1. Not to think to earn Grace and Glory by your own endeavors, or to do that
of your selves which may bring you under the Covenant promise of life; this
will never be: were there no more in the Gospel, but only that counsel, believe
and be saved, the grace of the Gospel would do us no good: but when God speaks
of making us to believe, of working the will and deed, that is the life of
Gospel Grace: Christ bids us to come, but if he come not first, he would keep
his Salvation to himself.

2. Not to put away the grace of God from you till you have made your selves
fit for it. Many say, what have I to do to ask Grace, who am so vile and cannot
come to God? I answer, none has more need of it than such an one: and
therefore do not say, I will wait till I have fitted my self; but wait on God
for his preventing grace, to fit and prepare, and turn you unto him: say not,
if I could get up yonder to him, it would be well, but wait for him to come to
your pit.

3. Not to rest in means and endeavors, as if they were able to do for you
what you need; but look up to Grace to help you to attend upon the means, and
bless that attendance for your Spiritual good. Promise not to your selves any
thing from Ordinances themselves, but only so far as he shall breath in them:
Wait therefore for the north and south wind to blow.

4. Be willing to wait the leisure of freegrace. If that lead, it must not be
limited, but suffered to take its own time; only it is our duty to be waiting
in the use of all means, not growing weary, fainting or repining.

2. To the converted, learn you also from hence,

1. Not to be proud of your grace, or think highly of your selves above others:
He has but a shadow of grace, and not that which is true, who is apt to say, I
am not as this Publican. It is certain, where grace is most eminent, there the
creature is least in his own eyes, not arrogating or ascribing any thing to it
self. That Grace is the most insuspectible and renders us most unworthy in our
own esteem.

2. Would you be serviceable in your generation to the glory of God, be
directed to go to him in all you have to do, for his grace, that by it alone
you may undertake. Paul will engage in any thing, so Christ shall stand engaged
to strengthen him. It may teach us to begin every work with prayer, which we
desire to have succeed; for if God be not in it, leading and strengthening, it
will certainly fail: Not all other advantages of helps and means will be
otherwise then abortive, if grace give them not their efficacy. If you set
about any thing without engaging God in it, the very spring, and rise, and
strength of all is wanting.

3. If you find the work of Conversion wrought in your selves, or see it
wrought in others, be sure to ascribe it to the grace of God as the leading
cause. No flesh has any cause to glory, but all the glory is his due: you have
used means, attended on ordinances, been constant in duties, and now you find
grace coming in upon these, Faith to believe in Christ, and rely upon him, an
heart subdued to obedience; say not now that this is your own work; you saw not
how it came in, but by this effect you are led up to the cause, and must say
the finger of God was in it: Others have done the like for the matter of it,
and never the near. You see that your labors with your Children or your
servants are blessed, your reproofs and counsels take effect; think not now
that you have done the work, or deserve the praise of it; but consider it:
God's blessing upon your labors which havh done all: others have been as
careful, and yet can see no fruit, God so dispenses himself to the Children of
men, as to take away all boasting, and when we look upon all our gains and
seize we must conclude with Paul, it is by the grace of God we are what
we are. Had not he come home to us, we had never gone forth to him; had not he
been gracious to us, we had died in our sins. Have you seen your sin and
misery? he opened your blind eyes; have you arose and gone to him? he saw you
first, and being moved with compassion came to you, and took you up in his
arms. Study therefore to live to the praise of his Grace; and still wait upon
him for the continuance of it; for the completing of your Salvation, and
bringing of you to glory, knowing that he who has begun a good work in you,
must also perfect it to the day of the Lord, if ever it be done; and except he
leads, you can never follow.

SERMON XXI.
THus much for the season; now let us consider the manner of the Fathers
carriage to his Son, according as it is described: 1. By the cause of it. 2. By
the effect, or carriage it self. 1. The cause of it, he saw and had compassion.
2. The effect; He ran, etc.

1. To begin with the cause; his seeing his Son, and having compassion on him,
do not decipher two acts, but only one. God chooses miserable man to be a
subject of his mercy, and makes his misery an occasion of discovering it; but
man's misery is not the impulsive cause, but Gods mercy: the meaning of the
expression is, that he looked upon him with a compassionate eye, when lying in
his misery, and his own pity moved him to do as he did. Divine Attributes, the
declarative glory whereof God designs in the World, have a subject in which
they are pleased to discover themselves: but this subject does not move them,
but they incline themselves to the subject. The word [ Had compassion] comes
from a root that signifies bowels, and the English of it is, his bowels did
earn; and the bowels being the seat of the affections, especially of pity,
Hence the word is used to express great and active pity. Thence,

DOCT. The compassion of God is the only moving cause prompting him to show
favor to a poor perishing sinner,
In the former Doctrine, we heard that Grace prevents; here we see what grace
it is that first moves, viz. The fathers compassion, when once this begins to
set it self on work, he can sit still no longer, but rises, runs, etc. Here
consider, 1. What the compassion is. 2. The evidence and reason of the Doctrine.

1. What is the compassion of God which leads him to show favor to a sinner?

Answ. Compassion, when it is attributed to men, or reasonable creatures, is a
compound affection, made up of love and grief, and admits of this description:
It is an affection stirring up the soul to be grieved, at the discovery of some
miserable object, and moving of him to endeavor its succor or relief.
Affections are the feet of the soul, and prime mover of the will of man; hence
they are moved with reason either true or apprehended, and lead unto actions
suitable to that motion: now though God be in himself (...), not capable of
being moved with any outward object; and unchangeable in his will; and hence
never more propense to any thing at one time, than at another, but performs
all things according to the everlasting counsel of his will which is
unalterable: Yet, speaking of himself after the manner of man, he assumes
affections, as love, hatred, joy, compassion, etc. And that because in operibus
ad extra, or in the works of providence there are such manifest fruits, as are
wont in men to proceed from such affections: so that we may see something
resembling this description, in the present case; observe then.

1. The object of compassion is a miserable thing: A creature brought into
distress, groaning under his misery, and standing in need of his succor: Such
an one is the sinner: he is one famishing, and ready to die; he is the forlorn
creature, a miserable wretch, going without hope to the pit; an helpless
creature, whom no created being can relieve and rid of his misery, he is both
poor and perishing, as we before heard.

2. The affections which go into compassion are two,

1. Grief; whereby the mind is moved and troubled at the creatures misery: the
sight of it oppresses the heart, when he sees it; he cannot tell how to bear
the sight of it; hence also often proceed sighs and tears of pity over the
object. Thus, God also (speaking in our dialect) seeing poor Sinners in their
misery, expresses himself like one whose heart is ready to burst, Hos. 11.8.
How shall I give thee up? how shall I deliver thee? my heart is turned; my
repentings are kindled. And after like manner, Jer. 31.20. in this grief also
we are wont to be troubled at our selves if we have done any thing to bring the
creature into such a miserable condition, and hence we relent, and repent; and
so God also speaks of himself, in the forecited, Hos. 10.8.

2. Love; for without love there can be no compassion: hatred is inexorable;
it^ rejoices and triumphs in the misery of its enemy; and the more miserable
it sees him, the more it can rejoice in it: but compassion argues good will:
hence God uses such expressions concerning Ephraim, Jer. 31. 10. Is Ephraim my
dear Son? is he a pleasant Child? etc.

3. The natural operation of this affection in us, is to stir us up to do what
we can for the succor of the person thus in misery. If we do indeed thoroughly
pity the condition of one that is in sorrow, we cannot sit still: this
affection will hale men to action, they will certainly afford the best help
they can: thus God by virtue of this compassion of his, succors, saves,
delivers the Sinner, frees him from misery, restores him to a better state,
this affection sets him on work, Jer. 31. 20. My bowels are troubled for him; I
will surely have mercy upon him.

2. In the clearing up of the Doctrine, consider 1. That God is a God of
compassion. 2. That this is the moving cause of all the mercy which he shows to
a Sinner.

1 That God is a God of Compassion appears:

1. Because it belongs to his Attributes, Exodus 34. 6, 7. merciful and
gracious, forgiving iniquity, and transgression and sin. Hence his People
ascribe this title to him, Psalm. 86. 15. But thou oh Lord art a God fall of
compassion.

2. Because his works declare him to be so: his works of providence toward his
visible Covenant people evince it, Psalm. 78.37. But he being full of compassion
forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not. His works of special favor
toward his Elect, in pardoning their Sins, and accepting of them to be his
Children, do more notably confirm it.

2. That this is the moving cause of all the mercy which he shows to a sinner,
will appear.

1. From the nature of God: He is the first mover to his own actions, and
cannot possibly be moved by any thing out of himself: Hence man's pity and
God's, differ in respect of the the moving cause: Man has such an affection
habitually, but it lies still till an object excite it; but God is otherwise,
it moves it self: That which moves in us, has the respect of a cause, and that
which is a cause is in nature before the effect, but the good will of God to
man, whence all his compassion flows, was from Eternity, Jer. 31. 3. I have
loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore in loving kindness have I called
thee.

2. God renders this as a reason of all his mercy toward his Creatures: When
he speaks of pitying and relieving them, he reduces ^t to our good-wil, and
mercyful nature, Jer. 3. 12,13. Hos. 11.9. Romans 9.15. Psalm. 78.38.

3. Because there is nothing in the Creature can be rendered as a sufficient
moving cause of his compassion toward it.

1. Not the Creatures misery in it self, For,

1. The sinners misery is not a fortuitous thing, or befalling an innocent
person, but it is the just penalty of his sin, inflicted by God himself, and
that according to the equity of an holy and just Law, Lam. 3.39. A man for the
punishment of his sin.

2. Then must God be equally moved to compassion to all sinners, who are alike
miserable, and alike need succor; and then why are not all saved? That
compassion which saves one, could as well save another, but there are but some
sharers in this saving compassion, others suffer his rigor, Romans 11. 7. The
Elect obtained it, the rest were blinded.

2. Not their legal convictions, and tenors, and confessions and softly
walkings etc. i. e. No preparatory work: For, 1. The Son was for all them a
great way off, when his Father pitied him. 2. There are that Call, and God
will not hear, that seek him early, and shall not find him, Prove. 1: 28:

3. Not legal Repentance and Reformation, turning from many sinful practices,
and doing many things: For these are nothing but sin: Esau repented and wept,
but it profited him not, Heb. 12: 17: Herod's reformation engaged not God to
him. In sum, God's compassion is according to his will, and that is absolutely
free, nor to be regenerated by the creature, Rom: 9: 16, with 18:

4. Because God's design in the Salvation of a sinner is the manifestation of
his Grace; which grace discovers it self in showing him compassion. Now this
grace of God has described its subjects from eternity; and therein
distinguishing Grace is made to appear, when it falls upon a subject that has
nothing in it to engage him, nor could of it self do any thing in the least to
move him.

USE 1. Here we see how far the name and term of merit is a stranger from
Gospel language; and what care we ought to take that we do not entertain any
thoughts of it. God is no debtor to his creatures except voluntarily: as it was
free to him to make them, so also to assign them their end and use: and it is
certain that he designed or appointed no creature to any use, but withal
completely furnished it for that end; and if, through its own default, that be
lost, it can claim no restitution at Gods hands: hence let no man think that
his misery should be a sufficient ground to engage Gods mercy to him; no nor
his acknowledgment of his sin and misery neither: for if we stand at the
tribunal of Justice (unto which merit is properly reckoned) it does not deserve
pardon for a delinquent to fall down at the Judges feet, confess his fault, and
beg that it may be past by, and not imputed to him: if the Law condemns him,
and he stands guilty before the Bar, it is only a free pardon that can acquit
him. Now though an humane Judge may be moved by the submiss and lamentable
expressions of a justly condemned person; yet God is capable of no such
impressions; but if he intends a soul good, he puts this very frame into him,
and then accepts him in this way, though not for this carriage: but in all this
there is not any room or occasion to speak of merit.

USE 2. Learn hence also not to be discouraged from going to God in the sense
of your own misery: Though you are altogether unworthy, and have nothing of
your own to plead with him, which deserves to impetrate his mercy, yet you see
here that his own compassion leads him to be merciful, and that the object
which it has chosen to express it self unto, is miserable sinners, such as are
every way miserable; helpless and hopeless creatures: And if thou know,
find, and feel thy self to be such an one, there is no reason to be
discouraged; thou art one of such whom God has chosen to express his
compassion upon; and he who knows thy condition, if he will, can have mercy on
thee: Such as are helpless, he is ready to help, Isa. 63.5.

USE, 3. It may be a ground of wonderful encouragement to poor sinners to go to
God, and to wait upon him for mercy: to consider that God is a God of
compassion, and that this compassion is the originial of all the good which the
creature receives.

1. To consider that he is a God of compassion. We have heard, say they, That
the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings. He is a God that delights to exalt and
magnify himself by those titles of Merciful, Gracious, Compassionate, etc. His
bowels stir toward, and he pitties dying sinners, and therefore he comes ^o
their Graves and bids them live. The commendation of a pitiful and a
compassionate nature in a prince, wilbring in rebels apace, to come and throw
themselv^s upon his mercy, and sue for a pardon; who if they knew him to be
pityless and inexorable, would run utmost adventures, as those that know they
can but die, and can hope for no better by submission.

2. To consider that this compassion is the root and spring of the mercy he
shows: Hence we may silence all uprising of heart, and discouraging
temptations, and be animated to break through all. I can do nothing; but if I
could, it would but obscure his compassion. Be encouraged, Satan presents God
in arms against us, and tells us we must appease him with sacrifices of
obedience, but God accepts of no sacrifice but that of Christ; he looks that
his mercy alone should be sought unto; learn then to make heaven ring with thy
cries; ask mercy, put God in mind of these Attributes, which he has commended
himself in, to the Children of men, Exodus 34. 6,7. put that into every prayer
to encourage thy hope, Psalm. 86 ^. Thou art good, and ready to forgive, and
plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon thee. And Dan. 9. 9. To thee
Lord our God belong mercies, and forgiveness.

USE, 4. For Exhortation to Believers: This truth tells you what is the work
you have to do all your lives; viz. To adore, admire and magnify God's
compassion, those wonderful bowels of mercy that have appeared in your delivery
out of all that misery, into which Sin had cast you: This is the great subject
which should take up the thoughts and words of the Saints, Grace, Grace; it
should be the ^oice with which the Temple should resound. Think therefore often
with yourselves, where you once were, what was your former condition, who it
was that transformed you, when it was that he looked upon, and had regard to
you; what miserable sinners you were, and how near to the pit of eternal
destruction. Follow this compassion up to the beginnings of its actings toward
you; think not that it only met you as you were returning, but call to mind,
that it came to your dungeon and lifted you out thence; that it followed you
into your far Country and fetched you from among the swine, or else you had
still been there, and perished for ever.

SERMON XXII.
THus far we have considered the cause of of the Father's kind carriage to his
son, the Effect follows in the carriage it self: his is expressed in three
words: He ran, he fell upon his neck, and kissed him. All these acts refer to
the work of Conversion, and serve to express what love God applies to the soul
in this work: they show us how much of Divine affection breaths forth in the
first act of special grace passing from God to a sinner: They carry in them the
most Pathetical intimations of the greatest love; it being a custom among the
ancients, especially in those countries, to discover the super-aboundance of
their overflowing affections in these kinds of gestures: one notes upon this
ver. that although all Christ's Parables are very moving to the affections, that
none carry so much in them as this does.

[ He ran] Love is active, it cannot stand still, nor yet go softly, where it
sees its object to stand in need of speedy succor; it shakes off all sloth,
and rather seems to fly on wings than go.

[ He fell on his neck] God takes the sinner in his arms, falls upon him: i. e.
with his distinguishing Grace.

[ And kissed him] Kissing was used among other things to express. 1. Intimacy
and peculiar affection, and then especially, when dear friends meet, after long
absence; thus Moses and Aaron, Exodus 4. 27. 2. Reconciliation, after some
distance, by reason of injuries and provocations, thus David kisseth Absalom, 2 Samuel 14. ult.

DOCT. God manifests his choice and incomparable love to a sinner, then when he
converts him to himself.
Here it is that God's special grace is made to appear, and such love as all
comparisons are but dark shadows and resemblances of. God indeed shows a great
deed of common favor to the world, the goodness they taste of is called his hid
treasures: But all this falls incomparably short of that which he confers upon
an elect person in his conversion. This love of God was from eternity, sealed
up in his own breast: It began generally to be published and made known in the
world, as soon as man had by his fall brought ruin and misery upon himself,
and his progeny; as was whispered in that first Gospel promise, Genesis 3. 15. He
shall break thy head. And more abundantly shone forth when the Lord Jesus
Christ had laid down his life at the foot of Justice: but these were more
general demonstrations of it. It more especially and particularly first begins
to appear to the sinner himself, then when he is regenerated, and eternal life
begun in him. The manner and nature of this work, was then opened when we
considered the Prodigal's return; that which is here to be observed, is the
greatness of this love, and how or wherein it expresses its self, according to
the spiritual meaning of these phrases. I might here expatiate, but I shall
confine this discourse to the words in our text, by a reduction of them to a
spiritual sense.

1. The first expression of this love is, in that he ran to him; herein is
intimated a twofold declaration of divine love; one positive, the other
comparative.

1. Positive, It points out God's coming to the sinner where he is, to bestow
his grace upon him. The sinner could never have gone to God, he therefore
comes to him: He was a great way off, and could come no nearer: The rock of
his salvation is higher than he is. Though as to rational and common actions,
man is capable of using means, yet as to spiritual life-actions, he is void of
a principle of them: like Lazarus, he is both dead, and bound in his grave
cloths: God therefore by his spirit comes to his graves side, to his pits
mouth, where he is perishing, and thence he fetches him,: and is not this
wonderful love? Had not God come hither, the sinner neither could nor would
ever have come to him: that is Emphaticall, Zech. 9. 11. I have sent forth my
Prisoners out of the pit where there is no water.

2. Comparative; he not only comes, but he comes in have, to the help of the
poor dying creature. Bis dat, qui cito dat. Running is a note of speed, and
signifies a great commotion of the affections: God makes great have to bring
relief to a perishing sinner. The Heathen painted love with wings, noting the
swiftness of this affection in its actions. Here therefore God's wonderful love
to a sinner manifests itself, in that he comes to him unsent for, and brings
his grace, when it was unsought, Isa. 65. 1.

2. The next evpression of his love is, He fell upon his neck. When men
embraced each other in one another arms, they were said to fall upon one
another necks: It notes embracing: And this serves to express the favor which
God takes a sinner into: It holds out that union which in conversion is made
between Christ and the soul: They which were at a great distance are now made
near. God does not only come and do something for his relief, but he takes him
into his arms; and now those that were enemies, are in mutual embraces: Such
were the greeting between Jacob and Esau, Genesis 33.4. Each does now, as it were,
breath himself into the others bosom; they exchange souls, manifesting by dumb
signs, that love which is too great for words to express, so that by this
expression we are taught.

1. That God gives himself to the sinner to be his, and takes him to himself,
makes himself to be his portion, and bequeaths himself to him, and receives him
into arms of mercy, making him his peculiar treasure and jewel.

2. That he now infuseth his grace into his soul, by breathing spiritual life
into him: He falls upon him with his spirit and grace, and lays the foundation
of spiritual life in him, by putting a principle of it into his soul,
quickening him who was dead.

3. He kissed him; this is the last thing in the act; and here is great favor
indeed; that when he might have killed him he kisseth him; this word has
diverse expressions of love contained under it.

1. God now opens and reveals that secret and everlasting love of his to his
soul, kissing was an outward act to intimate an inward affection: Men often did
it dissemblingly, but God always does it really: Now God begins to give the
soul to perceive what was his purpose of good will to him from eternity, what
were his ancient thoughts about him; this is a visible confirmation of that
secret love.

2. God now reveals that he is fully reconciled to, and at peace with him; that
all former distances and alienations of heart are wholly taken away; he is no
more angry, nor will any more condemn him. David kissed Absalom to let him
understand he was now reconciled. God never kisseth and kills, as Joab dealt
with Amasa: his heart always goes out with his promise. It is a justifying
kiss, intimating that this soul shall never more have any more cause to fear
the suffering the punishment of his sins, or being exposed to condemnation.

3. The father by this manifestly takes his son into the state of a son: It is
a kiss of Adoption; David thus acknowledged Absalom: The sinner had made
himself an abject, God now restores him again to that inheritance which he had
rooted himself out of: he is thus taken again into his fathers house, and made
to enjoy the privilege of a Child.

4. God by this draws out the love of the soul to him; breaks his heart, and
wins him to himself: By this testification of his love he attracts a reciprocal
love from the sinner; makes him now to choose God and give himself up to him,
put himself into his hands, and devote himself to his service, for all this
presently follows, verse. 21. Thus it is a sanctifying kiss.

5. All this is done to restore comfort to the soul: Sense of his sin, and the
great wrong that he had done to his father, by so vilely leaving him, and
profusely spending his estate, had filled him with sorrow and bitterness; his
Father now kisseth him to comfort him: They are called the kisses of the mouth,
Can. 1.2. which are given in the application of the promises to the soul, and
enabling of him to close with them, suck the sweet out of them, and draw to his
consolation the good that is in them: and thus it is also a glorifying kiss.
Put altogether and it tells us what a wonderful declaration of God's love it
is that comes into the soul at the hour of Conversion.

USE 1. For Information,

1. We hence learn that the soul is passive in vocation: I do not mean as it is
a Rational, but as it is a spiritual Agent. If God had not come to the sinner,
he had never come to God, nor could he have done it: As well might the widows
son lying upon the bier, and carrying to the grave, have fetched back his
departed soul' as a sinner dead in trespasses and sins, recover the lost Image
of God. Hither every Regenerate man ows his spiritual original, viz. Not to the
strength of his nature, or flexibility of his will, but to God, who came to him
there where he lay a dying, and whence he was not able so much as to lift up
his eyes toward heaven, without God put the ability into him by reviving
Grace. And this proclaims the wonderful condescendency of the great God to
undone men and women, in that he is not only ready and willing to receive them
when they come to him, but he runs forth to meet them, and to do them good: The
condition that all men are lying in, at such time as he speaks that happy word
to them, live; tends mightily to enhaunce or illustrate the unspeakable
kindness, of God, and hence deserves an ingemitiation, Ezekiel. 16. 5,6. None eye
pitied thee, thou wast cast into the open field; I said unto thee when thou
wast in thy blood, live; yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood,
live.

2. Here we see that in Regeneration the whole body of graces are brought into
the soul at once and together. In effectual vocation the soul receives Christ
himself, and that not only relatively, by receiving his person into such
relations whereby he becomes his Redeemer and Savior, applies his righteousness
to him for Justification, and by marrying him, admits him among the Adopted
Children of God; but also really, by the communication of his graces, and
filling him with his spirit: He falls upon his neck and kisseth him; all grace
is communicated in this act: and there is great reason for it, for Christ in
giving of himself to the soul becomes its life, Gal. 2. 20. Christ lives in me.
And Christ thus becomes his spiritual life, not only by changing his relative
state from what it was, but especially (life being a principle of operation) by
putting this new principle into him, in which are contained all such habits and
dispositions as are requisite to fit him to live spiritually: i. e. the habits
of all graces, for all flow from one and the same principle, viz. spiritual
life.

3. As a consectary from the former, we hence see that at the instant of
effectual vocation, the soul is made partaker in every grace; Justification and
Adoption fully, Sanctification and Glorification inchoatively, and in their
degrees: these come all together and inseparable, and are made over to the soul
in the instant in which God converts him: For when God gives Christ, he gives
all things with him; Romans 8. 32. Yea, he gives him to be all to us, 1 Cor. 1.
30. He is made of God to us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption There is a succession of these Graces, 1. Doctrinally, they are to
be handled orderly, methodically, and distinctly, in the opening of the
Doctrines of the Gospel. 2. In the apprehension of a Believer, who does not
immediately discern all of them. 3. In order of nature and consequence: But in
time they are contemporary: and the reason is, because the whole Covenant is
sealed up in Conversion, and all that is contained in it; i. e. all grace.

4. We here see the Reason of the sudden and strange alteration which we may
sometimes see wrought in a sinner: one whom the other day we saw bleeding to
death ^n his sins, rotting in his grave, spending all in riot, slighting all
counsels and persuasions, going in the ways of destruction; now changed and
become another man, all new in him: yea, one that was wounded under amazement
and terrors of conscience, despairing and dying under convictions; now
rejoicing and ravished with the experience of the love of God. These are
strange alterations, but not to be misbelieved, if we consider the have that
God makes to find out, and take into his arms dying sinners, and the ravishing
embraces he affords them. When God comes, he runs; he may delay a while, and
let the sinner run himself out, and not come presently to convert him; but when
he does come, he comes without delay, nothing stops him, Hab. 2. 2. Cant. 2.8.

USE. 2. For Exhortation to the regenerate, or such as have been converted unto
God; meditate much upon, and labor to be deeply affected with the discoveries
of God's wonderful love to you: Think often.

1. What have he made: I was dying, despairing, hopeless; but he speedily came,
and put under an everlasting arm: or ever I was aware, etc.

2. With what ardour of affection he fell upon thy neck: Oh remember those
embraces; how he took thee up in his arms, an unworthy, filthy, polluted
armful; how kind were those claspings which encircled thee? those embraces
which took thee out of thy pit.

3. How he kissed thee; breathing his soul into thee, and filling thee with his
love; pardoning all thy sins, taking thee to be his son again, influencing thee
with his grace, in thy far Country speaking comfortably to thee. Oh! love the
Lord all ye his Saints, and let your hearts boil over in ardent affections to
him.

SERMON XXIII.
Verse. 21. And the Son said unto him, Father I have finned against heaven, and
in thy fight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.
WE now come to observe the Son's deportment to his Father; or how he carried
it under these large and liberal expressions of his love to him; and that is,
with all humble and penitent carriage. The blotting out and pardoning of his
sins, does not blot them out of his remembrance, or make him ever the less
apprehensive of his unworthiness; no, but it draws out his humble and penitent
confession. This acknowledgment, is the same for substance which he had
resolved upon, verse. 18, 19. He purposed, if ever he could meet his father,
thus he would say; he now not only sees him, but finds himself in his embraces,
and here he poures out his soul to him. There is only the last clause omitted,
and why omitted is not essential to enquire; diverse reasons are given, and that
which seems most probable, is that his father's kind carriage, and abundant
expression of his love, had left him no room for it, because he now found
himself accepted in quality of a son. The particular meaning of these words, as
they express the nature of true repentance has been spoken to from, verse. 18,
19. That which we have now to consider, is only his expressing of them at this
time, viz. after his father had shown himself, fully reconciled, and so
signally testified it in his carriage to him. Hence,

DOCT. When God manifests his special love to the soul of a sinner in
Conversion, it will draw forth the most kindly acts of true Repentance.
God's pardoning and accepting Grace, sensibly apprehended, will make a soul
more to loath his sins, accuse himself of them, and be ashamed at them. Though
whiles God is kindling these resolves, he comes in with them and brings his
Salvation, yet this shall not extinguish those resolutions, but help them. This
is the season to express and act, Godly sorrow, humiliation and repentance. We
have David in this for an excellent example; whom when ^ none but free Citizens
were to wear rings: others, for his ennoblement, among the Oriental nations,
none but the Nobility had this privilege: others for the seal of the spirit:
The Wedding Ring was given as a ratification of Marriage; so now the union
between Christ and the soul is sealed and confirmed.

3. Shoes are put upon his feet: The feet are the affections, shoes are both
for Ornament, and for saying the feet from harm: These shoes are the
preparation of the Gospel, of peace, Ephesians. 6. 15. The soul is adorned with
sanctifying grace, and the affections preserved from being gravelled, and
galled with the pebbles of carnal desires.

4. The fatted Calf is killed [ Gr. the fatted Calf, sacrifice it] This intends
Christ, and may bear some respect to the Sacrament of the Supper: the soul is
now spiritually fit for it, and to be invited to it. In sum, the best
preparation is made, the soul is feasted: i. e. Divine love is shed abroad,
Romans 5. 5. God gives him all his favors in titles and communicates of them to
him, according to that measure which is best for him; and so much (at least) of
Divine light is irradiated upon him, as enables him to rely upon Christ alone
for life, and hope in his Grace. This must needs be a joyful day; for,

1. It is the day of Jubilee, which was always joyful: Now the servant of sin
goes out free; he that had before bound himself to a stranger, to Satan and his
lusts, is set at liberty.

2. It is his Wedding day: which is always celebrated with symptoms of joy;
more especially, when a Beggar is married to a Prince; when a condemned
prisoner of Justice is honorably espoused, to the eternal Son of God.

3. It is his Birth day; the day wherein he was new born: his Resurrection day
in which he rises out of his grave, verse. 24. He was dead and is now alive.
And that is a blessed day, Rev. 20. 6. Blessed is he that has part in the
first Resurrection.

4. It is the day of his Adoption; the day wherein the King of Glory entitles
him his son, gives him a new Name, and seals up to him an irreversible deed of
conveyance, wherein he confirms him in title to an inheritance worth many
Worlds.

USE, 1: For Information.

1. Here we see how sincerely God speaks, when he says, As I live I delight
not in the death of a sinner, but had rather he should repent and live. The
satisfaction which he expresses himself to take in a sinners conversion, is an
abundant confirmation of it. If after God has said and sworn it in his Word,
there should any make a doubt of it; let him go to the converted sinner, and he
shall tell him such a story of God's abundant love, and that precious
entertainment that he gave him, as shall make it evidently appear. If God did
not take great delight in our Conversion, can we think that he would make such
a royal feast to entertain us, and confer so many and such unspeakable benefits
and blessings upon us? Do men use to kill and slay, to make noble feasts for
the entertainment of those whom they have no delight to see?

2. Here we see a reason why the affections of the soul do often appear more
ardent and overflowing toward God, about, or quickly after Conversion, than
afterward, and discover themselves, both,

1. In an extraordinary delight in spiritual duties: The soul now can scarce
find opportunity to do any thing else, but read, hear pray, meditate, confer
with Christians, etc. Why is it their Wedding day, it is a feast day with them,
and they cannot but be ravished with it: It is a new world with a Prodigal,
when come from a famine to such plenty and delicacy.

2. In a cotempt of the world and things of it in comparison of these things;
slighting and scarce regarding of any thing here below; only taken with
heavenly things, and desirous to depart and be with Christ; willing to have
(...) ^ore to do here if might be: How can it almost be otherwise? Who can but
think it good seeing, tasting, enjoying the love of God? and relishing the
sweetness of the streams, to long to be at the Well head of all this? but when
these treats are something over, and he go from his feast to his work, and
there mee^^ with difficulties, and many temptations; now he is sometimes at a
^^and, his affections cooled with carnal things, and his heart distracted with
worldly cares: Hence it is that we sometimes hear God calling his people back
to their first love, Rev. 2. 5.

3. Here also see a Reason why Believers have usually more ravishments and
ecstasies, and abounding comforts at first Conversion, than afterward: It is
because the robe is now brought out to them and put on, etc. It is the most
glorious entertainment they were ever at, and they themselves the occasion of
it; as long as this feast lasts it must needs be so: therefore,

1. Be sure if it be thus at this time, lay in against a time of want: that may
come before you think of it. Store your selves now with the experiences of the
love expressions which God reveals himself to you in: It is not impossible but
it may be such a time with you, as you shall never have the like opportunity
while you live again

2. And if at any time afterward in your Christian race, you meet with doubts
and darkness, and are put to a stand in regard of your spiritual state, be sure
to have recourse to the day of espousals: Call to mind the Garment, the Ring,
the fatted Calf, etc. Psalm. 77. 10. I will remember the years of the right hand
of the most High.

USE, 2. For Exhortation and encouragement unto awakened Sinners in special, to
repent, and return to God; to fall down at his feet and beg his grace and
favor, to confess your unworthiness: Oh, long for the day of Conversion, it
will be a joyful day. God himself will rejoice in thee; it is well pleasing to
God, it is his delight, he takes pleasure in the Sinners return; thou can not
give him greater content by any thing. Thou will afford matter of joy to the
blessed Angels, who are exceedingly satisfied in the glory of God, and
Salvation of Sinners. Thou will glad the souls of glorified Saints, if not now
because they know it not, yet when thou shall go to them, and thy presence in
that General Assembly of the first born shall be a witness to it, then will
they magnify God for it, and take pleasure in thee. Thou shall wondrously
refresh the souls of militant saints; thy Godly Parents, faithful Ministers,
pious neighbors, these shall have smiles instead of tears; and shall take
delight in reaping the fruit of their many prayers, and counsels. Thou will
grieve none but Devils and devilish men. Nay, it is thy own concern; thou art
now mourning, thou shall then rejoice and be filled with unspeakable gladness
of heart: Nay, God himself will make a feast for thee, a Wedding day shall be
kept with greatest solemnity, and thou thy self shall be the subject of all
those triumphs and songs of joy: Oh then all^ forsake satan's camp, come over
unto the Lord Jesus Christ; then shall those that have been grieved for your
sin and obstinancy, have their hearts refreshed by you, and all rejoice
together with you in your Conversion.

SERMON XXV.
THere are some other more particular useful observations may be here made, viz.

DOCT. 1. God uses his Servants as instruments in bestowing his spiritual
blessing upon his Children.
He does not usually dispense these things immediately, but in and with the
means. We may here consider. 1. Who are these Servants. 2. The confirmation of
the Doctrine.

1. Who are these Servants?

Answ. Touching the Ministry of the Holy Angels, though the thing be a truth,
Heb. 1. 14. Yet the way is more secret: and I verily believe they do more for
the Saints than they are aware of, and may be as active in suggestion of that
which is good, as satan that which is evil: But I shall not adventure here to
particularize, therefore,

2. By these servants we may understand the Ministers of the Gospel, who are
appointed to this end, to be laborers under Christ for the help of the Elect,
and bringing of them to Glory, Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12. these are therefore called
Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now Ambassadors are the representatives
of their Princes, and manage foreign affairs in their name; and these do
dispense for Christ the Gospel of Reconciliation, verse. 19. Hence they are
called Ministers, and Stewards, I Cor. 4. 1. Whose work is to distribute their
Masters Estate according to order. They are also called Deacons, I Cor. 3. 5.
Because as they do by office distribute the outward, so do these the spiritual
treasures.

2. For Confirmation of the Doctrine: The Scripture gives us clear light for
this truth; besides that Allegorical direction, Cant. 1. 7, 8. See, Mal. 2. 7:
The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should ask the Law at his
mouth. Which is spoken of Gospel times: besides illustrious examples add
confirmation to it; that of Paul, Act. 9: 14: of Cornelius, Act: 10: of the
Eunuch, Act: 8: show what care God takes to ratify this way. Though Paul be
enlightened and awakened extraordinarily, he must be confirmed and comforted by
a Minister: Though an Angel appear to comfort Cornelius and counsel him, yet
his instruction and receiving the spirit, must be under Peter's ministry;
Though God works a miracle upon* Philip to bring him to him, yet the Eunuch
must receive the Gospel by ordinary means: and the ground is,

1: Negatively; not for want of power in God; he needs not the assistance of
Angels or men; he sometimes does without them; though to keep up and credit his
appointed order, it is but seldom.

2. Positively; God does it:

1. To suit our nature: the People begged that Moses might speak to them: God
speaks to us familiarly when he speaks by men like our selves.

2: To honor his servants: it is an honor to any creature to be used by God
in any service of his; but to be used in the greatest work, that is so much
more; this is it which so elevates Paul, Ephesians: 3: 8: To me, who am less than the
least of all Saints, is this grace given, etc.

USE, 1: For Information,

1: See their folly who, contemning the servants of Christ, expect all their
comforts and benefits to come from himself immediately: They scorn to receive
the best robe, etc. at the hands of Christ's Servants, but must have it from
him without means, though (should God grant us our desire) it is most suitable
that his Servants should be helpful in it; yet it is a strange frame in a
Prodigal; that he will be limiting his Father, and telling him how he shall
relieve him, or not at all? What? Can we not see the father's love in the gift,
because it is sent by the hand of a Messenger? Well; it God's own way cannot
content men, they are like to go without his blessing.

2. That those are likely to receive the greatest manifestations of Gods love
to their soul; that are most careful and diligent in giving attendance to the
Ordinances. In heaven indeed, we shall derive all immediately from Christ, but
upon earth it is otherwise: Hence that promise, Prove. 8. 35, 36. Blessed is the
man that hears me, watching daily at may Gates, etc. It is vain for men to
depend upon immediate revelations; Moses and the Prophets they have, let them
use them. Gods way is in his Temple. David desires to dwell in Gods house,
there to behold his beauty, Psalm. 27. 4. and declares such as do so, to be
blessed, because they will still be praising him, Psalm. 84. 4. i. e. they will
be always finding matter of praise.

USE, For Exhortation: It may advise all such as would receive the spiritual
blessings of the Gospel, to make use of the help of Christ's Servants, his
Ministers. Do you want help, relief, comfort? repair to them. Though it be true
that God only can give it, and all means avail* (...) without his blessing, yet
is also true, that by them he dispenses it ordinarily: Now, as the means are
appointed by God, so he honors them with the presence and efficacy of his
spirit, which else is not to be expected, where there are such advantages.
Truth may be the same, spoken by a Minister and another, and yet it may come
with more efficacy from such an one, than from another; not from any virtue in
him, but from the grace of God, who will thus own his own appointments. Are you
in trouble and want help? May you not blame your selves? You say, Alas! What
can such an one stead me? I answer, not at all of himself, but God comes where
he will, and may justly leave you without the blessing, if you despise his way:
Let then the messages of peace be welcome to you; if God sends you comfort by
his Servants, do not refuse, but receive it.

DOCT. 2. God testifies his love to a penitent sinner, not so much in words as
in deeds.
We do not here observe that the Father is mentioned to say any thing, to his
humble son; weeping out his confessions to him in his arms; but he calls for
his servants, and commands them presently to do for him, that which shall be a
real testimony of his entire love: What is done for him shall speak his
affection better than ten thousand complemental professions.

USE, This may show us the difference between God and men: Those make many
proffers and protestations; say be fed, be clothed; but mean while the needy
creature may perish for all them: But now God seeing a miserable soul in
distress, he takes it up into his arms, gives him what he wants, cloths his
nakedness, feeds his hunger, takes away his (...) It may also direct us in
clearing up our evidences; you are ready to say, could I but hear or understand
him to speak to me in this or that promise, it would greatly satisfy my
doubts; but I reply, is there not a convincing language in deeds? and do you
find that to be wrought in you which the promise speaks of? is there suitable
spiritual supply brought into your souls? Do you find that there which answers
your wants? and shall not this satisfy and certify you of your fathers love,
and your interest in the Promise: Nay, you may safely thus argue the case,
could he do this for me if he loved me not? Am I not de^lt with as a son, and
shall I any longer doubt of my sonship.

DOCT. 3. There is a very eminent and glorious change wrought in Conversion.
This is expressed, verse. 24. under two resemblances, wherein the state of man
before and after conversion is opposed.

1. Of one that was dead, and is now alive* the natural man is spiritually
dead, Ephesians. 2. 1. This part of the curse actually fell upon Adam, as soon as he
fell, and falls on his posterity as soon as they are born, or have a being.
They are every way like one that is dead, have no principle of spiritual life,
being wholly without Sanctification, which was the informing principle of their
Theological life: he can do nothing that is good, can neither stir hand or foot
to the service of God; he stinks in the nostrils of God, all that comes from
him is rotten and noisome, he sees, hears, understands nothing spiritually. But
the convert is alive, Gal. 2. 20. I live; the Image of God is restored, his
eyes are opened, ears bored, and he is made capable of doing God service, and
glorifying of him in his life; he can now savor the things of God, and walk in
his ways.

2. Of one that was lost, and is found: Every Son and Daughter of Adam is lost,
gone astray, knows not the way of peace; is in a wilderness and cannot find the
way out of it; cannot tell where he is, nor what he is doing, nor whither he is
going, and will certainly be lost for ever, if grace follow him not into the
Wilderness: seek him out, take him up into arms of mercy and bring him home:
But the Convert is found; grace has sought and found him in the mountains, set
him in his right way, and becomes his conducter; and now he is going to eternal
happiness, and shall arrive at glory.

USE, 1. To teach us how unjustly they boast of their conversion, who are still
the same that they were; no changlings; whose lives and conversations are as
dead and sapless and unsavory as ever; who are wandering from God and from his
ways: Let us assure our selves, that where grace has been at work it will not
be so, if men have received spiritual life, they will live; if they are found,
they will seek and endeavor to keep in the way of peace, in Tit. 1. 16. See a
vast difference between some that say they are converted, and such as are so
indeed.

USE, 2. For comfort to those that find this change wrought in them: these are
the beginnings of eternal life: This the father gives as the reason of the
joyful feast; can you say you were dead and are alive? you have the ground of
all consolation in you, and may rejoice in the midst of all other sorrows and
troubles. He that lives spiritually, shall live eternally, and him whom Christ
has found, he will save, and he shall be lost no more: He may have his
wanderings, but he shall never wholly swerve.

DOCT. 4. The Believers joy is but begun in this life.
They began to be merry. They are but the sips and foretastes, inchoations of
joy which they partake in in this world: The Saints have joy here transcending
all the worlds pleasures and delights, such as indeed they cannot so much as
apprehend, 1 Cor. 2. 9. but compared with those that are to come, they are but
drops, essays, inchoa^ions.

Reas. 1. From the different manner of their fruition of the object of their
joy: Their joy here, is for the most part a joy of hope, but afterward it
shall be a joy of possession, Romans 8. 24. 2 Cor. 5. 7. For we walk by faith,
not by fight. They are now heirs, and their inheritance is glorious, and the
forethought of it affords them great joy, but they are under Tutors, and
Guardians the while; but then they shall take possession of all the Glories of
Heaven, and fullness of Christ: they now rejoice that their names are written in
Heaven; then they shall themselves be there placed upon thrones, and wear
Crowns.

Reas. 2. From the different degrees of their fruition: They have something now
to live upon by Faith, there is something of heaven that does come down into
the souls of Believers here upon earth, but they are but earnests, like a bunch
of grapes to refresh them in a wilderness; which, though it be sweeter than all
that is in the world, yet it is but little to that Canaan where these grow in
abundance: they have spiced draughts here, but then the mountain of spices,
Psalm. 16. ult. fullness of joy is in thy presence.

Reas. 3. From the mixture and allays of their joys here, which shall not be
in another world. The joys of Believers are here sometimes interrupted, a
cloud intercepts the Sun, a curtain is drawn before their window, they are in
the dark and see no light: Though Faith be never lost, yet sense is many times
taken away; they have broken bones to pain them: Yea, all along the presence of
sin, that captivating power of the body of death, put them into mourning; their
clearest sunshine is attended with showers, so that their present joys cannot
be full: but there no cloud does arise, that upper world enjoyes a perpetual
serenity; There is no sin to molest them, no frown of a father to deject them,
nothing to cut off their full and endless communion with Jesus Christ the
fountain of life and glory.

USE, 1. This may help to strengthen and augment a Believers present joy: There
is a vast difference between a mere penny, and an earnest penny: Though we see
but a little light just at day breaking, yet this is the comfort of it, that it
is an harbinger to, and witness of the Suns rising shortly; so, though they be
but weak and faint beams of comfort that are glimmering upon our hearts, yet
this is our happiness that they dart in to tell us that we shall ere long be
put into possession of all that felicity which Christ has bought and paid for.

USE, 2. Let this also serve to sweeten to our thoughts, the apprehension of
our change: If a drop does so refresh thy soul, as to fetch it again to life,
when just dying, think how blessed then are they who dwell by the fountain, and
drink their fill of it every day? Ah what will it be to be in his arms
everlastingly? Did thou hear his voice in an Ordinance, it was so full of
charms, that thy ravished soul could hardly, keep in from quitting its mortal
tabernacle? What will it then be to feel his everlasting embraces? How welcome
should this make the messenger of Death; yea, how pleasantly may it make thee
to meditate upon and put into thee a desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ which is best of all.

SERMON XXVI.
Verse. 25. Now his elder Son was in the field, and as he came out and drew nigh
unto the house, he heard music and dancing. Verse. 26. And he called one of the
servants, and asked him what these things meant. Verse. 27. And he said unto
him, thy brother is come, and thy father has killed the fatted Calf, because
he has received him safe and sound. Verse. 28. And he was angry. --
THe third part of the Parable has been spoken to, and therein I have have
given an account of the main matter intended in the this discourse, viz. To
make discovery of the wretchedness and unworthiness of a finner, the riches of
the grace of God in his Conversion, the nature also and quality of converting
grace. I shall very briefly pass over this fourth and last part; in which we
have described the carriage of the elder son; by whom, we observed in the
beginning, our Savior aims at the scribes and Pharisees, whose murmuring at
his familiarizing of himself with Publicans and sinners, gave occasion to this
and the foregoing Parable: He is called the Elder, because these men looked
upon themselves as the proper heirs and inheriters of the Promises; took
themselves to be the only men of merit, and thought that all favor shown to
Publicans was misapplyed.

In this part of the Parable there are two parts. 1. The offense which this son
took at his father's carriage to his younger brother, verse. 25. to 31. 2. The
Father's vindicating the righteousness and equity of the carriage, verse, 31, 32.

1. In the offense we may observe, 1. The ground of it, viz. The information
given him of his brothers entertainment, partly by his ears, confused, verse.
25. and partly by information upon enquiry, verse. 26, 27. further illustrated
by the place where he was, when all this was done, verse. 25. 2. The offense it
self described, 1. Positively, verse. 28. 2. In its aggravations, verse. 28, 29,
30. where he justifies himself against his father's entreaties, condemns his
brother, and accuses his father of ingratitude, if not injustice. I shall give
you some brief hints from these several passages.

1. We may take notice where this Elder son was, when all this was done, viz.
in the field, about his business, following his vocation, hard at word: Hence,

DOCT. 1. Outward careful attendance upon the visible service of God, is no
sure sign of a sincere Christian.
The eldest son was in the field, and where could he have been better? He was
getting money, while the other was spending it. The Scribes and Pharisees were
great sticklers in the law and outward worship of God: hear how he boasts of
himself; Luke 18. 11. and yet all this may be where there is no sincerity; see,
Mat. 5. 20. A man may do abundance and be a stranger to saving grace.

Reas. 1. Because a man may do all this upon false and unsound principles, for,

1. There may be bodily service where there is not the heart, Ezekiel. 33. 31. It
is the censure which our Savior passed upon the Pharisees of his time,
applying the saying of the Prophet to them, Mat* 15. 7, 8. and declared it to
be vain service, verse. 9. Hence that, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Bodily exercise profits
little.

2. Men may do all this for outward credit and applause: When Religion is in
fashion, there are many that court it merely for fashion sake, many love to be
as the times are; Many are very Religious only in complement, to be talked of,
commended, etc. This fault also our Savior found in the Pharisees, and
charge hypocrisy on them for it, Mat. 6. 1, and 5.

3. Men may do a great deal because they hope to be saved for their doing: As
there is in all men a reaching desire after happiness, so there is also a
natural pride, they are willing to be their own saviors, in quest of which men
will take much pains; and when they apprehend li^e to be had by doing, they
will do much: this also was another ground of, and defect in the doings of
these Pharisees, Mat. 6. 7. Romans 9. 31, 32.

USE, 1. Here see the Reason why some that have in their time been great
Professors, and careful, do afterward degenerate, and grow licentious: for if
all that so profess are not sincere, do not act from a sound principle, no
wonder if they decline: If the seed that has no rooting, though it grow a
while, and out-grow many, do at last die, wither, decay, we are not to wonder,
nor ought this any way to discourage those that are sinners.

USE, 2. Let it counsel us, to have a care that we do not ground our confidence
in this, that we do more than others: think not our selves better, or surer
merely for this: Though God will not reprove you for your sacrifices, yet he
may for your hypocrisy, and so you may weary him with your vain oblations,
Isa. 1. 13. Remember there is no Justification legal, by the work we do.

DOCT. 2. The Hypocrite is not acquainted with, nor invited to the
solemnization of the great joy which is at the conversion of a sinner.
Whiles this joyful entertainments is provided for and afforded to this younger
son, his elder brother is in the field, the father does not send and call him
in unto it: This is not without its spiritual meaning; hypocrites may seemingly
do a great deal, but still they are strangers to, and have no share in the joy
of true Believers, Prove. 14. 10.

Reas. Because he is a mere stranger to that which is the cause of his joy,
viz. converting grace; he does not know what it is, what is the worth and
excellency of it, nor what are those grounds of spiritual joy which proceed
from it: these are spiritual things, and therefore a natural man cannot receive
them, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The hypocrite is truly unregenerate, and hence he moves in
an inferior orb, and can no more know what the joys of a Believer are, than a
beast can understand the nature and advantages of a life of reason: he is in
the flesh, but these are not fleshly joys.

USE, 1. This may show us the true reason why hypocritical men are so little
affected with the conversion of a sinner to God: when the report of it comes to
them, it may be they are angry and envious, however they are not stirred up by
it to praise God for them, to congratulate with them their happiness, and
partake in their joys: Alas, they were not invited, they do not see nor know
what it is to have been dead, and be alive, to be restored from spiritual
death, to be brought home to God, of a Prodigal to be made a son.

USE 2. Here we also see a reason why unconverted men wonder when they hear the
People of God speak of their joys and comforts; whereas they look upon them as
sorrowful and miserable men, and think them mad to please themselves with
phantasms and dreams; whereas their own blindness and ignorance is the cause of
their admiration. Foelix thinks Paul is distracted, whereas he himself is
distempered; Hence let not the People of God judge themselves by, or think
worse of themselves for worldly men's opinion concerning them.

USE, 3. If Hypocrites may not feast it with the People of God here, much less
shall they do it in the Kingdom of Glory: If they may not partake with them in
the feast of Tabernacles, much less in their consummation: How miserable a
thing then is it to be a professor and no more? to how wood and draw water with
the Gibeonites? to do the drudgery of the Law, but not to partake of the joys
of the Gospel? a legal li^e is a life of much business, but of no comfort;
there are many terrors which may oppress the conscience for defaults, and much
labor in striving to attain an unattainable legal perfection; but no true
joys, which can only flow from the sense of God's love and pardon in Jesus
Christ; beware than of Hypocrisy.

2. We may observe the ground of the offense, viz. The information he had of
his brothers kind entertainment: this he guesseth at by the noise he heard of
joy, but waits for further information, which he receives by one of the
servants, who readily informs him of it, and fully acquaints him with the
occasion.

The action of this servant, is exemplary; it tells us thus much;

Observe. That in our relation of matters of fact, we should do it with all
fidelity and candor, to make the best of things and not the worst; The servant
both tells what his master had done, and gives a good reason for it, that one
would think might have been convincing, however it is otherwise taken. It is
very certain that a story may be true, and yet so told as may be advantageous
or prejudicial to him whom it concerns. Doeg, for all that we read, spoke true
of Ahimelech, but in such manner as was pernicious, and carried a ly in it, and
is therefore called a lying tongue, Psalm. 52. begin. Which may give us warning
to beware how we represent matters in our relation of them: have a care
therefore of a spirit of detraction, else its certain the most spotless actions
of the most innocent persons, may be laid open ^o the malice and spite of men:
and the rather avoid it, because it is a disease the times labor of. There is
something also commendable and imitable in the action of the eldest son; he
enquires before he determines, he does not presently conclude, from what he
hears, but seeks to be certified in the truth; which if it were more practiced
amongst Christians, would prevent many unjust censures which are, by over
credulity, past upon the innocent. But I especially intend to take notice of
the ground it self of his offense, whence observe this,

DOCT. 3. It is the guise and Character of an hypocrite, that he is offended
and angry at the grace of God, manifested to those whom he converts and takes
into favor.
They cannot bear that God should show any love to repenting Prodigals: The
elder brother is angry that his father should make a feast for his returning
son: The comforts and consolations of a Penitent are his great eyesores: The
Scribs and Pharisees could not bear that Christ should conve^^e with Publicans
and sinners,: Hence the more they observe of God's love to any, the more they
hate and abhoor them. This was Cain's sin, and for this very cause he murdered
his innocent brother, because God had more respect to his sacrifice, than to
Cain's: this is the ground of persecution, and their prosecuting them with all
malice, and studying by all means to do them injury: they are the joys of the
People of God that these m^n cannot bear.

I shall give the evidence of the Doctrine in two things*

1. The natural enmity of the wicked against the Godly, makes them to grieve at
all their prosperity which they partake in: Wicked men are of the evil one;
who, next to God himself, hates his Children; and as there is war betwixt
Christ and the Devil, so also there is opposition betwixt their seed: There is
a spirit of envy in the nature of fallen man, Jam 4. 5. It has for its objects
persons and things: The persons whom it most expresses it self against are the
People of God, because they are not of them, Joh. 15. 19. And the things are,
all their prosperity so far as they apprehend it: Sorrow and misery is not
envied, at that they can rejoice, and say, Aha! so would we have it: But their
prosperity, the singular favors of God, their comfort, their hopes, their
professed assurance; these they cannot bear, and hence they are spitefully
enraged, and gnash their teeth, Psalm. 112. 8. 9, 10.

2. Where this spirit is found ruling in a professor, it is a certain note of
an Hypocrite I know there is no sin but has its motions in a Believer, but it
does not there reign; but where it so does, let a man's profession be what it
will, it proves it vain and dissembling: and the reason is plain, because it
contradicts this property of a Believers grace, which is to rejoice both in the
glory of God, and in our neighbors good; both of which are herein so eminently
manifested, that if there be any grace stirring, it will be raised by it: God
most prizeth the glory of his grace, which that more appears, the more vile and
unworthy the subject has been: And the joy of Conversion is the realest and
best joy that a soul can have, that of glory differs from it but in degree; and
he that envyes God's Glory, and his neighbors good, he breaks the whole Law
at once.

USE, 1. Here we see a Reason why the faithful People of God meet with so much
opposition, in the world, not only from the professed enemies of Godliness, but
also from many pretenders to it; they cannot bear the prosperity of the
righteous, the more God favors them, the more they envy them; alas, all are
not Israel that are of Israel: There are many that profess God, and yet hate
godliness; and then no wonder if they cannot endure that God should bless the
Godly: they therefore persecute them, and do all they can to disturb them in
their quiet and tranquillity: Let not these things amuse us, bet let it satisfy
us if God love us, though men hate us: if God give us joy in himself, peace in
our consciences, though others seek to trouble us, be not discontent, nor let
us seek men's favor but God's; yea, let that always be our prayer, Psalm. 109.
28. Though they curse, do thou bless.

USE, 2. For Examination; here we have one Rule for the trial of our sincerity,
i. e. How are we affected when we see and hear, that this or that poor Prodigal
that was lying in sin, and had dishonored God, is converted and brought home,
and made partake in his grace, and rich benefits? Do we truly rejoice with
them, and bless God for them? or do we envy them, and grow angry that any thing
should be done for them? do we hate them, and the more because we think God
loves them? this is a dangerous note of hypocrisy: and truly if men would
search their own hearts, they might find too much of this spirit: Gods people
are hated for their liberties, privileges, their communion with God, and
acquaintance with him: Men pretend other reasons, but this is the true reason:
But let me expostulate with such spirits, as God did with Cain: If you do well,
if you also are converted, there is enough for you, God can fill all souls with
joy, there can be nothing wanting; if you are not converted, you have more need
to mourn than envy: The fault is your own, not theirs, do as they have done,
return and humble your selves before God, land you may fare as they do.

USE, 3. To Exhort Believers to show a spirit contrary to the envious spirit of
wicked men* do you therefore pray for, and by all means in your compass,
endeavor the Conversion of Prodigals, long and travel for the regeneration of
sinners; and when you see it, rejoice in it, and glorify God for it; so shall
you approve your selves to be the People of God, and not only so, but you shall
also share in their joy, and it shall be a complement of your happiness to be
fellow commoners with them, in the blessed things which God prepared for those
that love him.

SERMON XXVII.
Verse. 28. And he was angry and would not go in: therefore came his father out,
and entreated him. Verse. 29. And he answering said to his father, Lo those many
years I do serve thee, neither at any time transgressed I thy commandment, and
yet thou never gave me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends. Verse.
30. But as soon as this thy son was come, which had devoured thy living with
harlots, thou have killed for him the fatted calf.
IT follows now to consider the offense it self, and that which we have here
principally to take notice of, is the plea which his son uses to justify his
anger. In particular we may observe. 1. Wherein he discovered his anger, he
would not go in. 2: His fathers meekness and condescendency to him, he went out
and entreated him. 3. His resolute refusal, grounded upon a pretended plea of
just offense, where he charge his father for a double partiality; 1. In
neglecting of him; and not rewarding of his faithful service, wherein he
accuses him of great unkindness, verse. 29. 2. In showing such extraordinary
favor to his younger brother, who deserved ill at his hands; hence, 1. He
reviseth his former wicked carriage. 2. Adds his fathers kind entertainment to
it, to make it look odious, verse. 30. as if his father had by this approved of
his prodigality; he therefore takes no notice of his repentance and return.
Hence,

DOCT. 1. It is the Hypocrites own fault that he does not partake with the
People of God in their joys.
The father did not shut the elder son out, but he would not come in; yea,
though his father entreated him he still refused.

Object. But he was not invited, how then should he come?

Ans. But if he had had an ingenious and brotherly spirit, he might have come
when he heard of it: The word tacitly insinuate that the servant did entreat
him, but he would not hear him. But to give a closer de cision of the case;
unregenerate men are not, and yet they are invited: There is not the inward,
spiritual, powerful invitation which compels them, and by particular
application of grace draws them: But there is a general, doctrinal, conditional
invitation presented to all where the Gospel comes, in which God by his
Servants speaks seriously, pleads earnestly, expostulates industriously, waits
patiently, as one that is willing and desirous that they should come in; this
is the invitation which they reject: and of such it is that our Savior uses
those expressions, Joh. 3. 29. Men choose darkness. Chap. 5. 20. Ye will not
come unto me. Romans 10. 2. All day long have I stretched forth my hand, unto a
disobedient and gainsaying People.

Reas. Because they refuse to come up to the terms upon which they are invited.
God bids all come, but he tells them how he expects they should come; but these
terms are hard, and they cannot bear them: Men will not leave their farms and
merchandise, they will not part with their darling lusts, they will not suffer
loss of their own righteousness; the company does not please them, the Saints
ere the People they hate: The eldest son its like would have come in, if his
father would have turned his brother* out of the doors: Men, instead of
embracing the Gospel, pick quarrels with it, they will not come at all unless
they may come in their own strength, bring their righteousness with them, etc.
Romans 10. 3.

USE, Hence how inexcusable will wicked men be, and without any Apology, when
they shall be condemned to everlasting separation from the Saints and their
joy? Time was when they might if they would, but they would not; they scorned
the communion of the Saints here, and shall be justly denied it for ever: Then
shall they remember the time when they were striven with, pleaded withal,
^arnestly entreated to be recon^^^ed to God, but they scornfully refused, or
pleaded impotency, and because they could not come of themselves, they would
not let Christ help them, but kept off by unbelief: And if men thus despise the
feast of the Gospel, and will not part with their lusts, vanities, carnal
confidences, that they may feast it with Christ and his People, can they charge
unjust dealing, or undue severity upon the master of the feast, if he swear
against them that they shall never tas^ of his Supper? Is not the law of
retaliation just? Prove. ^. 2. etc. Beware then how you despise, or envy, or
find fault with the dispensations of the Gospel unto a wilful exclusion of your
selves; it will be bitterness in the latter end.

DOCT. 2. It is the disposition of false and hypocritical Professors to be
finding fault with God's dispensations of providence.
The fathers dealings seem very irregular and unrighteous to his eldest son:
This was the frame of that self-cheating people, Isa. 58. 2. They think God
does them wrong: thus it was with Cain, he counted himself injured, because his
brother was accepted before him; yea, it was too common a thing among the J^w^
to say, God's ways are not equal, Ezekiel. 18. 25. -- 29: etc.

Reas. 1. Negatively; not because God does any wrong, for he who is the judge
of the whole earth cannot but de that which is right, though he often acts
soveraignly, yet he never acts injuriously: he will plead his cause and
vindicate it one day, to the silencing of all those who now seek to impute
injustice to him.

Positively: The ground of it is,

Reas. 2. Because Hypocrites judge of things only by outward appearance, and
that cannot be righteous Judgment: the causes of Gods providence are many
times obscure, but never irregular: He that looks upon the outward face of
things may be amazed, but he that beholds that an al-wise hand of God does all,
will suspend, his Judgment, and wait till the time when all things shall be
made clear.

2. Because of their ignorance of the ways of God: they are above them, and
they cannot see into them: Ignorance and a good opinion of themselves, meeting
together, is the reason of all the mis-judging of carnal men: Through
self-conceit they argue thus, that because they cannot see the reason,
therefore there is none; as if we were bound to confess that the sun shines
not, because a blind man sees it not: Wisdom is too high for a fool, therefore
he condemns it of folly.

USE, 2. It may teach us that if we would escape the just censure of being
hypocrites, we labor to have reverend thoughts of all God's ways: Though you
cannot always discern the depth of them, yet be not rash in censuring then:
condemn not the things you know not, but rather admire them; and when you
cannot give a reason of this or that providence, remember you are men, and then
you need not to wonder at it: When many parts of Divine wisdom are too high for
you, and with the Psalmist, Psalm. 73. you are pained within you, with searching
into them, then satisfy your selves in this, that it is God that sits at helm,
and he is good, and cannot do ought but good.

DOCT. 3. Legalists look upon their own works to be meritorious, and think God
unjust if he do not reward them eminently.
The Son is angry that his faithful service is not rewarded so much as with a
kid: The Jews thought their fastings ill laid out, Isa. 58. begin. If they do
not prosper, and all things go as their hearts can wish, legal spirited men
think themselves abused.

Reas. Because such as rely upon their own works and doings, though they may
have taken up an Evangelical profession, and have gotten the name of Christ in
their mouths as a word of course; yet they were never truly broken off from
themselves; they never saw the emptiness of their own righteousness, nor
understood what unprofitable servants they are, when they have done all: There
is a root of pride remaining in all unconverted men, they are not humbled as
they ought to be: As long as a man thinks his doings to be of so much worth, he
will consequently count himself injured, if they be not rewarded according to
his expectation.

USE, 1. Here we see the very root and and ground of all our repinings, and
murmurings at the providence of God which do befall us; it proceeds from a
legal spirit: It is because we set up our counters for gold, and rate our poor
sorry doings beyond their desert: and particularly many grumble and complain
that they have no fatted calf; i. e. feasting and joy, though they labor hard,
and live conscientiously, yet they spend all their time in the dark, have not
the provision and entertainment which others have. It is true, a Believer may
walk in darkness, and want light; but to envy others theirs, and to find fault
with God that they themselves enjoy it not, and though they have waited long
for it, yet it comes not, has too much of a legal spirit in it.

USE, 2. It may teach us, that if we would justify God in all his dealings to
our selves and to others, we must learn to despise, and see the emptiness, and
nothingness of all our own performances. They that had labored all day, are
angry that loyterers, and idle persons, that came in but at the eleventh hour,
had their penny too as well as they; they judged their work worth something:
Whereas an humble soul that counts his own righteousness rags, and polluted,
that acknowledges free grace to preside in all the dispensations of Divine
favors; he will adore that grace which appears to others, and patiently wait
on God for the like favor, not repining that it comes not yet, but counting
and confessing it an high favor if ever it comes (...).

DOCT. 4. A man may live a long while in Christ's visible family, and also in a
careful outward attendance to duty, and yet never be made to partake in his
special love and favor.
Never be feasted with his special spiritual grace, never have a kid killed for
him to feast it with his friends: The hypocrite never tastes one crumb of the
Childrens bread,

Reas. 1. From their incapacity; they are not in a state and condition to be
feasted: joys and feasts are for the living, and not for the dead; whereas
these men are not alive: they are painted sepulchers, but full of dead men's
bones, they are really dead, though seemingly alive.

Reas. 2. Because the dispensation of God's special love and favor are not
Legal, but Evangelical dispensations. God does nothing for any of Adam's sinful
progeny for the sake of their righteousness, but only of his free grace; as
long therefore as men boast of their doings, they may do all their lives long,
and God no whit regard so as to accept of them: the proud Pharisee is not
justified.

USE, 1. To teach us that when man has done his utmost, still grace is free,
and not owing to him: The father had not been unkind, much less injurious to
his son, though he served him, and he killed no kid for him: God ows not
conversion, nor the benefits that come by it to our endeavors.

USE. 2. Hence wonder not if many Professors in the visible Church are
lifeless, and sapless, hold no spiritual communion with Jesus Christ: It is not
to be wondered at, if we consider how great difference and distance there is
between being a son in the visible family, and a son received into special
grace, and favor with his father.

USE, 3. It may also teach us to beware that we rely not upon our selves and
our duties, but to renounce all, and fly to the Grace of God in Christ, that is
the only way to come by, and be partakers in special and soul refreshing grace.

DOCT. 5. Wicked men delight in aspersing the People of God with their former
follies.
How eloquent is the elder son in rehearsing the wickedness of his brother? but
not a word of his repentance. They love to remember what the Saints were, not
what they are; if in their youth they have been vain, profuse, prodigal, this
shall never be forgotten; but their reformation, deep sorrow, and sincere
repentance shall never be taken notice of; they are like Scaribees that live
upon dung-hils, and suck nothing but corruption, like flies that live upon
^ores: And this they do,

1. In enmity against the grace of God: The eldest son does it to cast a
blemish upon his fathers kindness, as if he therefore favored such wickedness:
When one objected against (...), some wanton youthful Poems, he said, Hi^ homo
invidet mihi gratiam Dei.

2. To justify themselves, they hope by this means to gain the better
reputation, they that have no real goodness of their own, think to shine by
comparison: I am not at this Publican.

USE, To teach those that are the People of God to avoid this frame of spirit:
Consider not what the People of God were, but what they are; if they have been
Pr^digals, yet if now they are Converts, acknowledge the grace of God, and
magnify it: If God has blotted his sins out of his book of remembrance, do
not you record them: Remember, if you your selves have not been such in your
outward conversation, you had as bad hearts, and it was only restraining grace
that did prevert you, else your like natures had appeared in as bad actions: Be
sure consider always that it is the grace of God by which you are what you
are; be not envious at them, but labor to strengthen your faith by their
example: Think how glorious a God you serve, that is able to pass by and pardon
such sins; trust him the more, love him the better, rely on him with the
greater confidence.

DOCT. 6. God's converting grace many times meets the profane Prodigal in his
Career and turns him, when it passes by the moral and legal Professor.
God finds the Prodigal in his far Country; his eldest brother is at home, and
yet past by. In our Saviors time there were more Publicans converted than
Scribes and Pharisees; afterward the Heathen Gentiles came flocking in upon
the preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, whiles the Jews obstinately
refused it: So true is that of our Savior, Luke 13. 28, 29, 30. Mat. 21.
31,32. The Publicans and the Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you,
etc.

Reas. 1. From the deep interest of self in a legal Professor: The profane
persons sins are almost convincible; whereas the other thinks his righteousness
to be of great worth, and is not easily persuaded of the unprofitableness of
it, Romans 9. 31,32.

Reas. From the wisdom of God, to make his free grace thus the more manifest,
The more profuse any have been, the more visible and observable is that grace
which is made to appear to be in them: The Phy^itian gets no credit by
administering to one that thinks himself well already; the more desperate the
disease is apprehended, the more eminent is the cure acknowledged to be, Luke
5. 31.

USE, 1. To awaken carnal Professors; you may easily be cheated: Why are you no
more concerned with the awakening means which you enjoy? you think your selves
to be whole and sound, and these warnings are for the vain and profane; beware!
you may be lost, when those whom you despise may be saved.

USE, 2. To advise us not to despair of, but to pray for the worst sinners: God
both knows how to magnify his mercy upon them, and not only so, but is often
pleased to single out these to make illustrious monuments of his saving grace,
despair not then of them, but pray hard for them, that they may be converted,
and believe.

USE, 3. To encourage any that have been grievous sinners against God; despair
not, such are often chosen to be the subjects of grace, and if God has
awakened and humbled you, hope in his mercy; he knows how to get him a name in
your Salvation.

SERMON XXVIII.
Verse. 31. And he said unto him, Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have
is thine. Verse. 32. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for
this thy Brother was dead and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.
IN the last place we have to consider of the fathers vindication of the
righteousness and equity of his carriage to his younger son, in which he
asserts three things. 1. That there was no such occasion offered of making such
a feast for him, thou art ever with me. 2. That there was no wrong done to him
by thus entertaining (...) his brother, it diminished not his Portion, nor put
him besides his own, all that I have is thine. 3. That there was sufficient
cause for the joyful reception of his Prodigal son; It was meet, etc. and he
gives the reason of it, verse. 32.

Before I come to particular observations, it is needful to clear these words
from an objection. I have in this discourse interpreted the elder son to aim
firstly at the Scribes and Pharisees, and so under them at hypocritical
Professors, legal men, and vain boasters; but here seems to be a scruple, viz.
How comes it then that his father says, All that I have is thine? Have
unregenerate men a title to Gods, spiritual grace and favor? This objection
seems at first blush to carry some force with it, and has so far prevailed
with some, as to make them interpret this eldest son to signify the Godly, who
(by a religious education) have not fallen into; but been kept from such foul
enormities; and through infirmitly are sometimes stumbled at such providence of
God: But then as great a scruple may arise on the other hand, viz. Shall the
penitent Prodigal have no portion again? Is not all repaired in Christ, which
we lost in Adam? Was not Paul, though he had been a persecuter, etc. upon his
conversion made a just heir? But to come to some resolution: It is certain
Christ must aim at the Pharisces in this eldest son, else the scope and purport
of the Parable had been Alien from his present design, and so to no purpose;
for his business is to silence their murmurings: You have the occasion of the
Parable, verse. 1. 2. Hence the interpretation of every particular must be
such, as may be reduced to the general, and may bear and suit with it according
to the Analogy of faith. It is a good rule in Divinity, That all expressions in
Parables must be so interpreted as to agree with other plain Scriptures,
referring to the same thing. Parables are similitudes, in which spiritual
things are familiarized to us by earthly things, by way of allusion: Now though
there be a vast disproportion between God and the Creature, between heavenly
and earthly things, yet there is some shadow of those in these, and that is all
that we seek in a Parable. Our Saviors design is to convince the Pharisees of
the unreasonableness of their murmurings; and he does it by an argument a
majori ad minus. q. d. The Son might seem to have some plea against his Father,
but indeed had none, much less have you against me: Though his son had been
faithful, and careful, and was heir, yet his father could make a feast, and
receive his younger son without detriment to the other; much more may I
entertain Publicans and Sinners, without injuring you, who deserve nothing, who
are holy only in pretense. O^ the argument may be by way of Concession: We know
the Pharisees thought well of themselves, but says our Savior, put case you
are the men you pretend, yet what wrong is this? Is there not room left for
free grace to a Prodigal? So Tertullian glosseth it, Posuit illos in parabold,
non quales erant, sed quales esse debu^rant. Except we take this rule, we shall
scarce find any Parable, but will involve us in difficulty. We must not think,
because every labourer had his penny, therefore the degrees of glory are all
equal: because the Master bid the servants let the tares grow till harvest,
therefore Churches are to suffer manifest hypocrites without censuring of them:
but this may suffice. I now proceed to make some observations.

DOCT. 1. There is never any occasion of special joy over an Hypocrite. Son
thou art ever with me.
The father insinuates that he was not wont to do things superfluously or
without occasion: And we may see the evidence of the Doctrine, if we consider
what is the ground of extraordinary expressions of joy among men. Now, though
men that are given to excess will make occasions of feasting, and great shows
of jocundity, where there is no reason; yet as joy is an affection moved by the
apprehension of some present good; so, the extraordinary signifying of it by
feasts, mirth, great entertainments, is when the reason of it is more than
usual: Hence the most of those occasions recorded in Scripture are either, 1.
The revolution of birth days, so Herod kept his birth day, Mat. 14. 6. and
Pharach, Genesis 40.20. 2. The time of weaning Children; so Abraham for Isaak,
Genesis 21. 8. 3. Marriages; Christ honored with his presence a wedding feast,
and with his first miracle, Joh. 2. begin. 4. Great victorys ad deliverances,
hence days of thanksgiving appointed, and hence the passover. 5. Gods signal
blessing upon their labors, in giving them the fruit of the earth. Hence the
feast of ingathering. 6. The entertainment of strangers, or occasional
visitation of friends; thus Lot made a feast for the Angels, Genesis 19. 3. and
David for Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 20. 7. The finding of that which was lost, Luke 15.
6 -- 9. But there is no such respect in one or another kind, on a spiritual
account, with an hypocrite: whereupon God should make him a joyful
entertainment: For,

1. He has no birth day; was never born again, but lives and lies in sin: All
his legal and moral duties are but splendida pecc^ta: He is the lame he was,
there is no gracious change wrought in him: There is more reason to mourn over
him as a dead man; than to rejoice over him as a living man; ^o celebrate his
funeral, than his birth: The state of nature is a state of death. Ephesians. 2. 1.

2. He was never weaned from the world and vanities of it, but still hangs upon
its breasts, seeking his contentment among creatures, and to satisfy, his
appetite upon these things; His name is written in the earth, he lives upon
lying vanities, cannot say as David, Psalm. 131. 2. I am like a weaned Child.

3. He is not married to Christ; his league with sin and satan was never
broken, he was never dead to the law that he might be united to a Savior: How
should there be a marriage feast without a marriage? Christ indeed has woed
him; but he never gave his consent, nor will leave playing the harlot with
other lovers; never embraced that call, Jer. 3. 2. (...)

4. He never was a conqueror over his lusts, nor got victory upon his
corruptions; but remains a slave of sin and satan, led about at his pleasure,
and serving diverse lusts: Sin rules him, his Chains were never knocked off, nor
his prison doors broken open, but he lives under the power and condemnation of
sin.

5. He has brought forth no fruit to God, or to his own souls comfort; is a
dry heath and barren ground, a fig tree, which if it have the leaves of a
profession, yet has no fruit of sanctification; a vine, which if it bear any
grapes, they are sower wild grapes; a fig tree long waited on for fruit, and
ready for that sentence, Cut it down, why cumbers it the ground, Luke 13. 7. A
piece of ground that is night unto cursing. Heb. 6. 8.

6. He never came to God for entertainment, not so much as like a stranger to
ask his friendship and favor: much less as a son who had absented himself, to
seek his fathers pardon; but he lies out from him, keeps at a distance, will
not come to Christ for life, Joh. 5. 40.

7. Though he be a lost creature in himself, yet he was never found, but is
lost still; he is yet in the wilderness, wandering upon the mountains: and
whiles it is thus, what occasion can there be of special joy over him?

Use, 1. Hence the joys and boastings of unregenerate men are groundless: Many
talk of their hopes, and comforts, and soul satisfactions; they tell how God
refreshed them at this and that time with these and those promises; nay, they
have had tastes of the powers of the world to come: Alas! enfatuated souls! God
does not scatter his joys promiscuously: Though men may, God will not make a
needless feast.

USE, 2. It may put men upon enquiry, when they cannot find that comfort and
joy in their service which they expect, whither this may not be the reason of
it: I do not say it is always so, the best Saint may sit in the dark, Isa. 50.
10. And there are other reasons why the al-wise God will make his own Children
to fast, and to mourn too: Many falls, much heedlesness; yea, their weakness to
bear much of this new wine; God stints his own People, and will not ^ill them
with Cordials: But I say, it is a good enquiry, have thou not, nor ever had
any taste of these joys? ask then, am I new born, etc. If there be none of
this, wonder not, there was no occasion: most men act preposterously, they try
their grace by their joys, whereas they ought to try their joys by their
Grace.

DOCT. 2. Unregenerate men have no cause to complain that God shows more
special favor to repenting sinners, than he does to them.
What ever they think they have to say for themselves, yet God wrongs them not:
The father could entertain the younger son, without injuring his elder: This
will appear if we consider,

1. That God in the dispensing of his grace, acts as a free Agent. This is
insinuated in that Parable, Mat. 20. 15. A Father is not bound to give an
account to his Children how he improves his estate; much less is God to sinful
men how he distributes his grace. The Creature cannot oblige the Creator, much
less a sinful creature, who has forfeited all: It is the Apostles Challenge,
Romans 11. 31. Who has given to him at any time? The^^ cannot be respect of
persons in grate it is; there is no binding rule of justice in the bestowing of
kindness, and where the benefit is a free favor, the choosing one, and passing
by another is arbitrary, and depends on the will of the Doner. In Gods
bestowing of Grace on the Children of men, there can be none worthy, and if he
will pitch upon the most unworthy, to make his favor the more notable, who
shall call him to an account?

2. That the best works of the most resined hypocrites are no ways obliging or
deserving. An unregenerate man may do many things materially good, he may pray,
confess his sins, read the word, attend upon ordinances, carry fair among men,
abstain from many evils, do many duties; but still they deserve no favor, nay,
they deserve the wrath of God; Their prayer is abomination, their plowing sin,
their oblations detestable, Isa. 66. begin. If the Godly do confess their best
to be rags, their holy duties dung; what then must we say of what the
unregenerate do, who have no saving principle of holiness, no meadiatour
through whom to obtain acceptance, no good end in their performances?

3. That the same grace is tendered to them, and the same means of obtaining it
are afforded them; if therefore they go without it, it is their own fault. Men
are indeed ready to say, God's ways are unequal, when their own ways are so:
The proffer of Grace in the Gospel is universal; if men thirst, God shows them
the waters, and bids them come freely; if they thirst not, and will not come,
who is to blame? God stretches out his hand all the day (...), but they gain
say: God says, If they will (...) and believe they shall be saved; but they
say, These many years have I served thee, (...) any ^^me transgressed I thy
commandment; God says, if you be sick, here is a Physician, they say we are
well and need him not. And what wrong then is it to them, if when a company of
sick souls, who feel their malady, and are ready to die of it, come to him for
healing, he shows his skill; if when a company of hunger-starved beggars come
to him for food, he feeds them; yea, plentifully feasts them?

USE, Learn we hence in stead of quarreling with, to admire the free grace of
God, which opens a door of hope to the greatest and worst of sinners: Do not
discourage or dash the hopes of any; be not afraid to invite the worst to come
to Christ upon Gospel-terms; (...) let any poor soul that is stung with sin,
that (...) it ly as mountains between him and God, despair of Salvation: Lo,
Christ came (...) over the mountains, and leaping over the bill^: Say not, can
God save me and be just? He has satisfied his own Justice, and will silence
the cavils of Men and Devils: Say not there is no hope for me; think therefore
of the Prodigal: Are there such bowels in men? and are not God's thoughts above
ours? This Parable was written for thy sake, who have been a chief sinner, and
now art humbled, to encourage thee to go to God in the name of Christ, and to
hope for his mercy.

DOCT. 3. Then, and not till then is there true cause of rejoicing over a
sinner, when he is converted and brought home to God.
This the father thinks enough to silence all the grumblings of his
discontented son, verse. 32. What cause there is of joy at such time, has been
expressed under a former Doctrine, that there is none before, may in a word be
cleared, from the consideration of what every sinner is before conversion. I
confess men may differ in many things of an inferior nature, one may be better
morally disposed than another, one may have more restraining grace, a more
affable nature, carry it more obediently to his Parents, be more reformed, etc.
than another: But in this the state of all unregenerate men before conversion
is alike, viz. that they are,

1. Dead creatures, under the power of spiritual death, rotting in the grave of
sin; we do not use to rejoice over our dead Children and relations, but to weep
and mourn. They can do nothing for God, nor for their own souls Salvation; they
cannot glorify him, etc.

2. They are Children of wrath, Ephesians, 2. 3. They are blasted by the curse, held
under condemnation, liable every moment to fall into hells flames; yea, going
to execution: and what mother could ever rejoice over her son that was going to
suffer for his deserts, or not wring her hands?

USE, 1. This may give check to the mad mirth of ungodly sinners: Hearken you
merry Greeks, that sport your selves in the world as the fishes do in the sea,
that cannot spare time from your jollity to have one serious thought: Stay a
little, let me ask, what cause? why so jovial and facetious? are you converted?
ah no! I know you will plead, it is lawful to be cheerful, and that civilly in
the enjoyment of the outward comforts of this life: True, but when? when they
are sanctified by the grace of God, and made yours in the New Covenant: Get
this title, and then you may rejoice in all Gods goodness; till then take this
bitter pill; all the curses written in the book of God are upon you, and all
the things that you rejoice in are tainted with them; you are going to the pit,
and all these are but fatting you to the slaughter; treasures of mercy are thus
turned into treasures of wrath.

USE, 2. Let this direct those that are the People of God, what chiefly to
rejoice in: It is our saviors advice, Luk.10. 20. In this rejoice not, that
the spirits are subject to you, but rather rejoice, because your names are
written in Heaven. Count that your only joy, that the love of God has appeared
in translating of you from death to life: and in regard of your Children, do
not take too much carnal delight in them; one is comely and beautiful, another
active and sprightly, a third witty and pleasant; they are good natured: all
these are good in their place, and mercies of God; but oh remember the want of
saving grace dasheth the joy of all those, and takes away their pleasancy: If
they are not converted, as they were born under the curse, so they are still
held by it: Oh then travail with pangs of holy care and sorrow for them, till
Christ be formed in them; then will you have cause to rejoice indeed: till then
think solemnly, what if they may still be damned, and separated from God for
ever? what then will all these things avail? Long for their conversion, and
when once you see it, now rejoice as a mother over her first born son: here is
ground for that joy which shall never end, but increase ^ill it grow up to
Everlasting Hallalujah.

FINIS
ERRATA.
P Age 19. (...) 5. for affirms read confirms. p. 28. l. 8. for for r. from. p.
59. l. 16. for work r. working. p. 63. l. 27 for e^periences, r. expences^ p.
89. l. 29. for brible r. bribe. p. 94. l. 4. for remove r. remorce: p. 96. l.
18. for charge r. change. p. 132. l. 2. for ye r. yet: p. 132 l. 2. for are r.
for: p: 142. l. 17: for charms r: charmers: p. 157: l: 6. for so r. for: p:
186: l: 3: r: plenty: p: 215: l: 3: r: be: p: 220: l: 19: r: as a cause: p:222:
l: 21:r: this: p:223: l: 2^: r: by: p:236: l: 26 r: desert: p: 244: l: 25: r:
contumely: p: 256: l: 7:r: his: p: 257 l: 24: r: not p:286: l: 18: r: him: p:
294: l: 18: r: which: p, 302: l: 21: r his: p: 303: l, 12: riterrours: l: 26:
r: regulated: p: 308: l: 3: r: this: p: 309: l: 20: r: deal: p: 358: l: 3: r:
sincere: p: 376: l: 29: r: prevent.

The Reader is desired besides errors in letters and pointings, to correct
these more observable.


