Some Considerations on the BILLS OF CREDIT Now passing in NEW ENGLAND.
Addressed unto the Worshipful, JOHN PHILIPS Esquire Published for the Information
of the INHABITANTS.
Mr. Treasurer.
I Am (...), and am apt to believe it? That the Exchequer in Silver Runs very
(...); Nor can I think that the Country in General is much better furnished.
'Twas an honest and good method you took, to pay by Bonds what you could not by
Ready Cash. I therefore cannot a little wonder at the great indiscretion of our
Countrymen who Refuse to accept that, which they call Paper-mony, as pay of
equal value with the best Spanish Silver. What? is the word Paper a scandal to
them? Is a Bond or Bill-of-Exchange for 1000 l, other than Paper? and yet is it
not as valuable as so much Silver or Gold, supposing the Security of payment be
sufficient? Now what is the Security of your Paper-mony less then the Credit of
the whole Country. If the Countries Debts must be paid (as I believe they must,
and I am sure in justice they ought) whatever change of Government shall come,
then the Country must make good the Credit, or more Taxes must be still Raised,
till the public Debts be Answered. I say, the Country, and not the Gentlemen
who Administer the Government, who are but the Countries Agents in this Affair.
All the Inhabitants of the Land, taken as one Body are the Principals, who Reap
the Benefits, and must bear the Burdens, and are the Security in their Public
Bonds. What do the Gentlemen get, but their labor for their pains, and perhaps
not a little Obloquie into the bargain? can all their Estates (with all their
Gains, if there were any) bear the Charge of Government for the whole Land? no,
no, it cannot be supposed. If any murmur at their management as ill, and that
they have needlessly drawn the Charges upon us; pray tell them, as long as they
enjoy the Choice of Administrators, they must bear what is past, and right
themselves for the future, by choosing better next, if they know where to find
them; So Merchants do with their Factors, and it is their only Remedy.

You know Sir you and I have had some former Discourse about the Nature of Money
That (as such) it is but a Counter or Measure of men's Proprieties and
Instituted mean of permutation. As metal indeed it is a commodity, Like all
other things, that are Merchantable. But as Money it is no more than what was
said, And had it is Original from a general ignorance of Writing and
Arithmetic; But now these Arts being commonly known may well Discharge money
from the conceited Necessity thereof in Humane Traffic. Is not Discount in
Accounts current good pay? Do not Bills Transmit to Remote Parts, vast sums
without the intervention of Silver? Are not Taxes paid and received by mutual
Credit between the Government and the People, The Government requiring the
Country to give them Credit wherewith to pay the Countries Debts, and then
again receive the same Credit of the Country as good pay? It Is strange that in
the mean while; between the Governments paying the People, and the Peoples
paying the Government: The Governments (or rather the Countries) Bills should
not pass between Man and Man^. It Is strange that one Gentleman's Bills at
Port Royal for diverse years, and that among Foreigners; or another Gentleman's
Bills in the Western Parts for as many or more years should gain ^o much Credit
as to be current pay, among the Traders in those places; yea, that the Bill (as
I have heard) of any (...) Magistrate in the Western English Plantation, shall
buy any Commodities of any of the Planters; and yet our people (in this pure
air) be so sottish as to deny Credit to the Government, when it is of their own
Choosing: Had the single Gentlemen (above named) a good bottom for their Credit
in their Warehouses, and are not the whole Estates of the Massachusetts as
good? Is the Security of one Plantation-Magistrate, better than that of All the
Massachusetts Representatives? can that one Magistrate give force to the
Contracts, and cannot All our Government do the (...)

Certainly Sir were not peoples Heads Idly (...) with Concei^s that we have no
(...) no Government, And by Consequence that we have no Security for any thing,
which we call our own (a Consesequence they will be Loath to allow, though they
cannot help it, If once we are Reduced to H^bs his state of Nature, which (says
he is a state of (...) and then the strongest must take all) I say it seen
foolish conceits were not Entertained, there would not be the (...) Scruple in
accepting your Bills (...) Cu^rant Pay.

If you should require the Country to pay their I (...) in Silver, that (...)
might be enabled to bear the Cha^ges (...) the Government by Silver, when such
quantity of it as is needful for that purpose cannot be had in the Country, or
at least not in any preportion to be procured, unless men (according to the
Proverb) should But Gold too Dear, and so Ruinously undervalue the fruits of
their Labors and their Lands. This were to require men to Make Brie^^ (...)
Straw.

If you Require the Taxes in Corn^^ a^^ overvalue, with I know not what old
A^b^^rents if they bring in Money; which is to set up (in my Understanding)
(...) and a Measure (a thing which Call allows not) And then if the Government
say the Charges of Conveyance from Re^^ter-parts, and bear all Damages after
(...) what will it amount to when all (...) and Damages are allowed; perhaps
(...) two fullings to the Government, of (...) shillings from the Country; and
(...) will the public Debts be paid? or when will be an end of Taxing?
Certainly (whatever were intended by the Propo^ers of this way of Tax) the
Tendency of it is only to render the Government (...) by a great noise of
Taxes, when little comes thereby; a great cry of ^og sheering, when there is no
Wool.

If neither Silver can be had, nor Corn brought in without loss both to the
Government and People, what remains but Accounts, Bills, or such like
Paper-pay? and certainly this necessity may (if I mistake not) bring to the
whole Country no small advantage; for

X. Is there not hereby 40000 l: Running Cash in the Country more than ever
was, If men's folly hinder not its Currency? yea and more than they are ever
like to ^^ave, so long as they cannot keep Silver in the Country, which they
will never do while the European. Trade conti^^es, and that is like to be as
long as we are a people. Silver in New England is like the water of a swif^
Running River, always coming, and as fast going away; one (in its passage) dips
a Bucket-full, another a Dish or Cup-full for his occasions; but if the (...)
of plate from the West Indies the (...) for a little while, and the Ef^^^ (...)
Returns for England continue; (...) not the ^ill-po^d be quickly d^^ined, so as
neither Bucket nor Cup can dip (...) fill? Whereas on the contrary,

2. This (...) Running Cash is an abiding Cash: for no man will carry it to
another Country, where it will not pass; but rather, use it here, where it will
(or at least) ought: and then only the Growths of the Country will be carried
off, and that will be no^ Damage but rather an Advantage to us.

3. If this be made Current, the Credit of the Colony will rise to the utmost
height of it is ability on all Extraordinary Emergencies; whereas otherwise you
may be quickly Distressed; for if the Soldiers cannot put off their Pay to
Supply their necessities, who will hereafter serve the Country in their
greatest Dangers, and if the Merchants cannot Buy as well as Sell for Credit,
how shall they carry on their Trades? and how shall they (...) end upon great
occassions if the Countries Bill lie dead on their hands? surely they will no more
trust the Country, whatever sudden need we should have, unless on the bare
consideration of their own Security.

There is indeed a way found out by poor men's Necessities to make the Bills
passant; namely by Selling them at Under-rates. Thus the poor Soldier is
horribly injured, who have adventured their Lives in the public Service, and
the Government made ^^^mptible as not worthy to be trusted. I remember many
years since, there was such a prank played in England and Ireland after the War.
Some bought up the Soldiers Debenters at very low Rates, and then with half
Debenters and half Money purchased great Estates in Kings and Bishops Lands, (a
fine Trade they made of it if it had held) but God shook his Lap at this
dishonest and interloping gain; and a great unexpected Revolution made them
lose both their Lands and Money. Thus the woman shook her Dog by the Collar,
till she made him Disgorge again all her Puddings.

A better way (in my opinion) to make the Credit passable without Interruption,
is.

1. To Raise the Rates of those above the common Standard, whom you catch Tardy
in Debasing the Credit of your bills either by purchasing them with little
money; or selling commodities for them at Excessive dearer Rates:

2. Let all refusers to receive them have forthwith their I axes demanded in
Silver, nor let them have the benefit of paying them, who will not also Receive
them. And in like manner several such, as shall at any time reproach them as a
Grand Cheat. Who is it but They, that makes 'em so.

3. What if the General Court Declare by a Law, that if any man tender these
Bills for payment of his Debts, to be accepted at their full value, which the
Country has put upon them; If any private person will not receive them so, That
then the Government will not concern themselves for the recovery of those
Debts, till all the Public Debts are discharged. It is a known Maxim of Law in
England (and I think in all other Countries) that of Debts, The Kings must be
first paid. And great reason for it; for why shall the Government secure others
Debts by Law; and not their own? now if these refusers stay for their Debts
till the Country be first served they may stay till they are weary. And if
hereafter they resolve to make no more Debts (for fear of this Law) I believe
their Trading will be very dull. Whereas (on the Contrary) If they shall accept
the Bills, it is probable their Debts will come in a pace; their Trading will
revive, and the Countries Credit become Current.

To Conclude [ Fas est et^ab Ho^^e Doceri] The French (I hear) at Canada pass
such Paper money without the least scruple; whereby the Government is greatly
Fortified, since they can at all times make what they need. Now if we account
our selves to Transcend the French in (...), It Is a flame for us to come so far
short of them in (...) and U^^e standing.

These are my present thoughts, which you may communicate as you see cause;
mean whole please to accept them as Really intended for the Public good. By A
well (...) to New England and your Humble Servant. etc.

Some Additional Considerations Addressed unto the Worshipful ELISHA
HUTCHINSON, Esquire.
By a Gentleman that had not seen the foregoing Letter.
Sir,
1. I T is manifest, the Country is plunged into Circumstances that require
heavy Taxes to preserve us from ruins, that would be thousands of thousands of
Pounds heavier than our most heavy Taxes; without great Charges it is
impossible to pay the just wages of them that have bin in the Public Service;
to defraud whom would not only be an Imprudence, which must in a little time
leave us without all defense, but also an Injustice that would cry in the Ears
of the Lord of Hosts. Besides there is a necessity of great Expenses to
Fortify our selves against the ^nrodes of Enemies, went this day have ground
to expect, and ought to be prepared for.

2. For any to Grumble at the Raising needful Taxes to defray our public
charges, is a piece of unreasonable and abominable Baseness; and it is a
scandal to New England that ever it should be found among us. What would these
Complainers Have? would they have no Public Charges at all defrayd? This would
be immediately not only to dissolve all Government but all Society. Or would
they have such Public Charges born by voluntary Contribution of the
Inhabitants: This would not do the (...) part of what must b^e done to prevent
our perishing; and besides, i^ would (...) the burden upon (...) but not the
most (...) to Provide for the common Safety. Moreover, (...) to be remembered,
that nothing is (...) on this People but by their own Consent in a General
Assembly. And they deserve not the name on Englishmen, that are not more
ready, and count it not more easy, (...) part with a pound in this way, than a
penny in the (...) Mode. Or is it from (...) sin which too much prevail (...).
The Scripture calls it (...) (...) may also call it the worst (...) It witholds
that from our (...) that will add to an Enemies (...) in our s^ameful misery;
as (...) who refusing, to pay the charge of all (...) on their Walls, were
themselves and (...) wealth made a prey to the Tu^^s. If ^^y plead we have no
Government, and so have no power to raise money; pray, let them call to mind,
that all the Subsidies now raised in England, are by an Assembly chosen by
Corporations no otherwise restored than ours. And is it indeed any thing less
than a Treason against the Crown of England, for any to intimate, that we have
no Government for, and so, no Protection from, that Crown^ O^, looks it not
very sincerely, for those persons, whose Consciences never troubled them, when
Taxes were Treasonably Levied; without any Assembly of the People, now to
pretend Conscience for not paying of those which the Body of the People in an
Assembly have judged necessary to support their Majesty's Interest in these
Territories.

3. All the Taxes hitherto raised have bin most advantageously Employed. Our
Present Rulers, have no personal benefit by them; They spend their time and
care, and are at cost too, for the Common Weal, and would count themselves well
paid for all, in the Contentment, of the people. The great complaint is, That
our ventursome Expedition to Canada has run us into Debt. It should be
Considered that the voice of the people every where called for it.
Our-Neighbours in the West made us believe they would lay all the mischief that
should be done by the French at our doors, if we did not attempt it: such
Importunities with assurances of aid by Land did first engage us and oblige us.
Had the West not filled us, we had certainly bin Masters of Canada; and then
our Expedition had been as much Exto^^^ as now it is Despised! it was not a
thing too big for us, for notwithstanding the Failure in the West, and the
(...) of some among our selves, till the (...) was too far spent for any Great
Thing to be done; add also the scantness of our Ammunition, with the smalness
of our Army; yet the missing of Quebeck is hardly accountable to rational
Satisfaction, Besides, the French had Assaulted us by Land before ever we
visited them by Sea; and that short visit we made them, we are assured, has
preserved our Country from further Assaults of theirs upon us. Nor is it
rational to think that we can ever have a settled peace, while Canada is in
French hands; if there should be a Peace between the two Cr^^^, we may fear,
they may, as they have boasted they will, by setting their Dogs (the Indians)
upon us to make America too hot for us. Hence also the reducing of it unto the
English Empire, was a Design wherein was manifest as the desire of our own
future Welfare, so of doing the greatest Service to the Crown of England. The
Design seemed to be as well said, as any that was e^^^ undertaken in these
parts of the World; and it had been dangerous to have delayed it unto another
year; for had they not gone with the (...) to Canada, a thousand Boss-l^^ers
had been upon our Country Towns and said them waste: Prayers and Hopes for one
Good issue of that Expedition, met nor with a total Disappointment; nor do we
(...) see the (...); the business is not over yet. If Heaven has frowned on
us, it calls us to (...) our sin, and not Increase it by denying the payment of
Debts this way contracted, or spending our fury on any that were active in this
Affair. That were to carry it not like Englishmen, much less like Christians,
but more like Turks who destroy their best Counselors for the wisest Counsels,
where they do not Succeed. Let men beware they do not provoke God to make these
Canady Enemies as fiery Serpents to sting Murmurers at and Despisers of Divine
Providence.

4. Upon the Difficulties and Necessities which the Country has been brought
into, a better way could not well be thought upon, then the (...) of CREDIT now
passing (or that should be so) among us. Silver we have not enough in the
Country to do which must be done, more being usually Exported than is Imp^r^ed
And why may we not do as well (...), as (...) her Plantations of America? What
is the use of Coined Silver? but to furnish a man with Credit, that he may
obtain from his Neighbors those Commodities, which he has occasion for? The
Country in the General Count, have Recognized o^^ Acknowledged, a Debt of so
many thousand pounds unto them that have been the Servants of the Public. The
Credit conveyed by these Bills now Circulates from one hand to another as men's
dealings (...), until the Public Taxes call for it. It is then brought in to
the Treasurers hands, from which it goes not out again. Now the Conveniences
which the Servants of the Public have had by them, have honestly paid the
Countries Debts; and ^^at could coined Silver have done more? Hence it follows,
that for any to (...), the first Receivers of these Bills, by forcing them to
abate of their ju^t value; and then for themselves to bring these Bills to the
Public Treasury, where they are better than ready^ Silver, is a crying
Opresion. When any persons pay their Rates to the Constables in these Bills,
they do in a manner say, They to (...) indirect Advantage to get them cheaper
than they are of Credit for. If the Government can find out any that have done
otherwise, they ought to advance the Rates of such people to procure a
Reparation to them that have been wronged. It will speak ill for New England,
that poor Soldiers and Seamen should be cheated by any of the Inhabitants, and
no Restraint put upon them, no Redress required where it may be done.

5. It is strange to think that New-Englanders, who dwell in such a keen air,
should not have sharpness enough to perceive the prudence, justice and
universal benefit, of paying and saving public Charges, by these Bills of
Credit. When Canada shall be better known to us, we shall find, It is a common
thing for the Government at Quebeck to pay their men in such ways, and the
Inhabitants there are not so dishonest as to cheat the needy persons to whom
the Bills were first given, of half the worth of them; yea, there are no men of
business through the world, who do not use as well as know the way of dealing
by Bills of Credit: How many Credible Merchants are there, whose Bills do Pass
as ready money, with hundreds of People with whom they have had no immediate
Concernment? And shall not the Government of this Colony, have much Credit with
a people that choose all, and make part of it? Besides, no man that deals but
for ten Pounds, will refuse to grant, that Discount in Accounts Current is good
Payment. All these Bills enable people to Discount with the Treasure at last;
therefore it is but fair and just they should have a General Circulation.

6. The more sensible part of mankind have thought (...) of C^^a^t on many
Accounts preferable to silver in their Pockets; it is so in Venice, P^^i^,
Leghorn and Amsterdam, and other s^^^^^ding places. We shall find men who ha^^
had store of money, have carried it into Banks, from whence they have taken only
Bills of Credit, with which they have managed all their businesses, Bills being
less Troublesome, and Cumber some, then Silver would be; and more Safe. What
happened at Venice is very memorable: That State had occasion for Two Millions of
Ducats, accordingly monys were brought into the Bank, and Bills given out for
the ^ame value; such was the usefulness of these Bills that they would not
afterward be parted with for money; and the Government was for^^d unto
Contrivances, to limit the value of them. If we as well understood our
interest, these Bills would in a little time be so valuable, that men would
Cheerfully give Silver, to purchase them at their full Credit. It Is true ours
are founded on the acknowledgement which the Country has made of their being
so much in Debt, and their Resolution of raising what is owing. Now suppose,
that Fund, be never so Tottering, it is a sufficient bottom for those few Bills
which there has yet bin order for: besides, these have some advantages which
Stamp^ Silver will never have; They are so well Contrived, that it is harder to
Counterfeit any of them, then to Counterfeit any Coin in the World. And though
they are more Portable then Co^^, yet they will not be Exported out of the
Land; nor will they be hoarded up, but Inspire our whole trade with such a
vigor as hitherto has not been seen. All men must own, that till we can light
on something Equivalent to Coin, that may Run amongst us in such a quantity as
may agree with our Affayrs, and yet not Bleed away in vast summ's by every
Vessel that goes to foreign parts, we shall always have a Consumption upon us,
In short, if the way of d^aling with these Bills, were more improved and
refined, it were easy to propose a certain Method by which this poor Country
might in one half years time be Enriched above One Hundred Thousand Pound: yea,
we might at any time Command ^alf^ that Sum without the Tenth Part of that
vexation that now every Country Rate occasions, And let it be considered,
whether they who do decry our Bills of Credit, do sufficiently weigh the
desperate circumstances of the Country. We are surrounded with Adversaries; if
we cannot find store of men to Expose themselves for us at this time no man in
his wits, can think the Country can stand: these Men must have money to reward
and support them in their Services, or they can do no more: but Silver we say
we have not; Credit we may have, and it will do as well, if by this Credit we
permit our Friends to Command the same useful things as if they had ready
Silver in their hands. If the French should Prevail, some men would part with
Thousand, and have no Bills of Cre^^^ for it; to make ours passable, is the
most probable visible means to prevent it. Hence to do any thing to render
those Bills Contemptible and Unpass^ble, is in Effect to leave the Country
without all manner of Defense, against any that would prey upon us; which is a
Moral Madness we should upon no Terms render our selves guilty of: whereas if
these Bills of Credit might pass with full Credit among us, we might with Gods
Blessing, be able to Encounter greater Difficulties than we have yet met
withal. It is not worth while to take notice of the foolish Flout of some, in
the Name they put upon these Bills, calling them Paper-mony; when all kn^w that
a Paper signed and sealed may be worth many Pounds of Silver. And why may not
Paper-mony be as good as Tobacco-mony, Potato-mony and Sugar-mony? yea, do not
our Brethren at Connecticut find, Corn-mony will do their business for them All
the Difference is, that some English-People in America know how to make a
Bargain with what they Have, for what they Have not; which it is time for
New England to Learn.

7. It is time for all people to examine, what is that which clogs the passing
of our Bills. It is the debasing of them, so that twenty shillings in a Bill
can scarce find Credit for fourteen or fifteen shillings of stamped silver: But
wherein is the Original of this? Is it in the Merchant? or the Trader? surely
they who have lent the Country some Thousands of Pounds, much of it in ready
silver, and all of it without Interest, or other Gains (that an unthankful
Neighbor hood have reported of them and reproached them with) and have taken
their whole Repayment in Bills of Credit, they should be willing to keep up the
Credit of these Bills. Is it in the Husbandman? one would think they who find
it so hard to buy Silver, should be willing with their Provisions to buy
Credit, that may be as good (and in some cases better) to them than ready Cash.
It remains then that all should join to mend this great error. And why may not
Boston begin? wherever were the first fault, it seems, possible now for
Boston to Correct the whole. It is supposed the Government will be resolute in
Raising what has been granted by the Country this year, for the Public Rates.
Many Proposals have been made unto the Government, for establishing the Credit
of our Bills. In my opinion, they need only to do this; Let the Public Rates
be vigorously Raised. These Rates will in one years time fetch back all the
Bills into the Treasury, where they will be cancelled. The people will find it
their Advantage then (common sense will reach them) to furnish themselves with
these Bills; though they give ready Silver for them, they will find they thereby
save a Shilling in a Pound. If but a competent number of men, who Deal much,
would now give your selves the Trouble of Meeting, to Debate, Agree, Conclude,
and Engage upon giving a just Reputation to our Bills, The whole Country must
and will join with them in it. And if they will further give themselves the
Trouble of Publishing to the Country, ^^at may Rectify some common mistakes,
and how wishing they themselves are to pay and also to take Bills at a due
price, doubtless it would much promove the Cure of this Distemper among us.

Sir, You will heartily accept of these Thoughts, from one who counts and loves
New England as his Country, th^^ he was not Born and Bred in it. The Violations
of Conscience as well as Policy among us in the Things I have Discoursed of,
have made me count it my Duty thus to answer your Desire, of seeing some
thoughts upon the Subject we have now h^d before us. You (...) much a Desire of
yours is a Command, on,

Sir, Your Servant, (...)
FINIS.
Boston, Printed by Benjamin Harris, and John Allen: And are to be Sold at the
London-Coffee-House. 1691.


