BLOOD WILL OUT, OR, AN Example of Justice IN THE Trial, Condemnation,
Confession AND EXECUTION OF Thomas Lutherland, Who Barbarously Murdered the
Body of John Clark of Philadelphia, And was Executed at Salem in VVest-Jarsey
the 23d of February, 1691/2.

Philadelphia, Printed and Sold by Will. Bradford, 1692.

The Trial, Condemnation, Confession and Execution of Thomas Lutherland, who
barbarously Murdered the Body of John Clark of Philadelphia.
SInce there can be nothing more seasonable than a right Information and
understanding of Public Acts, and lest this so public Trial should be
misrepresented, it was thought necessary, for the satisfaction of Rational men,
to make it more public.

At Salem Town, in the County of Salem, and Province of West-Jarsey, the 16 and
17 days of February, 1691/2 before Justices.
John Worlidge, President, George Deacon, Roger Carrary,


The Persons that were summonsed for Jurors, appearing, were impannelled.

Clark, Call over the Jury. Which was done, and Silence commanded. The Jury
took their Averment.

The Indictment Read.
THomas Lutherland, Thou stand here Indicted by the Name of Thomas
Lutherland, late of Pennsilvania, and now of the Town and County of Salem, in
the Province of West-Jarsey, Carpenter, for that thou did on or about the
12th day of November last past, in the Night time, contrary to the Peace, Crown
and Dignity of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, William* and Mary* King and Queen
of England, etc. Not having the Fear of God before thine Eyes, Wickedly,
Maliciously and Felloniously enter the Boat of John Clark, late of
Philadelphia, in the Province of Pennsilvania, Merchant, then Riding near Salem
Landing, and did then and there break open, and Felloniously take and carry
away the Goods of the said John Clark, to the full Value of Fifteen Pound Eight
Shillings and Eleaven Pence. And further, thou did then and there, with Force
and Arms, VVillfully, Maliciously and Barbarously, for lucre of the said Goods,
inhumanely Murder and Destroy the said John Clark; for both which said Facts
thou art required to plead, Guilty, or Not Guilty.

Clark, What say thou, Thomas Lutherland, art thou Guilty, as thou stand
Indicted, in manner and form aforesaid, or not Guilty?


Lutherlad, Not guilty of the Murder, but guilty of the Felony.


Cl. By whom will thou by tried?


Lutherland, By God and the Country.


The Prisoner was asked, If he would make any Exceptions against any of the
Jury? He excepted against four, who were set by, and four others set in their
places. [ Note, The Jury at this time had not taken their Averment.]

President. Read the Information you have taken.


Cl. Reads. In the beginning of November last, John Clark late of the City of
Philadelphia, was Trading at Salem with several sorts of Goods, according to
his usual manner; and upon the 12 day of the said Month, his Boat was found on
Shore at Sandy Point, near the Mouth of Salem Creek; John Clark was not in the
Boat; the Boat, and Goods that were in her, were secured, and information given
to the Justices and Sheriff concerning them, who went where the Boat then lay,
and viewing the Goods, there were serveral Persons present, that were with John
Clark the day before in his Boat, and they affirmed, That they did see several
Parcels of Goods th^n in the Boat, which Goods were considerable, and were now
missing: Whereupon the Justices supposed that the Boat was Robbed and John
Clark Murdered for the love of his Goods: And having just cause to suspect the
Prisoner at the Bar, he being a Person convicted in England, at Sea, and at
Philadelphia, and being of evil Name and Fame in Salem, there was a Warrant
issued forth for the searching all suspicious places; by virtue whereof, the
Constable, with his Assistance, went to the House of the Prisoner, where they
found of the said John Clark's Goods to the value of 15 l. 18 s. 11 d. the
Prisoner not being then in the house, but within a ^^ort time was taken coming
home, and then was brought with the said Goods before two Justices of the
Peace, who examined him* How he came to those Goods? He answered,


Prisoner. I bought the Goods of John Clark the same Night he went away from
Salem Landing, and they cost me 8 l. 5 s. I paid him all but 35 s. that I owe
him still, and he gave me Credit for so much in his Book.


Justice. We have examined his Book, and do not find you have Credit there.


Pris. I am sure he entered it in his Book.


Just. What Specie did you pay John Clark with?


Pris. I paid him 36 s. in Wampum, one piece of (...) two half Pieces, nine
single and two double Bits, and two or three old Casks.


Just. All this that you say, you have paid, amounts not to 5 l. surely you are
mistaken in your account.


Pris I am sure it is as I say, that I bought the Goods of John Clark, or I
wish the Earth may open and swallow me alive


The Evening of the same Day the Prisoner was examined by the Justices the
second time, and who answered* viz.

Pris. In the Morning before day I was at Salem Landing to buy some Tape, when
I came there Clarks Boat was gone, then I (...) up ^n the Bank to Windham,
thinking to overtake the Boat there, and did see the Boat at Sandy-point, then
I took a^ anow from Windham Landing, and went to the Boat, where I found no
Body, then I went into the Boat, took the Goods, and brought them on Shore, and
came to my own House; By that time the Sun was half an hour high in the Morning.


Just. Call Mary Lutherland.


-- She appeared.

Just. Where was your Husband that Night, and at what time went he from home?


M. L. My Husband went from home in the Evening, and came not home until almost
Morning; then he came to Bed, and lay until the usual time that he used to go
to work.


Just. Thomas Lutherland, where were you from the Evening till near Morning?


To which he could give no account.

Whereupon he was committed to Prison, from whence (...) his escape, but by the
diligence of the Sheriff was soon taken

(...). Upon the 11 day of January, 1691, 2, the Body of John Clark was found
near Windham Landing. The Coroner Impannelled an Inquest, who upon viewing the
Corpse, and diligently searching the same, they found his Neck was very limber,
and much shrivelled upon the skin, and seemed more blew than other parts of his
body. They sent for the Prisoner; when he was brought, he was bid to touch the
Corpse, the which he did do, and wished most execrable Wishes, That God would
send some sudden Judgment upon him, if ever he murdered John Clark; saying,
if he had murdered him, he would bleed afresh; saying, Poor innocent man! why
should I destroy him?

The Corooners Inquest, seventeen in Number, withdrew to consider of their
Verdict.

They sent for the Prisoner, asked him to tell them, how he came to the
forementioned Goods? He said, he had been with John Clark in the Evening, and
bought some Thread Buttons of him for some old Cask, and when he came home, his
Wife told him, she wanted some blew Tape, and some Mettle Buttons for the
Children; whereupon he went to the Town Landing, and finding the Boat gone, he
went to Windhame, and from thence he saw the Boat near near Salem Creeks Mouth,
then there was three Canows at Windham Landing, and he took one of them, which
was a knotty Canow, and went to the Boat, finding no body in it, he took the
Goods, and put them into the Canow, brought them to Windham Landing about half
an hour before Sun rising; he hid the English Goods in Windham Marsh, and
carried a parcel of Cheese home that Morning, and fetched the other Goods home
about two or three days after.

Several Persons that were of the said Inquest, were at Windham the same
Morning (about Sun rising,) that the Prisoner said he landed the Goods there,
and they do affirm, That there were three Canows there, but no such (...) as
the Prisoner described, neither could any of (...) Canows that lay there be
brought so near the Landing, (...) they lay, at the time the Prisoner
mentioned; for (...) Sun rising, the Water was fallen several Yards from them.

All which Self-Contradictions in his several Examinations, and diverse
Circumstances being duly considered, the Inquest brought in their Verdict, viz.

That John Clark came to his Death by Violence of Strangling, and that Thomas
Lutherland is guilty of the Murder.

King's Attorney
May it please the Court, The Prisoner at the Bar is now to be tried, and that
by the good old Laws of England, the beginning of which Trial is his
Presentment, which is already found by the grand Inquest. He is now to come to
his Trial by Twelve men of his Peers, and of the Neighborhood legally
constituted, who, I trust, will do Justice indifferently; and Magna Charta, The
Petition of Right, and many Statutes do confirm this way of Trial; and I hope
the Court, and all that hear* and see their Proceedings, will receive full
satisfaction in the Legality and Fairness of their Proceedings against him, and
himself the benefit of Justice and Law.

Let none say, The Prisoner is not tried and judged according to the
Fundamental Laws of England: The Judgment is given in by twelve men of the
Neighborhood ( vid. Cooks com. upon Littleton) the Justices are but to inform
the Jury in matters of Law, and to pronounce the Sentence and Judgment written
against the Prisoner, and order the same Judgment to be put in Execution.

Where there is a Superior Power. inferior Magistrates have their Power
limited; but among Equals in Authority (as it is in this Province of
West-Jarsey) there is no Superiority, therefore those Magistrates that are in
Power here, ought to defend the Weak, punish the Wicked, and be just to all,
acting as there is need, and as the Times, Persons and Accidents do require,
and according to the Exigency, Distress and Necessity of the case. In vain are
good Laws made, if there be none to put them in Execution.

May it please this Court, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, You are here for the
Trying and Judging of Thomas Lutherland, Prisoner at the Bar, for his notorious
Murdering of John Clark, late one of the King and Queen of England's Subjects,
and for the Fellonious taking and carrying away his Goods: He has been a
notorious fellon in England, at Sea, in Philadelphia, and in this County of
Salem, stands now before you to receive the good of Justice.

The King and Queen of England have lost a Subject, who was in Health at the
common Landing place in Salem Town after Sun set the 11th day of November,
1691. and on the next Morning the said John Clark was not to be found, but his
Boat robbed, and diverse parcels of goods felloniously taken and carried away by
the Prisoner, as himself has confessed. That John Clark was murdered by the
Prisoner at the Bar, seventeen Reputable Persons, on the Coroners Inquest, has
given it in their Verdict, and this Felony has relation to the Murder, for
the Murder was committed for love to the Goods. If it be found that A. B. was
murdered in the Night, and the Goods that he had with him at the time of his
Death, shall be found in the possession of C. D. the next Morning before Sun
rising, it does naturally and necessarily imply, That C. D. murdered A. B. for
the love of his Goods: Had the Prisoner taken the Goods, and spared the man's
Life, the man would have discovered him, for he knew him; therefore, because
otherwise, take the Goods without being discovered, he took away the man's Life
also.

The Prisoner himself has disproved himself in his several Examinations: All
Circumstances concurs with the Grand Inquests Judgment, That the Prisoner at
the Bar is guilty both of the Murder and Felony charged upon him. First, he
said, he brought the Cheese home in the Evening, and left the English Goods in
George Hazlwoods Shallop till the next Morning. Another time he says, he
brought the Cheese home from Windham Landing, and hid the English Goods there
in the Marsh for two or three days.

All his Serpentine Turnings, and Windings, and Self-contradictions are but
like Irish Quag-Mires that have no sollid Ground, or Reason: He is incorporated
into Evil by a long habit, in such sort, that his Understanding it self
approves it, and consents thereunto; His heart is so hardened, that
Wickedness is therein rooted and framed, and as it were naturalized, end his
Soul infected and wholly tainted therewith. All his Evasions whereby he
endeavors to avoid the Punishment, are but the tying an Artificial Knot in the
Halter, whereby to strangle his Conscience.

The Truth or Falseness, respectively, lies in the strength or weakness of the
Arguments that are brought in defense of them* There is not any of the
Prisoners Confessions that he has made at several times, but one is repugnant
to the other* all his study cannot make his words speak Reason, but doubtful
and ambiguous words, with particular Reserves, argues a base Mind.

It is usual and necessarily lawful to judge of Causes by the Effects, that
naturally and necessarily flow from them: The Man is found Murdered, and his
Goods some found in the Prisoners house, some hid in the Hay, and some hid
among Corn out of the House Evil Actions show an evil Intent, and both put
together declares Guilt.

Concerning my self, I bear no Malice to the man's Person, than I do to my
dearest Friend; but I hate that cursed Principle of Cruelty and Felony, which
has so long harbored in him.

And now, as the Truth is, I must conclude him guilty of the Murder and
Felony charged upon him; and that he who has made himself a President in
these parts of the World, in committing such Wickedness, I humbly desire, that
this Court, for Justice sake, would make him an Example for others, for time to
come, that men may hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly; That he, who
would not be a Pattern to other Tradesmen to live honestly in this Life, may
be a President of Justice by his Death.

When the Prisoner was first apprehended, the Justice commanded the Constable
to search his Pookets, from whence the Constable took a small parcel of Papers
tied together, and the Prisoner said, they were his own Papers; but when they
were opened, the first Paper viewed, was a Bill from John Gillman to pay John
Clark thirty Shillings; Then a large Paper was taken out of his Pocket, and he
said, That was his Deed for a Town Lot he had lately purchased; but being
viewed, it appeared to be a Deed for Land that John Clark had purchased: Being
asked, how he got those Writings? he said, He found (...). I am fully
satisfied, the Prisoner (...) to dye: And it is a special use of Justice to
condemn one that is accustomed to Wickedness, and suffers (...) strength in
him, and he grows obstinate (...) it, that such an one may serve for an Example
unto others. If this Wickedness should escape with Impunity, (...) be hazardous
f^r a single Person to travel by Land, or by Water, especially in the Night;
which, for better Security, I hope this Court, which is a Habitation of
Justice, and Principles of Freedom, will do speedy Justice, that this Prisoner,
who has been so often convicted as a Malefactor, may be removed out of the way,
that the People may enjoy Liberty and Freedom from such an inhumane Devourer as
the Prisoner is: For you can no more convert him, than you can new create him;
but our comfort is, that his Wickedness will end with himself, and that we
shall have cause to thank God, that we have Magistrates in Authority, that are
not afraid to do Justice.

Clark. Thomas Lutherland, You have heard the Evidence against you, what have
you further to say for your self?


Lutherland. I am guilty of the Felony, but not of the Murder.


The President having given the Jury their Charge, they went forth to consider
their Verdict, and an Officer was attested to attend them, and to keep them
without Meat and Drink until they should agree.

The Court adjourned until eight of the Clock the next Morning.

February the 17 th, the Court being for, the Prisoner was set to the Bar, and
the Jury called over by their Names.

Clark. Are you agreed of you Verdict.


Jury. Yes.


Clark. Who shall speak for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Clark. What say you? Look upon the Prisoner, Is Thomas Lutherland Guilty in
manner and form as he stands indicted, or not Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


And so the Jury said all, one by distinctly.

The Attorney General demanded Judgment against the Prisoner.

A Case of this Nature never happening in this part of the Country before, the
Court was very cautious in passing Sentence of Death.

Whereupon the Grand Inquest, the Jury of Life and Death, and the Coroners
Inquest, and the most part of the Country there present, caused the following
Petition to be presented to the Justices.

WHereas Thomas Lutherland is found guilty of the Fellonious Taking and
carrying away the Goods of John Clark, and of wilful Murder, as by the
Judgment of Fifty Two Persons, Jurors, does appear. And forasmuch as Justices
of the Peace, by the Commission of the Peace, are not empowered to pass
Sentence of Death, where there are superior Courts, but seeing we have no
superior Court in this Province, we must apply our selves to you for Justice.

The great Charge and Trouble it has been to this County in securing the said
Lutherland, and the hazard of his escape, the Encouragement which the Impunity
of this Notorious and Heinous Fact, may give to other Wicked People to do the
like, whereby their Majesty's loving and peaceable Subjects may be (...)
constrains us to call to you for Justice, and that you pass sentence of Death
on the said Lutherland, according to Law, and give order for the Execution
thereof. And we whose Names are ^^re-under written do join and accord with you
in the same, with (...) Consent. In Testimony whereof, We have hereunto set our
Hands this 17 Day of February, 1691.

This was Signed by about one hundred Persons of the best Yeomandry in the
County of Salem.

In answer to the said Petition, after deliberate Consideration, the Justices
proceeded as follows, viz.

President. Thomas Lutherland, Thou have been Indicted, Arraigned, and pleaded
Not Guilty of the Murder of John Clark, and for Trial thereof, have put thy
self upon thy Country, which Country are these who have found thee guilty: What
can thou say for thy self why Judgment and Execution of Death should not pass
against thee?


Prisoner. I have nothing to say; I am guilty of the Felony, but not of the
Murder. I think I am hardly dealt with. I never knew that the King's Attorney
should plead against a Person for Felony.


President. Thomas Lutherland, Thou art here found guilty, 1 st. by the
Corroners Inquest, 2 dly, By the Grand Jury, and lastly, by the Jury of Life
and Death. And now having nothing to say, why Judgment should not pass against
thee.

Now it rests to pronounce the Judgment, which I wish thou had not been
this day to have received; but since thou have been found guilty of the Murder
and Felony charged against thee, Thou shall be had to the place from whence
thou came, From thence to the place of Execution, and there thou shall be
Hanged by the Neck till thy Body be Dead, Dead, Dead; and God have Mercy upon
thy Soul.


President. What time do you desire to prepare your self for Death?


Prisoner. So soon as you please.


The Court gave him five days time, and gave order for his Execution the 23d
day of the aforesaid Month* February.

The First Day of the Week after his Condemnation, the Prisoner sent for the
High Sheriff, and confessed to him, That he Murdered John Clark; and said, he
would make an open Confession at the place of Execution.

The next Morning the Prisoner sent for the Clark to take his Confession in
Writing, which is as follows, Viz.

The Prisoner's Confession.
Prisoner. I have been a great Sinner, and have continued in my sins until this
fortieth Year of my Age, and have committed more sins than man could almost
commit, for Drunkenness, Whoring, Swearing, Tempting Young Women to Debauchery,
and then leave them; then for Theft, and now for Murder. I was convicted of
Felony in England, for which I was Transported into Pennsilvan^a* I consented
to the stealing of several parcels of Goods on Shipboard, which is the same as
doing the Fact: In Pennsilvania I was convicted of several Thefts, but could
take no warning by all this.

I pray* good People take care of your Goods, and leave them not in Our houses
carelessly, which are great Temptations to sinners, the Devil takes such
opportunities to persuade sinners to S^eal and Rob. I declare, I never took any
Goods out of a House that was locked. Good people pray take warning by my
Example, I have been a (...) to many, but consider, the Pitcher goes not so
often to the Well, but comes home broke at last.

What I said in denying the Murder of John Clark, I find God has showed an
Example by me: Think not, that Murder will ever be hid, the very Leaves of the
Trees will discover Murder: When I touched the Murdered Corpse of John Clark,
I was afraid the Blood would have flown in my face: Pray take heed, Young and
Old, this hard heart of mine is the greatest Enemy I have. I forgive all.

When I sold John Clark the empty Casks, he showed me several sorts of Goods
for my pay: I was to go over the River to receive some pay due to me, and the
Devil tempted me to take away this man's Goods; intending to sell them there;
but I knew I could not take away the Goods without killing the man: This was
three or four days before he went to John Gillmans; when he was gone there, I
began to bless the Lord, he had prevented the Wickedness in my heart, thinking
he had been gone; but when I went down to the Landing, I met him, and he
brought me my (...), and told me, if I wanted any Goods he had, I shou^^ freely
have them. I was sorry for seeing him, for then the Temptation came strong upon
me. I went down with him, and bought some Three B^^tons; (...) I went away from
the Boat, I told him, he had a cold place: He answered, he had a warm Cabin;
and I bid him wrap himself warm. As I was going home, my heart mis-gave me, and
I thought, Why should I destroy this Innocent Creature. When I came home, (...)
Nicholas Philip^^ to buy some Tools of me, which I sold him; so he supped with
me, and after Supper asked me to go to the Ordinary to drink a pot of Beer; I
went with him, and we drank two pots of Beer, and one Gill of Rum: After I
parted with him; and as I went to go home, the Devil's Temptation came so
strong, I put my foot over the fence, intending to fetch a Bag to put the Goods
in; but I thought my Wife would betray me, so withdrew my foot, and went down
to the boat thinking I should find something there to put the Goods in: When I
(...) to the Boat the man was in the Cabin, I counterfeited (...) Voice, and
asked, Whose Boat it was? He answered, Mine: I asked, where he was going? He
said, Up the River: I told him, I must go to New Castle, he said, He wou^d
carry me, if I would pay him: I told him, I would pay him nothing, I must have
your Boat* so he put up his head, I suppose to cry out: I bid him put down his
Head; he said, He would be still; so I took an end of a Roap, and put about his
Neck; he cried, Friend do not destroy me, he that Created me, Created thee;
Remember thy Creator and Redeemer, and have Mercy upon me, as you expect Mercy
from God: So I told him, I would not destroy him; but he said, I think you
intend to Choke me. I asked him, if he had got any Money? He said, he had got
some Wampum; so he cried, Spare my Life, and take my Goods; but I pulled both
ends of the Roap together (he cried, Lord have Mercy upon my Soul! Lord have
Mercy upon my Soul!) till he was dead; then I took the Keys out of his Pocket,
and unlockt his Chests, and put his Goods into a Sack; but before I removed
them, came William Penton, and some others, and he cried, Let us call John
Clark; so I lay down in the Waste of the Boat, and covered my self with some
Sacks: When they were gone, I removed the Goods into George Hazlwood's Sloop,
and rowed Clarks Boat down to Windham, and hawled him over board, but could not
make him sink, which put me into great fear; then I jumpt on shore with the
Sp^^t of the Boat, and left the Boat a d^ift; so returned back to the Sloop,
and removed the Goods, and hid them in a Hay-stack, and in two or three days
removed them into my own Hay-stack, and afterward, unknown to my Wife, brought
them into my Chamber, where they were found; and upon the finding of these
Goods, I was committed.

I confess my great Sin in Marrying a Wife in this Country, having a Wife and
Child at Clay Cott^n in Northhamptonshire. I have been very disobedient to my
Parents, a great Breaker of Sabbaths, which was the cause of my habit of sin: I
had rather go to an Alehouse than to any Church. Pray Young People take
warning by my shameful end: Keep the Sabbath truly: Go to any Religious
Meetings, whether of your own Persuasion or not. The Devil is always at hand
to tempt Sinners. I have had great Oppression upon my Spirit since I was in
this Prison* and I thought I should never Repent or Confess until almighty God
softened my hard Heart and gave me Grace to Repent. I beg all good People to
join in Prayers with me. I have great need of your Prayers.

Not long after the Clark had taken his Confession, he was carried (...)
guarded by the Sheriff and his men to the place of Execution. All the way as he
was carried, and at the place of Execution, he made a Repetition of the
aforesaid Confession, and gave good Exhortation to all People, to take wa^ning
by his Example, earnestly desiring, both Young and Old, to be careful in
keeping the Sabbaths; and all Young People to be Dutiful to their Parents. So
praying about a quarter of an hour, and desiring all there present to join with
him; and having forgiven the Executioner, the Cart went away, and he dyed
immediately.

A True Copy, By me, Samuel Hedge. Clark.

FINIS

