AT A SESSION OF THE General Court Of the Massachusetts Colony, in Boston, 28th
of May, 1690.
WHereas the Honorable Sir William Phipps, Knight, is appointed to take the
Chief Command, and Major John Walley to be Second unto him in Command of all
the Forces that shall be provided for their Majesty's Service, in an Expedition
by Gods assistance intended for Canada, against the common Enemy, French and
Indians.

All Gentlemen Soldiers and Seamen, that shall List themselves for the said
Service, are desired to enter their Names with such persons herein after Named,
appointed for Muster-Masters in the several Regiments where such Soldiers and
Seamen dwell or have their Abode, and to be in readiness to Randesvouz at such
time and place as shall be assigned by the said Muster-Masters respectively,
the Soldiers to appear completely Armed.

And for Encouragement to persons willingly to offer themselves to said
Service, It is Ordered,

1. That the Pay of all Land Officers, and private Sentinels, shall be in all
Respects equal to what has been already allowed to those improved against the
Indian Enemy.

2. That the Pay of all Sea Officers and Seamen, shall be after the same Rate
proportionably to what shall be paid unto them lately improved in the Port
Royal Expedition.

3. Besides the stated pay, one just half part of all plunder taken from the
Enemy shall be shared among the Officers, Soldiers and Seamen. Stores of War
Excepted.

4. If it so happen (which God forbid) that any of ours fall in the Attempt,
then what would rightfully have belonged to such person or persons if they had
lived, shall be made good to their Widows and Children, and if none such be,
then to those who have the next Legal Right.

5. If any persons be so wounded, as to loose a Limb, or the use thereof, so as
thereby to be disinabled for bodily labor, further consideration shall be had
to such, out of the part of plunder accruing to the Public.

Muster-Masters for the federal Regiments, viz.
For Major Saltonstal's Henry Short Newbury, Major Appleton's Nathaniel R^st
Ipswich, Major Gidney's Benjamin Gerrish Salem, Major Hinksman's Henry Woodiss
Concord, Major Phillips's Samuel Phipps Charlstown, Samuel Champney Cambridg,
Major Hutchinson's William Coleman Boston, Major Quinsey's Joseph Dire
Weymouth, Samuel Ruggles junier, Rox^bury,

By Order of the Court, Isaac Addington Secr'.


