The Pretended ANTIDOTE PROVED POISON: Or, The true Principles of the Christian
and Protestant Religion Defended,

And the Four Counterfit Defenders thereof Detected and Discovered; the Names
of which are James Allen, Joshua Moodey, Samuel Willard and Cotton Mather who
call themselves Ministers of the Gospel in Boston, in their pretended Answer to
my Book, called, The Presbyterian and Independent Visible Churches in
New England, and else where, brought to the Test, etc. And G. K. cleared not to
be guilty of any Calumnies against these called Teachers of New England, etc.

By George Keith.

With an Appendix by John Delavall, by way of Animadversion on some Passages in
a Discourse of Cotton Mathers before the general Court of Massachusetts, the
28th of the Third Month, 1690.

Philadelphia, Printed by Will. Bradford, 1690.

Introduction.
To James Allen, Joshua Moodey. Samuel Willard, and Cotton Mather.
Men and Neighbors;
I Have seen your pretended Answer to my Book, which ye call, The Principles of
the Protestant Religion maintained, etc. which I have also read and well
considered, and I find that upon the matter, ye have left the substance or
principal matter of it wholly unanswered, and that your said pretended Answer
contains little else but Railing after an extraordinary and unusual manner of
Speech, scarcely to be paraleli'd, and many very gross Mistakes and Perversions
of my words, and some absolutely false Quotations and Recitations, alleging
Words, and Sayings, and Doctrines to be mine and delivered by me in my Book,
which are neither directly nor indirectly to be found there and which are
neither my express words nor so much as the most remote true and (...)
Consequence of them. But it is altogether unfair and (...) to allege any thing
upon a man which are not either his expres^ words or the plain and manifest
sense of them, obvious to every intelligent and impartial Reader: For, to
allege ^consequential sense of a man's words, which they win no wa^es bear, is
most un^ivil and inhumane, and a^gueth at most a weak and desperate Cause, when
ye are put to use such mean and unlawful Arts to make your part seem fair. And
su^ely, ye who pretend to find so great fault at the supposed (...) of G. K.
should have at least) upon some prudential consideration, as men, shown your
selves not to be so deeply guilty of that Vice of Calumniating, which ye, only
with great confidence, allege, but can never prove against him

I find, ye are not a little vexed at my Book; but since it contains little
else but Nonsense, Tautologies, Nauseous Repetitions, Cavils and Sophisms, as
ye a^edge, why are ye so angry and fretted? why should Nonsense and
Tautologies, Cavils and Sophisms vex you so very much? what aileth you, that ye
come with such a company? ye seem, in great part, to resemble Micah pursuing
some of the Children of Dan, to recover your lost gods, and to answer with him,
after some manner, Ye have taken away our gods which we made, and our Priests,
and ye are gone away; and what have we more? And what is this that thou say
unto us, what aileth us? But I assure you, I intend to make no such usage of
your gods as the Danites did of the gods of Mi^ah, nor have I robbed any of
your gods or idols from you, but as becoming a true Christian, I have fairly
and honestly labored to convince you of your many evil and hurtful Errors
which ye set up in your hearts, as Idols and false Godds; for ye may know, that
the Scripture te^leth of foam, that did set up Idols in heir hearts; yea,
whatever any men set up in their hearts, in the room and place of the true God,
an his Precious, holy and living Truth, and the divine dictates and Testimonies
thereof, are but false gods, and idols of men's making. It is a most false and
injurious Accusation ye insinuate against me, as if I did seek to persuade any,
to part with an infinite and eternal God, and having a created Soul
blasphemo^sly place in his Throne, or to part with the precious Bible ( viz.
the holy Scriptures) as a dead Letter, and to have silent posiures of their own
in the room thereof, or that I seek to persuade these called your
Congregations, to part with an inestimable Red^emer, for a dim Light within
them, which may prove Darkness it self, or to have the (...) Gospel Bapt^sin o^
Christ and his Supper taken away from them, and the glorious Doctrines of
Election, Justification and perseverance depraved with Opinions that make man
to be all, and Grace to have (...) or no share in the matters of Salvation. All
which are most false and injurious Accusations, with many more of that sort,
which ye very unchristianly cast upon me, as I hope will clearly appear in the
(...), and does sufficiently appear in my former Book. My desire, and earnest
travail of (...), That ye, and all others, who remain ignorant of God, may come
to the true knowledge of him, and of his Son (...) Jesus, whom to know is Life
eternal. I assert no created Soul or thing to be placed in the room of God in
his Throne, but (...) against you, that as God and Christ dwell in Heaven, so
they dwell in the hearts of all the faithful, and that not divided or separated
from their Operations and Infl^ences, but together with them, and one with
them, though ye would divide and separate them asunder; and that the same God and
Christ, as they are one, so their operation and influence of Light and Grace
are one, and that by some gracious operation and influence they are pleased to
visit the Souls of all men more or less; and as God and Christ are every where
present in all the Creatures, so in a more special way and manner of
manifestation, beside that universal O^nipresence, they are in all men, and
cannot be excluded from any of the Creatures; and therefore it is a most
injurious Calumny, as if either I or any of my Fri^nds did set up any thing in
the ^oom or throne of God; for whatever ^^^umination, operation or influential
Effect of God and Christ we assert to be in men, we do not say that it is God
or Christ, for we do not confound the Cause and the Effect, nor the Worker and
his work, but we say, God and Christ, the Word, by which all things were made,
are most inwardly present in all Creatures; and if ye deny this, ye, and not
we, deny the true God; and God and Christ are Light, as the holy Scripture
declares, and are no dim Light, which is in you Blasphemy to assert; but, both
your Eyes, and the Eyes of many are dim, yea, and blind, that ye cannot in this
your blind state see the glory of God: And for the holy Scriptures, ye your
selves say, The MIND and true SENSE o^ the Scripture, is the Scripture or Word,
and that was never called by us a dead Letter, nor is the Scripture dead to any
but to such who are dead, and past feeling; we hold to Scripture phrase that
says, the Letter kill^^^, which we thus understand, that whoever have not the
inward quickening, and living operation of the Spirit of God, that does usually
attend and accompany the outward (...) of the holy Scriptures, to such the
Letter of the Scripture is a (...) Letter, and the sober of your own Church, I
suppose, will not deny it, and so it pro^eth ^o all Infidels and Unbelievers,
while remaining such, who are dead in their sins and Trespasses, but to all who
are made alive unto God, the Scriptures Testimony is a living, sweet and
precious Testimony, in all its parts and not at all either a dead Letter, or a
killing Letter. And as for the Gospel Baptism of Christ, and his Supper, and
the glorious Doctrines of Election, Justification and Perseverance of God's
elect Saints and Children, we own them with our souls and hearts, and only
disown your false glosses of all these things; ye must not think to be both
party and judge in these matters, both ye and we have a most impartial and just
Judge, the great Lord of Heaven and Earth, to judge and witness betwixt us, and
to his Witness, Evidence and Testimony in all hearts I can and do freely leave
these matters of difference betwixt us, in the mean time ye are greatly (...)
to think, that either I or my Friends decline all outward Evidences and
Testimony, or just and equal Methods or Ways of fair reasoning and argument,
touching the matters of difference betwixt us; nay, its a great, if not woeful
Mistake in you, we shall never fear to deal with you in all fair and reasonable
ways of dispute, either by express Scripture or by just and rational
Consequences therefrom, and then to leave all to the impartial judgment of all
such who are both spiritual and reasonable men; for, to be both spiritual and
reasonable are well consistent.

Ye may be greatly ashamed, (if Shame be (...) unto you, to use some of your
own words) in the beginning of your Preface to; tell of Persecutors with (...)
Club in their hands, when ye have been so deeply guilty of using Cain's Club,
and continuing to justify it, in putting to death so many innocent Servants of
the Lord. Ye are idle and impertinent to call me the Champion, whom the
American Quakers do so much admire, I know none called a Quaker in America, or
elsewhere, that does admire me; we admire and adore the glorious God and
Creator, but no man, no^ do I seek the honor and praise of men, it is enough
that I am loved by my Friends and Brethren, and that I am acknowledged to have
a part and lot among the faithful. Ye acknowledge ye pass ever many assertions,
called by you unfound, in my Book, with a d^y foot, and so ye might have said,
ye have passed the substance and matter of the whole, and the Arguments thereof
without due notice, and rather than wet your (...) ye wi^^ go far about, and
digress or deviate from that which ye cannot fairly nor justly answer. As for
Cotton Ma^^er's pretended Vindication of his Father Increase Mather, his abuses
against the People called Quakers, I have fully answered to it in Print in a
Book called, A Re^utation of three Opposers of Truth, etc. to which I refer,
and which I suppose is come to his hand long before this of yours ^^me to me.
Ye express your fear of me, as if my (supposed) Apostasy had rendered me
incurable; and elsewhere ye call me a fearful Apostate, and infinuate, as if I
were not only Apostate and Heretic, but grown beyond Admonition: But how know
ye this, seeing ye pretend not to a Spirit of discerning or a divine Revelation
in the case? Suppose ^err in some things (as I have good assurance^ do not in
any o^ these things ye charge me) does one or some few Errors or Mistakes (not
wilfully held) in matters that are not fundamental, render me either Heretic
or Apostate? Ye, or at least, the more sober among you, allow, that men holding
the fundamentals of the Christian Religion, although they he in an Error or
Mistake, to ^^hing diverse things, that are not fundamental, may be allowed to
be true Christians, and Members of Christ's Church; hence the more sober of
Presbyterians have a Charitable judgment of many, not only of Baprists and the
Episcopals, but of Arminians and Lutherans, yea, and of many in the Church of
Rome also. And I believe ye cannot give me one instance wherein ye can justly
accuse me or my Friends of any fundamental Error in Christian Doctrine, so
acknowledged by the more sober part among you, held by us. It is high and
extreme Uncharitablene^s for you so to ^n ^ristian us, but praised be God, we
can, and have holy confidence to appeal from your false Judgment, to the just
God, to whom we are known, and whose Peace and Justification we have in our
Bosoms, that is Proof against all your false and injurious Accusations; And I
have not dealt so with you, so to unchristian you in the whole lump, or any one
of you, altogether merely for Doctrine; for I only did charge it upon you, and
I believe I have made good my charge, That your visible C^urches are not the
true Church o^ Christ, to wit, not having that purity of Doctrine, Ministry,
Worship, Constitution, Government, etc. that constitutes the true Church of
Christ, either as the Church was in the Apostles days, or as she is yet to be
restored, and is now restoring, after the great and dark night of Apostasy, yet
I have freely and readil^ granted, that there are among you who belong to
Christ and his true Church; and though you judge this a great inconsistency and
contradiction, yet ye are in a great mistake, for my charge is as consistent,
to grant, that some among you, yea, all who are sincere and faithful to what
they do know, and are reaily convinced of the (...) but in part that are among
you, belong to God, and to his true Church, as the Charity of many of the more
sober among you, is consistent, to grant, That the most sincere sort in the
Church of Rome, belong to God, and his Church, and are his People; for God has
of his People in Babylon, whom he calls to come out of it; and this was the
judgment generally of these called the first Reformers, and is the judgment
generally of the more sober and (...) (...) o^ all sorts, at this day, and was
my charitable judgment when I was among the Presbyterians, and remains now to
be; and yet, such who have this charitable judgment of many in the Church of
Rome, do not call her, nor own her (for most part) to be the true visible
Church of Christ, b^t call her a Whore, and a false Church, and Baoylon, and
for this cause judge, that their separation is just from her: And as the
Protestants generally, who are of the more sober and moderate sort, do exce^l
these called Papists or Roman Catholics, for their charitable judgment of many
among them, because scarce any Papist has the least charitable judgment of any
one Protestant of any sort; so we the People called Quakers have the advantage
over you, in that we have a real Christian charitable judgment, not only of all
the sincere hearted among you, but among all others, that are sincere hearted,
who hold the fundamentals of Christian Religion, that they belong to God and
Christ, and are our Christian Brethren, though in many things dark and weak,
and under great mistakes of judgment, that does greatly hinder their growth,
and endanger their Souls state, and therefore we labor, if possible, to
undeceive them; but we can have no charity for Hypocrites, and such who are not
sincere in what they profess, but having a form o^ Godliness deny the Power of
it, and are Proud, E^vious, (...), false Accusers, Persecutors, and of a
persecuting Spirit, who have killed the Martyrs of Jesus, and justify them who
have so done, as you do these who put to death our innocent and Christian
Friends at Boston; and though ye allege, they suffered for their crime, that
they came purposely to undermine the civil Government, and yet it is known
generally over almost the whole World where New England and Bos^on is named,
and what they did in that matter, that it was simply for their Conscience, and
for no (...) in matter of fact at all, but transgressing that unrighteous Law
of not returning on pain of Death; and if that be to subvert civil Government,
then all Persecutors are justified, and all the many thousands of Gods faithful
Martyrs and Witnesses are to be condemned for being subve^ters of the civil
Government, for they did generally transgress the unrighteous Laws of men,
under which they suffered; yea, (...) himself at this ^ate is guilty (which is
blasphemous to think) for as the Jews said, We have a Law, and by our Law be
ought to dye, and he is no (...) to Casar; but that any thing directly or
indirectly was ever found in any of those our Friends put to Death at Boston,
that had any the least tendency against the civil Government, ye can never
prove, nor give ^^least colorable pretense, no^ did (...) hear that any such
thing was articled against them, except in so far as ye will call that a
subversion of civil Government, to transgress the unrighteous Laws ye made
against the People called Quakers, only for their Persuasions in matters of
Conscience, and their innocent and harmless Practices and Profession
accordingly. And if any of them have come at times to your public Meeting of
Worship, to bear a Testimony against your Formality, and Hypo^risie, and (...)
Doctrine, i^ is but the like to what some of these, well owned and esteemed as
the Martyrs of Christ, did in Q. Mary's days, and in other (...) and places of
Popery, where they came openly and boldly into the Popish (...), and witnessed
against them, and their Practice is commended in (...) Book of Martyrs, and
other Historians, as Noble and Heroical; yea, how many (...) highly commended
the Women for throwing their stools at the bishop reading Common Prayer in
(...) in Scotland, above fifty years ago, and judged it as a Noble and Heroical
Act, and some have imputed it to a divine Motion; but as I do not justine is,
yet it does serve justly to stop your mouths to make that a great crime in
others, only to witness (...) word of mouth against your false Way of Worship,
when many or most of you, the Presbytorian sort, justify that Practice by
violent hands, first of Women th^owing their Stools at the Bishop in the
Pu^pit, and then of men violently rising against him; which is a well known
Passage, and there are yet alive in Scotland who can bear witness to it. Ye
say, ye shall have no returns from me, except those of Rage and Wrath, which ye
shall not count it worth the while to publish any Reply unto, but what the
Archangel ^ave to a Railing Accusation. But I hope, through Gods help to
disappoint you, and to give you no retu^^^ of Rage and Wrath at all; and though
in my former Book I used some sharp words against you, from love and zeal to
the Truth, and good will unto you, and the People of New England, yet I am not
conscious of any Rage and Wrath I used against you, though ye change me ^ith
^ride and (...), and Slandering, and (...) b^tter Invictives, etc. but I stand
not to your judgment; however, as I retract nothing of what I than charged you
with, so at present, I hope, so far to disappoint you, as not to give you any
just cause to say, I give you any Returns of Rage and Wrath; for I shall most
willingly and freely acknowledge your skill and ability of using hard words and
speeches, does far exceed my Capacity, if I durst allow my self a liberty, as I
dare not, to contend with you in that manner, but I can say it (...), I love
rather to contend with strong and (...) Arguments, than any hard words
whatsoever, and so far as it shall please God to give me leave, I shall labor
to refrain them, to take away all occasion from you, of making excuse not to
answer, only remember, that ye confess, in some passages, ye have (...) your
work cuttingly, (...) your selves, that some are to be rebuke^. But what
Apology can this be more to (...) than to me? you must take all liberty
imagi^able, yea, exceed all bounds, to answer (...) cuttingly, and yet this is
no Wrath or (...) in you, but love and (...) will to me, ye (...) say; for, I
hope, if I be judged your Enemy ye will say, ye ought to love me; but if I use
but a small part of hard words toward you, and withal expressing my love, ye
will needs construe it to be Pride, Gall, Rage and Wra^h; if this be not
partial, let all impartial Readers judge. However, though your words ^cem
cutting, yet since your Reasons and Defenses, by way of Argument, are bl^^t and
dull, I feel no wound nor smart by any thing ye have done, and (...) in no fear
of any thing ye can do against me; for the Truth, which is the strongest of
all, is my defense against you, and all your assaults. Ye not only indulge your
selves, to use most hard and uncivil Language against me, but against that Way
professed by me, called by you, the Contagion of Quakerism, and the peculiar
P^ague o^ this Age; saying, in Quakerism ye see (...) vomit cast ^orth, in the
bypass Ages, by w^ole Kennels of these Creatures, for (...) the Apostle has
^ound a Name, licked up again ^or a new (...), and once more exposed for the
(...) of Mankind; and it is especially (say ye) the more ignorant, and unwary,
and (...) part of Mankind which it is accepted unto; and abundance more of this
sort: Which is a shame to hear, o^ read such odd kind of dirty words, enough to
defile the Air, etc. but it is no new or strange thing that Light should be put
for Darkness, and Good called Evil, and Bl^ssed are ye, said Christ to his
Disciples, when men shall speak all manner of Evil against you, fals^y for my
sake; if they have called Christ a Blasphem^^ and c. what may his Servants
expect? So used the Papists and Popish Clergy to abuse the primitive
Protestants, the sincere sort and part of which, who, from true inward
Conviction of Truth, and zeal to Truth, did witness against the corrupt
Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, we cordially own, and have unity
with their Testimony against the same. And though ye four seek to gain applause
and praise from the ignorant Multitude, as if ye were mainly concerned to
defend the Principles of the Protestant Religion, against the Quakers, yet I
question not but to make it appear, that the People called Quakers are better
and truer Protestants than your selves, and whatever was of Truth, and true
Doctrine, and true Christian Practice, or is among at the sorts of Protestants,
we do own it, (...) to our knowledge and ability, and deny nothing of what was
ever, or is true among them, only what is no true part of true Protestant
Doctrine, but dross, or dreg, and refuse, that did or does cleave to any or all
that go under that Name of Protestants or Protestant Churches, we do justly
renounce and disown; and this is not to turn Apostates, but to go forward, and
fo^^ow the Lord in his further leadings and discoveries; for Luther (after
whom, and those that did own him, the Protestants were so called) did plainly
acknowledge, That the Light of the Gospel that did shine in his time, was a
certain sign of the glorious appearance of our Lord and Savior Christ, and
like the Morning Red that appears, be ore the everlasting Day, and rising of
the Son of Righteousness, see cap. 12. page 198. of his Mensa^ia, and therefore
Luther did account the Light that shined in him, and his Brethren, but as the
twilight before the Sun arise; and it is certain, that men cannot see well in
the twilight, to discern many things; and ye your selves will and do
acknowledge, that both Luther and Calvin had their mistakes, and yet ye will
not allow yo^ selves to be Apostates, that ye agree not with them in these
Mistakes; and Luther did prophecy of a horrible Darkness that was to (...)
after his time, cap. 7 p. 130 of that Book; and is not this fullfilled in great
part over the generality of Protestants, as well (...), as others that go under
the Name of Protestants, no^ to mention the People called Quakers, whom ye will
not reckon to be so considerable as to have caused such a dark Cloud or shadow
to overspread, it is manifest to the impartial, that these called Protestants,
or first Reformers, as in too many things they fell short, and retained too
many Re^iques of Popish Doctrines and Practices, so in other things they did
run into E^treams, as is too common for men to do, out from the middle path;
and since Protestants generally own the holy Scriptures as the only supreme
outward Rule, and Standard, and public Test and ^ouchstone, whereby to try
(...) Doctrines and Practice^ of C^ristian Religion, the which also we do, it
is evident, that whatsoever Doctrine or Practice is (...) to the holy
Scripture, is both Christian and Protestant; and there are no Principles of
Doctrine received by us, in opposition to Popery, but what we have great
Numbers, not only as good, but better Protestants than your selves, receiving
the same Doctrine, as may in time be made appear, and not only, confirmed with
ScriptureAuthority, but with ancient Writers, acknowledged by you to have been
truly Pious. The narrow-spirited party in New England, and in some other parts
of the world, who too unchristianly judge all others who differ from them in
some matters of Doctrine, to be (...), Impostors, etc. are so far from being
the whole Body of Protestants, that they are but a very small and
inconsiderable part thereof, especially ye called Independents. And though ye
upbraid the People called Quakers with Novelty, saying, The Novelty of the Sect
(...) their Falsity, because a Quaker said, anno 16^^. it is now about 7 years
since (...) Lord raised us up; yet this does nothing militate against the
Quakers, more than against you called Independents and Presbyterians, for your
being raised up or appearing in the World under such a Name and Model of
Doctrine, (...) pline, Ministry, and as peculiarly distinguished from other
Societies, and by your peculiar circumstances is but Novel, and of late years;
for ye cannot trace your beginning, as such, higher than the (...), so called,
of Amst^rdam in Qu. Elizabeth's, days, from which ye have not a little
degenerated, both in Doctrine and Life; and your present Model is yet later,
and but erected since New England was planted with English People, (...)
seventy years ago; and in respect of Novelty there is no great odds betwixt
seven Years and seventy Years, (...) or seven hundred Years; for that Religion
and Doctrine which cannot be proved to ^e as old as the (...) and Apostles,
(...), in some sort from the beginning, is not true, but false: It is a true
saying of some ancient (...), A (...) i. e. The truest Principles of (...) are
the most An^^nt: and as the (...) used to answer the Papists, when they
que^ied, (...) Religion was before Luther? saving, Where Popery was not, to
wit, in the holy Scriptures sufficiently declared: we (...) the same. If we
prove our Doctrine to be warranted from the Scripture, as we have done, and are
able still to do, through Gods help, we prove out Religion to be ancient
enough. And though one called a Quaker said o^ (...), anno 1659: that they mere
raised (...) seven years agone, this does not infer the Newness of their
Religion, but at most, that at that time they were out newly come to the true
knowledge and faith of it, even as when an Infidel (...) converted but this
year to the faith of Christ, it does not follow, that the faith of christ is
not elder than his Conversion: Its true, the Name Quakers were not given till
about the Year aforementioned, not had they such Discoveries and Knowledge of
Truth before, as then, yet that does not (...), but the (...) then rev^aled
unto them, was from the beginning; Men see no^ the light of the Sun and they be
born ^ to the Wo^^d, yet the same (...) was in the World some Thousands of
Years before they were born. Not one of there (...) Principles in (...) you
(...), ^ut I can being (...) of Protestant (...), of great note and account,
ho^^ing with (...), as may in due time appear. After ye have raised against me,
after a most unchristian and licentious manner, ye say, It will give no (...)
Repiv ^^to, but what the Archangel gave to a Railing Accusation. But if we
think it worthy of Imitation, to follow the Example of the Archangel now at
last, why did ye not so at first? Why did not the answer of the ArchAngel
suffice you at first, to have given me? What is this but to abuse the
Scripture, first to use an extraordinary Licentiousness of Railing Accusations
against me, and the^ to conclude, ye will bring no Railing Accusation, unless
ye Repent you of your former Railing and Reviling Speeches against me and my
Friends? I call them justly railing Speeches, because they are false, and
grounded upon false Surmises and ^^^egations that ye can never prove; but what
I have charged on you is true, and I have proved it, and can more abundantly
do. And whereas ye are big (...) hope, that ye have now furnished New England
with an (...) against that fa^^ly called by you, I (...) Co^tagton of Quaker
sin. If the clouds of Prejudice that are in many or most of the People, were
removed, your ^ntidote would prove very mean and ineffectual. It is the
unhappiness of too many, the prejudice of their Education, and that they have
sucked in false Principles almost with their Mothers Milk, and a too great
credulity to (...) Teachers, all which in due time God will remove; and I
believe, That ye call your Antidote, may prove to many, an occasion to discover
your Nakedness, Ignorance and Unsoundness of Doctrine, more than formerly Ye
tell us of a sort of Quakerism not long since broached in Italy, called
Quietists; but ye find fault with some of the Quakers among ^ou, That they
disturb the quiet of all that are about them. As for the Quietists, so called,
in Italy, they have not been so quiet but they have made a great noise in the
World; however, that they either are, or have called themselves Quakers, does
not appear, and their Principles and ours sufficiently differ. But it will not
prove, that the Quakers are not a quiet and peaceable People, that they witness
against false Doctrine and Unchristian Practices; for so did the quiet and
peaceable Christians of old, and so did the Apostles, who yet were said to turn
the World upside down, by their false Accusers.

Ye seem to rejoice and glory, that the Religion of the Quakers has got place
but in some more obscure (...) and corners of New England: And what does this
prove against the truth of their Religion, or what does it give you of
glorying, more than that there was no room for Christ in the Inn, after he was
born? and the Foxes (i. e. the false Teachers) have holes, and the Fowls of
the Air (i. e. proud and airy men) have nests, but the Son of Man, even Christ
(and his blessed Doctrine) has scarce where to lay his head. It was not the
better for the Gadare^^ rejoicing, that Christ departed out of their Coasts. In
the close of your Preface ye presume to prophe^e, as if some Ent^^siastical
^fflatus or breathing had got hold of you, although ye are declared Enemies to
the Spirit of prophecy, or divine Inspiration now remaining, where ye say,
(...) day is at ^and when our blessed Savior will (...) his Temple, and sweep
Quakerism, with (...) Defilement^, (...) it, etc. But in opposition to this
your false Prophecy, I believe, and am well persuaded, that the holy Truth and
Doctrine witnessed unto by the honest and sincere Quakers, so called, which ye
call Quakerism, the (...) that (...) will abundantly plant it, both in
New England, and in all other parts of the World; for every plant of Gods
planting, will grow, and fill the Earth with fruit, in due time, and what he
has not planted, will be rooted up. But how think ye, shall Quakerism, as ye
call it, be sweeped out of Gods Temple? has it then got place in Gods Temple
in New England? what is that Temple, is it your Presbyterian and Independent
Churches, or any part of them? Or how can Quakerism, which ye hold so
povsonous, that it destroys all men, and makes them who hold it to be No
Temple or Church of God, but Apostates and Infidels, Denyers (...) God and
Christ, etc. have any place in the Temple of God? But this is none of the least
of your many Contradictions.

CAP. I.
PAge 1. ye allege, That by my over-liberal C^ncessions I have given cause to
my Brethren, called Quakers to judge o^ me as the Papists judge of (...) ana
Erasmus, who prosessing to be Catholics, yet yielded too much to the
Protestants. And p. 2. ye say, It is apparent that he has (...) betrayed the
cause he under too to patronize. But all his is but your bare affirmation,
without any proof; I have conceded to nothing but what both the hol^ Scriptures
and the Quakers Doctrine, rightly and dull understood, wi^^ bare me out in: I
should know the Quakers better than any of you, are their true Principles,
having been so (...), (...) so much conversent with them, and in unity with
them; but ye neither rightly know the Quakers Doctrine not them, and ye are not
willing to learn, but after the manner of all such as were declared Enemies to
the Christian Religion, ye charge false things (...) them, which they no wise
hold, as Celsus and other Heathen (...) used to charge the ancient (...), to
whose false Accusations Tert^llian, (...), O^^gen, A^nobius and many others did
solidl^ answer. And so, in your Imagination ye make a ridiculous thing, and
call it a Quaker, and then fight against it, being your own shadow; yet this is
not to justify any unsound words that possibly may have dropped from some
ignorant and unsound persons, called Quakers; for as ye judge not your selves
obliged to own any unsound words or practices of any called Presbyterians or
Independents, no more are we to own any or every thing said o^ done by them who
may be called Quakers, or may call themselves so, but yet are not one with us
in spirit and doctrine. And seeing ye only mention G. F. but cite none of his
words, ye had as good done nothing; I know not wherein I differ from G. F. in
Doctrine, and I judge I know him much better than ye: If it were needful I
could produce plain and evident Testimonies from my friends printed Books long
before mine, that my Doctrine is one with theirs: But what does it advantage
you^ The design of my writing to you was to convince you of Error, and that in
a friendly way, if ye could have received it; and whatever be the Doctrine of
the Quakers, ye are concerned to answer to the things charged against you, or
confess your Error.

Page 4. Ye say of me, as if Benhadad seems to be risen again, citing ^ Kings
20. 10. But as I am not Benhadad in the case, so nor are ye the King of Israel.

P. 5. Ye call my Epistle to the People of N. England, Paltry Stuff, but ye
only say it, and that is all, and this is most generally, or rather universally
your way, to say and dictate things Mag^^^erially, without proof; and since it
is so, ye might have taken a more easy way, and as effectual, to have only
said, to every passage and argument in m^ Book, as it is reported, how one
refuted bellarmine, saying only to every passage and period in his Book, Thou
ly^st, Bellarmine.

Ye say, ye have turned your Minds to the Light of Christ (...) you, as well as
ye can, and it tells you, that my (...) are bold, presumtions and (...). But
take heed of such ignorant Blasphemy, and cease your ^ockage. The Light of
Christ within you, that I directed you, and all unto, is that Light of divine
Inspiration and Revelation which is common, in some measure, unto you, and all
men; but this ye do not believe, and therefore ye have not turned your Minds
unto it, nor hearkened to the voice of it. And whereas I said, It is the same
Spirit that gives to all Readers a right understanding of Scripture, ye ask,
Why then have not all the same understanding of it? but contradictory, the
answer is easy, because all do not duly believe in it, as my following words
make clear. Then ye accuse my following words, as guilty of contradiction,
because I said, If ye believe in Christ the Light, etc. and joya your minds to
his inward divine Illumination, he will anoint the Eyes of your Understanding,
and then your Eyes shall be opened, which ye put this ^illy and impertinent
gross upon, If ye will see of your selves, then he will give you ability to
see; and then ye scoffingly add, This may be no Contradiction in a Quakers
Logic. But this is not my Logic, but your Perve^^ion; (...) as ye are, ye are
not altog^^her (...), as Christ said to the (...), so^n 9. 41. I, ye mere
blind, ye should have (...), etc. and if ye were faithful to what ye (...) see
and know, your Eyes should be further opened: And this is good sense, and no
Contradiction; and what ye see or know of Truth, in the least thing, ye see it
not of your selves, but it is given you to see by that Light, which ye
blaspheme, calling it, Ignis (...), and a stinking vapor from Hell.

In page 6. ye allege a most abominable Falsehood upon me, as that I said in my
Epistle, That the (...) in a man, as it abides, it is impossible it should
perish. This is an absolute piece of Forgery, as much as ever The Hicks coined
against W. Penn; I use no such words, and nothing but Malice can put such a
gloss upon my words, which are these, p. 5. of my Epistle, And every Soul that
is thus quickened and made alive unto him, as it does ^old fast this beginning (
viz. of the good Work of God in it, etc.) and as it here abides, it is
impossible that it can perish: Where (...) words say, the SOUL cannot perish
that abides faithful, etc. And this is good sense, and well warranted by
Scripture, 2 Pet. 1. 10. For it ye do these things ye shall never sale; which
according to your absurd Logic (...) a if he had said, (...) ye never fall, ye
shall never all; or (...) Grace continue, it (...) be lost; this Nonsense and
Absurdity ye (...) upon me, is yours, and not mine.

Page 7. Because I said, the holy Scriptures are a sufficient outward Rule and
Standard, whereby to try all Doctrines of men, ye most (...), (as (...), (...)
manner) pervert my words, as (...) did intimate, as if God taug^^ us one (...)
by (...), and a other by his Spirit; The contrary whereof I have sufficiently
asserted in my Book; for what the Scripture says outwardly, the Spirit says
the same inwardly, and the Testimony of these two, to wit, tha^ of the
Scripture without, and that of Gods Spirit within, cannot differ o^ (...).
Next, ye blame me for not ^aking Practices, as well as Doctrines, liable to
this (...). And so ^ do; for all commanded Practices of a holy Life are
contained under that head of Doctrines, for things to be done, as (...) to be
believed, are belonging to the Christian Doctrine, as the ten Commandments, and
all other Moral and Evangelical Precepts and (...) witnessed of in the holy
Scriptures. And why ye should blame me for calling the Scriptures an Outward
Rule, showe^^ your inclination more to Cavil than to Dispute, as men of solid
Reason: Are not the Scriptures an outward thing? and if an outward thing, then
an outward Rule, seeing they are a Rule, as i^ conf^^ed by us both; and
Protestants commonly can the Scriptures the external o^ outward Word, witness
the A^g^stine Confession, published (by Protestants, Article 5. And is not the
External Word the External Rule? and does not the external or outward Word,
intimate that there is an inward Word, that is the inward Rule? and these two
agree in one, and can never differ, as an inward Dem^nstration of any natural
Science, does agree with the outward, set down in w^it or print on Paper. And
though I call the Scripture an outward Rule, yet I deny not but it has a real
service in the hand and management of the Spirit, to regulate our inward
Apprehensions and Conceptions of all Christian Doctrine, as well as our outward
words and Actions, and so it may be called an Organ^^^^ and (...) Rule, in
respect of the Spirit of God inwardly witnessing, which is the principal. Nor
do (...) the least retract what I have said, as ye (...) allege, when I say,
There are many things (...) God does reveal of his (...) to his Children, which
are not in Scripture, either (...) or consequentially, wherein I give a five
^old instance at least, that though ye cannot disprove, ye boldly, but
Ignorantly contradict, contrary to the blessed and solid Experience of
Thousands; for these things instanced, as for a man to know his inward state
before God, etc. and for a Minister to know his inward Call, and a Christian to
know (...) his call to pray in vocal Prayer or in Public, and returns of his
Prayer from God in secret; they are no matters of Christian Doctrine, belonging
to the common Faith of common Duty of all Christians, but only are relative to
a Christians private Condition and Consolation; for no Doctrine or Precept in
all the Scripture requires me to believe, or to know, whether many, or one by
name, besides my self, be in a justified state, etc. but it belongs to me in
particular, and therefore it is no part of the common Doctrine, or Faith, or
Practice of the Christian Religion, to believe for another, or others, but
every one to believe for himself. And that ye allege, p. 9. that Lucas should
say, Any Quaker, if he was a mind to it, may make as good a Book himself, as
the Book of the holy Scriptures, is ^ut a false alledgance, from a (...) of
Lies against the Truth, and is sufficiently refused by N. Lucas's (...)
Declaration, solemnly denying, That ever he so spoke or thought, printed in the
Appendix of G. W. to W. P's Book, called, Reason against Railing, being an
Answer to Tho. Hick's Forgeries against the Quakers, see p. 11. of the said
Appendix. And whereas Henry tout was referred unto, as a witness against N.
Lucas, he has also printed a Declaration, that is in the same Appendix, p. 12.
altogether denying, That ever he heard him, or any other man, say any such
thing in all his life, p. 12. And yet with such Lies and Forgeries, because ye
have no better Weapons, will ye fight against the Quakers? And that W. S.
denies the Scriptures to be the Rule to Christians; it is to be understood, in
the sense that his adversaries affirm it, viz. the only and alone Rule, etc.
which does exclude the Spirit of God inwardly witnessing, from being the Rule
of a Christian, in any respect, and that is most absurd. And as it does well
agree with the holy Scripture, to call the holy Spirit, a Christians Rule, so
it does with Antiquity, for Ignatius in his Ep. 14. to the Ep^^sians, says,
Using the holy Spirit, the Rule.

Page 9, 10. Ye say, G. K. had in his Youth gotten a little o^ that carnal
thing, called human Learning; and though one would have thought that a dose
(...) new light world have purged it all away, yet there are some confused
Dr^gs behind, and he will try if it (...) not help at a dead list. But this is
nothing else but a saterical Derision; whether I had o^ have little or much of
humane Learning, is nothing to your purpose, we never rejected any true part or
parts of humane Learning, or the good and right improvement of sound Reason,
but do always acknowledge it serviceable, in a subordinate way to the Spirit
of God, and these spiritual Gift of his; no^ do we reject (...) things, but use
them in their place, as Food and Raiment, and the like, as we ought to do; but
carnal, and unclean, and (...) I (...) we (...) to reject forever; And I can
say it to God's praise, any further divine (...) have received, has (...) are
helped my Reason, and not weakened (...) it: And for as little as I have o^
that (...) Letter Learning, I have as much (...) whereby I know, ye either have
very little, or make very little good use of it; for (...), ye show little true
^^mare Learning in this your work, and less of that thing ye call Mother With
(an (...) which is said to (...) worth a (...) of Cl^rgy, and least of all of
any inward and Spiritual and experimental Knowledge in the things of God; but I
shall not glory in my Letter Learning ((...) to glory in nothing but in the
Cross of the Lord (...).) nor need I to make much use of it against you in this
undertaking, plain Scripture Proof, with the easy exercise of the least true
Reason, can do sufficiently against you, in the mouth or (...) of the least,
that is enlightened in the right knowledge of the Truth.

Page 13. Ye confess, The work of the Spirit, (whereby he gives to a Saint to
know assuredly) that he has the (...) marks (...) a man justified, is neither
Scripture nor Scripture consequence. And thus ye give away your cause fairly;
for that work of the Spirit is a real inward Evidence, Word and Testimony, or
Witness of a Truth, not contained in the Scripture, neither expressly nor
consequentially, viz. That A. R. or ^. C. has the infallible Marks of a
justified man; for whereas ye use to resolve your assurance into a practical
Syllogism, thus, Every one that has such infallible Marks of a justified man,
is justified, But A. ^. has such infallible Marks, Therefore A. B. is a
justified Man. The which Practical Syllogism having two Propositions, the fir^^
is warranted by Scripture, but the second is no where warranted by any place of
Scripture, viz. that A. B. or J. A. or J. M. or S. W. or C. M. has these
infallible Marks. This is the only work of the Spirit, which ye confess, is
neither Scripture nor Scripture Consequence, and yet discovers a great Truth,
and very sweet and precious to such who have it; and though the Scripture be
instrumental to warrant the first Proposition, yet we find no Scripture to
warrant the second, viz. that A. B. or any of ^on have such infallible Marks;
or if ye have an, Such Scripture warrant, produce it, otherwise acknowledge
your rash undertaking.

The second Instance, that refer, to an inward Call to (...) Ministry, ye
reject, and say, It runs upon the same (...) Notion with the former. Ye say it,
indeed, and that is all, but say nothing to prove it to be so; yea, by your
saying it, ye show what sort of Ministers ye are, to wit, That ye are no
Ministers of the Spirit of God, which is inward in all his true Ministers, and
as he is inward, and inwardly in-dwelling, so his Call and Motion is inwardly
revealed.

And though ye make a great noise, as if ye were mighty Defenders of the
Christian and Protestant Doctrine, against the Quakers in these and other
things, yet the Quakers, so called, are the best Christians and Protestants in
these very Doctrines; for have not many Protestant Ministers, who never had any
outward Call from Pope, or Clergy, or People, alleged the inward Call of God
in their hearts, to the work of the Ministry, as well as the inward assistance
of the Spirit of God in the exercise of it, which yet has no Scripture to
prove, that such a particular man has it. Calvin in his Institutions says
expressly, That God did raise up in his Day, if not Prophets and Apostles, yet
Evangelists, to reform the Church: And Luther declaring his inward Call to the
Ministry, says, He was (as it were) tugged by his Hair to the Office of the
Ministry, see cap. 1. page 11. Mensai. And surely this was an inward call, and
had great inward sensible evidence. And cap. 11. p. 19. of Gods Word, he says,
Sectaries and Seducers know to preach much of Christ, but seeing they feel him
not in their hearts, they leave the right ground (...) the Ministry. Again, p.
3. c. 1. he ^^teth diverse Scriptures to prove, That God and the holy Spirit
speaks now in true Ministers of Christ, as he did in the Pr^ph^ts and
Apostles, as where Christ said, It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit o^ you
Father, which speaks in you; and where Peter said, Holy men of God spoke as
they were (...) by the holy Ghost. Both which (...), with others, Luther
applies to true Ministers (...): and yet when we commonly bring those places,
the common answer of (...) and Independents, is, That these places o^ Scripture
were (...) to the Prophets and Apostles, but not to any men in our days. And
(...) ye upbraid the Quakers Doctrine with Novelty, yet in the former instance
concerning a man's (...) intallibly of his Election and eternal Salvation, as
the Test^mony of the Scripture is for us, so of Antiquity; for (...) says
ex^^esly, lib. 11. de Civil. d^^. ^. 12. What men knows, that he shall
finally perserve in the Action and Progress of (...), unless he be certain by
some Revelation from him, who does not (...) all of this thing, by his (...)
and (...), at deceives no man. Where it is plain, that according to (...) who
lived above 1200 years ago, That all (...) begin (...), do (...). In both which
he contradicts you, and (...) the Doctrine of the People called Quakers: And
yet, though Angastine be a Saint in your esteem, the Quakers for holding the
same thing, must be Apostates, and no charity allowed them to be Christians.
And as noted and well accounted Protestants say the same with us, as (...), and
the (...), generally, who are all better Protestants in Doctrine than your
selves, whether ye will acknowledge it or not. I had not (...) to (...) Authors
but Scriptures, but that ye would needs be so impertinent as to scate the
Debate betwixt you and us, as if the Quakers Doctrine were a mere Novelty, and
only ne^ly started up to undermine the Protestan^ Doctrine. Whereas we have
more and better Protestants with us, than ye have. Ye had done better not to
have brought the Controversy to this issue, as it the Quakers were not
Protestants, when we can easily prove our Doctrine, in all these twelve
Particulars, to be warranted by Protestants, of better and more famous account
than your selves.

In my Third Instance, ye pervert my words, after your wonted manner, saying,
p. 14. That I hold, men are to (...) or an inward call to pray, or perform any
Religious Duty. But I did not say so, but that every true Christian should know
(...) inward Call to pray or give (...), from Psalm. 27. 8. which ye wholly pass
by unanswered. Now to Know the inward call is one thing, and to T^vy for it, is
another; some inward calls are to be waited for, as when a duty is not always
required of a man, but only at certain times, as vocal Prayer, etc. But all
such Duties as are continually required of us to be done at all times, as To
believe in God, To love God, To fear him, yea, and continually to pray unto him
with inward breathings and desires, have a continual inward call and command,
that needs to be known, although it is given, and no man should suppose it
will be wanting to him to do every thing that is his continual Duty.

Page 16. Ye say, Ye de^y not but the Spirit of God doto still put an impulse
on the Spirits o^ his People frequently, but ye query, Is it self-evident, or
must not the warrantableness (...) it be tried by Scripture rules? I Answ. It
is self-evident, and yet may be tried by the warrantableness of Scripture
Rules; but the warrantableness of a practice does not prove in the least the
impulse or motion to be divine; for a wrong or evil Spirit may move a man to do
a thing that is not unlawful or unwarrantable in it self, as to take a ^ourne^
from England to America, and yet if he obey such a motion or impulse, he should
not do well, and might suffer great hurt thereby. And if a divine impulse have
no self-evidence, or some inward self-evidencing Light to discover it to be
divine, it is good for nothing, for it leaves a man still in the dark, and at
uncertainty; surely Gods inward leadings are sure and certain, as thousands to
Gods praise can witness against all your ignorant, but presumptio^s Assertions,
without (...) Proof. And ye say, I tell you, that Phillip, Peter, and others,
were extraordinaryly called to such and such Services; where ye pervert my
words; for I do not say of these particular Services mentioned by me there,
that they were extraordinarily called (...) them; for to go to a place, or
Persons, to preach the Gospel, is no extraordinary, but ordinary inward Call of
Gods Servants in all Ages, though Peter, and the other Apostles, had in other
cases extraordinary Calls and Revelations.

That place in James 4. 15. (...) the Lord will, ye understand it only of
divine Providence, permitting any man to do what he (...), if not forbidden in
Scripture. But as this is merely begged by you, without all proof, but your
bare affirmation, so it is altogether absurd; for how many do rash and hurtful
things both to themselves and their Families, which yet are not forbidden by
Scripture, as for a man to leave one place, and remove to another beyond Seas,
is not forbidden in Scripture, and yet if he undertake such^ thing, merely
because divine Providence does not outwardly stop him, by some cross event,
without the inward sense and approbation of divine will, inwardly permitting or
allowing him, he may have cause to repent it all his days; for many by so
doing, have fallen into great Inconven^encies. Ye are miserable comforters that
will not allow to People that privilege, that they may wait to know Gods
divine good Will and Approbation in their hearts, in their removals from one
place to another, and in other weighty concerns of this Life. And as concerning
Marriages, ye do allow People to ask Gods mind and could with whom to join in
Marriage, and if they are not to expect a return of their Prayers, otherwise
than a bare outward permission of divine Providence: What is this but to mock
God, and deceive poor People? But to Gods praise many can say, they have both
sought and received Gods counsel, with whom to join in Marriage, and because
thereof have found their Marriage made both blessed and comfortable unto them
in the midst of all Trials.

Page 17. Ye call my saying, That God answers the returns of the Prayers of his
People, etc. A Quakerism, i. e. Nonsense; ^pity your Ignorance, and want of
Experience. May not the frequent and reiterated Prayers of his People, for the
same thing, be called, the Returns of their Prayers? as when a Child returns
again and again to seek a thing of his Father; and that God answers these
reiterated and returning Prayers, as in Paul's Case, who Prayed for one thing
thrice, thousands can witness, though to you this is (...), became ye have
neither sense nor salt in your selves to descern it; It is a great
encouragement to (...), unto God, that we find him to answer us (...) his
living voice and speech in us; (...) when God speaks to us Scripture words or
promises by his living voice and speech in us, it is a new Revel^tion and
divine inspiration to us, although not of any new doctrine, for there may be
thousands of new and distinct Revelations of the same Doctrine, as there may be
a thousand sights and eyes beholding the same thing, and a thousand Voices
speaking the same thing and (...) i. e. are new and (...), and yet the (...)
s^o^on is one and the same, a (...), are not New.

Page 18. That the word of the Lord grew and multiplied, ought to be understood
as well exte^^^vely, in respect of multitude of living (...), as Intensively,
in respect of Efficacy; for there was both at that time; and though there was
no new Doctrines, yet there were new, and that manifold and frequent living
Testimonies to the same Doctrine; and therefore the Word itself was properly
(...) and multiplied.

Ye blame me for saying, Christ and (...) Apostles expounded the scriptures by
Inspiration, and yet (...) no new Doctrine, but it seems ye have forgot that
(...) said the same, Acts. 20. 22. for all that Christ and the Apostles taught
and enjoined, was either declared or fore told by the Prophets long before;
therefore the Doctrine was the same for substance, and the Gospel was preached
to Abraham, and to the Prophets, but after Christ's Resurrection, the
Dispensation of it was more clear, and full.

Page 19. ye blame me for Charging that upon you in the 12th Article which ye
never believed, much less professed, viz. that the Scriptures ought to be
believed only for their own outward evidence and Testimony, and not for the
inward Evidence and Testimony of the holy spirit in men's hearts. But in this ye
are equally impertinent, as in most other things, as I have showed in my Answer
to Cotton Mather, to which I refer more at large. Ye say, The scripture is the
only Rule of Faith, and has a Selfevidence, but the inward Testimony and
Witness of the Spirit has no Self-evidence, but as some have called it, Medium
(...) ass^ntien^^, i. e. and unknown middle or mean of assenting; and that ye
deny all Inspiration and Revelation, properly so called, all this proves you
guilty in the sight of all impartial men, for to talk of an evidence or witness
among men, that has not a certainty or Self-evidencing Authority in it, by it
self, is absurd and illegal; he who is a witness or evidence among men must not
borrow his evidence from another; and to say the Spirit of God in his inward
teaching and (...) has no proper and self evidence, as it derogates, from the
Glory of it, so it is as absurd as to say, the Suns light at noon day has no
evidence of its own, but men must light a Candle to let people see the suns
light at noon; This is rare Logic o^ yours.

(...) yet a true difference can be assigned by Schoolboyes, betwixt
Communication, as (...) betwixt two or more, and (...) of (...) and speech,
that may be of one, when none co^^ answer.

Page 20. ye will have the word of God compared to Bread, (...) efficacy of it,
and not (...) the extent and (...) of it; but for this we have your bare
authority, contrary both to Scripture and Experience of thousands, who witness
the Word of God plentifully to dwell in them, like to the drops of (...) and
Dew^or plenty of the divine dropping^ and ^^owerings of it, as well as (...)
efficacy.

Ye grant, The Scriptures are (...) by Metaphor and Metony me called the Words
and Word of God; and in so doing ye give away your cause unto the Quakers, for
we say the same, although the great out-(...) has been against us, that we do
not allow the Scriptures to be properly and without all figure of metaphor or
(...), the words and word of God: And since ye thus agree with us, I see not
how ye can call us Apos^ates for gainsaying you in this particular.

page 21. Ye say, I (...) the Metonymie (...) with a Metonymies (...) but I say
ye prevaricate; for (...) mention the o^e (...) the (...) the examples brought
by me (...) their king of Metonyme without (...), (...) (...) books are called
(...) by the (...), and (...) his book is called his (...) (...) the Metonyme
(...).

CAP. II.
I Shall briefly take notice of your Perversions and Omission in this Chapter,
and so proceed to the end; for it is but wasting time and paper, both which are
to be better bestowed than to follow you at large.

Ye disown the word Inspiration, as given in our days, Page 22. wherein, as ye
are singular, so ye are inferior to the Church of England, who for all your
pretense to spirituality of Worship, and Praying by the spirit, yet are short
of them; for they, in diverse places of the Common Prayer, pray for Inspiration,
and the Scots Confession of Faith, i^ John Knox's days, says ex^^esly. That
Faith is the Inspiration (...) the holy Ghost: And therefore your Ignorance and
(...) does here plainly appear, and instead of desending the Protestant
Religion ye ^ut betray it and (...) it; for sober Protestants, both (...) and
Prebyte^ian do own Inspiration^ which ye plainly (...).

Page 2^. The Scriptures that both the Assembly and ye cite, That divine
Inspirations and Re^^lations are (...), to wit, o^ A^tient Doctrine (for we
plead for no New Doctrine^) are wholly from your purpose, as 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
Heb. 1. 1, 2. and Prove. 2. 19. or any others; for notwithstanding all these
Scriptures, divine Inspirations, and (...) internal divine Revelations
continued in the Church after all this, in and with the Apostles. But ye (...)
pre^^icate, by your (...) fair way of answering, That there (...) no New
Revelation of any New Doctrine, or New Doctrinal Truth; And thus ye think to
(...) my Arguments before the Eyes of ignorant Readers. But this mean Art of
yours will not do, for ye fight against your (...). Shadow, and not against our
(...), (...), we assert no New Revelation of (...) New Doctrine, b^t of the
(...) Doctrine (...) delivered to the Prophets and Apostles; but as their Faith
could not save us, so (...) could their inward Inspiration and Revelation.

(...) may in a true sense well be admitted, and the Prophets and Apostles had
both ordinary and extraordinary; we plead for the ordinary Revelations they had
common to them, with other Saints, but not for the extraordinary they had;
whereas your Confession denies all sort of Revelation.

Again, ye blame me for confounding Inspiration, Revelation and (...); but I
say, they are one and the same thing, and it is great Nonsense to separate or
divide them; and all the differences betwixt them that ye allege, are merely
begged and affirmed, but not in the not least (...). Ye should remember, ye are
not now in the p^ipits, where people take things on trust for your bare
Authority, but that your Book is gone abroad; ye should bring better Proof,
than bare Assertions. 1st, Ye say, Illumination is common to all Believers,
Inspiration as peculiar to some: But this last is denied, not only by us, but
by the (...), (...) England, and the Scots Confession o^ Faith in John Knox's
days, and by the general sense of ancient Writers, especially A g^stine, who
frequently mentions Inspiration in his Works. 2dly, Ye say, Illumination
ordinarily accompanies (...) diligent unto the mean^; Inspirations, ye say,
usually come upon men, with out using any means for them. But this second
distinction is also merely begged; Illuminations and Inspirations come at times
with the outward means, and at times without them, and yet not without all
means, very frequently even outward; for both the Prophets and Apostles used
means to prepare them to receive divine Inspirations and Revelations, and in
the use of means received them frequently; for Acts 10. while Peter went up
upon the house top to pray, about the sixth hour, he had a divine Revelation;
and when Peter preached to Cornelius, and others, the holy Christ fell upon
them; and as they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, to wit, certain Prophets
and Teachers, Acts 13. 2. the holy Ghost said, Sep^rate me Paul and Barnabas,
etc. It is great ignorance, and want of Experience in divine M^steries, to
think, that divine Inspirations and Revelations are without all means, or tend
to make either outward or inward means void and useless; for commonly and
generally, all ordinary divine Revelations come ^n the use of some means or
another, as Learing, reading, prayer, meditation, watching, and silent inward
waiting, all which are means, and most especially and always in the exercise
of true Obedience unto God. Your 3 d Distinction is to as little purpose, viz.
That Illumination becomes habitual, but Inspiration is transient; for if by
Habitual ye understand permanent and abiding, Illuminations and Inspirations
may be, and are permanent, of some sorts, and of other sorts (...) or passing.
Your 4th Distinction is also vain and idle, as that illumination (...)
gradually, but (...) so Inspiration; for they may and do increase or decrease,
according to the various kinds of them, and he who is faithful to God may
expect his Inspirations daily to be increased, and continued with him. Lastly,
Ye say, Illumination is always understood, (...) Inspirations sometimes are
not understood; but no more is Illumination always understood; yea, how (...)
my have a divine Illumination, and yet understand it not? and ye your selves
deny that Illumination has a Self evidence, so th^n it would be objective
Revelation, and fit to be the Rule of Faith and Life, which ye deny, saying,
the Scripture is the ONLY Rule.

Page 28. The Saint^ Experience of inward enjoyments of God and Christ, beyond
all words, warranted from 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. Ye call, a Rapsody in commendation
o^ our silent Meetings; but this is a poor evasion and answet to to weighty a
place of Scripture, with diverse others adjoined; But b^ind men cannot judge of
Colors.

Page 29. My Comparison taken from the outward teaching of humane Sciences,
that presuppose some inward Principles of natural Knowledge in the ^earners,
whereby to show the consistency and harmony of outward teaching of divine
things, and the inward teaching by the Spirit, as presupposed in part, and in
the other part accompanying the outward Teaching, ye understand it not, and
therefore ye call it Impertinent, but (...) against it; for I do not in^end by
the same to hold forth any New Revelation of any new Doctrine, as I have off to
d^ you, but a new Revelation of ancient Doctrine; and the comparison is pro^e
and pertinent in this respect, that as outward teaching of natural things
require an inward Principle and ^ight of Knowledge, that is natural, so the
outward teaching of (...) and divine things require on inward principle of
divine and (...) Knowledge, whereby to enable (...) to perceive (...) otherwise
a man could be no more capable (...) know divine and spiritual things, than a
(...) would be capable to know humane things; for as the spirit of a man
teaches man thing of men, so the Spirit of God in men, teaches them, who
hearken thereto, the things of God.

(...) But as they pretend not^ to that, so nor to any new Revelation or
Inspiration of that Doctrine which is contained in Scripture, and (...) great
fault to deny all such Revelation, even of that Doctrine there contained; for
without divine inward Revelation and Inspiration, the true Faith of the
Doctrines contained in Scripture (...) be discovered, no more than we can see
to read what is printed in a Book without light; and therefore their Faith is
but a made Faith, and also that in the ignorance and blindness of their minds
they have made things Articles of Faith; which are false, and contrary to
Scripture, and therefore I am not to be blamed for so calling them.

Page 33. By your granting, That there is a spiritual ^^eling and tasting, and
intuitive Knowledge of God and divine things, ye give away your cause to the
Quakers, and contradict your grand Principle, That there is no divine Immediate
Revelation; for intuitive knowledge is immediate, and immediate knowledge must
have an immediate Light and Revelation, as when I see a picture of a man in a
Table, or read a discourse of him in a Book, that knowledge of him is only
abstractive and discursive, as also when I see England only in a Map, and that
is but remote and mediate knowledge; but when I see a man face to face in the
clear light of the day, and see the Land of England it self, that Knowledge is
Immediate and Intuitive. But tell me in good earnest, do ye indeed grant, that
there is an Intuitive Knowledge o^ God, that is not discursive and abstractive,
that is, certainly to see God, and to hear him, without a necessity of the
interposition of words, or other means? I am sure this is Immediate Revelation,
and I am as sure that ye commonly deny it, and tell People, They shall (...)
bear God, no^ see him in this mortal Li^e; for the vision of God (...) served
to the future life, as ye use to say But ye say and unsay the some thing, a
vice ye charge upon me, but are guilty therein yourselves. And granting it be
so, that we have no Intuitive Knowledge of any divine Truth, whereof we had not
a discursive Knowledge before, this says nothing against our Principle, no
more than that a man first has a discursive knowledge of England, before he
see it. We grant, the discursive knowledge is serviceable, and commonly
introductory to the Intuitive, and yet both may consist together, though the
intuitive excels the discursive, as far as the sight of the Land of England
excels the sight of the bare Map of it. Discursive Knowledge cannot be
without words, or pictures of things, and signs of them, but Intuitive
Knowledge can be without all words and signs; and now if ye grant that men have
a knowledge of God, and Christ, and divine Things, without all words, i. e.
without the Scripture, ye fairly give away your cause; for if without
Scripture, then surely by Immediate Revelation; for the Scriptures are the
means, ye say, altogether necessary to obtain all the knowledge of God that any
have, or can have in this mortal Life. But for the better Information of the
Reader, I say, the Scriptures are the usual necessary means (in God^s ordinary
way of working) whereby (...) obtain the Doctrine and Dis^^^sive Knowledge of
the Christian Faith and Religion. And seeing the doctrinal and discursive
Knowledge is of great service to prepare the (...) of men for the intuitive and
sensible Knowledge of God, that comes after, that is, an (...) of him a ta^^s
and fight of him, that he is good and gracious; and also, seeing this intuitive
and sensible knowledge of God is gradual, and is to increase in the most
advanced, and that the doctrinal knowledge has still a preparatory service to
the same, it follows, that the holy Scriptures have a preparatory service and
use to Gods saints, while in the mortal Body; yet in so far as the end of this
preparatory service is answered, by the Souls obtaining some degree of that
intuitive and sensible knowledge of God, by the light and taste of him, as
inwardly revealed in and through Christ, that immediate service and need of the
Scripture, cease, in respect of that degree of intuition, sight, taste, and
sensible knowledge of God, that the Soul has for that present time; even as
when a Husbandman u^eth many means and instruments of Husbandry, to procure
Bread, and other good Provi^ions for himself, the use of these means and
instruments are always necessary at times, and that f^e^uently; (...) there
are times that he enjoys the (...) of his labors, that he eats, and (...)
and is (...); and when he sitt^th down to eat and drink at his (...) he needs
not, in those in ervals of time, to use his instruments of (...) as the plow,
the Cart, the (...) etc. nor so much as an that time to think of them: And thus
it is as rouching the use and service of the Scriptures, and other outward
helps and means, the use, and service, and profit of them is great to all the
Saints and Children of God, in this mo^ta use, to the end of it, even as the
use of the In^^^uments of ^usbandry is to the Husbandman; but yet there are
times of feeding in the House of God, where the Souls of the faithful, either
together or apart, eat of the heavenly bread, and drink of the heavenly Wine in
the House and Kingdom of God; and these (...) are frequent; and at such times
the need of Scripture words, and of all words that (...) of Letters, do cease;
as when a man eats Bread and drinks Wine, and has his taste well, he
needs no words to tell him of the taste of it, he tastes it without all
words that the mouth can utter; and even so, the Children of God at times, yea,
frequently taste of the goodness and sweetness of Christ, by an inward sensible
taste, without all Scripture word^, and without all present remembering of them,
yet if at such times the Spirit of God brings them to their remembrance, they
have a service, at least to (...) the doctrinal and discursive knowledge of God
in them, and further to open the Mysteries of the Christian Doctrine, which is
a great gift and blessing of God in its place.

Page 34. Ye allege, I introduce an Hypothesis that is a Castle in the Air,
that they say, there is no sensible or intuitive knowledge o^ God in this Life.
But I say, many or most of you expressly deny it, I mean, most of these called
Presbyterians and Independents, as I have had to do with them before now, who
have told me, There is no sensible knowledge of God at all, no sight, nor
feeling, nor taste of him, and they give a reason for it, viz. That only bodily
things could be seen, felt and tasted, but God being a Spirit, could neither be
felt nor tasted, and though the Scripture use these words of seeing, tasting^ and
feeling, they say, they are as improper and in ^aphorical as when it is said in
Scripture, God has Eyes, Hands and Feet, etc. Again, though ye seem to affirm
it, yet it is in contradiction to your selves; for it is an absolute
Contradiction to say, A man has a sight of God, and taste and feeling of him,
and yet has no immediate discovery and knowledge of him; as much as to say, I
see and taste Wine, and yet I have no immediate discovery or knowledge of it:
All sensible knowledge is immediate, in regard of their Objects.

P. 34. Ye blame me that I say, ye preach altogether an absent Christ; but ye
wrong and pervert my words, as your manner is; my words are, p. 36. They preach
altogether an absent Christ, as some of them say, Christ is not really and
properly in his People; or if (...), a Christ altogether dumb and silent, etc.
So ye see, my words are not positive, but dis-junctive or alternative. But if I
did say so, it is according to your own Doctrine, though ye seem to contradict
again; for do ye not generally accuse the Quakers for setting up a false
Christ, because they preach him present, and in his Saints, yea, and in all
men, in some respect; and as Pardon (...) a^t and Benj. Ke^ch call Christ in
the heart a (...) Christ; so John Owen whom ye esteem your reverend Brother, in
his (...) Treatise against us, answered by Sam. Fisher, says, I^ (...) be in
every Quaker, there are as many Christ, as Quakers. So you may see I do not
wrong you; and your Assembly ye so much honor, say, It is blasphemy to say,
the Saints are partakers of the God ^ead. And this is to exclude Christ with a
witness. And if some of you say, God and Christ are in the Saints, yet ye deny
all immediate discovery, sight and revelation of them, objective, or by way of
object, which is as great Nonsense as to say^ A Man converseth with his Wife
in one House, eats, drinks, lodges with her, and has fellowship with her,
and yet the has no immediate sight nor knowledge of him, which she must needs
have, if she be not blind, senseless and stupid; and it is a most palpable
Contradiction in you to say, Men have an (...) and (...) knowledge (...) God,
that is distinct in (...) from discursive knowledge, and yet God and his
spirit, in ^ll his inward operations, gives no self-evidence thereof, but is
(...) mean or principle of assenting, as the Schoolmen phrase it, particularly
Robert (...) Pro^e for (...) at (...), in his Book, called, (...) so (...),
against (...), more particularly cited in my book of Immediate Revelation.

Page. 37. The different degrees of Revelation, well warranted by scripture, ye
(...) and ignorantly call Rabbin^cal ^oppe^ies: That there is not only a
gradual but specifical difference of divine Revelations, I never denied.

CAP. III.
Inte^d throughout principally to notice your gross perversions, and other
gross Abuses and Mistakes, which will i^ effect sufficiently answer all ye have
said, and leave my book, and the evidence of (...) held forth in it, (...)
these two are the basis and (...) of the following Controversies

Page 3^. Ye pervert my words, as if I did affirm, That the Scriptures only
were a Rule (...) Doctrines betwixt men and men. But I neither mean nor say any
such thing. I believe they are a Rule in the hand and management of the Spirit,
to regulate our inward appre^^^ions and thoughts concerning all Christians
Doctrines, and yet the Spirits, inward Witness is the greater Rule.

Page 39. Ye say, To call the Spirit the Rule, (...) Nonsense. I say, to call
the Spirit (not abstractly, but (...) conjunctly with his inward wit^e^^ing and
speaking, is good sense to all, but such as (...), who have not sense to
understand it. (...), as I have said above, a more ^o thy man and precious
(...) of Jesus, Ep. 14 to (...) called the holy Spirit (...) Rule.

CAP. IV.
Page 41. Ye own, That natural and acquired (...) of (...) Learning, (without a
divine Inspiration^^ are sufficient to (...) a Gospel Minister; and that Grace
and true Piety i^ only accidental; which, ye confess, may look black as (...).
It is so far well, that since this is your Doctrine, that we have it under your
hand, and it deserves to be engraven in Capital Letters on the Doors of your
Meeting Houses, that the People may generally know it; for very many to whom I
have told it could not believe it to be your Doctrine; but however, now it is a
good proof (...) print it as yours. Another saying of yours, equally ^amous,
and which deserves the same equal inscription in Capital Letters, i^, that ye
say, It is no absardity, that a man may be at us Minister, and not a true
Christian. But how then can he beget any unto God^ If he who is (...) true
Christian can beget a true Christian by his Ministry, it will as easily follow,
That he who is no man may beget a man; for as in spiritual generation, a man is
but the Instrument, so in the natural, when a m^n ^^gets a man child, God is
the great Maker and principal Cause, and man the Instrument. But though ye
would make the ignorant multitude believe, that your Doctrine in this is
Protestant Doctrine, yet I say it is Popish, and ye have no other Argument but
the Papists Arguments to defend it, to wit, some Perversions and false Glosses
of some Scripture places, as, The (...) sit in Moses^, C^air, etc. But Luther,
who is judged, as it were, the Father of the Protestants, and whose followers
were first called Protestants, hold with the Quakers against you, and called
them Seltaries and ^^ducers that know how to prea^h much of Christ, but feel
him not in their hearts, cap. 1. p. 19. Mers. (...) noted above. To my
Arguments against an impious Ministry, who have no true Piety^ ye answer
little, but with a strong Denial, and so may any child or fool give a denial to
the strongest Arguments that can be brought? And seeing ye plead so expressly,
That an Impious Ministry is God's Ordinance, to wit, such as have no true
Piety, it is no wonder that New England abounds with such impious Ministers,
for this Doctrine opens a door unto them.

Page 42. Ye deny, That God gives you infallible Rules, ordinarily and
immediately, whereby to know men's hearts. It may be granted, they are not given
to you, because ye believe not that which gives a true discerning; but that
Gods People, who are made alive unto him, and begot into his Image, being
Children of one Father, and having his seal upon them, are known one to
^another, where due watchfulness and diligence is used, and that kept in which
gives the true discerning, is not only a Christian Doctrine and Experience,
but has been the experience of some Presbyterian Ministers, in their purest
times, above seventy Years ago; witness The fulfilling of the Scriptures, a
Book set out by a zealous Presbyterian not very long ago, who relates, how
Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian Preacher in Edinbrough in Scotland, had a spirit
of discerning, by which he freely declared to Robert Blair, That though (...)
Sermon (...) elaborate, yet it had not the Spirit of God, although the Doctrine
(...) (...) blamed by him. And I have often heard them say one to another, Let us
go near such a man, he is a living man, and has a lively and power^^l
Ministry; and of others they would say, They were dead and dry. And seeing one
living man can know another naturally, why cannot one spiritual man know
another living spiritual man, spiritually? a Sheep can know a Sh^ep, and a Dove
a Dove, and a Man can know a Man, and yet a Saint cannot know a Saint, by your
Logic, viz. certainly and (...). And as to the word Immediately, used by you,
I say, a Saint may know a Saint as immediately and infallibly, as a man may
know a (...), to wit, he knows him to live by (...) Motions, and working, of
Life, (...) immediately reach to his natural Senses, and he ^eeth him breathe,
and hears (...) speak with strength of natural Life, and that his discourse
has Wisdom and Reason in it; so a Saint or spiritual man may and does know
another Saint or spiritual man by immediate motions and operations of spiritual
Life that immediately reach to his spiritual senses; and it is the divine
Inspiration of the Spirit of Life that ma^eth spiritual man, and gives him
^oth the^ spiritual (...), and the infallible use of them.

Page 42. Ye say, The Apostles never pretended to a (...) it; but that they had
a knowledge of the sincerity of some, and of the insincerity of others, is most
clear from many places of the New Testament; for did not Paul most ^ositively
affirm of some particular Names, That they were (...) in the ^ook o^ Li^e? And
did not Peter know, and that by a spirit of di^cerning, the di^^^mulation of
(...) and (...)? And that they might be deceived before they received the holy
Ghost, in that plenty, as after Christ'^ Resurrection, or even after, in some
particular men, arg^eth nothing against the (...) sense and disce^ning where it
is given; all it (...), is, that they had not always the perfect exe^cis^ of
it. The natural Senses are (...), touching natural Objects, not absolutely b^t
according to such due conditions; and so the spiritual Senses, according to
their due conditions, have their In^^^^ibility.

And whereas I showed in my Book, That neither the example o^ (...) harisees,
nor o^ Judas could defend a Ministry, (...) Piety. (...) the (...) and (...)
were yet under the legal Dispensation. But he question^^ lates (...) Gospel
Dispensation, in its more clear (...) perfect discovery, after (...) many
things, as the Sacrifices and Circumcision, etc. ^o of the Priest^ood, and
manner of it.

Ye insinuate fa^^ly against us, That Hypocrites (...) be in^allibly known by
their mere looks.

Page 44. That a man may have Piety, and real Sanctification, and yet not have
a ministerial and spiritual (...) Knowledge and (...), so as to be able to
teach others, is granted: but yet whoever have these spiritual Gifts, have in
some measure the Grace of Sanctification, which is the root of them; even as
every Schoolmaster is a man, but every man is not a Schoolmaster; every man
is a living Creature, but every living Creature is not a man. Unsan^tified
Gifts that any may pretend unto, are not spiritual, but carnal, and are not
(...) worthy as to be esteemed the fruit of Christ's purchase. Your saying Ye
have too much cause to be persuaded by Scripture Rules, that G. K. is an
Apostate, and unsanctified man, I little regard, your Tongue is not slander, ye
know me not, and ye pretend to no infallible discerning of me, and therefore by
your confession ye may be mistaken; and ye neither have given not can give any
Scripture Rules to prove me such. Men of your spirit called the Lord a (...), a
Gl^t^on and a (...), and therefore it is no strange thing that ye call me as ye
do; but my comfort is, that I am known to God, and to many of his Servants; and
this your Reviling and false Speeches will turn to my good, and ^o your hurt
and shame, it ye repent not, which I wish ye may.

Page 45. Ye say, Ye do not plead for scandalous Ministers, whose Conversation
is (...) to their Profession and Doctrine, but (...) his ye fall into a gross
Self-contradiction; for did ye not plead your Doctrine from the example of the
pharisees, whose Conversation was contradictory to their Doctrine; for Christ
said, They did not as they said: Ye blame me unjustly of forgetfulness, but are
exceeding guilty of it your selves, and much (...). And besides, the
Qualifications required in a true Bishop or Preacher, do equally require him to
be really holy, and (...), and virtuous, as to seem or appear so to be, 1 T^m.
3. 1. Tit. ^. 7, 8. A Bishop must be blameless, etc. sober, (...), holy,
temperate, etc. he does (...) say, let him be a Hypocrite, only let him seem to
be so, but let him be so.

Page 48. Ye say, Grace has a spiritual sense, and when the Spirit of God
(...) it, it can feel it. Ye need to explain this further, ^ow Grace feels
the in^^uence of the Spirit; i^ Grace an intelligent perceiving and
intellectual being? does not the Soul feel it, or is it only the Grace that is
sensible of the Spirits influence, and the Soul insensible and stupid? If a
Quaker had so expressed himself, ye would have called it Nonsense.

^y application of (...) 2. 27. to things of (...) making, though ye can it
most (...), it is out your bare af^^^mation; for why may not thing of men's
making, be comprehended under things made, as well as the things of the old
Law, which though first appointed of God, yet seeing men did seek to hold them
up beyond their due season, they were nothing as such, but beggarly Rudiments,
and things of men's making; and Christ said, Every plane that is not (...) my
(...) Fathers planting, must be (...) up; and every work (...) man (...), and
(...) Wisdom, Spirit and Power of God, shall be burnt up.

Page 49. Ye grossly and most falsely accuse the Quakers, That they (...) the
witness of Gods spirit, and their own Spirit. This is utterly false.

Page 50. Ye say, The Spirit, when he witneseth, does it (...), yet he does not
make (...) Spirits (...). Here ye use a little fallacy, but it is a very thin
fig-leaf, and will not cover your Nakedness; for though he does not make the
spirits of his Children absolutely and in all respects infallible, yet when he
speaks to the spirits and hearts of his Children infallibly, and (...) and
prepares them to (...) It and understand it, have they not so far, is that
particular thing or things, an infallible knowledge and assurance? for even
among men, he who (...) me an infallible truth, (...) that the Sun is risen and
^ hear himself it^ and my (...) of hearing is sound, I can say, I did (...)
hear him; for to say, the Spirit is only infallible to himself, but gives us
no infallible knowledge and says of what he says, is most absurd; for all
that true and real Knowledge and Faith that God gives to men is infallible;
and to think other wise respect, upon Gods goodness, wisdom and veracity; for
why should the infallible God give men only a fa^^ible knowledge? Well then,
let it so remain, that your Doctrine is, A^ the Knowledge and Faith that ye
have (...), and Christ, and Christian Doctrine, (...), and may (...) you, and
be only a fancy or dream: How will this relish to sober Protestants? Is not
this rather, with a witness, to betray (...) cause of the Protestants, than to
defend it? but in contradiction again, though ye say, The Witness of your
Spirit (...), and ye may be mistaken, yet so far as the Spirit of god confirms
you by his Witness, ye (...) infallibly assured. What greater Contradiction can
there be in men's words, first to say, The Spirit of God witness the infallibly,
but your Spirits are not infallible. Again, ye say, Ye are infallibly (...) so
far as the Spirit (...) God (...) you by (...) Witness. So in one thing, and at
one time, and in one and the same respect ye (...) (...), and yet not fallible:
This Logic is (...) for (...) but ye te^ not whether the Spirit of God at any
time confirms you of any Truth by his inward infallible Witness; for if ye
grant this, ye grant all that the Quakers desire in the case, for that is
divine inward Revelation and Inspiration; and none of us pretend to an absolute
Infallibility, but only so far as the Spirit of God witnesses to us, and in us.

Page 58. Ye most grossly pervert my words, and cite them falsely, when ye say, I
make the Ministers m^re than mere by instrumental, and that they can by their
own virtue heal and convers a Soul. Nothing can be more falsely alleged; for
when Grace, Spirit and Life or living Virtue does emanate through the Ministers
to the Hearers, they are but Instruments, and instrumental Pipes and Conduits,
yet not dead, but living Instruments; and that Grace, Spirit, Life (...) Virtue
is not their own, as of themselves derived, but is Gods and Christ's, and is
only freely given them.

Page 52. That ye say, The Spirit of God (...) in betwixt the Mouth of the
Speaker, and the Hearts of the Hearers, is granted; but so it comes in betwixt
the heart of the Speaker, and the hearts of the Hearers, and a good Minister
out of the good Treasure in his heart brings forth good things; and that is
more than bare words.

1 Pet. 4. 11. Ye say, Relates only to an outward ability or estate, enabling
them to give (...). Which, as it is merely begged, so is singularly strange,
and will be strange to the Ears of many who hear it: Does ever the Scripture
call outward Riches the mani^old Grace of God? And does not verse. 11. say, If
any man speak? So it relates to a Ministry of the Mouth, and not of giving by
the Hands.

Page 55. Ye grossly pervert, to say, I am for pulling down Preaching, Praying
and Singing, that are Gods Ordinances; for neither I nor we are against, but
for all preaching, Praying and singing, that is rightly performed, viz. by the
help and ability of the Spirit of God, and that is Inspiration, and is
confessed so to be, by better Protestants then your selves; yea, the Church of
England pra^eth in the Common Prayer for Inspiration, as above noted.

That men without the Spirit are under a command to pray, is granted, but yet
Prayer without the Spirit, is no Obedience to that command, as men who have no
Money, nor Goods equ^vele^ to Money, may owe a debt to a man, and yet if they
go to pay him, without money, or moneys worth they do nothing in order to the
payment, they only but mock their Creditor, and offend him; even so, all Prayer
without the Spirit, is a Mockery; and the like of Singing.

That want of Grace discharges none from (...) Obligations, is granted, but
yet without grace, none can perform their Obligations. Ye grossly deny, that the
Prayers of Abraham and the saints, were universally by divine Inspiration,
contrary to the sense of many sober Presbyterians and Episcopals; and that
Abraham prayed for Ishmael, by a natural affection sanctified, does not prove,
that he prayed not by divine Inspiration; what is Inspiration, but the
breathing of the spirit into men's hearts, both to enlighten, and to sanctify
them, and to quicken and warm them with warm and servent Affections. Christ
ascribes the work of Regeneration in men, to the breathing or Inspiration of
the Spirit, as the Latin ancient Christian writers did Translate these words,
John 3. Spirit us (...), (...), the spirit breaths or Inspireth where it
wills; for the greek does well bear it (...) is most frequently translated
spirit, in the new Testament, and pu^o, signifies to breathe or inspire, hence
(...), signifies divinely inspired.

Page 56. Ye allege, that singing without Notes and Tones, measured by art,
would be singing without singing, and that could be no melody, that is, without
Tones measured by art; and to say otherwise, ye affirm, is so foolish, that it
is not worth a Reply; but the folly is your own: the scripture speaks of
Melody in the heart, and that is without all tones of art; beside, what art is
there in the songs of Hannah, Mary, and Elizabeth? ye are extremely ignorant,
if ye know not, that singing with Rhymes, and like sounding Cadencies of words
and Musical Notes of act, as (...), (...), came not into custom among
Christians a long time after the Apostles, and these Notes of art Guide (...)
found them out, by which ye learn to sing, that is not of a long standing.
These and many other things, are but late inventions introduced into
Church-worship, as Polidor V^rgilus does show, and no Rhymes were sung, that I
can understand, by the French Protestants in french, till Beza composed them,
and Translated the Psalms into french (...), and so they were sung at Geneva,
hence they were called Geneva Jigs; the Hebrew Psalms of David have no like
sounding Cadencies, or Rhymes. That Christ Condesended to sing, with the
Dis^ples, suppose after the costomary way used by the Jews, at their feasts, is
no proof to continue that Custom, more than to continue the Jewish Feast of the
Passover, and other Types; ye greatly so get your selves, in your way of
re^sonning from the time of the Law, to the Gospel time.

Page 58. Ye would clear your running into a Circle, that Ministers call the
Church, and the Church calls the Ministers; but all in vain: Ye pretend no
answer for the Presbyterians, who commonly derive their call by the (...),
Rome, (...) Cotton did expressly say at Hampton, in the hearing of some
hundreds, and (...) only I, but your reverend brother as ye call him, John Owen
has sufficiently discovered the N^^lity of that Call, and than therefore
Presbyterians while they ^ay the stress of their call on that rotten
Foundation, have neither Ministry, nor Gospel, nor Sacraments: And for your
call, who are called Independents, seeing your Church is not older than the
Brownists, of Am^^erdam, I mean, your visible Church, or how, when it began,
what Ministers gathered your Church at first? If ye say, your Church was
invisible before; let it be so, but how could an invisible Church call a
visible Ministry? or how could a visible Church arise without any previous
Ministry? Ye do but triffle to make these things intelligible; who s^eth not
but ye are reduced to this miserable pinch, out of p^eiudice against the inward
Call of Gods Spirit by divine Inspiration, which both (...), and other
primitive Protestants did affirm they had.

Page 59, 60, 61. Ye tug hard for a Maintenance to Ministers, not voluntary,
but of debt, and by bargain, and that may be forced by the (...) refused; And
is this also one of the Principles of the Protestant Religion. Read (...) a
Protestant: Also, read what your Fathers, the Brownis^s of Amsterdam say in
their Apolo^y against the University of Oxford, in their Address to Q.
Elizabeth, 7 Position, That the due Maintenance of the Ministers should be of
the free and volantary Contribution of the Church: And they expressly declare
against the Maintenance that is exacted, and which the People are constrained
to yield unto them. Behold how far ye are degenerated from your Forefathers!

Your Argument from the Tithes under the Law, serves not your turn, unless ye
will bring in the Levitical Services also; but even under the Law, the Tithes,
though commanded, the Magistrates were not to compel men to pay them, as is
most clear out of the old Testament; and grant that the (...) or equity in it,
that faithful Ministers (...) be supplied, and so that the Poor's wants be
supplied, therefore the (...) word that (...) (...) signifies (...) it will
not therefore follow, that the Magistrate may compel them; there is a Justice,
the Transgression of which the Law punishes, and there is a Justice, the
Transgression of which the Gospel punishes; but as for Ministers to bargain
with People, What will (...) give me, and I will preach unto you? it (...) so
fordidly Mercinary, that ye may be ashamed to defend it; but that is not
enough, People must be forced to pay you Wages that own you not to be Ministers
of Christ, as has been largely practiced in New England: That ever the Apostles
bargained with People, or forced Wages of any, or received any other than
simply to supply (...) personal Necessities, has no shadow of Proof in
Scripture. The Greek word translated Wages, 2. Cor. 11. 8. viz. [ opsonion]
signifies Meat, or something to eat, most properly; translated by Pas^r [
^dulium] and this answers to Christ's words, The labour^r is worthy of his
Meat: This was no yearly stinted Sallary, it was wholly Apocriphal, and has no
foundation in the NewTestament, and therefore is no Protestant Doctrine. That
Christ sent forth the Disciples to preach freely, ye say, was a special
Precept; but ye have nothing but your bare Authority for it, the Scripture
says no such thing; ye may as well say, to preash the Gospel was a special
Precept. Ye profess to have a respect to the Waldenses, who are generally well
esteemed by Protestants, as their Predecessors, and faithful Witnesses to the
Truth in their day; and it was said of them, and objected unto them, That their
^eachers were Weavers and Cobl^rs; whereto they replied, We are not ashamed of
our Priests, because they labor with their hands, etc. because both the
Doctrine and Example of the Apostles lead us to such apprehensions. Usher de
Succes. Eccle^. cap. ^. 9. 8.

CAP. V.
Page 64. Ye call my Declaration of our Faith, touching the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, and Christ his being both God and man, with other great and
weighty Truths, a new Quakers Cre^d, insinuating, that I am not so ignorant, as
to believe that that was their faith in those times; but this ye merely affirm,
without all shadow of proof.

Ye excuse the Assembly for not mentioning, Light, among Gods attributes, as
not being proper, but metaphorical: A poor Evasion. And why not as proper for
the Assembly, to say God is Light, as for John the Apostle? think ye, the
Assembly was more wise than John, and could (...) properly and warily, ho^d
forth Gods attributes, then John, did or could: The wise Assembly, speak
properly, but John, a poor Fisher man speaks I^ properly and metaphorically
only, when he said, God was Light. But all this is merely begged; ye say
nothing for proof that the name Light, is any more improper to be a Name of God
then the name Spirit; for the name spirit, in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin has a
various signification, (as well as (...)) and signifies wind; and therefore
either (...) is a proper name of God, or Spirit is not; and if Spirit be
improper, than the Assembly was still partial to say, God was a Spirit, and not
to say he was Light. Indeed all Names that the language of men can express,
fall infinitely short to ex^ress him sufficiently; but in the Language of men,
the Name Light is as proper as the Name Spirit.

Page 65. Ye draw a perverse and blasphemon, Consequence from a most great and
absolute Truth, God is an immense Light; and then (ye infor^ H^ll it self
dwells in his Light, and Devils must be full (...) immediate Inspirations. Its
strange that ye will so sport with so weighty matters: The Scripture says, God
is light, and God is every (...), yea, in He^^, but it does not follow, that
either Hell or Devils, dwell in God, for there can be no communion betwixt
Light and Darkness, God and Beli^l; and therefore Devils and Hell cannot dwell
in God; dwelling signifies Communion; and yet in Contradiction, ye confess,
that God is a divine Light, and derives of his wisdom voluntarily, not to all
alike. I have never found in any Book so many Self-Contradictions, as ye are
guilty of in this your dark Work.

Page 66. Ye call it Giddiness and Nonsense, to say, the light is immediate,
though it comes through a medium; but ye have not sense enough to deny it: Does
not every man acknowledge that he enjoys immediately the outward light of the
sun, in the open air, and yet the Air is the medium through which it comes to
him, and also it comes into his sense and perception through the medium, and
organ of his Eyes and though we head ^ man (...), yet the Voice comes through
the air, and organ of the (...): Ye are very poor Logicians and Scholars tha^
cannot distinguish betwixt the medium that transmitte^h, and the medium that
does intermit and hinder the action to be immediate; for the medium that
transmitteth, does not hinder the immediate action.

Ye add one Abuse to another; for ye allege, I cite Plato, saying, it was man
in (...), to converse with Images of things; and to oppose this, ye say, Man
shall converse with images of (...) forever in his perfect state of Glory. But
it is clear by my word, what Images I meant, by adding the synon^mous words,
shadows and Figures; and then, according to your Logic, man in his perfect
state of Glory, shall forever converse only with the Shadows, and Figures or
Pictures of things, but not the things themselves: But the Image of God, which
is Christ Jesus, is ^o Shadow nor Sign, but a most excellent Substance, Ye say,
Plato is with me little inferior to Moses: But it is a false Charge: I judge
him, beyond what I can express, inferior to Moses.

Page 60. Ye heap abuse on abuse, falsely (...) me, that I say, The Word of God
has no more of God, than a Glass Window has of the Son: For I speak not of
the Word of God using that Similitude; But of the Scripture; and though I
compare the Scripture to a Glass Window, yet it does not follow, that in every
respect it answers to the same.

Page 67. Ye excuse one of your brethren, for calling the Light of God in
people, a (...) Vapor from Hell, by alleging another falsehood upon us, That we
say, the poor imper^e^^ Light of Nature, is God and Christ, which is a mere
Forgery; we never said not thought it. But suppose neither God nor Christ is in
People, which is false, yet do ye indeed judge, that the poor impersect Light
of Nature, that ye, Page 30. confess, Teaches so many good things, and
prepareta to the receiving the Gospel is a stinking Vapor from Hell? Remember
how ye can clear this.

Ye justify the Assemblies saying, That the (...) of the Saints with Christ
does not in any wise make them partakers of the substance of his Godhead; for
that would infer, as ye allege, the (...), eldian Doctrine, That a Belever is
goded with God, and Christed with Christ, and this is the thing (ye say) that
G. K. is here to prove, or he proves nothing.

I Answer; That (...) used any such manner of Doctrine or Terms, I find not
that ye prove from any of his Writings; and it is possible that ye may abuse
him, as ye do the Quakers. But however, Swen^^selaus is to answer for himself,
I own no such Doctrine or Terms, nor my Brethren; but on the contrary, we have
believed, and do still believe, that none of the Saints are God or Christ, and
that no man is the Lord Jesus Christ, but he only who was born of the Virgin
Mary, and suffered Death under (...) Pilate, who is both God and Man, and to
whom divine Worship, Honor and Glory is to be given, but to no Man else, nor
to Saint nor Angel. But yet the Doctrine of the Assembly is absurd, That the
Saints are in no wise partakers of the Godhead of Christ; for this wholly
excludes Christ and God from the Saints: If they had said, The believers and
Saints are not partakers of the Godhead as the Man Christ was, in every
respect, or in that respect, so as to be both God and Man, they had said well;
for the difference is wonderfully great: The Union of the Manhood and Godhead
of Christ is so great and so admirable a Mystery that it surpasses all created
Understanding, and shall be the Object of the Admiration of Saints and Angels,
as now, so in the World to come; and this Union is not through any Mediator
betwixt God and the Man Christ, but the Believers are united unto God through
Christ, the Mediator; and therefore he is the Head, and they the Members, and
that is Honor and Happiness enough unto them. But since the Scripture says,
That Believers at partakers of the divine Nature, and of the hot Spirit; and
that the divine Nature and hot Spirit is (...) Substance with God and Christ;
therefore the Assembly's Doctrine is absurd, to deny, That the Saints are
partakers in any wise of the substance of his Godhead.

Page 69. Ye will not own, That Believers partake either of Christ's Godhead or
Manhood; but ye say, They partake of his Graces, and they are substantial
things. But all this will not help you; for ye say in the following page Grace
it self is a Creature, and created Principle. Now if the Saints partake only of
a created Principle or Creature, they partake nothing of God's Substance or
Being, unless ye will say, That a Creature is any part or measure of Gods
Being or Substance. And whereas ye say, Graces are substantial things, and are
(...) Accidents, but Adjuncts: And thus ye seek to hide you from the ignorant,
in the (...) of some Loicgal and School Terms and Phrases; but when ye say,
Graces are substantial things, ye do not (...) whether ye call them so properly
or metaphorically, as when ye call God Light, ye say, it is not properly, but
(...). And for your distinction of (...) and Accidents, I suppose I learned
that thing ye call Logic (that ye seem to glory in) as well as ye, and do
remember what is any wise useful in it, as well as ye, and I never understood,
that either Logicians or Philosophers so called, did hold, that the (...) of
man had any Adjuncts, that was neither the real Essence and Substance of the
Soul, nor yet Accidents; and therefore if the Grace of God in the Soul be no
Accident, but the Adjunct of the Soul, it must be the Soul it self, and this is
Pelaganism and Socinianism, with a Witness; for Pelagi^s and Socinus denied the
need of any inward Grace that was not the Soul it self; for the Attributes of
every being, and so of the Soul, are such Adjuncts as are either essential to
that being, or accidental; and for this, I can and do appeal to all who have
any ordinary taste of that called Logic or Metaphysick; but I shall not insist
on the School-nicity. And for your Proof that Grace is a Creature or created
Principle, from Ephesians. 4. 29. If you mean, the virtues brought forth in the
saints, called the fruits of the Spirit, as Faith, Hope, Love, Temprance,
Righteousness, etc. we own them in the Scripture sense to be the new man, which
after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness, but that they are such
a Created Principle as are neither the Soul it self, nor Christ, nor Accidents,
but a substance of another nature from all these, is a novelty that I have not
formerly heard of: As for our Doctrine concerning Grace, it is plain, according
to Scripture, the Seed or Original Principle of Grace in the Soul, is a measure
of the Spirit and Life of Christ, and is not Properly a Creature, as commonly
taken, but a Pure divine Emanation and stream from Christ, the Fountain, and is
of the same nature with the Fountain, and is substantial, and every Soul that
is by a true and living Faith joined to this Seed and Principle of Gods Grace,
is partaker of it Substantially, and none else, and is there by made fruitful
to bring forth heavenly and divine Fruits, as Love, Joy, Peace Meckness,
Temperance, Humility etc. which are Divine Effects, and may be said to be the
New C^^ation, on the Image of Christ formed and brought forth in us, and where
these effects are, yea, where that Seed in, neither God nor Christ can be
separated from the same.

Page 69. and 70. Ye say, Nor does the Doctrine of Dr. Owen or Mr. Rutherford
in the words of theirs which he cites, at all run into the Quakers Blasphemy.
Ans. Ye do then hold it Blasphemy for the Quakers, to say, that God and Christ
dwell in the Saints and true Believers, and therefore to avoid this Blasphemy,
ye will not own that God and Christ dwell in them, and then surely ye preach an
absent God and Christ; for if Christ dwell not in Believers, he is absent from
them: And yet ye contradict your selves herein, as your manner is; ye say, The
Person of the Holy Ghost dwells in us by his Operations. And thus ye would
falsely gloss upon the words of J. O. and S. R. for J. O. h^ld a peculiar
Persuasion, far differing from his ^^rethren, the Presbyterians, for which
(...) severely taxed him; that wherein they held it, that the holy Ghost dwel^
not by himself ((...) personally, as they phrase it) in Believers, but by his
Operations, Graces and (...) J. O in his Book of Perseverence uses many
reasons and words to prove, That the holy Ghost himself, together with his
Operations and Graces, (...) as well as they dwelt in Believers, and (...) the
Gr^ces without him; and upon this he builds the Doctrine of Perseverance. And
S. R. said, He will not have the Graces of Christ (...) Christ. But ye plead,
that the Graces of Christ are in the Saints, but not Christ himself, and
therefore if our Doctrine be blasphemous, ye must allow J. O. and S. R. equally
guilty^ but the guilt of Blasphemy is yours, who would exclude Christ from the
Saints, and divide the Graces of Christ from Christ, which is impossible, and
is contrary to all sound Reason, as well as Scripture, to divide and separate
the Operator from his Operations.

Page 70. Ye do acknowledge, That ye agree with the Ranters in that Principle,
viz. That God does all, and has unchangeably ordered all things, good and bad,
are we therefore Ranters? say ye. Answ. Let impartial men judge, seeing this is
the fundamental Error of the Ranters, and the Root and Base of all their other
Ranting Principles and Practices.

Page 72. Ye most falsely charge me, as if I were restoring (...) into the
World, as (...) two Principles or first (...), the one of Good the other of
Evil; for ye (...) very ignorant if ye know not that the (...) Principle was,
That there was an Evil first Cause (...) Principle, essentially evil, (...),
eternal, independent, and equal to the good. But (...) hold no such Doctrine;
there is one only first cause of all thing originally, that is essentially good
and goodness, and all things were originally good; and all the Evil that came
afterward into the World, was not any (...) Creation or Production of any
substance; for Evil, in the abstract, i. e. Sin, is no substance, but either a
privation, as the sin of Omission, or some depraved mode, or modification, or
alteration in the Creature, that the Creature it self is the Author of; and
therefore Christ (...), The Devil was a Liar and Murderer from the beginning,
and when he speaks a Lie he speaks of himself.

Page 73. Ye require me to tell you, (...) God did foreknow all evil Actions
that should be done i^ Time, unless he had pre-determined them Answ. The way
and manner of Gods foreknowledge su^passeth all creaturely Understanding; and
therefore it is too great boldness and presumption in you, to imagine ye can
tell it, and it is yet worse to think ye can tell it by a way that contradicts
the Scripture, and the inward sense of God in men's hearts, as Because God
pre-determines all evil (...), (...), Murders, Adulteries, therefore (...)
them. This is to make God (...) the Author of Evil, as of Good. It is (...) to
us to believe and know, that the decree of God is Permissive, but not
Pre-determinative of evil Actions; and as he knows evil Actions that are at
present brought forth; us they now are, so he did foreknow them before they
were brought forth; as they lay hid in their seeds and causes, which yet could
not be without his Permission; and the knowledge of God is one, of things past;
present and to come; without any variation in him; however, the Creatures and
their Operations vary; and as all Effects lie hid in their Causes, whether
necessary and natural, or free and voluntary before they come to pass, so God
does know them all most perfectly; for they are but hid, as unto us, and not
unto God; who sees into the most hidden things of all his Creatures.

Page 74. Ye say, My assertion is (...), viz. That Ele^tion and Reprobation are
not contradictory. But ye only say it, without proof: They are not
contradictory, because both positive, and a contradiction can never be betwixt
two positives, but one positive and the other negative or privative; and
Election signifies a pre^erence, or Gods choice of some? above others, and yet
no absolute Reprobation of any; and the foresight and purpose of God considers
them as having sinned out the day of (...) Visit^tion; and as such only they
are Reprobates, and not before; and Reprobation is not the Decree of God, as
Creation is not; Reprobation is the casting away the Wicked out from his Mercy
and Favor, and this is not but for their final Impenitency and Unbelief, and
therefore cannot be before it; and this ye might easily understand, did not
Prejudice blind you.

Page 76. Ye say, The very notion of a sufficient Efficacy of means used,
without the effect wrought in them, with whom they are used, (...) an
unintelligible Quakerism. Answ. Ye say it, but prove it not, as your manner is,
and the contrary is manifest, and generally acknowledged by all rational men,
that a Cause may be sufficiently effectual to produce an Effect, and yet the
effect not produced, not for any defect in the Cause, but some one thing or
other that is wanting in the Subject, by way of condition, as when good Seed is
sown in two sorts of ground, in one it brings forth fruit, but not in the
other, and the seed is the same in kind, equally good, and the labor of the
Husbandman is equally the same, and the heat and influence, and Rain of Heaven
is the same, but yet the other ground is unfruitful.

Page 78. Ye say, It (...) you not to dispute, whether Esau himself was saved,
or not, but is an eternal Election be typified in Jacob, the Reprobation must
be of the same kind.

Answ. Election was typified in Jacob, but it does not follow that an absolute
Reprobation was typified in Esau, if Esau was saved, as ye say, it concerns you
not to dispute it; for if the Type was saved, the thing typified could not be
damned, for that would destroy the Analogy betwixt the Type and the thing
typified. And surely, many of your Brethren have been highly concerned to
affirm, (...) Esau was reprobated (...) before (...) was born, (witness (...)
Cottons Sermons on Romans 9. at Hampton, which many yet (...) heard him preach;
and if this does not concern you, your strength is gone: The things typified in
Jacob and Esa^, are, That Esau (...) the Nature of Man, simply as such, but
Jacob signifies the divine Principle and Seed in man, which is worthily
exalted over the nature of Man, and made Lord over it; and Esau's blessing, is,
That he is subject to this divine Seed and Principle, and made one with it; and
this divine Seed is typified by Jacob, the younger brother, because the said
divine Seed is commonly brought ^orth in men after the nature of man has acted
its part; but because of its weakness and imper^ection, the other is preferred
as Lord over it; and as John said, He that comes after me is pre^erred unto me,
for He was before me; which, as it was true, with respect to Christ as he came
in the flesh, so with a respect to his inward and spiritual coming in this
divine Seed and (...).

Page 79. Ye say, God has no where revealed it, that he has accepted the
Satisfaction (...) for all that dye in Infancy. Answ. As much for all that dye
in Infancy as for some, seeing the Scripture says, Christ dyed for All; and no
Infants have made themselves guilty by actual Unbelief, as many men come to Age
have done.

Ye say again, from Romans 5. 14. That the Sentence of Damnation has been
actually exicuted upon some Infants. If ye mean the final Sentence of
Damnation, ye merely beg it; it could be no other Sentence, at most, but what
passed on Adam, but that was not final, for the Promise came after it, to him
and all his Posterity. And indeed that Romans 5. 14 is to be understood of
Infants, and especially of one part of Infants, and not another, ye merely beg
it, without all proof. Ye do very unadvisedly to ground your uncharitable
judgment of eternal Damnation (...) many Infants on this place of Scripture,
that the sense of it is so hard to be reached, that it is understood after
several ways, some understanding it of men, so and so considered, others
otherwise; this may well be thought one of these plates in Paul's writings,
that are (...) to be understand, as Peter d^^lared, which the ignorant and
unlearned wrest to their (...); and should I say, I could declare unto you the
true (...) of it, your Prejudice would not suffer you to believe it.

Ye are so presumptions to declare it to be a Slander, that some of your
Church Covenant glo^^ed, that none of their Children, while Infants, were
Reprobates, as if ye were omniscient, and knew all that any of your
Church Covenant say or do, when they are not present with you; if it were worth
the while, i^ could produce the Name of a person of your Church Covenant, that
said it in mine and others hearing; and your Federal Holiness is little worth,
if any Infants within or under it perish; and I cannot fi^d that ye understand
any thing by your federal Holiness, but a mere Nothing, clothed with an
outward Name or Denomination, otherwise, if it have any being or reality in
Infants, how can they perish, and go to Hell with it?

Page 81. Ye gr^sly wrong my wo^ds, alleging, (...) I call that Holiness,
mentioned 1 Cor. 7. a Capacity of Holiness: Whereas my words are, a more near
capacity in Hol^^ess in Children of believing Paren^^ than in the Children of
Unbelievers. Whereby ^imply, that there are several degrees of this capacity,
some more near, and some more remote; even as the Land that is sown with good
Seed, that has not taken root, has a nearer capacity to bring forth Corn,
than another field where (...) seed is sown; and there may be another field
that is yet in a nearer capacity to bring Corn, being helped by greater
advantages and conveni^^^ies than the other, and the grounds may differ also.
And ye seem to think it very (...), to call a capacity of Holiness, Holiness,
Answ. A bare remote capacity of Holiness, that is nothing else (...)
possibility of being made holy, without having any inward Seed or Principle or
Holiness lodged in the Soul, I call not Holiness, but because there is such a
Seed and Principle of Holiness placed in all Children, even Infants, that is
the purchase of Christ's Death, and which God (...) pro^^ised to our first
Parents, and re^ewed to (...) (...), And behold, I establish my Covenant with
(...) and toy Seed after thee; and yet again renewed to Abraham, saying, In
(...) S^ed shall all Nations be blessed; because of these three general
Fathers, which were as a holy Root, the Branches are holy, as I said, not
actually, but in a capacity to become actually Holy, through the holy Seed
given unto them, which before I called a near Capacity, that is, more remote or
near, as that noble divine Seed and Principle is more or less clouded or (...)
in them; and ye show your selves more ignorant in Logic than ordinary
SchoolBoyes, who generally know that distinction betwixt a thing in act^ prime,
and the same thing in acts see undo, which is as much as to say in English,
betwixt a thing that is in a near capacity and readiness, or tendency to be so,
and a thing that is actually and really, o^ infact so; thus A field sown with
Corn, although the Seed is not sprung in it, nor has taken root, if sown with
Wheat, we call it commonly Wheat, if sown with Rye, we call it Rye, because the
Seed of Wheat is sown in the one field, and Rye in the other, and if nothing
hinder, it may be expected that the one (...) shall bring good Wheat in due
season, and the other good Rye, because the Seeds of Wheat and Rye are sown in
these fields. And how generally all Infants and Men, because of Christ's Death
and Purchase, until they reject the Remedy, are clean, I proved from Acts 10.
12, 13, 14, 15. for by all manner of your footed Beasts, and wild Beasts, and
(...) things, and Fowls of the Air, all sorts of men are to be understood,
whom God has after some sort cleansed by Christ's Death, viz. by putting them
in a near capacity to be clear (...) and sanctified, by that divine Seed of
Holiness put in them, that is, the purchase of Christ who dyed for them. But to
this most weighty and demonstrative place of Scripture ye say nothing at all,
but pass it by with a dry (...), as you phrase it, lest if ye should have
meddled with it, your folly should have been manifest; and this is your common
way to pass by what ye cannot give some shadow of Answer unto; and if ye give a
shadow of Answer, it is all. Your easiest Answer is, and which ye have given
upon this head, viz. That our Doctrine in (...) perfect Arminian Principle, and
has been one (...) by all that have written against them; so ye might have
spared your Paper and Pains, with this one short answer to my whole Book, That
it has been enough (...) already by all that have written against (...), as
(...), (...), and ^. Owen, etc. all which have been sufficiently answered, but
as for the Arminian Principle, it is not our Principle, nor do the (...) or
(...) hold the Doctrine of Universal Grace, as we do, as will be obvious to any
that will compare our Books and theirs; for we say, The divine Gospel
Principle, and Seed of Regeneration, and Word of Faith, is put by God, as his
free Gift in all men, though it is not manifest or know^ to be such in all; and
this, neither the Arminians nor the Rem^nstrants, nor Jesuits ever did affirm,
but are generally professed Adversaries to the inward Word and Spirit of God in
men, as much as your selves, witness Bellar^^ine for the Jesuits, who says, in
his Treatise de (...), That he is a madman who relieth upon the Testimony of a
Spirit within him, that (...) fallacious, and ever uncertain. And A minius and
his followers are generally against the Doctrine of inward divine Inspiration
and Revelation, as is apparent from their printed Books. It does not follow, as
ye insinuate, that the Condition of (...) better than that of Christians, or
that the Gospel (...) a door to man's undoing, which ye build on a false
supposition, That the Paga^s are incapable of rejecting the (...) who is never
offered to them; This ye assert without all proof, and the Contrary I have
proved, and is clear from Scripture, that Faith is offered unto all men, and
the Gospel preached to every creature at one time or another before their end,
and all are called, some at one hour and some at another.

Page 83. Ye most gro^^, traduce and abuse me, by alleging and fathering upon
me, as mine, which are not mine at all, two assertions, 1st. That Grace it
propagated by our natural Parents; 2dly, That there it habitual Sanctification
in all me, by nature. That both these are extreme falsely alleged on me, the
Reader shall see by reading page 91 and 92. cited by them; Yea, on the
contrary, I say, that Seed or Principle of Holiness put in Men and Infants, is
derived from Christ, the second Adam, and therefore not from the first Adam, or
our immediate Parents; and I believe, the Souls of all men have come from God
by Creation, and do not believe that the Souls of the Parents generate the
Souls of the Children; and if the Souls of the Children are not generated from
the Souls of the Parents, then surely the divine Seed and Principle is not
derived by humane Generation, as if the Soul of the Parent were the Author or
Original of that divine Principle; but on the contrary, both the Soul and the
dvine Seed and Principle in it, come from God and Christ; nor do my words give
you the least occasion to think otherwise; for although the Parents are not the
Author of the divine Seed and Principle, in the Souls of their Children, yet
according to Paul's Doctrine, there is commonly a great diffrence betwixt the
Children of Believers and Unbelievers, the one he calls Unclean, and the
other Clean or Holy; and it is plain from Scripture, that the Children of the
faithful (...) were called the Holy Seed, and had an excellency in them, above
the Children of the M^abites, Amonites, and Canaanites, etc. because the noble
divine Seed and Principle was more clouded and veiled in these last, and lay
under more Rubbish and Impurity; and therefore God forbid the People of Israel
to join in Marriage with those unclean Nations, lest their Seed should be
defiled with them, and a wrong mixture should happen, as sometimes did; and
therefore the great Uncleanness of Parents, commonly does more vail and cloud
the divine Principle and Seed in their Children, than where that Uncleanness is
not so great, and that the Parents are true Believers. And because I assert,
that there is a Seed of Holiness in all men, during a day of visitation, it
does not follow, that Habit^^^ Sanctification, is in all men's a Seed of
Holiness (...) one thing, and the Habit, Garment or Clothing of Holiness is
another; as the Seed or Flax is one thing, and a Habit or Garment of Flax is
another; for the Seed must g^ow, to bring the Flax, that can be made into a
habit or Garment. And as for the school-^^tion of (...), it is so old and (...)
bare, being a (...) contrivance in their (...), promoted by (...), (...) upon
some mistaken notions of (...), that it is generally exploded by learned and
(...) protestants, as well as their other absurd Notions of material
substantial Forms and (...) of innumerable sorts.

CAP. VI.
Page 82. Ye greatly mistake that Scripture, Rom 5. 13. and contradict it by
your bold Assertion, That Sin was imputed before the Law; (...) (...) says, it
was not imputed when there was no Law; which is not to be understood simply,
but comparatively; for the Times generally before Moses Law, were Times of
Ignorance, at which God wicked, and as the time of the Worlds Infancy; even as
Parents wink and connive at the failings of Infants; and therefore a (...) I
did well ag^ue, That sin is not imputed to new born Infants.

Page 84. Ye pervert my words, as if I meant, That the World and the (...) were
the same thing, because I bring Scripture to prove, that (...) the Savior of
the, World, Joh. 4. 42. and the Savior of the Body Ephesians. 5. 23. But I brought
these Scriptures to prove, that Christ was not only the Savior of Believers,
in a special way, but of all men in a general way, yet this does not say, the
World and the Church is one.

Page 85. whereas I brought many Scriptures to prove, that the Love and Grace of
God is universally extended us to all, because the word All is as expressly
mentioned, frequently in Scripture, with respect to Gods Love and Grace, and
Christ's Death, as with respect to that damage suffered by Adams fall; and
therefore as it is confessed, that all have suffered a damage by Adams ^all and
sin, so all have received a benefit by Christ's Death, and the Parallel brought
by the Apostle Paul does prove it, which ye say nothing solidly against, only
nibble a little, alleging, that it will follow, that then all shall be saved
by Christ. I Answer^ it does not follow, unless ye could prove, that all were
eternally lost, by having a Sentence of Eternal Damnation, equal to that of the
Wicked at the end of the World, past upon them; as to argue thus, the Sentence
of Eternal Damnation did pass upon all men, after Adams fall, and therefore the
sentence of Eternal Justification has passed on all men, because of Christ:
But the Sentence that passed on all men, was not that of Eternal Damnation; for
it was not said to Adam, Thou shall dye the second death, and be cast into the
Lake of ^ire; for the Second Death, implies, that there was a first death, and
that first Death, was only that Adam was deprived of his enjoyment of God
inwardly, and his Soul became dead unto God, and Righteousness, and his body
became subject to death; but this does not infer the same degree or kind of
Punishment with that of the Second Death, that is inflicted for contempt of the
Gospel, and final Unbelief. Therefore the Parallel (...) holds good, that
whatever loss (...) come upon Adams Posterity, by occasion of the fall, it is
restored unto all men who are Adams (...), through the (...) of the remedy, to
wit, Jesus Christ, who dyed for all, and if they (...) that remedy, finally,
they shall be punished with the Second Death, that is greater Punishment than
the first death in Adam; and though the Remdy of Christ and his Grace be
offered and applied unto all, in a day of Visitation, yet it does not follow,
that Christ and his Grace has not sufficient Efficacy, if all are not Saved,
no more than that it does follow, that a ^ose of good (...) is not a sufficient
effectual (...), to cure a Disease, because some to whom it has been applied,
are not cured by it, though the same dose of (...) has cured many, of the same
Disease, which proves its sufficient Efficacy in it self, although eventually
it has not that success an some, for their own fault, that have not duly
observed the Phy^^cia (...) Rules, and after application, have done some things
that did hinder its operation.

And as to 2 Cor. 5. 14. Whether I or ye pervert the true sense of it, I do
freely leave to the Impartial Reader; your sense being this, If one died for
all Gods Elect only, then (...) only Gods Elect, but all others that are a
(...) greater number, were dead; but this would make (...) argument, altogether
void, and reflect upon that holy Spirit that did dictate these words in him;
for it does not follow, from the particular to the general, as every Shool-Boy
does know as to say, Christ dyed for all Gods Elect, which are but a part of
men, and therefore all, both Elect and others, were dead; this is an unlawful
inference in the common reason of men; but this is a most just and necessary
inference, Christ dyed for all men universally, therefore all men were dead.

Page 86. Ye perve^^ly allege on me, That I own Christ's Death and Prayer to be
lost, and his Redemption void; and ye say, w^y are they not saved or whom
became to dye? Ans. That I own Christ's Death and Prayer to be lost, and his
Redemption void, is most falsely alleged; it has its effect perfectly, unto
the Salvation of all that believe and continue in Faith unto the end, and to
the great Condemnation of them that do not believe, and to the glorifying the
justice of God in them that believe not; and because of Unbelief, perish in
their sins most justly, whereby they are (...) without excuse; for if Christ
had not dyed for them, they could not be guilty of d^^ying the Lord that (...)
then, as the Scripture plainly (...): And the death of Christ has its various
effects on them that are saved; for as all are not saved at one time, nor in
one Age of the World, so all do not partake of the same measure of Grace, but
to some it is given, as one Talent, to some as Two, to others as Five, and yet
he who has received the Grace of God as two Talents, does not make void the
Grace of God, because he has not received as much, as the other who had fire.
And though such who are saved partake most plentifully of the Effects and
Fruits of Christ's Purchase, yet even all such who are not saved, partake of
great and considerable Effects of Christ's Death, here in this World, as that
God has spared them, and exercised much long-(...) toward all of them, for
Christ's sake, who dyed for all, and has given all a Day of (...), and an
Opportunity, whereby they might have been saved; and that they are not (...),
it is only their own fault; for we find, that at the Gardaners (...), the (...)
Fig Tree was spared a whole Year, over three Years that were past, which was a
Parable used by Christ, to Express how God has spared both them that are
saved, and them that (...), for Christ's Death, and Intercession. Therefore
neither Christ's Prayer nor Death, is made void to any, but has all its
effects, that it should have both to them who are saved, and to them who
perish. And the Talent that was given to the evil and slothful Servant, was
given him, for Christ's sake, who dyed for him, and so Christ's Death, was not to
him in vain, and though the slothful Servant did not improve him one Talent,
yet it was not lost, but was taken from him, and given to another, and
therefore nothing of the Grace and Gift of Christ is lost; and though some
loose the benefit of it, as to themselves, yet that loss is sufficiently made
up to another in his place.

Page ^6. Ye allege, That I said, many are guilty of final Impenitency a
considerable time before they (...), (...) ye say, (...) a Contradiction: But
ye wrong my words grossly, as your manner is; for my words were, There is a sin
unto Death, etc. (...) J^h. 5. 16. And this is that sin of final Unbelief, and
obstinate Impenitency, (...) may be permitted to live a considerable time
before they dye, which ye confess upon the matters, saying, many are (...) of
God to persist in Impenitency (...) they (...) And why so, but because they
have sinned that in unto Death, where of they are not to repent; and that may
well enough be called Final Impenitency.

Page 87. ye say, ye would fain know, where I place the inequality, since I
tell you, that God gives no greater measure of inward Grace to one than
another, but he sute^ Providence eminently. Here ye wrong my words grossly, for
I deny not, but on the contrary, I affirm, that God may, and often does give a
greater measure to one ( viz. that is saved,) than to another, ( viz. that is
not saved) but it is not always so, but in some cases or examples, the inward
Grace may be the same both in kind and degree, in some (Note, some) that are
saved, and in some that are not, at the Parable of the (...) and Marks plainly
declare. Here ye may see, how I say only, in Some it may be so, but not in all;
for I bring the example of Paul, who did acknowledge the Grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant to him, with Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus, and
even in all who are saved, although the Seed or Principle of Gods Grace may be
the same; as in some wh^ are not saved, in degree, yet the gracious Providence
of God are wonderfully extended toward all that are or shall be saved, which
are not so extended unto others that shall not be saved. And the inequality
lies here, that whoever are saved, it is not of themselves, but by Grace they
are saved, Grace has begun, and has carried on, and shall finish or perfect
the Work of their Salvation, and they are but the instruments of God and his
Grace, and they have loved and chosen God and Christ, because God and Christ
first did love and choose them, and God wrought that free choice and consent in
them of his free good pleasure, and thereby did not take away from them the
true freedom of Will, but begot the true freedom of Will in them which before
was rather bound than free, as Luther called the Will of unconverted men,
Servum A^bitr^m, i. e. servile Will, and not free Will. But on the other hand,
whoever are not saved one time or another before the end of the World, the
cause and fault is only they themselves, sufficiency of Grace and Means was
afforded unto them, but they did not improve them, which they might and could
have done, but did not; and therefore they are without excuse. Nor is it enough
for any of them to say, If God had done as much for us who perish, we should
have also been saved: It suffices, that God has done enough ^o clear his
Mercy and Justice, and render them inexcusable.

Again, ye wrong my words, as if I had said, That all the difference on Gods
part toward the elect, is a mere (...) o^ Providence, and which in p. 69. I
call gracious Providence, and Dispensations, and (...) of his own (...). All
which I did not and do not understand, as r^lating only to outward acts of
divine Providence, but also and chiefly to inward actings of Gods gracious
care, love and fatherly Providence, viz. by secret motions, and invitations,
and perswas^ons, and al^^^ments of his divine Love and Goodness; an which are
not mere Moral (...), but divine and heavenly Perswa^^ons, suited to due times,
places, and other circumstances, (...) which are the effects of Gods
discriminating love to all such who are o^ shall be saved, beyond their who
shall not be saved^ and though there may be and i^ great variety and (...) in
these gracious a^urgs of God, and divine movings in the hearts of them who are
to be finally saved, yet this does not universally infer a difference of the
Principle of Gods Grace, either in kind or degree, in all them that are not
saved, and in all them that are saved. And concerning this great discrimination
that God make^h betwixt Men and Men, though he call and visit all with his
Grace, Augustine faith, lib. (...). (...)1st. ^. 34. Now (...) any (...) us to
search into that depth, may God does so swade or call one, that he dot^
persuade him, and yet does not so to (...)? At present, only two things I think
good to answer, O the height of the Riches! and, Is there Iniquity with God?
Who disliketh this answer, let him seek more learned, but let him beware (...)
^e find Pr^sumers.

Page 88. Ye say, Ye thought heretofore that Faith and Love had been Graces.
Answ. And so ye ought to think still; for so I did formerly believe, and so I
do still, that Faith and Love are excellent divine Graces, and that they are
not given to all; for all men have not Faith; but these Graces, viz. Faith and
Love, are the Fruit and Product of that Seed of Grace that is sown in all men;
and as the seed that is sown in all grounds, does not bring forth fruit in them
all, but only in some; even so it is in this ca^e, the divine Seed of Gods
Grace is sown in all men, but it brings not forth these excellent Fruits, viz.
Faith and Love in all, etc. therefore when we say, (...) is given to all, we do
not mean, Faith and Love, he Fruits, but the Seed that would produce these
fruits in all, if men did not wilfully hinder; nor is the Se^d lost in these
persons, in whom it brings not forth fruit, but is that Talent that is taken
away from the ^^^athful and evil Servant, and given to him that had ten
Talents, according to Christ's Doctrine, which still I suppose is a great
Mystery unto you.

Page 89. Ye allege, I perversely interpret Christ to be the Word spoken o^,
Romans ^0. 8. which is evident by the context, to mean the Scriptures, called the
Word of Faith, because it is an instrument of begetting it. But this is your
bare alledgance, and your proof has no weight nor solidity, that because the
Scripture is the inst^^ment whereby Faith is commonly wrought in men, that
therefore it is, that Word of Faith, Romans 10. With as great probability, ye may
say, the Scripture is the Spirit of Faith; but as the Spirit of God is called,
in Scripture, the Spirit of Faith, as being the Author, and Object, and
Foundation of Faith, so is Christ called the Word of Faith, as being the
Author, and Object, and Foundation, together with the holy Spirit of the same
Faith; and that (...), and not the Scripture, is that Word of Faith, is clear
from the context v. 6, 7, 9. nor can it be the Scripture, because little of the
Scripture was writ, when Moses spoke these words to the People of Israel; and
the five Books of Moses were rather, the Law, than that Word of Faith; and
Moses told them, this Word was nig^ them, ^n their hearts and mout^^s, as being
of an internal, or inward nature, directing them to the heart, where it was
originally placed, and not in the outward leaves of the Book or Scroles; and he
calls it the Commandment in the Singular number, to signify the excellency
of it, that being one, cortaineth all; and that cannot be the Letter without.
Next, what Moses said to Israel, and Paul to the Romans, may be said to every
man, in a day, the Word is nigh t^ee, in my mouth, ( viz. to eat it,) and in
thy bear^, to believe in it, that thou need not to ascend, nor acscend nor
go over the Seas, to bring this Word; and therefore it cannot be the Letter of
Script^^e, which came over the seas, from (...) to Rome, and other places of
the world.

Page 8^. (...) Ye most unchristianly and inhumanly wrest my words to a ^uite
contrary sense, saying, I (...), in a Word of Faith, (...) 10. (...) Christ's
coming in the flesh, (...) of Jews and Gentiles; and to show your gross
perversion, that seems wilful in you, I shall set down my words, which are
these, Page 110. And because this great Mi^^ery, viz. the Word of Faith, which
was in the Gentiles, was much hid in the time of the Law, and in all Ages of
the world, until Christ came in the flesh, both in Jews and Gentiles, as Paul
called it, the Mystery ^id from Ages and Generations: Where it is most clear to
any, that will not wilfully pervert the plain sense of my words, that the words
[ until Christ came in the flesh] does not refer to his coming in the flesh,
in Jews and Gentiles, as they wilfully pervert it, but to his coming in the
Body of his Flesh, even in that prepared body that was born of the Virgin^
Mary, etc. in the fu^ness of time. So that the words, until Christ came in the
Flesh, are insert only by way of Parenthesis, although by some omission, either
of the manuscript or print, the sign or note of the Parenthesis was omitted,
that is no hing material; for when men us^ a Parenthesis in speech^ they use no
note or sign of it. Your cause is very desperate, when ye must needs make the
poor omission of a (^) in my Book, a ground to raise your charge of Blasphemy,
or subverting the hopes of Salvation, against me; although in Contradiction to
your selves, ye clear me, citing Page 59. that I did acknowledge that Christ
came in the flesh; but ^e use a fig leaf cover, saying, ye know not when t^^y
own any thing; And it was once the received Doctrine of the Quakers, that there
is no other Incarnation of Christ, but only as he dwells in us: But this is a
most gross Calumny and falsehood, which ye can never prove; and because ye
cannot prove it, in the least, therefore ye declare your selves to be of that
Generation, who make Lies your Refuge, which God has swept away, and yet will
more abundantly, and ye will be seen, what sort of men ye are, that dare thus
falsely accuse the Innocent. The like poor shadow of advantage, ye seek to catch
at, page 28. of your Book, saying, my Spirit mi^sinformed me, when I cited
Cant. 2. 4. because of a mistake in the Manuscript or Print, of the word (and
again) for the word (or.) in your so doing, like the Pharisees of old, ye
strain at a Gnat, and swallow^ a Camel.

Page 90. Ye say, The word Reprobate, there used, intends only, that all
Unbelievers are at present unapproved by God, and in a state of Perdition. Ans.
Be it so, it no wise weakeneth my Argument; for seeing all unbelievers, by you,
are not finally reprobated, but only at present unapproved, and may pass from
that state, into a better, viz. into a state of Faith, that is approved; this
quite overthrows your Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation, that denies it
possible, that a Reprobate can be saved, which here ye acknowledge: And seeing
these Unbelievers, by your confession, were not absolutely or finally
reprobated, but unapproved, or disapproved, what did so disapprove, or judge
them, but Christ in them? And therefore still it remains, that Christ is in
all, but such who are finally Reprobates.

Ye say, That Christ has commanded that his Gospel be Preached to all Nations,
and he tells us, that so it shall be before the end of the World, is no proof
of what it is brought; for the many Generations past have no advantage by that,
being ended and gone, before that time comes. But this ye merely beg, and
assert without all shadow of proof; for that Christ told, the Gospel shall be
Preached to all the world, before the end of the world, is not, surely, to be
understood, that the preaching of it to all the world, shall only be in the
Last Age, of the world, yet to come; but the Gospel (...) began to be preached
from Adams fall imm^^^ately, shall be preached to all men, that ever lived in
the World, some time or other before the end of the world, so that such who
shall not live in the latte ^ges of the world, have had it preached, in the
former Ages, when they lived in the world, and therefore the preaching the
Gospel to all the World, is the preaching of it to all Mankind, that ever
lived, and shall live in the world, in all Ages, from the beginning to the end;
for all that part of mankind, that is to live in the world, in the Last Age, or
Ages of it, yet to come, are but a small, or inconsiderable part of the world.
And though it may seem hard to demonstrate, how this has been, and shall be
effected, in a general way and manner, it may suffice unto us, to believe, what
the holy scriptures testify, that because (Acts 17) Faith is offered unto all
men, or that God has given assurance to all men, that God has raised the man
Jesus from the dead, therefore all shall be accountable to him, and be judged
by him; and whoever shall perish, their Destruction shall be for not believing
in Jesus Christ, who has been preached unto them.

Page 92. Ye say, That Moral Honesty is a Meritorious Cause, either of
Salvation, or of any further (...) of saving Grace to men, i^ a Jesuitical
Principle. And this ye would fix upon me, or us, but all in vain; we hold no
such Principle, although, if we did hold it, your Refutation is poor; Its held
by the Jesuits, therefore it is false: Ye might argue as strongly, it is held
by the Jesuits, that there is a God, therefore. etc. Every thing held by the
Jesuits is not false, but some true, and some false. However, as we do not say,
that Moral Honesty is a (...) Cause, etc. so we have another understanding of
Moral Honesty, than either ^^suits or ye; for both ye and the Jesuits, by Moral
Honestyunderstand only some outward acts of justice, and Temperance, performed
by the Authority and Powers, eitheer of some outward rules of Honesty, or by
the m^er natural, and ca^nal, and corrupt dictates of men's natural
understanding: But we understand it quite otherwise, viz. that all true Honesty
is performed by the Power, Authority, and Efficacy of a divine Principle, even
the Word of Faith, divinely inspiring the hearts of Mankind universally with a
general Revelation and Discovery of the Mind of God, relating to general Piety
toward God, as a Creator, and to believe in him, fear, love and obey him, as
such, and to exercise other Acts of Temperance, Justice, Meekness; and as this
part of general Religion is sincerely performed, though with some weakness, God
is pleased, not by way of merit, but for his great love and mercy, and for his
dear son Jesus Christ's sake, to follow that first more general Revelation, and
Discovery of his will, with a more special Revelation, and discovery of it, in
the peculiar Doctrines and Mysteries of the Christian Faith. This first part of
Religion toward God, at Creator, etc. where Christ, as come in the flesh, and
crucified, etc. is not distinctly revea^ed, is called by some, not so unf^^ly,
perhaps, Deism, or Theism, i. e. a Religiou^ Worship and Service to God, as
Creator, as good, holy, just, wise, etc. and such was the Religion of (...),
before Christ was preached to him ^y ^eter, and such was the Religion of (...),
and others mentioned in Scripture; but the second more exellent part, is
Christianism, or the Christian Religion, where Christ come in the flesh, and
God in Christ so come in the flesh, is known, believed in, worshipped, loved
and obeyed. The first is introductory and preparatory to the second; the first
may be called the Law, which as a Schoolmaster l^adeth unto Christ, both Jews
and Gentiles. But such is the infinite goodness of God, and so Large is the
purchase of Christ's Death, that not only to such, who have been honest, and
sincere in the first Dispensation, but to the most unworthy, in all the world,
one time or another, within the day of Visitation, the Gospel is preached unto
them, and the Gospel Grace, (discovering, in some measure, Jesus Christ, etc.
(is extended unto them; else how is the Gospel preached to every Creature? and
how is Christ's Command to be fulfilled, that he has given to his faithful
Apostles, and to their faithful ^^ccessors, in all Ages? and how is the
Prophecy of Christ fulfilled, that so it shall be before the end? and how shall
God be just, to take Vengeance on a^l the Wicked, for not obeying he Gospel?
for let all the Scripture be searched, and it shall not be found, that the
Second Death, or casting into the Lake of Fire, is appointed to any, b^t who
finally reject Christ, and disobey the glorious Gospel, and (...) against the
holy Ghost, which is the only (...) Sin, that is neither to be so given in this
World, nor in that to come; and therefore the Writer to the Hebrews
distinguishes betwixt the Punishment due for the breach of Moses Law, and that
due for Unbelief and Contempt of the Gospel, and not harkening to Christ, the
greatest Prophet of all; but this to you will be a great mystery.

Page 93. Ye wrongfully charge me, for pleading for New Revelation of things not
contained in Scripture. If by things, ye mean Doctrines and Principles of
Faith, and general Precepts of Christian Religion, I have often told you, the
Revelation is New, but not of any New Doctrine, etc. Yet since both some
Infants and Adult Deaf and Dumb Persons belong to Gods Election, as ye confess,
God does reveal some things, without the outward (...) of Scripture, by your
own confession, and therefore all divine Revelation i^ not ceased, nor is all
committed to writing^ as if that were the only and alone means and instrument,
which ye confess, reaches not to Infants and Adult Deaf and Dumb Persons.

Page 94. Ye say, I forget all Laws of Disputation, when I bid you disprove it,
viz. that all honest Gentiles, some time or other, had not faith in Christ
crucified; for Affirmantisest probare. Answ. Ye rather forget the Laws of^
dispute, and mind not rightly to distinguish betwixt a Negative, relating to a
Doctrine or Principle, and a Negative relating to a matter of Fact; the
Negative relating to a matter of Fact, often times cannot be proved, and yet
sometimes it can; but the Negative relating to Doctrine, both can, and ought to
be proved, by him, who strongly asserts it, as Paul does excellently pro^e,
That by the Works o^ the Law, no flesh is justified, but by Faith in Christ
Jesus. And Protestants commonly prove against the Papists, that the Bread of
the E^c^arist is not Transubstantiated into Christ's Body. Therefore seeing
(...) assert a Negative so confidently, That the honest Gentiles, who lived in
remote places where Christ was not preached outwardly, before they dyed, had no
knowledge nor faith o^ Christ crucified; ye ought to prove it; But
ex^^abundami, I had proved the Affirmative, to wit, That all honest Gentiles
who were faithful in their Gentile state, were in a state of Salvation begun,
but not perfected, and therefore they could not perish; and consequently, they
behoved to have the Faith of Christ, some time before the end, in order to
their Perfection.

Page 94. Ye are miserably beset, and put to it, to answer to the two instances
I g^ve you, the one of Nathaniel, the other of Cornelius, both which had so
great a Testimony of God, that they could not be in a state of Damnation, but
were in a state of Salvation, at jest begun, the' not perfected; and ye grossly
abuse me, to say, as if I did affirm, they were Unbelievers; for they had faith
in God, though not in Christ come in the flesh, as I expressly affirmed, page ^
12. Now let us hear your Answer; ye say, They had believed in a Christ to come,
though at present they knew not that ^e was come in the flesh, ^^ll it was
further revealed to them. Answ. At this rate ye make all the Jews throughout
the whole World true Believers in Christ, because they all profess to believe
in a Christ to come, even as ye say, Nathaniel and Cornelius believed in a
Christ to come. But as it was the true Faith to believe in Christ to come,
before he was come, so it was not the true Faith, but a great mistake or error,
at least, though pardona^^e, to believe in Christ to come in flesh, when the
true Christ was already come; for their Faith could not be the true Faith,
which had not the true Object; for, to believe in a Christ yet to come in the
flesh, is ^ false Faith, such as the faith is of those hardened Jews, who
generally believe not in Christ who is already come in the flesh, but in a
Christ or Messiah, whom they imagine yet to come in the flesh. And before th^^
Peter preached to Corn^lius, Christ was crucified and raised again: And seeing
ye grant, Corn^lius had not faith in Christ crucified, until Peter preached
unto him (and yet was in a good state) ye quite give away your cause. Beside
that, ye merely allege it, without proof, That Cornelius had any sort of Faith
of a Christ to come in the flesh at that time; for it only appears, that he
was a devout and religious Gentile, but no Proselite to the Jewish Religion.

A Third Instances gave you of Christ's Apostles, who had not the true knowledge
and faith of Christ's Death and Resurrection for some time; for it is expressly
said in Scripture, when Christ told them, he was to be put to Death, and to
rise again (...) mind day, They understood it not; and yet, who will say, they
were altogether in a state of Damnation? Ye are so pinched here, that your
Cause is desperate, and that makes you so angry and f^etful. Ye say, Faith in
God, without Christ ( viz. come in the Flesh, and crucified, etc.) is not
saving, citing Jo^n 14. 6. Acts 4. 12. I have answered you, it is not in that
degree, so as to perfect the work of Salvation, but yet it ^ath a preparatory
work, and may begin it, otherwise ye must say, the Apostles, that were ignorant
that Christ should dye, were not in any state of Salvation.

Page 95. Ye imagine, that ye have got a wonderful advantage, saying, What then
shall we say to his New Doctrine, that they may receive is after death? Ye
further say, We shall have a new Quakers Purgatory erected ere long. But if ye
were not very partial, ye might see, I did principally argue so with you ad
^omin^^, because of your Principle, according to your own Doctrine in your
(...) of Faith, that says, The Souls of the Right^o^^ after Death, [Note,
after Death] being then made per^ect in Holiness, are (...) into the highest
He^^ens^ These are the expres words of your Catechism as I told you, cap 32
sect. 1. and that ye say, It is a bold Untruth, for they say no such thing
there. I Answer; Let the Reader but be at the pains to read that place cited,
cap 32 ^. 1. and he sha^^ (...) it expressly so; and therefore the bold Untruth
is your own, and not mire; and if they contradict it i^ their shorter
Catechism, by saying, at the infant to death, what is that to me? they must
answer for their own contradictions, and not I for them: And for my saying
after Death, it was by way of Hypothesis, (...) say. And whereas I brought you
a Scripture out of J^b. cap. 33. 22, 23, 24. (...) wonderful dealings and
workings of God with men on their (...) bed, or at death, without the outward
Ministry of men, to show unto them their Uprightness, and the Ransom or
Atonement, see from v. 14. to v. 30. Even by his own speaking to them in a
Dream, in a Vision of the Night, when deep sleep salleth upon men, in
slumberings upon the Bed, them ^e opens the Ears of men (and as it is on the
Margin, he reveals or uncovereth, Heb.) and seals their Instruction. What
say ye to this weighty place of Scripture, that deserves so great
consideration, as holding forth the wonderful love of God toward men in
general (for the word Man indefinitely is to be understood universally or
generally, see v. 29. L^, all these things works God often times with man)
and his care over them, that where outward helps and means of men's Ministry
fail, he supplyeth by his own speaking to them, yea, when deep sleep falls
upon men (whether that sleep be understood natural or figurative, is not very
material to determine) and all to keep back their Souls from the Pit, and that
they may be enlightened with the Light of the living: Certainly this place of
Scripture has much in it, yea, very much, more than ye or most are aware of,
to prove, that Gods love and care is exceeding great toward Mankind, and his
patience and long-suffering is greatly extended toward them, to keep back
their Souls from the Pit; which altogether does overturn that most cruel and
Cannibal-like Doctrine of yours, that ^aith, God damneth many In^ants to Hell,
and universally all who have not have had Christ preached unto them by the
Ministry of men, ( except in some singular cases of Abraham, and some others
that were Prophets) but to this weighty place of Scripture ye say nothing at
all, but are as mute as a Fish; it is a cunning way in you, to pass by with a
dry foot, as ye phrase it, that which most pin^heth you, le^t by meddling with
it ye should not only wet your feet, but be in danger to d^own your sinking and
desperate Cause. All sober Protestant; as well as others, will condemn you for
your great uncharity, to Damn not only so many Millions of honest Gentiles, but
of poor Infants, that ye say, never sinned actually in thought, word or deed,
but merely for the sin of another, that was forgiven to him and thousands more;
yea, not only the Episcopal, but many in the Church of Rome are not so
uncharitable. Your great Uncharitableness makes you cruel and hard-hearted,
and this begets in you a spirit of Persecution. But is it not a great sin in
you to be so uncharitable, when ye have no g^ound, but your own mistakes of
some place of Scripture hard to be understood. Oh! Repent ^f this your great
sin, not only of Uncharitableness toward so great a part of Mankind, but of
your evil and sinful thoughts of God Almighty, rendering him so cruel and so
short in his Mercy, who has declared himself to be good unto all, and his
tender Mercies to be over all (...) Works, and that he is slow to Wrath,
long-suffering, and with much long-suffering he endures the (...) of Wrath,
p^^ficted for Destruction, as the Greek word does well bear it; so that none
are finally lost and destroyed, but such who are perfected in Wickedness, after
the long-suffering of God has endured them, and waited on them, with much
long-suffering; which certainly proves, that no Infants dying Infants, are
Veisels of Destruction. However, as to the general state of Infants, and other
adult Persons deaf or dumb, and deprived of these common outward helps given to
others, the particular way, method and manner of God toward them is a great
secret; it suffices, that God disposes of them in Mercy, and does not destroy
any without sin, not only actually committed, but finally and impenitently
persisted in, and rejecting the Remedy offered. And why should it appear such a
new Doctrine to you, or inferring a Purgatory betwixt Heaven and Earth, to say,
that the Mystery of Christ crucified, and other great Mysteries, that have been
very obscurely and imperfectly known to many here in this world, shall be made
known perfectly after Death in the World to come? Is not this the general
Belief of Christians, and ground of their Consolation, that many things which
they know here but obscurely, weakly and imperfectly, they shall know most
clearly and perfectly after death, in the World to come. And as I did argue in
my first Book, that whereas perfect SALVATION is a Salvation from all sin, and
ignorance, and error, and is a perfect renewing into the Image of God, and the
true knowledge of Christ, even the Man Christ, is necessary, to the end we may
be made conform ^o him in his holy Life and Virtues, Death, Sufferings, Burial
and Resurrection, as the New Testament plainly declares; and that all who go
to Christ after Death, what has been wanting of their full and perfect
knowledge of him, here, shall be given them there after Death, when they come
to be with Christ in Heaven: And if it shall be given to Christians, who have
more knowledge of Christ here, than may be supposed many of the believing Jews
had in the time of the Law, or pro^elited Gentiles, or others, why not also may
not the like be said of honest Gentiles, that what was lacking of their
knowledge of Christ here, shall be given them perfectly in the World to come,
after Death, they having received sense beginning of the knowledge of Christ
here, though but obscurely and weakly; as ye grant, that many of the Jews had
but a weak, and obscure, and imperfect knowledge of him; the Vail, ye confess,
was not then taken off, before Christ suffered in the flesh; and if an obscure
and weak knowledge could serve the Jews, of Christ that was to come, as held
forth under the Vail of the Rites and Ceremonies of Moses Law, which their
Faith could take hold of, even of Christ hid under that Vail: It may be said,
it could also serve the Gentiles^, for the Gentile^ had a Law given them out of
Noah's Family, that taught them to sacrifice to the true God; and certainly
Noah taught his Posterity that these Sacrifices of Beasts were figures of
Christ, that great Sacrifice, that was to come; and many Gentiles did sacrifice
to the true God, as no doubt Job and his friends did, and what was Jo^ and his
friends but Gentiles? And it seems to have been a divine ^^stinct put into
men generally, before Christ that great Sacrifice came, to sacrifice unto God,
as Aristotle said, It was proper to men to sacrifice; for the same that taught
them to pray to the true God, taught them to sacrifice; and that sacrifice was
the Vail to the Gentiles, pointing at Christ, as it was to the Jews, that their
faith might reach unto him; and though too many of the Gentiles sacrificed unto
Devils, and not unto God, yet that does not prove, they had not some sense or
knowledge that they did stain ^o doing, for the Jews too oft^ did also
sacrifice unto Devils. In short, if an obscure and weak, or imperfect knowledge
and faith of Christ, as he was to come and suffer in the flesh, did suffice to
Salvation, as ye say it does, and did to Cornelius and Nathaniel, it may (...)
to all honest Gentiles, who might have that obscure, and weak, and imperfect
faith of Christ, as he was to come in the flesh, or ^s now come in the flesh;
and what if I should tell you, that not only the Gentiles Sacrifices, that they
offered (...) unto the true God, did preach Christ unto them, and his Death,
etc. but that the whole outward Creation had the like use, in some sort, to the
Gentiles, to be Vail^ and Types, to preach Christ unto them, though not so
fully and distinctly, as these delivered by God to the People of Israel? Did
not God make the Rainbow a sign of his everlasting Covenant betwixt him and
all flesh upon the Earth, i. e. all Mankind; for so is all Mankind often called
in Scripture, viz. all Flesh; for when (...) saw Christ in Heaven, he saw him
with a Rainbow upon his head, and round about the Throne; and therefore the
Rainbow that appears in the Cloud in Rain, is an universal Type and Figure,
that God has given to all Mankind of his Everlasting Covenant in Christ Jesus,
that he will not destroy them, but save them who believe in his Son Christ; and
though the Rainbow has another signification, as to give notice that God would
not destroy the World any more with Water, as he did the Old World, yet that
hinders not, but that it was given as a sign also to point unto Christ, as the
Passover was both a sign of the destroying Angel his passing over them in
Agypt, and ^et was also a figure and type of Christ, as Paul has plainly
declared. And no doubt, God that has given the Rainbow as an universal sign
of his Love and Favor in Christ, both God and Man, (signified by the light of
the Sun, united with the Water in the Cloud, that give most excellent and
resplendent Colors, signifying the Mercy and Justice of God, together with his
divine Wisdom and Power, etc. all most sweetly and harmoniously concurring
together, with manifold divine Graces in the work of man's Salvation, through
Christ; and the string or cord of the bow appearing next to the earth, as when
a man holds his Bow in his hand, in sign of Peace, as not intending to shoot
with his Arrow) has also given other Types and Figures in the outward
Creation, to be as Vail^ and Shadows, to shadow forth the Lord Jesus Christ,
and men's Salvation by him, as Winter, Spring, Summer and Harvest, and the
sowing of the grain of Corn in the Earth, and its rising again within a little
time, and bringing forth much fruit, which our Savior brought as the figure
and example of his Death, Burial and Resurrection, and which the Wisdom of God
has recorded in Scripture, not only as an example or emblem of Christ's
Resurrection, but of the general Resurrection of the dead; and indeed the whole
Creation points at Christ as both God and Man, that most excellent middle, that
^^^es God and Men together; for in all the Creation we see how the wonderful
Wisdom of God, and his wonderful Power has united extremes by certain means or
middles; and these do plainly point unto us, how as the highest and lowest
Creatures are united by a certain medium or mediating nature, partaking of both
extremes; so God the Creator and most high over all, is united with men, the
noblest of his visible Creatures, by him that is both God and Man, made like to
us in all things, but without sin, and therefore behoved to dye and rise again,
to lay a Foundation for our Faith and Hope, that though we dye, we shall also
rise again. Nor is this my u^gle Persuasion, but that of very judicious and
wise Men, long before me; and Paulus ^^cius, a Jew by Birth, but who became a
Christian, in his Treatise de Caelesti Agricultura, lib. 1. from page 40 to 52.
shows how there are many excellent Symboles in the Creation, that as Types
and Examples hold forth that great Mystery of Christ, God and Man, that were to
be united in one; and that this man could be but one only single man in the
entire nature of Man of Soul and Body, in all essential parts, who should be
both God and Man: and for this he ^iteth a saying in Aristotle, which is this,
lib. 10. Metaph. Inquolibet genere rerum datarmum maximum, ^et omnium ahorum
summum, i. e. in every kind of things there is one the greatest and highest of
all others: And who is this but the Man Christ Jesus? who only among all men is
both God and Man, and the Head of all man? And by excellent Symboles and
Examples he shows how this one man was to dye for all other men, and rise
again. And therefore however strange it may seem unto you, not only many things
in the Creation, but the whole Creation it self is a Book full of Symboles,
Vails and Figures, pointing at Christ, even the Man Christ, who was to suffer
Death, and rise again for the Salvation of men; and yet I do most freely
acknowledge, that the Books of Moses and the Prophets did more (...) and
distinctly hold forth this great Mystery. But seeing ye grant, That the Vail^
and Types of the Ceremonial Law did suffice to the Jews and People of Israel,
so far as outward helps and means were re^uisit, to shadow and hold forth
Christ unto them; the same may be said as concerning the Gentiles, that in some
sort, sufficient (as in respect of outward helps and means) for that day and
time, until more knowledge should come into the World, was the Book of the
outward Creation, together with that knowledge they had, that they were to
sacrifice unto God, as is above said. And as God gave to the Jews and People of
Israel his good (...) to instruct them, in the signification of the Mosaical
and Ceremonial Law, and the Type and Shadows thereof, so no doubt he gave a
measure of his good Spirit to instruct the (...) what these Types and Figures^
legible in the Book of the whole Creation, did signifi^; for as the Book of
Wisdom says, The (...) Spirit of God is in all, that is conf^^med by
Scripture; for God gave his Spirit unto, and by his Spirit strove with the
People of the old World; and it is the Light of Christ, the Word, and of the
Spirit, that convinces and reproves of sin, that lights every man that
comes into the World; which, however ye call it only natural and humane, we
have good cause to believe it is divine and supernatural, yet lightning the
dark nature of Man; and as it is absurd for any to hold a Book to a man's face
in the dark, and bid him read therein, when he has no sufficient light to read
with, so it were absurd, that God has set so excellent a Book, as the whole
Creation, before the Eyes of men universally, I mean the Eyes of their
understanding, and not give them sufficient Light, in some measure, to enable
them to understand what is writ therein; and seeing that Book contains true and
real Types and Symboles, Figures and Shadows of Christ, as he was to come in
the flesh, and suffer death, and rise again, it follows, God has given all
men so much inward Light, as whereby they might read and understand what is
written therein concerning the Man Christ (although the express Hebrew and Gr^e^^
Names Messiah and Christ be not known to them) in such an obscure way and
manner, as might serve to that time; but the great Glory and Light of the
Mystery of God manifest in flesh, which i^ Jesus Christ come in the Flesh, who
is both God and Man, and yet one Christ, ^oth incomparably surpass not only
what all Vails and Types, either of the Law or outward Creation, can discover,
but all declaration of words, and cannot be perfectly known but by a very high
degree of divine Revelation; and no doubt, the full discovery of it is reserved
to the Life to come, where it shall be matter of eternal Admiration and
Adoration to Saints and Angels.

And ^^st you should say, This is some new Fancy of mine, and some other late
Writers, or apostate Heretics, as ye use to say, I shall recite a Testimony of
a very ancient Writer, who is judged to be either Ambrose or Prospe^ above
twelve hundred Years ago, in that famous and noted Treatise, De vo^atione
Gentium, i. e. of the calling of the Gentiles, much esteemed and cited by
Protestants of great note, and particularly by Vossius and Grotius, learned and
judicious Protestants: In the said Treatise, de vocatione Gentium, lib. 2. cap.
1. ad sin. he says in express words, citing Acts 14. And indeed he left not
himself without a Witness, giving Rains from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons,
filling Your hearts with Food and Gladness. But what is this Testimony that was
always serviceable to the Lord, and never was silent of his Goodness and
Power, but the very indeclarable Beauty of the whole World, and the rich and
orderly la^gition, o^ his indeclarable benefits, by which, (...) Tables of his
eternal Law were given to one hearts of men, that the common and public
Doctrine of divine Institution might be read in the pages o^ the Elements, and
in the Volumns (or Books) of the Times; therefore the Heavens (...) all
heavenly things, Sea and Land, and all things in them, by the harmonious
Consent of their kind and order, did at^est the Glory of God, and by a
perpetual preaching, did speak the Majesty of their Author. But this is not
all, he further says, And yet the greatest number of men, who were permitted
to follow the ways of their own will, did not understand, and did not follow
this Law, and the Savor of Life, which breathed, or inspired unto Life [Note,
is not this in some degree Evangelical] was made unto them, the savor of Death
unto Death, that even in these visible Testimonies it might be learned, that
the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives Life. And immediately in the
following Chapter, he says, Therefore what was^ done in Israel by the
appointment of the Law, and the Sayings (or Oracles) of the Prophets, the
Testimonies of the whole Creation, and the Miracles of the divine Goodness, did
perform in all Nations. And that the Rainbow was a sign of Salvation, the same
Author expresses in the following words, lib. 2. cap. 4. And the Security of
Salvation (^aith he) is consecrated in the Testimony o^ the Rain bow,
consisting of diverse Colors, that is in the sign of the manifold Gra^^; the
which Mysteries and Sacraments, did not instruct these very few men of one
Family only, b^t in them all their Posterity, that what was given for the
Instruction of the Parents, might be profitable to the knowledge of their Sons:
Thus he. And in the same Book, cap. 9. he says, And it is manifest that by
diverse and innumerable manners, God will have all men to be saved, and to come
unto the knowledge of the Truth; but who come, they are directed by the help of
God; who come not, they resist by their own pertinacy. And in the beginning of
that Chapter, he says, The Grace of God indeed does principally appear in all
Justifications, counselling with Exhortations, admonishing with Examples,
terrifying with Dangers, inciting with Miracles, inspiring Counsel [Note the
word Inspiring] and enlightening the Heart it self, and induing it with the
Affections of Faith. And a little after, Which help ( viz. of divine Grace) is
offered or applied unto all, by innumerable ways, either hid or open; and that
it is rejected by many, it is their own Wickedness; but that it is received by
many, it is both of the divine Grace, and of the Will of Man, viz.
cooperating. And cap. 10. he says, We have labored to prove, so far as God
has helped us, that not only in the last days, but in all the foregoing
Ages, the Grace of God was present with all men, with a like Providence and
general Goodness, but in a manifold manner of working, and diverse measure; for
either hiddenly or openly he is (as said the Apostle) the Savior of all men,
but especially of them that believe. The which Sentence, of most subtle
shortness and great strength, if it be considered with a quiet sight, does end
this, whole Controversy; for by saying, He is the Savior of all Men, he has
confirmed the general goodness of God over all men, but by adding, especially
of them that believe, he shows that there is a part of Mankind, which by the
merit of Faith, divinely inspired [Note the words, Faith divinely Inspired, ye
who deny divine Inspiration to be remaining] ^is carried on to the highest and
eternal Salvation, by special benefits. And a little after, he says, 'And
although that general Vocation does not cease, yet that special Vocation is now
made common to all. And immediately before, he says, No place of the World is
destitute of the Gospel of Christ. Where it is worth the observing, how he
holds forth a two fold Vocation and Calling, both of Grace, and belonging to
the Gospel and Salvation; the one general, the other special, and peculiar to
such who have the Gospel preached to them by the Ministry of Men, and have the
benefit of the holy Scriptures. And L^ther, in the Book called his Mens^lia,
cap. 6. p. 101. says, In all Creatures we see a Declaration and Signification
of the holy Trinity, the Substance signif^eth the Almighty Power of God, the
Father; the Form and Shape declares the Wisdom of God, the Son; the Power and
Strength is a sign of the holy Ghost, in so much that God is present in all his
Creatures. Thus far Luther expressly. And since ye say, Your Knowledge and Faith
of Christ, in this Life, as well as your Holiness and Obedience, is not
perfect, do ye not think, if ye come to Heaven (as I wish ye may, by unfeig^ed
Repentance, for your gainsaying the Truth) that ye shall receive the more
perfect knowledge of Christ at or after Death? and then why not faithful
Gentiles, as well as ye?

Page 96. Ye ask, Where do I find three Baptisms in Scripture, etc? I Answ. I
find in Scripture the Baptism of Moses, for the Fathers were baptized into
Moses, in the Cloud and in the Sea; 2 dly, The Baptism of Jo^n; 3 dly, the
Baptism of Christ with Fire and the holy Ghost; and some were under a divine
Dispensation, who knew God only as a general Father to Mankind, but knew not
that God had an only begotten Son; and others knew that God was, and Christ was
the Son of God, and believed, knowing only the Doctrine of John, and said, They
knew not that there was an holy Ghost, viz. to inspire men; and in this same
Ignorance ye are at this day. And without doubt, every divine Dispensation has
its inward peculiar Baptism and Washing; and that a man's Salvation may be begun
under the first, but not perfected, I still affirm, and have proved, and ye
have not disproved it.

Page 99. Ye speak very ignorantly and scossingly against Christ, the Light in
all men, saying, Is it the Light in men that was born of a Virgin, hanged on a
Tree? I Answer; Here ye more act the part of Socinians, like your Brethren in
Opposition, Pardon Tillinghast and B. Keech, who use the same Language, and
whom I have answered, than like Orthodox and Sound Christians; does not the
Scripture say, They killed the Prince of Life; and he who was killed and hanged
on a Tree, was not a m^er Body, but a Man, consisting of Spirit, Soul and Body;
and was not a mere Man, but both God and Man; and He who was hanged on a Tree
said, He was the Light of the World, and in him it pleased the Father all
fullness should dwell, of Light, Life and Grace, and a measure of his Light and
Spirit, that neither is nor can be separated from the fullness, is in all men,
in a day of Visitation, and dwells in the Saints, and is revealed in great
Glory in them; but in Unbelievers it is very greatly veiled and hid, and is the
Light shining in Darkness, etc. and the Man Christ, who did hang on the Tree,
is that second Man who is the quickening Spirit; and ye may as well say, Did
the quickening Spirit hang on the Tree? surely he who suffered Death on the
Tree was both God and Man, and not a mere Man; and yet he suffered not as God,
nor in his Godhead, but in his Manhood. Your Ignorance is greatly to be
lamented, who are thus ignorant of the first Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, although ye profess your selves Ministers of the Gospel; Take heed of
willful Ignorance; that unless men be in the Faith, Christ is not in them, in
that peculiar sense of the word Inbeing, as it signifies union, and
in-dwelling, and enjoyment, is granted, as we say, in one sense, the seed is
not in the ground, though sown, ^till it begin to take root, but yet according
to the more general sense he is in all men; for his illumination and operation
cannot be separated from him.

Ye say, I falsely render the place, James 1. 2 ^. (...), Innate Word. But ye
only say it, without proof; it is composed of on, in and phyo, nascor,
therefore in true English it is innate, and is so used by Plutarch, a Greek
Author, who ^aith, There is a Faith, innate, emphutos, in every reasonable
Creature, living and dwelling in the Soul, and never leaving the Soul destitute
of Guidance; and it is used in the same signification by Clemens Alexandrinus,
writing to the Gentiles, where speaking of the inward Witness, which was in
Unbelievers, he calls it, Emphuton Martyra, testom innatum, fide digunm^ The
innate Witness, worthy of Faith; and I suppose ye judge not your selves better
or so well skilled in the Greek language, as Plutarch and Clemens Alexandrinus,
who were Greek, Authors, and Gr^^ians by Birth.

Ye say, (...) the Light be connate with men, what (...) G. K. make such a
splutter about Immediate Revelations? It may be said to be both innate and
connate with men, not as ye imagine Accidents or Qualities to be in a subject;
but seeing the eternal Word and Wisdom has created all Souls of men after his
Image, therefore in a special way of presence that eternal Word and Wisdom is
in all Souls of men, by a measure of it planted, or if ye will grafted in all
men; for grasted and innate may be of the same signification, and this eternal
Word and Wisdom has its operation and influence on the Understanding of the
Souls of men generally, to enlighten them gradually, first with the more common
and plain things of Religion, and then, as the former are learned, with the
more special and peculiar Mysteries of the Christian Religion, yet not without
the use of the holy Scriptures, in Gods ordinary way, so distinctly and
perfectly as Christians know them, who have the use of the Scriptures; and all
internal divine Illumination is properly Revelation.

P. 102. Ye find great fault that I conclude, That the inward Dispensation that
is among the Gentiles, that have not Christ outwardly preached ((...) by the
Ministry of men, and the holy Scriptures) has its glory and great service to
those that are faithful in it; and ye say, (...) is to talk at liberty my self,
and to deny all others a liberty to judge. But herein ye wrong me, I allow all
spiritual men a liberty to judge. I question not, but to all such who have a
spiritual discerning and ability to judge what I have affirmed of the glory and
great serviceableness of the inward divine Dispensation in the Gentiles, will
be approved, and my Reasons and Proofs, both from Scripture and other Authors,
found vallid. And though ye seek to untye that ye call, a knot, that I judge is
indissolvable, p. 91. I judge so still, that ye shall ^ever be able to untye
it, as ye persist in your Doctrine: But yet ye pervert my words, in that ye
call the Knot: for I did thus argue, That seeing Infants, by your confession,
might be saved by Christ, and regenerated by the Spirit of Christ, that works
when, and where, and how he pleases, Therefore might the honest and faithful
Gentiles be saved by the same regenerating Spirit of Christ, who works when,
and where, and how he pleases, and by faith in Christ. But that ye may with
some seeming show, appear to loose the Knot, ye word my Argument quite another
way, (...) Infants may be saved by the working of the Spirit in them, why may
not the Gentiles be so, by giving obedience to the Light in them? And thus ye
would make me appear to the ignorant as if I did plead, that the Gentiles were
of could be saved without faith in Christ, and the regenerating Spirit of
Christ, only by obedience to the general dictates of the Light within; but I
say, though none are saved, but who are obedient to the Light in them, yet no
Obedience can save, without faith in Christ, and the Spirit of Christ
regenerating them, that is altogether necessary to every man's eternal Salvation.

Whereas I produced diverse very convincing Arguments to prove, That the Light
in men that did accuse or reprove for sin, could not be some natural faculty of
man's Soul; these Arguments some of them ye pass over very slightly, answering
by your bare Affirmations, without proof, and some ye give no answer unto at
all, nor take any notice of, see my Book, p. 119, 120, 121. which I again
recommend to the Readers serious consideration. I argued, That since ye
confess, that man is wholly defiled and darkened, so that he is called Darkness
in Scripture, therefore the Light in natural men could not be any part or
faculty of their Souls; for that were to say, Men are not fallen totally, nor
totally (...), but in part. And I further argued, That since your Confession
^aith, All Sin is a Transgression against the Righteous Law o^ God, and since
the (...) are sinners, this righteous Law of God must be in them, against which
they transgress; and this righteous Law cannot be any part of faculty of the
Soul, which ye confess, is wholly unrighteous and defiled; for a thing cannot
be wholly unrighteous and defiled, and yet in part righteous, holy and clean;
To this I find not that ye say any thing. Ye say, I mistake, when I think ye
reckon it any distinct Faculty: but the Mistake is yours, not mine; I did not
think that ye do reckon it any distinct Faculty; but on the contrary, I blame
you for saying, It is nothing else but the natural Conscience, or some natural
Faculty of man's Soul; so that ye are wonderfully careless of what ye say; see
my book, page 119. and your Book page 98. And yet ye seem to make it now, Not
the natural Understanding, but something there imprinted^ Well, let it be
something there imprinted, this evinceth, that it is properly Gods Word; for I
hope ye will not deny, but that which God writes or printeth with his own Hand
or Finger, is Gods Word, and does as well, or rather more deserve to be
accounted the Word of God, as that printed in the Bible, seeing God is the
immediate Printer of this, without the Ministry of men; but the Print of the
Bible is the work of Men, though the Truth there witnessed is immediately of
God; and therefore by your Confession, there is an inward written or printed
Word of God in Heathens, and generally in all men, and that immediately,
without the use of help of the Scriptures, commonly called the outward Word
Hence it clearly follows, that the Word without is not the whole Word of God,
nor the only Rule, in contradiction to you who affirm it. And seeing, by your
Confession, the Word of God is in the Gentiles or Heathen, who have not the
Scriptures, why may not the same virtue and efficacy be given to it, as to that
which ye say is contained in the Scriptures? It is improper to prefer that
which is writ or printed on Paper by the labor and work of Men, to that which
by God immediately is printed on men's hearts and souls, without the work of
men. And since ye grant, That there is a Law written in men's hearts
universally, by God (...), Why may not that Law be understood to be the same
mentioned, Psalm. 19. 7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul?
yea, that it must and ought to be so understood, is clear from that analogy
that the Wisdom of God in David makes betwixt the preaching of the Heavens and
Firmament, Day and Night, and the course of the Sun, and the Preaching or
Testimony of this inward Law, that as universal as the outward is, so universal
is the inward; for the outward in the Symbol, Figure and Type of the inward,
as the Ceremonial Law of Moses was symbolical of the inward GospelLaw; and if
both had not been Universal ^he Analogy would have been improper and false; for
the true Analogy is betwixt two Universals, and not one universal, and another
particular: And Paul, by the Spirit of God applies the universal Language of
the Heavens and Firmament, Day, and Night, and Sun, to the preaching of the
Gospel, Romans 10. 18. by the same Analogy. Ye contradict^ the Scripture
expressly, when ye deny it, that the Law in the Gentiles, so far as they obeyed
it, made them excusable; for as some had thoughts that accused them when they
did evil, so they had thoughts that excused them when they did well; and this
excusing of them proceeded originally from the Law it self within them, see Rom
2. 15 which ye expressly contrad^^t. And for Gods inward speaking to men, most
frequently without the Ministry of men or books, as outwardly, I cited diverse
observable places of Scripture, as Psalm. 94. 10. Psalm. 50. 1. 16 to 22. Am^s 4.
13, Micah 6. 8. Prove. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. Job 28. 28. 24. 13. and 21. 14. and that
noted place, Luke 12. 20. from an which I did conclude, that it has been the
way of God, and ever will be, to speak to men in their hearts, to call them,
and warn them, and fore-warn them of evil and danger, and to persuade and
incline them to that which is good. And all these places of Scripture prove,
that God does at present, and in every Age, move and stir upon men's
Consciences, and speak in them by his Word and Voice, as really as he did in
the Prophets, though not equally, nor the same in all respects, and this is
immediate Revelation and Inspiration, seeing God does it without the Ministry
of men most frequently, even in the Heathen, and in the Wicked, when they are
neither hearing men, nor reading, nor thinking on any place of Scripture; and
all this ye merely slubber over, with a bare Magisterial Affirmation, saying,
That it is all but the actings of a natural Conscience, under legal
Convictions: But tell me, What works these Legal Convictions? does not the
Scripture say, it is God? and he does it by speaking to them in their hearts;
for God does not use to speak to men by an outward and (...) Voice; and
therefore there is more in men than what ye can a Reliq^^ les^ in men of a
natural Conscience; there is that which newly, and freshly, and immediately
calls to men in their hearts, and is a new gift and visitation of God. I find
not that ye say any thing but one, that has some shadow or appearance of
weight, and that is from Romans 8. 3. and Gal. 3. 21. viz. That the Law is weak,
through the flesh, and cannot give Life: And this is even that Law which was
within both Jews and Gentiles universally, and was not the mere outward Law.
But to this I Answer, That by the [ Law] in these places cited by you, and in
many other places that could be (...), as Romans 3. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, etc. and Gal. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. is indeed to be understood, not the
mere outward Law given to the People of Israel, but the Law within in its first
Administration or Dispensation, that has its proper work and service to
condemn, and not to justify, to wound, bruise and kill, and not to heal, bind
up and make alive; and this first Administration of the Law is most necessary
and proper, and is the real effect and work of Christ in his inward appearance
in men's hearts, as a Lawgiver and judge, but not so properly, not clearly, nor
distinctly as a Savior, as he appears in his second Administration perfectly
to save the Soul, and deliver it from Sin, and Wrath, and perfectly to restore
and renew it into the Conformity of his own Image, by faith in him, the whole
Christ, entire and undivided, both as he came in the flesh, suffered Death for
our sins, rose again, etc. ascended into Heaven, and is now in Heaven, our
^ntercessor and Advocate with the Father, and as he comes in Spirit.

And of this two fold Administration of Christ, first, as a Lawgiver,
secondly, as a perfect Savior, Moses and Joshua were Types; Moses was a type
of Christ, in his first Ministration, and Joshua was a type of him, as a
perfect savior in his second Ministration, both which are inward; for though
the true Christian Faith, respects Christ come in the flesh without us, and
now glorified in Heaven, in the glorified nature of Man, etc. yet the Mystery
of this, and the worth of his Death and Intercession, must be inwardly opened
and revealed (...), by the Spirit of Christ: And as Moses led the People out of
Egypt, through the red Sea, and through the Wilderness, and brought them to
Jordan, and the borders of the good Land, and no further, and than (...); ^o
Joshua was raised up, to bring them beyond Jordan, into the good Land;
therefore Moses begun the work, but Joshua finished it: Which two are plain
figures of the two fold inward Ministration of Christ, the one that is more
Legal than Evangelical, and h^^h the Evangelical; (...) in it, but not clearly
revealed, the other that is clearly and apparently Evangelical; and because the
second inward Ministration of Christ in men's hearts does not appear at first,
in its fullness of vigor and strength, but gradually, therefore there is a
mixture of the first and second, which is a middle Dispensation, consisting of
both; and this is well known and experienced by spiritual Travelers, although
to you it is a Mystery and a Riddle, that ye mock at, rather than enquire into.
And concerning this diver^^ty of inward Dispensations and Ministrations, both
having one Author, to wit, the Lord Jesus Christ, not only the people called
Quakers, but many (...), and juditious Protestants have given Testimony, and
their Testimony is upon record in print, some calling them (...), and referring
them, the one to the Father, the other to the son, together with the Father,
and the third and Last to the Holy Ghost, together with the Father, and the
Son, and of these three inward divine Dispensations, he called Doctor Gell, an
English Protestant, whose Works are printed in English, and well received by
many Protestants, though he was no Quaker, has particularly made mention, and
the^e three Dispensations being reduceable unto two, (as suppose there may be
several mixtures of Water and Wine, three, four, or seven, or more, yet still
they are but two viz. Water and Wine) some other Protestants have mentioned and
explained them, as particularly Henry Vane, in his book called, The (...) man's
Meditations, etc. whom I the rather particularly mention, because there are
some in New England, and perhaps members of your Church, who both knew him, and
have a true respect to him, as judging him a sincere Christian, and neither
Heretic nor Apostate, for his Doctrine; and yet when I or any of my friends
hold forth the same Doctrine, of distinct inward Dispensations, and
Ministrations, nothing differning in substance, such is your want of Charity,
that we are Heretics, and Blas^^mers, and fearful and incorrigible Apostates,
which shows great Partiality in you; and that we would evaporate the Gospel
into Allego^ies and Dispensations, as ye phrase it. But ye are greatly
mistaken; although we own the due and moderate use of Allegories, well
warranted by Paul and the other Apostles, and Prophets, and by good Christian
writers in all Ages, yet we place not the Gospel in the mere Allegory or
Figure, that is but the Shell; the Substance is the inward kirnel, hid under
the Shell. And for variety of Dispensations, the Scripture is plain and
express, and mentions the Dispensation of the fullness of Time, when Christ
after his Death, and Resurrection, gave the holy Ghost to all true Believers,
as the more excellent, far exceeding any former Dispensation, when Christ was
the Mystery hid in great part, from Ages and Generations, and not so revealed,
as when the fullness of Time came. And ye your selves hold forth differing
Dispensations of Grace, if any Credit can be given to your words, page 87.
where ye say, We thought there had been different Dispensations of Grace
clearly intimated, Romans 11. 7. Whereby ye plainly insinuate, That even such who
are not saved, are under a Dispensation of Grace; and yet this, though affirmed
by us, is denied by you, who restrict the Grace of God only to such who are
saved; so ye say and unsay the same thing, little heeding what ye say; and
though ye blame me for ^his, ye are guilty of it, and not I; for I doubt not
but that I can well defend all my Sayings to be well consistent one with
another. And notwithstanding that I readily grant unto you, yea, and plead for
it, as much as any, that the first Administration of Christ and God, in men's
hearts, is weak, and is not sufficient of it self to justify and save with
eternal Salvation, and to give eternal Life, without the second, that is to
follow, which gives faith in Christ, as come in the flesh, dead and raised
again, and more abundant Grace that does accompany that Faith and Knowledge of
Christ, as such, yet all this nothing serves your turn in the least; for we
never asserted the sufficiency of the first Manifestation and Ministration of
Christ in men's hearts, as alone and without the second; but as relative unto
it, and as regarding it as the end of the first. And yet we still affirm, that
God and Christ is at work in all men, in a day of Visitation, in order to save
them, and God and Christ are sufficient to begin and carry on the work. And
though Paul call the Law weak, yet it is to be considered, that he calls it
not so absolutely, or of it self, but weak through the flesh, because the flesh
or nature of man is weak to fulfill it, until Christ be revealed in the second
Ministration of him, to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law; And if ye were
not very partial, ye might have understood, by what I charged against you in
^rticle ^. that I placed not such a Snfficiency in the first degree of Light
and Grace, and in the operation thereof, as did suffice from first to last; but
there is a Sufficiency in it to begin some good work in men, that has a proper
and real tendency to the perfecting the Salvation of men's Souls; as when a
Chyru^gion lanceth a Wound, and searches it, and washes it, that is a
necessary work, and what he does, he does as a skillful, able and sufficient
work man, and that work has a proper and real tendency to perfect the cure;
yet that alone is not enough to cure the Wound, but he must apply his Healing
Plaster to it, and make several new Applications of his Medicine.

And though we still preach God and Christ in men's hearts to be all-sufficient
to save them, yet we never said nor thought, that what is revealed or dispensed
of any inward Ability, Influence or Operation of God and Christ, is sufficient
for all time to come, either to Gentiles or Christians; for the best Christians
need a daily renewed Influence of Grace, of Wisdom, of Life and Ability from
God and Christ, to descend upon them, and come into them, and they are to wait
for the daily and hourly incomes of it. And therefore the weakness of the first
inward Administration of Christ, I deny not, but assert; and yet it is not weak
in it self, but through the flesh; and it is weak to justify and save
perfectly^ but it is mighty and powerful to reprove, to judge, to wound, to
bruise and to kill; and He, even Christ, and God in Christ, who wounds,
heals; and He who kills, makes alive, and He who bruiseth, binds up, and
He who makes the Soul sick, and sensible that it needs the Physician,
proves the Physician to the Soul; and such kind of Doctrine I have heard among
the more sober kind of Presbyterians, and some Presbyterian, Preachers have
said, That Moses and Joshua were Types of Christ, as we say; and as Moses began
a good Work, though his Ministration was weak, in comparison, and carried the
People a great way, so as to bring them to Jordan, and the border of the good
Land; so we say, Christ's inward Ministration, that Moses outwardly, by way of
Allegory and Analogy did answer unto, though weak comparatively, begins a
good work in men, and carries them a great way, as it were to the spiritual
Jordan, and to the border of the spiritual Canaan, and Kingdom, and then comes
the second toward Ministration, that answers to Joshua, that brings them
into the good Land, and gives them their Lots and Possessions therein. But
still, our Controversy is great and just with you, who say^ The Law (...) so
weak, and all the Light that is within the Gentiles, or unconverted men, called
Christians, is impotent and unable, that it (...) do no good thing in them,
(...) can begin the least good work in men, be they never so diligent to
improve it, that has a real tendency to Salvation; which we say it has. ^or
though the Law be weak, comparatively, yet that proves not, that it has no
ability to work or beget any good thing in men: A weak man or Child can do some
good things; and though man's corrupted Nature can of it self do no good thing,
yet this inward Law and Illumination, even in its first appearance, can and
does help the corrupt Nature of man, partly, if not wholly to cleanse it, and
being cleansed, to enable it to do some good things, which God does not wholly
reject, but in part accept, in and through Christ: and indeed Paul, as he uses
diverse Allegories and Figures whereby to hold forth the service and use of the
Law to men, before Faith came, as that of a Schoolmaster, and that of a first
Husband, so that of a Custody or place of Refuge, like the City of Refuge that
was appointed for the Manslayer to hide himself in from the Avenger of Blood,
where he might remain, as in Prison, yet safe, until the Death of the
High Priest, as does plainly appear from Gal. 3. 23. But be ^re Faith came we
were kept under the Law, (which Beza, a French Protestant, tanslateth in his
Latin Translation, sub Legis P^sidie, i. e. the safeguard or defense of the
Law, and the Greek does well bear it) shut up (as within a custody) unto the
Faith, that should afterward be revealed. And this is clear in the example of
Cornelius, and his Household, who were in a good state, and yet had not the
faith of Christ crucified and raised again, as the Christian had it, and as he
needed to have it, to receive the holy Ghost, and the knowledge of remission of
sin, that Peter preached to him, through faith in the Name of the Man Christ
Jesus.

Ye will not have Romans 1. 28. understood properly of Reprobates, b^t of such as
were not approved o^ God at that time. Which quite overturneth your absurd
Doctrine o^ Reprobation before the World beg^n; ^o if they were not Reprobates
when Paul wrote concerning them, Romans 1. 28. to be sure they were not
Reprobates before the beginning of the World, as every Schoolboy may judge.

Moreover, ye say, That Law mentioned, James 1. 22. etc. cannot be applied to
Christ, no^ by any tolerable Catacresis. But ye say it, and that is all; why
may not Christ be said to be the Object of our Obedience and Works, as well as
of our Words, without any Catacresis? When the Apostles preached Christ, Christ
was not their preaching or speech, but the object or ground of it, and yet they
are said to preach him, without any catacresis; so that Obedience that men give
to Christ the living Word in their Hearts, has him to be the Object and Ground
of it; and therefore they may be said, by a Metonimy, to act Christ, as well as
to speak him; as we use to say, Such a man acts the Peiagian, or Socinian,
etc. Ye do but (...), instead of disputing; yea, men's doing the Law, is a
Metonimy; for their doing is not strictly the Law; but a conformity unto it.

And because ye make such a Clamor in the Ears of an ignorant Multitude, as if
the Quakers Doctrine concerning Christ's dying for all men, and giving a measure
of his Grace unto all, were only the Doctrine of vile Heretic, Apostates,
Impost^rs and Blasphemers, I shall cite some Testimonies of Augustine, and
Orofias, and Chrysos^om, ancient Christian Writers of great esteem, who did
hold the same Doctrine with us, (not mentioning many more which I could cite)
Augustine lib: 1. de genes c^ntra Manich. cap. 3. in English thus, But that
Light does not feed the Eyes of unreasonable Creatures, but the pure hearts of
them who believe God, and betake themselves from the love of visible and
temporal things, to keep his Commands, which a^ men can, if they will, because
that Light enlightendeth every man that comes into the World. (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) Nations in this World his (...) suffering and eternal
Clemency, -- daily, (...) and instantly to all and singular. And again, That
have, as I judge, a sufficient proof of the cooperating (...), to the
Gentiles, viz. who were not Christians. Chrys^st^m on John 1. If (...)
enlighten every man that comes into the World, how is it that so many men
remain without Light, for all do not know Christ? How there ore does ^e
enlighten every man? surely he does enlighten them, so far as be^^^eth to him;
but if any willingly sh^^ting there Eyes to the Beam o^ this Eig^^, would not
direct (...) it, they have remained in Darkness, not from the nature of the
Light, but their own Wickedness, who willingly made themselves unworthy of so
great a (...). By all which Testimonies it plainly appears, these worthy men
had no such a mean esteem of the inward Illumination common to all men, as ye
have; but on the contrary did believe, it was the Grace of God, and such a
Gift, as being duly improved, could give them the knowledge of Christ, and
enable them to keep Gods Commands. And the Acelatensian Synod about the Year
490. said, Anathema to him who shall say, Christ has not dyed for all, nor
would have all men to be saved. And again, Anathema to him, who (...), That he
who has perished has was received that he (...) be saved. And not only
ancient Christian Writers, but Protestants, yea, some Calvinists of great
account, as (...) and (...) have delivered it as their Perswa^^^^, That Christ
has dyed not only for all kinds and (...) of men, but all, and singulars of
all kinds; and have printed in defense of it. And Testardus, another French
Protestant has printed another large Book in Latin, wherein he proves, That
not only Christ has dyed for all men, whereby all may be saved, but has given
inward Grace, sufficient to save all men; but that whoever are saved, have some
special Grace and Favor of God extended toward them. Besides that, the
Arminians and Remonstrants, who are as justly reckoned Protestants as many
others that dissent from them, are zealous for the universal Grace of God, and
Christ his dying for all men; and yet no sober Protestant will say that all the
forenamed are vile Heretics, and fearful Apostates, and Blasphemers, and
Denyers of the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, as ye most Uncharitably
and Unchristianly judge us; but your false Judgment will be your own burden.

CAP. VII.
I Need not be large o^ this or the following Chapters, but take notice
principally of your grossest Perversions and false Quotations, recommending the
substance of my former Book to the Readers, remaining unanswered.

Page 104. Ye pervert my words, as if I said, Christ only (...) the adopted,
because I said, Christ has left his spiritual goods, as Justification,
Remission, Adoption and Eternal Life to his Brethren, by spiritual
Regeneration; and since ye deny this, ye must allow, That Christ gives
Remission, Justification, Adoption and Eternal Life to such who are not
spiritually regenerated; which is a Contradiction to your own Doctrine. And
your own Doctrine distinguishes betwixt Regeneration and Adoption. Ye grossly
abuse me, in saying, I confound Justification and Sanctification, alleging, I
fall into downright Popery; for on the contrary I assert Justification as it
is opposed to Condemnation, and according to the most proper and frequent use
of the word, is distinct from Sanctification; as thus, justification is Gods
act of his free Grace, whereby he forgiveth the sins of all true Believers and
Penitents, and accepts and owneth them to be righteous in Christ, being
clothed with Christ and his Righteousness, imputed freely unto them, and whom
he has truly sanctified and begot into a true and real state of inward
Holiness and Righteousness; so that true inward Righteousness and Holiness, or
Sanctification, is not the Foundation of Justification, but a Condition and
Qualification required, in order thereunto, and I place inward Righteousness
and Holiness no other way than Faith, by which men are justified, to wit, as
necessary Conditions and Instruments of Justification ^ and all true Believers
are clothed, not only with Christ imputed Righteousness, in respect of what he
has done and suffered for them, but with Christ himself, in-dwelling, living
and ruling in their hearts, making them really holy and righteous; and this is
a double clothing unto them, or as the Scarlet that is of a double Die, where
with all the true Children of Jerusalem from above, the Mother of all the
faithful, are clothed, so that they are not afraid of the S^ow, according to
Prove 31. 2. ^ But all such who think, that the alone Righteousness of Christ
without them, while they are not inwardly clothed with real inward
Righteousness, will cover them, will be greatly disappointed. True inward
Sanctification and Justification, though distinct, yet are not divided, nor is
the one perfect without the other; he, who is imperfectly sanctified, cannot,
while such, be perfectly justified; Sanctification is ingredient in the Object
of Justification, and so is distinct from it; for it is only the holy Man whom
God justifies by his act of his free Grace and Favor. And therefore
Sanctification is in the priority of order, the not of time, before
justification, as the Object is prior in order to the Act; for as God
condem^eth none but him who is wicked, so he justifies none but who is (...);
and he justifies the Ungodly from (...) Ungodliness, (...) in it, viz. such
who ^ad been formerly ungodly, being now sanctified, he justifies them; and
still, Justification is as much the free Grace of God, as our Sanctification,
yea, both equally his free Gifts and Favo^r. Note, that Augustine, cap. 26. de
spir. e^ lit. does acknowledge a twofold sense of the word [ Justified] in
Scripture; 1. To make just by the inward effect of Righteousness, wrought in
men by the Spirit of God. 2. To account, reckon or repute to be just. And many
Protestant Writers of great note have acknowledged that twofold sense, and for
the first they cite Rev. 22. 11. He that is just let him be just still, or more
justified.

Page 106. Ye say, It is a great mistake in me, to say, that Faith is one hand
to receive Christ, and Love another; and ye further say, By Faith we receive
Christ, and by Love we serve him. A very unlearned and foolish distinction; do
we not serve him both by Faith and Love? Yea, and we receive him by both Faith
and Love, and by both he dwells in our hearts. And as ye bring no proof to
contradict it, so the truth of what I say is manifest; for it is the Love of
the Heart and Soul, as well as Faith, that qualifieth it to receive Christ,
yea, Love does most sweetly embrace Christ; for it is the nature of Love to
embrace its beloved Object; the loving Parent embraces the loving Child, and
the loving Child embracet^l the loving Parent, and one Friend embraces another
Friend, and not only receives him into his House, but into his Heart; and
therefore one said, The Soul is more where it (...), than (...) ^reatheth; and
all sensible Souls, who know in experience what it is to love Christ, will
contradict you, and say with me, That by and with their Love, that he has
(...) in them, they receive Christ, they embrace him, and hold him, as well as
by Faith. (...) too much, it is your (...) of spiritual experience in this
Love, that makes you talk so widely. Yea, Faith, as it is a (...) act of the
Soul, and of the Will, and not a bare assent of the Understanding, has Love
and Desire in it, and belonging to the very nature and being of it, as
Augustine said, What is it to believe in God? by believing, to love him, and to
go into him. The virtue of divine Love does wonderfully knit and unite the
hearts of true believers to Christ, and one to another, according to Co^. 2. 2.
and this is felt by all that have any measure of the divine Love shed abroad in
their hearts; and if Love (...) the heart to Christ, by Love it receives him,
as that which knitteth the Graft to the Tree, causes the Graft to receive the
Life and Substance of the Tree into it.

Ye say, In my sixth Paragraph I give up the whole cause, if I speak sincerely.
Answ. I speak sincerely, and according to the plain and (...) of all the words
contained in it, and yet^ give up none of my Cause to you, but still I differ
from you considerably; for I say in the same Paragraph, That real inward
Holiness and Righteousness, as well as Faith, are the Instruments whereby men
are justified, yet they are not the Foundation and ground of Justification^ And
as this clears us of Popery, so it does not make us one with you, unless ye,
and not I, give up your Cause; for ye say, Only Faith, and not real inward
Holiness and Righteousness, (...) the Insi^^^ents of Justification.

Page 107 That Paul, and other Saints renounced inward Holiness and
Righteousness, after believing, for being so much as ^^struments of
Justification, ye can never prove, though neither he nor they did build on
them, but on Christ, the alone Foundation of Justification and of
Sanctification, and all other Blessings and Mercies; and to be justified by
Works, is but a secondary Justification; for inward Holiness and Righteousness
planted and begot in the Soul, is before Works of Righteousness, as the Tree is
good before it bear good Fruit, and as some Worthy Protestants have said, A
good Tree makes good Fruit; but a Tree cannot bear good Fruit before it be
good. We are created by an inward Work of Christ's new creating unto good
Works; and therefore this new Creation and work of Sanctification is before
good Works outwardly wrought, in order of cause, as the good Tree is before the
Fruit.

Page 108. That Faith is used in Scripture, not only to signify Gospel
Doctrine, as ye grant, but Gospel Holiness and Virtues, by a synecdoche of the
part for the whole, is clear to any who are not partial; for the just shall
live by Faith; and said Paul, the Life that I now live I live by Faith; and yet
certainly his Life was not only the Life of Faith, but of Love, and other
divine Virtues: And whereas the Faith of the Elders is frequently mentioned,
Heb. 11. is St only their single Faith that is there commended, or rather the
whole Body of divine Virtues, whereof the Root, as it were, it Faith, as when
we name a Tree by the Root, we understand the Branches included, and when we
number men by the Head, we understand the Body also; and Gal. 3. 5. after that
Faith is come, that was not the Doctrine only, but the Grace of Faith, together
with all the other accompanying Graces and Virtues; and as Unbelief is put in
Scripture for all other sin that men generally are under, Romans 11. 32. so Faith
signifies the whole Body of the Christian Graces and Virtues; but of this ye
take no notice, but pass it with a dry foot, because ye can give no sollid
Answer to it, though mentioned in my first Book.

And that it may appear I am not Popish, in the Doctrine of Justification, hear
the Judgment of James Durham, a Presbyterian Preacher, in his Commentary on the
Revelations, in one of his Digressions, where he says, Who only place
Repentance, Conversion and Holiness, etc. but as Conditions necessary to
Justification, and but equally necessary as Faith, and in the same respect with
Faith (or in words to that effect) the are not to be ac^^nnted Popish; and
therefore hitherto ye cannot, nor shall find, in what remains, any Doctrine
asserted by me, that is either Popery or Heresy, but what is defended by as
good Protestants, and better than your selves, and which has the Scripture
Authority to warrant it.

Ye say, Ye understand not the meaning of my Rant about a Christ divided, a
Christ without; and a Christ with in, a Christ in Heaven, and a Christ in the
Heart; we believe, say ye, that there is but one Christ, etc. Here ye grossly
misrepresent my words, and pervert the sense of them, as if I did divide
Christ, or hold two Christ's, one Christ in Heaven, and another Christ in the
Heart: Let the Reader see my words in my Book, and he will find, that I am not
for dividing Christ, but blame them who do divide him, either in his Offices or
in himself; nor do I use these words, a Christ in Heaven, and a Christ in the
Heart, as if they were two; but I say, it is one and the same Christ, which is
both in Heaven, and also in the Hearts of his Children; and seeing ye call this
a Rant, it is plain, that ye do not own Christ at (...) in the Hearts of the
Saints: Let this be well remembered against you, for ye call it a (...), to say,
Christ is both in the Heaven, and in the Heart; did not the Lord say, He
dwells in the High and Holy Places, and also in the Hearts of them that are
Contrite, etc? Ye say, He dwells in the Hearts of all his People by his
Virtue, Influence and Grace: But I say, his Virtue, Influence and Grace cannot
be in the heart without him, and separated from him; for if by Grace ye mean,
Faith, Hope, Love, they would fail, wither and dye, if he were not present to
nourish and preserve them. And how sillily and foolishly do ye infer, page 135.
That I hold two Christ's, because I say, That by the Spirit of Christ a man is
joined both to Christ in him, and to Christ in Heaven; and if two Unions, then
two Christ's, say ye. But ye fight against your own shadow, I say nothing of two
Unions, nor do my words infer it, more than when I say, a Graft that is grafted
into a Tree is united both to the Branch that it is grafted into, and also to
the whole Tree: Does it thence follow, that there are here two Unions and two
Trees? or that the foot is both united to the Life or Soul in it, and to the
Life or Soul in the Head, that therefore there are two Unions and two Heads?
This shallow way of your Reasoning shows what learned Clarks ye are.

Page 108, 10^. Ye deny, That Faith has (...) in t^^ b^ing and nature of it,
but only that which is Objective, and not Subjecting^ And thus with
School-Terms and phrases (...) seek to cover your selves in the Clouds, from
Ignorant People: But let me explain it in English what ye say, which is this,
That Christ and Happiness has the Assurance, but the Faith has no Assurance
of Knowledge, or Evidence in the Nature of it; as who would say, There is
assuredly such a City as London, and Paris, but he who is going toward it has
no assurance he is in the true way that leads to it. Ye say further, This
assurance may be had without extraordinary Revelation; and so say I; for it is
ordinary to thousands of Gods Saints in all Ages; but what is that to you who
deny all Revelation, both ordinary and extraordinary at present, and say, The
former ways of Gods revealing his will are ceased?And yet many Protestantshave
acknowledged a Spirit of Prophecy in some of the Martyrs, as in George
Wis^hartand others, as is to be seen in Fox's Book of Martyrs, which contradict
the Confession of the Assembly, espoused by you.

CAP. VIII.
Page 109. Ye commit a great Abuse, when ye say I deny the Doctrine of
Perseverance. I own both the Doctrine and Grace of Perseverance, to all to whom
God does give it; and my earnest Prayer is frequent unto God for my self, and
Brethren every where, yea, all who love the Lord, in any measure, is, whatever
Name they go under, that he may be pleased to establish them in that which is
good, and crown them with that most noble Grace of Perseverance. And upon this
head, ye, and not I give a way the Cause, though ye contradict your selves in
so doing. for ye grant, That not only common and preparatory work that are
wrought in men, that work a (...) in many things, but also a Faith may be lost,
that is real and true, and not false and hypocritical, For ye say expressly,
Page 111. We must distinguish betwixt a false Faith, and one that i^ (...)
saving. So ye grant, that Faith which is not false but true, may be lost; but
whether it may be called saving, is rather a strife of words, than any thing
else, which I love not to contend about. That it is not finally and eventually
saving, is certain, otherwise it would have continued; but yet that it had a
preparatory service and use, and began a good work, that is not false and
hypocritical ye grant, and if ye did abide by what ye have said in this matter,
the Controversy might end, as to that head.

Page 110. The cutting off the Natural Branches, If we may believe your bare
Authority, for ye give no shadow of proof, ye will have (...) relate only to a
visible Church state; but the contrary is manifest from this, that at the
cutting off is, so shall the grafting in again (...); for that Romans 11.
contains a plain Prophecy of the Conversion of the J^^s, and People of
Israel, when all Israel shall be saved. And surely, that Conversion and
Salvation, i^ a real thing. Ye are no less absurd to say, The Oil that the
foolish Virgins had in their Lamps was only a Profession they had of Grace; and
yet ye say expressly, Their Lamps was their Profession, which is a gross
Self-Contradiction; for the Lamp and the Oil could not be one and the same
thing; if the Lamp, as ye say, is the Profession, the Oil must be something
else, unless ye will say, The Oil is the Cask, and the Cask is the Oil.

Page 112. Ye strangely contradict your selves in answer to Ezekiel. 18. 24.
saying, The Scriptures assure us, that no true Believer shall totally and
finally fall away from Grace: How strangely do ye forget your selves, who
within a few Lines before did affirm, That the Faith that may be fallen from is
not a false Faith, see page 111. line 8.

Page 113. Ye argue, That David's Fall, when he committed Murder and Adultry,
was not totally from Grace, because he prayed, Psalm. 5^. 11. Take not thy holy
Spirit from me. But ye are strangely inconsiderate; may ye not think, that a
Child can answer you? when David prayed that Prayer, God had begun to restore
him again^ and that Psalm is called one of his penitential Psalms, and was a
Testimony, that God by his good Spirit had begun a true work of Repentance in
him, after his fall, and had given him, together with Repentance, his holy
Spirit, and he prayed, that it might not be taken from him. Do ye think ye deal
with Idiots, and persons void of common sense, when ye argue at this shallow
rate? I told you before, and I again tell you, That if a Murderer and an
Adulterer, while such, may be a real Saint, the worst of Men may believe, that
they are real Saints. Your Answer has no Validity, when ye say, They never had
the work, of Conversion past upon them; but this is barely said: Why may not
others, who have had some real beginning, like that of David, in some measure,
fall into these Sins of Murder and Adultry? And surely, these who commit Murder
and Adultry, whatever they have been before, may be numbered amongst the worst
of men. They may say, according to your Doctrine, They had the work of
Conversion wrought upon them formerly, and they are Saints still, and ye cannot
convince them to the contrary by your Doctrine. I say still, it would argue
great Partiality (which far be it from us to think it can have place in God)
that one and the same Sin is Mortal in one, and not Mortal in the other; the
pure Life of Faith is killed by every gross Sin or Crime, such as Murder and
Adultry; for if he who hates his Brother has not eternal Life abiding in him,
surely nor he who with his hands kills his Brother. That Gods Promises are
merely Hypothetical to his elect Saints and Children, I neither said, nor say,
yet the Promises are held forth Conditionally, and some are Conditional, and
some absolute.

Page 115. Ye grossly abuse me, by alleging, That I introduce the Popish
distinction of Mortal and Venial Sins. I use no such words, and have not the
Popish sense of these words; but yet I believe there are lesser and greater
Sins, and great and ^^inous Sins and Crimes kill the Soul, such as the Crimes
of Murder and Adultry, but every smaller Offense does not kill the Soul
utterly, but yet hurts or wo^^deth; and this both Experience and Scripture
confirms, and ye are a sad sort of men, if ye think, that the gross Sins and
Crimes of Murder and Adultry do no more hurt the Souls of men, than some
Weaknesses and Infirmities that are really culpable, yet of a smaller kind, as
a little wandering of Mind, a little slackness or remisness for a little time,
etc.

Whereas I did affirm, There is a state in Grace, that men may grow up into,
wherein they never fall away, but are crowned with Perseverance; for which I
cited diverse places of Scripture, as Psalm. 119. 2, 3 and ^ Joh. 3. 9. and 1
John 2. 19. and these I called such who were the Sons and Children of the
Freewoman, and who are made conform to the Image of the second Adam, Christ
Jesus, (beyond the Image of the Earthly Adam, who fell) and who sit down in
Christ that never fell; and these abide with him, and go not out. To this ye
say nothing that has any weight, but mere triffling; ye say, It belongs to
Faith, where ever it i^, that who ever have it are ^orn of God: And here ye
contradict again your own Doctrine, who granted, That there is a Faith that may
be lost, that is not false. Ye say, I mistake the Notion of the difference
between Servants and Sons; for, ye say, true Believers are both Sons and
Servants. But this (...) not deny, nor do; yet the Scripture makes a
distinction thus, Every Son is a Servant, as Christ was both Gods Son and
Servant, as he is called in Scripture; and Paul was a Son of God and a Servant
of God; but yet every Servant is not a Son of God, born of the Freewoman: The
Servant, said Christ, abides not in the House forever, but the Son abides
forever. The Son of Hagar must become the Son of Sarah, that he may dwell in
the House of the Lord forever. But ye falsely allege against me, as if I said,
None are in the New Covenant, until that after Death they come into glory. And
ye show your great Ignorance, and want of Experience, to deny that men may be
in a middle state, between both, as partly of a Legal Spirit, and partly of a
Gospel Spirit, for some time; for the Disciples were too much o^ a Lega^ Spirit
when Christ told them, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of. Too many, called
Christian, who have a measure of Gospel-sincerity, are too much of a Legal
Spirit, and are not wholly leavened into the Gospel Spirit.

Page 117. Ye say, I seem to lay the (...) upon the strength of Inherent Grace,
(...) the Scripture (...) us, it is of God, and depends upon his Power. I say
the same, it is of God, and depends upon his Power, and both God and his Power
does preserve the Faith, Love, and other Graces and Virtues of his People, and
keeps them ever green, (that they withe^ not) as the ^edars of Lebanon. Ye
fa^sly (...) I con^ound the two Covenants, and do not show wherein. Ye say, The
New Covenant cannot be fallen from. Again, ye say, It is a Contradiction, that
a man may be a Believer, and yet but in Adam's Covenant, and fall away: Which
yet is your own Contradiction; for ye have granted, That the Faith that can be
lost, i^ not a false Faith; and therefore if not false, it is true in its
manner. But whether the Faith that can be lost, and the Faith that Persevereth
and holds out to the end, and is like to Gold, and more precious than Gold,
differ in kind or degree, is a Question too subtle, and does involve into
Philosophical and School-Subtilties; for it is not altogether agreed among them
called Philosophers and Schoolmen, what makes a specifical difference in all
respects, as whether Brass, Silver and Gold differ in specie and kind, or only
in degree; therefore such a dispute I waved, and do still wave, as not being so
proper to be disputed in School Terms, for it is best to keep to Scripture
words, which the holy Ghost has dictated. As Gold endures all trial of fire,
and is not consumed by it, so the most precious Faith of Gods elect Saints and
Children endures all fiery Trya^s of all sorts.

And because ye would appear to be such mighty Patrons and Defenders of the
Protestant Religion and Principles, I shall cite the Testimony of Luther, whom
ye will not be so bold, I suppose, to deny but that he was a Protestant, and a
better man than any of you, as concerning this matter, and another Testimony of
these who gave forth the A^gustane Confession, who were followers of Luther,
and are generally acknowledged Protestants. In Luther's Mensa^^a, cap. 13. p.
227. he says expresly^ For Faith is either false or feigned, or although it be
upright, yet it is extinguished, when People witting and wilfully do against
Gods Command; and the holy Spirit, which is given to the faithful, d^parteth,
and is lost, through evil Works done against the Conscience, as the example of
David sufficiently witnesses: Thus L^t^er. And the A^gustane Confession, given
forth by Protestents, says expressly. Article 12. They condemn the Anabaptists,
who deny, that they who are once justified, can loose the holy Spirit. So ye
may see, or if ye will shut your Eyes, yet the Impartial Readers may see, how
it is a Doctrine of ancient Protestants, more ancient than your New England
Model, that they who are once justified may loose the holy Spirit, and they who
say they cannot, are guilty of the Error of the Anabaptists; and the Scripture
Testimony is most plain, that they may be Partakers of the holy Spirit, and may
afterward fall away, Heb. 6. So that hitherto ye have not showed any one
Article of Faith, wherein I or my Brethren differ either from Scripture or the
best sort of Protestants; for in all these matters we have both the S^ipture,
and the best sort of Protestants on our side; and therefore your Charge is
false, as if ^or we did oppose the fundamental Articles of Salvation, as ye
allege, p 127. ad sin.

Page 118. Ye falsely charge the Quakers, that they boast of Perfection. The
honest and sober People, called Qrs. hold forth the Doctrine of Pefection
according to the Scripture, as a state attainable by the Grace of God, but
boast not of their attainment; they choose rather to express any measure of
Seize, they have, by a good and innocent Life, than by a talk of it.

Page 119. Ye falsely charge it upon me, as a Cheat and Fraud, That I infer it
from your Doctrine, that the good Works of Gods holy Spirit are defiled in and
by the Saints. Answ. I make no such (...), but I did set down the expres^ words
of the Confession of the Assembly, owned by you, cap. 16. That (...) best Work
of the Saints, (...) proceed from the Spirit of God, as they are wrought by
them, are defiled. Let the Reader see the place, and he wi^^ and the Cheat to
be yours, and not mine; yea, p. 119. forgetting your selves, ye say expressly,
That the Works of the Saints, (which ye confess, are wrought also by the holy
Spirit) are defiled by sin. And whereas ye say, The Work is not totally perfect
and totally sin; yet ye tell not what part of it is not sin; for the whole
Work, as done by you is sin; which is still a Chimara, seeing that whole Work
is done also by the Spirit.

Page 120. Ye blame me for alleging it to be your Doctrine, That they must
sin, viz. Saints and Believers, as long as they live; as if there were a fatal
necessity that God laid them under of so doing. Answ. But whether this be not
the real and true sense of your Doctrine, that says, No man is able, by any
Grace of God, to keep the Commandments of God, but dot^ daily break them in
Thought, Word and Deed. Let Impartial Reader judge, for what men cannot do,
they are under a necessity not to do, and not to do is sin; and ye say, God
has decreed all thus; and if it be not a fatal Necessity in the sense of the
Epi^^re^^s, or others who held a fatal Necessity, and denied a divine
Providence, yet in another sense it may be called a fatal Necessity.

Page 121. Ye would cover the Impertinency of the Citation of Romans 3. 9, etc.
from the description of the natural state of man there given: But this is but a
fig-leaf; for the Assembly brings that place of Scripture to prove universally,
That no man, neither Saint nor any other, can keep Gods Commandments, etc. And
truly they are sad and miserable Saints, who are in the case there described;
and yet, as I said before, too like to these in N. England, whose feet were
swift to shed Blood, and their Throat an open Sepulcher. Your answers to the
places of Scripture I brought to prove the possibility of Perfection by the
Grace of God, are mere Assertions, without any Reasons of the least seeming
weight to prove them; and therefore I refer both what I and Ye say to the
Readers further Impartial Consideration.

Page 123. Ye say, Nor was Noah so perfect, but that afterward he was drunken:
This is a weak Reason; ye may at this rate deny that God created Adam free of
all sin, because after God made him he sinned. We plead not for an
impossibility of sinning, but a possibility of not sinning, by the Grace of God.

Ezekiel. 36. 25. The making them clean from all their Filthyness, belongs, ye
say, to Justification.

Answ. I doubt ye have forgot your selves^ sure I am, it was the common
Doctrine of the Presbyterians, That Justification took away the Guilt of Sin,
and Sanctification took away the Filth of it. But now according to your New
Model, it seems Sanctification takes no Filthilness of sin away at all; and
therefore as in respect of Sanctification, the whole filthiness of sin remains
in the best Saints, their hearts are as filthy inwardly as ever formerly; for
Justification, ye say, puts no inward purity or beli^ess in men. But is not
Filthiness, and Holiness or Purity, contrary's? and therefore Sanctification,
or making pure, takes away filthiness of sin.

Page 121. Ye blame me again for alledging^ They say they are only free from
sinning after death. But to this I have above answered. Let the places I cited
be read, and it will be found. Beside, it s^ometh too great a School Nicity to
distinguish at Death, and immediately after Death; for ye will not grant, that
any man is free of all sin one instant, or any sensible part of an instant
before death; and therefore what follows, may be as well said after death, as
at death; for the Distinction, as used by you, is a Quib^le; the instant of
death is but like a Thought; it is easier to understand the time (...) after
Death, than the precise instant of Death, which no wit of man can measure.

Page 124. Ye very injuriously charge me with Blasphemy against God, calling
him Cruel and Tyranical, and worse than Phar^ah. This is a most false and
injurious charge; God forbid that I should have any such thoughts; I only told
what your false and unchristian Doctrine represents the most merciful God to
be. Your Answer mends not the matter; for what men lost in Adam, Christ, the
second Adam, gives Grace to restore; and ye confess, That true Believers are
under the New Covenant, and not under Adams Covenant; and all to whom the
Gospel is preached, are called to come under the New Covenant.

Ye grossly and most absurdly and falsely allege, That Gospel Obedience is
shorter, and lesser than the Obedience that the Law requires. Whereas Christ
under the Gospel not only fulfilleth the Righteousness of the Law in the
Saints, according to Romans 8. in conformity to the first Adam, but carries true
Believers further, as they follow him, to a higher and more perfect
Righteousness, like unto that of the second Adam; but this is done gradually,
until the Gospel Perfection be attained: And that the Gospel Dispensation has
more lenity and gentleness in it, than the Law, in respect of the plenty of
forgiveness that it provides for the true Penitent, is granted; but still, it
leads on and brings to a greater Perfection than that of the Law.

Page 125. Ye call me a vile Worm, and yet say, ye Rail (...); And ye say, An
Holy God is not thus to be treated by a vile Worm. But I can and do in holy
fear and reverence appeal to the holy God, (before whom I and Ye are Dust and
Ashes) Whether ye, and not I, in this matter, speak not aright of God. Be not
too proud and confident, but fear to speak or think any thing of God that is so
contrary to his Nature, or to the Nature of his Gospel, as if the Gospel of God
gave men more toleration to sin than the Law, and to continue therein for term
of Life, o^ that God punishes men with (...) Fire for that he never actually
gave them power to forsake.

Page 125. Ye say, Believers sin more or less till they dye, and yet dye not in
their sins. This is a too nice Distinction; can ye measure the time betwixt
until Death and the instant of Death? it is too Metaph^sical or rather
Sophistical; but in the Scripture Language they are one; for said God, Your
Iniquity shall not be purged away till ye dye: What was that but that they
should dye in it?

Page 126. Ye say, They that cover, and not they that confess, their sins, are
pleaders for it; and then ye falsely charge the Quakers, That Sin had never such
Attorneys as they. Answ. They that cover their Sins do plead for it, and so
they do who confess it hypocritically, still confessing, but not forsaking, nor
believing that God will enable them by his Grace perfectly to keep his
Commands, ever in this (...) Life; how can ye pray in faith, Thy will (...) on
Earth, as it is done in Heaven? That the Quakers are in any so^t Attorneys for
Sin, is out your bare Accasation, without proof, and is but a part of your
Railing Language, that fi^eth most of your Book.

Page 126. Ye falsely say, I challenge as much Perfection as Christ or Adam ever
had. I never did say, nor think, that Believers could be equal to Christ in
Perfection; it is enough they are like to him, Likeness is one thing, Equality
is another: The Saints in Heaven are neither equal to Christ nor to one
another, and yet all Perfect. Ye falsely allege on me, That I yield all ye
pretend unto. Let the Impartial Reader compare your Assertions and mine, and he
will find great difference: Ye not only affirm, That there may be Motions and
Tentations to sin, in Believers, but that they are consented unto, and that
they sin daily in thought, word and deed. This I did not yield unto, but plead
against, as Unsound and Unchristian Doctrine. And as ye make your Appeal in the
Conclusion, I do likewise make mine to every Impartial Reader, whose
Understanding is but commonly enlightened, and has any true measure of a
spiritual Understanding, Discerning and Experience in the things of God,
Whether I have not made good my Charges against you, even all of them; and
Whether ye have not altogether failed in clearing your selves of them; and
Whether your Answers are not rather manifest Falsehoods, Slanders, Perversions,
and false Accusations, and mere Magisterial Asseverations, than having any
thing of sol^^d Truth in them. And that our Doctrine concerning the Possibility
of living without sin, by the Grace of God, is no Heresy, nor was ever
accounted Heresy by ancient Christian Writers, I can easily prove; for
Augustine, who writ zealously against those who were accounted Heretics in his
time, and has set down a Catalogue of all the Heresies he knew, being in
Number, as he reckons them, Eighty Eight, does not mention the Doctrine of a
possibility of living without sin, by the Grace of God, any of these Heresies,
nor yet any other of these twelve Articles, as held by us, in Contradiction to
you, are judged by him or any other ancient Writers, Heretical, unless ye will
say, That was condemned by Augustine for Heresy, That Children dying without
Water Baptism could be saved: And if this be a Heresy in us, it is a Heresy
in you, for ye say the same. And Augustine was so far from condemning it, as
Heresy, that men may live without sin by the Grace of God, that he says
plainly, lib. de Spiritu^et Litera, cap. 2. If any defend it, that some have
lived without sin, they do not (...) nor (...), seeing he is deceived who
thinks so of others by some Benovelence, if so a man think not himself so
perfect, except he do really and evidently find himself to be such. But he
^aith, They are earnestly and vehemently to be resisted, who think, that they
can perfect Righteousness by the mere Power of Man's Will, without the Grace of
God: Which was the Pelagian Error, and is altogether denied by us; and of the
same mind was Jerome, lib. 3. adv. Pelag. And the Augustane Confession, Art. 12.
set forth by Protestants, does not condemn them as Heretics, who say, they can
live without sin, by the Grace of Grace, but such who say, They are come to so
great Per^^^tion that they cannot sin in any respect; which we do not affirm;
for we plead not for the absolute impossibility of sinning, but for the
possibility of not sinning, by the Grace of God. And of the same mind with us
have been many Protestants of good esteem, as not only the Remonstrants, who
are as good Protestants as ye, (and have better Protestant Doctrine, for all
that ye deny it) but Castelli^ (who translated the Bible into Latin, called
Castellio's Translation, and was the Author of that little Book, called,
Dialog^^ Sacrorum, much used in Protestant Schools) in a peculiar Tractate on
that subject.

And thus it may plainly appear, how falsely ye accuse me, That I would b^at
down the Foundations of many Generations. (...) all (...), ^endom, make the
Scripture, to intend just contrary to what it speaks, and oppose almost all the
Fundamental Articles of Religion that have been maintained almost Seventeen
Hundred Years, as ye say, page 155. wherein ye show, either your great
Ignorance or Malice; for in all those twelve Articles, above recited, we have
the generality of the best ancient Christian Writers on our side, as well as
the best sort of Protestants, and it is but too much Self-love, and vain
Conceit, and narrowness of Spirit in you, to think, That because we oppose
twelve, or some more Presbyterian and Independent Articles of false Doctrine,
that therefore we unchurch o^ oppose all Christendom; for we do no more
unchurch them than your selves do, who think, Ye, ( viz. the Presbyterians and
Independents) are the only true visible Church, and that but of late ye have
made to your selves a Mu^ge^il new Church Model, the Independents refused to
own the Presbyterians to be a true visible Church, because of her being
National, or that her Ministers were true Ministers because deriving their call
by the Pope of Rome, and consequently had no true Ministry not Sacraments, as
witness what (...) has printed against them: We believe God has many that
truly belong to him, and are Members of his true Church, in Christendom, among
the several Pro^es^ions o^ it though we cannot own the visible Constitution of
their Churches to be true, and conform to the true Pattern of the primitive
Church in the Apostles days.

CAP. IX.
PAGE 128. Ye wrongfully blame me that I charge you for holding, That nothing
of Grace, or of the Power of Godliness is requisite to constitute a Member of
your visible Church; which, ye say, is all Railing; And yet within a few lines,
page 129. ye plainly confess, That such a Profession both of Words and
Practices, may be, where sincerity is not; And thus Hypocrites, ye say, may
belong to the visible Church. And page 131. ye say, it is nothing else, but an
outward form of Profession, that can make them a visible Church. And therefore
ye sufficiently clear me, that I have not in the least wronged you, unless ye
hold, that Hypocrites have the Grace and Power of Godliness indwelling in them,
which ye deny.

Page 132. Ye say, I am deceived, when I say, every Member of Christ is a
living Member; Christ has said otherwise, John 15. 2. How in Christ, but by
Profession, their being fruitless, proves them dead. But your reason ye bring
does not prove, that Christ has said otherwise; all it proves is, that a man
may be a branch in Christ, not only seemingly, but (...), and yet if he leave
off to bring fort^ (...) he is cut off; that proves the possibility of falling
away, from a good and true beginning of a good Work, against your unchristian
Doctrine; for it is usual to Branches of Trees, that are real Branches, and not
only seemingly so, that did once bear some fruit, to leave off bearing, and
then the Husbandman cuts them off. Your citing the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor.
3. 6. or any other instances, can never prove, that any Hypocrites, were ever
acknowledged to be Members of the true Church, they were but the Tares, and
Chaff, and Weeds that were mingled among the good Wheat, but were none of it.
Your Notion of a visible Church, whose Members have only the Profession, and
Form of Godliness, but not the power, and sincere practice of it, was not
according to the ancient doctrine of the best Protestants; for the Augustane
Confession, presented to Charles the fifth, by the Protestants, who were the
only Protestants of greatest note, at that time, defines the Church of God,
expressly thus, in so many words, Act. 8. That the Church it properly the
Congregation of the Saints and true Believers, although in this life there are
many Hypocrites and evil Men, that are mixed. Whereby it is plain, that they
did not judge Hypocrites to be Members of the Church, any more then Tares to be
Wheat, though mixed among the Wheat. I told you, that the Invisible Church and
the Visible, do not differ in substance, or nature, but in some Circumstances
of Time, Places, and outward Action^ To this ye object nothing of any weight,
but that ye will have the Invisible Church and the Visible to differ in being
and nature, still affirming, that nothing can constitute a Visible Church, but
that which is only or merely Visible; that ye confidently assert, without any
shadow of proof or reason; and a Child may be too strong against you, in his
reason, in this thing; for what makes a visible man? is it only his skin, or
visible part? does not any ordinary Schoolboy know, that he who is a true
visible man, must be a real man, and have his invisible parts, as Heart,
Stomach, Brain, and other inwards, yea, and Life also; and as he must have
s^^ming motions of Life, so real, proceeding from true Life in him, which is
invisible, otherwise it might be said, the mere Skin, or out side of a man, is
the whole visible Man, which none of common wit will say, for take the mere
skin of a man, and fill with hay, or some other mattar, none will say, that is
a true visible Man; and yet such a visible Man, as this would be, such a
visible Church Member, would he be, that has only but the Skin or Outside
Profession of a Christian, without the inward Life and Power of Christianity.

Page 129. Ye say, Profession, as it is understood by the Assembly, is not a
mere verbal thing, but Practical too, it contains in it an Orthodoxy in the
Principles professed, and a Co^^ersation framed thereto, a professing in words,
and a not denying in work, else men are not visible Christians, but to be
turned from, citing 2. Tim. 3 5. But this is your gloss on the words of the
Assembly, without any proof; And that your imposed Gloss is not the real sense
of the Assembly, is manifest from this, that the (...) greatest part of them
being Presbyterians, and but few Independants in comparison of the major part,
the Presbyterian Church was then a National Church, composed of the whole Body
of the Nation, both in England, Scotland and Ireland, as much as possible could
be, and the Presbyterian League and Covenant did not only take in all, who were
willing^ however many thousands of them were of (...) Life, but the Promoters
of it forced them who were unwilling, that either they must take the Covenant,
or suffer Banishment; And it is manifest, that the Presbyterian Church in
England, Scotland and Ireland, was as National, and consisting of as gross a
mixture, as the Episcopal, or even as the Church of Rome it self, as in respect
of Scandalous Livers, so that what Luther said of his followers in his day, may
be as much applied to the Presbyterian Church, whose Ministers did mostly
compose that Assembly, in the forecited Book, called Mensalia, cap. 22, ^.
290. The manner of Life (said Luther) is (...) Evil among (...) as among the
Papists; wherefore we strive not with them, by reason ^ the manner of Life, but
for, and about the Doctrine. And it is manifest as the ^oon day, that not only
the far greatest part of the People, composing the Presbyterian Church, were of
a dessolute and scandalous Life, but too many of their Ministry and Elders,
which occasioned the breach betwixt the Independents and them, that these
called Independents, thinking that the multitude of Presbyterian Professors,
were not duly qualified to be Church Members, as in respect of a strict life,
erected a new Model of Congregational Churches, which are now again almost
wholly degenerated, if not altogether into a Presbyterian Laxeness; and how can
it be supposed that a National Church, as such, can have the multitude of its
Professors to be free of a scandalous Life, seeing no such instance can, as yet
be given; for the Presbyterian National Church, as well as the Epis^opal and
Church of Rome, receives Men and Women to be Members of their Church, either
how soon born, or by Infant Baptism, and rarely, if ever, does excommunicate
any for their Vis^o^ manner of living (except in some extraordinary cases of
Adultery, Incest, or Sedomy, etc.) but if any dissent from them in Doctrine,
then nothing but dreadful Thunderings of Excommunication, like the Popes Bulls,
against the primitive Protestants: All which shows, that by Profession the
Assembly understood, much rather a mere verbal thing, than the Practice of a
holy Life, or so much, as the outward appearance thereof; And ye may be
ashamed, to cite 2 Timothy 3. 5. for that requi^eth us To turn away from such, as
having a form of Godliness, deny the Power thereof; and that is to be sure,
from all Hypocrites, and such who have not real inward Piety and Holiness; for
who have not true piety, deny the Power of Godliness. And that either the
Presbyterian or Independent Constitution of a Church require an uniform
Practice of a Godly and Christian Life, in all the necessary parts of it, as of
living Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, and denying Ungodlines^ and worldly
(...), is no wise apparent from their (...); however it may be allowed, that
some external Practices in some things, that Hypocrites may most easily
perform, yea, and Scandalous Persons also, may be and are required, as
particularly, To present their Children to be sprinkled, To break Bread twice
or four times a year, more or less, etc. together, ^o come to Church, as it is
called, once or twice a week, To salute the Minister with a Ha^^ Rabbi, and a
low Cringe, in the streets, and putting off the Hat, and most especially, as a
most necessary practice, To pay every one his share of the Preist^ Wages: These
and the like very ordinary and superficial Practices, are the most that I can
find, are required in your Church Members; and what is there required of the
Spirit of God, or real inward Holiness in all this? surely nothing, by your own
confession. Nor ought ye to blame me, for this Character of your Church
Members, seeing John Fox gives me a President in his Book o^ Mar^yrs 1.volum.
Page 43. in the like cass, where he defines a Christian man, after the Popes
making by his (...) some outward things, no wise in (...) inward Holiness of
Life; and after concludes with these express words, Now look upon this
Definition viz. that he has given of a Member of the Popes Church) and tell
me, good Reader, what Faith, or Spirit, or that working of the holy Ghost in
all this Doctrine, is to be required. Whereby it is most plain, that John Fox,
a man of great Authority among Protestants, agrees with the People called
Quakers, against both Presbyterians and Independents, in the true definition of
a Member of the true Church visible, viz. That every such Member should have
the true Faith, and Spirit, and working of the holy Ghost, which yet ye openly
deny to qualify them thereunto, requiring only an outside Profession of words,
and at most some outward Practices, that may be, and are commonly practiced by
the greatest Hypocrites.

Page 1^ 2. Ye say, I find fault with you for using an Hourglass to know how
the time (...), and a Bell to ga^^er your Assemblies together. But for the use
of an Hourglass, simply to know the measure of Time, I did find no fault with
you, but that ye commonly measure the Time of your preaching by the Hourglass,
which shows, that none of you preach by the Spirit of God, which is not
limited to any stinted measure of Time; and the primitive Christian Preachers
had no such thing as either Hourglass or Dial, to measure the time of their
Preaching; nor are we against the civil use of Bells, Clocks or Dials, but the
superstitions use of Bells, hanging in high S^eeples, like the high places used
by Idolators of Old, and which ye follow the Papists in, to call your Assembly
together, and the sound of which many ignorant and carnal People are vainly
delighted with. Hospimian de orig. Templ. says, Bells were not used for
certain, in the first five Centuries, at most, of Christianity; when yet their
Parishes or Church-Precincts were of a greater extent than the most diffused
among us.

P. 133. Ye call the inward Gospel spiritual Bell, ringing in the hearts of the
faithful, which is the living Word sounding in the hearts, a Fancy, more
fabulous than any thing in AEsop. Whereby ye show, how ^arnal, dark and
ignorant ye are; for hereby ye deny the inward Call, Voice and Sound of Christ,
the Son of God, in the hearts of the faithful, which by a figure I call the
Gospel Bell, whereof Aarons Bells, that did hang at his Garments, were a Type;
and it is common in Scripture, that the name of the Type is given to the thing
typified by it. But that P sal. 89. 15. intends the Silver Trumpets in the time
of the Law, ye barely all^dge, without proof; and that ye say, Ancient and
Modern Interpreters agree therein, ye ^ow your ^r^shness, for ye name no
ancient Writer that says so: And Theodoretus, a very ancient Writer,
expounds that place, P sal. 89. 15. in his Commentary on the P salms, of
(...) J^bilation, or joyful Sound in the Gentiles in Gospel-dayes, who should
believe in Christ; and ^is evident that the Psalm is a Prophecy of Christ, and
of the great blessings that should come to all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles,
by him, as both Th^odoretus and other ancient and modern Writers understand it,
as is clear from verse 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, etc. that is not applicable to David,
but to Christ, whereof David was a Type. And that ye say, The Quakers give
notice of their Meetings, we grant, but yet we use neither Bell nor Drum to
give such notice, and find no need nor occasion for any such superstitious
Custom.

Page 135. Ye query, May ye not succeed the Apostles in their Ministry, though
not in their Apostleship? I Answer; Nay, seeing ye deny that which qualifieth
all true Ministers of Christ, which is the Spirit and Power of Christ inwardly
revealed, and that ye require nothing of real inward Godliness necessary to
constitute ^ Minister of Christ, ye have no President for your Ministry that ye
plead for, without true piety, from the true Apostles, but from Judas the
Apostate, that betrayed the Lord Jesus Christ, and in so doing fell from his
Ministry; yea, ye are not ashamed to mention him and the Pharisees for your
Presidents and Patrons, to which I have formerly replied. And though the
Apostles ordained Elders and Overseers over gathered Churches, yet it was by
the direction of the holy Ghost, and this ye deny, that your Ordination was
such. Nor was it proper and peculiar only to the Apostles to travel through the
Nations to preach the Gospel, but was common to other Pastors and Teachers, as
to the Apostles, as is clear from the Acts of the Apostles, and from Christ's
Commission. And every true Minister of Christ is to know his place and calling
by the Spirit of the Lord, how long he is to stay among a People, whether all
his Life time, or for some season. But if ye were indeed called of God to sit
down all your days in one place, how comes it to be so usual among you, to
remove from one place to another, and most commonly to some new place, where ye
can have a greater Benefice, or some better outward Accommodation?

Page 136. Ye say, I reflect a Scandal upon you, in respect of the endeavour^
for the Conversion of the Indians; and for this, ye refer to the printed
Accounts. But ye should have mentioned i^ particular what these printed acounts
say, that they might be examined, whether true or false; for we know many
printed Accounts are false; and it is most manifest, that great Sums of Money
have been sent out of Old England to encourage that work of pr^aching to the
Indians, and it is as manifest, that much of that Money has been ill bestowed
and improved, as the Country of New England knows well enough; and these
called Christian Indians, your pretended Converts, are known generally to be
worse than the poor Heathens.

CAP. X.
Page 136. Ye say so little in defense of that ye call your Two Sacraments,
(confe^^ing withal, That the Scripture says nothing of the word Sacrament)
that I shall not spend Paper nor Time to answer all your Impertinencies,
considering that I have said enough that may suffice to answer you in my former
Reply to Pardon T^llinghast; for if Water Baptism be no Gospel Precept, then
surely sprinkling Infants is none; only I shall consider some of the grossest
of them. Page 1.37. As for sprinkling, ye say, ye plead not for it, but for
pouring Water, not on the forehead only, but on the face: This seems a
learned distinction, that may pass current among ignorant People; what
difference betwixt sprinkling and pouring? (...) all the Water ye pour is
neither gallon not ^int, but so much as ye can hold in the hollow of your hand,
which cannot well wet the whole face, and therefore is more sprinkling; but
still, ye are to seek for a proof, that either sprinkling or pouring Water on a
child's face was eve^ commanded by Christ, or practiced by any of the Apostles
or Ministers of Christ recorded in Scripture. Ye say, Origin and Cyprian tell
us, (...) the Apostles gave order for the baptizing of Infants, withal citing
Augustine; but this is no Scripture Proof, and Authority of ancient Writers,
without Scripture, ought to be of no weight among true Protestants. The Church
of Rome does so argue for her ^^^^riptural Traditions, and is more ing^^^ous
than ye, that she does confess, There is no Authority for Infant Baptism, but
only the Tradition of the Church; and if ye have no better Authority than
Tradition, your cause is desperate, and your Refuge to the Tradition of ancient
Writers, proves you more Papish than Protestant. And as for Origin, Cyprian
and Augustine, they lived long after the first Century, and ye can give no
evidence in Church History that Infant Baptism was practiced until Cypria^^s
time, past two hundred years from Christ's Resurrection; and whereas while the
practice of Water Baptism continued in the Church, (...) was required, that
before Baptism, the Persons that were to be baptized could cea^ess to the
Truth, and also that they did confess their sins, and declare their Repentance
and Faith, which Infants could not do, and therefore were incapable of
Water Baptism; to supply which defect, in after Ages the invention of
Godfathers, that should confess and vow for them, was set up, that has no
shadow of ground in Scripture.

Page 139. Ye say, I fraudulently omit that ^lause, citing Luke 18. 15, 16. For
of such is the Kingdom of God. Answ. I do not fraudulently omit it, but saw no
necessity to repeat it, as having not the least seeming strength in it for
Water Baptism to Infants; for granting that those Infants, or such, belonged to
the Kingdom of God, it does not therefore follow, that they were baptized with
Water; ye must ^how either Precept or Practice, but ye do neither; and that ye
say, It is above the capacity of Children to receive the Lords Supper, so
called, ye give no instance wherein that is more above their capacity, than to
receive Infant Baptism by sprinkling or pouring, seeing both, ye say, are signs
of spiritual Mysteries; and in Angustines time, that called the Supper was
given to Children, or Infants; if they be incapable of understanding the thing
signified by the one, so are they of understanding the thing signified by the
other. Ye falsely allege, That Contra-distinguished signifies two Contrary^s
the one to the other; but I did not understand any contra^^ety betwixt John's
Baptism and (...)'s, but only a diversity; nor does the word
contra-distinguished import any other (...), but as the Type has (...) the
Antitype, i. e. counter-type.

Page 140, 141. Ye contend, that Mat. 28, 19, 20. (...) be Water Baptism,
because the Apostles ever renounced doing any of these things, as beg^t^ing or
converting men unto Go, and baptizing with the Spirit by their own virtue. But
this is a must poor Evasion, we do not say they either did or could do any of
these things by their own virtue, that is not the thing (...) Controve^^^; for
what they did they did not by their own Virtue, but by the Virtue and Power of
Christ. Ye still b^g the Question, (though to deny it ye call Infatuation, but
the Infatuation is your own) that Christ commanded these words to be used, as
words of Institution, In the Name of the Father, etc. for we find not that he
bid them say or repeat these words. Ye put a mere precations gloss on Paul's
words, ( That he was not sent to Baptize) That he was not obliged by any
necessity to do it ordinarily personally; And besides, this is as much as to
say, that Paul thought it enough to obey Gods Command by a (...), and (...) may
as well say, he was not under any necessity to preach, but by a Proxy or
Deputy; this is to abuse Scripture, and not to expound it; for if Paul might
obey one Command of God by a Proxy, why not all others? And thus ye teach men
to excuse themselves from Personal Obedience to Gods Commands; it is enough,
according to your gloss, that others obey for them; but would (...) (...) God
for not obeying a Gospel-Precept? and yet he said, He thanked God (...) any of
^^m, but some few: Paul might have baptized some without a Commission, as well
as he circumcised Timothy.

Page 142. Ye say, Ye have (...) professed your zeal for the inward Baptism
with the holy Ghost: But this is a great Falsh^^d and Contradiction, when ye
deny all present inward divine Revelation and Inspiration, and the real in
being and Presence of Christ o^ God immediately in the Saints.

Page 143. Ye most grossly (...) and abuse thy words, because I said, Christ had
an outward Supper with his Disciple, when he did eat the Pas^h I Lamb with
them, ye turn his your false gloss on it, as if I said or thought, (...) had
the thing with (...) the thing signified, i. e. that Christate the Pass^ve
hypocritically^ Nothing can be more grossly alleged; for I said expressly, that
the Disciples at that time when Christ had that outward (...) with them, had an
inward enjoyment of (...) given them by Christ, in the use of the Field and
Wine, see page 190. And by your many such gross Perversions, that seem wilful
in you, ye show what men ye are. Ye allege, The first Cup belonged to the
Passover, Luke 22. But ye may as well say, so did the second; for ye give no
Reason why one, rather than another; and ye may with as much color say, thus
the second Cup did not belong to the Supper, because it is said, Luke 22. 20.
He took the Cup after Supper, etc.

Page 143. Ye allege, I arrogate Gods Pr^vogative, who only can judge the
heart immediately, when I say, your Sacrament has no inward spiritual
signification unto you. But I speak not so simply nor absolutely, as I can and
do appeal to the impartial Reader; for ye leave out my following words, that
qualify them, viz. As ye use it, while ye altogether deny that the Saints are
partakers of the Substance of Christ, or that Christ really and substantially
dwells in his Saints, and while ye also deny all inward Revelation of him, in
these latter Ages. And thus I presume not to judge you, as if immediately I did
know your hearts, but by your words ye are judged, even as I may judge of that
man, who denies, that he has eat any substance of Bread or Food, that he has
not received of Bread, etc. For as he who eats Bread, receives the Substance
of it into his body, so he who eats Christ, the Bread of Life, receives some
measure of him substantially into his Soul. And though this is denied by many
of you, and as I said, in my former Book, the many lean and dead Souls among
you, void of inward and spiritual discerning, taste or favor too manifestly
demonstrate, ye are generally strangers to the Supper of the Lord, there No^^,
I say not universally, but generally I yet I have that charity, that some
called Presbyterians and Independents, of the more so be^ kind, and who allow
in part of inward divine Revelation, and of a real inward indwelling of Christ
in Believers, may truly know somewhat at times of the inward and spiritual
Signification of that Figurative Supper, yet not because of that outward manner
of using it, but indeed because there is some secret breathing and desires
after the Lord in some of them, and such are sober, and tender, and not of a
malicious and persecuting Spirit, as too many among you are, who continue to
justify the putting to Death our innocent worthy Friends at Boston; and thus
our Charity is greater than yours; for ye call me a fearful Apostate, and so
ye, and not I, arrogate Gods Preregative, who only can judge the heart
immediately; for ye can give no probable signs of (...) Apostasy, seeing in the
judgment of all sober Protestants, (...) all the Fundamental and most necessary
Doctrines of the Christian Faith, and ye can charge nothing in my Conversation
or manner of Life inconsistent with true Christianity; I have departed from no
good thing either of Doctrine or Life, that I had when among these called
Presbyterians, I have only relinquished their Errors, and that will no more
prove me Apostate, than Luther and Calvin their relinquishing Popish Errors,
does prove them Apostates, although the Papists have so charged them; yea, I have
known Presbyterians accuse the Independents for being Apostates. But as I value
not your uncharitable Judgment against me, so I cannot but take notice how
guilty ye are to blame me for Uncharitableness in judging, when ye are so
deeply guilty in that very thing.

Page 144. Ye grossly abuse and pervert my words, when ye allege, That I say,
ordinary eating, as it is the common Duty of all men, is the Supper of the
Lord. I said no such thing; but (...) often in the use of outward eating and
drinking, being sanctified and blessed by the (...) of God and Prayer, we have,
together (...) the outward eating, eat the inward and (...) Bread; and together
with the outward Cup, have drunk that spiritual Drink, and withal, remembering
the Lords Death, and what he has done and suffered for us: And I distinguish
betwixt the Saints more solemn eatings together (upon frequent occasions, where
their thus eating together was a figure or sign of their inward Communion) and
their daily eating a part; and withal, I declared, (...) i^ all our eatings and
drinkings, and at (...), we should remember the Lords Death even until his last
coming, and to the end of the World, see page 188, to 191. And when the Saints
outwardly eat together, and then also inwardly eat of that inward and spiritual
Food, and have together an inward enjoyment of the Lord in their hearts, that
may be called the Supper of the Lord (which both may be without and with the
outward eating) but I did not say, nor do ^^ow say, that always when the
Saints eat outwardly at their ordinary Meals, they eat together inwardly, but
that the times are very frequent of their outward and inward eating together at
one time, wherein they remember the Lords Death, and praise him, as for all his
Mercies, so for what he has done and suffered for them; and this Solemnity may
be well used by any Number, as well small as great, and without any Gown-Man or
ordained Priest, either of Pope, Prelate or Presbyter; for all (...) Faithful
are a Royal Priesthood unto God; and there is no shadow of ground in Scripture,
that Saints may not eat and drink together, remembering the Lords Death, with
Prayer, and Blessing, and Thanksgiving, and enjoying an inward (...) spiritual
Communion together, though they be ever so small a Number, and though having no
Priest outwardly ordained, as above said. And seeing outward Ordination of
Priests or Presbyters, either by Pope, Prelate or Presbyter (none of whom have
any inward and immediate call) is a mere human Invention (as John Owen, whom ye
esteem your reverend Brother, has sufficiently proved) and that ye lay the
main stress of this Ordinance, its being observed or practiced hereupon, that
some ordained Minister consecrate it, or Independent Pastor, which is of no
better Authority than the former. Ye can never prove that that ye call the
Supper, is any thing beyond what is frequently practiced among us, even as
outwardly, although as to the inward, to Gods praise, we know we have the
advantage incomparably beyond all of you. And instead of proving that your
eating together has any advantage above ours, ye say, Ye think your Supper is
beyond ours, as being an holy Ordinance of Gospel Worship, and ours i^ only the
common Duty of all men. But as ours is not the common Duty of all men (as ye
falsely allege) so yours is not an holy Ordinance of Gospel Worship; for it is
essential to all Gospel Worship to be performed in the Spirit, because God is a
Spirit; but ye plead, That men, called Ministers, who have nothing of true
Piety, or the Spirit of Truth and Holiness, may consecrate the Bread, and make
it a Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord.

Page 145. Ye commit another gross Abuse, falsely alleging on me, that I said,
All outward eating and drinking is a natural and necessary sign of the inward,
see my Book, p. 192. I say not All outward eating and drinking, but I say, such
a figure as is natural and necessary to be used by us all, etc. where ye may
see, I restrict it to Believers; so that the outward eating and drinking of
Believers, is a natural and necessary sign or figure of the inward, to
Believers (but not to Unbelievers) as the whole outward World is a figure of
the inward and spiritual, as Paul does expressly call it, 1 Cor. 7. 31. But
whereas ye say, There is not one Syllable, expressly nor consequentially
intimating any such thing there; ye show your great Rashness, or Ignorance; for
in the Greek (to which I did refer) the word is (...), Latin, Seema, and
Englished, Scheme, that most commonly signifies figure, and is expressly
translated Figure, in that very place, by Pasor, a zealous Protestant, in his
Lexicon, thus, Figura hujus Mundi preterit, i. e. the Figure of this World
passes away. Hence in all Mathematical Schools, in teaching Geography or
Astronomy, we call the draught or figure proposed in the Lesson, the Scema or
Scem^; and any ordinary Schoolboy, or common Shepherd or Plowman may inform
you, that this visible World is a Figure of the invisible, and the outward a
figure of the inward, which is a common Saying in the mouths of men generally,
and is further confirmed by Paul, saying, The invisible things of God are
understood by the things that are made, Romans 1. 20. and by the forecited
Saying of Luther, That in all Creatures we see a Declaration and Signification
of the holy Trinity. And whereas I said, That in our outward ^atings, sometimes
we do use both inward and outward Prayer and Thanksgiving, and sometimes only
inward; this in a way of Scoff, ye call, A new way of Consecration; whereby ye
declare your selves too great strangers to inward and mental Prayer, performed
only with the heart and mind; for if ye did rightly understand inward and
mental Prayer, ye would acknowledge that the outward eating is sanctified by
the Word of God, and by inward Prayer, as well as both inward and outward, but
the outward without the inward, has no virtue to sanctify the Creatures of
God; and yet certainly ye give too much cause to judge, that your outward
Prayer want^th the inward, when ye allow both the Members and Ministers of your
Church to be Members and Ministers, without all inward Holiness, or working of
the Spirit of God. And how the Prayer of Unholy Men, (as ye allow your
Ministers may be, that consecrate the Bread and Wine to be the Sacrament of the
Supper) can consecrate, sanctify, or make holy, even as Instruments, these
Elements, is as strange a Paradox, as how an unclean thing can bring out a
clean, or one contrary another.

Page 146. Ye allege, That the Seventh day was appointed, viz. for a Sabbath,
before the Fall, and so was no Type of Christ. But the former ye barely
allege; for that the Seventh Day, its being said to be blessed, etc. (suppose
a natural or common Day) before any mention is made of the Fall of Adam, no
more proves its institution before the fa^l, for a Sabbath, than that it can
be proved, there were diversities of Languages before Babel, because Languages
or Tongues are mentioned, Genesis 10. 5^ 10. 31. and yet in the following Chap.
verse. 1. its said, The whole Earth was of one Language; for diverse things are
recorded in Scripture by Anticipation.

Page 147. Ye say, Heb. 4. 9, 10. it is said, Christ entered into his Rest; and
does that mean, that be entered into himself? Answ. It is not said that Christ
or God entered into his Rest, but That God ^^ased from his Works; but allow it,
That Christ entered into his Rest, is not That that he entered into that Glory he
had with the Father before the World was? and can God or Christ have another or
better Rest than Himself? or can any natural or common Day be a Rest unto God?
O blind Men! Ye call an inward Day, Nonsense, but it is because ye have not
sense to understand it: Is not the Day of Gods Power, and the Day of Salvation,
mentioned in Scripture, an inward and spiritual Day? Ye say again, If I can
find an inward Seventh Day in Scripture, it used be a rare lovention. I Answer;
As I (...) Moon and Sun inwardly and spiritually understood in Scripture, so I
find seven Days, and a Seventh Day inwardly and spiritually understood, see
Isa. ^0. 26. but this to you is still a Mystery. And whereas it is the outward
and natural Sun that constitutes common and natural Days, therefore did
Origin, Augustine, and many others conclude, That the seven Days, mentioned
Genesis 1. 2. and Exodus 20. could not be common and natural Days, for there was no
Sun until the fourth Day, nor Firmament until the second, nor dry Land and Sea
ti^ the third.

P. 147. That God altered the Sabbath from the Seventh Day to the First, ye
merely allege, without any proof, as your common manner is. I suppose ye are
not so ignorant as not to know that Calvin, the Father, so called, or Founder
of the Presbyterian Church, and the French Protestants generally, and also the
Dutch, though they keep the First Day for worship, after the manner of primitive
Christians, as we also do, yet do not judge it to be the Sabbath, or commanded
by divine Institution; and we set apart that day worthily and commendably, with
other Protestants, neither for any betterness in it, simply as a Day, nor as
being commanded for a Sabbath, but in honor of our Saviors Resurrection,
after the Example of the primitive Christians in the Apostles days, mentioned
in Scripture, and that we see a great (...) and service in it, to keep a Day
weekly unto the Lord, and as said the Apostle, He who keeps a Day, keeps it
unto the Lord, and that Day rather than another, because of Christ's
Resurrection on the first day of the week, and the worthy Example of primitive
Christians, recorded in Scripture.

And thus I have gone through all the Heads contained in your Book, relating to
the Doctrinal part, and have showed our agreement in every one of them, with
the holy Scriptures, and also with famous Protestants, and Ancient Writers,
called Christian Fathers, except in that one matter of Infant Baptism, wherein
if we differ from many of these called Ancients in one thing, ye differ in
another; for they generally judged it absolutely necessary to Salvation, which
ye, as well as I, judge an Error in them, and these called Baptists commonly,
who may be judged as good Protestants as ye, deny your Infant Baptism, as a
humane Invention; and yet ye have no other: And if this does not unchristian
them, so nor can it us; and ye deny their baptizing into Water such, who have
been baptized, when Infants; why then may ye not allow the same Charity to us,
that ye, viz. the more sober part hoth of Presbyterians and Baptists, so called
(though the more Rigid sort call one another Heretics) allow one to another, and
that we allow to the sober, and tender, and honest hearted of you both, yea,
and to such in all Professions, where the Head and Foundation is held, which is
Christ? and we have that Charity, that there is a sincere fort among all
Professions, who belong to God and Christ, and though they have wrong Notions and
Conceptions of some things belonging to Christian Doctrine, and have not a form
of found words, in delivering some matters of Faith, which is a great hurt unto
them, yet they have some true inward sense of Christian Truth and Doctrine, and
their faith and sense may be partly sound, where their words, where by they
express it may be very unsound; for many have a right sense and feeling of
things, whereof they have not a right Elocution, Utterance and form of Speech,
as in Naturals, so in Spirituals, as when Men taste Honey, and their taste of
it is the same, yet they differ in the Names they give it, or in some subtle
and curious Questions about the Nature of it, or the nature and manner of
tasting it, that is not so very material. So men may have some real sense and
experience of the workings of the holy Spirit, and inward divine Revelations
and Inspirations, that work and beget in them some measure of true Faith, Hope,
Love, and other Christian Virtues, and yet by the Prejudice of Education, and
wrong outward teaching, or ill wording of things, may give wrong Names to
things, yet God forbid we should unchristian them, simply for a Mistake, or
defect in not giving proper words and names to things; and yet many things of
Controversy, among single hearted men, lie but in words, and such should have
a regard to that which is good, tender and sensible one in another, where it is
felt: But where a persecuting and malicious Spirit, and great hardness of Heart
prevails in any, these are not to be regarded as Christians, whatever they
profess. So I would have you all to know, all the sober and tender hearted
People of New England, and elsewhere, whether called Presbyterian,
Independent, Baptist, or Episcopal, (...), and others, holding the Head, and
being sincere in the main, That we can, and do own that your sincerity, although
we cannot but (...) from you in matters both of Doctrine and Practice, wherein
we find you to err from the path of Truth, and so far as we have together
attained and are agreed in all good things of Christian Doctrine or Practice,
let us walk by the same Rule, and live in Charity one with another.

Page 148. In your Reflections on that I called, A Call and Warning to the
People of Boston, etc. first, ye falsely charge me, That I arrogate as much to
my self, as any of the Prophets of Old had, of an immediate Mission from God.
But let that Paper be considered, and it shall not be found that I arrogate or
assume any thing equal to the Prophets of Old, only I did, and I do still
affirm, That I had the Word of the Lord to declare to the People of Boston,
etc. and it was as a burden unto me, until I had delivered it; and he who has
not Gods Word, as it lives and is the Word of Life in his heart, is no true
Minister of Christ, but every Minister of Christ is not either Apostle or
Prophet, in that high and eminent sense that is frequent in Scripture. Ye
charge me with, 1st. Lying, 2dly, Slandering, 3dly, Railing, 4thly, False
Doctrine, 5thly, Nonsense; but all this ye allege without proof, as your
manner is: Sharp Speeches are not Railing always, but commendable in some
cases; for both Christ, and the Prophets and Apostles used them to men of your
Generation, and your Speeches are more sharp against me and my Friends than
ours are against you; and which are most deserving, we freely leave it to the
Lord, and his Witness in men's Consciences. Ye would six Nonsense on my words,
that I said, Your Self-actings of all sorts, in that ye call your Duties and
Performances, ye are to repent of, etc. Where it is clear, by that ye call your
Duties, I did understand, (and so might ye) your Preaching, Praying, Singing
without the Spirit of God, and them page 149. ye call Dirt and Dung; and yet ye
continue to offer up this Dirt and Dung unto God, but remember that God will
cast the Dirt and Dung of your Sacrifices on your faces, and the Dung of your
solemn Feasts, according to Mal. 2; 3. And surely, seeing by your own
confession, your Prayers are Dirt and Dung, they cannot be that pure Offering
which God promised his People should offer up unto him, Mal. 1. 11. ^^othly, Ye
say, Prophets do not use to call men to Repent of their holding the Truth as it
is in Jesus, and his Call is nothing else. Ans. I bid you not Repent for your
holding the Truth in Jesus; for that is false, ye hold it not in Jesus, but as
ye hold many Errors in Doctrine, so ye hold something of Truth in
Unrighteousness, according to Romans 1. 18. and I bid you Repent of your
Hypocrisy, Pride, Vanity, Blasphemy, hard Speeches, Cruelty, etc. 7 thly, Ye
say, Prophets had wont to show some proof of their Call^ but ye allege, I have
shown none; but ye have not told what proof they used to show, or what proof
John, a great Prophet, showed to the Pharisees, for he wrought no Miracles;
their ordinary proof was, Hear the Word of the Lord, and Let the Lord be
Witness, and this is my proof, who do not equal my self to any of those
Prophets; it suffic^th, that I am one of the least of the Servants of Christ.
But it is hard to prove a thing to be White to a blind man, or that I speak to
a deaf man: When ye can prove, that ye have Ears to hear what God says in his
Servants, or that your Ears are open to hear, I can prove, That God spoke by me
unto you; but ye shut your Ears against Gods Call, as many did of Old, and
said, The Lord has not spoken, when he did speak. I (...) it with Sorrow, if
ye were not blind, ye might see some of the Judgments of the Lord begun to be
execute^ upon you, (...) I was made, with great sorrow to declare, I did feel
were to come upon the People both of Boston and New England, if they did not
speed^ly Repent; and though Ye have not considered and laid it to heart, yet
some have, and more I hope will, for their Amendment; but as for me, I have not
d^li^ed the Evil Day to come upon you, but greatly desire, if it be the good
will of God, that ye may find Mercy to Repent, and so his Wrath that is begun
to kindle against you, may be quenched. And though I told you, That whatever
Doctrine cannot be proved from Scripture, is to be rejected, whatever pretense
men may make to Immediate Revelation; yet this does (...) me, for I bring no
Doctrine but what I prove from Scripture; but as for the Call that Gods
Servants used to have, they proved it not by Scripture, but by the living ^oice
of God speaking in them, to all who have an Ear open to hear, but your Ear is
shut, as so was Pharoah's Ear, against God's Call in Moses, though accompanied
in him with great Miracles, and as some believed, that saw no Miracles of old,
so many did not believe, that (...) them; and so would it be now, if Miracles
were wrought

In your Appendix, which contains a poor empty shadow of Answer to my Letter
unto you, I need not take notice of all your Impertinencies, nor reply unto
them, as judging is loss of time and paper. Ye say,

1st, Ye hope, ye have now given a satisfactory Reason, why ye called my Letter
a Blasphemous and Heretical Paper. But your hope will prove vain, I freely
leave it to all that are sober, and able to judge in these matters. 2 dly, Ye
think, ye have now found spiritual Weapons, if the Word of God be the Sword of
the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. But the Word of God ye are ignorant of, and also of
the Scripture that testify of it, and ye have only wre^ted and abused some
places of Scripture, to defend your bad Cause, as I have made sufficiently
already appear. 3dly, Ye say, your preaching is open, and ye shut out none, but
those that will not come. But this is a poor excuse, do ye not deny, to give us
a fair hearing, when if any come to answer to your false accusations, and
gainsay your false doctrine, before they can speak one sentence they are
carried away to the Goal? 4thly, Ye allege, when I came unto you, your
Liberties were taken away. But this is a notorious Falsehood; ye had all the
Liberty that we or I had, or could be desired: None of your Meetings were
disturbed by them in Authority, nor no Prohibition to hinder you fairly to
debate things of Religion, only ye had not power to persecute as formerly, and
your Sun of Persecution was set. 5 thly, Ye falsely allege, I beast of my great
Conquest; for I only publish your Cowardice. And that ye say, Ye suppose ye
have made my Cake appear to be Dough, it is but a supposition, and has nothing
of truth in it. 6 thly, Ye say, Ought not the Shepherd to be aware when the
Wolf comes to his Flock? But suppose I were a Wolf, (as I thank God I am not)
when the Wolf co^^eth among your flock openly, should the Shepherds abscond,
and not give the Wolf an open Assault? Is this the way to defend your Flock?
unless ye did judge, that by your open appearing in a public Dispute, ye would
discover your weakness. 7 thly, Ye say, Ye knew I was a Quaker, and therefore
doubted my design. But I told you plainly what my design was, viz. To discover
you to be Teachers of false Doctrine in many things. 8 thly, Ye say, I give no
demonstration, that I came in the Will of the Lord unto you: But ye should say,
ye are blind, and cannot see it, as all false Teachers and Persecuters were,
who did not acknowledge that the true Servants of God, who came unto them, were
sent of God. 9 thly, Ye falsely, and without all shadow of proof, say, It was of
God, doubtless, to leave him in the banas of Satan, to be th^^ acted: I value
not your false Judgment, further than to pity your great Blindness. 10 thly,
Ye say, I have set you a President, viz. To (...) and Rail, but ye follow it
no^. But let all sober and impartial Readers judge, whether ye have not both
Lied and Railed most grossly; and though I have used some sharp words toward you,
according to your desert, as Gods Servants have done formerly against men of
your Spirit, yet my tender Conscience bears me witness, with the help of God,
that I have neither lied nor raised upon you. 11 thly, Ye say, It has been
proved, that I bring another Doctrine, than that of Christ. But ye say it, and
that is all: And whereas I told you, an Heretic (though I am none) should be
twice admonished, before he is rejected^ Ye answer, Have I not been more than
so? But I say, I never to this day received Admonition from any Church,
Presbyterian or other, according to due Church Order, as Christ has
instituted; and though I have had diverse Debates, some in writ, and some by
word of Mouth, with diverse Opposers, yet that says nothing that ever I was
duly admonished, according to Christ's Order, nor rejected out of any Church
Society; for these I had to deal with were only private Persons; and therefore
ye are impertinent to mention, for your excuse, either John Alexander in
Scotland, whose Book I have many years ago answered in print, and my Answer to
it is now in New England, or these Baptists (who are judged by many of you to
be Heretics) at Barbycan in London, or any at Hampton; Public Disputes are
one thing, and an orderly Church Admonition or Censure, is another. but whereas
ye mention Salem, your insinuation fails you, I writ a fair Letter to the
Priests at Salem, to have some discourse with them before the People, but they
refused, and I had no further meddling with them. And though ye grant that Christ
and the Apostles disputed with men of ill Principles, yet ye must not dispute
with me, because I am ^^rse than any of those, and grown beyond Admonition: But
this is your bare alledgance, and none will believe you, but who are blinded
with the same Prejudice as ye are. But ye give me no Answer, why though ye will
not receive Quakers into your Houses, yet some of your fort will receive their
Goods, taken from them by force, because they could not for Conscience sake
give you Maintenance. That your preaching in your public Houses, are
instituted means of our Convi^^ion, ye take for granted, without proof; nor can
we believe you, so long as ye are declared Enemies to the Inspiration of the
Spirit of Truth, that does only qualify Peachers to convince men of their
Errors. But ye forget how ye contradict your selves in two weighty particulars,
1 st, That we are past Admonition, and Incorrigible; and yet your Preaching in
your public Houses, are means of our Conviction, but not your Conference with
(...) in private Houses. If we are past Admonition and Inco^^^gible, how can
your Preaching be a means of our Conviction, any more than private Conference
in your private Houses? If it be a Duty to preach to us, is it not also a Duty,
when ye are desired, to discourse with us in private, at least before
Witnesses? 2 dly, Ye are guilty of another great Contradiction, That because I
am a Heretic, and worse, ye must not dispute with me, but reject me; and now
at last ye dispute with me in Print, that is a more open way of dispute, than
by word of Mouth; or can ye find any ground in Scripture to warrant you to
dispute with me in Print, and yet to forbid you to dispute with me by word of
Mouth?

My comparing you to Turkish Pirates that hang out false Colors, ye say, holds
not Parrallel; but that I can freely leave to the judicious and impartial
Readers. But it seems, all your former Reasons were but made or feigned, not
real, why ye refused a public Dispute with me; therefore ye proceed to give
other new Reasons, that ye think will appear more sollid. First, therefore ye
begin again to say, It was not in your power to grant it it to me, to have a
public Disputation with you, without Laying your selves obnoxious to the then
Government, who had expressly forbidden the People to take liberty of any
public Meeting together on any occasion on the week days, besides the usual
Lectures. But to this I answer; 1 st, It might have been supposed as
serviceable as your Lecture, to have allowed the time of your Lecture to a
public Dispute. 2 dly, If ye had given this Reason for your denial at first,
without all doubt a liberty could have been most readily procured unto you,
from the then Government. 3 dly, Many of the People took a sins greater liberty
afterward, not only to meet openly, without leave of your then Governor, but
to do a great deal more, etc. But if it was unlawful to dispute with an
Incorrigible Heretic, why do ye now insinuate, that had it not been for laying
your selves obnoxious to the then Government, ye would have given me a public
Disputation with you? Surely ye do greatly forget your selves, to write such
Contradictions. Secondly, Ye say, Ye knew none of your Hearers had any scruple
about your Doctrine. But what then? Ye should be ready to give a Reason of your
Hope to every one that asks you, and to convince Gainsayers, if they be out
of the way, and ye in it. Thirdly, Ye say, Ye knew there would be no holding of
me to any Law or Rule of Disputation, partly because a Quaker, and partly by
Reports of me, and that I would bring all to my Revelations, etc. But who sees
not the weakness and shallewness of these Fig-leaf Reasons? These called
Quakers are known to be men of Reason, and many of them know as well as ye, how
to hold to the true Laws of fair Dispute, and false Reports of me I value not;
it (...) was (...) my way to bring any matter of Dispute (leaving the
Scripture) to inward Revelation; but if I cannot prove the Doctrine, whereof I
charged you to be false, from Scripture, I should be silent; and Ye and the
Readers may see, I have not left the Scriptures, and run to Inward Revelations
(though I own, that with (...) inward divine Revelation no man can have a right
understanding of Scripture) for proof against you, but hold to Scripture and
Scripture Proof, in a way of fair Reasoning. 4 thly, Your last Reason is as
false as any of the rest, That I had declared my self at once in opposition to
almost all the fundamental Articles of Religion, which have been maintained
almost Seventeen hundred Tears by the Church of Christ. The falsehood of this
will sufficiently appear, from both my first, and this latter Book, to all
sober and judicious Readers. And whereas ye say, Who but Madmen would expose
these to be publicly debated? Why then have ye exposed them that ye call
Fundamentals (but are no Fundamentals of Christian Doctrine, but Fundamental
Errors, that false Churches have been (...) upon) now to be publicly debated?
Why do ye thus declare your selves, by your own confession, to be such Madmen,
to debate them so openly in the face of the Nations, both in America and
Europe, yea, much more openly than they could have been by 2 or 3 hours
discourse before two or thr^e hundred People? And that ye your selves gave the
rise to this so public way of disputing in Print, is evident from the words of
your Letter, saying, If he would have a public Audience let him Print.

I defire the Reader to take notice, That what Testimonies of ancient or latter
Writers of good esteem among Protestants, I have cited in this Treatise, is not
for want of sufficient proofs of Scripture Testimony, OR every head of
difference betwixt our Opposers and us; for I have brought sufficient
Testimonies of holy Scripture to confirm every one of these heads, as the
judicious and impartial Reader may observe in both my Treatises; but because
these men who are our Opposers, thinking to render our Doctrine odious, do
accuse it, either at Novel, or as Old Heresies revived by us, and as
contradicting almost all Fundamentals of Christian Religion for almost
Seventeen Hundred Years past, hold by good Christians; Therefore I sound it
convenient to cite these Testimonies, to show our agreement, not only with the
holy Scriptures, but also with other Writers of good esteem among Protestants,
even in these very Heads, called by our Opposers Heresies and Blasphemies, that
their Ignorance and Partiality may appear, and their evil Design to render the
Truth Odious, may be discovered.

In the end, I desire the Reader to take notice how that after C. M. and his
Brethren have been disputing against all divine Inspiration, as a most absurd
and false Doctrine, so much as to suppose it remaining or in being, whereby men
may be assisted to preach or pray, yet in his postscript to his Thanksgiving
Sermon, printed in 1690. he gives an account of some prophesying Boys and
Girls, and other Men and Women now in France, that both pray and preach by
Inspiration; and he says expressly, He dare not say what Authority or what
Original is to be assigned unto these Inspirations. But seeing, according to
his Doctrine all divine Inspiration is ceased, he ought to conclude, they are
not of God, but of the Devil; but because he dare not so conclude, he allows
it to be possible they may be divine; which is a manifest Contradiction, and
giving away his Cause; as also that he allows, that G^rles and Women may
preach and pray in Christian Assemblies, which the Priests of N. England have
so much opposed. G. K.

An APPENDIX.
AMong the many Writers this scribbling Age has furnished the World with, there
is none in these American parts has seen so busy as one Cotton Mather, a
pretended Minister of the Gospel in Boston, whose public Discourses in print
sufficiently evince^ to the serious Intelligible, Reader, how little reason
himself has to assume that Title, or his Brethren to confer it upon him. I
shall only at this time take notice, as the Lord shall assist me, of that, by
him sent forth to public view, under this Title, The Serviceable Man, A
Discourse made unto the general Court of the Massachusetts Colony in
New England, at the anniversary Election the 28 th of the 3 d M^. 1690. The
style, tendency and purport of this Discourse more resembles the Harangues of a
Mountebank or Comedian, than of a serious sober Christian, much (...) a
Minister of Christ; its plain, this Author has been more solicitous to please
the Ears of his credulous Auditors, than to consult how Truth would vindicate
his Assertions, as appears partly by his Self-Contradictions, and also by his
false malitio^s Slanders and Reproaches of an innocent People, by him and
others in scorn eall'd Quakers, whose Principles he is either unacquainted
with, or else wickedly perverts them; if the first, he manifests his Ignorance,
if the latter, his Envy and Malice, both ill Companions for a Minister of
Christ. In proof of his Self-Contradiction, read page 28. of his said Book,
compared with page 57.

Page 28. thus, It Is the Prerogative of New England, above all the Countries of
the World, That it is a Plantation for the Christian and Protestant Religion:
You may now see a Land filled with Churches, which by solemn and aweful
Covenants are dedicated unto the Son of God; there are, I suppose, more than an
hundred of these holy Societies among us, which would in Luthers judgment
render the meanest Villiage more glorious than an Ivory Palace; in these you
may see Discipline managed, Heresy subdued, Profaneness opposed, and Communion
maintained, with a careful respect unto the Word of God in all; you may see
faithful Ministers and sincere Christians, and multitudes of Souls ripening a
pace for the Kingdom of God; you may see proportionably as much of God among
them, a^ in any spot of Ground which the Children of Adam walk upon. This is
greatly in praise of N. England, if he had not as fully and amply contradicted
it, p 57. in this manner; But if our Fathers were to write unto us from that
Heaven unto which they are gone, I am thinking what they would say; Would they
not write in very disgracing Terms unto us, and say, Alas! you don't walk in
our ways: we left in your Hands, a work to be done for the People of God; but
you have thrown by that work, and found something else to be concerned about.
We hoped that you would have trod in our Steps, and that we should have shortly
congratulated your Arrival to the Glorious place, which we are Triumphing in;
But we now fear, That we have dropped you and lost you forever; and that we shall
never see you more, tell me behold you wringing your Hands and Guashing your
Teeth among the Goats at the Left Hand of the Lord Jesus in the Day of His
Appearing.

If what this Writer so confidently affirmed before were undeniably true, let
the Reader judge, how unlikely it is, an Epistle from Heaven should be filled
with such Contents against so holy a People; and for the future the Author will
do well to avoid the like Contradictions. It cannot be counted Breach of
Charity in me, or any other, to give greater credit to what I am ready, with
him, to believe would be the Contents of an Epistle from Heaven, from such of
their Fathers as are gone unto those heavenly Mansions, prepared for them by
our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, than unto this Author's Character,
directly Contradictory hereunto.

This Author has plentifully vented his Envy and Malice against an innocent
quiet peaceable People, whose behavior under all Governments (where by the
Providence of God they have had their abode) has been such as loudly gain-says
the bitter Invictives belched forth against them by this Satirical Author in
page 34, 35, 36. of his book: I shall cite the Passages verbatim, and so make
some short Reply.

C. M.

While these Enemies are seeking to involve out Civil Concerns in Confusion,
there are Sectaries and Seducers that are using their Batt'ring Rams upon our
Sacred Ones. And among those, the Quakers are certainly the most Malicious, as
well as the most Pernicious Enemies.

Reply.

Here is a heavy Charge against an innocent People, that they are not only
Sectaries and Seducers, but the most Malicious and Pernicious Enemies among
those. Were this ^s firmly proved as it is boldly asserted, it were enough to
render us Odious: Its no less just than strange, this man should be so
infatuated, as to imagine, those many thousands, unto whom his Discourse is
made public by print, should be so easily imposed upon as his credulous
Auditors were that day; for may not by this manner of Reasoning, without the
least shadow of proof, the best of Societies, as well as particular men be
grossly abused: A Method the Papists use against the Protestants.

C. M.

They were once in a ready way to have broken up all the Good Order whether
Civil or Sacred, in the Infancy of this Plantation; which occasioned the
Authority whom they would have undermined, then to turn a Sharp upon them, by
Laws not so severe as those in the Realm of England against ( their Fathers)
the Jes^ites, on the same Account: yet those Troublesom^ (...), who had no
Business here at all, but the overthrowing of our whole Government, would push
themselves on the Swords point, and though repeated Banishments with merciful
Entreaties to be gone, were first used unto them, nevertheless, two or three of
them would rather Dye, than leave the Plantation undisturbed.

Repl^.

How or after what manner the Plantation in its infancy was in such danger, our
Author is silent in: True it is, that upwards of thirty Years past, some of our
Friends, as faithful Servants, in obedience to their Lord and Masters command,
the great God of heaven, by the spirit of his Son in their hearts, did visit N.
England in true and tender Love to the Inhabitants thereof, for whose Immortal
Welfare they earnestly travalled, and were bowed down before the Lord, and
being amongst them in much brokenness of Heart and contrition of Spirit, they
were grieved and weighted in their Souls with the Hypocrisy in New England,
against which they witnessed, sealing it with their Blood, their hearts being
filled with that Message the holy Apostle Paul, in his day, was employed in,
Acts. 26. 17, 18. To open their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan unto God, directing them to the manifestation of
the Spirit of God in them; A Teacher not to be removed into a corner, nor that
would any ways deceive them, or suffer them to be at case in sin: This High way
of the Lord, cast up in his Son Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, the Sound
thereof offended the Ears of New-England's Teachers, who not unlike Demetrius
the Silver-smith, Act's 19. 24. proved notable Incendiaries against the Lords
Servants, lest their craft should be in danger, so far did they kindle the Rage
and Fury of their bigoted Rulers, that by cruel Usage and inhumane Laws they
far exceeded any thing in the Realm of England against the Jesuits. And whilst
I am writing, there livingly springs up in my heart, to you the Inhabitants of
Boston and New England, a weighty Exhortation, and that in tender Love, That
you would mind the Grace of God that brings Salvation, and as the holy
Scripture testifies, has appeared unto all men, 2 Tit. 11. that in the same
you may see your blind Guides, for if the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall
into the Ditch: Beware that it be not your Condemnation that Light is come into
the World, and that you love Darkness rather than Light, because your Deeds are
Evil: I have neither Envy nor Malice against the Priests or People of
New England, but earnestly desire the Eternal Welfare of both; yet I cannot
but lament the present state of New England, as well as its former, whose
Priests, to the life, are drawn out in the 3d of Micah, v. 5. Thus says the
Lord concerning the Prophets that make my People (...), that bite with their
Teeth, and cry Peace; and he that puts not into their M^^thes, they even
prepare War against him; and verse. 11. The Heads thereof judge for Reward, and
the Priests thereof Teach for Hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for Money;
yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, I^ not the Lord among us? none Evil
can come upon us. O New England! New England! is not this your present state?
Are not your Priests crying Peace unto you, as if no Evil could come upon you,
in the midst of these Clouds of Dangers that are hanging over your heads? some
of them you have, for more than a Twelve Month felt, to wit, A Bloody and
Cruel War with the Heathen, the loss of so many Lives has humbled me before
the Lord, and at this time the earnest Cry and Supplication of my Soul unto
God, is, That you may by your speedy and sincere Repentance unto him, prevent
his Judgments for the future. That the Jesuits may be properly termed the
Fathers of New England Priests, none can doubt, if they differ not from their
Brother John Cotton of Hampton, who in a public Dispute with G. K. owned, To
have received his Ministry by the Pope of Rome, whose Emisaries they are.
Beside, as they can never prove the Quakers guilty of any one Jesuitical Error,
yet we can prove these Priests of Baston guilty of many, and more especially in
their being Incendiaries against the Peace of the Government. The further
calumniating those who suffered Death, to answer your Cruelty, is but a mean
way to expi^te the Crime of their innocent Blood, which cries aloud for
Vengeance, and the Lord, unto whom it belongs will repay it. Thou Cotton
Mather, nor all thy Fraternity will never be able to prove these 4 Worthies
troublesome Heretics, that patiently endured Martyrdom for the Testimony of
Jesus, by their crul Hands; neither will thy poor Insinuation help, That two or
three of them would rather dye, than leave the Plantation undisturbed. They had
no reason to hearken unto your Hypocritical entreaties to be gone, it was their
birthright, as freeborn Subjects of the Kingdom of England, and so might
claim it to inhabit^ N. England, as well as any that there resided, as not
being forbid to them by either the Law of God, or the Realm of England; so that
being innocent, they feared not man, that could only hurt the Body, but feared
him that could cast both Body and Soul into Hell Fire.

C. M.

It is possible a Bedlam had been fitter for those Frantic People, than what
was inflicted on them; and for my own part, I must profess with regard unto
such Heretics, Ad Judicium sangumis Tardussum; nor have I the least
inclinations to Hereticide as a fit way to suppress their Errors.

Reply.

Here our Author does not a little impeach the Authority of N. England, at that
time, who were accessory to the Death of those 4 Worthies, by him called
Frantic People, for if, according to him, a Bedlam had been fitter, surely
they greatly sinned in passing and executing Sentence of Death upon them; the
present Governor Simon Broadstead, then a Magistrate, is greatly concerned in
this Charge, which amounts to no less than the taking away four Lives by an
unjust Judgment; for how can that Sentence of Hanging be just against such for
whom a Bedlam had been fitter. Such as this Author renders our Friends to have
been, are by the Laws of England exempted from the punishment of Death; as
also, its reckoned amongst the Abuses of the common Law, That such who kill
People by false Judgment, be not destroyed as other Murderers, as may be seen
in that noted Book, called, The Mirror of Justice, C.5 Sect. 108. in express
words thus, It is abuse that Justices, and other Officers, who kill People by
false Judgment, be not destroyed as other Murderers, which K. Alfred cause ^o
be done, who caused forty four Judges in one Year to be hanged, as Murderers,
for their false Judgments; which in the said Book are particularly noted, and
in the 4th Case he instances^ how King Alfred hanged Cole, because he judged
(...) to death, when he was a Madman. Cotton Math^ forgot his respect to the
venerable (...) of his Country, as he at other times (...) when (...) has
exposed him.

C. M.

Especially every Shepherd is an Abomination to those Egyptians^ and one of
some Figure among them, an Ignorant and Malignant Apostate, who has this Mark
of the Unpardonable Sin ^^on him, that he calls those Prayers of ours, with
which the Holy Spirit of God has helped ^s in Vanquish the very Devils
themselves, but so many Conjurings, and Charms, and Spells; this man has
vomited more venomous Pamphlets against these Churches, and all the Ordinances
therein observed, than any that have gone before him; only God has helped some
of us lately to furnish our Churches with an Antidote.

Reply.

The nature of the true Sheep is, that they will follow the Shepherd of their
Souls, Christ Jesus, for they know his Voice, and a stranger they will not
follow, but will flee from him, for they know not the Voice of a stranger, John
10.4, 5. This is the case of those our Author reproaches with the Title of
Egyptians, who are known to many to be true Israelites indeed, and will be
manifested as such, unto many more; these knowing the voice of their Lord and
Master, cannot give ear unto the uncertain found of N. England's Shepherds, who
teach for hire and divine for Money, and run and are not sent. To revile, is a
poor way of Reasoning, and lays this writer but the more open: His Venom
belched forth against a faithful Servant of the Lord, will return one day upon
him, if he repent not, what has been written by this my dear friend and
Brother, against the visible Churches of N.E. or against C. M. in particular,
it will be too hard a task for him or a de^ad more of his Brethren to refute:
How poor an Antidote the four Priests of Baston have furnished their Churches
with, will appear to the Impartial Reader of the Reply thereunto,

John Delavall.

ERRATA.
Page 3. line 20. read placed, P 6 l 21 r wilful, P 11 dele and, P 14 l 3
after rebuked, add so; P 2^ ^quid r que, P 22 l 3 r afflatus, P 30 l 25 r
satirical, P 34 l 1 r mystery, P 44 l 14 dele no^, P 66 l 17 r pneuma, l 18 r
pn^o, P 71 l 18 r fisherman, P 85 l 23 r of holiness, P 94 l 17 r Schoolboy,
P 98 l 14 r arbitrium, P 98 l 29 after Providence, read which are not my
words, but these following, by suitable Providence, P 120 l 28 r ^num, P 124 l
5 r certain, P 173 l 14 r Grace of God, P 179 r dissolute, P 208 r information.

THE END.

