A NARRATIVE OF The Proceedings OF Sir Edmond Androsse and his Accomplices, Who
Acted by an Illegal and Arbitrary Commission from the Late K. JAMES, during his
Government in New England.

By several Gentlemen who were of his Council.

Printed in the Year 1691.

TO THE READER.
THE Particulars mentioned in the ensuing Narrative, are but a small part of
the Grievances justly complained of by the People in New England, during their
three years Oppression under Sir E. A. For a more full Account, the Reader is
referred to the Justification of the Revolution in New England, where every
particular exhibited against Sir Ed. and his Accomplices, by the Agents lately
sent to England, is by the Affidavits of honest men confirmed. If some men find
themselves thereby exposed to the just Resentments and Indignation of all true
Christians, or true Englishmen, they must thank (...) for publishing such
untrue Accounts as that which goes under the name of Captain John Palmers, and
that scandalous Pamphlet called N. E's Faction discovered, supposed to be
written by an Implacable Enemy of all good men, and a person that for Impudence
and Lying has few Equals in the World. That which follows, being signed by
several Gentlemen of great Integrity, who likewise had a particular knowledge
of the things by them related, is therefore of unquestionable Credit. The
Design in making of it thus pu^^^ck, is to vindicate Their Majesty's Loyal
Subjects in New England, and to give a true Representation of things unto those
who have by false Relations been imposed on.

B. N. E. Feb. 4. 1690/1.
HAving Received from Mr. Addington by order of the Council and Representatives
of the Massachusetts Colony, a signification of their desire; That whereas we
were Members of the Late Council in the time of Sir Edmond Androsses
Government, we would give some Information of the Grievances and
Male-administrations under the same. Upon consideration had thereof, and in
answer thereunto, we cannot but own and declare, that not only our selves, but
many others in the same station (not now present to join with us) were of a
long time much dissatisfied and discouraged with very many of the Proceedings
and Administrations in the said Government; and had little reason to wonder
that so great a number of the People were so too. It might well have been
expected that the Governor (not so successful heretofore) notwithstanding the
extraordinariness (to say no more) of many Clauses and Powers in his
Commission; yea the rather and the more, because thereof would have cautioned
and moderated the Execution of the same: But to our Great Trouble we found it
very much otherwise. Many were the things that were accounted Irregular and
Grievous therein, far from conducing to the Public Weal of the Territory, and
not a little to the disservice of the Crown, as tending rather to the
disturbing and disaffecting of the Subjects here, than to the furtherance of
that cheerful Obedience, Loyalty, Love and Duty in them, which ought by all
good means, to have been nourished and promoted. And of all this unhappiness,
we must reckon the first step and inlet to be, that the Governor did so
quickly neglect the great number of the Council, and chiefly adhere unto and
Govern by the advice only of a few others, the principal of them Strangers to
the Country, without Estates or Interest therein to oblige them, persons of
known and declared Prejudices against us, and that had plainly laid their
chiefest Designs and Hopes to make unreasonable profit of this poor People.
Innumerable were the evil Effects that from hence were continually growing up
amongst us; The Debates in Council were not so free as ought to have been, but
too much overruled, and a great deal of harshness continually expressed
against Persons and Opinions that did not please. The Greatest Rigor and
Severity was too often used toward the soberest sort of People, when any thing
could be found or pretended against them, their humble submissions were little
regarded, and inexorable Persecutions ordered against them, whilst in the mean
time the notorious viciousness and profaneness of others met not with the like
discountenance, but persons of such a character were put into places of
business and trust* The long settled maintenance of the Public M^^nistry, even
from those that applied themselves to no other way of Worship* but continued
ordinary hearers, could not be upheld by any act of Authority providing for the
same, and Schools of Learning so well taken care of formerly, were in most
places fallen to decay, and many more such like might be reckoned up. But we
shall more especially instance farther in the particulars following, as not the
least.

1. And first; It was as we thought a great slight put upon the Council, and to
the prejudice of the good People of the Territory, That whereas at the
Governors first coming a Committee appointed thereunto by himself, and a full
Council had with great care and several weeks trouble revised a very
considerable number of Orders and Laws collected out of the several Law Books
of these Colonies found by long experience very needful and agreeable to the
good of these Plantations, which Laws so Collected and Revised, were again
presented unto, and upon further advisement approved by the Governor and
Council and passed. Yet upon the introducing Mr. West from New York to be
Deputy Secretary, they were, for what causes we know not, totally laid aside,
and the People denied the benefit of them. And this Grievance was so much the
greater, and a plainer Indication of the severity of some men in their Intended
Management of things, because on good deliberation there had also passed an
Order of Council, That until the Council should take further order, the several
Justices, Town-Officers, and others should proceed according to former Usages,
and such Local Laws in the several parts of this Dominion, as are not repugnant
to the Laws of England, etc. Yet because by virtue of the said Order some in
Authority have proceeded to put forth their power for the support of the
Ministry, and some others did justify themselves in some actions done by them
that were not pleasing; hereupon when a discourse only, and some debate thereof
had passed in Council but without any regular determination made, and contrary
to the express words of the said Order, it was Entered in the Council-Book
concerning it, resolved that the same was only in Force till the next Session
of the Council, and so determined as null of it self, and that none presume to
act pursuant to such Laws as are or shall be made here.

2. Whereas the Act for the Continuing and Establishing of several Rates,
Duties and Imposts was one of the first of so great Moment that came out in
Form under the Seal of the Territory, and was publicly proclaimed, we that
were present have great cause to remember what trouble and dissatisfaction
there was amongst the Members of the Council concerning the same. As that Act
was framed and urged upon us, a very considerable number (and we believe we
were the Major part) dissented from and argued much against it. And tho the
Governor expressed not a little heat and positiveness alleging his
instructions, and held the Council together, unreasonably a very long time
about it. Yet when we did at last break up we could not imagine that he could
take the Bill to be agreed to; Nevertheless it was the next day (to our
wonderment) brought in fairly Engrossed in Parchment, and quickly Signed by the
Governor without any counting of Voices either then or the day before, which
was the more needful because some did continue still to make their objections,
others that had spoken against the Bill the day before, declaring their
adherence to what they had then said; and many more under so great
discouragement and discountenance, as was manifested sitting silent, which we
are sure in the regular passing of Laws can never be reckoned for a consent.

3. The Way and Manner used afterward of proposing and passing all Laws was
very uncertain and unequal, not answerable to the Nature of so great a Power,
nor to the largeness of the Territory that was to be obliged by them, or to the
Number of the Concellors appointed therein; for after a little while there were
no set times appointed or given notice of for the making of Laws, that so the
Members of the Council might attend in a fuller number to be helpful therein.
Bills of the greatest concernment were usually first consulted and framed in
private, and so unexpectedly brought into Council at any time, and then our
work too was often under great disadvantages, not to advise freely and consult
about the making of a Law thought necessary but to maintain a sort of Contest
in opposition to a very inconvenient one, too far promoted and engaged in
already; and above all, there was never any fair way of taking and counting the
number of the Counselors consenting and dissenting, that so the Majority might
be known in any matter that admitted of any considerable reasonings and
debates, by reason whereof both Laws and other Orders and Resolutions might be
set down as passed by the Council, which ought not to have been. And when it
has been (as often it was) expressly and earnestly prayed when matters of
greater moment than ordinary were in hand, that the Debate and Resolution of
them might be put off till a fuller Council of Members from other several parts
of the Dominion might be Convened, such motions were ever disaccepted, and
entertained with no little displacency; so that it might be too truly affirmed,
that in effect four or five persons, and those not so favorably inclined and
disposed as were to be wished for, bear the Rule over, and gave Law to a
Territory the largest and most considerable of any belonging to the Dominion of
the Crown.

4. In pursuance of this way and manner of passing Laws above expressed, there
were two in special that came forth, which we are sure in fuller and freer
Councils would have had a full stop put to them; viz. First, The Act for
Regulating the Choice of select Men, etc. wherein the Liberty of Towns to meet
for the managing of their Public Affairs referring to their Common Lands, and
all other their concernments, which they had enjoyed for so many years, to
their great benefit, was most unreasonably restrained to once a year, and all
other Convening of Inhabitants as a Town Meeting upon any pretense or color
whatsoever, was strictly forbidden: And the other Act was that entitled, An
Act requiring all Masters of Ships or Vessels to give security, in which there
were such restraints laid upon all persons from Transporting themselves freely
(as their occasions might call) out of the Territory, That it would have been a
mere Prison to all that should be found therein, and such Bond required of all
Ships and Vessels (extending in the practice even to Shallops and Wood-Boats)
as would quickly have intolerably discouraged, if not ruined the Trade thereof;
and all without any other ordinary general benefit of the said Act, but the
filling some men's Pockets with Fees: And (as it might be thought from the time
of moving for this Act, which was when Captain Hutchinson was already gone, and
Mr. Mather was known to be intending for England) the obstructing of such men's
going home as were likely there to make just Complaints, and seek Redress of
Public Grievances; and when this Act had been strenuously opposed in Council
here at Boston, where it was more than once vehemently urged, and as often
denied, it was carried as far as New York, and there an opportunity found for
the obtaining of it.

5. The great matter of Properties and Titles to our Lands is the next to be
insisted on, His Majesty that granted the Charter did fully invest the
Patentees with Right to the Soil throughout the whole Limits thereof, and here
on the place, the Right of the Natives was honestly purchased from them. The
Disposal, Distribution, and Granting of Lands by the Patentees, who were also
incorporated, and made a Body Politic, was in such a plain, ready, easy way,
without any charge to the Planters, as in the Settlement of so large a Country
was thought to be most agreeable: And so much of a public spirit and design
were those Noble Gentlemen, that (though well they might) they settled not one
single Penny of service or acknowledgment to themselves and Heirs in any of
their Grants, a thing so self-denying and worthy, that few Instances can be
given of the like. All which notwithstanding, and the Possessions, Descents and
Valuable Purchases of so many years that have passed since, The Governor and
those he adhered to, resolved and practiced to make all men's (...) in effect
quite null and void. The purchasing of the Natives Right was made nothing of,
and next to a Ridicule. The Enjoyment and Improvement of Lands not enclosed,
and especially if lying in common amongst many was denied to be possession; it
was not enough that some men that thought it convenient, and were both willing
and able, did take Confirmations of their Lands, the numbers of whom in time
might have been a considerable gain to them; but nothing would satisfy unless
all in general might be compelled so to do; hence those that refused were
^^^^^red Intruders upon His Majesty, and put in fear of having their Lands
granted unto strangers. Many were Solicited, and Encouraged to Petition for
other men's Lands, and had a shameful Example set them by some of the chief
Contrivers of all this Mischief. When some men have Petitioned for a
confirmation of their own Lands, a part of these only was offered to be granted
to them, and another part denied. Nor could any man's own Land be confirmed to
him, without a particular Survey of every part and parcel of them first made,
the great charges whereof, and of other Fees to be taken would have been to
most men Insupportable: Yea it has by some been computed that all the money in
the Country would not suffice to patent the Lands therein contained.

And yet farther, a considerable quit-rent to the King was to be Imposed upon
all Lands, though already a constant yearly Tax for the support of the
Government had been laid on them.

And for all this most unreasonable vexation to a Laborious and Industrious
people, the only Ground pretended was some defects and wants of form and due
manner alleged to be in the way of the disposing and conveying of all Lands
from the Patentees to the Townships and People here; which whatever it amounted
to might have been easily remedied, either by an application and representation
to the King for the obtaining a General settlement of all properties (which
would have been highly Worthy and Generous for the Governor to have engaged
in, on behalf of the People) or by some other ways that were proposed. But
nothing but the way of particular Patenting as abovesaid could prevail. In
prosecution whereof all Actions intended upon Informations of Intrusions in His
Majesty's behalf, or between old Proprietors and new Grantees must have had
their Decision at the Ordinary Courts of Common Law here upon the Place where
matters of Equity and of a Consideration Transcending all ordinary Cases could
not have a proper Cognizance and due Influence in the Decision, Determination
and Judgment.

6. Though sufficient Courts of Justice were appointed, and held in the several
Counties for the Trial of all Offenders, yet it was too frequent upon more
particular displeasure to fetch up persons from very remote Counties before the
Governor and Council at Boston (who were the highest, and a constant Court of
Record and Judicature) not to receive their trial but only to be examined
there, and so remitted to an Inferior Court to be farther proceeded against.
The Grievance of which Court was exceeding great, for hereby not only the
Charge, was made Excessive upon such persons by the notorious exactions of the
Messenger, the Secretaries Fees for Examination, etc. But these Examinations
themselves were unreasonably strict, and rigorous and very unduely ensnaring to
plain unexperienced men. And the Trials of several, were by this means
overruled to be at Boston, and not in the proper Counties, and were otherwise
so far prejudged as to be rendered less equal.

The Extraordinary Oppressive Fees taken in all matters by indigent and
exacting Officers, these were at the first for a long time Arbitrarily imposed
and required without any color of an Establishment of them by the Council.
Afterward a Committee was appointed, to bring in a Table of Fees, that spent a
long time without finishing any thing, the reason whereof was because some
therein especially the Deputy Secretary West, insisted upon Fees, much more
extraordinary than some others could consent to. In conclusion; There was a
Table of Fees drawn up to be presented to the Council, and signed by some of
the Committee, one of whom (whose Subscription is to this Paper) declaring
expressly, that by his Signing he did no otherwise agree, but only that it might
be presented to the Council, to do therein as they should see cause, who also
when it was so presented to the Council, declared that many of the particulars
in that Table contained were unreasonable, and ought to be abated, and of this
mind were many others. But the Entry after the usual manner was an approbation
thereof.

Lastly, As to those Great Jealousies and Suspicions of Sinister Designs in the
Governor as to our Troubles by the Indians, we have to say, That although
diverse things too uncertain, if not untrue, have been too easily reported and
spread concerning him, a practice which some of us have formerly with no little
prejudice to our selves discountenanced and born Testimony against; yet there
have not wanted some other particulars that might give too great a ground for
the same. The principal of them (as far as we have any knowledge of things of
that kind) are these.

The Governors Seizing and Taking away the Goods of Mounsieur St. Castine of
Penopscot, the Summer before the War broke forth, which thing has been
esteemed not a little to have stirred up and furthered the succeeding Troubles.
The Governors not hastening his Return to Boston when these Troubles were
actually begun, but lengthening out his Tarrience in places so remote till the
Hostility of the Indians, and the great Mischiefs thereof were too far
advanced. That during his absence, he was not pleased sufficiently to empower
and instruct any to act things necessary for the safety of the out Plantations
and the Prosecution and Suppression of the Enemy, though he had speedy and true
Accounts from time to time sent him of all that happened. That all that was
done to this purpose in a case of such necessity, either by the Lieutenant
Govenour, or by the Justices of Peace, and Military Officers in many places, by
securing and disarming of Neighboring Indians, setting up Warding and
Watching, Garrisoning several houses for the security of the Inhabitants,
especially the Women and Children, in case of sudden Inroads and Surprizings
that might be, sending some relief of men to some places that were most in
danger, and also what was done by those Members of the Council that were at
Boston in conjunction with the Commander in chief left in the Fort there, who
raised and sent some Forces to Casco-Bay, where greatest harms were done. We
say, that all that was thus done, was so extremely disapproved of by the
Governor upon his Return back from Albany and New York, and an unaccountable
displeasure manifested against all persons that had so acted, and that he was
ready to call them to an account as high Offenders for the same, and refused a
long time, though much solicited, to give any Order concerning the Soldiers sent
to Casco, either for the continuance of them there, where they were very
necessary, or for their dimission home. Unto all which may be added the
Governors sending Messengers both John Smith the Quaker from Albany, and soon
after Major Macgregory to Keybeck upon such Errands and Business as were not
communicated and laid open to the Council. And further, his Relase and setting
at liberty sundry Indians that were in hold, some of them known Enemies to the
English, and particularly objected against by several of the Council, and that
without any exchange of our English Captives then in the Enemies hands.

These are the chief Matters which upon this occasion (without any undue
Prejudice against any man, or design to justify the defects of our selves in
the performance of our own shares of duty, but in answer to the desire
signified to us as above) we have to set forth, professing truly that by such a
state of things as we had the experience and feeling of; The Places that we
held were rendered exceeding uneasy to us, and that out of a sincere respect to
the Prosperity of these Their Majesty's Plantations, we could not but be very
desirous that through the Favor of God and our Superiors, all due Redress
might in a good happy season be obtained; and the way of Governing English
Subjects in Their Majesty's Dominions without an Assembly of the Peoples
Representatives banished out of a World for ever.

Boston in New England, Jan. 27. 1690. William Stoughton, Thomas Hinckley,
Wart. Winthrop, Barthol. Gedney, Samuel Shrimpton.


FINIS.

