Fair Weather.

(...) CONSIDERATIONSto Dispel the CLOUDS, and Allay the STORMS of DISCONTENT:
a DISCOURSE which with An Entertaining Variety, both of Argument and History,
lays open, the NATURE and EVIL of that Pernicious VICE, and offers diverse
ANTIDOTES against it;

BY COTTON MATHER.

Whereto there is Prefixed a Catalogue of SINS against all the Commandments,
whereof all that would make thorough Work of Repentance, especially at this Day
when the God of Heaven so Loudly calls for it, should make their Serious and
Sensible CONFESSIONS before the Lord; with an Humble and Fervent ADDRESS unto
this whole People, there-about.

BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, (...) John Allen, for Benjamin Harris at
the London Coffee House, 1692.

PREFACE
It Was on the Twenty Fourth of December 1691 that the following Sermon was
delivered, at the Boston Lecture, unto a very great Audience, with whom, the
Merciful God gave it some Acceptance. The Four Ministers which carried on that
Ancient and Famous Lecture, had for many Months of late, been setting
themselves, to Fight in their Courses, against the more Common M Miscarriages,
now found among this Professing People of God; And it fell unto me, who am the
Last and Least of them that here do the Service of our Savior, to conclude
those Testimonies, by some just Animadversions upon that Malignant Sin of
DISCONTENT. That I might give Content unto many of the Heaters, that have asked
a Copy of the Discourse, I have been Content that it should now see the Light;
being sensible, that it is not easy for me to Pi^ch upon any Subject of more
General Concernment for my Neighborhood. And I have taken this Occasion, to
Recapitulate our other Offenses against the Divine Commandments whereof we then
is our Public Prayers, made Confession before the Lord our God; and now
Address Earth, as we then did Heaven, for the Reformation of our Provoking
Evils. It Is by such Ess yes to Witness for God, that some of His Poor Servants
now, Whenever or However, they may be taken from their Work, will through the
Blessed JESUS, be able to lay down their Heads with Joy.

AN Humble and Faithful TESTIMONY For God, unto the Children of my People.
INasmuch as the Miscarriage of our First Parents, while they represented whole
Mankind in the Covenant of God, is by a Divine Ordination and Imputation most
equally laid upon us all, it is but Righteous with God that the Children of
such Parents, in their becoming so, be left without the Righteousness, with
which His Image, now defaced by Theirs, would else have made them glorious; and
the Absence of that Image, does as Reasonably, as Necessarily, infer the
Presence of a Nature in us (...) with a Depraved Prejudice against what is,
Holy and Just, and Good.

Such a Corrupt Fountain will have Bitter, Woeful, Deadly Streams; and w^ may
see [Lord, open our eyes!] a doleful prospect of them in our Hearts and our
Ways.

Hences it is, That we do not Acknowledge the True God, nor labor for an
Acquaintance with Him; nor Glorify Him, in Thinking of Him, Speaking for Him,
Praying to Him, Hearing from Him, Choosing Him, Loving Him, Trusting Him, and
Serving Him; and Rejoicing in Him, when we have had nothing else to comfort us.
Instead thereof, we Deny Him, we Forsake Him, we have mean Opinions of Him; we
give to the World and the Flesh, and the Devil, the Homage which is due to Him
alone; we let Creatures have the Affection, the Dependence, the Obedience,
which he alone may lay claim unto; nor do we live as having him always in our
Eyes. We have also laid open our selves to Hea^csits about the Christian Faith;
by a rush admission of Thoughts that overthrow the glorious Frame of Religion.
Yea, there have been, at least Implicit Witchcrafts in some of our Usages.

Hence it is that we do not zealously wait upon God, in the serious and constant
Observation of all those Institutions, where^^ our Lord Jesus Christ has taught
us to maintain our Communion with him. Church Fellowship is neglected; a Gospel
Ministry is not supported; a Gospel Discipline is not affected; the Baptism of
the Lord is not Improved; and the Supper of the Lord is not Approached. Instead
thereof, we are prone to the vanity of Humane Inventions, and humanely Devised
Sacraments and Holy Days, in the Worship of God; we have imitated the Pagans in
many Religious Rites; that of HealthDrinking, in particular; and perhaps we
have had un awful Pictures in the Honor of our Lord.

Hence it is that we do not make a Reverent Use of the Names, Words, Works,
Attributes, and Ordinances, by which the Lord makes Himself known unto us. We
have not had awful Apprehensions, of His Majesty, when we have been diaving
near unto him. Our Oaths have not been only in Truth, Justice, and Judgment;
our Vinces have not been wisely made, or truly (...) We have abused Lots in our
(...) And the Creatures of God have been (...) Nourishment of our Pride,
Gluttony, Drunkenness and Wantonness. In Prosperity we have been unthankful,
and impatient in Adversity: the Dispensations of God have not awakened us.

Hence it is, that we have not Entertained the Ordinary Sabbaths of God, with a
due Preparation for them, Celebration of them, Satisfaction in them. We have
been Idle, Worldly, Wicked on that Holy Day. And we have had an Indisposition
to those Extraordinary Sabbaths, which Extraordinary Troubles of Extraordinary
Mercies, have called, for. We have not Prayed and Fasted, we have not Praised
and Feasted, with a suitable Solemnity, in the Seasons for our doing so.

Hence it is, that our own and our Neighbors Place, has not been preserved with
us. Especially Family Government sinks most ominously! As for Superiors, they
have not been sufficiently respected, and requited. Parents have been Griev^^d
by our Insolence, Wastfulness, Unrea^ableness, and Incorrigibleness. Masters
have been Grieved by our Eye-service, Unsubjection, Slothfulness, and
Surliness. Husbands have been treated with Disesteem, Frowardness, Jealousy,
Imprionsness, and Ill-management. Magi^^^ have met with Reproaches, and (...)
and they have not been Assisted (...) our Interests. Ministers have been (...)
standered, starved, and our unfruitfulness has hastened them with sorrow to
their Graves. As for Inferiors, they have not been so regarded, as they should
have been. Wives have been Affronted with contempt, hatred, bitterness and
unfaithfulness, Children have been Ruined with Indulgence, or provoked, with
Cruelty, and had little care taken about their Immortal Souls; nor have they
had an Ingenuous Education. Servants have been Compelled or Invited unto
unlawful Things; and hindered in the Thing that is Good; and perhaps pinched of
their Food convenient. Subjects have either been Discountenanced in what in
virtuous; or Encouraged unto what is vicious; and possibly their just Liberties
and Properties, and universal Welfare, has not been so guarded as might have
been. People have not been watched over, with a Paternal Tenderness and
Fervency; possibly Theirs may have been sought (...) than They; or, our
Prayers, our (...) our unwearied Endeavors, (...) not been enough employed
upon (...). As for Equals, they have ambiti^^^ affected a pre-eminence, over
one another, and been full of Envy at the Greatness which they have seen God
advancing their Neighbors with. In all persons, a private Spirit has
prevailed, and the Times have been made perilous, by men's concernment for none
but their own Cabin, while the whole Vessel has been in a Storm.

Hence it is, that our own, and our Neighbors Life, has not been Preserved with
us. We have Impaired our Health by our Intemperanc^es; We have been Passionate,
Revengeful, and Contentious, toward others; We may have (...) them, with
needless and vexing (...) and it may be, we have Rashly St. (...) them.

Hence it is, that our own and our Neighbors Bed, (...) not been Preserved with
us. Our (...) our, Desires our Glance, our Speeches, out (...) our Garments,
have been such, that we may cry out Unclean, Unclean! Perhaps, Promiscuous
Dancings have been Countenanced. Or, However we have not Shut up all our Senses
against all the motions of all Uncleanness, but it may be given as well as
taken, Temptations of Lasciviousness, especially in making our selves the
Companions of those Fools that are to be destroyed.

Hence it is, that our own and our Neighbors Estate has not been Honestly
dealt withal. We have been Sluggards is our Callings; the Poor have not had our
Liberal Alms; We have not Paid our Debts. We have wrongfully taken or with
held, what is not our own. When we should not have spent, we have been to
Prodigal. when we should have spent, we have been too Niggardly. By Fraud we
have Cheated, or by Force we have Oppressed, when we have had an Advantage in our
Hands; and measured Right only by our Might; not have we made Restitution of
what we have gotten by Dishonesty.

Hence it is, that our own and our Neighbors Credit has not been kept
inviolate. We have Suppressed or fore-born the Truth; and spoken Contrary
thereunto. We have had Sinister Suspi^ions one of another, and either Made, or
Spread, or too Easily Received False Reports. Tale-bearing has been Cherished;
and Innocence has not been Vigorously Vindicated: No, we have been, Full of
Lies!

Hence it is, that we have been Discontent with our Condition; and harbored in
our Hearts, a Roving and a Ranging Lust, after an undue Alteration of it. Nor
have we presently Extinguished, those Vain Thoughts in our minds, which have
been the First Motions toward the breaches of all the Commandments.

And unto all these Provocations, We have added this, which Exceeds them all,
That we have despised the Offers of the Lord Jesus Christ; and although the Old
Covenant now speaks to ^ing but a miserable Death unto us, Yet we have refused
the Gracious Offers of that New Covenant, wherein a Wonderful Provision is made
for all the miseries of our Souls, by a Mediator, in whom there does All
Fullness dwell. We have permitted our Earthly Assa^^s to keep us at a Distance
from the Lord Redeemer, who has been waiting to give us, (...) and Remission
of Sins.

Alas! What a Sinful Thing is Fallen, Alas! In this Impartial Glass, if you
look attentively, you may behold the Spots, for which every Penitent Soul, will
Judge and Loath it self before the Lord; and O that many Repenting Sinners
would in their separated Hours, of the deepest Humiliation and Supplication
before God, Examines themselves by this Glass; and Confess, and Renounce all of
these Abominable Things, with a Believing Reliance upon the Lord, Jesus Christ,
for the bestowal both of Pardon and of Power against them all.

But will my dear COUNTRY now consider, that for the sake of these things the
Wrath of God is came upon this Disobedient Land! Among THESE we shall find
those Indictments upon which the Judge of all the Earth has proceeded, in
visiting us with sure plagues and of long continuance. The Effects of it are
too sensible and sorrowful to leave it uncertain, That we have been many years
weltring and wasting under the orea^^ Judgments of God. And the T^kers of our
Gods Displeasure have not only been in some respects, upon every one of our
precious and pleasant Things, but they have grown upon us at such a terrible
rate, as to punish us yet in one Assault after another, with a, Seven times
more for our Iniquities. The Year before this last, was most Remarkably a Year
of Rebukes upon us; 'twas a year, when besides the General Clog upon all our
Affairs, we miscarried in a most Important Expedition, like those Active
Ephraimies, who before the Time Sallied from Goshe^ against the Canaanites in
the North, in hopes to be Enriched by the Plunder of those Injurious
Adversaries; but came off Loosers, because, as the Psalmist says, They kept not
the Covenant of God. It was a year, wherein we were not only Distressed and
Consumed by the Calamities of War, but the Destr^ying Angel did with Sickness
also make among us a most lamentable Slaughter, Truly, The Slain of the Lord
have been many. I suppose no less than as Thousand were in that (...) year,
carried unto their Long Home, from one Town in this Colony. And at the same
time, very many scores of our poor Neighbors, especially of our young people,
whose Concerns lay at Sea, have been carried as well to the Prisons in France,
as to the Fevers in the Indies, where, ^^ske Sheep they have been laid in the
Grave, Death has fed upon them. Nor are the black Tempests impending, blown
over yet! No, The Lords Anger is not Turned away, but his Hand is still
stretched out! so that it is a very direful, stupid, fatal Dementation, which
is upon us, if we do not now Enquire, What means the Heat of this Anger? To
answer that Enquiry, we had a Great Voice out of the Temple, twelve years ago,
a Sy^o^, then distinctly laid before us, the provoking Evils that were the
Grounds of the Controversy, then and since managed against us by our God, G^a
knows how little we thereupon studied every one, the Reformation of our Hearts
and Lives. And we know, what Advances the Wrath of Heaven has been since making
toward those Ruins, which threaten something like the Dissolution of these
Plantations. Our Political Fathers in the GENERAL COURT, at the beginning of
our late Mortal Tea^, beholding how In^n^ably we ^ined away in our Iniqui^^,
Emitted a Proce^^mation, again to advise, us That the Corruption of Manners
among us had (...) ought the Ax to be now more than ^^er laid unto the Root of
our Tree; and Excite all Ranks of Men unto the doing of their part for the
Amendment of our Ways; with a Solemn Admonition unto this whole people, that
they every where give Demonstrations of a thorough Repentance, without which
(as they expressed it) we have little Reason to hope for any Good success in
our Affairs. Our Congregations had this Admontion very faithfully by their
several Watchmen set before them; and we did not want our Printed
Advertisements thereupon, That as it is related concerning the Sons of El^i,
They hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because the Lord, would
(...) them; To, if men did now show themselves Refractory (...) their Provoking
Evils, the issue would be this, They hearkened not unto the voice of their
Fathers, because the Lord would make a terrible Slaughter of them. That none of
all these Means, have Recovered us out of our Apostasies is Confessed by all
sorts of Men; and accordingly the continuing Vengeance of Heaven upon us, has
been written in dismal and bloody Characters.

However, at the Intercession of our Dressers, we are spared yet one year more
to see whether any good Fruit can at last be obtained from us. And therefore I
do with an Importunity, which I wish may be Ungainsayable, beseech of all my
Neighbors, That we may all as one man, consider the manifold Guiltiness which
the Catalogue of our sins has now set in order before us, and most humbly apply
our selves to God in Christ, for his Forgiveness of our former Misbehaviours,
and for his Assistance to a better Conversation. There is this one thing, l'le
venture to do; I do boldly charge all Impenitent [and such are all
Inconsiderate!] Sinners, as the most Real Troublers of our Land: If any Counsel
though never so wise, though never so goods, have not prospered with us, we
have been ready with a Turk^sh Fury, to fly upon the men that gave it, as the
Authors of all the Disastrous Events that followed. But, as when the Roman
Empero^r upbraided his General ^erentius, for Loosing of a Battle, he Replied,
Sir, I am to tell you, it is, you that lost the Day for us, by your open
fighting against the God of Heaven, as you do! so would I say, to those among
us, that Live not according to the Rules of Godliness, and Righteousness and
Sobriety; It Is you that still undermine the best Counsels that can be given for
our safety. Wherefore I take leave to add, Brethren, we shall not only save our
own souls, but also do a service to the public; if we may every one of us, be
able to say, I thought on my ways, and I turned my Feet unto the Testimonies of
the Lord.

But there are some that have a more peculiar opportunity to prosecute that
Reformation, which would be, The Lengthning out of our Tranquillity. And I
would pray that the Freedom of my Address may not be m^sn e^p^eted. Yea, I Will
consent, Inveniar sane super^us, made (...) silentis non arguar. Our very
Enemies can twit us with our Backsliding's: as particularly, a scandalous, and
a slanderous Libeller the other day, in the midst of many Printed Faliboods,
could Admonish us too truly of the Sins which attended our Husking Times, as
what might make us fear that we should have the Blast quickly come upon our
Indian, which has been on our other Grain. Had we the pious prudence of Austins
Mother, in us, even such Insinuations in a way of Spite, given to us, would Put
us upon correcting of our thus Notorious and Offensive Lewdnesses. How much
more ought modest Representations in a way of Love made unto us, to be
received, as, The Smil^ngs of the Righteous! But indeed, they are not Blows;
(...) they are Balms, which I have now to make a Tender of.

I. I would then in the first place, humbly say; Why may not our Churches, even
every particular Church by it self, have their blee^ings, wherein after their
Mighty Cries to Heaven, they may freely, fairly, with all Humility, and without
all uncomely Reflections propound, what they judge to be any Evil growing upon
them? And so far as they can comfortably Agree, in their Sentiments, why may
not every such Evil be in a proper Instrument for that purpose, declared a
thing against which they will be watchful, both in themselves, and in one
another, as God shall enable them? Our Churches are well formed with a most
sacred Covenant, and that Covenant is but a Recognition of our Obligation to
the Duties in the Covenant of Grace. Every Church-Mender when he says Amen, to
the Church Covenant, professes himself to be in that Covenant which forbids all
manner of Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin. How Inquisitive then should all
ChurchMembers be after all those Evils against which their Covenant is to Arm
them, that they may be Stoned before the Lord! Behold, a most Natural,
Rational, Unexcep^^onable way for our Churches to Purge themselves, and become,
Terrible as an Army with Banners! The only Exception that I know against the
practice of it, I shall remove, by saying, It Is not so mean a person as my
self, that is the first proposer of this Thing. I suppose there are diverse
Churches among us, that have been looking this way. And, for their
Encouragement I would say, That on^ Church, yea, one Man, thus Reforming, may
fill a^ made Gap, in the way opened for the Anger of God. Moreover, Holy Mr.
Herbert Palmer Produced a wonderful Reformation, in his Town of Canterbury, by
prevailing with his people, to sign an Instrument, where in they declared their
Detestation of sinner Evils grown common among them, and Resolution with Gods
Help, to take heed of such Evils for ever. Truly, a most Excellent Precedent!
The Quakers in their late Pamphlets presume to foretell, The utter Removing,
Undoing (...) of all (our Churches, which they call) our Babylonish Buildings:
and no doubt, the Devil will turn every stone to accomplish that Prediction.
But some such courses as are now recommended, would procure us those
Protections of Heaven, which would render those Adversaries, as great Liars in
their Prephecies, as they are in their Principles. I must confess that our
Churches have some Omens upon them, which do sometimes give me Apprehensions
Blacker than the Ink I write with; nor can any thing but a Remarkable Recovery
out of those Decays, which have been upon, The power of (...) among ^s, alter
those direful Omens. We do perhaps value our selves upon the purity and
privilege, which we have in our ChurchAdministrations; but our God sa^s unto
us concerning. These, as unto his people once about their Ornaments, Put them
off, that I may know what to do unto you. That is, Believe that They will not
save us, if we have not, The Fruits of Repentance. We may perhaps also promise
our selves our shares in that Resurrection of the Witnesses, which I hope, the
Operations of God are now upon. B^^ it may be, we do not, well weigh, of what
sort, The Day of the Lord, will be, Believe me, 'twill be accompanied with such
Earthquakes of War, Death, and Uproar, as none of us are sure that we shall
our-live the Ruins. O that our Churches would then vigorously set themselves
upon some Extraordinary Methods of Self-Reformation, which indeed are now the
only Methods of Self-Preservation! I assert, That The Doing of something
Extraordinary this way, is the work of THIS, Gloomy, Cloudy, Stormy Day: and it
is probable, that the man who is cold in this matter, will be cold, Formal,
Sapleis, in all his Ordinary Duties. But that which makes me write the more
prest^ngly about this matter is, That Apostatized Churches have rarely yet been
known, to Reform themselves (...) have had their course, and Desolutions have
Ensured. And now think, O New England, what has particularly come upon the
Churches of (...), Ephtsus has now a few Cottages but no Christians in it.
Smyrna has much Traffic, but scarce any Gospel there. Pergamus has left in it,
perhaps about a dozen Families, of Superstitious and Miserable Greeks. Thyatira
has bloody and brutish Turks filling of it: Sardis, once a Metropolis, is now
a Beggarly Village. Philadelphia is overrun with Slavery and Idolatry; and
(...), is utterly Desolate. Or, if a Later and sadder Example will more affect
us; What are we (except in our Sabbaths better than the Churches in France? Yet
have they lately seen their Temples destroyed, their Pastors Ban shed, and fell
Drag^ons, like since Dragons, let Loose upon them. From these, no Escape has
been allowed unto them; by Land, they had Soldiers to watch the Palles; by
Sea, they intented such Poisons, that if any lay had in unsearchable co^^e^s of
an Hold, yet they killed them with the Vapor. They have ever since been
Tortured in the Hands of Devils Incarnate, who have so treated them, that six
years ago, there were Medals made, whereon 'twas bragged, That the French King
had already reduced no less than Twenty hundred thousand Calvinists, from the
Protestant Religion. So horribly has he, who I doubt will one Day be called,
Louis le Loup, ravaged upon the Flocks of the Lord Jesus O Tremendous Judgments
of Heaven! But, suppose we that these were greater Sinners? Nay, except we
Repent, we may all of us likewise Perish.

II. In the mean time, it is our Petition to God, that our Laborious Pastors may
Cry aloud, and not spare, but lift up, their Voice like a Trumpet, against
those Evils, which will not let our God become our Friend While they do like
the Soldiers of G^deon ca^r, the Light of the Gospel (as Paul, speaks) in
Earthen Vessels, they also at the same time carry Trumpets to oppose what is
Contrary unto God. Qui Claves haben^ Eccles^^ Ostia Suorum Lib^^rum aperiant.
The great God has seen such Evils in our Camp, that He Demands, Who is on my
side, against them all? It is to be hoped, that the Sons of Levi, will all
appear for Him. Their Name is that of, A Reprover; and the Almighty God says
unto them. as unto young Jeremiah, Arise, and Speak unto them all that I
Command thee, been's dismayed at their Faces. I know very well, that the
Reprover who acquits himself with a good Fortitude and F^^lelley, shall if not
with John loose his own Head, yet loose the Heart of many an Exasperated
^^fendor; but, God will make it up! Very truly says the Excellent OWEN; He is
a lost man in this World, who without Respect of Persons, will engage seriously
in this Work; Every Day he shall find one or other Displeased, if not Provoked.
And yet even in this World, by the strange Interposition of Heaven, The
Reprover often lives more Comfortably that the Flatterer. They Report of the
Tygre, that the sound of a Trumpet, will cast him into a Prodigious Rage.
Truly, the World has many Tygres in it; if we Lift up our Voue like a Trumpet,
against their misdemeanors, they will be monstrousl. Enraged at it: but its no
matter; (...) we had been Dumb Dogs, instead of Shep^rde, the Tygres would have
l^k^d us: Let us have the Last Trumpet continually Sounding in our Ears; and
that is Enough to animate us and Encourage us. W^^ though our Athanasian Courage
in bearing all sorts of Testimonies for our God, should so Ens^ame the
Indignation of both Heretuke, and (...), that for a man to Rail at Us, must be
one of the first Shjbol^th^ to discover a Person ^^^ted unto all that the
People of God count Valuable? There is no Damage, no, there is much Glory in
it. I have from the Experiment made; You shall cast a ^oad (...) Deadly Tor^^e,
if you threw a Grain of Salt upon him; Vo^ Ester Sal Terroe and if we are our
Lords Witnesses, the L^^ts of men must Receive Torment from us. But the, Inward
Conso^ations of the (...), in our Souls, will even at the present abundantly
Compensate, all our Suffering for our Faithfulness; besides the Recompenses
that we shall have at, The (...) of the Just. It is not Impr^b^ble, that Paul,
Rapture into the Third Heaven, was at the very time when the People had been
sto^^^g of him. Not shall we go without a particular (...) of God about us, in
a^^ the Perils, to which we do this way become Obnox^ous. I have known the
Devil in a possessed Person (...) Cruel Strokes, and Kicks against a Messenger
of God, then Praying in the Room; and yet the Hand or F^o^ of the Person
Strangely R^coyl, when within perhaps an Inch of him, as if Rebounding against
a Wall. Thus has our God promised us, I have made thee a Defenced (...), an
Iron Pillar, and a Brazen Wall. The Angles will defend us, as their
Pe^^^-Servants, and we shall dwell under Angelical Influences every day, if we
undauntedly set our selves to bear down all the Sins, that keep up the Kingdom
of the Devils.

III. And our Honorable Rulers will doubtless lend their Helping Hand; for the
Redressing of every Evil, that hurts Humane Society, whereof by the
Constitution of God, They are the Officers. There is not so much as a
Conservation of the Peace, where those ^ces which disturb it, are not
Chastised. We may Lift up our Voice like a Trumpet, but the Strong holds of
Sin, are Stronger than those of Jericho: there must be Swords as well as
Trumpets, to demolish them; and we need not be told, of whom it is said, He
bears not the Sword in (...). There are it is true some Spirit is (...) sins,
which are not, Inquities to be Punished be the Judge; but when there is
Disorderly Living, he is then to be, A Terror unto Evil (...). Indeed Every
time the Sword of (...) Justice is thrust under the Fifth R^b of our (...),
there is as it were, with a Blessed Magic, a wound given unto all those Ill
Persons, that seek to Trouble us. Yea, the whole Congregation fares the better,
for every Ph^nehas, that Legally but Zealous^^, animadverts upon the Baseness
committed in his Neighborhood The Good Lord then bless the World more and
more, with such Vicegerents of Himself, as our Lord Jesus will shortly, Empower
with his Commissions, when, His Kingdom comes; and when the Mountains will
bring peace to the people, and the Little Hills by Righteousness. Having
breathed out these Wishes, of a Soul, which trembles to think, what may be the
Issue of our Delays to make Thorough Work of Returning unto the God that
Smites us; the conclusion that would best finish all, is that, Be strong, O
Z^rubba^el, Be strong, O Joshua, Be strong, all (...) People of the Land, says
the Lord.

To have done, Among the many Accursed Things (...) the midst of us, the (...)
comprehensive Mischief (...) show mine Opinion^ is our Aversation to, and
Violation of, the Covenant of our God. Either people do shamefully forbear to
put themselves under the Wings of that Convenant, or are afterward most
woefully forgetful of the (...) which that Covenant lays upon them. We do as it
were throw by our Errand into the Wilderness; which was to wait upon God, in a
true, pure, Evangelical Church State, for all the sure mercies of his
Everlasting Covenant. But, Who does hinder? Why, the False God, which has been
too generally bowed unto. Our Trade, our Cash, our Land, have been our Gods,
until there has arose Wa^ in our Gates. As a poor Indian once in the West-
Indies, held out a piece of Gold, saying, This is the Christians God! so might
I hold out a Turf of Earth, and say, Here is the God of many a poor New England
man! A Be^^^bul indeed! a fine (...), made of Dung! O how happy, how holy, how
reformed should we become, and how true to the Covenant of our God, if this
Idol were more cast unto the Moles. Whereas, if our value for the World cause
us to let the Church-(...) of Gods Covenant fink and fail in the midst of us,
we shall certainly be vexed with all Adversity, until at last we perish utterly.

But next unto that of Convenant-Breaking, methinks we have no Fault, more
Contagious, or Pernicious, then that of Discontent; it is an Ep^^^^cal Evil,
and it insinuates it self into all our Concerns. For the cure of this Evil
against which I would have a more particular Antipathy, there is a Composition
here laid before my Readers; that so the Clouds and Storms in our Hearts, being
abated by the Word of God blowing upon us, we may see, Fair Weather out of the
North. An Author that shall do what he can to promote the C^^^^ment of the
World, ought certainly to be welcomed as, A Friend of Mankind; and on the score
of my Design to make every man Comfort^^^, to himself, I do now demand such a W
elcome.

I am not Unsensible, that I have by the Importunity of some that have thought
much too well of me, been prevailed with to Burden the PRESS, with too many of
my little Composures; but they that understand what a Self-Denial it is unto any
man of Sense, to become an Author, will rather Pity me, than Revile me, for
the Temptations which must attend all such ways of being Serviceable. And
perhaps I have been sometimes Ready to Imbibe the Notion of some Learned and
Weighty Divines, That the Glory of the Saints in Heaven receives Additions
daily, as their Treatises, or Examples, do, after they are De^d and Gone, bring
forth fruit unto the praise of God, among these that are left b^^ind them, Nor
is it seldom that I have thought on that sweet word of our Savior, Herein is
my Father Glorified, if ye bring forth much Fruit. However, Let not a short
Sermon upon the Evil of DISCONTENT, cause any DISCONTENT, in the Minds of my
Readers; who will do themselves more Harm than me, I assure them if it should;
and I suppose they will hereafter see the PRESSES of New England otherwise
Employed. I do sincerely reckon it a great Instance of New-England^ being
Brought very Low that one so very Low as I am, should be (...) any Numbers of
my Neighbors counted worthy to be Read. But I hope, that my weary L^cubrations
have Earned me at least a Remembrance in the Prayers of those few who have had
their Edi^^c^tion at all serve^^ in them.

COTTON MATHER.

A Sacred Exorcism, upon Sinful DISCONTENT. Uttered on December 24. 1691. at
the Lecture in Boston.
I. Cor. X. 10. Neither MURMR Ye, as some of them also Murmured, and were
Destroyed of the Destroyer.
IT was the (...) and profane Error too much of the Ancient (...), That (...)
C^^formity to the Law of (...) fulfilling of that Holy Law: An Error about
(...) Confuted by our Blessed (...), when (...) to ^^rpound in a (...), the
same (...) which was by (...) (...) (...) Received. Our Great Apostle Paul, was
once a Pharisee; and he seems to have been Tainted, as not only the Roman
Catholics, but even all Unregenerates at this Day, too much are, with that
Opinion, until the TENTH Commandment of the Law Convinced him; says he; in Romans
7. 7,8. I had not known Lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not Covet.
From This Commandment, an Inference may be made Concerning all the rest; and so
it is with an Artifice of Wonderful and Infinite Wisdom here placed in the
Close of all: As if the Lord had said, Let none of you imagine, Your Hearts to
be free from the Cogn zance of the Lam^s which I have newly given you; and
therefore to convince you that my other lam^ do reach as far as the Hearts of
you all, behold, I now Limit you with one Commandment, which you may Evidently
see, cannot be kept or broke without the Heart.

The First sin Committed by our Father was, Conc^pisce^ce; and that Sin has
been the^ Mother of all our other Misbehaviours. What was First Committed, is
Last Forbidden; and it gives us, a Demonstration, that none of us, can fully
keep the Law of our God* In all the Affirmative Precepts of the Law, there is
that Rule interwoven, With all thy Hearts, and all thy Soul, and all thy
Strength. And all the Negative Precepts are under the Influence of that Rule,
Not so much as Covering. Blind and Proud Liars are these men which do not own
themselves full of Sin against a Law, thus Exceeding Broad!

It has been a matter of much Enquiry,

What is that CONCUPISCENCE, which the Tenth Commandment, gives us the
Prohibition of?

We may truly Conceive, That it is not merely Original Sin; which by this
Commandment becomes Exceeding Sinful: No, the Lust here forbidden, is the I
ff^ct, and indeed the Firstborn of that Sin; it is said in Romans 7. 8. Sin
wrought in me, all mannar of Concupiscence. And in truth, Original Sin is a
Transgression against every Commandment of God.

We may also justly Conceive, That it is not barely the Heart-Sin accompanying
all our other Sins in the sight of God, which this Commandment affro^ts with a
Flami^^^ Sword. There is an Heart-Bride, an Heart-Murder, an Heart-Unclea^nes^,
a Dishonesty of the Heart, and a Falsehood in the Heart, which is forbidden,
when that of the Life is Countermanded. Says our Lord, in Prove. 23. 26. My Son
give me thy Heart. And in reallity, an Heart-Sin it reached by every one of the
Commandments.

But what then? W^y, The Tenth Commandment, Supposes not a New Object as the
Five Preceding do; but it forbid^ a New Act of the Soul, in relation unto the
Things, which the former Commandments forbid us, to Sin upon. In shor^ This
Commandment supposes a man to be in the Enjoyment of those Five Things His
PLACE, his LIFE, his BED, his ESTATE, and his ESTEEM, among hi^ Neighbors; and
now the Commandment forbids all Inordinate M^ttons of the Soul toward an
Alteration of our Condition in the World. A man may Lawfully seek to Change his
Condition, where that which God allows him to reckon, The Good Order of his
Concerns, is impaired or defective Yea, there are things which may be Coveted,
be Earnestly Coveted But when (...) man is by the Providence of God, brought
into a Condition which he does not (...) a Present and an Honest way, for the
Emendation of, and the Soul of the man is hereupon boiling and ro^ling, with an
Uneasy Disposition; I say then, Sin ly^th at the Door. At the Door, did I say^
Yea, it is in the House, and in the most Retired Closet of it: This I say,
although perhaps the mind of the man have not yet consented, unto any of those
Iniquities which Violate N^ne of the Ten Commandments.

To prevent Circumlocutions, we must Look out for some One Word, which may be a
Name for this A^^minable Thing; and meth^^ks, the fittest Name for it, is that
of DISCONTENT, or MURMURING.

Of THIS, we have a doleful Instance in the Words now read unto us. The
Corin^^^ians had written a Letter unto the Apostle Paul, to request his
Resolution, upon diverse Cases of Conscience, which they were in the Dark
about. One of those Cases was, Whether Christians might have Communion with
Pagans in th^^r (...) ^^trous Festivals! Our Apostle (...), No; by no means;
and he (...) (...) with sundry Arguments. One of those Arguments is drawn from
the Sin, and (...) wherein Christians would be Entangled by that Communion. It
was an Usual thing for the Old Heathen Idolaters, at such and such Times of the
Year, to have their Holidayes in Honor of their Dri^^es, and those Holidayes
were so many Merry Festivals among them. Thus particularly, in the Month of
December, they had their Sa^urnalia^ Jollities; and their S ^^urn, whom they
made the President of Drunkenness, being indeed, but Originally the same with
our Noah, they then made a Trade of those Excesses, with one Act whereof, Noah
of old was Unawares overtaken; and it was, Mensi^ Geni^lis with them, as they
called it; that is, A V^lup^^^s. (...). Now, as those ^^olick-some Festival, of
Idolatry, did w^fully Ensnare the Souls of the poor Pagans, in all sorts of
Sins, and therefore in the Plagues that would be Conse^^ent thereupon; So, if
Christians ever (...) bear a Part in those Rites of Pag^^^, they do b^ bring
themselves into the (...) of the like Sins and Plagues before the Lord. In the
Prosecution of this matter, our ^postle here lays before us, the Example of
Sinful Israel; who making of a (...) (or Ox) to suit the Impressions, which
their Idolatrous Education had upon them, they became Idolaters; and he adds,
It is written, [you have it in Ex^. 32.6.] The People sat down to eat and
drink, and ro^e up to Play. It seems they kept their Feast in Honor of the
true God; even of the Lord Jekovah; their Calf (or Ox) was but ^n Uninstituted
and Unwarrantable Ceremony, retained by them, as perhaps used in Egypt from
whence they came, in Commemoration of JOSEPH, who by Expounding a Dream of
Kine, was an Instrument of Saving them from the Terrible Famine; and such Fools
they were, [I had almost put upon them, the Name of their Idol!] that they
thought their Games, their Bouts, their wild Revels would be a Service for the
Honor of the most Holy Johovah; as if He were altogether such an one as
themselves. Now it is well known, that Israel has paid very dear, for their
Imitation of the Egyptians, in those mad Extravagancies and Exorbitancies;
there has been, as a Jewish Rabbi notes, an O^nce of that (...) Calf, in every
Calamity that has ever since come upon that unhappy Nation; and therefore we
should all beware how we Do, lest we also Feel, the Like?

Our Text, is a prevention of an Objection, against so Ha^ a saying. Men may be
Ready to Murmr against the Restraints, which the Christian Religion thus
lays upon them, for thereby we not only Abridge unto our selves a world of
Liberty which the Flesh would be we^ pleased with; but we also Expose our
selves to the Hatred and Contempt o^ those, with whom we will not, Run into
the-same Excess of Riot. But if we begin to Murmur, our Apostle will again
produce the Example of sinful Israel, for our Warning. Israel I say, that so
often Murmured at the Hard Things that occ^^red in the way to the Land stowing
wi^^ Milk and Honey. Says he, Neither Murmur you, as some of them also Murmured
and were Destroyed of the Destroyer. Loo^ into Numb. 14.36,37. and you shall
have the History. The P^^itence did fearfully consume, those old Murmurers; and
the mention of, The Destroyer, in th^^ business here, would insinuate unto
(...) That the Devil, who is, The Ang^^ of Death, and (as the Apostle declares
has, The power of Death, has a speci^^ permission, to have a special Influence,
about Pestilential Diseases, where they do prevail.

But that which from hence I have to lay before you is,

A General Admonition.
That the Sin of DISCONTENT or MURMURING, is a most provoking and pernicious
Iniquity, sometimes found among the People of God.

The Apostates, that were to Arise before, and are now quickly to perish by,
the Brightness of our Lords Coming, have committed This, among the Rest of
their Absurdities; That while they have most sacrilegiously [And for that
cause, Come out from among them, O People of God!] stolen the second
Commandment out of the D^calogue, they have Nonsensically split the Tenth into
two. To confute their Folly; it is enough if we compare the two Copies of the
Commandments in Exodus, and in Deuteronomy; In Exodus the House is put before
the Wife, from whence, by the way it has been sometimes gathered, that People
before they Marry, should know Where and How, they are like to Live; But in
Deuteronomy, the Wife is put before the House; doubtless for a Cause worth
Considering. Now, if both be not One Commandment, Let 'em tell me, which is the
Ninth Commandment, and which is the Tenth? No, I may say of this Law, as was of
old said in another matter; Though^ it be doubled, yet the Thing is but One!
And so, it is One sin, that is the Cheef Transgression of it; which One sin, is
that of, DISCONTENT. To Eight against neither small nor great, but against this
King in the Army of Sins, I shall with Gods Help at this Time, Endeavor; and
there are Three Particular Heads of Discourse, under which I may dispatch the
Work of God now before me. But, O Lord God, I pray thee, Remember me, and
Strengthen me this Once, I pray thee!

Now for, I. The Nature of DISCONTENT.
To Discribe the Sin of Discontent, I need only say;

First, In Discontent, there is, A Dislike of that Condition which God would
have us to be Well-pleased with. Every part of our Condition is Ordered by that
God, who has formed all things, and whose Kingdom Rules over all. We are
told, in Psalm. 75 6, 7. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor from the De^art. [which lay both North and South of Canaan] But God
is the Judge; He puts down one, and sets up another. Be our Condition High or
Low, it is God that makes it so. And such is the Bounty, such the Mercy of our
God unto us, that, He would have our minds Approve of that Condition which He
has carved for u^. A sweet Acquiescence of Soul, in the Divine Dispensations
toward us, i^ as much our Duty, as it would be our Comfort; and it is as
Necessary, as it would be Profitable for us Breefly, When our Condition has
been so Circumstanced, that nothing but a LUST in the Heart, would wish it
otherwise; and there is no way of God for the Mutation of it, we are then to be
Satisfied in that Condition. So was that Excellent man, who could say in Phil
4. 11. I have Learned, in whatever state I am, therewith to be content. But
now, Discontent, is a Vice which disturbs the Mind, at the View of something or
other in our Condition, which God has not put us in a way for the Retrieving
of. Would you see a Picture of Discontent? Let Angry Jonas give it you. In
Discontent a man is Angry, that God has not furnished him with such or such a
Guord, as he thinks would give a Comfortable Shadow to him. Something there is
in the Circumstances of his Place, his Life, his Bed, his Estate, and his
Esteem, which he does not Like, and which yet he cannot, or may not Help.
Discontent is a Dissatisfaction, at the want of such Pleasures and Profits, and
Honors, as God has denied unto us; and He has Denied whatever we cannot
Regularly seek to Obtain; Whatever will not advance His Glories and Praises in
the World. Would you hear what is the Discontent, which the Tenth Commandment
is the Disallowance of? We are told, in Joh 2. ^6. The Lust of the Flesh, the
Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. When a man's Carnal App^^^es unto the
Delights and Granden^s of the World, ^ast him into such a ^^q^^etment of Soul,
as hinders his Walk with God; There, is a Discontented man. Solomon speaks
about Four Things that never say, It, is Enough! We may now add a Fifth without
any Culpable Additions to the word of God; it is, Discontent. A Discontented
man, says, I have not Enough; he (...) a Wolf in his Breast, that must always
be fed, but never will be st^^d; the Soul of him is a Sponge, ever such ^ng,
but never filled, of what is in, the Broken Cisterns of this lower and evil
World.

Secondly, That which Enflames the Discontent of men, is usually the Condition
which they see their Neighbors in. Indeed ENVY most properly seems to fall
under the Crimes that are Branded by the Fifth Commandment of our God; it is a
Disposition to Diminish the just Greatness of our Neighbors. But there is a
Roving and a Ranging of the Soul, after what our Neighbor has, and a Grudging
at his Prosperity, which the Tenth more peculiarly stigmatizes. Although we do
not go so far, as to consent with our wills unto the doing of any unjust thing,
for Dispossessing our Neighbor of what God has given him, yet of our Souls
have any stirrings, and bublings, and loose Hankerings after it, here is that
which brings us within the verges of Discontent. A Discontented man, may be
willing that his Neighbor should still enjoy his Place, his Life, his Bed, his
Estate, and his Esteem; nevertheless the view of what his Neighbor has, causes
him to Grudge that h^^ han't the like. It was said of the Discontented, in
Deuteronomy. 28. 34. Thou shall b^ mad for the sight of thine Eyes, which thou shall
see. A Discontented Man sees that which makes him stark mad; and what sight is
that? It is the sight of what the merciful God has bestowed upon his Neighbor,
and not upon himself. That Is his Eyesore; the, Light of God shining upon a
Neighbors Tabernacle, is what the sore Eyes of him, are vexed at. When Ahab
comes to see a Neighbors V^^tyard, he is heavy, he is displeased, if he has not
the Like. We read in Ex^d 16. 2. The whole Congregation murmured, and said, In
the Land of Egypt, we did (...) by the Flesh Pots, and eat Bread unto the Full.
A Discontented man sees, the full Table, the fine Living, the daily Pomp, that
some E gyptian has; and he now makes a cruel grumbling, because he has not the
same. In Discontent, we make another condition, the measure for our own. Our
Brown Bread has not such a favoury Taste in it, because others have White. The
Camel will cry for Horns, the Ox must wear a Saddle, and the Horse draw a
Plough-share, whether it be suitable or no; merely because they see some in
that Condition.

Thirdly, There are many, perverse, Froward, Expressions, wherein Discontent
uses to vent it self. Indeed, it Leads to the Breach of all the Commandments;
particularly, The first Motions to all Second Table Sins, are in this
Discontent. But there are some other Expressions of Discontent, which the other
Commandments do not so directly refer unto. It is said, in Eccl. 6. 9. The
wandering of the Desire; -- this also is vanity and vexation of Spirit. Where
Discontent comes, the Desire falls to wandering after this and that vanity, and
from thence comes a vexation in the Absence of it. A discontented man does
first wish that he had this and that, which God has placed out of his reach,
and he does then Vex, and fret, and fume, that he cannot reach it. He is a man
that fancies many straits upon him, and they are but Fancied straits; as it is
said in Job 20. 22. In the Fullness of his Sufficiency; he shall be in straits.
He has more wants then ever God Almighty permitted him to reckon so; and though
he be never so much preferred, unless he may have the Knee of Mordecai too, he
says, All this avails me nothing! And To, a vast flux of Cares now runs and
eats into the Soul of such a man. We should ordinarily treat our Cares, as a
Person of Quality does his Inferiors, that ask to wait upon him; we should
say, Let 'em stay, till I call (...) them in! But by Discontent, the Doors of
our Souls, are set open so, that all kinds of Cares rush in upon us, with a
most untruly violence; and O what a Clamor do they make upon us! Our
Affections hereupon come to be all in a Tumult; like that Riotous Multitude at
Ephesus, One cries one thing, another cries another, and all is in Confusion!
And our Soul-nourishing, our Soul-refreshing Thoughts of God, are superseded by
Troublesome Thoughts, upon that point, How shall I Compass my Desires? At last,
it grows on to the Discouragement, and Melancholy; which is quite contrary to
Serving of God with Gladness of Heart. The Hornets that stung the Hearts as
well as the Skins of the Ancient Canaanites, are got into the Soul of a
Discontented man; they disorder the man, as the Hornets that got into the
Trunks of the Elephants, did the Army of Sapores, when he Besieged a C^ty where
many Christians were Endangered. Yea, it is well if this Inward Fever do not
cause a Scab upon the Lip: there are filthy Mutterings, Growlings, and
Snarlings, which we fall, into when Discontent has Bitten us, Even the meek
Moses himself, when Discontent had once Discomposed him, spoke unadvisedly with
his Lips.

Finally, Discontent, is a Temper, or more truly, a Distemper, opposite unto
that Calm of the Soul, in which we should still be Sailing to our Eternal Rest;
for here, quite otherwise than in our other Navigation, the more Calm we have,
the more Way we make. We should still Sail upon the Pac^^ick Sea, but by
Discontent we are cast into an Horrible Tempest. A Discontented man, is in a
Cage which God Himself has framed for him; and he, instead of Cheerfully
Singing and Feeding there does nothing but furiously, and foolishly, heat
himself against the Cage.

But we now pass on, to show,

II. The Evil of DISCONTENT.
Now to Blacken the Sin of Discontent, Let it be Considered.

First, Our Discontent is a Monstrous Piece of Ungodliness, Yea, of Re^^llion
against the Almighty Lord. There is a woeful Corruption in the Soul, where
DISCONTENT Predominates; it is like a Fretting Humor in an Ulcer, yea a Cancer
of the mind. It is Ungodliness: in Jude 15. 16. we find Ungodliness, no less
than four times over, in one verse charged upon some in the world; and who are
they? It follows, These are Murmurers, Complaine^s, Yea, it is B^belion. In
Numb. 16. 41. with 17. 10. It was said, All the Congregation Murmured; and then
it follows, There was a Token against the Rebels. Indeed, our Discontent, is
but a Quarrelling with Almighty God; but, Woe to him that striver with his
Maker? A discontented man, either Quarrels the Wisdom of God, as if God might
have done things more conveniently; or, he Quarrels the Goodness of God, as if
Good pleased himself in our Sorrows; or he Quarrels the Truth of God, as if God
would not fulfill his Merciful Engagements. However, be sure, he Quarrels the
Justice of God. Qui de p^nts Murmur at, Ferientis Justitiam accusat. Among all
his Lamentations, you shall not hear him-using the words in our Inspired
Lamentations, Why should a Living Man complain! a man for the punishment of his
Sin? He does not own his Sinfulness to be such, nor Gods Righteousness, that he
is dealt kindly withal, while any thing short of Death and Hill, is inflicted
on him. It is indeed a most Impious and Accursed Pride, which is the Rise of
our Discontent. A Sinner counts himself to Be better than his Neighbors, and
therefore if he don't Fare better than they, he will be Discontented at it.
Yea, the Almighty God himself must gratify all of his Capricio's, or he will be
dissatisfied. Although there is perhaps not one known Papist an Inhabitant of
this Country; yet there is many an Antichrist in the midst of us; Every
Discontented man has, A Man of Sin, within him, or that which Exalts it self
above all that is called God; he must have his own will to be the Director of
what God shall do unto him. And is this fitting? Judge I pray you.

Secondly, Our Discontent is not only Disagreeable to the Spirit of a
Christian, but it is the very Spirit of the Devil. The Blessed Spirit of God,
is like a Dove, whose meek, sweet, quiet Qualities, are inconsistent with
Discontent; there is a Vultur, or an Harpye, that preys upon the Soul, where
Discontent is Harbored Now, the Spirit of God is in every Christian; and, if
he be got but as far as A. (...). C. in Christianity, that Spirit has made him
Con a little of this Lesson, To be Content. The Christian has chosen God, both
for his LORD, and for his GOOD; and hence, let things go never so Ill with him,
there are two things that he attains unto. One is that in Psalm. 39. 9. I was
Dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou did it. He is willing that God
should Rule, the whole World, and all his own little Affairs in the World.
Another is that in I Sam. 30. 6. He Encouraged himself in the Lord his God. He
reckons, that while be has the Enjoyment of God the Knowledge, the Image, the
Favor of God left unto him, the loss of all other things, is but like the
spilling of a Cup of Water, unto him that has a perennous Fountain running at
his Door. This is the Spirit of a Christian! But what then is Discontent? It is
truly, the Spirit of the Devil. Satan is the greatest Malecontent in the World;
and he is, The Father of such. He (with all his Legions) is a Roving, as well
as a Roaring sort of a Creature; it is said of him, He seeks Rest, and finds
none. We (...) concerning, the Discontented man, He (...) the Troubled Sea. Now
it is said in Jam. 2. 19. The Devils Tremble; the Greek word is an Allusion to
the Noise made in the Rote of the Sea, or by the dashing and breaking of the
Ways against the Rocks. The Devils, and the Discontented, are like one
another; both of them, as the Troubled Sea. Discontent is of all things, most
properly, Vitium Diabolicum; there is a sort of Diabolism in Discontent; our
Murmur is therefore the Devils Music. And hence, Discontent is the Stock upon
which the Devil uses to Graff the most violent and outrageous, of his
Temptations. How many doleful Wretches, have been decoyed into Witchcraft it
self, by the opportunities which their Discontent has given the Devil, to visit
'em and seduce 'em? We have seen tremendous instances of those Hellish
Witchcraft^s and Compacts unto which the discontent of some have driven them. I
once knew a Minister whom God made an Instrument of saving a discontented young
man, from signing a Covenant with the Wicked One, which he by strange Accident
found out, that the youngman had already Written with his Blood. Yea, Murder,
and the worst, Murder too: even Self-Murder, is that which the Devil! does by
discontent often precipitate many wretched madmen into. Achitophel falling into
a pang of Discontent, goes and hangs himself. O it is a most hideous and
hazardous Possession which the Devil takes of a discountented man. When Saul
was in a discontent, it is noted, An Evil Spirit came upon him. Why, Discontent
invites all the Devils within Call, to make a Kende^vouze in the Heart of the
disturbed man. Yea, if I were as much a Sadducce, as I am, even by matter of
Fact, able to confute a Sadducee, I would say, Discontent is it self a Devil,
and the very Prince of Devils. But it is enough to say, The Devil has not a
greater Engine to work withal.

Thirdly. Our Discontent, lays us open to the Terrible Wrath of the Eternal
God. Indeed a Discontented man rarely feels the Love of God, witnessed unto his
own Soul. Those Joyful and Gladsome Seals, wherein a Saint has powerful
Assurances, That God has Loved him with an Everlasting Love, are usually
withdrawn, yea, they are Banished, from a Discontented Heart. But instead
thereof, the Wrath of God lies hard upon the Soul, whom Discontent has
overwhelmed. It is reported in Numb. 16. 41. The Congregation Murmured; and the
next News was, There is Wrath gone out from the Lord. It is a Token of a
Direful and Ireful Wrath from God upon the Soul, when the Evil Disease of
Discontent, shall take away the Relish, which otherwise a man might have in his
Enjoyments. And it further Provokes the God of Heaven, to inflict His Wrath
upon all the Interests of such an Unthankful, and Unholy man. We read in Psalm.
105. 25, 26. They Murmured in their Tents, therefore He Lifted up His Hand
against them. In Discontent, we Lift up our Heart against God, and then He will
soon Lift up His Hand against us, that we shall continue in a desolate
Wilderness all our Days. If our Children are Stomachful when the Rod has been
upon them, they are Lashed and Scourged with it again; and Impatiens Egrotus,
Crudelem facit Medicum. God will not bear-long with Discontented Ones. He said
in Numb. 14. 27. How long shall I bear with this Evil Generation, which Murmr
against me? It is nothing but the Infinite for bearance of God, that keeps off
the bitterest and the dreadful lest miseries, from a Murmuring Generation. But
we may be sure, that the Just God, will multiply the Marks of His Vengeance
upon Discontented Ones, until either they come to Abhor themselves, and say, I
am vile, I have spoken, but I will Proceed no further; Or, until, they come to
^eel, Wrath unto the Uttermost.

There were Especially Two Punishments, which the Wrath of God inflected upon
His Discontented People in the Wilderness of Old; and I wish my own
Discontented Country would Think upon it. The Discontented People, were
Punished with, A DELAY of mercy; they hoped that within One half year, they
should have had a Comfortable Settlement of their Affayrs; and that they should
quickly have had a Rest in their own Land under an holy and an happy
Magistracy; but for their Discontent they were kept for many years together
under very great Unsettlements. The Discontented People, were also Punished,
with, FIERY SERPENTS, Let loose upon them; there were horrid Scorpions that
were sent among them; those Malignant Presters whose ^ayls had a most
Incur^eable but a most curciating Poison in them, very cruelly Stung them for
their Discontent. I pray, Let him that has Ears to hear, Hear!

Fourthly. Discontent is the most Unreasonable piece of Madness, the maddest
piece of Unreasonableness in the World. It is said of Discontented persons, in
Psalm. 39. 6. Surely, they are Disquieted in Vain. Truly, it were easy to give a
thousand Evidences, that People are usually Discontented in Vain, when they are
so at all.

Discontent, it will procure none of the those Good Things we are concerned
for: They will not come a bit the sooner for all our Intemperate Snatches after
them. Indeed, a Likely, yea, a Certain way for us, to have more Good, is to be
so Content with what we have already, as to be Thankful for it. I have heard,
that Old Mr. Dod, having a Kinswoman, among the first Planters of New England,
who Underwent more than Ordinary Inconveniences, in the Beginning of the
Plantation, he sent the Gentlewoman for a present, at the same time, first, a
Brass Counter, then a Silver Crown and then a Gold Jacobus, all of them
severally wrapped up; with this Instruction to the Gentleman who carried it;
That he should first present her only the Counter, and if she received it with
any show of Discontent, he should then take no further Notice of her; but if
she Gratefully Resented that small Thing, for the sake of the hand it came
from, he should then go on to present the Silver, and so the Gold; and withal
assure her, That such would he the Dispensations of God unto her, and the other
good People of New England; if they would be content with such little things as
God at first bestowed upon them, they should in Time have Silver and Gold
enough. The Gentlewoman gave the man occasion to go through with all his
Presents; and many more besides her have also found the Reality of the
Observation. But now, Discontent puts men out of the way and reach of Gods
Blessing upon them. If a man do happen to Get any thing with discontent, it is
a thousand to one, he will keep it so, if he keep it at all. What comes with a
Eret, has a Eret in it when it comes. If a Rachel be discontented for her
Barrenness, and cries, Give me Children! what sort of Children do they prove
unto her? Truly, very deadly Ones. No,

Discontent will heap all sorts of Bad Things upon us. For, it utterly deprives
us, of our Comfort in those things which we are already the Subjects of. It Is
Content alone, that will make a man really Rich and Great. A man truly is the
Possessor of nothing, which he is not Contented with. It is said. A little that
a Righteous man, has, is better than the Riches of many Wicked. Why so? because
a Righteous man is a Contented man. Most of our Indigencies and Necessities,
are but in our Conceit; Now Content gives a man, a conceit of Enough, in his
Little. Whereas, if a man has never so much about him, he will be a poor man,
as long as Discontent shall worry him. Our Naked Eye, will show us five or six
Hundred Stars at once in our Hemisphere, glittering over us; but if we hold no
bigger a thing than a Groat close to our Eye, it will hinder us from seeing
those Lamps of Heaven at all; all is dark. Why, we have glorious Constellations
of Comforts on every side of us; but our Discontent lays one perite
Inconvenience or other close to our Eye, that all is darkness about us, and we
are even ready to say, We c^n see nothing that God has done for us! What
signified all the Widow of Sar^pta's Preservations, Provisions, and
Protections, in a very Calamitous Time, unto her, while Discontent was
Complaining, My Son is dead! What signified all the Miraculous things done for
Jonas, (whom the Jews count the Son of that Widow,) while Discontent was
complaining, My Guord is gone? O it is a most ungrateful thing, this Discontent!

Indeed, it also Forfeits all those things, wherein we have been ready to take
our Comfort. As the Lord said, Because ye did not serve the Lord with gladness
of Heart, ye shall serve your Enemies with weariness: This is the Common Fate
of Discontented Persons; Because they are not Content with that they have, God
says, I Will take it all away! And when those Comforts are gone, our Discontent
makes us, yet more unable to bear the going of them. As a man is a Fever, or a
Bird in a Limet wig, the more he Tumbles and Flutters, the worse his matters
are; so is it in Discontent. None of the Fetters which God lays upon us, would
be half so Galling, so heavy, so irksome, if Discontent were not a sore first
made upon us; it is by this that, The Iron Eats into our Soul. But now, being
brought into our sorrowful Hours, our Discontent serves us, as the Jews did
our Lord upon the Cross; Gall and Vinegar, is all the Cordial that it brings
for the supporting of us; it is, As Vinegar to Nitre, one Sharp thing upon
another unto us, when we are of an Heavy Heart.

In fine, Our Discontent, is upon all Accounts, as much without Reason, as the
most Brutish thing in the World: For, Either we can Remedy our Affliction, or
we Can^^s If we cannot, Levius (...); a contented Patience must be the Remedy.
If we can, Go do it then, and the Content.

Allow me to touch a Little upon one frequent and fretting string of
Discontent; It is that of Murmuring at the Government. The World, and this part
of it more particularly, is much disquieted with a sort of people, known by the
Name of, Murmurers; and what is it breeds 'em? It Is commonly the Taxes which are
demanded of them. And yet if they would hearken to Reason, many times all this
foaming Discontent would be taken away. Perhaps the Taxes were granted by the
Consent of the People in an Assembly, and cannot such Taxes he paid with the
Content of the people that have given them? Perhaps all the Taxes are
necessarily employed for their Defense against such Calamities as would cost
them far more than all their Taxes ten times over. Perhaps they needlessly throw
away the value of more than thrice their Taxes at the Taverns, or at least, on
Superfluities in a year. Are there Inequalities? These are Unavoidable. And
perhaps the Taxes in other Countries are as hard again, as what are in ours.
Ten thousand such Things, might be spoken to show how Irrationals the
Discontent of men, often is in that ONE particular; and the like might be said
upon Ten thousand more. But I shall Irritate the Discontent of my Hearers, if
my Discourse grow too being upon them; I Will therefore only say this one word for
all; Almighty God once Pressed that upon His People, Show your selves men; and
I affirm, that this one Direction well attended, would Clap a Golden Bridle
upon most of the Headstrong Discontent, which we are carried away withal.

But I hope, you are prepared now to hear,

III An ANTIDOTE against the Sin of Discontent.
Contentment! How shall we be masters of so rare a Jewel! Were this Jewel ours,
we should be as the Apostle speaks, though, Having Nothing, yet, Possessing All
things; it would produce a continual Heaven, in our Souls, and it would place
us in those Regions, Whither Storms do not reach, and where God and Rest is
Enjoyed for ever. There has been much Talking about, and some Hunting after, a
sort of a Powder, which they call, The Philosophers (...); I will not Expose my
self so far as to (...) my Opinion about the Attaineableness of such a thing:
But this I Will say, It Is Morally Attaineable, If a man will drop a few Grains of,
CONTENT upon his Peuter, his Iron, Yea, or the Wooden Vessels in his House,
he will turn them into Gold immediately; and on the other side, if a man have
never so much Gold without Content, he would be but horribly famished in a Room
full of Gold, as your Little Sons at School will tell you, who was of old. Or,
to speak more Scripturally; Though the waters whereof you drink, be the waters
of March, a little Sprig of Content, thrown into them, would presently take
away all their Bitterness. What shall I say more? -- But I will Preface nothing
more, in the Commendation of Contentment; although you see, it is a Subject so
Charming, that one shall rather be a little Incoherent, than leave it, without
any thing said upon it. I Will address my self to offer you an Antidote, against
all your Discontent; and the Antidote shall be made up of Three Ingredients.

I Let Serious THOUGHTS be the first part of our Antidote.

Contentment is like Charity; it, Thinks no Evil. And if we were full of, Good
Thoughts, it would core our Discontent. We should indeed keep a Guard upon all
our Thoughts; and not permit 'em to run (...) into the Woods, by giving 'em up,
to Think, We know not what? Those Rambling Figments, which rise within us, when
the Cogitative Power is not Governed by, The Law of Christ, are the Ch^os our
of which we create all our Discontent. We must use to, Think by Rule; and when
the special Exercises of either our General or particular Calling, do not (...)
for our (...) Thoughts, we must not let all the Interval space between our more
stated Businesses be over grown with the Words of none but Vain Thoughts; We
must fetch back our Desultory and Impertinent Imaginations, from their
Vagaries, and we must fetch in some useful Meditations into our Souls, which a
Divine and a (...) Chemistry, would make even the meanest Occurrences to afford
unto us.

But there are some Thoughts more peculiarly adapted unto the Mortifying of all
Discontent in our Souls. e g.

Let us Think, It is the Blessed God, who appoints my Condition for me.
Although never such Afflictive. Thing do Happen unto (...) it is not by mere
Hap that they come to pass. It is said in Job 5. 6. Affliction comes not forth
of the Dust, neither does Trouble Spring out of the Ground. Possibly, we have
parted with a Desir^able piece of Dust; or, it may be our Delights have been
said into the Ground; yet it is not from the Dust or from the Ground, that all
these Afflictions come. No, it is [to use the Name which the Book of Esther
has, for, GOD] from, Another PLACE, even from GOD Himself. There is no
Affliction that so much gives Discontent unto us, as what has the Hand, and
perhaps the Spite, of MAN, among the causes of it: when we can say, Such a man
(...) me, or, such a man has wronged me; But let us make the Conclusion which
David made in such a case, It Is God has bidden him! The worst Oppressor, is but
an Ax, or a Staff, in the Hand of that God, whose Throne is in the Heavens. The
sense of this, will make us apprehend, That nothing but what is Wise, and Just
has come upon us; and then, What R^om for Discontent! It was a Blasphemy
uttered by that Arrogant Prince of Arragon, That he could have mended the
Creation of God. A BLASPHEMY as little Differing from That, as Providence is
from Creation, would it be to say, That we can mend the Providence of God. If
we see GOD, in all that Happens, it will terrify us from the Least Lisp of such
a Blasphemy. They said concerning our Lord, in Mark. 7. 37. He has done all
things well. Who dare say any other about the Works of that GOD, who is, Wise
in Counsel, and Wonderful in Working! Truly, A Regenerate Soul has used often
to say, I can take any thing well as the Hands of my God. The most Common, and
believe me, not the least Sinful, Discontents of men, are spent upon the Little
Accidents of Humane Life; Cross Accidents of the Weather, or in a Journey, and
the like, do every Day raise a Pe^, in the Minds of Men. But what? Cannot you
take such a Thing well, at the Hands of your God? I tell you, There is the Hand
of God in every one of those little Accidents, and you know not but the End of
God may be greater in them, than you are well aware. I have been well informed,
That very lately, a very poor Woman Riding from this Town to her own, had her
Horse taken with such an Obstinacy in the Street, that he would not Stir, upon
any of the Provocations that could be given him. While many Violences were
ineffectually used upon the Refractory Beast, a Gentlewoman, before whose Door
the woman was thus Incommoded, Courteously invited her to come in, though she
were wholly a Stranger to her. Several Discourses past, in which, the Poverty
of this Woman at length came to be discovered; and the Charitable Gentlewoman
immediately gave (...) a Liberal supply for her Distressed and Indigent Family,
in the Ensuing Win^^er; after which the Horse would go without a Spur. Behold,
the Hand of God in an Accident of the Journey! I can also inform you, That a
Minister on Foot walking Two or Three Miles out of Town, a very violent Shower
of Rain compelled him to go in unto an House upon the Road: There, because he
would lose no Time, he treated the people of the Family with Occasional
Discourses upon the Things of their Eternal Peace. And God thereby shot those
Arrows into the hearts of some who were present, that they could not pluck 'em
out, without their going Home unto the Lord. Behold, the Hand of God in an
Accident of the Weather too! I say then, Let Gods Co^curse with all Second
Causes, be the first cause of our Content, in all they do or bring unto us.

Again, Let us think, The worst Condition that besals me, may be better for me,
than I am aware. To silence our Discontent, our Lord says unto us in the midst
o^ all our Affliction, as in Joh 13.7. What I do, thou know not Now, but
thou shall know Hereafter. Do but look upon the diverse. Interpretation, made by
Jacob and Joseph, of the very same Affliction. While it was [Now] says Jacob,
All these things are against me; but when [Hereafter] came, then says Joseph,
God meant it unto Good! The Affliction which causes your Discontent, may be
your Physic; and it may come to that upshot, Hereby Iniquity is purged. Or, it
may be your Baliast; you might soon Overset into some lamentable miscarriages
of Soul; and therefore, If need be, you are in Heaviness. Yours Spiritual and
Everlasting Welfare may be more than a little promoted, by those things which
you are now discontented at Your Sickness and Weakness, may be to save you
from, Lean^ess in your Soul. Your Disasters in your Trades or your E^^ds, may
be to make you, Rich in Faith. The Reproaches cast upon you, may be to procure
your Testimony from the Lord, (...) done, Good and Faithful Servant. In a word,
Your Afflictions, in themselves, they are but, Light and for a Moment; and
besides, they work for you, that is, they work you for, A far more Exceeding
and Eternal Wright of Glory. Moreover, they may promote your Temporal Welfare
too. How ordinary is it, for men's disappointments to be their deliverarces!
that they may say, (...), Or, I had been undone, if God had not kept me from a
thing which my mind was extremely set upon! We cannot say, when we Run too
Fast, or Creep too Slow; pray then, let us not be discontent, when our Goings
are Ordered of the Lord. Said the Psalmist, in Psalm. 119.75. Thou in
Faithfulness has Afflicted me. You may think that you are going to be Stabbed at
Heart; but such may be the Faithfulness of God, that the Sword may only open an
Ulcer, which would otherwise have been a Mort^^ one. Have you never heard of
(...) ^^^ing? Think thus, and be Content!

Furthermore, let us think, Though my condition be never so bad, it will not be
Long. Our Mortality may give a Deaths would unto our Discontent. So thought the
Apostle in I Tim. 6, 7, 8. We brought nothing into the World, and it is certain
we can carry nothing out; Now having Food and Raiment, let us be therewith
Content. Are we Discontent, because we have not so full a Chest as another man?
Remember, Within a little while, I am to be my self Locked up in a Black Chest,
among the Dead! Are we Discontent, because we have not so fair an House, as
another man? Remember, A cold, small, dark House, of about six foot long, will
'ere long serve my Turn! Are we Discontent, because our Tables are not so well
spread, as we would have them? Remember, I shall my self shortly Feed the
Worms! But when are we like to see this Time? Truly, it is upon the Wing toward
us; it flies, as we read in Job 9, 25, 26. Swifter than a Past, passing as the
swift Ships, as the Eagle that hastens to the Prey. With so quick a Dispatch,
will the Time come upon us, when that which (...) causes our Discontent; will
all be over (...) (...), quid mul^^^ viatici? We have not so much of our Way
yet before us, that we should be Discontents about what (...) (...) in the way.
A Great Saint among (...) a Bone broken, and not well set again, with a
pleasant gravity said unto some of his Friends that were Discontented a^ (...)
no matter, it will serve as long (...) I have (...) for it. Why, are we
Discontent, because our Affairs are any of ^^em out of Joint. It may be things
will (...) as they are, while we have any (...) them. O keep the Curse of (...)
in the world; and say with the (...), Lord, I am a S^journer! Though we
Fare-hard, and Lodge hard, and are molested with filthy Bugs, that will fetch
Blood of us too, yet Remember, All these are but the Inconvenienc^es of our
Inn, from whence I shall be gone immediately! What Esau said profanely about
his Birth right, we may piously say for our own Content, Beh^la, I am at the
point to Dy^, and what signifies it, whether the World go one way or (...) with
me? And as our Dying, so do^^ our Lords Coming loudly bespeak our Contentment,
with what our Station is. It was said, in Phil. 4. 5. Let your Moderation be
known unto all men; The Lord is at Hand. So I say, Let your Contentment be seen
in all things, for the Lord is at Hand. If you were sure, that the Appearance
of our Lord Jesus Christ in Flaming Fire, to Consume, The Antichrist, and set
up that Kingdom of His, which, The Day of Judgment, in the several Stages of
it, is intended for the various Representations of, would come to pass, within
a few Months or Years, would it not make all the Confusions of the world, more
easy with you? I may tell you, that there are lately Raised up some Godly and
Learned Men, that have made a Midnight Cry, to advise a secure World, that such
an Event is, one of, The Things to be Looked for; and it seems that, Our being
will aware of such a thing, is the watchfulness to be most in these Days
Endeavored, where unto the Virgins will nevertheless be most generally
indisposed. For my own part, I shall only set before you the words of a Worthy
Person, (and one that is no Fanatic) in an Epistle before a Sermon lately
Published, about the Probable Appr^^aches of our Lords Appearance; He says,
Take the Doctrine as refined from the D^oss [mentioned] and it will appear pure
Gol^^ I desire (says he) to be ashamed of my own Darkness and ^^leness; that I
have not attained unto the Evidence and Pers^vasion of our being NOW come to,
THE TIME OF THE END, that I know some of the Dear People of God have arrived
unto. But I bless God for what I have seen; and I could wish I had words to
declare it unto the world, that they who live in the Daily Expect^^ion of the
Coming of Christ, are the most Lively Zealous Christians, that ever I have
known or heard of in these Latter Days; the wonderful Impressions, which they
have upon their Souls about it, are Soul-ravishing, Enflaming their Hearts with
Love to him; they are Soul-replen^shing, that they even overflow in all their
Discourse, with the most affectionate speaking of CHRIST, and for him: whereby
the: are rendered some of the most useful Saints upon Earth. And whereas all
Enthusiastical Opinions are wont to pul^ up, these Impressions have tended to
make them the most Humble and Lowly Christians, that ever I came near. As the
generality of Christians are without these Expectations, so by woeful Experience
we know (...) cold we are in our Hearts and Live ^^n our Converses and
Families. The he: And methinks any thing should content us, while our Lord
says, Behold, I come quickly.

Fourthly and Lastly, Let us think, The Comparing of my Condition, is enough to
make me contented in it.

Let us compare our Condition with our Demerit. As for our Blessings, They are
far more than we have Deserved. We may say, as in Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy
of the least of all the Mercies. Upon every Morsel of Bread, or Drop of Water,
or wink of Sleep we take, we may own, This is too Good for such a Sinner as
(...) As for our Troubles, they are far less than we have Deserved. We may say
as Ezr. 9. 13. Thou our God have punished us, less than our Iniquities deserve.
In our worst Hours we may cry out, as a good man once under grinding pains of
the Stone, Blessed be God, this is not Hell! It Is Hell that is my Due!

Moreover, Let us compare our Condition, with other and better men's. I am sure,
we would be lo^h to undergo, what is undergone, by thousands in the world,
concerning whom we must nevertheless confess, That they never sinned against
God, so much as we have done our selves. Yea, I Will offer you a proposal, which
even the most Afflicted Person among you all, dares not, comply withal; It Is,
That all the Sufferings of Mankind should be laid in one Heap, and you, each of
you, take your equal share out of the common Heap. Would you like your Dividend
in that proportion? I doubt not. Then like what you have Or, see whether your
Hardships are like those in Heb 11. 37. 38. They wandered about in Sheepskins,
and Goat Skins, being destituter afflicted, tormented, and yet the world not
worthy of them. Yea; when our Lord Jesus Christ himself came among us; how was
it? It was truly, In form^ pa^peris! It Is said, in 2 Cor. 8 9. He became poor.'
He once brought in an Inventory of his visible Estate; and how much, do you
think it was? The Sum Total was, The Son of Man has not where to lay his Head.
And because he would not refuse to pay his Rate, he works a Miracle to get
Fifteenpence, for his doing of it, Nay, there was no fort of Misery which did
not befall our Lord; Though he were, Gods Beloved Son, yet he was also, A man of
Sorrows. The worst that we meet withal, is but a little splinter of that Cross
on which our Lord was Crucified.

Finally, Let us compare our Condition with what it has been, as well as with
what it will be. As for what you will be, it is said of the most opulent man
alive, in Psalm. 49. 17. When he Dies, he shall carry nothing away. The Great
Saladine, the Commander of the World, ordered his Grave Clothes to be showed at
his Funeral, and this Proclamation to be made, Her^ is all that a mighty
Emperor now lays claim unto. The Day is at hand, when all your Clothes will be
but a Windingsheet, and all your Lands a Sepulcher. But, perhaps, what you have
been heretofore, should not be forgotten with you. Although you have lost never
so much, cannot you call to mind the Time, when you had Less than God has yet
left you the Owners of. I have sometimes noted it, That such as have Risen from
Nothing, to some Figure and Splendour, are of all persons the least able to
brook any Frowns of God upon what they have. If such as These do meet with any
Shipwracks, or Burnings, or disadvantageous Bargains, or with any thing that
abates their Upstart, Splendour and Figure, what a wretched whimpring and
whining is made by these little Souls? Now this argues a very mavelous
wickedness in the Hearts of men! I pray, Reflect! As Jacob could say, Once I
had nothing but my Staff, whereas I am now become two Bands; Thus is it not
within the Memory of Man, That you were hardly worth so much as the Head of the
Cane which you now carry in your Hands! And what if God should Reduce you to
That again? Will you be so Ingrate, and wicked as to say, I cannot bear (...)?
However, you may say with Job, in Job 1. 21. Naked came I out of my Mothers
Womb; and therefore though you should now become, As poor as Job; yet you should
again say with Job, The Lord gave, and the Lord has Taken away; Blessed be the
Name of the Lord!

Surely, here are Thoughts enough, to lay our Discontents under such
Reprimands, that they must for shame now be Hushed for ever.

2. But now, there are Needful CRACE^, to be the further Ingredients of that
(...) which is to be used with us. It we had much of Heaven in our Hearts, we
should be contented, although we have Little of Earth in our Hands. Discontent
is a Kind of a Snake; let us take High Flights of Grace, and that Snake will
not be able to fasten upon as. One of the Ancients, has well said, Nil sentit
Crus in Nervo, cum Animus ^st in Celo. Were we very Spiritually Minded, and
were we continually acting of Grace upon God, in a life of most Intimate
Fellowship with Him; We should be after a sort Insensible, of the Things which
do now so Exceedingly Discontent us. Particularly; There are especially Three
Graces to be now Recommended unto us all.

First, Let me Recommend Faith, as that Grace, which brings, Perfect Peace,
unto him that has it. Faith will keep us, as from Fainting, so from Fretting,
under our Afflictions. By Faith, let us Live upon Gods Promise in the New
Covenant. There are Great and Precious Promises, which God has given us, for
the Contenting of our Souls; and now, although we have nothing else, yet let
these be, Our Heritage, and the Rejoicing of our Heart. What a Promise is that
in Heb 1 3. 5. Be Content with such things as ye have; for He has said, I
will rever leave thee, nor forsake thee. Mark the Preceding Verse, and you may
see, That Married People are Eminently concerned in this Promise of God.
Marriage is Honorable, says the Apostle; Yea, but say many, It Is Change (...)
too; and as the Family Grows, Discontent will do so too. Well, says the Lord,
But I (...) never leave thee nor forsake thee; Be but Content, and I Will provide
for all the Family! See also, Psalm. 84 1^. and Psalm. 34, 10. with many more
such, Faithful sayings. By Faith likewise, let us Realize Our Portion in a more
Glorious World. Persuade your selves, of the Portion which you have in those
Things that, Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, and Heart has not
Conceived. It was said, in Heb. 10. 34. Ye took ^^^fully, the Sp^^^ing of your
Goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven, a better and an
Enduring Substance.(...), we should be deserted by all the Friends we had in
the World, yet let us Know, That we have Him for our Friend, who says, Am not I
better unto thee, that Ten Sons? or than Ten Worlds? Let us Know that though we
have little Money, yet we have, The Pearl of Great Price. Let us Know, that
though we have hardly Rage of Cover us, yet we have, The White and clean Linen
which is the Righteousness of the Saints. Though our Names here are Spit upon;
yet let us Know, we have, Names Written in Heaven. And though our House be a
Cottage, and perhaps an Hired one, yet let us Know, In our Fathers House, there
are many Mansions. O be Content with such a Portion! You Will say, How shall I
know this? I Reply, Thus; Try whether these Considerations will Kill your
Discontent, and Extirpa^e that Root of Bitterness out of your Souls. If you
(...), They Will Do; That is a Sign that such Considerations do belong unto you;
you are the Heirs of such Consolations.

But let me, Secondly, Recommend Repentance, as a Grace which will give a
Diversion to all our Discontent: This will make us use all our Discontent upon
our Sins; and this is. A Discontent not to be Discontented at! While we Mourn
for our Dealings toward God, we shall not Murmur, at any of His Dealings with
us. Did Sin set Heavy upon us, every thing else would be Light. Repenting would
give a Check unto Repining. The Voice of the Penitent is, If God say, I have no
Delight in thee, Behold, Here I am; Let Him Do unto me, as may seem Good unto
Him!

And, Lastly, Let me Recommend Humility, as a Grace which Cuts off the very
Spring of all our Discontent. All things do always go well with an Humble man.
He is, As a Weaned Child, and so not a Froward one. Let the worst come that can
come, he will say as One once did, in terrible pain, I Groan, but I do not
Grumble. O could we say with Paul! And if Paul could say so, sure you and I,
may say it. One thing said by Paul was, I am nothing. Say after him; and then,
though we Have nothing, we shall not be Discontent. Another thing said by Paul
was, I am the Chief of Sinners. Say after him; and then we shall not be
Discontent, though we are the Chief of Sufferers.

But,

3. Fervent PRAYERS may be propounded as the Last Ingredients of that Antidote,
which we are to be advised unto. Prayer, It Is the Heart-ease of Discontented
ones Hannah found it so; when a Fit of Discontent was-upon her; we are told,
She ^cured out her Soul to the Lord, and so was no more fad. I now say, Go and
do likewise. In there any Grievance which you are Discontented at? Then, Go to
^the Lord; This will wonderfully Unload your Souls. As Luther called Prayer The
Leeche of his Care; thus you may find it will suck all your Discontents away.

Be much in Prayer. The Hurricanes of Discontents are not in that Mount,
whither Prayer will carry you: But pray particularly for, A contented mind. It
is a Ri^co of matchless Wisdom; now, If any man lack this Wisdom, let him ask
it of God. When Paul had said, I have Learned the Mystery of Contentment; left
any should mistake him, as if he had spoken like a Self taught man, he
subjoyns, in Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ, who strengthens
me. O then, ask the strength of Christ; and as of old, When he Rebuked the
Winds, there was a great Calm; Let us beg of him that he would mercifully
Rebuke all the Discontents in our Souls. That one word of his Peace! Be still!
will set all to Rights within us.

THUS, have we been Testifying against the Sin of DISCONTENT.

But after all, it is Time for me now to say, there is One sort of Contentment,
against which I am to warn you all; That is, a Contentment in Sin; a
Contentment with a State and a W^^ of Sin, before the Lord. You have been
Solemnly Warned in this place, is Look upon every Sin. As the Abominable thing
which is Hated by the Soul of God; O be not Contented that the Guilt and the
Love, of this (...) Thing should cleave unto your Souls; any more than Lot was
to be in S^dam, when hot Thunder-boles were going to be discharged upon it. If
you be, I have only this to say Now Concerning it; We have Sounded the Trumpets
of God among you; and We have told you, That an Horrible Tempest is yet
impending over the Heads of the Impenitent. As Joshua said, Behold, This Stone
shall be a Witness, for it has heard the Words of the Lord. So I say, this
Pulpit, these Pillars, these Galleries may be Witnesses, and thousands of
Angels will bring in their Witness, that you have had the Dangers of your Sins
faithfully set before you. O take the Warnings, that so both you and we may
Rejoice together in the Day of the Lord Jesus.

A NARRATIVE of a (...) Magical Accident, which happ^^ while the foregoing
Treatise, was in the Press; not impertinently Introduced here, to give a
further Edge and Force unto the Design: of the Treatise.
THere are two things which the Reader has with many Pressing Terms been thus
Discours^d upon; the One is more General; namely, A REFORMATION to be pursued
in all one Churches; the Other is more Special: namely, A CONTENTATION to be
mentained in all our Spirits; And behold, what an Accent I now have to put upon
these WORDS of God, from those WORKS of His, which have happened in our
Neighborhood, since the Writing of these Meditations! I may now give you that
Invitation of the Psalmist, Come, Behold the Works of the Lord, what
Desolations He has made in the Earth! Alas, When shall the next sentence come
to be fulfilled? Good God! When shall we see, He makes Wars to cease unto the
Ends of the Earth?

If our CHURCHES do not now more then ever Study to Reform every thing that may
be offensive to the Sacred and Flaming eyes of the Blessed Jesus in them, and
Revive their Zeal, their Watch, their Care against every R^^e of Bitterness,
which Professors may have insensibly Rising in their Hearts and Lives; We are
certainly Blind before Lightning, We are Deaf to Thunder! The Lord Jesus
throughout all our late War with the Indians in our East, had hitherto
marvellously preserved and protected our Churches, and only Broke up such
Plantations as had been too much without the due Respects or Effects of His
Glorious Gospel. But what a doleful Thing is there now come to pass? A Church
of Saints in now lately in a manner Dis^^pated, by a Sudden, Furious,
Treacherous Attacque, from the most Bloody Salvages in the World. Our Hearts
are harder than the Northern Iron, If they do not bleed at the Tidings of the
Blood shed; made by the Northern Indians, which Barbarous Worshippers of the
Devil, have newly, after a sort broken up an Holy Society, of Believers, that
were Combined for the Evangelical Worship of our Lord Jesus Christ. Sad! That
we must now Complain, Lord, The Enemy had done Wickedly in the Sanctuary; thine
Enemies Roar in the midst of thy Congregations! It seems that even unto
Churches too it may now be said, There are even with you also, Sins against the
Lord! Doub^less, the Fall of One Golden Candlestick in our Borders, makes Noise
Enough to awaken all our Churches, unto the doing of some Remarkable Thing in
Returning unto God; unless our Lethargy be become (God forbid!) Incureable.
When a few poor Gal^leans had been in the midst of their Sacrifices, butchered
by a Cursed Pagan, our Lord made that Reflection thereupon, Suppose ye that
these were Sinners above all! I tell you, Nay; but Except ye Repent, ye shall
all Likewise Perish. But what shall we say, when many Times Eighteen
Christians, are in one Day made a Sacrifice unto those Tawny Pagans, than which
there are not worse Devils Incarnate upon Earth! O that all the Churches in the
Country might now more than ever Stir up themselves unto such Demonstrations of
Repentance, as might prevent the further progress of our Calamities; and answer
this Warning of the Lord our Savior, Be thou Instructed, O New England; Lest
my Soul Depart from thee, L^st I make thee Desolate!

And now also if our SPIRITS, are not more Content than ever with such Estates
as God has Ordered for us, What a Conviction have we in the Disasters which our
Friends to the Northward have newly met withal! We are now perhaps upon all
accounts as we would be; but let us then think, not only upon those that are
hurried and huddled into Garrisons, where besides the Difficulties necessarily
attending such Confinements, they are every Hour Expecting the Doubtful
Assaults of an Adversary, from whom, every Act of Mercy is a Prodigy: but also
let us think upon the miserable Captives now in the Hands of that brutish
Adversary; Captives that are every minute Looking when they shall be Roasted
Alive, to make a Sport and a Feast, for the most Execrable Canibals; Captives,
that must Endure the most bitter Frost and Cold, without Rags Enough to Cover
their Nakedness; Captives, that have scarce a bit of meat allowed them to put
into their Mouths, but what a Dog would hardly meddle with; Captives, that
must see their nearest Relations butchered before their Eyes, and yet be afraid
of Letting those Eyes drop a Tear upon the most Heart breaking Occasions, that
can be imagined; Captives, that may not bear a part in any Comfortable
Devotions nor be known to have so much as a Bible with them, lest a French
Priest should si^ze upon it; Captives, that wear (...) one weary Week after
another, in the midst of such Wolves as are every moment (...) to ^ear them
(...) to p^^ces. Pray, (...) us resent the Condition of such Captives; and let
their Captiv^^^, teach ^s a Lesson of Contentment with such unsp^^^ly (...), is
our Gracious God has favored us withal.

It is then to be distinctly Related, That the Indians yet living in Hostility
against us, after they had by a long silence and repose, in their Inaccessible
Kennels of Late, made our Frontier Towns in the North-East, a little too
Remiss, they did on the 25th of this Instant January, 1691. come upon part of
York, in the Province of Main, where the Inhabitants were in their Unguarded
Houses here and there Scattered, Quiet and Secure Upon the Firing of a Gun by
the Indians, which was their Signal, the Inhabitants Looked out; but unto their
Amazement found their Houses to be Invested with horrid Indians, who
immediately Killed many of these unprovided Inhabitants; and more they took
Prisoners. Having dispatched their Slaughter, they went on to Plunder, both
rising, those Houses, which thus became ob^^xious, and Burning about Seventeen
of them. Hereupon, this Great Body of indians went (...) to some of the
Garrisons; and (...) them to Surrender; their (...) they fine in Writing, by
(...) of the Captives who had the Generosity to Return into the Hands of the
Monsters that were become their Masters, lest by their breaking of their Word,
the other Prisoners might be Exposed: and therein they promised, If they would
Surrender their Garrison, they would let 'em go free; For, as these Flouting
Rogues would have it inserted, They were a people that Fear God, and will not Lie;
if they promise, they will be as good as their word; else they know they shall
burn under ground; and if they Lie, God will not have them; they added, They
were Three Hundred Strong. Some little Garrisons, which had no more than two or
three men in them, received these wild Summons, but they had the Courage to
Reply, That they would s^end their Blood unto the last Drop, are they would S
urrender; and upon this, those Cowardly Miscreants had not mettle enough to
meddle with them. They Retired into the Howling Thickets of the Wilderness;
carrying their Booty with them; only sending Home two aged Women and about
fifteen or sixteen little Children, whom they were loath to be ^^^^led with, and
yet, which is (...) and strange! were loath to Murder them.

They that went immediately to Bury the Slain, have given us an account, that
there were about fifty persons Killed, and near an Hundred Captived; among
which last is the Family of their Godly and worthy Minister. Several also were
wounded; whereof some since are Dead.

But besides the mortal Wounds at this Time given to a precious Church of the
Lord Jesus, there was one terrible Circumstance attending this Desolation,
which we had not yet seen in our Wars.

These cursed Bloodhounds, having bin inspired by the Counsils of some Romish
Missionaries, had been long wishing that they might E^brue their Hands in the
Blood of some New England MINISTER; and they had now an opportunity for such a
Diabolical satisfaction. The Church of York had been blessed with a MINISTER,
who for his Exemplary Holiness, Humbleness, Modesty, (...), and Fidelity, was
one, Of whom the World (...) not worthy. It was the Reverend (...) ^^MMER, a
Gentleman (...), wellTempered, and (...) not much ^^der (...) He had been (...)
to leave his place, when the G^^ods grew thick and black, and were going to
break upon it; but he chose rather with a paternal Affection to stay among
those, who had been so many of them Converted and Edified by his Ministry; and
he spent many pounds of his own Patrimony, to subsist among them, when their
Distresses made them unable to Support him, as otherwise they would have done
He was one that Lived much in Heaven upon Earth; and one that might by way of
Eminency be called, A Good Man. This Good Man was just going to take Horse at
his own Door, upon a Journey in the Service of God, when the Tygres that were
preying upon the Sheep of York, Siezd upon this their Shepherd; and they shot
him, so that they left him dead upon the Ground. So fell at a fatal Blow, The
Chariots of York, and the Horsemen thereof! Such precious Blood our Enemies now
have to Fatten them for the Destruction which, Do thou hasten upon them, O our
God! Thus was, A Burning and a Shinning Light, in our Churches Extinguished by
the Hands of Things worse than the Dragons of the Wilderness? Thus was a Famous
Temple of the Holy Ghost spitefully Demolished by the professed Vassals of Satan!
Thus is there Expired, a Man of God, whose Fate all the pious and sober
Survivers in the Land, Lament with Floods of^ Tears; among which Tears there
now falls the Ensuing.

EPITAPH
DUMMER, the Shephard Sacrificed
By Wolves, because the Sheep he Prized;
The Orphans Father, Churches Light,
The Love of Heaven, of Hell the Spite;
The Countries Gapman, and the Face
That Shone, but Knew it not, with Grace.
DUMMER, a Wise man of the East,
Gone to see JESUS, in His Rest:
Hunted by Devils, but Relieved
By Angels, and on High Reciev'd:

