SOME OF THE Fundamental Truths OF CHRISTIANITY. Briefly hinted at, by way of
Question and Answer. With a Postscript by the Author G. K. The 3d Edition.
Quest. O F whom have we our Being, our Living, and Moving, and all the good
things we enjoy?

Answ. Of God.

Q. How know we that?

A. There is somewhat in our own hearts that declares it unto us.

Q. I^ that our own Natural Reason, as Men.

A. Though we might gather it even from Reason, as men, yet there is somewhat in
us that does more convincingly and manifestly declare it unto us, than our own
Reason as men.

Q. How do we distinguish it from Reason?

A. Very plainly, because it often teaches us this, and many other true things,
when we are not exercising our Reason, but still and quiet in our Minds; yea,
it often preventeth all Reasonings in us, and in a more ready and immediate way
convinces us than Reason can do.

Q. How so?

A. Because Reason teaches us things by a way of Discourse and Inference,
gathering a second thing from a first, and a third from a second, and a fourth
from a third, etc. which way is but mediate, and commonly is wea^^isom and
tedious.

Q How does that other teach us?

A. By setting things before our Understandings simply and immediately, even as
when the outward Light gives us to see the shapes and color of outward things
immediately, without the need or use of our Reason.

Q How may this other thing be called which is in us, a dinstin^t Principle
(...) our Reason, as men?

A. It may be called (according to Scripture) a spiritual and divine Light,
which has the same use to the Mind, that the outward Light has to the Eye.

Q. What other Names has (...), according to Scripture?

A. The Word of God, because thereby God speaks his Mind and Will unto the
Heart^ and Souls of men, as one man speaks his Mind to another by the wo^d of
his Mou^h.

Q. (...) is Light and Word God (...)?

A. It is an immediate Manifestation of him, which though it may be distinguished
from him, yet is not, nor cannot be divided o^ separated from him, for he (...)
with it and in it, and is the Fountain and Life of it.

Q. What other difference is there betwixt our Natural Reason and this
Principle.

A. Our natural Reason may be corrupted, and is often corrupted, and so may teach
us contrary things unto what this teaches, but this is altogether
uncorruptible.

Q What other Difference is (...) betwixt them?

A. The ^^ching^ of our natural Reason, even of things that may be true, are
but dry and barren, and void of that living Virtue, Influence and Vigor, which
the Teachings of this Principle have; for this Prince, (...) quick and powerful
and pregnant, or full of heavenly and divine Virtue and Life.

Q. But do they not differ originally, as to their very Nature and Being?

A. Yea, they do; the one is Natural, the other Supernatural; the one is
Humane, the other divine, the one is an essential Property of the Humane
Nature, the other is the free Grace and Favor of God given unto ^ian to
dignifie and exalt him above his natural E^^ate and Condition; that ^o he may
be more than a natural Man, even a Son and Child of God, yea, to have a Name
better than of Sons and Daughters.

Q. Is this Principle given unto all men?

A. Yea, it is given unto all Men.

Q. For what end is it given unto all?

A. That they may become the Children of God thereby, and may live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present World, as the Children of God, that so
after this Life in this present World they may live with God in the World to
come, in the fullness of everlasting Joy, Peace and Happiness.

Q. By whom does this Grace or (...) come-up^^ all Men?

A. By Jesus Christ, as John declared; The Law (said he) (...) given by Moses,
but Grace and Truth comes by Jesus Christ, and of his Fullness have we all
received Grace for Grace.

Q. Is Jesus Christ himself given unto all Men, or only his Grace?

A. He is given unto all men, in so far as he is sent of the Father unto all,
and is come unto all, and is both offered of the Father as his Gift, and does
also offer himself unto all, so that his Grace is not alone without him, nor he
alone without his Grace, they are given together, and are offered together, and
are received together.

Q. How is Christ and h^s Grace to be distinguished?

A No otherwise than as the light, warmth and influence of the Sun is from the
Sun himself, which preceedeth from the Sun, as out of his fullness, according
to John's declaration, who said, Out of (...) Fullness have we all received,
and Grace for Grace.

Q. How is Christ Jesus come unto all? Is he come outwardly as a Man unto all?

A. He is not come outwardly as a Man unto all, though he is come ^ven outwardly
as Man for all (so that all may receive the benefit of his outward Coming as
Man, who are not wanting unto themselves) but he is come inwardly unto all, as
the true Light that lightens every man that comes into the World, and not only
as the Light, but as the Resurrection and the Life.

Q. How is he the Resurrection?

A. Because he quickens and makes alive the Soul unto God, and raises it
out of its sin, in which, as in a Grave, it has layn dead and corrupted as to
the Life of God.

Q. Is this the general Condition of Men?

A. Yea, the general Condition of Men in the first state, is, that they are
dead in their sins and trespasses.

Q. All men therefore do need Christ, not only to be a Light unto them, but to
be the Resurrection and the Life also.

A Yea, for they want not only Light unto their Understandings, but they want
Life unto their Hearts, and unto all their inward Powers and Affection^ which
are de^d (as unto God) so that they cannot move toward him, nor in his
Service, but as they are quick^^^ and influenced by him.

Q. How does Jesus Christ minister Light and Life unto the Souls of (...)?

A. By his shinings and breathings in their hearts.

Q. Is that Immediately, or Mediately, or bo^^?

A. Both Immediately and Mediately.

Q. How Immediately?

A. Even without all outward Means, as by his free Love and Favor, preventing
he ^^n before the use of any outward Means, and by ministering unto them who
have not, nor never had the outward means; for he is the Light of the World,
according to his won Testimony, and as John declared of him, He lights every
man that come^^ unto the World, that all through him might believe, and
believing rug ^^ave Eternal Life. Now if he lights all men, then surely he
lights as well those who have means, as those who want them, and those who
want, as those who have them, as truly, though not as equally: And therefore
seeing they who want the outward means are immediately onlightned and taught,
then surely they who have the outward means are also; otherwise their
privilege should be less who have the outward means, and theirs the greater
who want them.

Q. How Mediately?

A. By the shining and breathings of his own Light and Life, in and through his
faithful Servants and their Testimonies, whether by words or works; all which
have a manifestation and ministration of Light and Life in them, to ^ncrease
and raise up Light and Life in them, unto whom they minister.

Q. But (...) God and Christ minister Light and Life immediately unto ^^en, are
not all means useles^ and unnecessary?

A. We are to distinguish betwixt things that are absolutely necessary, and
things that are necessary in some respect; also, betwixt things absolutely
necessary, and things very useful and profitable; for many things are greatly
useful, which are not absolutely necessary. And thus, though men have no absolute
need of outward means for the conveyance of Light and Life unto them, yet the
outward means are very useful and helpful unto them.

Q. Give us an Example in another case.

A. All men have a Principle of Natural Reason in them, which without all
outward means (either of Men or books) teaches them immediately some things
belonging to Natural Reason; and yet none will deny but that ^oth Men and Boo^s
are very useful and profitable to further us in the Knowledge of Natural
Things, and in the exercise of our Natural Reason, to the further improving the
same.

Q. But are the Immediate Teachings of God and Christ of absolute Necessity
unto every Man, to give him (...) true and saving knowledge of God?

A. Yea, they are^ for indeed all outward Means could do nothing without the
immediate teaching and ministering of God and Christ, by his holy Spirit, Light
and Life; because the Immediate is the Ground and Foundation, or Principle, for
or because of which the outward means are useful and profitable.

Q. Give us an Example in another case.

A. The same as before; for if men had not an inward and immediate Principle of
Natural Reason in them, that taught them immediately some things belonging to
Natural Reason, all the Men and Books in the World, though never so convincing,
could not gain ground upon them; but because Men have a Principle of Reason in
themselves, therefore when things of Reason are presented and offered to them,
by Men and Books, they embrace them and receive them, not simply or only
because the Men and Books say so, but because the innate Principle of Reason in
themselves says so, and does witness and answer to the same things.

Q. By this it would seem that men are taught many more things immediately,
than mediately.

A. Yea surely, for according to the aforesaid Example, what men are there
(except Fools and Idiots) ^ut the Principle of Natural Reason in them, teaches
them, in the things of Natural Reason, above an hundred to one, more than any
Books or Men ever did, or can do? As is manifest in the daily Occurrances and
Occasions in the outward Life, a man's Natural Reason teaches him a Thousand
things which he never learned from Men or Books. Even so, the Children of God
are taught of God many Divine and Spiritual Things, which Men nor Books never
did, or could teach them.

Q. By all this i^ seems, that the Knowledge of Divine and Spiritual Things,
must flow from a divine and spiritual Principle in the Heart, and that they
cannot be known and learned sufficiently from or by the Natural Principle of
Natural Reason.

A. It is even so; for though the Natural Reason in a subservient way, may be
made use of, yet it can no more reach unto the things that are spiritual and
divine, nor indeed so much, as a blind Man by all his Reason can reach unto
Colors, to judge of them distinctly or a Deaf man to judge of Sounds, etc. for
even as the things of Sense are judged or known by a Principle of their own
Nature, which Reason cannot immediately reach unto by descending; so the things
of Faith, which are divine and spiritual, are judged and known by a Principle
of Faith that is of their own Nature also, to wit, divine and spiritual, which
Reason cannot immediately reach unto by its ascending; but as a man, having the
Natural exercise of his Senses, can use his Reason in Natural things that are
sensible; so he who has the use of his spiritual Senses, can use the same
Reason in Spiritual things, to wit, in a subservient and subordinate way.

Q. What is the first ^^^ing required of men, that they may learn of God and
Christ Jesus, so (...) to become wise through those immediate Teachings?

A. That they believe those Teachings, and receive them in the love of them.

Q. How can they do that?

A. Not of themselves, but there is a Virtue in all the Teachings of God and
Christ, that is ope^a^ (...) and effectual to cause men to believe them and
receive them, and the Truth of them in love.

Q. What is next required of them?

A. That they continually apply their whole Minds, Souls and (...) (...) ^is
spiritual and divine Principle in them, and unto God and Christ therein, that
it may have its universal influence in them and upon them.

Q. How can they do that?

A. By its own drawings, or rather by the drawings of God and Christ in it.

Q. What is that Universal Influence?

A. It is not only of an enlightening nature, as to give Knowledge, but it is of
a ^^^ening Nature, and of a leavening, h^^^ing, puri^^^ing and (...) Nature;
more particularly, it has these two (...) 1. To (...), con^^me and destroy
sin, both in fruit and root, sto^k and branch; 2. To beget Righteousness and
Holiness, which comprehends (...) the ^raits of the Spirit, such as Love,
M^^kness, Temper^^^, Pati^^e, (...), Joy, Peace, Hope and Confidence, etc.

Q. How (...) (...) or Gift of God conveyed unto men at first? and how is it
(...)?

A. As (...) thing, even as a Seed, the least of all Seeds.

Q. And now is it multiplied and increased a men's hearts?

A. By its growth in them; for if it does not grow in them, it does not
multiply, but remains as dead and barren as unto them, though living in its
own Nature.

Q. How does it grow in Men?

A. By getting root in their hearts, even as a grain of Corn, by getting root
in the Earth.

Q. How does it get root?

A. It has a native Virtue and Influence in it, whereby it takes root in the
heart naturally, if men do not resist it; and though the ground where it
seeks to take root, be foul and unfit, yet it has a cleaning and fitting
Virtue in it, to prepare the ground, and make it good and fit; but it requires
man's consent and concurrence, by which it acts, and God in it, and with it
draws and moves effectually the heart of man unto him.

Q. But may these drawings and movings be commonly resisted?

A. Yea, they may, and so the work of man's Salvation may be hindered by Man
himself, and that both in the beginning, or when begun in its progress.

Q. Does God teach men all things necessary unto Faith and Godliness ly this
Principle?

A. Yea, as he is faithfully and chastely waited upon, believed and followed.

Q. But has he not his Order in teaching, or does he teach all at once?

A. He has his Order, and does not teach all at once, but line upon line, here
a little and there a little, according as a man can bear, through the growth of
this Principle in them.

Q. What are the first things he teaches in and by this Principle?

A. To deny Ungodliness and Wo^^^ly Lusts, to live soberly and Righteously, to
live Godly, and when they have ascended by these degrees, he b^ingeth them into
his holy Mountain, City, House, Kingdom, and Paradise, where he gives them to
enjoy of he^e pleasure^ and delight^, that because of the sweetness, beauty and
glory of them, are beyond all utterance or thoughts of man's heart.

Q. What are the first beginning (...) God work in the heart, after
convincement, or enlightening the Understanding?

A Faith and Repentance? Q What is Paul?

A. I^ is a cleaving of the Soul and Heart of Man (...) God and Christ,
according to the inward Revelation o^ (...) (...) Mercy and Goodness, in the
shinings of his own divine Light, Life and Spirit within him.

Q. Is then the Object of Faith God and Christ, as inwardly revealed?

A. Yea.

Q. What Faith then have they, who say, inward and immediate Revelation is not
the common Privilege of Men, nay, not of the Saints in these days?

A. They have not the true Faith, which is the Faith of Gods Elect, that
works by love, and puri^^eth the heart, and is fruitful of good Works, but
their Faith is but a Dream and Imagination, which as it finds them in their
sins, so it leaves them to live and dye in them.

Q. What is Repentance?

A. It is a change of the Mind, and of all the Powers of the Soul, and its
Affection, from Sin and Unrighteousness, unto Holiness and Righteousness; so
that whereas it loved, desired and rejoiced in sin before, and had a distaste
of all Righteousness and Holiness, and an aversion and alienation therefrom,
now it has a distaste of Sin universally, and an aversion and alienation from
it, and a true and intimate love of all Righteousness and Holiness, desire
after it, and joy therein, and more abundantly after and in God and Christ,
whose it is.

Q. How is this Repentance wrought?

A. By degrees, through the Power of God, his Life, his Love, his Judgment, his
Mercy, his Goodness, revealed in his own Light by his own Spirit, as the heart
is turned thereunto, and continues in a steady and fixed application unto the
same; this naturally and gently melteh and thaweth the heart, and breaks it
into pieces, yea, changes it from a heart of stone into a heart of flesh, and
makes it naturally to savor and relish the things of God, which it hated
before, and to dis-relish and dis-mi^^ the things of dishonesty and
Unrighteousness, which it loved before.

Q. What Rule (or Law) has God given unto men, to serve, obey and worship him?

A. Even the same divine and spiritual Principle aforesaid, the Word of God,
that is nigh unto us, even in our Mouths and in our Hearts, that (...) ^ay
know it, believe it, and obey it: This is the Law or Rule of the New Covenant,
who walk after this Rule, Peace is and shall remain upon them; neither is there
any Condemnation unto them, but justification and Approbation from hence forth
and forever.

A Postscript to the foregoing Sheet.
WHereas some years ago I writ some Questions and Answers is one Sheet, chiefly
directing to the Fundamental and Original Principle of divine Knowledge, which
as a sacred Key opens the door into the Treasures of divine Wisdom as well as
of divine Life and Virtue, my principal end and aim in that sheet being to
direct the minds of People thereunto, and leaving the said Sheet in the hands
of a Friend, after I was come away for America, my dear Friend R. B. meeting
with the said Sheet, caused it to be printed, and gave it this Title, viz. The
Fundamental Truths of Christianity, etc. which so soon as I saw, I was
dissatisfied with it, being too large, and not answering to the Book, nor to my
design in writing it, and therefore with my Pen corrected it thus, Some of the
Fundamental Truths of Christianity, etc. and that Title I can own and stand by;
or if by the Fundamental Truths of Christianity, may be allowed to be
understood not all the Fundamentals, but some (neither the word all nor some
being expressed in the first Impression) in that qualified sense I can own the
Title as it was first given; and I am well satisfied that my said dear Friend
that caused it first to be printed, most especially and principally out of his
love to Truth, and next out of his love to me, was of my Mind, to wit, that the
said Sheet did not contain all and every one of the Fundamental Truths and
Principles of Christianity in express words and matter there delivered; and
this is easily and clearly enough proved out of his own Books extant in print,
especially his printed Apology, where he treats of diverse other weighty Truth
of Christianity, as namely, concerning Christ's Death and Sufferings, and the
Redemption that he wrought for us thereby, without us, and the influence it
has upon us for Remission of Sin and Justification, and how it is Damnable
Unbelief not to to believe what the Scripture records of the same, to whom it
pleases God to reveal it, when so declared; and he says also expressly, We
believe that the Remission of (...) which any partake of, is only in and by
virtue of that most satisfactory Sacrifice, and no otherwise, see page 94, 95,
96. And in his Vindication of his Apology, page 89. he says expressly, I do
believe, that the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ that was (...) (...) at
Jerusalem, was again (...) (...) the Power of God, in which glorified Body the
Lord Jesus Christ (...): And page 189. We are fals^y charged with denying the
Outward Appearance o Christ, the real existence of Heaven and His, as a place
without us, The last and general Judgment, The Resurrection o^ the Body, for we
really believe these things: And all these, I am well satisfied, were to him,
as they were, and still are to me Fundamental Truths and Principles of
Christianity, as they are to all faithful Friends. And though the said Title
seems too large, as is said, especially because of some that look more at
Letter than Sense, and seek to pervert and mif-con^tine the words of some, at
whom they are manifestly prejudiced, yet plead more than ordinary for a more
favorable construction of their own words, than Reason or any good Sense can
bear; notwithstanding, to can some of the Fundamentals or first Principles of
Christianity, the Fundamentals, is consistent with Scripture phrase, and
therefore no wise blameworthy in a qualified sense, as where Repentance from
dead Works, Faith toward God, the Resurrection of the dead, and Eternal
Judgment, the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of laying on of Hands (Note, it is
said, the Doctrine, but not the Practice) are called The Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, Heb.6.1. and yet who will say, that these only ^^presly
mentioned there, are all the Principles of Christ's Doctrine, seeing nothing is
expressly mentioned in that place of Faith in Christ, either within us or
without us, nor of Justification, nor of Perfection, nor of Universal Grace,
nor of the parts inward Teachings, all which, and diverse others, are
Fundamental Truths and Principles of Christianity, as well to faithful Friends,
as to others professing Christianity, although they are not expressly mentioned in
that place, Heb. 6.1. But if any say, Though they are not expressly mentioned in
that place, yet they are employed and understand; As this is granted, so I say
the same of the present Sheet of Questions and Answers, concerning Christ and
the Faith of him, as he dyed for our sins, and rose again for our
Justification, and is gone into Heaven, and there rem^ineth our Advocate and
Intercessor with the Father, and other great and Fundamental Truth and
Principles, they are employed and understood in the same, though not so clearly
and distinctly expressed, it not being my intention in that Sheet to write a
fa^l account of all Fundamental Principals of Christanity, but to direct to one
Fundamental, viz. the Word, Light, Grace, and Spirit of God (...), which being
duly improved (partly immediately by it self, and a^^y mediately and
instrumentally by outward preaching and Books, and especially the Scriptures,
or where these outward instruments and Helps are wanting, God supplying that
defect some way and manner, as his infinite Goodness and Wisdom sees meet)
does infallibly lead all faithful Improvers of the same, as by certain degrees
and steps, to eternal Happiness: And thus the sufficiency of the Word, Light,
Grace and Spirit of God within, is fully asserted by me, as well at pre^^t, as
at any time formerly, ever since I came under the same Profession with the
People called in scorn Quakers, and though too many go under that Profession
that are not worthy to be called Christians, for their ignorance and Unbelief,
as well as loose and scandalous Life, yet the faithful and sincere of that
People, as many such there are to be found, I hope, through the Grace of God,
to live and dye in unity with, notwithstanding the Lies and false Reports of my
Adversaries to the contrary. And whoever understands the Quakers Principles,
so called, cannot say or think that this one Sheet contains all the Quakers
Fundamental Principles, and consequently nor the Christians, seeing the
faithful Quakers, own themselves to be of no other Religion but sincere
Christianity, there being nothing expressly mentioned of Prayer, which yet is
essential, and consequently fundamental to every true Christian; nor is any
thing expressly mentioned in that Sheet concerning Meetings, and the Religious
Exercises therein, that ought to be performed; not concerning the Church, and
the qualifications of the Members, nor concerning our universal Testimony
against Swearing, paying of Tithes, and using the carnal Sword; all which are
so Essential and Fundamental to the People called Quakers their Religion,
together with diverse other things, that they hold none to belong to their
Society who differ with them in the faith and practice of these things. And by
what is said, it does easily appear, that as I did not intend that Sheet to
contain a full and entire Account and Declaration of all our Principles, who
are called in Scorn Quakers, so none called a Quaker, that does understand the
Quakers Principles aright, can think it so to do: And yet some in this place,
highly laying claim to the Title of Quakers, and to be of the better sort of
them too, have caused to be reprinted this my said Sheet, thinking thereby to
discredit me, and make the Readers believe I have changed the Fundamental
Principles of my Christianity, which, I say, is (...) gross abuse and trick
they seek to put upon (...), wherewithal to de^^^ive the ignorant and
inadvertent; and while they are most inveterate Adversaries to my Person, they
pretend a great kindness to my former Books, and especially to the
abovementioned Sheet, and that chiefly, (as one has well observed to me in a
late Epistle) The Reason why they so (...) esteem the said Sheet is, because
there is so little of Christ crucified in it. But in this they show themselves
as foolish a full of prejudice, my design in that Sheet not being to treat of
the whole Body of Christian Doctrine, but to inform People where and how to
find the true Key that opens the door into the Knowledge of it, and therefore I
am no more bl^me worthy in that respect, than he who holds forth a Key to a
man, is to be ^lamed, because he does not show him all the parts of the
Building, the Door or Gate into which that Key does open. How many good Friends
have writ on particular Subjects of Religion, selected and set a part
intentionally by them, to treat on them only, and have but occasionally
mentioned other things, and many other things not at all, as some have writ on
^ythes, some on Swearing, some on the Use of the Carnal Sword, as inconsistent
with Christian Perfection, and other subjects, wherein they treat little, or
perhaps nothing of Faith in Christ cruc^^s^^, does it therefore follow, that
Faith in Christ crucified, is no Fundamental Doctrine of their Christ^ may?
Surely Nay: And no more does it follow in this preser^^ case; and yet through
the good Providence of God, so much is expressed in that one Sheet (though but
occasionally,) as dorn suffice to demonstrate my sincere Faith in Christ Jesus,
even the Man Christ Jesus, as he came outwardly for all, though he did not come
or appear outwardly unto all, as it is expressly mentioned in one of the Answers
to the^e Questions, see page.3. Also there are in that Sheet diverse express
hints, sufficient to prove that my Faith was the same then, as now, concerning
Christ, when I distinguish expressly betwixt the Grace of Christ and h^^ist
himself, as the light, warmth and influence of the Sun is to be distinguished
from the Sun himself, which proceeds from the Sun, as out of his finners,
according to John,who said, (...) his Fullness have we all received, and Grace
or Grace, see page.3. And I show expressly how Jesus Christ does minister Light
and I ^^e unto the bouls of men, both Immediately and Mediately: Meadiately in
and through his faithful Servants, and their Testimonies, whatever by Words and
Works, under which I comprehend chiefly the holy Scriptures; and yet some have
so gros^y perverted my words, as if (...) hold, that God did so teach men all
things necessary unto Faith and Godliness by this Principle, as not only to
exclude all outward (...) and the ho^^ Scripture^, out also the Man Christ
Jesus, (...) in having any part or ^^^ere^t and ^^^cern in our Salvation, which
is a notorious and abusive Perversion of my words, the which one of great Note
made use of against meat a late Quarterly Meeting, in the hearing of some
hundreds here at Philadelphia, and which to my vindication and his Shame, I
sufficiently answered. Also, I say expressly in that Sheet, That the Object of
Faith is God and Christ inwardly revealed; and ^^^scribe Faith expressly thus,
It is a cleaving of the Soul and Heart of Man unto God, according to the inward
Revelation of his divine Power, Mercy and Goodness, in the shinings of his own
divine Light, Life and Spir^s within him, see page 7,8. The which description
of Faith I still own to be sound and true, and know it so to be by blessed
Experi^^^e. But if any think that I mean God and Christ only as within and that
our Christian Faith respects God and Christ no where else but within us, they
are miserably mistaken, and have most dark, and false, and unbecoming Thoughts
both of God and of Christ; for though we can know nothing of God or Christ, but
as inwardly revealed, yet that Revelation does teach us; that God and Christ is
in Heaven as well as in our Hearts, yea, much more gloriously revealed in
Heaven, than in our Hearts, and our Faith does respect God and Christ in
Heaven; and though Christ, as he is God, is wherever the Father is, filling
Heaven and Earth with his Presence, yet the Body of his Manhood that was raised
and is ascended, is not every where, for the Heavens have received it, and will
until his Coming again and Appearance without as to judge the quick and the
dead.

But notwithstanding of the design of him that caused to Re-print the second
Impression of my said Sheet, on purpose to discredit me, and render me a may
changed in my Principles, which I am no^ nor can he, or any else, prove me to
be, either by that Sheet or any other of my Books, but on the contrary, I can
prove a good consistency of my present Doctrine with all my former and latter
Books, notwithstanding the insinu^^^ of some to the contrary; I have great
liberty to recommend, not only the second Impression of the said Sheet, but
this third Impression, with this annexed Postscript to the loving and friendly
Re^ders, hoping that all such who have Salt in themselves to savor with, will
favor the same Life of Truth in me now, as wa^ in me when I wrote that Sheet;
and my trust is in my gracious God and Father, who causes all things work
together for good to (...) that love him, that he will defe^^ and disappoint
the Counsel of (...) design evil against me, and I shall not (...) to pray for
them, that God may give them Repentance. (...) the mean time let it be noticed,
that seeing the reason why they so much esteem the said Sheet, is because it
has so little concerning Christ crucified and raised again, etc. in it, that
this, with other Reasons, sufficiently prove, that Christ crucified is to such
a stumbling Block and Foolishness, although to us who believe, he is even Christ
crucified, the Power of God and the Wisdom of God, and to him, and to God the
Father through him, together with the holy Spirit, even to the Lamb that was
slain, and has redeemed us with his Blood, be given Blessing, and Glory, and
Honor, and Praise, and Thanksgiving forever, Amen.

Note, This Sheet was the Book that T^^ Lloyd proffered to submit the main
matter of Controversy unto, to which their Paper of false Judgment does refer,
which helps them nothing, as may appear by this Postscript; but for a more
full account of our Faith, touching the Fundamental Principles of Christianity,
I refer to my printed Catechism, and to another printed Sheet, called, An
Account of our sincere Faith, etc.

Note also, That their causing to reprint a Paper of G. F'^ against the
Separation that happened in Old England about Church Discipline and Women's
Meetings, does nothing serve their turn against us; for our Difference here is
not about Church Discipline and Women's Meetings, but about Christ crucified and
raised again, whether he is to be (...) or rejected, as having any share in our
Salvation? And their causing to be Reprinted that Treatise of S^^^en Crisps
does no more serve them, unless they will say, That to preach Faith in Christ
crucified and raised again, as necessary to our Salvation, is a Doctrine of
Seducing Spirits, according to S. C. for that is the main matter of
Controversy betwixt us here. And as concerning S. C. his earnest Refutation of
them, in that Treatise, who say, If men fall short of a due sitting and
preparing for the Kingdom on this side the Grave, i^s no great matter, for they
shall have other Opportunities, even in this World hereafter, when they shall
be born in other Bodies; As we know none who are of that false and foolish
Opinion, so it touches us nothing, who are altogether clear of it.

And in the said-Book of S. C. there is a passage in page.1. concerning which
the weak and unwary Readers need to be cautioned, lest they take the words in a
wrong sense; as where it is said; All that are true Children of the Day, do
find, that their standing is by Faith, and not by Knowledge. Now, if by
Knowledge be meant dead and barren Knowledge, such as is barely Historical and
L^iteral, or the Knowledge of the Carnal Wisdom; putting its Glosses on
Scripture Saying^, it is true, the standing of Gods Children is not by that
Knowledge, nor yet by that Faith that is dead and barren, and barely Historical
and L^tteral; but as the True Faith is the Gift of God; and wrought in Gods
Children by (...) Spirit and Power of God, so is the true Knowledge of God, and
of divine things and Mysteries; and as True Faith is not the principal Cause of
the standing of the Children of God, but an Instrument thereof, the principal
Cause being the mighty Power of God, and Christ inwardly revealed, wherein
their Faith stands; so True Knowledge is an Instrument of their standing, as
well as Faith, and they are joined together, as being both Instruments to their
standing and stability in the Truth, Ephesians. 4.13. That they may be no more
Children tossed to and fro with every Wind of Doctrine, etc. and True Faith
cannot be without True Knowledge, but has Knowledge ingredient in it. And as
true Divine Knowledge is a great means of preserving men sound in the Faith,so
Ignorance or want of True Knowledge is a great cause and occasion of men's
running into dangerous Errors and damnable Heresies, and Doctrines of Devils,
as Experience does sufficiently teach. And for the great advantage and benefit
of true divine Knowledge, received and held in the Life of Truth, both for our
standing and stability in the Truth, as well as in other respects, many
Scriptures abundantly testify, see these following, Prove. 1.4,7,22.
2.6,10.11,12. 8. 10. 11.9. 15. 14. 22. 17. 19.2. 24.3.4,5,13,14. 28.2. E^^^es.
7. 12. Isa. 11.2. 32.4. 33.6. 53.11. Jer. 3. 15. Dan. 12.4. Hos. 4.6. Hab. 2.4.
Luke 11.52. Jo^. 17.3. Romans 15.14. I Cor. 1.5. 2 Cor. 2.14. Ephesians. 1.17. Phil.
1.9. Col. 3.10. I Tim 2.4. 2 Pet. 1.3.5. It does therefore proceed from great
Ignorance, Error and Darkness of Understanding in such men that preach and
speak against Knowledge, without making a due distinction, as if it were the
Forbidden Fruit, or a (...) thing, as I have heard to my great grief, some to
preach and teach, when they have heard some things spoken in a Meeting that
have proceeded from a true opening of the Spirit of Truth, which have exceeded
their Reach, and which they were not willing to understand, prefering Ignorance
to true Knowledge; and they have cried out against such as have brought forth
these things in the living Openings of Truth, That they were seeding People
with the forbidden Fruit; also, perverting Paul's words, That Knowledge pusseth
up; for True Knowledge humbles.

G. K.

THE END.
Books lately Printed, and to be Sold by William Bradford in Philadelphia. 1692.
The Christian Faith of the People called Quakers in Rhode Island. 4 d.

A Catechism for Children and Youth, and such others as need to be instructed
in the first Principles of the Christian Religion. By G. K. Pr. 6d.

A Testimony concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, Day of Judgment, and
Christ last Coming and Appearing without us. By G. K. 3d.

Truth and Innocence defended, against Calumny and Defamation, in a late Report
concerning the Revolution of Humane Souls, etc. G. K. ^d.

Some Causes and Reasons of the late Separation that has come to pass here at
Philadelphia. Showing, That G. K'^ Opposers were the Causes of the said Breach
and Separation, and most properly are the separate Meeting. Together with an
account of the sincere Christian Faith of G. K. and his Friends. Price 9d.

The Plea of the Innocent, against the False Judgment of the Guilty: being a
Vindication of G Keith and his Friends, from the false Judgment, Calumn^es and
Defamations of S. Jenings, J. Simcock, T. Lloyd and others, being in Number
Twenty Eight. Price 6d.

A Vision concerning Separation among Friends in Old England. By G. F.

A faithful Warning and Exhortation to Friends to beware of seducing Spirits.
By S. Crisp, 6d.


