THE Christian faith of the People of GOD, called in Scorn, QUAKERS In Rhode
Island (who are in Unity with all faithful Brethren of the same Profession in
all parts of the World) VINDICATED From the Calumnies of Christian Lodowick,
that formerly was of that Profession, but is lately fallen therefrom.

As also from the base Forgeries, and wicked Slanders of Cotton Mather, called
a Minister, at Boston, who has greatly commended the said Christian Lodowick,
and approved his false Charges against us, and has added thereunto many gross,
impudent and vile Calumnies against us and our Brethren, in his late Address,
so called, to some in New England, the which in due time may receive a more
full answer, to discover his Ignorance, Prejudice and Perversion against our
Friends in general, and G. K. in particular, whom he has most unworthily
abused.

To which is added, some Testimonies of our Ancient Friends to the true Christ
of God; Collected out of their printed Books, for the further Convincing of our
Opposers, that it is (and has been) our constant and firm belief to expect
Salvation by the Man Christ Jesus that was outwardly crucified without the
Gates of Jerusalem.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at Philadelphia in Pennsylvania, in the
Year 1692.

Our Sincere Christian Belief is plainly asserted in the following Particulars,
viz.
1. Concerning Jesus of Nazareth the true Christ of God, as he is True and
Perfect God, and True and Perfect Man.

2. Concerning his Conception, Birth, Life, Death and Sufferings, Resurrection,
Ascension, Inter^ession, and Coming again and Appearance to Judge the Quick and
the Dead at the Day of Judgment in his glorified Body. And the Resurrection of
the Dead; at what Time attained.

3. Concerning his being a most acceptible Offering and Sacrifice to God for
the sins of the whole World.

4. Concerning the True Faith in Christ, how it respects him both as without
us in the Fullness, and as within us in the Measure, whole and undivided, being
one Lord Jesus Christ.

5. Concerning the Distinction betwixt the devout Gentile and Christian, and
how the Christian Dispensation far excels that of either Jews or Gentiles,
and the Dignity of Christianity above the most Refined and Devout Gentilism.

6. Concerning a twofold inward Ministration of the Light and Spirit of God and
Christ, and the state of Servants and Sons.

7. Concerning the gre^^ Benefit of the holy Scriptures, and how they are made
Instrumental to our Christian Faith and Knowledge.

8. And lastly, Concerning the Possibility of the Salvation of Honest and
Conscientious Gentiles by Jesus Christ.

The Christian Faith of the People of God called Quakers, Vindicated from the
Calumnies of Christian Lodowick.
WHereas Christian Lodowick has given forth several Paper^, Challenging all
these belonging to Newport Meeting, who speak in the Meetings of the People
called Quakers, and that within these few days past he has renewed his
Challenge, accusing the Foundation of their Gospel, Faith, Doctrine and
Religion, to be unscriptural, false and naught, shaken and Sandy, and
challanging them to appoint one of their Number to disput^ with him.

These are to give Notice to all sober People and Neighbors, that: these so
challenged by him, having taken his Challenge into consideration, and finding
many things in it falsely and perversely stated, which they could not own, (so
stated by him) to be the Foundation of their Faith, etc. did meet with him at
the House of Walter Clark in Newport in Rhode Island, the 18 th of the 4 th
Month, 1691. in order to have things fairly stated, that if any did dispute
with him, they might know before hand, what he was to dispute against, but they
could not procure him to allow of this; but after that some of the things,
charged by him in his Papers, began to be discoursed of, in order to a fair and
right stating of them, he would not hear of it, but went away.

And whereas diverse of us challenged by him, declared sincerely before many
People there assembled on the said day, their sincere Faith as concerning the
Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and what the holy Scriptures testify of him,
yet he did continue to accuse them still, a^ Denying the True Christ,
alleging, they had another Sense than the Scripture words did hear, and that
his Sense was True, but their Sense was False, appealing to their Consciences
whether it was not so: Thus making himself Judge over our secret Thoughts, as
having a secret sense in our Thoughts of Scripture words, contrary to the true
sense of them, though we have not given him, o^ any other, occasion to judge ^o
rashly and uncharitably of us; and our Consciences bear as witness, in the
sight of God, that we do sincerely believe and think as we speak, when we say,
according to the holy Scripture, That Jesus of Nazareth is the true Christ of
God, and the only true Savior, and there is no other Name given under Heaven,
whereby men must be saved; and that this same Jesus was in fullness of Time
bora of the Virgin, called Mary, being conceived of the (...) Ghost, who dyed
for o^^ sins, and (...) again for our Justification; and by his Death on the
Tree of the Cross, was a most acceptable Offering and Sacrifice to God for the
sins of the whole World, having ta^ed Death for every (...), and given himself
a Ransom for all. And we believe, that Christ was God manifest in the Flesh,
even in that body of Flesh in which he did suffer Death on the C^oss, and that
the fullness of the God (...) dwelt Bodily in him, and does still dwell bodily
in him, and that of his Fullness we all receive, and Grace for Grace. And we
(...) so believe, according to holy Scripture, that Christ's Body that was
crucified on the T^es of the Cross, was raised again on the third day, and
after forty days did ascend into Heaven in the light of the Disciples, and who
is exalted at the right Hand of God, and ever lives to make Intercession for
us, and that Christ has his Body in Heaven a most glorious Body, not charged
in Being or Substance, but in Condition and Manner of being; and that Christ is
true and perfect God, and true and perfect Man, the Son of God, b^gotten of God
from Everlasting, glorified with the Father before the World began, and also
begotten of God in the Womb of the Virgin, called Mary, and born of her in the
fullness of time, the Son of Abraham, the Son of David, who took not on him the
Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, and which he still has; and that
Christ, as Man, (...) Soul and ^ody, and his Manhood i^ most excellently and
(...) (...) United with his God end, yet his Manhood is not his Gounead, not is
his Body that he had of the Virgin, and now has in Heaven, his Godhead, but
the Temple of it, as Christ ca^ed his body the Temple, and is the Garment or
Clothing wherewith the Eternal Word did cloa^^ he himself, who i^ that New and
living Way that he has consecrated for us, through the Vail, that is to say
his (...).

And we believe, That God the Father has appointed the Man Christ Jesus to be
the Judge of the Quick and the Dead, and that he is to come to Judge all
Mankind, and that his Coming so to Judge all Mankind with the great and last
Judgment is at the end of the World, the which and of the World we do believe
is not come, either within us or without us, as he does fa^^ly charge; for the
End of the World, a^ the Scripture declares, it is the end of the Ages or
Times of this World; for the Times and Ages of this World shall have an End;
and God has appointed a Day wherein he will judge the World in Righteousness
by that Man Christ Jesus, whom he has ordained, but of that Day and Hour
knows no Man, as Christ has declared, that all might be watchful.

And because, according to Scripture Testimony, we do faithfully believe, that
Christ has also inwardly and spiritually appeared in the Hearts of men, and
that all true Christians do believe and own his inward Appearance and
Revelation in them, as he is the Word, Light and Life in them, in various
Measures and Degrees of divine ^^^^tion, and that he is the true Light that
ligh^eth every man that comes into the World, and that we Testify that all
should turn to his Light in them, that convinces of sin, and should believe in
it, and obey and follow it, and that all who so do, will be led in due time to
^^^^eve in him in whom the Fullness is, and to receive the benefit of Christ's
Death and Resurrection in the outward, therefore has this Accuser joined with
Thomas Hicks, a Baptist Teacher at London, and John Falao, an Independent
Teacher, and diverse others, to accuse us, as Denying the True Christ, be^^u^e
we believe and confess to Christ's inward and Outward Coming and Appearance, as
if to believe and co^f^ss to Christ's Inward Coming and Appearance, were to
deny his Outward, or to hold forth two Christ's, which i^ but their great
Ignorance and Unbelief, and no (...) of our Principle for the true Christ of
God is One, and the true Christians Faith, receives and (...) him whole and
undivided, and own^^^ his inward and outward Coming, who, as he did come
without u^ i^ a state of Humiliation to (...), and is risen and ascended into
Heaven, so he will come (...) without (...) to Judge the Quick and the Dead,
and all (...) shall st^^d before him, the Sh^^p on his Right Hand, and the
Goats on his Left. And there (...) be a Resurrection of the Body, both of the
Just and Unjust, that is not attained already or immediately after Death, but
it is to be attained unto in the Time appointed of God, called The Day of
Judgment. And seeing our Friends in England have fully answered to all these
false Accusations of Thomas Hicks and John, Fal^^, with whom Christian Lodowick
has joined, we refer to their Answers, for the further Satisfaction of them
who de^^^e to have it.

And it is falsely charged upon us b^ Christian Lodowick in his Papers, That
according to our Principle, all Honest and Conscientious Heathens or Gentiles,
who have not the Knowledge and Faith of Corist crucified outwardly, and risen
again, etc. and Jews and Mahometans are in Christ as well as we, and true
Christians, Believers, etc. Nor does this follow by any just Consequence from
our Principles; for though we do affirm, That all Conscientious and Honest
Gentiles, such as Cor^elius was before the Faith of Christ was preached to him,
have some measure of Light, from Christ to enlighten them, and are under some
Administration of the Spirit, yet it is but the first Ministration, until the
Knowledge and Faith of Christ, as he dyed for our sins, and rose again, etc. be
spiritually received; and such who have the true and saving Knowledge and Faith
of Christ, as he dyed and rose again without them, spiritually receiving it by
the Light and Spirit of Christ in them, and wrought in them by that mighty
Power that raised Jesus our Lord from the dead, and which conformeth them to
Christ, in the like Virtues of Love, Patience, Humility, Resignation, etc. so
as to love Enemies, are only Christians, and Sons of God, of the Free Woman,
having received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry Abba, Father; but who
have not this Faith of Christ crucified and raised again outwardly, spiritually
received and wrought in them by the Spirit of Christ, whether they have or have
not heard Christ outwardly preached unto them, are at best (however just and
conscientious to the just Principle of God in them) not under the Second, and
more peculiar Ministration of Gods Spirit, that makes men worthy to be
esteemed Christians, but are only under the first, and such are held under the
Custody or Sa^eguard of thhe Law, shut up unto the Faith that is afterward to
be revealed, as Paul has declared, Gal. 3. 23. and the state they are in under
this first Ministration, is to them as the City of Refuge was to the Man-slaver
under the Law, and whereof it was a Tipe: And this first Ministration of the
Law and Light in them, (that answers to Moses and the Prophets, and to John,
who are faithful and conscientious under it) prepares them to receive the
Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, and fitteth them for
the Second Ministration of the Spirit, that brings them to witness the Spirit
of Adoption, and the Anointing that makes them true Christians, and conformeth
them to Christ in th^^ke Virtue, so as to love Enemies, and lay down the Life
for Enemies, which is more than mere honest conscientious Gentiles, who have
not the Faith of Christ cr^cified and raised again, can do.

And whereas the said Christian Lodowick does further accuse us, That what we
say we know of the Scriptures, we should have known, if it had never been writ,
according to our Principle. This is f^l^ly charged upon us, as many other
things in his Papers; for though we believe and say, that some things declared
in Scripture, we should have known, if they had not been writ, as that there is
a God, the Creator and Lord of Heaven and Earth, that requires us and all men,
by his Law and Light in us, to live soberly and righteously, and to fear, love
and worship him, and diverse other general things, of great use and service to
men, according to (...) Doctrine; For the Invisible Things of God, (...) (...)
Eternal Power and Godhead are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, so that they are without Excuse; for what is to be known o^ God is
manifest within them; yet the peculiar Doctrines and Mysteries of the Christian
Faith, as that Christ should be born of a Virgin, dye for our sins, and ^ise
again, and that he is both God and Man, and many other the like peculiar
My^^e^^es of the Christian Faith, we do acknowledge, and have always
acknowledged, that the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures, a^ outwardly preached
to us by holy Men, or as Read by us in he holy Scriptures, or having outwardly
heard these things, have (...) Instrumental, by and together with the (...)
working of the Spirit of God, to b^g^t in us the Knowledge and (...) o^ them,
and we (...) to bless God for the benefit of the (...) Scriptures given us,
being able to make us who unto Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus; but
that we prefer the Spirit to the Letter, we are not ashamed to own before all
men, and that God and Christ and the Spirit, whom they testify of, are above
the Scriptures, and greater than they, we do freely acknowledge; for all
outward Testimonies, Means, Instruments and Helps, such as the holy Scriptures,
and all outward Preaching, and Men, and Boo^s, are but Servants to God and
Christ, but God and Christ are Lord, and Master, and King over all, to whom be
Glory and Honor forever and ever.

And as to the final state of all honest and conscientious Gentiles, who have
not had Christ outwardly preached unto them either by the Ministry of Men or
the holy Scriptures, it suffices us to believe that God is not wanting to
them, and it is one God, who is the God both of Christians and Gentiles, and
who shall justify the Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through
Faith, Romans 3.30. and it is no greater, nor other difficulty to understand how
Honest and Conscientious Gentiles can be saved by Christ Jesus of Nazareth,
than how Infants, and Deaf and Dumb Persons, so bo^n, can be saved, which our
Adversaries generally acknowledge, and therefore they can have no advantage
against us in that respect.

Edward Thurstan, Henry Bull, Anne Bull, Thomas Cornwall, Thomas Roadman,
George Keith, Ebenezer Slocum. Joseph Nicholson, Daniel Gould, Jacob Mott,
Walter Clark, Rob Hutchins John Easton,


Here follows some Testimonies Collected out of the Writings of our Ancient
Friends, giving some account of their Faith and Belief.
The Principles of Truth, by John Crock etc. P:3, to 18.

MAny are the Reports that are abroad concerning this People, not only as to
their Practices and Deportments, but also as to Doctrines and Belie^^. The
former time having resolved and worn out, as being the Refuge of Lies; but though
the first be gone, yet the latter sticks with many, as not knowing what they
hold as to Doctrine, some saying, They deny the Scripture, and the Resurrection
of the Body, and all Ordinances, wish the Man Christ, and his Death and
Suffering, and Imputation of his Righteousness, and Faith in his Blood, etc.
Wherefore for the Satisfaction of all that would willingly be resolved, and
know the Truth, I have written this short Account of their Faith and Belief.

1 st. We believe, That the God of all Grace has given a measure of Grace, or
some Manifestation of his Spirit and Light thereof unto all men, who at some
time or other do feel something in their Hearts and Consciences, that does lust
against the Flesh, and the Flesh against it, and that these two are contrary
the one to the other, one lusting after Evil, which is Evil, and the other
after good, which is good.

2 dly, We believe, by this Gift, Grace and Inspiration of the Almighty, man
only can come to know the true God truly, what he is, and how he works in the
Hearts and Consciences of People, to regenerate them, and make them hear his
Image.

3. We believe, That all the Errors and Mistakes about God, and the things
relating to his Kingdom, sprang and arose from men's wandering from this Gift of
God, into their own Imaginations.

4. We believe and know, That this Gift and Grace of God appears in and unto
all men, that all may be without excuse, accusing for the Evil, and excusing
for the good, Romans 2. 15.

5. We believe, That wheresoever the Power of God is not known within, there
the Gospel is hid and unknown.

6. Through this Gift, we believe, That Christ Jesus, the Son of God, was
manifest in the Flesh in the fullness of Time: and this we know, by the same
Spirit by which our Fathers believed he should come, and Abraham saw his Day,
by the same we do believe he is come, and do see his Day, as also by the
Prophets and Apostles Writings, which Two-sold Cord is not easily broken.

7. We believe also, That this same Jesus has God highly exalted and given him
a Name above every Name, that whosoever believes on him shall not perish, but
have Everlasting Life, and that there is not another Name, whereby any can be
saved, than this Name of Jesus Christ: Nor is Remission of sins to be preached
by any other Name.

8. We believe, That this Jesus dyed for or because of sin, and rose again for
the Justification of those that believe in him, and that he thereby spoiled
Principalities and Powers, and triumphed over them openly, and led Captivity
captive in his own Person -- It is not a Belief from the Letter only, that can
give a man the saving Knowledge of the Death of Christ, but he must have the
same Power, in measure, working in him, to beget Faith in his Heart, that he
may believe unto Salvation, as well as confess with his Mouth: And this man
whoever he be, Bond or Free, that thus believes the Death of Christ, and its
Satisfaction to God, cannot make it void, nor divide it, but will say, Here is
a dying man, witnessing the Death of Christ, and nevertheless the same man
living with Christ, and concluding, if Christ had not dyed, man must have
perished in his Sin; This being the way found out by God to recover him.

9. By this Gift of God in our hearts, we further believe, That Christ Jesus
rose again from the dead, and sits at Gods right Hand in glorious Body. And we
believe, that ^^r low Estates and humble Bodies shall be made like unto his
glorious Body, through the working of his mighty Power, whereby he is able to
subdue all things unto himself; and that this Mortality shall put on
Immortality. -- And we believe, that Regeneration, or the believing in the
Light of Christ within, does not make void the Death and Sufferings of Christ
without at Jerusalem, no more than believing the Scripture Testimony without,
concerning Christ Death, makes void the Work, of Regeneration and Mortification
within; but as the Apostle says in another case, so I say in this, For as the
Man is not without the Woman, neither is the Woman without the Man in the Lord:
even so is not the Death and sufferings of Christ without at (...), to be m^^e
void, and of none effect, by any thing within; neither does the Light within
make that of none effect without, but both in the Lord answers his Will: For,
though there is, and may be a Knowledge and Belief of what Christ did and
suffered without the Gates, in his own Body upon the Tree, and yet sin alive in
the Heart, and the Work of Regeneration not known; yet it cannot be so where the
Light within is believed on, so as to have its perfect Work in the Heart, to
regenerate and make all things New, and to be of God; this man can never make
void what Christ has done and suffered without: And yet this New Birth, or
Christ formed within, and dwelling the heart by Faith, does not limit or
confine Christ to be only within, and not without also, but both within and
without, according to the good pleasure of the Father to reveal and make him
known; for he f^leth all things, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him,
and yet is he at God's Right Hand, far above all Heavens, in a Glorious Body.

10. And we also believe the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, the one to
Salvation, and the other to Condemnation, according to the Judgment of the
Great Day, and then shall every Seed have its own Body; for if the Dead rise
not, we are of all men most miserable. But because we da^e not be so foolishly
inquisitive, as to say, With what Bodies do they arise, therefore do some say,
We deny both the Resurrection of the Body of Christ, and of all that are or
shall be Dead: But this also is false; for every man shall be raised in his own
Order, but Christ the first Fruits, I Cor. 15.23. And we believe they shall be
raised with the same Bodies, so f^r as Natural and Spiritual, Corruptible and
Incorruptible, Terrestrial and Celestial can be the same.

Page 40. of the same Book, by E. B^rrough, And we believe, Even He that was
Dead is alive, and lives for evermore; and that he Comes, and shall Come again
to Judge the whole World with Righteousness, and all People with Equity, and
shall give to every man according to his Deeds at the Day of Judgment, when all
shall arise to Condemnation or Justification, he that has done good shall
receive Life; and he that has done evil, everlasting Condemnation.

Testimony for the Man Christ Jesus, page 4. cites W. Penn, where he speaks in
the Name and Person of the Quakers, thus, We do believe the Man Christ Jesus to
be glorified in Heaven: We do believe that holy Manhood to be glorified in
heavenly Glory. See now how far the Quakers are from denying the true and real
Manhood of Christ in Heaven, or disowning Jesus of Nazareth to be the Maffiah.
A (...) further add and confess, That the Same Man Christ Jesus, that suffered
and was put to Death in the Flesh, and raised from the dead by the mighty Power
of God, ascended into Heaven, Gods dwelling place, ascended both as to a change
of Place and state of Glory: He is highly exalted in Power and Authority,
Page.7. We have always believed and owned the Man Christ Jesus, according to the
plain History of him in Holy Scripture, as namely, That he was miraculously
conceived by the holy Ghost overshadowing the Virgin Mary, that he lived an
innocent and sinless Life, preached powerfully, wrought Miracles, was crucified
and put to Death, as concerning the Flesh, buried and rose again the 3d day,
and was seen of his Disciples and many Brethren after he arose; and that the
Same Body that was put to Death, was raised by the Power of God, and was a real
Body really seen both before and after his Resurrection, and at his ascension
also. So we confess the same Man Christ; not only to be still in being, but
also glorified, and his Body to be a glorious heavenly and spiritual Body. And
as to his being Man, We have one Mediator between God and Man, even the Man
Christ Jesus, (...) Tim.2. And God will judge the World in Righteousness by
that MAN whom he has ordained, whom he has raised from the Dead, Acts 17.31.
So that this MAN Christ did neither Vanish nor Perish in any thing Essential to
him, either as to his SPIRIT, SOUL or BODY, but is highly exalted and glorified
P.12. But if we shall be changed as to our low Body, and fashioned into a
glorious and spiritual state, then is Christ as to his Body changed or
translated into a far more glorious State than what it had when on Earth P.13.
as for those Objections against the Man Christ his being in Heaven, they are to
W. Harworth's own framing, and not the Quakers; for where did they ever thus
argue, viz. Ephesians.4.10. The Apostle says he ascended far above all Heavens,
ergo, Christ is not in Heaven as to his MANHOOD: Let him show us that Book or
Dispute wherein we have this Argument, it he can. Again, I Cor.15. Flesh (...)
Blood cannot enter into the Kingdom o^ Heaven; Where do the Quakers argue from
hence, that therefore Christ is not there, as to his Manhood: Let him produce
Book and page for this, or forever be ashamed. -- His Reasons to prove Christ
now a Man in Heaven, do not reach nor touch us, the thing not being denied, but
really believed and confessed unto by us.

Malice of the Indep. Agent again rebuked, p. 17. The terms Natural and
Earthly, as given to the glorious Body of Christ, were and are offensive to us
-- It must needs be a very glorious heavenly Body; and we believing such a
change in the glorious Body of Christ, we do not thereby, (nor ever did)
believe that the Body of Christ which suffered was annihilated, and that his
Flesh saw Corruption: No such matter: May there not be then a very wonderful
change in the Body and yet the Substance not annihilated nor destroyed; nor
does it follow from our not believing nor owning his Characters (of natural and
earthly) on Christ's glorious Body, that therefore nothing of that Body remains
or is in being. P. 19. As if we allowed nothing of the Man Christ, either or
Spirit or body, to have a being (after his Resurrection) to ascend; which is a
horrid falsehood; for though it was changed, and became excellent, refined and
glorious, yet it follows not that it was annihilated. -- Though Christ be God
and Man in a most glorious Union and Power, yet the Manhood is not the Deity,
nor the Deity the Manhood, yet inseparable in the heavenly Man, Christ, who is
Lord from Heaven.

Page 23. Postscript by George Whitehead, in answer to W. H^s Q^eries. Q. I do
but Query, what is become of that Flesh wherein He, ( i. e. Christ) was
manifested? I^ that Flesh now in being? if so, where is it? in every place, or
circumscribed in Heaven? Answ. That Flesh saw no Corruption, but was raised
from the dead: Christ did rise in that Body wherein he suffered, and in the
same ascended into the Heavens, where the Patriarch David did not, as to his
Body, which is in the Sepulcher, Acts 2.29. And that very Body of Christ which
was raised from the dead, how should it but be in being, seeing he dyed not
again, according to Romans 6.9. knowing Christ being raised from the dead, dies
no more, Death has no more dominion over him: his dying was only as to the
Body, he was put to Death as concerning the Flesh, therefore the Flesh was
raised from the dead. And it is so far circumscribed or encompassed in the
Heavens as it is capable of, and as is proper to it; and though it be spiritual
and glorious, yet a Body, and therefore not in every place where God is: To be
Omnipresent is only proper of God, and not to Bodies.

Q. How do they but deny the (...) Christ, that say, the Body of Jesus is
changed as to Substance, and his Soul is in every (...)? Answ. 1 st, They do
not deny the Manhood of Christ, that say, his Body is changed, as to the
Quality and Glory of it, that it is a spiritual glorious Body, in a higher
state than when on Earth under Sufferings: This is no annihilating of the body:
2 ly. That his Soul does powerfully extend to, and is in every Saint, in some
^^^ce and degree: This must needs be, if it act together in Union with the
Deity, in perfecting all good in us, as our Adversary has confessed, as also
that it is virtually in the Saints: Though we grant, that it is in more fullness
in himself than in as, yet of his fullness have we all received.

Q. They own, they say, the real Birth, Sufferings and Resurrection of Christ,
but do they own his Intercession in his Manhood, a^ an ^^go Pri^st in Heaven?
Ans. Yes, we do; he is entered into Heaven it self, to appear in the face of God
for us. -- Note, That we referred him for a more full answer than we have given
about Christ's Manhood, to a Book entitled, The Way cast Up, by G. Keith.

The real Quaker a real Protestant, by G Whitehead, p. 105, 106. Priest says,
That two of his Neighbor Quakers told him, That Christ's Body did vanish at his
ascension, and that now he has no other Flesh or Body but the Flesh or Body of
his People. Ans (...) deny it to be the Quakers mind that Christ's Body did
vanish (so as to become annihilated) at his ascension: 'twas changed, and more
glorified, but not vani^ht. I am sensible that none in their right
understanding or sense, would give him any such mistaken answer or account
concerning the Body of Christ, that it so vnnisht as to become annihilated. --
Christ has a glorious Body, most near and proper to himself, above and more
excellent than all our earthly Bodies, like unto which he will change our low
and humble Bodies. -- P. 119. Christ has a true and spiritual glorious Body,
whereof the Saints are Members.

Page 108. Pr. The Qrs. do believe, that Christ, God Man, did never purchase
the Redemption of any sinners by the price of his own Blood. Ans. We believe
that Christ as Mediator, has obtained eternal Redemption for us, and that by
his own Blood, that we might be sanctified and redeemed from all Iniquity, for
which end he gave himself for us.

Pr. The Qrs. believe that deliverance from Condemnation is not by believing in
Christ who dyed to save Sinners, but by obeying the Light within. Answ. This is
a Forgery again: Christ and his Light within are not to be divided in matter of
Faith or Salvation: We never opposed Christ who dyed for Sinners, or Faith in
his Name, by believing or obeying the Light within.

Judgment fixed, by G. Whitehead, in answer to Jessory Bullock, viz. You
(Quakers) do preach both Salvation and Justification, and also Condemnation by
the man Christ the Son of God, as other Professions do, and this Doctrine I
would have you to prove, because you preach Salvation by Christ the Light
within. It is no where written that we shall either be justified or condemned
by that Christ which dyed without the Gates of Jerusalem, but it is written, by
Grace are ye saved, and by the Light of the World are ye condemned, etc. Ans.
Thou that can not reconcile (or see the consistency of Salvation by the Man
Christ Jesus, And by his Light within, art gone from his Light, into
Imaginations. Why have thou not better observed the Gospel preached by the Angel
of the Lord, to the Shepherds concerning Christ Jesus, For unto you is born
this day, in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. The true
Christ of God is but one, though he has appeared in diverse manners, both in the
Flesh and in the Spirit; he is the Light, he is the Way to the Father, he is
the Savior, he is the one Mediator between God and Man, even the M an Christ
Jesus, the heavenly glorious Man, the Man that was promised to be for a hiding
place, who in the days of his flesh said, I am the Light of the World: This our
one Lord Jesus Christ is our Light, Life and Salvation; he is Judge of quick
and dead, that Man by whom God will judge the World in Righteousness. See also
Tit. 2. 11. where the saving Grace of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, etc. are
testified of; and therefore Salvation by that Christ, through his Grace, are
not inconsistent, page 326.

Flesh and Blood of Christ, by I Pennington, (Preface) I have often heard them
( the Quakers) own Christ both inwardly and outwardly; yea, I heard one of the
Ancients of them thus testify in a public Meeting many years since, That if
Christ had not come in the Flesh in the (...) of time, to bear our sins in his
own Body on the Tree, and to offer himself up a Sacrifice for M ankind, all
mankind had utterly perished. p. 16. Glorious was that appearance and
manifestation of his Son in (...) flesh, precious his Subjection and his
Obedience to the Father: His giving himself up to death for sinners was of
great esteem in his Eye: It was a spotless Sacrifice, of great value, and
effectual for the Remission of sins, and I do humbly acknowledge unto the Lord
the Remission of any sins thereby.

Rob. Barel^y's Apology, p. 94, ^5. ^6. We do not intend to equal on solve to
that holy Man, the (...) in whom (...) the fullness of the Godhead (...) (...)
no to (...) o^ the (...) of his present existence; so though we (...) not
immediately, but (...) her she Head, and (...) ^^mbers; now as the Soul (...)
(...) wells otherwise, and in a (...) more immediate manner in the H^^d and
Heart than in the hands (...) so God dwells otherwise in the Man Jesus, that
(...). We also freely reject the Here^e of A^po^onarius, who d^^y him to have
any Soul, but said, the Body was only acted by (...) God^^ad. As also the Error
of Eutyones, who made the Manhood to be (...) w^^owed (...) Godhead; wherefore
as we believe he was a true and real man, so we also believe, that he continues
so to be glorified in the Heavens, in Soul and Body, by whom God shall judge
the World in the Great and General Day of Judgment. We believe all those things
to have ^een certainly transacted, which are recorded in the holy Scriptures,
concerning the Birth, Life, Miracles, Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ, and we also believe, that it is the Duty of every one to behave it, to
whom it pleases God to reveal i^; yea, we believe it were (...) (...) not to
believe, when so declared. And we be^^^^ (...) the Remission of sins, which any
partake of, is only in and by virtue of that most satisfactory Sacrifice, and
no otherwise.

His Vindication of Apology, p. 89. I do believe that the Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which was crucified at Jerusalem, was again rais^^^ by the Power
of God, in which glorified Body the Lord Jesus (...) dwells. Page 189. We are
falsely charged with denying the outward appearance of Christ, the real
existence of Heaven and Hell as a place without as, the Last and General
Judgment, the Resurrection of the Body; for we really believe these things.

Much (...) might have been cited out of the Writings of our Ancient Friends,
but this may suffice at this time to convince our Opposers, that it has been,
and is, the firm Belief of the People called Quakers, to expect Salvation by
the Man Christ Jesus, who was born (...) the Virgin Mary, was crucified for our
sins, and rose again for our Justification, ascended into Heaven, and ever
lives to make inter^^^^ for us.

Faithfully collected, and Recommended to p^rusal, by Will. Bradford.

FINIS.

