OPTANDA.

GOOD MEN Described, AND GOOD THINGS propounded.

A SERIOUS CONSIDERATION OF Two very Important CASES. I. What should be our
(...) AND II. What should be our Study That so All Things may Go well (...)

By COTTON (...)

In Two (...) Preached (...) and (...)

To His Excellency, Sir William Phipps, Knight. Governor of the Massachusetts
Province, and General of NEW ENGLAND.
May it please your Excellency.
A Ltho' the Great Austin, once entered it among his Aged and Humble
Retractations, That in a Dedication of a Book, unto one, whom be yet Esteemed,
A Good Man, he had spoken more Honorably of that Person, than be deserved; I
am abundantly satisfied, That I shall never have cause to Retract my Dedicating
of this Little Book unto you, as unto a Person, Most Exemplarily desirous to
serve Your Country, and as Exemplarily Self-denying in the doing of that
Service. The World surely must be now convinced, That we were not at all
deceived in our Expectations, when we publicly Saluted You some years ago, As,
One Raised by God, for such a Time as This! And your People would now be the
most Ungrateful of Men, if they should not acknowledge, That your Indefatigable
Endeavors to Do us Good, have more than a Little obliged us, to Thank you, to
Value you, to Honor you, and to Pray for you. But as you have often expressed
your Esteem for the Prayers of such men as now Rejoice under your Protection;
so the Sermons uttered among them, have had a singular Acceptance with you.
It Is upon this encouragement, that I now ask Your Excellency, to Accept of a
Sermon, which describes, An Excellent Spirit; a Spirit no less Needful than
Useful in all sorts of men; but especially in those who on the score of any
preferments do Excel other men; even, that Spirit, whereof whoever shall be
destitute, may have this Lamentation made upon them, Does not the Excellency
which is in them, Go away? They Die even without Wisdom.

SIR,

The Charming Examples of such an Excellent Spirit, are plentifully exhibited
in those Judges wherewith our God favored his Israel, of old. But having
recommended Them, as the Cheef and Best Subjects for your pious Emulation, it
will not be amiss, if I also set before Your Excellency, the instance of a
Noble Roman as truly admirable. It Was the Renowned Fabius Maximus; Who being
advanced unto the Highest Office and Command in the Commonwealth, did through
a zeal for his Country, overcome the greatest affronts that any person of
quality could have received. Minutius the master of the horse, and the next
person in dignity to himself, (...) first pri^^^^y Traduce him, as One that was
No Soldier, and, Less Politician; and be after wards did by both Speeches and
Letters, prejudice not only the Army, but also the Senate, a against him, so
that Minutius was now by an Unpresidented Commission brought into Equal Terms
with Fabius. All this while the Great Fabius did not throw up his Cares for the
Commonwealth, but with a mavelous Equality of Mind, endured equally the
Malice of the Judges, and the Fury of the (...), and when Minutius a while
after, was with all his Forces, upon the point of perishing by the Victorius
Arms of Hannibal, the very Injured Fabius, not Listening to the Dictates of of
Revenge and E nvy, came in, helped him, saved him; and by that Excellent
Spirit, he at length made his worst Adversaries the Captives of his G
enerosity. Upon this History, I may now say with one of the Ancients, If
Heathens can do thus much for the Glory of their Name, what shall not
Christians do for the glory of Heaven? Sir, You being a Christian, that have
already given such Demonstrations of an Excellent Spirit, as cannot be found in
those that are Strangers to the Spirit of Christ, I do assure my self that you
will go on in Answering the Character of an Excellent Spirit, now Laid before
You. Which if You do, the Benefit that You did unto the English Nation, by
carrying more than One or Two Hundred Thousand Pounds into that Kingdom, will
not be so considerable as the Advantage that will accrue to Your D ear
New England, by Your Contributing to the Continuance of the Divine Presence
(...) among us. It Is with such Wishes, that I take Leave to Subcribe my self,

Your Excellencies Very Sincere and Humble Servant Cotton Mather

GOOD MEN Described. In a Sermon, Directed unto the GOVERNOR, of NEW ENGLAND.
PROVE. XVII. XXVII. A Man of Understanding, is of an EXCELLENT SPIRIT.
IT was a Sharp, and yet a Just, Rebuke which the Rash and Wild Zeal of Our
Lords own Disciples, once brought upon Them, in Luc. 9. 55. Ye know not what
manner of Spirit ye are of. As it is not easy for a man to pass a Judgment
upon his own Picture, So for a man to know his own Spirit, is a thing no less
Difficult, than it is Uncommon in the world. Men may Dream that they have, no
less a thing, than The Powerful or Glorious Spirit of Elias in them, when
indeed, those Evil Spirits, which filled and acted the Swine of old, have
possession of them. It is the Spirit of man, whereof he that Formed it, has
said, It is Deceitful above all things, who can know it? And therefore that
Counsil of Heaven, Try the Spirits, is of a very wonderful importance to us
all; Especially with reference unto Our own. But if that be a Question which
would puzzle the most among us, What Spirit are you of? There is another
Question, which is not altogether so intricate, so perplexed; Namely, What
Spirit we should be of? It is a Question, whereto we have an Answer, in the
Text now Read unto us. We are told in Prove. 12. 26. The Righteous is more
excellent than his Neighbor. And our Text shows, Wherein? it is in the Spirit
of him.

If the very Title of the Proverbs in our Bibles, did not intimate, that they
were Excellent Sentences, yet the Author, the Penman, the Matter, and the
Te^^ure, would all conspire to declare their being so. It is then an Excellent
Sentence which now lies before us; and an Excellent Spirit is the thing
recommended in it. We are told in I King. 10 24. All the earth sought unto
Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put into his Heart. But behold,
something of that Wisdom now seeks unto a Little Part of the earth within
these walls this day, that we would attend unto it.

We have here a description of a Wise Man, which the only Wise GOD put into
the Heart, of One that was himself such a Man. To be too Sollicitous and
Inquisitive after the Aspect, which these words may bear unto the Context, will
be to forget the Independency of the Sacred Proverbs, which rather ly together
like an heap of Unstrung Pearls, in the Book of our GOD. Nevertheless, it is
plain that Solomon is here commending the Taciturnity, which Wise Men usually
have a kindness for; and we have this, assigned as the Reason of the Silence,
that is affected by such Men as those; Particularly, when they receive great
provocations from their Injurious Neighbors, and are punished, even for their
Justice, or Stricken for their Equity; How come they to be Sparing of their
words! Why, they are of an Excellent Spirit.

But referring all those Observations, which may be made upon the Circumstances
of this Text, unto the place most proper for them, I shall, with Gods Help,
Address my Self to Answer this most important CASE. What is that EXCELLENT
SPIRIT, which a Good man desires, and studies to be adorned with!

Divines of some Note, have still wished for Sermons, whose Motto's might be,
Many Truth's, and not many words. It would be disagreeable to the Composure of
the Proverbs from whence my Text is taken, and my Context would give me a very
particular Check if I should not Crowd what is to be said upon this Case, into
as Little Room as ever I can. To Discourse Closely then,

By the Spirit, is meant the Soul; Or, that Spiritual and Rational Substance,
whereto our Body is to be Vitally United, as a Mansion and an Engine for it. By
the Excellency of the Spirit, is meant some Ornament upon the Soul, which may
be grateful unto the most High God, and graceful in the Eyes of all Reasonable
men. We are therefore to Enquire, What are those Ornaments, with which a Good
man would have his own Soul Accomplished?

Know then,

I. An Excellent Spirit is an E xtraordinary Spirit; and such would a Good man
have his own Spirit arise to be. We Look upon Rarity and Excellency to be
AEquivalent Why, a Good man will always be a Rare man, as long as almost the
whole World Lies in Wickedness; But he will further aspire after those Rare
Seize, which even many a Good man does not arrive unto. No, he would in
all that is Virtuous and Laudable be, An Extraordinary man. There is a
Commendable Singularity Endeavored by such a man; and he will not be Barked
out of it, by such Flouts and Scoffs, as they some times assaulted the Great
Luther with, Tune Solns Sapis? Is there no Wit, no Sense among Mankind, but
what you have monopolized? A Good man, will not oblige himself unto the Common
measures of Iniquity. There are Ordinary Vices, which, be sure, a Good man will
not comply withal; he has not a Spirit that will permit him, To follow a
multitude in the Doing of evil: if he dwell in a Sodom, hell be a Lot for all.
When the whole Congregation had been Sinning against God, said the Lord in Number.
14.24. My Servant Caleb, he had another Spirit, and has followed me fully. It Is
that other Spirit, that is an Excellent Spirit. Suppose, a Whole Country, yea,
a whole Nation, be distempered with Formality, Debauchery, and Enmity against
the Right ways of the Lord, a Good man will be of Another Spirit; although
like E lias he be put upon Complaining, I am left alone! If a whole people
decline and back-slide from God, and let the World eat up all their Zeal for
the House of the Lord; Yet a Good man will be of Another Spirit; he will be
another Noah for his Uprightness, though there be a Deluge of Profaneness,
overwhelming of all his Neighborhood. He is one bound for Heaven; and thinks
he, To heaven I Will go, though I should not have one man alive, to bear me
Company. But there are Ordinary Virtues too, with which a Good man will not be
Satisfied; he will ingenuously confess himself to be, The least of Saints; but
he will diligently Labor to be one of the Highest Form; to be Ultimus Bonorum,
^ill not serve his turn; he has a Spirit suited by that Advice of the Apostle,
Seek that ye may Excel. Said our Lord, in Math.5.47. What do you more than
others? It Is a Spirit for Doing more than others, that is the Excellent Spirit.
To Live Soberly, and Honestly, Doing no body any Harm, and to keep up a Round
of Duties from Sabbath to Lecture, and from Lecture to Sabbath, here is what
others, that are none of the worst, use to do; but a Good man is for Doing more
than others. He is for Doing Nobler things than they do; and for doing the same
things which they do, upon far Nobler ends. As for Natural Actions; his Eating,
Drinking, Sleeping, and Recreation; it is not merely because he is Hungry,
Thirsty, Weary, and his Appetites call for it; this is what others do; No, but
it is, that so he may be Supported and Refreshed in the work of God. As for
Civil Actions; his Trading, Ploughing, Working, and Visitation; it is not
barely to accommodate himself with Worldly Advantages; that is what others do;
No, but it is to Glorify God in the station wherein God has placed him. And
then, in his Religious Actions, a Good man, would have more Piety and more
Charity, than other men. Others have some Faith; but he would have such an one
as Abraham had; others have some Love; but he would have such an one as David
had. Others have some Repentance, but he would have such an one as Peter had.
Others do something for God; but he would be able to say with Paul, I have
Labored more abundantly than they all! Of Good men, it is said, in Isa. 40.31.
They shall mount up with Wings as E agles. Truly, A Good man is for HighFlights
in Religion; he would fain Soar above the middle Region; Yea, he would, if it
might be, come to move with and like the very Angels themselves, who you know,
are called E xcellent Spirits. He hopes he shall one Day come to be, As the
Angels; and therefore he would now be of such an Angelical Spirit, that the
very Angels themselves may take Delight in attending on him. As for that
Creeping Frame of some, who would gladly know the Minimum quod Sic, or, just
how much Religion will set a man within the Gates of Heaven, that they may
there make a Stop and Stand; I think, it is Incompatible to a Godly man.

II. Holiness is Excellence; and that is it with which a good man would have a
Spirit most gloriously Replenished. We are told in Psalm. 16. 3. The Saints that
are in the Earth, are the E xcellent. The Spirit of a SAINT is an E xcellent
Spirit. I know not whether he be most of a Bruit or a Devil; it is one of them;
that shall make a Scoff at being a Saint; though that be a wickedness that has
been committed, by some that would be called Christians. But a Good Man, is
very desirous to be, A Saint on E arth, and one of the, Holy Brethren, Indeed
the Inclination of many, is too agreeable to the Popish Canonization: which
acknowledges no Saints, but what are already in the Heaven of the Blessed. We
do but humor that, when we do say, Saint Matthew, and will not as well say, Saint
Abraham. But we do more grossly follow it, when we are for no Saintship, till we
are dead and gone, and we are, Like Sheep laid in the Grave. Whereas, A good
man is for being, A Saint on E arth; inasmuch as he believes, it is that,
Without which, No man shall see the Lord. But Holiness; What is that? It is in
short, A Consecration to the Service and Glory of the Great God. God Holiness
is His Advancing of Himself alone, and his Agreeing with none but such as
concur with him in doing so. And thus our Holiness, lies in our Advancing the
Honor of God, and making all that we are, and all that we have, and all that
we do, subservient thereunto. New a good man, would be such a Saint, as thus to
have, Holiness unto the Lord, written upon all that he is concerned in; he does
like those worthy Macedonians, of whom we read, They gave themselves unto the
Lord; and then he subscribes himself, as in Psalm. 119. 38. Lord, I am thy
Servant, Devoted unto thy Fear. A Spirit of Respect unto God, has touched him;
and being a Needle touched with such a Loadstone, he would always have none but
Godward Vergencies of Soul. A good man, would be an E noch, that is to say, A
Dedicated man; and he would, Walk with God, by a Continual Dedication of every
thing within his Reach, unto that Great END of, Showing forth the Praises of
God. We are Commanded, in I Cor.6. 20. Glorify God in your Bodies, and in your
Spirits, which are His. The Spirit of a Good man says, Amen to this! We are
Commanded, in I Cor.10.31. Whether ye Eat, or Drink, or whatever ye do, Do all
to the Glory of God. The Spirit of a Good man, cries out, Lord, Let me do so!
He is a man that would set a part every thing for God; and Subordinate every
thing about him, unto the Interests of the Lord. If the Flesh and the World,
and the Devil, tempt him, to do any thing that may be for the Dishonor of God,
he would make Joseph's Refusal, How shall I do this wickedness, and sin against
God? But here is not all; he has a Spirit for more than this. What Ahab so
sneakingly and absurdly, said unto Benhadad, in I King.20. 4 I am thine, my
Lord, and all that I have; That would a Good man very Holily speak unto the God
that made him; Let my all be the Lords. When he looks upon the Powers of his
Mind, he says, O that this Understanding, this Cogitation, this Conscience, and
this Memory, might always be at Work for God; and, O that this Will, and these
Affections, might always be closing with God my Savior. When he Looks upon
the Members of his Body, he says, O that all my Senses might Operate for God
alone; and, O that this Tongue might speak for God, and these Hands Acts for
God, and these Feet carry me where God is to be served. Yea, As we read, in
Psalm.30. Tit. about, The Dedication of the House of David; even so, a Good man,
would have no Comfort, by which Gods Glory should not be promoted. His House,
His Cash, His Lands, His Goods, His Friends, and all His Capacities, he Wishes,
O that my God might have the more Acknowledgments for my having such things as
these! And therefore also, he sometimes does ask himself, like David of old: he
does more particularly ask himself, O what is there that I may do for the Dear
Name of my God? This note is the Spirit of Holiness in a good man; and whatever
Opinion the Debauched and Vitiated Souls of unrenewed Sinners, may have
concerning it, if all the Angels that are now Invisibly present here, had it
referred unto them, I am sure they would all say, This is an excellent Spirit!

III. A good man would be of an Active and an Useful Spirit, and that is an
Excellent One. What we render, Excellent here, may be rendered Precious. A good
man would be such a Jewel to his Neighbors, as that they should all fare the
better for him; he would give them cause to say concerning him, while he lives,
He is a precious man; and when he Dies, There Is one gone that will he missed!
It was said concerning one that was an Active and an Useful Instrument for the
good of His People, in 2 Samuel 18. 3. Thou art worth ten thousand of us. Why, a
good man would make himself of much Use to as many Thousands of his Neighbors,
as he can; and if this will make him of More Worth than many thousands of them,
he will be so. It is noted of a Sheep, that every thing about it, is of some
good use or other. A good man is a Sheep of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Shepherd
of Israel; and he would have some good Use made of whatever God has given him.
Indeed, this is the proper Distinction and Character of a Good Man, as in Romans
5. 7. opposed unto a Righteous one; it is a Man, who, Does Good. A good man will
be an Excellent Husband and Steward of the Talents, which God has bestowed upon
him; and put 'em all to an Excellent Use. He would fain be, as it was noted of
the Blessed Bradford; E ither with Tongue, or Pen, or Purse, always doing of
Good. Perhaps he seldom comes into any Company but he thinks with himself,
What useful thing shall I Say or Do, before we part? There are several
Relations, which the God of Heaven has placed him in; and he would so discharge
those Relations, that all about him should Bless God for ever for him; he would
procure those Praises to make Heaven ring every day on his behalf, Blessed be
God for such a Magistrate, for such a Minister, for such a Father, such a
Master, such an Husband, or such a Son! All his Gifts, and all his Graces, and
all his Capacities he would so lay out, that the Church of God, may have the
Advantage of them. And, if you can but evidently lay before him, An opportunity
to be Serviceable, you need not use many Motives to make him take it: no,
thinks he, My Opportunities are my Treasures! His Riches, if God have sent him
any, how does he Employ a good portion of them? It was said, If Riches
Increase, set not your Hearts upon them; instead of That, he sets his Heart
upon Contriving what Good he shall do with what he has? It Is said in Isa. 32.
8. He does Devise Liberal Things. He sets himself to Devise how he may support
sacred and civil Order, how he may set the poor to work, how he may feed the
Hungry, clothe the Naked, Relieve the Sick, Comfort and Requite his Parents,
and make the Heart of the Aged, the Widow, and the Orphan, Sing for Joy. And
hence also, He is a man of a Public S pirit. He is not all for Himself, but he
earns that Epitaph to be inscribed upon his Grave at last, Here lies a Good
CommonWealths Man! and while he lives he is concerned for the whole Vessel, as
well as his own Cabin; especially when an Horrible Storm does Threaten all.
When that Excellent Prince of Orange, the Ancestor of our present Sovereign,
had from a Treacherous and Murderous Papist received such a mortal wound, that
he saw he had but one Breath to draw in the World, he cried out, O my God, have
mercy on my Soul, and on my poor people! His poor People! had half of his last
Breath. Truly, so, a Good Man would let his poor People, have more than Half of
all that he has, when it must and can be afforded unto them. Be sure, he will
not grumble at every penny that goes to defray, the Public Charges, while he
can throw away whole Pounds on his own private Pleasures. Nor will he needlessly
and angrily Decline to Serve the Public, when he has a clear Call unto it.
Though a sense of Inability may make him very backward in accepting of an Office;
yet if he be Able he will be Willing to do his best. It is true, every Public
Servant must carry two Handkerchiefs about him, one to wipe off Sweat, of
Travail, another to wipe off the Spit of Reproach, but a Good Man, has his
Handkerchief always at hand. It is possible, that the Poor People, have been
shamefully Ungrateful to him, for what he has already done; but their being
Ungrateful shall not make him Unuseful; he Looks for his Rewards, not in the
Acclamations of a fickle and froward people, but in the Great Gods, Well done
Good and Faithful Servant! he can pass by their Little Follies, and still spend
his Time and Strength, and Estate for them; even, To do them good against their
Wills; as every one must, that will do them good at all. In Serviceableness, He
is, Like the Lion, which turns not away for any. It is required in Gal.6. 10.
As we have opportunity, let us do Good unto all men. And that which the Good
Man says upon it, is, Lord, give me opportunities, and an heart with my
opportunities.

IV. A Good Man would have an Excellent Breath, and that is both a symptom and
an Instance of an Excellent Spirit. By Spirit here, Breath may be one thing
intended; as it is in some other places. Now a man, of an Excellent Breath,
imports much as a man of an E xcellent Speech. And therefore it is added in our
Context here, H e that has Knowledge, spares his words. We read in Prove.
17.7. concerning, E xcellent S peech. Why, such would a good man, have his own
S peech to be. He says, with the Wise Man, I will speak of E xcellent Things;
and it is in excellent strains, too, that he would speak. It is an observable
Antithesis, in Prove. 10. 20. The Tongue of the Just is as choice silver; but
the heart of the wicked is little worth. Thus, here; inasmuch as a good man has
an E xcellent S pirit, or an heart of some worth within him, the Tongue or
Speech of such a man, will deserve a price, beyond that of the finest silver,
to be set upon it; yea, the Name of Chrysostom, or, a Golden Mouthed Person,
belongs unto him. A good man would speak Honestly, whenever he speaks. It may
be said of him, He puts away Lying, and S peaketh the TRUTH with his NEIGHBOR.
He is for a perfect Harmony both between Words and Things and between T houghts
and Words. Perhaps he does not speak all he Thinks, yet he would ever speak as
he Thinks. A Good Man would speak Usefully too, when ever he speaks. It may be
said of him, No rotten communication proceeds out of his mouth, but such as is
good for the use of edifying. He is not for such discourse, as may infect the
manners of the Hearers; but he is for discoursing, partly on matters of
Personal Business, and partly on subjects of General Concernment; as on the
Truths of God; or on his Works, both in Creation and in Providence. Once more,
A Good Man would also speak Solidly, when ever he speaks. He will not foam out
his own Wrath; nor fly out like a Nabal, with reviling language; nor, if they
vex him, will he bawl, and fume, like Saul, who in his fury, would call his own
Son, The Son of a Whore. He will not sound out his own Praise neither; nor
will he bragg of what has Enriched him, or Enobled him; no if he must mention
any thing that might set off himself, He covers it with such a style as John
used of old, There was a Certain Disciple. Much less will he utter any
Filthiness whatsoever. All Bawdy and Obscene talk, is Banished from his lips;
nor will he let the Loathesome Steam and Stench of an Open Sepulcher come through
his Throat, by his descanting upon those things, whereof the Apostle says, It Is
a shame to speak of them. Finally, A Good Man would speak Deliberately, when
ever he speaks. He would neither speak Too soon; because words cannot be E
aten. And he considers, The heart of the Righteous studies to answer; But the
mouth of the wicked pours out evil things. Nor would he speak Too much;
because when the Chest is always open, it is taken for granted, there is little
that is valuable there. And he considers, In the multitude of words, there wants
not sin. What shall I say more; A Good Man would speak so, as becomes one that
remembered, what the Scripture says, The Lord hearkened and heard! It is
reported by Tertullian, that the Feasts among the Faithful in the Primitive
Times, were seasoned with very Savoury Communications; and he gives this as the
cause of it; Ita fabulantur, ut qui sciant Dominum andire. Thus let a good man
be where he will; suppose at the table, yea, or in the Tavern, he would speak,
what he would be willing to find in the Book of Gods Remembranee.

V. If a man could get his Natural Humor to be S anctify'd, there would be an
E xcellent S pirit in him; and this is an Happiness which a good man would be
very ambitious of. It was the Blessing, in I These. 5. 23. May your whole spirit
and soul and body, be preserved Blameless. There are who judge, that by S
pirit, here, is meant our Humor or our Temper, which is that Air of our
Complexion that results from some circumstances of the Union between our S oul,
and our Body. If a man be of a Generous, Affable, Candid Humor, we say, He is
a man of such a S pirit; and it were indeed that E xcellent S pirit, which a
good man would fain work himself unto. Every man, is born with some S pirit,
which we call the Genius of the man; and a good man would gladly have his
Humor, his Temper, his Genius, cured of all that may be distastful in it. He
would therefore Learn, what his own humor is, which indeed is not very
commonly or easily Learned. We shall not be many Weeks, with scarce any man
alive, but we shall give a shrowed guess, What humor be is of? Whereas we are
many Years before we take an exact view of our own. But I say, A good man,
would be thoroughly acquainted with his own humor; and then, he would both
Limit it, and Apply it so, as that it may serve him like S ails to a Ship, or
like Wings to a Bird, in the Glorifying of God. One good man, is like Abraham,
of a free, noble, spending H umour. He would now take advantage from this, to
supply and nourish the Distressed Members of the Lord Jesus. Another good man,
is like S ampson, of a merry, cheerful, pleasant Humor. From this would he
take advantage to be much in Thanksgivings unto God, and in the Joy of the
Lord. Here you shall see a good man like E lijah, of a Choleric Humor. Now
from thence he would take occasion to testify against the Sins of the place,
with more warmth and zeal, than is in other men. There you shall see a good
man, like Jeremiah, of a Melancholy Humor. Now he will turn this, into the
channel of Mourning over his own Sins, and the Sufferings of his Neighbors. A
good man is sometimes like Peter, of a Forward Humor. From hence he will be ready
to undertake any Testimony that must be born for the truths and ways of God.
Sometimes a Good Man is like John, of a very loving Humor. Then he will set
himself to Enkindle Charity, and Extinguish all Contention, in those that are
about him. One while, a Good Man, is like Moses, of a more Composed Humor. And
then he will keep up an even walk with God, Let the winds blow from what Point
of the Compass they will upon him. Otherwiles, a Good Man is like Heman, of a
Suspicious Humor. And then he will ever suspect lest a Lying Devil, or a
False-Heart, be putting some Cheat upon him. Perhaps the Good Man is like
David, of a Courageous Humor. He will then be, Valiant for the Truth upon
Earth. Or perhaps he is like Barak, of a Cowardly Humor. He will then by Fear
of Death be driven to the utmost preparation for it. I was going to touch upon
a Revengeful Humor, and a Penurious Humor; but, I may inform the people of
such Humors, that I cannot remember any Good Man in all the Bible, of them. So
that I only add, -- A Good Man would reduce his Humor to, The law of Christ,
and then he will be of an Excellent Spirit. A Man will be most Excellent that way
that his own Spirit, or Humor goes.

VI. An Intimate communion with the unseen and future world, would make an
excellent-spirit, and a good man would pursue that communion. It was confessed
concerning Daniel in Dan. 5.12. An E xcellent S pirit was found in him. And, I
pray, what was the Spirit of a Daniel? why, it was a Spirit so Refined by
Mortification of all Sensual inclinations, and by assiduous, Meditations on
Scripture, and Supplications to Heaven, that the Spiritual World became very
familiar with him. I say then, A Good Man would have his own Spirit wound up
unto an Unison, with that part of the Spiritual World, which now dwells in God.
There is a blessed World of Spirits at this day, in the Celestial Regions; but
a Good Man thinks with himself. O! what are they now a doing in the Spiritual
World! How are they Disposed, How are they Employed, in that Excellent World!
And as far as this present, Sinful, Dying State will allow of it, he
accordingly conforms himself thereunto. He therefore would be most exquisitely
Purified from the Feculencies of Pride, Malice, Envy, Selfishness, Uncleanness,
and all that may be offensive to the Holy Spirit of God; and He comes hence to
be of so fine a S pirit, that he has now and then those Touches upon him,
whereof I may say, They are unutterable things; and a Stranger cannot
intermeddle in them. Such an exalted Spirit, is an E xcellent Spirit. But there
was one thing in the Spirit of Daniel, which calls for a little further
Illustration with us. An Angel said unto him, in Dan.9 23. Thou art greatly
Beloved. It seems, the Angel counted him one of an E xcellent Spirit. But it
may be rendered, Thou art a man of Desires; which a very great Interpreter,
says, it is to be taken Actively. He was a man that had many D esires in his
Holy Soul, after the Messiah, after the Coming of the Messiah, and after the
Knowledge of his Coming. He consulted the Sacred Prophecies very much, with
Desires to understand whereabouts the Church of God was in the Line of Time;
and by much Prayer with Fasting, he prepared himself accordingly. Here was a
thing that rendered him, A man of Desires, among the very Angels of God. Thus,
if a man would soberly Bend himself (which the Apostle tells us, the very
Angels themselves Desire to do!) to Look into the Characters and Approaches of
the Coming of our Lord; and instead of any Unscriptural and Ill Computed
Conclusions about the precise Time of it, if the man would now vigorously
prosecute such Frames and such Works, as we should wish our Lord at His Coming
would find us in; it would make the man to be of an Excellent Spirit. There is
a wonderful Charm, in modest, humble, well-regulated Studies upon the K ingdom
of our Lord, which is to Come, When His Will shall be done on Earth, as it is
in Heaven; they give a man a certain prelibation of the Glory that shall be in
that Kingdom; and they Transfigure him till he become, An Excellent Man. A
little before the First Coming of our Lord, there were some that like Simeon
and Anna, had cast up Daniels weeks, and finding that they could not be far
from the Time of our Lords Coming, they were daily fitting themselves for the
Appearance of the Consolation of Israel. Now these were the Excellent Spirits
of those Days; and the like Dispositions now, toward the Second Coming of our
Lord, would render men the E xcellent Ones of ours. When Ezekiel had in a
Vision once accurately Looked upon, The Son of Man, from that very Time, the
Name of, Son of M an, came to be put upon himself. This I say, Let us be duly
concerned about the Coming of the Son of Man, and that Son of Man, will
gloriously impart unto us, of His own Excellent Spirit.

VII. The man who Reckons his own Soul, an Excellent Being, is like to have an
Excellent Spirit; and a Good Man, will make such a Reckoning. Of a wicked man,
it is said in Prove. 15. 32. He despises his own Soul. But a good man, although he
do with much Abasement of Soul, bewayl that Abasement of Soul, which by Sin, is
come upon him; yet he counts his own Soul to be a most Excellent Being. When he
weighs the State of his Never-dying Soul, it weighs down the whole world
besides, in his Resentments of it. A Great King was once advised every day, to
think on that Word of the Lord Jesus, in Matthew. 16. 26. What is a man profited,
if he Gain the whole World, and Loose his own Soul? or, what shall be give in E
xchange for his Soul? Why, a good man has that word ever now and then sounding
in his Ears, Ten worlds are not so much worth, as that Soul of thine! Those two
words, A CHRIST and, A SOUL, make a mighty Noise in the Ears of such a man. He
looks upon his own Soul, and then he thinks, This poor Soul, or, such a Soul as
this, the whole inferior World, cannot show an Abler or Nobler Thing? He again
looks upon his own Soul, and thinks. The Almighty Son of God Himself, counted
not his own Blood, a price too big, to lay down for the Ransom of such a Soul?
He looks once more upon his own Soul, and thinks, The best Angel in Heaven,
would gladly be a Guardian to assist the Deliverances of such a Soul! He goes
on to look upon his own Soul, and think, Here is a Soul, as poor as it is,
every corner of Heaven would ring with Joy, at the Conversion of such a Soul.
It is a Soul made for Eternity; the bright Mansions of heaven, were built on
purpose, for such a Soul to be for ever in them. And when a good man thus
thinks on the Excellency of his own Soul, oh! how loath is he to sell that Soul,
for a Song! Indeed, ungodly men do make most woeful Bargains about their Souls;
insomuch that their Souls may complain, as did the Savior of Souls, in Zech.
11. 13. A goodly Price was I valued at of them! If the Devil tender them a
little bit of Money, or Frolic, they will sell their Souls unto him, by
Rebellions like the Sin of Witchcraft. Whereas, if the Devil offer unto a good
man, all the Pleasures and Profits and Honors of the World, he will not sin
for the sake thereof, and wrong his own Soul. No, he says to the Devil, Thy
offers perish with thee; my Soul is too excellent a thing for thee to have it
so. But instead hereof, a good man thinks no pains, no prayers, no cares too
much for the Salvation of his own Soul. Indeed Judas begrutch'd what was
Religiously Expended; saying in Mat.26.8. To what purpose is this wast? But
when a good man reflects upon all the Self-denial, and all the Diligence, and
all the Exercises of Piery and Charity, which are for the health of a Soul; he
does not say, To what purpose is this wast? No, he owns, An Excellent Soul, is
worth all that can be done for it.

VIII. There is a reading of my Text, which is to this purpose, A man of
Understanding is of a Cool Spirit; and indeed a Cool Spirit, is an Excellent
Spirit. So then, a Good Man would have a Spirit free from those Heats, which
may distemper it. Particularly, A Good Man would have a Cool Spirit under
Afflictions from the hand of God. He would have no Rage of Spirit, at any of
those Losses, or Crosses, which may befall him; No, there are these two things,
which he takes always for Granted. One is that in I Sam. 3 18. It is the Lord.
Another is that in Genesis 50 20. God meant it unto Good. This makes him resolve,
Il take anything well at the hands of my God! He would with a mavelous
Patience, of Spirit, bear any of those disasters, that may come upon him, as
being persuaded, That God therein punishes him, far less than his iniquities
have deserved; and That God chastens him for his profit. Moreover, A Good Man,
would have a Cool Spirit under Injuries from the hand of Man also. He would
mentain a Calm of Spirit, although he should be never so much affronted and
abused; and he would be ready to overlook the most provoking passages. He would
follow that pattern, in I Pet. 2.21. Christ, who when he was Reviled, Reviled
not again, when He suffered, He Threatened not. He would obey that precept in
Romans 12. 17, 19. Recompense no man evil for evil; Avenge not your selves, but
rather give place to wrath. He would have such a Spirit as there was in Moses;
Moses was Pastor and Leader of a great congregation, wherein some or other were
almost every day basely murmuring at him; yet was he always Preaching to them,
Praying for them, and Standing in their Gap; with small or no Regret at their
unworthiness. He would have such a Spirit, as there was in Calvin; Calvin had
bin by Luther unhandsomely Reflected on; But, Well, said this Brave man, Though
Luther should call me a Devil, yet I will call him an Eminent Servant of the
Lord Jesus Christ. What a Spirit was that Expressed by Famous Mr. Dod? A
furious Blade being Enraged at his faithful Ministry, barbarously gave him a
Blow, that struck Two of his Teeth out. He spat out his Teeth with his Blood,
into his Hand; and only said, Here, you have knocked out a Couple of my Teeth
without any cause; but on condition I might help forward the Salvation of your
Soul, I would permit you to dash out all the rest. A Good man would gladly be
of such a Spirit; and have that, Meek and Quiet Spirit, whereof the Apostle
tells us, In the sight of God, it is of great price. Be sure, The Spirit that
is Contentious, is not Excellent, albeit, only by Pride (which is an
affectation of Excellence) comes Contention. Fire will soonest Catch in the
roofs of Thatch't, Low-built, Little Cottages. The Highest Regions are sedate;
there are no storms to ruffle them. Excellent Spirits, like the Angels, are
willing to go Down as well as Up, the Ladder of Heaven; and they will not
Justle one another. This is an Excellent Spirit; I appeal to every Conscience,
whether it be not so. But, in Gods Name, can you stand before the Glass? who of
us can find such a Spirit in our selves? I have only this further to say upon
it. As they said, in Judge.18 9. Arise, for we have seen the Land; behold, it is
very Good; and are ye still? Be not slothful to go and Inter and possess the
Land. So I say, Arise, you have seen the Lineaments of a Spirit; behold, it is
an Excellent Spirit; and are ye still? Be not slothful; but use all sit means
for the obtaining of such a Spirit. If you ask, What shall are do? I only Leave
this one Lesson with you. Cry mightily for the Spirit of God. It was said of
Barnabas He was full of the Holy Ghost; and it is further noted, He was a good
man; or one of an excellent Spirit. O (...) what you can then, that you may be
full of the Holy Ghost; you will not be without an Excellent Spirit, if you have
in you the Spirit of the Holy God; that Spirit is an excellent (...) and
excellent are all the Fruits of that Spirit. O go to God (...) it; and plead
that promise of His in Luc. 11. 13. Your Heavenly Father will give the Holy
Spirit, unto thou that ask it.

To the Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, New England.
THere is now to be Seen by you, a Sermon which was Heard, at a Time whereof
the Inhabitants of this Province may say, as the Romans once did upon another
Occasion, They had not seen a Greater Day. But if upon this Little Sermon, as
upon another Pharez, it should be demanded, How have thou broken forth? it must
be answered, That the further Publication of this Discourse, is the effect of
the Desires, and Commands, which your House have given me. And I would
indeed-with an Abased Soul, adore the FreeGrace of God, that any thing of mine,
should be either Serviceable or Acceptable to his Dear People; without being
Discouraged by the Frequency of my being driven thus unto published Labors;
inasmuch as it is promised among the Blessings of Heaven, The Lord thy God, will
make thee plenteous in every Work of thy Hand: but I would also speak as did
the Venerable Baxter, when some Comforted him in his Dying Hours with the
Remembrance of what Good had been done, by his Preaching and Writing for the
Church of God, Alas, I was but a Pen in Gods Hand; and what praise can be due
to a Pen?

As for the Meditations now put into your Hands, I have only this Favor to beg
of my Country, That they would not imagine me to undertake the Theme, of a
Comparison between the privileges which we had in our former, and the
privileges which we have in our present Settlements; That is a Subject
foreign to the province of a Preacher; and perhaps many of those which handle
it, Enquire not wisely of this matter. Only thus much I profess to Design; I
would fain have all this people sensible, That God has most Graciously inclined
their Majesty's to do those things for us, which lay us under greater
Obligations of Gratitude, both to Him and Them, than any other of the English
Dominions. And having advanced this Assertion, I then bring my Buckets to
Extinguish the Fiery Plagues of Contending and Complaining, which may make us
Loose our Opportunities of becoming, Happy; Vices concerning which, if any ask
me, When I will give over Declaiming against them? I will Reply, as Chrysostom
did when he had been long Reprehending of another Iniquity; I will then leave
off Testifying against it, when others leave of. Committing of it. And in Thus
doing, I believe the Mercy of God in Christ, before whose Judgment the Dying
State of my Health bids me quickly to expect my Appearance, will give me to
Rejoice; as in Well-doing. To That Mercy is his Country Recommended by

Your very Devoted Servant Cotton Mather

Good Things Propounded in a Sermon, TO The GOVERNOR and General Court, of the
Massachusetts Bay NEW ENGLAND. June 9. 1692.
II Chron. XII. XII. Also in Judah Things went well.
IT has been sometimes Remarked, That the Bible is unto the Church, what the
Firmament is unto the World; the God of Heaven has Gloriously Expanded these
Heavenly Oracles over us, and in this Expanse we have those things that are, To
give light upon the earth. The Steers-Men, of this poor shattered, sinking
Bark, are in a General Assembly this day Convened and there is a Bright Star in
the Firmament of the Bible, which I would humbly recommend unto their
Observation: It Is the Text now read unto us, whereof I may with good Reason say,
Ye shall do well if ye take heed thereunto, as unto a light that shines in a
dark place. Nor is it unworthy to be CONSIDERED with a particular Attention by
our selves in such a DarkTime as has been upon us. There is, Prophecy, as well
as History, in those Records, which the Scriptures give us of Transactions that
happened between Two and Three Thousand years ago; they Foretell what Effects
will still follow upon what Causes; being written for the Admonition, even of
Us upon whom the ends of the World are come. It is no less the Sollicitous
Enquiry of all men. Whether things are like to Go well at this Day among our
selves, than it is the Importunate Petition of Good men, That they May do so.
Now to be satisfied about that matter, I invite you to Look upon a passage that
happened so Long ago; Also in Judah, things went well.

In our Context, We find that the People of God, had been Laboring under
Oppressions and Confusions, which rendered them very miserable; they had cast
off the Service of God, and for this they were punished with a Slavery to men;
a Cruel Shishak had got them under the Yokes of his Arbitrary Government. The
merciful God was pleased, at length, to Recover them out of the miseries with
which they had been harassed; and Establish them with Settlements not
altogether unlike those which they had formerly enjoyed; in which happy
Restoration, that Eminent Man of God, the Prophet Shemajah, was more than
ordinarily Instrumental.

My Text in general Terms, does give us an Account of the Circumstances which
attended the Restoration of the Jews out of their Calamities. There was first,
a Serious Humiliation, on man's part; there was then a Gracious, Reconciliation
on Gods part; and upon this it follows, Things went well; or as it may be
rendered, There were good Things among them. As there were the Good Things,
which produced Good Terms between God and Them; the Good Things of Repentance,
of Obedience, of Reformation; so there were the Good Things which were the
effects of such Good Terms as those; namely, the Good Things, of Prosperity.
Good Times are implied in the Good Things, that were now among the people of
God. Things went well; the meaning is, They had not Needy, Hungry, Bloody,
Strangers any more to Lord it over them; There were no Shishaks to squeez hard
Quitrents from them for what they had before possessed as their Free-holds Time
out of mind; As to their Sacred Concerns, there was none to give them
Disturbance in the Worship of God; As to their Civil Concerns, there was now no
Law, and no Tax, imposed upon them, except what their own Acts concurred unto.
Things went well, when the Times grew both Morally, and Peaceably Better than
they were before.

The Text thus paraphrased, will cast into our Hands, a very important CASE;
When do Things Go Well among a People?

Or, What are those Good Things, which would make Any, and, if you please, OUR
SELVES, Particularly, an Happy People?

In the Handling of this Case, there is,

FIRST, One General Assertion, which we may advance, as Preliminary to our more
Particular Thoughts, that are to follow. It Is This;

Good Men are Good Things among any People; and Things will go well with a
People, when Good Men abound among them. Good Men have much of God with them;
it is to Them, that the God of Heaven says, I am with thee; so that if we have
many such Men of God among us, the God of those men, will therein vouchsafe His
own Presence unto us; now, the presence of God carries all sorts of Blessings
with it. He says, Woe to them, if I depart from them; and we may say, It will be
well with us, if God be with us; now, God our Father, will be where many of His
Children are. It was said concerning a Sinful Nation, in Isai.6.13. The Holy
seed, shall be the substance thereof; that is, the S tock or T runk of it. As
the strength of a tree, is in the stock or trunk of it; so the strength of a
people does ly in a Number of Holy men among them; Holy Men, that have wholly
Dedicated themselves unto the Service and Glory of God: Holy men that are
afraid of defiling themselves with any Breaches of piety, or charity in their
conversation: Holy men, to whom the character of Barnabas belongs, T hey are
good men and full of faith and full of the Holy Ghost; of such men I may say, T
hey are the chariots of a people, and the Horsemen thereof, we should be
well-guarded, if there were good store of such good men among us. Good men are
Gap-men, to keep off the Judgments of Heaven, from the people, which they
belong unto. It is recorded of a good Moses, in Psalm. 106. 23. He stood before
the Lord, in the Breach, to turn away His wrath, Lest he should destroy them.
Israel cannot be Ruined, until a good Josiah be gone; and Hippo cannot be
taken, while a good Augustine is alive. It was a mavelous expression, which
the Lord used unto Lot, in Genesis 19. 22. I cannot do any thing against Sodom,
till thou be come to Zoar. Blessed Lord, Can one Righteous Man, thus ward off
the Blows of thy Vengeance, from a sinful Neighborhood! yea, so it is. Good
men occasion all Things to Go well in the places where they Live; and they do
it, partly by stopping and checking the current of wickedness, which would else
lay all open to the Indignation of God: partly by propagating of what is
virtuous, and laudable, among those that are about them; but chiefly by their
fervent Prayers, whereby they Interceed with God for their poor Neighbors, and
say, I will not let thee go, except thou bless them. The Prayers of men that
are the Friends of God, yea, the prayers of one such man, are, as the Queen of
the Scots once acknowledged, Of more Account than an Army Ten Thousand Strong.
It Is the Prayer of such men, whereof we are told in Jam. 5. 16. It avails
much. 'Twas the Prayer of Abraham, that procured Health unto them, with whom he
Sojourned; and the Prayer of Samuel, that often saved Israel from Desolation.
There was a Legion of Good Men, once in the old Roman Army; and that Legion did
by their prayers obtain such a Deliverance for the Army, as was the Admiration
of the World. Good Men are the Favorites of the Great God; He says of them,
They are my Jewels: May our Country become a Cabinet full of those Jewels, and
our God will see, that it shall never be lost. In fine, The Rewards of
Universal Goodness, will cause all things to Go-well, where that Goodness does
prevail. I say then, Let good men be much Countenanced, and Encouraged; and let
a favorable Respect be still cast upon, The Faithful in the Land. Where good
men, find Ill entertainment among a people, that people do, but, if I may speak
all in one word, cut down the bough they stand upon. On the other side, it was
a notable Account of a good man, which a courtier once gave to a great King,
Sir, you have not a better Subject in your Kingdom than that man; pray, make
much of him; for that man can have what he will, of God Almighty. But O that
All men, would become good men, upon this persuasive thereunto. May people
among us, be generally converted unto God; may people be generally Devout,
Humble, Righteous, and Heavenly; Then indeed, Then it would be said, Also in
this Country things went well. The Ungodly Generation among us, do not stick
oftentimes to charge our Elijah's themselves, Thou art he which troubles
Israel; It Is You, said they to that Great Prophet, it is You, that have undone
your Country. But as that Prophet answered, in I King. 18. 18. I have not T
roubled Israel, but it is thou, which have forsaken the Commandments of the
Lord; so I say, unto all the Unregenerate Sinners in the midst of us; You that
Live without the Fear of God in you; it is you that are the Achans, the
Troublers, of the Land. Whereas all of you that seriously Turn to God, albeit
you may be never so Useless and Little otherwise; even you, that are of the
Sex, which can do no more Pray before God; it is You, that will cause Things to
Go well among us. Good Hearts will procure Good Times. It is the Speech of the
Wise Man, in Eccl. 7. 10. Say not thou, what is the cause, that the former
Days were better than these? For thou do not E nquire wisely concerning
this. Why so? Because if men would mend themselves, they would mend the T imes
immediately. But now there are

Secondly, some other particular Assertions, which we are now to descend unto.
We may, by an Induction of particulars, attempt a Catalogue of good things that
would make a people Happy; and I shall endeavor that all Sorts of men, may
find themselves touched in it.

I. It is fitting that they who fit Highest, should be first carved unto; they
that fit in the first place, must in the first place be spoken of. FIRST then,
I say, That Good Magistrates are some of the Best Things among any people; and
Things will go well with a people, when they have Good Rulers over them. There
is a Day coming; And Amen! Let it come quickly! A Day wherein all things will
go well among the Children of men. And a principal Character of that
Illustrious Day will then be this, That the Greatness of the kingdom under the
whole Heaven, shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most High. It
is mentioned as a cause of the Good Things which will attend that Notable Day,
in Psalm. 72 3. The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the little
Hills by Righteousness. There shall then be no Mountain, or Superior
Magistrate, and no Litlle Hill, or Inferior Magistrate, but what shall be a
Saint of God. There shall be no Jeroboams to corrupt and poison their Subjects,
nor will the Lord Jesus employ any but men like David, with Hearts after his
own Heart, as His Vicegerents in the World Things would Go well, if they that
have the Chief management of things, were more like unto those Magistrates
which are to Rise in the Approaching Age, when, God shall be the Governor
among the Nations. How well are Things to go in the European parts of the
World, by that Prognostication of a Great Man? God will stir up some Happy
Governor in some Country of Christendom, Endued with Wisdom and
Consideration, who shall discern the true Nature of Godliness and Christianity,
and the Necessity and Excellency of Serious Religion, and shall place his
Honor and Felicity in pleasing God, and doing Good, and attaining Everlasting
Happiness, and shall subject all wordly Respects, unto these High and Glorious
Ends! And when any parts of the world, are thus advantaged, Things will go well
indeed in such Paradisaic Regions.

To speak yet more particularly.

First. Things will go well, when Magistrates are themselves great instances of
what is Holy, and Just, and Good. Every Magistrate, when he does Well, or Ill,
is a sort of Briareus; it is with, An hundred hands, that he does what he does.
I might say to them Ita Nati estis, ut Bona, Malaque Vestra ad Rempublicam
pertineant. The wise man has told us, in Eccl. 10. 17. Blessed art thou, O Land
when thy Princes eat in due season, for Strength, and not for Drunkenness; that
is, when Magistrates are Sober, Temperate, Moderate men. Even so, I say; It Is a
Blessed Land, whose Magistrates are Men that have Renounced the Flesh, the
World, and the Devil; and entirely consecrated themselves to God in Christ,
according to his Eternal Covenant. Blessed is the Land, whose Magistrates, have
hearts that prefer the Interest of God, above all secular Considerations
whatsoever. Blessed is the Land, whose Magistrates keep up a Constant Communion
with God, in all the methods of Devotion every Day: and can heartily speak
those memorable words of that Noble Italian Marquess, That man's money may, for
all me, perish with him, who counts all the riches of the Indies, worth one
Days communion with God. Magistrates will make a Blessed Land when they do, as
it was reported of a great Emperor, Soepius cum Deo, quam cum Hominibus loqui,
converse more with God than Men. It is for this cause that New England has been
a Bliss-Land hitherto; and may it still continue so! Such Magistrates, when
they carry their Own Souls, to the most High God, for his Blessing on them,
they obtain the like Blessing for their People too; and in all the concerns of
their people, they visit the Wonderful Counselor. Nor can it easily be
expressed, how powerfully their Examples will diffuse the Fear of God into all
that are about or under them. Regis ad Exemplum, and, Magnates Magnetes.
Holiness, and virtue, grow into Fashion, when such men become exemplary for it.
The great Ridly said once of our last King Edward, As he was the Highest so I
verily believe he was the Holiest in the whole Kingdom. And a great writer
notes upon it, That all things went well, when that Prince was the doer of
them. Whereas, Woe to thee, O Land, when the Slaves of Hell shall be the only
persons that have Rule on earth; and when drinking, whoring, Swearing, and all
sorts of divellism, are the Qualifications, of a Magistrate. Magistrates are
called Gods, or Angels, in this most Angelical Book of God. Now if they would
have the Hearts, and lead the Lives of Angels, they would make all Things to Go
well, among those, to whom God has made them Guardians. They with whom these
are Charged, will have cause to make that Address unto their Magistrates,
Because the Lord Loved us, therefore has He set thee to be a Ruler over us.
When Magistrates over men, being but Enemies unto God, will at last have cause
to Order that Epitaph to be Inscribed on their Graves, Hic Situs est, cu^ nihil
infoelicius in vita accidit, quam quo Regnaverat.

2. Things will go well, when Magistrates are to Others, great promoters of the
(...) that good is, and of what the Lord requi^^^ of them. I do not mean, that
it would (...) well for the Civil Magistrate, with a (...) Penalty, to compel
men unto this (...) Way of Worship, which they are Conscientiously Indisposed
unto. No, let him rather say, as the King now on the British Throne explained
one of his Coronation Oaths, I will now be obliged to become a Persecutor. He
is most properly, the Officer of Humane Society; and a Christian by
Nonconformity to this or that Imposed Way of Worship, does not break the Terms
on which he is to enjoy the Benefits of Humane Society. A man has a Right unto
his Life, his Estate, his Liberty, and his Family, although he should not come up
to these and those Blessed Institutions of our Lord.

When a man sins in his Political Capacity, let Political Societies animadvert
upon him; but when he sins only in a Religious Capacity, Societies more purely
Religious, are the fittest then to deal with him. Indeed, in the OldTestament,
the Magistrate was an Ecclesiastical Officer; and compliance with the Mosaic
Rites was that which Entitled men unto the benefits of Canaan, the Typical and
Renowned Land. But now these Figurative things have more Spiritual things to
answer them. It may be feared that things will not go well when Hoeresies are
not Exterminated. But I pray, when (Except once perhaps, or so, in the case of
Donatism) did Fines or Gaols, ever signify any thing for the cure of
Haereticks? The primitive Church, for the First Three Hundred Years of
Christianity, Cut off a Thousand New Hydra's Heads, without borrowing such
Penal Laws as have since been used;it was by sound Preaching, by Discipline, by
Catechizing, and by Disputation, that they Turned to flight the Armies of the
Aliens. Then it was that Christians did use to say, Non gladiis aut Jaculis, ^ut
militari manu, veritas proedicatur, sed Suadendo, et Consulendo. Afterward
indeed the Orthodox Engaged the Emperors unto Severites upon the Heretics of
those days; but what got they by it? When a wicked Manichee, a sort of a
Quaker, was put to Death, an Excellent Historian says, It Was a Most wretched
Example, and it made the Heresy, spread the more. Such prosecutions, do but
give a Principle, which would be most fatal to the Church of God; yea, they do
but afford a Root for Cains Club to grow upon. These Violences may bring the
Erroneous to be Hypocrites; but they will never bring them to be Believers; no,
they naturally prejudice men's minds against the Cause, which is therein
pretended for; as being a Weak, a Wrong, an Evil Cause. Wherefore, that things
may go well I would humbly put in a Bar against the Persecution of any that may
conscientiously dissent from Our Way. Possibly the Zeal in some Famous, and
Worthy Disciples of Our Lord, among ourselves has been reported, and Reckoned
as having once had a little too much Fire, on this account; but the Churches of
God abroad, counted that things did not go well among us, until they judged us
more fully come up unto the Apostical Rule, To Leave the otherwise-minded unto
God. Nor would I desire my self to suffer Persecution upon a clearer cause,
than that of testifying against our Persecution of other Christians, that are
not of my own opinion. I am sure; Things will not go well as long as we incur
the Fulfillment of that awful word, If ye bite and devour one another, take heed
that ye be not consumed one of another. Nevertheless, when Things go well,
there are Magistrates that will set themselves to Advance all the Truths and
Ways of God, among their people. Magistrates, are not only, themselves to
Profess the Truths, and Practice the Ways of God; but also to Protect and
Favor all them that shall do the like. There is an Aspect of Singular
kindness, Defense and Support, which Magistrates are to bear unto them that
Embrace, and much more, to them who Declare, the truths and ways of God. Things
went well, when it could be said as 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. Hezekiah spoke
comfortably, unto all that taught the good knowledge of the Lord. Moreover, it
belongs unto Magistrates to punish all the vices which disturb the good order
and repose of Humane S ociety; And hence also Liberty of Conscience is not to
be permitted as a cloak for Liberty of Profaneness. To live without any Worship
of God, or to Blaspheme and Revile his Blessed Name, is to be chastised, as
abominably Criminal; for there can be no pretense of Conscience thereunto.
Things will go well when they go thus; they go well when there is an
accomplishment of that word, in Romans 13. 3. Rulers are not a Terror to Good
works, but unto the evil. It Is well known, That the Laws of England inflict
Suitable penalties on such Vices, as Drunkeness, and Idleness, and the like;
and yet no Liberty of Conscience is invaded in those wholesome Laws. If a man
have been Drunk, for the first offense, he is to be fined notably; for the next
offense, he is bound with two sureties for the good Behavior. And if an
Ale-House-keeper be Convicted of Drunkeness, he is disabled for three years to
keep an Alehouse; and if the Keepers of such Houses do suffer any of the
Parish to continue unseasonably Tippling in their Houses, there are yet sharper
augmentations of the penalties. Thus for profane Cursing and Swearing, there is
a mulct also by law provided. A Phinehas now, that will set an edge upon such
laws, will make things to go well among all the people.

Thirdly, Things will go well, when Magistrates are Endued not only with all
Needful Wisdom and Justice, and Courage, but also with a Fatherly affection
for the people that belong unto them. Wisdom is of so much concernment for
Magistrates, that the wise man writing to one that was to succeed him, says
It Is the principal thing, get that! Where should Eyes be, but in the Head! what
will come of it, if, The Blind lead the Blind? The Art of Governing, is a
buisiness of more exquisite contrivance, than all the Seven Liberal Arts. When
S olomon became a King, that so all things might go well, this was his first
and chief petition to God, in 2 Chronicles. 1 10. O Lord God, give me now Wisdom
and knowledge that I may go out, and come in, before this People. A Magistrate
is to be a sort of an Argos, full of E yes; and such an one, that it may
without Flattery be confessed unto him, Thou art as an Angel of God, to discern
Good and Bad, the Lord thy God will be (...) thee.

But Wisdom without Justice, will (...). Crafty to make Things Go well (...)
Recommended unto Magistr^^ (...) they Reign in Righteousness, and Rule in
Judgment. When things are misapplied, so that the Innocent are Condemned, and
the Guilty Acquitted, what is there to be seen, but, An Abomination to the
Lord! The Balance used there, is to weigh, not the Cash, but the Crime of
Delinquents. Hence our God giving us a promise of Things Going well, He says,
in Isa. 60. 17. I will make thy Officers peace, and thine E xactors
Righteousnest. A Magistrate should affect rather to be called, The Just, than,
The Great; and he should in his Impartial Proceedings, but Antedate the
Judgment of the Great Day, when, The Lord shall Judge the World with
Righteousness, and the People with Truth.

But Justice without Courage will be too Feeble, to make Things Go Well in the
midst of us. They that are the Head, must Remember that they are the Heart of
the people too. Seats of Judicature, like Solomon's, must have Lions for their
Supporters; and they that sit on them are to be such as Dare do right, in
defiance of all Temptations to the Contrary; and in their way, be, As the (...)
which turns not away for any. Hence (...) unto the Magistrate, from the God
(...) him, is that in Deuteronomy. 31.23. Be (...) of a Good Courage, and I will be
(...) And it is a famous Clause in the Judges Oath, Ye shall not Delay any
person, of Common Right, for the Letters of the King, or of any other Person,
nor for any other cause.

But all this while, to make Things Go (...), it is to be supposed, that
Magistrates Look upon their Subjects as their Children, and pursue their
welfare with a most Fatherly Affection. It Is impossible, that Things ever should
Go Well when the Rulers and the Ruled, have a Separate Interest of their own:
Or where the Walls of SenateHouses, have not after some sort written upon them
the Admonition which was upon those of Rome, Ne quid Res Publica Detrimenti
Capiat. Let Magistrates count themselves made for their People, and the People
not merely made for their Magistrates; and let them Delight, Study, Labor to
see their People Thrive in all Enjoyments; then will Things Go well with such a
people. Things went well with the People, and you have seen the sort of men
that were sorry for it, in Nehe. 2. 10. It grieved them Exceedingly, that there
was come a man, to seek the Welfare of the Children of Israel. A People
sometimes may call him that is their Head, by the Name of him, who once headed
the Tribe of Benjamin in the Wilderness; Abidan; or say, Our Father is Judge.
Sometimes a people are blessed, with a person, who has many years before laid
himself under the Vows of God, That he would set himself to serve that people
of God, and the Churches among them, unto the utmost of his Capacity; and who
has refused very Advantageous Offers for himself, because of his Resolution, To
Rise and Fall with such a people.

Truly, Things are like to Go well with a people, when such men become their
Governors. When Things went not well among the people, that was the
Description of the Magistrates, in Mic. 3. 3. They Eat the Flesh of my People,
and flay their Skin from off them; that is, they were Butchers rather than
Rulers; or, LAOOPOI, as the Philosopher of old, called those, Devourers of the
People: but when Rulers are Fathers to a people, Then Things will Go well among
them Magistrates that like Caesar, will not say to their Subjects, Ite, or, Go
ye, but, Eamus; or, Let us go, that is, that will be willing in all things to
take part with them; and Men in Honor, that are Men of Honor too; will
ordinarily make all things to Go Desireably.

II. We may take another step in our Enumeration of the Things that would M ache
for our Peace. Wherefore,

SECONDLY, It is to be said, That Good Ministers are also some of the Best
Things among any people; and Things will Go well with a people when they have
Good Pastors over them. Can Things Go well with the Flocks, when either they
are Sheep without a Shepherd? Or when the woeful Shepherds feed themselves and
not the Flock? Can a City do well without their Watchmen? Or the Blind without
their Seers? It was well with that Man, to whom 'twas said in 3 John 2. Thy
Soul prospers. All Things Go with us, as Things Go with our Souls; if well
there, then all is Well. Now the Weal of Souls, does more than a little depend
upon those men, whom God has separated for the Care of Souls. When the people
of Antioch, were like to Loose their Minister, they Cried out, We had rather be
deprived of the Sun it self, than of our Minister! It Is clear, Things will not
Go well, where the Lights of Heaven do not shine upon them. Our Lord calls his
Ministers, The Stars in his Right Hand; and the Influx of such Stars is greatly
needful, that Things may Go well in the lower World.

Particularly then,

First. Things will go well, when there is due care taken that every place
become furnished with, Able Ministers of the New Testament. Those people are
indeed gotten some Degrees beyond Pagans in impiety, who are willing to Live
without some among them, that shall be, Set a part for the special service of
their S ouls. Barbarous Ignorance and Hideous wickedness, will soon overwhelm
such a people; and is that the way for things to go well among them, think ye?
The Devil himself knows, That Things cannot Go well where there are no
Ministers of the Gospel settled; and therefore he uses multifarious Devices, to
deprive men of this Gift, which our Ascended Lord has left unto us. Every Day
convinces us, That all Things, within a little while go to Wrack the Ruin, in
those Plantations which Live one year after another without any Ministers of
our Lord among them: Mankind will own at last, Nullus est Capitalior Humani
Generis Hostis, quam qui E vangelij cursum impedit; But it it as Evident, That
for Things to Go well in a place, the way is, to place Evangelical Ministers
there. And indeed upon this Article, I need only to Quote the Words of One that
had as great an Influence as any man, in laying the Foundations of our
New England; Said he? No where sit down without Good Ministers, if it be
possible; and sure possible it is; else Christians may Resolve to Tarry where
they are; as Ezra tarried by the River Ahava, Ezra 8. 15. till he had got, some
Levites to go with him, that they might go and make a comfortable work of it;
you have seen, says he, Plantations very suddenly unsettled by the God of
Heaven for the want of this. Even so, I say; If we would not have a direful
Blast of Heaven upon all our Concerns, let it be made an ^^^^rable thing, for
any Plantations to remain long, without such as may dispense the Ordinances of
God unto them. It Is said, in Prove. 29.18. Where no Vision is, the People perish.
And surely Things cannot go well, with such a People. I believe that Things
went well in Judah, when Jehoshaphat made provision, that there should be some
Able Men, having the Book of the Law of the Lord with them, to teach in all the
cities of Judah. And it would be a prodigy if there should be one such Atheist
among us, as would be afraid of such a Blessedness.

Secondly, Things will go well, when Ministers, approve themselves Burning and
Shining Lights, unto those, over whom their God has placed them. When Things
were to go well with Israel, the God of Israel thus expressed it, in Jer. 3.
15. I will give you Pastors, according to mine Heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and with understanding. Ministers that have those three Excellencies,
of Sincerity, Ability, and Industry, will wonderfully contribute unto the going
Well, of all things in their congregations.

It Is well when Ministers are men Zealous for God and Christ, and the Souls of
Men. Ministers that maintain a most exact and watchful Walk with God
continually; Ministers Experimentally acquainted with the power of their
Doctrine upon their own Hearts; before they press their hearers therewithal;
and that spin out of their own Bowels the Silken Garments of Righteousness for
their Hearers. Ministers, that like the Blessed Bradford make their Sermons on
their Knees, and fetch from Heaven the Manna with which they feed our Souls; O
little do we imagine, how well all Things are like to go within the reach of
Ministers, which thus always lie in the Bosom of the Lord Jesus Christ. It Is
Well, when Ministers are skilful about the Work which the Lord has called them
unto. Ministers that come like Bezaleel and Aholiab unto the Service of the
Tabernacle; Ministers that have a sharp Insight into all the Sciences, which
may accomplish them to Divide the Word aright, and cast a Luster on the
Scriptures of God; Ministers that are prudent S tewards in all their
Dispensations, and can Handle Matters wisely; there are mighty Strokes to
things, that they may Go well, given by such Masters of Assemblies. Once more,
it is well, when Ministers, are so many Paul's, for Laboring Abundantly.
Ministers, that wholly Give themselves unto their Spiritual Warfare, and will
out-work the buisy Husbandman; Ministers that privately as well as publicly,
do all they can for the Salvation of men; as Chrysostom and Austin sometimes
did; and as the Pastors of Geneva, when they divided the City into parts, for
the personal Instruction of all the Families; Ministers that with Tongue, and
Pen, and their whole Contrivance, are always at work for God; I may tell you,
the people that have them, will soon have cause to say, Blessed be God for such
Ministers! As on the contrary; A Debauched, Foolish, and Slothful Clergy, is as
Transcendent a plague as ever the Devil troubled this World withal; Things
cannot Go well, when Ill men Teach others, how to Go. -- I remember a Notable
Story of an Horrible Witchcraft, wherein the Devil got into a Pulpit, and spoke
strange things to his Vassals there. The Devil still does it by his Deputies,
in all those places that are under the guidance of none but those wretched
Parsons, who pull down with one hand, what they build up with the other; and who
are upon all Good Things fain to tell us. You must do as we say, not as we do.
And how can Things Go well in such Haunted Places?

Thirdly, This (...) will Go well, when Faithful and Painful Ministers find, at
least so much Encouragement, as may prevent their sinking under the Temptations
of Oppressing Poverty. The Israelites found that Things went well with them;
when the Tribe of Levi, which was not a Fortieth part of the people, had as
much maintenance, as T hree of the Twelve Tribes besides; and yet, it would be
thought Well enough, if our Ministers, were much less than Half so well
considered. I pray, do but Consult the Words of the Almighty God Himself, in
Mal. 3. 9, 10. Ye are Cursed with a Curse, for ye have Robbed me. Let there be
Meat in my House, and prove me now herewith, if I do not pour you out a
Blessing The Ministers of God in these Days are as Discerning Men, as those
were of old and yet if they might have much less than a quarter part of what
the Ancient Levite had, it would free them from a multitude of those
Distractions, which now make many things to Go not well, even among their
Auditors: yea, except we have Renounced the Belief of the Great GOD Himself, A
pour of Blessings would be like to follow the doing of Right in this matter.
There is a Certain Portion of our Estates due unto our Heavenly Melchisedeck,
the Lord Jesus Christ: and His Ministers are among His Receivers. If you will Read
the Sixth Chapter to the Galatians, you will Find, That God Himself has said, He
will make the Ministry of His Word most useful unto he Souls of them that are
most Honest in the Payment (I say not, of these Alms, but) of these Dues unto
Him. And if you will mind some Little Towns among our selves, that have been most
Expensive in the rendering of these Dues, You Will see, that they are not the less
Thriving, or one jot the Poorer for it. Yea, it is worth Considering, Whether
one whole Colony in this Land, have not had their Piety this way, sensibly
Requited by Distinguishing Preservations from Common Calamities and
Overturnings. What shall I say? The Oracles of God assure us, Things will Go
Well, with Liberal Souls! It is the Glorious God Himself, that has Required,
in I Cor.9.14. Even so has the Lord Ordained, That they which Preach the
Gospel, should Live of the Gospel. Which Greek word, for, The Gospel, is taken
in Heathen Authors, for the Gift that was given unto men, that brought Good
News unto the Neighborhood. And this our God, has ten thousand ways to blast
the Affayrs of them that with a flat Rebellion against that Edict of Heaven, go
to Withold more than is meet. They who commit that Sacrilege, do but prove
Penny-wise and Pound-Foolish at the Last; nor will Things Go Well, where the
Spirit of Judas prevails, which counted all Thrown away, that was laid out upon
the Lord Jesus Christ. As for our selves, it is hopeful, that the Devil will
never be able to break up our Churches, by any Storm of Direct and Formal
Persecution upon us; but the Slighting, the Starving, the Creepling of a Gospel
Ministry among us, is the only way, whereby the Devil can again make himself
the Landlord of the Territories, from whence the Silver-Trumpets of our Lord
have here once Expelled him. And can any man Dream that Things will Go Well,
where men find their own Curse, in that Old Blessing of the Tribe of Levi? in
Deuteronomy.33.11. Lord, smite thou the Loins of them that Rise up against him, and of
them that Hate him, that they Rise not again.

But, III. hings will not Go well among a people, unless the People themselves
do Their part about it. And therefore, Thirdly, Let all People Do well, and all
Things will Go well, among them. You know that not only Zerubbabel, and Joshua,
but, All the People of the Land, must be called upon, to Do what they can for
the Good Order of their Affayrs. When there are Ill Spirits, and Ill Doings
prevailing among a People, all Things will be Ill-going there, let their
Overseers do what they can unto the contrary. Indeed, I cannot more Appositely
to this purpose Express my self, than in the Words of a Great Writer, which
would certainly help us to more Infallible Divinations, than the Absurd and
Juggling Pamphlets of the Astrologers, which in the E nglish Nation are so
fondly Doted on. They are these; When God is Angry with a people, and intends
to Dash them to pieces; He leaves them without Heart, without Counsel, without
Strength, without fit Commanders; Involved so with D ifficulties Foreign and
Domestic, they know not how to E xtricate themselves. If one give good
Counsel, presently another by Captious Arguments overthrows it, and those that
should Judge of both, have not Light enough to discern which is for the public
Safety, and which Destructive. If any Opportunity of Service be presented,
either there is no Notice taken of it, or to save a little Charges, it is
Neglected; or, none knows how to Improve it. Dangers Imminent, are, either not
foreseen, or slighted: Traitors creep in, which Discover their Counsels to
their E nemies. There are Jealousies and Factions among their Great Men, in
favor whereof, one studies to cross the Designs and Successes of the other,
though the Public be undone by it. The Treasury is wasted in Needless Expenses.
And finally, while all seek their own profit, and no man's Heart is upon the
Public Good; all runs to ruin. Thus my Author. Nor would a thousand Blazing
Stars over the Heads of a People, portend more against Things Go well among
them, than the Black Omens that have been thus recounted. But if we then make
the Demand of the Psalmist, Show me a Token for Good; I say, Let such Things be
seen, as we are now going to Enumerate.

First. Things will Go well, when a people improve their Interest in the
Legislation, for the Establishing of Good Laws among them. It Is not the least
among the Rights of the E nglish Nation, That the People are to be concerned,
in the making of the Laws whereby they must be Governed: And our Plantations
also have, I hope, their Indisputable Claim to that Invaluable Right. But may
we now be Good Stewards of such a Talent; and not be so Remiss and Careless in
the using of our privileges, that a brave Roman should censure us, with a,
Qnos non decet esse nisi Servos, or, people unfit for any thing but Slavery.
It Is by its Laws, that England is the Paradise of the old World; and by its
Laws may New England be the Paradise of the New. As on the contrary? Things
cannot Go well, where, Mischief is framed by a Law. Let a people have Laws that
shall make every Vicious Thing, to be both Disgraceful and Expensive unto all
that shall commit it; and Laws, that shall render all that is Virtuous to be
Meritorious. Then, as when there were such Laws, 'twas said, in Deuteronomy. 4. 6. T
he Nations that shall hear all these Statutes, will say, surely, This Great
Nation is a Wise and Understanding People: Even so, all Spectators will say,
Surely, Things go well with such a people. Be sure, Things did not Go well in
that Kingdom, whereof, Nicolaus de Clemangis once professed, There was more
Righteousness in Hell, than in that K ingdom; for in Hell, no Righteous Man is
Afflicted, nor any Wicked Man unjustly punished. But among Laws, those that
concern the Regulation of Taxes, are of a very particular force to make Things
Go well among those that have them. It Is true, that an exact E quality in
Taxes, is altogether to be despaired of; yet it were easy to Tender probable
Expedients for a Nearer Equality in them, than has been ever yet attained. And
it seems but Equal indeed, that as many of the Taxes as may be, should be laid
upon the Vanities, wherein people are most prone amiss to Indulge themselves;
not only the vile Drunkenness, but also the strange Apparel, too ready to
creep in upon us, would be notably Retrenched, if Taxes laid upon the Fuel of
those Lusts, did fetch out of them, what they might yield unto the public
Treasuries. Were but this one sort of Laws well adjusted, we might soon come to
this, That there would be, No Complaining in our Streets; and you know the
Psalmist adds upon that, Happy is that People, that is in such a case; that is,
Things Go well among such a people. Only, when all other Laws are
well-directed, we may like Solon of old, Wish for one Law more; namely, A Law
to provide effectually for the E xecution of all the Rest; A Law to make it a
very dangerous Thing for Officers to Neglect the Duty of their places; A Law to
prevent the fulfillment of that unhappy Diverb, That men play with Oaths, as
Children do with S hells, although they be Sworn to Do Justice and Judgment. O
Thrice, and Four Times, Happy indeed the People that are in such a case.

Secondly. Things will Go well, when a Liberal E ducation is Liberally
Countenanced and Encouraged among a people. -- Ingenuas Didicisse fideliter
Arts. -- Let Arts once Go well among a people; and that will be one way for
all T hings else to do so too. MEN, are the best Things a people have; nor can
Things Go well among those that have no MEN among them. Now to the making of
such as deserve to be called MEN, it is well known that Learned S chools are
altogether Necessary! And hence, among the people of God, even when Immediate
and Extraordinary Inspirations, were more granted than in our Days, yet
Schools of the Prophets, were in request; and the Great Samuel himself was
President of a College. The Jews tell us, that the Hill pertaining to
Phinehas, whereof there is mention in the last Words of Joshua's History, had a
College upon it, which Phinehas himself, was the Rector of. Thus when we read
in I Sam. 10. 5. About, The Hill of God, where was a Station of the
Philistines; the Jews inform us, there was a College of young Prophets upon
that Hill; which the Barbarous Philistines themselves, did not care to
Demolish, because of the Divine Studies, which were followed in that Academy.
Yea, a Learned Rabbi assures us, That in the Days of the Prophet Isaiah, there
were no less than Four Hundred and Fourscore Schools at Jerusalem it self; and
the Talmud acquaints us, That both the Tutors and Scholars of those Learned
Societies were free from Civil Tasks and Rates, and all other public Burdens.
This was the practice of the pious Hebrews; and I might add, that the profane
Pagans themselves had so much Discretion too, as to see, that S chools were
needful to make Things Go well among them. It would insinuate some undue
Suspicion of you, if I should enlarge on this point; but, how importunately is
it now to be desired, That the like S chools may be supported among our selves!
I cannot but utter, and, I hope all the Ministers in the Country will join with
me in uttering, the pathetical Wishes of our Departed ELIOT; For good Schools
every where among us; That every Member of the Assembly may go Home, and
procure a good School, in the Town where he lives! That before we Die, we may be
so Happy as to see a good S chool, in every Plantation of the Country! Then
would things Go Well indeed. It was Julians policy, to undo the Christians, by
putting down of their Schools; and it may be Satan's policy to undo us, by thus
making of this Gradually to become, A Land of darkness. Hereby, 'twould in
truth soon become His own Again! and the New-Englanders would become A BASE
PEOPLE, in a little while. But while I am thus a Petitioner for the Life of the
Schools, let me put in a good word, peculiarly for my dear Mother, THE
COLLEGE, with which this Wilderness has been Subdued and Ennobled. We are not
Ignorant, how vigorously, the Eminent Reformers of the Last Century, applied
themselves, to set up Colleges every where; without which, how miserably had
the Reformation sunk! When the States of Holland, had Received a Miraculous
Deliverance from the S paniards, they, to show their Thankfulness, Erected and
Endowed a College at Leyden, with most ample privileges; and all the World
has had cause to bless God for that University. (...) ^^trely, 'Twould be an
Ill Return for the benefits of God, bestowed upon our selves, if we should not
now do something for our COLLEGE, among the First Things we do. The Admirable
Voetius, could happily boast of it; that whereas there are no less than Ten
Provinces in the Popish Belgium, there are no more than Two Universities in
them; when, though there are but Seven Provinces in the Reformed Belgium, there
are Five Universities therein, besides other Academical Societies. May We, have
the like Regards unto Learning, far exceeding what is to be found in Canada and
Mexico! And may our zeal for an University, become the Emulation of Barbados
and Virginia, till they also have settled among them such Nurseries for
Learning, as the Good Spirits there have long bin wishing for. Alas, How far
from well had things gone among us, if our Fathers had not formed, that Elessed
COLLEGE, of our Cambridge! When things went well with Israel, there was that
Memorandum of it, in Amos. 2. 11. I Raised up of your sons for Prophets; Is it
not even thus, O ye Children of Israel? And Things have gone well with
New England, because of such a vast Convenience for us. We cannot conceive that
Europe would have sent us over MEN enough to answer our Necessities; but if we
had not been thus among our selves provided for, Darkness had soon covered the
Land, and gross Darkness the People. But I pray mark what I say; If Contempt of
Learning once become the prevailing Spirit of this Country, we are a People
apace Running down in all sorts of Ruins unavoidable. May there be then placed
the Marks of our singular Affection, upon that River, The Streams whereof have
made Glad, the City of God! It is That upon which depends the welfare of the
next, as well as the present Generation; And,

Hac Casti maneant in Religione Nepotes.

Thirdly. Things will go well, when a people do neither want, nor chill, any
Public Spirits among them. What is the first cause, why things do not go well
in our days? It Is intimated in 2 Timothy 3. 1. 2. In the Last days perilous times
shall come: Why so? First, Because men shall be lovers of their own S elves.
That is, men shall so Love Themselves, as to love no body else. But when there
is a plentiful set of men, that are sincerely desirous to Know what they may D
o, and to Do what they shall Know, for the service of the Public; Such men
will do much to make things go well where they come. They that have a single
Eye at, The good of many, in such things as they propose and pursue; They with
whom the old Heathenish virtue, Pietas in Patriam, is become a Christian Grace;
and they whose chief Mark is not, T hey seek their own things, will cause
Things to go well indeed! A Soldier in a Battle, having received his
Deaths-wound, cried out, O that I had another life to lose for my Lord-Jesus
Christ! They that are Blessed with many persons who are spirited like so brave a
Soldier; Persons willing to part with any thing for the Lord Jesus Christ and
his people; persons who count not all that is done or spent, for the Public,
merely thrown away, while they can Lavish out of the Bag, upon every little
impertinency; These will see things go well among them. It was a most unhappy
thing, that an Eminent Venetian Ambassador, after a long residence in England,
Sailing homeward, should not without cause cast his Eye back on the Land, and
say, The Happiest country on the face of the E arth, were there not a want of
Public Spirits in it! And it will as much forebode things going not well, in
our New ngland, if the like lamentations must be made upon us. How should
Things go well when every thing is begrutch'd that should make them Go! I am
very sure, Things did not go well in Constantinople, when the Citizens would
not be at the Charges of Defending their walls; whereby the Turks became the
Masters of their Wealth, whereof they found vast Coffers hoarded up. No, a few
Public Spirits will make all to go well. Only then, it is of inexpressible
importance, that Public Servants be not abused for what they do. Let not
unreasonable Reproaches, and Revilings, and Hard Speeches, too Reasonably and
roverbially be called Country, pay for worthy men. If when men have been doing
their best for the removal of Throtling circumstances from a people, they must
count it Recompense Enough to escape without having their Heads bitten off: And
if when men have been Showing favor and Lending, for the support of a
distressed people, they shall be requited with unjust censures of, I know not
what, Selfishness, in what they do; Or if when men have with Inviolate
Integrity and Unfainting Industry, been serving of their people, they shall be
treated with unworthy Infamies, and perhaps be Blamed as the Authors of those
very Inconveniences against which they have most Vehemently, though
Ineffectually, Labored; it will at last come to this, that every man of sense
will say, I will never be an Healer to such a people! But would that be well, I
beseech you? Things went well with the people of God, when Gideon, that had
ventured his Life to serve them, had them saying to him, Thou shall rule over
us: But they Go not Well, where all the services done by a Joseph shall find no
better memories, than Riven Dishes to retain them.

Fourthly. Things will Go well, when people, having laid aside all Dividing and
Contentious Animosities, do come to Love one another. I have good Authority for
this Assertion; even, the Word of God Himself, in Psalm. 133. 1, 3. Behold, how
good, and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to Dwell together in Unity. -- There
the Lord Commanded the Blessing: And surely, Things will Go well, when they
have the Blessing of God, commanded upon them. But Things cannot Go well, where
there is Every evil work; and you know where that is. Especially, we may say
it, If, T he Mountain of the Lords House, become, A Mountain of Bether, it will
not be a Mount, whereof any Disciple of our Lord can have cause to pronounce,
It is good to be here! When People are Vultures and Harpies one unto another,
they disoblige that Spirit, who has taken on Himself, the Representation of a
Dove; and when that Spirit is vexed, he causes all things to fall out
vexatiously, among those who have made Him their Enemy. The People that are
always Enkindling and Fomenting of Sinful Fires among them, will provoke the,
God of Love and Peace, to say, These people are as a Smoke in my Nostrils, I Will
be gone from them. But let people have no such Fires, among them, and they will
procure a Sabbath for themselves, a little Anticipating of that New Jerusalem,
wherein all Things will Go well among the Nations. Breache^^ in our Love one
unto another, are so many Breaches in Gods Hedge about us; the Devils
themselves break in upon us, [whereof we have now a Stupendous Instance in our
Vicinage!] and confound all things where there are those Breaches made. But let
us be a Philadelphia, which you know signifies, Brotherly Love; and our Lord
will speak nothing but Good of us, nothing but Good for us; yea, He' will
preserve us, though we should have but, A Little Strength. That Great Man,
whereof Dr. Wilkins would say, 'Twas enough for one Age to produce such a
person; had this Excellent Expression, I can as willingly be a Martyr for Love,
as for any Article of the Creed. For what he could be a Martyr, for the same
let me be a Beggar this Day. It it a pearl, even an UNION, whereof I now Beg,
not that you would Bestow it on me, but that you would Accept it for your
selves; 'twould so Enrich us, that All Things would Go well upon it. If any of
us have our Little Displicencies at one another, let us Learn, Privatas
Inimicitias Reipublicoe condonare, and bury all in an Entire Amnesty, for the
sake of the Public, upon which a New World is now begun. There are Factious
Distinctions to be heard among us; whereof, I wish, that by an Universal
Forbearance of those Frenzies and Hatreds which would Embarass our Affayrs, the
Names might be Remanded unto that side of the Ocean, where those Names had
their first Original. But I am above all concerned, That the Blessed Unity
wherein our Churches do Agree, not only among themselves, but also with the
biggest part of the Reformed Protestants abroad, may be still continued. The
Romans built a Temple to Quies, as a Goddess; Whereto it is yet said, they
seldom, or never Sacrificed. But I am for our Sacrificing of every Thing,
besides, Faith and a good Conscience, unto, Quiet; not as to any Goddess, but
as to a Peerless Blessing; and this peculiarly, in what pertains to the Temple
of our God. So shall we have Things Go well, in our Comfort of Love! I am loath
to recite a Fable in a Sermon; but I think, I may mention one, with which the
Great Melancthon bespoke that Unity, which he thought would make. Things to Go
well among the Protestants of the Former Century; it is this. The Wolves going
forth to Battle against the Dogs, first sent a Scout forth, to discover the
Strength of the Enemy. The Scout Returning to the Wolves, informed them, that
the Dogs indeed were the stronger Army; but, said he, There is no good
Understanding among them; their Commanders are at variance; and their Colonies
do not well hang together; there are several Factions of them; and they are
always, Envying, Thwarting, Tearing one another; wherefore fall on them;
nothing is more easy than to Ruin such an Army. I pray, why may not This Age
also, be made sensible by such a Parable? This I know, That when Things went
very Ill, among the ancient people of God, the Good Cyprian said upon it, Non
advenissent Fratribus hoec mala, si in unum Fraternitas fuisset adunata; The
Brethren had not Seen such horrid things, if they had lived more like
Brethren.

Fifthly. Things will Go Well, When people find fit Remedies against the Growth
of those two Twins, Poverty and Idleness, among them. When the Almighty would
have Things to Go well, He said in Psalm. 132. 15 I will abundantly Bless her
provision, I will satisfy her poor with Bread. When there is not one in the
Bee-Hive without Food, or Work, Things go well in such an orderly Hive. As for
the Needy, things go well, when these are supplied with, Food Convenient for
them. Only then, it must be looked unto, that the Slothful may not be indulged
in that, whereof, There comes not Goodness. It Is far from well, when people are
permitted, in a course of life, which will disable them to answer Pharaohs
Question, Of what Occupation are you? Diligent Hands make all things to Go
Well, where they come. Things would Go Well among ourselves, if our very
Children might not only mentain themselves, but assist the Public Charges also
too; and at the same time have an Ingenuous education freely besto'wd upon
them. And yet I suppose, A ll This might be accomplished, if a little advice
were hearkened unto! However, as it helps not a little to make things Go Well
in Old-England, that those whom the Law calls Idlers, have suitable Corrections
ordered for them; So things did Go Well in our New England, when one Returning
home to London could in a Sermon before the Lord Mayor, declare, I have newly
spent seven years in a Country, where all that while, I never saw one Man
Drunk, Or heard one Oath Sworn, Or beheld so much as one Beggar in the Land.
God forbid, that now in the Room of our wasted Indians, there should rise up an
Unworking and Indigent Generation of English, Humoured like them: That would be
a thing too Ill for us to find a Worse!

Sixthly, Things will G o Well, when people Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep
it holy. They that, Keep the Sabbath from polluting it, will be likely to, Keep
their Land from feeling of Evil too. It is Well foretold in Isa 58. 13 14. If
thou call the Sabbath a delight the Holy of the Lord Honorable; Then shall
thou delight thy self in the Lord;[There are Spiritual Blessings!] And I will
cause thee to Ride on the Highplaces of the earth. [Here are Temporal Blessings
also!] It was no Injudicious Observation, of that Admirable Person, the Lord
Chief Justice Hale; That be could ordinarily form a probable Conjecture, how
all matters would prosper with him all the week, by the manner of his Keeping
the Sabbath Day. It seems we may give a shrowed guess, whether things are like
to Go well, among us, by the Respect which we give to the Sabbath of our God.
The Holy God, will wonderfully Break the Rest of that Professing People, that
shall not K eep His Holy Rest. Among the Looser Protestants abroad, the
Doctrine of the Sabbath, has been abusively called, Figmentum Anglicanum; An
English Fancy. But is it any Fancy, ye Sleeping Virgins; That God has with a
long Train of Desolations, been taking away a Sabbath from you? Is it any
Fancy, that you can get no Rest, but are, Afflicted and Tossed with Tempests,
and not Comforted? Oh That they would Consider of it! A Person of Quality,
reflecting upon, The Tears of Germany, Printed Fifty Years ago, saw cause to
say, he believed, the Wars of Germany would not be over yet, Because in a
Catalogue of their, Provoking Evils, there is no Confession made of the,
Sabbath-breaking, too common among them. And you know how Ill all Things have
since gone in those parts of the World! When poor England was filled with S
ports on the Lord's Day, what an horrible Day of the Lord soon came upon the
Nation? What Bloody, Fiery Wars, quickly overwhelmed the Nation, and most
particularly the Authors of those Unlawful Sports? Blessed be God, for the
Regard which the English Laws have since had unto the Sabbath of our Lord; Laws
worthy to be written in Letters of Gold; yea, worthy to he Engraven in our
Conversations, by the point of that Sword, which is not to be Born in vain!
Would we have Things to Go well, among us, by our speedy entering into the
Twilight of that, Rest which Remains for the People of God? Let us devoutly
Sanctify that Weekly Rest, by prescribing whereof our God has so abundantly
consulted our Welfare; yea, let all within our Gates, be so Restrained, from
open violations of this High Day, that it may not be said unto them, Ye bring
Wrath upon your Country, by Profaning the Sabbath.

Seventhly. Things will go well, when People do much Flock to, and Keep up,
wellconstituted Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ. When things went externally
well, among the old Romans, even Cicero, an Heathen could acknowledge, Non
calliditate aut Robore, sed pietate ac Religion gentes superaverant; it was
Piety and Religion which all their Successes were owing unto. If any one ask,
unto what the Sudden and Matchless thriving of New England may be ascribed? It
is the Blessing of God upon the Church Order, for the sake whereof, [ Let all
Mankind know] this Plantation was first Erected: Things have Gone Well, while
our worldly accommodations have been Subordinated unto that GREAT INTEREST: And
God has Built and Filled our Houses while we have been doing so for His. Our
ChurchState is our Glory; and as it is said, in Isa.45. Upon all the Glory
shall be a Defense; thus all things will go well, where there is this
WellDefcended Glory! If once our people become generally careless about
Church-Work, it will soon come to that issue, whereof a young Prophet in a vast
Assembly once admonished the Backsliding Jews; In those Times there was no
peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in; but God vexed them with
all adversity. What is it, that brings the B lasting Strokes of Heaven, upon a
people? When they look for much, Lo, it comes to L ittle; and all things go ill
among them; Whence is it? I pray, Take the God of Heavens answer to that
enquiry; It is because of my House, that is wast, and yerun every man to his
own House. Only, that things may go well, we must be concerned for this also,
That the Altar be set upon its right Bases; That we keep close to our
Scriptural, Platform of Church Discipline; That we have our Churches framed,
according to, The pattern in the Mount. Let the Things of a True Church Order
Flourish well in the midst of a people; and all things will go well among them;
Let us be duly careful, To dwell in the House of the Lord; and we need not
fear but Goodness and Mercy shall follow us all our Days. To retrench our
Churches of all that may be offensive unto the Glorious Eyes of the Lord Jesus,
who walks In the midst of the Golden Candlesticks: To supply our Churches with
all those things which our Lord Jesus has appointed for the Edifying of the
Body of Christ; and for us to procure ourselves a Lodging in Churches thus
instituted: THIS would be at all Times our security; but NOW more peculiarly. I
can with Good assurance forewarn you of a FLOOD, an Horrible! Yea, a HERY
FLOOD, coming apace upon a sinful world. Now Particular Churches of the Lord
Jesus Christ, are like to be the Arks for safety: in the day of that
Overflowing Scourge. I Know not what to say of a Story which we have, that, In
the Primitive Times a terrible Earthquake befell a great City, wherein all the
Houses fell, Except those whereon an Eminent Person then saw an Angel writing
those words CHRIST WITH US. But this I know, That the way for a people to
escape falling in that Horrendous Earthquake, which is now begun upon the
Nations, is to obtain the favor of, CHRIST WITH US; Then may we sing, We will
not fear, tho the earth be removed and the mountains be carried into the midst
of the Sea. And this I know; That the way for us to have, CHRIST WITH US, in
this Overturning Earthquake, is to have and own as much as we can, the
Ordinances of an Evangelical Church State among us; Those Evangelical Things
are the Things that cannot be shaken.

It Is a most amazing Revolution that those dear People of God, the Waldenses
have newly seen. That Blessed People have had, as it is the Motto of their Arms,
The Light shining in Darkness, among them from the very first Ages of
Christianity; and all the infandous Croisaides made against them, were never
able to Extirpate them; till the other Day the Leagued French King, and Duke of
Savoy, together did effect their Dissipation. But behold; just three years and
an half, after the Last Abjuration, which broke up those Illustrious Churches,
a Spirit of Life from God is entered into them. In the sight and spite of all
their Adversaries, they have with a Series of Miracles fighting for them,
Repossessed themselves of their Country; and their Two Persecutors, becoming
bitter Enemies one unto another, have been hard striving who shall first, and
most gain these Vaudois unto their party. Those Churches of Piedmont which are,
as it were the Root of all the Protestant Churches being thus Revived, it
marvellously Confirms the conjecture, so often published among you, That the
last Persecution being over, we are got into those Dreadful E arthquakes, with
which the Resurrection of our Lords Witnesses, is to be accompanied. Well;
would we be safe at this Day? Let us become faithful Witnesses for that
Ecclesiastical Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, which at this Day calls for
our Testimonies.

Eighthly. Things will Go well, with a people, when Regeneration becomes a
frequent and common Thing, among the Rising Generation. It is Predicted that
all Things will one Day Go well among the people of God; and it is thus
expressed, in Isa. 64. 13, 14. All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord,
and Great shall be the peace of thy Children: In Righteousness thou shall be
established, thou shall be far from Oppression. Where we may see an abundance
of young people, seriously entering into Covenant with God; Where young people
are generally with Pierced and Broken Hearts crying out, What shall I do to be
Saved? Where young people are generally so well-disposed, that it may be said
of them, Behold they pray! Oh! how well are Things like to Go, among such a
people. It is for this cause, that I cannot break off, before I have earnestly
Addressed my own Generation, upon this All-concerning Article. O Generation,
see the Word of the Lord! If YOU, that are Young People, would now generally
Turn to God, and if instead of Walking in the Ways of your Hearts, and the
sight of your E yes, you would generally be associating your selves with such
Companions as would quicken you in the fear of God, and Exercise your selves in
Devotions agreeable to them that are Traveling for another World, and Live as
those who Know that God will bring them into Judgment; we should soon think
that all Things would Go well among us. We apprehend that Things do not Go
well, because the Anger of God is exceedingly and peculiarly Burning against
You, of the Rising Generation; and the Angel of Death seems to have had a
special Commission, for the Destroying of You. If the Wrath of the Omnipotent
God, were once removed from You, and if the Most High would no more go on to
say, I will take no pleasure in your Young Men! all Things would Go well apace.
Come then; My Brethren: Let the wicked Young Man, Forsake his way, and the
Unrighteous One his Thoughts; and let us Turn unto the Lord. Methinks I hear
the Lord Jesus from Heaven, sighing over us; O that they were wise, that they
would consider their Latter End! O that they would Remember their Creator in
the Days of their Youth! If they were once Good, I would soon make all things
to go well among my people there! Hear this, ye children of New-E ngland, and
be not more unrelenting at this voice of the Lord Jesus, than the Rock it self
was, when Moses called upon it; O Give! O Melt into the Tears of a conquered
Soul; and say with Ephraim Lord, I am ashamed, I am even confounded, for the
Reproach of my Youth, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. Become Young
Samuels, Young Josiahs, Young Timothy's; and You will not only make Joy in
Heaven, by Turning unto God; but you will make, Joy on Earth too; inasmuch as
it will help to make all Things go well among us. I only urge this; and if as
many Drops of My Heart Blood, as I have now spent of Tears in pressing this
matter, would obtain it, I would not value it; I say, only thus much: My son,
know thou the God of our New-English Fathers; and Serve him with a Perfect
Heart, and a Willing Mind; if thou seek him, he will be found of thee. And we
shall all fare the better for it.

But, Lastly; Let Prayer be going, and all will go well; only that Supplication
then must be Joined with Reformation. Whatever things are before us, it is Prayer
that must make them go well; Frustra nititur, qui non innititur. If we don't go
Leaning upon God, every step, we shall go wrong, and nothing will go well in
our Hands. Moses in the Mount, will make all thing to go well, in the Camp. The
Jews alluding to their usual posture of Standing, when they Pray, have a
saying, Sine Stationibus non staret Mundus. i. e. The world would not Stand, if
we did not. If thus you Enquire of (...), Whether we shall stand? I shall
answer (...) with Demanding, Do we Pray? A Town in Switzerland, was once very
horribly ruined by an Earthquake all except one piece of an House, in which a
Good man happened then to be at Prayer with his Family. O may this people be
all hands at Prayer continually, but especially in such a Day of Heart-quake,
as is now come upon the world; that would be the way for us to have, Our House,
not left unto us Desolate! But let us herewithal, Reform all our Provoking E
vils; I say, Reform, lest the Jealous God say When ye make many Prayers, I will
not hear, for your hands are full of sin: Once more I say, Reform, Lest the God
whom we so impenitently offend, should Punish us yet seven times for our
iniquities: but then, I suppose things would be far from going well among us.
Let us lay the Ten Commandments of our God before us, and let us examine
ourselves each one by that impartial Glass, What have I done? Examine, What
omissions, What commissions of mine, have these laws been vic^^^ed with? So let
us ask the help of Heaven, that having the pardon of our sins in the Blood of
Christ sealed unto us, we may cordially say I will not have any more to do with
Idols. How well would all things go, if this repentance were to be seen
throughout our Land!

THus have I with all Freedom uttered these things, whereof I may use the words
of the Apostle, We are Bold in our God to speak them. Nor is there any of my
Testimonies this day for that great King, who has made the meanest of men, his
Ambassadors, whereof I would not say, as a Divine of much upon a signal
Occasion did, I^^l were in a Church full of Kings, I^ would speak it? Now, to
Transfer these Things into the Circumstances of New England, is a work which I
wholly Resign unto that Great Assembly, which is Met this Day to consider, How
Things may Go well among us. I only take leave, to Leave with you these two
Meditations thereupon.

I. That so many Things do Go so well among us, as there do, is matter of
exceeding Thankfulness. Let us ponder the Lamentable Oppressions and
Confusions, that are undergone by others in the World; or let us ponder, the
Horrible Number and Malice of them that wish Ill unto us; or, in a word, Let us
ponder our own prodigious Misbehaviours in the Days, when our God has been
Trying of us: O ponder, and wonder to see what is done! I know not what
Resentments there may be in some among us, who perhaps are Strangers to all but
Themselves, if not also to Themselves; but I know, what would have been
Entertained among us, four years ago; with Transported, with Triumphant
Acclamations; and This also I may say, It Is with us, as in Psalm. 1^6. 2. They
said among the Heathen, The Lord has done Great T hings for them. Those that
have been scoffing at our Prayers, and those that have long been waiting to
make or see New-E ngland the prey of them that Hated it; All They do with
Indignation say, Great Things are done for them! And shall not we our selves
then Thankfully account them, Good Things? Yea, I will further and freely Add,
That the Friends of New England abroad are generally pleased with a gladsome
and joyful Admiration, at the Great and Good Privileges obtained for us; as
indeed some of the last words uttered by one of the Greatest Men, in this Age,
when the last Winter he lay a Dying, were, To bless God for the obtaining of
what has been Accomplished for us; for so the Excellent Bates in his Funeral
Sermon for the Renowned Baxter, has reported it; nor are we Friends unto our
selves, if we scornfully undervalue them. Is it not Well, That all Christian
Liberties, and all English Liberties, are by the Royal Charter effectually
Secured unto us? Is it not well, That all our Titles to our Livings are at once
Confirmed, beyond the Reach of all Intruders? Is it not well, That we have our
Judges as at the First, and our Counselors as at the Beginning, and that no
Judges, or Counselors, or Justices can over hereafter be Arbitrarily Imposed
upon us? Is it not well, That by our Negative upon any Governor that may
hereafter come upon us, we are more privileged than any other Plantation in
the Kings Dominions? yea, than Ireland? yea, than E ngland it self? Is it not
well, That the several Colonies in this Province, are not Rent away into
Parcels and Booties, to the Impoverishing, if not the Destruction of us all?
but that the Arrows are now tied up in one Bundle, which, we hope, the common
Enemy will not be so able to break? And, I am verily persuaded, That the
Nearness of our Dependence on the Crown, which does now so sensibly protect us,
will be found one of our most glorious Advantages; especially in the Day, when
the Earthquakes that have already begun to Shake Terribly the Earth, shall
Expire in the Kingdoms becoming yet more gloriously, T he Kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ! I am then your Humble Petitioner, this Day; That one thing
more may be well among us; It Is, That we may be well-disposed unto all that
Thankfulness which both the God of Heaven, and under Him Their Majesty's also
are justly looking for. And this the rather, because our Thankfulness for what
we have, will certainly make the things that are thus well, to be but the
beginning of those Better Things, which we shall see in the Day, Which do thou
(...) (...) our God! Our God has begun Deliverances for us; and it becomes us,
to bring the Sacrifices of Thanksgiving to the Lord, as they did of old, when
they had but seen six paces of Mercy taken toward the Good Settlement of the
Ark among them. If all our Thankfulness for what we have, be but a froward
Murmuring and Complaining about what we have not, we may tremble at the
Consequence. When Moses had begun the progress of Israel toward a Settlement,
they begun their Murmuring and Complaining, that there was no better progress
made; but for this Iniquity, the Censure of the Almighty God upon them was, You
shall continue in an Unsettled Wilderness, ye unthankful Generation, all your
Days.

II. We have now such an Opportunity for Things to go well among us, as has
not hitherto been put into our Hands. What ever our present Charter have done
for us, it has made us capable of doing more for ourselves; Even than ever the
former did. As far at least, as the powers of a Province Exceed those of a
Corporation. Be sure, We have now an Opportunity to frame such a Body of Good
Laws, and to settle such Officers for the perpetual Execution of them; as may
for ever shut the Door upon the (...) whereof we have most cause to be afraid.
Well then, may we Lay aside every Weight, and the misunderstanding that so
easily besets us, and Vigorously, Sedulously, Unanimously, apply ourselves to
the Work of the Day! If we loose this Opportunity, all men of Thoughts, will
weep over the Country, and say, as, in Luc. 19 42. O that thou had known,
even Thou, New England; at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto
the peace! -- I will not add the Rest; and may there never be cause to speak
it! -- only I will say thus much, The slipping of Opportunities, has hitherto
been, though the dreadfullest, yet the commonest of our Calamnities. I conclude
therefore, with Moses the Servant of the Lord; calling Heaven and earth to
Record, that Life, and Death, Good and Evil, have been set before us. If we are
those that Love Death, let us throw aside all united Endeavors to put all
things into a right posture among us; Let us become so Discontented and
Refractory, that it shall become evident, None but a Stork shall be fit to
govern us: Let us be Hating, Vexing, and Undermining one another, and neglect
the One Thing needful. Hoc Ithacus velit. This would be the advice of our
adversaries. But, if we Choose Life, then let us join together as one man,
Sacrificing all our own lesser Sentiments, for the common good; Let us every
man of (...) be Actively, and Prudently Inquisitive, What may I do, that things
may go well? And let us fervently Recommend all things among us, always unto
the Blessing of that God, in whose word, we have had that Prophecy for our
hopes, I will do better to you, then at the Beginning; and this directory for
our Prayers, The Lord our God be with us, as he has been with our Fathers; Let
him not leave us, nor forsake us:

FINIS,
ERRATA.
PAge 11.l 6. for Note r. Now page 26 l 24 r. Disasters. p.56 l 25 f. Discerning
r. Deservaing. p.58. l 26. f Thou, r Through. p.60 l 14. f. Go r Going.


