THE CHARTER Granted by their MAJESTY'S King WILLIAM And Queen MARY, TO THE
INHABITANTS OF THE PROVINCE OF THE Massachusets-Bay, IN NEW ENGLAND.

PRINTED at London, and Reprinted at Boston, in New England, By Benjamin
Harris, Over Against the Old-Meeting-House. 1692.

The CHARTER granted by their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, etc.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, King and Queen, D(...)fenders of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these
Present. (...)all come Greeting. Whereas his late Majesty King James the First,
Our Royal Predecessor, by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
bearing Date at Westminster the Third day of November, in the Eighteenth Year
of his Reign, did give and grant unto the Council Established at Plymouth in
the County of Devon, for the Planting, Ruling, Ordering and Governing of
New England in America, and to their Successors and Assigns, all that part of
America lying and being in breadth from forty Degrees of Northerly Latitude
from the Equinoctial Line to the forty eighth Degree of the said Northerly
Latitude, inclusively, and in length of and within all the breadth aforesaid
throughout all the main Lands, from Sea to Sea, together also with all the firm
Lands, Soils, Grounds, Ha^ens, Ports, Rivers, Waters, Fishings, Mines and
Minerals, as well Royal Mines of Gold and Silver, as other Mines and Minerals,
Precious Stones, Quarries, and all and singular other Commodities,
Jurisdictions, Royalties, Privileges, Franchises and Preheminences, both
within the said Tract of Land upon the Main, and also within the Islands and
Seas adjoining: Provided always that the said Lands, Islands, or any the
Premises by the said Letters Patents intended and meant to be granted, were not
then actually possessed or inhabited by any other Christian Prince or State, or
within the Bounds, Limits or Territories of the Southern Collony, then before
granted by the said late King James the first, to be planted by diverse of his
Subjects in the South parts: To have and to hold, possess and enjoy, all and
singular the aforesaid Continent Lands, Territories, Islands, Hereditaments and
Precincts, Seas, Waters, Fishings withal; and all manner of their Commodities,
Royalties, Liberties, Preheminencies and Profits that should from thenceforth
arise from thence, with all and singular their Appurtenances, and every part
and parcel thereof, unto the said Council, and their Successors and Assigns for
ever, to the sole and proper Use and Benefit of the said Council, and their
Successors and Assigns for ever: To be holden of his said late Majesty King
James the first, his Heirs and Successors, as of his Manor of East Greenwich
in the County of Kent, in free and Common Sockage, and not in Capite, nor by
Knights Service: Yielding and Paying therefore to the said late King, his Heirs
and Successors, the fifth part of the Oar of Gold and Silver, which should from
time to time, and at all times then after happen to be found, gotten, had and
obtained, in, at, or within any of the said Lands, Limits, Territories or
Precincts, or in, or within any part or parcel thereof, for or in respect of
all and all manner of Duties, Demands and Services whatsoever, to be done, made
or paid to the said late King James the first, his Heirs and Successors (as in
and by the said Letters Pattents, amongst sundry other Clauses, Powers,
Privileges and Grants therein contained, more at large appears:) and whereas
the said Council Established at Plymouth in the County of Devon, for the
Planting, Ruling, Ordering and Governing of New England in America, did by
their Deed indented under their Common Seal, bearing date the Nineteenth Day of
March, in the Third Year of the Reign of Our Royal Grandfather King Charles the
First, of ever Blessed Memory, Give, Grant, Bargain, Sell, Infeoff, Alien and
Confirm to Sir Henry Rosewell, Sir John Young, Knights, Thomas Southcott, John
Humphreys, John Endicott and Symond Whetcombe, their Heirs and Assigns, and
their Associates, for ever, all that part of New England in America aforesaid,
which lies and extends between a great River there, commonly called Monomack
alias Merinnack, and a certain other River there called Charles River, being in
a bottom of a certain Bay there commonly called Massachuset^, alias
Mattachusetts, alias Massatusetts Bay, and also all and singular those Lands
and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying within the space of three English Miles, on
the South part of the said Charles River, or of any and every part thereof; and
also all and singular the Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying and being
within the space of three English Miles to the Southward of the southermost
part of the said Bay called Massachusetts, alias Mattachusetts, alias
Massatusets Bay; and also all those Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever which
lie and be within the space of three English Miles to the Northward of the said
River called Monomack alias Merinack, or to the Northward of any and every part
thereof, and all Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever lying within the Limits
aforesaid, North and South in Latitude, and in Breadth, and in Length, and
Longitude, of and within all the breadth aforesaid throughout the Main Lands
there, from the Atlantic and Western Sea and Ocean on the East part to the
South Sea on the West part, and all Lands and Grounds, Place and Places, Soil,
Woods and Wood-grounds, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Waters, Fishings and
Hereditaments whatsoever, lying within the said bounds and limits, and every
part and parcel thereof; and also all Islands lying in America aforesaid, in
the said Seas, or either of them on the Western or Eastern Coasts or Parts of
the said Tracts of Land, by the said Indenture mentioned to be given and
granted, bargained, sold, enfeoffed, alien'd and confirmed, or any of them; and
also all Mines and Minerals, as well Royal Mines of Gold and Silver as other
Mines and Minerals whatsoever in the said Lands and Premises, or any part
thereof, and all Jurisdictions, Rights, Royalties, Liberties, Freedoms,
Immunities, Privileges, Franchises, Preheminencies and Commodities whatsoever,
which they the said Council Established at Plymouth in the County of Devon, for
the Planting, Ruling, Ordering and Governing of New England in America, then
had, or might use, exercise or enjoy, in or within the said Lands or Premises,
by the same Indenture mentioned to be given, granted, bargained, sold,
enfeoffed and confirmed, in or within any part or parcel thereof: To have and
to hold the said part of New England in America, which lies and extends, and is
ahutted as aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof; and all the said
Islands, Rivers, Ports, Havens, Waters, Fishings, Mines, Minerals,
Jurisdictions, Franchises, Royalties, Liberties, Privileges, Commodities,
Hereditaments and Premises whatsoever, with the Appurtenances, unto the said
Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Thomas Southcott, John Humphrey, John
Endicot and Simon Whetcombe, their Heirs and Assigns, and their Associates for
ever, to the only proper and absolute use and behoof of the said Sir Henry
Roswell, Sir John Young, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott and
Symond Whetcombe, their Heirs and Assigns and their Associates for evermore: To
be holden of our said Royal Grandfather King Charles the First, his Heirs and
Successors, as of his Manor of East-Greenwich in the County of Kent, in free
and common Sockage, and not in Capite nor by Knights Service, yielding and
paying therefore unto our said Royal Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, the
fifth part of the Oar of Gold and Silver which should from time to time, and at
all times hereafter happen to be found, gotten, had and obtained in any of the
said Lands, within the said Limits, or in or within any part thereof, for and
in satisfaction of all manner of Duties, Demands and Services whatsoever, to be
done, made or paid to Our said Royal Grandfather, his Heirs or Successors (as
in and by the said recited Indenture may more at large appear.) And Whereas Our
said Royal Grandfather in and by his Letters Pattents under the Great Seal of
England, bearing date at Westminster the fourth day of March, in the fourth
Year of his Reign, for the Consideration therein mentioned, did grant and
confirm unto the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Thomas Southcott, John
Humphreys, John Endicott and Symond Whetcomb, and to their Associates after
named, viz. Sir Ralph Saltenstall Knight, Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John
Ven, Matthew Craddock, George Harwood, Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard
Bellingham, Nathanael Wright, Samuel Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe,
Thomas Adams, John (...), Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins, William Vassal,
William Pincheon and George Foxcroft, their Heirs and Assigns, all the said
part of New England in America, lying and extending between the Bounds and
Limits in the said Indenture expressed, and all Lands and Grounds, Place and
Places, Soils, Woods and Wood-grounds, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Waters, Mines,
Minerals, Jurisdictions, Rights, Royalties, Liberties, Freedoms, Immunities,
Privileges, Franchises, Preheminencies and Hereditaments whatsoever;
bargained, sold, enfeoffed and confirmed, or mentioned or intended to be given,
granted, bargained, sold, enfeoffed, aliened and confirmed to them the said Sir
Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott
and Symond Whetcombe, their Heirs and Assigns, and to their Associates for
ever, by the said recited Indenture: To have and to hold the said part of
New England in America, and other the Premises thereby mentioned to be granted
and confirmed, and every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances, to
the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Sir Richard Saltenstall, Thomas
Southcott, John Humphrys, John Endicott, Symond Whetcombe, Isaac Johnson,
Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, Matthew Craddock, George Harwood, Increase Nowell,
Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathaniel Wright, Samuel Vassal, Theophilus
Eaton, Thomas Golfe, Thomas Adams, John Brown, Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins,
William Vassal, William Pincheon and George Foxcroft, their Heirs and Assigns
for ever, to their only proper and absolute use and behoof for evermore: To be
holden of our said Royal Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, as of his
Manor of East-Greenwich aforesaid, in free and common Sockage, and not in
Capite nor by Knights Service; and also yielding and paying therefore to Our
said Royal Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, the fifth part only of all
the Oar of Gold and Silver which from time to time, and at all times after
should be there gotten, had or obtained, for all Services, Exactions and
Demands whatsoever, according to the Tenor and Reservation in the said recited
Indenture expressed. And further, Our said Royal Grandfather by the said
Letters Pattents did give and grant unto the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John
Young, Sir Richard Saltenstall, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John
Endicott, Symond Whetcomb, Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, Matthew
Craddock, George Harwood, Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham,
Nathanael Wright, Samuel Vassal, William Pincheon and George Foxcroft, their
Heirs and Assigns, all that said part of New England in America, which lies and
extends between a great River there, commonly called Monomack, alias Merinack
River, and a certain other River there called Charles River, being in the
bottom of a certain Bay there commonly called Massachusetts, alias
Mattachusetts, alias Massatusetts Bay; and also all and singular those Lands
and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying within the space of three English Miles, on
the South part of the said River, called Charles River, or of any or every part
thereof; and also all and singular the Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever,
lying and being within the space of three English Miles to the Southward of the
southermost part of the said Bay called Massachusetts, alias Massaachusetts,
alias Massatusets Bay; and also all those Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever
which lie and be within the space of three English Miles to the Northward of
the said River called Monomack alias Merinack, or to the Northward of any and
every part thereof, and all Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever lying within the
Limits aforesaid, North and South in Latitude, and in Breadth, and in Length
and Longitude, of and within all the breadth aforesaid throughout the Main
Lands there, from the Atlantic or Western Sea and Ocean on the East part, to
the South Sea on the West part; and all Lands, Grounds, Place and Places,
Soils, Woods and Wood-lands, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Waters and Hereditaments
whatsoever, lying within the said Bounds and Limits, and every part and parcel
thereof; and also all Islands in America aforesaid, in the said Seas, or either
of them on the Western or Eastern Coasts or Parts of the said Tracts of Lands,
thereby mentioned to be given and granted, or any of them; and all Mines and
Minerals, as well Royal Mines of Gold and Silver as other Mines and Minerals
whatsoever in the said Lands and Premises, or any part thereof; and free
Liberty of Fishing in or within any of the Rivers or Waters within the bounds
and limits aforesaid, and the Seas thereunto adjoining; and all Fishes, Royal
Fishes, Whales, Balene, Sturgeon, and other Fishes of what kind or Nature
soever, that should at any time thereafter be taken in or within the said Seas
or Waters, or any of them, by the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Sir
Richard Saltenstall, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott, Simon
Whetcombe, Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, Matthew Craddock, George
Harwood, Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathaniel Wright,
Samuel Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe, Thomas Adams, John Brown,
Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins, William Vassal, William Pincheon and George
Foxcroft, their Heirs or Assigns, or by any other Person or Persons whatsoever
here inhabiting, by them or any of them to be appointed to Fish therein.
Provided always, that if the said Lands, Islands, or any the Premises before
mentioned, and by the said Letters Patents last mentioned, intended and meant
to be granted, were at the time of the granting of the said former Letters
Pattents, Dated the third day of November, in the Eighteenth Year of the Reign
of his late Majesty King James the First, actually possessed or inhabited by
any other Christian Prince or State, or were within the Bounds, Limits or
Territories of the said Southern Collony then before granted by the said King,
to be Planted by diverse of his loving Subjects in the South parts of America,
That then the said Grant of our said Royal Grandfather should not extend to any
such parts or parcels thereof so formerly inhabited, or lying within the bounds
of the Southern Plantation as aforesaid. But as to those Parts or Parcels so
possessed or inhabited by any such Christian Prince or State, or being within
the boundaries aforesaid, should be utterly void: To have and to hold, possess
and enjoy the said parts of New England in America, which lie, extend, and are
abutted as aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof; and all the Islands,
Rivers, Ports, Havens, Waters, Fishings, Fishes, Mines, Minerals,
Jurisdictions, Franchises, Royalties, Liberties, Privileges, Commodities and
Premises whatsoever, with the Appurtenances, unto the said Sir Henry Roswell,
Sir John Young, Sir Richard Saltenstall, Thomas Southcott, John Humphrys, John
Endicott, Symond Whetcombe, Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, Matthew
Craddock, George Harwood, Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham,
Nathanael Wright, Samuel Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe, Thomas Adams,
John Brown, Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins, William Vassal, William Pincheon
and George Foxcroft, their Heirs and Assigns, for ever: To the only proper and
absolute use and behoof of the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Sir
Richard Saltenstall, Thomas Southcott, John Humphrys, John Endicott, Symond
Whetcomb, Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, Matthew Craddock, George
Harwood, Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathaniel Wright,
Samuel Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe, Thomas Adams, John Brown,
Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins, William Vassal, William Pincheon and George
Foxcroft, their Heirs and Assigns for evermore: To be holden of Our said Royal
Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, as of his Manor of East-Greenwich in
the County of Kent, within the Realm of England, in free and common Sockage,
and not in Capite nor by Knights Service: And also yielding and paying
therefore to Our said Royal Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, the fifth
part only of all the Oar of Gold and Silver which from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, should be gotten, had or obtained for all Services, Exactions
and Demands whatsoever. Provided always, and his Majesty's express Will and
meaning was, that only one fifth part of all the Gold and Silver Oar above
mentioned in the whole, and no more should be answered, reserved or payable
unto our said Royal Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, by Color or Virtue
of the said last mentioned Letters Pattents, the double Reservations or
Recitals aforesaid, any thing therein contained notwithstanding. And to the end
that the Affairs and Business which from time to time should happen and arise
concerning the said Lands, and the Plantations of the same, might be the better
Managed and Ordered, and for the good Government thereof, our said Royal
Grandfather King Charles the First, did by his said Letters Pattents Create and
make the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Sir Richard Saltenstall,
Thomas Southcott, John Humphrys, John Endicott, Symond Whetcombe, Isaac
Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, Matthew Craddock, George Harwood, Increase
Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathanael Wright, Samuel Vassal and
Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe, Thomas Adams, John Brown, Samuel Brown, Thomas
Hutchins, William Vassal, William Pincheon and George Foxcroft, and all such
others as should thereafter be admitted and made free of the Company and
Society therein after mentioned, one Body Corporate and Politic in Fact and
Name, by the Name of the Governor and Company of Massachusets-Bay in
New England, and did grant unto them and their Successors diverse Powers,
Liberties and Privileges, as in and by the said Letters Pattents may more
fully and at large appear. And Whereas the said Governor and Society of the
Massachusets-Bay in New England, by Virtue of the said Letters Pattents did
settle a Collony of the English in the said parts of America, and diverse good
Subjects of this Kingdom, encouraged and invited by the said Letters Pattents
did Transport themselves and their Effects into the same, whereby the said
Plantation did become very populous, and divert Counties, Towns and Places,
were Created, Erected, Named and set forth, or designed within the said parts
of America, by the said Governor and Company for the time being: And Whereas
in the Term of the Holy Trinity, in the thirty sixth Year of the Reign of our
Dearest Uncle King Charles the Second, a Judgment was given in Our Court of
Chancery then sitting at Westminster, upon a Writ of Scire facias, The first
Charter vacated by a Judgment in Chancery, Anno 1684.
brought and prosecuted in the said Court against the Governor and Company of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England, that the said Letters Pattents of our
said Royal Grandfather King Charles the First, bearing date at Westminster the
4 th. day of March, in the fourth Year of his Reign, made and granted to the
said Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, and the
Enrollment of the same should be cancelled, vacated and annihilated, and should
be brought into the said Court to be cancelled, (as in and by the said Judgment
remaining upon Record in the said Court does more at large appear:) And whereas
several Persons employed as Agents in behalf of our said Colony of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, have made their humble Application unto us,
That we would be graciously pleased by our Royal Charter to Incorporate our
Subjects in our said Colony, and to grant and confirm unto them such powers,
The Agents of that Colony Petitioned to be reincorporated as formerly.
privileges and Franchizes as in our Royal Wisdom should be thought most
Conducing to our Interest and Service, and to the (...)lfare and happy State of
our Subjects in New England: And We being graciously pleased to gratify our
said Subjects, and also to the end our good Subjects within our Colony of
New-Plymouth in New England aforesaid, may be brought under such a form of
Government, as may put them in a better (...)ondition of Defense, and
considering as well the Granting unto them as unto our Subjects in the said
Colony of the Massachusetts Bay our Royal Charter, with reasonable Powers and
Privileges, will much tend not only to the safety, but to the flourishing
Estate of our Subjects in the said pa(...)ts of New England, and also to the
advancing of the Ends for which the said Plantation were at first Encouraged;
of our Special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, have Willed and
Ordained, and We do by these presents for us, our Heirs and Successors will and
Ordain, That the Territories and Colonies commonly called or known by the Names
of the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay, and Colony of New Plymouth, the
Province of Main, the Territory called Accada, or Nova Scotia; And all that
Tract of Land lying between the said Territories of Nova Scotia, The
Massachusetts, Plymouth, and the Province of Main, Nova Scotia, be united and
made one Province.
and the said Province of Main, be united, Erected and Incorporated: And we do
by these presents unite, Erect and Incorporate the same into one Real Province
by the Name of Our Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, and of our
Especial Grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, we have given and granted,
and by these presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant unto
our good Subjects, the Inhabitants of our said Province or Territory of the
Massachusetts Bay, and their Successors, all that part of New England in
America, lying and extending from the great River commonly called Monomack,
alias Merrimack, on the North part, and from three miles Northward of the said
River to the Atlantic or Western Sea or Ocean on the South part, The Extent
and Bounds of that Province.
and all the Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever lying within the Limits
aforesaid, and Extending as far a(...) the outermost points or Promontories of
Land called Cape-Cod, and Cape-Ma^l^bar North and South, and in Latitude,
breadth, and in length and Longitude, of and within all the breadth and Compass
aforesaid throughout the main Land there, from the said Atlantic or Western
Sea and Ocean on the East part toward the South Sea, or Westward as far as our
Colonies of Rhode Island, Connecticot, and the Narragansett Country: And also
all that part and portion of main Land, beginning at the entrance of Piscataway
Harbor, and so to pass up the same into the River of Newickwannock, and
through the same into the furthest head thereof, and from thence Northwestward,
till one hundred and twenty miles be finished, and from Piscataway Harbor
mouth aforesaid Northeastward along the Sea Coast to Sagadahock, and from the
period of one hundred and twenty miles aforesaid to cross-over land to the one
hundred and twenty miles before reckoned up into the land from Piscataway
Harbor through Newickwannock River, and also the North-half of the Isles of
Shoals, together with the Isles of Capawock and Nantukett near Cape-Cod
aforesaid, and also the Lands and Hereditaments lying and being in the Country
or Territory commonly called Accada, or Nova Scotia, and all those Lands and
Hereditaments lying and extending between the said Country or Territory of
Nova Scotia, and the said River of Sagadahock, or any part thereof; and all
Lands, Grounds, Places, Soyls, Woods and Woodgrounds, Havens, Ports, Rivers,
Waters, and other Hereditaments and Premises whatsoever lying within the said
Bounds and Limits aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof: And also all
Islands and Islets lying within Ten Leagues directly opposite to the Main-Land
within the said Bounds: And all Mines and Minerals, All Mines and Minerals
granted to the Inhabitants and their Successors.
as well Royal Mines of Gold and Silver, as other Mines and Minerals whatsoever
in the said Lands and Premises, or any part thereof. To have and to hold, the
said Territories, Tracts, Countries* Lands, Hereditaments; and all and singular
other the Premises, with their and every of their Appurtenants to our said
Subjects the Inhabitants of our said Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, and their Successors, to their only proper Use and Behoof for
evermore, To be holden of Us, our Heirs and Successors, as of our Manor of
East-Greenwich, in the County of Kent, by Fealty only in free and common
Soccage: Yielding and paying therefore yearly to Us, our Heirs and Successors,
the Fifth part of all Gold and Silver Oar, and Precious-Stones which shall from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, happen to be found, gotten, had and
obtained in any of the said Lands and Premises, or within any part thereof.
Provided nevertheless, and we do for Us, our Heirs and Successors, grant and
ordain, that all and every such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and other
Estates, which any Person or Persons, or Bodies Politic, or Corporate, Towns,
Villages, Colleges or Schools, do hold and enjoy, or ought to have, All Lands,
Hereditaments, etc. formerly granted to any Town, College, or School of
Learning, confirmed.
hold and enjoy, within the Bounds aforesaid, by or under any Grant or Estate
duly made or granted by any General Court formerly held, or by virtue of the
Letters Patents herein before recited, or by any other Lawful Right or Title
whatsoever, shall be by such Person or Persons, Bodies Politic and and
Corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges, or Schools, their respective Heirs,
Successors and Assigns for ever, hereafter held and enjoyed, according to the
purport and intent of such respective Grant, under and subject nevertheless to
the Rents and Services thereby reserved or made payable, any matter or thing
whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. And provided also, That nothing
herein contained shall extend, or be understood or taken, to impeach or
prejudice any Right, Title, Interest or Demand, which Samuel Allen of London,
Merchant, from and under John Mason, Esquire deceased, or any other Person or
Persons, has or have, or claims, or claim to have, hold or enjoy, of, into,
or out of any part or parts of the Premises situate within the Limits
abovementioned: But that the said Samuel Allen, and all and every such person
and persons, may and shall have, hold and enjoy the same in such manner, (and
no other than) as if these Presents had not been had or made. It being our
further Will and Pleasure, That no Grants, or Conveyances of any Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments to any Towns, Colleges, Schools of Learning, or to
any private Person or Persons, shall be judged or taken, to be avoided or
prejudiced, for, or by reason of any want or defect of Form, but that the same
stand and remain in force, and be maintained and adjudged, and have effect in
such manner as the same should or ought before the time of the said recited
Judgment, according to the Laws and Rules then and there usually practiced and
allowed. The Governors Council to Consist of 28 Assistants.
And we do further, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Will, Establish and
Ordain, That from thenceforth for ever there shall be One Governor; One
Lieutenant, or Deputy Governor; and One Secretary of our said Province or
Territory, to be from time to time appointed and commissionated by Us, our
Heirs and Successors; and Eight and twenty Assistants, or Counselors, to be
advising and assisting to the Governor of our said Province or Territory for
the time being, as by these Presents is hereafter directed and appointed: Which
said Counselors or Assistants are to be constituted, elected and chosen in
such form and manner as hereafter in these Presents is expressed. And for the
better Execution of our Royal Pleasure and Grant in this behalf, We do by these
Presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, nominate, ordain, make and
constitute our Trusty and Well-beloved Simon Broadstreet, John Richards,
Nathanael Saltenstall, Watt Winthrop, John Philips, James Russel, The Names of
the first Assistants.
Samuel Sewall, Samuel Appleton, Bartholomew Gedney, John Hauthorn, Elisha
Hutchinson, Robert Pike, Jonathan Curwin, John Jolliffe, Adam Winthrop, Richard
Middlecot, John Foster, Peter Sergeant, Joseph Lynd, Samuel Heyman, Stephen
Mason, Thomas Hinkley, Wiliam Bradford, John Walley, Barnabas Lothrop, Job
Alcot, Samuel Daniel, and Silvanus Davis, Esquire the first and present Counselors
or Assistants of our said Province, to continue in their said respective
Offices or Trusts of Counselors or Assistants until the last Wednesday in May,
which shall be in the Year of our Lord, To continue until May, 1693. and until
others are chosen by the Assembly.
1693. and until other Councillors or Assistants shall be chosen and appointed
in their stead, in such manner as in these Presents is expressed And we do
further by these Presents constitute and appoint our trusty and well-beloved
Isaac Addington, Esquire to be our first and present Secretary of our said
Province, during our pleasure. And our Will and Pleasure is, That the Governor
of our said Province for the time being, shall have Authority, from time to
time, at his Discretion, The Governor with seven Assistants to be a Council.
to assemble and call together the Counselors or Assistants of our said
Province for the time being: And that the said Governor, with the said
Assistants or Counselors, or seven of them at the least, shall, and may from
time to time hold and keep a Council (...) the ordering and directing the
Affairs of our said Province. And further, We (...) by these Presents for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, do Ordain and Grant, that there shall and may be
convened, A general Court of Assembly to be held the last Wednesday in May, or
oftener every Year.
held and kept by the Governor for the time being, upon every last Wednesday
in the Month of May, every Year, for ever, and at such other times as the
Governor of our said Province shall think fit, and appoint, a Great and
General Court or Assembly; which said Great General Court or Assembly shall
consist of the Governor and Council or Assistants for the time being, and of
such Freeholders of our said Province or Territory, as shall be from time to
time elected or deputed by the major part of the Freeholders, and other
Inhabitants of the respective Towns or Places who shall be present at such
Elections, each of the said Towns and Places being hereby empowered to elect
and depute Two Persons and no more to serve for and represent them respectively
in the said Great and General Court or Assembly. Two Assembly-Men to be Chosen
by the Freeholders in every Town.
To which Great and General Court or Assembly to be held as aforesaid, We do
hereby, for Us* our Heirs and Successors, give and grant full Power and
Authority from time to time to direct, appoint and declare what number each
County, Town and Place shall elect and depute to serve for, and represent them
respectively in the said Great and General Court or Assembly. Provided always,
that no Freeholder, or other person, shall have a Vote in the Election of
Members to serve in any Great and General Court or Assembly to be held as
aforesaid, who at the time of such Election shall not have an Estate of
Freehold in Land within our said Province or Territory, to the value of Forty
Shillings per Ann^^ ^t the least; or other Estate to the value of Fifty Pounds
sterling: And that every Person who shall be so elected, shall, before he Sit
or Act in the said Great and General Court or Assembly, take the Oaths
mentioned in an Act of Parliament made in the First Year of our Reign,
entitled, An Act for the Abrogating the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
appointing other Oaths: And thereby appointed to be taken instead of the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy: And shall make, repeat and subscribe the
Declaration mentioned in the said Act, before the Governor, or Lieutenant or
Deputy Governor, or any Two of the Assistants for the time being, The
Governor has Power to Adjourn, Prorogue and Dissolve the Assembly.
who shall be thereunto authorized and appointed by our said Governor. And
that the Governor for the time being shall have full Power and Authority from
time to time, as he shall judge necessary, to Adjourn, Prorogue and Dissolve
all Great and General Courts or Assemblies met and convened as aforesaid. And
our Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby, for Us, our Heirs and Successors,
grant, establish and ordain, That yearly, once in every Year for ever
hereafter, the aforesaid number of Eight and twenty Counselors or Assistants
shall be by the General Court or Assembly newly chosen; that is to say,
Eighteen at least of the Inhabitants of, or Proprietors of Lands within the
Territory formerly called the Colony of the Massachusets-Bay; and Four at the
least of the Inhabitants of, or Proprietors of Lands within the Territory
formerly called New Plymouth; and Three at the least of the Inhabitants of, The
Governors Counselors to be Inhabitants or Proprietors of Land in New England.
or Proprietors of Lands within the Territory formerly called the Province of
Maine; and one at the least of the Inhabitants of, or Proprietors of Land
within the Territory lying between the River of Sagadahock and Nova Scotia. And
that the said Counselors or Assistants, or any of them, shall or may at any
time hereafter be removed or displaced from their respective Places or Trust of
Counselors or Assistants, by any Great or General Court of Assembly; and that
if any of the said Counselors or Assistants shall happen to die, or be
removed, as aforesaid, before the General Day of Election, that then, and in
every such Case, the Great and General Court or Assembly, at their first
sitting, may proceed to a New Election of one or more Counselors or
Assistants, in the room or place of such Counselors and Assistants so dying or
removed. And we do further grant and ordain, That it shall and may be lawful
for the said Governor, Judges, Sheriffs Justices, etc. to be appointed with
the Consent of the Governors Council.
with the Advice and Consent of the Council or Assistants, from time to time,
to nominate and appoint Judges, Commissioners of Oyer and Termaner, Sheriffs,
Provosts, Marshals, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, to our Council
and Courts of Justice belonging. Provided always, that no such Nomination or
Appointment of Officers be made without Notice first given, or Summons issued
out seven days before such Nomination or Appointment, unto such of the said
Counselors or Assistants as shall be at that time residing within our said
Province. And our Will and Pleasure is, That the Governor, Lieutenant or
Deputy Governor and Counselors, or Assistants for the time being, and all
other Officers to be appointed or chosen, as aforesaid, shall, before the
undertaking the Execution of their Offices and Places respectively, What Oaths
are to be taken.
take their several and respective Oaths for the due and faithful performance
of their Duties in their several and respective Offices and Places; and also
the Oaths appointed by the said Act of Parliament made in the First Year of our
Reign, to be taken instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and shall
make, repeat and subscribe the said Declaration mentioned in the said Act,
before such Person or Persons as are by these Prsesents herein after appointed:
(That is to say,) The Governor of our said Province or Territory, for the time
being, shall take the said Oaths, and make, repeat and subscribe the said
Declaration before the Lieutenant, Deputy Governor; or, in his Absence, before
any two or more of the said Persons hereby nominated and appointed the present
Counselors or Assistants of our said Province or Territory, to whom we do by
these Presents give full Power and Authority to give and administer the same to
our said Governor accordingly. And after our said Governor shall be sworn,
and shall have subscribed the said Declaration, that then our Lieutenant, or
Deputy Governor for the time being, and the Counselors or Assistants before
by these Presents nominated and appointed, shall take the said Oaths, and make,
repeat and subscribe the said Declaration before our said Governor: And that
every such Person or Persons as shall (at any time of the Annual Elections, or
otherwise, upon Death or Removal) be appointed to be the New Counselors or
Assistants, and all other Officers to be hereafter chosen from time to time,
shall take the Oaths to their respective Offices and Places belonging; and also
the said Oaths appointed by the said Act of Parliament, to be taken instead of
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and shall make, repeat and subscribe the
Declaration mentioned in the said Act, before the Governor, or
Lieutenant-Governour, or any two or more Counselors or Assistants, or such
other Person or Persons as shall be appointed thereunto by the Governor for
the time being: To whom We do therefore by these Presents give full Power and
Authority, from time to time, to give and administer the same respectively,
according to our true meaning herein before declared, without any Commission,
or further Warrant to be had and obtained from Us, our Heirs and Successors in
that behalf. And our Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby Require and
Command, That all and every Person and Persons hereafter by Us, our Heirs and
Successors, Nominated and Appointed to the respective Offices of Governor, or
Lieutenant, or Deputy Governor, and Secretary of our said Province or
Territory (which said Governor, or Lieutenant, The King reserves to him self
Power to appoint the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Secretary
or Deputy Governor, and Secretary of our said Province or Territory for the
time being, We do hereby Reserve full Power and Authority to Us, our Heirs and
Successors, to Nominate and Appoint accordingly) shall before he or they be
(...) to the Execution of their respective Offices, take as well the Oath for
(...) and faithful Performance of the said Offices respectively, as also the
Oaths appointed by the said Act of Parliament made in the said first Year of
our Reign, to be taken instead of the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
and shall also make, repeat and subscribe the Declaration appointed by the said
Act in such Manner, and before such Persons as aforesaid. And further Our Will
and Pleasure is, and We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, grant,
establish and ordain, that all and every of the Subjects of Us, our Heirs and
Successors, which shall go to and inhabit within our said Province and
Territory, Persons born in New England to have the Privileges of Natural
Subjects of England.
and every of their Children which shall happen to be born there, or on the
Seas in going thither, or returning from thence, shall have and enjoy all
Liberties and Immunities of Free and Natural Subjects within any of the
Dominions of Us, our Heirs and Successors, to all intents, constructions and
purposes whatsoever, as if they and every of them were born within this our
Realm of England: And for the greater Ease and Encouragement of our loving
Subjects, inhabiting our said Province or Territory of the Massachusetts Bay,
and of such as shall come to inhabit there, We do by these Presents, for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, grant, establish and ordain, Liberty of Conscience to
be granted to all Christians except Papists.
that for ever hereafter there shall be a Liberty of Conscience allowed in the
Worship of God to all Christians (Except Papists) inhabiting or which shall
inhabit or be resident within our said Province or Territory. And we do hereby
Grant and Ordain, That the Governor, or Lieutenant or Deputy Governor of our
said Province or Territory for the time being, or either of them, or any two or
more of the Council o^ Assistants for the time being, as shall be thereunto
appointed by the said Governor, shall and may at all times, and from time to
time hereafter, have full Power and Authority to administer and give the Oaths
appointed by the said Act of Parliament, made in the first Year of Our Reign,
to be taken instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, to all and every
Person and Persons which are now inhabiting or residing within our said
Province or Territory, or which shall at any time or times hereafter go or pass
thither. And we do of our further Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion,
Grant, Establish and Ordain, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, that the great
and general Court or Assembly of our said Province or Territory for the time
being, Convened as aforesaid, shall for ever have full Power and Authority to
Erect and Constitute Judicatories and Courts of Record, and other Courts, to be
held in the Name of Us, our Heirs and Successors, The general Court has Power
to erect Judicatories* to hear and determine concerning all manner of Crimes,
capital or not capital, and Pleas, whether real, personal or mixed.
for the Hearing, Trying and Determining of all and all manner of Crimes,
Offenses, Pleas, Processes, Plaints, Actions, Matters, Causes, and things
whatsoever, arising or happening within our said Province or Territory, or
between persons inhabiting or residing there, whether the same be Criminal or
Civil, and whether the said Crimes be Capital or not Capital, and whether the
said Pleas be real, personal or mixed, and for the awarding and making out of
Execution thereupon: To which Courts and Judicatories, We do hereby, for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, give and grant full Power and Authority from time to
time to administer Oaths for the better discovery of Truth in any matter in
Controversy, or depending before them. And We do for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, Grant, Establish and Ordain, that the Governor of our said
Province or Territory for the time being, with the Council or Assistants, may
do, execute or perform all that is necessary for the Probate of Wills, and
granting Administrations for, touching or concerning, any Interest or Estate
which any Person or Persons shall have within our said Province or Territory.
And whereas we judge it necessary that all our Subjects should have Liberty to
Appeal to Us, our Heirs and Successors in Cases that may deserve the same, We
do by these Presents Ordain, that in Case either Party shall not rest satisfied
with the Judgment or Sentence of any Judicatories or Courts within our said
Province or Territory in any personal Action, Appeals to the King in some
Personal Actions.
wherein the Matter in Defense does exceed the Value of three hundred pounds
Sterling, that then he or they may Appeal to Us, our Heirs and Successors, in
our or their Privy Council, Provided that such Appeal be made within fourteen
days after the Sentence or Judgment given; and that before such Appeal be
allowed, security be given by the Party* or Parties appealing, in the value of
the matter in difference, to pay or answer the Debt or Damages for the which
Judgment or Sentence is given, with such Costs and Damages as shall be awarded
by Us, our Heirs or Successors, in Case the Judgment or Sentence be affirmed:
And Provided also that no Execution shall be staid or suspended by reason of
such Appeal unto Us, our Heirs and Successors, in Our or their Privy Council,
so as the Party suing or taking out Execution, do in like manner give security
to the Value of the matter in Difference, to make Restitution in Case the said
Judgment or Sentence be Reversed or Annulled upon the said Appeal. And We do
further, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Give and Grant to the said
Governor, and the great and general Court or Assembly of our said Province or
Territory for the time being, full Power and Authority, from time to time, to
Make, The general Court has Power to make Laws, not repugnant to the Laws of
England.
Ordain and Establish all manner of wholesome and reasonable Orders, Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances, Directions and Instructions, either with Penalties or
without (so as the same be not repugnant or contrary to the Laws of this our
Realm of England) as they shall judge to be for the good and welfare of our
said Province or Territory, and for the Government and Ordering thereof, and of
the People inhabiting, or who shall inhabit the same, and for the necessary
support and defense of the Government thereof. And We do for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, give and grant, that the said General Court or Assembly shall have
full Power and Authority to Name and settle Annually, To Name and Settle Civil
Officers.
all Civil Officers within the said Province, such Officers Excepted, the
Election and Constitution of whom We have by these Presents reserved to Us, our
Heirs and Successors, or to the Governor of our said Province for the time
being; and to set forth the several Duties, Powers and Limits, of every such
Officer to be appointed by the said General Court or Assembly, and the Forms of
such Oaths not repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this our Realm of England,
as shall be respectively administered unto them for the Execution of their
several Offices and Places; and also to impose Fines, Mulcts, Imprisonments,
and other Punishments, Power to impose Taxes on all the Inhabitants, to be
disposed by Warrant from the Governor and Council, or according to such Acts
as shall then be in force.
and to impose and levy proportionable and reasonable Assessments, Rates and
Taxes upon the Estates and Persons of all and every the Proprietors or
Inhabitants of our said Province or Territory, to be issued and disposed of by
Warrant under the Hand of the Governor of our said Province for the time
being, with the Advice and Consent of the Council, for our Service in the
necessary Defense and Support of our Government of our said Province or
Territory, and the Protection and Preservation of the Inhabitants there,
according to such Acts as are or shall be in force within our said Province,
and to dispose of matters and things, whereby our Subjects, Inhabitants of our
said Province, may be religiously, peaceably and civilly governed, protected
and defended, so as their good Life and orderly Conversation may win the
Indians, Natives of the Country, to the Knowledge and Obedience of the only
true God and Savior of Mankind, The Conversion of the Indians to be
endeavored.
and the Christian Faith, which his late Majesty our Royal Grandfather King
Charles the First, in his said Letters Patents declared was his Royal
Intentions, and the Adventurers free Profession to be the principal End of the
said Plantation. And for the better securing and maintaining Liberty of
Conscience hereby granted to all Persons at any time being and residing within
our said Province or Territory as aforesaid, Willing, Commanding and Requiring,
and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, ordaining and
appointing that all such Orders, Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, Instructions
and Directions as shall be so Made and Published under our Seal of our said
Province or Territory, shall be carefully and duly observed, kept and
performed, and put in Execution according to the true intent and meaning of
these Presents. Provided always, and We do by these Presents, for Us, our
Heirs and Successors, Establish and Ordain, that in the framing and passing of
all such Orders, Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, The Governor to (...) the
Assembly.
and in all Elections and Acts of Government whatsoever, to be passed, made or
done by the said General Court or Assembly, or in Council, the Governor of our
said Province or Territory of the Massachusetts Bay in New England for the time
being, shall have the Negative Voice, and that without his Consent or
Approbation signified and declared in Writing, no such Orders, Laws, Statutes,
Ordinances, Elections, or other Acts of Government whatsoever, so to be made,
passed or done by the said General Assembly or in Council, shall be of any
force, effect or validity, any thing herein contained to the contrary in any
wise Notwithstanding. And We do for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Establish and
Ordain, that the said Orders, Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, be by the first
opportunity after the making thereof, sent or transmitted unto Us, our Heirs
and Successors, under the Public Seal, to be appointed by Us, for Our or their
Approbation or Disallowance. And that in Case all or any of them shall at any
time within the space of three Years next after the same shall have been
presented to Us, our Heirs and Successors, in our or their Privy Council, be
disallowed and rejected, and so signified by Us, our Heirs and Successors,
under our or their Sign Manual and Signet, or by Order in our or their Privy
Council, Laws to be sent to England for the Royal Approbation: If not
disallowed within three Years, to be in force until Repealed by the Assembly.
unto the Governor for the time being, then such and so many of them as shall
be so disallowed and rejected, shall thenceforth cease and determine, and
become utterly void and of none effect. Provided always, that in Case We, our
Heirs or Successors, shall not within the term of three Years after the
presenting of such Orders, Laws, Statutes or Ordinances, as aforesaid, signify
our or their Disallowance of the same, then the said Orders, Laws, Statutes or
Ordinances, shall be and Continue in full Force and Effect, according to the
true intent and meaning of the same, until the Expiration thereof, or that the
same shall be repealed by the General Assembly of our said Province for the
time being. Provided also, that it shall and may be lawful for the said
Governor and general Assembly to make or pass any Grant of Lands lying within
the Bounds of the Colonies formerly called the Colonies of the Massachusetts
Bay, and New Plymouth, and Province of Main, in such manner as heretofore they
might have done by Virtue of any former Charter or Letters Pattents; which
Grants of Lands within the Bounds aforesaid, We do hereby Will and Ordain to be
and continue of full Force and Effect, without our further Approbation or
Consent And so as nevertheless, The general Court has Power to pass any grants
of land in (...) the Province of Mayn.
and it is our Royal Will and Pleasure, that no Grant or Grants of any Lands
lying or extending from the River of Sagadahock, to the Gulf of St. Laurence
and Canada Rivers, and to the Main Sea Northward and Eastward, to be made or
past by the Governor and general Assembly of our said Province, be of any
force, validity or effect, until We, our Heirs and Successors, shall have
signified our or their Approbatibation of the same. And We do by these Presents
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, grant, establish and ordain, that the
Governor of our Province or Territory for the time being, shall have full
power by himself, Grants of Land between Sagada^ock and St. Lawrence to have
the Royal Approbation.
or by any chief Commander, or other Officer or Officers, to be appointed from
time to time, to Train, Instruct and Govern, and Exercise and Govern the
Militia there; and for the special Defense and safety of our said Province or
Territory, to Assemble in Martial Array, and put in Warlike Posture the
Inhabitants of our said Province or Territory, and to Lead and Conduct them,
and with them to Encounter, Expulse, Repel, Resist and Pursue by Force of
Arms, as well by Sea as by Land, The Governor to Command the Militia.
within or without the Limits of our said Province or Territory, and also to
kill, slay, destroy and conquer, by all fitting ways, enterprises and means
whatsoever, all and every such Person and persons as shall at any time
hereafter attempt or enterprise the destruction, invasion, detriment or
annoyance of our said Province or Territory; and to use and exercise the Law
Martial in time of actual War, Invasion or Rebellion, (...) occasion shall
necessarily require; and also from time to time to erect Forts, and to Fortify
any Place or Places within our said Province or Territory, and the same to
furnish with all necessary Ammunition, Provision and Stores of War, for offense
or defense, and to commit from time to time, the Custody and Government of the
same, to such person or persons as to him shall seem meet, and the said Forts
and Fortifications to demolish at his pleasure, and to take and surprise by all
ways and means whatsoever, all and every such Person or Persons, with their
Ships, Arms, Ammunition, and other Goods, as shall in a Hostile manner Invade,
or attempt the Invading, Conquering or Annoying of our said Province or
Territory. Provided always, and We do by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, Grant, Establish and Ordain, That the said Governor shall not at
any time hereafter, No Persons to be Transported out of the Province without
their own Consent.
by Virtue of any Power hereby granted, or hereafter to be granted to him,
Transport any of the Inhabitants of our said Province or Territory, or Oblige
them to March out of the Limits of the same, without their free and voluntary
Consent, or the Consent of the great and general Court or Assembly of our said
Province or Territory; nor grant Commissions for Exercising the Law Martial
upon any the Inhabitants of our said Province or Territory, The Law-Martial not
to be executed on any Inhabitant without the Consent of the Council.
without the Advice and Consent of the Council or Assistants of the same.
Provided in like manner, and We do by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, Constitute and Ordain, That when and as often as the Governor of
our said Province for the time being, shall happen to dye, or be displaced by
Us, our Heirs or Successors, or be absent from his Government, that then and in
any of the said Cases, the Lieutenant or Deputy Governor of our said Province
for the time being, shall have full Power and Authority, In the absence of the
Governor, the Deputy Governor to have the same Power.
to do and execute all and every such acts, matters and things, which our
Governor of our said Province for the time being, might or could by Virtue of
these our Letters Patents lawfully do or execute, if he were personally
present, until the return of the Governor so absent, or Arrival or
Constitution of such other Governor as shall or may be appointed by Us, our
Heirs or Successors in his stead; and that when and as often as the Governor,
and Lieutenant or Deputy Governor of our said Province or Territory for the
time being, shall happen to dye, or be displaced by Us, our Heirs or
Successors, or be absent from our said Province; and that there shall be no
person within the said Province, Commissionated by Us, In the absence of both
the Governor and Deputy Governor, the major part of the Council to have their
Power.
our Heirs or Successors, to be Governor within the same; then and in every of
the said Cases, the Council or Assistants of our said Province shall have full
Power and Authority, and We do hereby give and grant unto the said Council or
Assistants of our said Province for the time being, or the major part of them,
full Power and Authority to do and execute all and every such acts, matters and
things, which the said Governor, or Lieutenant or Deputy Governor of our said
Province or Territory for the time being, might or could lawfully do or
exercise, if they or either of them were personally present, until the return
of the Governor, or Lieutenant or Deputy Governor so absent, or Arrival or
Constitution of such other Governor, or Lieutenant or Deputy Governor, as
shall or may be appointed by Us, our Heirs or Successors from time to time.
Provided always, and it is hereby Declared, that nothing herein contained,
shall extend or be taken to erect, or grant, or allow the exercise of any
Admiral Court, Jurisdiction, Power or Authority, but that the same shall be,
and is hereby reserved to Us and our Successors, and shall from time to time be
erected, granted and exercised by Virtue of Commissions to be issued under the
Great Seal of England, or under the Seal of the High Admiral, or the
Commissioners for Executing the Office of High Admiral of England. And further,
Our express Will and pleasure is, and We do by these presents, for Us, our
Heirs and Successors, ordain and appoint that these our Letters Patents shall
not in any manner Enure, or be taken to abridge, bar or hinder any of our
loving Subjects whatsoever, to use and exercise the Trade of Fishing upon the
Coasts of New England, but that they and every of them shall have full and free
Power and Liberty to continue and use their said Trade of Fishings upon the
said Coasts, The Trade of Fishing not to be abridg'd.
in any of the Seas thereunto adjoining, or any Arms of the said Seas or
Salt Water Rivers where they have been wont to Fish; and to build and set upon
the Lands within our said Province or Colony, lying waste, and not then
possessed by particular Proprietors, such Wharfs, Stages and Workhouses, as
shall be necessary for the salting, drying, keeping and packing of their Fish,
to be taken or gotten upon that Coast, and to cut down and take such Trees and
other Materials there growing, or being upon any parts or places lying waste,
and not then in possession of particular Proprietors, as shall be needful for
that purpose, and for all other necessary easements, helps and advantages,
concerning the said Trade of Fishing there, in such manner and form as they
have been heretofore at any time accustomed to do, without making any wilful
waste or spoil, any thing in these Presents contained to the contrary
notwithstanding. And Lastly, for the better providing and furnishing of Masts
for our Royal Navy, We do hereby reserve to Us, Trees fit for Masts, not
growing upon any Soil granted to particular Persons, to be preserved.
our Heirs and Successors, all Trees of the Diameter of twenty four Inches, and
upwards of twelve Inches from the ground, growing upon any Soil or Tract of
Land within our said Province or Territory, not heretofore granted to any
private Persons: And We do restrain and forbid all Persons whatsoever from
felling, cutting or destroying any such Trees, without the Royal License of Us,
our Heirs and Successors, first had and obtained, upon Penalty of Forfeiting
One Hundred Pounds Sterling unto Us, our Heirs and Successors, for every such
Tree so felled, cut, destroyed, without such License had or obtained in that
behalf, any thing in these Presents contained to the contrary in any wise
Notwithstanding. In Witness whereof, We have caused these our Letters to be
made Patents. Witness Our Selves at Westminster, the seventh day of October, in
the Third Year of Our Reign.

By Writ of Privy Seal. True Copy Examined according to the Original by PIGOT.


