The PRINCIPLES of the PROTESTANT RELIGION MAINTAINED, And Churches of
New England, in the PROFESSION and EXERCISE thereof DEFENDED, Against all the
Calumnies of one George Keith, a Quaker, in a Book lately Published at
Pensilvania, to undermine them both.

By the Ministers of the Gospel in Boston,

Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own cause seems just; but his
neighbor comes and searches him. Phil. 2. 3. Beware of dogs, beware of evil
workers, beware of the Concision. 2. These. 2. 10, 11. They received not the
love of the Truth, that they might be saved; And for this cause God shall send
them strong delusion, that they should believe al^^. BOSTON, in New England,
Printed by Richard Pierce, and sold by the Booksellers. M DC XC.

The Praeface.
Although the Church of God, which is a Society of men professing the Truths, and
practicing the Ways, of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Sacred Sriptures have
Recommended them unto the world, has in all ages undergone the Batteries of a
various assault, yet it has outlived them all. As one while there arise
Persecutors with Cain's Club in their Hands, endeavoring by Force to banish
out of the world, that Godliness which their sore eyes se^^ an Ey-^ore in; so
another while, the grand Enemy of our Salvation bring's Heretics upon the
stage, who with Fraud would persuade the people of the Saints of the Most High
to unchurch themselves by parting with all the means of Communion between them
and their God. But hitherto an Abortion has attended all their attempts against
that Mount Sion which cannot be removed, but remains for ever; the impotent
Assailants find themselves but pushing hard against the great stone, and perish
by its Rolling over them. This is among the Glorious things which are spoken of
thee, O thou City of God!

Indeed the Craft of the old Serpent has not shown it self in any one thing
more mavelous and dangerous, than in his Fitting of Seducers to the several
Designs, Peoples, Tempers, which he has had to manage. He knows, that as the
first Creation, so the new Creation, begins with Light^ and he has used a
thousand Blinds to keep a saving Light from entering into the souls of men, that
being a people of a wrong understanding, He that made them might not have mercy
on them. Hence the Deceivers of the former days having been baffled and
conquered by the Spirit of the Lord lifting up a standard against them, in the
Labors of His faithful Servants; the Hydra of Error, has had new sprouts
proceeding from it; among which, that of Quakerism seems to be one of the
vilest, as well as one of the Latest, and we see therein fulfilled, what was
long since foretold, That Seducers will wax worse and worse. In Quakerism we
see the Vomit cast forth in the bypast ages by whole kennels of those
creatures, for whom the Apostle to the Philippians has found a name, licked up
again for a new-Digestion, and once more exposed for the poisoning of mankind;
and it is especially the more ignorant and unwary, and envious part of mankind
which it is adapted unto: few swallow it but the more silly and feeble sort of
souls, and those in (...) the Light (which they so much adore) affords little
better Directions, than those of an Ignis fatuns. Indeed Quakerism is the
peculiar plague of this Age. One that was a pillar-^^^ it, wrote in the year
1659. ^uch a passage as that It is now about seven years since the Lord raised
us up, And as the Novity of the Sect proves their Falsity, so it is beyond all
measure admirable, that in so clear a daylight of the Gospel, so many should
espouse it. It is through the wrath of the Lord of hosts, that any part of the
English Nation should he so darkened, as to follow this new light (...) and it
is the particular disgrace of the English, with but one or two Nations more, to
have these people in it, who the they tremble, yet believe not, but oppose and
muddy the whole of that Religion, by which we draw near to God.

We cannot but have our sad Apprehensions, when we behold this great Choak^weed
of the Christian and Protestant Religion, taking root in the Borders of N.
England; and, whereas unto our own Inclination^ to be doing so, their have been
added the Provocations of one George Keith, in a late Book addressed both to
them for their Establishment, and to us for our Conviction, we have counted
ourselves concerned to appear in the defense of those glorious Truths, which
all Quakerism (and George Keith's particularly) does oppugn. We have answered
the Cavils and Sophisms of the Champion whom the American Quakers do so much
admire, not feeling in any of his arguments the weight of a Weaver's beam; and
if in any passages we have done it cuttingly, we knew, that same are so to be
rebuked. But the Reader (...) oblige himself to peruse the Whole of our
Treatise, before he pronounce upon the sufficiency and validity of our Answer;
we found it so dull (...) thing to follow the confused methods of our
Antagonist, and to renew our Discourses as often as h^s tedious and n^^seous
Repetitions came in our way, that we resolved, as we met the several Haeresies
we would Answer once for all; and therefore we do pass over with a dry Foot
many unfound Assertions in diverse parts of his Book, because by the very same
in other parts of it, we are forced to wade over shoes in the mire after him.
And we take no notice at all of the calumnies, which in the close of his little
Volumn, he loads the Reverend Increase Mather with, because the Son of that
worthy person, has elsewhere already vindicated him. We wish that we could with
any hopes propound the Conversion and Reduction of George Keith, as the end of
our present undertaking. But we fear lest his Apostasy, after he had been
enlightened and had taste of the good word of God, has rendered him incurable.
If it should be so, we must expect, that though the Arrows here fetched from the
Scriptures of the Lord Jesus, may force from him a (...) ^hou have overcome!
yet we shall have no Returns from him, except those of rage and wrath, which we
shall not count it worth the while to publish any reply unto, but what the
Archangel gave to a railing Accusation.

We do likewise wish, that we had more hopes of turning others that have been
prosely^ed (though scarce any have been so by him among our selves) unto his
Persuasion, from the Error of their way; which we do sincerely declare to be
the worst that we wish to them, though is be also the Best that we can do for
them. They are much mistaken, if they think that we shall ever pursue them with
any thing but Pity, and Prayer, and Reason, which they want above most in the
world. We desire no Revenge on them, for all the Railing and Hatred, which they
so commonly follow us withal, save only to pluck them as brands out of the
fire. But, alas, it is usually a poenal, judicial, vindictive Stroke of the great
God upon the minds of men for sins against the Gospel of our Lord Jesus,
accompanied not seldom with a very sensible Possession of Satan, through which
the Delusions of This way come to be received. And the Efficacy thereof, is
therefore frequently too obstinate for a Cure! Only, the Power and Mercy of
God, can Restore those wandering souls; which we do from the very bottom of our
Hearts implore.

However, we have just Hopes, that we shall now furnish the Churches in this
Land, with an Antidote against the Contagion of Quakerism; and supply our
Conflicting Neighbors with Answers to encounter the Attempts: made by Seducers
upon The faith once delivered unto us. There bath (...) sort of Quakerism not
long since broached in Italy, the Professors whereof go under the Name of
Quietists, and the late Pope himself was not without suspicion of being ^ainted
with it. But the Quakers among us are some of them so far from being Quietists,
that they disturb the Quiet of all that are about 'em, and go about, seeking
whom they may deceive. It Is our Duty to Warn you against them, Ye Flocks of our
LORD! and we do it in the Name of our Glorious Master, whom you declare to be
Your King, your Lord, your Lawgiver.

We cannot be faithful, if we do not warn you against (at least) the Teaching,
Talking, Bu^ie and more Bigoted Quakers, which infest you, as a Sort of men,
who invite you to give up at once, your whole Religion, and to Embarque your
souls ^o more on that Bottom, which all the Saints have hitherto been saved
upon. If you shall think it convenient for you, to part with your Pastors
because the Wolves bark at them, We do assure you, that most of us could have
lived much more easily and pleasantly, and provided more comfortably for our
Families, if we had applied ourselves to other Callings than that of the
Ministry; It is our Grief and Care for You that will make us cry after you,
Entreat us not to leave you, for our God must be your God.

But how can you think of parting with an Infinite and Eternal GOD, and having
a created Soul blasphemously placed in His Throne? How can you think of parting
with a precious Bible, as a Dead Letter, and having Silent Postures of your
own, in the Room thereof? How can you think of parting with an Inestimable
REDEEMER, for (...) dim Light within you, which may prove Darkness it self; and
then, How great is that Darkness! How can you endure to see the whole Gospel,
which your souls have hitherto lived upon, all evapourated into Dispensations
Allegories, and mere mystical Notions? Baptism and the Supper of the Lord
Jesus, of no Advantage to your Faith, your Love, your Joy? Can you with any
patience behold the glorious Doctrines of Election, and Justification, and
Perseverance, depraved with Opinions, that make Man to be All, and Grace to
have small or no share in the matters of Salvation?

But, Blessed be our GOD, our Churches have yet had very little Impression from
any Seducers hitherto; and they are the more obscure nooks and skirts of the
Country which These do make any figure in. We nevertheless forbear not these
wholesome Cautions; and though we believe, the Day is at hand when our Blessed
Savior will Purify His Temple, and sweep Quakerism among other Defilements out
of it, with a swifter and a greater Force than we can promise to our present
Endeavors, yet we are now making some little Essays as that work, by taking
the brushes of the Sanctuary, to strike down what Cobwebs, the Quakers have
been spinning there.

James Allen. Joshuah Moodey. Samuel Willard. Cotton Mather.


The Introduction.
IT is reported of Bellarmine, that great Atlas of the Papal Interest, that
after his Death, there was a sharp Contest in the Lateran, whether his books
should not be called in and burnt, as having in them as much exposed the cause
by his over liberal Concessions, as supported it by his cunning Sophisms. And
we are told that the Papists have hanged Erasmus between Heaven and Hell,
because he professed himself a Catholic, and yet wrote too much like a
Protestant. The Hands were Esau' s, but the Voice Jacob's. And what Reason G.
K. has to expect the like treat at the hands of his brethren the Quakers, will
be obvious to any that shall read his late pernicious Pamphlet pretended to be
emitted for the Discovery of the false Doctrines of some particular sorts of
Professors of Religion, but indeed to Bid Defiance to the True Religion, in the
principal fundamental Articles of it, as they have been in all Ages and places
acknowledged lodged by the Church of Christ; which he has clothed in a rough
Garment to deceive withal. For however he expresses a right spirit of a
Quaker, in his nonsense, fallacious way of declaring himself, and bitter
Reviling of the Orthodox, which is enough to proclaim him one of that Society;
yet might any Credit be given to his words, and the commonly received Sense put
upon his Expressions, it is apparent that he has mightily betrayed the Cause
he undertook to patronize, and (setting aside his Billings gate-Rhetorick, a
gift seldom separable from these men) has said more against their received
Principles (if they ever had any) than against ours: For if he speak the
Judgment of the Quakers, it is certain that G. F. and other Rabbi's of that
Sect were mistaken, for they speak quite another thing; except he will tell us,
we poor Ignorants understand not the Language of their spirit, which regards
neither Grammar nor Logic; and this is the Hercules's Club, wherewith they
are wont to knock all our Reasons in the head, and brain them at once.

However, his Design is easily discerned. The Devil himself, that spirit of
Delusion, knowing that some principles are rivetted in men's Minds, will
nourish them (though he be the Father of Lies) that he may graft his Falsehoods
upon the stock of them: and why should not his Messengers do the like in
Imitation? See 2. Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. He hopes by some large Concessions to
gain Credit with the Simple, and persuade them to say as they, Act. 23. 9. for
whose sake only have we undertaken him, and not for any need of Refuting his
Errors, which have been so often Cashiered, there being no New-Revelation in
them, but what has been the Vomit of ancient Heretics licked up by him, and
again disgorged.

Reflections on his Title Page and Epistle.
In his Title he talks high and looks big, and would hold the world in hand
that he had at once routed, broken and disbanded all the Orthodox Churches in
Christendom, and proved that they had neither Doctrine, Ministry, Worship,
Constitution, Government, Sacraments, nor Sabbaths, but what are Surreptitious,
and not belonging to the true Church of Christ: and truly if men would be dared
out of their Religion, he has bid as fair for it as any we know, but how far
they fall before his [in-words] acknowledged Test, is yet to be Tried: And be
it known to all men, That we are not yet sensible of the wounds that (...) has
given, any further than as the Name of GOD is blasphemously, abused by him, and
drawn in to patronize his filthy dreams. When we read his Inscription, Benhad^d
seems to be risen again, who sent that confident Threatening, 1. King. 20. 10.
and the Answer of the King of Israel is enough. ver. 11.

He had so much Pride and Gall to crowd into the Title, that he is fain to
borrow a Room in the left hand page, to put in a few Scripture Citations,
maliciously abused and misapplied, which, whether they belong to our Churches
and Ministry let the Day declare: we are not to stand or fall at the menacing
Praedictions of an Enthusiast.

He directs his Epistle to us, giving his word for it (so far as it will go)
that the book was written in good will to us; and if to slander and calumniate
with bitterest Invectives, may pass for a Demonstration, he has proved his
Love to be Extraordinary: any truly it is as much as we expect from one of his
humor.

There is little observable here, but what will be met with, in the Preatise,
and once to Answer such paltry stuff is enough, if not to much: It may
therefore be passed over with two or three Remarks.

He calls us to turn our minds to the Light of Christ within us, for our better
information; we have done it as well as we can, and it tells us, That his
Assertions are bold, presumptuous, and Haeretical.

He tells us, It is the same spirit that gives to all Readers a right under
standing of Scripture; but if so, why then have not all the same understanding
of it, but Contradictory? Can it be the Spirit of God, who is always the same?

He bids us to Believe in Christ, and join our minds to His divine
Illumination, and He will anoint the eyes of our Understandings, and. we shall
have our eyes open to see etc. q. d. If we will see of our selves, then He will
give us Ability to see: this may be no Contradiction in a Quakers Logic.

We have him also in a fit of Charity, (and we are beholden to him, for we
shall not a always find him in so good a mood) granting that some of us may be
in some sense of the true Church: which how it should be when we have neither
Doctrine, Ministry, Worship, etc. of a true Church among us, let him see to
that: But we have him afterward, putting on his Spectacles., and then he
retracts his Charity with a witness.

We have him also nibling at the Doctrine of Perseverance, which we shall
shortly find him beating down with Axes and Mauls, and there shall take him to
task. Only It is worth the while to observe, what a notable (and no doubt
inspired) Doctrine he recommended to us, viz. That the Quickening in a man, as
it abides, it is impossible it should perish: To pass the Nonsense of it (which
must be allowed a Quaker, or you undo him) let us note its profoundness, If
Grace continue, it cannot be lost, a thing cannot be and not be at the same
time; could D^lphos have delivered a more mysterious Oracle?

Finally he tells us plainly that his Design is to turn away our Hearers from
us, under the Title of False-Teachers; i. e. he aims at no less than the
subverting of all the Churches of Christ in New England, yea, (...) the World:
A Gygantick Essay! (...) let him do his utmost, as long as Christ sits upon His
Throne-we are not dismayed. As for the Imputation of being False Teachers, we
can (through Grace) appeal to many of our Hearers, in Paul's words, 2. Cor. 3.
beginn.

Reflections on Chap. 1. of the Holy Scriptures.
We have here a Confession of his Faith, (such as it is) concerning the
Scriptures, wherein, (if he gives us his mind heartily, which we have cause to
suspect; (and shall give our reason before we part) we are sure he does not
express the sense of his Brethren and Predecessors, except they say one thing,
and mean the contrary.

Section, 132. As for the two first Paragraphs of this Chapter, we will take
them as fa^^ as they will go; though the word Outward has a Reserve in it, and
intimates That God has one Rule to direct His people by Outwardly, and another
Inwardly; or as if God taught us one thing by His Word, and another by His
Spirit; we shall have Occasion afterward to discourse how perniciously this
undermines the Christian Faith; and why he has not made Practices as well as
Doctrines liable to this left might well be enquired. However there will be
occasion to rubb up his memory, with his own Concessions, when we find that he
has forgoten himself (for a quaker's spirit is not of a perfect Reminiscence)
and mean while let him try how he can reconcile himself to his Friends, who
have directly (as might be instanced abundantly) rejected the Scriptures with
Scorn. Smith tells us, It is the greatest Error in the world, and the ground of
all Errors, to say the Scriptures are a Rule to Christians; and many
Expressions of the same import. But he will salve all with the nice Distinction
of an outward and an inward Rule.

Sect. 3. This Paragraph might have past, had it not been for his perverse
Interpretation of it, in which the spends his Second Chapter, where we shall
have it out, if our patience can but wait a little.

Sect. 4. We were afraid, when we saw him so liberal of his Concessions, that
he would soon repent of it; we have him therefore here trying to get something
of it back again; but stay, Friend, and be more frugal of your Largesses
henceforward: Well, he has given the Scripture leave (in a good humor) to be
so far a (...) at least, that No Doctrine that cannot be demonstrated and by
it, lays us under any Obligation to believe it: and so we are satisfied that
it is no mortal sin to withold our Credit from any of their New-Revelations,
that are neither Scripture, nor Scripture-Consequence, which, in Chapt. 2 nd.
he pleads for.

G. K. had a mind to wheedle some into a Compliance with his Opinions who had
been taught to entertain a good Respect for the Scripture; For which reason he
would insinuate, that the honest Quakers are not the men that they have been
represented to be, nor are they such Enemies to the written Word, as they are
reported; but why then does he not correct his friend Lucas, who has told us,
That any Quaker, if he has a mind to it, (as they are arrogant enough) may make
as good himself; and they challenge us to tell them what one Scripture has
Light in it; and many like Blasphemies not to be named.

But what shall he do to satisfy his brethren, whose Fabric is built upon the
sandy Foundation of a New Light and new Revelations, if the Scripture has all
the Doctrines of Religion in it? He had in his youth (when he was in the Dark,
as he says we are) gotten a little of that carnal thing called Humane
Learning, and, tho* one would have thought, that a dose (...) New-Light would
have purged it all a way, yet there are some confused dregg^ behind, and he
will try if they may not help at a dead life; and let us see how he will manage
it, Though (says he) the Scriptures contain a full and sufficient Declaration
of all Christian Doctrine, yet they (...) not contain the whole mind and will
and counsil of God, as some say they do. and, pray So, who ever said so? Qui
been distingui^ been docet. If by the Mind, Will, and Couns^l of God, he
intends the Eternal Decrees and Purposes (as these words are often taken) then
we never said nor thought that the Scriptures contain a full discovery of these
they are the Secret things which belong to God; and are so far revealed in
Scripture (...), and Providential Accomplishments, as God sees meet; and there
are some new discoveries of them every day. But if he means the Preceptive Will
of God, discovering to man what is his Duty, in order to his Happiness; then,
not we only, but he also, Sect. 1, 2. says that they do contain all, (If he
says any thing at all) and in this sense (besides which he says nothing to
purpose) here is a plain Contradiction; for to say that a thing contain all the
parts and yet not the Whole, is so in the Letter, whatever it be in his spirit.

But let us see how he proves it; and here we have a Reason for it, and then a
tedious Induction of diverse Instances, and they make it as plain as can be,
except you be in the Darkness.

1. The Reason is Because (and if every thing that men put Because to, may
stand for a Reason, his is a good one) there are many things wherein God does
reveal of His Counsel to His Children, which are not in the Scripture, either
expressly or consequentially, altogether, Necessary for their peace and Comfort.
i. e. Either some new Duties which were not contained (no not consequentially)
in the Scriptures; or some new Promises, which the Word of God referrs not to;
and New Duties, and new Promises make a new Gospel, against which we are
awfully cautioned, Gal. 1. 8. If there be new Duties, they must contain a new
Doctrine not revealed by the Scripture; but he gives no encouragement to
believe any such; Sect. 2. If new promises, they must refer to Purgatory; for
the Scripture has given all that belong to Time and Eternity, The life that
now is, and that which is to come; 1. Tim. 4. 8. And if he mea^ only that there
are New Providence which contribute to their peace and Comfort; (...) it is
nothing to the purpose, so he should have done well to have imparted a little
o^ his Light to us, to teach us how to extract this grace and comfort, without
making use of the Scriptures to that end.

2. Let us see how far his Instances will help him; he gives us Five, though
one to the purpose had bin worth five hundred such as these.

1. The first respects a man's Assurance of his present state of Grace, in his
inward Calling; as he entitles it. The knowledge whereof, he says, is a part
of God's Counsil; i. e. it is God's will, and his duty that he be acquainted
with it. That it is a duty we never denied; but that it is by the Scripture
that we know it to be a duty, we believe, see 2. Cor. 13. 5. 2. Pet. 1. 10. But
then, the Assurance it self cannot be infallibly gained by Scripture or
Scripture Consequence, but only by the Spirit of God: and for this he cites
Romans 8. 16. very unhappily for himself, if he had thought of it; for by this
very Citation, he gives us another point; viz. that it is by the Scripture that
we come to know that we must have our assistance from the Spirit alone; nay
more, he grants that the Scripture gives the infallible marks of such an
estate; (...), but the Spirit must apply all this, or it cannot be known; that
is the Mystery then, but what avails this? Why only this? the Work of the
Spirit is neither Scripture nor Scripture-Consequence; and who knew not that as
well as he? But if the Scriptures be the Instrument which the Spirit uses to
work this Assurance in us by his instance is impertinent. We assert and believe,

1. That the Spirit of God is the Author or Efficient of all Grace in the
hearts of Believers; and therefore is called The Spirit of Grace. 2. That he
^seth the Word of God in Scripture, (...) putting Men into that state upon
which their Assurance is built, Jam. 1. 18. (...). Pet. 1. 23. 3 die. That the
Witness of the Spirit is Co-witnessing with our spirits, Romans 8. 16. which is
necessary to make the Evidence Authentic. 4 thly. That the Testimony of our
Spirits is an Evidence that is drawn from these infallible marks, which, but
for the SCRIPTURE we had not known to be such; and if the Spirit should apply
any other evidence but what is according to Scripture, by G. K.'s own Doctrine,
we are not bound to believe it.

2. The next instance refers to an Inward Call to the Ministry; and runs upon
the same foolish notion with the former, and needs no further Answer: only let
it be here laid by in store, That he pretends to own such a distinct Office in
the Church, which the Practice of the Quakers makes a Gift Common to all they
account to be of the true Church, both men and women,

3. In his third Instance he begs a Principle which will never be Granted him,
viz. that men are to tarry for an Inward Call to pray or perform any religious
Duty; which being Voluntary on the Spirit's part, he concludes cannot be known
simply by the Scriptures. But let it be here remarked,

1. That Moral Duty depends on the Precept, and not on inward Motions: Prayer
(which he refers to in particular) is to be without ceasing, 1. These. 5. 19. i.
e. every day, and on all occasions. 2. That the Motion to do any thing, which
is at any time upon us, is to be tried by the Scriptures, whether it be of God,
for we are bidden to try the Spirits, and are directed to the Law and Testimony
as our Rule, and if it be not there Revealed, G. K. tells us we need not
believe it. 3. We are commanded to stir up the Grace that is in us; and how
often have we David at this? yea, when we want the Spirit for Prayer, we are to
pray for the Spirit.

4. As to his next instance referring to our Enquiring and discovering what is
the mind of God in our Carriage under His Hand, and in the management of our
weighty Affairs; when he has said all he can, the Word of God, or the
Scripture, is that which must ultimately resolve us, That, to know What is
Duty, depends on Divine Revelation, we are Agreed: That God did sometimes
reveal His Will extraordinarily to His Servants of Old, we deny not, but that
the Word of God in Scripture is that which to us in Gospel Times, since the
Canon was perfected, Answers all the other ways of Revelation is an Article of
our Creed, and we think we have Scripture-warrant for it, 2. Pet. 1. 19. etc.
As to the Case of Marriage, which he talks of, and instanceth in the carriage
of Abraham's servant, it is quite aliene to his purpose: for who ever asserted
that God's providence is bound to follow Scripture Rules, being supreme and
arbitrary? But still in our serving of this Providence, and knowing how to use
it to His glory, and particularly to know what is the mind and will of God to
us in this Providence, we have no other Rule to inform our selves by, but the
Scriptures; and though the Spirit must reveal it, yet this is the thing Revealed.

Where as he tells us, that Philip, Peter, and others, were extraordinarily
called to such and such services, it is readily replied, that That was
extraordinary, and without warrant for us ordinarily to expect the like:
moreover, the things they were called to, were such as the Scripture satisfied
them to be according to God.

Finally, We deny not but that the Spirit of God does still put an impulse on
the spirits of His people frequently, but is it self-evident, or must not the
Warrantableness of it be tried by Scripture-Rules? Let G. K. if he can, give an
instance of a Quaker that ever had such a self-evidenceing extraordinary Call,
as Philip Peter, etc. had in former days. How impertinently he quotes Fam. 4.
15. to prove his Assertion, [ if the Lord will] may soon be seen. He interprets
it of a Will not to be known by the Scripture, but by the Spirit without it;
whereas any man of common sense may perceive that the sense of that Text is
this; That when a man is satisfied that his design is Lawful, he is then to
acknowledge that his affairs are subject to the Ruling Providence of God, who
may either further or impede his Undertaking as He will; and how comes he to be
satisfied in this but by the Scriptures? If Providence furthers him, he is
satisfied that it was Gods Will to suffer it; if He puts a stop to it, it
discovers the secret Will of God revealing it self in this particular, and how
to demean himself under this he has also from the Word; and what is all this
to their inwardly feeling a Command or Permission, which he idly talks of?

5. Here we are told of God's Answering the returns of the Prayers of His
people; A Quakerism! i. e. Nonsense. And we have him at length concluding his
impertinent fourth Paragraph, with Assuring us, That the Scripture promises
applied by the Spirit are the inward Voice of God to His children: but why has
he been all this while fighting with his own shadow, if this be all he intends?

Sect. 5. Now he draws his Conclusion, Therefore the Scripture does not contain
all the Word or Words of God: whereas we thought that if he had concluded from
the premises, he should have said, Therefore it does, because all these are
nothing but Scripture, either expressly or consequentially. He brings in Act.
12. 24. The word grew and multiplied to prove his Assertion; but we might ask
him, whether he intends its multiplying by new Inspirations or Revelations, or
by multiplied Efficacy? Did not he himself resolve us, that there was no new
Doctrine? and thence we infer that there was no new Word, in the sense we are
disputing.

Sect. 6. What have we here? Christ and His Apostles expounded the scriptures
by Inspiration, and yet taught no new Doctrine. Sure he forgets himself, was
not the whole frame of the Gospel Dispensation a New Model? And hence there
were new Institutions; see Heb. 7. 12. Chapt. 8. 7, 8. and 13. 10. for which
things there was required extraordinary Inspiration; and therefore to his
Demand, Why may it not be so now? we answer, Because the Canon is perfected;
and whereas he asserts that it is so, because some do at this day expound the
scripture by the same spirit; though it be impertinent, for if it be the
Scripture it is not a new thing revealed; yet we have also to charge him with a
Fallacy purposely used, in the word Spirit, if taken personally, for the Holy
Ghost, it is beside the case, if for His Gifts, or the manner of His dispensing
of Himself to and by His servants, we have but his word for it, and that not
very well agreeing to 1. Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. and if his own Rule be true, viz.
that such men's Exposition as have no infallible spirit cannot be the word of
God, he has thrown himself as well as us, and his book is to be little
regarded, being full of Mistakes, Nonsense, and Lies: had he been infallible,
he would not in his 12 th Article against us, have charged that upon us which
we never believed, much less professed.

Sect. 2. Here we have a great stir about the word ( Logos,) but indeed a mere
Logomachy, and lest he should not have senses enough to lose it in, he falls
into Tautologies: Somebody might do well to ask him, what different fense he
finds between, Communication, Words, Talk, and Speech? But the knack is, it
signifies the Scripture only in a thirteenth rare and improper sense; and yet
this is more than some of his friends will allow it.

But let that pass. He has two or three Queries to puzzle us withal; though he
takes upon him to answer them himself.

His first Quaery is, Whether the Scripture contains all the Word or Words of
God? and that he denies, for the reasons already given, which are none at all:
Well, if they will not set us down, he will try what Scripture. Metaphors will
do; and now we must observe that The Word is compared to the Rain and Dew,
De^t. 32. 2. and to Bread, (...). 15. 16. Now the drops of Rain and dew, and
the small grains of flower, in bread cannot be numbered; ergo the Scripture
contains not all the Word of God. But let us ask him (if he may be spoken to
after such a profound Revelation as this) whether he allows it to be a good
Interpretation of Scripture Allusions, to apply all that is in the thing
alluded to, to that which it is compared with? or is it more safe to restrain
it to that particular thing for which the Comparison was made? Why then may not
the Word be Resembled to the Rain and Dew, for the fruitful Efficacy of it on
the hearts of God's people? and to Bread, from the spiritual Nutriment it
affords? wiser men than G. K. have thought so.

As to his 2 nd, Q^^stion, it is mere Quibling, We directly say, That The
Scriptures are properly the revealed Will of God, which was Metaphorically, and
Anthropopathos called His Words, because God by them does signify to us His
Mind, as we do ours to others by words, and this belongs to the Scriptures as
they are written, or spoken.

To his last Question We only say, Let him first tell us, whether he intends
the Grammatical sense of the words, or the Gracious sense of them upon the
heart, and we shall know what to say to him. As for the sense in which he
yields the Scripture to be the Word of God, he talks idly, confounding a
Metonym. Efficientis with a Metonym. Signi.

Reflections on Cap. 2. of New Revelations and Inspirations.
The Fancy of New Divine Revelations and Inspirations, being the Pillar of
Quakerism, it concerned him to treat the Scriptures with such caution, as to
leave room to introduce this Figment, else he had undone his whole Cause: and
yet it will be found that he has granted so much there, that he must needs
contradict himself here, as will be made evident.

In this Chapter the Dispute is, Whether (...) divine Revelations and
Inspirations of the Spirit of God he now ceased? He undertakes the Negative
against us: but indeed the whole is nothing (...) but mere Legerdemain.

The right Stating of the Controversy between us, will abreviate and
facilitate our work, in animadverting on this tedious and i^significant
Chapter. In order to that, these three Terms, Inspiration, Revelation and New,
must be rightly understood. Words are used to express our minds by, and are to
be taken in the sense commonly used among men; and when any are used
aequivocally, such as use them must have Liberty to interpret their own meaning.

As to the Word [ Inspiration] it is vulgarly understood (in Divinity) to
intimate an Inward, extraordinary Discovery of the mind of God, made by the
Holy Ghost in the hearts of His servants; so, 2. Tim. 3. 16. and so we
difference it from those ordinary and mediate ways in which we come to this
acquaintance. [ Revelation] is applicable indeed to any way in which a thing is
made known to us which we knew not before: and so the word may be (as sometimes
in Scripture) applied to any Discovery which is made to us of the Will of God.
But this word has also attained a particular Appropriation to such a Knowledge
of Divine Truths, as would never have been attained by the best Improvement of
natural light or reason, without the Manifestation of the Spirit: and this is
either Immediate or Mediate, the Immediate is the same with Inspiration: the
Mediate is that which is commonly called Illumination, the Spirit of God
helping us with His Influences, whenever we are in the Use of means. The word
[ New] may be applied either to the kind of the things revealed or to the Act
of Revealing. Here then our Bele^f in this matter may be reduced to these
Heads. We do believe, 1. That Saving Illuminations of the Spirit, influencing
the hearts of His people with the knowledge of Christ and His Truths, are
common and needful to all Believers in all ages, Rev. 8. 9. 2 ndly. That in
this sense, there are new Revelations made from time to time to God's Children,
i. e. subjectively, 2. Pet. 3. 18. 3 dly. That such inspirations as the
Prophets and Apostles of old had, by which God discovered His mind to them
immediately, enabling them to declare these things to others, were not common
to believers in these times. 1. Cor. 12. 29. and verse. 10. 4 thly. That the
Scriptures do so fully contain the mind of God in all things necessary for
Faith and Salvation, that there need no such Inspirations to be afforded to any
and therefore they are now ceased. 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17. with H^b. 1. 1,2. 5 thly.
That therefore there are no new Revelations made, since the Canon was
perfected, of things or Doctrines which are not contained in the Scriptures, we
are therefore directed hither for our establishment against Seducers 2. Tim. 3.
13, 14. and not to abide by this, is to make it appear that they have no light
in them, Isa. 8. 20. If now we examine what he opposes to this Doctrine, we
shall find nothing but Fallacy and Foolery.

Sect. 1. His first charge here is upon the Assemblies Confession, in the very
first Article, and truly, If men lay the first stone wrong, the whole Fabric
must be weakened thereby. That which he alleges against them, is, they are
admirably blind in their bringing in particular Citations of Scripture; and we
may retort, that he is admirably base in perverting their sense, and design in
Citing of them. They had asserted several things in this paragraph, for proof
whereof they directed to the Scriptures printed in the Margent, which he
perversely reflects upon, as brought only to prove that one Assertion (which is
not to^idem verbis made by them) That all new Revelation is ceased. They had
said that God had pleased to commit His declared and revealed will of things
which concern man's salvation, wholly to Writing; for which they allege, Prove.
2. 19,20,21. and do not these Texts assure us, that God has written His Word to
us, and that this Word tells us what God says, yea, and to speak otherwise is
an evidence that men have no saving light in them? Which, by the way, tells us
what to judge of the Quakers light; and one would think this is to purpose, and
has something of proof in it, and to the same purport are Luc. 1.2,3,4. Romans
15. 4. Man. 4. 4. and 7. 10. They had again told us, That God had made
Scriptures necessary; and for the Evidence, direct us to, 2. Tim. 3. 15, and
can Impudence deny the Inference from that Text? Finally they tell us, That the
Scripture being thus given to be a Rule for Faith and Manners, and being
completely sufficient to its ends, The former ways of Gods revealing Himself
are ceased, for which they cite, Heb. 1. 1, 2. 2. Pet. 1. 19. which one would
think, if joined with the former, especially 2. Tim. 3. 15, 16, 17. might prove
it. Does not the Apostle Heb. 1. 1, 2. renounce the former ways in the times of
the Law, to give place to this one and better in Gospel times; and what can be
do that (...) after the King? And does not the Apostle Peter in the fore cited
place, tell us there is a surer way than an Immediate voice from heaven? and
what have stars to do when the Sun is risen? In sum, all these Scriptures,
are brought to prove what G. K. confesses, Cap. 1. Sect. 1, 2, 3. nor do we
see what absurdity would follow, upon our granting that New revelations of any
truth, not before made known, ceased, before John the Apostle deceased, though
his other extraordinary gifts did continue.

Sect. 2. And pray what do we assert, but what he seems plumply to grant here
viz. That the rule to try all doctrines is completely contained in the
Scriptures: only the business is, that this must in no wise prove the ceasing
of new revelations, or inspirations, or prophesying. Let it for the present
suffice to say, that he who goes about to confound terms which are used for
distinction, has some cheating trick to impose upon us: it has therefore been
the guise of Heretics in all ages; but possibly he will interpret himself more
fully in the next.

Sect 3. Here therefore he furnishes us with a Distinction, which if he will
give security that he will stand by, and make it appear that he intends no
more, we will try for an accommodation. We have already told the world, that we
deny not new Revelations, subjective and mediate, i. e. that the Spirit of God
blesses the Use of means, Reading, Hearing, etc. with His Influence, opening
the eyes of their minds, and giving them a spiritual Illumination; and if that
be all he would have, he might have let us alone.

But when he comes to interpret himself, he pleads for the Immediate and
extraordinary way of Revelation of these things* such as the Apostles had,
whose understandings Christ opened at once, to understand the Scriptures,
without ordinary helps, and upon whom the Holy Ghost came in cloven tongues,
etc. which is far another thing, and of which the Quakers can make no proof.

Sect. 4. The Fallacy of this Paragraph (and indeed of the whole Chapter) lies
in his confounding Inspiration, Revelation, and Illumination, which ought
warily to be distinguished. That Christ by His Spirit does give to His Children
another sense of the Excellency, sweetness and Glory of divine Truths than
natural men have, we believe, and experience confirms; but what is this to
Inspiration? Here therefore for once, let us observe the main differences
between Inspiration and Illumination: Illumination is common to all Believers:
Inspiration is peculiar to some, as Prophets, Apostles, etc. as has already
been observed and proved. Illumination ordinarily accompanies the diligent Use
of the means; Romans 10. 17. Inspirations usually came upon men immediately, and
without using any means for them. Illumination becomes habitual; Inspiration
was transient, off and on Illumination increases gradually, Inspirations were
greater or lesser, as God saw meet. Finally. Illumination is always
understood, whenas Inspirations sometimes are not understood by such as had
them. Dan. 12. 8.

His inference, viz. that on suposal of Illlumination, or mediate Revelation,
we must needs grant it to be the same in kind with what the Saints had of Old,
is dubious. We ask him what saints he intends? If he means ordinary Believers,
we grant it; if inspired Prophets, we deny it; for such Inspirations differ
specifically from ordinary Revelations: and his spirit misinformed him, when he
cited Cant. 2. 4. He brought me into his banqueting house and again, He brought
me into his (...). What again is there, when it is the same Text, and the same
word, diversely rendered?

His following Rhapsody in commendation of the Quakers silent Meetings we leave
to themselves; for our own parts we have no such way of the Communion of
saints, and yet let not any think that we deny the sweetness of retired
Communion between God and the fouls of His People in secret prayer, meditation
etc. his language therefore about it touches us not.

To what purpose he (p. 16.) concludes this long Section with a Comparison
taken from humane sciences, which are taught only to such as have innate
principles in them upon which Teachers build, we know not, if it be (as it
seems) to prove that men have the seeds of all Divine Truths in their natural
light, and therefore the Revelations of God's Spirit are only the drawing out
of these Principles into exercise, by the meet improvement of their Reason, and
discovering only that the knowledge whereof they had in them seminally before;
it labors of two faults, Falsehood and Impertinency. Falsehood, inasmuch, as,
though the light of nature has in it the Remains of many Theological notions,
and though man, as a reasonable Creature, is a Subject capable of receiving the
impression of Revelations, yet there are no feeds of Evangelical Truths in the
hearts of men; nor is there, any witness antecedently in the Consciences of
men, to assert to the Truth of them; the credit of them wholly depending upon
divine Testimony. Impertinency, because it serv's not to prove now
Inspirations, but rather to prove them needless; the mere Excitation of the
light within, by his inward Teachings, being (on this principle) sufficient; we
hope he will not deny a manifest difference to be between Inspiration and
Excitation: nor is the Text he alleges ( Act. 17.) any thing to his purpose,
if he would prove new Revelation from it; for the Apostle is there only
endeavoring to convince 'em, that the light of Nature would (if attended)
inform them of the vanity of Idolatry, of the Being of the eternal God, of the
incongruity of their manner of worshipping Him; and this in order to his
preparing of them to hearken to the Revelations of the Gospel.

Sect. 5. How arrogantly and falsely he charge Nonsense upon the Reverend
Assembly, for acknowledging Illumination, and denying of New Revelation, will
be gathered from the premises, and needs not to be here again insisted on; for
indeed, inward Illumination is not Revelation in the sense wherein we deny it;
nor do his Texts cited help him; for we still deny that every one who is taught
of God is inspired, and he has not proved it.

When he says (p, 19.) to be taught of God, etc. as the Prophets and Apostles,
what is it but to be taught by Divine inward Revelation? It it is a mere
Sophism. We consider the Prophets and Apostles, either as such extraordinary
Officers, or as they were Believers, for they had this double Capacity: to say
that all were or are taught as they were, in the former sense is utterly false,
as has bin proved; to acknowledge them so in the latter sense, proves not such
Revelations; yea, Paul himself, was not always inspired, but sometimes gave
his Judgment as one illuminated. 1. Cor. 7. 40. Nor can he prove, that 1. Cor.
2. 10. is applicable to all Believers in the same sense; the Revelation or
Inspiration belonged to the Apostles, the Application, or discovery by
Illumination belonged to all believers in their measures: how ungroundedly
therefore does he here assert, that Paul holds forth that his Illumination was
Revelation? must he not so contradict himself in 1. Cor. 12. 29, 30.?

Nor can we altogether pass the scurrilous Title, he puts on the Reverend
Assembly, calling them Faith-Makers; who never pretended to any new Revelations
of any Article of Faith more than is contained in Scripture, and therefore have
little Reason to be charged for making a new Faith. But if it were enough for
the Archangel to say to the Devil, we content ourselves with so saying to one
of his Emissaries, The Lord rebuke thee.

Sect. 6. Here he makes a Clutter between Subjective and Objective
Illumination; he has no great matter to say against the Distinction it self;
but he finds fault with us for denying Objective Illumination; but he might
have spared his labor and heat, for if he will be patient, we will not deny
that neither; i. e. That the Spirit of God reveals the Object to the soul, as
well as enlightens the Subject, and if this will do, let him be quiet: only we
say, He reveals no new object besides what is revealed in the Scripture, and we
thought that he had said so too in this very Chapter, S. 3. But now he would
insinuate ( p. 21. which he dares not speak out) that he would have new Truths,
or Objects, besides what are revealed in the Scripture, i. e. either expressly
or consequentially, o^ he says nothing; let him but reconcile his third and
sixth Paragraph, and we shall know where to have him.

As for the Comparison by which he does illustrate (or rather scandalize) our
Doctrine, as if we acknowledged No other sight of the Truth, but as one that
sees England in a map, but never saw the land, or one that hears and reads of
meat, but never saw and tasted it: it is altogether aliene: we believe with the
Apostle, that all our sight here is in a glass, and that darkly or
aenigmatically, I. Cor. 13. 12. and that we walk by faith, and not by sight. 2.
Cor. 5. 7. and yet we believe that here is a spiritual feeling, and tasting,
and satisfaction in all this, Heb. 11. 1. we are not therefore concerned in
this piece of Raillery, with which his 22 nd page is stuffed; only we observe
his spirit, like that of the primitive Persecutors, who clothed Christians in
skins of beasts, and then worried them.

Sect. 7. We dissalow not his Distribution of the knowledge of God into
Discurssive and Intuitive; but how poorly he improves it to his purpose, let
the Reader judge: for if in the mean while our Intuitive Knowledge brings no
new truths to us, but what are contained in the Word of God, he hurts not our
Doctrine in the least. That Intuitive as well as Discurssive Knowledge may be
in diverse Christians in different degrees, we never questioned; but when he
has made all the splutter he can about his intuitive knowledge, he can never
prove it to be any other than that inward Satisfaction which the Spirit of God
affords to the minds of His people about the things that are contained in the
Holy Scriptures, by the particular and personal Application of them to their
hearts, and let G. K. or any other of his friends (if they can) produce any
once instance to evidence that ever they had any Intuitive Knowledge of one
divine Truth, whereof they had not a discursive knowledge before.

And how much he vilifies the Word of God by comparing it only to the Cup which
reveals the wine, and the Spirit to the Wine in the Cup, is plain, David had
another Opinion of the word, Ps. 19. 7 etc. and Christ gives it another
Encomium, Joh. 6. 63.

Sect. 8. He introduces an Hypothesis, If they say, etc. but who of us ever
said so? make a Castle in the Air, and then discharge pot-Guns at it: but we do
say, that all this makes nothing for his New Revelations, although it affords
glad Tidings to the fouls o^ God's Children.

Had he any Forehead left him, he would never have here affirmed, that we
preach altogether an absent Christ; we always professed our selves to believe,
That Christ is really and properly present with His people i^ His Ordinances
and Application of Himself to them, only we say, He is so spiritually and not
corporally, and it is strange that such pretenders to spirit, should deny a
Reality and Property to it.

Sect. 9. What little Reason he has to charge us with Nonsense, will be seen
in what has been already said at the beginning of this Chapter: to which we
refer the Reader. But how comes G. K. by so much modesty as to grant, That
there is both ordinary and extraordinary Revelation, and that theirs is but
ordinary and protends not an equality to that of the Apostles, either in degree
or variety? Some Quakers have been otherwise persuaded; else had their Lucas
never said, If thou have a mind to a Scripture, thou may write as good an one
thy self. But if he meanno other Revelation but what Christ did Joh. 5. 25. we
allow it; only that differed more than in degree from what the Apostles had as
such officers.

Reflections on Chapt. 3d. of the Supreme Judge and Rule of Controversies in
Religion.
Let us not wrangle before we know what it is for. The Dispute here is about
the Judge or Rule of Controversies in Religion: and observe, 1. That it is only
about Matters of Religion 2. That Judge, and Rule here intend one and the same
thing, viz. the Standard by which things are to be tried and judged. 3. It
refers to Controversies, i. e. where principles are in debate. Now we will
suppose two kinds of Controversies, one between men and men. one party and
another, each pretending to have truth on their side. The other between a man
and himself, having a debate in his own mind, and not being as yet settled: The
Question then is, What (as a Rule) is to set men down, and put an end to these
Debates? and let us go together as long as we can.

Sect. 1. He seems here to bid fair for an Agreement, at least in the first
sort of the Controversy, i. e. between men and men, for we have only outwardly
to deal one with another; and he assures us that the Scripture is the
Touchstone by which the Doctrine is to be tried; and then surely it must judge
and determine, or what is the Advantage of Trying? Only he spoils all by
telling us. They have a greater proof, viz. the inward Testimony of the Holy
Ghost. We would only for the present ask him, (though that is not all we have
to say to him) whether this inward Testimony be greater ( as a rule) to judge
another by, and set him down? and this because his words import that we are to
judge by the Scripture whether the Testimony be from the Spirit or no; for in
what other way can the Spirit of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets? else
when a Quaker comes to tell us he has a Revelation, and this is a Testimony
above the Scriptures, it would be impudence in us to search the Scripture, if
the thing revealed be so or no.

What though the Spirit witnesses in us that this is the Rule, does it hereby
become no Rule, or an inferior one? how absurd!

Sect. 3. Here also he begins fair, and would make us believe he is good
natured, for he gives the Scripture a preference to all other Writings, and for
that reason allows it to be a sufficient outward Standard; and one would think
that were enough to try Controversies between men and men, and determine them,
though his Reason is but awk; viz. Because Scripture-Writers had greater
Measures of Wisdom etc. so that he allows them a gradual difference of
Revelation, and not specifical, which may be judged of by what has been
already said, and what is it to us how or in what measures God revealed Himself
extraordinarily to His Prophets, who pretend to no such Revelation at all? It
suffices, that the lowest degrees of these Revelations were infallible, and
therefore one Scripture is not less so than another: Nor shall we trouble our
selves to prevestigate his Rabbinical Fopperies about the different degrees of
Revelation, by which (no doubt he has raised his credit much with the poor
blind Quakers; whereas indeed, if a man had studied to make himself a Fool in
print, he could not easily have done it more effectually; and though we grant,
That God reveals Himself gradually to His servants, and to some more than to
others; yet his Citatation of Exodus 6. 3. proves not what he brings it for; it
intends not that the Fathers did not know the Name Jehovah, (we find the
Contrary, Genesis 22. 14. 26. 24. 27. 20.) but that He did in His providence
rather exemplify Himself by the name of Almighty, in Protecting and defending
of the Patriarchs, but now He would most eminently display that of Jehovah in
the completing of the promises which He had made unto them.

In fine, he confesses ( p. 32.) That the Quakers degrees are so low that they
are not in the state of Perfection, but they may by humane frailty in some
measure or way, more or less (tread softly) decline or depart from the pure
infallible teachings of the spirit; and then we hope this kind of spirit is not
superior to that which spoke infallibly in the Scripture; and from which we are
assured that the Prophets, and Apostles in their Dictating or Writing the
Scripture, did not decline in any measure or way more or less.

When he infers from hence, that their Doctrine is to be tried by the
Scripture; and their spirit by the Spirit of Truth: We would ask him what
Difference he here puts between Doctrine and Spirit; and let him (if he can)
show how their spirit is to be tried but by their Doctrine, or what Spirit they
can be tried by which will carry Conviction, but only that which breathes in
the Scriptures: and it would be a great stroke he would drive, if he could
reconcile our being led infallibly by the Spirit, to our being mean while in
the same things left to mistakes; which is the very sense of his Words.

Sect. 3. Here also he will grant the Scripture (or the Spirit speaking in it)
to be a Supreme Judge in a figurative sense, so we do not restrain it hither,
but allow Him to speak something without Scripture: But this has been already
detected of vanity, for how shall we jugde of the Spirit, but by the Scripture?
That the Spirit of God must open our Understandings to discern the spiritual
meaning of the word of God, we never doubted; and that Prayer and Meditation
are helps to it, who questions? But what is this to the purpose? In sum, the
Spirit is the Interpreter, but to call Him the Rule is Nonsense.

Sect. 4. We had waited long to know the Reason why, Cap. I. S. I. he calls the
Scripture the Outward Rule, and now he fairly tells us, viz. Because the Spirit
is the inward rule. i. e. To determine all Controversies, at least such as we
have in our selves a debate about. The Text alleged is impertinent, for the
Testimony of God there spoken of is the Scripture witnessed to by the Spirit:
and we must distinguish between the Testator and the Testimony, the latter of
which only can in any proper sense be called the Rule, and let it here be well
observed, That the Scripture is a Judge in it self, and does always carry the
Determination in it, whether we understand it or no, so as to be able to make
use of it as such. And further, That it is not necessary that we have a saving
Illumination for the mere Doctrinal improvement of it, since the Scripture is
delivered in humane Language, and there is a logical knowledge of it to be
attained by Industry, so far as to decide Controversies in Religion, by such as
are not savingly illuminated, nor is it the spirit of the Disputant, but the
convincing light of the word of God it self, which is to sway our Judgments
and set them down satisfied as to the Doctrine.

Reflections on Chapt. 4th. of Ministerial Gifts etc.
It will be superfluous to quarrel with him about his method, since we are
necessitated to follow him in his own path.

Sect. 1. He has cased us of some Trouble by acknowledging, that the things
contained in this Chapter have a close connection with the matter of the
pr^ceding, i. e. if his Doctrine about Revelation and Inspiration will not
hold, neither will the ensuing: there will therefore (having already detected
the Fallacy of those) be need of little more than brief touches at the things
here asserted.

His Charge in this Section, that we assert, Natural and acquired gifts of
letter Learning (without a divine Inspiration) to be sufficient to qualify a
Gospel Minister, and that Grace or true Piety is only accidental; may look
black at the first view: but let our Judgment in that point be fully weighed,
and we shall have no reason to be ashamed of it.

That a man may be so Qualified, as to be capable of being Called to the Office
of a Minister by a Gospel Church, and yet not truly pious, we fear not to
assert, but still we believe that no man can discharge any Office of Trust
acceptably to God, without saving Grace. We here presume (and shall have
occasion to prove it anon) That there is a mediate Call necessary to introduce a
man into the work of the Ministry; since the Apostles times; and they who are
to call them, must have some rule of discerning to regulate their Call by,
which must be something discernible; that their piety cannot be discerned as
such, he will anon put us upon proving: If therefore this were necessary to the
Essence of the Officer, we could never know who is, or who is not a Minister.
But de facto, Christ Himself, condemns the Scribe and Pharisees for Hypocrites,
and yet acknowledges their Office, Mat. 23. 2, 3. Christ Himself made Judas,
not only a Minister, but an Apostle; we shall shortly see what he ha^ to say
against this. As for his Asserting tha^ by divine Revelation a Quaker can
infallibl^ know a man's spiritual estate, it is precarious, presumptuous and
false: for though Go^ knows all men's hearts, yet that He gives infallible Rules
to know them by, ordinary^^ or immediately cannot be evidenced: the Apostles
themselves never pretended to it, but were often mistaken: Judas was not
suspected by his fellow-Apostles; Simon Magus past for a while, till he
discovered himself; Demas went long unsuspected, and w^ in high credit with
Paul: We acknowledge that men may discover themselves by such things as are
inconsistent with saving Grace and by this way we have too much Cause to be
persuaded by Scripture Rules, that G. K is an Apostate and an unsanctified man
but all men's sins do not (like his) go before to Judgment.

His Inference then, That Hence a man cannot be known to be a true Minister
without (...) discovery, is vain: he can by our Doctrine. which is according to
Scripture, tho not by him which is altogether unscriptural; our people
therefore are left in no perplexity about it.

Sect. 2. His Assertion, That No man can be a true Christian without Divine
Inspiration, (...) hither-to unproved by him, and disproved by us: and were it
true (as it is otherwise) his Consequence, viz. That without the same none can
be a Gospel Minister, is inconsequent: nor is it any absurdity to say, That a
man may be a true Minister, and yet not a true Christian, i. e. he may be
orderly called to the Office of the Ministry, though yet he may not be savingly
brought home to God: There is therefore an Ambiguity in the word [ True] which
may be applied either to the Professors (...) to the Profession.

Sect. 3. He mistakes the Apostles meaning, when he distinguishes between the
ministers of the letter and of the spirit, 2. Cor. 3. 3, 6. for that whole
Context assures us, that by the Letter he means the Old Testament, by the
Spirit the New Testament, and the Reason of his so Calling them, is thence
easy to be gathered.

His arguing the Necessity of Saving Grace because, Spiritual gifts are
requisite, is altogether illogical, nor does it at all help him, because these
also were purchased by Christ for he has purchased other things for us besides
Grace. That there is a specifical Difference between Gifts and Grace, is
certain (though both may meet in the same man, and we seek for both in every
Minister, to the best of our discerning) that these are separable of beyond
doubt; that a man may have Grace, and yet not spiritual gifts G. K. (implicitly
at least) acknowledges; yea Christ purchased Gifts for men, not merely for
their Salvation, but mainly for the Edifying of the body, so we are told ephesians.
4. 10, 11. that therefore because a man must have spiritual gifts to make him a
Minister, he must have saving Grace, is a Non Sequitur.

Sect. 4. And that these spiritual Gifts were discernible we deny not. There is
a fair and easy Trial to be made of them: but his inference that therefore
They could discern whether men were true or false Aopstles and Teachers,
sincere or Hypocrites, is to be better weighed: That false Apostles might be
proved by their false Doctrine. is nothing dubious: That Hypocrites might
discover themselves by their fruits is also easy to acknowledge; but that in
themselves, without any such Effects, and merely by their looks, there was or
is a spirit of immediate discerning them, (...) utterly untrue, neither has he
given us one Rule to direct us in it. As to his Citation of 1. Cor. 4. 19. to
prove this discerning, it helps him not, for the Apostle speaks not there of
their inward Grace, but of the fruits and effects of their Ministry, or of the
Conformity of their Conversation to their Doctrine.

And whereas he censures us for Limiting one man to preach only, it is not
true; we admit of one to preach one part of the day, and another on the other
part, where they are to be had: only we require that they be such as are fit
for the Ministry; and we would not have others to do it. Nor did the Apostle
intend that there should be any Confusion in this Affair, 1. Cor. 14. 29. and
and to very little purpose does he quote (...) Tim. 3. 5,6,7. (though we see
what he ^ould be at) for that is not appropriated to Teachers, but applicable
to all Professors; nor did we ever plead that Scandalous Ministers whose
Conversation is contradictory to their Profession and Doctrine should be
continued in that Function, when once they are discovered to be such. We
therefore concede to him, that there ought to be a Try^ of men, and (if he will
too) that it is n^^ merely whether what they preach be true Doctrine, but a
great deal more; yet it must necessity, be either of his Doctrine, his
Ministerial gifts, or his Life, or rather all thr^^ beyond which we are to seek
of what Try can be made by men; for man judges and must judge, according to
what can be know^ and the Searching of the heart is GOD's Prerogative.

Sect. 5. That because we pretend not t^^ Inspiration, therefore we lay no
claim to the spiritual gifts, is an Argument as vain as the author: Are there
no Spiritual gifts but Inspirations? are there not diversities of them see 1.
Cor. 12. 4, 5. Romans 12. 6,7,8. H^^ Inference, That hence We plainly confess
th^^ we have no infallible Discerning who is gracious we assent unto; and yet
we do believe w^ can discern of this as much as G. K. or any of his friends:
and his Charge that we please that all spiritual gifts are ceased, is
notoriously, false, for we try men by them; and (...) are sure that these may
continue, notwithstanding the Cessation of Inspirations; nor can he infer the
Contrary, till he prove (which he never will) that all spiritual Gifts belong
to the head of Inspirations: Hence neither does it follow, that we must d^ny an
Inward Call to the ministry; since there are other Criteria by which it may be
judged of, (...) sufficient Directory for which, we have in the Scriptures, and
have a power of Reasoning and Judging without immediate Revelation. for him
therefore to urge, That All that is not by Inspiration [ Church, Ministers,
Ordinances, Worship] must needs be of man's making, is insolent: Must every
thing that is not by Inspiration be Man-made? Has not Christ left Institutions
for His Church in His Gospel, that may sufficiently inform them in their Duty?
It is the Quakers that make Churches, and Ordinances, silent-meetings etc.
under a deluded pretense of Inspiration, without any Scripture Warrant.

On the same blind and perverse notion it is that he charge us with plainly
confessing that we have no Assurance, or Infallible Knowledge that we have the
Spirit of God, or any of that Grace which is the operation of the Holy Ghost.
For, First the Charge is false, and all the world knows that we stand to
maintain Infallible Assurance, against both Papists and Quakers and who ever
deny it. And 2ly. We are satisfied this may be had without Immediate
Revelation: A man may have the perception of such Operations in hi^ which by
Scripture Rules he may be able (...) judge of, that they are of the Spirit of
God he himself aiding them in this Examen: a^^ for what other end were all
these Rules given but to help us herein? Romans 8. 3. H^^. 12. 14. 1. Joh. 3. 14.
and many others.

His Cavil about Effective and Objective illumination is already answered, and
it is an ^^dious Aspersion that he casts upon us, That we make men stones,
that have no inward perception of what is acted upon their hearts; we believe
that Grace has a spiritual sense; and when the Spirit of God Influenceth it,
i^ can feel it: only there is Corruption i^ us too, and the Spirit of Delusion
sometimes excites that, under close pretenses which requires our Application to
the Word of God for a Determination, Isa. 8. 2^. His abuse of Heb. 12. 27.
interpreting the Apostle, by things made to intend things o^ men's making is
most gross, For it is certain these things were of God's making, viz. th^^ Old
Testamnt-Ordinances which were now t^ be taken away to give place to Gospel
Institutions of Christ's Appointment; and these are the Church, Ministry etc.
which we maintain. But let any man pursue him in the Paragraph, and he shall
perceive, that hi^ very design is to take away all Gospel Ordinances and
worship and reduce all to Inspirations; the Tendency whereof, to subvert the
whole design of Christ in his Gospel, is sufficiently Observable; for that all
these were there instituted is undeniable, That therefore must be antiquated if
this take place, contrary to Heb. 12. 28. and let serious souls beware of such
as would rob them of the Gospel.

His Sophisms in Charging us of Blasphemy, for saying, We have the Spirit of
God, and yet saying, we have no infallible spirit; as if therefore we charged
the Spirit of God Himself of being fallible, may seem to have some influence
upon weak minds, (see page 41) it may therefore need a little Discussion:
Observe then, that the Evidence which we have within us of the Certainty of our
spiritual State, or of any spiritual motions in us, is confirmed by two
witnesses, God's Spirit, and (...) own, Romans 8. 16. and these are two di^^^ct
witnesses, (the Quakers, indeed, have blasphemously confounded them, and made
them but one) now we acknowledged and believe that the witness of the spirit of
God is Infallible, He cannot be deceived, neither (...) He deceive by
witnessing to a falsehood; (...) the witness of our own spirit is Fallible;
because we are persons liable to mistakes Now, though the Spirit when He
witnesses does it Infallibly, yet He does not make our spirits Infallible; and
more than so, the Spirit of God witnesses as He will: sometimes He withdraws
His Testimony, and His Witness is commonly mediate, it is with our spirits:
Now, the way in which our spirits witness is rational, i. e. by searching our
state. or examining the Suggestions in us, and bringing these things to the
Rules of Trial given in Scripture, 2. Cor. 13: 5. In both the Examination and
Trial we may be mistaken, for we know but in part, and yet so far as the Spirit
of God confirms ^s by His Witness, we are infallibly assured.

We find also, that the inspired men of old (such as Paul) did not declare all
things to the people by Immediate Revelation, but some things as they were
skilful understanding Christians, influenced with the ordinary Assistances of
the Spirit of God, and rationally Judging of things: Hence Paul's distinction,
I. Cor. 7. 12, -- 25. and therefore the words alleged, verse, 40. I think,
etc. (for all his Railery) speaks thus much, That he did not suggest these
Advices by immediate Inspiration, but by the Common Assistances that God
affords His faithful Ministers.

Sect. 6. How blasphemously does he in this Section ascribe the effects of the
Scripture to the Ministers? he would have no Minister but such through whom
grace, spirit and life do emanate to the souls of the hearers; making them more
than merely instrumental in Converting and Edifying. We deny not but that a
gracious Minister is more likely to do good than another, but not by any power
of his own, but because, as he will be more faithful, so he may expect more of
Gods Assistance and Blessing: but that he can by any Virtue of his own, any
more heal a Soul, than those Apostles could the body of a Cripple, (who utterly
disclaim it Act. 3. 12.) we believe not, and we are confirmed by the Scripture,
Joh. 1. 13. And truly the Quakers want Charity, if they have such a virtue to
Convert and save all the world, and do not.

His Similitude of Ministers being called Flames of Fire (if it intend
Ministers, and not rather Angels) is not Argumentative, they may be so
compared, for their Activity, and Zeal, and not from the Efficacy in
themselves. And as little Cogent is his Instance of the Disciples, Luc. 24. 32.
for he forgot that Christ Himself was then the Preacher, who had a Divine
Power; and yet we deny not but that the same may be said of the preaching of
another, but then it is the Spirit of God coming in between the mouth of the
Speaker, and the hearts o^ the hearers who does it, yea, though Christ had the
Spirit without measure, yet how often did He preach without such Efficacy hence
His Complaint, Isa. 49. 4. Yea there were more plentiful Conversions after His
Ascension, by His Apostles, when the Holy Ghost was given, Act. 2. The
Scripture by which he would prove this, 1. Pet. 4. 11. is nothing to his
purpose; For the Ability there spoken of, is an outward estate enabling them to
give Alms, and more especially concerns the office of the Deaco^ in Relieving
the poor out of the Church Treasure, which must be done according to the stock
in hand; and what is this to a^ in ward Power of Converting souls?

Nor does he more exalt his Ministry tha^ he degradeth the Word of GOD, denying
it to be the Milk, which is to nourish us; making it nothing but a Bottle that
carries this Milk; and yet the Scripture he alludes to, calls it the Milk.
However, let it be the Bottle, still we must go to that for our Nourishment,
and draw it out of those breasts, and then there is no need of Immediate
Inspirations.

His Comparing Ministers to Fathers is Scriptural; but the Improvement of the
Similitude is his own, and like him. There are some things in which there is a
likeness between these, which gave occasion to the Comparison, but yet they are
far unequal Causes. A natural Father is a Father properly, for all G. K. denies
it, and is something more than an Instrument, he is a natural Efficient, a
procreant cause, but the Minister is not so in the spiritual Regeneration, but
merely instrumental (which he also grants) and the newborn Christian derives
no part of his new Nature from him, Joh. 1. 13. And as unhappy is his
improvement of the Metaphor of Seed, 2. Cor. 9. 10. Isa. 55. 10. The former of
which Texts only intends, that God has given them an estate to be able to
believe others withal; the latter is of the Word it self; (which is likened to
grain, which the Minister only sows) and which ^^keth rooting in the heart;
and fructifies; and what is all this to the Ministers being able to convert? or
what Force will it give to his Inference, Viz. How then can a graceless man
have any fruit or success; seeing all fruit (...) success belongs not to the
instrument as proceeding from it? It Is easily retorted, Why may not God (if he
will) make use o^ such men to convert others by, since it depends not on them
but Him? Herein He may make His power the more to appear though we have already
said, we believe the God ordinarily blesses the labors of the faithful with
the greatest success. But (...) limit Him not.

Sect. 7. Nor are we pinched or narrowed (as he insultingly if not triumphantly
boasts to prove our Call to the Ministry, notwistanding we deny it to be
immediate: nor yet are w^ necessitated to prove it mediate by deriving from the
Pope, who is Antichrist. We are no^ straightened about a Succession, as if that
only would make a Call mediate; (though we believe that Christ has had a Church,
and Ministry continued always ever since the Apostles.) A man's Call to the
Ministry either Inward or Outward; neither of the is Immediate: not the Inward
Call, or the persuasion which a man has that God callet him; he has it not by
Revelation, but by investigation, for which (besides his Inclination to it) he
must prove his own Fitness so it, which must be by the mediate Application of
himself to Scripture Rules, and judgin of himself by them. His Outward Call
also mediate, Viz. by men, on whom he ha^ no warrant to impose himself; and
should he say he has a Revelation for it, yet if he cannot prove it by
Scriptures, G. K. beleev's they have no Obligation to Credit him; whereas an
immediate Call is neither of men nor by men. Gal. 1. 1.

Sect. 8. Having routed the Ministers (in his arrogant Opinion) now to pulling
down the Ordinances: and good reason they should go together: and here (because
Preaching is ipso facto cashiered with the Preacher) he only levels his Canon
against Praying and Singing without Inspiration: and that both public and
private. and,

1. For Prayer, he sends a Challenge to produce one Instance in Scripture,
where Praying without the Spirit is commanded. We discover his Dilemma, and
shall avoid the Horn: If being commanded to pray without the Spirit be taken in
sensu Composito, i. e. to live content in a Graceless, Spiritless state, and
yet pray; or to rest in our natural Alities without seeking the Aids of the
Spirit of God; we believe there is no such Command in the Word of God: But if it
be taken in sensu Diviso, i. e. that as well men without the Spirit, as such as
have the Spirit are under a Command to pray, we affirm it, and can give both
Proof and Instance for it. Prayer is a moral Duty, and Want of Grace
discharges none from moral Obligations; for if it did, none of the apostate
Race of Adam would come under Condemnation. That Simon Magus had not the
Spirit, or saving Grace, we are sure, and yet Peter commands him to pray for
Grace and Conversion. He is also much mistaken in saying, Do they not grant
that all the prayers recorded in Scripture proceeded from Divine Inspiration
and Revelation? We never granted it, never will. The Scriptures themselves were
written by Inspiration; but all the things there written of were not so.
Abraham prayed for Ishmael, by a natural affection sanctified: and Paul's
Praying thrice against his thorn, was from a Sense of the Affliction, and a
Religious Persuasion that he was to go to God as Him who only could help him,
which he knew without Inspiration.

2. As for Singing: he does not Condemn the thing, for fear he should provoke
his Friends the Singing Quakers: but two Things he has to Charge us guilty of,
Singing with artificial music, and Notes or Tones, and singing on a Book: To
the first, it is so foolish, that it is not worth a Reply; for would he have
singing without singing? What Melody can there he without Notes, and Tones
measured measured by Art? Does he think Singing is only making a confused
Noise? or does the Spirit tune men's voice by immediate Inspiration? or are men
only to sing in the Spirit, i. e. sing and not sing? To the 2 nd. Singing on a
book pleads nothing for praying on a book, having different Reasons. In prayer
there is but one speaks, and the other are only to join their Amen; but in
Singing there is to be a joint Expressing themselves, by all the Community;
there must therefore be a known matter that is to be sung, and that in such a
Meeter as is accommodable to the Tune sung by them; the very nature of the
thing calls for this: and sure he will not say all this will come at once to
all alike by immediate Inspiration. Till therefore we can find better, we may
make use of David's which are suited to all Conditions of Gods people. These
Christ Himself with His Disciples made use of, and that at the Sacrament, Man.
26. 30. When they had sung a Hymn, which is a Scripture Title of some of
David's Psalms, which are distributed into Psalms, Hymns and Songs, to which
the Apostle advises Christians, Col. 3. 16. and these we are sure were given
by Inspiration; That any now made by men are so, there is nothing to prove.

Sect. 9. It is a pure piece of trifling whereby he would bass^e the Plea which
some make Viz. That their Ministers have their Call of the Church, and
therefore it is mediate; by telling us that Ministers were before Churches, an^
that this is to run in a Circle: for though we place not the whole of a
Ministers Ca^ in this, yet his Cavil is empty, In order the Calling of a
Church, we grant that Ministers are before it, and are Helps under Christ in
the Calling of it and such Christ used in the beginning of the Gospel, be these
were called extraordinarily and immediately by Christ Himself: but such
Ministers o^ not live for ever, and the Church abide when they are gone; and is
now in a Capacity of Supplying it self, and so there is room for a (...) Call;
and what Circle is there i^ this? There are Planters, and there are Wi^terers;
and both Ministers.

Sect. 10. One blow more at the Minister to make sure work. These are Eye-sores
Quakers and all Heretics* if they were out of the way, who discover all their
abuse detoct all their Fallacies and deceits, and establish people in the
Truth; what might the not do? If then they cannot persuade the^ to lay down
their Preaching, they will try they can persuade the people that they (...)
them no Maintenance, and if they can starve them out, the business is done.

His first proof that Ministers can require no Maintenance but what is
voluntary and of Charity, is from 1. Cor. 9. 14. It would make any man of
Reason out of Love with the Quakers Spirit, if it interprets Scripture so
Diametrically opposite to the Letter; his Argument must needs run thus; If God
has positively ord^ined that Ministers of the Gospel shall have maintenance,
then the people may choose whether they will maintain them or no: and it is
observable, that the Apostle proves this from the Ordinances of the Old
Pestament, relating to the Ministers of the Tabernacle, concerning whom we
find, that God not only ordained that they should be maintained, but what they
should have. And whereas he inferrs from hence, that they must only have
necessary Maintenance, and that but if they are poor, just to relieve them and
no more; it plainly contradicts the Apostle's Argument; for he pleads from the
Care of God for the maintenance of the Old Testament Worship, and argues from
the lesser to the greater: Now what Provision God made for the Priests and
Levites, is to be conjectured by what is recorded in the Levitical Law. For,
(as judicious men have computed, and see particularly, Reinolds on Psalm. 115.
page 477, 478.) the Tribe of Levi was not a fourtieth part of the people, and
yet had as much maintenance allowed them as three of the other Tribes. Nor is
the Ministers Maintenance an Alms of Mercy, but a Debt in Justice, as the
New Testament fully clears, Gal. 66. 1. Tim. 5. 17, 18. 1. Cor. 9. per totum:
in which Chapter the Apostle proves it by many Arguments. And if it be due in
Justice, how poorly does he plead against the Care of the Magistrate, by Laws
to provide, that it shall be duly defrayed? All Acts of Justice come under the
Cognizance of the Civil Magistrate, who is to see that all have their dues: nor
does it prove any thing to the Contrary, that Christ sent forth His disciples,
prohibiting them from taking any thing, and yet they wanted nothing: It was a
Special Precept, and when Christ bids others to to do so, they may rely on His
providence; till then it would be to tempt, and not to trust it. Whereas
therefore he says, that there should be no bargaining in this case; it is
built on the same mistake. There is a due, and it is lawful to use ways of
prudence to obtain it: his Example of Paul is aliene: What though he labored
with his hands, not to make the Gospel a Charge? yet we find I. Cor. 9. that he
there so states the case, that no other should suffer because of his Example:
proving that it was his due, if he should require it, that he did it for a
peculiar Reason. Nay we find that though he took no wages of the Churches of
Achaia, yet he did else where. 2. Cor. 11. 8, 9, 10. Nor for all his railing
(will the Ministers in New England be ever Charged with oppressing the people:
and what though Paul and other^ extraordinarily gifted in the new planting of
the Gospel, and in times of Persecution sometimes labored, and in part
maintained themselves; must they therefore who must industriously use the
means to help them in their work, who live in times and places of the
peaceable Settlement of the Gospel, and among those that profess it, do so too?
If they then did it voluntarily, always asserting their own liberty to do
otherwise, must we do it of Constraint?

Sect. 11. Once again, he must have a fling at our saying that true piety is not
essential to a Gospel Minister: What our Judgment is in this point, is already
declared: he here only labors to enervate some of our Scripture proofs by
Example.

1. For Judas; he cannot deny but he was Minister, but tells us we cannot prove
but he had some measure of piety: if his popish Docttrine of Falling from
saving Grace may hold, we may be at a loss, but if it be otherwise, (as we
shall have occasion afterward to discuss) it will be evident he never had any,
for he died a graceless wretch.

2. For the Pharisees, whom Christ advised His followers to hear, as sitting in
Moses's Chair; he says, their teaching belonged to the Law, and what is that to
Gospel- times? We reply, Whether G. K. or Paul were most infallible, judge ye;
sure he insinuates that they were Gospel-Preachers, for he tells us the Gospel
was preached to the people then, Heb. 4. 2. and by whom but by the Preachers?

3. That Paul rejoiced at the Gospel's preaching, though they had ill ends that
Preached it, Phil. 1. 15, -- 18; and Consequently they were ill men: he says,
it is nothing to the purpose, it justifies not their Preaching but commends the
power and wisdom of God. And we say too, that it justifies not their so
preaching; but it at least holds out thus much, That they were Preachers, and
might do good by preaching else he would not have rejoiced in it: his
Comparison therefore from Persecutors is impertinent; for though God's people
rejoice to see Truth to spread and flourish under Persecution, yet they do not
therefore rejoice for persecution; whereas Paul not only rejoiced that there
was good done by their preaching, but that Christ was preached by them.

Reflections on Chapt. 5. Of God, His Deartes etc.
Sect. 1. He introduces this Chapter with a sad Complaint of abuse offered by
the Presbiterian and Independent Teachers to the poor innocent Quakers, and
that for nothing else but their using of Scripture words to express the Mystery
of God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost by. We should be sorry if any had so
done: But before we are gotten over this Chapter, there will something else
appear, for which they are not abused, but deal't justly with.

But there is more still; they not only abused them in word, but persecuted them
to Death, for nothing else but this, and some other things of like nature; and
them too, precious menservants and maidservants of the Lord. Sure they ^ere
irreligious and barbarous people that did this; only there is a bold im^^dent
Lie in the story. The persons he intends were Quakers; and what precious saints
they are, we leave others to judge, and the Crime which occasioned their
suffering was. They came purposely to undermine the Civil Government and
persuade the people to Renounce it; which is every where accounted Sedition,
and a Capital Offense: nevertheless the Rulers used utmost Lenity toward 'em,
and all fair persuasions to have 'em depart yea, they banished and sent them
away, but they wilfully returned, yea, resolutely and daringly affronted them.
Now this seem to be a diverse Case from what he pretends but a Quaker sticks at
nothing that serv's his cause.

And now he pretends to give an account of their faith about the Trinity;

But it is a new Quakers Creed, nor is h^ so ignorant as to believe, that that
was their faith in those times, or for many years after.

Sect. 2. But all this Harangue was for nothing else, but to introduce the
Discourse about God's being Light, and vent a few lightheaded Notions about
it. First he find^ fault that in our Confession we omitted the Attribute of
Light, and smells an ill design in it. Truly the Intreague was merely this, The
Reverend Divines intended only to express such Attributes as were proper and
not metaphorical; and unto which all such Metaphors might be reduced: of this
nature is that of Light, and is included in their saying, He is most Wise: and
for G. K. to say, it is no figurative or Tropical Expression, argues him either
of grossest ignorance, or boldest Confidence.

And now he has gotten the Notion of Light in his head, how strangely does he
plead for Immediate Revelations and Illuminations in such Seraphical terms as
must needs transport his Reader. Well then, we are all in the Light as well as
he. GOD is an Immense Light, and then, Hell it self dwells in His Light, and
Devils must needs be full of Immediate Inspirations: and it is a Contradiction
for a Quaker to tell us that we are in the dark for we live and move and have
our being as much in the Light as he. But all this is Burlesque; a good
distinction would cure him, were he capable of receiving it. Distinguish
between Divine Light and natural, and their different way of Communicating
themselves. The Sun is a natural Light, and ^^^^minates all the things that it
shines upon: the Divine light, is the Infinite Omniscience and Wisdom of God;
but though in Him it be infinite, yet He derives of it to the Creature, not
naturally but voluntarily, not to all alike, Job. 35. 10. And He chooses what
Medium ^e sees meet to communicate it by.

We thought he would soar till he grew ^^dy, his brains turned, and so speaks
Nonsense; and let it come out; Light, he tells us, is im mediate though it
comes through a Medium^ i. e. its immediate, though it be mediate: but let that
pass Whereas he cites Plato (who is with him little inferior to Moses) to
prove that It is man's Inselitity to converse with Images of things; we accept
not the Testimony; for Man was made to Converse with the Images of things, and
shall so Converse for ever in his perfect state of glory; this being the nature
of his understanding, to receive the Knowledge of things by taking in the
Images.

And what he seems to insinuate, p. 62. viz. That the Word of God has no more
of God i^ (...) than a glass window has of the Sun, is in (...) wise to be
admitted: Its true, we are said to see in a glass, 1. Cor. 13. 12. which
comprehends the Scripture, but then it is not Perspective glass, but a
Looking-glass that i^ alluded to: and it is certain, that God has imprinted
the image of His preceptive will there: and the Scripture is adapted to
discover much of God to us by its own light, else all the Encomiums given to it
Psalm. 19. 119. Prove. 6. 23. and elsewhere, are Hyperbolical.

Sect. 3. The Blasphemy charged upon us for Calling (as he says) the light of
God (...) His people, (...) stinking vapor from hell; will light upon their
side, who call the poor imperfect light of nature, God and Christ, as they have
done in many of their books: but more of this afterward.

He here arraigns the Assembly for that in Confess. cap. 26. sect. 3. they say,
that the Communion of saints with Christ does not in any wise make them
partakers of the substance of His Godhead; and endeavors to prove the
contrary to be true. But observe, the Assembly in this Artitle oppose the
Swenkfieldian Doctrine, that a believer is Godded with God, and Christed with
Christ: and this is the thing that G. K. is here to prove, or he does nothing.
That we are made partakers of the divine nature, that we have near and intimate
Communion wish God and Christ; that we receive grace out of Christ's fullness,
and that God is our portion, we believe.

But a right Conception of the Mystery of our Union and Communion with God and
Christ, will soon detect his Fallacies: Union is the ground of Communion; and
therefore, such as is the Union: such is the Communion. Now this Union is one
of the Gospel Mysteries, Ephesians. 5. 32. only this much we know to our present
purpose; 1. That it is an Union between two, Viz. Christ and Believers. 2. That
these two are made one by this Union, Joh. 17. 21. 3. That they are so one, as
that they are still two Persons, two distinct in nature; It is an Union, b^^
not a Confusion; they are so one, as the Husband and Wife are one, who are two
persons, but one in Relation, and the fruits of it, Ephesians. 5. 32. God is God, and
man is man still. 4. That this Union is made by Faith on our part, by which we
take possession of Christ: and His Spirit on His part, by which He dwells in
us, Gat. 3. 26. 1. Cor. 6. 7. 5. That by Virtue of this Union God (...) Christ
becomes the Believers Portion, La^^^ 3. 24. 6 ly. That God in Christ
communicates Himself to them according to their Capacity, and that is by way of
Efficacy and Influence. Hence, 1. All His Divine Attributes are employed for
their Benefit, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. Exodus 34 6, 7. 2 ndly. the Spirit of Christ dwells
in them by His Influence. Romans 8. 1^. 3 dly. Christ as a Fountain of Grace
derive streams down to them, having a stock put into His hands as Mediator,
Joh. 1. 1^. 4 thly. They are made to share with Him in His Mediatorial Glory.
cap. 17. 24. But what is there in all this of our being Deified or Christed?
which if he intend not, he has said nothing to the purpose.

When he says, If they partake neither in His Godhead nor manhood, they
partake not in Him substantially; wants Logic. We say they partake in His
graces, and they are substantial things: and then he charge us for saying,
that Graces are nothing but Accidents, we utterly deny it, we say they are
neither the soul nor the body, but they are Adjuncts: and he might have learned
to distinguish between Adjuncts and Accidents. Graces are Adjuncts to men,
because they are separable without destroying their Humanity; this G. K.
believes, and all that deny perseverance must believe it: they are not mere
Accidents because Accidents cannot receive Accidents nor Qualities as Adjuncts
may, and Graces do; hence the Epithetes put upon them in Scripture. But he goes
about to make Graces to be the very Divine Substance, because they proceed from
GOD; When as if he had studied the Doctrine of God's Efficiency, he would have
known better. Nor does the Doctrine of Dr. Owen, or Mr. Rutherford, in the
words of theirs which he Cites, at all run into the Quakers Blasphemy; for who
does not acknowledge the Person of the Holy Spirit, and the Person of Christ in
their Operations, for they are personal acts, and therefore the Person of the
Holy Ghost dwells in us by his Operations, etc. And in sum, we believe that
that there is a Divine Act or Influence on us, ^s in Creating so in assisting
our grace; but, our reaction of that grace is not God, but an exercise of that
principle which is created in us, for Grace it self is a Creature Ephesians. 4. 24.

Sect. 4. Here he charge our Doctrine referring to the Divine Decrees, to be
the same with that of Ranters; which is an abusive slander and we shall make it
appear to be far otherwise; for, supposing them to agree with us in one
principle, viz. That God does all, and has unchangeably ordered all things
good and bad; are we therefore Ranters? We deny not every thing that G. K.
sales, but that does not make us Quakers. May there not, (may, is there not) a
vast difference between their Interpretation and Improvement of this Article
and ours? But had he well studied the Doctrine of Divine Concurse, he would
never have said, either, That If God decrees all things, He must needs be the
Doer of them, or, that hence he must needs be the Author of Sin, for all our
denying any such Consequences. This Doctrine is so fully handled by all that
have written Systems of Divinity, or that have waded in Controversies between
us and the Jesuits and Arminians, that it would be superfluous here to search
into it. Let only two or three Conclusions that are to our present purpose be
observed, Viz. That, firstly All creatures depend absolutely upon God, as in
respect of their Being, so of all their Actions, Act. 17. 28. 2 ndly. That this
dependence is not only for a general sustentation of the Being and powers of
the Creature, but for influence into every individual Action, Joh. 19. 11. 3
dly. That Notwitstanding this Influence upon the creature, in respect of its
Action, the Creature has its Action of its own, subordinate to, and assisted
by this Influence, 1. Cor. 3. 9. 4 thly. That Sin is a moral respect which the
Action bears as it is done by the creature, who is under the Law, 1. Joh. 3. 4.
and therefore it cannot touch God. And his interpretation of that Ephesians. 1. 11.
that [ all things] intends only all things that He does, is true; but his
Inference, Viz. That when we say a man does all things by Wisdom, none will be
so foolish as to infer that he does all foolish things, is a foolish
Similitude: for to argue from a particular Agent to an Universal Efficient, by
making them parallel, is Folly. Besides, though they are Follies of second Causes,
yet there is the wise Conduct, even of these things, by the First Cause; and it
is none of the least discoveries of His Wisdom, that He conducts the follies of
creatures to the Exaltation of His own Glory: but any man may here perceive,
that he is restoring Manacheism to the world, as if there were two principles
or first Causes, the one of good the other of evil.

That we have him ( page. 72.) making a large Concession of the Substance of
what we believe, seems to intimate that he labors between Conscience and
Interest; exeept it be, that he would persuade silly souls to think that we
have some strange Mysteries in our Doctrine that others cannot see.

But this has been but a Digression from the matter in hand, Viz. the
Universal Decree, and now he will glance at it again: endeavoring to enervate
our plea from Act. 2. 23. (where he joins us again with Ranters) by a
distinction between Delivering and Staying; but we so distinguish too, and yet
that God only exposed Christ to them, is not the whole meaning of the Text; for
it certifies us that this was done according to an eternal purpose of God, who
had appointed in that way to bring about man's Redemption, using them as
Instruments (tho wickedly abusing their free will) in these sufferings of
Christ, by which we were Redeemed. Compare Chapt. 4. Verse. 27, 28. and it will
clearly appear, that God has certainly decreed all things from Eternity, which
come to pass in time, to him that shall consider.

1. That God is the Supreme Efficient or Worker of all things, according to His
Counsil, Ephesians. 1. 11. 2 ndly. That God foreknew from all Eternity what should be
done by all Creatures in time: this G. K. pretends to believe: and let him or
any of his Company tell us how He did so in respect of voluntary Agents, unless
he had p^^determined them.

What he faith of Gods Hardening of men, That it is by His withdrawing of His
Spirit from them, is a Truth, but not the whole Truth, there is more contained
in it; sometimes it is by denying them softning means, sometimes by presenting
before them Objects, sometimes by a judicial delivering 'em up to Satan, and
their own hearts lusts; and all these ways are according to Scripture.

Sect. 5. Here we are told that the honest Quakers believe all that the
Scriptures say, concerning Election; and who would desire more? But if they
believe not the things which the Scripture necessarily intends, they
prevaricate, for the mind of the Word is the Word* and now see how it will
appear, he presently tells us, that We nowhere find in Scripture that God
reprobated any part of mankind before the foundation of the world. That He made
'em on purpose to damn them, is none of our Doctrine, but Scandalously imputed
to us: We say He made them for the glory of his Justice, which is exalted in
their Damnation, procured by their own fault; and for proof follow him but
three or four lines, and he confesses as much himself, or else he speaks he
knows no^ what; for he acknowledges an everlasting connsel about them that
Perish yea, (P. 76.) that Christ in His infinite Justice permits such to resist
grace; and had he understood himself, what could he say more His saying that
God considers them in his erernal counsil as having resisted all grace, and
having hardened themselves finally, helps him not, for he must grant (and does)
that if God had done as much for them, as He does for his elect, it had been
otherwise, but because He decreed not to do it, they naturally ly and die in
sin; and certainly He could not foresee all this but in his own purpose.

And his Assertion is extremely ridiculous, Viz. That Election and Reprobation
are not contradictory, and that Election signifies a pr^ference of some before
others, it does not argue (...) total reprobation of others. Certainly, if it
be to glory that some are elected and others are not, then they are reprobated
i. e. God has not seen meet to choose them, which necessa^^^y argues His
purpose to leave them to perish in their sins, and what is this but
Reprobation? He himself therefore grants, that in the end they shall be sound
Reprobates; and how is that, but by appearing not to have been chosen of God?
Especially if it be well pondered what he says concerning God's Elect, p. 76.

There is a great fallacy lurks in his saying, ( p. 76.) that as God has
provided grace whereby some shall certainly be saved; so by the same all are
put under a possibility: and that they are not, is not for want of Sufficiency
or Efficacy in this grace of its own nature. We grant there is a sufficiency in
the means that God affords to save all such as enjoy the Gospel, i. e. a
sufficiency of means Isa. 5. 4. there need no more: nor does He use more with
them that are saved than with them that perish, 2. Cor. 2. 10. 16. But that He
has put a sufficient efficacy into these means in respect of all that enjoy
them, is a para^^^ whence is it then that they are not efficacious? The
Efficacy is not in the means themselves, but in the Concomitancy of the Spirit
with them to give it, and that is voluntary: and the very notion of a
sufficient Efficacy of means used, without (...) Effect wrought in them with
whom they are used, is an unintelligible Quakerism.

In p. 77. he tells us that Election goes before Reprobation, and is not
^^aetanous with it and yet a little before ( page 75.) he own Reprobation
(though Conditionally) to be eternal; and who taught him to make Periods in
Eternity? Yea, Reason it self tell us that in the very nature of Choosing some
before others, these others are in that very Act and instant, necessarily left
out, which is Reprobation.

Sect. 6. Here he undertakes the Patronage of poor Infants, (and it is pity
but they who cannot speak for themselves should have somebody to speak for
them) whom he finds sadly exposed by this Doctrine of absolute Reprobation: and
is in no little passion for them, to think that we should insinuate that some
of these are by the decree left finaly to perish: but though we may and ought
to commiserate them, yet we cannot help them, beyond what God has purposed
concerning them.

His main Labor in this paragraph is to free Romans 9. 11, 12, 13. from a true
interpretation, and force it to accept of a false one: and let us see what he
has to say against our glosses upon it.

He tells us that the Apostles design is to show that God had chosen the line
of Jacob before the line of Esau, and that only to be His Church in the
peculiar dispensation of the Mosaical law. That Paul is here treating of the
Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, has been fully evinced by many learned
Orthodox. That he makes way to this by asserting the Sovereignty of God, is
clear in the Chapter: That his Instance of Jacob and Esau, did historically
intend what G. K. alleges we deny not: But here it is to be noted, that there
was a Typical Representation of greater things in these instances: and it is
the Apostles manner to argue from the Type to the thing signified, see Gal. 4.
24. etc. but what further needs? G. K. ( p. 79.) acknowledges that this was a
figure of another thing to be spiritually fullfilled, and this is it that the
Apostle uses it for; so that we may safely argue the thing Typified from the
Allegation, it therefore hurts not our case, that he says ( ibid.) that this
does not infer Esau's personal Reprobation as to his eternal state; it is
enough that there was a Reprobation in the same sense that there was an
Election. If therefore he grants an eternal Election to be typified in it, (as
he seems to do) the Reprobation must be of the same kind, else there is no
parallel. It therefore concerns not us to dispute whether Esau himself were
saved or not though his Text cited, Heb. 11. 20. Prove^ it not, for there were
temporal, as well as spiritual and eternal blessings: but this whole discourse
is aliene, and makes nothing to the purpose. and whereas ( p. 84.) he asserts
that, the whole passage of Jacob and Esau, is (...) figure of two seeds, none
of which were reprobate but the other preferred is a contradiction, for there
can be no Election without Reprobation, choosing it out of diverse, and
necessarily argues a Leaving.

Sect. 6. p. 84. Here we are challenged to prove that there are Reprobate
Infants, or such as go to hell for Adam' s sin only: to which we reply. 1. He
himself grants ( p. 88.) that men generally (and why not universally?) are
Children of wrath by nature: and he will not deny but that by Nature is
intended that natural condition they were born into the world in. (and then it
must needs concern Infants as well as others) and this too is by Adam' s sin
transferred upon them, and his corrupt Image communicated to them. 2. That
hence Children in their natural birth are under a sentence of Condemnation to
dye, is a necessary Consequence. 3. That God has no where revealed to us that
He has accepted of the Satisfaction of Christ for all that die in their
^^fancy; and where there is no Revelation, there is no ground for Faith. 4.
That there (...) merit enough for Damnation in them, else it would be unjust
that they should be under Condemnation. 5. That this Sentence has ^een
actually excecuted upon some Infants, Romans 5. 14. they never sinned actually,
and yet they died, and it was the same death spoken of verse. 12. If therefore
the Text which some of ours use, 1. Cor. 7. 14. should not prove it, it follows
not that no other can: and yet we suppose there is thus much (...) that too,
Viz. that till Parents do openly profess the Gospel and submit to it, or as
long as they abide in their Gentilism, their Children were also unclean, and so
apparently lying under guilt, and liable to eternal Death. And then he charge
some of our Church Covenant, for glorying that none of their children were
Reprobates while Infants; we declare it to be a slander: we never affixed
section to a visible Relation to the Church of Christ.

And how strangely does he prevaricate, when he tells us ( p. 85.) That it is
plainly revealed and declared in Scripture, that the Condemenation is not
simply because Adam had sinned, because of what Christ says, Joh. 3^. 1^. he
might have read verse ^3 that he that believes not, is condemned already. The
Case stands plainly thus; In the first Covenant we stand condemned for the
breach of the Law, either as Adam's sin is ours by imputation, or as we have
actually broken the Law. Where the Gospel comes, Christ is offered, a way is
discovered to life by Him. Now this is the proper Gospel Condemnation* that men
despise Him and will not follow this Light; and this is added to the former
they were before condemned by the Law, and now the Gospel condemns them too.

What he says, ( p. 8^.) That All have an Opportunity or Possibility to be
converted and become the Children of God, is ambiguous; is the word Possibility
be exegetical of the former, viz. Opportunity, it is Nonsense, for these two
are Dispartes, if he intends them disjunctively, we deny not a possibility, for
all Mankind are salvable; but for an Opportunity we renounce that, for where
the means of Salvation are not, there is no opportunity. But what is all this
to the purpose? or what does it make against the Reprobation of Infants? We
must be led a wild-goose chase if we follow him in all his absurd Digressions.

As for the Contempt which in the same page he casts upon Foederal Holiness, it
argues his ignorance; and as little as he counts the Interest of Children in
the visible Covenant worth, we shall not cease to bless God that ours stand so
related: and when he grants an Holiness, i. e. a capacity of holiness, in time
to come, in some (not all) of our children, we believe if we had talked so
wildly, nonsensically, and Self-contradictorily; we should have heard of him.
To call a Possibility of Holiness, Holiness, is scarce sense, and to
acknowledge a capacity of Holiness but in some, and yet but one page before, to
lead a possibility of Conversion in all, would have been a Contradicting
himself, if it had ^ot been G. K.

Sect. 7. We have G. K. here speaking the Scripture fair. The Scripture is a
rich treasure, and he is for Scripture Words, and it is not safe to leave them:
and what is all this for^ ^^hy, the Scripture indeed acknowledges all (...) be
born in sin; but what then? Why, the ^^ed or principle of sin and Corruption
is, but it is not imputed, till men join their Consent to it, and actually obey
it; and its as clear as midnight from Romans 5. 13. and thus he interprets it;
The time of Infancy is the time (...) wherein there is no Law, and therefore
(tho children are dead in law) there is no imputation. Excellently well
expounded. Paul is there proving that there was a law antecedent to the edition
of the law of Moses and his argument is because there was sin in the world
before: and that it is imputed he might have found, if he had read the
following verse, for there we find the sentence executed, which necessarily
presupposes imputation; nay, the very calling it Sin is (...) charge or
imputation, and a supposition of a Law condeming men for it: nor do his many
Citations at all prove that none dye and finally perish for the first sin, but
for actual sins of their own; which was now to be proved; for they only
intimate that all men's actions are liable to the Judgment, and shall be tried
and sentenced; but deny not that man's state in Adam shall be so too: Because
the Scripture says, that men shall perish for actual sin, does it thence
follow that men shall not so for original sin?

But the knack is, they died in Adam, (...) Christ by His death for all that
died in Adam has dischared all of that Imputation; which a perfectly Arminian
principle, and has (...) enough confuted by all that have written against
them: That therefore he concludes that none do suffer final Distraction bar for
Rejection the Physician, makes the condition of Pagans better than that of
Christians: for these are certain to escape destruction; being incapable of
rejecting the Physician who is never offered to them, whereas Millions of those
do reject Him, and perish for it. The Gospel then opens a door to man's
Undoing, which else he had been out of the danger of, if Christ had but died
for us and never told us of it.

His wild Assertion ( p. 91.) That all the children of Adam and Noah, have a
foederal Holiness, i. e. a seed of holiness in them, i. e. a capacity of being
made holy (not to call the Coherence of it in question) seems to contradict the
Apostle, who, 1. Cor, 7. 14. assures us that Unbeleevers children are unclean,
i. e. not holy; and he there treats directly about foederal holiness.

He concludes this Paragraph and Chapter with two Insinuations (how true, let
any Judge) 1. That Grace is propagated by our natural parents. (how this is, it
may be he will tell us next time.) 2. That there is habitual Sanctification in
all men by nature. As to ^he first, David was of another mind, Psalm. 1. 5. For
the latter, Paul was not acquainted with this principle, Romans 7. 18. But he
speaks as yet but in the clouds, we shall have him a little more open in the
next Chapter.

Reflections on Cap. 6. of Christ's dying for all, etc.
In this Chapter he proceeds more particularly to urge and maintain the
Doctrine of Universal Redemption, and we might dismiss him for his Answer to
the writitings of the Anti-Remonstrants, but because many may not be advantaged
with those discourses, we shall make a few brief Remarks upon his Absurdities.

Sect. 1. His first and main plea is from the words of Scripture, which express
it in Universal terms, viz, All, all men, every man, the world, the whole
world: (as for that of the Body, Ephesians. 5. 23. Paul himself there interprets it
of the Church, and its strange that the World and the Church should be of equal
extent) some of ours (whom he calls the Adversaries of Truth) have answered,
(though it is not our whole Answer) that by All, is not meant all particulars,
(i. e. Individuals) but some of all sorts, all the Elect. His Reply is, that
the word [All] must needs be as full and universal with respect to Christ's
death and the benefit of it, as it is with respect to Adam' s Fall: and who
denies it? But it is not so in his sense, except he will plead for universal
Salvation, as well as Redemption, else the benefit is not parallel to the
damage; and so he indeed seems to plead, by Citing 1. Tim. 4. 10. for the proof
of his Assertion; but yet this he afterward denies. We are here to consider,
that Adam and Christ are in Scripture made parallel in many Respects: as Adam
is a common Head, so is Christ: hence, as Adam has a natural seed, so has
Christ a spiritual seed: as Adam ruined all his seed, so Christ Redeemed all
His: as Adam's seed are called the world, because they comprize all the men and
women coming into the world by natural Generation; so Christ's Seed are called
the world, because they comprize all the men and women that belong to the world
to come. But then we must remember; that Christ's Seed are a number selected
out of the other; and therefore, though they are all because He loses none of
His Elect, yet not all the Individuals of Adam's posterity; for there are they
of whom Christ says, They are none of my sheep. Nor does he interpret but
pervert that in, 2. Cor. 5. 14. If one died for all, then were all dead: for
the Apostles intention there, is to prove that all God's Elect were dead,
because Christ died for them all: The word [ All] therefore, does not signify
some, but all that come under that denomination.

Sect. 2. Whereas Christ, Joh. 17. 9. makes a Difference between His Redeemed
and the world, and ^aith, I pray not for the world, he would persuade us, that
world i^ there meant of final Impenitents, or such as have finally rejected the
means of Grace, and with whom the Spirit has ceased to strive. But not to
call over what has been already offered. Viz. That all have not the means of
Grace, and therefore cannot resist them; it is plain that he excludes only the
damned from Christ's prayer: and hence he inferrs that Christ died only for
their sins past: Well then, He died for those sins, and prayed for those men:
he then owns His death and prayer to be lost, and His Redemption void. Did
Christ dye to condemn men, or to save 'em? see Joh. 3. 17. why then are they
not saved for whom He came to dye? Was He not able to draw them to Him or to
save them that come, to the uttermost?

That he says, Many are guilty of final Impenitency a considerable time before
they die; seems to be a Contradiction, though he says it is none. We believe
indeed that many are left of God to persist in impenitency till they dye; but
then they are none of those for whom Christ died, Joh. 6. 37.

But we have him acknowledging, ( page 96.) That He dyed not for all, with
equal intention or degree of Love, and thereupon confessing, that they that are
saved have more abundant cause to bless God for His abundant mercy than the
other; though they have no reason to complain. We grant, the damned have no
cause to complain, because they suffer justly: but we would fain know where he
places the inequality, since (at the bottom of the same page) he tells us,
That God gives no greater measure of inward grace to one than to another. Oh!
but he suits Providence eminently: And is this all the difference? We thought
there had been different dispensations of grace clearly intimated in Romans 11.
7. and one would surmise that what G. K. says ( ibid.) that God draws, moves,
enclines, persuades (and that is more than mere swasion) them to come, and when
they fall infallibly reclaims them, etc. had been grace, and more than mere
Suiting of Providence; especially, when he there also tells us, That He and
not they made them to differ from others: and here against Scripture does he
bring that to prove his Assertion 1. Tim. 1. 14, -- 16. And the grace of our
Lord was exceeding abundant with faith and (...). We thought heretofore that
Faith and Love had been graces: and that God's giving one more abundant grace
than another, proves that one has no more grace given him than another, is not
very clear to us as yet. Nay, ( p. 93.) he tells us, That God by His infallible
persuasions of love and grace, prevails infallibly with the Elect; and is not
the Effect of grace grace, yea more grace than where there is no such Effect?

That it is every man's Duty to improve all the means of salvation,
notwithstanding he is not sure of his Election, is true, but that he can use
grace to that end, before he has any, is hard to understand; he should first
seek for grace, for that universal grace he speaks of is a mere Nonentity. Nor
does our Doctrine of Reprobation (as he charge it, page 99.) make the
effectual use of means absolutely impossible (...) any, so as to leave them
under discouragement: for he himself tells us, that it is the Duty of all men
to use the means, and yet he says, that there are elect, and that none but
these shall be saved: and we say the others are the Reprobate: and if all are
to use means, and are not discharged, though but some ( viz. the Elect) shall
obtain, what discouragement is their more in our Tenet than in his?

Sect. 3. He well knew that Universal Redemption, without sufficient help,
would render his Doctrine ridiculous; here therefore he tells us, how a
sufficiency of means is afforded to all men; and First, That Christ by His
Death procured for all men an inward principle of divine grace, light, life,
etc. the Contrary to which is true; He purchased these only for his Elect, for
whose sakes He died. The Scripture makes a difference between his being head of
the Church, Ephesians. 5. 23. and his being head over all things to the Church, Cap.
1. 22. But supposing a purchase, what benefit can they have by it if it be not
applied? Well, he will give an account of that too, as good as he can, ( p.
100) Where outward means fail, God supplies this with inward teachings, and
some other secret ways of Providence: and are these sufficient to lead men to
Salvation, or bring men to Christ? The Apostle then must use a fallacious
Enthymeme, Romans 10. 14, 15. And how perversely does he interpret Christ to be
the word spoken of, Romans 10. 8. which is evident by the Context to mean the
Scriptures? called the Word of Faith, because it is an instrument of begtting
it, verse, 17. he interprets it of Christ coming in the flesh, both of Jews and
Gentiles; and is that all the Incarnation which he allows to Christ? He seem^^
to be of another mind, ( page 59.) but indeed we know not when they own any
thing. And it was once the received Doctrine of the Quakers, That there is no
other Incarnation of Christ, but only as He dwells in us; which how subversive
it is to our hopes of Salvation, let the serious judge.

He mistakes the meaning of the word Reprobates, 2. Cor. 13. 5. endeavoring to
prove that Christ is in all but Reprobates, and they are such as are given up
to final impenitency whenas the word there used, intends not Reprobation in our
sense, but only that all Unbeleevers, are at present unapproved by God and in a
state of Perditon.

Sect. 4. A further proof of this universal grace, is, that Christ both
commanded that His Gospel be preached to all nations; and he tells us that so
it shall before the end of the world; this is no proof of what it is brought
for; the many generations past have no advantage by that, being ended and gone
before that time comes: that therefore all mankind shall be accountable for not
obeying it, because once in the end of the world it shall be revealed to them
that are then living, is a slender way of reasoning; but his Salvo is that
though not outwardly at the present, yet iwardly to be sure it is preached to
all: but how this is, he has not satisfied us in the premises, what he may do
in the sequel we must wait for.

Sect. 5. This Paragraph is but Nausea his ^^cta, asserting, but neither
expounding not proving, that all men have had more or less, and all sufficient
means of salvation: sure it will be some great thing, which has so much
preparation made to introduce it.

Sect. 6. Here he begins with a good Confession, viz. that, Never any were
saved but by Jesus of Nazareth; but he seldom spoke Truth without a design,
and has frequently some Error in a readiness to graft upon it. He knows it
would be asked him, how any could be saved by Christ, who never heard of him?
and how shall they hear without the Gospel? He therefore anticipates it, and
answers with Railing instead of Reason: only he puts in a Quibble, and thinks
he has tied a knot upon us that is indissoluble: We plead for the Salvation of
Infants by Christ; and why may not he with as good reason, plead for that of
the (...)? The parallel looks but odd; viz. If Infants may be saved by the
working of the Spirit in them, wi^^ may not the Gentiles he so by giving (...)
light in them? We might only say, they are not causes equally powerful. But let
us a little commora^^ here? Observe then: 1. That we de^^ not the power of God
to save without outward means; but to argue merely from His power to His Will,
without His own Revelation, is to give laws to the Almighty. 2. That the
Infants of Believers are under t^^ visible means of Grace, viz. the Covenant
and Baptism, and so are not the Heathen Isa. 63. 19. 3. That Christ has
assure us that some Infants are saved, Mat. 19. 14. 2. Sam. 12. 23. but we have
no assurance concerning Heathen or Pagans, but the contrary, Prove. 29. 18. 4.
That the different capacity of Infants and grown persons, in regard to the
means, requires a different manner of the dispensation of grace to the o^^ and
the other: that therefore is asserted concerning all adult persons, Romans 10. 14.
For him therefore to assert that All honest else gentiles are saved in some
other way, is (...) mere Begging of principles that will never be conceded.
That moral Honesty is a meritorious Cause either of Salvation, or of any
further Discoveries of saving grace to men, is a Jesu^tical principle; That
there are any Elect among Pagans, who never had the gospel offered them, is not
only without Scripture-Warrant, but against its Testimony, as has been again
and again made evident. And his pleading for New Revelation of things not
contained in scripture, because Infants are saved by another manner of
Application to them than Adult persons, is merely precarious; for it is ^he
same grace which is revealed in Scripture, which is reveled to them, if G. K.
has said true, viz. That, None are saved but by Jesus of Nazareth.

Sect. 7. How perversely does he here state the Question! viz. Whether any are
or can be saved without the express knowledge of Christ crucified, is one
question, and whether without all bearing of Christ outwardly preached, is
another. We believe that God did not reveal Christ so clearly at first, as
afterward; nor had they, all of them in former times, the same distinct
Conceptions about Christ, which are now made clear in the Gospel: but we also
believe, that they had so much knowledge of (...) Savior, as led them to place
their trust in Him for Salvation; and these Truths were extraordinarily
revealed to some; and gradually too: But that All honest Gentiles who did by
nature the things contained in the law, had an express knowledge and faith of
Christ crucified (as he asserts) is not credible to us; and when he bids us to
disprove it, he forgets all laws of disputation; for Affirmantest probare; it
suffices for us to deny it, (...) say there is no Scripture to prove it, till
he produce it; the Spirit's working When and Where He will, is no evidence for
it.

A gross Error it (...) him to say ( p. 110.) That the knowledge and faith of
Christ belongs to the finishing work of Salvation, but not universal to the
beginnings of it: for how shall they believe etc. Romans 10. 14, 15. his
instances in Nathaniel and Cornelius give him no relief, and its his ignorance
(if not his malciousness) to say that they were Unbelievers when that testimony
was given o^ them Joh. 1. 47. Act. 1. 2. They had believeed in a Christ to
come, though at present they knew not that He was come in the flesh, till it was
further revealed to them: And it would do well to observe concerning th^^
latter, that though he had an Angel sent t^ him to direct him how he might be
acquainted with that necessary Truth, yet Peter must come and preach it to him:
and whereas he says ( p. 112.) that he had not faith in a crucified and raised
Christ, but in God, and in the Word of God in his heart; We answer, that Faith
in the word of God in the heart, without Christ, is not Saving, Act. 4. 12. Nor
is Faith in God without Christ so, Joh. 14. 6. And he is greatly mistaken, when
he says, The mystery of Christ crucified was not firstly necessary to be
known, as not being fully preached. It was preached from the Beginning, Genesis 3.
^5. though more clearly in Gospel-time. All the Rites and Ceremonies of Moses's
Law preached Christ; though the Veil is now taken off, and the glory of the
Truth is (...) manifest and resplendent: he therefore concludes before he has
proved his Assertion, That the express knowledge of Christ crucified, is not of
absolute necessity, especially (he is very cautious) where it has not been
preached, to the beginning of a man's salvation, though indispensibly necessary
to the finishing of it: And surely, I. Cor. 4,3. and Heb. 12. 2. ^^and much
against him: And his so often^erated Assertion, That there are honest Gentiles
stills, that have no, Christ outwardly preached, and yet die in Salvation, is
nothing else but (...) magisterial Assertion, without any one proof at all to
command our Belief. What then shall we say to his new Doctrine ( page 115.)
That they may receive it after Death? If he thinks to Father such a thing upon
the Assembly of Divines, Cap. 32. S. I. Confess. Its a bold untruth, for they
say no such thing there, but believe that in the instant of dying, Believers
are made perfect in holiness, ^ee Shorter (...), Quest. 37.] we shall have a
new Quakers purgatory erected e^^long; Christ revealed to men for Salvation
after death, who died ignorant of Him! And now what Reason has he to conclude
this Section with a Triumph! That he has demonstrated from Scripture, that men
have been in a state of salvation, that have not had the Mystery of Christ made
known to them! unless perverting of the Scripture may pass for Demonstration.

Sect. 8. But what needs more then? would he outdo Demonstration? Fain would
he draw in Paul, I. Cor. 12. 4,5,6. to speak of the different degrees and modes
of God's revealing Himself before Christ, under the Law and after Him under the
Gospel. Though we are satisfied that Paul aims at another thing, Viz. the
distribution of gifts in the days of the Gospel variously: yet, supposing the
other, what is this to men's knowing of Christ where the Law was not: or to the
Gentiles being illuminated with saving knowledge? and where does he find three
Baptisms in Scripture, especially, such as that the First only reveals the
Father, the Second, the Father and the Son, the third, the Three Persons? or
had he this mystery by Revelation? if so, he might have kept it to himself, for
he has discharged us from believing him: and wherein it serves to his purpose
we see not, except it be to prove that man might under the first be saved
without Christ; and that will contradict his own profession.

Sect. 9. Now at length, after a deal of tedious waiting, we are come to the
thing which he has all this while been making way for, and this will salve all
the (...), remove all doubts! The Light within! the Quakers God, and Christ,
and Holy Ghost, and Word, and what not?

What particular thing this Light is, they ^^em to be in the dark about; very
likely, ^^s beams are so languid, that they are not self-evidencing: However,
something it is, and it is in all men; yea, so great a thing, that it may be
blasphemed; for he tells us, (...) is no less than real Blasphemy (though we
thank him, that he that has made it blasphemy, has made it pardonable too) to
say that the Light in man is not sufficient to give him (...) knowledge of God
that i^ necessary to Salvation: But how can we plead Guilty or not ^^ilty, till
we know what it is that we have ^^fered such an affront to? Let us therefore ^e
if we may not find it out by some means, and whether he has not help^ us in
the search. He tells us, the Assembly twice call it the light (...) nature, and
the Expression he can allow, but not in our sense: Thus far we suppose he will
grant it in our sense; viz. That the Light within, is that Discovery of divine
Truths which is made to men inwardly, as they came into the world, whereby they
are able to know something of God, without outward means to acquaint them; or
something within them, which does make these discoveries in them: and this is
not any special, extraordinary Indulgence to some, but it is common to all men,
belonging to Humanity. Only herein we differ, and are not to be reconciled: We
say, That it is nothing but some remains of the Law of nature in the Hearts of
men, Romans 2. 14. which they are capable by their Reasoning Faculty of improving
for the making a Discovery of many Truths by, which will suffice to leave men
without excuse, Romans 1. 20. [he mistakes] when he thinks we reckon it any
distinct faculty, the Understanding indeed, and in that the Conscience, is the
subject of it, but it is something there imprinted.] He on the other hand tells
us that It is Christ Himself in the man, and that it is he who quickens (...)
sanctifies nature in all men; and this he understands to be the Emphutos Logos,
in Jam. 1. (...). which he fasly renders Innate word it properly signifies,
Engrafted, as our translation renders it; and is a Metaphor from a Stene that
is grafted into another stock than at first it grew upon; intimating that the
word (whatever it be) is not natural to us, but is ingraffed in us
supernaturally, and therefore is not put into the nature of all men, and that
this word is not Christ, appears from verse. 22. and those that follow* it is a
word that we are to be the Learners and Doers of, it is a Law of Liberty that
we are to be looking into, which cannot be applied, to Christ: no, not by any
tolerable Cata^esis.

There are Three things, which we will here not only assert, but also give
Scripture proof for. 1. That Christ is not the Light of nature in all men. Is
it the light in men that was born of a Virgin, hanged on a tree, ^^ried in a
grave, all which he elsewhere confesses of Christ? Besides the Apostle
expressly says, that men in their natural estate are without Christ, Ephesians. 2.
12. and that except men be in the faith, Christ is not in ^^em. 2. Cor. 13. 5.
and he tells us that All have not faith, 2. These. 3. 2. 2. That the Light of
Nature left in fallen man, is not sufficient to point him out the way to
Happiness; had not they the Light of Nature of whom it is said, Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
that the Lord has not given them eyes to see to that day? and they to whom
Christ gave that warning, Luc. 11. 35? Does not the Apostle describe the
natural estate by this, Ephesians. 5. 8. and what sales he, 1. Cor. 2. 14.? but we
have him confessing this amply in p. 120. That man in his state of integrity
had Light sufficient to have guided him to felicity, we believe; but all the
Light of nature in fallen man, will not objectively reveal the truths necessary
to be known in order to salvation. It had never told men of Christ, and the
Satisfaction that is made to the Law by his Righteousness. 3. That God has not
any way imparted such a light universally to all men; which the forecited
Scriptures do prove. Besides if this Light be connate with men, what needed G.
K. to make such a splutter about Immediate Revelations? and if it be only by
Revelations, where will he find evidence that God has so revealed Himself to
all?

Sect. 10. That from the Law written in men's hearts, he goes about to prove
that man has such a sufficient light, is weak, for the Apostle speaks plain, in
Romans 2. 14. (which we are turned to) of the law given to man at the first,
which is become weak through the flesh, and cannot give life; Romans 8. 3. Gal.
3. 21. And his pleading from our Concession That it is sufficient to make them
inexcusable, that it is therefore sufficient to make them excusable that frame
their lives to it, follows not. The fall of man has left him without strength
to obey it. Romans 5. 6. The Light of Nature discovers to man that Duty which he
does not, and, by reason of Sin, cannot do; which leaves him inexcusable, Romans
1. 18, 19, 20. but it is Christ only that can take off guilt, and remove
Condemnation; and the light of nature neither discovers His person, nor the way
how to get pardon by Him.

His arguing ( page 121) That Because for men's not glorifying God, He gave them
up to a reprobate mind, therefore they were not Reprobates from the beginning,
has no face of a reason in it; for, besides that (if we should take the word
Reprobate in Romans 1. 28. in such a sense) a man may be reprobated before he be
left up to make the open discoveries of it: the meaning of that place is, that
God left them to a mind that chose dross rather than Silver, preferred
wickedness before Holiness, and so was a mind disapproved God.

And when He tells us that The light the Gentiles had is a new gift and grace
of God to them, he says nothing at all till he can prove that there is such a
gift common to all men; nor do all his alleged Scriptures speak one word that
way: inward convictions and warnings of wrath to come (which we deny not to
have been in heathen) will not amount to it, being only the Actings of a
natural Conscience under legal Convictions, which indeed show to man some of
his Misery, but nothing of his Remedy: and that place on which he puts a
peculiar Remark, Luc. 12. 20. God said, thou fool, etc. is as little to his
purpose as any; for, if we cannot tell how God said so to him, yet it is enough
that He did it by awakening of his Conscience, may, that he did it
Providentially; and what is this to a sufficient Light, telling men how they may
be saved; it is a mere Wheadling and not Arguing.

It is therefore impudence in him to assert ( page 122.) That though God's
Dispensations of grace be various, and the Gospel Dispensations (fine words!)
be best; yet whoever is faithful in any one of these is accepted of God; and
yet none is accepted but in Christ, or for His sake; and give no other proof
for it, but his ipse dixit, which is of no value among sober men: and hence to
conclude, That the inward Dispensation that is among the Gentiles that have not
Christ outwardly preached, has its glory, and great service to those that are
faithful in it, is to talk at liberty himself, and deny to all others a liberty
to judge.

Reflections on Chapt. 7. of Justification.
The Doctrine of Justification is one principal pillar of our Faith, we cannot
forego one clause of it without greatest hazard: let him not then think to
wheedle us out of it, his attempts so to do must be detected and defeated.

Sect. 1. When he says, God does not justify men in their Ungodliness, but
from it, would be true, if he had not perverted it afterward. To justify a
man is to uphold and defend him in such a way, and to say to the wicked, thou
art righteous; this is far from God. But to justify a man from his
ungodliness, may admit of a double Interpretation, if it intend that He
absolves a man from his ungodliness by a gracious act of pardon and
acquittance, it is true: but if it intend a taking away of his sin from him by
cleansing him from his filthiness* and purging the corruption of it out of him,
(as he after interprets himself) this is no Justification at all, but belongs
to Sanctification.

Sect. 2. He says, They are only the sanctified that are justified; if he
intends that whom God does justify, He does also sanctify, it is a great
truth; but if he puts Sanctification (which is a Concomitant) to be a cause of
Justification, yea, the material cause, (as his following Discourse evidently
insinuates) it is a deceit: and here he mistaketh when he says, That we are
the seed of Christ by Sanctification: which is only a benefit which Christ
bestows on His seed, and not a cause of their being so. And when he tells us,
That Christ bestows Adoption only on His brethren, it is as much as if he had
said that Christ only Adopts the Adopted.

Sect. 3. Here he falls into downright Popery confounding those two great
benefits of Justification and Sanctification, which (though inseparable) are to
be distinguished. All Protestant Writers of Controversies against papists, have
abundantly Confuted this mistake, only he will force us in the Sequel to make
some brief Remarks on this matter.

Sect. 4. One Error begets another: a false principle will afford mistakes for
Deductions; and here we see it: he took Justification and Sanctification for
one thing, and so he tells us, that God justifies not only by faith in Christ,
but by a real inward righteousness too: though Paul thought that these two ways
of having a justifying Righteousness were inconsistent Romans 11. 6. but herein
he follows his Fathers the Papists; and whereas he sales That The graces of
Sanctification are the instruments of obtaining Justification from Christ; he
mistakes the order of Christ's Benefits; for its certain that there is none of
these graces in the man habitually, much less the Exercise of them, before
Justification: for, in and with the souls applying it self to Christ by Faith,
it is justified; and it is to be remembered that Paul tells us, it is the
justification of the ungodly, Romans 4. 5. Such God finds them in themselves,
when He comes to justify them. And when he says, Jesus Christ cannot be
applied to men for justification, unless the man be made righteous; its either
a Contradiction or a Sophism. If they be made righteous for their
justification, the Application of Christ for their Righteousness is
superfluous: If he intends, that the Application of Justification makes them
righteous, it is fallacious: it makes them so in a Law sense, but not in a
moral sense, not justification, but Sanctification does that: his Similitude
is from that which has no Likeness; his Scripture Citations are not to the
purpose, that in 1. Job. 3. 7. Speaks of Sanfictication; that in Rev. 22. 15.
speaks of the visible Right to Church Communion, which men are to prove by
their Obedience or if he will not admit of that, let him Remember that Faith,
which lays hold on the Righteousness of Christ, is the great Gospel Command,
1. Joh. 3.23.

Sect. 5. It Is a great mistake in him to say, that Faith is one hand to receive
Christ, and Love is another; the Office of Love is another and quite different
thing: by faith we receive Christ, by Love we serve him, or testify our
Thankfulness in our Obedience to Him, Joh. 14. 15. and it is by Faith that we
derive from Christ all that virtue which nourishes the graces of Love, whereby
we may serve Him, Gal. 5.6. And whereas he here applies the putting on of
Christ to Justification, we that esteem Justification and Sanctification two
things, reckon it to Sanctification, and that according to Scripture; for what
else is the Righteousness and true Holiness by which it is interpreted, Ephesians. 4.
22. 23, 24.

Sect. 6. In this Paragraph he gives up the whole Cause, if he speaks
sincerely; if not, let him answer it to his Judge.

Sect. 7. That because Pardon of Sin is a part of Justification: therefore
Repentance is a necessary instrument to obtain it, has no Consequence in it.
Repentance being an inseparable Concomitant of Faith, and influenced by it,
Act. 5. 31. 11. 18. and elsewhere. Only let it be observed that we separate not
Repentance from Justification, ^ut deny it to have any causal Influence into
(...). His proof from Tit. 3. 5. is impertinent: he never denied Sanctification
to be necessary (...) Salvation. But we suppose there is more equisite to
Salvation than there is to Justification; not only must we be adjudged to the
inheritance, but we must be made meet or ^^itable for that happy state, Col. 1.
12. and that is by Sanctification, Hebr. 12. 14. ^is therefore is one of the
Gospel Conditions of Salvation, but not of Justification. ^hen he says that
Paul in saying that men are not justified by the works of the Law, only
includes the legal performances in which the Jews ^^^ed, who had not faith in
Christ, he labors (...) a double mistake; for, both, all the Jews ^^d not rest
in them, but some had faith in Christ, and yet they did these works, and were
not justified by them; and Paul re^^unceth his own works both before and after
believing, distinctly, Phil. 3. 7. 8.

Sect. 8. Whereas he says, that when Paul takes of Justification by faith, he
uses the (...) faith by a Synechdoche; it is gratis dict^^ we have only his
word for it; and how much the word of one guilty of so much Heresy and
Blasphemy is worth on this account let any judge. We grant that the word Faith
is sometimes used for the Gospel Doctrine, but when the Scripture mention it as
the instrument of justification, it is never so intended, and it belongs to him
to prove it if he can.

Sect. 9. We understand not the meaning of his Rant in this Section about a
Christ divided; a Christ without and a Christ within a Christ in heaven and a
Christ in the heart^ we believe that there is but One Christ, and that He is in
Heaven as to His humane nature, infinite as to His Divine Nature, and that by
His Virtue, Influence, and Grace, He dwells in the hearts of all His people,
and that they live upon Him by Faith.

Sect. 10. None of us ever doubted that Faith has true Assurance in it, and
infallible too: he therefore abuses us in saying that we deny that faith has
assurance in the being and nature of it: only he must give us leave (on we will
take it) to distinguish between the Assurance of the Object, and of the Subject
by the Assurance of the Object, we understand the full Security which a
believer is put into of enjoying eternal life, in the very instant of
belaeving: this Assurance we say, belongs to faith of its own nature, i. e. it
cannot be without it. but the Assurance of the Subject is, that Knowledge or
Discerning, whereby a Believer reads the Evidence, and has it infallibly
confirmed to his knowledge; this we say is not of the nature of Faith, but
belongs to inchoate Glorification; and that Believers may be safe, and yet want
the Discerning of it, Isa. 50. 10. though we still believe (and have formerly
proved) that this Assurance may be had without extraordinary Revelation: and
the argues foolishly, that because no place of Scripture tells us that we have
these infallible marks, therefore we cannot know them infallibly without such
Revelation; for the marks are knowable, men have understandings and can know
what they mean, and apply 'em; and the Spirit can and does in this way set His
seal to the Confirmation hereof,

Sect. 11. The poison contained in this Section, will be more fully discovered
in the next Chapter, to which we refer the Reader to prevent the nauseous
Tautologies which his book labors of.

Reflections on Cap. 8. of Perseverence, etc.
Its worth the observing, that all those that stand for Justification by works,
deny the Doctrine of Perseverance; and great reason might be assigned for it.
Wonder not then that we have him chopping at this Pillar too; (...) this
Doctrine is a Cordial of such worth, that we believe that none who have
rereceived it in the promise, will readily part with it; let us then vindicate
it from his false Comments.

Sect. 1. Real and true beginnings of faith and Sanctification (says he) may
be fallen from: What means he by this? There are some previous and preparatory
common works that are wrought in men; such as Conviction of sin and misery by
the law, and the terrors of the Lord that make men afraid, and may put a stop
to their lewd courses, yea, and work a reformation in many things, and make a
natural Conscience to act more strongly than before: if he means these, we
deny not but they may be lost; but then we deny them to be the beginnings of
true justifying or saving faith, called the Faith of God's elect, to
distinguish it from other faith, and those which he instanceth in Heb. 6. 4, 5,
6. belong to this head; they had through these arrived to a Temporary Faith,
but not to that which is saving; and therefore the Apostle charitably exempts
his Hebrews from any such danger; as having other things in them, verse. 9. His
instance from Romans 11. relates only to a visible Church state, which all that
stand in are not true Believers. That of the Angels fall, is impertinent, for
they were under a Covenant of Works. Their Faith in the thorny and stony ground
was but a temporary Faith, it had not a saving rooting, and for that Reason
abode but a while. And we must distinguish between a false faith and one that
is not saving: it is therefore blameworthy for men to lose some things, the
keeping whereof will not save them; such are all the moral principles which men
have imbibed, such as the young man had, Mat. 19. And it is to be observed,
that the good ground is differenced from the other three, by the epethete good,
to show that the other were not so in a spiritual sense: and though God's
children feel many thorns and stones in their hearts after Conversion, yet
their hearts being in saving measures softened and broke-up, they receive their
Denomination from the better part, according to Scripture. Nor will the Parable
of the Virgins, Mat. 25. begin. help him at all: we grant, the oil there
signifies true saving grace; but then by Lamps we are to understand an outward
profession: by Vessels, the heart; the foolish Virgins had oil in their Lamps,
i. e. they pretended to, and made a profession and show of Grace, though they
had none really; the wise virgins had it in their lamps, i. e. profession, and
vessels too, i. e. hearts; and it is no new thing for the Scripture to express
things which men seem to have, as if they had them, because they hold others in
hand, and often deceive themselves into a belief that they have them, see Luc.
8.18. compare Mat. 13.20. His allegation from Ezekiel. 18.24. etc. may at first
seem to have a face of a plea init, but it only seems so. Other Scriptures
assure us that no true believer shall finally and totally fall away from grace;
and Scripture does not contradict it self. Several things might here be
offered; briefly Consider, 1. This is but a conditional expression, and
therefore asserts nothing to his purpose. 2. God is pleased sometimes, to curb
in His people's Corruptions by such Conditional Threatenings, see Romans 8. 13.
Heb. 12, 14. for they have nothing in themselves, but what they might lose if
God did not secure it; and God so preserves His People as to stir up fear and
care in them. 3. And what if we say, That God speaks to them in respect of the
typical part of the typical Covenant, to whom the promises and threatenings
concerning the typical blessings of Canaan were made on these conditions, which
they might either keep or break, and by breaking fall from them, and forfeit
their lives and Land.

That David is a clear instance of one that totally fell from grace, he proves
not: the sins he committed were great, the Aggravations heinous, but if he had
totally lost his grace, why does he pray, Psalm. 51. 11. take not thy holy
Spirit from me! Nor does it follow (as he intimates,) that because a justified
man may fall into Murder and Adultery, therefore the worst of men may believe
that they are true and real Sain^s; for they never had the work of Conversion
past upon them, as David had: and besides, such horrid falls break their bones,
defile their hearts, wound their grace, and consequently be-cloud, their
Evidences, what plea is there for such as never had any Evidence? Nor does it
follow that if these men die in their sins they shall go to heaven immediately:
For though God suffer (for holy ends) His Children to fall far, yet as not to
fall totally, so He will give them Repentance: though the just fall, yet he shall
rise again: Nor will God suffer them to die, before He has recovered them.
Neither yet does our Doctrine encourage to any hope of such who so defile
themselves, and die without Repentance. It is therefore a vile Aspersion to call
our Doctrine Poisonous. We believe that sin of its own nature kills the sinner,
that its wages is death: that the soul that sins shall die: but we believe that
he may die in his surety, that God can pardon and justify him for Christ's
sake; and that if He does, He will sanctify him too; and what poison is there
in all this? the foundation of a sinners hope is laid in this; and but for this
hope, the least sin of thought is mortal; all the gall therefore that he vents
in these three pages hurts us not, being mere false Aspersions, or deceitful
insinuations; (and does not he himself say, that if God suffers those whom he
has drawn, at any time to depart, they shall certainly be reclaimed, P. 46.
^ay, that they shall infallibly be called, and at last glorified, P. 76.) Nor
could he have said, that this makes God a respecter of persons in the worst
sense, if he had not been ignorant of what that Respect of persons is: there is
no respect of persons in gratuiti^; for that is only when Justice is perverted,
for some ^inister consideration: the owner may do with his own what he will.
Besides there is in the bestowing of the Recompense of glory, a vast difference
between them that receive it and such as miss of it. Mat. 25, though still it is
God that makes them to differ.

Sect. 2. That God has laid duty upon His people to use endeavors for their
standing, we deny not, but constantly urge; but that always where the promise
of preserving *em in faith is mentioned, this condition is understood; is
warily to be taken up; if he intends that God will keep them, by fulfilling the
Condition in them, it hurts us not: but if he mean, that the promise depends on
our performing the condition, and so is merely Hypothetical, its an error; for
i^ is certain that the very keeping of His people from utterly falling, belongs
to the promise of the New Covenant, under which they are by Believing, Psalm.
84. 11. Jer. 32.40.

Sect. 3. G. K. knowing that there were some Scriptures that did so fully
assert the Perseverance of God's People; that he could with no face deny the
truth in them, begins, in this Paragraph, to concede, yet so as not to favor
our principle at all, who say, that Its the privilege of every true Believer
to persevere. He therefore makes it a particular state of Holiness, which only
some of these arrive unto; and then they commit no gross sins, but only
Peccadillo's (and thus, with the Papists he introduces the distinction of
mortal and venial sins, which has been sufficiently confuted by ours; who have
made it evident that all sins are mortal by the law, Ezekiel. 18.4. That all sin,
excepting that against the Holy Ghost, is venial by the Gospel, Mat. 12.31.)
but when he comes to describe who these are that are thus indulged) he woefully
prevaricates. In p. 46. he tells us they are, 1. such as are born of the free
woman, and not of the bond woman; Well, this is not a peculiar privilege of
some, but is common to all Believers, even the Galatians, who were so weak and
foolish, Cap. 4. ult. 2. They are thoroughly renewed. If by being thoroughly
renewed, he means so sanctified as to have no dreggs of sin remaining; then
there are no such; for he grants of these he speaks of, that they do commit
little faults, and that must be because there is something of the old man in
them. If by thoroughly, he means in all the parts, then it belongs to every
Believer, 2. Cor. 5. 17. 3. They are such as are born of God: and that belongs
to Faith where ever it is, Gal. 3. 36, Joh. 1.12. When he says that, those who
commit any gross sins, as Fornication, Murder. Adultery etc. never arrived to
to the pure state of sonship, he does, 1. Mistake the notion of the difference
between servants and sons; true believers are both, sons by Adoption, servants
by being devoted to the Obedience of the Gospel. How often does Paul call
himself the servant of Jesus Christ? and so does James, Cap. 1. 1. and Peter,
2. Ep. 1. 1. and Jude, verse. 1. Its true, Paul distinguishes between the
outward servile Condition of Believers under the Old Testament Dispensation,
and the more free and son-like Condition of them under the New Testament, Gal.
4. begin. but he assures us that they were children, though but in their Nonage.
2. Contradict the Scripture; David fell into some of those sins, and the worst
of them, and yet before that, he had the highest Testimony of his Sonship.
Solomon had his amazing falls, and yet God witnessed before and after that he
was His son, and that He loved him; called him Jedediah, 2. Sam. 12. 24, 25. 1.
Chron. 22. 9, 10. He seems in all this discourse to lay the stress upon the
strength of Inherent Grace, and the Believers own Attainment, whereas the
Scripture assures us that it is of God, and depends upon His power, Romans 5. 2.
14.4. 1. Pet. 5. 12. 1. 5. and God hereby perfects strength in weakness, 2.
Cor. 12. 9.

In p. 147. he strangely confounds the two Covenants; and yet really grants the
whole Case: He says, The first Covenant may be fallen from; the Angels and
Adam fell totally; but the new Covenant cannot be fallen from? and thus we say;
but the knack we were not aware of is, a man may be a Believer, and yet ^e but
in Adam' s covenant, than which there can be no greater Contradiction, or, a
man may be in a middle state between both; which is the greatest confusion; or
finally, he will have none to be in the new Covenant till they come to Glory,
and then they shall sin no more; and this is directly against Scripture.

Page 148. He says, There may be infallible marks and signs of such given, and
yet God only knows them, and such to whom He reveals it. We thought that Marks
had been given purposely to know by, but the Folly of this has been already
detected.

Sect. 4. We are now come to the Quakers Doctrine of Perfection of which they
boast: and here he first rails at ours that denies it, and then tries to prove
his own, though that very Essay will prove him to be very imperfect.

That the best Duties of the best Saints in this life are imperfect, and that
by reason of sinful mixtures in them; and that daily the most holy come short
of perfect legal Obedience, and might be charged with sin for their best, if
God should be strict, we believe; and can appeal to the sensible complaints of
holy men in Scripture; but for him hence to infer, that we say, that, the good
works of God's Holy Spirit are defiled in and by the saints; and to print it in
another Character, as our very words, is cheating. But how far our Duties are
the work of the Spirit, and how far they are our own, has been already
discussed. Its be that makes the (...). and not we; we never say, that One and
the same thing is a perfect. an and a perfect dog: We say, that every Believer
in this life, has a new nature and an old in him; a body of Grace, and a body
of Corruption: the one increasing and the other decaying; imperfect grace, but
growing; a body of death, but dying; and he is as it were two men: and so Paul
distinguishes of himself, Romans 7. 15 17. Nor do we say that the work is
totally perfect, and totally sin; but we say, that the work it self is
imperfect, by reason that, though it be influenced by grace, it is also defiled
by sin, being done by one in whom there is both sin, and the Influence of it
into his best performances. Nor do we any whit misinterpret God, when we say,
He accepts of these works in Christ, tho they be defiled: and if he shall say,
that we do therefore suppose that God accepts of the defilement that is in
them, he mistakes: In all the gracious Actings of Gods people there is
Imperfection (now all moral Imperfection is defilement) and God accepts of the
sincerity, and pardons the imperfection, and both in Christ. And this indeed is
the privilege of the Covenant of Grace, above that of works: why else was the
High Priest to make an Atonement for the Sanctuary, etc. Lev. 16. 33. but that
the Services, notwithstanding the pollutions (but for which no atonement was
needed) might be acceptable? and this was Typical. No doubt but that God sees
sin in whomsoever it is, and where He sees it, He condemns it; but in respect
of Imputation to the person. He does not always see it, i. e. charge it. Number
23. 21. and why? but because CHRIST has made Satisfaction and Atonement for
it.

In his Examen of the Scriptures alleged by the Assembly, he plays foul with
them: he first points to three places, where he says they speak of this
matter: Confess. cap. 16. fect. 5. Larger Cat^ch. Q. 149. 89. though this last is
on another subject. Secondly, he gathers up diverse matters in one,
endeavoring to express; them in as harsh words and sense as he can. Thirdly in
p. 155. 156. he gathers ^o the the whole, and says, they expressly so word it
in Q. 39. which is utterly false, and indeed, he has so worded it for them,
that there are two things Charged on them which they say not: viz. 1. That that
they must sin as long as they live; as if there were a fatal necessity that God
laid them under of so doing. 2. That they are only free from finning after
death; whereas they say At their death. 3. he mischievously perverts the design
of the scriptures alleged by them. All the Scriptures he animadverts upon, are
only those which they annex to Q. 49. (omitting those aided in the other
places.) Let us observe, There were two things they had to prove, 1st. That no
man can in himself perfectly keep the law, 2. Nor by the Grace of God; and from
these principles they infer these Conclusions, That they daily break the
Commands in thought, word ^^d deed: and how pertinent these Scriptures are to
prove these two Positions may be ^dged. That Man cannot do it in himself, (...)
would think that the description given of ^is natural state, Romans 3. 9. etc.
and Genesis 6. (...) is sufficient to demonstrate. That (as to ^^e latter) he
cannot do it by Grace received, does not intend that God cannot give them grace
enough, but that He does not, and therefore their imperfect grace cannot attain
(...). And surely that is sufficiently proved by ^^ch Scriptures as. 1. tell
us, That in many things all do (...) for which, Jam. 3. 2. Ezekiel. 7. 20. 2. That
every Believers grace depends for its exercise upon the help of christ, without
which they can do no gracious thing, for which, Joh. 15. 5. And th^^ Consectary
is not forced, if we consider, that the Nature of man being so corrupt,
unregenerate men can do no other than daily break the Command; that because
Believers are renewed but in part, and yet are active beings in thinking,
speaking, doing, there will be an Influence of remaining Corruption into these
actions, which will make 'em shortcoming in point of the strictness of the Law;
and consequently breakers of it. In the other place cited, Confess. cap. 16.
sect. 5. they quote, Isa. 64. 6. Joh. 5. 17. Romans 7. 15; 28. and certainly Paul
had as much grace as any now can Pretend to.

As to his particular Reflections on the forecited Texts, they are scarce worth
minding. What he observes on Jam. 3. 2. is a mistake of what they brought it to
prove, and i^ does prove against him, the Imperfection of any in this life. For
that in Ezekiel. 7. 20. his observation, that the word is in the future, makes
against him, intimating that they can do no other as long as they live; and his
(...) it for the (...), is precarious, his applying it to the times of the Law,
which made (...), is fond; for they had the Gospel as well as we, and were
perfect in an Evangelical sense, Genesis 6. 9. Joh. 1. (...) Psalm. 37. 37. For
that in Genesis 6. 5. when (...) says it only speaks of that generation of ^^en
so degenerate, he errs; it shows the natural state of man by the Fall, and we
have as Parallel after that generation was gone, Genesis 8. 21. Nor was Noah, so
perfect, but that he was afterward drunken. For that ^om. 3. 9. etc. we grant
it expresses the natural state of men as they are (not only) generally, (but
universally) under the Law; and it was brought by the Assembly for that
purpose: nor is it any Contradiction to say, Righteous men sin: we must
distinguish between such as are righteous legally, and them that are so
evangelically; and between such as are free from the Dominion, and them that
^^re free from the Presence of sin.

Sect. 5. When therefore he cites, Romans 3. 8. to prove that Perfection, because
they are ^ree from sin, it will not do; that is to be understood of freedom
from the (...) of it, (...) v. 14. And his Application of Ezekiel. 35. ^5. and
Jer. 33. 33. is confused for want of ditinguishing of what it there referred to
Justification, and what to Sanctification; That Justification is perfect we
acknowledge, (tho (...) before denied it.) that Sanctification is imperfect, we
plead (tho he says it is perfect). Now the making them clear from all their
filthiness, belongs to Justification: putting the Spirit in them: giving them
an heart of flesh, etc. belongs to Sanctification, and this confirms them in
perseverance; for they shall not depart, but does not wholly deliver them from
sin.

His plea for perfection from Matthew. 11. 29 because Christ's yoke is easy, and
from 1. Joh. 5. 3. the commands not being grievous, is too far fetched; we are
to distinguish between Legal and Evangelical Obedience: the Gospel has abated
of the Law, and provided strength for us to obey Evangelically, and made the
command grateful to our new nature; and Christ's grace is sufficient for what
he intends by it; but what is that to the Power of exact performing the law in
its latitude?

And its his ignorance in the Gospel which transports him into the following
blasphemy against God, calling Him Cruel and Tyrannical, and worse than
Pharaoh; his friends the Arminians do the like: and why? because He requires of
some, that which He gives them no ability to perform: Had man had none in Adam
it would have looked harder; but since he had, and wickedly lost it, and cares
not for having it again; shall God now lose His Glory because man has by his
own (...) lost his power, or must He otherwise be said to be cruel? Certainly
if we cannot see into the depth of His providence, an Holy God is not thus to
be treated by a vile worm: Nor is it (as he pretends) injurious to men's
pressing after perfection, and his Similitudes to illustrate it by are
fopperies, and no way quadrate. Death is but Catacrestically (or worse) said to
heal all bodily diseases: but Grace is then properly perfected, and sin
abolished; and that is a great comfort, that when we remove hence we shall sin
no more. the City we are going to lies beyond Death and the Grave, and so it is
no discouragement that we cannot reach it in this world, Heb. 13. 14. Christ
has provided sufficiently to keep his people from sloth, and make them press
to the park. Who of us ever said that if a man die in his sins, his faith shall
save him, tho he live and (...) in his sins? what is this but to slander? We
say, that Believers shall not die in their ^^ns, but God will give them
Repentance, (...) at any time they fall: and yet that they (...) more or less
till they die, we say, ^OD says so too: but it is one thing (...) have Sin in
us, another thing to be (...) our Sins: And when he says ( page ^59.) That, It
is an ill sign that we plead earnestly for sin; We Demand, Is a saying that we
have sin in us, which calls (...) our humbling, end plying the work of
mortification, and going daily to Christ the fountain, a pleading for sin?
surely they tha^ Cover, and not they that Confess their sins are pleaders for
it: and then we are sure that sin never had such Attourneys as the Quakers.

Sect 6. Now for the positive proof of Perfection: and he is at a loss how to
define it or where to state it: he seems to deny absolute or perfect
Perfection, and yet challenge^ as much as Christ or Adam ever had. nay 2 ndly.
He grants that It is not in all, bu^ (...) some; and that not at first
conversion, but afterward. Nay, 3 dly. He further conceives the It is not in
the most perfect without Infirmity ((...) that must be in a moral sense) and
then there must be some sin: and that is almost as much as we say. Yea, 4 thly.
he yields all that (...) pretend to, though he will not acknowledge^ it to be
sin. Viz. Motions to sin, not only from the devil without, but from the mortal
part with in: and that is it which Paul often calls sin in Romans 7. and whereas
5 thly he pleads tha^ though it be, yet it is not imputed; that is another
question. It suffices that it is imputable, and it is on Christ's account that
it is not actually imputed. and 6 thly. To wind u^^ the whole, he comes to a
fair acknowledgment, that he pleads for no more perfection ^^n faints than we
do. It is a Faithfulness to God, in that degree of Grace and assistance that He
affords, according as he sees meet, some more, some less, I, but in them that
have least, it is safe dying for them in that state (...) and all this we plead
and preach for. And now let any man judge how he has gone thro^ and cleared
the charges that he made against us in his blasphemous letter. If to ly,
slander, pervert Scripture, magisterially dictate Hae^^esies, is to be
acknowledged for conviction, we are gone to all intents and purposes.

Reflections on Cap. 9th of the Visible Church.
We have already seen what little Reason there is to indulge the Doctrine of
Immediate Revelation: Allow but a Quaker this Engine, and he will do wonders
with it: beat down the foundations of many generations, un^^ Church all
Christendom, make the Scripture to intend just contrary to what it speaks; and
who shall question him, if he tells us he sees all this in the Light, and has
it immediately revealed? G. K. has hitherto discharged this against the
fundamental Articles of Salvation; endeavoring to set GOD against Himself, and
shamm us out of our faith: Nor has he done yet, but will a fresh essay to
remove all that is visible of Christianity in the world, and if he can blow up
Churches, take away Sacraments, and wrest our Sabbath out of our hands, what
would Beelzebub himself have desired more? But the Church is built upon a Rock,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Sect. 1. His first Essay is against the Church considered as visible: and here
he cavils at the description of the visible Church given by the Assembly; Viz.
That it consists of all those throughout the world that profess the true
Religion, together with their Children: insinuating that we hold that nothing
of grace, or of the power of godliness is requisite to constitute a member of
our visible Church: but this is all Railing, not understanding what we mean by
Visible, nor what by Profession.

1. It is the visible Church they speak of, and he also after grants that there
is such a thing: and what is it that makes it visible? it must be something
that makes it discernible to others: Here then observe, 1. That there is inward
Grace required absolutely to make any one a living member of Christ, etc. so of
the Church of the firstborn. 2. That this sincerity of heart is to give its
evidence to others by an answerable life and conversation: There is a
confession of the mouth, as well as a believing in the heart, Romans 10. 9. 3.
These Fruits are they by which others are to judge of men's Sincerity, and
accordingly to declare them to be visible members of the Church: this rule the
Apostles themselves followed in their owning of men. 4. That such a profession
may, be, where sincerity is not; and thus Hypocrites may belong to the visible
Church; there were such in the primitive times, Simon Magus, Demas, and those,
1. Joh. 2. 19. were such. 5. There may be many Irregularities in the
Conversation of such, which yet do not presently unchurch them; such there were
in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia. 6. That when such are become
scandalous, there are Church- censures appointed by Christ; and these can be
administered to none but under the consideration of their being Members of the
Church visible: thus Paul delivered Hymeneus etc. to satan.

2. Profession, as it is understood by the Assembly, is not a mere verbal
thing, but practical too: it contains in it an Orthodoxy in the principles
professed, and a Conversaion framed thereto, a professing in words, and
not-denying in works, else men are not visible Christians, but to be turned
from. 2. Tim. (...) 5. and yet we believe that men may do all ^is, and be close
Hypocrites; and that they may afterward fall away, G. K. himself consesseth:
and now let us trace him.

He infers, that Notoriously-scandalous persons, liars, deceivers, drunkards,
etc. are qualified members of our Church; but without reason; if he should
essay, he would find is to reject him for some of the qualifications he
mentions: We acknowledge not such for professors; and if any in our Churches
afterward prove so, we censure them.

And it is grossly untrue, that Independents require no more than such a
profession as he talks of, to make them members of their church: for they whom
he calls Independents, distinguish between the Church visible, or Christianity
at large, and Membership, or Fellowship in a congregational Church, and have
not been wont to be charged for their Lawness, but rather Strictness in
Admission. Nor does it argue them of Hypocrisy, or contradiction, because they
separated from another Church, viz. the Episcopal, it being well known that
they did it mainly because their terms of Communion were such as they could not
in Conscience comply with; though also their promiscuous Admission of all sorts
of ignorant and scandalous persons to the Lords Table, added to the incitement:
as for the Presbiterian Churches, we did not separate from them but have held
Communion with them, and have admitted their members to Communion with us;
although by reason of some points of Church Administration, which they differ
from them in, in principle, they thought they might without any just offense do
so in practice too.

Sect. 2. How daringly does he here assert that we find no such Church in all
the Scripture, owned to be the church of Christ, that the outward form or
profession of religion makes such; when the whole New Testament acquaints us
with no other, if he keep to his subject, viz. a visible Church? For indeed it
is nothing else but such a profession as we have described, that can make them
so; nothing else can give them the visibility of a Church: and how strangely
does he talk, when he sa^es, We nowhere find in scripture any society called
the church of Christ, that had nothing but the professon of the true religion?
who ever said that they had nothing but so? We say, if the profession be right,
its a making sincerity visible as far as may be: but yet let us tell him, there
are such owned for Churches, in which the major part were such as he mentions,
Sardis was so, had a name to live, and was dead, had but a few names, Rev. 3.
2. and La^dicea was so, verse. 15. But the (...) is, (...) aequivocates about
the word [ True]: If by a true Church he intends such as are united to Christ
in truth and sincerity, we plead it not: but the word also signifies that there
is really such a thing; and that there is really such a thing, is visible:
there may be a true visible Church, tho many in it are not of the true
invisible Church.

Sect. 3. Men that talk of two things, may thwart one another strangely, but we
thought he had been discoursing of the visible Church: and if so, then he is
deceived when the says, that every member of Christ is a living member: Christ
has said otherwise, see Joh. 15. 2. and how in Christ but by profession? their
being fruitless proves them dead: and they might be taken away, which they
could not be if they were not first in him: and he did well to instance in the
Church of Corinth, 1. Cor. 3. 6. there was the old Leaven in this Church which
was to be purged out; there were fearful divisions, there were that would ea^
in the Idols Temples, that horridly profaned the Lord's Table, that denied the
resurrection of the body, etc. Such a mixture there was in this Church, and yet
see what a glorious Encomium Paul gives them, on the account of their being a
visible Church. cap. 1. begin.

His finding fault with us for using an Hourglass, to know how the time spends,
and a Belt to gather our Assemblies together orderly, is worse than ridiculous:
That God's people should have their Meetings to worship GOD, is undeniable, to
neglect it is a sin, Heb. 10. 25. as for his inward spiritual Bell (which he
calls the Gospel-bell, ringing in their hearts) serving for such a use, it is a
Fancy more fabulous than any thing in AEsop: as if the Light-within were a
Clock to tell the hour of the day. Besides, it is certain that God's people in
all ages have had a known time of meeting, and some civil sign to give notice,
that they might meet together, as in one place, so at one Time: and he knows
that we place no holiness in Bells: yea, the very Scripture which he abuses,
to prove a Gospel bell, is directly against him, Psalm. 89. 15. which intends
the Silver Trumpets which God appointed for such an end, as ancient and modern
interpreters agree: yea the Quakers themselves give notice of their meetings.

Sect. 4. He makes The work of conversion wrought by the Spirit in the hearts
of God's Elect, to be the true gathering of a visible Church (for of that he
must speak or he is distracted) and let any man of sense judge, whether this be
any gathering of a visible Church at all; or whether this makes a man so much
as a visible Christian; it being a thing secret, and that which no man knows
but he in whom it is wrought. As for his Banter here about new-made things, it
is but a second Disgorging of the vomit, which he has licked up after he had
once before spewed it, in p. 36. where he is animadverted upon, and once is too
much.

Sect. 5. Here he again confounds the mystical invisible Church, which the
visible, and gives the encomiums proper to the one, unadvisedly to the other:
which mistake led him to draw that blasphemous Inference ( p. 172.) that the
Religion which we profess is not the Religion of Jesus Christ, and that in the
foundation it self which is Jesus Christ: hence we do (without any breach of
charity) infer that G. K. bids the world to take notice that he utterly
renounceth the religion we profess, even in the very foundation of it, which is
JESUS CHRIST, and of which he himself (if we are not misinformed) once made no
mean profession in the University of Aberdeen; and say if Julian the Apostate
did worse!

Sect. 6. He contradicts himself here in the same Paragraph; at the beginning
he says, that Christ is but one both in heaven^ and in us^ and before the end
he tells us, that by the Spirit the man is joined both to Christ in him, and to
Christ in Heaven: and if two Unions, then two Christ's.

Sect. 7. Now he afresh sets upon us for our Qualifications required in our
Ministry; but it has been already canvass'd in cap. 4. Only toward the latter
end of this Section, he tells us of Two spirits that guide men on earth, the
Spirit of God, and of the devil, and he gives three Criteria of men's being
guided by the latter; Viz. he is fallible, false, and continually given to
Errors, by which he clearly detects himself to be under the devil's leading;
for he has before acknowledged himself to be fallible; and we have proved him
to be false, and continually leading into Error.

Sect. 8. The fault which (in this paragraph) he finds with our Ministry is,
that they are not itinerary, as the Apostles, whose Successors they pretend
themselves to be; [truly better sit still in a place; than go up and down,
seeking whom to devour] But may we not succeed the Apostles in their Ministry,
though not in their Apostleship: And do we not find, that though they went about
to gather Churches, where there was none, yet when they had gathered them, they
ordained Elders, among them to he settled Ministers, such as were Over seers of
particular Churches, see Act. 14. 23. 20. 27. with 28.

The Scandal he reflects upon us, in respect of the Endeavors for the
Conversion of the Indians, is sufficiently confuted by the printed accounts
that are published to the world of this affair; and what if they he not all
sincere? its God's work, and not in our power to make any so: We say of our
selves as Paul, 1. Cor. 3. 5. 6.

Sect. 9. It seems strange to us, that something invisible should make a Church
visible, as having always thought, that a thing was visible when it might be
seen. The Inward Light in a man then cannot be the visibility of a Church to
men. But we find no end of such foolish Contradictions.

Reflections on chapt. 10. of the Sacraments etc.
The last Mine he has to spring is to demolish our Sacraments and Sabbaths,

Sect. 1. That the word [ Sacrament] is not to be found in the New Testament,
we grant: but it has obtained to be a Word used in the Church, for many ages
to express that by, which is evidently enough laid down in Scripture, nor does
he dispute us about the Lawfulness of using such words. But when he says,
there is no word in Scripture to answer that word, except the word [ Mystery,]
we cannot go along with him; that the word [ Mystery] is at all used in this
sense, we suppose cannot be proved; but there are two other that are; and imply
as much as we intend by a Sacrament, viz. a Sign and a Seal, which are both
used of the Sacrament of Circumcision, Romans 4. 11. and by parity of Reason are
applicable to the New-Testament-Sacrments: that Baptism is such a sign: is
evident from, 1. Pet. 3. 21. that the Lord's Supper is so too, see1. Cor. 11.
26. for how is the Lord's death showed forth in it, but by an instituted sign?
And when the Church of Rome can show as good a plea for their other five, as we
can for these two, we will then confess the injury we have done in denying them.

Sect. 2. Now for Baptism! What need he to combat Infant Baptism? If there be
no Baptism, then none of Infants: only he loves to be wrangling. and what Cavil
against Sprinkling, if neither that nor Dipping be of force by Divine
Institution? Thus some must be meddling.

As for Sprinkling, we plead not for it; we say Baptism is a Gospel-Ordinance;
that Water is the Element to be applied, that it may be done either by Dipping
into, or Pouring on of water, there being no express Precept for the one more
than the other; that, it being a sign, it has no other Efficacy than by the
Blessing upon the Institution, that as a sign. It may signify, by pouring upon
one part of the Body; that the Face is most ready and convenient, and why may
we not allude to that of Christ to Peter, Joh. 13. 10. that we do it on the
Forehead particularly, is a slander. When be asks us, Why John baptized Christ
by Dipping Him in Water? We think his first Question should have been, Whether
he did so or no? and it is certain he cannot prove that he did. Our Consequence
from infant Circumcision to infant Baptism is good: for, it was the same
Covenant, and the same promises that Abraham and we had, Circumsion was a sign
of the Righteousness of Faith; and so is Baptism; and Infants are as capable of
the one as of the other: and the promise is still to our Children.

That the Baptizing of Infants was not the practice of the Church during the
first century, is arrogantly affirmed by him, against Antiquity: Orig^n and
Cyprian tell us that the Apostles gave order for the Baptizing of Infants: and
Augustine tells us, Baptism of Infants had been universally practiced in the
Church ever since the Apostles.

And sure he mistakes when he says that in Col. 2. 11, 12. Neither
circumcision nor Baptism there mentioned is outward: Whereas the Apostle is
arguing from the sign, to the thing signified by it, in respect of
Circumcision; and then mentions Baptism it self intimating that it signified
the same thing, and therefore laid them under the same obligation to Holiness:
there is therefore a sacramental Dying with Christ; because in this Ordinance
there is an engagement laid upon us to dye to the world. And what a poor shift
is he put upon, when to evade Mat. 28. 19. he acknowledges the Institution of
Baptism, but tells us it says nothing of water? does not the very Word imply
it, and the Gospel assure us that Water was the Element? Furthermore, We have
two Baptisms mentioned, Mat. 3. 11. it must then be one of these two, but the
Disciples could not baptize with the latter, it being Christ's alone
prerogative. In citing of Luke 18. 15, 16. he fraudulently omits that clause,
for of such is the Kingdom of God: and G. K. assures us that that Kingdom is on
earth, as well as in Heaven; and if so, then they are Subjects of the
privileges of this Kingdom, as far as capable: and of the same import is that,
Romans 11. 16. for all his cavil against it? nor does it follow that they may
receive the Lords supper as well; because that is above their Capacity at
present: a Child may be an Heir, and yet not be put into actual possession of
all that he has a right to: and though Christ Himself baptized not, yet His
Disciples did by His Authority.

Sect. 3. That Baptism with water properly belonged to John' s Ministry, is
easier said than proved: that It is expressly contra-distinguish'd from Christ'
s baptism, by John and Christ Himself; is an error; the outward Administration
is distinguished from the Efficacy, which depends upon Christ, and not on the
Minister: but not contra-distinguished, for these are two, but not contraries,
but concomitants, as being indeed, two parts of the same Sacrament. And that it
belonged not limitatively to John's Dispensation appears, because Christ gave
order for the Continuance of it, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Philip baptized the Eunuch
with water, Act. 8. Paul baptized, 1. Cor. 1. 15. Nor will he ever disprove the
Baptizing with water, being appointed, Mat. 28. 19. till he can prove that
there is some other ministerial Baptism, for which he must run to his
Revelations, Ten thousand of which are worth nothing. And what an infatuation
is it to tell us, there are no other words of institution, but the words of
Institution? What more would he have? Nor does he evade by telling us, they
could baptize with the Spirit as well as beget sons and daughters to God; for
this was done ministerially by dispencing the Ordinances, which Christ only can
bless to that end, though He own His servants as workers-together with him in
their place; but they ever renounced their doing any of these things by their
own virtue. Yea, also Baptism is signified in Mat. 28. 19. to be one way in
which they made disciples of them: But he foresaw that we would tell him, that
the disciples under Christ's Dispensation, and after the Resurrection of
Christ, baptized with water; and has provided a fine Evasion, viz. It was done
by Toleration, as many things else by the Law; but we suppose that
Infant Baptism was not of the Law, but of the preparation of the Gospel: yea,
an Institution which Christ Himself confirmed by his commands, and so, not a
mere Toleration. And when Paul says, he was sent to baptize, it is meant not
so much to baptize as to preach; he was an Apostle and had diverse Ministers
waiting upon him, who were ordinarily employed in baptizing such as by his
Ministry were prepared for it: his Thanking of God therefore that he baptized
so few, was not because the Ordinance it self was not Authentic, and
honorable, but because as there was no necessity ordinarily for him to do it
personally, so it eventually prevented occasion of their naming themselves from
Paul: this Reason he gives 1. Cor. 1. 14. if G. K.'s pretended reason had any
weight, he had broken his Commission in baptizing of any.

Somebody ows him thanks for his Charity, that allows Babes and children their
Images, etc. provided they are cordially zealous for spiritual Baptism; and he
grants there are some few such (only Christ is little beholden to him for
making a sacred Institution of His a George-on-horseback to invite children to
their books) but for us, we are not thus obliged, for we are not so much as
babes, but mere Hypocrites, and Formalists: did he ever read, 1. Cor. 4. 8. and
Romans 14. 10. we have always professed our zeal for the inward Baptism, and our
whole Ministry is a witness to it, only we are for both Baptism with water and
the Holy Ghost, and the Quakers pretend to be only for the latter; and which is
most agreeable to the mind of Christ, let the Scripture determine: and indeed
they thus take away the very means appointed by Christ for enjoying that other.

Sect. 4. Nor does he treat the sacred Supper with any better language. He
grants That Christ had an outward supper of the Pascal Lamb: i. e. that He had
the sign without the thing Signified; i. e. that Christ are the passover
hypocritically, which is prodigious Blasphemy. When he says, Our sacrament
has no inward spiritual signification to us, he arrogates God's Prerogative,
who only can judge the heart immediately: and his reason is groundless, for we
never denied a real and spiritual partaking in Christ, though we allow it not
in the Quakers carnal sense, but spiritually.

When he takes notice of Christ's drinking first, and drinking twice at the
Sacrament; he bewrayes his ignorance or perverseness; if that place be more
obscure, it is to be interpreted by such as are more clear: the other
Evangelists mention the order of the Institution; By Christ's first blessing
and giving the Bread, and after that the Cup; and Paul tells us he received the
Order from Christ Himself thus, 1. Cor. 11. 23. etc. Christ indeed kept two
Sacraments at one Meeting, the Passover which He now antiquated, and the Supper
which he now instituted; the former Cup belonged to the Passover, which also
represented Christ, and Jewish Antiquity tell us, it was their custom to
conclude that Sacrament with such a Cup.

In page 188. we have him there introducing a new Sacrament, which he tells us
they have at their ordinary Meals, and the Ministers do consecrate them,
sometimes by Praying, sometimes by silence, (a new way of Consecration) and to
this he shrinks up this Gospel Ordinance; which is pure Familism, endeavoring
to banish all instituted Worship out of the Church, under a pretense of
continued holiness, a fine way to extirpate Religion out of the world, by
Evacuating the Appointments of Jesus Christ. We believe that there is a
spiritual Feeding on Christ, which believers are to practice daily by the
exercise of Faith; and are Satisfied that our Eating etc. should be alwais to
the glory of God, and might possibly say as much of that as, and with more
truth than he. But Christ's institution is something beyond that, and is
appointed as a special help of our Faith in these exercises, herein therefore
they are behind us, they pretend to no more than we do, and in our measure
endeavor, whereas we are also for the Sacred Institutions of Christ, to help
us in all other duties; and we think that our Supper is beyond theirs, as being
an holy Ordinance of Gospel Worship, and theirs is only the Common duty of all
men: we believe that outward eating is but a sign of the inward, and therefore
not to be rested in, but because it is a sign: and Christ has enjoined the use
of it, we dare not omit it.

That all outward Eating and Drinking is a natural and necessary sign of the
Inward, we utterly deny; that it is accommodable to it by way of resemblance,
we acknowledge, else Christ would not have chosen it for this end: but we use
them for figures upon the account of His institution, and not because of a
natural Analogy; else we might multiply Sacraments at Pleasure; and yet we
grant it to be as much a natural sign, as the outward world is a figure of the
inward, which he says Paul expressly calls it. I. Cor. 7. 31. when there is not
one syllable expressly or consequentially intimating any such thing.

Sect. 5. But if the Sabbath may but be cashiered, the other Ordinances will
fall. Here then, his first cavil is against the first day of the week, but if
he decries any outward Sabbath at all (as he calls it) the First day needs no
more Vindication than any other: touching the Change of the Sabbath, such as
acknowledge the Sabbath to be moral and perpetual by divine precept, may find
it made good by many, Sheppard, Owen and others. His Cavil also against Rev. 1.
10. has been fully answered by the forecited Authors, and he seems himself
to grant the cause, for he tells us ( p. 103.) It is commendable in Christians
to set apart the first day of the week for rest from Employments and to help
the mind in its spiritual exercises: now, they must set this day apart rather
than any other, either because the day it self has some Betterness in it, or
because Christ has put an Excellency upon it; the former cannot be proved, the
latter can be only by His sanctifying of it; to be a Day of Rest.

Nor is the Changing of the Seventh Day, which was the Jewish Sabbath, into the
First which was the Christian-, to put the first day of the week in the Room of
Christ; for not to say, that it is hard to prove that the Seventh Day was
merely a Jewish Type of Christ, for it was appointed before there was any
Revelation of Christ, or occasion for Him; ( viz. in Innocence;) but if it
were, yet the Sabbath it self was not so, but a time appointed by Divine
positive precept for the performing of natural and instituted Duties to God in,
and is therefore of a natural and perpetual consideration, and cannot cease to
be necessary, till such duties cease, or men can do them without taking time to
do them in.

And is he not run quite out of breath, when he tells us that, Exodus 20. 8, 9.
says nothing of one day in seven, but only of a seventh day, we thought that
had been one day of seven: but suppose him to mean, that it left it not
arbitrary, but fixed it; we may in part grant it, viz. that it fixed it to the
Seventh day, which God saw meet to appoint, but that it necessitated it to the
last of the Seven, so that God could not alter it to the first of the seven,
there is no need to conclude, and the Scripture will prove the contrary,
because He did afterward change it.

And whereas he so often pleads that, The Sabbath is Christ and nothing else,
he poorly proves it from. Heb. 4. 9. 10. it is there said that Christ entered
into His rest, and does that mean, that he entered into Himself? his Asserting
that in the New Testament there is no outward day is nonsense; what inward day
did he ever hear of? He thinks the words outward and inward, may be applied to
every thing, but he must run up the folly a little further; we cannot prove
(says he) that the fourth Command enjoined the Jews to keep an outward seventh
day: we know that it was a Seventh day, it is expressly so said, and if he can
find out an inward one, it will be a rare invention: we are sure that it was a
day to be celebrated from the Evening to the Evening. Nor is his allusion to
the tenth Command of any strength; that that only enjoins inward duty and not
outward, is a grand mistake: every Command of the Decalogue respects the
actions as well as the heart, and so do the fourth and tenth.

Reflections on his Call.
He has now done with his Doctrinal part, and shutts up all with a thing which
he styles, A Call and a warning to the people of Bosston in New England to
Repent, etc. in which, by his language he arrogates to himself as much as any
of the Prophets of old had of an immediate Mission from God. We shall not
trouble our selves with the reviling Language he here uses, ( Jesus Christ
will call him to account for that ere long) but only endeavor to make it
evident by his own manner of expressing himself, that he is no true Prophet.

1. The true prophets do not use to ly, especially in delivering their
Messages; and that he does egregiously, there has been more than once observed
in his book; and what does he less when he here tells us that God has
enlightened us all to turn from darkness to light etc.?

2. True prophets do not use to Slander, and how often he has done so by us,
we have seen throughout the pamphlet, and here also, p. 200. in saying, that We
profess to own Christ without, but do not own him within, an horrid abuse!

3. Prophets are not wont to rail and revile, and that he does; as if he had
been educated to it, particularly p. 198. and all this he charge upon
strangers, whom he had no knowledge of.

4. Prophets use not to deliver false Doctrine and Heresy, and such is his
whole Pamphlet stuffed withal, in particular, that of the Light-within, which
he here charge us for Blaspheming, P. 198.

5. Prophets use not to speak Nonsense, and that he is notoriously guilty of,
and a Specimen of it he gives in the warning it self, which he tells us he had
in the Light, p. 201. where he charge us for calling our duties, and tells us
not what we call them; though possiby he could not tell, for we call them,
dirt, and durg, and nothing..

6. Prophets don't use to call men to repent of their holding the Truth as it
is in JESUS, and his Call is nothing else.

7. Prophets are wont to show some Proof of their Call, but he has shown none;
he tells us indeed that it is by Immediate Revelation, but withal has told us,
that if it cannot be proved by Scripture, we are not bound, ^o believe him: and
so we dismiss him, only wishing him at leisure to read, Jer. 23. 31, 32. Ezekiel.
13. 6. -- 10.

An Appendix.
WE had now done with him, but that he has printed at the End of his Call the
Copies of three Letters, two of his and one of ours, nor needs much to be said
to these.

As to his first Letter, all the Reflection we shall here make is, that he tells
us in it, that the false Doctrines which he charge upon us, were such as he
was assured by the Spirit of God that we taught them, and that they were false:
Now the Spirit of God assures none of a Ly, and that in matter of Fact. But we
have before intimated, that the 12 th. Article in his Charge, is none of ours,
but the contrary; by which it appears that G. K's Spirit teaches him to ly.

What we have to say in Justification of our Answer to him will be seen in our
Animadversions on his reply.

1. He tells us, We called his letter a blasphemous and heretical paper, and
give no satisfactory reason for so doing; We had then no opportunity, but we
hope we have now done it to the Satisfaction of the sober.

2. That When our carnal weapons were gone, we found no spiritual ones: We
suppose it is now evident that he was mistaken, if the Word of God be the sword
of the Spirit, as it is called, Ephesians. 6. 17.

3. He vaunts that We have no courage to appear in the open field, but lurk in
our dens where the honest Quakers have no occasion to hear us: but we say, it
is their own fault; for our preaching is open, and our doors shut out none but
those that will not come.

4. He calls us Beasts of prey, and Nightbirds, that creep out only in the
dark; but this charge is very impertinent and contradictory; it was in his
Language night with us, when our Liberties were taken away, and then (if at
all) we refused to come out, and then G. K. comes daringly; he then is the
Forrest-beast, by his own doom.

5. He boasts of his great Conquest in his book, and yet (like an Hypocrite)
would arrogate nothing to himself, no, he is but like the Barley cake which
tumbled into the host of the Midianites, only his Conquest is not like to hold
the parallel, for we suppose we have made his Cake appear to be Dough:

6. He thinks we were afraid of exposing our people, and wonders that we have
wrought no more on them all this while: and might we not lawfully have a
cautions Fear? Ought not the Shepherd to be aware when the Wolf comes to his
flock? Nor did we ever pretend to make our people savingly holy, any further
than as God blessed our endeavors.

7. He wonders we doubted his design; but we knew he was a Quaker.

8. He tells us that he came not of his own will, but by a necessity from the
Lord: but gives no demonstration.

9. He Wrote this treatise of the will of the Lord: and little reason to boast
of that: It was of God (doubtless) to leave him in the hands of satan to be
thus acted: If we say we have written this Answer in the will of the Lord, we
can give a better account of His approving will in it, because written in
defense of the Truth of Christ which he has perverted, and the Name of Christ
which he has blasphemed, this moved us to reply upon him, and this is of God.

10. He desires us, If we answer him, not to defend our cause with Railing and
Lies; Physician, heal thy self; he has set us a precedent, but we follow him
not, our cause needs it not, as his did, and since he has gotton the Monopoly
of both, and warns us not to encroach upon his Property, we promise him that we
will not.

11. He supposes we misapplied 2. epist Joh. verse. 10. but offers nothing
convincing; he denies that he brings another Doctrine, but that has been
proved, and he gave evidence enough of it in his letter. He tells us, that was
to a private Woman, and concerns not us who reckon ourselves teachers, but
Ecclesiastical Histories tell us, the Apostle John himself did as much by
Cerinth^s. But however, an Heretic must be twice admonished before he is
rejected: and had not he been more than so? How often in Scotland, particularly
by Mr. John Alexander in his Reply, and at the Barbacan in London, and in
New England, at Hampton and, Salem; and must every one in particular admonish
and Heretic twice before he reject him? But he is more than an Heretic, an
Apostate, a Teacher of lies and salse Doctrine, a Deceiver; and for this reason
to be shunned: and especially after Admonition, persisting in his Course. And
when he says the Apostles did not thus treat men of ill principles, nor
Christ, but (...) etc. We answer, they were not A ^^tates and Heretics, grown
beyond Admonition, but persons that had been trained up in false principles,
from whence they endeavored to draw them which alters the case: nor is it any
Contradiction, that Quakers may be invited to come to our public Meetings, and
yet not admitted into our private Houses. There are the instituted means,
which if they come to, they may possibly be convinced but the Scripture has
given cautions to Christians in the other respect. Nor is there any parallel
between his comparison and the thing, Turkish Pirates hang out false colors and
invite men to rob them; that we do neither, He that will one day vindicate His
own truth and ways, will make it appear, then Wisdom shall be justified of all
her children; mean while we take it to be one Commendation of our Doctrine and
Ministry, that G. K. and such as he rail at and revile it.

But before we part we shall, for the Satisfaction of some, who possibly are
concerned that we took him not up, when he challenged us to a public
disputation, subjoin our reasons then moving and swaying of us; which were not
from any suspicion of our own cause, nor Fear of his strength of reason, or
jealousy left our Hearers should be seduced; but,

1. it was not in our power to grant it him, without laying our selves
obnoxious to the then Government, who had expressly forbidden the people to take
liberty of any public Meeting together on any occasion on the weekdays,
besides the usual Lectures.

2. We knew none of our Hearers that had any scruple on their minds about any
of those Truths which he charged with falsehood, but believed them ^rmly, as
far as we had any knowledge, and therefore to dispute them for their sakes, was
altogether needless.

3. We knew (partly because he was a Quaker, partly by the reports of his
managing himself elsewhere, partly by his first Article of his Charges) that
there would be no holding of him to any Law or Rule of Disputation, but he
would bring all to his Revelations, and therefore the whole must needs issue in
a tumuluous Brangle.

4. Because he had declared himself at once in opposition to almost all the
Fundamental Articles of Religion, which had been mained for almost seventeen
hundred years, by the Church of Christ; and in Defense of which so many
thousands had laid down their lives; and who but Men Distracted, would expose
these to be publicly debated, is so many disputable Points in Religion upon
the Challenge of a fearful Apostate: And we suppose here is enough to satisfy
any that are intelligent.

But now being under some Necessity, we have (with no little Tediousness, in
being put upon it to take notice of so many Impertinencies, Fooleries, and
Tautologies, as his Book is fraught with) answered the Substance of what he
has said, with as much Brevity as is consistent with Perspicuity: And so we
commend it for its Success to His Grace and Blessing on whom alone it depends.

FINIS.

