THE MOVRNERS CORDIAL Against Excessive SORROW Discovering what Grounds of Hope
Gods People have concerning their DEAD FRIENDS

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in BOSTON.

2 Cor. 5.1. For we know, that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were
Dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eternal in
the Heavens.

Boston, Printed by Benjamin Harris, and John Allen. 1691.

Very Suitable to be given at Funerals.

READERS,
WE live in a dying World. Our dearest Friends and most precious Relations are
ever and anon bidding us a sorrowful farewell. To sanctify God in a duly
moderated Mourning at such a time, is a great but difficult Duty. God is most
dishonored by our admitting our passions to carry us beyond bounds; and a
Christian never more needs relief, than on such occasions, when Nature
influenced by corruption carries him into unbecoming transports of ungoverned
Affections. God has therefore, in his word, provided excellent Cordials to
revive the Spirits of his Children, and keep them from fainting under these
trials. One of them, and none of the least, is presented you in the following
Discourse. These Sermons were Preached in a time when Death rode in Triumph
among us; when many were carried daily to their long home, and Mourners went
thick about our streets; and they were not, through Gods blessing, without
their desired effect. And since there will be frequent occasions for you to
make use of this Receipt, as long as you converse with Mortality, it has been
desired to be exposed in Print for the benefit of more than had the advantage
to hear it. If in an Hour of Temptation, God shall please to make it any way
serviceable to your faith, and enable you to suck out any Consolation from it,
let him have the praise, to whose blessing I commend it, who am

Your Servant for Christ's sake, Samuel Willard,

1 These. 4.13. But I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning
them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope.


MAN, who in his Creation was made of dissoluble Principles, is by his Apostasy
subjected to that Dissolution, which, had he retained his Integrity, should
never have actually siezed upon him: whereas now the whole race of fallen men
are daily exposed to be made a prey to Devouring Death, which comes armed
against them in a thousand shapes; and without favor or respect to persons,
snatcheth them away from among the living: sometimes it comes on foot, taking
here one and there another, in an easy progress; as in times of health and
peace: other whiles it comes on. Horseback, Jehu-like, driving furiously,
hurrying men away by Shoals to the Land of Darkness: In which it dissolves the
most sacred Ties, and makes a separation between the nearest Relations, which
occasions Mankind's being so often put into mourning. Now, as Nature prompts
men to mourn over their Deceased Friends, and we may as well root out the
Affections planted in Humanity, as to deny them the liberty of venting
themselves when there is an occasion offered; so the Christian Religion gives
us Rules for the due bounding, and right regulating of these passions, and it
is a point of Christian Wisdom to be well instructed therein at all times, much
more when the Providence of God orders it to be a time wherein the Sword
abroad, and mortal sickness at home, are so often calling us to the exercise
thereof: and he that is acquainted with the extravagant exorbitancy of his own
Affections, will see abundant reason to take pains in learning of this Lesson.
No man in his right mind can be so fond of sorrow, as not to be willing to have
some lenitives applied to it, for the casing of the grief of it. Heathen
Morality has laid it self out very much upon this Subject; but alas! the best
dose that ever that could provide for men, was nothing but a few Narcoticks, to
stupify, and not in the least to cure that Malady. He that would be well
provided for his relief in this case, must consult Paul and not Seneca; the
Word of God, and not Pagan Philosophy, and here is one excellent Receipt
prepared to our hand in the Text and Context.

This Chapter belongs to the hortatory part of the Epistle; and from this verse
to the end of the Chapter, he gives precious and profitable advice to the
people of God about their mourning over their Deceased Friends: The advice it
self is given in the Text, the arguments to strengthen it, and render it
profitable to them, is in the following verses. The advice it self is, not to
mourn despairingly over them* the reasons why they should not so do are three;
taken from the consideration of the glorious Resurrection they shall ere long
arrive at, the happy meeting which they shall then have with the Lord Jesus
Christ, and their being thenceforth made to live with him for ever in glory;
and one would think this were enough to set men down completely satisfied,
could they embrace all this with Faith.

In the words then we may take notice of,

1. The Subject to whom the advice is given, Brethren; he applies it to such as
were by profession Christians, and in the judgment of Charity, true believers.
This Cordial is only provided for such, and if any other shall take it, it may
prove to be poison unto them.

2. The Subject concerning whom this advice is given; Them which are asleep:
sleeping is an expression which the Spirit of God makes frequent use of in the
Scripture to express dying by; and it is for the most part applied to the death
of the Godly, thereby to take away the formidableness of it, and make it more
welcome to us; he therefore intends such as are dead in Christ, or those whom
we are well persuaded of, that they had a title to him by a living faith: such,
of whose death we have encouragement to believe that it is but a sweet sleep.

3. The subject matter about which the advice is given, viz. Sorrow: It refers
to the Affection of grief, which is apt to break forth into, and vent it self
in bitter mourning upon such sad and solemn occasions as these.

4. The advice it self which he gives in this case, wherein he does not forbid
all sorrow, but only regulates it. The Apostle Paul was no Stoic; the Spirit
of God never advised men to Apathy: there is danger in despising as well as in
fainting under affliction, and therefore they are both cautioned against Heb.
12.9 and there is a double limitation here set to it; or rather a limitation
with an explication.

1. The limitation it self is, as do others: Gr. as the rest, or residue; i. e.
of mankind: by these he intends such as are not Christians, nor have been
instructed in the Doctrines of the true Religion: and the comparison may be
referred either to the Heathenish modes used by them in their mourning, or else
to the degrees of sorrow which they were wont to express in it.

2. The other limitation or explication of the former, is, in these words;
which have no Hope. Hope is an Affection very serviceable for the alleviating
of sorrow, and where that is not active, g^ief will grow up to despair.

3. Here is also one general help offered against this irregular and unbounded
mourning, viz. Knowledge: I would not have you to be ignorant. Implying that it
was Gentile ignorance, which made them so to mourn; the knowledge and the
thorough persuasion of sound Principles will help to fortify us against the
imitation of them.

The Substance of these words may be drawn into this DOCTRINE.
Gods People in mourning over their Dead, ought not to be so ignorant, as to
sorrow like Heathen, or men without Hope.



If we consider the Doctrine with relation to the Text, and the Phraseology
that is used in it, it may be taken up in several Propositions, which may serve
for the explication and confirmation of it to us.

PROPOSITION I. That Gods People have consolations which others are strangers
unto.
God has provided those comforts for his Children, which he has not made
common to the World: they have their Joys which a stranger may not meddle with
without presumption, because he has nothing to do with them. The Apostle,
applying of himself to his Thessalonians, makes a plain difference between
them, and others who did not believe: he leaves wicked men to sorrow without
hope if they will, yea and he reckons that they have reason enough so to do;
but he wholly disallows it in the Children of God, as a thing that is
altogether unreasonable, and that must be because they have something peculiar
to support their spirits withal, or else what should make the difference? The
world indeed make high pretenses to their comforts, but they are of another
stamp and character than those that belong to the people of God, and no way
comparable with them: and we may observe these four differences between them.

1. Those are but seeming comforts, whereas these are real. They are but the
shadow* these are the substance of Consolation. Of the worlds comforts, we have
the Wis^mans observation upon them, Prove. 13.14. Even in Laughter the heart is
sorrowful; they think they have some refreshments, but indeed they have none.
But the comforts of Gods Children are realities: they are therefore said to
inherit substance: there are true settled refreshments in the Joys of the Holy
Ghost, which these partake in: there is neither delusion nor deceit in them.

2. They are of men's own making, but these are of Gods providing. Ungodly men
arrogate them to themselves they snatch at, and take them without any leave, or
title to them; they walk in the light of their own fir^, and by the sparks
which they have kindled, Isai. 50.11. But the Children of God have theirs given
to them, it is God that comforts them in all their afflictions, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4.
He has made this Consolation for them in the promise, and he applies it unto
them by his Holy Spirit, who imprints it upon their hearts indelebly, and makes
them to taste the sweetness and satisfaction there is in it. And Hence,

3. Those are groundless, but these are grounded. The ungodly man builds
without a foundation, whereas Gods Children are built upon the Rock. Sinners
are under a curse, and there is no peace unto them, if God may be believed, for
he has said it, Isa. 57.1. and where there is no peace, how can there be any
solid comfort? If they enjoy any favor Providentially, yet they have no
security of it, being exposed to lose it every day, yea every moment; and while
they have it, it is attended with a fearful curse: But the people of God have
the assurance or security of theirs given to them. It is called strong
Consolation, Heb* 6.18. not only in regard of its prevalency over the greatest
Temptations of afflictions, but also as it is well laid and immovable. It has
its strength in the Everlasting Covenant, secured by the immutability and
fidelity of God; and evidenced by those things that are wrought in them, which
accompany salvation, attested by the Spirit of God in them, so bearing witness
unto their Sonship.

4. Those are but during this life at the farthest reach, but the^e are both in
and after Death. Our Savior Christ, speaking of wicked men, says that they
have their consolation, Luke 6.24. i. e. they have already as much as ever they
are like to have. Their personal comforts will reach no farther than so, Psalm.
49.17. for when he dies, he shall carry nothing away. Their relative comforts
do now also cease: whilst they live with them, they solace themselves in them,
and make merry, but when they dye, they have now no more comfort of them:
whereas the Children of God have their consolations lying beyond death, this
moth cannot eat them out, this thief cannot rob them of them: their joy for
themselves is, that their Names are written in heaven; their solace in their
relations, when they are dead, is, That they are gone to Christ.

USE I.
Hence then, how little cause have the world to scorn Gods people, or they to
envy ungodly men? these do both herein appear to act preposterously, and
altogether unwarrantably. Let scornful men flout as long as they will at the
children of God, because they comfort themselves in the Word and Promise, and
settle themselves on an Hope which they derive from thence: it will be found
one day that they had no cause so to do. Let them boast and brag of their
greater and better comforts, they will shortly know themselves to have been
grossly mistaken. Let them look never so well of it to an eye of carnal reason,
and seem to be the only darlings of Providence; yet Gods Children have no just
cause to malign them upon this account, or to fret and be disquieted by reason
of it; for God has provided better things for them which the others have
nothing to do withal, nor shall ever be made the partakers of: when at any time
you are assaulted with this Temptation, and it is like to be too hard for you,
then read and ponder well upon these two precious portions of the Word of God
in, Psalm. 37* and 73.

USE II.
Let this warn every one to beware how they apply to themselves the
consolations of the Word of God. There are some whom they do belong unto, but
they are not all who may make this claim: there are terrors there also, which
are the portion of many: and it is not a little perilous in this case, for men
to arrogate to themselves that which is not their own: when God is about to
speak comfort to his people, he then says unto ungodly men, hands off; he
would have them to stand by and hear, but not to presume: if their hearing of
them pronounced upon his people, may awaken them to see their own misery in
being without them, and excite them to diligence in seeking after an interest
in them according to the Gospel directions; this is proper, and will be
profitable; but if they take them as spoken to them, run away with them, and
never regard what it is that can only give a title to them, this will prove a
woeful delusion; and there are none that perish more fearfully than these do:
Our business, when we hear of these things, is to enquire seriously, what
manner of persons are they to whom they belong? and then to reflect and ask, am
I one of these? if indeed we are, we may then safely live upon them, they are
our portion; but if it be otherwise, they will not prove Cordials, but poisons
to us. It is as dangerous to take comforts un-given as to refuse them when they
are offered.

USE III.
Hence then what a shame is it that Gods Children should sink under troubles
like other men? How much more then that they are not able to bear up so quietly
under them as others can? that a shadow should seem to do more than the
substance? It must needs be here granted, or else we shall do injustice to good
men, that there is a vast difference between the contempt of afflictions, which
the men of the world make such a flourish withal, and the humble sense and
patient submission of the children of God, which makes less show and noise: but
still there is a decorum to be observed by us; and if we faint in the day of
adversity, who have such a cordial to support and refresh our spirits withal,
it says that we are not in the right exercise of Faith. Let them despond who
have nothing to trust to, but let not those sink in their spirits at any thing
who have Gods comforts to support them: know it therefore that there is one in
the Word of God which is suited to every condition that you can be in; and it is
strong enough to do the thing it is prepared for, if you would but take it.

PROPOSITION II. That Grace does not secure any against Dying* or, Gods
Children must dye as well as other men.
A bodily death is the common lot of all sorts of men, and Piety is no more a
Bail against it than wealth or honor, or pleasures. Our Apostle does not here
go about to encourage his Thessalonians by telling them that they shall not
lose their godly friends by death, no, but he endeavors to give them relief
against oppressing sorrow in case they do lose them, presuming it to be a thing
which they are daily to expect. The truth of this, in Thesi, is confirmed unto
us by daily observation, we see the best, the most holy, the most desirable to
be going off the stage from time to time: all men may make that observation,
Psalm. 49.10. He sees that Wisemen dye: when therefore Christ promises that
some, viz. such as had believed on him, should never die, it is not meant of a
bodily but of a spiritual Death. Nor do some extraordinary instances of those
that were translated that they should not see Death, as Enoch and Elias,
invalidate the the generl Truth of this assertion, being only special
exceptions from the rule. But that which calls for our observation and enquiry
here, is, why Gods Children who are united to Jesus Christ, whose sins are
pardoned, and from whom the Curse is removed, must yet die as well as other
men, upon whom the curse of Death lies in its weight? and we may take a summary
account of it in the following Conclusions. For although there is enough to
stop our mouths, and silence our cavillings, to consider that Infinite Wisdom
has seen meet in sovereign pleasure so to determine it: yet this Wisdom has
its reasons, and if we know them not all, yet it has told us sufficient not
only to silence, but to satisfy us too: here then let us observe.

1. That Death at first came into the world as a curse of sin. It was not a
condition of man's nature, (as some do falsely suppose, and frivolously plead)
but a consequent upon the great Transgression, and a moral effect of it, Romans
5.12. By one man sin came into the world, and death by sin. God had laid a
restraint upon Mortality in man's Creation, but he took it off again upon man's
Apostasy, and left him to be a prey in the hands of it. If mankind had never
sinned, he had never died. It is therefore a curse in its first introduction
into the world, being in it self an evil which man's nature is grievously averse
unto, and being brought in as a penalty upon the creature, and therein a clear
discovery of Gods righteous Displeasure at man: the Apostle therefore makes
that an argument undeniably to prove that Sin was in the world from Adam to
Moses, because men died all that while, Romans 5.13, 14.

2. That the whole Curse of the first Covenant is taken off from a man in his
Justification. It is of the very nature of this benefit, that it removes the
Curse from that person to whom it is applied. The nature or essence of the
Curse consists in that sentence of Condemnation which is past upon the sinner:
now in Justification that very sentence is taken off from the man, and there is
no more of it lying out against him, Romans 8.1. There is now no condemnation to
them that are in Christ. The forgiveness of sins is contained in it, and where
sin is forgiven, the punishment of it is removed; such therefore are said to be
past from death to life.

3. Hence the believers Death is spoiled of it is sting. It cease to be unto
them a cursed Death. God can suffer Death it self to continue, and yet take the
malediction out of it: he does so by all the other afflictions which befall his
people in this life, in that he causes them all to work together for their
good, Romans 8.28. and he does so by Death it self too, for what says Paul,
Phil. 1.21. to die is gain. When the poison is taken out of it, it becomes an
innocent and a serviceable thing, as will be seen afterward: and thus it is to
all Gods people, so that Paul could make that challenge in behalf of all the
regenerate, 1 Cor. 15.45. O Death where is thy sting? he does not say where is
Death? but where is its sting? and this is the very thing which makes a Child
of God not to be afraid to die.

4. Yet there are many reasons why God sees it convenient that believers should
die, and some of them are these following.

1. It is fitting that they should taste something of the fruit of sin. Though
this be not in the way of a curse, yet they must have some experiment of it in
the way of Providence: The Apostle tells us, Romans 8.10 The b^dy is dead because
of sin. One thing designed in this expression is, that because Gods people were
once sinners, therefore God will have them to taste of a bodily death. This
becomes to them a witness that once they were Transgressors, and serves to keep
them humble under all the grace they have received, and the sense of Gods love
in Christ, which they enjoy, to think that they still must die. It is true, if
there were nothing else of advantage to them by dying but only this, God would
not have thus continued it to them: but still, this is a Remembrancer to them
as long as they live; and it is one profitable use of it to them, to bring sin
to remembrance.

2. Death is sometimes a fatherly correction which God inflicts upon his
Children. There must be acknowledged a vast difference between a curse and a
chastisement: the matter of the one and the other may be the same, but the
design which denominates them, is vastly diverse. A curse is ever the fruit of
hatred, but a correction has always love in the bottom of it: there is indeed
anger in it; and it consists well enough with the love of God, for him to be
angry with his children, and when he is so, he can lay hard blows upon them,
and love them still, because they are for their good and not hurt; yea, because
he loves them he chastens them, Heb. 12:6. And sometimes he strikes so hard
that he kills them. God is angry with Moses for his unadvised carriage at
Meribah, and he must die for it: David provokes him in the matter of Vriah, and
he must lose his Child on the account: and though such a stroke has a great
deal of smart in it, yet there is no harm comes of it.

3 Gods people must die, that sin may be rooted out of them. Sin is beyond
dispute the worst evil, and the greatest misery; that Gods people are for the
present subjected in it, and have the remains of it in them, they woefully
experience: and it is no little infelicity that abides them to consider that
they will be sinning as long as they continue in this life: this makes them to
cry out dolefully of their wretchedness; with him, Romans 7.24. and it is Gods
good pleasure not to destroy this sin all at once, nor totally as long as they
live; but they must know it to be an evil and bitter thing by sad experience in
themselves. But when they die, then they sin no more; that unhappy work is at
an end with them for ever; so then, their death is to them a passage into a sin
less estate: and henceforth God will be no more dishonored nor their souls
wounded by their sin.

4. And they must die that their Grace may be perfected, and this is consequent
upon the former: for till sin be totally abolished ^n the man, his Grace must
needs labor under imperfection. All the sanctification of a believer in this
life is but in part, and because of this, he practically comes short in every
thing that he sets about: and it is no little trouble upon his spirits to find
so much of the mixture of sinful defect in every thing which he takes in hand:
but now Death passes him over to the fullness of a perfect man in Christ; the
Souls that are gone through Death unto Glory, are called The Spirits of Just
Men made perfect: Heb. 12.23. there are they arrived unto entire Holiness; and
this also they get by Dying.

5. By Death Gods People are delivered from Satan and ungodly men, as long as
they are here in this life, they dwell within the reach of these enemies, and
they give them no little molestation; partly by Persecution, putting them to
all the trouble they can; partly by Temptation, endeavoring to draw them aside
into sin, that so they may wound their Souls; and partly by their ungodly
lives, whereby they are to these a continual vexation, as the Sodomites were to
Lot, whilst he dwelt among them; so that their life is a mere dwelling in
Mesech, and sojourning in the Tents of Kedar: and these Daughters of Heth,
makes them weary of their lives: but when they come to die they are then
removed from them, and shall be molested with them no more for ever: they are
now called away and carried to that place where no such creatures as these
shall ever come.

6. Death puts an end to all the sorrows of Gods Children which they encounter
withal here. This world is a vale of tears, sin has made it to be so; and the
Saints of God have a very large share in the troubles of this life; the few
days which are allowed to them to live in, are full of trouble: and very often
do they meet wi^^ a great deal more of this uncomfort^^^e entertainment than
others do: tiresome days and weary nights are appointed for them: the curing of
the wantonness of their flesh, and the trial of their Graces do call for this,
and the Wisdom of God sees it meet that they should be thus exerc^sed; but
though it be for their benefit, it is yet troublesome, and will be an happiness
to be rid of it, when we are fit for such a delivery: and this shall be when
they die; now shall all their tears be wiped away, and their cheeks shall be
dried: their bodies will now rest in their graves, when sickness and pain shall
hurt them no more: and their Souls are conducted into that place, where trouble
is a perfect stranger, where grief and molestation were never known.

5. Death also finisheth all their labor. The work of a Christian is a great
work* and hard too; the remains of strong and active corruption in them,
together with the weakness of every Grace they have, and the opposition which
they encounter both from without and within, makes it to be so: and though it
be the delight of the new man to be engaged in Holines^, yet the employment it
self is work, and wrestling and fighting. Now, as God has appointed this life
to be unto his people a time of labor; so the other life is for rest, and it
is Death which wafteth them over into it, Rev. 14.13. They rest from their
labor.

6. It removes them to the place of their complete Happiness. Sin has spoiled
this lower world from being a place for the enjoyment of perfect felicity, it
is now in heaven alone that it is capable of being possessed. That is the
Kingdom of G^ory, there are the fullness of joys and pleasures for evermore,
that is the place where o^^r portion is laid up and reserved for us, and we
must go thither in order to our inheriting of it: thither is our Bridegroom
gone, the Lord Jesus Christ, in whose embraces our felicity does consist, and
thither must we go to meet and enjoy him: there is our everlasting employment
and fruition; there is all our company either gone or going, for that is the
place of the General Assembly; we are strangers here, there is our home, so
that we must either die or be translated, there being no other way to come at
our Happiness; this latter God sees not meet to indulge us withal, and
therefore it must needs be by the former.

USE I.
I earn hence that Death gives us no rule of judging whether men be good or
bad. This is one of the all things which the Wiseman tells us fall out alike
unto all, Eccl. 9. ^^g. the remarks that men are apt to make here are
fallacious. A judgment cannot pass in respect of Death it self, for wisemen and
fools both die alike, nor can there be any censure safely made in respect of
the circumstances with which it is clothed; godly Josiah dies just after the
same manner in which wicked Ahab dies; both good men and bad men die, some in
youth, some in old age,; some by a natural, others by a violent Death. It is
true, if there be an apparent reason to be read in the lives of men, a sober
Judgment may be made about the manner of their dying, so far as to put us upon
adoring of the Righteousness of God in it: but merely from thence to conclude
them to be either good or bad, is to argue from a false Topic, Luke 13. begin.

USE II.
Let this teach the children of God to maintain their hopes by looking upon
something beyond Death. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.19. if our hope in Christ
were for this life only, we were of all men most miserable; and it must needs
be so upon this article, that believers must die as well as others; for who
meet with more of the troubles of this life than they do? It is the great folly
of ungodly men, who think their houses are for ever, that they lean upon them,
and that they look for, and lay up nothing on the other side of the grave* but
let not the people of God do so, who live in continual expectation of their
change, and are thoroughly persuaded that there is nothing in this world that
can be a suitable supply for that eternity into which they are posting. Let our
Hope then live upon such things as Death it self can never be able to touch. If
Grace cannot secure us from dying, let us then exercise it unto the making sure
of something, which shall be to us better than li^^.

USE III.
This may put Gods People upon the doing of all the good they can whilst they
live; yea and making have to do it. This is the inference which the wiseman
draws from the Doctrine of Dying, Eccl. 9.10. whatsoever thine hand finds to
do, do it with all thy might; and it is a good lesson, if it were well learnt
and practiced; to think that we must die shortly, and that there is then no
more Service to be done for God by us; that if we would do any thing for his
Service, we must do it now, and to spur our selves on by these thoughts unto a
diligent endeavor to be redeeming every shread of time for that work, which
shall turn to a good account, for the bringing of as much honor to God, the
doing of as much good for the souls of others, the laying up of as much
treasure in Heaven for our selves as we can: and thus shall we put our selves
into a very comfortable posture to entertain our death at any time, when God
shall see meet to fend it to fetch us away; for Blessed is that Servant whom
his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

USE IV.
It may exhort us to get all the benefit we may by the People of God, whilst
they live. Are we sure that these Excellent Ones must die shortly? let us then
make use of them presently; now let us improve them for our spiritual
advantage, and get all that we can out of them. When once they are gone hence,
we shall have no farther liberty or opportunity for converse with them, till we
follow them unto, and overtake them in that blessed Sanhedrim: and if we now
neglect to improve their graces for our instruction and edification, it will
then repent us, when they are taken away from us, and we can come no more at
them. There is no going to the house of darkness, to ask them any question
there, or to e^quire after their Experiences* if you should call at their
graves, there will be no hearing nor answer: i^ then you would have any ben fit
from them, seek it now, and so you will have abundant cause to bless God for
them when they are gone hence, their memorial will be precious to you, and
invite you to follow hard after, that you may be with them for ever.

PROPOSITION III. The Death of the Godly is but a sort of sleep.
The Spirit of God takes delight in expressing it by this Metaphor in
Scripture; hence also their grave is resembled unto a Bed, and their abiding in
it unto Rest, Isa. 57.2. and there are many respects in which the resemblance
s^tably expresses the thing; only we must here cautiously observe, that it
refers only to the bodies of the Saints; for their Souls sleep not, but do
immediately pass over to actual perfect blessedness in the Kingdom of Glory. It
is the body properly that dies, it is that therefore which sleeps. The Heathen
Poets were wont to call sleep the Image of Death, and the Brother of death,
because of the similitude between them, but more especially does the
resemblance hold in the Death of Godly ones. For,

1. Sleep is a binding up of the senses, and thereby it takes off the
apprehension of pain and trouble. A man that is asleep does not feel his
sorrow. If it be Bodily pain, or if it be any grief oppressing the spirit, by
falling asleep he loses the present sense of it: as long as it keeps him
waiting he is molested with it, but now it is to him as if it were not; and
Death puts a real end to all the molestations and sorrows of the people of God.
In this life they are full of them, and they accompany them to their
dissolution* but at the Grave they leave them, and they know them no more: All
their Tears are now wiped away, sighing and sorrow now cease for ever.

2. Sleep gives a suspention to labor Men that work must be awake, when they
go to sleep they leave off laboring; it puts an end to present business; men
lay aside their work, when they lay themselves down to rest: and the death of
Gods Children gives a cessation unto their work: the time of life is working
time for Gods People, and they have a great deal of business to be employing
themselves in, whilst they are here, in glorifying of God, and in working out
of their own Salvation; this is enough to employ all their time, if they had a
great deal more than they have; but when once they come to die, they have done
with this, there is no business to be done in the Grave, Eccl. 9 10. and this
is one part of the happiness of Believers in their Death, That they rest from
their Labors, Rev. 14:13.

3. Sleep is a very comfortable and desirable thing to them that are weary. It
gives them rest; when a man has been to^ling and turmo^ling all the day long,
and tired himself out at his business, it is a desirable and pleasant thing for
him to lay himself down to sleep, so says the Wise man, Eccl. 5.12* The sleep
of a laboring man is swee^; and the death of godly men must needs be
comfortable to them, when they have born the heat of the day, and gone through
many wearis^me troubles of life in a weary world; and every gracious soul finds
it to be so, who has been ready to faint under his burden: It is an Encomium
which is put upon the Grave, Job 3.17. there the weary are at rest; and of
righteous men it is said, that now they rest in their beds, Isa. 57.2.

4. The night is the most proper time to sleep in. Then it is that all things
are wont to be at quiet; and there is no work to be done, when the darkness
invites men to rest; we therefore read, 1 These. 5.7. they that sleep, sleep in
the night. The day is accommodated for labor, and the night for repose, and
the time of death is compared to a night; the Grave in which the Dead are laid,
is called a land of Darkness: and also the troublesome condition of men in this
life is compared to a night. There is a great deal of darkness upon the present
condition of Gods People whilst they are in this world; and the more troubled
the affairs of this life are to them, by reason of manifold afflictions which
they encounter (...)* the more desirable and pleasing it must needs be unto
them, to turn aside into the Grave, as into a bed of rest, where they may be
gotten out of it, and be quiet.

5. Sleep is in order to waking again, and that refreshed; men that lay
themselves down to take a sleep, do propose to themselves to awake and to rise
again, and no^ only so, but also to have their spirits restored, and their
strength renewed, and themselves to be rendered more lively and vigorous by the
benefit they have gotten by it: and thus it shall be in respect of the children
of God that die: their death is therefore but a longer sleep, and when the time
of it is over, they shall assuredly awaken again, and that to their complete
satisfaction: this the Psalmist, in contemplation of his dissolution, comforts
himself withal, Psalm. 17.1* I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy
likeness; and this is the Prophets encouragement, Isa. 26.19. Thy dead men
shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise.

USE I.
This consideration may serve to take off the terrors of Death from the minds
of Gods people, Death indeed is called the King of Terrors and well may it hear
this title upon it, with respect to ungodly men, and that because it comes to
do execution upon them: to post their Souls away into the place of endless
miseries* and to lodge their Bodies in the Prison of the Grave, there to be
reserved for a Day of Vengeance: but it is far otherwise with respect to the
Godly: When the Lord comes to call them off by dying, it is but to ^ay them to
sseep* he does now put his children to bed, that they may rest. And this is the
great comfort of it, that they not only sleep but they Sleep in Jesus; he
watches over them, while they ly and rest, and he will keep them safe all
night long, till that happy Morning comes, in which he will awaken and call
them up to G^o^y. The Spirit of God puts this name upon Death, on purpose to
make his people the else afraid of dying. Who is wont to be afraid to lay him
down to his rest? what terrors are there in going to sleep? and when death has
lost it is sting this is the worst of it. It is true, it puts an end to our
work, but then it begins our rest; and do but think how sweet this rest will
be. Do but give diligence to make that one thing sure, that you are in Christ,
by a true and living Faith, and then entertain these charitable thoughts of
death, that so you may not go up and down ^n frights and terrors at the
apprehensions of it, and forewarnings given you to be in expectation of it, but
when you see the night coming you may be refreshed to think that you shall
quickly go to sleep, and there ly still and quiet till the last Trumpet shall
awaken you to come and meet Jesus Christ; in his Kingdom and Glory.

USE. II.
Let it serve to direct Gods people, what to do, that their death may be
comfortably thought of, and expected by them: and that is by endeavoring to
get this secured, that it shall be no other than a sleep to you. This is the
^o^ of all Gods Children: but though Death shall be really thus to every true
Believer, yet there is something to be done by them, that it may be sensibly so
to their minds, and they may be able thus to entertain it when it comes: and
for this end there are these three things which you are to be advised about,
viz.

1. Labor to feel the weariness of this life. They are the weary, that would
fain be at rest. As long as life and the concerns of it are not tiresome to us,
so long we are loath to die, and the thoughts of it are ungrateful to us; but
when it is thus with us, then the very forethoughts of it will afford u^ matter
of refreshment: Job could say, that he would not live always, if he might have
such an indulgence granted him; and there are a great many things which have
enough in them to make us weary, if they were well pondred: there is that sin
which we must be always dragging after us, and putting us to continual grief:
and there are the sins of others, which we must see and hear, which will wring
tears from our eyes: there are also the sorrows which this life is burdened
withal, and will not be at an end whilst that lasts: yea and the very
difficulties with which a Christian does any thing for God here, by reason of
his weak grace, and the strong corruption which makes resistance to it; yea,
and the dismal days that are expected to come: it is an happiness to be at rest
out of the noise and bitterness of such things: that therefore was a merciful
promise which was made to the godly King Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 3^.28.

2. Be sure to get your work done. The child or servant who has loitered all
the day is loath to come home at night, because he can give so poor an account
of his business: but he that has followed his labor with diligence, and
improved his time carefully in the work he was set about, goes home to his rest
with a great deal of cheerfulness. There is nothing which makes a Child of God
more unwilling to die, than to look back and see how woefully he has neglected
the work of God which he was called unto, and how unhappily he has been
diverted from it; he is blessed whom his Lord finds so doing. To have our great
Master come to us and say, you have labored sufficiently for the day; come now
and lay you down to your rest, is a most comfortable thing: be you faithful
unto the death, and it shall be so.

3. Endeavor to get this assurance that your souls shall be safe lodged when
you die. This is the great concern of all men. The soul is every wise man's
principal care, and when that is secured all is well: he that can say as Paul,
2 Cor. 5.1* We know that if our earthly house were dissolved, we have a
building of God, eternal in the heavens, has enough to satisfy him; and when
death comes he may say with the Psalmist; Psalm. 116; 7. Return unto thy rest O
my Soul! Make sure of your union unto Christ, and it shall be so: then shall
your Soul go to Christ, and Be with him which is best of all: and you may then
with greatest freedom and cheerfulness recommend your body to it is bed, where
it shall rest, till it be called to the same blessed eternity of Glory with
it is companion in the Resurrection.

PROPOSITION IV. When Godly ones die, it is lawful and a duty for their Friends
to Mourn over them.
Sorrow for the Death of Pious relations, is, so far from being a sin, that the
Omission of it would be so. Our Apostle does not here tell them, that he would
not have them to sorrow at all: but he only regulates this Mourning; we have
therefore in the Scripture the examples of the most eminent and holy men
recorded for this without any the least reflection made upon them for it; yea
Jesus Christ himself wept at the grave of Lazarus: we shall farthermore find,
that it is one Judgment, which God has in his word threatened to befall some,
that they shall die unlamented. We may take this brief account of the ground or
reason of this conclusion.

1. Sorrow or Mourning is nothing else but the ^^ting of the Affection of
Grief. To grieve, to sorrow, and to mourn do all intimate one and the same
thing. Grief is the inward principle, and sorrow is the expression or exertion
of this principle, by the influence of it upon the spirits, oppressing and
dejecting of them, and mourning outwardly, which discovers it by sighing, and
weeping, and bitter complaints, that persons make, or whatsoever other outward
symbols of it men are wont to signalize it by, as by solitariness, and walking
softly, putting on Sack Cloth, lying in the Dust, which kinds of practices we
find recorded in Scripture.

2 Grief is an affection which is stirred by the apprehension of a present
evil, that oppresses one, and cannot be remedied. Grief derives principally
from Hatred, which is an aversation from evil, and will always some way or
other discover its dislike of it; which various ways of expressing it self,
according to the different Postures of it, give denomination to the several
Derivarive Affections. Now there are three respects which the evil bears, that
give occasion for the stirring of Grief: it is a present evil, for if it be
future, it moves fear; It is something that is upon one that makes impression
upon this affection And it is an oppressing evil: a man's spirit will sustain a
great deal of infirmity, but when it overbears, then it makes it begin to
(...): and it is an evil that connot be remed^ed: as long as the man has any
hopes that he may bear it down and repel it, Anger takes place, and fortifies
against it: but when there is no such expectation, then it sets grief on work:
the Spirit is now straightened and burdened by it.

3. The Death of Friends and Relations gi^es a proper occasion for the
excitation of Gr^ef in us. It has all of that in it which is proper to the
object of such an Affection. It is an Evil; it is one of those things which are
greatly averse to our natural inclinations; it deprives us of those good things
in which a great deal of our love was laid up: it is a ^^reavement, so Jacob
accounted it, Genesis 43 14. It is a present evil: it is that which makes an
actual separation between us, and our chiefest comforts, and it is an
oppressing evil; the most of our delight which we place in any Creat^d Objects,
is wont to be carried forth unto these; it therefore rends our very Cauls, and
streins our heart strings. Yea, and it is an ^rremediable evil; they are now
gone from us, and they must never come to us again; Death makes a total and
utter separation; there is no returning again to have any converse among the
Living, when we are once gone from hence; all hopes of any farther communion in
this world is now wholly cut off, Job 14.7. with 10. there is hope of a Tree,
etc. but man dies and wastes away; yea man gives up the Ghost, and where is he?

4. Hence mourning upon such an occasion is but a rational improvement of a
natural affection. All the Affections were put into men by God when he Created
them, and so they belong to the very nature of Humanity; now there was an use
and serviceableness that these were put into man for; and that was to help him
to carry himself suitably to all the occasions of his life. Sin indeed has put
these much out of order, and made them very unruly: but still there is a
rational use to be made of them, which is in it self lawful for men, yea and a
moral duty; and by such an application or improvement, the Affection does
attain the moral end which it was placed in the man for: the thing it self
therefore is warrantable; though the corrupt heart of sinful man, always spoils
his lawful actions, and they, being unsanct^fied, are not pleasing to God, nor
can be: yet the things themselves are justifiable: and hither belongs this of
mourning over our dead Friends.

5. The Death of godly Friends has in it the greatest occasion of all for our
grief. Besides the ty^ of nature, which has an equal respect here as
elsewhere, we may observe a farther call to it under this consideration that
they were godly, for;

1. The loss it self is upon this account the greater: and that both
personally; we must needs suffer the more by it, by how much the more
profitable they were unto u^; and soul advantage is the greatest of all: (...)
^ore of benefit that we enjoyed by having their presence and company with us,
so much the more must we lose in our ^^sing of them: and upon a public account
also, in which we are jointly concerned with others: the Death of the Godly is
an universal loss; all that they lived among are suffere^^ by it; ^ea though it
be of a private Christian, for he was a public good; and this cannot but
afford us the greater reason and matter for sorrow: There is always some of the
glory of a people goes away when a godly man dies.

2. The more of Gods anger oftentimes discovers it self in such a loss. God
takes away his own Children from us, because he is angry at us: we lose our
Friends because we had provoked God against us, and be herein testifies unto us
that he is displeased at us: and there are no Deaths that carry so much
testimony of the Divine Displeasure in them, as those of the righteous: for
usually his taking of them out of the way, is that he may thereby make way for
more Calamities to break in upon us; Isa. 57.1. The righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.

3. Not to lay the Death of such to heart is in it self a provocation given to
God. When godly men go off the stage, and there is little or no notice taken of
it; it is scarce any matter of grief or trouble to others, they pass it over
and are hardly concerned at it, God makes a critical remark upon it, and puts
it down as an evil Omen, hence that complaint which he makes about it, Isa.
57.1. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart.

USE I.
Learn hence the difference between Christianity and Stoicism. That would
hamstring nature, and cut off the Affections from their natural activity, as if
they had been given to and put into men for nothing else but to be suppressed;
and to make no use of; as if he could enjoy no benefit by them but only by
doing of violence to them: whereas the Word of God and the rules of Religion
teach us, not to destroy, but to improve every faculty that is in us, and in
particular our Affections, to the glory of God who gave them to us; and hereby
it comes to pass that all in us may be actively engaged in his service; and
truly, whatsoever men may think, if God should lose the honor of the
employment of our Affection for him, we should rob him of a great deal of his
due, yea cut off the very feet of our Souls, and how then should we be able to
run the race of his Commandments.

USE II.
Learn hence that the greatest griefs and greatest comforts may meet in the
same subject, and from the same occasion. There is no such consolation in the
Death of any, as of such as die in Christ, and yet no grief in the loss of any
is comparable to it. The greater is their gain, the more is our cause of Joy,
but because herein we suffer the greatest loss, there is also the most occasion
for our sorrow: the one is for them, the other is for our selves: only the due
compounding of these will bring all to a right temper.

USE III.
This tells us that those who part with their Friends without sorrow, are
guilty of a trespass both against nature and Religion. The Apostle speaks of
some that are without natural affection, 2 Timothy 3.3. among other ways wherein
this is to be discovered, this is one: and though men may boast of it as a
commendable virtue, to bear up unconcerned under such Providence, yet it is
here disapproved, and there is blame in despising as well as in fainting under
afflictions.

USE IV.
This bids Christians to beware of being over rigorous in censuring of others
for their sorrow and mourning. This is not only that which God allows to men,
but without which they cannot duly lay his Providence to heart, or rightly
sanctify him under it: yea, and there is a vent of grief which nature must be
allowed to have; and as it is a piece of fruitless indiscretion to go about to
damm it up, so it is over rigorous for us to charge all of this nature to folly
and sin.

USE V.
Yet let it be a word of caution to (...) Mourners, to advise them that they
take heed of giving too large allowance to themselves in this respect. Though
God has given us a liberty, yea prescribed to us a duty in this regard, yet
there are those bounds within which he has limited it, and it is the duty of
Christians to beware least they transgress them; and the rather because our
unruly affections are too apt to exceed herein: and for our help in this case
the Doctrine will afford us a following Rule, viz.

PROPOSITION V. Christians in their mourning ought not to imitate the rest of
the World.
Although they may irreprehensibly sorrow at the death of their Friends, yet
not as others do: These Thessalonians to whom the Apostle directed his Epistle,
lived among a company of Heathen, who had not the Knowledge of God nor Christ,
and had many Heathenish and Idolatrous Customs among them, and particularly in
their mourning over their dead: he here gives the people of God warning against
imitating of them, or obliging themselves to all their vain and superstitious
customs upon this account; and that we may take up a right notion of the
caution here given, let us observe a few things

1. Negatively, take these two observations;

1. That it does not follow from hence, that because the Heathen mourn for
their Dead, therefore Christians are bound not to mourn at all. It is not the
thing it self, but the manner of it that is here cautioned against: none but
Stoics ever prohibited this, and that upon a false Hypothesis: it has been
already taken notice of, that the Law of nature and of Religion concur in it;
and there are some things which mere Gentiles do, that are morally good, and
commendable, and performed according to the light of nature, and dictates of
right reason.

2. Nor does this caution forbid us to use all outward expressions of our
sorrow in our mourning. Such as weeping; when our Savior said to the woman at
the bier of her dead Son, weep not; it was not a reproof of her action, but a
preparatory to her comfort, in the restoring of him to life again: and the
putting of themselves into a mourning garb; although there be a great deal of
vanity and excess used by many (...) this regard; yet the thing in it self is
no^ forbidden, and Gods People in former time^ were wont to use such
expressions of grie^ as these; such as covering of the lips, and putting on
Sackcloth, etc and if the inward affection be a thing lawful, the sober
discovery (...) it cannot be denied, if it be not in it self a thing unworthy
of a Christian, and reproachful to his Profession; but

2. Positively, three things may be observed.

1. That the Heathen are not to be imitated in their excessive Mourning. The
Apostles drift in this place is, to persuade them to moderation in their
sorrowing; and so not to follow the courses which such used as did exceed all
bounds therein Gods People are too prone to be overwhelmed with immoderate
Grief on such occasions as these befalling them in the Providence of God.
Rachel weeps for her Children, and will not be comforted, because they are not;
the Gentiles were accustomed to do too much, but those that profess Christ
should set bounds to themselves, and ende^vour not to go be^ond them: the
reason of this difference will afterward follow; but here this Rule is to be
attended, viz Gods Children should beware of indulging themselves in their
sorrow. They have a great deal more need to lay Restraint upon themselves, the
most are in greater danger of doing too much than too little* we find that the
Egyptians mourned for Jacob, seve^ty days, Genesis 50 3. whereas Joseph mourned
but seven days, ver. 10 al^hough he was his Father, and had been so tender of
him, and this was not for want^ of filial affection or because they loved him
better than he did, but because he had more grace than they, which helped to
rectify the exercise of naturul grief.

2. The^e are many kites and Customs are ^sed by them, which ought not to be
imitated by the people of God, as being Heathenish and no way becoming of
Christianity. I shall not here take into all the fo^^lish customs which the
Gentiles addicted themselves unto, but only point at some of them, which the
Scripture takes notice of, and rest fieth against, and gives warning to them
that fear God that they beware of them; and those were such as were expressions
of great immoderacy in mourning, and carried also (...) decency in them* we
fi^d such a prohibition Lev 19 28. Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh
for the dead, nor print any marks upon you; in Deuteronomy. 14, 1. Ye are the Children
of the Lord your God, ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness
between your e^es for the Dead. The argument he uses is from their relation
and neerness* unto God; the things forbidden, are, cutting the flesh, making
prints upon themselves, tnd baldness upon their heads: these were customs which
the Heathen had taken up, and were in the p^actice of, and all to testify the
exuberancy of their sorrow; and in likelihood there were some Ri^es belonging
to their superstitious worship, which had been taught them by the Devil, and
were every way unseemly to be taken up by the people of God. Our Savior also
showed his dislike of the use of Minst^^ls at the death of Friends, when he
came where they were made use of, Mat. ^.23. etc. these were a company of
mourners, who with sad and doleful ditties stirred up and enkindred (...)
sorrow of those that were related to (...) deceased party, and blow it up to
great ex^cess: The custom also of having mour^ing wom^n belongs to the same
original; nor are we to look upon it as approved by the spirit of God, because
we read, Jer. 9.17. Call f^r the mourning women, that they may come; for it is
there used Rhetorically to signify the desperate miseries which were coming
upon them, which would call for the bitterest lamentation. These women were, by
their brutish howlings; and formidable e^ula^ions, accustomed to represent
sorrow Tragically, and raise the affection in the mourners; which ought rather
to have means used with it, whereby it may be rectified and moderated; now of
all these, and such like things, it is to be said, that the Customs of the
Heathen are vain.

3. In a word, nothing is to be done here that does not be me^ the profession
of the Gospel. Because the Heathen are not acquainted with th^s, it is no
wonder if they do not comport with it in their Solemnities, but follow the
depraved inclinations of their ungoverned Affections Though nature is not
altogether to be restreined, yet it must always be regulated by Grace, and by
the rules of Religion, which teach us better, and afford us help in al^ the
cases which we can any way be concerned in. There is ^^ason enough why we
should not give our selves this unlimited allowance, in this consideration,
that we have not so learned Christ* but a more special reason for it will
follow to be considered in the next Proposition: and in general, let us
remember, that it is the duty of all Christians, to let the world see and know
in all things that they are not Heathen.

USE I.
For Reprehension. This consideration will afford matter of rebuke to a great
many professed Christians; and convince them of their sinful carriage in their
sorrowing for their dead. We forb^d them not to mourn and weep too on such
occasions, but if they forget themselves in it, they are to be rebuked: and
this truth condemns.

1. All excess in this respect. Not to mourn at all, is unnatural; and to mourn
beyond the stinted bounds is unChristian: and here in brief, ^et this be
observed, That, whatsoever demeanure of ourselves under such bereaving
providence, carries in it the discovery of a non submission to the Holy
Spotless Sovereignty of GOD in what befalls us. Whatsoever gives an obstruction
to our careful and suitable a^tendance upon our Christian Duties, and
wha^soever dr^^es us to carry it disconten^edly or d^scouragedly in the service
of GOD; is of this nature, and lays us under this blame They mistake themselves
who think that Moses, or GOD either just^fi^d A^^on, upon that excuse which he
made for his not eating the offering, according to the institu^io^, Leuit.
10.19 20. GOD can pity and bear with; and Gracious^ excuse the infirmities of
his Children, when he does not justify, and commend them, so did CHRIST his
Disciples, when he f^und them ^sleep. There are the ungoverned carriages of
persons, under the exo^b^ancy of their passions, which Religion teaches them
to avoid; and though God pity them, yet he will make them to be ashamed of,
when the^ come to themselves.

Any custom that favors of Heathenism. Whether there are an^ such customs in
use among us, which derive from Pagan folly, I enquire not at present: But
there is one pract^ce that is become too much of a custom, which I cannot upon
so fair an occasion omit the mention of without baulk^ng a direct call of God
to it: and that is for mourners to take the liberty, if not to look upon
themsel^es as obliged to tarry from the house of God, and the pub^ick
Ordinances of his worship, if they have their dead lying by the Walls upon a
Sabbath day: and though excessive grief may plead some excuse and compassion for
some who do so; yet that it self is a sin, and therefore cannot make this to be
none. But the usual reason for this piece of state is, because, forsooth, they
may not appear abroad in company, but in their mourning habits, and these are
not to be worn (according to custom) before they go the interm^nt of the
Deceased Relation: and what is this but downright Heathenism? I am sure David
did otherwise: 2 Samuel 1^.19, 20. when he perceived that the Child was d^^d,
etc. he came into the house of God, and worshipped; and Gods people have never
mo^e need to wait upon God ^n his own way^ for his grace and help to support
them, then when their hearts are burdened and oppressed with over-bearing
Sorrow.

USE II.
To exhort Gods children to set themselves to use the means against this
excessive Heathenish mourning. The main help against this will take in with the
following proposition, but here be advised in general,

1. To avoid every unnecessary thing which may tend to put your Affections
beyond the due bounds. And one thing I would here piont at is the keeping of
your dead too long in your fight. Abraham was a gracious man, and he wept and
mourned at Sarah's, death, as a testimony of the tender love he bare to her;
but he knew his own infirmity, and how much such an object lying always before
his eyes, would tend to put his affections out of order; he therefore desires
as soon as is convenient to have her interred, and so removed out of his sight,
Genesis 23.4.

2. To labor to get your hearts established with those thoughts and
considerations, which may give you true support under your sorrows; and let
them not be such poor ones as the Heathen were wont to make use of, because
they could find no better* but such as have substantial matter of easing and
alleviating of grief in them: the word of GOD affords us many of these, and
they are the Cordials which GOD has provided for us, and are to be taken or
made use of at such a time as we have so great need of them; and they are
either such as respect ourselves: where we have this assurance given us, that
GOD lays no affliction, brings no bereavement on his Children, but what is
intended, and shall effectually prove for their benefit: or else such as
respect those that are taken from us, concerning whom we have manifold reasons
given us in the word of GOD to hope well concerning them, which is next to be
taken notice of. Hence.

PROPOSITION VI. GODS People have an Hope concerning theirs that are asleep,
with which they ought to alleviate their sorrow in Mourning over them.
There are some who take this Phrase in our text, [ who have no Hope,] to be a
Paraphrasis to express the Heathen by, of whom that is one Title, Ephesians. 2.12.
without Hope; as if Heathen and Hope-less Men were equivalent terms: Certain it
is that the Apostle uses this expression as a reason why the people of GOD
should (...) their Grief, upon all such occasions more than the Heathen do,
Because th^se have ^ good Hope, whereas those have none at all. In the making
out of this Proposition; there are two enquiries may be made and resolved, viz.

1. What influence Hope has upon our sorrow for the moderating of it.

2. What Ground of Hope GODS people have concerning their Dead, more than
others,

1. What influence Hope has upon sorrow for the moderating of it.

A. It has already been observed that sorrow is an affection which sinks the
Spirits under the pressure of a present evil that is felt: and hereupon the
greater the evil (...) the more sinking it must needs be. The Spirits of men
have some portion of strength in them, so that they are able to bear a
considerable burden, and to stand upright under it without sinking; but
sometimes they meet with a burdrn which is too heavy, and then they stoop, and
are overwhelmed. Now though aff^^ctions themselves, are not alike heavy, yet
there is nothing that puts a greater weight into any trouble that befalls (...)
than to look upon it as a Suffering that is irreparable; for this adds despair
unto sorrow and that is a breaking b^llow indeed; and the more our closing
affections are engaged and united to a thing the more terrible a thought it is,
to consider that we have not only lost it, but that we can never enjoy it any
more and that the thing it self is also lost irremediably. That therefore which
will ease us in this circumstance, will grea^ly abate from our present
distress* and make it to be nothing near so molestful to us; and this is done
by Hope.

Now this is the nature of Hope, that it is an affection in the exercise
whereof we entertain our minds with the grounded expectation of some future
good. The object of hope is good; it is one of those affections which carries
us after our object, and enables us to embrace it: it is derived from love; and
the good which it does embrace is something future; it has it not in hand or
present possession, the man need not hope for that which he has; but he sees
it at a distance; but yet Hope carries the Soul to the thing, as far off as it
is, enableth him to entertain it; and for this reason the ancient Patriarchs
are said to see the promise afar off, and yet to embrace it, Hebr. 11.13. and
in this respect it makes absent things to be present. The hand wherewith this
affection lays hold upon its object, is expectation; it looks for it, the man
presumes and promises himself, that although at present he (...) without it,
yet he shall in due season enjoy it; that it will undoubtedly come to him, if
he can but have patience to tarry for it, until the proper season: he therefore
sees it not only absent but future too; that it is coming, and will be present
before it be long: and this expectation is not a mere fansy, but is built upon
reason; the strength therefore of this hand is the ground upon which the
expectation is built, according to the measure of stability there is in that,
is this Hope either stronger or weaker.

Now these grounds of expectation are fetched from three Topics, in which also
there is a gradation, or so many degrees of settlement.

There is Possibility: this is the lowest, and yet it has its support; for
Hope is willing to live, though it have the meanest and thinnest maintenance
to live upon; if it can but have a few crumbs, it will not starve: it will keep
it self up upon no more than a who knows? Jon. 3.9. if it does not see the
matter to be clogged with an utter impossib^lity, it will not give up: Though
the man ha^h a great deal of fear upon him, and a great many improbabilities
are in his view, making him to question, that he is willing to hope too Then
there is Probability, and this has a great deal more of life and nourishment
in it; Hope can quarter it self pretty comfortably upon this, though there is
also a gradation in this, and the more likelihoods there are of the things
obtaining; the better Table Hope is able to keep: and with these discoveries it
is able to suppress those fears which may make any motion in him by reflecting
upon the possibility that the thing may miscarry; especially if things be not
near an equipoise, but every thing bids fair for a good Issue likely to ^nsue.

Finally there is Certainty; and this is the top of all; when the thing is so
secure, that there is no possibility of its failing, the futurition of it is
built upon such grounds as cannot miscarry, or in the least be prevented; this
furnishes Hope with such a rich Table, that it is able to feast it every day,
and make merry in spite of all that can interpose to disturb it; compare, 2
Cor. 4.16. where the Apostle tells us how they bare up cheerfully under
afflictions, in hope of better things; with chap. 5.1. where he gives an
account of the strength of this, for we know, etc.

And now we may easily discover what influence this must have upon sorrow to
attemper it, and make it moderate, viz. by giving us a prospect of good with
relation to that very evil which has put us to trouble: and there are these
effects which are the natural result of it, all of which are very serviceable
unto this purpose.

1. It makes the affliction look less then it did before: it has not so much
in it now as appeared to us at the first aspect: for by this hope entertained,
we begin to discern that it is not so great an evil as we had reckoned it to
be: the man had overrated it, whilst he was looking upon it through the
spectacles of despair; but Hope puts a sweeter color and countenance upon it;
it makes him to resolve that it is nothing near so bad ^s he had been persuaded
by his misgiving thoughts: it takes off many of those evil circumstances which
he thought it to be attended withal; and this greatly heightens it, and makes
it be far more portable; thus the Psalmist eased himself when he found the
burden ready to sink him with its weight, Psalm. 43. ult. Why art thou cast down
O my soul, hope thou in God, etc.

2. It moderates the affection of fear which before did exceed. Fear in excess
affords continual nourishment unto sorrow; if this passion be but moderated,
the other will be far better dealt with: moderate fear is an help to men,
because it puts caution into them, and employs them in a diligent using of
means to redress their troubles; but if it grows beyond the bounds of
moderation, it then drives men from endeavour^, and betrays them into the hands
of despair, which is the bitterest ingredient of Sorrow: now Hope is a
preventive to this; because, how sore soever the present distress be, it
commands the man to expect a good issue of it, and to resolve with him, Psalm.
56.3. what time I am afraid, I will trust in thee.

3. It diverts the mind with better thoughts, sorrow takes a great deal of
pleasure in feeding it self with poring upon black and bitter speculations; it
finds a kind of a sullen contentment in representing every thing to it self
with Sable Colors, and thereupon to sink it self yet lower with its own
thought whereas Hope interposeth more bright and lightsome things for the mind
to be looking upon, and by such an entertainment as this is, gives unto it a
very happy diversion; the heart is hereby opened, and has liberty given it to
fetch breath and recover spirits and life again.

4. It puts men upon the exereise of Patience. Impatience under sorrow, makes
it to be a great deal more burdensome than otherwise it would be: now the
genuine fruit of Hope is patience: when expectation is raised in a man, it puts
him upon waiting, and makes him quiet in waiting; and this is proportionable to
the degrees that hope has arrived to; so that when the good expected is
certain to come without fail, and there is a clear prospect that when it does
come, it will make a full compensation for all the trouble which has been
sustained, together with the removal of it from him; a comfortable persuasion
that it shall be so, makes him to be earnestly looking out for it, and to
satisfy himself for the present with the expectation of it. This may suffice
for the consideration of Hope in general; it follows to enquire.

2: What ground of Hope the people of God have, concerning their Dead, more
then other men have.

A. The Apostle here intimates concerning others, that they have none at all:
not as if there were none but Gods children that make any pretense to an hope
concerning such as these. If we speak of the Heathen Nations, to which our Text
has a more immediate respect, they enterteined diverse sentiments concerning
the state of the dead, and made answerable improvement of these notions. The
Epicurean Sect indeed thought man to be utterly mortal; their tenent was Cum
sumus, non est mors; cum mors est, non sumus. And hereupon they pleased
themselves with this, that death puts an end to all miseries: But the
Platonists held the Immortality of the soul, and the communion of souls in a
future state, and would take a great deal of satisfaction in the forethoughts
of that happy day when they should come to enjoy one another again in a better
condition. The Peripateticks also verged this way, though not without some
hesitancy. But as to the Resurrection of the Body, it agreed not with their
principles, and seemed an impossibility to their way of reasoning, and
therefore they exploded it with all manner of scoffs and scorns: If we speak of
the visible profession of Christianity, and such as have been acquainted with
the Word of God, these do for the generality acknowledge the same Truths upon
which the Hope of Gods Children is built* and do also support themselves with
such ^ope from the consideration thereof, as affords them a great deal of
present quiet* But the intendment of the expression is, that there are none
else but the people of God who have a good ground for their Hope; that all
others, how confident soever they may be, do build without a foundation.

Now if we would take a right scantling of this matter, there are three things
which must be considered in conjunction?

1. The persons hoping; and they are such ^s are not barely Christian by
profession, but ^^e also true believers in State. For tho^ this hope is offered
to all persons where the Gospel comes, yet there are none that have really
embraced it but they, and though the goodness of the person hoping, does not
contribute any thing to the good estate of the person for whom this hope is
conceived, (for every one must be saved by his own faith, and not that of
another, which is of Gods free-giving, and not o^ our meriting,) yet there is
an hope which godly men may entertain with respect unto their dead, which
others cannot do upon the same reason: yea and there are arguments of comfort
to be drawn from their hope, by such as these, which others cannot derive unto
themselves without falsehood; as will be made to appear in the sequel of this
discourse.

2. The persons hoped for: they are such (...) sleep: i. e. such as we have any
grounded hope concerning, that they died in Christ; and this is not the lot of
all men; nor yet of all such as live under the Dispensation of Gospel
Ordinances, and have been externally related to the Covenant: and it is a thing
very evident that the hope here intended has all its strength from Christ; and
therefore the thing hoped must derive from an interest in him, and by
consequence it must hold proportion with the reason which we had to conclude
that they had such an interest, for, to be without Christ, and to be without
hope, do run parallel, Ephesians. 2.12.

3. The things upon which our Hope feeds it self concerning them, and from
which it supplies us with our consolation: and they must be such things as are
in themselves hopeable, and upon a presumption that they shall come to pass, do
contain matter of good consolation in them. Now that which must comfort us in
our mourning for those that are dead, must give us particular relief against
those very things which are the grounds of our Sorrow: and the proper reason of
this sorrow is, a supposed loss which there is sustained by their death: and
this must be either with respect to our selves, or unto them: That which is
with respect unto our selves is, that we have lost them, and that which refers
unto them is that they are lost: hereupon the evil which we apprehended to be
suffered by this loss, is that by which we take the measure of our sorrows: all
the hope then which we can entertain about it, either that the thing is not so
as we think, or that it is not so bad as we did suspect it to be, will give us
mitigation here: and that is it which we are to make enquiry after. Let us then
for the present take it for granted upon supposition, that we that are Mourners
are true believers; and they for whom we are in mourning, are such as are dead
in Christ: and in this case, the Word of God is fully stored with abundant
provision to establish our Hope, against those very things which Christians are
wont to make the greatest arguments of their grief.

Here then observe,

1. This Hope does not take away all occasion of mourning wholly from us;
because there is undoubtedly a present grievous loss sustained by us ^ we a^^
^^^sers by the Death of all such on a temporal respect* for we are bereaved of
their desirable and delectable company; we can no farther enjoy them, and
solace ourselves with them in this life; we have no hopes ever to see them any
more among the living; all the benefit which (...) had by their sweet company,
pleasant entercourses or whatsoever was dear to us in their presence with it,
is now utterly gone, and we must see their faces and hear their voices no
more; yea and many times there is a great deal of the sense of the anger of God
imprinted upon our minds, upon the taking of such away from us; and a sad and
sorrowful remembrance is left behind of the fearful provocation that we had
given to God to bereave u^, and that carries a sad and smarting sting in it,
which makes deep wounds in our consciences, and ingeminates our grief. And they
are lost also as to themselves in many respects They are ^o^t in respect of the
present life, which is in it self a very desirable blessing, but now they are
cut off from it, and it may be in the very bud, or in the blossom of their age,
before they have had the opportunities to do much of their work; and their
bodies are lost as to any capacity of being serviceable to their souls in their
natural employments and rational services, being now laid by in a rotting
grave, deprived of all life and motion, they are therefore lost as to any
farther opportunity of glorifying God among the living: might they have been
spa^ed and suffered to have lived a little longer, they might have been precious
instruments of the Honor of God, been capable of doing much good in their
generation, and how much would this also have also tended to their everlasting
benefit, but now they are lost as to all this, the deal praise thee not, etc.
Psalm. 115.17. and these things do carry evil, and matter of mourning in them
but.

2. There is something to compensate this loss which our Hope may safely stay
it self upon; and that both in consideration of our selves and of them too;
neither is our nor their case desperate or irreparable: it may be made up, the
loss repaired in a good measure for the present, and to be sure in measure full
and running over for the future, and what more is there to be desired to make
our hope full? here then;

1. For the present there is good Hope, and that

1. In respect of our selves in waiting for the accomplishment of that Promise,
Romans 8.28. all things shall work together for good to them that love God. The
Apostle is there speaking of afflictions, and the loss of friends and relations
is none of the least of these. God is able to repair us to the full and running
over, and that both by his Grace and his comfort, he can sanctify such a loss
to us for our very great gain: there is many a Child of God that finds honey in
this Lion* they are by such a Providence weaned a great deal more from
Creatures, and drawn nearer unto God; they experience how poor things these are
to lean upon or make the objects of our delight, and to find that none but God
can be a portion suitable and sufficient: God also uses this to put them upon
serious reflection upon their former ways and courses; and leads them to
repentance and reformation of those things that had provoked God thus to deal
by them: they learn to love earth the less, and heaven the more by this, and
accordingly they are put upon the pursuit of heavenly things with intenseness;
and this is an exceeding great benefit; and God is able to reveal more of
himself to their souls upon it, and give them spiritual comforts in the room of
temporal, the light of his countenance in exchange for the delight which they
had in the creature; and God is frequently wont thus to do, which is a very
happy and advantegeous exchange to them.

2. With regard to them who are Dead. Though a lifeless body, which they leave
upon our hands lying by the Walls, to be commended to the cold and silent
Grave, where it must be entertained with Worms and Rottenness, and be turned
into putrefaction and dust, are sad entertainments to our Melancholy thoughts;
yet God has provided our hope with a comfortable repast for the present, when
we look off from this sad spectacle, and remember that their immortal soul no
sooner took their flight from their dying bodies, but they immediately fell into
the hands of glorious Angels, and were by them royally guarded to the Palace of
delight, and are now sweetly entertained in the bosom and embraces of the Lord
Jesus Christ; perfectly freed from all sin and sorrow, which shall never more
molest them; filled with joys and pleasures in that blessed Kingdom: that they
went from hence directly into Paradise, and are now, whiles we are in heaviness
for them, singing of endless Hallelujahs: that they have but broken their
prison, and obtained the greatest and most blessed enlargement: that their
better part now lives, and is with Christ which is best of all. And this for
the present.

2. For the Future: And here there is a victorious Hope in both the
forementioned respects: and there are more especially three Articles of the
Christian Religion, which affords life and nourishment to this hope, all of
which are urged by our Apostle in the context of this Chapter, for the whetting
on of his Exhortation upon these he writes to; and they are of equal use to the
People of God, in all the Ages of the World.

1. The Happy Resurrection which all those that sleep in Christ shall partake
in. It is true, all the Dead, both good and bad shall rise again; but ungodly
men have no hope in the Resurrection: nor yet their friends for them on this
account; because their rising is only in order to their having the more fearful
fall: whereas the Resurrection of the Just is a Doctrine full of all
Consolation this therefore is urged, context, verse, 14* them that Sleep in
Jesus will God bring with him. And it is greatly enlarged upon, in* 1. Cor. 15,
Where both the thing it self is asserted, and the precious qualities of it are
declared. For Gods people to think with full persuasion that these very bodies
which we had been so intimate withal, and of whose Communion we are now
deprived shall not only rise, but so rise as is describe^, verse, 4^.43.
Changed so exceedingly for the better, is a very precious thought: the Psalmist
thought this truth believed and pondered by him, was enough to make his flesh
to rest in hope, Psalm. 16.^^.10. he thought he could dye cheerfully: well then
may we quiet ourselves in hope, concerning them, by observing and believeing
what a change for the better shall then be made.

2. Their happy meeting of Christ when he shall come to the last Judgment.
That he will so come, the Scriptures of truth have given in a full Testimony
unto: that all these shall meet him at his coming, is asserted, context. ver.
15. where it is given as another ground of Consolation to the Children of God*
and there is a great deal of reason for it, because they shall then meet him in
the quality of his Favorites and Redeemed ones. It is true they shall meet him
as their Judge: but this also is their great Privilege, because he will then
come to acquit them from all that was here laid to their charge, openly to
Justify them, to declare them to be his redeemed, to confess them before his
glorious Angels, and to adjudge them to be the heirs, and appoint them to the
possession of that Kingdom, and those felicities which he has purchased and
provided for their everlasting entertainment: others indeed shall meet Christ
at his Tribu^al, and there they shall be judged by him, but it is to be
condemned, to receive a fearful Sentence, adjudging them to eternal miseries;
whereas these being acquitted, shall be made honorable Assessors with Christ
in his Judging the world, 1 Cor. 6.2.

3. Their everlasting abode with him in his glorious Kingdom, after the
Judgment is over; this encouragement is expressed, Context, verse 17. and so
shall we be ever with the Lord; when Jesus Christ shall have finished that
great Affair, and that High Court shall be broken up, then shall he return to
Heaven again, attended with the pompous Train of Holy Angels, which waited upon
him in that Transaction, together with all his Redeemed Saints, who in Soul and
Body shall go with him to the heavenly Kingdom, and there be filled for ever
with his presence, and be made blessed by his Communion through all Eternity;
where as all others shall be excluded from his Presence, and suffer everlasting
miseries in that Separation. Now these hopes are sufficient to swallow up all
sorrows, and to dry up our tears* at least to keep them within the bounds of a
due moderation, in either respect* now is the happy time when we shall come
together again, and when we are there met, we shall part no more: and then our
mutual fruitions shall be entirely perfect, and without any dregs or mixtures
of sorrow or fear; we with them being together made completely blessed in the
full enjoyment of all that which we have hoped for: and here lies the strength
of a believers hope in this respect: The things themselves which are to feed
and nourish it are full, and there is nothing wanting in them; and they are
also certain with respect to all those that are so qualified, as we have been
considering; we have the infallible Testimony of the Spirit of God recorded in
the Holy Scriptures giving us a full confirmation of these things.

But there is a great enquiry whieh still remains, and it is about the strength
of this hope in reference to the Subject about which it is to be conceived by
us: Though the things themselves be indubitable conclusions concerning all such
as are so qualified; yet what room is there to exercise this hope in
particular, respecting this and that person? and how may our sorrow be
moderated thereby? for, suppose we our selves are true believers, and
consequently heirs of the Promise, yet except we have some encouragement to
hope and believe that those who are gone, died in Christ, we must remain
hopeless concerning them. I know that there are diverse serious Souls, that
would desirously have something be offered for their satisfaction in this great
case; I shall therefore endeavor to discuss it according to Scripture Light;
and to make way for a more full resolution, let these things be premised.

1. That Christian Hope is a Grace which is exercised by the influence of
Faith. Faith is the leading Grace of all those that are wrought in
Sanctification, and a Child of God lives by it, Hebr. 10.38. the Just shall
live by his Faith i. e. it is to influence the hope of a Christians
conversation: it is that whereby he depends upon Christ, and by the promise,
derives from him all that which enableth him to serve God in the improvement of
every virtue that is in him: and this is that which principally makes
Christianity to differ from mere morality: Hope must have its grounds, and Gods
people must have the help of Faith to establish them on these grounds.

2. Hence we infer, that a Believers hope has a good foundation to build upon,
which it is fully assured of. For if it be built upon Faith, it has the same
foundation in the bottom with Faith, and that must needs have its Evidence in
it, which supposes assurance: for that cannot be called Evidence or
Demonstration, which is no^ sure; hence we have that Encomium given to Faith,
Heb* 11.1. it is the Evidence of things not seen; i. e. it gives a full
discovery that the things hoped for, though they lie out of our present sight,
are no^ mere suppositions, but realities. If there were not a certain future
happy estate of the People of God, if this proposition were not infallibly
true, both with respect to the thing, and also to the subjects for whom it is
provided, Faith could give unto Hope no evidence at all; ^ut these things are
unquestionably true, being confirmed by the Testimony of him who cannot (...);
so that the Doctrines forementioned are not things that may come under dispu^e,
but are confidently to be belie^ed by all that will not deny their Religion:
and these are they which hope makes use of,

3. That the application of this Hope is in respect of something future. For
such a thing, we observed, is the proper object of hope, according to that of
the Apostle, Romans 8.24 Hope that is seen, is not Hope, for what a man sees, why
does he yet hope for? There is something that is expected to come, upon the
assurance of these premises; and that is the eternal felicity of such as are
under the shadow of this promise: either they are ^ot yet happy, or we are not
as yet fully assu^^^ that they are* either the thing is future, or (...)
perfect knowledge of it is so; and we are in the mean while encouraging of our
selves by this Hope.

4. This application is not in respect of every one for whom we Hope, of equal
evidence. Though the general Rule of faith be sufficiently Demonstrable, viz.
chat all the Dead are blessed which die in the Lord: yet the particular
inference of hope, has its different degrees with respect to the persons
concerning whom it is execised: and the reason of this difference lies here,
because we have not a like evidence of the being of the thing in those whom we
hope for, which is the reason of our Hope; for,

1. In regard to our selves, we may have a sensible assurance of our future
good estate: such as may set us down fully satisfied, and which shall not
deceive us: Paul could say, we know, 2 Cor. 5.1. and we are always confident,
ver. 6. I do not say that every true believer has this apprehensively; godly
men have many clouds that intercept this light, and there are some that sit in
darknes^; but he may have it, it is a thing attainable, and he has the grounds
of it in him. That every one that dies in the faith shall rise again in a
glorious state, meet Christ coming to Judgment with comfort, and live for ever
in his presence, is certain: now they that are united to Christ by a living
faith, shall assuredly so die: and there are those discoveries to be made of the
truth of this faith which are undeceiving, for it has its properties which
belong to it, and are no where else to be found: they are the things which
accompany salvation: so that upon the experience of them in himself, a believer
may safel^ assume, and say, I am united to Christ, by a faith certain, and
therefore I shall rise in glory, stand in the Judgment, and eternally possess
the incorruptible Inheritance.

2. In respect of others the case is far other^wise: for though the Hypothesis
is certain, viz ^f they are in Christ, then all the felicity we have heard of
is their portion, yet the Assum^^ion is not directly of Faith which always has
the Divine Testimony to confirm it, but of charity, for.

1. No man can infallibly know anoth^rs good estate without divine revelation.
The differencing notes by which Sincerity and Hypocrisy are to be distinguished
are latent; God only knows them certainly. A man may make a great show, and
carry it with a great deal of strict preciseness, and yet be rotten within.
There are a great many that profess and walk orderly for along time, and yet
they fall at last into some soul Apostasy; and it is not to be questioned but
that there are others that never discover themselves to the world, but go off
fairly to our apprehension, who yet dissembled, and deceived others, and it may
be themselves too. The day will discover many mistakes and wrong guesses that
were here made by the most discerning Christians. It is Gods alone prerogative
to judge the heart.

2. There are greater hopes concerning some than others, of some there are such
probabilities as give us a great deal of settled satisfaction concerning them*
their lives are so holy, their Testimonies are so clear, their conversation so
shining, that we hope without any doubt concerning them, having as much to set
us down; as can rationally be expected for our satisfaction in their good
state, others give only slight and more weak encouragements to our hope, and
mix it with many occasions of fear and jealousy concerning them: and yet hope
has at least so much to say, that there is some probability, at least a
possibility that they may be well, and this gives some relief, though not so
much as the other.

5. This Hope is only given us for our present support in this life. The truth
is there will be no occasion for it afterward: The Children of God are while
they live here very anxious and sollicicions about the everlasting estate of
their friends and relations* they know a great deal more then others do,
concerning the terrors of the Lord, and the affairs of another world, and their
natural affection put them upon much inquisitiveness about them; the present
thoughts which they have of their being under the impression of those doleful
miseries that are denounced in the curse, are killing thoughts, and they cannot
tell how to support their spirits under them, but they are ready to sink, God
is therefore pleased to afford them this Hope for their present relief. When a
Child of God is made perfect, as he shall then be fully informed and assured
about these things, so he shall be completely satisfied in them; there shall be
no unruly unmortified affections then to be wrested withal, but an entire
acquiescence in the Justice and Righteousness of God: and as there will be no
more room for hope, either for one or for another, because every ones state
shall be put beyond it, so there will be no occasion for it: but whilst we are
here in this life, there is no doing without it, God has therefore set it
before us, together with the grounds of it, and they that make a right
improvement, shall never be ashamed of it: the use of our hope, is not to do
them any good, for they are gotten past the advantage of receiving any benefit
by us; but it is to do our selves good, and it serves suitably to that end,
when it is helpful to put us into a quiet and submissive frame to the hand of
God upon us.

6. We are to rest in the revealed will of God for our Hope, and not to pry
into his secret will. It is to be granted, that concerning our selves, we may
come to know our Election by our vocation, and we ought to endeavor to arrive
to that assurance; 2 Pet. 1.10. but we can have no such knowledge concerning
others. We are apt to say, oh! if we were but sure of their well-being, we
could then be quiet and contented; but this is to fight against God* it is his
pleasure to keep these things secret for the present; and it is good for us
that he so does, we are not fit to be acquainted with the particular estate of
these and those in another life; when we are, we shall know; and that will be
when there are no more remainders of flesh and corruption in us. In the
Interim, God has so far revealed his mind unto us in his word, as to give us
those grounds of hope, in which we ought to bear up, and comfort, at least
sustain our souls: but we must ever remember that of, Deuteronomy. 29.29. the secret
things belong to God. It is Gods will that we should pry no farther, than into
his word, for our direction; and it is our duty to comply with his will, and
there can be no profit in doing otherwise.

7. All the Arguments of our Hope, are to be fetched from the new Covenant. It
is in that Covenant that the only foundation for fallen man's hope is laid: It
is one Epithe^e that is put upon that legal estate, or the relation which men
have to the first Covenant, that it is without Hope, Ephesians. 2.1^. The unhappy
fall has brought the whole race of mankind under the sentence of Condemnation:
man, woman, and child are so many dead persons according to the tenor of that
Covenant: the curse of Death is fallen upon them, which has bound them over to
the suffering of all misery. It is in the new Gospel Covenant that life and
imtality are brought to light; and as the only way to Salvation is there made
known to us, so the foundation upon which Salvation is to be hoped for, is
there alone to be found and it is according thereunto that we have solid
encouragement.

From hence therefore I shall endeavor to draw those Rules upon which our hope
is to Proceed in the Present case. And here also there are two sorts about whom
we are wont to be concerned and very thoughtful, viz. such as die in their
infancy, and such as dye adult, or after they are come to years of
understanding: I shall speak of each distinctly.

1. Concerning Children that dye in their infancy. I understand all that age
wherein they are not grown up to these years of knowledge, wherein they are
able to improve the word of God, and the ordinances of the Gospel, for the good
of their own Souls, in the ordinary course of Gods providence; for some
extraordiaary instances are not here to be drawn into a general Rule. There is
great reason why we should not mourn for these as that have no Hope; for there
is a great deal to be pleaded, and that which is abundantly satisfying, upon
their score. And we may take a brief discovery of it in these particulars.

2. Negatively take these three Conclus^ons.

1. That Saving Grace is not absolutely tied to the visible covenant. It does
not ascertain Conversion and Salvation to every one that is under it. The
Gospel Covenant requires such conditions to be found in us, as God alone is
able to work by Almighty power, and he is Sovereign in his dispensations; he
has mercy on whom he will have mercy, Romans 9.8. His Grace is free. So that
being in the Covenant and under the terms of it, does it not make an infallible
truth that such an one must and shall be Saved. We know that God has a Glory
for his revenging Justice, as well for his Grace, to be gained in his visible
Church; there are therefore threatenings as well as promises put into the
Covenant; and the promises themselves are Conditional, and will argue no
farther than from the Condition being wrought in the person, which God is not
under any possitive engagement to this or that person to do it for him:

2. The innocence of Children cannot save them. Nor is it any reason or ground
of Salvation: It is not that which makes any impression, or becomes any motive
on the heart of God to save them rather than others. It is then a very poor
Hope that is built upon this Consideration. This, as it raises prejudices in
some at the providence of God to think that such poor innocents must die, and
they are ready to murmr on this account; so it is the strength ^f the Hope of
a great many other; they comfort themselves after such a manner, poor Babes*
they never did any harm in this world, Innocent Lambs that never sinned in
their lives, surely then God cannot but pity and have mercy upon them, and is
this all? alas! there is no reason nor plea at all in this. B^bilons Children
were every whit as innocent as ours are, and yet see what is declared
concerning them, Psalm. 137* ul^. By innocence we can intend truly no more but
only this, viz. that they never actually did any harm, that they have not
committed any actual sin since they were born; and this is a very poor sort of
innocence: why did they not so do? it was because they could not; they were not
arrived to a capacity of doing either good or hurt: as not having the liberty
or power of using their rational faculties for the performing of Humane acts:
but in the mean while let us remember, they were only innocent vipers, that
were as full of the poison and malignity of sin as ever they could hold, and
would have vented this venom of theirs as soon as they had gotten a little
strength and understanding; we should soon have seen what brood they were of;
and therefore in themselves deserved to be killed in the nest; we are told what
all Adams posterity are, in their birth, Psalm. 58.3. they are estranged from
the womb, they go astray as soon as they are bo^n, speaking lies; and what an
innocence is this?

3. Nor can the piety of the parents merit the application of saving grace to
the Children. God is not obliged or brought in debt unto us, by any thing of
ours. We ourselves when we have done all we can, and served God with the
greatest integrity, are still saved by grace, Ephesians. 2.8. And so must our
Children too: God has the liberty to do with his own what he will, we cannot
be before hand with him. They greatly err, who think that infants are saved by
the Faith of their Parents, as the Condition of their salvation; much less can
it be the procuring cause of it: The qualification to which Salvation is
ascerteined, or the condition required in the new covenant in order to
Salvation must be found. Habitually at least, in every one that partakes in the
good of it; The Just shall live by his Faith; and as a godly Parent can neither
Propagate it by Generation, nor produce it by all his most careful endeavors,
so neither can he make God a Debtor of it to his Children by any thing that he
can do, for when he has done all he is an unprofitable Servant, has done but
his duty, Luke 17.10.

2. Positively, take these following conclusions;

1. That godly parents have a better hope concerning their Children than those
that are Unconverted. Though both are in the Gospel Covenant outwardly, and
under the external dispensations of it: and though a gracious man can no more
merit for his Children then an ungracious man; nor can ^e any more work saving
grace in them than the other; yet his hopes are far better than the other: and
the reason of this is evident; because we have observed that the hope of Gods
Children is a result of their faith; we are therefore said to be begotten to a
lively faith, i. e. in Regeneration, The Hope of Godly ones is not a mere
Affection, but a sanctified Affection; and therefore it cannot be but there
where this sanctification is wrought.

Though God can as well save the Child of an unbeliever, as of the most eminent
Saint in the world, yet the unbeliever cannot so well hope for it: and the
reason is because this soul satisfying Hope, is a fruit of the spirit, and is
wrought in none but such whom he sanctifies. An unregenerate man is under the
Covenant threatening, and therefore all the Hopes that he maintains himself
withal in that state, are no better then presumptions; he is ready under a
curse, and so cannot challenge an interest in any promise* what has he to do
with Gospel Consolat^ons as long as he goes on in his Transgressions.

2. The more fruitful and conscientious Gods people are in their Duties to
their Children* the stronger hopes they may entertein concerning them. There
are some Duties which we ow to our Children in their infancy; others are to be
attended as they grow up to understanding: the former of these are under our
present consideration. Now, though all our care and conscience that we exert in
these Duties, cannot work the saving change in them; yet* as it is certain,
that in order of the means, doing of duty is nearer to the blessing then the
neglect of it; so a man has a great deal more of inward tranquillity upon his
mind, in the faithful discharge of it, than in the omission or sl^ghty
performance, Psalm. 119.165. great peace have all they that keep thy law, and
nothing shall offend them. And because there is a connection between the promise
and the precept, the more fruitful we are in our obedience to God, the clearer
is our evidence that the promise belongs unto us: Now there are Duties to and
for our Infants: God has put them under our care, and expects this of us: They
are to be presented to God in Baptism, that they may have the sign and the seal
of his Covenant bestowed upon them: and they are to be continually brought to
God in our ardent importunate prayers; and we are to begin early with tyem to
instruct them, and drop into them the things of God, and the great things, of
Salvation, according as they are capable of imbibing the same. The neglect of
these things will not a little obstruct the exercise of our hope: it will be a
great damp to our minds, to have such a reflection upon them as this, I did not
so much as pray earnestly to God for the Soul of this Child, and now it is gone
past all prayers. I do not say, that those of Gods people that have not been so
solicitous as they ought, have no hope; God can give us hope too ^ but to be
sure every such consideration will cast a damp upon our spirits.

3. The Infants of Professing Parents are in the Gospel Covenant. By professing
Parents I understand, such as do openly own the truths of the Gospel, and do
walk orderly in subjection to the Government of Christ therein appointed; and
that the Children of such as are within the Vineyard, are brought under the
terms of the Covenant, and privileged with the outward benefit of it, is a
great Scripture Truth, and a ground of abundance of consolation to the souls of
serious Parents, then they can look into the Word of God, and there satisfy
themselves in this, that God has so far owned their Children to be his, as to
take them under the shadow of his Covenant. This was not only a privilege
conf^r^ed upon Israel in the days of the Old Testament; but it belongs to the
visible Church in the days of the New Testament too: It belonged not
restrictively to Moses 's; padagogy, but it was put into Abraham's Covenant,
Genesis 17.7, 9. It is therefore revived in the days of the Gospel, Acts 2.3^. the
promise is to you and to your Children, 1 Cor. 7.14. your Children are holy;
and certainly it cannot but be some relief to a sorrowful Christian, when his
Infant dies, to think with himself, this Child of mine wa^ in Covenant with
God; especially if he consider how much there is in this; and therefore,

4. That the direct aim of the New Covenant is life and Salvation. I do not say
that all who are any way comprehended under it shall certainly obtain
Salvation, the Scripture assures us that the case stands far otherwise: the fig
tree which is planted in the vineyard may prove barren, and be a cum^er to the
ground, and for that reason may be cut down: the Gospel may, and very
frequently does eventually, prove to be a savor of death in them that perish,
2. Cor. 2.15.16. Many are at last found unbelievers and so procure Damnation to
themselves. But this is certain that God introduced the New Covenant (...) the
deficiency of the Old-One, in point of being able to give life to fallen men,
Gal. 3.21, If there had been a law that could have given life, verily
Righteousness should have been by the law. It was because man had destroyed
himself, and there was no remedy provided for him in the first Covenant, that
God revealed another in which there was one: and what could the direct aim of
this be, but that a number of that unhappy race might be delivered from eternal
death, and made partakers in Salvation? There was enough to destroy all mankind
in the former Covenant, the curses of it were amazing: if it had not been for
the Salvation which is provided in this it had never been promulgated; life
therefore and immortality are said to be brought to light by the Gospel, 2.
Tim. 1.20. And this consideration also gives no little ^ift to the Hope of
Godly Parents: it must have some comfort in it, to think that the Covenant in
which my Babe died, was a Covenant of life and peace. And yet farther.

5. That the Babtism which is appointed for and applied unto infants is not to
no purpose. It would be too large a digression here to insert what may be said
to make it evident that infant Babtiism is a Divine institution, appointed by
God to be applied to the Infants of his professing people. That they are
included in Gods Covenant, and have the qualifications rendering them capable of
this Ordinance, has been so often and substantially made good against all the
attempts that have been used to undermine this Doctrine, that I hope duly
considerate persons will not call it in question: Now upon the supposition,
which I reckon to be sufficiently evident, That these Infants are Baptized by
Gods Command, and that this Baptism is a visible seal of the Gospel Covenant
unto them, as Circumcision was of the Covenant of Grace under a more legal
dispensation of it; certainly then God had some end in this appointment; for we
know that he does nothing, he commands nothing in vain: and this design must
have a respect either to the Children, or to the Parents, or to both,
mediately; and to the Glory of God ultimately: This very thing must bring some
glory or other unto God, either from the one, or the other, or both. In respect
of the Children who are made the Subjects of this Ordinance; we cannot readily
conceive that it should increase their Condemnation upon the supposition that
they die in their Infancy; and the reason is because, as they cannot unders^and
the nature and design of it, so they are incapable of actually abusing it: and
how it can possibly have a moral influence upon them to draw them unto Christ,
is beyond our ability to conceive, in as much as they have not any present
knowledge of it: and a physical operation, it can have none at all, it being
purely Sacramental: and we have reason to think that the Spirit of God works
faith and holiness in them, at least habitually, immediately. In the Pa^ents,
it has a very good end and design, viz. not only to lay them under a strong
obligation of Duty, but also potently to encourage them to be strenuous in the
doing of it, upon the good Hope which they do hence entertain, because it has
pleased God to make them his Sealed Ones, and to appoint that his name should
be called upon them; and herein they glorify God, and the Apostle thought it a
great encouragement to believing Parents for them to be acquainted that their
Children were holy, 1 Cor. 7.14: but still,

6. Infants dying in their Infancy cannot be charged with rejecting of Gods
Covenant. It is true, they are by nature Children of wrath as well as others.
They have a relation which they bear to the first Adam, and derive both Guilt
and Pollution from him, by virtue whereof the Justice of God has a righteous
plea against them; they have a corrupt nature cleaving to them in their very
conception and birth, and they sadly show it as soon as they come to a capacity
of doing any humane actions. But if we look to the Gospel Covenant, which God
has seen meet in his Sovereign Pleasure to extend unto them, they have for the
present done nothing at all against it: they have never despised a Savior, nor
turned their backs upon Salvation, they have never said unto Christ, depart
from us: they have indeed a nature in them prone enough to do this; they have
congenerate principles which adhere to them by virtue of Original Sin, which
would lead them unto all this in time, if not graciously prevented: but the act
they are at present incapable of, and this also affords a good supply of
encouragement unto parents, to consider that God has taken away their Children
before they ever d^d practically renounce his Covenant which he had taken them
under; and hereby has prevented them of (...) any such consideration to
exercise their minds withal.

7. We no where read in the Scripture that the Children of Godly ones dying in
their infancy did eternally perish. Though we know that Gods Electing Grace is
free, and that there is no express word of promise upon this account, God
having seen meet to reserve his own Counsels in this affair within his Bosom;
yet there is this farther to encourage our hopes, that we do not find in the
Word of God, either such a Doctrine delivered, or such an example recorded,
that any one such did miscarry. That David had any particular revelation
extraordinary we read not, (and we may well enough, according to the tenor of
Faith suppose that he had not) about that Child of his, and yet, though it were
begotten in Adultery, and he had followed that with Murder, and other grievious
sins; upon his true repentance, and his fasting and praying in particular for
that Child, he is enabled to Comfort himself with this Hope, 2. Sam. 12.23. I
shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. For it would be a poor argument
of comfort we must think him to draw, if we suppose he argued only from a
consideration of his own Death; nor could he expect or desire to go to him, but
upon the Hope that he was gone to Glory.

8. We are fully assured that there are multitudes of such as these are now in
the kingdom: The word of God is very clear and plain for this* It was the
argument which our Savior Christ used to encourage their bringing of little
children to him, when his Disciples would have prohibited them, math. 19.13.14.
of such is the kingdom of Heaven; which text of Scripture assures us both that
Jesus Christ has a special favor for children, and that they are the Subjects
of his Grace and Glory; By the word [Such] cannot be meant such in quality, or
disposition, as some would go about to put us off, for why did Christ take
these little Children into his arms, and Bless them? they whom he Blesses are
Blessed indeed: the meaning therefore plainly is, of such as die in that age,
that are taken away in their infancy: and there is a great deal of reason to
draw this inference from it, that there are more of that than of any other Age,
in Heaven.

9. And they are not incapable of having the Gospel condition wrought in them,
it is true, they are not in a capacity of being regenerated by the ordinary
means which are appointed for the conversion of adult persons; they cannot
attend upon the Preaching of the word, they cannot be taught by the counsels
and instructions of parents, because they are not able to understand any thing
in this way; but there are some means which they are capable of having used for
them, and because God has appointed them, we may hope for his Blessing upon
them; they may be Baptized, and they may be prayed for; and the Spirit of God
is able to do all that for them which they want in order to their being made
meet for the Inheritance. They have Humane Souls which are subjects capable of
being Sanctified, aad purged by his Holy Operation upon them; and though he has
tied us to the use of the means according to our advantage, yet he is not
himself tied up, so as not to do it for them: Divines Generally suppose that
Jeremiah, and John Baptist, were Sanctified in the womb: I dispute it not, but
I am sure this is not too hard for God, and he has done it, because there are
many such Glorified.

10. And there have been some Children that even in their Infancy made a good
discovery of their seriousness, according to the measure of their capacity of
understanding the things of God, yea and beyond what could ordinarily be
supposed to have been in them: though their understanding has been small, yet
there has appeared in them the favor of some breathings after Christ, herein
has God been pleased to show his power; Possibly Jeroboams Son was such an
one; in whom There was some good toward the Lord God of Israel. And this also
is a great encouragement to Hope; and when all these things are put together,
they will certainly afford matter of releif.

2. We may now proceed to consider this with respect to adult persons. Or such
as die after they are grown up to years of understanding; and see what Hope
there is which we may entertain ourselves withal concerning them, and how far
there may be the exercise of it for our support under the sorrow that we feel
for the loss of them: and here I shall first give some general Rules, and
afterward apply them to the particular respects* In general then.

1. That the Covenant promise is made to man upon Condition. It has been
already observed: that it is the New Covenant which gives men all their hopes:
from thence they do derive; Now that as well as the O^d-one, is a conditional
Covenant. The Promise, according as it is revealed in the Gospel, is not
absolute, it is not there declared to be made to these and those men
particularly and personally, but it is offered unto all where the Gospel comes,
upon terms which are proposed for their acceptance: and indeed it could not be
a Covenant Promise if it did not bear such a tenor: for it is Essential to a
Covenant that it always has in it a mutual stipulation. Gods Decrees are
absolute but his Covenant, in which he transacts with the Children of men, is
exhibited with Articles in it, which are proposed, in which God requires of men
that they should thus do and makes a promise of Salvation to them upon their
compliance with him; thus therefore were the Apostles commanded to Preach the
Gospel, Mark. 16.15 16. And thus Paul proposes it in Romans 8.13. The Precept
therefore and the promise connected together exhibit the Covenant.

2. That except this Condition be wrought in them, they cannot be saved. That
without it they cannot lay any claim unto salvation; and there is neither
injury nor false dealing in God, if he withold it from them: this is very
evident, because the Gospel promise which is declared unto men, has brought
him no farther under obligation unto them, than according to the terms of it.
If he should deny Salvation unto him that does believe, he would not be so good
as his word, because he has engaged it to all such, and made it their
encouragment to believe, Joh. 3.16. that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life: but if he withold it from an unbeliever,
he is just, because he has not performed the condition upon which it was
tendered to him. But besides this, there is no hope that he ever will save such
an one; nay he cannot bestow salvation upon any without the condition wrought
in them: no unbeliever can be saved in his unbelief, because God should be
equally false to his Creature in saving such an one, as in denying Salvation to
the other; in as much as there is a Covenant threatening which includes this man
in it, and has something to say to him which must be accomplished upon him,
and that is, he must be damned, Mark 16.16. there is no room therefore for any
indulgence to such an one, nor will Gods Holiness or Truth allow of it.

3. This also must be before they die. The working of the Gospel condition in
us, depends upon the Grace of God, and except he puts it in* to us we shall
never have it: and he gives to none but here in this life, this is the only
accepted time, and day of salvation; there is no business to be done in the
grave, and nothing of this nature left to be accomplished in another world: now
only is working time, then every one comes to have his reward, and that is to
be distributed to every one according to the things done in the flesh, 2 Cor.
1.10. Death disposes of men to their everlasting Unchangeable Estate. It puts
an end to the Gospel treaty, and brings every man to, and lodges him in that
place from whence he shall return no more^

4. The reality of this work is a secret which no other can infallibly discern:
The Saving change in a man is something inward: the sincerity of it lies in the
heart; and that must be much out of our knowledge; It is Gods alone prerogative
to Search and judge of that. All that l^ves within our compass to do about
(...), is at most but conjectural, and the best conclusion that we can draw, is
no more than that it is strongly p^obable that it may be so: though saving
grace has its marks or characters, yet because they are spiritual, there is
none that can certainly know them, but he that gives them, and he that has
received them: But as to what is visible to us. Grace has its counterfeit; and
there are those that can ape it so handsomely, that a discerning Christian, with
all his observation cannot see into the imposture: and by reason of this, there
is many a false Hypocrite that passes with him for a sincere Christian, and
many an upright soul, because of his great infirmities is suspected by him, he
doubts of him whether he be right or no.

5. Yet there are the fruits of this change which are brought forth by such as
live after their Conversion. They can bring forth nothing before, for where
there is no grace, there can be no exercise of it; and if they die immediately
upon it, as it may be presumed that some do, they are deprived of the
opportunity to discover it in an holy life, and God will accept of the will,
and not deny his own Grace which he has created in them by his Almighty power;
but if they are spared, and have a season allowed to them, they will more or
less discover some encouraging symptoms of a work of God wrought in their
hearts, by a life and conversation ordered according to the will of God,
therein showing forth the virtues of him that has called them. They are
regenerated to this end; and the Spirit of God will aid them in it; and so far
as we discover any of these things, our hope will receive a lift from thence,
to conclude that they have received the Grace of God, and that therefore the
well ordered and Everlasting Covenant is made with them; and the inferences
which we shall draw from thence must needs be comfortable.

6. Hence, as these fruits are more or less apparent, so will the strength of
our hope concerning them be more or less. This being the ground of the Evidence
which affords to our hope its support, it can be no stronger than the ground is
upon which it is built: and because this does not show it self forth in all
alike, our hopes concerning them must have different degrees of clearness and
comfortableness: concerning some therefore we can have but weak and faint
hopes, and those that are mixed with a great deal of fear and suspicion; whereas
in respect of others they are strong, prevailing, comforting and satisfying
hopes, which enable us to rejoice in them, and rest with abundance of quiet
upon our spirits, that it is now well with them, and that their Change is for
the better. The particular application of these things will now follow.

1. There are some who have been Religious from their very Childhood, and held
on so until their death. They began early to seek after God, and have led a
pious and exemplary life ever since, faithfuly serving of God in a careful and
conscientious observing of his commands; they have not only been blameless, but
patterns for others imitation: they have made a good Profession, and brought a
great deal of Honor to God in their place and generation, their light has so
shined that men have seen their good works and glorified God for them: They
have cheerfully both done and suffered for Christ: have been exceeding watchful
over themselves, and taken a great deal of h^^d in the discharging of a^
relative and personal Duties incumbent on them, in obedience to God: and mean
while have solemnly professed to renounce utterly all reliance upon themselves
or their own righteousness, depending upon Christ alone for the acceptance of
the^r persons and services: and they have lived very humbly as well as
Conscientiously, When such as these are come to die there is abundant Hope,
concerning them, for they have all the discoveries upon them, by which we are
advantaged to Judge of men's being truly pious, and in a good estate: these are
the visible Characters which the Scripture gives us to look upon as the notes
of good and Holy men, yea of such as are eminently so: they do therefore
command this Hope from us, they leave a precious name behind them, their very
memory is blessed, and we have a good confidence concerning them; and tho it is
not impossible but that men may dissemble Holiness so artificially as to impose
upon the credit of the Godly, and the dissimulation never be discovered in this
life, yet we have no reason to suspect such as these, or to entertein doubts
and jealousies in our minds about them, since there is nothing else to be seen
by us in them, but what calls for our good opinion of them. Our Savior Christ
^^rects us to Judge of them by their fruits Math. 7.16. they keep faith and a
good conscience to our observation; and such as these are declared to be happy
in their Death, Psalm. ^7.37. Take notice of the perfect man, mark the upright
for the end of that man is peace.

2. Others there be who have had a very great visible change wrought upon them.
It may be they have spent a great part of their life in vanity and debauchery;
they wasted away their youthful days in folly, and spent many of their riper
years in notorious wickedness; they lived in a woeful neglect of Duty, and would
not hearken to the Counsels give^ them whether in private or in public; they
have fallen into gross and scandalous sins, such as Drunkeness Whoredom, Theft,
Sabbath-Breaking, Scoffing at Godliness, etc. And they refused to be reformed,
they would not bear to be reproved, but would rail, and revile at those that
offered to check them in their Carreer's, But God at length met with them in
their Career, and stopped them in it, knocked them down, as he did Paul, brought
them to his foot, made them to taste the bitterness of their sin, humbly and
thoroughly to confess and bewail all their former follies, and utterly to
renounce them with their whole heart, and to betake themselves to him in Christ
for pardon and healing: and hereupon there is a very notable change apparent in
them to the observation of all they converse with; they do now as much hate
their sins as formerly they delighted in them, and they a^re as eagerly set for
the ways of God and Holiness, as formerly they slighted and abominated them;
and are as zealously engaged to promote the interest of Christ in the world, as
they sometimes were to serve the designs of Satan and their own lusts. An
eminent instance of such an one was Man^sseh; see 2 Chronicles. 33. beg^n. compare,
verse 15, 16. and though Paul were not a Debauch, yet he had been a virulent
enemy of Christ, see what he says of himself, 1 Timothy 1.19. and yet afterward
be labour^d for Christ, more than all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.10. and indeed
there is no one in the world that affords more matter for hope than such an
one; there being so eminent a change brought about in him from one contrary to
another; that it must needs be so much the more observable: and although it is
not to be denied but that legal co^victions and terrors, may work a great moral
change in a man's Conversation, without the product^on of a real saving change
in his heart; yet it speaks to us as fair for it* as any one thing that we can
know: the Church glorified God for Paul, when they heard what an alteration was
made in him, Gal. 1.24. and such as these will be illustrious instances of the
rich Grace of God in the great day of Accounts: when therefore such persons die,
we may and ought to have strong hopes concerning them.

3. There are some who only lead a sober and civil life among men. They make no
great open profession of piety, they are not in their carriage and dep^rtment of
themselves, zealous for the promoting of the interest of Religion, though they
discover nothing against it, but show a favor for it; they live honestly and
quietly among men; they are neither drawn into d^baucheries with lewd men, nor
to the strict duties of pie^y with Godly men; though they attend upon the
commodities of Religion: thus they live, and thus they die; there is very little
can be said for them, and very little against them. Concerning such as these
let these two things be observed.

1. Here is very little if any ground for a positive and concluding Hope
concerning such as these are. And why? because there wants something that is
positive for such an Hope to build upon: and such as the ground are, such the
Hope must needs be. It is certain that where there is no Saving Grace wrought
in men, there is no Foundation of Salvation laid in them; and Grace, wherever
it is, is an active princ^ple: and (...) it be not alike active in all men, yet
it can no further appear than we make the discovery of the actings of it, or of
something that c^rries such a resemblance in it, that we (...) able to argue
concluding and affirmatively concerning any: If we know nothing by them, it
follows that we can determine nothing concerning them. Restraint from enormous
sins, and doing of moral duties to men among whom they live, and maintaining of
a form of Godliness and practiced duties in the profes, sion of Religion, as,
going to hear the word preached, reading the Scriptures and praying in the
Family, and externally Sanctifying the Sabbath: though they are in themselves
commendable, yet they are such common things among professors, that they speak
very little positively, especially where in conjunction with them there is
nothing made of any thing more than a kind of ind^fferency.

2. Yet there is a considerable deal of a negative Hope that may be entertained
for such as these; in as much as they have had a great deal of Gods restraining
Grace on them, and though that may be where there is no Saving Grace, yet many
times it is a fruit of such an inward principle: Besides, there is corruptton
in the best, and that many times has not only a great influence into but also
much of Prevalency upon the natural temper or constitution which is in men.
There are some constitutions in men, which will make a great deal of show with
a little Grace and there are others that can make but a very small appearance
of a great deal: and if we give to men these allowances, which Christian
Charity requires from one to another, we may lawfully Hope, that there might be
the root of the matter in them, although they did not make so great a discovery
of it as could have been desired.

4. Some there be whose conversation is good and commendable, and their
profession is very desirable: only they stand off from holding Communion with
the Church of Christ at the Lords Table: and under this circumstance they live
and die: and there are too many who so do, and this consideration becomes a
stumbling block, and occasion of many heart searchings in their friends when
they come to die in this Condition: and truly it is not without a great deal of
reason: for out of doubt it is a duty incumbent on all adult persons living
under the means of Grace, and making profession of the true Religion, not to
rest satisfied without a due preparation for, and actual fellowship in all the
ordinances of the Gospel: every one that is at years of discretion who turns
his back upon a Sacrament, does therein offer an open contempt to the Lord Jesus
Christ. If he be not sitted for it, the sin lies at his own door, if he be and
does not come, how can he answer it? and therefore it must needs bring a cloud
upon all his other profession, which will much darken it: and for a person to
live and die under the neglect of a known duty, and that of so great importance
as this is, which Christ has required every one that has the least love for
him, to attend upon in remembrance of him, has not a little of reflection in
it: many therefore, when they come to lie upon a Deathbed, have terrible
agonies in their thoughts about it, and make little complaints against
themselves upon the account, promising that if ever God gives them a further
opportunity they will reform it: and if persons do live without this Communion
contentedly, and carelessly, it speaks as much against them, as all their other
Religious Conversation can speak for them. But still there may be that which
will give encouragement to our Hope concerning such as do die in such a
condition as this.

1. If their abstinence from this Communion be not from contempt of the
Ordinance, but a jealousy which they have concerning themselves, There are
those that have upon them a deep sense that they want the benefit of this
Ordinance, and that Jesus Christ has made it their duty to seek after it; but
they are possessed with a great deal of fear, they apprehend in themselves a
great deal of unworthiness: and unfitness for such a thing as this; and they
are afraid that if they should come they should abuse it, and thereby eat and
drink their own Damnation: the danger of that afrights them, and they cannot
tell how to get over it. Though this be sinful, yet it may be allowed by us to
their infirmity, and that which they are striving against: yea it argues
positively thus much, viz. that there is something of seriousness in these
persons; and if God please to take them away before they can obtain to have
their minds cleared and satisfied in this point, he knows how to pardon this
infirmity to them.

2. If the Church Communion be clogged with unwarrantable terms. And such are
all those that are not of Christ's own in instituting, what plausible pretense
soever they may carry in them. There are some which men cannot comply with,
unless they will sin against the precept directly: and there are others which
men can see no warrant for their being required of them, nor can they find a
willingness in their own minds to do such things as Jesus Christ has no where
made their Duty; and this keeps them off. For the former, their abstinence is
their commendation, and that man who can live without the Sacrament, rather
than defile his conscience for enjoyment of it, commends his sincerity to the
Consciences of others. For the latter, I would say: though I verily believe
that the terms of Communion are ^n Ordinance of Christ, and must have a word of
Institution to warrant them, and that according to the Gospel, Orthodoxy in the
profession of the Truths of the Christian Religion, under which is comprised a
knowledge of these truths; and this attended with a Conversation that becomes
the Gospel of Christ, is that which is the ground of our reputing them
believers and receiving them into our fellowship: and whatsoever more is
required as a ^est is supra stat^tum; yet I also believe that there are some
things, which, though not regularly required, may without sin be complied with,
and never trouble him that does so, either living or dying: and it will be no
comfort in a dying hour to think, I kept my self off needlessly: but here also
there is hope, where it is not done upon open Contempt.

3. They have given Testimony on their Deathbed of their sincere Repentance of
such neglects, and sought to God for his forgiveness of them through Christ,
herein they have manifested to us that they have tasted the bitterness of such
a sin, and God knows how to pardon them, and we may Hope that he has remitted
it to them, and accepted of them in his rich grace.

5. There are some that die with a great deal of Comfort, and professed Hope,
and possibly assurance of their good estate, and joyful expectation of the
Glory to be revealed in them. They are both ready and willing to die, and speak
very comfortably concerning their after estate in another world; and this gives
abundance of encouragement and comfort to their friends, and they are often
ready to solace themselves in it. But the ground of this Hope is warily to be
considered. It is indeed a very desirable thing in it self, to stand by and
hear our dying Friend testifying of a good hope, for a blessed eternity. But
then that which must derive strength to our Hope from hence must be gathered,
not from the mere confidence of such a profession made by them, but by putting
other circumstances thereto: And there are these two more Especially.

1. If there be a good agreement between their life and their Death. For us to
hear one that has lived in all good Conscience, and has approved himself
faithful unto God in his generation, now at last bearing a full Testimony to
the love of God to him, in his life, and rejoicing in Christ his Savior, and
the expectation of his Glory at his death, singing with Good Simeon, Luke
2.29.30. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have
seen thy Salvation. This is a precious and Heart-Ravishing thing and gives
abundant cause of boasting Hopes concerning such an one. But to hear one that
has lived wickedly, vainly, profanely, all his days, that has neglected
duties to God and men, never testified any love to Jesus Christ and his ways
all his life long, while he enjoyed health, and strength, and opportunity, nor
yet so much as witnessed Godly sorrow and repentance for his formerly misspent
life. On his sickbed* Talking of his Comforts and Assurances, and discoursing
of Death and Eternity with a Sedate and Composed frame, is a most Astonishing
thing, and so far from strengthening, that it weakens, nay let me say it
extinguisheth the Hopes of any considerate Christian concerning such an one:
and serves to fill him with doubts and despairing fears about him. We read of
those who* despise God in their lives, and yet have no bonds in their death,
and he looks just like one of these* and this looks like the effect of a seared
conscience, accompanied with the delusions of Satan.

2. If it be accompanied with a Suitable Frame of Spirit, When this professed
confidence is waited upon with great self abasement, and self abhorrency, with
adoration of, and admi^ation at the riches of free Grace which has appeared in
the giving of Him this Hope; acknowledging his utter unworthiness of it, and
ascribing i^ all to the undeserved mercy of God in Jesus Christ, extended to
him who was as bad as others, and had done nothing to merit this, but the quite
contrary: here is good matter of thinking well of, and rejoicing with such an
one; Whereas when men draw their comforts, and satisfying conclusions from
themselves: they thank God they have loved him always, they have kept his
Commandments from their youth, they never sinned as these and those have done,
and the result of all centers in what they have been and done, and they seem to
rest upon their own Righteousness, or only upon the general notion of Gods
mercy, and his good will to mankind, and they therefore conclude that he will
have mercy upon them, these confidences are poor and shallow, and may be
expressed by an unjustified Phar^^^^, Luke 18.11. with 14.

6. There are some that die in a Cloud. They labor of a great deal of doubting
and jealousy, and fear about their own everlasting estate, by reason of which
disquietment they cannot die with that willingness, and cheerfulness, and
resignation unto ^od, that many others do: they are woefully afraid of mistakes,
presumptions, false and deceiving Hopes, and this terrifies them, and indeed,
this cannot but afford grief and trouble to those that sit about them: But yet
it may be no impediment to our good Hopes concerning them, whiles there are
other substantial arguments to fortify them withal, for.

1. Actual Assurance proceeds from the joint witnessing of the Spirit of God
with our Spirit, Romans 8.16. till therefore he seals, and confirms, and
testifies to our evidences, we shall for all them remain in suspense. A man may
have really in him the things which accompany salvation, and have also such a
discovery made to him, of their being in him, which he dares not to deny, and
yet be much afraid of himself, suspect a mistake, and question whether they be
not counterfeit: his confident and comfortable persuasion of the truth and
reality of these things depends upon the confirmation given by the Spirit of
God to his soul: but this notwithstanding, his State is mean while as safe and
secure, as if he had the greatest satisfaction about it, though it be not so
clear to him; he shall as certainly be saved as another, though he be not so
well satisfied in himself concerning it; where God gives Grace, he will without
fail give Salvation.

2. The Spirit of God is sovereign in the giving in this Testimony of his to
the soul. He acts in it according to his own Wisdom and good pleasure. Gracious
Souls have, in their lifetime felt of his withdrawing this witness from them
upon these and those occasions, yea sometimes the most holy and conscientious
men may be without it, they may fear the Lord, and obey the voice of his
Servant, and yet sit in darkness and see no light, Isa. 50.10. and the same
holy wisdom of his may see meet to suspend it at their death, as well as any
other time; for who shall prescribe or set limits to him, who is not to be
taught or directed by the creature, nor gives to us an account of his actions.

3. Hence, if such an one has lived like a Christian, and so as becomes
Godliness. This can be no ground of weakening our Hope about their everlasting
welfare: his latter and shall be peace for all this: though we observe nothing
but doubts and fears, yet he shall find to his eternal joy, that the very
moment in which his soul departs from his body, he is put out of all his fears,
and when it falls among the Blessed Lifeguard of Glorious Angels, who are sent
to bring him home to the Kingdom, and lay him in the B^some of his Blessed
Redeemer, he shall then know himself happy: we may believe that God has
gracious ends in this thing, to humble him, and to do him good by it.

4. Though such cannot express that boasting confidence which others can, yet
they may discover to our charity as much grace as others do. They may under
this very cloud and darkness, express their endeared love to the Lo^d Jesus
Christ, their earnest longings to see his face and be with him, their humble
sense of their own unworthiness of his mercy, Justifying of him in this very
dispensation of his unto them; their entire hatred of sin, and their deep self
loathing by reason of it: their insatiable desires after Christ, and
everlasting communion with him, the earnest breathings of their souls after
more holiness, and whatsoever else is the proper fruit of Saving Grace in the
Souls of Gods Children: and the observation of these things will give us a
better foundation to build our hopes in respect to them upon, than the great
confidence which many do express; because it is from such things as these are,
that we fetch our arguments to persuade us that that is right and not deceiving.

7. Some that have lived soberly in their Childhood, have afterward been
drawn into lewd courses, and would not hearken to counsel, neither of their
Godly Parents, nor faithful Ministers, till God came to lay them upon a sick
and Deathbed, and then they have had terrible awakenings and Convictions, and
made solemn confessions both to God and man, taken shame to themselves
earnestly begged of God for pardon, and possibly also have testified some hopes
that they have conceived hereupon of mercy and acceptance with God, and we have
occasion to take notice of several such cases as these are; and concerning our
Hopes about such, I would offer these two things.

1. They cannot be so strong but that they must needs be attended with no small
fears too* (...) this is not without reason: they cannot be so prevailing
because we had not the opportunity to see the trial of the sincerity of this
repentance of theirs. The terrors of Death, and the apprehensions of eternity
just now to be entered into, and the consideration of the dreadful miseries of
ungodly men, may well put men into terrible agonies, and bring their sins to
remembrance, and make them to vomit up their morsels which before lay
indigested upon their Consciences, drive them to making Confessions, to begging
of pardon, and warning of others, in particular their Companions to beware of
the like; and yet this may be but a legal work: we have seen some that under
the terrors of Death have done the like, and yet recovering again, they
Returned to their vomit, and wallowing in the mire; and that God should make it
a common thing to give Repentance unto life upon a Deathbed, to such as
despised his Grace all their lives before, is a thing scarcely to be thought of.

2. Yet may we have some support to our hearts under this. To be sure it it is
a thousand times better to see a sinner dye under the sense and burden of his
sins, bitterly bewailing of them, than in a senceless stupid frame, as too many
are observed to do; and not only so, but though we may not dare to assert a
frequency of this manner of application, lest sinners should be encouraged to
delay until then: so we may not deny a Sovereignty to the Grace of God,
extendible hitherto, that he can take his own time, and if it be at last who
shall forbid him? yea and farther than so too, for God also has sometimes done
such a thing, there is instance for it in the Scripture, that so all our hopes
may not uttterly be cut off* from encouraging us about such as those over whom
when they are ready to depart we stand with bleeding Hearts: the very example
of the Thief upon the Cross, whose dying repentance was accepted, declares it
to be possible: and God is able to glorify his Grace more peculiarly by Saving
of such an one who is born out of time, and called into his Kingdom, after the
eleventh hour is current. And farther more if such an one has been a Child of
a great many prayers, and tears, and heart-breakings, if it be such an one unto
whom you have been very faithful in Duty? and for whom you have been very
importunate with God that he would turn him, and though you have with grief and
sorrow taken notice how he has slighted your Counsels and trampled upon your
reproofs, yet this has not made you leave off doing your duty, to him, or to
be willing to let God alone upon his account, but made you the more urgent and
earnest; you may well Hope that God is now at last come to answer your prayers
and endeavors, and signalize his grace to them, by plucking them out of the
fire which they were just dropping into.

8. Some there be who have spent their days in wickedness, and have given no
Testimony at all either at or before their death of their Repentance, either
God has taken them away by some sudden stroke, in a speedy and violent death,
they have gone in a moment to the grave; or they have fallen into some violent
sickness, which has at once bereaved them of the use of their understanding,
and they have died distracted without any the least capacity either of
receiving counsel, or of giving glory to God by a free and humble confession of
their sins: or, with Nabal, they have lain like a stone, and had no sense at
all of any spiritual thing upon them. Such instances also there are not a few;
and the Friends of such may well enquire, what Hope can we have?

Concerning such as these it must needs be confessed, that their fears are very
great and amazing, and their hopes can be but very small: but yet give me leave
to offer these rules to be considered.

1. It is the duty of all such silently and submissively to adore the Divine
Sovereignty, God is free in the dispensing of his grace, and he has mercy on
whom he will have mercy; and it is too much boldness for the Children of men to
call him to give an account of any of these matters. It is recorded concerning
Aaron, that when his two elder Sons were slain by a fire from Heaven, in the
very act of offering strange fire unto God, that he hold his peace, Lev. 10 3*
and of Eli, that when the most dismal threatening of the fearful destruction of
his two wicked Sons was delivered unto him, he said, It is the Lord, let him do
what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3.18 David indeed was excessive in his mourning
for his fondling* Absalom, but he met with a sharp rebuke for it: God has
required it of us as a great duty, to fall down before him and worship him in
the most severe of his dispensations toward us.

2. Not only is Gods absolute Supremacy, but his Righteousness to be
acknowledged by us in such a case. Though the thing be terrible, yet he has
done nothing but what is just and equal in what he has done; nothing but what
we had reason to live in continual expectation of: he has warned us of, and
threatened such things as these, that such as go on boldly in their
transgressions and will not be reclaimed, shall perish, and that quickly too;
Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy; he has declared that strange Judgments do
wait for, and shall fall upon such refractory ones as these: and they that will
live wickedly under all the means of grace, and strivings of Gods Spirit with
them from time ^o time, have a great deal of reason to look for Gods Hand to
overtake them every day, and when it does thus fall out, it is no new or
strange thing. God is holy in all these ways of his, and just in all these
doings.

3. Such providence do loudly call us to a more serious and deep reflection
upon our selves and our own ways. This is a crying voice from God unto us, to
put us upon the taking of a more str^ct account how we have carried our selves
toward God, and toward them too: whether we have not given him provocation by
some grievous sin so to smite us, and whether we have not been greatly
negligent in the doing of our duty toward them, when we had the opportunity
and many fair advantages for it. This should humble us low before God, and put
us upon the renewing of our Repentance, and peace with him; and by thus doing
we shall have hope concerning our selves, that such an awful Providence as this
is, shall work for our good; and so it shall turn also to our account, and make
us the more careful to our selves, and over others, who are yet within the
reach of our using the means with and for the bringing of them to obtain
salvation.

4. It may be no little relief and support to the spirits of Gods Children even
at such a time as this is, to be able to say that they have been faithful in
doing of their duty to such. If whilst they were with us, and we had the
opportunity, we prayed earnestly for them, carefully endeavored to set before
them a pious example in all the duties of Religion, and godly conversation; if
we have taken unwearied pains with them in counselling, reproving, restraining
them, according to our best discretion, and as we have had opportunity; it will
be a great relief unto us; for God will acknowledge our sincerity, and our
labor shall not be lost, nor our prayers return empty.

5. We do not know what God may have done for them by a secret work in the
interim. This is not to be doubted of* but that he can do his work suddenly;
though woe to them who will boldly run the risque of such a thing. But he may
have had mercy upon them, inter pon^em and fon^em, it is not impossible but
that his spirit may have wrought in them effectually; though if he have, it is
not fitting that it should be known by us, lest the^e should be a shameful
abuse made of it; yet the thing is not in it self an impossibility: and though
it can be but a very languishing one, yet where there remains a who knows?
hope is not without all relief.

6. And if we are those that fear God (and it is of no other that I am now
speaking) it will but a little while before we shall be fully satisfied. If we
should go mourning to the grave under the remembrance of such a thing as this
is, yet it should be a support to us under that mourning; so as that it may not
sink us, and distract us in the work God calls us to, to consider, that when we
come to the Kingdom, and shall there have all our weaknesses and imperfections
done away, we shall then take everlasting satisfaction in all that God has
done; and the eternal glory which he will have by every one of the Children of
Men, will be matter of our endless praises: and the hope of this should not be
despised by us, in the deepest dumps that we are oppressed with all, by reason
of such stupendous Judgments of God.

The Doctrinal handling of this Truth having been so much practical, the
particular application may be very briefly dispatched: Here then,

USE I.
For Information; learn hence*

1. The great advantage that Gods people enjoy by the Gospel; and truly it is
that which gives the Gospel no small commendation to the hearts of the Children
of men; the consideration that it affords to men such an hope, from whence they
may be deriving of those conclusions, the right improvement whereof will help
to swallow up a great part of their sorrow, and make their Mourning to be
comparatively next unto none: it provides and supplies us with such matter for
hope to live upon, as has solidity in it: humane reason has strained it self
in seeking ^o find out many arguments wherewith to stop the current of sorrow,
but it could never make a discovery of such as the Word of God has furnished
his people withal: and the Children of God have a great deal of reason to bless
him for it, who have so much of occasion to be making use of it; who live among
so many deaths, and are so often called into mourning over their choice Friends
and Relations, whom Gods Providence is from time to time snatching out of their
arms and emb^aces: and truly, if the Gospel did not afford a better hope to
them, than what carnal reason does suggest, it would leave them more miserable
and sorrowful than other m^n. They are but dark notions which the Gentiles have
groped out by their best improvement of the light of nature, concerning the
after sta^e of men, and therefore their solicitude about it cannot be so great:
but they that enjoy the Scriptures, and live under the means of grace* have
more clear and distinct discoveries of an after Eternity which all men pass
into by dying, and of the great miseries which then meet and fall upon such as
die in the^r unregeneracy* and if they had not a better prospect of the glories
which are prepared for all those that die in Christ, these thoughts would more
terribly cruciate their minds. Let us then be thankful to God, that we are born
in times and places of Gospel light; and let us improve this advantage for our
help and consolation, on all such distressing occasions as these which may
befall us.

2. That the composed Carriage of Gods people at the death and interment of
their friends and relations, is to be commended. One great usefulness of Hope
is to moderate Grief; and the moderating of that will produce a more sedate
frame of Spirit, which will be discovered in the deportment of our selves: and
not to improve it to this end and use, is to despise the Consolations of God*
which he has provided for us, and therefore provided, because he would not
have his people to be transported into excesses of sorrow on such occasions. It
is true, God has allowed us to mourn; and it is an Honor that is put upon the
remembrance of those that are departed, not to let them go without making it to
appear that they were desired, and that the loss of them is (...) affliction to
us; and it is a curse th^^ has been denounced against some, th^^ they shall die
unlamented; it is also a blessing promised to others that they shall be mourned
for, 1 Kings 14.13. all Israel shall mourn for him. But still, the Affecti^ns
^ought to be under the Government of Reason, and much more of Religion; the
right regulating and moderating whereof, is no little part of the commendation
of it; and the people of God do hereby show themselves not to have been in the
School of Christ for nothing.

USE II.
This may also serve to reprehend the immoderate mourning of Christians, as if
they had no hope. It is true* we ought to bear a great deal one with another in
Infirmities, and not to insult over such as are over much born down by them:
but Gods People ought not to allow themselves in any such thing, but willingly
admit of a reproof for it: and I hardly know any one thing in which they do
more deserve it: how many be there who are like Rachel, they mourn for their
Dead, and refuse to be comforted, because they are not? who seem to take a kind
of a sullen contentment in nourish^ng and giving way to sinking reflections on
their spirits, whereby they may aggravate instead of mitigating their Grief,
and that both by indecent words, and uncomely gestures? In words they express
themselves so as if their loss were insupportable, their bereavement
irreparable, murmuring against Gods Providence, charging him with hard dealing,
and expressing prejudices against him: and in gestures carrying of themselves
after such a manner as carries abundant reason to make them ashamed of. In
sum, this rebuke speaks to such who;

1. Mourn too much. Their lamentations are excessive, they out do in quantity:
they can set no bounds to their sorrow, but suffer themselves to be quite
overwhelmed; their grief drinks up their Spirits: leaves them no room or
liberty to take any comfort in any of the other many mercies and blessings of
God which are yet continued to them, or giving to him the due acknowledgement
of them, but, as if their comforts were all gone at one stroke, they cast
themselves into the current, and suffer themselves to be carried away in the
stream of sorrow: and there is not one word to be thrust in or spoken to them
which they will hear, they cannot bear to be told of any thing that might
relieve them in the least, or convince them of their Duty of patient and
submissive bearing the hand of God that is upon them; the very mention of such
a thing puts them into the most violent transports of an ungoverned passion.

2. Mourn too long. If it were only for the present, whilst their spirits are
under a sudden surprise, and by reason thereof their sorrows are too hard for
them, having gotten an advantage over them; although this is not to be
Justified, yet it might better be allowed; b^t when they settle themselves to
it, and resolve to bid adieu to all joys any more; they go mourning from day to
day, and year to year, and never strive to get themselves into any composed
frame, and their minds stayed: this is altogether a fault to be reprehended, it
calls for a sharp rebuke; this is at least Heathenish, if it be not a great
deal worse.

3. Their mourning puts them by their Duties which they ow the constant
performance of unto God. Any thing that obstructs a Christian Conversation, and
takes men off from the service of God is to be reproved, and there are the
Duties which we are called to a constant upholding of, and in so doing we
express our faithfulness to God. The sorrow which drives us to more care and
diligence in these than before we used, is profitable for us; but that which
puts us off from them, and so gives a check to our progress in holiness, is to
be reprehended. All Christians are by Duty called to be spiritual Priests unto
God, i. e. they are to offer up Sacrifices of Thanksgiving unto him in an holy
life: now the Priest of old, was not to lay off his garments for mourning, i.
e. he was not to unfit himself for the service of the Altar. If Gods Children
do by their sorrow put themselves out of any disposition for the duties
incumbent on them, they do amiss; and that this reproof may take effect upon
us, let us consider;

1. By thus doing you bring reproach upon Christianity. Every Christian ought
to be concerned more for the honor of God, and credit of his Religion, then
for any thing that respects himself. If it were a truth, that you should
gratify your selves by complying with your own inclinations in so doing, yet
if in the mean while you di^shonour God and wound the credit of your
profession, it is to be seriously thought of: and thus you do not a little,
whatever you may think of i^: the world will be ready to say, what is their
profession better than ours, it will not teach them to carry it better in all
conditions than we do? If we can manage our selves no more composedly with our
Grace, than other men can do with mere Morality, what are we bettered by it?
and indeed, all the discredit we thus get to our selves will refl^ct upon the
profession that we make.

2. By this you put away those comforts from you, which God has provided for,
or at least makes the offer of unto you, what are those Gospel discoveries made
for, wherein God does so abundantly acquaint us with the happiness of his People
after Death; those precious entertainments which they find with him, that
glorious Heaven which he has prepared for them, those Eternal Joys which they
shall swim in in the Kingdom, that precious company, and those perfectly
happifying fruitions which they are there advanced unto, but only to give us an
occasion thereby to comfort our selves in consideration of those that are gone
to that place? God would have his Children to live comfortably under all their
losses, and has provided abundantly for it; but you thrust all away from you,
and thereby offer contempt to these comforts, and put an a^front upon God
himself who offers them to you; and how unworthy a carriage is this?

3. Thus also you give Satan very great advantage against you. They who give
place to over bearing sorrow, do therein give place to the Devil. This is the
reason that Paul gives why he would not have that scandalous person dealt over
rigedly withal, 2 Cor. 2.7, 11. lest Satan should take advantage; when we are
in such a frame we lie dangerously open to his assaults, and he may easily
batter us with his Temptations, against which we then have but little heed to
stand upon our guard: and if we refuse Gods consolations, we shall readily be
brought to entertain Satan's prejudices; then, how far he may draw us into sin
by them, is not easy for us to determine, and that will be sure to cost us
sorrow in the sequel. Let Gods Children then be humbled for, and beware of
indulging themselves in such things.

USE III.
Let it now be for a word of Exhortation to all that hear this Truth, that we
labor to get, strengthen, and improve this Hope. Has God graciously provided
such an Hope for his people? let us then make it our own, and when we have
gotten it, let us nourish it, and be in a readiness to make use of it at all
times when Gods Providence calls us to have the occasion to improve it.

To move us hereto, consider,

1. You cannot well live without it in this world of change; and it will be
very uncomfortable Traveling through this Wilderness without such a cordial to
refresh your tired Spirits; for you must expect to meet with such occasions of
sorrow as well as other men. Gods people are not to promise themselves a
discharge from this War any more than other men: if they should be so foolish
as to feed themselves up with an expectation of it, their experience would in a
little time confute these expectat^ons. Good men lose their Friends as well as
bad; we see that wise men die, as well as the foolish and brutish, Psalm. 49.11.
and the more of these comforts that you do enjoy in this life, the more such
bereavements you must expect to undergo: every one of them is mortal, and
exposed to the common casualties by which God is wont to take men out of the
world: and so much room as they have now gotten in your affections, so much
sorrow you will be liable unto when they shall be taken away. Death has as
many ways to seiz them as it has for others; and though godly men have more
reason to hope for the sparing of the lives of theirs in a time of great
Mortality by the judgments of God upon a sinning people, than the wicked and
ungodly have; yet it must be acknowledged that in these things God does his
pleasure, That his Judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past our finding
out.

2 Such times will be hours of Temptation. All the affl^ctions in this life,
are called Temptations, James 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.6. because where there is a trial
in the things themselves, and that which both Satan and our own corrupt part in
us are ready to make use of to tempt us withal, and draw us into some sin
thereby; and when we lose our choicest comforts, there will be the sorest
Temptations on that account: now we shall be ready to be full of thoughts about
them, and our selves, and about God too, and that will hurry us, and put us out
of hope, if we be not the more careful to our selves.

3. Hence your Affections will now have special need for something to moderate
them. When such Providence have set them on working, and given vent to them,
yea opened a great Flood-gate for them to run out at, you will now be sure to
find great occasion for something to give check to the exorbitancy of them;
they will else be very unruly, and bear down your Reason and Religion too
before them, so as to precipitate you into strange exorbitancies. Now there is
nothing more proper or suitable for this purpose, than to have this hope by
you, ready to clap in and stop the breach: if any thing will do, this will. If
yoa can swim ashore upon this plank, you will not need to fear drowning in the
torrent of sorrow: the People of God never made use of this really, but they
found it profitable for their help at such a time.

2. It is not the portion of all that live under the Gospel to enjoy this Hope.
There are indeed the offers of it made to all that sit under the Ordinances,
and a way is pointed out unto them how they might come by it, but it is not
every one that has obtained a title to it so as to be owner of it. It has
been before shown, that it is the portion of none but such as have truly
believed in Christ, but all men have not faith; no not all that are visible
believers, they have not that faith which is here requisite: It is proper to
Gods Elect; it belongs to Gods Israel, but all are not Israel that are of
Israel: and it is a foolish thing to presume of it, except you have made it
yours by coming under the Covenant promise: and it will be a woeful unhappiness
now to arrogate it, and when you come to have urgent occasion to make use of
it, then to find that it does not belong to you.

2. Those that have it may obstruct the exercise of it, if they be not very
careful to themselves. Besides the Habits of Graces, there are also
dispositions requisite for the vigorous exerting of them, and though a saving
Holiness can never be lost, yet this disposition may be either off or on, and
this has a great deal of dependence upon a Christians right improving of
himself in his endeavoring to excite, and quicken, and envigorate his Habits.
If a gracious Habit comes to be neglected, it will grow rusty and unfit for
use, whereas if it be carefully nou^ished and strengthened, it will usually be
very prompt and ready for the service which it is useful for; and it is an
experienced Truth, that as there are many things ^en may do which will dead^n
and ener^ate their Hopes, if they be not the more watchful over themselves, so
there are several things which they may do, which will greatly actuale them,
and this therefore is your great prudence to consider of, and practice, for;

4. The exercise of this Hope will be very comfortable and profitable to you in
such an hour. It will greatly heighten your spirits when they are ready to sink
under the weight of sorrow; it will revive you when you are almost fainting
with Grief; it will give the Soul a standing, and enable it to feel the ground
when it is in the Flood; we live by Hope, Romans 8.24. It was David's Catholicon
against all despondencies, as we find, in Psalm. 42, 43. this will be to us,
light in darkness, joy in sorrow, comfort in heaviness, yea life in death it
self: it will help you over the dashing billows which threaten to drown you,
and afford you renewals of strength to enable you to hold on your course, and
cheerfully to travel through all the vicissitudes of time: by this you shall live
comfortably in the midst of all these Storms, which will sink them that want it.

For Direction.

1. Make sure of your own good estate. There is no man can challenge the Gospel
Consolations to himself, any farther than he has this persuasion, that he is
entitled to the New Covenant: he that will take the promise as belonging to
him, and not arrogate what is not his own, must see that the condition be
wrought in him: those only can assure themselves that all things shall work
together for their good; all others may expect, and shall find all to turn to
their harm: How shall that man comfort himself with such an Hope that this or
that person is in Eternal Glory, who has no grounded hopes that he himself
shall ever come there? He may be in his conscience persuaded that such an one
is gone to Heaven, but it is another thing to entertain such a persuasion with
Hope: Hope is that in the exercise whereof the Soul is relieved, but what
relief can an unbeliever have by such a persuasion, yea it is the Spirits work
to give us the Consolation of our Hope, that it may have real refreshing in it,
but such have not received the Spirit, and therefore can be under no such
influence.

To think our departed friends are in Heaven, and to expect ourselves when we
dye to go down to the Pit of Destruction, can give no Hope at all. Where Faith
does not lie in the Foundation, there can be no Spiritual Hope in the Soul;
Would you then enjoy it, get into Christ by a true and living Faith, who is the
Author of all our Hope, and so you shall have one that will not make you
ashamed.

2. Be very Faithful in doing of your Duty to your Friends whiles they live
with you. As God is wont very often to give his blessing unto the use of means,
by making it successful in the thing intended, so usually he affords the
greatest comfort to those who being bound in Duty so to use them, are
accordingly most careful and conscientious therein. And on the other Hand, it
oftentimes so falls out, that God brings about his Holy Purposes of destroying
some sinners, by suffering of those under whose care and watch they were, to be
remiss and negligent in the discharge of their Duty to them. Eli, in a great
measure neglects his Duty to his Sons, and God tells him of it, but he mends it
not, and the reason is, because God would destroy them; and it is not recorded
for nothing concerning Adonijah, 1 Kings 1.6 that his Father had not displeased
him at any time, in saying why have thou done so? and this becomes not only a
righteous punishment of them that perish, but a just chastisement of the others
neglect; there are the Relative Duties which we owe one to another, and when
they are sincerely discharged, this will afford good nourishment unto hope: we
owe to our Children, when they are grown up to a capacity of it, instruction,
good example, a restraining them from exhorbitant courses, a teaching of them
the good word, and ways of God, and this is the way in which God has said he
will bestow the blessing upon them, Genesis 18.19. let us then be careful in this
matter; and here;

1. Do it speedily. Take the season whilst you may; use the opportunity while
it is in your hand. Their lives are uncertain, their times are in Gods Hand,
and if we use unnecessary delays, feed our selves with purposes to do it
afterward, thinking that it is now too soon; the time may be lapsed, and they
may be gone to the grave; and then to be sure they will be out of the reach of
our ever doing any thing more for them.

2. Do it thoroughly. Be not perfunctory in this matter; be very serious in the
work; it is a great thing, and of unspeakable moment: it is not to be done to
the halves. How shall we expect them to be in good earnest in minding these
things, if we are not so in our pursuit of them? let not carelessness, fond
indulgence, sinister ends, or worldly affairs put us by any part of our Duty
which we ow to them; Think not our care of their Souls to be the least or last
care incumbent on us: what Christ bids us to do for ourselves, we should
endeavor for ours also* Math. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness.

3. Do it perseveringly; though you should meet with a great many lets and
discouragements lying in your way, yet resolve to break through them all:
though you can see no present good coming of all your pains and endeavors,
though they should slight and despise, and grow more vain and obstinate under
and after all; yet do you commend your endeavors to God, and set to it afresh*
think with your selves, if at the last you may but obtain what you long for,
your labor will be satisfactorily recompensed: we are bidden not to be weary
of well doing, and in the morning to sow our seed, etc.

3. Take all the encouragements that God has given you to strengthen your Hope
by* God has seen meet to afford his people a great deal, to establish their
hope withal; and if we would have it in exercise we must make use of it
accordingly: In particular*

1. Live upon the New Covenant promises. Though God has not given us any
particular absolute promise, that this or that relation of ours shall be made
happy in the everlasting enjoyment of himself when they die, yet he has
afforded to us many encouraging promises concerning them, as has been
exemplified in the explication. He has promised that our labor shall not be
in vain; he has promised to be a God to our Children; he has promised, that
if they seek him he will be found of them; and now there is occasion for our
making use of these and the like promises; and though they will not amount to
full assurance, yet they will give strength to Hope.

2. Eye and observe the Providence of God in his answering of your endeavors
with them. Take notice what effect your labor and pains have upon them. It is
not enough for us to sow the seed, but we are to be watchfully looking for its
coming up, and to observe how it thrives: and if you can discern them to be
serious, willing to take counsel, and hearken to your advise; if you can find
that they bring forth any fruit which is becoming them; and according to the
Word of God, you are to receive this as an answer of your Prayers, and a token
for good: and now you may comfortably recollect the remembrance of this, when
they are gone; and bear up your spirits therewithal: and the more memorials you
have of such things as these the more let your hearts be encouraged, and your
hopes strengthened thereby: the neglect of thus doing, many times leaves us at a
loss, and under prevailing fears.

4. Be not ignorant. Our Apostle ascribes the immoderate sorrow of Christians
to this. Text. where under Ignorance is comprehended, a not knowing, a not
believing, and a not considering: for that which we do not give credit to, or
do not apply our thoughts unto, we may be said practically not to know; and for
help against this in particular;

1. Do not fix their happiness, or your comfort in them to life and time; what
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 25.19. If our hope in Christ were for this life only,
we were of all men most miserable, is applicable not with respect to our selves
only, but to ours too. If all the comfort, and joy, and hope which we have in
our relations, be only temporal; if we look no farther than the present, their
Death will cut all off at one stroke. This was one great reason why the Heathen
sorrowed so hopelesly; because they knew so little about the after-state of
men: but God has given his People full assurance in his Word about these
things: believe then firmly, and meditate frequently in the Doctrine of the
Resurrection; think of the state of men after time, and draw what you may from
thence. Hence,

2. Believe and much meditate upon the future happy condition of the People of
God. It is not enough to believe that there is an after-state, but our hope
lies in thinking what that shall be: The Word of God has told us as much of
it, as is meet for us to know in this life; and let us be pondering often upon
it: think what great glories they must be, of which Paul tells us, that it is
not lawful to utter them; what it is to dwell with God and Christ for ever;
what is that Eternal Life and those Joys for evermore, which shall entertain
them after they are here no more.

3. Think your selves now with them in that happy state. The Apostle gives that
enco^ium of faith, He^. 1.11. it is the substance (or present subsistence) of
things H^ped for. Pass then over this little spot of time, which must soon flee
away; and say to your self, why should I mourn for their Departure, who am
looking in a very few days to be called away hence to be with them? Suppose
your self now to be out of this Tabernacle gotten to the Kingdom, and solacing
your self in their company, in the Bosom and Embraces of C^^^st; and would you
mourn if it were indeed so? think it so already, because you hope it will be so
shortly.

5. Resolve to leave all dark things to the time when God shall satisfy you
sul^y. Satan and a troubled mind, will offer a great many perple^ing questions
and doubts; may it not be otherwise than I hope; is it not possible that I may
be mistaken in my expectation? but are they well indeed? how shall I know?
these are things which you have nothing to do withal now: Take those
encouragements which God has given you in his Word; put away the fears that
Satan and your own corruptions would put upon you; and leave Secret Things to
the day of Revelation; so shall you be able to carry it as becomes the People
of God, and nothing shall offend you.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
THere is now Published an Ingenious Piece which turns George Keith inside
outward, and proves his pretended Light within to be utter darkness. In a
Letter which impatially Discovers the manifold Heresies and Blasphemies. By Mr,
Cotton Mather pr. B. 1 s.

With the good Liking and Approbation of the Ministers in Boston. There is
Published, A Token for Children, in 2 Parts. Being an account of the Holy Lives
and joyful Deaths of several young Children. By James Janeway. To which is
added the shorter Catechism. Price Bound 1 s. 4 d.

There is now Published A Boston Almanac, for the Year of our Lord, 1692.
Being Bissextile or Leap Year. To which is added Bills Bonds and an Indenture
for an Apprentice. Together with a Copy of a Will.

That Excellent Antidote against all Gripings called Aqua anti torminalis,
which if taken it not only cures the Gripings of G^ts, and Wind Cholick, but
preventeth that woeful Distemper the Dry Belly Ach. Sold By Benjamin Harris.
Price 3 s. the Half Pint Bottle.


