A Brief EXHORTATION To all who profess the Truth, To come clear out of
Babylon, and not to join with any hurtful or unseemly Practice, nor make
Marriages with Unbelievers, but be a separate People from every Unclean thing,
that God may receive you.
My Dear and Well Beloved Friends,
THere is, and has been a long time, a great Travail and Exercise upon me for
the Prosperity of Sion, and the Tranquillity of New and Heavenly Jerusalem, that
she may be the Praise of the whole Earth, and that her spiritual Government may
spread over Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People, where the Whorish Spirit
has sat, which has led People from God into Babylon, which is Confusion and
Disorder. Oh, what shall I say! my Soul and Spirit is grieved and pained within
me, when I take a view of the Numberless Number of hurtful things that this
Spirit has led People into; But that which on the other hand is comfort unto
me, is, That the Lord our God, in his unutterable Loving Kindness, has made
bear his holy Arm, and caused his glorious Light to shine in the hearts of many
Thousands, which has discovered Mystery Babylon, (the Mother of Harlots and
all Abominations) in a great measure, praises be to his great Name forever,
Amen.

Dear Friends, That which ought to be all our Concerns, to whom the Lord has
so largely appeared, as to make us a kind of first Fruits to himself in this
latter Age, is* to see that we come clear out of Babylon, that we be not
Partakers with her in any of her hurtful things which have been brought in in
the Midnight of Darkness and Popery: The Cry is now, which John heard many
Years ago, Come out of her my People, partake not of her sins, lest ye also
partake of her Plagues, for strong is the Lord that judges her. Now dear
Friends, her Worship in all her finest Dresses and Names, (under what
Profession soever) you that are come (almost, in the least measure) to believe
in the blessed Light, I doubt not but you see over it, and cannot join with
them in it; yet bear with me a little, there may be some things that some may
stick in, or not so clearly see over, as they should or might do if they well
minded the Light. We read of some of old that had much good in them yet was
short in some things; some in all Ages saw before others in some things for a
time; but those which were truly faithful to what they did know, not regarding
the friendship of the World, nor yet their frowns in that case, had their
understandings more and more opened, and were made instrumental to convince and
to strengthen and confirm others. So, all dear Friends, dwell in the Light that
you may clearly see every little thing that is to be denied, and the tendency
of every Spirit, Practice or Custom that may be hurtful either in our day, or
to succeeding Generations: Christ told his Disciples, that they were as a City
set upon a Hill which could not be hid, and the Salt of the Earth: The Salt is
to season that which otherwise would be unsavory. Oh! the Lord help all his
People well and truly to consider this weighty thing, in all our commerce with
all sorts of People, that Gods pure witness may be reached, and every
appearance of Evil born Testimony against; for the Lord is about to make a
clear separation, he will not bear much longer, as he has done in the time of
Ignorance. Therefore let us all see that we do not uphold or countenance any
vain Custom or Practice that has been brought up in the dark Night of
Apostasy, or that may be of an evil tendency, but rather let us dwell alone in
those things: What if we be not reckoned among the Nations, as it was
prophesied of old? and the Prophet Isaiah said (speaking of the Gospel times)
Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out, touch no unclean thing, be ye Clean, that bear
the Vessels of the Lord, Isa. 52. And the Apostle said, Be ye separated, says
the Lord, and touch not the unclean Thing, and I will receive you, and I will
be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord God
Almighty: These are precious Promises: What if we be slighted by the World,
because we cannot join with them in any excess of Riot or evil Custom? The
Apostle said, The Friendship of this World is Enmity with God; and has not God
put Enmity between the two Seeds? how then can they have affinity together?
(though there may be commerce is things civil) Let this be well minded in all
our Marriages; the Apostle said, Be not unequally yoked together with
Unbelievers, for what fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness? and
what communion has Light with Darkness? or what Concord has Christ with
Belial? or what part has he that believes with an Infidel? Joshua said to
Israel of old, If ye do in any wise go back and cleave unto the Remnant of
these Nations, and shall make Marriages with them, they shall be Snares and
Traps unto you, and Scourges in your sides, and Thorns in your Eyes, until you
perish from off the good Land: And did not this come to pass? and had not we
need to have great care in this matter? Truly I see rather more need here than
we had in our Native Land; for many come to our Meetings, and will get a Friend
by the hand, that know little of Truth in their hearts. Therefore it concerns
our Monthly Meetings to inspect well into this matter, that we may not become a
mixed People, lest the Lord be angry and spue us out; but I hope better of most.
Abraham commanded his Servant, That he should not take a Wife for his Son Isaac
of the Daughters of the Canaanites, but of his Kindred, and the like charge
Isaac gave to Jacob; but afterward Marriages with outward Kindred was
forbidden, and they were to marry with them of the same Society, or with such
as kept the Ordinances of God; and does not our Society stand in that which is
heavenly and spiritual, which may be called a spiritual Kindred, with whom we
may in the fear of God join in Marriage. Marriage is honorable in all, where
the Bed is undefiled, but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. And if
any unclean or hasty Marriage happen, when a man or woman does not stay a
convenient time after the decease of the Husband or Wife, Friends should show
their dislike, and not countenance them at all, that we may be Witnesses for
our God against all Unrighteousness both of Flesh and Spirit: Know ye not that
the Saints shall judge the World, but if we join with any uncomly Action, they
will judge us. And take heed of too much observing that Custom of making great
Feasts at Weddings, or of joining with the World therein, but let all wait to
be guided in Gods Wisdom, that so all things may be done to his honor; for
Marriage is a weighty thing, and ought to be solemnly performed in the fear of
God, and not in Revelling and Lightness, as many of the World have done, using
those immodest Actions of taking the Brides Garters and Shoestrings, and
showing of folly in getting them to bed* Oh! let not these things, or any other
unseemly Action or Word be once mentioned amongst any that profess the Truth of
God; and let all Friends take heed of making, or joining with them that do make
appointed Feasts some small time after a Child is born; for I, with many of the
Lords People have seen much evil therein, and been constrained to bear our
Testimony against it; yet let all beware of Covetousness in that and all other
things, providing things honest in the sight of all men. The Apostle Paul said,
Whatsoever things are true, just, honest, pure, lovely, and of good report; if
there be any Virtue, think on these things. Friends, these things should be
minded in our Marriages, Births and Burials, that all may be in a comely sollid
order, out of all Extremes, and so we shall overcome evil with good, and leave
a good pattern to our Posterity.

There is one thing more, which for the sake of our Youth, and some others, I
cannot well omit, without giving a hint of it, and that is about observing the
time called Christmas, which the false Christians set up, as they did many
other days, called, Saints days, which the Lord has laid a holy constraint
upon his People to bear their Testimony against, though some have not been so
clear as they should have been therein. Now Friends, this is that which God by
his Light and Spirit has opened in my Heart many years ago, That when they had
in a great measure lost the Saints Life and Christ's Day within them, then in
the darkness they set up Saints Days and Christ's Day (as they call it) without
them, about which time there is more Wickedness acted than at other times: I
could say much about that, and many other things which have been set up in the
Night of Darkness; but these things were of weight upon me, and this is the
sense which God has given me, That none who profess the Truth should make any
show of observing these Times, either in Apparel or Provision, or going a
visiting, or neglecting their usual Business because its that time. But some
may object, and say, We have known some Friends appoint Meetings on that day,
and about that time. I Answ. True, but for what end? has it been to observe the
Time? No such matter, but to catch People when they were idle, and to labor to
bring them from the observation of days without in Vanity, and to bring them to
the Day of Christ within, that they might walk in the Light of it, and be saved
from their sins.

Dear Friends, These things are written in the true Love of God, and without
Reflection upon any particular, but for easing my self of what for some time
has lain upon me. It was my design at first writing that it should be read in
Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, but that I shall leave to the judgment of
Friends to do as they see meet: I hope it will not be hurtful in any Meetings.

Written the 25 th of the 1 st Month, 1691. By your Travailing Brother, John
Wilsford.
POSTSCRIPT.
There is another thing comes afresh upon me, which I cannot well omit, which
is this, It seems an uncomly thing, and shows too little love to the former
Wife or Husband for either Man or Woman to be concerned or keep company with
any in the way of Marriage too soon after the former Wife or Husband be dead,
though they may stay a year before they Marry, yet if they keep company, or be
too soon concerned on the account of Marriage, it is not of good savor; and
all who profess the Truth of God should be good Examples to them that are
without, that they seeing our sober sollid godly conversation, coupled with
fear, may have cause to glorify God on our behalf, in the day of their
Visitation.

J. W.



A short Testimony for the good Order of Truth, as it is established and
practiced amongst the People, called, Quakers, showing how by degrees the Lord
in his love led us into it: Written partly for the opening the Understanding of
the weak and honest hearted, and for convincing of Opposers and Gain sayers.
Dear Friends and People;
WHen first the Lord Almighty cast his Eye of Pity toward us, we were a poor
People, scattered upon the barren Mountains and partched Heaths, where some of
us wandered from Mountain to Hill, from one Profession to another, seeking the
living amongst the dead, but found him not there, for he was risen; and our
Rest that we had, some in one Profession, and some in another, was polluted,
and we were troubled, being as Sheep without a Shepherd, and then we cried unto
the Lord, and sought secret places to pour out our souls before him, as well as
we could, crying for the holy guiding of his pure Spirit; for we were at a
loss, and knew no bottom to stand upon. Then in this day of Distress, (which
was more than my Tongue can declare) did the Lord in his unutterable
loving kindness open his way unto us, and showed us that we should wait in his
Light and Spirit within us, for that which was to be known of God, was manifest
within; and then we durst not give our own meanings to the Scriptures or other
Writings of holy men, but came to know a time of t^^e silence, for which my
Soul has great cause to praise the Lord; for the Lord showed me and many more
that we must wait upon him out of our own Thoughts. I^^^^nations or
Conceivings, and then was Judgment laid to the Line, and Righteousness to the
Plummet, and our sins were set in order before us, and there was no help nor
strength left in us, of our selves we could do nothing, but lie down under the
Judgments of the Lord and abide the day of his coming, (...) Judgment was
brought forth unto Victory, and the Lord was pleased to reveal his own
Righteousness, and overshadow us with his Loving Kindness, and cause us to
drink of the still Waters of Shilo, which caused our hearts to be glad, being
overcome with his love, and then we said, O Lord! show us more and more what
thou would have us to do; for thou have won our hearts, and overcome our
Souls, and we are given up to do thy Will, whatever it cost us. And as we
continued waiting upon him in his Light and Spirit, our Understandings were
more and more opened, and our number increased; The Net was cast into the Sea,
and gathered of every kind; for the Lord made Fishers of men; and then he
showed us that there was need of Discipline and Order amongst us touching
Marriage, and many other things, and that if any offended, they might be dealt
with, as Christ taught in the 18th chap. of Matthew, and as Paul said, warn
them that are unruly, and further, We command you, Brethren, withdraw your
selves from every Brother that walks Disorderly; yet it was the mind of
Christ, and the Apostle, that if a man was overtaken with a fault, those that
were spiritual should labor to restore him in the Spirit of Meekness; and that
those that oppose themselves should be instructed, that if God peradventure
would give them Repentance, to the acknowledging the Truth. And as we continued
waiting upon the Lord, he led us by degrees, according to our measures, into
this way and method; and we have labored to instruct, advise and counsel one
another; and though there be diversities of Gifts and Operations, yet its by
the same Spirit that works all in all, to the edifying of the Body, of which
Christ is the Head, to the end there be no Schism, but true Unity and Harmony
amongst the Members; for indeed one Member cannot suffer alone, it is the
nature of the Body, if any Member be out of joint, to endeavor to bring it in
again; but if it cannot be gotten in, but becomes putrified, and in danger of
hurting or spoiling the whole Body, the skilful Chyrurgeon will advise to cut
it off, rather than the whole Body should perish, though this is not delightful
to the true Body, but sorrow and pain to lose a Member, and its seldom done
until all the Friends of the Monthly or Quarterly Meeting whereto such an
Offender belongs, be clear of ^im; for its the labor, care and desire of
Friends, that if any professing Truth, should be overtaken with a fault, by
which Truth may suffer, that they may see it, and repent, and clear Truth
themselves. And let not any think it to be a light thing to be so stubborn and
rebellious, as to cause the Body or Church of Christ to disown them, though the
Papists have assumed to themselves, for filthy Lucres sake, that Power which
God never gave them, yet there is much in Christ's words, (who never spoke
unadvisedly) where he says speaking of O^fenders) If he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as a H^athen man, or a Publican; verily, I say
unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and
whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven: Again, I say unto
you, that if two of you shall agree on Earth touching any thing that they shall
ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in H^aven; for where two
or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them.
These are weighty Sayings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and ought to be well
considered on all hands. Was it ever known, that any Member prospered, being
separated from the living Body whereunto it did belong.

And as touching Marriage, it has been Friends advice, and a necessity has
been seen for it, that all who profess the same Truth with us, should publish
their Intentions of it, according to the Law of these Provinces; yet according
to the sense and understanding that God by his Spirit has given me, with many
Brethren, all that profess the same Truth with us, ought first to publish it to
Friends, as abovesaid, and have their advice and unity in their proceedings.
And all that frequent our Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, should have in some
measure the sense and concern of Truth upon them, and not come as evil Spies to
wrest Friends words, and carry Tales about; if any do so, they are more like
Enemies than Friends in that matter.

And all dear Friends, who have the Concerns of Truth and the care of the
Church upon you, wait to feel the living Power of God in all your Gatherings,
and the mind of the Spirit, that all things may be done in the Wisdom of God,
which is from above, which is pure and peaceable, and easy to be entreated to
every good thing. And all, both Male and Female, wait to know your several
Services in the Church of Christ; for the Body is not one Member, but many, and
the Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have no need of thee, nor the Head to the
Feet, I have no need of thee; but every Member has its proper Service; Though
the Man is not without the Woman, nor the Woman without the Man in the Lord,
yet they have their particular Service in the outward Family, so in the
spiritual Family or Church of Christ: Let them that Read Understand; does not
the good Woman take care that nothing be lacking in the Family? and are not the
good Men one with them in it? Oh dearly Beloved Friends! my Soul loves you, and
I desire that all may feel the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of true
and lasting Peace. The Devil is laboring to make Divisions all the World over,
and can we expect to be free from his Temptations? Therefore we had need Watch
and Pray that we may be delivered from Evil, that we all may be as lively
Stones built up, a Spiritual House to offer Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to
God, by Jesus Christ, that we may show forth the Praise of him who has called
us out of Darkness into his marvelous Light. Which is the earnest Desire and
fervent Prayer of your Friend (who at the close of this Epistle is filled with
the Love of God to all his Flock.)

Written, the 4 th of the 2 d Month, 1691. John Wilsford
Let one of these be kept in each Quarterly Meeting-Book.



THE END.

