THE GREAT DAY OF JUDGMENT. Handled In a SERMON (...) Assizes at Ne^ (...)
October. 7. (...)

By the Reverend (...) SAMUEL LE^^^ (...) sometimes Fe^^^^ (...) Wadham (...)
in (...)

Accor^^^^ (...) With Preparatory (...) THE DAY OF (...) By Mr. COTTON MATHER.
(...)

Boston in (...) Printed by Bartho^^ (...) Nicholas Buttolph, (...) ^^eridg's
Coff^^ (...) Price (...)

Preparatory Meditations, upon THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.
S. 1. THE Great Apostle PAUL, according unto the Wisdom given unto him^
Writing unto the Hebreroes, has with Good Reason erected Those as the Two
Pillars, even the Jachin and Bo^^, (...) all Religion, GOD IS, and HE IS (...)
REWARDER; Nor are the ^ountainous, Pillars of Heaven, (...) (...) or more
lasting, than these (...), most Glorious Principles. That these is, (...) GOD,
or a JEHOVAH, is (...) more Engr^ven in the whole (...) of the World, than the
(...) (...) Artificer was of old into the (...) (...) of his M^^erva. Even the
(...) (...) M^^^ Creatures do (...) (...) ^lame the Being of a (...) ^^^te^^^,
^^ocet quaelibes, (...) (...) that I may say with Job, Ask now the Beasts, and
they shall Teach thee; and the Fowls of the Air, and they shall Tell thee; Or
speak to the Earth, and it shall Teach thee, and the Fishes of the Sea, shall
(...) unto thee. The World must necessarily have a Beginning; and that it could
not have its Beginning from it self, is evident, inasmuch as Nothing would have
then been the cause of Something. Nor do^ any thing l^ss: than the Power of a
GOD, the (...) of a GOD, and the Goodness of a GOD, appear in the Constitution
of the Universe. And as all the Creatures are so many Letters in the Book of
Creation, from which we may (...) Existence of a GOD, so does th^^ ^^ook of
Providence give us a Continuation of the Demonstration, which proves a Deity.
For therein, besides the Extraordinary Occurrents, in Prophecies, and Miracles,
and Ret^li^^tions, upon the sight which every one c^yes out, The ^inger of God^
the Excellent Order, wherein all things are preserved, abundantly argues a GOD,
whose Kingdom Rules all. But indeed; I may say, What need we any further
Witnesses? Or what Need of any Coming from the Dead unto us, with such Advice
as the Spectre of Major Sydenham gave to Captain Dyke, a while ago, I a^ come
to tell you, that there is a GOD, and that He is a Just and a Terrible God! The
Notion of a GOD is imprinted so deeply in the Spirit of man it self, that it
can be ascribed unto none but such an Author, and therefore such an Author
there is, as a GOD, who Forms the Spirit of man within (...) Had this Idea, in
the Soul of man, been a Mere Tradition of our Ancestors, why is it not all this
while detected like other Vulgar Errors of much less importance? Or, Had it
been a mere Policy of our Governors, whence is (...) that Rulers themselves,
as much as any other Mortals, are smitten with the Terrors of it? The Notion is
a Natural, as it is Powerful; man is (...) with an Inclination to acknowledge
(...) GOD, and he will have Many rather than have None; Atheism has not been
so agreeable to mankind, as (...). The Notion also is as General as it is
Natural; it is not peculiar to any one Kingdom or Kindred; they which Differ in
all other things, yet Unite in their sense of a GOD; and the Salvage Indians
themselves in the most hideous and Barbarous Thickets of America, own a
Koutantow^^, as the First Cause of all. Yea, I do confidently affirm, That of
all the Few Professed Atheists, which have been known among the Brutify'd part
of mankind, there has been hardly so much as O^e, which has (...) Believed,
That there is no God, (...) Vehement Suspicions of the Contrary. It Is by some
Remarkable (...) from our Injured and Provoked GOD, upon the more Atheistical
sort of the (...) things which would be called, (...) that ^one use the Name of
GOD, in the prefa^e. Abuses of Swearing and Cursing, so much as those Monsters
do: and Calvin, as I Remember, mentions one of them, that upon a Blow given
(...), Cried out, O God help me! though he had just before been Vehemently
disputing, that there was no God at all. But besides, those Undesigned
Confessions of a GOD, from the Mouths of those Miscreants, there are at some
times usually before they Die, such Flashes of Lightening from Heaven, darted
into their Souls, as force 'em Deliberately to Recant, the Po^^^ which acted
them, when they said, that is, w^sh'd, rather than Thought, in their Hearts, --
No GOD. Some that have in their Lives pretended unto the more than D^villish
Bravery, of Renouncing the Belief of a GOD, yet have declared at last that
their Minds inwardly and frequently twitch'd 'em with direful Remo^strances
against their Impiety, and Read 'em Lectures upon the Reality of a GOD, which
made 'em always Live uneasily. And if some Wretches, by the Constant Practice
and Lerry of their Vices, have laid the sense of a GOD, in their Souls a s^^^m;
yet our great GOD, has Commonly roused them into some waking Minutes, wherein
they might have said. When I Consi^^, I am afraid of GOD; GOD in (...) Heart
Soft, and the Almighty (...) me. Wicked men, that For^g God; would sain also
Destroy him; I d, that they may go as far as they can, they Labor to Shake
Off, and Root Out that Remembrance of GOD, in their Souls, which gives 'em so
many Vexations in their Courses of Ungodliness; but it will not Off, it will
not Out, the Almighty GOD makes the most haughty Criminals to stoop under this
Instance of His Empire over them. A Certain Spark a while since in Company
begun to brag, Well, I Will prove, for I am now able to prove, There is no God. A
Gentleman (if a Beast may be called So!) then present, replied, Prithee Do! and
I^l give thee a thousand Guinnies for thy Pains! But all the Guinnies in the
World, will not rescue a man from the force of this persuasion, That there is a
GOD; and such are the Circumstances of the persuasion, as that it must be From
the, GOD, OF whom it is. Now from the Faith of a GOD, we are led presently to
Conceive of a JUDGE; JEHOVAH will be ELOHIM; it is to be Concluded, that He has
given Laws, according whereunto Mankind is under His Moral Government; and in
the Execution of this Government He will dispense Rewards unto the Children of
men, according to the Rules for the Distribution thereof, by Himself Prescribed.

S. 2. There are Various Dispensations of Providence, wherein the God of
Heaven, discovers Himself a REWARDER, unto that People, which He has formed for
Himself, that they may show forth His Praise. And were there more Collections,
with fit Res^^ctions, made of Dispensations this way Remarkable, it would be a
Work full of Service and Honor unto our God; They that were so Wise, as to
Observe these things, would certainly Understand the Loving kindness of the
Lord, even in the Remarkable Things, that could be done for themselves. But is
(...) not in this World, that our God ha^ the glory of His being, A REWARDER,
so fully and so clearly displayed, as it ought to be; We daily see Godliness
Oppressed and Wickedness Advanced, in this Present evil World; and neither the
Appeals of Afflicted Innocence, nor the Affronts of Outrageous Vallany, have a
Sufficiently Sensible Notice taken of them. There is therefore an Eternal State
of Blessedness and Misery, whereinto the Righteous God will bring every one of
us, according to our Behaviors here. Our Short. Condition in this World, is
but a Condition of Probation or of Stewardship; and according to our Carriage
in this Condition, we shall in the issue, as the mouth of our faithful Savior
Himself, has long since assured us, Go away into Everlasting Punishment, Or,
else, Into Life Everlasting. But at the Threshold of that Eternal State, it is
but proper that a Distinct Account should be taken of what every man has done
the Body, that so the Luster of that Justice, which Dooms them to their
Interminable Blessedness or Misery may strike the very Consciences of all
Beholders. Hence it is, that the Oracles of Truth have told us, Gos has
appointed a Day, in which He will Judge the World, by that man whom He has
Ordained: Whereof, He has given Assurance unto all men, in that He has Raised
Him from the Dead. There is indeed a Particular Disposal of Immortal Souls, by
the Lord Jesus Christ, before whom they Appear when their Bodies here are by
Death made Untenantable; and from whom they then Receive Order, Either to be
Admitted among the Spirits of Just men made perfect, or to be Reserved in
Darkness unto the Judgment of the Great Day.That Separate Souls thus Exist in
an Invisible World, is a thing whereof I know some, who have such palpable
Evidences, that were the Scriptures wholly Silent, which Blessed by God, they
are not, about it, yet they could no more Qustion it, than they Question their
own Existence in the World. But there is a more General Work of this kind,
shortly to be done, in a Vast Assembly of all mankind, unto that end Summoned
by the Mighty God, and called from the Rising of the Sun unto the Setting
thereof. The Souls of men shall reassume a fit Portion of the Dust, whereunto
they were formerly United, by the Almighty God fetched out of the Various
matter whereinto it has been Dissolved and Dispersed, but now become as were
the Keel, where upon shall be Built Incorruptible Bodies: and some that shall
then be found alive shall by a Translation, have their Bodies made in a like
manner Spiritual. In their Bodies thus Raised, and Changed, they shall stand
before a Tribunal of our Lord Jesus, descended from the Heavens into our
Atmosphere; and after an Exact Examination of their Behaviors While God was
upon Earth Trying of them, they shall have One of these two Sentences
pronounced upon them; Either, Come, ye Blessed, Inherit the Kingdom; Or,
Depart, ye Cursed, into Everlasting Fire, Which will be accordingly Executed on
them. Such a Day of Judgment is there to come upon the World! Amen! Come, Lord
Jesus, come quickly. Indeed, about the Circumstances of this most Illustrious
Day, it is more easy than lawful for us to Enquire into such things as we are not
yet Able to Answer; nor has the Lord Indulged any Curious and Critical
Enquiries after Particularities, which He has not Revealed. It seems Revealed,
That this Last Day, will be a Long Day; It will be a Day, of Public Hearing,
and all D oings of all People must be called out; Cunctaque Cunctorum Cunctis
Arca^a patcbunt,


So that things will not be Hastily Huddled, and Suddenly Shuffled over Yea, It
seems, Revealed, That the Morning of This famous Day, will take up at least a
Thousand Years, wherein our Lord will be managing His Davidical Kingdom, with a
New Heaven and a New Earth wherein shall dwell Righteousness, and Reigning
before His Ancient People Gloriously; at the Close whereof it seems to some
that. The Rest of the Dead Live again, and all the Dead Small and Great stand
before God The Hour, when it shall be Commended, and the Spot, where it shall
be Chiefly managed, seem not Revealed; nor a thousand things more, that concern
the proceedings of the Day. But whatever may be yet Unrevealed, it is
abundantly. Plain and Sure unto us, That the Son of man shall come in the Glory
of (...) (...) there, with His Angels, and then, He shall Reward every man
According to his Works. This is Revealed, and it is a Damnable Things to
Cherish any D oubt of This, That we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
the Lord Jesus Christ.

S. 3. The Judgment of the Great Day, Or, a Day, wherein all men shall be
Raised and Changed into a State of Immortality, and appear before the Son of
Man within the Bounds of our Air, to be Judged according unto what they Did,
before they Died; This is a thing which the People of God in all Ages, have
given their Assent unto. Even in Old Times, long, before the Flood, the Church
of God, made this an Article of their Creed. We have some short Notes of what
was delivered by the venerable Enoch about it, so long ago, in Jude 14. Behold,
the Lord comes, to Execute Judgment (...) (...) Yea, This war was a main
Controversy, between the Antediluvian Saints, and the Impious, impure
Generation of Atheists, then upon the Stage. The Godly did Assert, There shall
be a Day of Judgment, but the profane did with Hard Speeches, Deride and
Explode the Belief of that awful Truth. We read in Genesis 4. 8. Cain Spoke to
Abel his Brother; the Hebrew Bibles usually leave a Blank at the end of this
clause; and the ancient Jewish Targums, presume to put in the Discourse which
they had; they say, that the Quarrel between Cain and Abel was upon this point;
Abel said, There is to be a Day of Judgment, and there is a Judge, and there
shall be another World, and the Godly shall be Rewarded, and the Wicked
Punished. But Cain said, There is no such Thing; and as the Targum of I. Ben
Uzz^el adds, Et Prop^er ^arum Re^um Causant Contendebant Super Facies Agri. and
methinks, the Apostle in the Beginning of his Eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews,
may seem to Countenance this Tradition. It seem as if Abraham also, saw this
Day afar off; inasmuch as there are those who put his Plea for Sodom, into this
English in Genesis 1825. Will not the Judge of all the Earth, Execute Judgment
(...) q d. Lord, Thou do intend hereafter, to appear for a Judgment upon all
the World, in such Flames of Devouring Fire as thou art now going to destroy
this miserable Place withal; be Entreated therefore to spare these Towns, until
that Revolution come. Indeed all Christians have always Agreed in this
Acknowledgment, long before, as well as ever since the Days of Job, I know
that my Redeemer Lives, and that He shall stand at the Latter Day upon the
Earth; and though Worms Destroy this Body, yet in my Flesh I shall see God. And
even in that Confession of Faith, which the Jews themselves at this Day
embrace, their Eleventh Fundamental Article is, the Eternal Judgment.

To what the People of God, have thus Received as the Faith delivered unto the
Saints, they have had the Scriptures of God, most abundantly given their
Infallible Testimony. There is hardly any one part of the Old Testament, which
has not Considerable Glances at the Day of Judgment; But in the New Testament,
it is yet more plentifully insisted on. Very many of the Sermons Preached by
our Lord Jesus Christ, and all the Letters written by His Apostles, do set the
Day of Judgment before our Eyes. Yea, not only the Approach, but also the
Process of this wonderful Day, is diverse times Expressed in these Lively
Oracles. The Holy Spirit of God, has Chosen to make one of the Last Clauses in
the Bible, an Admonition unto us hereabout; the very last Lines of the last
Advice we have had from Heaven, are to this purpose, The Lord Jesus Christ will
shortly come to Judge the World. And with the Assertions of Scripture,
concerning this matter, the Apostle in a certain place tells us, the Accusings
and the Excusings of Conscience, do join their Testimony thereunto. The Verdict
of Conscience upon the Sinner is, as Tertullian calls it; Futuri Judic
Prejudicium; a presage of a future Judgment. It is true, the Dim Rush C^^^e,
which the Heathen had in their Notions about the Burning and the Judging of the
World, might be much lighted, at the Lamp of the Israeli^^sh Sanctuary. But yet
mere Natural Conscience, did use to warn the Rudest Pagans, of a Judgment,
which God will at Last bring mankind into. Hence Felix the Governor, before
Paul the Prisoner, Trembles at the Tidings of a Judgment to come; he had a
Preacher in his Bosom, that gave him a terrible Premonition of it. The very
proceedings of the Lact Judgment are antedated in our Consciences; and the
Triumphs of Conscience upon our Well-doing, the Horrors of Conscience upon our
Wickedness, the Inferences of Conscience from the Intricate Things every Day
happening in the World, are so many most penetrating Intimations of that
Judgment, wherein we are to stand before the Lord. Now the certainty of that
Notable Day, being a thing as clear and sure as Day it self, it becomes us to
silence all the Ca^ils of Carnal Reason, against any of its Unfathomable
Circumstances, (...) a Faith acquiescing in this Assurance of it, Thus says
the Lord. Indeed; what Paul says, about the first of the Transactions belonging
to this Day of the Lord, may I say about the whole Assayr of the Day, Why
should it be Thought a thing Incredible with you? All the Cavils which our
Unbelief can make against this Word of God, are Sufficiently and Eternally
taken off, with Demanding, Is any thing too hard for the Lord? But some of the
Cavils, that have seemed Speclous, will upon Second Thoughts be found so A^urd,
that even Common sense it self would his^ at them. Such is that Objection,
Where will their be-room for such a Vast Multitude as Adam, with all his
Children? The whole surface of the Earth could not hold them all? Ridiculous
Exception! Allow that this World should Last no less than Ten-Thousand ^oars,
which it will not; Allow that there are at once alive a Thousand Millions of
men, which there are not; Allow all these to march off every Fifty years, with
a New Generation rising up in their stead; and allow each of these Individuals
a place Five so^t Square to stand upon. I think these are Fair Allowances. I
would now pray the Objector, If he have any skill at A^ is home^ick, to
Compute, Whether a Spot of Ground, much less than England, which contains
perhaps about Thirty Millions of Acres, but about a Thousandth Part of the
Terraqueous Glob, and about the Three Hundred thirty third part of the
Habitable Earth, would not hold them all. I say then, we have something else to
do, than to Cavil, the unexceptionable Doctrine of the ^ast Judgment; it is our
Interest and business to Improve, it, with deep Im^^^ons thereof upon our Souls.

(...) Of such an Aspect are all things in the Day of Judgment, as (...) the
Apostle might well call it, The Terror of the Lord. But methinks, there is
nothing that-gives more Dread unto a Soul awakened out of Sinful Slumbers, than
that ETERNITY, wherein this Day Expires; that Eternal issue, that Eternal
Event, which depends upon the Day. The last Judgment sixes the Children of men,
like so many Rocks, in the Ocean of Eternity. Men will then be Immortalized;
and their State of Weal or W^, will be so inwrought into the very Beings of
them, that Immortal Things may as easily cease to Be, as for a Righteous or
Wicked man to pass into another State, than what he is then Confirmed in. It Is a
Passage in that Memorable and Perhaps Historical Parable, which decribes the
State of men, in the other World, that after this Day, men have, A Great Guilf
fixed, unto them; there is by the Decree of God, such a Vast Pit, about the
Children of men, that they cannot pass out of the State wherein they are: The
Nature of things will then (...) that they be Unalterable; the Children of men,
will then be most Immediately Siezed, either by the Goodness or by the Justice
of God; and because (...) God Himself Changes not, there (...) state of men
becomes then (...); nor will it stand with the Wisdom of the most High, to
alter the Sentence then Pronounced about the State of Weal or Woe, which will
then belong unto us. At the Day of Judgment, all Righteous men shall be
adjudg'd unto a State of Eternal Happiness. It Is (...) Life Eternal, us an
Eternal Salvation, it is an Eternal Inheritance, it is an Everlasting Habitation,
and they are Pleasures for ever more, of which the Believer shall be made
Partaker. After he has been in the mansions of the Blessed, as many Millions
of Ages as there are Sunbeams in the Universe, he will-still continue there.
The stately Pillars in SolomonsTemple, were thence removed; but the Believer
shall now become a Pillar in the Temple of his God; from whence he shall no
sooner go out, than the Temple it self (...) all Tumble down. A Devout Person
at a Feast, said well, In Heaven there is Good Cheer, and Good Company; and so
there is here: but in (...) there is no Taking away. The (...) (...) ^^soctions
of the Believer, will (...) disquieted with such a Thought as this, At the Lo^^
(...), these things will have an end. God will not Repent of the Love which He
has freely set upon him; nor will Christ ever Suffer one of His own Members to
be Plucked away. But at the Day of Judgment, all Wicked men shall be adjudg'd
unto a State of Eternal Misery. It Is a Worm which Dies not, and a Fire which is
not Quenched, wherewithal the Sinner shall be Cr^ciated; It is an Eternal
Damnation, and it is an Everlasting Destruction. Suppose an leap of as many
Little Poppey-seeds, as according to the old Ptolemaick System, would fill the
whole Machin of the World, and no more than one of them in a Thousand years
fetched away, but the sinner in Anguish till the heap were all wasted so;
behold, and be amazed! All this Long while would be but as a Drop to the Ocean,
compared with that, Forever! that horrible Forever! whereto the T^^ments of the
Damned shall be ^^^ened. Fifty two Ciphers, and One ^^gure at the Head of them,
would Comprehend, as the Learned and Noble, Otto de Gu^rick affirms it, the
Number of the Little Poppey-seeds^ in the prodigious Heap, newly mentioned. But
I say then, suppose a Scroll as large as the Starry Heaven it self, all filled
with Figures of Nine; and yet so many Myriads of Ages, as would be therein
deciphered, are Nothing to that Endless Duration, which the Torments of the
Damned shall be made Exquisite withal. It may be said unto the sinner, Are not
thine Iniquities Infinite? A Sin Committed against an Infinite God, Exposes, a
man unto an Infinite Wrath. The sinner makes himself a prey to an Infinite
Vengeance; and the Exercises of that Vengeance must be Infinite, or they bear
no Proportion to the Desert of the sinner; now, they cannot be Infinite for the
Degree of them: of such the sinner would be Incapable; so then, they must be
Infinite for the Durance of them; they must abide World without End. Lord, what
Rocks are our (...), that they do no more Tremble a^ tho (...) of such an
ETERNAL JUDGMENT.

^. ^. To be Seriously, constantly, Vigorously Preparing for the Day of
Judgment, is indeed, The thing which our Hand finds to Do; and, O that (...)
may do it with our Might! Now it is our Cordial Closure with the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Consent of our Souls to the Gospel-way of Salvation, by Him, in
the New Covenant Exhibited, which is the Preparation, whereby alone, we may be
Ready for the Terrible Day. It was the study and the Desire of the Apostle, O
that I may be found in Him! We are to give our selves unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, as unto our Prophet, and our Priest, and our King for ever; and now
before Him, Judge our selves, for all our Sins, from which we would have Him to
save us. Our Judge will then become our Friend; and we shall be safe in the
Day, that shall Burn like an Oven, and Consume all the Wicked of the Earth.
When the Watery Blood, overwhelmed the old World, O how many Wishes had people
then, for, An (...) (...) A^k! to Shelter them? At the Day of Judgment there
will be, what the Ancients called, a Diluvium Ignis, or, Fiery Blood, upon the
World; and O what a rate, will, A Christ! A Christ! be then Esteemed at? May we
Now make sure of Him, by Faith in Him! If once that were done, we might, (...)f
before the Lord, for He comes, He comes to Judge the Earth. Suppose that before
to Morrow Morning, the Lord Jesus Christ should set the World on a Light Fire,
and Melt the Pillars of Heaven, with the Brightness of His Appearing; Suppose
that we should, awaking at the next Midnight, hear such fearful and rattling
Thunder claps, and see such hideous flashes of Lightning, as made Mount Sinai
shake at the Giving of the Law; yet our Hearts might even Leap with Joy within
us, at it, as John did within his Mother, when Jesus came into the room. Only,
when I hat is done, we are to Remember, that our Faith will have this Happy
Symptom, to Justify it, That it will cause us to Abound in the Works of the
Lord. May (...) then by a Spirit of Foresight Consider, how Comfortable in the
Day of Judgment it will be unto us, to Look back and say, I once made it my
Care, to be every Day, all the Day long at Work for God; And, When the Lord put
His Talents into my Hands, I husbanded them unto the best Advantage that I
could; And, Here can I in this Great Assembly, point at Multitudes of Persons,
to whom I was not Unserviceable, when I had my Opportunities! And may we Do
Accordingly. There will be a Day of Judgment; and the Plain Deduction from it
is, What manner of Persons, ought we to be, in all Holy Conversation, and
Godliness!

S. 6. It Is to be added, That some of the most hopeful Preparations for the Day
of Judgment, would be attained in our Solemn Anticipations of that most Great
and Notable Day of the Lord. Let us before hand Act over the Day of Judgment;
not in a Play, Like those Germans, who turned the parable of the Virgins into a
Comedy, whereat a Prints then present, fell into an Astonishment that
immediately ended his Days, but by Seriously bringing our selves Now to such
Trials as will then be passed upon us. It Is among the Gracles of God, in I Cor.
11. 31. If we would Judge our selves, we should not be Judged; and surely, if
we would now proceed Against our selves, with a most Exact, and Humble Judgment
upon our own Miscarriages, it would be the way for us to stand, in the Day when
the Lord shall Mark Iniquities. If we are nor Christians, of Lean Souls within
us, we sometimes do set a part our Days, for Fasting with Prayer before the
Lord; and thus we do sometimes more particularly, when we are Perfuming of our
selves for our Approches to the Supper of the Great King; now, let such Days,
be so many little Days of Judgment with us all. On such a Day, let us Examine
out selves, by all the Ten Commandments of our God, and among other Things; Let
us be Inquisitive,

I. Have I not Grievously Forgotten the God that made me? And given unto the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, the Homage, which is due to Him alone? Or let
Creatures have the Affection, the Obedience, and the Dependence, which He alone
may lay claim unto?

II. Have I not shamefully Neglected the Institutions wherein the Lord Jesus
Christ has taught me to mentain Communion with Him? And Humoured the
Superstitions of a Vain Conversation?

III. Have I not Irreverently Treated the Names, Attributes, Words; Works, and
Ordinances, whereby the Almighty God makes Himself known unto us? And been
without awful Apprehensions of His Majesty, under His Various Disconsations?

IV. Have I not been Carnal, Careloss. Weary, in the Ordinary Sabbaths of God?
and been Indisposed unto the Extraordinary ones?

V. Have I not been Perverse and Haughty toward my Superiors; Unkind and
Foolish toward my Inferiors? Envious toward my Equals? and miserably Solfish
in my Conduct of myself?

VI. Have I not impaired my own Health by Intemperancies? or been toward
others, Passionate, Revengeful, and Contentious?

VII. Have I not been Unchaste, in my Acts, my Thoughts, my Words; (...) or been
a Companion of the Fools, that are so?

VIII. Have I not by Frand or Fore wronged my Neighbor? nor been too Prodigal
when I should not have spent; but when I should have spent, then too Niggardly?

IX. Have I not uttered, or somen^ed, what has been Contrary unto Truth's nor
given Countenance to a False Report?

X. Have I not been Discontent with my own Condition? or, harbored in my Heart
a Roving and a C^aving Lust, after an undue Alteration of it?

XI. Have not I despised the Offers of the Lord Jesus in the New Covenant, and
the Wonderful Provision therein made for Unhappy Sinners? And permitted my
(...) Affayrs to keep me at a Distance from the Lord Redeemer, who has been
Waiting to give me, Repentance and Remission of Sins?

XII. Is not the Fountain of all these Bitter and Cursed Streams, the Corrupt
Nature which I have derived from my first Parents; a Nature, filled with a
depraved Prejudice against what is, Holy, and just, and Good?

Upon the Discovery of our Guilt in These, and such Articles, Let us now Judge
our selves as Worthy of Everlasting Destr^otion from the Presence of the Lord.
And if the Judgment, which we now pass upon our selves, be attended with the
Self Ab^orrencies, and SelfCondemnations, and New-Resolutions, of a true
Repentance, it will Prevent our coming under the like Judgment on the Day of
our Appearance before the most High Tribunal. But indeed, the Evening of Every
Day is also (...) be reckoned a fit Opportunity for us, to call our selves unto
an Account about our whole Behaviors in the Day; it becomes us with
Self-Judging Hearts, every Night before we Sleep, to make a Process, like what
would be in the Day of Judgment; and this as not knowing, but that before we
Wake out of that Sleep, a (...) away to Judgment! may Surprise, (...) Nightly
Recollections have been Commended by Sob^r Pagans, and should not be Omitted by
Pious Christians, but, when we have Considered, What has been Gods Providence
toward any self in the foregoing Day! We may do well also to Consider, if What
has been thy Behavior toward God, in the Day? We may now particularly take
an Account.

Q. 1. Have I Loved this Day, under a Dec^^ sense of Mortality and Eternity?

Q. 2. Have I Devoutly head the (...) God this Day; and Seriously souls so
(...) Face of God, both in my Retirement, and with my Family?

Q. 3. Have I had many Ejaculations this Day, both in a way of Petition, and in
a way of Thanksgiving unto God?

Q. 4. Have I had most affectionate Meditations upon Heavenly Things this Day;
and have I made Earthly Things to occasion some of my Profitable Reflections?

Q. 5. Have I been careful of my Discourse this Day, and Spoken with a Tongue
B^^died by the Fear of the Lord?

Q. 6. Have I been Diligent in my Calling this Day, and avoided all Needless
Expense of my Precious and Golden Minutes, in Diversions?

Q. 7. Have I this Day Endeavored all Usefulness unto those to whom I am
Re^^ted, or with whom I have been Concerned?

Q. 8. Have I this Day Controlled and Conquered my Master Sin? and has my
Watchfulness issued in my Victory over my own Iniquity?

Q. 9. Am I in a sit State and Frame to appear before the Judgment Seat of God,
if I should before To Morrow Mornning be Sum^mned thereunto? And therefore, Do
I still choose the Great God a^ my best Good, and my last End: and the Lord
Jusus Christ, as my Prophet, my Priest, my King? And is it my Desire to be
Employed as a Witness for His Truths and Ways for ever?

Did we not let any Day pass us without such Representations of the Last Day
unto our minds, we should be Always Ready. Reader, let us Aspire after such a
Continual Readiness!

S. 7. But none of the least Exercises in our Preparation for the Day of
Judgment, would be our Meditation of it; Or, Our Looking for the Glorious
Appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ. He was an Holy man, among the Ancient^^
who could say, Wherever I am, and Whatever I do, Methinks I have the Sound of
the Last Trumpet in my Ears, ARISE YE DEAD, AND COME TO JUDGMENT. We should
Labor to get a Proper and a Lively Character of the Day, when God shall Judge
the Secrets of men; and often Raise it in our minds. It was said, Woe to them
that put far away the Evil Day. Truly, The Day of Judgment will be an Evil day
indeed, unto them that put it far away. Thoughts upon the Day of Judgment,
should continually Lodge in our Hearts; and however we are employed we should
think, What shall I do, when God rises up? and when He Visits, what shall I
answer Him?

Now for the Assistence and Nourishment of our Private Meditations upon, The
Day of God, we are happily Supplied with the Published Meditations of many
Worthy Pious Learned Writers, upon that Important Subject; and I pray, that we
may not be Unthankful, or Unfruitful under such Advantages. The Carnal Jews,
when they Read the Book of Ecclesiast^es, have the ^^st Verse but one [which
has in it, Fear God and keep His Commandments.] Printed over again, it the
Close of all, because they would not have the Remembrance and Impression of the
Last Verse [which has in it, God shall bring every Work into Judgment] to be
too strong upon them; whereas if men would Think more of the Latter, they would
probably Do more of the former. God forbid, that we should any of us have any
Indisposition to such Meditations on the Day of Judgment, as are Laid before
us, in the Books of some that are Longing for the Day. Dear New England! Thy
Little Presses too, do now afford more than two or three Savoury Treatises upon
the Day, which will not bundle such Books for the (...) that shall then Burn up
the Hay and Stubble, of Innumerable Volumns; No, Such are some of the Books
that shall be Opened for a Witness against Impenitents I In thee, is Reprinted
the Zealous Thomas Vincents Discourse, On our Lords certain and sudden
Appearance to Judgment. In thee, is Printed, a Sermon on, The Day of J udgment,
whose Author is the Father of him that now addresses thee. In thee, is now
Printed, the Reverend ^^muel Lee's, Assize-Sermon, of (...) to the Great D ay
of J udgment; (...) among us, as his Mantle, by that (...) when he went away
for Europe. Th^^ besides other Books, h^^ New England had, for the Loudenine of
that (...) night Cry among us, Behold, the (...) gr^^m comes. And indeed if
upon, (...) passing away of the second Woe, the Third comes quickly, which
brings on, The Time of the D ead, that they should be J udged, we that now see
the Second Woe coming a pace unto its Period, should co^nt no Awakenings too
many, to rowse us out of that profound Sleep, wherein the World shall be fast,
When the Son of man comes. I am verily persuaded, The J udge is at the D oor; I
do without any hesitation venture to say, The Great D ay of the Lord is Near,
it is Near, and it hastens Greatly. O That our Minds may be as deeply Engaged
in Thinking on the Second coming of our Lord, as the Saints of old were in
Thinking of His First; and that the Books by which we may Understand, much of
what concerns that matter, may have a due Entertainment and Efficacy with us. A
Person of some Quality having Wasted much Time, at Unlawful Games, could not
(...) the Night following, and mentioned ^^to an Inquisitive Friend, the Ground
(...) it; Yesterday casting my Eye into a (...) that I saw open, I read the
Word ETERNITY, and this Word has broke (...) very Heart within me. Truly, we
that have so many Books about, ETERNAL JUDGMENT, have our Hearts harder than
the Nether Millstone, if at the sight of that Word, ETERNAL JUDGMENT they do not
break. But it is unto the God of Grace, that we are now to bow our Knees, with
Petitions for, Mercy in the Day of the Lord.

COTTON MATHER.

A SUMMONS Or WARNING to the Great Day of JUDGMENT, In a SERMON. Preached at
the Assizes at Bristol in New England October. 7. 1687. now somewhat Amplified
and Fitted to the Service of others.

Luke 21. 36. Watch and Pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to Escape
all those things, that shall come to pass and to stand (...) the Son of man.
A.kempts de Imit. Christi. 1. I. c. Vere non (...) duo gaudia habere: hic (...)
in m^ndo and postea regnare cum Christi. Verily thou can not expect two
Joys: To be solaced in this World and Afterward to Reign with Christ. By
SAMUEL LEE. M.A. and sometimes Fellow of Wadham Coll. in Oxon.

BOSTON, Printed by B. Green, for N. Buttolph, at the Corner of Gutteridg's
Coffee-House. 1692. Price Bound (...).

THE EPISTLE
To the Worthy and Pious Auditory; before whom this Subject was treated upon.
Grace and Peace in Christ Jesus our Lord.
WHereas by the Call and Invitation of some of your very much Honored and
Respected Society, this Serious, Summons to the, great day of Judgment; was
proclaimed in your Ears, at, Bristol, near Mount Hope in New England, at the
Assize, there held, on Friday October.7. 1687. Being also moved to the
Publication thereof, I do here humbly present it under divine Protection and
Blessing to your Candid Acceptance and Defense, who sometime Composed the
quire of a most attentive, benign and solemn Audience in the time of its
delivery.

Honorable and Beloved, As these Papers tend (with your Kind leave) to
re^inkindle the the memorial of that days Soul awakening Subject: so let me (
I pray in this proem) (...) Son.
beg you to ruminate on a saying of an Eminent Divine at Bury a Town of great
note in Suffolk of old England [That Sermons are never done, till they are
Done] and let me add, If never Done, the hearers are undone for ever.
Especially in such weighty and momentous Points as these, about the formidable
day of Judgment.

The tears of Auditors, said Jerome (as I.M.) are the Jewels of Preachers; and
if Sincere, Presage a Crown of Eternal joys to both. There are among many
others in Divinity, three illustrious Doctrines. (1.) Justification by Faith in
Christ alone (2.) Sanctification by the Spirit. (3.) Resurrection to Glory. In
whose Compass and Bosom was our present Subject about the Universal Judgment.
As to which, Give me leave to present three things, and Close with the
Apostolical Prayer.

1. State your own Eternal State, (...)
while yet in the State of this Life. Matter not the day or Censures of man's
Judgment. I Cor.4.3.
They Will Fluctuate in their love as the wind of their Passions, Interests and
Envious or false informations turns the fane of their Constructions if they are
not both wise and godly. And sometimes hastily Carp your Innocence as if they
had forgotten Plutarch and S^necas memorials about natures Gal. 6.1.
gift of two Ears before they determine matters in question: not pondering as
they ought, in the Spirit of meekness the many Fentations Jam. 3.2,
the best of men are incident to, their own frequent infirmities and others
proud and invidious detractions and your own virtuous and Slander. Shaming
Apologies. Taking little heed to the Fifteenth Psalm, and how unworthily these
blast others usefulness and Exodus 3. ^.
lay up Prove.1 17, 18. 23.
Scourges for their own Consciences in the day when God shall visit them and
give their abused Friends, the greatest favor at last, when his Neighbor
Searches him out; and then thy Brothers Mo^e may swell to a Boam in thine eye,
by the rubbing of others inflamed Censures upon thee, when thy turn comes. We
all need Contrition, Confession, and Pardon.

2. II.
Make Peace with God. betimes times and Expedite it. The sands of times hour
Glass never stop, and are more precious then the golden ones of Tagus. Do this
work seasonably, sincerely, and speedily, to frustrate the trouble of the New
Repentance and prevent the divine Judgment. Delay not, lest Tardy neglects
quicken Soul-Confounding horrors, 2 Cor. 11. 31, 32.
and Sudden Wracks of Conscience will draw out the funeral Song of Ep^metheus,
O non puturam; Prove. 26^ 19.
or that of the Fool in Solomon. Was I not in j^st? and cry out in earnest
concerning laughter; Eccl. 2. 2.
that it is mad, and of mirth What does it? but as the Crackling of thorns
under a Pot: whose Pricklessly in his Eyes, and leave him in utter darkness,
wringing his hands in the blood of his heart, and streaming out bitter groans,
that he did not think the Evening Shadows were so nigh. O Sirs, this tremendous
work cries aloud for the greatest deliberation, the swiftest Execution, and
perseverance without end. O Blessed Lord, help us out of the woeful T^ntations
and Intricate Labyrinths of delay, AEsop.
lest when Death comes indeed, as in the ancient Apologue, it prove an other
guess work than most are now aware of; You 'I stand in need of more then all
your Graces, Experiences, Reliances and Restaurations out of deep and dark
desertions. Yea and all little Enough and will prove scarce able to life you
out of the dungeon of terror: unless the gracious Supplies of the Spirit come
in upon a Spring tide from Heaven, and lift up the Ark of Conscience above the
flood gates and Rocks of Confusion.

3. Labor to provide against III.
the formidable Thunders of Death, that the Sun-shines of the Evidences of
glory may brighten the dark passages of the Grave. The beauty of grace first
darted into thy Breast, in a beam from the Eye of the Electing Love of God, and
shall never cease the shining and warming influences till like new Stars that
at last Concenter all their motions in the Sun: so shall the rays of thy joys
be inbosomed in the Eternal Love of God. When thou have done this work, which
the Father has given thee to do: John 8. 2^
then that TO PHOBEROTATON, Aristotle's grand King of Terrors, shall sling down
his Crown with amazement at the foot of Christ: Heb. 3. 1. Cor. 1. 55, 57.
and that Dragon: who has the power of death shall himself be stung to Death
by the Cross of Christ, first upon his illustrious Tomb at Mount Golgotha; or
like the standard of Constantine, carrying TO SEMEION, the Laharum or sign of
the S on-of^ man, Mat. 24. 3^.
set upon the back bone of the Serpent, as you may see it on the Reverse of
that Emperors Coin. Spelman. As^il^gin. P. 20. El. Lord. 1654 (...) uptem.
Yea and all holy Christians are like the Roman D^aconiferi, the Dragoniers of
the ancient Empire, carrying the Exuv^e or case of the old Serpent in triumph,
and yielding up their Spirits into the hands of a most faithful Creator: who
once formed us, and will shortly as faithfully Redeem us out of the dust: and
inform us a new with the same Immortal Souls, to inherit the same Body in a
State of Immortality, to Coinhabit the Temple of Heaven in an immortal State of
Glory, ever beginning: and never ending. When the day of the last Redemption,
that great day of the feast; when the ruddy morning shall Climb the Eastern
hills of Mount Olivet with its pleasant Blushes to cure all the dark Solitudes
and Sollicitudes of this Valley of Dragons, and our Blessed Redeemer standing
upon Mount Zion, Zech. 13. ^.
shall proclaim to all His Saints: Lift up your Heads, for the day of your
final Redemption is come. Lets end with that apprecation of holy Paul. Heb. 13.
20,21.
[ Now the God of Peace that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepard of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Make
you perfect in every good Work, to do his will, working in you that which is
well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and
ever, Amen.]

Yours in Gospel Service, SAMUEL LEE.

A SUMMONS or WARNING to the Great DAY of JUDGMENT.
Revelation. 20. 12. On Friday October. 7. 1687. At Brist^^ by Mo^^ Ho^e Ne^^^^
And I saw the Dead, Small and Great, stand before God: and the Books were
opened: and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life: and the Dead
were Judged out of those things which were Written in the Books, according to
their Works.
THE Preceding Ver^ presents this Evangelical Prophet, with a Visionary scene
Preparatory to the Day of Judgment: and here in the Text, we have a^ (...)
further Procedure in the amazing Concernments of that tremendous Session^ where
in may be observed.

1. I.
The Apostles place or station in the He of Patmo: (now Patina) near the Shore
of the AEgean Sea, Rev. 13. 1.
looking Eastward toward Ephesus and Jerusalem; Zech. 14. 4.
as you may suppose: Act. 1. (...)
because our Lord is represented standing upon Mount Olivet in that day. Where
(in Speculo Visionis) in a Visionary Glass, he beholds with great attention
what the Angel presented to him.

2. The Several Persons and things Exhibited to his strict Observation; which I
may properly Conjoyn together under several Heads, and therein.

I. We have first the Character, or Denomination of the Persons attending; set
forth under the style of the D^ad: that is, not such as were now really Dead in
this great Morning of the Resurrection; but which very lately had been involved
in the state of the dead: Verse. 13.
but now raised out of their dolesome Graves, and had newly Shaken off the
Chains of Rottenness, and some come Dropping out of the stormy Seas and
hastening with more shaking horror, to a yet more direful Shipwreck. Death and
Hell must give up all their dead, at the formidable Summons of that Archangels
Trumpet. 1. Cor. 1^. 52.
By Hell or Hades we understand (under a metony my) the Souls of men delivered
out of their invisible State (under the manute^ency of divine power) to the
reinvested with their Bodies, and to appear at this astonishing Bar^^ For so
the Greek Fathers understood by HADES q. AIDES the Souls A men in States
Separ^^^ according to that of Homer [POLLAS, D^^^THLA (...) MOUS PSUCHAS AIDI
PROIAPSEN] He dismissed many Valiant Souls, i.e. Persons into Hades.

II. Their various quality Both small and great; The Shortest Dwarfs cannot
Creep into so deep holds or corners; not the Blustering N^tmrods cannot R^ffle it
away in their Pride and Jollity; but every Soul must drag his PrisonChain into
this most Solemn, and Splendid presence. Nay the Small are named to come first,
to set forth the impossibility of their Exemption, and these meaner persons
must stand out before the great ones, that all may be see^ in their Proportion.
[ this I speak only by allusion] But to be fure, none shall Shuffle behind Noon
and abscond from that Meridian Glory, or be Veiled from this all Searching Eye:
And the all-revenging hand of God. The Summoners and Apparitors of all these
inferior Courts, must there appear and qu^ver and tremble for Summoning of Gods
Saints here upon Earth. I'ts appointed for all to die, and then to Judgment.
Heb. 9. 27.
We must all stand at the dreadful Tribunal Seat of Jesus Christ. Where Judges
themselves divested of all their formalities, like so many unhappy Felixes will
Glatter their knees together, at the MEAN TEKEL, Den. 5. 25.
graven upon the Crystal Walls of the Caelestial Firmament; and glad men,
could they but undergo (...) 11. 11.
such an Earthly Sentence they passed upon in there is.

III. Observe their posture (...)
they must stand, Pro Tribunals before that adamantine Bar, let down before
them. Romans 14. 10.
They have little Stomach to come too their, no rude audacious Crowding into
the presence of that most awful Judge. There will be but little pressing to
see, His Sovereign August Countenance, that shines brighter, then the Sun in
his greatest glory: but as forced by the Angelical Messengers; while they
continue Crying to the Deaf Mountains and the Rev. 6. (...)
Inflexible Recks to hide them from Him that Si^^eth on the Throne and from the
Wrath of the Lamb.

IV. The Ireful face of that most dreadful Judge; before whom the Heavens all
on a light flame shall Crackle like a Parchment Scrol and fly away: (...) Pet.
3. ^1, 12.
when Christ the Son of God and God man, that Impartial Judge of quick and
(...), from whom there is no appeal, shall put on an other guess purple Robe to
judge (...) 25. 17.
Pontions Pilate and Herod, and (...) man of War, that mocked Luk 23. 11.
Him in the day of His Humiliation. This will be a day of horror to all those
Wretches also, that mocked and steered at Gods Messengers, when they denounced
against them the Judgments of the great day. Then comes out a Quo Warranto with
a witness, to Inquire what woeful work they made at Jerusalem: and who empowered
them to Jude 15.
Judge the Son of God, and to utter hard speeches, and commit ungodly deeds for
a trace of some thousands of years, without Control or Impeachment.

V. The Allegations, proofs and evidences produced out of the black Books and
bloody Registers of all Ages; which before were shut up and Sealed in Gods
Archiva, or treasure Chambers above, are now all opened and if they cannot Rev.
6. 20.
Read their Psalms of Mercy: there is no hope of Exile to a Paemus, or any
foreign Islands at that day, for they shall fl^^ away.

6.
VI. The final process [ and they were judged out of the things written in the
Books] whence there is no appeal, no recalling or reversion. There will be that
Positive and final Conclusion.

OBSERVATION.
Observe.
Most formidable and dreadful will be that great and general Day of Judgment.

It Is a Coming and hastening toward us. Nay it is near at hand. Jam. 5. 9.
The Judge is even at the Door. If you ask, how long. I Answer, He that was at
the Door in the Apostle James his time, may be now kept over the Threshold in
our da^es, and well forward in His Journey toward Mount Olivet; and ready to
ascend into the Seat of Judgment. (...) Besides, it is so near to (...)
Particular Person, ^^en (...) strides over the ^^ck Threshold of Death: that we
cannot certainly tell How little a moment it will seem from the time of his
Death to his Solemn appearance before Jesus Christ, and then 'twill indeed
determine the truth of that Scripture, that it is Heb. 1^ 31.
a fearful things to fall into the Hands of the Living God; and most dreadful
to all out of Christ at that day. Ephesians. 2. 12.
If without Christ, having been without God in this World, they shall like Dogs
be cast out of the Holy City, in the World to come, into a lake Burning with
Rev. 22. 15.
^are and Brimstone. Judicial days here, under the Sun are but like Pictures
and Stories, in hangings, and all Executions but like Painted Fire to this
great and terrible day of the Lord which will make all the Eccl. 3. 16, 17.
Russians quake like an Aspen lease. Those fools which now making a mock of
Sin. Prove. 14^ Act. 24. 26.
Those Careless Gallios and grave Felixes, that put off the hearing of this day
till another time: That allarm Trumpet will make your Ears to tingle above all
other, and will ye, will ye: up you must hasten to Judgment. There are three
things which Command into the inmost Chambers of your hearts, most dreadful,
most amazing thoughts, and high reverence with deepest astonishment. If so be,
ye fall into the Snare of Death, in a State unreconciled to God, and not purged
from your Scarlet Sins by the precious blood of Christ.

1. I
The infinitely glorious Majesty of the Judge.

2. II
The Exact rule of Procedure according to things found written in the Books
before the Judge.

3. III
The stupendous quality or property of this Judgment. Of which in order.

1. I
Let us call to mind with all Reverence and trembling the infinite Majesty of
the Judge who will then sit down upon the throne of Judgment. No less Person
than the Maker of Heaven and Earth; before whom all the Devils tremble, Verse.
(...)
and the Pillars of Heaven are astonished and confounded, the foundations of the
Earth flee away and Vanish into Smoke and nothing; at the fiery Breath of His
Nostrils: whose single Words Shrinks the Universe into less than the Shadow of
an Atom, at His pleasure. But let us here Remember, Isai. 40. q. 7.
we are not to Consider of this Almighty and Eternal Judge as God Essential
^onely; but more Personally, the Son of God, who comes with Ten Thousand of
His Saints Jude. 14, 15.
(that is) His Holy Angels, to Execute judgment, in that day for all the
Violent actions against His Church and People, or any of His Redeemed ones.

2. II
The several strict rules of Procedure according to the Various Books, all
lying patent before the Judge upon the Table: which are these following.

I. The Books of Creation and Providence; like two Volumns joined and bound up
together; wherein the distinct Successions of all Generations are delineated.
God knows all the Stars of Heaven, and all the Lamps of the Intellectual
beings, by name. The genealogical stemmes of all persons are fairly written in
that Register, and he will call their bodies up out of their Graves, at that
day from the Rising to Setting Sun, Psalm 50. (...)
to meet their Souls, and to accept a new Animation from them. When the
El-Elohim-Jehovah as some gloss those Titles in the Fifteth Psalm, Isai. 27. 13.
that Powerful just, and merciful God will cause the great Dan. 12. 2.
Trumpet to sound and awaken all out of the dust of Death, and then God will
call thee to account for the abuse of every Limb, Psalm. 139 16.
and member written in that Venerable book.

II. The particular books of Record or Remembrance: which whether written by an
Empy^^an Pen drawn from a Seraphims Wing: I mean, whether the Holy Angels are
the Scribes and Recorders, is not revealed to us. Its true the Lord Himself,
Rev. 11. 19. and 22 6, 16. and 19, 9, 10. Psalm. 164. 4.
or they in His Name enjoin holy John to w^^^e, what they are Commanded to
dictate to him. Besides we find them registered as Presidents of Nations, and to
have the Guardianship of Saints, and Heb. 1^ 14.
to be Ministers of the Divine, Pleasure and of mighty influence in Slaying
God's and His Churches Enemies, and to manage the great turns and overturnings
of Kingdoms, That Is certain: as in the case of Egypt, Psalm. 78. 49.
when God sent evil Angels among them, that is, the Executioners of woeful and
evil Judgments among them: like as the Angelus Percussor, the smiting Angel may
be said to make Ezekiel. 9. 3.
a way for His wrath. Such instruments were used in Executing divine wrath
Psalm. 78. 50.
upon Sennacheribs army, and upon poor Jerusalem in her sad day, 2 King. ^9. 35.
and afterward in the destruction of Babylon, Ezekiel 9 3
when the Captain of the Lords army Marched before the Red and Zech. 1. (...)
Speckled Horses in Zachary's Visions. In like matters both as to Nations,
Citys, and Persons: we may conceive of things as in the Glass of a continued
Allegory: that there is a particular book for every Person in several cases:

1. There may be (I mean Allegorically) a dreadful black Book for every man's
Sins. And truly this is a matter of heavy concernment (that though it should
not be so Specifically, yet it is Equivalently and Eventually) that there is a
particular Book in the Court of Records in Heaven with thy name on the out
side, where every Sin of thine is written down with the blood of Dragons mixed
with the galls or Cruel Venom of Asps, Deuteronomy. 32. 33.
and durably as if with the point of of a Diamond upon a Rock. Jere. 17. 1.
Truly its all one, nay worse, then if so really: for it is writ in the memorials
of that tremendous Judge. For every Secret Sin is set down in the Light of His
Counten^nce, beyond all the Noctiluca's in Psalm. 90. 3.
the World. Every Secret is determined to Eccl. 12. 14.
come to Judgment. Ten times have the Children of Israel Murmured against Me,
Nur. 14. 22.
says the Lord: and so again, the Sacred Pages number up Six Captivities under
the Judges, answering to Six Judges (...) 10. 13.
several prevarications in the Worship of God. Petav. rationarie. P 84.
Isai.65.6.
It Is written before me, says the Lord by Isaiah, and I will recompense into
their Bosom. And so it is now, Ten times Drunk, such a man: Ten times Forsworn,
such another: Ten times, such a Proud Jezabel with her Painted Eyes, Strutting
in the Streets of Jerusalem: (...) him down, set her down. says God; Paint her
to the Life, that all the World may then behold her with Peacocks Feathers:
(...) King. 9. 30. Isa. 8.16.
and mincing, tinkling motions with, her feet. How should it strike as with a
Poisoned arrow to, the heart to think of these dreadful tradegies of that
terrible day.

^ 2. Men's Repentance sorrowful Sight and Actions are also (...) set down in
God, day book: and this I speak for the comfort of all humble Mourners in Zion.
The Confession of that Penitent Thief at Golgotha's Mount, Lord, Luke 24. 42.
Remember not in thy Kingdom. We never drop a sincere tear, but it drops
up-ward; Contrary to all other tears, it ascends up into Heaven, and Runs into
the Chrystall-Bottle upon the Shelfe, with thy name ingraver^ upon it, in
Letters of Gold: and it is often taken up, and Looked upon, to see how it fills.
Psalm 5.^.
Are they not in thy Bottle, says David, and in thy Book; But w^ to them that
have none. Every hearty Sigh, that Reeks e suleo pectoris, from the in most
Closets of thy Soul are Pencilled with Virami^^ion, under the bloody lines
streaming from the Cross of Life.

3. Men's gracious discourses and good-works, are all written in that Books When
terrious Persons ^oo but meet, and think upon the Name of the Lord in evil
times, and ^alkt often together. Mal. 3^. 16.
Every time you meet, every Heavenly thought, and every holy word you speak, is
written down. Nay all your Prayers and Alms deeds like those of Cornelius Act.
10.1.
go up in Remembrance before God. Every Penny you put into Gods Treasury; Nay
every Mite you give to Temple uses; as in the case of the poor Widows; Mark.
12.2^.
is put down in Gods Debt Book, and will be Converted into so many Pearls to
adorn, your Crown in Glory.

III. The Books of men's Consciences shall then all be laid open. Romans 2. ^^.10.
(...) Cor. 3. ^^.
Here men's thoughts Excuse or Accuse one another till that day, when God shall
Judge the Secrets of all men by Jesus Christ according to the Gospel Prouched
by Paul and let me tell you, that every faithful Sermon which you ^ear,
Consonant to the Word of God, will come up in Judgment as a Testimony against
you, if disobeyed: so that if our hearts Condemn us not, that is our
Conscience, I John. 4.17. I John. 3.20,21.
as to Irreverence, Negligence or Disobedience: we may have Confidence in the
Day of Judgment before God; who is greater then our hearts, and knows all
things: and this will give us, a holy freedom of Spirit in that Solemn time.
There will be no Shuffling Tricks, no False and Treacherous accounts, no
Tiffany Cheats, no FineSpun-slams, but all fly away like Spiders Webbs, before
a Beesome. The flaming Eyes in the Scepter of that day sees through all in a
moment.

IV. The Book of the Scriptures shall then be taken down, and the Parchment
Rolls all unfolded. The Acts For^nsia, the Public Commentaries; the Regula
Juries, the Institutes of the I am, Rom2.16.
and the Cannons of the Gospel shall be all produced for Conviction of Sinners.
All their iniquities written in that Book, mentioned by Jeremy, jere. 17.1.
with the point of a Diamond, or graven with an iron Pen, in focules or leases
of Lead, mentioned by Job; job 19. 24.25. Dan. 12.1. Zech. 14.4.
or in a Rock for the ever of this World: till our Redeemer stands upon the
Earth at mount Olivet at the latter day to Judge the World:

V. 5:
The particular and singular Book of Election, when all that are written in
that ivory Volumns, shall come forth and Dan.12.1;3. Rev.3.5.13,8. 1^.8,
Exodus.32.3^. Luke 10.20.
Shine as Stars for ever and ever. The Sheep of Christ's little Flock, that are
written in the Lambs Book of Life shall then pass under the rodaccount for the
Sanctuary of Glory. Nay God Himself is said to write down the names of those
Chosen Vessels that are ^^epared and sit^ed for Salvation. Psalm. 68.28. Phil.
4.3.
The names of the Holy Apostles and Saints are deciphered and set down in
Heaven. when others are written in the Dust, and shall be legible by the flames
of Hell.

And so much for the Second particular, the rules of Procedure and its branche.

In the Third Place we are to Consider the 3. ly
quality or property of this astonishing Judgment, in Five Particulars.

1. It Is most accurate and Critical Exactness, as to Equity and Commensuration
to Every ones actions be they good or bad. The Judge sits down in His Sella
Curnl^s, or seat of Judgment, Dr S^oughtons selicitas ultimiseculi. (...).
all of ivory or unspotted Alablafter, like the Sur^ when He Shines [in Libra]
among the Caelestial Balances, near the Milky way. The Eyes of Justice are
Covered with a Purple Mantle, no accepting the Person of any as to Earthly
dignities and distinations; but its Ears are with all diligence and Curiosity
attentive to the impending causes.

2. II.
Impartiality, in determining: Cuts off all demurrers and delays and gives
speedy dispatches, to persons of all Degrees. There will be no favoring of
Rich and Great men to sit down near the bench, as here among fellow Worms: nor
no pitying of a poor man in his cause from a seeming Comiseration to the mean
and Afflicted. Lev. 19.^^.
The dispensation of justice will be Equal to a tittle, no pleading Sub forma
pauperis at that day.

3. III.
Universality as to Comprehensivenes of both persons and times. All Ages, both
Sexes, all Qualities and degrees of men must make personal appearance without
any Proxy in this Doomsday Parliament: no Slye Excuses or writs of Error to
impeach, or turn by the gravity of that most awful judicature: no querks nor
tricks, nor juggling account shall Velum Pretendene, cast a mist before the
Sagacious inspection of that quick and all searching Judgment.

4. IV.
The Irresistible doom. There is no Subtle arguing, no wresting of the Text of
the Law, or the intentions of the Sacred Lawmakers. No pleading of old
Customs; or the Opinions of Reverend Ruffes here upon Earth. There is no
Versilingues Procuratores, no Tongue flexible Proctors, that have no strait
bone of Equity in their Tongues, but turns up and down like a Serpents, be the
cause good of bad; like the Counselor at Athens, that had [ bos in lingua] a
bag of Silver-oxen (a Coin so called) to hang upon their Tongues, and to tip
them with justice-perverting Eloquence. The cause will be stated in a moment.
The Universal Conscience, that Public notary stands by with flaming Eyes, and
makes instruments of Recognisance without any sees or private Audience. There Is
no Appeals to any Superior Court.

5. V.
The Eternity of its Issue. Either to be with our Blessed Lord Christ and His
Saints, Mat.25.^1.
or with the Devil and his Angels for ever. Ever! Oh dreadful Ever! Oh that
word of terror, that Shoots barbed Arrows, PHLOGOENTA BELEMNA, flaming darts
through the stoutest hearts of the Proudest Nimrods, in the World. Ever! Oh
irrevocable Doom! Of which lamentable Doom that poor Bird which appeared to the
Scholars in a garden, who were then Assemi^led (as I Remember) at the Council
of Constance Sang Melodiously: and then Cried out, O Eternity, Eternity,
Eternity, and then flew away.

But let us now retire to some Uses.

Use. 1. Use
Of Earnest Advice to all of you to Exercise your selves with deep
Consideration of the strictness of the Process, the Exactness and Inquisitions
of that Sacred Judge in the management of that dreadful day. The brightness of
the Sun in his highest Apogy is like Sackcloth, and his beams like streaming
Pitch to the amazing glory of that time. Oh that the Presentment or Fore
thoughts of that day might always press upon our hearts, to a Serious
Preparation for that appearance. If Jeroms Trumpet as to the advent of that day
did always sound in our Ears: we should be better Christians, and keep
Sabbaths more Holy, and hear with more Attention, and practice with more
Conscientious diligence, then we do: but we are drowned in Sensuality, Supine
Stupidity and negligence, till that day take us like Birds in an evil Snare.

Use. II. 2
But Secondly be Exhorted to an anxious and sedulous Care as to every Vain and
Idle Word. Crave daily pardon and beg strength and watchfulness against their
daily incursion. As to evil thoughts in duty, and as to any Omission Sins: Cry
out with that Holy man Bishop Usher: Lord forgive me my Sins of Omission. For
all these things without Pardoning, Purging and healing grace must come into
the golden Scale of that Critical Judgment. That Vain thought in one Scale, and
the golden weight of the Precept in the other Scale, and the balance Poised in
the hand of that most Holy and Righteous Judge [PAN ARGON REMA] q. AERGON.
Every Idle word, or thing, that is, Mat. 5.36.
whatever is not attended with some real Service to God, or benefit to man:
than cannot plead some useful Scope at the end of it: must be arrested and
brought to that Sacred touch stone. Eccl. 12.12.
Every Secret thing, that is, in the depth of the thoughts, must pass by the
Bar: ad limam revocari, be brought to the file, and to the Virgula censor^a, to
be Examined by the censure of divine justice. Rev. 21.27. and 22.19.
No person can enter within the Gates into the City; but must pass this fiery
Trual. Teque his ait, eripe flamis: Deliver thy self by Faith and Holiness,
from the dirt of these dreadful flames.

Use. III. Use. 3.
Remember, that this day may Quadamenus, in some sort, be said to be Placed
between time and Eternity. It Is set in internodio, in the very juncture, In
aequilibrio, in the very poise and center of that weighty concernment of
Eternity. As that day fixes: so all ends and determines. Joh. 14. 17. Eccl. 9.6.
Then shall the Sins in the bag, as Job speaks, be pulled our. Not to instance
in many; Then Envy shall cease; that blody Cain, that monster of humane
Consusions, Aril Rhet l. 2. c. 10. Plato in. Tim. R. Edic H. See h. Vol. 3. p.
27.
that speckled Viper must have its Specious Colored skin pulled off: when all
the Secret defamations, backbitings and slanderings of men better then
themselves, shall be brought to light. We shall then know perfectly, No Envy
does at any time befall a good man.
what ill aspected malevolent persons they were, that durst not endure the
luster of virtue, the faithfulness of Pious reprovers, the brightness of a Holy
Friends presence, without biting his heel like the old Serpent, and must now be
all Scanned and Sifted to the bottom, from, whence the base abuses of good men's
Credit have issued, spic from their Cankred mouths, must now appear in their
Venomous Colors in the light of Gods Countenance. Psalm 90.8.
All those and other Secret Enormityes must, stare the affrighted Consciences
of such Envious malignants in the face, before all the World; and gnaw their
Vitals with fresh Wounds to all Eternity.

Use. IV. Use.4.
Remember before thou set thy hand to any new affair: whether the Transaction
of it will stand in the Day of Judgment, with approbation. Eccl. 11. 9.
Rejoice O Young man in thy youth: let thy heart Cheer thee: Walk in the ways
of thy heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes: but Remember God will bring thee
to judgment, for all these things. Sing and Swagger, beat your fellow Servants,
Luke 12.46. Mat. 24.^9.
drink and be drunken, but Remember the Lord will come in an hour unlookt for
and cut you in pieces and divide your portion among Hypocrites, where weeping
and gnashing of teeth, for ever in a place that has no bottom; where is Fire
without light, and Shivering in the midst of burning. O Remember, thou must
come to Judgment.

Use. V. Use. 5.
Be sure thou be well acquainted, and get into favor with the Judge, that
shall sit upon the throne: and happy, O thrice happy man, If He give you a
promise to stand your Frined in that day: and shall plead with the Father on
your behalf: nay with Himself and His own most Blessed Bowels. To be assured,
that He dyed for you: and that your peace is made: before you die to nature,
that you may live to grace: and then you shall certainly live in glory. Heb.
7.25.
For this Son of God will ever Live to enterceed for you, who art one of the
most Blessed Creatures that ever were born, that has power given thee to
become one of the Adopted Sons of God, Joh. 1.12.
and stand before the Son of man in that joyful day. Thy Crimson Sins are all
washed away in His Crimson Blood, and shall never come into judgment: to shame
thee, much less to condemn thee.

Now give me, leave to Conclude with, a serious, though short paraenesis or
humble admonition of Exhortation, to Three Sorts of Persons. 1. To the Reverend
Judges themselves. 2. To the People present. 3. To the guilty Person here
arraigned before you, [for Murder]

I. (...)
As to you the Worthy and Reverend Judges, that are to sit in judgment before
the Lord this day: I shall not enlarge, but only present unto you, 2 Chronicles.
29.6.
what King Jehoshaphat gave in Charge to them from God, when he set them about
this work, City by City. [ Take heed what you do, Verse. 5.
for ye judge not for man but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment.
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you. Take heed and do it: for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of Persons, nor taking
of Gifts.

II. 2.
To you that are the People and auditors this day. Count it a great Mercy that
you have been preserved by Restraining or Sanctifing grace, not to stand in the
place of the nocent and so to become Obnoxious to the wholesome Laws and
Righteous Judgment of the Majestrate. Bless God for that Singular Mercy: If it
were not for Majestracy, that great Ordinance of God in the World, Jere. 9:8.
Psa.57.4. and 64.3.
men's tongues would bo like Poisoned Arrows shot forth, speaking deceit,
treating their Neighbor pepaceably with their mouths, and laying wait in
their hearts: 2 Samuel 23.7.
Some such Sons of Belial that a man cannot speak to them, they are so surly
and interrupting: and ought to be thrust away like thorns: If a man touch
them, he must be fenced with Iron and the staff of a Spear. I Sam. 25.17.
Men would prove Wolves and Vipers; Tigers, and Dragons mixed in one and the
same person, to each other. O Bless God for this great gift of Princes and
Judges to Rule the wicked and Enormous World, and to sway the Scepter of
Righteousness in the Earth. O Remember to speak Honorably of Rulers and
dignityes: Jude 8. Romans 13. 2 Pet. 2.10.
for they are Ordained of God for the Praise of them that do well; and Gods
Ministers and Avengers upon them that do Evil. Were it not for them, such as
are now but Secret Malicious backbiters, would soon prove Badgers, and bite
through the bone to the very heart. Have then a Special care of two Originating
Sins, that lead to many soul Enormities, that is, Pride and Envy: First in your
selves, that you be not tempted thereby to hurt others: and Secondly in others
that you do not hurt them. For wherever you see manifest Signatures and tokens
of these Sins lurking or putting out their forked tongues against others;
beware of them, they are Persons market of God: and always have graven upon
your breast that famous Emblem of a Righteous man. [ Quod non vis tibi, ne
feceris alters] Luke 6.3.^.
Do as you would be done by: It Is our Lords most golden Rule of Equity: Then
Judge your selves before God as to all infirmities, and otherwise insuperable
weaknesses: then fear not man's day: having presented your selves by Faith, as
Clothed with the Righteousness of Christ; 2 Cor. 10.
and in some sweet measure prepared for that Solemn appearance at His Tribunal.

III. 3.
A word or two also to the poor guily Person: which has Murdered her own
unlawful Infant: and so I Conclude.

As for thee, poor Creature! What was it that indeed, entangled, in flamed thee
to the Commission of these Sins against the Laws of God, the ^^ght of nature,
and the just Laws of the Land. I understand thus much from thee in the Prison;
that thy Parents were very negligent of thy Education, and so becamest a great
neglecter of Sabbaths and Sermons, and then fellest into the fellowship of
Lewd Companions, which may be a just warning to all others. All that I shall
say at present: because of the great Sorrow, remorse and Repentance which thou
have manifested be fore many witnesses, and I hope may prove Sincere: If thou
(...) from the horror, stain and shame (...) these thy Crying Sins, unto the
(...) precious blood of Jesus Christ, and layest hold upon it with a true,
though but a weak Faith: thou have (...) of Mercy in the blessed Book of God;
Manass^h, Mary Magdalen, and the Thief upon the Cross, to dispell the black and
dismal Cloud of despair: and to lead and encourage thee to hope in His Mercy;
Romans 14. 9.
To which I humbly and heartily Commed thee in the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
both of Dead and Living, AMEN.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX Containing only some Heads of Meditation, on the DAY OF JUDGMENT,
more largely and fully delivered in a Sermon Preached at Charlestown.
By the Reverend SAMUEL LEE.
On Math. 25. 6. At Midnight there was a (...)
THE Scope of a Parable (...) best Expositor of it. The Design of this is to
Express, The Suddenness of our Lords Advent, and the Supidity and Security of
the World with reference thereto.

Oberve, Blessed Christians, Three Things,

FIRST. A dolorous Exclamation, with the dismal season of it.

The out cry here, is like that of drowning Mariners, or routed Soldiers.

SECONDLY. The matter of the Exclamation thus amazing, which causes all the
great Hectors, and Herod's, and Belshazzars of the World, to tremble.

Yet it is not, Behold, the Judge Comes! -- but, -- the Bridegroom, the
Delight of our Souls.

It Is good Advice, Are you Ready! Dr. Usher used to say unto some Persons of
Quality. Madam, Be ready, Be ready.

THIRDLY. A Command unto all, Especially the Virgins, Go out to meet Aim. Even
Hypocrites count themselves in a fair way to meet the Lord.

Of old, Marriage was at Midnight, to show the Modesty of Marriage. You are by
Ministers now Contracted, and are to be by Angels at last Conducted unto Jesus
Christ.

The Ten Virgins are professors of Sorts. A Wise Virgin is a Soul that takes
the seasons of Grace, and is affected with the Beauty of Jesus Christ. A
Foolish, is one, that regards not the Word of God. Midnight, is the End of the
World, before the Morning of the Resurrection. The Cry is an Angelical Voice:
as soon as the Clock strikes Twelve, then the Angel sets his Trumpet to his
mouth, and proclameth so.

The Apantesis, -- the Meeting here Expressed, is the Resurrection. when the
Earth and Sea too shall yield their Dead; and the very Entrails of the Fishes
shall be raked by the Trident of the Archangel. Never was there such a Terror
as then will be! But the Saints are then led unto the Nuptial in the New
Jerusalem.

NOTE
At the Coming of Jesus Christ to Judgment, the whole World shall be in a state
of great Security, and Insensibility of His Coming.

I. There shall be a Great Day of Judgment. How many Warnings have you had
about this Day of the Lord? But alas, How many of the then Raised, shall say,
Non Putaram; or, This I thought not of! which is a sign of a great Fool.

Oh that we could be like Jerome: always having a, Come to Judgment, in our
Ears! I believe you all make a Day of Judgment, an Article of your Creed. Why,
The Heathen had a sense of it.

II. Near and At that very time, there shall be a deadly Stupefaction in the
World. As to sit under Nightshade, breeds a Stupor. -- This will be the Effect
of being in the Night shade Walks of the World.

How are most of us asleep? so that one can hardly get so much as any good
Discourse on foot among us. See Math. 24. 39. And knew not till the Flood came
and took them all away; so shall also the Coming of the Son of man be. --
Remember that on your Knees --

(...) This comes from want of Consideration God says, O that they would
Consider! See Psalm. 119. 59. It Is said, They Considered not for their Hearts
were hardened. No Hammer can break this stone, but Gods. It Is only Gods Fire and
Vinegar, that can cause the Nether Millstone of our Hearts to Crack. And it
works in Consideration. Consideration is the Glory of a man; and it would be
our Happiness. But for Inconsiderateness,

This comes,

1. From an Innate Inclination. People be not of Thinking Spirits. They are for
Pastime.Oh dreadful Word! a Word for the Devil to put into our Hearts.

The Fatness of Heart spoken of by Isaiah is mentioned Six times in the New
Testament. No Text of the Old Testament so often cited. Which is to be thought
on.

Blood is sometimes Congealed, like a Serpent in the Heart. Such Hearts have we!

Men are against Pricked Hearts; though the Corruption cannot otherwise (...)
come out, -- but the Devils will suck their Blood for ever.

2. From a Judicial Obsignation.

God says, to His Ministers, Go Preach at such a place, and harden the People
there.

Oh with uplifted Hands beg, Lord, let me not be Sealed up under this
hardness.This Hardness will be turned into shrieks in Hell. See Exodus 9.10.
From this Hardness it is, that men will Scoff at a Little Expression of a
Minister, -- but every such Scoff shall cost you a Thousand years in Hell. This
Nigrum Theta, marks for Hell.

3. From a Confaederation with Sin, and with Sinners. It Is not our Cannot, but
our Will not, that undo's us. Famous Fenner has Writ well of this Self-Murder.
Sinners, as Cliopatra, take the Asp of Incomsiderateness, and put it to their
Breasts.

And Sinners harden one another -- They are for a Priest that will be Drunk
with them; and for a faithful Preacher, they think, much Learning has made
him mad.

They are as Psalm. 50. end.

So I should come to our Saviour^ Question, What do ye more than others?

III. But our-Lord has given us a gracious Prent^^i^^^^on about the Day of
Judgment --

You have the Voice of the Archangel now in your Ears.

God forewarns,

By notable (...) going Judgments.

Every Feavour is a warning of the, Fire of Hell, -- Every (...) a Warning of
the River of Sayx. Every causualty is a Warning.

Have you not been sick? and said, If God spare me, I will be better? Well
said, Ph^^^oh. --

Have you not heard of the late Earth quakes in Italy? and one at New Haven
lately? Have you not Rumors of War with the ^ygre Heathen! -- Our Savior
spea^^ of these things as Warnings.

2. By Ministerial Denunciations.

As Loud as I can, I tell you all in the further Corners yonder, The Day of
Judgment is Coming!

And

3. By Angelical Ministrations.

We (...) their Inward Workings on our Spirits. We have Heavenly Infusions from
them, -- and we have Operations of Gods Holy Spirit. The (...) then is, as in
Rev. 3. 20. ^^hold, I stand at the Door, and Knock: if any man hear my Voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

Besides this, Near the Time, the Voice of the Son of God shall be heard
through the Whole World, like the Roaring of the Sea. This is when the Judgment
is just beginning, And the Angels shall Trumpet with a greater Noise than that
at (...)

Upon the whole,

Observe, and Bewayl the horrible Stupidity of the World.

The Inconsiderate soon grow Debauched. Speak to them of Judgments, they will
kick and say, Out (...) gone, you Hypocrite. Well, The Devil is in that Tongue.

Lament these, as Monica did her, Filium tot Lacrymarum; Be much with God for
them. Leave not until God strike the Arrow of His Lov^ing Vengeance into their
Hearts.

What if this Bible be Gods Word, Sinners, Where are you then? -- (...) in the
story of the Hermi^e.

Remember, The Seasons of Grace (...) sew; -- When the Spirit of ^^od comes
nigh to the Heart.

And now, Take some Antidotes ^^inst security.

Antidote. I.
Consider the Wonderful Suddenness of the Day of Judgment.

What if you Die, before you go put of the Assembly? A Last Day will come. Who
knows which Pal^^d^ Mors will take first?

Antidote. II.
Consider, As our Lord comes lik^ a Thees, like Lightening; so the sentence
will be Irreversible, and the Judgment Unavoidable.

Gold will not bribe Charon. The Wicked shall not stand in Judgment, (...) but
they shall be there.

Antidote. III.
Consider, the Impossibility of Escape ^^ter Judgment is past. There can (...)
no Writ of Error, no Appeal.

Think on Eternity; and let the Impressions of it, be kept in the I^a^i^ation
of the Thought of your Hearts for ever.

FINIS.

