A Companion for Communicants.

DISCOURSES Upon The NATURE, the DESIGN, and the SUBJECT of the LORDS SUPPER;
With Devout Methods of PREPARING for, and APPROACHING to that Blessed Ordinance.

By COTTON MATHER, Pastor of a Church at Boston.

Authoris Votum.

(...), Quaecunque dixi in his Libris de Tuo Agnos^nt et Tui; Siqua de M^o and
^^^gnosce, and ^ui, Amen. [Sic Aug. de Trin:] Utile est Plures libros a
pluribus fieri, diverso Styl^^ non diversa Fide; ut ad alios veritas sic
perveniat, ad alios autem Sic. Idem. Printed at Boston by Samuel Green for
Benjamin Harris at the London Coffee House, 1690.

To the CHURCH of the Lord Jesus in the North Part of Boston. Particularly, To
the Honorable Sr. William Phips Knight. To the Worshipful John Richards Esquire. And
to my Honored and Worthy Friends,

Mr. Adam Winthrop. Mr. John Foster. Dr. John Clark.
By whose Pious Desire and Expense, this Little Book is put into the Hands of
all the Rest, who belong to that Society.

T Was a Consideration of the Influence, which a Worthy preparing for, and
partaking of, the Lords Supper has upon our whole Religion, and the Multitude
of the Souls among us concerned in that Holy Ordinance, with the Paucity of the
Books among us, which might be Companions and Monitors to them for their
Assistance in it, that awakened me to write what is now in your Hands to Read;
and it may not be accounted any wrong unto New England, if any of its true
Friend^ endeavor to turn it from a Scythian Desert into a Kiriath-Sepher, by
spreading the Harmless Issues of the Press in the midst of us. I were a very
Degenerate person, if I should not be touched with an Ambition, to be a Servant
of the Churches in this now famous Country, which my two Grandfathers COTTON
and MATHER had so considerable a stroke in the first planting of; and for the
preservation whereof my Father, has been so far Exposed. Their Services (for,
Non ea Nostra voco^) were my greatest Blemishes and Reproaches, if I should not
be studious to do what Little I can for the Children of my people. He that
looks upon these Colonies, will see them filled with precious and Holy
Churches, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ is Adored and Obeyed with (so far as we
know) a strict, exact, entire Observation of His Glorious Institutions; and the
Souls of many Hundreds are apace Ripening for, The Inheritance of the Saints in
Light: He will see a great Instance of the Protestant Religion, in its purest,
and fullest Reformation, maintained, by the Children, which are the product and
Offspring of that Choice Grain, which ( as one sais) God sifted Three Nations,
to bring into this Wilderness; and he must have his Eyes not open if he do not
make that Exclamation, How Goodly are thy Tents, O New England, and thy
Tabernacles, O thou American Israel! To serve these Churches, which have been
so much Traduced and Maligned, by the Common Enemies of what is Holy, and Just,
and Good, and which have yet been such a Burdensome (...) as to break the backs
of all that have hitherto been heaving at them, is an Honor that a far better
man than I, were unworthy (...) not only our Thoughts and Cares, but the very
Lives of the best among us all, were too Little to be devoted unto their
Interest. It is at the Service of these Churches, and at the cultivation of the
(...) only Garden which our Lord Jesus has in the American Continent that I
have aimed, in publishing these Meditations; but that any of my poor Labors
may be Employed in such a Service, whilst this Country has a College in it,
that is every year bringing forth Sons, whom I see my self to be but a Little
Dwarf among, Lord, who am I? and what is my Life? or what is my Fathers Family?
Indeed, I ought to be filled with shame, at the smallness of my own
Improvements; through which it is, That whereas a Lipsius has at the Age of
Eighteen written his Various Readings, and a Grotius at Seventeen, yea at
Fifteen set forth Commentaries, I do at a far greater Age do very Little for
the House of my God; and albeit Calvin being but five and twenty years old
printed the first Edition of that Golden and Matchless Book, His Institutions,
I that am two years Older, have little better than these Crude Things to feed
my Readers with; only my Readers must Remember that these Things are but my
Blossoms, which I do the more vigorously put forth, because whether I consider
the Doubtful State of my Hea^th now twice in less than a Twelve Month attacked
with very Fiery Fevers, or, which is more humbling, my own Barrenness and
Sinfulness, I have reason to sear, That I shall be cut down by Death, before I
bring forth much of that Fruit, whereby the Heavenly ^ather may be Glorified.

B esides, as Mr. Stock, preaching somewhat freely at Paul's Cross in his
younger years; for which he was taxed with Rashness, and called a Green head:
in his Elders years long afterward Repeated the same Thing in the same place,
and said, a Gray-head speaks now, what a Green head spoke heretofore! So, if I
should (...) much longer than I think for, or if I should write with as
Deliberate a ^en as Austin had when he wrote, De Civitate Dei, ( the first
Book, they say, that ever was printed) I suppose I should not Retract what I do
now publish* And I am not without Hopes, That as the Renowned Reynolds
ingeniously defends his youthful Meditations on the Sacrament, with the
similitude of an Aged man sometimes Leaning on a Little Child, so, I may meet
with some, who, according to Isaiahs Expression, will suffer a Little Child to
lead them.

But however profitable or acceptable, this Treatise may be unto the Churches
abroad, for whose Prosperity, I would offer up my D aily Vows; I promise to my
self that it will have a particular Welcome with YOU; that are the Flock,
whereof the Holy Spirit has made me an Overseer. I may with some peculiar^ly of
Consideration mind my self, That your Servant is keeping his Fathers Sheep;
and, my dear Charge, give me (...) to tell you, as I have often told you, That
I am in some Anguish of Desire to find you all among the Sheep of the L ords
Right Hand in the Day of his Appearing. I think, I may truly say, That I had
much rather be instrumental to your Edification, than to any other peoples; For
besides my Relation which bespeaks my Affection to you, the utmost of my Love
and Work is due to you upon the scores of Gratitude: and this my Gratitude is
most remarkably obliged by your Charity, which has heartily overlooked the
miserable Infirmities both of my public Ministry, and of my private Behavior
for the more than three times three years that I have now spent in the L abours
of the Gospel with you.

Behold then, One Expression of my concernment for you; it is in the first place
for YOU that I send these Things abroad. I am here laboring that you may be
Well built Christians, which Well-ordered Approaches to the Table of the Lord,
will quickly render you: I am laboring that you may be brought to, and kept
in, a most Intimate Fellowship with the Redeemer of your Souls; and that every
one of your Souls may be bound in the Bundle of Life with the Lord your God. If
any of you miscarry, and are found at last among those of whom our Lord will
say, They shall not ^ast o^ my Supper, kn^w it, that this Book will be one of
the Witnesses to be produced against you, in the Dreadful Day of God. But that
it may rather be among. The Helpers of your Joy, I now bow my knees to the God
of Heaven, with my prayers, That the Truths here set before you, may have a
Gracious and a potent Influence upon your Conversations; That Goodness and
Mercy may follow you all your Days, and that you may dwell in the House of the
Lord for ever. These are my ardent wishes for you All; and very particularly
for those unto whose Desire and Expense it is to be ascribed, that this L
ittle, Manual for Communicants, comes into the Hands of you All. They are All
of them otherwise engaged in the public Service, which I hope the same God
that Spirits them and upholds them, will Reward them for; and Let This also be
Reckoned among the Good, which they have done, when Their God will think upon
them for Good. These are the Wishes of,

Your Pastor and Servant, Cotton Mather.

Invitations to the SUPPER of the LORD, With a DISCOURSE on the Nature, Design
and Subject of that Blessed Ordinance.
I COR. XI. 24. This do in Remembrance of Me.
THe Blessed God, who has made Sacraments to be such very necessary and
agreeable Engines for a maintaining of a Communion between the Visible and
Invisible World, has in both Testaments appointed several such means of our
Fellowship with Himself. A Sacrament is a Sign and Seal, by which is declared,
and confirmed, and conveyed some Spiritual Thing unto us. Though the Word
SACRAMENT be not in the Scripture; it being borrowed from the Name of the Oath,
which passed between Commanders and Soldiers of old: yet the Thing we are
abundantly advised of; and there are two Sacraments which under the Evangelical
Dispensation of the new Covenant, our God would have us approach unto him in.
Those are a Sacred Baptism, and a Sacred Supper; the former of which is to
signify our Inoculation into the Lord Jesus Christ, and our Obligation to
Serve and Fight under Him; but the latter of them is to signify our
Participation in all the saving Benefits of our Lord Jesus, and our
Augmentation in our Conformity and Obedience to Him. It is Remarkable (and a
Worthy Person of another Nation in a Treatise Entitled La manducation du Corpse
de Christ, i find long since putting such a Remark upon it) that as of old
under the Law those two Acts of Washing and Feeding were those which did
represent the Application of the Redemption to come, and by those two Acts were
the People made partakers of the then Holy things: thus the two Sacraments of
the New Testament have those two Acts to manage them.

They are not few or small Duties which you that are Baptized must count your
selves bound unto. It Is no less than A putting on Christ, unto which you are
engaged by your Baptismal Vow. God forbid that you should look upon your
Baptism as an useless Formality or a trifling Ceremony The Waters of Baptism,
will prove more bitter and baneful than the waters of jealousy to the guilty
Souls of them that forget what engagements are by their Baptism laid upon them.

You are Baptized into the Name of the glorious Trinity, to intimate the Bonds
which now ly upon you to acknowledge God the Father, as your Father, God the Son
as your Savior, and God the Spirit as your Strengthener. You have received His
Mark on your Foreheads, (...) show that you ought to make a public and open
Profession of His Name; and Renounce all the Idols of this evil World. It is a
Baptism unto Repentance which you have been the Sub^^^^ of; and you are thereby
bound unto such a (...) for, and Hatred of, all Sin, as is the Repentance not
to be repented of.

But one special reference of your Baptism, is that which we have now before
us: it is to be reckoned as a Preface to the Supper of the Lord. Our Lord gave
that Order once unto his Ministers, in Mat. 28. 19 20. Baptize men, teaching
them to observe all things, whatsoever I command (...). You that are Baptized
most horrib^^ violate your B aptismal Vow, while you wittingly and willingly
neglect any Institution of the Lord Jesus Christ. As the Circumcised were to
observe all the Laws of Moses, even so, the B aptized are to observe all the
Laws of Jesus; among which there is none that has a bigger or a brighter
Asterisk upon it, than that which we have now to insist upon, This do in
remembrance of Me.

In our Context here the Apostle Animadverts upon certain Abuses which the
Corinthians pre^^^ the Sacred S upper of the Lord Jesus Christ withal. That
Sacred S upper was too much discomposed among them, by means of another S
upper, which they unwarrantably annexed or prefixed thereunto. There were
indeed certain charitable Feasts, which in some of the primitive Ages and
Places were used among Believers, together with the Eucharist. But I do not
think these to be those Agapae, which the Apostolical Writings make mention of;
those Agapae I rather take to be the entertainments provided for S trangers, at
the cost of the Churches, in or near their usual meeting places, which are by
some judged a laudable imitation of the Hospitals adjoined unto the S ynagogues
of the Jews: and thus we find Gaius deputed and employed by a Church for their
Host of old. Much less do I look upon the Banquetings of the Corinthi^^^ before
the Eucharist, which are blamed here to be those Agapae. You must indulge me in
an Opinion, however singular it may seem, that there was a Jewish party in the
Church of Corinth which would not come to the S upper of the Lord without a
Paschal A nte-S upper, wherein they ate and drank ^^^ly enough: thus they
retained a Shadow of their Passover, and maintained a Relic of their
Judaism. The Gentile party of the Church disallowed these proceedings, and
would come Hungry, when the others came well nigh Drunken to the Eucharist;
upon which ensued a confusion in their Church Assemblies, too disorderly for
any time, but much more so, for a time when they were to attend such a
Tremendous Mystery.

Now to rectify these Abuses, the Apostle reduces them to the Original
Institution of that blessed Sacrament. This is the scope of the Paragraph,
which affords our Text unto us; the Apostle recites what our Lord said, and
what He Did, when He appointed this Holy Ordinance. Accordingly, in the words
of our Savior, which the Apostle here quotes, agreeably to the Account given
by Three Evangelists, we have two Things.

First, A Christian Duty, This D o, That is, My Disciples, Do you Assemble to
Celebrate such a Sacrament as I ^^re set before you.

Secondly, A Christian Design. In Remembrance (...). That is, I am withdrawing
my Bodily says, The Ro^k was Christ. Indeed the wicked P^^pish Clergy have
imposed upon the World, a monstrous Figment of a Transubstantiation here; That
whatever our Senses tell us, to the contrary, it is not Bread but Christ, which
we have after a wretched Priest has consecrated it, though the Apostle Paul
expressly calls it B read no less than three times after the consecration: That
the substance of the Bread being now Abolished, the Accidents thereof yet
remain, and it is the proper and real Substance of our Lords Body, which is
imperceptibly come in the room thereof; and that His Body is now there, after
the manner of a Spirit; which indeed ^s, To speak sense after the manner of
Nonsense. Well may it be mentioned among the Notes of Antichrist; That he
denies the coming of our Lord Jesus in the Flesh; for whatever Trash there may
be in a Book famous throughout the English World, there is this Truth well
asserted there, It is against the Truth of Christ's Natural Body, to be at one
Time in more places than one. The Inventors of this prodigious Heresy, which
lays a foundation for the most exquisite Atheism, and opens a Door for all
manner of Delusions and Impieties, these men, I suppose were those, of whom our
Lord foretold in Ma^th. 24. 26. They shall say, Christ is in the secret
Chamber, or, as it may be rendered, Christ is in the Cup-^^ard. It is easy to
tell How this Heresy first came into the World. When I mage-Worship was first
introduced into the Church of God, great ^^mbers of good Christians opposed and
(...) it with an Holy Violence, and one of the Arguments used by th^^ Or^^^^x I
mage-breakers was, That if our Savior have left one Image of Himself, which is
of Divine institution, th^n it is not lawful to make other Images of Him, (...)
are of Humane Invention. But such a Divine Image of Himself* He has left in the
Sacrament; all the Ancien^^ had still called it (...) The Memorable Seco^^
Nicene Council, had no^ Answer hereunto, (...) This, That the Sacrament is not
the I mage of (...) S aviour, but His (...) (...); for ^^e had (...) no^ est
Corpus (...). Thus was this Literal interpretation of these words, first
breached in the world; it served only as a wretched (...) our to Evade a
forcible and a d^str^ssing Argument; while Transubstantiation (...) been so
much as dreamed of. But in process of Time, the Popish Cle^^ discovered
incredible Advantages to be made by this Whimsey, and spend some scores of
years in forming it into (...) shape; so that at last, Four hundred and odd
years after the fi^^ Hitt upon it, it was in the ^at^ran Council^^ the year
1215* advanced into an (...) of (...); and an Idol has ever since been set up
with an^ (...) imprinted on it, which in (...) one small Kingdom of England has
compelled more Protestants (...) through the Fire unto it, than ever we read
the Ancient Moloch devoured in all the parts of the Universe.

But blessed be our God, That I now speak to some Hundreds, who are like to
live unto the Day, When this Heresy shall go out of the World again. All the
Wheels now move apace toward that Revolution, when mankind shall no more be
Inebriated with the Cup ^f Abominations in the Hand of the old Scarlet ^omish
Where. And give me ^cave to bestow a little Battering upon this that long
prevailing, but, I hope now ^^^ring piece of P^pery. Let us then reflect upon
the (...) of this Transubstan^^^. It is (...) a Doctrine made up of (...), and
contradictions, which it is beyond, or, be^^^ Almighty power it self to give a
Being unto. Yea, there are more than many millions of them in (...) Who can
with any patience recite the (...) ^^^leries and Blasphemies of those worse
than D^ceived Miscreants, whose Letany is, (...) Omnipotent^^ Dei car^ factus
miserere nobis? But let us penetrate a little into their Mystery; which (...)
thousand times in a year Crucifies (...) agan^ Him that was to Die, but once for
(...). It makes a Body to be every where; which is a perfection peculiar unto
God; but i^ a Body may be God, then God may be a (...) too It makes the B ody
that was born sixteen hundred and ninety years ago, to be Created but
yesterday; and the causes of that Body such as a B aker, a Wafer, a C harm, are
not, until many Ages after the Effect it self was upon the Stage. It makes a
Body, without Extension of parts, though Extension belong to the very Essence of
a Body; and it crowds a quantity of near six foot long, into a room far smaller
than the smallest Grain of Corn affords. It makes ten thousand Bodies of One,
and a thousand circumstances both absent and present with the same point of
Time. Yea, it makes the glorified B ody of our Lord Jesus, capable of having
deadly poisons mixed with it, as in the well known Story of both a Pope and an
Emperor, poisoned with the Eucharist. Indeed, The Papists have no more
Scripture for the B reads being Transubstantiated, than there is for the
Priests being so; when he Mutters, This is my B ody. Truly, is one single such
I mpossibility or Contradiction must be swallowed, we altogether l^ose all the
use of common sense, and Natural Reason, in those very things which God Himself
has made them judges in; and we can be sure of Nothing, all the World must
Evaporate into Nothing with us. That Opinion which will thus Transubstantiate a
Loaf, may as well Annihilate a God; it were better for a man to loose his Life,
than to swallow such a barbarous Heresy; hence the A rabian Philosopher chose
to perish with his Pagan Fathers and Neighbors, rather than to take his Lot
with a people who were so much worse than Canabals, that Manducant Deum suum.
And yet our Forefathers had this infinite absurdity thrust down their Throats
with burning Firebrarnds! It is therefore not unjustly said by a Learned and a
Witty person, Whenever I become a Scholar in the School of the Eucharist, and
renounce the Reason which God has given me, to Embrace the Romish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, I am fully resolved to keep a Decorum in it, and I will
certainly go over to that C hurch upon all Four. But if sense and reason may
not be heard, in this case, what will Rev^l^tion say? I wonder why our Lord
Jesus Christ Himself after his Resurrection Apoealed unto the Eyes and Hands of
the Standers by, to convince them of its being He, if Seeing, Feeling, Tasting;
might give no Direction to our Opinion in these concerns. Alas, that this lewd
piece of Priestcraft should ever make the world such a stage of Blood and
Fire, as it has! Give me leave to repeat the words of our Lord, The Flesh
profits nothing. Wherefore, do not look for proper and real Flesh, in the
Eucharist, but expect only, according to the Language of Tertullian, A Figure
of our Lords B ody; and consent rather with holy Austin, who upon that place in
Joh. 6. 53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the S on of Man, saw cause to say, This
seems to command a most heinous wickedness, and therefore the speech is
Figurative. We are not ignorant, that Cyprian in the Third Century, said, It
was Wine that our Lord called His blood; or that Ambrose in the Fourth Century
called it, The similitude of his precious blood. And not to multiply
quotations; we are not ignorant, That the Doctrine of even the Church of
England it self, seven hundred years ago, was this; in the S acrament, it is
naturally corruptible bread, and corruptible Wine; nothing is therein to be
understood bodily, but all is g^^stly to be understood. May we thus be evermore
sound in our Belief, about that which the Roman Catholics have made such a
burning Article! Provoke me not to translate those words which even the Pen of
a Jesuit has written for us, Tolera^ilior est error eorum qui pro Deo, colunt
statuam vel pannum Rubrum in Hasta Elevatum, quod narratur de Lappis, vel viva
A nimalia, ut quondam Egyptii, quam eorum qui Frustum panis.

But thus much for that.

Of the Wine, we hear our Lord saying in Mat. 26. 28. This is my blood of the
Nen-Testament: This is that which the Wine is herein peculiarly designed for;
although Popery has with its Transubstantiation imposed yet another cheat upon
the world, which they call by the Name of, C oncomitancy; a thing hatched by A
quinas, about the year 1200. When it had been taught, that B read was Flesh, it
was thought necessary also to teach that Flesh is B lood; and it seems we are
to drink the B lood while we eat the B read. But our Lord severally consecrated
the B read and the C up; which had been very superfluous, if in one kind we
could have enough Received both. No, The Wine is more especially to Represent
the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ. The First Man that we know to have Died in
the world, had a bloody Death; and he seems to have been the first that offered
a Sacrifice with Blood; thus when our Lord Jesus, the An^itype of that Man, and
of that Sacrifice, came to Die, it was with an Effusion of Blood, never to be
forgotten, but so to be Represented with us; and indeed there is in many
Respects an apt Resemblance between Blood and Wine, especially the Red Wine o^
Ca^^^n, which is called in Deuteronomy. 32. 14. The pure blood of the Grape. The
Reddesi Wines are not the unfittest therefore to be herein employed. Those men
are Wise beyond sobriety, who go to prove, That A dams Tree of Death was a
Grape Vine; but behold a Grape Vine here becoming a Tree of Life unto us.
Indeed, The C up which our Lord used, was mixed with Water, if He followed the
common Custom of the Jewish Nation. The Rabbi's of the Jewish Nation tell us,
that none might bless over the C up of Blessing, until Water be mingled with
it. It is true, That in the striking of the old Covenant, there was Blood mixed
with Water, s^e Heb.9. 19. And, from the side of our Dying Lord, there issued B
lood mixed with Water too, see John 19 34. But what countenance this may give
to the mingling of water, with the Sacramental Blood of the New Testament, I
leave to a more curious Enquiry, than can be convenient here. We have not yet
Warrant enough to do it.

But if it be now Enquired, For what Cause only B read and Wine (...) by our
Lord Jesus pitched upon.

The Answer is ready,

Even so, O our Savior, because it pleases thee! Indeed some think that our
Lord pitched upon the old Rites of the old Jews, and ordained them for a New,
and a Lasting, and a Gospel Improvement with us; and that he put a new S
uperscription upon a ^old Metal in it. For, they say, in the (...), the Master
of the Feast distributed unleavened B read unto them that were present, and
then concluded with a cup of Wine, which was called, a cup of B lessing, among
them. And it is also true, That our Lord Jesus had been Celebrating the
Passover when he first Instituted this holy S acrament; the Passover, I say,
and a very Notable Passover it was. I don't Remember a Distinct Account in the
Scriptures of more than seven Passovers that were kept, and at the seventh
(which is a perfect and sacred Number) behold the true Paschal Lamb Himself is
present appointing another S acrament. But (though I deny not this, yet) it is
easy to go too far toward the Rash and False Assertion of those, whose
Talmundic Learning has thought it self not enough acknowledged, unless we
affirm, That the pattern for the Rules and Rites of Gospel Churches, were taken
from the Synagogues of the Jews. An Assertion, as untrue, as, That Moses took
most of his Laws from the Egyptians. ^ut it is incident unto Learned Men that
have been at vast pains in the finding and fineing of one useful Notion to
think it not useful enough unless almost all the Affairs of the Scriptures
receive some Elucidations from it; as besides the Scholars of the Talmud, some
that have waded into the Zabian Rites, and others that have studied the
concerns of the Gnostics have given us an Example. As for the practices in the
Synagog^es of the Jews, we have no Record of theirs concerning them, but what
is at least two hundred and fifty years younger and later than the Writings of
the New Testament; and it is more likely, that the pretended Traditions with
which the Jews then undertook to Compose a New Religion, were taken many of
them from Gospel Churches, than that the Gospel Churches were shaped according
to those Traditions.

We may rather observe, That the Effects of Bread and Wine, most Elegantly
answer the Effects of our Approaches to the Lord Jesus in the Sacrament. If
Bread nourish and strengthen the Body, if Wine Refresh and Comfort the Body,
much more will the Lord Jesus do so, to the Souls of them, who draw near unto
Him. Besides, I conceive, That our Lord would Ordain Sacraments, which required
not the Occision of any Creature, because no Creature was after this to Die for
the Sin of Man. He did as it were say herein concerning the whole work of
Sacrificing for sin, It is finished. We may also herein Remark the Wisdom and
Goodness of our Lord Jesus Christ, in choosing of Bread and Wine for this End;
inasmuch as there is hardly any place in the world, which they cannot easily be
obtained at. Whether it be not in the Sacrament lawful to Substitute something
else equivalent where B read and Wine cannot be had? Whether in those Countries
that cannot procure Bread and Wine, that Food which is the B read, and that
Juice which is the Wine of the Country, may not be allowed for the Sacrament?
It is a question that I am not fond of discussing; but it were easy to quote
Renowned and Judicious Divines, who deliver it as their Sentiment, That this
were no Aberration from the mind of the Lord Jesus Christ:

These are the Sacred Elements in the Supper of the Lord. But what place is to
be assigned for them?

One would have thought that this were scarce any matter of Enquiry; because a
Table is the place for a Supper to be expected at. But the sin of those men,
that will have the Communion Table set Altar-wise, must arrest a few of our
considerations, as we go along. In the Days of K. Edward V^^ an hundred and
forty years ago, this usage was abolished as a gross piece of Popish Idolatry
and Superstition; but there being those that have Conjured it up again, it
requires us to Consider,

That the Scripture calls the Communion Table a Table, more than once. See 1
Cor. 10. 21. and Luc. 22. 21. Only our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is our Altar.

Moreover, an Altar implies a Sacrifice. P^^ the Supper of the Lord is not a S
acrifice. To talk ^f a Commemorative S acrifice, is extremely (...) It Is A poor
P riest that shall espouse a Conception so Incoherent.

Furthermore, The Altar is greater than the Gift. But no man is so desperately
blind as to say, That the Sacramental Bread and Wine are not as Great and as
Good, as the Board which they stand upon.

I confess, The Ancients would sometimes, use that Unscriptural Term of an
Altar, for the Communion T able, (...) they were in a more Loose, Wanton,
Extravagant Manner, expressing of themselves, and ^o they called it, The Throne
of Christ. B^^ their dangerous Metaphors have done more than a little harm to
the Church of God. And yet, even Origin and Arnobius, and sundry others, do
expressly deny, That the Christians had any Altars among them. The Having of
Altars, is a thing suited only to the principles of those Gentiles, who account
their Mass, a Propitiatory Sacrifice for Quick and Dead. One of the first
things in the Reformation, was a Destroying of Altars, with the most Detestable
Relics of Pope^y. To Erect them again, and set them out with all those
Massing Furnitures and Fooleries, of Tapers, Candlesticks, Basins, Crosses,
Rich Altar-Cloaths, clasped Books, with Crosses instead of Books, and Crimson
and scarlet Cushions; truly, it is too dangerously to undermine the Protestant
Religion. But our God will shortly purge His Church of such Abominations! It Is
now time to add,

Secondly, For the S acred Actions in the Supper of the Lord, there are six or
seven of them. The Command of our Lord is, Do this. But what are we to Do?

We do not read, that any Kneeling here is required of us. That was indeed a
Ceremony introduced about the Thirteenth Century, on purpose to suit and serve
the Idolatry of the Transubstantiation. But what have we to do with that? The
Popish Writers do with all Freedom own, That if the Bread in the Sacrament,
remain B read after the Consecration, to kneel before it, were as vile an
Idolatry as ever the Egyptians were guilty of. Alas, that any man, who calls
himself a Protestant, should in this manner symbolize with Popish Idolaters! I
am to tell you, that the Gesture of Kneeling at the Eucharist, is among those
Things, That have been offered unto an Idol; and therefore you may not now use
it, For his sake that showed it, and for Conscience sake. It is a great scandal
to the Protestant Religion, that any people of the Protestant P rofession
should retain it; much more, that Thousands of Godly Men should be Ruined and
Murdered for Witnessing against it. With what face can we, Kneel before the
Eucharist, and out of respect unto it; when we have no word of our God inviting
us thereunto? It Is pleaded by some, That we may pray in the Act of Receiving,
and therefore we may also Kneel; but those persons ought to be informed, That
Meditation and not Supplication, is to be the principal Exercise of the Soul in
the Act of Receiving. Our minds must be directly applied unto the Objects then
set before us; and it is Thinking, not P raying, that we are then to be engaged
in; otherwise than by short Ejaculations, which require no Changes of our
postures. There are others who plead, that a Reverent Humility in the Act of
Receiving is most agreeable to our Circumstances. But we should not forget,
That the Apostle condemns a voluntary Humility in such concerns. It is
Hypocrisy, and not Humility, that will go to show a Reverence, an Holiness, a
Devotion in the act of Receiving, for which there is no Warrant in the Word of
God. But that which utterly precludes this Gesture is, The Antecedent I
nterpretation of it, by those that first contri^ed it, and enjoined it, and
that for diverse Ages have maintained it. No Protestation of ours, will now free
it from the Interpretation of Idolatry; any more than it would have excused any
of the Primitive Apostates that threw Frankincense into the Fires upon the
Altars in the Heathen Temples, to say, That they did it only to perfume the
Room.

Moreover, The Apostle gives us to understand, that if we would be Regular in
our Evangelical Administrations, we must Reduce matters to the First
Institution of them. Now it is well known, That our Lord used a Table Gesture,
with his Disciples, at the First Institution of the Sacrament; and such a
Gesture ^ruly does most befit that intimate Friendship and Fellowship, which
our condescending Lord would have with us there. Wherefore that ever
Honorable. Reformer Kno^, called, K neeling at the Lords S upper, by that
black Name, A D iabolical Invention; and being demanded, why he did not Kneel,
he gave this Answer, B ecause the Action of C hrist was perfect, and it was
safest to follow His Example.

But then THIS Do; that is,

First, The Bread and Wine, are to be Taken. By whom? It Is to be done by a
Minister Ordained unto such Holy Services; we think with Jus^^n Martyr, only
the (...) is to^ do it. Our Lord Jesus took the Bread and Wine into His Hands,
as the Pater Famili^s at the Feast. And I suppose 'twas done in such a
Succession, that the Bread was Eaten before the Wine was Taken. This is to
signify, That the Son of God has Taken our Nature into a personal Union with
Himself. That astonishing thing, The Incarnation of our Lord; or, God manifest
in the Flesh, is herein referred unto.

Secondly, The Bread and Wine are to be Blessed. They are thus (namely by a
Thanksgiving over them) consecrated unto the Service now before us. We know not
what Words or Forms were used in the first Consecration by our Lord Jesus; it
is evident that the Sentence which the Romanists attribute such a more than
Creating and Conversive power unto; namely, This is my Body, was not, is not of
a consecrating Influence; it is only Assertive of what the Sacrament is before
that clause be uttered. No, it is prayers and praises for the Blessings of
Redemption accommodated unto this occasion, that consecrate what is before us.
This is to signify, That our Lord Jesus has been set apart unto the Office of
a Mediator. While This is doing, our Lord as it were says, Thus for their sakes
I sanctify my self.

Thirdly, The B read is to be Broken. That the pouring of the Wine should be
Looked upon, as any part of the Sacrament, I do not understand; I have not yet
seen the Order for it. But the Breaking of the Bread, is a Remarkable article
of our Business here; and far from Adiaphorous, or I ndifferent. Hence by a
Synecdoche, the whole Administration sometimes is called, The Breaking of
Bread. The Church of Rome sins not a little by the Omission of it. This is to
signify, That our Lord Jesus has been Broken for our Sin. Though His Bones were
not to be Broken, (and this was the Martyrs Argument against
Transubstantiation) yet His Flesh was broken, and His Heart was broken, for us.
While this Action is passing, our Lord calls from on high unto us, Thus was my
Body Broken for you.

Fourthly, The B read and the Wine are to be given. As our Lord, put first the
Bread, and anon the Wine into the Hands (not into the Mouths) of the Disciples;
thus the Pastors are still to do, by the Mediation of the Deacons. We do not
find that Christ or They rose up, for Him to deliver the B read and the Wine to
each of them immediately; but He gave it unto the First, and the First gave it
unto the Next; and thus we find in the Primitive Ages, there were Distributors
of these Holy Things to the Communicants. But there seems no Necessity of
Repeating the Invitations of the Lord Jesus over again, to each person at the
Delivery of the Bread and Wine; though in some of the Primitive Churches, there
seems to have been such a Thing, which every Communicant answered an, Amen,
unto* Well, This is to signify, That God now gives Christ, He gives that
matchless Gift, both To and For His People. The Lord now as it were says,
Beh^ld, I have provided a S aviour for thy Soul. Here, I freely give Him to
thee; Accept Him as thy own for ever.

Fifthly, The Bread and the Wine are to be Received. We are (unless in case of
Lameness) to Take the B read and Wine, even into our Hands; it profanes them
not for our Hands to Touch them; and the Popish Mode of Taking them otherwise,
is more fit for Beasts or Birds, than for the Children of Men. But this is to
signify, That we Receive the Lord Jesus Christ as our Prince and our Savior.
As we have the Eye of a True Faith, in Looking to Him, and the Foot of a True
Faith, in Coming to Him; so it becomes now to have the Hand of a True Faith, in
Taking of Him. We are now to Renew our Faith, and profess our Faith, and say,
Lord Jesus, I now embrace thee, as the Prophet, and the Priest, and the King of
my miserable S oul.

Lastly, We are to Eat the Bread, and to Drink the Wine, thus prepared for us.
There is an Eating, which is incumbent on us here. In the Ratifying and
Confirming of a Covenant, and (yet oftener) in the expressing and maintaining of
a Friendship among men, Eating has been but usual. Behold, the condescension of
Him that is the King of Kings, who thus admits us poor Beggars to Eat with Him!
It Is to signify, That our Souls now feed On, as well as with, a Crucified
Jesus! Herein we obey that C ommand of our Lord, Eat my Flesh and have Eternal
Life; and therein our Lord fulfils that Promise to us, I will come in, and Sup
with Him. But we are also to Drink as well as to Eat. Indeed, the Romish
Ecclesiastics deprive the Lords People of the C up in the Lords Supper. But it
is very surprising to see, how particularly our Lord long since laid in against
this Execrable Sacril^dge. He did not say, though He meant, ALL of you Eat; but
He did expressly speak this, ALL of you D rink; whereas an Impious and an
Impudent sort of Men, pretending the preventing of spilling the Cup, wholly
Reserve it unto themselves, and say to the people, None of you Drink. When the
Barbarous Days were come, that it was complained, There were Golden Cups and
Wooden Priests, then the Wooden Priests found a way (...) steal the Golden C
ups from the Supper of the Lord. The Communion in both kinds was not utterly
abolished, until the year 1300; and the Council of Constance, in the year 1455.
at length approved and confirmed that Abolition, by a Canon which runs in such
Horrible Terms as these, Though Christ did Institute in both Kinds; and the
Primitive Church did so Administer, yet we desire the contrary to be observed.
But what an Hellish Boldness is it thus to overruled the word of the Lord
Jesus! What an open violence is thus offered unto the Last Will and Testament
of our Lord? and how dishonestly is a precious Legacy thus withheld from the
Children of God? My Brethren, All of you are to Drink of this blessed Chalice.
And it is to signify, That the Lord Jesus therein says unto us, Drink in the
Spirit of the Lord!

This is the Supper of the Lord! A Sacrament that has in it more than a
thousand things observable! But among many others, This:

That there is a mavelous Opposition to, and yet a no less mavelous
Affinity with, several Ordinances of the Old Testament, in it. For, you may
observe, That under the Law, No man might Eat that which was offered for the
Remission of his own S ins. But, behold, because the Body of the Lord Jesus was
offered for our sins, for That very cause it is, that We are to feed on Him* You
may observe, That under the Law, The S acrificers were to Eat of the Victimes
which they had offered for the sins of other men. But behold, our Lord Jesus
has Transferred that Right unto the Sinners themselves; we are to seed on what
He has offered! You may further observe, That the Law which fo^bad Sinners to
Feed on the S acrifices that were for their Expiation, showed, That the True
Sacrifice was not yet exhibited, nor our Expiation Accomplished; but that the
Sacerdotal Act of Manducation, which was requisite unto an Expiatory Sacrifice,
now belongs to all true Believers, as an effect of their Expiation.

What shall I say more? God would not allow any man to Taste of Blood, until
the Blood of the Lord Jesus came to be shed. And you may observe, That the Law
forbad the Drinking of Blood, for that Reason, you shall drink no blood, for
it is to be shed for the Remission of sin. Whereas the Lord commands the
Drinking of blood, for the very same Reason: Drink this blood, for it is shed
for the Remission of sins! It Is in a S acramental Style that these things are
spoken.

But, Reader, make a pause at this; Let wonder and gladness fill thy Soul at
the Thoughts of this Mysterious Institution; and give God thy praises, That
thou live in the Days of the Son of Man!

This is our first Proposition; and the Discourse upon it, has given a
Supersedea^ to another that would have ensued thereupon. We need not now prove,
That the Lo^ds Supper is Commanded by our blessed Savior.

We need only to add,

PROPOSITION, II.
The Assemblies o^ B elievers are to Remember our LORD JESUS CHRIST, by the
Religious Observation of this Enjoined Sacrament.

We have three Conclusions in this Aphorism, to be briefly touched upon.

Conclusion, I.
None but B elievers are to Enjoy the Supper of the Lord. I am sorry that so
much Controversy lies in our way, as we go along; but there MUST BE such things
as Truth is to conflict withal. I have now particularly advanced an Assertion,
for which you must have the patience for a while to see me C ontend earnestly
against a sort of men, who tell us, That a bare profession of a Dogmatical or
Historical Faith (which Faith and Profession they themselves find it hard
enough to describe, but must leave the business in a perpetual confusion)
together with a submission to the G overnment of the Visible Church, will
entitle a man to Sacraments! Against this Opinion, I lay down this Conclusion.

That Regeneration is the Thing without which a Title unto Sacraments is not to
be pretended unto. Real Regeneration, is that which before God (in foro coeli)
renders men capable of claiming Sacraments. And Visible, or Expressed
Regeneration is that which before Men, (in foro Soli) enables us to make such a
claim. Or, take it so, A probable and credible P rofession of a Saving Faith,
(and no less than That) must be made by a man, before the Supper of the Lord
may be A dministred unto him.

I deny not, That unknown Hypocrites may be admitted unto the Table of the
Lord, there is no Help for That! we are so much in the Dark about the States
and Hearts of many Professors, that the Enemy will sow such Tares in our
Fields, and they will continue there till the Judge of the whole World shall at
last apply Himself to the Bundling and Burning of them. I do not Affirm, That
we can positively tell, who has a Saving Faith; but we may tell, who make a
Probable and Credible profession of such an one, when we Enquire into it; which
we should be able to tell with a more grounded Persuasion, than that which
common Charity has concerning every man alive, ubi de ^ontrario non cons^at;
and a little careful prudent Enquiry may also not seldom give us an Exclusive
Evidence against many, wh^ (...) well, till upon Trial a Rational (...) (...)
pronounce them strangers to the New Birth. I do not affirm That the Sacraments
prove Nullities in all Respects* to those that have been the unmeet Subjects of
them; but, I say, That those who have the Power of the Keys are to do their
part, That no unmeet Subjects be made Partakers (which is to be Profaners) of
those awful Things; and I say, That all who do not upon the Tender of Needful
and proper Questions to them give Just cause to think, That they are True,
Sincere, Converted, Belivers on the Lord Jesus Christ, are to be debarred from
them. Now to establish this Assertion, let these Arguments be Placidly and
Heartily weighed in the Balances of the Sanctuary.

First, That Qualification without which a man cannot Challenge Baptism, is
much more to be demanded of them that would approach unto the Supper of the
Lord. For no unbaptised person may be a Communicant in This Ordinance; and what
is Necessary at the Threshold, is much more Necessary at the Table: they that
may not be reckoned as Incipients, much more may not be treated as Proficients,
in the House of God. But a man may not Challenge Baptism, without a Probable
and Credible Profession of a Saving Faith. The very Form of the words used in
Baptism shows, That a man must not only Believe God, but also Believe IN God,
when he is Baptized. Now [ Defferunt, credo Deum, et Credo IN De^m] that
signifies the Consent of the Will, as well as the Assent of the Mind. Yea, The
man must Believe IN God the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit; and so, he
must acknowledge the whole Trinity, in all its glorious Operations. This is the
Faith surely which, Has Everlasting Life. Thus also, the Words used by Philip
to the Eunuch, are as full to this Purpose, as is Possible, in Acts 8.37. If
thou Beleevest with all thine Heart thou may be Baptized. It is a gross Abuse
upon the Speech, to say, That it cuts not off the Pretensions of those to
Baptism, of whom it may not Reasonably be thought, That they Believe with all
their Hearts; but unless they Believe with Affection as well as Understanding,
they do it not with all their Hearts. You may add to this, That Repentance and
Saving Faith, ever go together. But, without Repentance, a man may not be
Baptized. Those persons methinks must have the Itch of Disputing that will give
me any Trouble to make This appear. But for their Satisfaction, let it be
Remembered, That our Lord and His Apostles, did still prepare men for Baptism by
Preaching of Repentance. What said Peter in Acts 2.38. Repent and [then] be B
aptised; Certainly, we should not be more lax in our B aptism, than John was in
His. But His B aptism was called in Mark 1. 3. The baptism of Repentance; and
such a Repentance also, as the Remission of sins was annexed unto. He did not B
aptize all that came unto him; only those who did Confess their sins (and give
just cause of hope, that they did Forsake them too) were welcome to his
baptism, and such as had Fruits to justify the Repentance professed by them;
as for them who made no proof of a True Repentance, it is recorded in Luc 7 30.
They were not baptized of him. What shall I say more? B aptism is to be
accompanied with The Answer of a good Conscience to all the proposals of the
Gospel; it is to be accompanied with a Renunciation of The World, the Flesh and
the Devil; it is to be accompanied with an Hearty Listing our selves under the
banner of the Lord Jesus Christ* Now, there is no less than a Saving Faith
implied in such things as these. Wherefore I close this Argument, with the
words of the Renowned Gilespy, I believe no Conscientious Minister, would
adventure to baptize one, that has manifest signs of Unregeneration; and how
shall we bring such an One then to the Table of the Lord? I do, in imitation of
my Father before me, account this passage, A passage deserving to be written in
Letters of Gold.

Secondly, That Qualification without which a man may not be taken into Church
Fellowship, is doubtless to be demanded of them that would approach unto the S
upper of the Lord. For, without, a Regular standing in a Visible Church, the
Holy Table ought to be Inaccessible; and it is blindness, to imagine, That the
Lord has prepared this blessed B anquet, for any but those that come into His
Holy Mountain. It has indeed been disputed, Whether All C hurch-Members may
presently be admitted unto the Lords Table. We all of us do stigmatize it as a
gross Error, in those degenerate Christians, the Abissines, the Arminians, the
Maronites, and some others, To distribute the Eucharist unto children. And the
purest C hurches of the Lord Jesus, have generally not been so large, or so
soon in the Administration of the Lords S upper, as of B aptism. One has been
given as Milk, when the other, like S trong Meat has been withheld; and the
Ancients usually Detained the baptized, a while before they were C onfirmed.
But no man of sense ever imagined any other than that Only C hurch-Members
might be admitted hereunto. Now a man may not be taken into Church Fellowship
without a probable and credible Profession of a S aving Faith ^o settle this
point; I will not urge the Notion of some, that when our Lord washed the feet
of his Disciples, adding, I have given you an Example, He meant, As I have
taken care to have your Feet washed before I entertain you, so I would have you
see that the Faith of other people be cleansed before you take them to a
communion with you at my Table. I am no more sure of this paraphrase than I am
that the Rite of Feet washing should be continued in the Churches of our Lord,
as it was at Millain in the Days of Ambrose, or as it is too ludicrously at this
day among the Greeks. But I suppose, all men will grant* that only Disciples
may be taken in among C hurch-members. Now none are to be Reputed as Disciples
of our Lord, but such as have that character, in Luc. 14. 27. To bear a C ross,
and come after Him; and in Mat. 16. 24. to Deny Himself. The Disciples in
Heart, are those that cordially, and the Disciples in show, are those that
visibly, forsake all that is contrary to the Son of God. Our Lord says, in John
(...) 31. If ye continue in my Word, then are ^e my Disciples indeed. And the
Scripture owns none for Disciples but such as this character was deemed to
belong unto. Again, Let us Look upon the Materials of the Ancient, Primitive,
Apostolical C hurches; it is undeniable, that they are to be ^atterns to us.
Now, Rotten Timber was not willingly laid in the Foundation of those Churches;
but they thought it their concern to turn away from such as had only, A Form of
Godliness; and if there were ill-men among them, we are told, T hey crept in
privily and unawares. Concerning those Churches, we read, in 1 Cor. 14. 33.
They were C hurches of Saints; but unless men have upon them the Tokens of a
Real Sanctity, it is more than a Real Absurdity to esteem them so. Indeed, there
were foul miscarriages that some of them which had been reputed Saints, fell
into; but God forbid, that we should count the Churches made up of such
Transgressors. What were the Church Members at Rome; but such as, From the
Heart had obeyed the Form of Doctrine delivered to them? What were the
Church Members at Cori^^th; but such as were washed and sanctified and
justified? What were the Church members at Galatia, but such as had the S pirit
of the Son of God, sent into their Hearts? What were the Church members at
Ephesus; but such as Trusted in Christ, and were sealed with the Holy S pirit
of promise? Or the Church Members at P hilippi, but such as one might be
confident, had a good work begun in them? Or, the Church members at Colossi,
but such as were made meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in
light? What were the Thessalonian Church Members, but such as had Turned unto
God, from Idols, and received the Word as the Word of God, which effectually
wrought in them? Or, the Church Members among the Hebrews, but those concerning
whom, one might be^ persuaded of the Things which accompany Salvation? But I am
weary with quoting. Indeed, A Church (as the Greek Name for it allows us to
think) is to consist of people called out from the ways of sin, by the powerful
and effectual work of God upon their Souls. A main Design of Church Fellowship,
is to represent unto the world, who those are, that the Lord Jesus will have to
ascend into the Hill of the Lord, and to stand in His Holy place for ever. A
Church is a combined multitude of True Believers; that is the Famosius
Significatum of the Name. They that have not a True Faith can but Equivocally
be called Members of it; even, as, a Wooden Leg, or a Silver Tooth may be
styled Members of the Body. Let me say, after the Judicious Calvin, Quod
Exponunt quidam de sola Professione mihi frigidum videtur, E^ ab usu Scripture
est Alienum.

Thirdly, That Qualification, the Absence whereof, should bring a Communicant
under the censures of Church Discipline, is doubtless to be demanded of them
that would approach unto the Supper of the L ord. Certainly, we may not Receive
to, the L ords Table, any such persons as we should Suspend from it, if they
had already crowded thereunto. But when a person that is already a Communicant,
makes not a probable and credible P rofession of a saving Faith, our
Church Discipline is to censure him. I pray why are we to Excommunicate a
notorious and obstinate Offender against the Laws of the Lord Jesus, from the
Table of the Lord? The man will perhaps make a P rofession of the Christian
Faith in spite of our ^ceth: we cannot hinder that. But when we see that his P
rofession is not probable and credible to be a S aving one, we are to forbid
him our Communion; and as the Rule is in Mat. 18.17. L et him be unto thee as
an Heathen Man. The Reason, the true Reason, wherefore we are to turn an
Offender from the Table of the Lord, is, because the Offender, in his present I
mpenitence, is to be accounted unfit for the Kingdom of God; and because the
Man brings a just suspicion upon his P rofession, till he be Recovered out of
his Distemper. In a word, when C hurch-Members so carry themselves; as that
they have the common symptoms of Unpardoned Souls upon them, we are then to
Bind them on Earth. It Is quite wrong, that they should be Admitted to
Church Communion, that we know ought immediately to be Rebuked, Refused,
Censured in it. For a Mantissa to this Argument, let me say, An Ordinance
communicable to none but the Penitent: cannot be demanded by any but those that
make a probable and credible Profession of a Saving Faith. But the Supper of
the Lord is an Ordinance communicable to none but Penitents. This is clear
because the Impenitent a^e to be excluded from it; else we must agree to lay
all Church Discipline aside, which God forbid. And if Dionysi^s of Alexandria
may be a witness for it* The Primitive Churches would not admit a Penitent
neither, until having examined him, They discerned his Conversion and
Repentance to be such as would be accepted by Him, who wills not so much as the
death of a Sinner, as his Repentance.

And the Council of Nice gave this general Rule, That the inward state of
Penitents be observed in order to their Admission to communion with us. Now, if
they that are Impenitent for this or that particular sin, may not come to the
Table of the Lord, surely they that may be thought Impenitent for a whole
course of Sin, are also to be kept out of Doors, which is to be esteemed the
case of all them whom we may not Reasonably as well as Charitably judge Renewed
by the Holy Ghost.

Fourthly, That Qualification, without which a man to be there about Examined,
is to be supposed as continuing under the Covenant of works, is undoubtedly to
be demanded of all them that would approach unto the Supper of the Lord. Our
God has in two Covenants dispensed Himself unto us; both of which have had
their Sacraments. The old Covenant was not without a Sacrament in the Trees
which God then did set such a special Remark upon. But the Lords Supper is
purely a Sacrament of the New Covenant; And it is Folly to think, that until a
man accept of the Covenant he may meddle with the Sacrament. The Lords Supper
is a Sacrament provided by the Second Adam for such as become united unto Him;
as for those that keep their Union with the First Adam still, our Lord says
unto them, What have thou to do to take my Sacrament into thy mouth? Now till a
person make a Probable and Credible Profession of a saving Faith, he pretends
to none but the Covenant of Works. He remains what he was, when First born into
the World; but the Table of the Lord stands in that Kingdom of Heaven, whereof
our Lord says unto us, Verily, except a man be born again, he cannot see [he
is incapable of] that Kingdom.

Fifthly, That Qualification, without which they that approach to the Supper of
the Lord, are evidently guilty of the most detestable Dissimulation in the
World, must be demanded of them that would approach thereunto. But we encourage
a very detestable Dissimulation, if we permit men to approach unto the Lords
Supper, without a probable and credible Profession of a saving Faith. When we
make way for any person to have Communion with us at the Holy Table, do not we
expect, his consent unto the terms of the Gospel, and Subjection to the Lord
Jesus Christ as his Prophet, and Priest and King for ever? every Communicant
with us is to say thus much: The Lord Jesus is my Prince and my Savior: but
without probable and credible Profession of a saving Faith, it is a great LIE
for a man so to say. We may not encourage men to ly unto the Holy Ghost, by
causing them to speak what (and while) yet they do not Feel; but we must first
look to that, Let them (hopefully) Believe, and so let them speak. It is well
said by a worthy man, The Sealing of the Covenant unto men, before they
understand it, and take hold of it, is the common cutthroat of Souls in our
Parishes. The least thing to be exacted of a Communicant is, An Engagement to
leave off the ways of sin. Well* he must engage to do it presently, or else
hereafter: If he engage only to do it hereafter, there is a most cursed and
hellish Impiety in that Procrastination, and the Sinner does therein as bad as
declare, That he will remain an Enemy to God all his days. I pray, what
Sacrament can belong to such an one? If he engage to do it presently, we shall
have cause to judge that either he does Engage it Sincerely, or that he does it
Fallaciously, Deceitfully, Hypocritically. But what Promise did our God ever
make, or what Respect and Value did he ever command us to show unto such
Engagements? It was the Resolution of David, He that works Deceit, shall not
dwell within my House; He that tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight. And
shall we fill the House of our David, with such as (we may be justly jealous)
are Deceivers and Liars in their pretenses of Allegiance to the Lord Jesus
Christ? No doubt, it was the thought of this that made the venerable
Chrysostom, to say, S uppose he were the greatest man in the World, that would
receive the Blessed C up from my hand; I would rather give my Heart-Blood than
I would give that cup to him, whilst ^e approves himself to be NO DISCIPLE.

Sixthl'y, If the Supper of the Lord be not appointed for a converting
Ordinance, then a probable and credible Profession of a saving Faith, (or
Conversion) is to be first made by them that would approach unto it. They that
plead for more promiscuous Admissions to the Lords Table, usually suppose, That
the Holy Supper is to be used for the Conversion of such as come unto it. But
against this, I assume, That the Lords Supper is not Ex Instituto, a converting
Ordinance. That this Ordinance has never by Accident, been sanctified for the
First Conversion of them that had never bin brought home to God before, I do
not now say; though I suppose it would puzzle any man to prove that, It ever has.
If it have, what of that? I can tell the Name of a man converted by hearing
himself Preach; yet I hope the Church will be loath to admit unto the Ministry
such as they may not be first well persuaded about the Conversion of. I have
know some, whom a Dream has been very instrumental in converting unto God; yet
a Dream I suppose, is not now a converting Ordinance. But this Ordinance is not
by Appointment such an one as is to be employed for the First Conversion of
such as have never yet given themselves up to the Lord Redeemer. It Is
impossible to tell why the very Heathens are not capable of it, if it were a
converting Ordinance; and why we should not be as charitable in driving men to
the Lords S upper, as the Papists are in driving them to Baptism; among whom we
read of one old Priest that Baptized seven hundred thousand. No, There is A
another Ordinance directed thereunto; Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the
Word of God; but it is no where said, That Faith comes by Receiving of the S
acrament; nor is there so much as one instance in the Bible to countenance any
such expectations. Indeed, this Dog^ is A New Thing; the Assertors run Counter
to the common sense of the Church in all Ages, and have an Army to a man
against them. I would humbly ask, If the S acraments had been converting
Ordinances, would Paul's Commission have Run that way, S ent not to Baptize, but
to P reach the Gospel? Baptism it self is no converting Ordinance; we do not
find in Scripture that it was ever applied unto any but such as had likely
signs of the New Birth upon them; it is, The washing of Regeneration, a washing
only for them that be Regenerate. Certainly, Then the Lords S upper is not
intended for inferior Subjects. I would ask again, if the Lords S upper were a
converting Ordinance, were it not a preposterous thing to exclude any person
from that Ordinance in order to their being converted? but we have a Divine
Warrant so to do. The C orinthians were ^^idden, To p^t away a wicked person
(who had married his Mother-in-law; while, as it seems his own Father was yet
alive) from the Table of the Lord. What was this for? but in order to the
Conversion, Reduction, Reformation of the Delinquent. What was this, but to
deprive him of a great Remedy for his Conversion and Amendment, if an Erastian
may be credited?

Finally, The Lords S upper is an Ordinance rather Encharistical and
Consolatory, than converting. It Is also an Ordinance principally designed for
Nourishment, and that supposes Lise, Bread and Wine bcen't for D ead men. In
short, The L ords Supper is a S eal; and it is to Seal our Interest in the
Righteousness of Faith, in the D eath of C hrist, and in the Crown of Life. If
it Seal only the Reality of Gods Covenant, and his proffering and propounding
it unto us, it seals no more to a Receiver than to a Spectator, or to all
Receivers alike. No, it is to Seal our Interest. And there should be the Thing
S ealed, before the Seal ^e used. It can S eal no comfortable thing to the
Ungodly Man, for it not only Seals the offers of the Gospel, but it also Seals
our Tempers toward those Offers. When God gives it, it Seals (at least) His
willingness to be Reconciled unto us through Jesus Christ,; but when we Take it,
it Seals that Condition in which we at present are with reference to that
Reconciliation. The Sacrament is a Seal, in regards more awful and exact than
the Word can be. It Is great ignorance to think otherwise; and hence Luther
could say, If I were to call for a Curse upon my greatest Enemies, it should be
this; Let them go hear the Word of God, and then Despise it and Reject it. So
let them hasten to the Table of the Lord, and hereby they shall Seal the Stone
upon their Grave, and have DAMNATION written in great Characters upon their
Foreheads.

Seventhly and Lastly, We have the Best Examples to convince us, That nothing
less than a probable and credible Profession of a saving Faith is to be
required in those that would be Communicants at the Table of the Lord. Consult
the Monuments of Antiquity, and you will find the Ancients Uno Ore describing
their Baptized Ones, as Regenerate, and Renewed by the Inherent Graces of Gods
Holy Spirit. And what then were their Communicants? The Primitive Church would
not admit Paul into their Society, till they were well satisfied about the
Reality of the work of Grace in his Heart, and his Profession was become
probable and credible unto them. In the Primitive times, they were too strict
indeed, rather than too L oose in their Admissions; and they held men a long
while Competentes (as they called them) before they would gratify their desires
of Communion.

Origin expressly tells us, That the Christians did most exquisitely search the
S ouls of those that asked a full Communion w'ith them: elsewhere he says,
When men have made such a proficiency that they appear sanctified by the Divine
Word, then we call them to our mysteries. And elsewhere, The mysteries of the
Religion of Jesus, are duly delivered only to those who are holy and pure.
Lactantius tells us. That Bona men's purum pectus, vita Innocens, were in his
days required of Communicants. In Justin Martyr, who lived in the second
Century, writes, That they did examine persons, not only about their
Persuasion, but whether they had attained such a work of God upon their Souls,
as would enable them to conform entirely unto the Word and Will of God.
Cyprian, who lived in the Century after him, could say Vix pleba persuadec --
He could not easily persuade the Brethren of his Flock to consent unto the
Admission of such in whom Sincerity was questionable. Tertullian and others
inform us how the Catechumens were dealt withal; and what a Serutinium or Trial
they underwent; Whether they did indeed Renounce all their former vanities. It
was the Rule, Fiant s^rutinia, an verba fide^ Radicitus cord de fixerint. And
Austin signifies unto us, That according to the ancient custom grounded upon
the most evident Truth, none were Admitted into the Church of God on Earth, who
were visibly such as the S cripture excludes from the Kingdom of God in Heaven.
Moreover, the Agreement of the Pastors in the Days of Constantine about the
Discerning of the sincere is very memorable.

And in the latter Ages, it is well known what wishes the Eminent Reformers have
expressed themselves. The Learned Chamier wishes for much exactness in the
Examination of those that seek for Church Fellowship, Ne, qua^^^ fieri pot^rit,
L a eunt simones, that so Simon Magus might not get into the Church, B ucers
and Beza's complaints this way, are too long to be repeated. C omenius tells
us, That the Churches of Bohemia had an Examen conscientiar^^m before
A^missions to the Lords Table. And for a close of all, hear the great C alvin
saying, They that give the Bread and Wine to unworthy Ones, are as guilty of
Sacrilege every whit, as he that should give the Sacred Body of C hrist to be
Torn and Eat'n by Dogs, and Trampled on by Swine.

It may be Objected, That Judas was Admitted unto the L ords Supper,
notwithstanding our L ords Knowledge, that he was a Devil.

To this, it may be Answered,

First, That though a D ivine K nowledge had pronounced Judas a D evil, yet an
Humane K nowledge had not penetrated, so far into him; He had not hitherto
discovered himself. And methinks, our Friends do speak a Little too broad, when
they seem to plead for our Admitting of a known Judas, a known D evil, a known
Traitor, to our Holy Communion: Would they bring any people to an Ordinance,
that will be likely to leave them like Judas, more under the power of the D
evil than before? It may be again Answered, That it is very Questionable
whether Judas ever did partake in this Ordinance or, it is rather past Question,
That He did not, at least good old H^l^ry, besides diverse others of the
Ancients did not scruple so to say, Observe, It Is said, He Having Received the
Sop, went out immediately. The S^p was a part of a Rite belonging to the
Paschal Lamb. The Sacramental Bread was Broke, but no where Dipped. Our Lord,
without any Exception tells the Communicants, His Body was given for them, and
His Bleed shed for them. Whereas Judas was Dead and Damned, before the Death of
our Lord. Our Lord Excepted that S on of Perdition in His Prayers; much more is
it Likely that He would so do, in the S ymbols of those Benefits, which His
Prayers were for the Imp^tration of. Let no man then after this be so
impertinent,as from the Instance of Judas to Raise an Use of Reprehension unto
the Churches that would not have Hypocrites in them, if they could help it.
Brethren, if we could help it, we would not have our Churches to be Betrayed.

It may furthermore be Objected,

That in the Church of Israel, all sorts of persons were Admitted unto the
Sacraments; and why should it now be otherwise?

To this it may be Answered,

First, That the Form of the Church then was National; and (...) man's ^e^r
being of that Nation might give him greater pretensions to C hurch communion.
Whereas, in our Days, A National Church is but a contrivance of an Humane
Invention and Original. But we may with more Efficacy Retort this upon them
that make the Cavil. As it was a capital (...) for one that was not a Jew to
come into the Temple: and hence Paul once had like to have been knocked of the
head, because it was rumoured, That he had a Greek with him there; so it is
unlawful for one that is not according to the Sacred Language, A Jew inwardly,
to come into a Church of the Lord Jesus.

It may be Again Answered, That even among the Israelites, those that came to
the Sacraments were under Obligation to give manifestation of what might be
esteemed, A Work of Grace in their S ouls. If they would not Express a sense of
their Misery and Wretchedness by Nature, and their Need of a Sacrifice and a S
aviour, they might not Communicate. See Deuteronomy. 26 5.

It may be further Answered, That a C eremonial Holiness was required of all
the Israelites that came unto the Sacraments; and there were Officers whose
Business 'twas to make Exploration of it. Well, And should not Gospel-Churches
have the An^itype of That? Almost all Things in the Mosaic Paedagogy were
Typical; and the Substance of every S hadow there, is, that which we are to be
studious of. What have we now but Real Holiness to correspond with the C
eremonial, among the Jews? if a man be morally Unclean, he must now be thrust
from the Holy Things; or else we provoke the God of Heaven, by not
Distinguishing between the precious and the vile. God forbid, That we should
willingly see any under our watch and charge do so self-Ruining a thing, as, To
Eat with his Uncleanness upon him.

It may be, L astly, answered, That the Church of the Jews did use to be most
wonderfully Accurate and Scrupulous, in their Trying of Proselytes, before they
would admit these to S acraments among them. Buxtor^ and Ainsworth out of the
Jewish Rabbis, will convince you, That in former Ages, if any one were
desirous to join unto the Church of the Jews, they would pierce into the very
Soul of him, to discern whether he were acted by any carnal Motives in it; and
hence, they received fewer in the Days of David and of S olomon, than they
would have done in times of less prosperity. They would see, whether the
Proselytes were (...) or no; whether they had pure Ends and pure Hearts, in
becoming so. Now, it is, The Law of the P roselyte, if any part of the Jewish
Law, that must be urged as Exemplary to the Churches of the Gentiles.

But it may be then Enquired,

What is it that we may safely Judge to be, A probable and credible profession
of a Saving Faith?

To this I answer; That we must beware of Unscriptural Impositions in this
Affair; we must not impose any Modes of Profession which we have no warrant
for. It Is a Tyranny to Enjoin upon every man, A Relation about the precise Time
and Way of their Conversion unto God. Few that have been Restrained by a
Religious Education, can give such an one. Nor, is it any other than a cruelty,
to Enjoin upon every man, An Oral and a Public Relation of his Experiences.
Every Good man has not such a courage and presence of mind, as can speak
pertinently before a Congregation of many Hundreds.

But still; as the Probationers for our communion, are to make a Profession of
their Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, as that Redeemer in whom all F ullness
dwells, and on whom they Rely for communications from that Fullness to their
own Souls; thus, we must Look for some justifying circumstance of that
Profession. Our C harity toward all men of whom we know nothing amiss is. To
Hope all things, and Believe the Best. But when we come to make a Judgment of
them that lay claim to privileges with us, it is but Reason that our Charity
should require a more positive Evidence of the Qualification on which the claim
is made. In the Primitive Times, They made such a Profession at their being
Added unto the Church; and the Profession had this Justifying Circumstance in
it, that they made it, when they Endangered their very L ives to make it. I
make no doubt, but that in such a Time of Persecution, the Like Profession
ought to be esteemed sufficient. But in places where the true Religion is in
Repute and Fashion, then to look for some other Justifying Circumstance of a
Profession, is but a Reasonable Conformity to the custom and manner of the
Apostles. Now, Reason cannot r^^^ly dicta^e an easier, a ^^irer, a fi^ter
method for this; than, That a (...) a blameless and (...) Conversation, should
either by (...) o^ (...), express what (...) the Word of God has had upon his
(...) Soul. The Savior of such a Religion (...), very much manifest the (...)
of him that makes it; (...) i^ more ^or the (...), for the (...) of His people,
than to hear good Christians than making that Invitation, Come and (...) all ye
that fear God, and I will declare what (...) done for my S oul. It is true,
That after all we cannot be Infallibly sure, that we do not admit an Hypocrite
in Heart into our Communion. Nor indeed, after the distinctest profession of a
Dogmatical and Historical Faith, can we be sure that the person whom we admit,
is not an Heretic in Heart. Nevertheless, no man scarce ever doubted, That
Communicants must be Examined about their Orthodoxy. But we should go as far as
we Reasonably can to prevent the pollution of Holy Things, by the Unregenerate.
In the pressing of this matter, I do not insist on that Celebrated Scripture,
in Mat. 7 6. Give not that which is Holy, unto the Dogs; which the Unregenerate
may be too much compared unto; though Austin long since, and Chryso^tom before
him, and ^ertullian before him, thus improved it. But

That which causes me thus to enlarge upon this Article is, because it is of a
peculiar Importance to these Churches of the Lord Jesus. The Renowned Owen,
has evinced, That the Great Apostasy of the Christian Church was occasioned
by their Letting go this principle, That particular Churches ought to consist
of Regenerate persons. Alas, That any Batteries should be made upon this
Foundation-principle of our C hurch-Discipline, among our selves. I care not
whom it exasperates. That I look upon a Defection from just cares against Mixed
C ommunions, to be a thing fatal unto our Churches, and very offensive to that
God, who in fiery Thunders once uttered such words as those, Ye have brought
into my S anctuary, S trangers, Uncircumcised in Heart, to be in my Sanctuary,
to pollute it, which is an Abomination. When once we come to forego that old
Protestant Primitive Opinion, That Regeneration is a Necessary Qualification of
our Communicants, we may without a mere Fancy, over-hear the doleful, woeful
shout, which was aud^^^ sounded from Heaven to Rome, when the Church Doors
began to grow as wide as Hell Gates themselves, Hodie Effusum est Venenum in
Ecclesiam! Now the Churches are swallowing down their B ane.

Come then, Let not our Dead men be set at the S upper of the Living God. There
was indeed an Ancient and a Foolish Abuse of the S acrament (condemned by a
Carthaginian Coun^^) wherein Dead Corpses had the Elements of the Holy Supper
put into their mouths But let not them that are Dead in Trespasses and Sins, be
told that they shall reap any Advantage by this Ordinance, till they Arise from
the Dead, and Christ shall give them Life. What shall a Can^anite have to do in
the House of the Lord of Hosts? Let us write upon our Church Doors that Ancient
Canon, (...)

None but a Disciple may be a Communicant. I conclude in the words of the Holy
Herbert,Avoid, profaneness come not here Nothing but Holy, pure, and clear. Or,
That which Groan^th to be so May at his peril further go.

To which words, I take leave to add those of that blessed Ancient, of whom
Sophronius testifies, That he never Ly'd; Him whom Theodoret styled, Eximium T
errarum orbis Luminare, and when ^idore styled, (...).

Says he, Tell me, what can a multitude avail us? The Desirable Multitude are
the Holy, not the Many. I would endeavor that the C hurch may be adorned work
Many; but with many that are Good; if this cannot be, I would have the Good,
though but Few. In Act.3. H^^.8.

He (...) again. The Multitude* is but a more plentiful ^^rel for the Fire.
This I say lest any should (...) the C hurch for its Numerousness; Let him
rather (...) to make it Good. In Act. Ho^.^4.

Yea, ever now and then in his famous Writings, He tells us, That the
Introducing of Unworthy Multitudes, into the Church, was a thing of most
intolerable consequence; that it made the Church, A Fold for B easts, and A
stable for ^amels and Asses; and brought a most unsufferable Reproach upon the
Name of God; and that it had a pernicious Tendency to Debauch and infect the
whole Fl^ck, which such scabbed Sheep were admitted into; and that it would
procure unto the careless Pastors, nothing but shame in this, and pain and
grief in another World.

Such things were uttered by a Golden Mouth, When the Churches was falling into
the Degeneracies that some would precipitate us into; but let these Churches
now hear them, as, The Warnings of the Lord.

It Is now more than time that we should pass on to say.

Conclusion. II.
The Supper of the Lord, is to be administered only in the ASSEMBLILS of
Believers. It is ^itly s^yled A Communion, the Communion of Saints. is most
gloriously and admirably expre^^^ in i^. It is said in 1 Cor.10.17. We being
many are one Bread, for we are all partakers of that one Bread. Many Grain^
make but one Loaf, (and many Drops make one Cup of Wine) even so, many Saints
make but one Church, which is the mystical Body of the Lord Jesus. Now it is a
main scope of the Lords Supper to be a Sign and Seal of this blessed Mystery.
To Dispense the Lords Supper, when there is but one or two to communicate
thereof, is a thing for which we have neither Precept nor Pattern in the Book of
God. For one or two by a Bedside, or so, to go to observe this great Ordinance,
is to do an injury thereunto; it is a Corruption which God will one day incline
His People to the Reformation of. And some S uperstitious Notions and Conceits
about the Sacrament, have too much Contributed unto the maintaining of this
usage hitherto. I think the French, the Dutch, and the Scotch Churches have
already laid it aside; and he that shall read Musculus, and B^llinger, and
Beza, and Danaeus, and Aretius, and others, will find Great Names opposing of
it. We are told in Act. 20.7. That there must be a coming together, or an
Assembly of pious People for this Ordinance. (...) we are advised in 1 Cor.
11.18,20. There must be a coming together in the C hurch for it; a S ynaxis or
Godly People is needful for this intent and purpose; yea, they must be enough to
be called, many, there. And hence our Savior (...) about Him, in the first
precede^^ (...) have of this Holy Thing. Where ^re (...) savoury Admonition,
that the excellen^ (...) has given to us hereabout. Let the we^^ (...) approach
to the Supper of the L ord; and let the sick recall to mind, what they formerly
enjoyed in such Approaches, contenting themselves with a spiritual Communion;
according to that of Austin, ^cre^e et man^^ca^^.

Conclusion, III.
It is in REMEMBRANCE of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we are to Do this. [And
this also adds unto the confutation of that Popish Figment which holds the Real
presence here.] We are therefore told, in 1 C or. 11. 26. Hereby ye show the L
ords Death. The Apostle uses a word, (...), which is frequently used for the
Preaching and Spreading of the Gospel; and it alludes to the Haggada at the
Passover of the Jews. The Jews at the Passover had a solemn Declaration, or
An^unciation of their deliverance from their ancient Slavery. Thus, at the
Lords S upper we have a C o^^^e^ration of the Deliverance wrought for our
Souls, by the Bl^^d of the Lord Jesus, who was, the Paschal (...) sacrificed
for us. It Is an Ordinance made up of lively shadows, wherein the Mediation of
the Lord Jesus Christ is exhibited unto us. Our Lord is gone from us; and as we
do by some Token keep up the Remembrance of an Absent Friend; so do we in this
Ordinance Retain and Revive the Remembrance of an Absent Lord. We do therein,
as it were behold the Death of our Lord Jesus acted over again to the life; and
we Remember what He was, we Remember what He did, we Remember what He said,
when He was Incarnate here. We read in Joh. 19 5. When P ilate had been
Torturing our Lord, he brought him forth, saying Behold the Man! Even so, in
the L ords Supper our Lord is, as it were, in E^^^gie produced unto us; and we
hear that voice, Behold the Man! Behold a preci^us and a dying Savior! O see
what He has done, see what (...) has born for you! Our Lord Jesus in the^
Ordinance built a M^nument for Himself before He died; and the Maus^ae^m of
old, which was c^unten one of the seven wonders of the World, was inferio^r to
this, as to the (...) and Glory of it. We were not Eyewitnesses of (...); But
in this Ordinance we have Him (...) before (...) as that: and (...) for
Ministers, by lifting up the Bread and Wine toward Heaven to do what has been
called, Are Elevation of the Host. But yet it is (...), a C ommemoration of the
great S acrifice; and it is not only to our selves, or our Friends but it is
before the Blessed God himself, that we make the C ommemoration. And it is a
most Affectionate, Vigorous, Practical Remembrance which we are now to have of
our Lord.

But these Things must Issue in this

Application.
May we then Universally and Conscientiously Observe the HOLY S UPPER, in
Remembrance of our Glorious Lord. It is a Lamentable Thing to see what
Multitudes, and Quantites among us do daily turn their Backs upon the Table of
the Lord Jesus It is the Charracter of the Adult (...), in Prove. 30.20. She
eats, and Wipes her mouth and says, I have done ^o wickedness: this is the
guise of wicked persons, about the Forbidden Dainties of Sin: but the Precious
Dainties of Christ, find an Abuse Contrary, and yet Parralel, her-unto; it is the
Folly of many persons, They eat not, and Wipe their mouths, and say, I have
done no Wickedness; though it be a desperate and a Prodigious Wickedness which
they are herein guilty of I must confess to you, That when I Muse on the
horrible Neglect, and (therein) C ontempt of the Lords Supper, which prevails
in the midst of us; and this too among the Children of those, who have
undergone the fatigues of coming to and Planting in an Howling Wilderness of
America, that Theirs with Them might enjoy Unpolluted Sacraments; when I see
great Shoals, and whole Scores of People going a way from the Table that has
the Bread of Life upon it; then, The Fire Burns, my Heart is Hot within me, and
I cannot Suppress the just indignation of my Sorrows at so Unchristian a
practice in those that will yet be called Christians, and Challenge to
themselves the Name begun at Anti^ch.

But has the Son of God indeed said concerning the Celebration of the Holy
Supper, THIS DO? Alas, That such Vast Numbers do practically make that cursed
Answer, in Jere. 44. 16. We will not Hearken unto thee. Will you not? But, I
beseech you then o Hearken unto these few Considerations, which I do ^n the
Name of the Eternal God require your Attention to; -- And, O Our God, that
formest the Spirit: of man within Him, Let thy Presence and Power so accompany
these Considerations, as to affect the soul of the Reader into those
Resolutions which are the Good Things that thou requirest of us! But what shall
I say unto these Truants from the School of the Lord Jesus? or out of what
Quiver shall I fetch my Arrows? Shall I tell them, that they are in some sort
worse than old Cain himself? This may be proved; for Cain being, for his
wickedness debarred from the Ordinances of God, Cried out, my punishment is
greate^ than I can bear: but these debar themselves from the Divine Ordinances,
and yet bear it well enough. It Is amazing: but O Earth, Earth, Earth, (you that
are so busy about Earth, and the Riches and Honors of the World, as to
disregard this needful thing) H ear the Word of the Lord.

Consider, First.
It is a very Great Iniquity that you are Chargeable withal; it is a Scarlet,
and a Crimson Sin.

For,

First, It is a Disobedience to the Commands of the Lord Jesus Christ. Surely,
It Is beyond Question with you, That the Lord Jesus Christ has Commanded His
Disciples to celebrate an Holy Supper in Remembrance of Him. Indeed, the
English Nation has of late years been infested with a Sort of men called
Quakers, that have gone to Evacuate this Blessed* Institution of our Lord; but
These are a Sort of Blasphemous H^ereticks, that would Seduce us to give up our
whole Religion, and E mbarque our S ouls no more on that Bottom, which all the
Saints have hitherto been S av'd upon; There is hardly any, other Ordinance
which our Savior has appointed for our Benefit, but these Filthy Dreamers have
endeavored the Extirpation of it; no wonder then that This is vilify'd and
Reproched by them! and yet these Prodigious Hypocrites, while they cavil at the
Lords Supper as a Ceremony, can at the same time advance their own Ceremonial
Fooleries, of Thee and Thou, and the Hat, into the Catalogue of things
important to Salvation: They introduce those Diabolical Sacraments, while they
abolish those which our dearest Lord has instituted; and a s they would poison
us with a New Digestion of that Vomit which the U^lean Creatures of the former
Ages, have cast up, so they Labor to infect our Eucharist with an
Extraordinary and Peculiar Venom.

But, the Apostle Paul has told us, That we are to Eat this Bread, and Drink
this Cup, and Show the L ords Death, till He come; and it is a wonderful
Phrensy in any man to tell us, That our Lord is come now any more than He was
come, when that Command was written* Men and Brethren, It Is the Command of our
Lord Jesus, This do; and will you Boggle at any of His Commands? As God said
unto Joshua in another case, in Josh 1.9. Have not I Commanded thee! B e not
thou Dis^ay'd; So does our Joshua say to us, in this, I have Commanded thee;
and will thou be Disobedient? The R^^kabites were Commended for their
Abstaining from the use of Wine, in Obedience to their Father: but how can it
be Excused that you abstain from the use of Wine with Bread, in Disobedience to
your Savior! Have you no sense of His Authority to Command* or of His ^^er and
Justice to Condemn the Disobedient? Or is there in you the Stomach of the
Crocodile, whose Maker says, He is made without Fear! If it be said about a
Magistrate laboring for our Good, in (...) 13 2. He who Resists the
Ordinance of God, Receives Damnation to himself: What less Damnation is
incurred by R^^^sing a S acrament Ordained for our Good? It has been of old
said, Non Privatio, sed Contemptus damnat; Men may want the Sacrament, and yet
be saved forever; but if they Slight the Sacrament they fall into no less than
a Damnable Disobedience. Be it known unto you. That Sins of Omission are no
less Deadly and Dreadful, than those of Commission are. It Is because men DID
NOT as they ought to do, that they at last are Thunder-Str^ck with that
sentence, Depart ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire And Believe me, THIS Omission
is none of the least Provocations unto God; if they who did not Visit Christ in
a P rison are to suffer the Vengeance of Eternal ^ire, surely they who do not
Visit Christ at His Table have a s little to say for themselves. And this the
rather; for,

Secondly, This Disobedience has deep and black Aggravations in it. O That you
would a litt^^ Penetrate into the Monstrous Nature of your mi^^^riage, While
you stay from the Holy Supper in ^^ch you are to Remember the Lord Jesus Christ.

First, Look upon the Object against whom you sin, by this Unaccountable
Omission.

Breefly, you S in against Christ; but how execrable a thing is that in you
that hope to be saved by Him! It is a terrible passage, in Heb. 10. 28.29. He
that Despised Moses's Law died without mercy, of how much sorer Punishment
shall he be thought worthy, that has tr^d under foot the Son of God! What, A
sorer Punishment than a Death without mercy^ Who Trembles not? Moses gave a
Law, that a Passover to Typ^^y a Messiah to come, should be observed: and it
was a Death without mercy to omit the doing of it. Well, Jesus ha s given a
Law, that a Supper to Remember a Messiah already come, should be observed: and
i^ we omit it, we are worthy of more than, A Death without mercy, even, A Death
without pity too It is no less than the Eternal S on of God, whose Commands
you Violate; and you do moreover pretend such Relations to Him, that you are
altogether Hardened and shameless if you don't Repent of this Violation. Shall
not a Wife hearken to her Husband? but you seem to own the Lord Jesus Christ in
that Relation; and you would lay hold on that word, T hy M aker is thy Husband,
and thy Redeemer. Shall not a Child hearken to his Father? but you seem to own
the Lord Jesus Christ in that Relation too; and you would not Renounce that
Name of His, The Everlasting Father. Thy not coming to the Table of the Lord,
is a Disobedience to the Husband and the Father of thy soul! Adam would hearken
to a Wife, Jacob would hearken to a Child, yea, Naaman would hearken to a S
ervant: and will you be Disobedient unto the Lord Jesus Christ? Yea, you
yourselves have hearkened unto the Devil a Million times: and shall the motions
of the Savior now be contempti^^ with you? I would go on to say, It Is a Friend
(...) Matchless and a Peerless Friend, that now Invite s you to a ^anquet with
Him! but how Rude, how Vile, how Disingenuous are you to make Light of the
invitation?

The Immortal and Glorious King of Heaven, says to us poor Beggars* ^^t O
Friends, and Drink abundantly O Beloved: but while you live in that Omission
about which we are now Reasoning; you make that nes^ndons Reply upon Him, He
may keep His Danties to Himself, if He plea^^^ Oh bafest Inhumanity (...) Lord,
what Prodigies are we!

But this is not all* It Is the Token and Present (...) a ^^ing Friend which you
now give a most abominable Disrespect unto. When was it, that our Lord said,
This Do in Rememberance of Me? The sacred writers do assure us, It was in the
Night wherein He wa^ ^etray'd. Oh make a pause upon this Article! The (...)*
Friend that we had in the world went into a fa^ Country; where He Died, and His
Death was not only Cruel in it self, but also Designed, and Offered, and
Useful for US: it was for us that He laid down His Life; but just at His Death
He took out of His bosom a P icture of Himself, and sent it unto us, with this
Massage, M y Friends, often Look upon this, and as often Remember your Dying
surety. But behold the Tr^^t^^ents which our Dying Jesus meets withal! Men
throw by the Memorial of a Dying S aviour; and yet hope for an Happy and a
saving Interest in His Death! What an Unfriendly part is this! and how
Incongruous! Our Lord has said in John 15. 14. Ye are my Friends, is ye do
whatsoever I Command you. It is the plain Command of our Lord-Redeemer, Break
Bread among my Disciples, in the Remembrance of Me. But you act like none of
His Friends when you decline this Devotion to Him. No, when the people do
Throng so fast out of Doors before a Sacrament, our Lord Jesus Looks and
Mourns, and says, Behold How my Enemies are crowding together there! And what
has He deserved at your Hands that you should thus Herd yourselves among His
Enemies? Methinks I overhear the Almighty Savior saying, What I niquity have
they found in Me, that my Commandment and my Communion is so little Esteemed
with them?

This is the Object of your Sin*

Again, Look upon the Vows that you break by this O^^^ion. God knows whether
your Sea-storm-Vowes, and your Sickbed Vows, have not been that you will
study to conform unto the whole known Will of God? Behold, you now pass by a
Considerable Thing, whereof it may be said, This is the Will of God in Christ
Jesus concerning you. But your baptismal Vows are most certainly and
wretchedly broken by this Impiety of yours. The baptized are under bonds, to do
all things whatsoever the Lord Jesus has Commanded And i s not This one of
Those Things? Do not think now to mock the God of Heaven, by something that
Looks like a Renewal of your baptismal C ovenant, without seeking the Supper of
the Lord. If you content yourselves to hear the Form of a C ovenant Recited
unto you, and reply a Formal, Yes, unto it, as many do that they may have their
children baptized without Industrious, Assiduous, and uneasy Labors to be
sound among Worthy C ommunicants at the Table of the Lord; I am to tell you,
That you do but Mock the Great God in what you do; and verily, He will not be
Mocked. Every time that you contentedly go from the Holy Supper, there may be
fixed upon you that Brand, in Isa 24.5. They have broken the Ev^rlasting C
ovenant. You do what you can, that the Waters of baptism should be turned into
Rivers of B rimstone for the Eternal Vexation of your souls! It Is a perfidious
thing thus to be an Emansor from the Camp of the Lord; Oh come and take thy
Station there!

Once more, Look upon the S ouls that you Wrong by this Omission. You sin
against your Neighbors, and lay a Woeful scandal before their Souls; I say, a
Woeful one; because, Woe to the world because of offenses, but (much more) woe to
that man by whom the offense comes! I must blacken this your Sin, as Mem^can
did the flately Coyness of the Persian Empress, when she kept from the Table
which the King had Commanded her unto, in Est.1.16. This is not a Wrong done to
the King only, but to all the people. Even so, when you keep from the Table of
the Eternal King, T his Deed will come abroad, and when it shall be Reported,
That the Lord Commanded you to be brought before Him, and you came not, all the
people will despise the King of Heaven. By this Impiety, (for I do again
without scruple call it so) you strengthen the Hands of a Multitude in the
doing of Evil: and you Encourage all the Enmity in the world against those
Flocks of the Lord Jesus, which you will not Feed among. I pray tell me, What
Supper would our Lord Jesus have in the world, if all were like you?

And your Example in this, which is always Evil, is yet more H urtful, if you
have any Reputation for Godlyness among your Neighbors. If many a man be
asked, Why he does not come unto the S upper of the Lord? He will reply, such a
man in the Neighborhood is a Godly man, and he seeks it not: why then should
I? Here is the bridge of the Trap, which it ruins many a filly little soul to
Touch upon: thus thou that should Keep thy brother, do rather Kill him:
for thou do proclaim unto him, There is an Ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ
which I think I may be as well without as with!

But be assured, As the Lord will not hold that man Guiltless, who shall so
Take H is Name in Vain. So the blood, the Death of S ouls will be sound in the
S kirts of them that shall set a scandalous Exemple of Not coming to the S
upper of the Lord.

I n a word, Look and see, whether you can find any thing among the worst of
men to Equalize, and so to J ustify, the I niquity of this Omission. As it was
said in Jer. 2. 10. Pass over to the ^^^es of Chittim^ and see, and send unto
Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing. Thus may it
be said, Pass over to the Mahometans of Africa, and send unto the Idolaters of
America and see if there be any such thing among them, as that which you are
now (...) for! That Abaddon and Apollyon, that Hellish Impostor Mahomet, has
ordered his Followers to Drink no Wine* and these want not those among them,
that comply with his order, however severe it may by some be reckoned. What
shall then be said of us, who are Enjoined by the Lord Jesus to use a Sacred
Wine (with Bread) in Rememberance of H im, and yet make no Custom or
Conscience of doing so? Are we the sincere Followers of the Blessed Jesus,
while we pay not so much Homage to Him, as almost a seventh part of Mankind
does to the Great Devil of the East?

Once more, There was an Indian S ackem in this Countr^y, unto whom there
appeared a S pirit, which affirmed himself to be, The English man's God: This
Apparition required him, To forbear the use of a strong Drink, which his Nation
generally had rather Die than be without: and the salvage did most Exactly
forbear that Liquor forever: Yea, such was his Resignation to his Infernal
instructor, that a few Months ago, the Spectre bidding him to Kill himself, and
telling him, that he should within a few hours Revive into an I ncorruptible I
mmortality, he did notwithstanding the Defeats which his Attendents had given
several of his Attempts to do it, at length by a complicated self deceit and
self-Murder, throw his own soul into the ^lutche^ of the Destroyer. But behold,
The English man's Lord, or at least the Christian man's Lord, has required us to
Eat and to Drink upon a divine Repast, and this too, for the Salvation of our
souls, in Glory and H onour and I mmortality: but we do not mind what He says:
it is as if we had said unto the Son of God, What have we to do with thee, thou
Holy one? Alas, what Madness have we been bitten withal, that we are s^^itten
thus with a Passion worse than an Hydrop^ob^e* But no words are hard enough to
describe this matter with: I shall only say Now J udge, Oh Inhabitants of
Boston, and ye men of New England, I pray you, Whether a Not-coming to the
Table of the Lord, be not a Greater Iniquity than men are well aware.

Consider, secondly.
It is a very Great Calamity to which you Expose your selves. It is Injurious
both to your Inward and your Outward man: you are enormous Transgressors
against the second Commandment in a special and peculiar manner; now those the
blessed God calls, T he ^aters of him; and he says, I will Visit their
Iniquities.

Hence, I do not at all admire it, That this Omission often lays a thousand
Thorns in the Deathbeds of them that have had this blame lying upon them. How
often have I heard these Lamentations proceeding from those that have been
passing into another World! Their Lamentations have had the Groans of a Deadly
we^nded man setting an Accent on them; and they have sighed, Oh That I had
join^d my self to some Church of the Lord Jesus before I came to this! Oh that
I had been a more frequent and serious Guest, at the Table of the Lord! If God
will now spare me, that I may recover strength before I go hence and be no
more, the first thing I do shall be to Reform this Omission! It must needs
wound the Soul of a sensible man, to think, what wrongs he has done himself by
his, Not coming to the Table of the Lord.

For,

First, Look upon the Damage done to your Internal and Eternal Concerns by this
Omission. It was the Threatening against those which did Omit the ancient
Passover, in Exodus 12 15. T hat Soul shall be cut off! But, believe it, the
Lords S^pper is a Sacrament of an account not inferior unto that: the least
that you incur is, a Grievous loss unto your souls*

Your Souls must Loose the Grace of God, while you continue in this Omission
All this while, your Souls are thing away in their I niquities. They ask you
for, Bread! Bread! and you, cruel Ostriches, are deaf unto the cry. The Lord
Jesus, the true David, has found your Souls, as in 1 samuel 30. 12. Like the poor
Famished Egyptian in the Wilderness, and he has offered you Cakes and Clusters
for your support; but you deny them, you reject them! The Lords Supper is an
Ordinance, though not for the Begetting, yet for the strengthening, of Grace.
Very powerful Sights are herein Exhibited unto us: which are not only most
lively Motives unto us: To Hate the Evil, and Love the Good, but also very
sweet Channels, to convey that Grace which may Enable us thus to do. We have
here those Golden pipes, through which the Golden Oils of Grace may be derived
unto us: but you foolishly decline to be sucking at them. You Complain, That
you dare not come to the Lords Table, while you Corruptions are so strong, as
they at present are But let me tell you, That your Notcoming may be the cause
why your Corruptions are so strong. One of the Ancients could express himself
to that purpose, I am often hurried with strong corruptions: Well, but I know
what to do: [Calicem Salutarem accipiam] I will go to the Lords T able for a
Cure. Assuredly, your Souls Languish, for the want of that Communion with the
Lord Jesus, which is here to be Enjoy^d. Your Hearts remain horribly
Distempered and Disordered: why, but because the Best of Remedies is not
Applied? Long Fasting may be the cause why you have no bet^^r Appetite unto the
Things of God. And (...) sides, it is a very gross Hypocri^y, to complain of a
Blind mind, and an Hard Heart, and yet not use the mean for the redressing of
those Diseases.

Would you exact the utmost ^^^vency and Constancy of Devotion from your Souls,
while you do not use the Ordinance which is above all proper to maintain it?
Methinks, thy very Soul within thee, should reproach thee as worse than an
Egyptian Task master for thy Cruelty.

Your Souls must also loose the Joy of God, while you continue in this
Omission. Would you come suitably to the Table of the Lord, you might come
singing the Song usual with the Jews, that fetched water from Siloam* at the
Feast of Tabernacles, in Isa 12.3. With J oy shall ye draw Water out of the
Wells of Salvation. Truly, the Lords Supper is an Ordinance of such
Obsignations as might cause you to Rejoice with J oy unspeakable and full of
Glory; alas, that you should undervalue all that Joy! There is many an Hannah,
that will not Eat of the Peace Offering, because of their being able to say, I
am of a sorrowful Spirit. Nay, but their E ating might prove a cure for their
Sorrow. Many a devout Soul has Experienced those Vital Touches from the Spirit
of the Lord Jesus, in this Ordinance, which have caused them to cry out, as the
Dying ^levian did, O my joys, O my joys, they are unspeakable! and with,
Peter, Lord, it is Good to be here! and with Simeon, Lord, now Let thou thy
Servant Depart in peace! It is a Dark ^ime with many a Soul, they are dismally
harassed with Doubts and Pears and Astonishments; because of this Fault, They
come not unto the Banqueting House where the Banner is Love! Oftentimes, The
Comforter that should Relieve Souls, is far from them, because they will not
here come near to the Redeemer that has bought their Souls.

Indeed, there is but an Uncomfortable Aspect in your Withdraw from the Lords
Table, and you do therein Represent unto your selves the Hardest, and the
saddest Fate that can possibly befall you. To Leave, A little Number of men,
separated from the Rest of the World, for the Enjoyments and Embraces of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and for your selves at the same Time to, Go away; Methinks,
it looks too uncomfortably to be patiently o^ cheerfully Endured! Would you
have it Thus, at the Last Judgment, in the Day of the Lord that shall burn like
an Oven! wh^ do ^ou then so S acramentally bespeak this Confusion for your
selves? You cannot but be Enemies to your own Comfort in it.

Secondly, Look upon the Damage done to your Eternal Concerns, by this Omission
also. It was of old said by Them, in Exodus 5. 3. Let us sacrifice to the Lord
our God, left He fall upon us with Pestilence, or with Sword. There is Danger
lest the Lord your God fall upon you with direful strokes, and plagues and
Wounds, if you do not care to come unto the Table of the Lord. Such an Omission
had like to have cost Moses his Life; he omitted a Sacrament, and it is said,
The Lord sought to kill him. But O do not run the venture of T hat? I will not
conceal from you, That my personal Acquaintance has not been altogether
without Examples of those (otherwise) well-inclined persons unto whom, after
much urging them to do what was their concernment in this Regard, it has been
at last very sole^nly said, Well, T he God of Heaven has spoken thus with fair
words unto you; you may expect now to hear from Him in smart Blows upon you;
The Effect whereof has quickly been some sudden and wounding stroke of the
most High upon them, little short of Death it self: So were they Awakened: But
God forbid that any of you should wa^^ for Blows from His Omnipotent Hand.

It is for this cause that our Houses are many times frowned upon. God will
bla^t and break our Houses, because we do not Build His; and many of us have
our Children at this day feeding of Worms in their Graves, to chastise our not
Feeding upon our Savior at His Holy Table. Indeed the Calamit^ which this
whole Country has been followed and entangled with, is likely to prodeed from
the Controversy which our God has with us, for this Omission. We are suffering
by Poverty. Well, It Is said in Hag. 1.9, Ye looked for much, and ^o, it came to
Little; Why? says the Lord of Hosts! because of my House that is waft. At the
first planting or ^^en were generally set upon Frequenting a^ Upholding the
House of God; and then the plantation flourished. But We are, A Generation of
sinful men, Risen up in our Fathers stead, that are loath to trouble our (...)
about a Room in the House of our God; hence it is that our own Houses go down
the Wind; and out Tradings do all come to Little. We have been suffering by
Invasion too. Well, It Is said in Exodus 3^. 23,24. T hrice in a year shall all
your Men-Children appear before the Lord God: [i e. at the Three great
Festivals] Then shall no men desire thy Land, Why, There are men who Desire our
Land. We have been oppressed by those that said, We had none; and we have been
Assaulted be more that say, We shall have none. But is no man within Hearing
now, that goes not up so much as Once a year to the Gospel Feast of our Lord?
Let (...) tell you This Omission of yours, is one of the A^hans, which Trouble
the Land wherein you Live.

Consider: Thirdly.
It Is impossible for you to Excuse or Defend your Not C oming to the Table of
the Lord. What have you to plead for this Omission? B ring forth your strong
Reasons, and let it be seen whether in the Balance of the Sanctuary they will
not be found lighter than the smoke it self.

The Objection that so^e have made against coming to the Lords Supper, is, That
the Terms of Communion which our Churches demand, are too (...) and hard for
them But, I pray, wherein? What (...) might seem too strict and hard in the
demand s of these Churches formerly, is now generally Relaxed and Abated; the
Churches generally require no more at the Admission of any to their Communion,
than any Godly man would be willing to come up unto. They do indeed Require
some Relation touching the Regenerating influences of God upon the Souls of
their Communicants; but they oblige YOU not unto too Critical Discourses upon
the Ti me or Way of your Conversion; (...) they are content, that you Write, if
you find your selves not disposed to speak, upon those Affairs. In short, you
satisfy them, if after a sound Knowledge and Belief and a commendable
Conversation, you make but a modest Address unto them, Telling them, That you
hope the Grace of God has quickened your souls and that you ask their Communion
in the Holy Supper, for the Assistance and the Nourishment of that grace, and
withal give a good (...) for your thus Hoping, thus Asking. (...) were ill
manners to challenge a Fellowship with such a Society, (...) a Church of the
Lord Jesus, upon lower or easier Terms; and no Good man will boggle at them, if
he do sufficiently Remember those words of our Lord Jesus, Except ye be
converted, and become as Little Children, ye shall not Enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven.

But the most common and usual Objection with which men Apologize for their not
coming to the Lords S upper, is,

I fear, I am not fit for the Supper of the Lord; and it is a dangerous thing
to come unworthily thereunto.

Now there are these things to stop the mouth of this Objection.

First, It may be that you are Fit, when you do not imagine so. Those that have
most Jealousies and Suspicions of themselves, are least likely to be, The
Devils among the Twelve. We read in Isa. ^0. 10 about, A Child of Light in
Darkness. Your Darkness about your Estates, is no sign of your Hypocrisy. A S
pirit with much Fear-argues rather a Spirit without Guil^. Although (...) se^
little Good in your selves, yet can you say, That (...) prefer a Christ before
a world? and, That you abb^^^ Sin above a Toad? Is nothing so much the Load of
your Souls, as that you have so little Grace in your Souls! Then, Come in, thou
blessed of the Lord, why stand thou without? Be of good Courage; come with
all your In^^^^tary and unavoidable Infirmities. Come, with all your Hated
(...) your Loathed plagues; you shall be welcome here, the ^ou have but Faith
enough to say with Tears, Lord, help my Unbelief! and though you have but love
enough to say with Tears, L ord that I could Love the^ more! and though you ^a^e
but Repentance enough to Grieve because that sin is no more grievous to you.

Secondly, Whence arise those Tears which you are now hurried and harassed
with! You find many Misgiving and Recoylings of your minds, against your coming
to the Lord Jesus in the Sacrament; but may it not be sa^^, as in Gal. ^. 8.
This persuasion comes not of him that calls you. As for the Holy Spirit, He
calls and says Come to this Ordinance, O come with an H ungry, Thirsty
perishing Soul. May it not then be the Evil Spirit, which gives you an Evil
Counsil, to stay away? You may observe it, That the sincerest Christians, when
they are engaging in that solemn, serious, awful work of. Entering into Church
Fellowship, they find themselves wonderfully Distracted in their minds; there
arise those Commotions and Confusions in them, which they (...) before felt the
like unto. This now is but a sign, (...) at it is a good work which you are new
upon: if it were not so, the Devil (...) be so ^^ily to divert you from it, or
to disturb (...) in it.

Thirdly, ^ut what^ Not fit for the S upper of the Lord? How are you then I it
for (...) Judgment of the Lord? What would your portion be, if the God of
Heaven should resolve, This Night thy Soul shall be required of thee? We read
in Acts 20. (...). A young man, while Paul was long Preaching, fell down, and
was taken up Dead Suppose it were your case to be Taken up Dead among us,
before this ^our be out? Where, Oh where must your Immortal Soul* be Ledged
throughout Eternal Ages? Thou Heart of Adamant, H ow cause thou s^^ep in this
condition? How can you remain peaceably and quietly in a condition wherein it is
not safe to Die? You may Die before To morrow; and therefore, Awake, what meanest
thou, O Sleeper? Go make your peace with God immediately. Become Fit to Die, and
you will be Fit to Eat and Drink in the Supper of the Lord.

In fine, There is no escaping or avoiding of Great Sin without coming to the
Table of the L ord. It is a ^in to come unworthily to, but it is also a sin to
stay unworthily from, that Blessed Ordinance. Neither of these things must be
done; to choose either of them, is, As if a man should flee from a L ion, and a
Bear should meet him. The Real Bottom of men's Refraining from the L ords S
upper is too often only This: That they are not willing to be at the pains of
Getting and Keeping good Terms between God and their own Souls But, if this be
your cause, your A^^nting from the (...) of the Lord, is a Renunciation of all
that Christ, and Grace, and Lif^, which is thereon exhibited unto us; it is the
preferring of a Lust above a Christ: this paganism is in the Bowels of this
Omission.There is no peace to be Enjoyed by any of you, till you bring all to
this issue, I will presently and sincerely, and secretly enter into Covenant
with God; and then I will do it openly, that I may with safety approach unto
the Holy Table. Well then: Do not any ^onger Object, I am not prepared for the
Supper of the L ord: (I pray who^e Fault is that?) but immediately set upon
doing your parts for the preparing of your selves: Who knows, what God may work
in you, both to Will and to ^o? M^ Advice to you, is, that you immediately set
apart a time for due and deep thoughts on your Condition: and give not over
those thoughts, till you find your Hearts ^^ed, melted, broken, unto a
compliance with all (...), in such an Holy Covenant as this.

I do Ren^^^ce all the Vanities, the cursed Idols, and the evil Courses of the
ungodly World.

I do truly choose, and will ever Have, the Great God for my Best Good, my Last
End, and my only Lord. T he serving of H im shall be my work* and the Honoring
and Enjoying of Him shall be my Welfare for ever.

I do Accept the L ord Jesus Christ, as my only and mighty Lord-Redeemer: and I
will for ever Acknowledge H im as my Prophet, my Priest my King, and the
Blessed Healer of my miserable Soul.

I shall evermore be studying what is my Duty in these things; and wherein I
find my self to fall short, it shall always be my Grief, and shame: and for
pardon, I shall betake my self to the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant

In all these Articles, being sensible of my own weakness, I implore and expect
the Grace of the Mediator to be sufficient for me.

By suc^ a Covenant now Devote your selves unto the God of Heaven: and do it
not Rashly, but with clear Understanding, and much Deliberation. When this is
done, then come away to the Table of your Savior: His voice, His or, unto you
now is that, Arise, my L ove, my fair one, and come away. Put off no long^^
(...) your own Death come to be showed by your Friends in their Sighs over your
Graves, before that you show the death of the Lord Jesus in his Holy Supper.
Delay no more, Dally no more; it will be worse with you to morrow, then it is to
Day, Thus would I call the people unto Zion, there to offer the sacrifices of
Righteousness, and to partake of His T reasures there

But is all the Fault in these culpable Non communicants, that they continue
so? Truly, it is to be ^^ared, that our Churches themselves are not a little to
blame; for the paucity of them that are in Fellowship with us at the Holy
Table. Is there no Duty incumbent on the Churches, toward the Children of such
as are under their sacred Watch? The Continuation of Churches is Ordinarily to
depend on the Addition of Members out of the Families already incorporated
thereinto; and not be as once the Roman Commonwealth was like to have been,
The matter one age alone. It is an ill Omen to our Churches, if they must be
supplied only from such as are Occasionally converted in them: and if they be
not studious to preserve the Covexant of G od in the Families once taken
thereinto Wh^ then is not more care taken about a Regular and Orderly
CONFIRMATION of such as whil-Infants were B aptised in our Churches? when our
Children come to age, the Elders of the Churches may do well to send for them,
and Examine them strictly concerning their Conversion to God, and their
Inclinations to the Remembering and Renewing of their Baptismal Covenant. Those
that are found having in them the ^avoa^s of Regeneration, may be advised
immediately to apply themselves unto our Churches for a confirmation of their
Church Membership, in a Full communion with them. Those that are found under a
more discouraging and undesirable Character, may have particular Instructions
and Awakenings bestowed upon them, which they may not look for the privileges
of Adult-M embers till they have hearkened unto Such a method as this
maintained by our Churches, would perhaps fetch into our Fellowship, many
Hundreds of devout persons, whose Modesty has hitherto concealed them from
(...); and it would Excite and Quicken more to a due preparation for the holy
things of the Lord Jesus

May these Churches of our Lord, thus Increase with all the increasing of God!

PREPARATIONS for the SUPPER of the LORD With The MARKS of a Good State, by
which Communicants may be assisted in the Work of Self-Examination.
1 Cor. XI. 28. But let a Man Examine himself, and so let him Eat of that
Bread, and Drink of that Cup.
IT IS a Passage Registered and Recorded in some Ancient Histories, that the
Priest going to Sacrifice, would ask Who is here? and that Answer was usually
given to him, (...), There are none but good men amongst us. We are now drawing
near to a Sacred and a Solemn Ordinance, wherein the Lord Jesus will take a
special Observation of them that are admitted thereunto; unless it may truly be
said of us, They are good men, we can expect nothing but our own confusion in
the Displeasure of Him That will not be mocked.

The Error which the Corinthians fell into, and the Counsil which was thereupon
given to these Corinthians, may be made profitable to our selves, in assisting
those Preparations which our Lord requires us to approach unto Him with. It Is an
Afflicting Sight which our Context here gives unto us, of the foul Blots and
Blurs which were quickly made in a famous Church, that had newly come out of
the Apostles hands, An Epistle of Christ, fairly Written, and this not with
Ink, but with the S pirit of the L iving God. An Epistle was though needful to
mend the Abuses which their flourishing Church was fallen into; and
particularly, the Prophanations of the Lords Supper which a Jewish Party in
that Communion ha^ precipitated the whole Society into. Where fore we have here
a Correction of those Prof^nations, by a Reduction of that blessed Ordinance to
the Original Institution of it as it was made by our Lord Jesus Christ; and a
mo^ Wholesome Advice about a Worthy Receiving an Partaking is added hereupon.

That Wholesome Advice is in the Words now before us; and we have two Duties in
th^^ memorable Text, recommended unto us.

The First is, an Antecedent Duty which is enjoined upon us, to Qualify us for
the Discharge of the the other.

Let a man examine himself] What Man is to do this? why, the Man that would be
a Communicant at the Holy Table; the Man that pretends a Right and Claim unto
the Supper of the Lord. The man is to Examine himself. A Metaphor is here taken
from the Action of a Goldsmith upon a Metal. The Word of God is compared unto,
A Fire; and in this Heavenly Fire we are to make a Trial of our selves: which
no way excludes or hinders a further Trial to be made of us, by those that have
in their Hands the Keys of that House, which we demand an entrance into.

The other is, a Consequent Duty, and it is propounded as likewise a Privilege
to be enjoyed by those that upon Examination find themselves ready for it.

And so let him eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup.] So! That So, is, as
one says upon it, An Hedge planted against every Intrusion. It Is not an
Exercise which every man is immediately to be put upon. The Gospel, that is to
be Preached unto every Creature: But the Supper of the Lord is only for those
who upon a Self-Examination find themselves to be Subjects capable and
convenient for it. And behold here a direct Contradiction to a notorious
Heresy and Sacriledg in the False Aposratical Church of Rome. The Apostle
says, There is Bread now to be Eaten: the Synagogue of Rome says, No, it is
not Bread but the very Flesh and Blood of our Lord. The Apostle says, Let any
Believer Drink of the C up: the Synagogue of Rome says, No, let none but a
Bigoted Clergyman taste a Drop of it. What an Opposition is here? O my People,
come out of that Babylon, says the Lord.

But the Doctrine that remains for our Consideration is,

The Self-Examination is a considerable Duty of a Good Conversation; and
particularly incumbent on us in our Preparation for the Table of the Lord.

We have these thoughts to be now Rolled in our Minds.

Proposition I.
Every Christian has the Duty of Self-Examination incumbent on him.

There is indeed a Threefold Self-Examination which we are to labor in: we are
to look Forward, or to see whither we are going; to look Backward, or to see,
what we have done; to look Inward, or to see what we do All; all this is our
Self-Examination to dive into.

First, There is an Examination of our State* which we ought very carefully to
make.

This is, with a double Inculcation pressed by the Great Apostle, in 2
Cor.13.(...). Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your own
selves. It Is an Exact serutiny, not only like that of a Touch Stone upon a
Metal, but also like that of a Piercer into a Vessel; to see whether we are in
such a S tate as all true Believers are.

The Self Examination proper for us, is, The Reflection of our Consci^^ous upon
our own motions, Comparing them with the word of God, and Concluding from them,
our being either the Heirs of L ife, or the Sons of Death.

The Agent in this business is to be our Conscience; which is, A power in our S
ouls, passing Judgment on us, as under the Judgment of God. Our Conscience is
to set up a Tribunal in our Souls, whereat we are to call our selves to an
Account as before the Eternal God; whose Deputy, and Vic^gerent our Conscience
is.

The Object which our Conscience is to act upon, is, The motion of our hearts
and lives. Every motion of our Inward or Outward man, that has any Tendency to
discover what we are; the sense of our mind, the choice of our w^lls, the B ent
of our Afflictions, and the Tenor of our whole walk, must a severe Inquisition
be made into.

The Rule according to which Conscience is to proceed in this concern is, The
word of God; o^ what God has Revealed in the sacred Scriptures. Not the
Opinions and Practices of m^n; nor indeed any Suggestions but what are
Consonant unto the Faithful sayings of our Bible, are to be Regarded in this
affayr: according to That, they who do not speak, have us light in them.

The Work which Conscience has now to do, is To draw Conclusions from hence,
and to frame Inferences with References to our Spiritual Sta^e before the Lord*
it is to pronounce whether the Promises of God, or whether the Threatenings of
God, are our portion; it is in short, whether Life Eternal or Death Eternal,
whether Salvation or D amnation will be the issue of the Condition which we are
at present in It Is, by the Sy^^^isms of Conscience that Self-Examination is to
be performed. Our Consciences must shape an Argument, from a Comparison between
Gods word, and our own Heart and L ife, which in the Conclusion, will either
afford unto us An Hope of the Glory of God, or else, A fearful Expectation of a
fiery Indignation to devour us.

The Duty of passing such a Self-Examination, has these things to put an Edge
upon it; it is to be Looked upon in the light of these Conclusions.

Conclusion. I.
An Assurance of a Good S tate in the sight of God, is a thing Attainable,
Profitable Necessary. We may arrive to an Infallible certainty of it, That we
are the Children of God* and come to no less Confidently than Comfortably
challenge the Benefits of that Relation. If an Assurance of a good S tate could
not be attained in this Life, why are we bidden in 2 Pet. 1 10. To make our
Calling and Election sure. It intends not an Objective Assurance; for all true
Believers are most surely Called and most surely Elected, in respect of the
Thing it self; but it must me in, a Subjective Assurance; q d. Labou^ to become
in respect of your own Apprehension and your own Satisfaction Assured of it,
That you belong to God. The precept for this thing, intimates its being
Practicable Yea, we find many of the Saints Triumphing gloriously in the
Assurance which they have had of their own ^^^^city. Thus Job could say, I know
that my Redeemer lives: Thus David could say, The L ord will Redeem my soul,
from the power of the Grave; For He will Receive me! Thus could Paul say, I
live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave Himself for ME!
Doubtless these Holy men have their Successors in the World. It is the office
of the Spirit, as a witness, to confirm the Souls of Beleivers, in a Triumphant
persuasion of their good State before the Lord, see Romans 8. 18. And such are
the Impressions of that Eternal Spirit upon the Souls of many persons every
day; and this not only in a way of Renovation, but in a way of Consolation too;
that they can cheerfully say, as in Can^.2 16 my Beloved is mine, and I am His!
It Is upon the Supposition of This, That the Saints of God are called upon to
Rejoice Alwaye^, and Always give thanks; to style God, Their Father; and to
long for the second coming of Christ. There were too much of Irony in these
Commands if Assurance were not Attainable.

But how Profitable may we now imagine this Assurance to be? It add's oil to
the Wheels of all our Devotions; and Matchless, Transcendent, Infinite is the
sweetness of it. The lofty Nebucadnezzar or Artax^rxes, that could look upon
the Empire of the world, with such a boast, All this is mine; was not so Happy
as the man that is provided and Assured of a good State for his immortal Soul.
There is no good Thing spoken in the Book of God, but the man in a good State
may say* This is part of my portion; and there is no Dispensation of Divine
providence at any time Rolling over him, whereof he may not Reckon, This is a
smile of a good God upon me. Yea, such a man may with more Joy than F ear, look
the King of T^r^ours in the face; and he may behold the Sting pulled out of the
Snake, which man kind generally Trembles at the cold coylings of. So profitable
indeed is this Assurance, it may be wondered how any Rational being should not
account it Necessary; or how any man a live should Sleep quietly a night
without it. Something very Narcotic surely must be in our pillowes, if we can
give Sleep to our eye^, and Slumber to our eye-^ids, without some Assurance of
Gods being Reco^^l'd unto us. What a sad life must be led by them, who see not
themselves in such a good S tate as to be fit for Death! Either they must live
S^rtishly; and be drowned in a Lethargy by Secular Op^a^es procured unto them;
or they must live Sorrowfully; and be like them whom that woe was denounced
upon, Thy life shall hang ^n doubt before thee.

Conclusion. 2.
There are Multitudes who count themselves in a Good State, when God knows,
They are far from being so. There are indeed some S elf Condemned Hypocrites
unto whom it may be said, as it was to Shimei, Th^^ know the wickedness that
thine own heart is privy to. But there are also some S elf*Deluded Hypocrites,
who like some of the members in the Church of La^dicca, fancy themselves to S
tand in Need of Nothing, while they are in, the want of all things. It is too
general a character for the most of mankind, which we have in Jam. 1.26. He
seems to be Religious, but he Deceives his own Heart, the man's Religion i^
Vain* Truly, It Is very rare to meet with a man; but be he never so Ignorant,
never so Heretical, never so Wordly-minded, still he counts himself Assured of
this, God will not cast me off forever? He that made me, will have mercy on me,
and He that formed me will show me some Favor. In the Old World, no doubt they
general'y Dreamed of a D^y Sum^^er, when a Desolating Flood was a the Door. In
blind S odom, doubtless they generally Scoffed at the warnings of Sulphurous
Fiery consuming Thunderstorm impending over them. The most of men, are by
Security and Pr^su^^^ion about the Good State of their Souls trepanned into
Eternal miseries. Very seldom are any convinced, of their being out of the
Way; until their End come upon them; and that End is a very dreadful one, Alas
few of those who take up their endless and caseless Lodgings in the Pit below,
don't make that their First shriek upon their Fall into the dismal V^ult, O
(...) little thought I should ever come to this! I am to tell you, that
Millions of wary and witty men, that have scorned in any thing else to be
imposed upon, have yet been miserably Deceived about their Never-dying Souls.
Yea, great and high Professors, yea, able and zealous Ministers, and the
workers of Miracles too, have been at last, The Deceivers of themselves. The
World is full of Cheats; but no Cheat so common as This, For persons to be
cheated about their own Souls.

Conclusion 3.
For a man to be mistaken about his own Good State is a thing of the Illest
Consequence in the World.

If a man be indeed in a Good State, and perceive it not; what follows but a
world of inconveniences? The Person is perhaps like Daniel, one grearly
Beloved! yet, not having Assurance of it, be wrongs Himself by perpetual
Disquietments and Vexations; and albeit he be traveling toward Canaan, he
must always cry out as a Christian in Horror did, I am in a Roaring
Wilderness of Woe! He wrongs Religion too; and brings up an Evil Report o^ it,
among Strangers; as it at were but a Blac^ Mopish, Melancholy Thing. And he
gratified the Devil exceedingly; who because he, do Envy him for, would
therefore Deprive him of the Peace which the Lord Jesus has left as His Legacy
unto us.

But suppose the man to be not in a good State; Suppose him to be, in the Gall
of Bitterness, and the Bond of Iniquity; for this man to be now misled by a
false Assurance, This undoes him Totally, Finally, and very Terribly* The
Destroyer of Souls insults over such a man and makes that shout upon his
lamentable case Aha, so I would have it! The man is involve in many Labyrinths
of wretchedness; he is Preposterous in all h^s Applications; like him in Deuteronomy.
29. 20. who Blesses himself, saying I shall have Peace, while all the Curses
written in this Book do ly upon him And he is under such entanglements, that
neither can he pity himself, nor can any else that wish well unto him, Reli^ve
his unhappy circumstances; it is with him, as with that I dolater, in Isai.
44.20. A deceived Heart has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his Soul,
nor say, Is there not a Lyan my Right Hand? It is a thousand to one but the
unhappy man will Die Uncured. And The^ there will be no Recovering, no
Retrieving of a L ost S oul throughout Eternal Ages Though he should produce
never such ^mple Testimonials for himself, of his Blameless Living, and
Spotless Credit, they will not shelter him from the confusion of that Thunder
Bolt, Thou art a Worker of iniquity, I know thee not.

This then is the first sort of Self-Examination which I suppose by this Time,
we see no less important for us, than incumbent on us.

But

Secondly, There is an Examination of our Ways, under which we are to bring
our selves. It is the Repeated charge, in Hag. 1. 5,7. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, consider your wayes^ One of the Ancients does observe upon it, That the
Prophet there being but a Young man, and so, more liable to be slighted, his
Exhortation is therefore set on wide a great Authority, Thus faith the L ord of
Hosts. And if the Lord of Hosts require us to Consider our ways, who dares
omit the doing of it? But to Consider them, is to Examine them We should
Reflect upon the many Sins that we have been guilty of; and be studious to
understand our Errors. I^ was bitterly complained of, in Jere.8.6. No man
Repented him of his Wickedness, saying, what have I (...)? That is a Question
that we should often Examine our selves withal, What have I (...) doing of?
What have I done, that has been ^re^oking (...) my God, and pernicious to
myself* It was the speech of that good m^ in Job 13.23. How many are my
Iniquities and (...) Sins? make me to know my Transgression (...) my sin. We
should pursue (...) that Knowledge, by a diligent and impartial Examination of
our Ways. As in our Psalter we meet with, A Psalm to bring to Remembrance
thus, we should use the Law of God, as Book to bring to Remembrance, and we
should Remember all our old miscarriages, with (...) the Humbling Aggravations
of them.

Thirdly, There is an Examination of (...) Wants, unto which we are to count
ourselves obliged. We are to find out wh^^ Corruptions we yet have to be
redressed, an^ what Perfections we are yet non proficient in We read in 1 These.
3. 10. a wish for some To perfect what is lacking in their Faith. We should
Examine, what we lack in Grace, and what we lack in Peace, and what we lack o^
any Mercy from the Lord. By a serious Examination of our Wants we should
penetrate into those Deficiencies, for which we have cause to mourn before the
God o^ Heaven; and we should be disconten^^^ with our selves, till we see what
we (...) of a Meetness for the Inheritance of the Saint in Light.

But if we Sufficiently manage a Self-Examination on our State, we do by
Consequence take in these two other Heads of our Enquiries: it naturally leads
us to a View of our Ways and Wants; which therefore I must now once for all
enwrap into the same Denomination.

Wherefore we may now add.

Proposition. II.
The Duty of Self Examination is very Particularly incumbent on us, in our
Preparation for the Table of the Lord.

There ought to be a very Industrious and Conscientious Preparation in us, for
that Fellowship with the Lord Jesus, which the Holy Supper will then afford.
Our Lord would have a Room Prepared for this Ordinance, ^t the first
celebration of it; and He will still have an Heart Prepared for it. We are told
of a Time in John 19,^4. which was, The preparation of the Passeo^er, that is,
I Suppose, the preparation for the Repetition of the P asseover; which use to
be, when the Second Day of unleavened B read fell out, as now it did, upon the
Sabbath Day. Even so, there should be a Time, with us, which we may call, A
Preparation for the Sacrament And We should oftentimes count a Whole D^^ but
enough to be so laid out. Said Samuel in 1 Samuel 16.5. Sanctify yourselves and
come to the Sacrifice. Thus would I say, You are to Sanctify yourselves, that
you may come to the Sacrament. If Joseph judged it proper for him to cleanse
and change himself, before his going in before the King of Egypt, how much
more* ought we to get our selves well futed when we are going in unto the King
of Heaven Our God would have Purifications go before the more Sacred and solemn
Administrations of old: and not so much as the Shovels, the ^^^sons, the Fire
Pans, and the meanest Vessels of the sanctuary, might be used, until an (...)
had fitted them.

Well, It Is in Self-Examination, that their lies a great part of that
Preparation and Sanctification which we are to come unto the Feast of our God
withal. Let these Assertions help to state this matter with us.

Assertion 1.
We should Examine our State before our coming to the Table of the Lord,
because it is a Dangerous Thing to come without a Wedding garment upon our Souls.
We shall be Thunderstruck with an, How come thou hither? if we come not in a
state of Grace. A man in his Natural state, can do no other than Eat and Drink
unworthily at the Table of the Lord; for he must needs Eat and Drink under the
power of a cursed Enmity against the Lord Jesus Christ* he must needs Eat and
Drink without those virtues, in the absence whereof, he can do no other than
here Take the Name of God in Vain; he must be like the Impenitent that while
our Lord Jesus was (...) on the Cross, did only Revile Him and Reproach Him
there. If our Names he not found in the Genealogies of the Newborn, we may not
participate of those most Holy things. The words, Eat and Drink, are not spoken
to Dead men; they suppose unto be Not Dead in trespasses and sins; but
^^ritually Alive before the Meat and Drink (...) put into our mouths for our
Nourishment. None but a Regenerate man can Relish the Flesh and Blood of our
Lord; and the Doors of our Souls must be opened unto Him, by our Conversion
before He will Sup with us, in His Communion. Until we are truly in Covenant
with God, the S eals of that Covenant are very Improper for us, Un^sefull to
us. We shall receive mere Broad, and mere Wine, but no S eal (or at least no
Seal of Life) in the Sacrament, if by Unregeneracy, we continue strangers to
the Covenant of Promiss. It is a mocking of God, for a man to ask for the Seal
of his Pardon, while he still Hugs and Loves the Sin, which he would have to be
Pardoned. The Promise of God is made only unto a Repenting and a Believing
sinner* what Interest has he in the Seal, to whom the Promise it self does not
yet belong? We find in Exodus 12.7. The Paschal Lamb was not to be tasted of,
till the House were sprinkled with the Blood of it: Even so, till our S oul be
sprinkled with the Blood of our Lord Jesus we are very unfit for this utmost
Approach to our Evangelical Passover. The Sacrament sets a S eal to that piece
of Gospel, He that Believes not shall be Damned. How can any Unbeleever safely
take the S eal of his Damnation As one says, The Christ had not an Hole (...)
to lay His head, yet He will not have a sty, wherein to lay His Body. If we
Forget the Lord Jesus, all the week, as every unbeleever does (...) shall not
Remember Him at His Table, as we ought to do. Unless we Act grace upon our
Jesus in the Holy Supper, we shall but Affront Him and Abuse Him there* and
bring upon our selves the Guilt of profaning a very Dreadful mystery; but we
must Have Grace before we can bring it into Exercise. Before we snatch at this
Childrens Bread, we should see whether we are Dogs or no. There are a thousand
perils ^^n, by the Soul, that shall make an Unworthy and a Violent Intrusion
upon the Table of the Lord; and the Unmeet Subjects that, like Uzzah or Uzziah,
will thus draw near unto the God of Heaven, do but provoke Him to Sanctify
Himself in terrible plagues upon them; they find nothing (...) but what will be
more Deadly to them, than the Colocynthis of old, was to the Scholars of Elisha.

For this cause must our S tate be now, Examined.

Assertion 2.
We should Examine our Ways, before our coming to the Table of the Lord,
because our Sins are to be mortified with a Renewed Repentance before our
Entertainment there. The Jews before their Passover, searched all over their
Houses for what Leaven might be found therein; and so should we before a
Sacrament, see that our Leaven be turned out of Doors. The more Bitter that Sin
has been to us before the Sacrament, the more sweet will Christ be to us in it.
When we come to the Lords Table, we come for a General Acquittance of all our
Sins; we are therefore to see that we make our Accounts even before we come,
tha^ we have Mourned for all our sins, that we have Turned from all our sins,
and that we have (...) away the S pears which gave unto our Lord the Wounds
that we are now coming to be contemplation of. The Body of our Lord was not to
see Corruption in the Grave, nor will it mingle with any Corruptions in our
Hearts, which we shall Hate to have reformed.

We cannot expect any good News from our crucified Lord, unless with Peter, we
have wept bitterly for our Miscarriages. Would we Draw nigh to God in the Holy
Supper? ou^ Course then must be that in Jam. 4.9. Cleanse your Hearts, ye
Sinners. But we cannot cleanse them unless we search them. Without a
self-Examination, we shall bring in our Mouths the sweet Morsels, which we
cannot chew upon (...) Dying Jesus with.

Assertion 3.
We are to Examine our Wants before ou^ coming to the Table of the Lord,
because we are there to expect the supply of our spiritual Necessities.

We should bring Hungry and Thirsty Souls with us, to this Feast of our God;
but it must be a pungent and a pinching conviction of our Indigencies, that
must raise our Appetites. We should study well to know the Ails of our Souls,
because we are here to have the Medicines of them dispensed unto us; and we
should seek distinctly to know our own Emptiness, because we are here to
receive of His Fullness, in whom all Fullness dwells. When we come to the Lords
Table, He will ask us, as He did them in Mat. 20.32. What will ye that I shall
do unto you? And thence we should forehand ask our selves, What want we that
our ^^viour may do for us? what Wisdom, what Righteousness, what S
anctification, or what Redemption is there, that we have occasion for?

We must now open our Case to the great ^h^sitian of our souls; and it is a
Self Examination that must enable us to do it.

The Improvement of these things remains.

Application.
And, O let the Duty of Self-Examination he carefully now attended by us all.
Though it is mainly to Communicants that there is now come this Word of God; yet it
is not other to them: What I say unto those I say unto all; O that you would
Examine your selve^. Examine, let us all thoroughly Examine, what our State is
before the Lord; and so Examine this, as at the same time to learn what have
been the Ways and the Wants of our Souls. Know Thy self, was ever accounted a
very Sage Advice; the truth is, All Divine Wisdom lies in the Knowledge of G
od, and the knowledge of our selves. Now, in order hereunto, Prove thy self; let
(...) ^elf-Examination, bring our Thoughts to some upshot, about the state of
our Souls; whether we are the Children of G od, or the Children of the Devil?
Whether we are Israelites indeed, in whom is no G^ile? or whether we are those
^^ose Hearts are not right in the fight of the Lords

I would have you to Consider;

First, That a due care about a Examination is a very likely Token of Sins
S^ty. You shall rarely with an Hypoers whom Self-Examination is a frequent or a
grat^ful Thing unto. It argues, An heart not established with Grace, when we
are afraid of having our selves truly discovered unto our selves. Our Lord
intimates in John 3.20. that when men are loath to come unto the Light, it show
them and their Deeds to be evil. If you decline the most Critical Incisions
into your ow^ Hearts, it is a shroud sign of their being Rotte at the Core. Those
of you that can go from year to year without any Self-Examination have in this
rendered that Self-Examination thu^ far superfluous, that without any further
Trial you may pronounce your selves, in the Gall of Bitterness, and the Bond of
iniquity. But when a man loves to be Ransacking every Corner of his own Soul,
and is at a world of pains to be searched and tried, lest there be any way of
wickedness in him; this is a blessed sign of his being in a state, in which all
men should wish to be. Your Self-Examining persons, are usually those, of which
we may with out Scruple say, These are the good men that are upright in heart.

You may do well to consider,

Secondly, That it is beside the daily custo^^ of common prudence to live
without a thorough Self Examination. Men count it a rare and a fine
Accomplishment for them to Travel, till they are acquainted with other men;
they admire the Traveller, who Multorum ^^res vidit and urbes. But what a
pitiful thing is it for a man to be a all this while unacquainted himself; and
for his own Soul to be a Terr^^ Inc^gnita unto him! certainly it is of more
concernment for us to understand our own state, than to see the Qualities or
Seize of our Neighbors. We will not thus put our selves off about our
own more inferior Affairs! How solicitously do we consult our Doctors about
the Prognostics, or the Diagnosticks of our Bodily Diseases? And shall we be
contentedly ignorant of what has been or shall be befalling our immortal
Spirits? Many in the World, are so wicked as to request the Information of a
Juggling, Lying Fortune Tellers, what is hereafter to betide them; and shall we
be less careful to be informed about ou^ own eternal Circumstances? Profane
^^^ziah sends unto an Heathen Oracle, to heat, whether he were to Live or to
Die, and shall not we be as desirous to know whether Life or Death be like to be
our portion throughout Never-ending Ages? To be defrauded of our Silver, is a
vexation to us: but shall it not much more be so, for us to be de^^auded of our
of Souls? We are not willing that Another should put a Trick upon us, and shall
we do it upon our selves? Awake, ye Immortal Souls; O Awake; and Examine
whether GOD be thy Father? whether CHRIST be thy Surety? and whether Heaven be
thy Inheritance; yea or No? You say, I hope it is so! But man, art thou sure of
it? what if thou should immediately be arrested and summoned unto an
Appearance before God the Judge of all? can thou upon good ground say, I have
made my peace with Him? Our pretense is that in Heb. 11.10. To look for a City
which has Foundations: Methinks then we should see to this, That we be not
without an hope that has Foundations; that we build upon sure Foundations in
looking for the City. We love to see a security for our outward Estate; and why
do we not got our inward settled? You ought also to Consider,

Thirdly, That you shall at some time or other come under the Examinations of
the dreadful God himself. He does indeed forever know the state of every
individual person in the World; nor do the Flaming eyes of Him that searches
the Hearts of us all, need any Glasses or Fetch^^, for the exploration of us:
But He will so Examine us, that all Men shall also know, what we are, Perhaps
God may lead you into some N^table Temptation before you leave the World; and
this Temptation will make it evident, whether you have been an Abraham, or
whether you have been an An^nias and Sapphira all this while. Or, however,
there will come, The Judgment of the great Day, wherein you and I and every one
shall stand Naked in the view of Heaven and Earth. T^^ Name shall then be
particularly casled upon; and it shall be asked then, Did this man sincer^^ly
close with his Maker and his Mediator? was he sincere in his Pretenses to be my
^ervant devoted to my fear? Alas, if thou art now detected to have been but a
Stage Player in all thy Christianity, O the shame and everlasting Content which
thou will then be exposed unto! To be Pillori'd in that vast Assembly, with
such an Inscription as this upon thy Breast, All this Persons Faith was
Forgery! It Is an hard Heart that shakes and breaks not at the fear of this, and
that cries not out, Lord, (...) am afraid of thy Judgments! Give me leave to
say with him in Job. 13 10. Is it good that God should search you out? or as
one man m^cketh another, do ye so mock Him? Our Self-Examination is the only
prevention of it.

Now for the well-management of this work, I would only say.

First, Proceed after a Regular and an Orderly manner, and with a Wonderful
Strictness, in your Self Examination.
You should Retire yourselves; he that would meddle with this wisdom, should
Separate himself. Take Time for it; and be not like the Duke D' Alva, who being
asked, whether he had observed a late Eclipse answered, I have so much to do on
Earth, I have no time to Look up unto Heaven. So, Have not so much to do
Abroad, that you have no Time to look within; but allow yourselves Time to be
Alone. When you are thus Retir^^, then begin with an Humble and an Hearty
Prayer unto the God of Heaven. Be sensible, That a Deceitful Heart will but
illude you, if a Merciful God shall not Assist you and Remember, That the Lord
Jesus have (...) you to come unto Himself, not only for Gold Tried in the Fire,
but also for EySalve which may strengthen you to discern that Gold. Fall down
before the Lord with such a Supplication as that in Psalm. 119.23. Search me,
and Try me, O God; and add, Lord help me now, to Search and to Try my self, and
lead me in the way Everlasting. Zealously Implore the Father of Lights, that He
would not leave you in the Dark about the State of your own Souls. Beg that the
Eternal Spirit of God, would put forth His Righteous Operations, either as a
Spirit of Bondage or as a Spirit of Adoption in you; and that He would lead you
into all Truth. Have then at hand, a Competent Number of Good Scriptural MARKS,
by which a good State is Characterised in the word of God. You have many of
these therein scattered here andthere: and Especially, The first Epistle of
John is full of them; besides other whole paragraphs in this Book of Life; such
as the Fifteenth, the Twenty fourth and the Twenty Sixth Psalms, and sundry
Octonaries of the Hundred and Nineteenth, which describe the Heirs of L ife.
Here you may Read the Conditions of them that shall be saved; Oh do not shun
the Trials of the Scriptures; it is the Temper of Hypocrites, which Tertullian
found in Heretics, to be Lucifugae Scripturarum. i.e. such as care not to be
Tried by Scripture Light. These being laid before you, require of your selves
now a most Exact Account thereabout. Ask, Am I thus or no? ask, do I thus or
no? ask, have I this or no? Press a Direct Answer, and let not your Hearts Flam
you off, without a Punctual, a P ositive, and a Pe^emptory Reply to your
Enquiries. Deal by your own Hearts, as you would by a S lipp'ry Fellow who
declines to let you know, what he is; you ply him and Pump him with Importunate
Interrogatories, until you fathom him.

Secondly. Be duly affected with the State, in which upon your Self-Examination
you may perceive yourselves to be.
The Children of men are but in One of those two States. Either, they are the
Sheep, that must at the Right Hand of the Lord Jesus, Except a, Come ye
Blessed, Inherit the Kingdom! or else they are the G oats, that must at the L
eft Hand of the Lord Jesus, Expect a, Depart ye cursed, into Everlasting Fire!

If upon Examination, you find yourselves in a Good, Justified, Sanctified,
State of Soul; Oh then, Comfort yourselves with these words; Comfort yourselves
against all the Griefs, and all the Fears, that may oppress you. Imagine, That
you now hear that Voice from the Lofty Battlements of Heaven reaching to your
Ears, Child, Be of Good cheer, Thy sin^ are forgiven thee! And, methinks, one
such Intimation as that, may swallow up all the Troubles which this Life is
made uneasy with. Hereupon likewise offer up your most Raised P raises unto the
Great God, who has thus called you out of Darkness into His Mavelous Light.
Go sing the Beginning of the Hundred and third Psalm; and let the High Praises
of God be ever sounding in your souls; and be often thinking therewithal. O
what shall I render to the Lord, for all His Benefits?

But what if you find your Souls in an Ill-State, upon your best Examination?
what if you find that your Souls are not yet by Effectual Calling brought into
the Bundle of Life? and that still, God is Angry with you every day? Oh Then,
tremble to Continue as you are. Betake yourselves immediately to such
Transactions with the Blessed God, as may bring you into a B lessed state.
Immediately, Renounce and Forsake all the Idols of your Souls; and without any
more ado, give up yourselves unto God in Christ, by a Covenant never to be
forgotten. Been't so mad, as to ly down in the Top of a Mast, from whence you
are always ready to drop into the Roaring Horrid Floods of ever-burning
Brimstone. Holy Bolton would say, I would not be in my Natural Estate again, so
much as one Hour, for a thousand Worlds; lest I should happen to Die in that
Hour, and my I mmortal Soul be lost forever. Oh that the Gracious God would
inspire you all with a just Horror at such a Dangerous and such a Damnable
state, as that of Unregeneracy! Man, How can thou Endure to remain among the
Wretched slaves, that are Led Captive by the Devil at his will? or be every
Hour obnoxious to the V^ngeance of Eternal Fire? Let thy Awakened Soul, fly
faster out of this Estate, than Lot fled out of Sodom, when the Hot wrath of
God was going to consume it; and let thy Cry be like that of those that saw the
Earth Rumbling and Gaping under them of old; Lord, save me, I perish: Oh Never
be (...) Rest, until you have some cause to Hope, that you are going to, The
Rest which remains for the people of God forever.

Voe miseris nobis, qui de Electione nostr^ nullam adhuc Dei Vocem Cognovi^^us,
et jam in ocio quasi de securitate Torpentus.

Thirdly, Let none of the Due Times for Self Examination ship without your
making of it.
And here Let me say; First, This Day, even the present season is a proper
season for your Self Examination; This day, on which you have this voice and
call of Heaven sounding in your Ears, O Examine yourselves; take This day for
the doing of it. What if you should before you Rise from the Seats which you
are now upon, receive that Message, Set all in order for thou shall die before
many Days are out? What if it should be signified unto you, as it was to the
Muckworm in the Parable, This night thy Soul shall is Required of thee? Would
you not presently enter upon some Examination, Am I own that the second Death
shall have no power over? Well, then be advised; This is as like to come upon
you as Not. Oh then do not Procrastinate your Self-Probation; it is a thing not
to be Delayed, or Dally'd in I Indeed Every Day is a season for it. A Watchful
Christian will not find it easy to sleep in that Evening wherein he has not
cleared Accounts between God and him, Our liableness to a speedy and a sudden
Death, makes this a fit Question for us to sleep withal, If I Die this Night is
my immortal Spirit safe? Moreover, Every solemn, settled, Fixed Meditation,
brings a season for it. When we are in a Daily course thinking on the ^^ings of
God, we should first Enlighten our ^^nds, and then Enliven our Hearts; now that
second part of our work, we should ^^rk, what our own Failings have been (...)
out that point which we have been medi^^ing of. May the Children of Isaac,
accus^^me themselves to this Ingredient in their meditations!

Once more, A Time of Affliction is a Time or Self Examination. Is it with us a
Time ^f Affliction upon our I nward man? We are ^en to do like Asaph, who then
said, in Psalm: 7.7. I Communed with my own Heart, and my Spirit made diligent
search. It Is now seasonable for us to Examine, Why art thou cas^ down, O my
Soul? and whether we can say My God, My God, as well as, Why have tho^ forsaken
(...)? Or, Is it with us a Time of Affliction upon our Outward men? We are then
to do what is propounded, in Lam.3.40. Let us search and Try our Ways, and
return unto the Lord. It were now seasonable for us to Examine, Why am I thus?
and whether we are those for whom, All things sha^^ work together for good?

But finally, when we are Approaching to the Table of the Lord, Then it is that
we are more peculiarly to Examine our selves.

And there are two Cases of Conscience which I am now to Endeavor your
Satisfaction in.

The first Case. What Signs of a G ood State are those after which the
Self-Examination of every Communicant should make Enquiry
To be Particular.

First. Every Communicant should Examine himself, whether his Knowledge be
competent and whether his Belief be Orthodox.

You must Examine your selves in the first place upon this point;

Am I able to Discern the Lords Body in the Lords Supper?

The well-known words of the Apostle testify this unto us; That when we come to
the Lords Table, we must have not only such a R ational, but also such a
Christian Exercise of our Understandings, as to be capable of Distinguishing
the S acramental Bread and Wine, from what is Common upon every Table, and to
be sensible of the Use and End which these Element^^ ^here devoted unto. The
Lords T able must not be (...) upon as, An Altar to the Unknown God. To admit
Children unto the Communion Table, is a thing worse than Childish; it is not
less than Folly to Receive hither those who are Natural Fools; and it is a
perfect P hrensy to put these Mysteries into the Hands of those, in whom a
crazy madness would father call for Hellebore. We must have in us the
Conceptions of a Reasonable Creature, before we intermeddle in this Reasonable
Service. If we have been so Uncatechised, as not know, who the Lord Jesus is,
nor, How a Fellowship is to be maintained with Him, in this Ordinance, We are
to stay till we are better acquainted with the First Principles of the Doctrine
of Christ.

You must pass on to Examine your selves, thus much further;

Are the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion duly Apprehended and
Entertained with me?

An Ignorance of some Extra-fundamentals, may be in some persons Tolerable,
because Invincible. And a Diversity of Opinion thereabout, is no just Bar to
Communion, where the person supposed to Err may yet be supposed to have the
Spirit and I mage of Christ Jesus in him; an Exclusion from Communion upon this
account, is usually the effect of that uncharitable and pharisaical Pride,
which has a thousand times already set the Cornfield of our Lord on fire. But
as to things that concern the Foundation, we are to know, That the Soul without
knowledge is not Good. If we are not only Erreneous but Heretical, the Flocks
of the Lord Jesus are to drive us from them with such a zeal as the Apostle
John used unto Cerix^^us, or such as was used unto (...) by that S myrnian
Angel, Polycarp. If we (...) the Leprosy in our Heads, we may not come into
(...) C amp of the Lord Jesus. Briefly, Being well fixed and settled, in a
persuasion, T hat the Scriptures are the inspired and unerring Word of God,
containing all that we are to T hink* or Do, in order to our Happiness.

We are to know and Believe,

That there is a First Being, who being one (...) in three Persons, Infinite,
and Eternal in all perfection s, has from Everlasting Decreed all that is, and
is the Maker and Ruler of all other Beings.

That this God created Man, with an immortal Spirit, in an Earthly Body, and
Enduing him with a Divine I mage told him, that if he Did well, he and his
should Live: but otherwise Die every Death.

That this Man, at the solicitations of Devils, disobeyed his Lord, and all his
Children falling in him and with him, are Born horribly depraved and defiled,
and continually adding New Rebellions against the most High, are thereby
exposed unto every Curse of a Righteous and a terrible God.

We are to Know and Believe, that the S econd P erson in the Adorable ^rinity,
took upon Him the Nature of man, and therein fulfilled the Law of God, and
underwent the Wrath of God, and now ever Lives to make I ntercession, having
all Fullness in Him, that He may convey Life unto as many as Embrace Him for
their Lord and Savior.

That all among the Lost Children of Adam, who are chosen unto such Happiness,
are in the Time appointed effectually Drawn and Called unto the L ord Jesus, by
His Holy Spirit; and brought into His Church, for the Edification of which He
has I nstituted several Ordinances; and to Receive and Enjoy from Him the
privileges belonging to the Children of God, partly in this world, and more
fully in the world so come for ever; while all others are everlastingly
separated from the Favor and Fellowship of the L ord Jehovah. That this God
man, is now in the Third Heaven, improving of His Angels for the S ervice of
His people, and will ere Long Return from thence into this Lower World; and
having Summoned and Examin^^^ every one of mankind the Dead thereof all being
Raised for that End, pass an Irreversible Doom upon each one, either to
Everlasting punishment, or to Life Eternal.

We are to Know and Believe Lastly,

That we are bound to Love the God of Heaven* with all our Heart, and Soul, and
S trength; and that for His Sake, we are to Love our Neighbors as our selves;
But that, whereas, when we have done the Best, we have no Righteousness of our
own to Recommend us unto God: nor indeed have we strength (...) do any
spiritual Good at all; it imports us to (...) upon the Lord Jesus Christ alone,
for the Imputation of that Righteousness and Communication of that Strength,
which may bring us unto Blessedness.

Yea, Thirdly,

We should carry our Examination on to this, Is my Knowledge and Belief so
Powerful, Effectual, Saving, as it ought to be?

Are our Souls I lluminated by a Saving Operation of the Eternal Spirit on
them? Is the L ight of Divine Truth within us, become Irresistible, and
Ungainsayable? Is the Truth of God so strongly Imprinted upon us, that we can
give the Martyrs answer to the Sophistry of all opposers, Though I cannot
Learnedly Dispute for the Truth, yet I can Readily Die for it?

Have we a sense of Truth, and do we Taste and See, that, T he Lord is G ood? Is
Experience joined with our Speculation; and instead of being sw^ln like
Bellowed or Bladders, by that which when Unsanctify'd, puffs up, can we say,
Now mine Eye sees, I abhor my self? Are we come to judge of things with a S
piritual Eye; and admire, and adore the things which the world counts
Foolishness? Is our Wisdom so pure, that it puts us upon Mortifying all
Dispositions, that are contrary to God, within us? Is our Affection raised, by
what we understand; and does our L ove abound yet more and more in all
Knowledge and Sense? And is our Obedience thereby promo^^d, so that Knowing of
these things, we are so Happy (...) to do them?

Secondly, A Communicant should Examine himself, Whether his Repentance be, The
Repentance which is not to be Repented of. And what is true Repentance, but, A
Grace of God whereby a Sinner with Grief and Shame for Sin, Turns from it, unto
the Eternal God?

While we are Impenitent, there is, Nothing pure unto us. As the Lord of old
said, in (...) 1. 15. Put away the Evil of your Doings* Cease to do evil, L
earn to do well; that is Repentance; and it follows, Come now, and let us Reason
together. Thus does our God say unto us, First Repent of Evil Doings, and come
NOW to my Holy Table. We must Examine whether we have got the Sour Herbs of
Repentance for Sin in our Souls, before we come to the Passover of our Lord. It
was the purpose of the Psalmist, in Psalm.26.6. I will wash my Hands in
Innocence, so will I compass thi^e Altar, O Lord. The like should our study be,
I will wash my Soul in Repentance, and so will I come so the Table of the L ord

We are then particularly to Examine our selves.

Have I had such a Conviction of Sin, as to change my mind about it?

Are we Convinced, That we have been Guilty of All Sin, both Original and
Actual? and with Horror do we cry out, as he in Psalm. 40. 12. My Iniquities
have taken hold on me, they are more than the Hairs of my Head, therefore my
Heart fails me! Are we also Convinced, that All sin is a most Odious and a
most Dangerous Evil? and can we feelingly acknowledge that, in Jer. 2. 19. It
is an evil and a bitter thing, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God*

We are likewise to Examine our selves,

Have I had such a Contrition for sin, as to Break my Heart for it?

Have we Heartily said, after the Psalmist, in Psalm. 38. 18. I will be sorry
for my sin? Are we so far from Laughing, that like Peter, we fall to Weeping,
when we recount the Follies of our Youth? Is it with a prick^ H eart, with a
Rent Heart, with a Broken Heart, that we Look upon the Faults of our Ways? Do
we spend upon our sins* those just passions, in Ezekiel. 36. 31. Ye shall Loath
your selves for your iniquities and Abominations?

We are further to Examine our selves?

D o I make such a C onfession of Sin, as may argue a Spirit without Guile?

Have we followed that Example in Psalm. 32. 5. I acknowledge my Sin, and mine
Iniquity, I have not hid?

Have we vomited up our sins, by ingenuous Declarations of our Dissatisfactions
at them? and have we found it as uneasy to retain them, as a Cup of Tre^abling,
or, poison in our Bowels? Have we very penitently confessed our sins unto God;
like the Prodigal saying, I have sinned, and am unworthy? And have we done it
very particularly too; like the Apostle* saying, I was a Blasphemer, a
Persecutor, and Injurious? Have we also confessed our sins unto Men, when we
have injured them by sin, like David saying, Lord, I have sinned and wronged
these Sheep? Or, when we have Assisted them in sin (...) Joseph's Brethren
saying, We have been verily Guilty together?

We are moreover to Examine our selves,

Do I make such a Recession from sin, as to have no more to do with Idols?

Have we come to speak from the bottom of our Souls, after him, in (...) 34
32. That which I see not, Teach thou me, and if I have done Iniquity, I will do
no more? Are we (...) Universal Controversy with all sin? So, that in our (...)
we Loath every sin, and can say, I ^ate every false way? and in our Course we
Leave every Gross sin, and are among those, who, Do no Iniquity! Have we parted
with a Right Eye, and a Right Hand, which we have beheld offensive unto God?
And are we come to an Everlasting Separation from all Sin? So that we have
given a ^ill of Divorce unto our former ill-practices, never to be Repealed,
never to be Reversed? Is every Evil Spirit cast out of us, with that Charge and
Charm sufficiently laid upon it, Return no more into them?

Finally, We are to Examine our selves,

Have I thoroughly Turned unto that God, who will abundantly pardon?

Is our Character that, in Acts 26. 18. Turned from the power of Satan unto
GOD? Is God now become unto us, all that the Flesh, and the World, and the
Devil was heretofore? Do we seek the Glory of God as out Last End? and is there
within us a Noble principle that will not Endure to think of Living upon any
less Account than this, That God may be Glorified! When there is proposed unto,
us, That Blessedness of, Being the Vessels in, and by which our Glorious
Creator and preserver may have His Beautiful perfections for ever presented
unto the Contemplations, Admirations, and Adorations of the World. are our
Souls marvellously taken with it? Are our Expanding Souls Transported,
Ravished, Overcome at the Thought of t^is; and is it our Outcry thereupon, This
is all my Salvation and all my Desire? Do we also seek the Favor of God, as
our Left Good? Are we come to say with (...) have God, I have much, I have All?
and with (...) If the Lord be my Portion, I have a Goodly Her^ (...) we rather
undergo any misery, than be in (...) condition of them, with whom, God is Angry
every Day? and have we an unutterable value, for the Light of his Countenance,
at whose Fiery Rebukes the most ponderous Mountains are over turned? Shortly;
Do we choose God above All: Should the Eternal God say to us, as to him, of
old, Ask what I shall give thee; would we overlook all the pleasures, and
profits, and Honors of this Earth, and say, Lord, That I may live unto thee,
and with thee for ever! O give me this, and it suffi^eth! And is God unto us,
instead of All? Suppose we have lost never so many Creature Comforts, yet would
an Interest in God enable u s to say, It Is but a Cup of Water spilt unto him
that has a Fountain at the Door? And like the famous Italian, Do we Reckon,
That the Riches of both India's are not worth one Days Communion with God!

Thirdly, A Communicant should Examine himself, whether his FAITH be, The Faith
of Gods Elect. And what is true Faith, but, A Grace of God, whereby a Christian
does embrace the Word of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ as therein Exhibited.

We are told in Heb 11.6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. Even,
Even so, at the Lords Table, Without Faith it is impossible to find Christ. We
are coming to a rich Banquet but it is Faith by which we are to feed upon it.
We cannot see what is upon the Holy Table; much less can we Take it, Eat it,
Drink it in a due manner, if we have no Faith in our Souls; and we shall at
best have but a Seal unto a Blank, in this Glorious Ordinance.

We are then particularly to Examine our selves,

Do I yield a full Assent and Consent, unto the whole Word of God?

Can we truly say with him, in Acts 24. 14. I believe all Things written in the
Law and the Prophets. When we look upon all the Revelations which the Lord in
the Scripture ha s made unto us, do we say, These are True and Righteous
altogether? Yea, do we find our Hearts Closing therewithal; and can we
accordingly profess as in Isa 39. 8. Good is the Word of the L ord? Of the
Doctrines in the Bible, have we that Resentment, These are pure words, like
Silver purified seven times? Of the Commandments, do we say, These Laws are
Holy and Just and G ood? Of the Promises do we say, These are great and
precious Promises? Of the Threatenings, do we say, These Words are True from the
Beginning, and these Righteous Judgments endure for ever? In fine, Have all the
Oracles of God, that Reputation with us, in 1 Timothy 1. 15. Faithful sayings, and
worthy of all Acceptance?

We are furthermore to Examine our selves,

Have I been very sensible of the wretchedness, which the Word of God assures
me to be lying under?

Have we been so Humbled as to see our selves in that Rueful and woeful plight,
in Rev. 3. 17. Wretched* and miserable, and poor and blind, and naked? Have we
bin brought to see and say, If (...) ^it still I Die? and yet have we with much
Distress, and Anguish found our selves unable to stir? Have we seen our own
Guilliness, and cried out, O my wages is Death? Have we seen our own
Worthlessness, and cried out, O my Righteousnesses are as Filthy Rags? Have we
seen our own Impotence, and cried out, O Wretched man, that I am, who shall
deliver me! And have we had such bl^ck visions of our own wretchedness, as to
be filled with an Holy Violence of Soul, to be delivered from it? Have we been
in such Agonies of mind, that the Glad Tidings of a Redeemer, had as Refreshing
a sound unto us, as a Zoar had unto L ot, as the Serpent of C oper had unto a
^^ung Israelite, or as the City of Refuge had unto a poor Manslayer, or as an
Ark would have had unto the drowning Giants of the Antediluvian World?

We are hereupon to Examine our selves,

Have I Repaired unto the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Savior which the Word of
God advises me unto?

Have we with moved, melted, affected Souls considered the Lord Jesus Christ,
under that Endearment, in Col. 1. 19. It has pleased the Father, that in Him
should all F^^ness dwell? And-hence we have gone to Him, with a Lively Hope and
Trust, that His Fullness will make us happy? Have we behold the Lord Jesus, as
the only and the mighty Savior of Souls; a s one Able to save unto the
uttermost; and as one that will not cast out those who come unto Him? Have we
gone to the Lord Jesus, as to the Redeemer appointed and anointed by God for
our Help; and have we R^ly'd upon Him, for both Repentance and Remission of
Sins? Have we with a satisfied Eye looked upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and when
we have Beheld this King in his Beauty, have we said, In this Lord alone have I
Righteousness and S trength? and have the Executions of all his Offices bin
welcome to our Souls? have we prized all that S alvation which He is the Author
of?

Fourthly, A Communicant should Examine himself, whether his Love be, The L ove
which fulfilleth the L aw? The Lords Supper is a L ove-F east, and we should
have a L ovefire at it. There is a two^old L ove, which a Communicant should
Examine himself about.

First, We must Examine our selves about our L ove to GOD. And what is that L
ove, but, A desire of Union with G od, and a Respect to all that has the Name
of G od upon it?

When we come to the Lords Table, we see, That G od SO L oved the World, as
cannot be comprehended by finite Mortal Man. Well, we are now to Examine,
whether we So love G od, as to Abide in His L ove!

We are then to Examine our selves upon this,

Do I love G od with all my Heart, with all my Soul, and with all my Strength?

Is the Love of God in all our Hearts? and is our Understanding employed
frequently, seriously, pleasantly, upon Him? Have we so many Thoughts upon God
every day, that we may say, How Great is the Sum of them? Have we many
contrivances in our minds, how to advance His Interest; often pondering, What S
ervice is there that I may do for God?

Is the Love of God in all our S oul? Does our Will cleave and cling to the
Blessed God, as the most amiable Object what soever; saying, whom have I in
heaven but God, or whom on Earth besides Him? And for our Affections, is that
the Language of our Souls, The Lord is my portion, I will hope in him? and
that, I will Rejoice in the Lord, and Joy in the God of my Salvation? and that,
The Desire of my Soul is to thy Name?

Once more, Is the Love of God, in all our S trength? Do we Lay out our
Strength for Him? If He have not had the Strength and Youth of our years, do we
Recall that wicked Alienation, with extreme Sorrow and sadness of Soul? Do we
give unto God the S trength of our Estate? and not only Give a portion out of
it unto pious uses, but make a Dedication of it all unto the Lord, so that it
shall be subservient unto His praise, while we are providing for our own,
secular Accommodations with it?

We are to Examine our selves upon this also,

Do I L ove the Things of God, because I see (...) His Dear Name imprinted on
them?

Do we Reverence the Image of God, even in the meanest person whatsoever! Do we
account the Saints, as, The Excellent in all the Earth? While the world says of
them, T hey are not worthy to Live, do we say of them, The World is not worthy
of them! Are the Truths of God so dear unto us, that we count them worth being
Earnestly contended for? Being of his Resolution, Let the Sky fall, and Heaven
tumble on our H ead, rather than one crumb of T ruth should be L ost? And as
for that blessed Repository of them, the Holy Bible, can we say, Oh how I love
thy ^aw? do we say, 'T is more desirable than much fine gold, and sweeter than
the Honey Comb? are we conversing with it, until our Hearts are become, as it is
expressed about one of the Ancients, The L ibraries of the Lord Jesus Christ?
and can we, like that Renowned Prince, prefer the S cripture above a S cepter?

Are the Ordinances of God so precious with us, that we can say, Lord, I have
loved the Habitation of thy House? Would we count a ^anis^ment from the
Sanctuary one of the worst Calamities in the World! Can we cheerfully encounter
any Difficulties that we may, Dwell in the House of the L ord Would we look
upon brown Bread and the Gospel, as very good Fare^ and can we say, A Day in
thy Courts is better than a thousand*

In fine, Are the Works of God sought out by us, and do we take pleasure in
those Wonderful Works? Do we delightfully trace the Footsteps of God in the
works of Creation? Are we not only Rational, but also Religious Beholders of
all B^ings, from the stars in the Firmament, unto the stones in the pavement
and is that the shout of our Souls thereupon, O the power, the wisdom, the
Goodness of that God, who made and keeps all of these! Do we likewise observe
the works of Providence, and S ing unto the Lord, because He has done Excellent
Things? Especially, Are we Reconciled unto the most Bitter Dispensations of the
most High toward our selves? Do even Corrections and Afflictions which the
Providence of God visits u s withal, not ^ifl our Spirits: but can we say, with
David, It is Good for me that I have been afflicted? and can we say, with
another, I can take any thing well at the H ands of God?

Secondly, We must Examine our selves, about our Love to MAN. And what is this
Love, but, A Benevolence to all men, and a Complacence in Good men for the sake
of God?

Murderers may not come to the Lords Table; but what are we better, with out,
The Love of our Brother? If we give our own Bodies to be burned, and have not
Charity, it profits nothing; nor will it profit us- any thing, for us to come
where the Body of the Lord, is Broken, if this Charity be absent from us.

We are therefore to Examine our selves upon this,

D o I desire the Welfare of all men as truly as my own?

Do we, like the C ompassionate S amaritan, count every one our Neighbor, that
wants our pity? and can our Love extend it self not only unto strangers, but
unto Enemies? Do we Lament and Bewayl the miseries of our Fellow-worms; like
our Lord, of whom it is noted, that when he saw a man laboring under a
Complicate S urdity and Aphony, then, He sighed? Especially do our hearts bleed
over, the spiritual miseries of other men; wishing and Longing for the Day,
when* T he Devil shall not deceive the Nations any more? Are we therewithal
ready to do our utmost for the Redress of these Miseries and count we no Warm
Prayers, no Good Turns, too much for the Comfort of such as are in their
Distresses* Though our Charity do begin at home, do we see to it, that it End not
there; and can we act according to that Golden Rule, Do as you would be done
unto^ In Giving, do we show the same Concern and the same Friendship, that we
would expect from others in evil Hours* in Forgiving, do we generously pass by
more than seventy seven provocations, and are we like those that have been
famous for this Temper, To be sure to do a Kindness for an Injury?

We are moreover to Examine our selves upon this, D o I place a peculiar
delight in them that fear

G od and keep his Commandments?

Though all men have our Courtesy, yet have Holy and Gracious and Renewed men,
the Benjamines Mess of our Dilection* Do we discern a peculiar Beauty and
Sweetness in them that are B orn again; and will not this or that Little
humor, like a S ^ar upon them, extinguish their Interest in our Hearts* Yea,
though they may think meanly of us, yet (as Calvin of Luther) can we think highly
of them? and I as the Hous^old of Faith a peculiar share in our Bounty, while
we Do good unto all? Above all, are we as true Members in the Mystical Body of
our Lord Jesu s, every day concerned for the Good of the Whole? Truly, We are
passed from Death to Life if we love the B rethren.

It were very desirable for us in a S elf-Examination, to go over all of these
Articles; and there will be this Advantage in this Exercise, That our Enquiring
after the Grace of God in our souls, will put us upon the Exercising of all
that grace. When we Enquire, whether we have the Graces of the Holy Spirit in
us, indeed this is the best way to satisfy our own Enquiries; Let us with our
Ejaculations unto God, as we go along, Profess and Renew, the gracious
inclinations of our own S ouls, Let him who doubts whether he Lives, prove it
by moving, walking, Doing the Actions of them that are Alive. Your S
elf-Examination, may as it were draw forth all your Graces into the Field, and
gloriously Exercise them as to all the postures and power s of them there: by
which means you will even Feel your own Regeneration.

But I ought to consider the Circumstances of those who may happen to be so
straightened in Time, That they cannot go through such a Long Work as has now been
set before them. Wherefore, For the Relief of such Necessities, I briefly
single out, a few Notes, which you may more suddenly and speedily Try your
selve s upon.

Questions upon Repentance.
Quest 1. Am I at so hearty pains for no Outward and Earthly Thing, as I am for
the Mortification of every Lust?

Quest. 2. Are Afflictions themselves welcome to me, when I see my Sins thereby
Embittered and subdued?

Questions upon Faith.
Quest. 1. Is my Soul extr^amly affected with the Blessed Fullness and Glory
which is in the Lord Jesus Christ?

Quest 2. Does my Heart most Affectionately close with the Gospel-way of S
alvation by Jesus Christ, so as cheerfully to venture the Life of my Soul upon
it?

Questions upon Love.
Quest 1. Does any thing that ha s a Tendency to promote the Honor of God,
readily embraced with me, as a thing more desirable than all the Riches in the
World?

Quest. 2. Do I count no Service too much to be done for the people of the S
aints of the most High?

Ask yourselves these things; and O be much afraid of such a Doom as that in
Jer.2.37. The Lord has R ejected thy C onfidences, and thou shall not prosper
in them.

But suppose a person be still in the Dark about their Condition! This is*

The second Case.
What shall be done by Them who after Self-Examination, are still under such
Fears about their Good S tate as that they dare not come unto the Table of the
Lord?

Some Notice must be taken of such Dejected Souls; and may He that is Anointed
to give unto them that mourn in Z ion, the Garment of praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness, bless these words unto them!

First, Cherish not ungrounded Fears; for the more you do, the more you may.
One says well concerning these Fears, They are like Thistles, a Bad We^d, but
growing in G ood Ground. Ind eed they commonly grow most in that ground, where
there is least ground for their Growth; and it is because Good Hearts do too
much Nourish and Indulge them. A Complaining, Repining, Disconsolate, sort of
Temper is too much humoured by many pious persons, as if it were pleasing unto
God; whereas, God loves a Cheerful giver. Are you under sad F ears about
yourselves? Let me say to you, as the Angel said unto the Melancholy Prophet,
in I King.19.9. What do thou here? You must get up, and seek till you find
some Remedy against your Fears. Don't sweel away week after week in this
Fearful Disposition, but be Vigorous in your Endeavors to become Victorious
over it.

Secondly, Look again, and see whether your Fears be not indeed Ungrounded
ones. Perhaps you conclude Rashly against yourselves, and ought to Recall the
Verdict which you have passed upon your unregeneracy. We read in Math.17.20.
about, Faith as a Grain of Mustard seed; and yet it is a True Faith, which is
thus almost Invisible. There are L ittle Babes in the Family, and there are
Tender Grapes in the Vineyard, of the Lord Jesus Christ, if you come but under
Those Denominations yet you are to be Encouraged: You may stand not like
Olive-plants about the Table of the L ord, but rather like Bruised Reeds;
nevertheless He will not Break you there. Our God says in Amos.9.9. The least
Grain shall not fall to the Earth. If there is but the L east Grain of Grace in
your Souls, God has made a glorious provision for it; and the Holy Supper is
part of that provision. But what is the Least Grain? Why, A G rief is a G rain.
Is it the Real and Cordial G rief of you Souls, That you Repent so poorly, That
you Believe so feebly, and, That you Love so faintly? Then you Have, what you
Grieve because you Want, Again, A Groan is a Grain. Is it the most lively G
roan of your Souls, Oh that I had the Repentance which is unto S alvation! and,
O^ That I had the Faith, which is the gift of God! and, Oh That He that know^s
all things, might know that I love Him! Then you have what you Groan to have.
Even, The Desires of Grace are Grace, when they be of Grace as such. We find,
in Ne^. 1.11. That God has a special Respect, unto those who, D esire to Fear
His Name. Does all the D esign of God for His Elect, meet with a D esire in you
after an Interest in it? Is there no D istemper of your Souls, which you D
esire not the Removal of (...) Is there no Salvation of the Lord Jesus which
you D esire not the Bestowal of? Are you D esirous, to have all the Fruits of
the S pirit, even all of His G race thriving in you? Then be of good cheer; I
know not what Scarecrow should now fright you from the sweet smelling Field
which is blessed by the Lord.

Thirdly, It Is possible that your Fears themselves, may be Just G rounds for
your coming to the Table of the Lord. For,

Assurance is not Absolutely Necessary in order to a worthy Coming unto the
Holy Supper. We are to Examine our selves, and if upon the Examination we do
not find full cause to pronounce ourselves Unregenerate, we are to come, though
we have many Fears, whether we be indeed Regenerate. or no. We are herein to
Run some Hazard and Venture, out of Obedience to the Lord Jesus Christ. We read
in Math.14 28. That when our Lord said unto Peter, Come, he boldly step't into
the Deep to come unto Him; and when his Fears of S inking distressed him, our
Lord caught him by the hand. Even so, you may suspect, that for you to come
unto the L ords Table, would be as Dangerous a Thing as to cast yourselves into
a Stormy Sea; yea, but since the Lord says, Come, you ought to come as well as
you can, and humbly say, Lord, I t is ^t thy Bidding that I come, O let me not
Sink in the Floods of Death, by my coming to thee. What tho you have many F
ears upon you? We read of a poor Woman, that came, Fearing and Trembling, and
fell down before the Lord Jesus; who yet found Healing by Touching the Fringe
of His Garment.

Yea, The Holy Supper is ordained for the cure of those very Ails which are the
cause of all your Fears. The things which fill you with Fears, are your Lusts.
But answer ingeniously; Are you not much Troubled for them? are you not quite
weary of them? are they not the Burden of your Souls? you are then to bring
those Vexatious Things to the Table of the Lord, that you may find Help against
them there. You know who tells us in Math.9.1^. That a Christ, is, Not for the
whole, but for the S ick. A patient will not Reason so Unreasonably as to say,
I will not go to a Physician, because I am very Sick. Nor should we thus argue,
I will not go to the Lord Table because I have most fearful D iseases in my
Soul. No, you are to come hither as unto a Glorious Dispensatory, where you may
have Medicines for all your Maladies:

Hence Luther answers that Objection, I dare not come to the Lords S upper,
because I am unworthy! So, Thou art to come for that very cause because thou
art unworthy. Oh then Come with Hungry. Thirsty, Fearful Souls; and know, that
as when the Passover was kept, it is said, There was Great Joy among the
people; So, a Serious Approach unto the Sacrament, may Turn all your Fears into
Joys; Yea, into Joys unspeakable and full of Glory.

DEVOTIONS At the SUPPER of the LORD; With Some Touches upon the constitution
of the Gospel Churches which that Glorious Appointment of our Lord Jesus is to
be celebrated in.
CANT. 1. 12. While the King Sits at His Table, my Spiknard sends forth
the smell thereof.
OF all the Mysteries in the World; there is none more, Comfortable and
Admirable than the Blessed Union and Communion between the Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Church of Militant Believers on Him. Of all the Resemblances that can
be used for the Illustration hereof, there is none more Significant than what
the Marriage of two Passionate Lovers will afford. That mystery is most
elequently set forth by this Resemblance, in the Song of Solomon*

The Jews compare the Three Books of S olomon, to the Three Parts of the
Temple built by him; the Proverbs they liken to the Porch, the Ecclesiastes
they liken to the Holy Place; and the Canticles they liken to the Holy of
Holies, within the Vail, where all things were full of Mystery, Reverence and
Religion. It Is a Pastoral and a Nuptial Song which we an^ here entertained with;
but we may make the Enquiry sometimes made upon another occasion. I Pray thee,
of whom S peaks the Prophet this? of himself, or of some other? Truly, it
cannot be said, of S olomon, That he was a proper Shepherd, or that he was any
where shut out of Doors, till his Head was ^et with the D ew. Nor can it be
said about the Queen of S olomon, That she was a Rural Busy Shepherdess, or,
that having lost her Brid^groom, she was beaten by Watchmen that found her
seeking of him.

Moreover, The Opinion, That this was a Love-Song, made upon the too
Exceptionable wedding between David's Son and Pharaohs Daughter, is confuted, by
the mention which the Song makes about The Tower of Lebanon, that was not built
until more than Twenty years afterward. It is therefore Evident, That A
Greater than Solomon is here! Our Lord Jesus and His Church are the Lovers,
whose Interview^ are here described unto us. The Wise man, in his old Age,
bitterly Repenting of the Impure Loves which his younger years had been defiled
withal, does now write of a more Divine and S acred Love.

In our Text, we have the Respect of the Church unto the Lord Jesus Christ;
upon which, Two Things are to be noted.

First, we have the S eason of it. It is, when the King sits at His Table.

Behold the Person which we are now concerned with; it is a Great King who
vouchsafes to be treating with us miserable Beggars and Sinner here. O that we
could enough Admire the Benignity and the Condescension of the King that has
brought us hither! If we now put that Question, in Psalm.24 8,10. Who is this
King of Glory? Who is this King! We may take that answer, in Mal.1.14. I am a G
reat King, says the Lord of Hosts. Our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ is the King,
whom we now make our Addresses to; and it is our Business here to acknowledge
Him as our King. Very Royal is the largess, which we are here to Expect from
His magnificent and munificent Hands; we must now look for those things, that
Life and that Peace, which it may well be^eem the Dignity of such a King to
give. We are here also to Resolve that we will be Governed by His Laws; and
with an unspotted Loyalty unto Him, we are now to say, The Lord is our King,
and He shall save us.

But behold also the Posture which He stoops unto. We find He, Sits at His
Table. The Hebrew Original represents Him as Lying Down in a Round or a Ring of
persons, whom He does feast Himself withal. There is a Blessed Feast which the
Lord Jesus does Refresh the Souls of His People with; and He does vouchsafe of
His Presence to them as, and in this Heavenly Festival. This Presence of His,
is indeed that which sweetens all!

Secondly, We have the Effect of it. It is thus Expressed, my Spiknard sends
forth the smell thereof. Which is to be understood rather Actively, than
Passively. It signifies not only, That the Lord Jesus does here Perfume His
Church with the Liquid and precious Nard of His own Spirit; and that, We have
an Unction from the Holy One; But it also and chiefly Signifies, that the
Church does here very sweetly Delight the Lord Jesus, by Exercising of much
Grace upon Him. The Grace of God, is as a pure and rich Spice in the Souls of
them that have it; when this G race is Exercised, it is like a Perfume in the
Resentments of our Lord Jesus Christ; and He says upon it, My Spouse, how much
better is the smell of thine Ointments, than all Spices? Our Lavender, which is
a Bastard Spiknard, is very sweet; but the true and right S piknard of the
East- I ndies, is unspeakably more Delicious; however, the G race of God
Exercised in us, is far more fragant and grateful to that Holy Lord.

But we have this Doctrine then to think upon.

That the Exercise of Graces ought to be the Endeavor of Christians at the
Cable of the Lord.

One word or two will bring us to the Application of this Faithful saying.

Conclusion. I
The Lord Jesus Christ in Hi s Ordinances dispenses Himself unto us, as if He
were sitting at a Table with us. The Salvation of the Lord Jesus is not amiss s
compared unto a Feast; and with Respect unto it, He therefore, says, of the
Believer, as in Rev. 3. 20. I will Sup with Him. When our Lord Pardons us,
Renews us, Comforts us in this, and brings us at length to the G lories of
another World, He says to us, I sup with you. In a Feast, the Good Things are
plentiful. Thus may we say to our Lord, as in Psalm. 65. 4. We shall be
satisfied with the Goodness of thy House. There is enough and enough in Christ
Jesus to satisfy us all; Merit enough, power enough, and virtue enough; and of
His Fullness we may all Receive. Moreover, In a Feast, the Good Things are
Various. Thus does our Lord say unto us, as in Mat 22. 4 Come, for all things
are Ready. All that we Want, all that we Wish is in Christ Jesus; He is that
Manna which has the Relish of all that any sensible Soul can have a mind unto.
Now, it is in His Ordinances, that the Lord Jesus Christ conve^e s to us that S
alvation, and all Hi s Benefits; and in these Ordinances we have Him sitting
with us. There it is, that He sits, as at a Table, where he may be seen; and
his voice unto us, is that in Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me, and be ye Saved.

Conclusion, 2
The Exercise of Graces ought to be the Endeavor of Christians in all of those
Blessed Ordinances. The Opus Operatum of coming to the Ordinances of the Lord
Jesus, will be of no Advantage to us, if we have not a Spiritual Communion with
Him there; as the Phrase is False Latin, so it is none but a False Heart that
will be contented with the Thing. In every Ordinance we should be able to say,
as in 1 John 1. ^. Truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with his S on J
esus Christ, Now, it is by the Exercise of Graces, that we maintain that
Fellowship; it is by making Returns of Reverence, Repentance, Obedience, to Him,
that there bestows of His Influences upon our Souls. The Matter of our Duty s
in coming to the Ordinances of our Lord, will neither please Him, nor profit
us, unless we Look also to the Manner of it; now the right manner of attending
upon Ordinances is to Exercise all manner of Graces in the doing of it. The
Ordinance of our public Praying, is well used, when our Graces are so
Exercised in it, that we may say, as in Psalm. 25. 1. Unto thee O Lord, I do now
Lift my S oul; our S ouls are therein with sincere and Lively Affections to
address Him that is I nvisible. An Amen should accompany every stroke* The
Ordinance of our public Hearing i s well used, when our Graces are so
Exercised in it, that we do say, as in Psalm 85. 8. I will hear what God the
Lord will speak: We are herein with a most humble Submission to place our
selves under the word, as indeed the word of God: He did so that would not flip
an H ead, or a Text brought in a Sermon, without a pertinent Ejaculation
thereupon. The Ordinance of our Puplick Singing, is to have our G races
Exercised in it, according to that in Ephesians.5.19. S inging and making M elody, in
your Heart unto the Lord; it is pity to let one Verse pass us, without one G
racious Observation and Supplication raised from it. And in L ike manner are
all other Ordinances to be managed with such Motions in our Souls, as may be a
fit Entertainm ent for that God, Who will be worshipped in S pirit and in Truth.

But we need not now any longer Prorogue that

Application,
Which this Truth is designed for; It Is this, Let us come to THY S Table of the
Lord, on which we have the Supper of the Lord, with such an Exercise of Grace,
as He calls for; and let our Spiknard HERE so send forth the smell thereof,
as that we may be accounted Worthy Receivers of this Blessed Sacrament. You are
now coming to a Cable which the King of Heaven is peculiarly and eminently
present at. O be careful to come so Graciously, as that you may be reckoned to
come Worthily hereunto: and this the rather, because a Godly man, may fall into
that Pernicious miscarriage of coming a miss unto the Table of the Lord; a man
that shall not at last be Condemned with the World, yet may smart very terribly
for being a Negligent Communicant. I would set before you, these two
Considerations.

Consider. 1. Very Black is the SIN committed by them, who do not in a Gracious
and a Worthy manner approach to this Holy Table. We read in 2 Cor.30.15. The
Priest and Levites were Ashamed, and Sanctified themselves Truly It Is a great
Shame for us, to come ^^to the Table of the Lord, in an Unsanctify'd manner; a
Great Shame it is, because it is a great Sin. It Is an Affront unto Him who says,
I am a great King, and my Name is Dreadful; it is a Vile thing to be Undecent and
Uncivil, but so it is, to be ungracious, at the Table of such a King. A great
prince being too poorly and meanly treated by a another person, gave him that up
braid, Non putabam ess^ me tibitam Fami^earem; I did not look for this
Familiarity! It Is an impudent Familiarity that an unfit Communicant imposes upon
the God of Heaven with. Every thing else at the Table usually is clean; we have
only clean Linnens; and clean Vessels there; it is ^nexcusable if our Hearts and
our F rames be not also cleansed. It is a hot Thunderbolt that falls, in 1
Cor.11.27. Whosoever shall Eat this Bread, and Drink this Cup of the Lord
Unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and the Blood of the Lord. That
unworthy, notes not so much the Subject, as the manner, of Concunicating. Every
Communicant is an Unworthy Subject of this Ordinance, and m^st cry out, L ord I
am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies. But the Communicant that comes
in an unworthy manner, this man, as it were Crucifies the Lord Jesus over
again, and Justifies all the Abuses that His villainous Murderers give unto
Him; he handles the Blessed Body of our Lord, as unworthily as the Jews did,
when they Scourged it, smote it, Stabbed it, Hanged it, and Spat upon it: he
does indeed Show forth our Lords Death; but how? It Is with a Guilty profane,
wicked Repetition of it. Yea, the man would be a very Judas, if he had but
Judas's Opportunities. Now what an horrible Guilt is this? To be Guilty of any
man's Death is a most borrid thing; O Deliver me from Blood G uiltiness! was the
ourcry of David once. But what is it then to be Guilty of His, who is the Son
of God, the Prince of Life, and the Lord of glory! For the Blood of any man to
cry against us, is a dreadful, and a dismal thing; but what is it then, to have
the Blood of our only Savior crying to God against us? Woe to us, if that Blood
should not cry for us, and speak better things than the Blood of Abel; but O
what a Woeful Thing will it be, if the cry of that Blood should be, for Divine
Fury and Vengeance to break forth upon us, as the G uilty Shedders of it?

And therefore,

Consider. 2. Very sad is the WRATH Incurred by them, who do not in a G racious
and a Worthy manner approach to this Holy Table. From this Wrath it is that the
unworthy Communicnat gets no good by coming to this Ordidinance: His coming, is
one of those things which the Lord calls, Vain Oblations* He comes indeed unto
a Divine Supper, but he is not so made partaker of it, as to escape that Curse,
in 2 King.7,2. Behold, thou shall see it with thine Eyes, but thou shall not
Eat thereof; or that curse, in Hos.4.19. They shall Ea^, and shall not be
satisfied. No good got by him, did I say! Nay, much Hurt ^s felt by him. It Is a
Dangerous Thing to come Unsuitably,

For,

First, There are very d^reful and heavy Plagues, which in this Life are
inflicted on men, for their unworthiness at the Table of the Lord.

It was an expression in 1 Cor 11.30. For this cause many are We^k and S^ck
among you, and many sleep There seems to be a mortal Distemper sent among the
Corinthians, because the Supper of the Lord was profaned with them. Because
they did not use the Lords Body in a Becoming manner therefore Their B odies
were plagued with Troublesome Diseases, to chastise that Iniquity. If you love
your Lives, or if you would not perish like Julian the uncle, or F elix the
Treasurer of the Apostate. I pray look to your Behaviors at the Table which
represents the Death of our Lord. The Famous and Faithful Paraeus told his
Countrymen, When I consider your Sacrament-Profanations, I do not wonder at
the Desolating J udgments of God, that come upon you. And give me leave to say,
that the English Nation has at this day but unhappy Symptoms on it, on the
score of the Prostitutions which have been made of this Tremendous Ordinance;
it is well if the Righteous and Jealous God will not shortly make Rivers of
Blood to run in a Kingdom, where the Blood of His dear Son, has been used as
an unholy Thing.

Moreover,

Secondly, Men's Unworthiness at the Table of the Lord, always Deserves, and
sometimes Procures unto them the Vengeance of Eternal fire. It (...) strike
Horror into every one of our Souls, to read that Sentence in 1 Cor 11.29. He
that Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats and Drinks Damnation to himself.
But what an amazing Morsel is that? Our unworthiness here will render the best
of us, worthy of Damnation: only the pity and the pardon of a Good God Extends
it self to those that are Involuntary in this unworthiness. But if men are
Presumpteous in it, if they come to the Table of our Lord, with an High-handed
and an Hard-hearted malignity reigning in them, Woe to those Intruders? They Eat
the Passover Raw, than which nothing more unw^oesome or mischievous. This
Ordinance will be to them, as the Tree of Death was to our first Father; it
will prove the Sacrament and Instrument of their Eternal Death, and they will
swallow down their Damnation with the Eucharist. It will but leave them the
more fixed and settled in their Sins, and the more fully possessed by the Evil
one; as the Apostle expresses it, They come together not for the Better, but
for the worse; thus, they are the worse for their being here. And this will
expire in the Everlasting Torments, of that state wherein they shall have (...)
Bread out the burning Coals of Juniper, and no Cup except that unmixed one of
Red Wine, the Dregs whereof shall be wrung out by all the wicked of the Earth.
What became of the Person that appeared at the Gospel-Table without a Wedding
garment on! Oh Tremble at such a Doom as that; and therefore labor to have the
Spiknard of Grace here sending forth a S mell, acceptable to the Eternal King.

Now that you may not be found without the Savours of Grace, at the Holy Table,
there are these Counsils to be set before you.

Counsil. 1.
Prepare to Celebrate the D eath of the Lord Jesus at His Table, with as much
Awfulness and Exactness, as if your own Death, were at the same Time to be
prepared for. A serious and a solemn Preparation for the Table of the Lord, is
that which will give a Vigorous Odor to our S piknard there. Now, Let the
sense of our Mortality be Awakned, and be Transferred unto this Preparation.
When the Minister gives notice a Week before, That the Lords Supper shall be
Administered on the Next Lords D ay, if G od permit; Let the word come with as
much Dread upon you, as if he had said like the Prophet, in Isa.38. 1. S et thy
House in Order, for thou shall D y, and not live. Think with your selves, What
if I were to D y the next Lords D ay, and appear before the Judgment S eat of G
od! And behave your selves all the week, as if you were then to Die. Suppose you
were to Die at the Time of the next Communion; What Sin would be most Burdensome
to you? or, What Wish would be most powerful in you? or, What Disposition of
Soul would you choose to D y withal? Why, Be now concerned about those very
Affayrs, even as if you were to D y: who knows but you may D y before?

Counsil. 2.
Bring to the Table of the Lord, those things without which you cannot keep
alive, the Exercise of your Graces there. A few things there are without
which, your S piknard will wither at the Table of the Lord; and these you must
be sure to come furnished with. That they come in good States, is indeed, the
Unum necessarium of Communicants; you must in the first place look to this,
That you have the Root of the matter (of the Spiknard) in you. Having provided
for that, then,

First, Be sure to bring Right Ends with you. The Lord that asked an ill person
at His Table, How came thou hither? will ask every person Why come thou?
Now be capable of giving a good Answer thereunto. When some had been at
Ordinances, our Lord Enquired of them, in Math.11.8.9. what went ye out for to
see? Even so, when we come to This Ordinance, our Lord will put that Enquiry to
us, What are you come hither to see? O be able to say, That you did not come
out merely for a S how. The Lords Supper has been perverted unto wretched Ends
by evil men too often in the world. It has been Hurtfully (...) by them that
have made it a Test for, an Officer; admitting the vilest of men unto it, in
order to their having some civil or military Trust. It has been Blasphemously
perverted by them that have made it a B and of Iniquity; taking the Sacrament
as a Ty to strengthen one another in some Divillish Enterprise. It has been
Superstitiously perverted, by them that have made an Host or a Charm of it;
carrying it about in Procession for Adoration, or using it as a Medicine for
the sick, or casting it into a S epulchre of the Dead. Renounce all such Ends
as these, with all the other more carnal Ends of a Pharisee, in your coming to
the Table of the Lord. But when He demands of you, What come you hither to see?
Reply like those Honest Greeks, in Joh.12.21. We would see Jesus. Take the
Sacrament, as a Tarf, or a Key, by which we possess ourselves of the Lord Jesus
Christ Himself. B^^ able to say, Lord I come that I may know thee and serve
thee better; that thy Grace may be nourished in my soul, and that thy Joy may
be my strength. Be able to say, Lord I come that I may have thy New Testament
confirmed unto me; and that I may Testify my Faith in thee, and my Love to them
that are called by thy Name. O come with such Noble Aims in your Eyes.

Secondly, Be sure to bring Fixed Hearts with you. Take heed of a Wandering, a
Roving Fancy, at the Table of the Lord. The Psalmist could say, Psalm.^7.7. My
heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; I will sing and give Praise: Even so
should we be able to say, My Heart is Fixed, and now I will Communicate. Lay by
all your worldly Thoughts, when you are going to the Lords Supper, and say to
them, as he of old said unto the Servants, Abide you here, while I go yonder
and worship, and I will come again to you. And if any of those worldly thoughts
would haunt you while you are here engaged, fray them away as Abraham did the
Fowls, that would have torn and Spoiled the Sacrifices. Allow of no
Distractions, in this important Service; but if any I mpertinent Subjects would
solicit your Thoughts at such a Time, say to them, like him to them, in
Neh.6.^. I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down; why should the
work cease, while I leave it, and come down to you?

The Greek Language gives to a Butterfly the same Name that it gives to our
Soul; and alas, our Souls are too like unto Butterflies in our Devotions; they
frisk here and there to a thousand objects in an Hour, and are strangely
Desultory in their Cogitations. But let us chastise this Fickleness, at the
Table of the Lord; and if your minds begin to start, call upon them immediately
as the Sacrificers did upon the people of old, ho^ Agite! Oh mind what you are
about.

Thirdly, Be sure to bring with you Excited Appetites. It is a S upper that we
are invited now unto; but what signifies a S upper without an Appetite?
Methinks, every Dish and Cup upon this Table, has that Motto engraved upon it,
in Math.5.6. Blessed are they that Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, for
they shall be filled. Let us come with Hungry and Thirsty Souls, and very
bitterly sensible of the innumerable Wants which our Sins have plunged us into.
Get such an Hunger as will even break through stone-walls, and be at any
Difficulties rather than go without the Lord Jesus Christ; and get such a
Thirst as will cause us with S ampson to cry out, I die for Thirst! or with
David, Long, O who will give me to D rink of the waters of the well of
Bethlehem! ( There was our Lord Jesus born.) If our Hearts were but
sufficiently enlarged with Desires and vast cravings after Spiritual Benefits,
the Lord would give that Commandment unto the Sacraments, which He gave unto
the Servants, in John.2.7. F ill the water pots with water: And they filled
them up to the Brim! Let us affect our selves with the Deplorable and
Uncountable Necessities of our Souls, and come to the Lords Table, with
Importunate wishes to have them all supplied there; come with an Appetite like
that in Psalm.42.1. As the Heart pants after the water Brooks, so pants my
soul after thee, O God; or like that in Psalm.63.1. O G od, my soul thirsts
for thee, to see thy power and thy Glory, in the S anctuary.

Counsil 3.
Let the Affectionate as well as the Historical Remembrance of the Lord Jesus
Christ, be That which may Exercise your Graces at his Table. our Dying Lord had
this Respect put upon Him in John 12 3. Mary took a pound of Ointment of
Spiknard, very costly, and anointed the Feet of Jesus; and the House was filled
with the Odor of the Ointment. Even so, It Is our D ying Jesus that our S
piknard is here to be employed upon; and it is by a Remembrance of Him, that
the S piknard is to become truly Odoriferous. This is the short and the sum of
our buisiness here, D o this in Remembrance of the L ord.

First, There is an Historical Remembrance of the Lord Jesus to be had at his
Holy Table. The Elements and the Actions in the Sacrament all serve to
represent the History of the Lord Jesus Christ unto us, and we should therefore
so sit in the Meeting house, as that we may see those Elements and Actions
during the whole Administration. Having beforehand read the History of the
Lord Jesus in the S cripture; we are now to read it over again in the S upper
and accompany him from His Birth to his Grave with our Meditations. Remember
now the Incarnation and the following Humiliation of the Lord Jesus Christ, in
all the parts of it; and Remember especially the Agonies of his Bloody Passion,
When his S oul was made an Offering for Sin. Remember the Shame cast on the
Lord Jesus, when He was Accused and Reproached as the greatest Criminal;
Hurried from Court to Court with the Clamours of a whole Nation against him;
and at last Hanged between a couple of Enourmous Malefactors. Remember the Pain
felt by the Lord Jesus, when the heavy Fists and lead ^n Thongs of the
Soldiers tore His flesh from His Bones; and after the cruel jerk of the Cross
into the Ground with Him Nailed unto it, the Horrid Anguish of diverse Hours
caused Him to give up the Ghost. Remember the Soul-Torments endured by the Lord
Jesus, when the Terrors of His mind fetched from Him a Sweat of Blood, though He
were then in a cold Night grovelling on the cold Earth; and when His Roarings
were My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? O Remember the horrible
sufferings of the Lord; Hear the Echo's of His Groans, and look again into
every one of His Grievous, Hideous Wounds and Imagine that you have like Joseph
of Arimathea, His Dead Body all Ghastly, and Bloody in your Arms.

Secondly, There is furthermore, an Affectionate Remembrance of the Lord Jesus,
to be had at his Holy Table.

But How?

First, We are here to Remember the Lord Jesus Christ, with an Adoration of the
Mysteries appearing in His Dying for us. Let us now look upon the Causes of His
Death and admire the Mysteries contained in them. Remember the Impulsive Cause
of His Death; which was the Love of God. With Admiration here Behold, and say,
God so loved the World, that He gave His only Begotten Son! Behold and say, ^od
commends His Love toward us, that while we were yet Sinners Christ died for
^s! Remember the Meritorious Cause of His Death, which was the Sin of Man. With
Admiration again Behold, and say, He was wounded for our Transgressions, He was
bruised for our Iniquities, the chastisement of our Peace was upon him! Behold
and say, God made Him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made
the Righteousness of God in Him! These are Mysteries to be here adored. Let us
also look upon the Effects of His Death, and admire the Mysteries Illustratious
in them. Remember that Reconciliation which His Death has effected for us, and
all the circumstances of the Friendship now established between God and Man.
With Admiration here Behold and say, When we were Enemies we were reconciled
unto G od by the Death of His Son! Behold and say, G od is in Christ
reconciling the World unto Himself, nor Imputing their Trespasses unto them!
Remember also that Victoriousness Which His Death has effected for us: and
recollect how we are made Conquerors, and more than conquerors thorough Him
that loved us. With Admiration again, Behold, and say, The L ord Jesus Christ
has now overcome Death, and destroyed him that had the power of Death, which
is the Devil. Behold, and say, The Lord Jesus having spoiled Principalities and
Powers has made show of them openly, in His Cross triumphing over them! These
are further mysteries to be Adored here.

Secondly, We are here to Remember the Lord Jesus Christ, with a deep R
epentance for, our sins, which His Death is to be ascribed unto.

Particularly, We are now to R emember our Dying Jesus, with a Sorrow for all
our sins. Here we should fulfill that word, in Zech. 12. 12. They shall look on
Him, whom they have pierced; and they shall mourn. O We should now mourn to
think of the Grief, which our sins have put the Lord Jesus Christ unto; and we
should look upon our selves, as the Judas, the Pilate, and all the Wicked
Miscreants that butchered ou^ Lord. When we see our Blessed Jesus fearfully
mangled on his Table we may take it for granted, Surely some evil Beast has
devoured Him! But we must presently remind that we our selves were the
Devourers, and we may a little alter the Words used by David of old, Lo, I have
sinned, and I have done wickedly; but this Lamb, what has he done? Hereupon all
the Strokes and Stabs given to our Lord, should enter into our Hearts; and as
when our Dying Lord said unto Mary, Behold thy Son! it is noted, A Sword passed
through her Soul: So when it is here said unto us, Behold thy Savior! Every sin
of ours that brought the Curse upon him, should be as a Sword unto our very
Souls within us. If a Murderer touch the Body Slain by him* it (...) afresh, we
do here to^^ the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ, which we have Murdered; O that
our own hearts may bleed at it; and say, Lord, what a Wretch am I?

Again, we are now to Remember our dying Jesus, with an Hatred, yea, with a
Cripling and Killing of all our Sins. Revenge is one study of a Penitent; we
are now to Resolve that we will Revenge the wrong done to our Lord Jesus, by
the destruction of the sins that have done (...) Wrong. We are now to say
concerning the Sin that has killed the Lamb of God as David concerning the Man
that had Injured Uriah's Lamb, in 2 Samuel 12.5. As the Lord lives, the SIN (the
Pride, the Passion, the Sensuality, and the Covetousness) that has done this
thing shall surely Die. Perhaps you are of the same Inclination with that French
King, who newly after his Conversion, hearing a Sermon on the Sufferings of
Christ, from the Jews, in a fit of zeal, flew out, saying, If I and my
Soldiers had been there, I would have ^ut the Throats of them. Pray fall upon
your Sins then; for They did more than all the Jews in this matter. O Resolve,
Never will I play with the Spear that Stabbed my S aviour: Never, Never will I
have to do any more with I dols.

We should now indeed fetch ve^ue from the Death of Christ, for the Death of
Sin; and we should seriously and sincerely Resolve now to put our sin unto a
Death which may bear a notable Analogy to the Death of our Lord. As now, The
Jews never left urging of their Governor against the Lord Jesus, until they
got Him Crucified. Even so should we now fall to Sighing and shouting before
our God, Lord my sin is a Traitor to thy Throne! and beg till He give order,
The Rebel shall Die, (...) Complain against this Haman, when you are at this
Banquet with the Eternal King.

Moreover, The Jews drew up many Heavy I ndictments against the Lord Jesus.
When that was done, they throw all Sorts of I ndignities upon Him. They than
withdrew all kinds of Refreshments from Him. And lastly, They Tortured Him,
till by their Torments they hunted that H and of the Morning, His Soul out of
His Body. Resolve now upon such a Treatment of every S in, though the sin may be
as dear as a Right-Eye, or a Right Hand unto you. Devout Nazi^^zen said; when a
Lust gave too busy molestations to him, he could quickly quell it by Reading
the Book of the Lamentations. How much more Mortifying a spectacle should it be
unto us, when here we see, The Man who is Gods Fellow, hanging on a Tree?

Thirdly, We are here to Remember the Lord Jesus Christ, with a True Faith in
Him, and in His Death.

Particularly, We are now to Remember our Dying Jesus, with a Choice of Him as
our Savior. Profess now before Men and Angels, that you are not ashamed to say
of Him, who fell into the Icy paws of Death at Golgotha, as in Isa. 33.22. This
Lord is my Lord, my King, my L awgiver. The foul mouthed Julian would hellishly
deride the Blessed Jesus, calling Him, The staked God. The Heathen would Laugh
at the Christians of old saying, Tu adoras Crucifixu^^! What? you are one of
the Fools, that worship Him that was Crucified! And the Jews do still taunt at
us, with such a Scoff as that, What? you worship Talu^, i. e. an Hanged man!
Thus have these Blasphemers foamed. But in Opposition them, do you now make
this profession, That man who was Rejected by me^^ and smitten by G od Himself,
is G od as well as Man; and I will be the servant of Him, while I have any
Being. It is noted of Thomas, in John.20.28. That when he handled the Raised
Body of the Lord Jesus Christ, in a sort of Transport, he cried out, My Lord
and my G od,! Even thus, when you here handle the Word of life, than break
forth into such Acclamations a^, Here shall be my Lord and my G od; I will keep
His Commandments, and I will take up my C ross to follow Him, if He require it*

Again, We are now to Remember our Dying Jesus with a Trust in Him for all
Salvation. We are told in John 2. 11. That when Jesus turned Water into Wine,
His Disciples Believed on Him. Thus are we to Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ,
when we see him after a sort here Turning of Wine into Blood. As our Lord said
unto the man, in Mark 9. 23. If thou can now Believe, all things are
possible; and he Replied, Lord, I Believe. So does He now say to us, If thou will now put thy Trust in me, and give thy Assent and C onsent unto it, that
this Death of mine, should procure all good Things for thee, I have all the
sure mercies of my Covenant to bestow upon thee. O let your Answer be, Lord, I
believe! Lord, This is not only the Wish, but also the Trust of my very Soul.
We should with a vigorous and Renewed Hope, afresh commit our Souls into the
hands of the Lord Jesus Christ, as that Redeemer, Who is able to save unto the
uttermost, and In whom all Fullness Dwells; and give not over Appropriating of
Him to our selves, till we be Raised into some Raptures of Assura^^^ which may
enable us to say, My Beloved is mine, and I am His, and He has placed me now in
the midst of the Lillies which He Feeds among.

Fourthly, We should Remember the Lord Jesus Christ at His Table, with a warm
Lov^^ to what we should by His Death be Endeared unto. Particularly, We are now
to Remember our Dying Jesus with our Hearts going forth to God, who has made
Him a Propitiation for us. We should find our selves now touched with a
sensible Gratitude unto God for bestowing upon us a Christ, which is infinitely
better than a World. It is an Eucharist that we are here concerned in;
Thankfulness is wonderfully proper for us. Our Lord with His Disciples at the
Sacrament, in Mat. 26. 30. Sung an Hymn. And so should we, having the High
praises of God in our mouth s. The Jews at their Passover, sang the Hundred and
T^^rteenth with the five following Psalms, which they called, The G reat
Hallelujah, and indeed it is a great Hallelujah, which we ought to have at our
S acrament. A, bless the L ord, O my Soul; A, What shall I render to the L ord?
is a fit Language for us here. But our Thankfulness to God for, Not sparing His
Son, but Giving to us all things with Him, is to express it sel^ especially in
our closing with Him, and cleaving to Him by New Acts of Stipulation. We should
now renew our Covenants with God, and Repeat our Vows to be For Him and not for
another.

The Word S acrament, signifies an Oath; and when we receive the Sacrament, we
should anew bind our selves by such an Oath as this, Lord, I will never
willingly offend thee again, as I have done heretofore. Old Pliny Writes, That
the Christians in his days at their Meetings, would Sacramento se Obstringere,
ne Scelus aliquod committerent. On a Sacrament Day it should be a thing to be
spoken of us, which we have in Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avouched the Lord this
day to be thy God.

Again, we are now to Remember our Dying Jesus, with an unfeigned Charity unto
the people of God, who are with us made partakers of the like precious Faith.
When we see how the Members of our Lords Natural Body were lacerated for us, it
should make the Members of His Mystical Body more esteemed with us. The Apostle
says in 1 Cor. 10.17. We being many, are one; for we are all partakers of that
Bread. Even so, when there are many with us feeding on this one Broad, it
should cause us more than ever to become One with them. Though we don't as they
did in Cyprian's Age, mix Water with the Sacramental Wine, to signify the
mixture of all the People with the Blood of Christ; yet we are to look upon the
Communion of Saints as represented in this Blessed Festival. And our Compassion
toward those that may be indigent or afflicted among them, should now discover
it self at no common Rate. The Primitive Christians had their Oblations and
Collections for the Distressed in the Household of Faith, when they had been
communicating. Justin Martyr tells us of the (...), and Tertullian speaks of
the Deposita pietatis, on these occasions. Contributions for the Poor, are very
agreeable Things at the close of the Sacrament; and when we put our Two Mites
into them, it should be with such a Dart of our Souls, Lord, as a
Thank-Offering to thy Majesty, Behold my sorry goodness extending to the Saints
in the Earth! So should our Love, be Strong as Death, when we come to celebrate
the Death of Him, That has loved us, and washed us from our Sins, in His own
Blood.

But Finally, and for

The Close of all.
I T should be our Endeavor, That it be a Well-Ordered House in which we
spread or seek the Table of the Lord; and let it be an House in and of which He
shall be acknowledged as the Glorious King. The best Spikenard that we have to
offer unto the Great King, is to pay that Respect and Homage unto Him, in John
1. 49. Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. When we sit at the
Table of the Lord, let his Royal Orders be exactly observed in the Constitution
of these our Churches, which we celebrate the Holy Supper in. Blessed be God;
it may hitherto ^e said of the Churches in which we come to the Lords Table, as
in Number 23. 21. The shout of a King is among them! O let that shout continue,
and let it still be said, T he Lord J esus is our King! Two things there are,
of which my prayer for our Churches, is, Lord, keep these T hings in the
Imagination of the Thought of their Heart for ever!

The First is, That our Churches may observe NONE B UT the Institutions of the
Lord Jesus; and that we ^^ay be Lo^al to our Sovereign. It Is notorious that
New England was planted on that Noble and Holy Design.

But the Next is,

That our Churches observe ALL the I^stitutions of the Lord Jesus Christ; and
be perfect and Entire, wanting Nothing. So will our Heavenly King delight in
us, and afford us much of Hi s Presence and sweetness at his Holy Table. It Is
the Favor of our God unto us, That the Institutions of our King JES US,are so
far embraced in the Assemblies, of our little Z ion. We have our Sacraments, in
such a perfection, that the most perverse Disputers cannot charge us with an
Omission of any One T hing required by the Scripture in them; and yet with such
a purity, that we have none of those Crossings, and Kneelings, and other S
uperfluities which are not without their Naughtiness. We have our Ministers,
the only Dispensers of our Sacraments, called and chosen by our Congregations
to be the Overseers of their Souls, and by the Imposition of the Hands of the
Presbytery, with solemn Fasting and Prayer, set apart for that sacred Service;
Pastors and T eachers that are generally, Pious, painful, Faithful, and Learned
Men, who devote themselves to the Feeding of their Flocks, and will at last be
able to give up their Account with J oy and not with Grief. We have our
Deacons, that stand engaged what they can, to free ou^ Ministers from secular
Disturbances and Avocations, to look after the Outward Concerns and S upports
of the Ordinances, and to dispose of the Church (...) for the Relief of such as
it belongs unto; in the discharg^* whereof many of them do purchase for
themselves, A^ Exalted S eat, or, A place of some ^minency in our Church
Assemblies. We have our Discipline, in which our Church Members falling into
Scandal, are first with an Open and an Awful Admonition, suspended from Church
Privileges; and if they remain Obstinate, they are by the Elders with the
Consent of the Brethren, very solemnly Rejected, with a Declaration, That they
are Cast out of our Lords Visible Kingdom, and as to their External Condition,
given up into the state of the Heathen, who have the Devil for their Lord. For
these things, the Believers among us, do combine themselves into a Church State
by a most Holy Covenant; wherein they give themselves up to God, and Christ and
one another, with an Agreement among themselves to Assist one another in their
Attendance to the Rules of the Gospel.

And there is herewithal, such a Consociation of our Churches, as that not only
a person joined unto any one of them, is admitted unto an Occasional Communion,
at any time with any o f them, in the Supper of the Lord; while in the mean
time, the Differences between Independent and Presbyterian, are so
swallowed-up, as that only the S ubstantials of Religion are become the Terms
of our Communion: but also, upon Emergencies, we have our Synods, wherein the
Messengers or Delegates of many Churches do together give that Advice, that
Rarely, if Ever, sails of putting an Issue to any Controversies, which they
meet upon. While I am thus pleasing my self, with a prospect of these justly
Renowned, and yet basely Maligned Churches, methink s I nevertheless cannot
advise them to say with Laodicea, We have need of Nothing! Besides what other
Defects in our Constitution an Impartial Enquiry may convince us of, I cannot
my self at this time forbear Enq^iring, Why the Churches are no better
furnished with R ULING ELDERS throughout the Land? We have in our Platform of
Church Discipline delivered it as our principle, That We should have Ruling
Elders to join with the P astors and T eachers in those Acts of Church-Rule,
which are distinct from the M inistry of the Word and S acraments. But our
practice is become so contrary thereunto, that few of our Churches are supply^d
with such Needful Officers. Whence comes this to pass? I doubt the
Inconveniences which many worthy Preachers of the Gospel, have too often found
that Office bringing with it, have been some thing of the prejudice; whereas,
to Multiply those Officers would be a better way to Remedy the inconveniences
than to Nullisy them; instead of One, Let there at least be Two or Three Ruling
Elders in every Church. But many among us, perhaps by some Antecedent prejudice
disposed thereunto, have come to Question, yea, to Deny the Divine Warrant, for
such an Office. They Object, What Order for Lay Elders have we in the Word of
God? I answer, To speak properly, The only Lay Elders that are known to be in
any Church, are the Chancellors in the Church of England; persons Entrusted
with the Rule of the Church, and yet not Ordained unto any Office in it. But
for persons to be Ordained in every Church, To watch over the Conversation of
the Church* Members with Authority, is a thing which I suppose we may easily
find a Divine Warrant for. Unless a Church have Diverse Elders, the Church
Government must needs become either Prelatick or Popular; and that a Church
needs but one Elder is an opinion contrary to the sense of the Church in all
Ages. Now let us repair unto the Law and the Testimon^^ see what Elders we
ought to submit unto. I shall (...) before you, but One Text, which (as the
great (...) observes) Would be of uncontrolable Evidence, if it had any thing
to conflict withal, but prejudice and Interest, it is that in 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let
the Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor, especially they
who labor in the Word and Doctrine. Behold a Scripture that is not so easily
to be Avoided and Evaded, as the Sophistry of some Opposers has represented it.
The most of them, who put in Exceptions against the plain sense of the words,
yet will not fix any other sense of their own, by which they dare abide: if
they would fix upon any other, I durst undertake the disproving of it; nor do
they indeed, Agree among themselves. But he must be very I mmodest, who does
not grant, that Diverse kinds of Elders are intended in these words; and there
is this Unanswerable Argument advanced in them.

Preaching Elders that Rule well, are not worthy of double Honor, unless they
labor in the Word and Doctrine.

B ut there are Elders who Rule well, that are worthy of double H onour, though
they do not Labor in the Word and Doctrine.

Therefore there are Elders, that Rule well, who are not Preaching Elders, that
is, who are but Ruling Elders only.

May our Churches then every where, look out, for Prudent, Gracious, H umble
men; who may have a particular care incumbent on them, about the Admission and
Exclusion of Members; to inspect the Way and Walk of all the Communicants; to
prevent all Beginnings of Divisions and Contentions; to warn all persons unto
the Duties more peculiarly pertinent unto their Circumstances, by a personal
Instruction from House to House: to visit the S ick, the poor, the T empted,
and the P ersecuted; to inform the Ministers about the state of the Flock from
Time to Time; and to consult with them about all the Affairs of the Society,
over which they do preside. Surely, our Churches would flourish more, if these
Officers were less wanting in them!

But I have done; and shall now add no more, but only ask your Amen to my
Prayer, That the Lord Jesus would always s be the King of our Churches, and
grant that We who therein so often sit with Him at his Table, may at last come
to Eat Bread in His Kingdom, and Drink of the Pleasures at His Right Hand for
evermore. Amen, and Amen!

FINIS
ERRATA. Page 16. Line 13. read Talmudic, p.25.l: 15. add us. p.53.l. 22. for
to r. of. ibid l.26. r. Savor, p.56.l.14: for When r. Whom. p.74.l.7.l.
External.p.113.l.22, add, To. p.141.l.29.r. Tibi^tam Familiarem.

Books Printed for, and Sold by B enjamin Harris, at the London-Coffee-House in
Boston.
1. The Wonderful Works of God Commemorated: In a Thanksgiving Sermon: on
December 19. 1689. With a Postscript giving an Account of the Childrens
Prophe^es, which has lately happened in France. To which is Added, A Sermon
preached to the Convention of the Massachusetts- Colony: With a Narrative of
seve^^^ Prodigy s which New England has of late had the ^^arms of Heaven in

2. Speedy Repentance urged: A Sermon Preached at Boston December* 29. 1689. In
the Hearing, and at the Request of one Hugh S tone, under a just sentence of
Death, for a Tragical and Horrible Murder. With an Account concerning the
Character, Carriage, and Execution of that unhappy Malefactor. With certain
Memorable Providence ^elating to some other Murders, and some great Instances
of Repentance which have been seen among us. Each price bound, one shilling.

3. The Present state of New England, considered in a Discourse on the
Necessities and Advantages of a Public Spirit in every man: especially at such
a time as this. Made at the Lecture in B oston, March 20. 1690. upon the News
of an Invasion by bloody Indians and French men, begun upon u^. Price s^itcht
sixpence. All three by Cotton Mather, Pallor of a Church in B oston.

4. An Abridgment of the English Military Discipline Compiled by the Late Duke
of Monmouth: Printed by Especial Command, for the use of their Majesty's
Forces. Price bound two shilling s.

5. Primitive Religion: Or a Dying Christians Last Legacy in words of Counsel,
and Encouragement to a Godly Life. Written on a Deathbed, by. John Care, late
Minister of Gods Word. at S peldburst and Pembury in Kent. Price bound one
shilling sixpence,

6. A Little Handful of Cordial Comforts for Fainting Souls: intended chiefly
for the good of those that walk Mournfully with God. By R. S tandfast price
bound 8d.

7. A Disswasive from the folly and sin of Drunkenness. By way of Answer to two
questions: viz. 1 What it (...) What may be said against it. Price stitcht 3d.


