AN ADDRESS Presented to the KING, August 7 th. 1689. When those from the
Massachusetts Colony were, by that Worthy Citizen, Sir Henry Ashurst, Baronet.
To Their Most Excellent Majesty's, King William and Queen Mary of England, etc.
The Humble ADDRESS and PETITION of the General Court of Your Majesty's most
Ancient Colony of New Plymouth in New England.
Humbly Shows,
THAT whilst we contemplate the Wonderful and Glorious Appearance of the Most
High God, by whom Kings Reign and Princes decree Acts of Justice, in raising up
your Majesty's in that Noble and Illustrious, though Hazardous Undertaking, to
preserve the Three Kingdoms from Arbitrary Power, Popery, and Slavery, and
therein made You their Savior, through his Presence with You, and so moved the
Hearts of the People to say, as sometimes they did to Gideon. Do thou Rule over
us, for thou have delivered us, etc. We, whose Good is wrapped up in their^,
cannot but according to our Duty, render our unfeigned Thanks, first, to
Almighty God the Author thereof, and then to your Majesty's, as the Happy
Instrument in his Blessed Hand, and take this first Opportunity to Congratulate
Your Excellent Majesty's quiet Accession to the Crown; Humbly I Imploring the
God of all Grace to be with You, Guiding, Protecting, Blessing, and making both
Your Majesty's a Blessing to the Nations over whom he has or may set You, to
lay the Foundation of Happiness for many Generations: and as Duty binds us, we
Humbly Signify to Your Majesty's the ready Allegiance and Obedience which our
People bear unto You, who on the first intelligence of what was done by the
Parliament of England, did with the greatest Joy and Solemnity our mean
Condition would capacitate us unto, Proclaim Your Majesty's King and Queen of
England, etc. Which being first done, they proceeded to the Election of the
Governor and Assistants, according to their former and accustomed way and
order from the first Constitution of the Government in this Colony, which we
have enjoyed for more than Threescore and six years, and therefore humbly
conceive, we have good Title thereunto by Prescription, which according to Cook
(that Oracle of the Law) is one of those ways whereby Corporations or Bodies
Politic do commence and are established. Besides that, we have been from time
to time owned and acknowledged therein as such by King Charles the Second in
sundry of his Royal Letters unto us, ass^^ing us, that we should enjoy all our
(...)* without the (...) that he would always remember the ready
manifestations, upon all occasions of the Loyalty, Duty, and Affection of his
good Subjects of this Colony for their advantage; with many other Expressions
of great Grace and Favor, as in his Royal Letters of the 23 d. of April, 1664.
and of the 10 th of April, 1666. and 12 th of Feb. 1680. may more fully appear.
And by King James the Second in his Royal Letters of the 20 th of June, 1685,
promising at all times to extend his Royal Care and Protection of us in the
preservation of our Rights, etc. which we also quietly enjoyed without any
interruption, till after the sixty six years aforesaid, they were in the Year
1686 injuriously taken from us by Sir Edmond Andross his Illegal Arbitrary
Government over us, which now being ceased by the surrender of hi^ Government,
and his Person with other ill Instruments seized by sundry Gentlemen, lovers of
their Country, encouraged by your Princely Declarations, and Noble Example,
etc. In doing of which, though we had no hand, yet do partake of the Benefits
thereof, in being freed from many Arbitrary, Tyrannical Invasions we were
exposed unto, on our Persons, Lands, Rights, and Liberties, and we being left
without Government, were humbly Confident, that it would not in the least be
displeasing to Your Gracious Majesty's for us to resume a Government on our
former Foundation so surreptiously taken from us, without the least intimation
of any Misgovernment, or direct Notice to us from His Majesty of his Pleasure
for our Surrender.

We now further also become Your Majesty's most Humble Suppliants, That the
bright Rays of Your Princely Favor may be cast on this Your poor Nursling,
being the first English Plantation erected in New England, whose Predecessors,
that they might enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences in the pure Scriptu^^^
Worship of God (without Offense to other worthy Persons of a Different
Persuasion) under the desirable Protection of their Sovereign, and the (...) of
his Dominions, did at their own proper Cost and Charge, r^n that Hazardous,
Amazing Adventure with their Wives and Children, first to break the (...) into
this vast American Desert, where they had no Friend nor House to shelter them
from the Extremities of Hunger and Cold, nor from Wild Men and Wild Beasts,
which they had to conflict with, arriving here in November 1620. That now they
may be Cherished by the Influence of your Favorable Grant and Confirmation of
all our former Liberties, (especially Religious, the main End of that Great
Adventure) either by a Charter or Act of Parliament, as to Your Princely Wisdom
and Clemency seems (...) for the good Government and Wel^-fare of (...) Your
Majesty's Colony, for which we crave Your Princely Clemency, and prostrate our
selves Humble Petitioners on your behalf unto Heaven's Sovereign, that Your
Majesty's may be under a Confluence of such Divine Blessings, as may make ^our
(...) Prosperous.

So Prays Your Majesty's Most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, Tho. Hinckley,
Governor.
Plymouth in New England, June 6th. 1689. In the Name, and by the Appointment
of Your Majesty's said General Court.



Re-p^inted at Boston, by S. G. for Benjamin Harris, at the London Coffee
House. 1690.


