LITTLE FLOCKS Guarded against GRIEVOVS WOLVES.

AN ADDRESS Unto those Parts of New England which are most Exposed unto
Assaults, from the Modern Teachers of the misled Quakers.

IN A LETTER Which impartially Discovers the manifold Haeresies and
Blasphemies, and the Strong Delusions of even the most Refined QUAKERISM; And
thereupon Demonstrates the Truth of those Principles and Assertions, which are
most opposite thereunto.

With just Reflections upon the extreme Ignorance and Wickedness; of GEORGE
KEITH; Who is the Seducer that now most Ravines upon the Churches in this
Wilderness.

Written by Cotton Mather.

A Character of the Ringleaders among the QUAKERS.

1 Timothy 1.6, 7. Some having swerved, have turned aside unto vain jangling;
desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor
whereof they affirm.

Boston, Printed by Benjamin Harris, and John Allen, at the
London-Coffee-House. 1691.

TO THE READER.
Although it has been fully proved that Quakerism is Paganism; nevertheless, one
that appears sa^ely in Print, as an Advocate for the Qu^kers, with a most
Remarkable Ingenuity goes to demonstrate, That the Name of Christians belongs
unto the Quakers, inasmuch as the Etymology of that worthy Name agrees unto
them; he Learnedly tells us, the true Name is XPIS TI-ONO, which is in English,
Christ's Asses; and such he says, they be, while they patiently undergo all
manner of Reproaches and Revilings. I am willing to accomodate that Author,
with granting him the two latter syllables of the Name which he seems to
challenge for himself and his Friends. But when I read this ridiculous claim,
it caused me presently to Examine, Whether I had not in the following Discourse
laid more Lo^d upon the Creatures, than belonged unto them; and upon a Review,
I find that I have rather abated of their Just Load; their Tenets are worse
than I have Represented them. So that I shall hereafter desire their Load may
be rather adjusted by Mr. Lodowick an ingenious person lately recovered out of
Quakerism, who has published a challenge to the Quakers, to defend the gross
things, which he tells them they know in their Consciences to be their
opinions; and concludes, Your Rhode Island Quakerism is but Antichristian
Paganism; and subtle Idolatry, which the more (...), is the more pernicious;
and as such to be turned from by all that would Inherit the Kingdom of God.

QVAKERISM DISPLAYED AND GEORGE KEITH DETECTED; IN A LETTER, Addressed unto
those parts of New England, which are most in danger of being thereby SEDUCED.
IT gives me no little Exercise, MY NEIGHBORS, when I see Quakerism, that
great Choakweed of the Christian and Protestant Religion, taking Root in the
Borders of a Country famous for that Holy Religion; and unto you, doubtless it
is not without prodigy, that although this Country was planted more than Twenty
Years before the first Quaker that ever we could bear of, appeared in the
World, yet there should be some scores of Quakers in (...) Corners of the
Country. But we know, That where God has his Church, there will be something
else! Let me give you the Reverend Baxters opinion of it, expressed in his own
words, which are, Why is George Keith and his other Quaker from Pensylvan^a now
^ss^ulting the Churches in New England? The Hunter knows, there is the (...)?
And allow me that fault (...) Love, to do s^meth^ng that may help to (...) the
Game of the (...), who has Quakers (...) the S^tte^s, by which Men are c^tched
(...) him Upon a v^ry exact and sincere Self-^^^mination, I cannot charge my
self with any ^alice or Hatred against the poor people that ^he Seduced into
the strong Delusions of that (...); I am utterly against vexing and creep^^^ of
them with punishments on their Estates (...) Bodies for their Consciences; I
would not (...). An Admirer of the Light with worse age, than an Ancient Jewish
History tells us, ^he Patriarch Abraham was (tho hardly) convinced, That a
worshipper of the Fire, coming into his House, was to meet withal; I look upon
many of them as fair conditioned men, and persons of a Temper which we are to
^reat with Civility and Obligation; I think, (...) should labor to Overcome
them with good, with Prayer for them, with pity to them; and for my own part, I
must briefly say, Let that Quaker of them all, that has most Abused me and
Reviled me, make me to understand wherein I may (...) him any real kindness,
and if I do it not, let this Letter be a witness against me. This I utter not
as a vain brag of my victory over them that have spawned one Pamphlet after
another, filled with impertinent Reproaches and Calumnies against The
Colledge-Boy of New England, as their Hawkers, they say, please to call me; but
it is that I may discover the Equality of Spirit, with which I now address, you.

Nevertheless I cannot account my self hereby Released, from any proper
Endeavors to Antidote my Neighbors against the venomous and contagious
Heresies of Quakerism. I remember that George Keith somewhere bids us Turn our
minds to the Light within us, wherewi^h Christ has enlightened all men, and
points at this as a way to be saved from mistakes. I do then solemnly declare,
that I have seriously Turned unto that Light, and with the best of my light as
yet, I can see many damnable Heresies in Quakerism; if I have (as the Quakers
own all have) one spark of Light in me, Quakerism is but a profound and a
deadly Pit of darkness. I look upon Quakerism, as a snare of the Devil* wherein
many are taken alive by him at his will; and I were very uncharitable, if I
should not labor to rescue my Friends out of such an undoing Snare; a meaner
Creature than the meanest Owner of Reason, must have our Help against a Pit
less Dangerous than that of Quakerism. Quakerism, it attempts nothing but the
leaving our whole sacred glorious (...) in such a confusion, as that it shall
no longer give any plain and clear conduct unto us, in our drawing near to God;
and though it pretends unto Light yet it leaves the bewildred Souls of men, in
Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the Great Day.

Our Blessed Religion is wonderfully suited unto our constitution, by laying
before us both sensible and spiritual objects to converse withal; but
Quakerism, under the pretense of advancing the Spiritual Objects of Religion,
goes to annihilate all the Sensible; so that we must have no Bible, no Jesus,
no Baptism, no Eucharist, no Ordinances, but what shall be so Evaporated into
Mystical Notions, as to become unto the Children of Men, altogether
unintelligible, or at least unprofitable. Indeed, there is hardly any one
Fundamental Article of that Reformed Religion, whereby we look to be saved,
that is not undermined by Quakerism, whatever professions it makes unto the
contrary, when, An Angel of Light, is to be personated. What Religion shall we
have, if the Scriptures, once come to be vile in our opinion of them? Now to
withdraw men from the esteem and study of the Scriptures, has hitherto been
the main Design of Quakerism. Are they not the express words, of the Quakers in
their Systems of Divinity, It Is Blasphemy for any to say, the letter [by which
they meant the Bible] is the word of God; it is the Devil that contends for the
Scriptures to be (...) word of God. Do ^^ey not expressly tell us, It is the
greatest error in the world, and the ground of all errors, to say, The
Scriptures are a Rule to Christians? The Quakers in their Books expressly
challenge us, Tell me one Scripture that has light in it, And at the same time
entitle their own books, Light risen out of Darkness. They expressly reproach
men for, Doting on the Scriptures; and at the same time their own silly
Scribles they call The Shields of the truth, and Things written from the spirit
of the Lord, Hence as Mr. Cheiny tells us, in their Disputes the Quakers openly
have said, God has no where commanded us to walk according to the Scriptures.
Thus when Mr. Cotton of Plymouth, with some others, had attested, that they
heard George Keith affirm, The Scriptures are the word of God, this Keith
Prints a letter to revile the witnesses, for, Not Dealing Fairly, nor as
becomes true witnesses. Now let any reasonable man, find any reason of their
thus treating the Holy Scriptures; what can this caution signify? if they would
not have us think, that we pay too much Respect unto those Oracles of God. A
Crime which I assure you, few among us are guilty of! Though we are not so far
gone in Blasphemous Wickedness, as to speak of the Scriptures in James Na^bors
Terms God is at liberty (sais he) to speak to his people by them if he please;
and where they are given by inspiration he does so, and so he is at liberty to
speak by any other created thing: as to Balaam by his ass. Thus dos that Father
of Quakers bray out his contempt of our precious Bible. I say we cannot vomit
out such Blasphemies, and yet we think that wonderful Book, our Bible, has not
a due estimation with us.

It would be more tedious indeed, than useful for me to Transcribe the many
other horrible passages, which continually fall from the Pens of the greatest
Rabbi's among the Quakers, and such as have most pretended unto Inspiration
among them; but you shall find the Books of their most admired Apostles filled
(if I may speak the Truth) with most admirable Blasphemies. They begin to speak
somewhat warily in their later Catechisms; but what censure have they hitherto
passed upon one of their Authors, who twits us in the Teeth, with, Our imagined
God beyond the Stars; or, one of their Authors, who tells us, Your carnal
Christ is utterly denied by the Light?

When did they deal with Whitehead for calling it a LIE, To say, the Scripture
is the means by which Faith is wrought? or for saying in a Book signed by him
and three other Quakers, pretending to answer, a worthy Minister, Thou blind
Beast, thou that say that the Scriptures reveal God, Thou art a Liar? What
Animadversion have they used upon the most witty and Learned Gentleman that
ever had the unhappiness of being among them, for saying, (as Mr. Thompson
cites him) Unless Father, Son, and Spirit, are three distinct Nothings, they
must be three distinct Substances, and consequently three distinct Gods? Have
they testified against the same Ingenious, tho Heretical Writer, for saying,
Justification by that Righteousness, which Christ fulfilled in his own Person
without us, is a Doctrine of Devils? or have they chastised their Farnworth,
for saying, What Righteousness Christ performed without me, was not my
Justification, neither was I saved by it? What Retractation have they advised
unto their Fox, when he had written, He is deceived, who says God is Distinct
from the Saints? Have they thought Mr. Pen worthy to be mended, for saying,
Either the Resurrection of the Body, must be without the matter, or it must
not; if it must, then it is not that same Numerical Body, and so their proper
and strict taking of the word, Resurrection, they must let go; if it must not,
then I affirm it cannot be Incorruptible; for in such a manner does he oppose
the Doctrine of the Resurrection? Has Mr. Hicks falsify'd, when he quotes
Whitehead uttering such a Black Speech as this, They are like to be deceived,
who are expecting that Christ's Second Coming will be personal? In fine, has
their Primer yet been corrected, wherein we read, False Teachers preach Christ
without, and bid people believe in him, as He is in Heaven above; we are told,
Those things called Ordinances, as Baptism, and Bread and Wine, rose from the
Popes Invention. We are told, As for that called, The Lords day, people do not
understand what they say, every day is the Lords Day. Does not their Catechism
(which came out of William Smith's Forge, in the year 1665) also deride men,
for saying in their Prayers, They are miserable Sinners, and they do those
things they ought not to do? Is not this the Reflection there made upon it. And
if so, then not Believers; for they that believe in Christ, are not miserable
sinners, neither do those things they ought not to do. In that which they call,
The Lords Prayer, they generally say, Our Father; Now the Children of God are
not miserable Sinners; nor do not those things they ought not to do? And as to
Prayer, is not this the Conclusion there made of all, All must cease from their
own words, and from their own time, and learn to be silent, until the Spirit
gives them utterance? The sense of which, if you would know, you must fetch it
from the horribly prayerless Lives of the Quakers. How many prayerless Houses,
and prayerless Tables, are to be ^ound among the best of them! Some of them
have confessed, That they never pray without an inward motion from the Spirit;
and that in many years, they have (...) had a motion to prayer. See J. C's Call
to prayer, page 97. Thus do these Blasphemers, charge their own pride, and
sloth, and wickedness, upon the Eternal Spirit of God!

I say, until the Quakers do disown and reprove such Expressions as these, they
must pardon us, if we look upon these Expressions to be but the Explications of
what they mean, when they speak with more subtilty in their Confessions which
they make, when they are charged with being No Christians; and indeed their
Confessions are mostly so worded as to admit of these Explications. If the
Quakers do sincerely intend as my Charity obliges me to think and hope, that
many of the Seduced may honestly intend, no more than they declare in some of
their later Catechisms, it is a prognostic whereat I would rejoice exceedingly;
it is a mavelous Alteration; yea, it threatens no less than an Approaching
Extirpation of the Heresies, whereby that Sect formerly Denied the Lord that
bought us. I find the Sect very wonderfully changed, in several of their
Circumstances; and particularly, in that grand one from whence the Name of
Quakers was first put upon them. Heretofore, at almost every Meeting, you might
have seen some of them, taken with a strange Quaking, which looked so like a
Diabolical Possession, as that it well nigh produced another sort of Quaking,
by the horror it gave to the Beholders of it; and Fisher in his Rusticus ad
Academicos, which is in English, The Clown speaking to the Scholar, calls Dr.
Owen, a Blind Guide and a Bruit Beast, [a Language, befitting a Clown] for some
words of his against (as the man styles it) The Holy Duty of Quaking. But this
is now grown, I suppose, a rarer thing among them; and the words of their
Patric Livingston upon it are, Because the mighty motions of the Bodies of
Friends are ceased and Friends are still, cool, and quiet, they think that the
same power is not in Meetings; but oh ye Foolish Ones, -- Were not all the
shakings and quakings of Friends Bodies, to purge out sin? they were but for a
little time, and so were quickly gone again; and the voice of the Lord was not
distinctly discerned there. The stilness being come, that is a durable thing;
and here the mind is brought into a capacity to discern the voice of the Lord.
One would infer from this; either that those who are of late years Converted
unto Quakerism, have no Sin to purge out; or else that after their Quakerism
they continue with their sins unpurged all their Days. But however, it is here
granted, That about thirty years ago, The Quakers did not d^stinctly discern
the voice of the Lord; so that I am not altogether in Despair, that they may
now better discern it, and by degrees return to him that is the Shepherd and
Bishop of Souls, by leaving all their Errors, as well as the Tremblings which
first accompanied them. Nevertheless, no Spectacles I have yet met withal, can
dispose my Charity to do any other than suspect the Integrity of the more busy
Teachers among the Quakers, when they seem to acknowledge the principal
Articles of our Christian Religion; there is cause to think, that they Kiss
that Religion of ours only to Betray it; it is doubtless in this thing that
they practice what they sometimes profess, To become all things unto all men,
that they might win the more; nor do I make my self a Judge of Hearts, if I
give you that warning about them, When they speak fair, believe them not, for
there are seven Abominations in their Hearts. The cause of my suspicion is
plainly this; If they believe just as they speak in some of their Confessions,
about Religion, pray why do they oppose and reproach us for speaking of those
very things? For instance, The Quakers will verbally say, that they own the man
Christ Jesus, who suffered for our sins, and in the entire and perfect Nature
of man is gone into Heaven, and shall in like manner come again. But if they
really think so, why do they fling out whole Pamphlets against godly men merely
for speaking that very thing? I pray tell me, Does not George Fox in a Folio
Book vehemently Revile and pretend to Refel, one Antagonist for saying, The
Lord Jesus Christ is afar off in his Bodily pre^e^ce? and another, for saying,
Christ is with o^t the Saints, in respect of his Bodily presence? (...) a
third, for saying Christ is distinct from every one of us? And a fourth, for
saying, There is not any Heaven, within, into which the man Christ is Ascended,
or can any man contain a man four foot long. What occasion can the Quakers have
to Write, Rail, and Shoot Porci^pir^'s Quills, in voluminous Harangues, against
them that have so expressed themselves, if they deny not the Things contained
in the Expressions that are thus unexceptionable? or, what should all their
Humphry Norton to say in Print, You look for a Christ without you; what Country
man is He? You stand gazing up in the Clouds after a man; but we stand by in
white, Chiding of you* The other principles of the Protestant Religion, are in
like manner treated by these Gaynsayers; when they seem to own those
principles, it is protestatio contra Factum, they give themselves the Ly: If
they own those principles why will not they give us leave to own them? Why must we
for Holding and Preaching of those principles, be worried by these people under
the most christian, loving, handsome Names, of Idol Shepherds, Priests, Dogs,
Vipers, Dragons, Serpents, Reprobates, Children of Darkness, Liars,
Blasphemers, Devils, Impostors, Sorcerers, polluted and accursed Beasts? And
yet these are the best Names for that very cause put upon us, in the Writings
of those whom the Quakers do celebrate as, Men of God.

Suppose that Mather the Younger, should say He witnessed the Light which is in
every man to be Christ the Savior of the world, and yet suppose he should
publish whole Books, to Reproach every man as a Blasphemous Beast, for using
such terms; would not the Quakers call him worse then ever they have called him
hitherto, tho they have called him bad enough? would they not count him a lying
Hypocrite in his protestation for the Light? Either the Leaders of the Quakers
design by fair Speeches in their Catechisms to decoy their Proselytes into such
horrible opinions as I have said before you; or else they are Stark Mad, when
they spit such foul speeches at us, for maintaining the Things that are
seemingly allowed in those Catechisms; and if so, it was then; most fitly
propounded by a wife and good Magistrate in Plymouth Colony, That a Law might
be made for the Quakers to have their Heads shaved; The punishmen^ I confess is
Capital. But as it is the wors^ Punishment that ever that Colony will inflict
on them, so it is the best Remedy, for ought I know, that we can provide for
them; unless, The Oil for Lunaticks, lately invented might be more efficacious.

Among the modern Leaders of the missed Quakers, you must give me leave to set
a special remark, upon one George Keith, who rather then leave the Churches of
God unmolested, has in express term* contradicted the Tremblers that have writ
before him; and yet on the other side lest he should be a pure Keithian, alone
by himself, he puts in, My Doctrine is one with theirs. By the Respect which
Keith finds among his friends, One may see what an unsettled and uncertain Thing
it is to be among them. Heretofore, they made Lamentable outcries, against that
which they call, Outward Learning; and the way to be applauded with them, was
to have the qualifications of the Li quatri Illiterati, at Norcia, a Town
scarce ten Leagues from Rome; where they do at this Day choose their own
Magistrates, but use an exact care, That no man who is able to write, or to
Read, shall be capable of any share in the Government. Whereas, That which now
renders Keith to be A great one, among his Friends, is, That he has a little
Outward learning, that is the outside, or Bark and shell of a S^holar with him:
tho he be most horribly venomous, yet he has a pearl in his head, and they make
him their head upon that account. It is a passage which Mr. Tompson cites, from
their paper sent forth into the world, page 3. The word, which is the Original,
was before Tongues were and your Original, which will break all your Tongues
and Original to pieces. Pilate had your Original, of Hebrew, Greek and Latin,
[where, by the way, their light failed 'em; for, when did we make the Latin our
Original?] who crucified Christ. He that draws back into many languages, as
into Hebrew and Greek* draws back into the Naturals and so draws into
confusion. But the Ministers of God, who preach the Everlasting Gospel, draw up
into one Language; and so the Priests, and all that Trade into Natural
Languages we utterly deny.

Alas, what will then become of our poor Friend George? He has in his Writings,
tho less Truth, yet more Hebrew and Greek, than ever Pilate had upon the Cross;
he is upon all occasions drawing back into many Languages; and indeed he draws
into confusion too. (...) his drawing back thus into the Naturals procures him
the Admiration of a Drove that are little more than mere Naturals; they Deny
him not, but rather Adore him, because tho he be a compound of as great
Inconsistences as Iron and Clay, yet he has (I will not say, a Golden, but) a
Gilded Head. This Keith it is, who has given the greatest advantages to
Quakerism, and that with no little Alterations. Of his, we are newly
Entertained with a wily Catechism, wherein Quakerism is so disguised, as that
one would almost suspect him a Real Protestant; nevertheless, the juice of
Toads, were as wholesome a potion as that Catechism. You cannot swallow it,
unless, you also come to Believe, That the inward excusing or condemning
principle, which all men are born withal, is the man Christ Jesus. Upon which,
the Ingenious Mr. Lodowick, a Gentleman of Rhode Island lately Recovered out of
Quakerism, in a Challenge to the Quakers, tells them, If this your foundation
stand sure, it would follow, That all honest Pagans, Jews, and Mahometans, are
in Christ as well as you; and true Christians, Believers, Disciples, and
Followers of Christ (at least, as to the Mystery) and so your Brethren in
Christ. There are moreover, some other Errors, plainly enough expressed in that
Catechism, to make us all avoi^ them. E. G.

That some who are left without either (...) Help of the Holy Scriptures, or
Holy (...) do yet so rightly improve the inward (...) of Christ's Light and
Teaching in their Hearts, as to be Accepted with God; altogether contrary to
Romans 1.21, 22. where we see what became of the Heathon, for want of the Gospel.
And, That some who are under the first Covenant, and have not had Christ
outwardly preached unto them, yet cannot perish; directly contrary to Romans
10.14. where we find no Salvation is to be had without Believing, and no
Believing without Hearing and Preaching. And, That the principle of the New
Covenant is in all men; contrary to Ephesians. 2.12. where we see many Strangers to
the Covenant of promise. And, That the having of more Wives than One, was not
forbidden to Jews or Gentiles under the First Covenant. Contrary to Mat. 19.45,
48. which points to a Law from the beginning against that Iniquity. And, That
when one feels not a present Help to pray in words, he is to wait in silence.
Contrary to Acts 8.22. where a man that was without the Spirit of God was
bidden to pray. And, That Faith is not the only Instrument whereby Christ is
Received for Justification. Contrary to Romans 3.28. A man is justified by Faith
without the Deeds of the Law; and Romans 11.6. If it be of works, then it is no
more Grace. And, That none become Reprobate, until they are finished in
wickedness, and have no true Humanity remaining in them. Contrary to Romans 9.11,
12. where it is affirmed of those not yet born. And, That Christ's Baptism is
not with Water. Contrary to Asts 8.38. And, That the Lords Supper is to be
Administered without outward Eating. Contrary to 1 Cor. 11.26. But let all
unwary Readers know, that the principles of this Catechism, are but the
Shooing-horns of more Quakerism; if you swallow so much of the more specious
and gilded Quakerism, you will soon find your selves entangled at such a rate,
that you must wax worse and worse, and become as bad as all the other Heresies
of a Keith can render you. For notwithstanding the Or^hodoxy which in some
other points George Keith has blended in his Catechism with such False
Doctrines as these now recited; and although he, like other Quakers, in their
Books, has a way of discoursing more ambiguously than ever any Demon of
Delphos did, and usually imitates the Cuttle-fish by so darkning his Context
with his Ink, that one can hardly find him without some evasion; yet I have one
sure way to catch him. He directed (and since published) a Letter unto the
Ministers of Boston, which begins with saying, I being well assured, both by
the Spirit of God in my Heart, and the Testimony of the Holy Scripture, that
the Doctrine ye preach to the people is false, and concludes with diverse
Articles of this Doctrine, which he particularly charges as False Doctrine,
besides many others (as he says) that I could mention. Well then, from what
George Keith here counts False, we more easily than from his crafty express^on^
in other places, may gather what he counts True; and I now promise you the
fairest and finest System, we have yet had of a Quakers Divinity. He tells us,
we hold False Doctrine, when we say, That God has committed his Counsel wholly
to Writing; by which he knows, we mean, That God has not obliged us to believe
or practice any thing in order to our Salvation, which the Scriptures do not
either directly or by just consequence Reveal unto us. So then, the Quaker
holds. That there is part of Gods Counsel, (that is, that we are to think or do
something in order to our own Salvation) which we cannot learn from the Holy
Scriptures. He tells us, we hold False-Doctrine, when we say, That God has
foreordained whatever comes to pass; although he knows we affirm, That God has
not by his Eternal Decree either taken away the liberty of the Creature, or
become the Author of sin in the Creature. So then the Quaker holds, that there
are some things come to pass which God has not foreordained; and so the Blessed
God either does not Foreknow every thing, or else He does Foreknow something
which He does not Decree: and it must be said, that He knows things because
they will be, and not that things will be because he appoints them; and His
Knowledge must be Fal^^ble and Uncertain; and the Glorious First-Being is made
Subordinate to, and Determined by second causes. He tells us we hold
False-Doctrine when we say That God has not afforded or provided sufficiency
of Grace, and means of salvation to all mankind whereby they may be saved;
albeit we also say, That all mankind are Salvable. So then the Quaker holds,
that the Indians and Negroes, and the Pagans beyond China, have Sufficiency of
Grace and means of Salvation. He therefore holds according to what Keith adds
upon it, That the Light that is in every man, is sufficient to enable him to do
any work acceptable to God. He must hold that there is not in the darkest
corner of the Indies, a man that is Unto ^very Good work reprobate. He tells us
we hold False-Doctrine, when we say, That Christ has not Dyed for all men;
although we therein speak only concerning The Secret purpose of God and Christ;
and we grant, That the satisfaction of our Lord is both sufficient for all men,
and offered to all men; and that a day of patience for all men is thereby
procured. So then the Quaker holds, That, Christ has Dyed for all men; And that
the virtue and success of our Lords Death depends wholly upon something to be
done by men themselves, which God is not the doer of: That the Death of Christ
never bought that Grace and Faith and Repentance for us by which the Elect are
qualified to enjoy the virtue and success of it; and that Peter was no more
beholden to the Merit of the Lord Jesus for his Salvation, than Judas was for
his. He tells us, we hold False-Doctrine when we say That Justification is only
by Christ's Righteousness without us, imputed unto us, and Received by Faith
alone, and not by any Righteousness of God or Christ infused into us, (...)
wrought in us. Albeit, he cannot be ignorant, that we think Justification is
always attended with Evangelical Obedience. Hence then the Quaker holds, that
Justification and Sanctification are the same thing [which is rank Pop^^y; and
ye Keith charges us with Antichristianism, for holding of the contrary: so by
the way, I see Keith is one of those who look not for Antichristianism in
Popery;] and that (as Keiths own words are,) The Graces of Sanctification are
the Instruments of obtaining Justification from Christ; and so that men
exercise all those Graces, before they can be Justified; and (as Keith also
elsewhere expresses it) He who is imperfectly Sanctified, cannot, while such,
be perfectly Justified; and so it seems there is not one Justified man alive in
the world. He tells us we hold False-doctrine, when we say, That beginnings of
true Sanctification cannot be totally fallen from; although we do also say,
That every sin is Mortal; That Saints falling into grosser scandals, do be
loud the Evidences of their Saintship; That yet Saints cannot fall so far, but
God will Recover them before they die, and make them sincerely penitent. It
follow ^hen, the Quaker holds* That a truly sanct^^y^^ man may totally fall
away, and a child of ^od become a child of the Devil. When shall we have done?
He tells us, we hold False Doctrine because we say, No man in this life, by any
grace of God given him, (...) to be given him, can perfectly keep the
Commandments of God, but does daily break Them in Thought, Word, and Deed;
though we do not say, That the good works of Gods Holy Spirit are Defiled, but
we say, our Duties as far as they are our own, will in this life always have
Imperfection cleaving to them, which God pardons, therewithal accepting what
sincerity is in them for the sake of Christ Jesus. The Quaker then must hold,
That men in this life can perfectly keep the commandments of God; and that a
man may say, He has no sin, without being a Liar for saying so.

Once more, He says, we hold False-Doctrine, because we say, No men ever since
the Apostles Days are assisted, by any Infallible Spirit, to Preach, Pray, and
Write; and that to Speak and Pray by the Holy Ghost, as the Prophets and Holy
men witnessed of old, are ceased. In which Assertion, we are far from limiting
the Holy One of Is^ael, who may still do things extraordinary and miraculous:
but our intent is That we have no Warrant now to look for such Extatical
Inspirations and Infallible Assistences as the Ancient prophets had. And yet we
own special Illuminations of the Holy Spirit which the Souls of all true
Believers do and must experience; and we declare that without special
Assistances of the Holy Spirit, we can do no Duty as it should be done. We do
not think (as Keith did a a minute or two ago) that we bring into the world
with us a principle that is sufficient to enable us to do any work acceptable
unto God. Now the Quaker must then hold, That men in our Days have the same
Inspirations and Assistances, that were given to the Apostles of old; and may
preach, pray, write, with as much Infallibility as they.

There are several other things, which Keith charges us with False-Doctrine for
holding of; and what sense can there be in his charges? what is he but stark
out of his wits, if he do not hold the contray for true Doctrine himself?
Supposing then that Keith has truly represented the Doctrine of the Quakers, as
indeed he has laid before us but the most Easy Tenets of it; You then see
Quakerism in a true light; and I have taken the more pains, because that so to
Behold it, is a much more difficult thing, than to Refute it. My Neighbors,
you see what Quakerism is, the very best of Quakerism, or else you are never
like to see what it is at all. Say, whether we are like to have any Religion,
that may be called Protestant or Christian, if once this Doctrine be received!
I am confident there need no more to render Quakerism loathsome to all sensible
men then the bare dissection of it, yet that I may further prevent your
Drinking the death in the pot, about the Ingredients whereof I have thus
advised you, it is necessary that I first give you the Characters of the Man,
who is thus inviting you to swallow it. If I now set before you the Marks of
him that is laboring to snatch many poor Lambs out of our Flocks, with such a
vigilance and violence, as has awakened me to give you notice of him, it is not
out of any particular spite at his person, but merely because his Person (under
the Disguise of Sheeps-cloathing) is that by the Fame and Noise whereof, his
Doctrine comes to be the more favorably look^d upon. It Is because he is cried
up for a Rare Man, that his Word begins to go so far among many unthinking
people; and therefore, if I can Demonstrate, That George Keith is not the Man
which he is taken to be, but a most absurd and wicked Seducer, and one from
whom all good men should with Detestation Turn away: I shall do more to obviate
the spreading of a perilous Cancer among you, than by answering all the
Arguments of the Quakers, which are just None at all. I find that when the
Blessed Apostle Paul would stop the progress of an Error, which the Quakers in
our Days are infected with, he offers a pourtraiture of the persons that were
the principal Spreaders and Patrons of that Malignant Error. Give me leave then
to tell you, What a person it is, that some have in admiration so as to be in
hazard of becoming Quakers for him; and I shall deal so moderately in it, as to
avoid all Reports and Hear-says, and confine my self to the Idaeas of him which
his own Books, and but two or three of Them neither, have given us. I say then,

That GEORGE KEITH is a Person, from whom, they that have any Love and Care for
their own Souls, are to Turn away.

And I thus prove it.

The First Argument.
A Person that pretends, An Assurance from the Spirit of God, for a thing that
is a Direct LIE in matter of Fact, is one from whom all that are concerned for
their Souls, are to Turn away.

But such a person is George Keith.

All men will and should beware, how they deal with a convicted Liar; honest
men usually can as little endure the sight of a person that makes no Bones of a
Lie in matter of Fact, as Erasmus professes in his Colloquies. But when a man
that comes with a LIE shall Father that Brat of the Devil (for such is every
Lie!) upon the Holy Spirit of God, that sacred Spirit of Truth; surely the
Impiety is risen to a monstrous Elevation. And now (...) think, that George
Keith is chargeable with no less a wickedness. He has not only forfeited all
Reputation for Inspiration, as much, as the Quaker, that a while since
pretended, That he came with a Message from the Lord, unto a person who was it
seems then out of the Way by being out of the Town; but he has Ly'd like
Ananias himself. I do not mean, in his Account of Ralph Jones and his Cows at
Barnstable, which is affirmed to be a Lie: but I mean in his Printed Letter to
the Ministers of Boston. In that Letter he says, He is well assured by the
Spirit of God, That the Doctrine, which we preach to the people is False; and
says he, The particular Things I charge on you are these, The last of them is*
That the Scriptures ought to be believed only for their own outward Evidence,
and Testimony, and not for the inward Evidence and Testimony of the Holy Spirit
in men's Hearts. Now this is a Doctrine directly contrary to what we have
preached a thousand times over. For, tho we do say, That the extraordinary ways
by which G^d Revealed Himself to his People, before and for the writing of all
the Scripture, are so Ceased, that we have no warrant now to look for them, yet
we grant, that all Believers do still enjoy the special Illuminations and
Assistences of Gods Holy Spirit; and we hold that without a special Influence
of the Holy Spirit in the Hearts of men, the Scriptures cannot be duly and
aright Believed. But that which makes the LIE of this Keith more inexcusably
impudent and notorious is this. In that Letter he says, That he has diligently
examined our Confession of Faith, and thereby Learnt what we Preach. Now [to
see how he wanted the Memory so necessary for such persons] in that Confession,
there is one whole Article, to assert this Doctrine, That the Heavenliness of
the matter [ of the Holy Scriptures] the Efficacy of the Doctrine, the Majesty
of the Style, the consent of all the parts, the scope of the whole, the full
Discovery it makes of the only way of man's Salvation, the many other
Incomparable Excellencies, and the Entire Perfections thereof, are Arguments
whereby it does abundantly Evidence it self to be the Word of God; yet
notwithstanding, Our full Persuasion and Assurance of the Infallible Truth and
Divine Authority thereof, is from the INWARD WORK of the Holy Spirit, bearing
witness by and with the Word in our Hearts. If this do not prove Keith a LIAR
of the first magnitude, there never was yet a Liar from the Beginning. And you
shall now hear how Impenitent he is in his Lying. I did in print Admonish him
of this Lie, because it was in Print he vented it; but he does in Print Reply
upon me, Thy Affirmation is False; and adds another Lie to it; by saying, That
we deny the inward Revelation of the Holy Spirit in the Hearts of the Saints.
And lest here should not be Lie enough, he further says, Dr. Owen denies that
the Scripture derives its Evidence from the Inward Revelation of the Holy
Spirit in Men's Hearts. Whereas Dr. OWEN in the Book to which, I suppose, he
refers, expressly says, That the Scripture be Received as the Word of God, there
is required a twofold Efficacy of the Spirit; The First respects the Subject or
the mind of man, that assents to the Authority of the Scripture. And then the
Doctor spends more than four whole Pages, to tell us, That the Spirit of God
communicates a Spiritual Light unto men, and with his work of Illumination
takes off the perverse Disposition in their minds, and Effectually persuades
them to receive the Truth; and therewithal gives them a Spiritual Sense or Taste
thereof in themselves in order hereunto. Thus palpably does Keith you see cover
lie with lie, and yet it Rains through after all. I durst refer it unto any
sober Quaker in the world, whether Keith be not now Convicted of gross Lying in
matter of Fact: I do here, in auditu quam plurimorum, charge him as an
Egregious liar; and let him lay his Action against me when he please.

Wherefore when Keith comes among you, you must consider him as an Impenitent
Liar, who has yet blasphemously Entitled, the Blessed Spirit of our God, unto
his LIE. But will you then hear such a man as a Preacher of the Truth? or must
you not reasonably suspect all his pretended Inspiration; I say, Beware the
Geese when such creatures Preach! The society to which he belongs, if he belong
to any, are so far, No Christians, if they don't endeavor to bring him unto
open repentance for such crimes as these.

The Second Argument.
A Person that has (if not certain, yet) fearful marks of the Unpardonable Sin
upon him* is one from whom all that would be concerned for their Souls are to
turn away.

But such a person is George Keith.

The Apostle tells us, That we are not to pray for those that have committed
the Unpardonable Sin; I am sure then we should not suffer any such doleful
sinners to prey on us. I know it is no easy thing to conclude who are Guilty of
that Sin, and we should not be hasty, and sudden in such conclusions.
Nevertheless there are such Persons who have upon them, the Direful marks, of
their being Not far from the Great Transgression; and for some of them, Keith
has been observable. He has been enlightened, and had formerly much of his
education and conversation among the people of God; nevertheless he is a most
Infamous Apostate from the Truths and Ways of God, professed among them; and of
an Apostate he is become, as far as his Chain will reach, a Persecutor; for
besides all his malicious Railing, at the Ministers of God, which the Scripture
calls Persecution, he levels his Writings at no Design more plainly, than to
get them starved of all their poor Subsistence in the world; which was Julians
way of Persecution. Were the Transmigration of Souls a Truth, you might, when
you see Keith, imagine that you see Alexander the Coppersmith, alive among us,
doing much harm to the Religion of which he once made, like Alexander, a no
mean profession (...) with a no less brazen Impudence, than knocking Diligence,
hammering of mischief against the true Ministers of God. But he stops not here;
for he has arisen to the Malice of Blasphemy against a special work of Gods
Holy Spirit. There were four young people sensibly and horribly possessed with
Devils, in Boston, where of the whole Town which is the most populous of the
whole English America, had full satisfaction The Ministers of the Town by
nothing but solemn and zealous prayers over those possessed persons, obtained
from our good God, such a deliverance for them all [and they are now all alive
upon the spot!] as has been heard and read with wonder in more than both
Englands.

Well, This Keith in a pamphlet emmitted by him, to Reproach the person that
now writes, Reprochfully more than once calls these Prayers, 'A Co^ju^ing of
the Devil. And afterward again puts the style of Charms and Spells upon them.
And yet he knows, That it is our profession To pray by the Holy Spirit of God;
ye^, that we suffer for that profession: and he has cause to think that those
prayers were made by, The Spirit helping our Infirm^ties. Now for him to call
these p^ayers, but so many works of the Devil! I Will assure you it is very like
that sin, for which our Lord Jesus told the pharisees, They should never be
forgiven. It is bad enough in the Quakers to (...) of the best Ministers, as
Parnel does They are mere Witches: but for a man to put the name of Witchcrafts
upon the most serious and successful of our prayers, I say it is a most horrible
Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit of God. And which is further admirable; Keith
does in a page or two before* charge me with Falsifying the Holy Scripture and
Alleging a Downright Fals^hood, upon Christ himself, because I said in a
Sermon, We are told in Math. 12, 26. Satan is not divided against himself. Now,
I confess, I took that for the sense and scope of the Text; and I am deceived,
if I have not the generality of Interpreters on my side. Yea, it is plain, that
our Lord Jesus is there vindicating himself from the cursed aspersion (which
Keith has cast upon the poor Servants of the Lord Jesus here) of casting out
Devils by charms and spells; and His Argument is from the subtilty and policy
of the Devil. For if Devils do so side with our Lord as to confirm His word* by
the casting out of Devils, the Devils Kingdom would be so Divided as to be
quickly Ruined; but the Devil is too cunning to admit of such a Division in his
Monarchy.

Whereas, Keith affirms, That Christ does not so much as imply, That Satan is
not divided against Satan. Yea, says he, It Is utterly False, for Satan is
divided oftimes against Satan; and his Kingdom is divided also. Behold, how
concerned Keith is to wrest from our Blessed Jesus, the chief Argument, by
which he proved, that he was not (as the ^^pardonable Blasp^^mers then counted
him,) A Sorcerer. Thus he tha^ was committing so much of That sin himself, has
been left so to take part with the Pharisees, in doing that unpardonable Injury
to the eternal spirit of God! Now, if Keith be not gone so far in, The sin unto
death, as that we are to despair of doing any good on him, certainly, we have
at least, a sad cause to despair of getting any good from him. How can you
imagine, that the Spirit of God should speak, by a man that will put the title
of witchcrafts, upon the special operations of that Spirit? Or will you hear
the Sermons of a Wretch, that when you are going to Prayers, will tell you,
that they are charms and spells, which you are about?

The Third Argument.
A Person that pretends the Instruction of Souls, in the only way of Life, and
yet is full of shameful Self-contradictions in his Instructions, is one, from
whom all that are concerned for their Souls are to Turn away.

But such a Person is George Keith.

Verity is a thing marvellously Consistent with it self; where you see
Inconsistencies, you may suspect a cheat is intended for you; now Keith has
good store of them. Among these, I will not insist upon this, That George Keith
all over his Writings does exclaim against our Fathers that lived near forty
years ago, as the most hideous Murderers and Bloodsuckers in the world, and a
most persecuting generation: And yet in that printed paper, which he calls A
call to us* his words are, O unthankful Nation; ye are gone from that
tenderness, sobriety, and simplicity, that was among you and your Fathers
sometime ago. What? is he angry because we don't continue the Tenderness, which
two pages after he styles, more Inhumane, cruel, and Barbarous, than what is in
most of all sorts of mankind? But I shall confine my self to this man's more
Doctrinal Contradictions. Keith and his Friends are mighty Ready to find
Contradictions in other men; and will make what they cannot (...) Thus one
D^laval, in an Appendix to a L^te Book of Keiths, raises hideous Tragedies
against my self, as a self-contradicter; because, in one page of a Discourse,
Entitled, The Serviceable Man, speaking of the present Generation in this
Country, I say, There are Churches in it, Where we may s^e proportionably as
much of God as in any sp^^ of Ground which the Children of Adam walk upon. And
almost thirty pages after, speaking to the Rising Generation, I do to awaken
them (not Affirm, but) Enquire, Whether as they grow up, they will not give
their Fathers cause (if the Dead could express themselves) to Rebuke them for
their not walking in their ways? And if this be any Contradiction! Ridicula
Capita! A Dutch Woman's ^^intelligible Babbling at one of their private Meetings
would as much Enlighten me, as the Impertinent Scribbling of this man affects
me. But indeed, if one would see Contradictions, Let them only look into one
Book of Keiths; and in that one Book, I will note but a few of them, that would
occur upon a stricter Examination; it is the one Book, which he Entitles, The
Presbyterian and Independent Churches in New England brought to the ^est. The
very Title of that monstrous Book, tells us, that th^se Churches have neither
the Doctrine, nor the Ministry, nor Worship, nor Constitution, nor Government,
nor Sacraments, nor Sabbaths which belong to the true Church of Christ: and who
would now expect Salvation under the conduct of Churches thus False upon all
accounts beyond that of Rome it self? And yet within a Leaf or two, in an
Epistle to those very Churches, he says, He has a true Charity concerning a
Remnant among them, that they belong to Christ, and are the Real Members of His
Body, which is his Church; and that they are the Sheep of Christ. But in the
Book it self, which is a Box of poison as bad as what the Title promises; is it
not a Contradiction to say, page 1. The Scriptures contain a full and entire
Declaration of all Christian Doctrine; and to say in the same page, Yet they do
not contain the whole Mind, Will and Counsel of God? Or, will he grant, that we
are to enquire after D^ties and Comforts, which are no part of Christi^n
Doctrine? Either Keith contradicts himself: or he would have us to believe (and
so indeed he would!) some things which are no Christian Doctrine at all. Is it
not a contradiction, to say, page 32. We are not assured that any man is in
that state of perfection, that they may not by Humane Frailty depart from the
infallible Teachings of the Spirit of God; and to say in page 204. It Is false
Doctrine to hold, That no men ever since the Apostles Days, are assisted by any
Infallible Spirit, as the Prophets witnessed of old? Or, will he say, That the
Writers of the Scripture* did by Humane Frailty therein, sometimes depart from
the Infallible Teachings of the Spirit.

Is it not a conradiction, to say in page 74. We no where find in all the
Scripture, that God has Reprobated any part of mankind before the foundation
of the world; And in the same page, To allow, That Gods Purpose and Holy Will
concerning them that finally perish, is from before the foundation of the
world. And in a page, or two after, to confess, That God has a special and
peculiar care toward all that shall be saved; the number of whom is most
infallibly known to God; and, That God in his Infinite Counsel [which is
Eternal] permits others finally to resist His Grace? Is it not a contradiction,
to say, in page 77. Election goes before reprobation and is not Coaevous with
it; and yet own a page or two before, That Gods purpose concerning them that
perish, is from before the foundation of the world, and it conside^^ them as
having resisted the call of God? Or is it not a flat contradiction, to tell us,
That there is Election without Reprobation, which is to say, That among diverse
objects, there may be some chosen before and without others; and yet others not
Left out, not Rejected, not Omitted in the choice. Is it not a contradiction,
to say, in page 87. The Holiness of the Children of Believers only signifies a
nearer capacity that some have to become actually Holy in time; and yet say the
page before, All have a possibility to be Converted and become the Children of
God; (and to mend the matter add in his own Vindication p. 87. All Infants are
clean! By which also the express words of the Apostle, in 1 Cor^ 7.14. are most
expressly contradicted?) Is it not a Contradiction to say, in page 99. That our
Doctrine of, Reprobation, makes the effectual^ use of means absolutely
impossible to any, so as to leave them under Discouragement. While he himself
tells us, that there are Elect, and that none but these shall be Saved? The man
seems to be one of Mahomets Angels^ Mahomet saw certain Angels (as the Turkish
Bible tells us) that had Horns which were half Fire and half Snow; the
Inconsistencies which were on the Ovtside of their Heads, are got into the
Inside of this man's, who (by the way) is not so good a Christian as many
thousands that at this day dwell in Constantino^ople. Thus the sixth Section in
his Chapter of Justification, does not only contradict the tenets of them that
are most Men of Renown in the Congregation of the Quakers, but also give away
the whole cause which he is pleading of, by saying, The Lord Jesus Christ is
the alone and only Foundation and ground of Justification. Is it not a gross
Contradiction, to tell us in page 140, 141. That our Doctrine of Perseverance
is a most false, wicked, pernicious, poisonous Doctrine, and a most wonderful
piece of confusion; and yet grant in diverse other pages, That if God suffers
those whom He has drawn at any time, to depart, they shall certainly be
reclaimed; nay that every one of them shall certainly ^e Saved, and none of
them shall finally perish! Does not (...) inform us in page 147. that a True
believer may be only in the first Covenant! and is no^ that a Contradiction! Is
it not a most Jangling sort of Contradiction, to tell us in page 156. That
whereas we say. The best of the Saints cannot perfectly keep the Commandments
of God, but does daily break them, This is most expressly contrary to Scripture
in many places, and quite opposite to the very nature of the New Covenant; and
yet acknowledge in page 161. That those who have the most Noble Degre^ of
Holiness may yet fall short; and in page 162. That the best of men have motions
to sin, and these motions arising from the Natural and Mortal part still
remaining in them! Is it not a Contradiction to tell us in page 193. That (...)
have no reason to keep the First day of (...) week, as our Sabbath; and yet
confess in that very page, It is commendable in Christians, to to set apart the
first day of the week, for rest from employments, and to help the mind in its
Spiritual Exercises?

These and many more such Thwarting things you shall find his writings
entangled with; so that you shall never know where you are, or what he would
have. If Keith be what some take him to be, he might have known that there is
in the Popes palace an Officer called the Corrector of Contradictions, through
whose hands all the Popes Bull^ are to pass. Keith should have made his Book to
have passed through the Hands of that Officer, that it might not have been so
full of Bulls. Indeed, I doubt I have done the world a diskindness by noting of
these Contradictions in him; for he will go near now to print another Volumn of
equal Blasphemies, but of great^r Confusions, to Reconcile these two Champions
George and Keith; which two wandering Stars being in opposition, have an Aspect,
that foretells the downfall of Quakerism. But after all, it is I, and not He, that
must solve this appearance, and Reconcile them. Know therefore that the design
of this Heretic has been, chiefly to raise a Dust and a Noi^e, in the midst
and by the means of which he might make the people suspect their Ministers to
be (...), And though George must therefore for more than twice two hundred
pages together, cry out, False Doctrine! False Doctrine! yet Keith has been
under such Conviction of Conscience* that before he is aware, he confesses all
the Truths that he opposes. After all the Darn that he shoots against Heaven,
he falls down before the Truth; and like the wicked Julia^ of old, he cries
out, Thou have overcome! but he will not say, I yield! he has a stomach too
strong for that. Neighbors, You may still hold all the principles in which our
Catechisms have Instructed you; for either George or Keith has in Effect owned
them all. You Will say, Then the better man he! I answer, No; so much the worse;
for him to Rail with one tedious Pamphlet after another, at the Religion which
we do maintain, while he himself is not able to withstand it; I say, it looks
abominably; it shows that if he be not an Emissary of Rome, yet he is an
Emissary of Hell. And if so, you see how you are provided with a Teacher!

The Fourth Argument.
A Person that shall expressly Renounce both the Religion and the Savior which
the Saints have hitherto ventured their Souls upon, is one from whom all that
are concerned for their Souls are to Turn away.

But such a Person is George Keith.

The People of New England have generally hitherto received the same Gospel and
the same Jesus which was Preached by the Apostle Paul; we can bring plain and
full Testimony from the Inspired Writings of Paul, for what we hold, or else I
dare promise, in the Name of my Countrymen, we^l Renounce it; and therefore to
us also are directed the awful words of Paul to the Galatians, There are some
which Trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ; [There's a G. K.
among them!] But though we, or an Angel from Heaven, Preach any other Gospel
unto you, than that which we have Preached unto you, let him be Accursed. You
shall hear presently, you shall see the Name of the poor man, whom the terrible
Thunderbolt of this Curse, will fall upon. The words of George Keith in page
172, 173. of the Book we have so often quoted, are, The Religion ye profess is
not the true Religion, -- in the very foundation it self, which is Christ
Jesus. Now there is no sense in these words, if he do not mean* That ours is
not the true Christ Jesus. And therefore, when we did in our Printed Answer,
make this Descant upon it; George Keith bids the world to take notice, that he
utterly Renounceth the Religion we profess, even in the very Foundation of it,
which is JESUS CHRIST; I cannot find that in his Printed Reply, he has at all
disclaimed the Censure which we have passed upon him. As for us, Our Blessed
Lord Jesus Christ is, The Eternal Son of God, who became ^ Man, by taking to
Himself an Humane, but sinless Body and Spirit, being Conceived by the power of
the Holy Ghost in the Virgin Mary; and so was and continues to be God and Man,
in two Distinct Natures, and one person for ever. Never was any sinner saved
but by This Glorious Mediator; it is He, whom all the Saints of God have
hitherto trusted with all the Important and Eternal Concerns of their
Never-dying Souls. But it seems, Keith does Renounce this JESUS CHRIST, in the
close of all his Writings, notwithstanding the, Hail Master! which he had
before treated our Lord withal. He has Another Jesus Christ, for you, ye People
of New England; and will you Hear such a Man, any more than you would a Turk or
a Jew, holding forth among you? or will you not rather satisfy your selves, as
Peter did, There is no other Name, whereby we may be Saved?

You Will be desirous to understand, What CHRIST it is, that Keith is a Disciple
of? inasmuch as in some of his Confessions, he seems to fall down before our
Lord, and say, Jesus of Nazareth, I know thee, who thou art, The Holy One of
God. Now, I know no better way to guess at his meaning, than to repair unto the
Writings of the Quakers that have gone before him; doubtless, it is their
CHRIST, that he is a Believer in, or else they are the most unhappy of all
Wanderers, while they suffer him to lead them. It was an Expression among the
Printed Questions of that famous Queker Pennington, We can never call the
Bodily Garment, Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt in the Body. The
Quakers in Pennington's Days owned, That there was such a man, as Jesus the Son
of Mary, and that God, or rather Christ, was in him. But all this is no more
than they profess^d also of Themselves; and therefore Pennington also says,
That which he took on him, was our Garment, even the Flesh and Blood of our
Nature; which is of an Earthly perishing Nature; but He is of an Heavenly
Nature, and his Flesh and Blood, and Bones are of his Nature. In short, I
cannot express the Mystery of their CHRIST, in better Terms, than Mr. Faldo has
done it for them; There was an Heavenly, Spiritual, Divine Body Constituted of
Flesh, Blood and Bones, in which Christ came from Heaven; and he put that Body,
into the other Body of our Nature, which He took of the Virgin; and that
outermost Body, He left behind, when He Ascended into Heaven, nobody knows
where; and this Heavenly, Spiritual Body, is the Man Christ, which is in the
Quakers; and so the Quakers are as complete Christ's, as ever the Son of Mary
was; for they also have the Divine Nature of Christ, dwelling in a Body of
Spiritual Flesh and Blood, and those their Bodies which we see, are but the
outward Tabernacles of the God, and the Man Christ Jesus. It seems, that unto
such a sense as this, you must accommodate all Keith's Confessions about the
Man Christ Jesus. You must imagine, 'twas this more Spiritual Body, which was
Crucified in that more gross Bodily Garment which was derived from the Virgin
Mary* and you must imagine that Body to be in every Body as in a Garment,
Crucified over again; thus the whole Story of the Gospel is acted over again
every day, as Literally as ever it was at Jerusalem of old; it is all
transacted by unaccountable Dispensations within our selves; and Christ is in
every Quaker, as properly as he was in that Garment of a man, which was hanged
upon the Tree; hence Keith Expounding that place in Jam. 5.6. Ye have killed
the just one says, That is Christ Jesus in their Hear^^, Him they Crucified; as
Mr. Hicks quotes it, from Keith's Book Of Immediate Revelation. Beho^d, here is
a Key, by which you may open the Hearts of such men as Keith, when they seem to
confess, The Lord Jesus, whom God Raised from the Dead. Let Keith tell us
honestly, whether he does not count his own Body to be the Body of Christ, in
the same sense that the Visible, Tangible Flesh which hung upon the Cross, was
the Body of our Lord. Is it not a Declaration in the Quakers Catechism, We
believe that Christ does offer up himself a Living Sacrifice to God IN us, by
which the wrath of God is Appeased to us? And is not Men's Acquaintance with
this Notion, called, The Discerning of the Lords Body, in the Writings of the
Quakers? Here I suppose, (...) Christ, is that Light within, which the Quakers
do so much magnify, omnify, Deify; it is to this, that we must repair for all
our Light; and for the sake of this, we must have Penningtons Blessing upon us,
My upright Desire to the Lord for you (says he) is, That he would strip you of
your Knowledge of the Scripture according to the Flesh! though with my consent,
we will sooner be stripped of our SKIN, Yea, and our FLESH too, than of our
Scripture. I must profess, I do not now wonder at what Mr. Hicks quotes as the
Words of one Robert Wastfield, You are not able to bear what we have to hold
forth concerning him; should we deliver what we hold concerning Jesus Christ,
we should be stoned in the streets. Neighbors, I will animadvert no further
upon these things; but say of them, us the worthy Mr. Faldo does, He that can
digest such Fables as these, has a stomach hotter than an Os^rich! and add,
That the Curse of the Lord Jesus belongs to the man that Propagates them, or
Embraces them.

The fifth Argument
A Person that makes himself a Writer among the people of God, but in his
Writings discovers upon all occasions, a mavelous Giddiness, Ignorance, and
Falsehood, is one from whom we should all Turn away

(...) such a person is George Keith.

Our Lord will not send Ridiculous Persons upon such Special Messages, as Keith
pretends unto; but so Ridiculous, and therewithal so Slanderous is our Keith,
as that methinks wherever he comes, every sensible man should say concerning
him, Lo you see the man is mad; wherefore then have you brought him to me! It
would fill almost as many pages as Keith has written, to recount the Instances
wherein he has made himself Ridiculous; but I will touch upon a few in that one
book, which calls our Churches to the Test. If any man whose name is Mather,
had written about God's answering the returns of the Prayers of his people; it
had been a piece of Nonsense? but Keith has in a new Book strained and found a
way to clear it. Is it not admirably argued, The word is compared unto the Rain
and the Dew and to bread; Now the Drops of Rain and Dew, and the small Grains
of Flower in Bread, cannot be numbered; therefore the Scripture contains not all
the Word of God: And yet se page 78. of that Book, whether this be not the
profoundest of his Arguments! Did the Ridiculous man mind what he writ in page
12. where he cites, Cant. 2.4. He brought me into his Banqueting House; And
AGAIN, The King has brought me into his Wine Cellar. What AGAIN was there! Is
it not the same Text, and the same word? Can any thing be so Ridiculous as the
Rabbinical Fopperies, which he sometimes makes ostentation of? Is he not
Ridiculous, when he interprets the things made, in Heb, 12.27. to be Man made,
or made by men, when they were the things of Gods making, even the Ordinances
of the old Testament! And as Ridiculous is he in h^s exposition of 1. Pet. 4.1^
in page 49. Is it not Ridiculous for a man to allude unto 1. Pet. 2.2. The
Sincere Milk of the Word, and then tell us, That the Word of God is not the
Milk but the bottle? One would think none but one that had been at another
bottle could so unreasonably express himself. Tell me whether it be not
Ridiculous, to allow singing, yet condemn Singing with Notes or Tones.

Is it not Ridiculous, for a man that says, Ministers can require no
Maintenance from the people, to prove it from 1 Cor. 9.14. The Lord has
ordained, that they who preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel? ^s not
this a pretty Argument, If God has positively ordained, that Ministers of the
Gospel shall have Maintenance, then the people may choose whether they will
maintain them or no. But see whether in p. 55. Keith have it not, if he have
any at all. Is not the man Lightheaded, when he says, Light being used as a
Name of God, is no Figurative or Tropical Expression? And when he says, Light
is immediate, though it comes through a Medium? Does not he talk in page 16.
about an Efficacy as well as a Sufficiency, or of a Sufficient Efficacy, in the
Grace which God has provided for them that are never saved, and never have the
Effect of that Grace? Is it not one of his Revelations, That Christ bestows
Adoption only on his Brethren? which is as much as to say, None but the Adopted
are Adopted! Can any thing be so Ridiculous as this man, in page 169. Where he
finds fault with us, for calling our Assemblies together, by a Bell, because we
should have, A Gospel-Bell to Ring and Sound in our Hearts, and call us
together? or have his Friends got the property of the Cynocephalus in the
Temple of the Egyptian Serapis? or are they qualified like the man in Germany,
who never can speak a word, but just precisely at one a Clock? One of the
gravest Writers in the world, cannot forbear a Sarcasm on this occasion; he
tells the Quakers, our Bells are not carnal ones, as they call them; for if
they were flesh they would never be able to sound so high and far as they do.
But if the Quakers don't allow Bells, we shall see they can afford Libels
before we have done; which are things that one archly derives, as being Lies,
because false, and Bells because Loud. And Keith too carries about a Carnal
Clapper in his head. Is it not Ridiculous to make an Invisible Work in men's
hearts to be the gathering of a visible Church? Is it not Ridiculous to tell
us, That the Baptism with Water, appointed by our Savior and practiced by his
Apostles, belonged only to John's Dispensation? Is not the man Infatuated, when
he tells us, No words of Institution are commanded to be used in Baptism, but
the Command is, Go Teach and Baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Ghost? Were not a man Intoxicated with something besides
Water, he could never discourse at so wild a Rate; I say Intoxicated, because
he that will have none but a Spiritual Water in the Baptism of our Lord, must
permit me to mind him, that there is a Spiritual Drunkenness. From such a
Giddiness it is, that he tells us, about the Sabbath of the Lord, Exodus 20* 8,
9. Says nothing of one Day in Seven, but only of a Seventh Day; as if a
Seventh Day were not One Day in Seven! From the same Giddiness it is, that he
tells us, The Sabbath is Christ; and goes to prove it from Heb. 4 9, 10. as if
Christ Entered into Himself! And it is in this Rapture of high Speculations,
that he tells us. In the New Testament there is no outward Day. [What? must our
Days now go by Clocks that strike only on the Bells in our Hearts?] Yea, that
we cannot prove, that the Fourth Command Enjoined the Jews to keep an outward
Seventh Day. Severinus Boethius that had the skill to make the first Clock,
never had the skill to find out such a Day; to be measured by his Ingenious
Machin. I hope this Rare Invention, of, An Inward Day, will be acknowledged by
the Mathematicians of this Age, as a forerunner to, The Quadrature of the
Circle; or which were better, The L^^gu^ge ^ound; the Emperor Charles V. tha^
had a Wa^ch made in the Jewel of a R^ng, had the only ^nstrument that was
worthy to give the Time of such Days as we shall have, when we have no outward
ones. But I will not be any other than serious with him. I confess it is not
easy to mention the Follies of Quakerism without Sarcasms, like those which the
Prophet bestowed upon the Baalites of old. But when I ^ad once a little of
Irony in a Discourse, which one of the most Grave, Holy, Serious Persons now
alive in the world, namely, the Venerable Richard Baxter, has yet seen cause to
Reprint in the other England^punc; with a kind Preface of his own unto it;
George Keith cannot forbear calling me, A shallow Man, A^^ry and full of F^oth.
As for the shall^wness, I own it; [I am so Shallow that I cannot find sense in
Keith for my life!] but for the Air and Fr^^h, I hope I have not a Neighbor in
the world, which will not vindicate the Composedness of my whole Conversation,
from the slanders of this R^^iler. And indeed the slanders which Keith commits
in his Writings, are almost as many as his Follies. Is it not a slander, when
he says, We Preach altogether an Absent Christ? None Preach the most Intimate
Union and Communion with the Lord Jesus Christ, more than we. But he may well
slander us, if it be fitting for him to slander the most Eminent Saints, or to
say, That Nathanael and Cornelius, were Unbelievers, when the glorious
Testimonies in the Scriptures were given of them. Yea, he can slander a whole
Assembly of Divines at once, by saying, They expressly word what he recites in
page 155, 156. as it is recited there; which is utterly false; it is he that has
worded it so; and fathered some things upon them, which they do not speak. Why
does he represent us, in page 258. as telling people, That if a man Die in his
sins, his Faith shall save him, tho^ he Live and Die in his sins? if he did not
mean himself to Live, in the sin of slandering, or to be a man of no Faith
until he Die? Into what a Bears Skin does he Slanderously put us, when he says,
That Notoriously scandalous persons Liars, Deceivers, Drunkards, etc. are
qualified Members of our Church? I say, He is a scandalous person, Liar,
Deceiver, for saying so; and there is not one of our Churches* but what would
on the account of those Qualifications Excommunicate him, if he had been under
their Inspection. Is it no Slander upon thousands of Godly People in the
Country, when he says, Our Sacrament has no inward spiritual signifi^ation to
us? Indeed, he all along is full of opposition; but he can tell rather to whom,
than to what: he is resolved the Pastors and Churches of New England shall be
soundly railed at, that so unwary people may be decoyed into a detestation of
them; and in order to this, he childishly makes up a man of his own Clouts and
Rags, and calling it by a New-English Name, he falls to pelting of it. He
misrepresents most of our Doctrines, and this very wilfully, to make us odious;
and as among the Russians, a Knave will sometimes convey his own Goods, into
another man's House, thereupon crying out against him as the Thief; so Keith
puts Words and Things upon us, which we never thought of; and then raises the
Country with a Cry of, Thieves, Thieves! Ranters! Blasphemers! False-Teachers!
and what not? This is the manner of the Man. As for the Slanders that he raises
upon our Endeavors to Evangelize the Indians, I have already in the Life of
our Venerable Eliot refuted them with (I hope) a sufficient Efficacy. But as it
was of old asked, about the Prophets, Who is their Father? the Answer to such a
Question about the Liars, will give you to see what a person you have to deal
withal, when Keith comes among you, seeking whom he may devour.

I remember, I mentioned Ignorance among the Accomplishments of this man; and
of That also, you shall have one little Specimen,

I will not here enlarge upon, that foolish Banter of Keiths, in page 202* 203.
of his late Reply upon our Answer unto him. We thought, and might well think
that he had spoke Nonsense, by saying We called our Duties, but not saying
what we called them; and we informed him thereupon, That we called them Dirt
and Dung and Nothing. So in truth, we thought we might, because the Apostle
Paul, in Phil. 3.8. had called his Duties by no better a Name. Well, you shall
see whether Paul and George are of a mind* and whether George will not count
himself a better man than Paul! Says Keith, Ye call them Dirt and Dung, and
yet ye continue to offer up this Dirt and Dung unto God, but Remember that God
will cast the Dirt and Dung of your Sacr^fices on your Faces. And surely,
seeing by your own confession, your Prayers are Dirt and Dung, they cannot be
that pure Offering which God promised his people should Offer up unto him. Now,
was there ever seen such a Fool in Print! This man has Learned his Catechism, I
see, which teaches him to deride those that shall in their prayers acknowledge
themselves to be, Miserable Sinners. Its a Good Lad! But indeed, will Keith
dare to ^rag before the Almighty God, that his own prayers, are not as Dirt and
Dung, before those ^ure Eyes which cannot look upon iniquity! Neighbors,
it will be but just for you to disdain as Dirt and Dung, the Preachments of such
a Proud Fool, as will not confess his own Prayers to be ^ut as Dirt and Dung
before the Lord; you ^ave to do, Cum Stercore, when you have to do with such a
man.

But this is not the thing which I intended. It (...) this; He had said, The
Baptizing of Infants, was not the practice of the Church, during the first
Century, Upon this we ^ejoined, Origin and Cyprian tell us, that the Apostles
gave Order for the Baptizing of Infants; and Augustine tells us, The Baptism of
Infants had been universally practiced in the Church ever since the Apostles.
And we thought that these had been as credible Reports about the First Century,
as we could have when we had not many Wr^tings of those that lived in it;
except we could prove, which Keith would like, that the Mystical Dionysius was
of that Century. But Keith, who makes a mighty Lerry with Quotations from the
Ancients, resuming of this point, makes that Foolish Return, That Origin,
Cyprian, and Augustine, be not Scripture; pray who said, they were? and he
falsely insinuates as if we practiced Infant Baptism upon their Authority; upon
which he adds, Ye can give no Evidence in Church History, that Infant Baptism,
was practiced until Cyprian's Time, past two hundred years from Christ's
Resurrection. An Assertion to which there needs no Rejoinder, but what Calvin
made upon them that uttered the like, In eo Foedissime Mentiuntur; siquidem
nullus est Scriptor tam Vetustus, qui non ejus Originem ad Apostolorum Saeculum
pro certo referat. You see, No less a man than Calvin, has called Keith, A most
filthy Liar, for so speaking; and from Calvin let him take it. The poor man
doubtless thought, that our young Libraries in America, had not yet got any of
the Fathers in them; but he is mistaken. We can tell him, that Origin
flourished a little before Cyprian; and he says in his fourteenth Sermon on
Luke, Little Ones [Parvuli] are Baptized for the Remission of Sins; with much
more to that purpose. And in his 18th. Sermon on Leviticus, he says, Secundum
Ecclesiae obsernantiam, etiam parvulis Baptismum dari; it had been a custom
and usage in the Church of God. Nor is it any other than a Cavil, to object,
That these and more such passages were the Interpolations of Ruffinus
afterward. But because Keith may tell us, That Origin died not very long
before Cyprian, and he is not, such a Computer of Times, but that you may allow
him a handful of Minutes to prevent or excuse the mistakes of his Chronology; I
shall ask him, what Age Tertullian lived in? Whether he lived not in the
Century before Cyprian? Well, Did not this very Tertullian, Acknowledge that
the People of God then made Haste for the Baptism of their Children, while
their Innocens Etas, their Innocent Age was yet upon them? But perhaps the
Tertullian whom Cyprian would call his Master, will be no Master to out Keith.

I shall therefore again ask him, whether Irenaeus did not live before Cyprian,
and even before Tertullian too; and whether Jerome do not reckon him A man of
the Apostolical times! Now that man is utterly a stranger to the Language of
the Ancients, who does not suppose Infant Baptism intended by him, when he
says Infantes Renascuntur. I cannot for my Life, Divine, [although (...) have
called me A Conjurer] what Keith can say to these things; except he should
think to put his Reader off with that f^amm, that Tertullian and Irenaeus, are
no Church^History. But if here be not enough, what will he say to Hyginus, who
was Martyred, Ann^ D^m. 144. Of whom; Church History mentions, the Orders which
he had about those Qui Infantes tenent dum Baptizantur; who hel^ up the Infants
to be Baptized? Or, if it was Justin Martyr that wrote that Ancient piece,
Quest. and Resp. ad Orthodox. You there have an Author living at the farthest
in the very next age to that of Apostles, affirming, That Baptized Infants
obtain the good things that come by Baptism. Or, if that Piece were spurious,
yet in the Dial. cum Tryph: we have that Justin Martyr who lived, as is
judged,, even in the Days of the Apostle John himself, saying, That all alike
might then Receive Baptism, which is the Spiritual Circumcision. It is
impossible for Keith now to come off, unless he will tell us, that though we do
find Infant Baptism asserted by the Church History, to be attended within less
than Two, yea less than One Hundred years after the Resurrection of our Lord,
yet, He did not mean outward years, When he affirmed the contrary; he spoke of
inward years, which may differ as much from ours, as the Lunar do from Solar
ones. I take the more notice of this matter, because I do Divine that Keith may
write a Book, to prove, That the Ancients were all Quakers. For I find Keith
ever now and then showing this Mark of Hypocrisy; That he commends the Dead
Saints, but condemns the Living Ones. Just like Penn; who in the Name of the
Quakers, professes an high esteem for the English Martyrs; and yet of those
Ministers who now agree perfectly with them, in all the principles and
practices of Christianity, he says, They are the Pest of the World, the old
Incendiaries to mischief, and the best to be spared of Mankind. So, I don't
know, but Keith may try to hook into his party all the Departed Saints of our
Creed; not only the Reformers, but even the Fathers too, whom he seems
inclinable to the Applauding of. But if ever he do, pray see what a Trusty
Recorder and Reporter of Antiquity you will be troubled with! He will impose upon
you, with bold but false Representations of all Antiquity* and his word is not
to be taken for any thing he says. This is Keith; and now say, whether This be
not one, from whom all that have any Love to their own Souls, are to Turn away.
He is all over Leprous, and particularly has, The Plague in his Head: it is but
an wholesome Caution for you, to avoid a person so Infectious.

Having now done with George Keith, it remains that I set before you, a little
part of that Spiritual Armor, which may defend you against the Assaults of
Quakerism. As for the most of that Sophistry, which Keith has (...) ^e^ter you,
it is detected and refuted in an Answer to him, lately Published by the
Ministers of B^^ton; and I Exhort you to furnish your selves with such an
Antidote against him* He has indeed prin^ed a Book to Revile that of ours, as
if it were a mere Bundle of Weeds; but I believe, if all the Rattle-snakes in
this Country [and it happens, that at the very minute of my Writing this,
casting my Eye upon a certain Pamphlet, which decoyes people to dwell at
Pensylvania, the first word I read in my Author is, There be Rattle-snakes at
Pensylvania too; which he says, make a Noise like a Child's Rattle!] I say, if
they all had the voting of it, they would cry out upon Snake weed, as a Weed
which did abundance of hurt in the world. But if any Quakers do personally set
upon you, my humble advice to you is* That you have no Regard unto the
Deceitful Generals wherein they will make a noise like a Child's Rattle, and cry
up, Theirs as the only True Religion; but compel them to come unto a Point. Ask
them, Whether your own Religion be False? If they will say, It Is not, then bid
them be quiet; What would they have? If they say it is; make 'm to pitch upon a,
particular Instance; keep 'em to That, and let them not confound you with
Tedious and Rambling Digressions from, The Thing in hand. Accept no proof but
Scripture, or what is just consequence from Scripture; Tell them, If they speak
not according to that Word, there is no light in them. Lay down your own
Principles, in plain, brief, close Terms, and ask them, Which of these they
Deny? What they Deny, be you ready to Defend; thus, Resist them and they will flee
from you.

I. Assert, That the Bible is the Word of God.
Tell them, That by [ the Bible] you don't mean the Paper, or the Letter, but
the Heavenly Matter contained in it. If they make that Irreverent Irrational
Cavil, That there are the words of Sinners, yea, and of Devils in the Bible;
ask them, Who made the History which relates those words? Whether that History
were not written by Inspiration of God? If they Cavil, That Christ is the Word
of God; own it, and give the cause why He is called so; namely, because He is
the chief Subject which the Word insisteth on; and because He does, as a Word,
signify and manifest the glorious Attributes of God; yea, because, as a Word,
is the Offspring of the Mind, so our Lord Redeemer is by an Eternal Generation
the Son of God. But then turn them, to Jer. 23.30. I am against the Prophets
that steal my Word, every one from his Neighbor. Ask them, whether Christ can
be Stolen? Turn them, to Ephesians. 6.17. The sword of the Spirit, which is the Word
of God. Ask them, whether Christ be an Instrument for the Spirit or no? Enquire
of them, Whether the Devil himself did not own the Bible to be the Word of God.
When our Lord made him to Fly, by fetching three Texts out of Deuteronomy to
him? Let them see, That you will try that Method upon Them; and do you see,
whether they will be worse than He.

II. Assert, That we have no Warrant in our Days, to look for such
Inspirations as were given to the Prophets and Apostles of our Lord, before the
Canon of the Scripture was completed.
Acknowledge, That the Saints in our Days have their special Illuminations from
the Holy Spirit of God; and that the Spirit by those Illuminations does help us
to understand the Things Revealed in the Scriptures, which otherwise cannot be
savingly understood; and does further help us to apply the Scriptures unto our
own Instruction, Direction, Consolation. Yea, acknowledge, that the Holy Spirit
of God is the Author of all the Good Works, whereof there are many, (and let
them be what they will) in the Hearts of his People. But then tell them, These
things, do not amount unto such Inspirations as qualified the Writers of the
Scriptures for their work. In those Inspirations the Bodily Perceptions, did
not use to carry the Objects unto the Rational Faculties, and conclusions were
not usually formed in such a way; the Soul was more passive in them; it was not
by the Improvements of a sanctified Understanding, but it was by the Illapses
of rapturous Ecstasies, that these Inspirations were conveyed into the Subjects
of them. The Inspirations were not common to all Believers, nor were they
Habitual in those few which had them; nor were they Augmented by the Industry
and Experience of the Godly. Ask them whether Paul do not evidently make a
Difference between the Illuminations of all good men, and the Inspirations of
some, in 1 Cor. 7.40. After my judgment, and I think also that I have the
Spirit of God. He gives his Advice, as a Saint that had the Spirit of God
Enlightening of him as he does other Saints; whereas, if that Advice had been
immediately inspired into him, he did not well to make his own Judgment bear a
part with the Infallible Authority of God. See likewise 1 Cor. 12.39. Are all
Prophets? Challenge the Quakers to do any of those Miracles, or to speak any of
those Languages, which many of them that were of old Inspired, could. You need
not go to prove, That such Inspirations are so ceased, as that they are not
ordinarily to be looked for. Let them, if they can, prove that they be Not
Ceased. Yet that you may fully silence them, Turn them to 2 Pet. 1.19. We have
a more sure word of Prophesy, whereunto ye do well to take heed, as unto a
Light shining in a dark place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in
your Hearts. Look on the Context. Ask them, whether the Prophesy of Scripture
be not the more sure word, which is there said to be, More sure, than a voice
from Heaven, or any Immediate Revelation in our Days? Ask whether, those that
Peter then wrote unto, had not Christ in them, as much as any Quakers now? Or
whether it be not said of them in the Beginning of the Epistle, That they had
obtained like precious Faith with the Apostles? and whether these were not now
to prefer the Scriptures before a voice from Heaven it self? Tell them, that
the word [ until] does not always intimate, that afterward the thing must be [
No more] See Mat. 5.^8. But we must Give Heed, unto the Scripture, [ That so]
the Day Star of Gospel Administrations may arise in our Hearts; and continue
thus to do [ until] our Lord Christ Himself do come unto the Judgment of the
World.

III. Assert, That the Will of God Expressed in the Scripture, is a perfect
Rule for the Belief, and Practice, of every Christian.
Turn them to 2. Tim. 3.16.17. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God,
and is profitable. That The man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works. Ask them, whether any but a Perfect Rule can do this! Or,
whether there be any Good Work which we are not by the Scripture both Directed
and Obliged unto? If they pretend; that they have the Spirit as a Rule to them;
tell them, that the Spirit speaks in and by the Scripture. Tell them also* That
you will Try, that Pretense.

Turn them to 1. Joh. 4.1. Beloved, Believe not every Spirit, but try the
Spirits whether they are of God. Ask them, what Rule we shall have to Try, the
pretenses which men make to the Spirit, if the Scripture which the Spirit has
given us be not the Rule! And ask them, whether That which is to Try the
Spirits, is not the Supreme Judge of all Controversies in Religion.

IV. Assert, That every man is not Enlightened with a Saving Light.
Affirm to them, that the Light which is in every man does not Effectually make
all men to apprehend all Truths necessary to Salvation. Turn them to Deuteronomy.
29.4. The Lord has not given you eyes to see to this Day. Ask them whether any
can have, what God never gave! or what saving Light is in them that cannot see?
Turn them to Mat. ^.23. If the Light that is in thee, be Darkness, how great is
that Darkness? Ask them whether Darkness be a Saving Light? If the Light in all
men, be able to save them, ask them, Why they make further Inspirations to be
necessary!

Affirm to them, That the Light which is in every man, does not so much as
Objectively Reveal, all that we must know, if we would (...) Saved. Ask them,
whether the Light which is in our Tawny Pagans, ever did Reveal unto them, That
Great Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh? Do the Pagans know the
Gospel by this Light? Or, has not Paul said in 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be
hid, it is hid unto them that are lost?

Ask them, what need there was for the Scripture to be written, if all men had
Light enough to discov^^ all Saving Mysteries unto them! press them with the
Question, in Romans ^.1. What advantage has the Jew?

In short, If the Heathen had ^^ways Light enough to save them, ask them, what
Our Lord meant, when he said, in Joh. 4.22. Salvation is of the Jews! [Who then
were the only people, with or from whom the Scriptures were to be had.]

V. Assert, That the Light (or power) in every man, which condemns him after he
has done amiss, is not, THE CHRIST OF GOD.
Grant them, that we have a Light which is a Ray from the Sun of Righteousness,
as being the work and gift of our Lord, who was the Creator of Man, and has put
a Conscience into him. It is this Conscience, which is, The Candle of the Lord.
Yet let them know, That you can distinguish between Causes and Effects. You can
distinguish between a Light given by Christ, and Christ Himself, who gives the
Light. Grant them also, That all the Saints have a most Intimate and wonderful
Union with Christ, so that the Spirit of Christ, or Christ by his Spirit, is in
them the Hope of Glory. But then let them know, That Christ our Light, is not
thus in all men; it is a privilege peculiar to the Saints, who are the Mystical
Body of Christ. Maintain against them, That the Light in all men which Rebukes
them when they do amiss, is not, The Man Christ Jesus. Ask them, whether the
Light within were born of the Virgin Mary? And whether 'twas the Lig^^ within
which Encountered all the Things mentioned in the Gospel? Dispute after this
manner with them; The Christ of God condemns men for all sin. But the Light in
many a man does not so. Ask them, whether many a man does not sin, when yet he
acts according to his Light? Enquire of them, how we shall know Light within,
from Thought within. Quote them Joh. 16.2. The time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God Service. Ask them, whether their Light
reproved them, when they Thought they did God Service in what they were about?
Quote them, Acts 26.9. I verily Thought with my self that I ought to do many
things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Na^areth. Ask them, whether that Light
which Approved, a man when he did many things against Jesus, could be Christ or
no? Did Thought within, bear witness against these Damnable Sins? If yet they
are obstinate, ask them, whether their Magistrates ever had a Light which
directed them to punish a filthy Woman for Exposing her self stark naked before
their own Eyes in a public Assembly, to prove her Attainment of that Innocence
which is without shame? Ask them, if they know of no such thing, that has
lately happened? Or, whether when the Light has not hindered several such Light
Hussies, from those unnatural Pranks, in the Light among us, their Light ever
taught 'em to bear due Testimonies against them? Once more, They say, All men
have this Light within. Pray then, turn them to, Ephesians. 2.12. At that Time, ye
were without Christ. If they go to perplex you with J^h. 1.9. That was the True
Light, which ^ighteth every man, that comes into the World. Answer them; You
own that our Blessed Mediator, does both Instruct, and Comfort, the Souls of
poor Sinners; Tell them, He is the True Light, in opposition to the Ancient
Figures and Shadows, which were but so many Dark Lines of him. Tell them, That
even the Light of Reason is a Light, which the Son of God has blessed all
Mankind withal. It is rather as a Creator than as a Redeemer, that all men
Recieve Light from Our Lord; and the Context there, does Marvelously Suit this
Exposition; let the Quakers prove a better if they can. But if it must be
understood of Enlightening with Gospel-discoveries, tell them yett, it implies
not that every individual man, is therewith Enlightened; it means, That all who
are Enlightened have their Light from him. Show them Col. 1.28. We Preach,
warning every man, and Teaching every man. Ask them, whether the Apostles ever
did so to every Individual Man. Show them Psalm. 145.14. The Lord upholdeth all
that fall. Ask them, whether it implies any other, but that all who are upheld
are upheld by God alone. And finally Confess to them, That by [ every man] may
be meant Jews and Gentiles, without such Limitations as were before the
Incarnation of our Lord. Put them upon proving this Exposition to be false.

VI. Assert, That God has foreordained, whatever comes to pass.
Turn them to Ephesians. 1.11. Who works all things after the counsel of His own
Will. Ask them, whether any Creature can work without God? or, whether the
Counsel of God, be not from Eternity? Turn them to Acts 4.27, 28. Against thy
Holy Child Jesus -- they were gathered together, for to do whatever -- thy
Counsel determined before to be done? Ask them, whether there could be worse
things done, than what were against the Holy Child Jesus? and whether even such
things as th^se were not fore-determined by the Counsel of God? Make 'em look
into Acts* 2.23. Him being delivered by the (...) Counsel and Foreknowledge of
God, ye have taken, and by wicked Hands have Crucified. Let them tell you,
whether the Treason of Judas was not one of the Things in the Delivering of our
Lord Jesus into the Hands of them that Crucified Him! and whether even This
also were not by the Determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of the Almighty?
And do you tell them, That you do not conceive the Liberty of the Creature to
be taken away by the Decree, no, nor by the In^^ux neither, of the first cause
upon all second causes: but that there may be Necessity, where there is no
Coaction or Compulsion; and that we may act most Voluntarily when we act most
Necessarily. If they taunt at you, That you render God the Author of Sin; tell
them, No; tell them that God may be the Author of an Action done by Man, when
Man only is the Author of the Evil in that Action; tell them, That God may
Purpose to withold, and He may withold, from men the Grace which He never owed
them; and no Blame ly upon God, for the Sin which will follow thereupon, and
administer innumerable occasions for His Glory. Ask them, whether God Foreknow
all that comes to pass? or see Act. 15.18. Well, if God have not also Decreed
it, then God knows many things but conditionally; and His Knowledge is but
fallible and uncertain; and then there are some things whereof God is not the
Determiner; but the Free Will of man will make the Counsel, and so the very
Essence of God Himself to depend upon it. Away with such Blasphemies!

VII. Assert, That there is an Eternal Reprobation, as well as Election; and
that this Reprobation is Absolute as well as Eternal.
Since there are persons Converted, you prove that these were first Elected,
when you Demonstrate that nothing ever comes to pass, without ^he Counsel of
God. Bid 'em read Act. 13.^8. and then say, whether, there are not some
Ordained unto Eternal Life. Ask them whether they never heard from 2. Tim.
2.19. The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows who
are his. And ^id them confess whether Election be not that Foundati^n? See, 2.
These. 2.13. And Romans ^.30.

If there were an Eternal Election of some, ask them whether it be not pure
Nonsense to say, that some were Chosen, and others were not Lest Vnchosen? And
what else is Reprobation, ^ut a leaving of some Vnchosen, or a refusing and
rejecting of some from the unchangeable ^urposes of mercy by Jesus Christ? Ask
them, whether God has Eternally Chosen all to ^alvation? If so, why has He
not Called All, ^ustify'd 'em, and Glorified 'em? Ask them, whether they are
not contradicted by Our Lord in Joh* 6.37. All that the Father gives me, ^^all
come to me. It is clear then, that God has not Chosen al. Ask them whether
(...) Rest are not passed by? Does not the Apostle say, in Romans 11.7. The Rest
were blinded* see, Rev. 17.8. Force them to read, Jude* 4. There are certain
men, who were before of (...) Ordained unto this Condemnation. When an^ How
Ordained? Show 'em, That our Sin i^ the only cause of Damnation. Do not say*
That God made men to Damn them. Yet (...) 'em consider that in Romans 9.17. But
show 'em That the cause of Reprobation is Gods Will. (...) Sin were the cause
of that, ask, why are no^ all men Reprobates? for all men might come under the
consideration of Sinners before the Lord. God will Damn particular persons for
their sins; hence He did Eternally Decree (...) Damn those persons for their
Sins. But wha^ was the cause of the Decree? Fetch your Account of it from Mat.
11.26. Even so, Father* for so it seemed Good in thy sight. If they no^ begin
to Blaspheme. That then God is parti^^ or cruel; say to them, with the Apostle
in thi^ case, in Romans 9 20. Nay but, O man, who (...) thou that Reply
against God? Yet make it ap^pear, That none are to be hence discourage^ from
the use of means. Ask them, whether when a Battle is to be fought, God has not
certainly Decreed, who shall fall in that Battle; and whether any Soldier
should therefore forbear doing his utmost for his own Preservation.

VIII. Assert, That there is one God in Three Persons, the Father, the Son, and
the Spirit.
They will own, There is but one God. Ask them now, whether we don't read in
Mat. ^8.^9. Of, The Father, and, The Son, and, The Holy Spirit? Show 'em, That
the Father is God; because it is said, Joh. 17.3. Thee, the ^^ly true God. Show
'em, That the Son (...) God; because it is said, in Romans 9.5. Christ who is over
all God Blessed for ever. Show 'em, That the Spirit is God; because it is said,
in Act. 5.3.4. Why has Sa^an filled thine Heart to Ly unto the Holy Ghost?
^hou have not Lied unto men, but unto God. Bid them Read, 2. Cor. 13.13. Tell
them, that ^et the Father is not the Son; and the Son is not the Spirit;
because it cannot be said, That ^he Son begat the Father, or that the Spirit,
sends the Son. And force them to own, That the Father and the Son and the
Spirit, are PERSONS, because they are Intelligent Subsistences. Point 'em to,
Joh. 15.26. I will send unto you, from the Father the Spirit of Truth. Say to
them as Athanasius did unto them which doubted the Trinity; Go to Jordan and
thou shall see it. Make 'em to Read, what was done at Jordan, in Math. 3.16.17.
and out of that ^onvince 'em. Tho you cannot fully Fathom the Mystery of the
Trinity, yet be not Shaken by such a Rope of Sand as Mr. Pen would ham^er our
Doctrine with, when he says, If each Person be God, and God subsists in three
Persons, ^^en in each Person, there are three Persons or Gods, and so from
three they would increase to nine, and so in infinitum. You don't want any help
of mine to show you the Folly and poorness of such piece of Sophistry. If they
Boggle at the word Person, tell 'em what, A Person in the Godhead signifies. It
means not, A Distinct Substance but A Distinct Subsistence; it is, The Divine
Essence subsisting in a Relative property. Cause them also to Read Heb. 1.3.
His Son -- the Express Image of his Person. -- There you se^ the Father is a
Person. Cause them again to Read, 2. Cor. 2.10. I forgave it in the Person of
Christ. There you see the Son is a Person, to be represented. Pilate called
him, in Math. 27.2^ This Just Person; a Quaker is worse than a Pilate, if he
will not own as much. And then for the Spirit, -- He that can descend from
Heaven in a Bodily shape is a Person: but we find Luk* 3.22. The Holy Ghost
descended in a Bodily (...).

IX. Assert, That the Death of the Lord Jesus Christ, was not intended by God,
for the Salvation of all Mankind.
Allow, That the price paid by our Lord in His Death, was indeed sufficient for
all Mankind; and that the Benefit of it is tendered and proffered unto all
indefinitely, If they will believe: yea, that His Death is the thing that has
procured this Tender and Profer for the World. But, yet it was not the secret
^ntent, either of God or Christ, that His Blood should purchase Life Eternal
for all the Children of Men. Ask of them, whether our Lord by His Death has not
bought Faith for them that have it, even the Faith which qualifies them for
Benefit by his Death? Is there any Believer, that can dare to say concerning
his Faith, The Blood of Christ never bought it for me? Well then, If the Blood
of Christ as purchasing Salvation, were intended for all Mankind* was not the
Blood of Christ as purchasing the Condition of Salvation so intended? But, how
comes it then, that all Mankind have not that Faith which is the Condition of
Salvation? They will say, it is merely because the Sinner says, I will not; but
what will they say, when they must own, that our Lords Death is to purchase the
Sinners being overcome to say, I will? Ask them further, What the virtue and
success of our Lords Death depends upon? Is it wholly left unto the Free Will
of Man? Man will then be the principal in his own Salvation. Yea, this I say;
if the Number of persons Interested in our Lords Death, be not fixed and
settled, it were possible, That no man at all should ever be the better for it!
Horrible to be spoken! And Simon Peter were no more beholden to the Merit of
our Lord, than Simon Magus was. Ask them, whether they can be so Absurd (though
they have as large a Gift at Absurdity as any people in the world) as to think,
That God in sending his Blessed Son to Die, had as full a Purpose, that His
Death should be Effectual to Save, those who from all Eternity He foreknew
never should be saved, as for those whom he certainly foreknew the Salvation
of? or, whether God foreknows not who shall, and who shall not be saved?
Finally, Turn them to Joh. 17.9. I pray not for the world. And ask them,
whether our Lord Jesus intended His Death, for them, whom He would not bestow a
Prayer upon. The Quakers perhaps may tell you, That Christ Dies IN all men, and
so must needs Die FOR them all; but you are then drawn to another point. Only
before you leave this, Tell them they have done very well to acknowledge
themselves, The proper Crucifiers of the Lord Jesus Christ.

There is one Mr. H Glover, who has Printed a Pamphlet, wherein he Reviles me,
as being more than a Semi-Quaker, because in a Book Entitled, A Companion for
Communicants, I go to prove, That the Lords Supper is not [ex Instituto,] a
Converting Ordinance. The Foundation of that Gentleman's Discourse, is, That
Christ has died for all men; and the Sacraments are nothing but Seals to the
Truth of that Assertion. I desire him now to accept the Assertion and Argument
of this paragraph, as my Answer to him. As to my being, more than a
Semi-Quaker, it is the mistake of a Gentleman, that has more than a Sesqui*
Arminian in him; and I shall only tell him, That when I apply my self to the
Quakers for a Communion with them, I will make use of His Testimonial, without
which, I know they will not now Receive me.

X. Assert, That our Justification, is by the Righteousness, or Obedience of
the Lord Jesus Christ, Imputed unto us.
To be Justified, is to be Absolved from the Curse due for Sin, and Entitled
therewithal to Life Eternal. If they ask you, Who Justifies you? Answer, It Is
God that passes the merciful Sentence; as we read in Romans 8.33. It is God that
Justifies. If they ask you, For what you are Justified? Answer, For the
Obedience which our Lord Jesus rendered unto God, as a Surety and Ransom for
us: as we read in Romans 5.18. By the Righteousness of One, the Free Gift came
upon all men to Justification and Life. If they ask you, By what you actually
come within the reach of this Imputation? Answer, it is by that Faith, which
receives the gracious profer of the Lord Jesus Christ, and relies upon it: as
we read in Romans 10.10. With the Heart man believes unto Righteousness. If they
ask, In what you may Evidence the Truth of your Faith, so as to demonstrate its
being Faith unfeigned? Answer, It Is by the Works of a Godly Conversation, which
Faith has derived strength from the Lord Jesus, for the performance of; as it
is written, in Jam. 2.24. You see then, how that by works a man is Justified,
and not by Faith only. Let them not baffle you, about this Fundamental Article.
We cannot be (...) just before God, until we are Owners of a Righteousness that
fully satisfies the Demands of his Holy Law. Even Buroughs the great Oracle of
the Quakers tells us, God accepts not any, where there is any Failing; or, who
do not fulfill the Law, and answer every demand of Justice. Ask them, whether it
be not said in Romans 4.6. God Imputes Righteousness without Works? and let them
(if they can!) soberly tell you, what they think of it. If they say, The works
of Faith are our Righteousness, ask them, whether they be the Works wrought
before we are perfect? or after? if the Works before, then God will pronounce
us Legally Righteous, while we are yet Legally Unrighteous; for our works have
not fully answered His Law. If the Works after, then woe to us all; for we shall
not come thereto until we Die. Cite unto them, Gal. 3.13. Christ has Redeemed
us, from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. And ask them, whether
our being set free from the Curse of the Law, is not in our being Justified?
Cite them before those Texts, in Romans 5.9. Being now justified bp his Blood, we
shall be saved from (...) through him; and in Romans 3.4. Being Justified freely by
his Grace, through the Redempti^n that is in Christ; and in Ephesians. 12.6. We have
Redemption through His Blood, the Forgiveness of our Sins. And make them fall
before the force of 2 Cor. 5.19, 21. and Mat. 26.28. and Romans 5.10. and Phil.
3.9. with many more. After all, if they answer you, as Edward Buroughs does
one that enquired, whether there be any other Righteousness by which the Saints
are Justified, than what Christ works only in them; Thou Beast (says he) to
whom the Plagues of God are due, and upon whom the Wrath of God must be
Accomplished, who would have another Righteousness, than that which Christ
works in the Saints: Don't return such foaming Language to them again; but only
say, That you despair of escaping the Plagues and Wrath of God, without another
Righteousness. If they are so extravagant, as to speak what William Pen writes,
It is a great Abomination to say, God should condemn and punish his Innocent
Son, that he having Satisfied for our sins, we might be justified by the
Imputation of his perfect Righteousness; Only Reply, That it is a great
Abomination unto you to hear such Abominable Blasphemies!

XI. Assert, That a Sinless perfection in this world, is not attainable:
It is true, Godly men are such as, Do no iniquity, and they, Do not Commit
Sin. But let 'em understand, that this refers only to a Choice of Sin, and a
Course of Iniquity. Let them know, you don,t plead that Wickedness may liv^ but
you plead that Repentance may not die while we live. Tell 'em that they do but
enflam^ the most Cursed and Hellish Pride, while they Nourish a vain opinion of
Perfection here. Let them know that such as the Scripture sometimes calls the
Perfect, are the Sincere, and not the Sinless ones. Show them in, phil. 3.11.
Not as tho I were already perfect. Ask them, whether Paul, who was then an old
Believer, and an old Apostle too, were not as perfect, as any Quaker, yea, or
any Christian, in our Days! Point them, to ver. 15. Let us, a^ many as be
Perfect, be thus minded. Ask them, whether well-grown Saints are not there
called Perfect Ones; and yet, whether the most Perfect must yet be thus Minded,
as you Read before, Not as tho I were already Perfect. Ask them, whether Holy
David did not Cry out* Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant,
for in thy sight shall no Flesh Living be Justify,d. Quote 'em Eccl. 7.20.
There is not a Just man upon Earth, that does good and sins not. And Jam.
3.2^ In many things we offend all. And accept not of Quibbles for Answers to
such a plain Conviction. If they will yet make a Pother, Let loose Paul again
upon them. Let 'em hear the complaint of Paul, in Romans 7.19. The Good that I
would, I do not, but the Evil which I would not, that I do. Put 'em to it,
whether the Best of them, do not always make the same complaint; if they do not
then do you pass that Censure upon them, The Best of them is a Briar. The very
Best of them are Stark Naught. Let 'em also hear a Better man than the Best of
them, Exclaming, in Romans 7.24. O wretched man, that I am, who shall deliver me
from this Body of Death! Ask them whether we shall not have ^ Body of Death in
us, till, The Death of our Body? If any of them do pretend a full deliverance,
from the Wretchedness of that Body, say to them, That they are most Wretched
Bodies themselves, and under the Deadly power of that Body still. Enquire of
them whether Idle Words, Be not Sins: and Convince them that they have been
Guilty of several such in that little while that they have been talking with
you. If after all, they will say, They or any of their Friends, Have no Sin in
them, knock 'em with that Scripture, in 1. Joh^ 1.8. If we say we have no Sin,
we deceive ourselves, and the Truth is not in us. Tell them, That if they will
Deceive themselves, yet they shall not Deceive you; and so have done with them.

XII. Assert, That a Saint of God can not finally or totally fall away from the
Grace of God.
Let them Read (if they can do it) 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God, His
Seed remains in him. Ask them, whether the Seed of God, be not the Grace of
God, Received in Regeneration? If this can be utterly lost, ask them, How it
Remains? Ask them, whether those that are Converted, are not also Justified?
Let them know, That you think, They are; because Paul thought so, in Romans 8.30.
whom be called, them He also justified. Bu^ then let them tell you, whether
they that are once pardoned, are not ever so? or, turn them to Jer. 31* 34. I
will forgive their Iniquity, and remember their sin no more. But, if once men
fall into an Unconverted, they must then fall into an Vnjustify'd State again.
If you have leisure for it, make them feel the force of such Texts, as that, in
John 10.28. Neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand. Ask them, whether they
that are plucked out of a state of Grace, are not plucked out of our Lords
Hand? And that in 1 John 2.19. They went out from us* but they were not of us;
for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us. Ask
them, whether it be not now past all doubt that none who really are among the
Renewed, and Gracious People of God, can wholly go out from that Number?
Recommend unto their Consideration, the precious, Heart-melting, Mediatory
Prayer of our Lord Jesus, in Joh. 17.16, 20, 24. I pray that, thou should
keep them from the Evil; I pray for them that shall believe on me; Father I
will that they also, whom thou hust given me, be with me, where I am, that they
may behold my Glory. Ask them* whether all Saints were not concerned in this
Prayer; and whether this Prayer will not preserve them and their Grace from
being Lost for ever? See Luke 22.32. Finally, Ask them, from 1 Pet. 1.5.
Whether the Saints are not, Kept by the mighty power of God, through Faith unto
Salvation? If they object, That Peter or David fell so as to become utterly
Vnsanctify'd; never grant them That. Affirm* That the sudden prevalency of the
Flesh in David, or Peter, did not so Biass their Hearts, as that hereupon they
Habitually preferred the Creature above God; nor did they become Habitual
Unbelievers, As for David, he still went on in the ordinary course of Religion,
and if he had been, with Deliberation put upon it, he would still have chosen
God before the world. As for Peter, we are sure, His Faith failed not, in the
swoon of his perfidy. If they bring Instances of Apostasy, tell them they bring
but so many Instances of Hypocrisy. And if at last, they Bark, That the
Doctrine of Perseverance is an Enemy to Holiness, give ^em to see, That men are
for that, under never the less Obligation, but under the more Encouragement, to
work out their own Salvation. Show 'em that passage in Act. 27.24, 3^. Lo, God
has given thee all them that Sail with thee* Paul said to the Centurion, and to
the Soldiers, except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. Own also to
them, That tho a Saint may fall into very scandalous Evils, yet those Evils
will Eclipse his Evidences; nor can a man have the credit or comfort of a Saint
until such Evils be Repented of.. In fine, if they produce from Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
High Seize that may be fallen from; then from verse 9. prove, That these
High Seize are none of the Better Things, which Accompany Salvation.

XIII. Assert, That Baptism with Water, is an Ordinance of our Lord Jesus
Christ.
When once the Quakers have Bitten any, they are presently taken with an
Hydrophobie, so that they are marvellously afraid of the Water which our Lord
would have us to be Baptized with. But ask them, What Baptism, ou^ Lord meant,
when He gave that Order, in Mat. 2^.19. Go teach all Nations, Baptising them?
His Order is for our Duty; it is not our Duty to Baptize men spiritually,
although it be our Desire; only God can give the Spirit; and it is not our Sin
if our Hearers remain Unconverted still. Is it not an External Teaching which
our Lord has given us His Order for? And why not an External Baptism too? Ask
them, whether Paul would have thanked God, in 1 Cor. 1.14. that he Baptized so
few, if Spiritual Baptism had been his work. Ask them, whether all that the
Apostles Baptized, were certainly and inwardly Sanctified? Remember them, that
Simon Magus (...) of them; and is he a Saint among the Quakers? If Spiritual
Baptism is all that we are to look after, then every Believer is already
Baptized. And if so, what is the further Baptism which Believers are to be made
partakers of? Consult Mark 26.16. Act. 50.48. Act. 18 8. Ask them, whether the
Apostles did not Baptize with Water. Prove that they did, from Act. 8.38. They
both went down into the water, and he baptized him; and from Act. 10.47. Can
any man forbid water, that these should not be Baptized. And is not their
practice a sufficient Intimation of our Lords Precept, for Water Baptism? See
what they can say to this? Indeed some of the Quakers have answered unto it,
The Apostles knew not the mind of Christ. But if any of your Assailants be so
abominably Insolent, then tell them, That you will prefer the Judgment of One
Apostle, before the Arrogant Opinion of ten thousand Quakers; and so have done
with them. Do not, like the Witches, Renounce your Baptism, for any of their
persuasions.

If, to be further Troublesome, they Enquire, Wherefore you Baptize Infants?
Tell them, that our Lord always had in the World, a Catholic Church, which is
the Mystical Body of Christ; and that a Visible Saintship renders persons the
Visible Members of this Church. Tell them, that in the Days of the Old
Testament* the Infants of Believers were visible Members of (...) Church
Catholic; and that you will reckon the Infants of Believers to have the like
privilege in the Days of the New Testament until the Anabaptists can find
where our Lord Jesus has expressly cut them off; and that you cannot imagine the
Lord has now deprived the Infants of the Godly, of a privilege which they had
from the Beginning: for, either He must have done it, in Anger, or in Kindness;
not in Anger, because God has no new Controversy with our infants; ^ot in
Kindness, because it is a mercy unto our Infants to sustain this Relation. And
then tell them, That all Members of the Church are to be Baptized. Moreover,
Tell them, That holy Persons are to be Baptized: now, it is said, about the
Children of Believers, in 1 Cor. 7.14. They are holy. Finally, Tell them, They
that belong to the Kingdom of Heaven, are to be Baptized; now it is said, about
the Children of Believers, in Mat. 19.4. Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. And
show them from Act. 15.10. how our Lord graciously reckons our Children, his
own Disciples; now shall not his Disciples be Baptized?

XIV. Assert, That our usage of Bread and Wine, in the Sacrament of the Holy
Supper is an Appointment of our blessed Savior.
The (...) a worse thing, than pulling the Bre^^ out of our Mouths, when they
go to make us forego the Sacrament of the Supper; and whereas it is justly
stigmatized as a wicked Sacrilege for the Papists to cheat the common people
of the Wine in that Ordinance, when our Lord foreseeing it, expressly fo^^warned
it, saying, All of you drink you of i^: it is a more Diabolical Sacrilege that
these Robbers are to be charged with. Confute them, from 1 Cor. 11.23, 24. I
have Received of the Lord, that which also I Delivered unto you: This Do. Ask
them, whether our Supper of the Lord, were not a Command of the Lord? Is not a
sacred use of Bread and Wine in Church Assemblies pressed by the Apostle, as
Enjoined by the Lord Jesus? Will they now tell you, That it is an Ordinance
only for weak Believers? Then say, That you are one of Them, and will
accordingly observe it, though a Crew of Dead Heretics, will have no Communion
with it. And yet also say, That many of the Corinthians, to whom this Order was
given (as well as to us) were Enriched in all Knowledge, and were Justified,
Sanctified, Washed, and were united unto Christ, and were as able to see
through Shadows as any of the Quakers: nor when Adam was perfect in Paradise,
was he too high to use a Seal of Gods Covenant. And say, That Evangelical
Shadows of our Lords own Institution, are not Repealed, not (...); and that he
that shall Despise them, (...) not a spiritual Appearance of the Lord Jesus
Christ, but his being Revealed from heaven in flaming fire to take vengeance on
them. Turn them (...) 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as you eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye show forth the Lords Death till he come.

To this their, printed Answer is, We do not Read of another coming in the
Flesh, yet to be Expected. What, man* And not, in his Glorified Flesh? Did not
Job say, In my Flesh ^ shall see God, He shall stand at the Latter Day upon the
Earth! And yet did not Paul say* The Savior will come from Heaven, to make our
Vile Bodies like his Glorious Body! Jobs Body then will be Flesh, and so will
Christ's.

Reply upon them, That the whole New Testament assures you, of nothing more
tha^ of what the Angels Expressed, when they said, This same Jesus which is
taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as (...) have seen
him go into Heaven. If they do not look to see our Lord shortly coming in like
manner, or, in his Glorious yet Visible Humanity* tell them, They are the
Scoffers of the Last Day^ walking after their own Lusts. But show, That when
it was said, This, Do till our Lord come, it cannot mean the Spiritual coming of
our Lord* for so He was already come to the Corinthians* They were already
converted, and Joined unto the Lord. The^ (...) Christians, and the Quakers
dare not say, That Christ was not come in them. If they go on to call (...)
Holy Fellowship, in this Mystery, as Par^el (...), A Feeding upon the Husk,
tell them, they are Swine for saying so. And if they declare as Keith does,
that their Ordinary Meals are a Celebration of this Institution, tell them,
That men who pretend every Collation they have at a Loose Tavern to be as
Divine a thing as what we have at the Lords Tab^e, are as profane ^s the
Creatures who do not eat of the Childre^^ Bread.

XV. Assert, That the Bodies which we lay down at our Death, must Rise again,
at the end of the world.
When the Quakers come to you* with such Explications of the Resurrection, as
their ^ai^^r gives, when he says, The Heart is set free from Corruption, and
made able to escape the Pollutions of the world* and to run the ^ure Ways with
Del^gh^; which is the Glorious Liberty of the sons of God, the Resurrection
from the Dead; Or when the Quakers talk as they do in their Catechism, A man
has no Will, nor Wisdom, nor Reason left* in him, But all Baptized down into
the sufferings of Christ, -- and there the power Kills him, and gives him Life
again; and so man lays down his own life, and takes up Life in Christ in which
Life he comes to be Raised (...) Resurrection of Christ. If (...) to tell
plainly what (...) that is to rise again? they will probably say as they use to
do, Thou art one the Fools that Paul speaks of. But you may safely tell them,
That they are some of the Knaves that Paul speaks of; In 2. Tim 2.18. Who
concerning the Faith, have erred, saying, The Resurrection is past already; and
overthrow the Faith of some. And let them know, That your Faith shall not be
thus overthrown.

The Quakers will say, They own the Resurrection of the Dead; but be not ready
to trust them: for they use to come off with Allegorical Evasions, and some of
their greatest Heads, have, as Mr. Faldo says, confessed, That they did not
believe their Body should Rise again after Death. Confute them from the
fifteenth Chapter to the Corinthians. If they object, Flesh and Blood cannot
Inherit the Kingdom of God; Reply, It Is meant of Corruptible flesh and blood.
But say, That in the Resurrection, God will fetch a fitting portion of our Dust
out of the various matter which it has been dissolved and dispersed into, and
make it become Incorruptible. Say, That they may believe a Surrection, but they
deny a Resurrection, unless they look to have again, A Body, that shall be
substantially the same, with what we have now, though wonderfully altered for
qualities and accidents. If they object, As the Beast dies, so dies man, tell
them, a Beast must (...) be disputed with, and so bid them Farewell. One Turner
a Quaker, (as Mr. H^cks has quoted him) Raves at this rate, If the Bodies of
men Rise again* then there is a pre-eminence in the B^dies of men, above the
Bodies of Beasts; which is to give Solomon the Lie. Who but men Turned into
Bruits would argue thus? pray, take heed, Neighbors; they have got a
Lycanthr^py upon them.

XVI. Assert, That the First Day of the Week is by Divine Order, to be kept as
an Holy Sabbath to the Lord.
You may easily prove, That the most High God, at the Creation, did set apart,
a Seventh Day of Time, to be kept Holy unto Himself. You may prove it, from
Genesis 2.3. God Blessed the Seventh Day, and Sanctifi^d it. How did God Sanctify
such a Day, but by Appointing that it should be Kept Holy? The words will bear
no other sense. Nor is it a tolerable ^nterpretation, to say, That God
Sanctified such a Day, by only determining, that the little people of the Jews,
between two and three thousand years afterward, should Celebrate it. Yea* you
may prove, out of Mat. 24.20, That our Lord Jesus Christ Recommended the
Observation of a Sabbath unto his Disciples; a Sabbath to be kept, after the
Abrogation of the Mosaic Law, and after his own Ascension into Glory. Having
proved this; then go on to prove, That the First Day of the Week, on which our
Lord Rested from the work of Redemption by Him on Earth Engaged in, is by the
Divine Appointment become the Christian Sabbath. Our Lord lying in his Grave,
all the last day of the week, the Sabbath of that day was buried with him. You
may prove, out of Rev. 1.10. That there was in the Apostles Days, a particular
Day, well known by the Name of The Lords Day* All Antiquity demonstrates, That
this was, The First Day of the Week. Now, it could not be called, by way of
Eminency, The Lords Day, if it had not been Holy to the Lord* Compare Psalm.
118.24. It was the Day of our Lords Resurrection; it seems the Day of his
Ascension too; and this was indeed the Day, which our Lord still chose to grant
special Communion unto his Disciples on.

Yea, you may prove out of 1 Cor. 16.12. that we have an Apostolical Command
for Sanctifying the First Day of the Week as our Sabbath. Why did the Apo^^le
require Collections for the Saints, to be on the First Day of the Week? No
Reason can be given for it, if this were not the Christian Sabbath. Had the Day
been Indifferent, the Apostle would not have bidden us to have esteemed it
above other Days. You may also prove, out of Act. 20.7. That we have an
Apostolical Pattern, for so Sanctifying the First Day of the Week. Paul and the
Disciples with him, either kept the Seventh Day, or the First Day as a Sabbath;
but we find the First Day and that only, attended by them for Sabbath-Duties.
Finally, you may prove out of Ezekiel. 43.27. that the Eighth Day, or the Day
after the Seventh, was of old Prophesied to become the Christian Sabbath. 'Twas
Typify'd by the Solemnity on the Eighth Day of the Feast of Tabernacles. If
none of these things will satisfy them, give a Rest, unto the Disputation.

XVII. Thus have I been helping of you, to Assert many Truths of God; you shall
now give me leave to Assert one more before we part. I see cause to Assert,
That the Faithful Men, which receive and att^nd the care of your Souls, with a
solemn separation thereunto, are to be treated no otherwise than as the
Ministers of God among you. If any of them do prove scandalously and incurably
Unfaithful, it should be the Endeavor of their Neighbors, that they may be
removed from their Ministry. Yea, blessed be God, the Hunter of Souls never
sticks the Dart of any gross miscarriage, into the side of any one poor Heart
among us, but the whole Flock soon pushes him out of their company. And yet if
a Minister become an Apostate, you must not then have your minds Royled with an
Imagination, That all the Ministerial Acts of that man while he was yet a
secret stranger to the Grace of God, were null, and void; that the Sacraments
whereof this man was the Dispenser, were all invalid; or that the Conversions,
whereof this man was the Instrument, where all InInsincere. The Souls of
Believers must be distressed with Eternal Entanglements, if the Truth of either
Sacraments or Conversions depended on true Piety in the Heart of the Minister;
and to rescue the Hearts of Christians from such Distresses, is the Design of
our Declaring, How far Piety is Essential to a true Minister. It is this
Necessary Provision for the Everlasting Peace of Renewed Souls, (which never
can be safe, if it must wholly depend upon Grace in the Heart of a Minister,
that may afterward prove to be without Grace) It is this, I say, that makes
the most Infamous of Liars even George Keith, to Print this Exclamation, It is
no wonder that New England abounds with such Impious Ministers! But let me
freely say it, It is a Wonder of Divine Pa^ience, that the Earth can bear such
an Impious Liar on it. If some of our Ministers had none of the cleanest
Garments on, yet our Blessed Lord would now say to this Keith, The Lord Rebuke
thee, O Satan. But indeed, there is not that spot of Ground upon the face of
Gods Earth, which can proportionably match New England for Min^sters that not
only have and use all true P^e^y, but also are most Exemplary for it. No man
becomes a Minister in our Churches, till he first be a Communicant; and no man
becomes a Communicant, until he have been severely Examined about his
Regeneration as well as his Conversation. If any Minister do misbehave himself,
he soon hears of it, and becomes either a Penitent or a Deposed Man. Let this
wicked Shimei, find so much as one Ungodly Man, allowed as a Minister, in any
one of our Churches! or let him find but one that shall be half so bad as
himself, and I Will acknowledge him to be Better than ever I could yet acknowldge
him: Whereas I now do but reckon him, An Eminent Servant unto the accuser of
Brethren. In the mean time, I hope the young Scholars at the College, will be
so studious of an Unblemished youth, as that the Quakers afterward Charging
our Ministers with Impiety, may not be able to find so much as Old Follies of
youth to twit them with.

No, Neighbors, you are Blessed with Ministers that excel in piety; and you
are very unjust if you do not Support and Honor them. As for the Quakers you
may prove, even out of their own words, that there are, No true Ministers among
them at all. George Fox in his Mystery, denies any to be true Ministers, but
those that Can Witness an Immediate Call from God. As for us our call is
mediate; we know our Call from God, by the Call of his Church, which He
Qualifies and Enables us for the Answering of. The Apostles being Extraordinary
Officers had their call, Not of men Or by man; We that are Ordinary Officers,
have our Call By men tho not of men. The Quakers pretend, An Immediate
Apostolical Call, and as it is added they must have No Dwelling place; Now try
these False Apostles: Put 'em to Prove their Call. If they say, That They do
know it in themselves, ask 'em, How You shall know it; and until they can give
such a proof of their Call, as the Apostles did, you must say to them, Out of
thine own mouth, thou wicked Servant, Thou art no true Minister of Jesus
Christ* If this will not muzzle these Destroyers of our vines, (...) neither
passage from Fox, in his Mystery. Says he, How can ye be Ministers of the
Spirit, and not of the Letter if ye be not Infallible! Now if among all the
Quakers there were to be found, An Infallible man, that should be the man for
my money; I would part with all the little I have in the world, for one Days
talk with such a man; But until then, you are, it seems, by their own
allowance, so (...) more for them than for the Pope of Rome: if any of them
will be talking, presently try their Infallibility; and if they don't (which
you may stay long enough till they do) prove that, you may tell them, They are
at the best but Ministers of the Letter! and yet even so much is a Concession
too much, for such Unlettered holders-forth, as the most among them.

You may also give them to understand, that as None of their Speakers are True
Ministers, thus you can give some very particular Grounds (and good M^sculine
ones too) why their Women, who Speak so much at their Meetings, may not be
looked upon as Ministers. If you put 'em in mind of the Apostles Canon, In 1.
Cor. 14.34.35. Let your Women keep silence in your Churches, -- for it is a
shame for Women to speak in the Church; They will very Learnedly Indoctrinate
your Plumbeous Cerebrosities with telling you; That the Woman is the Flesh, and
that the Flesh has an Husband which is the Devil; if then you demand, whether
the Flesh is to ask the Devil, that he would instruct her in the principles of
Religion, they will be in a rage to find themselves entangled. But I am confident,
he would teach her just as Keith does his proselytes. In the mean time their
Patriarch Fox has got this further prodigious answer for you? The man may
speak, even Christ in the Male, and in the Female. But you may do well to tell
'em, That it is only for silly Women, led Captive by Knavish Foxes, and laden
with sins, to be satisfied with such an Answer. Query, Whether we should not
have as many Pope Joans in every Town, among the Quakers, as there are Authors
(and there are above threescore Popish Ones) that have handed us down the Story
of the Old One; if this would serve. Tell 'em also, That the only Excuse they
can have is, That they have no true Churches, nor any thing but mere Herdings
among them; and for that among other causes, Come not into their Secret, O my
Soul; unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou united! It is possible,
that some of you, or yours may be Enticed unto their Meetings by an Itch after
the New Things to be there me^ withal: but if I might advise you, have a care
how you go among them; for having the Itch already, you will not escape a more
dirty and spreading Scab among such a Drove. You had better say like them in
Neh. 10.39, We will not forsake the House of our God. It Is commonly pleaded,
That we are to Try all things; but this implies not that we are to Hear all
men. The Synagogues of Satan are not to be visited by unsettled and unstable
people, upon such a Notion* Will you put your hand into the Fire, to try
whether the fire be hot! No I have already told you, what is at their Meetings.
If after all you will be of the Gadding Tribe, and will venture in, it were
just that God should permit the Devil there to take possession of your Hearts:
the Devil may Pretend, as he did when he siez'd a Woman at a stage play, That
he finds you on his own ground? so that I cannot forbear calling upon you, in
the words of Moses, Depart, I pray you from the Tents of these wicked men, Lest
ye be consumed in all their sins.

In the mean time, you have Reason to be Thankful, for such Holy, Humble, Able,
Painful, and prayerful Minnisters as God has generally blessed these Churches
with: and I exhort you, as you would approve yourselves worthy to wear the Name
that was begun at Antioch, that you do not forget that Command of our Lord, in
Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for
they watch for your Souls. They gladly spend their Time, their Strength, and
their All, to Serve you, in your best Interests; and all the Discouragements
you give unto them, the Glorious Lord Jesus Christ in Heaven says, Ye did it
unto me! See Mat. 10.40. and Luke 10.16. The more that the Quakers call them as
William Pen has taught them, A cursed Stock of Hirelings, the more cause have
you to countenance them; and if they must be Dogs, yet the Sheep are Fools if
they part with them, because the Wolves call them so. To Preach for Hire, is a
vile thing; but for you to give Hire unto them that Preach, for what they do,
is but just; Has not our Lord said, in Luke 10.7. The Labourer is worthy of his
Hire? Does not Paul say, in 2 Cor. 11.8. I took wages? It is no easy
Employment, which they have Devoted themselves unto; But most of them can say
with him, I profess, were it not for the Belief of the Greatness and Necessity
and Excellency of the Truths I am to Preach, and for the will of God, and the
good of Souls, I would be a Plowman, rather than a Minister. If they are
Faithful, they deserve more than ever yet you did for them. Had they been
brought up to another Calling, or would they yet apply themselves to a meaner
Trade, they might Live as well as any of you. You owe them ^ Living, while they
are in their Warfare for you; and yet you see, none of them do Sue or Strain,
for any of the Dues which may be unjustly detained from them; the voluntary
Agreements and Disbursements of their Parishes is all that they hitherto
subsist upon. If they are prudently concerned about their Subsistence, it is
because they have Read that word, in 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for his
own, he is worse than an Infidel. And the Quakers are worse than Infidels, when
they clamor against a comfortable Provision for the Ministry: the worst of
Infidels do honorably maintain those that are set apart for the supposed
Service of their Souls. Do not think that your Ministers are more Burdens than
Blessings among you. No man that contributes Liberally toward the Maintenance
of the Ministry, finds himself at the years end, a penny the poorer for it; but
a secret Influence of Heaven prospers the Affairs of such a man: while they
that go to withhold more than is meet, prove but Penny wise, and Pound foolish,
at the last. Some little Towns in this Country, that have been at the most
considerable Expenses for their Ministry, are upon observation, the most
Thriving Towns in the Country; and the Israelites were but Enriched upon it,
when the Tribe of Levi, which was not a fortieth part of the people, had as
much Maintenance as Three of the Twelve Tribes beside. Pray consult, Mal. 3.9,
^0. Ye are cursed with a Curse, for ye have Robbed me. Let there be Meat in my
House, and prove me now herewith, if I do not pour them out a Blessing. The
Ministers of the New Testament, are as worthy Men, as those under the Old; and
yet if they might have a quarter part of what the Levites had, it would help
them to attend upon their work, without such Distraction in them, as is now too
often unprofitable to their Hearers. But if Moses took such care for his
Ministers, may we think that Jesus (the Son over His House) takes no care at
all for His? The Holy God will blast the Spirit, as well as the Estate of that
man, who shall not confess that a Portion of his Estate, more peculiarly
belongs unto the Lord; indeed, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is a Priest after the
Order of Melchisedeck, may well challenge those which Abraham owned as the
Rights of Melchisedeck; now, let the Ministers of our Lord Jesus, receive but
Half of those Rents, and it will more than satisfy them; yea, 'twill be upon
Experience found, That the Souls of them that are most Liberal this way, are
for Grace and Joy the Fattest, in the Congregation; God makes His Word most
useful to them that most Encourage it. But if after all, you will think, that
the Families of Ministers who wast their Lives for your Souls, must not have
Bread enough to keep Life and Soul together in them, or if those grievous
Wolves that Lead the Modern Heretics, must have a Muzzle clapped upon the Oxen
which Tread out the Corn; pray, contrive some honest way to get those Texts out
of the Bible; 1. Cor. 9.14. Even so has the Lord Ordained, That they which
Preach the Gospel, should Live of the Gospel; and Gal. 6.6. Let him that is
Taught in the Word, communicate unto him that Teaches, in all Good Things;
which give us as good a Title to our Livings, as any of you have to yours.

Thus have I briefly fetched from the Panoply of G^d, some of those Weapons,
which you may keep off the Quakers with. But when you have beaten them, every
other way, they will fall to Railing at the Country, for putting three or four
Quakers to Death, between thirty and forty years ago. Now for That, after you
have Disclaimed all Inclination to Persecution, you need only Quote three
Things unto them. First, Quote 'em the Laws which were then acted upon. The
Ge^neral Court therein expressly Recognize, That no Humane power is Lord over
the Faith and Consciences of men; but the Quarrel against the Quakers of those
Days, they Declare to be. Their Speaking and Writing Blasphemous Opinions;
Despising of Government, and the Order of God, in Church and Commonwealth: and
seeking to gain Proselytes unto their pernicious ways; and their Impetuous
Attempts to undermine our peace. Ask of them, whether one William Harris among
the Quakers, did not publish Writings against all Earthly Powers, Parliaments,
Laws, Charters, Magistrates, Princes, etc. Now this was the Spirit of the
Quakers which then suffered: and in my opinion the Quakers do not wisely now to
profess themselves of that party. The Government was then in its Infancy, and
finding that so little a thing as A^stray Swine, was then able to shake it, it
was no wonder, if it saw cause to make severe Laws against the Assaults and
Inroads of those more dangerous Beasts, which would certainly have broke up the
plantation, if they had not been some way Restrained. The Jesuits never
Undermined Old England more than the Quakers did New, in that Critical Time;
nor were Blasphemies ever so notorious, as theirs, when they would ordinarily
say to our people, We deny thy Christ! We Deny thy God, which thou call,
Father, Son, and Spirit: Thy Bible is the Word of the Devil, etc. Now, ask,
whether the Laws of England against both Jesuits and Blasphemies, are not far
more severe than any that ever were among us, against the Quakers? Next quote
'em a passage in a Vindication of New England from a certain Lying Address
lately Printed; where it is said, Of late, none has troubled the Quakers. These
Laws were but begun to be Executed, before the New-Englanders grew sensible of
their Error in making them; and of themselves, by disuse they died away, long
before their Charters were dis^^^bed. The very Quakers themselves, would say,
That if they had got into a corner of the world, and with an Immense Charge had
made a Wilderness Habitable, on purpose there to be Undisturbed, in the
Exercise of their Worship, they would never bear, to have New England men come
among them, and interrupt that Worship, and endeavor to seduce their Children
from it; yea, and Repeat such Endeavors, after mild Entreaties first, and then
just Banishments, to be gone. You must note, They had liberty to be gone, once
and again given them, after they were in the B^^ars; but they chose what they
had. They had the phrensy of the old Circumcellions, with worse Doctrine and
Error in them.

Lastly, Quote 'em the words of a manuscript which was written on that, and
shall be produced on this, Occasion. They are These, There is no man that is
justly possessed of House or Land, but He would Count it Unreasonably
Injurious, that another who, Has no Authority [and one likewise that had The
Plague upon him, whereby his Own Children and Servants might be Infected]
Should intrude into his House, without his Consent: yea, and when the Owner
does Expressly Forbid the same, If such an One should presume to enter into
Another Man's Habitation, He (...) justly be impleded As a Thief* and if in case
of such Violent Entry, the Owner should Se-def^ndendo, Slay the Assailant, his
Blood would be upon his own Head. May not the like be granted unto the Keepers
and Guardians of the Commonwealth?

Note, That the Rulers of this Country would have been glad of any Expedient
whereby to have kept these Quakers, in those Countries whence they came and
whither they had bin once or twice remanded. If after all, they will still
Clamor; tell them, That New England has Renounced whatever Laws are against a
Just Liberty of Conscience. And also tell them, That you are shy of their
stories; because because one of theirs, namely George Bishop [another George!
The Fable of Georges Fighting with Dragons, must give way to a real story of
Georges turned into Dragons, if this trade continue; and so many Keiths,
Whiteheads, Foxes, Bishops* and the like appear among us. I say, George Bishop]
relates in Print the Names of Two Quaker Women here that came stark naked into
our Assemblies; and he compl^^ns of the New England Persecution (...) cause
(...) Women [ Baggages, that ^hey (...)!] suffered Whipping by the Officers of
New England for it. Ask 'em whether this be the persecution they complain of?

But it is now Time to have done with them. Unless they have one Declaration
more to vex you; and that is for THEE and THOU, to be used in all our Language
to a Single Person. For this, you may tell them, what few of themselves ever
knew about it. You may tell them, That it was the General Custom of the old
Pagans as well as of the Old Christians ordinarily [ Tutoyer, as the French
have it, that is,] to THOU, and THEE, a single person. But that when the
Commonwealth of Rome was turned into a Kingdom and an Empire, and the power of
many came into one man's Hand, it grew common to treat Persons of Quality in the
plural Number with YOU; and so by degrees its descended unto all particular
Men. You may tell them, That Custom is the Master of Speech; and THOU in our
Discourse is upon the Matter as Indecent as, YOU has been in the Prayer of some
that have used it: and you want them, to show an Institution, for joining a
Nominative Case of the Second person to a Verb of the Third, which is usual
with them, when they say, Thou writes, thou Hears, and the like: Let them find
you a Scripture for it^ If they quarrel you, about The Hat, you may show them,
that the Saints throughout all Ages, denied not the Ceremonies of Civility to
their Neighbors; but the best thing that can be done with such Impertinencies,
is, To throw our Caps at them.

And now manum de Tabula. -- I shall now break off; and there is a passage in
the Quakers Catechism, which at last obliges me thereunto; page 94. Let none
Reason about us, for there [that is, in REASON] they can never know us, nor
come unto us. You see that if ever you come unto them, you must have No Reason
for it; and it is very true: You see also, that No Reason can find them out,
and therefore it is in vain to meddle any further with them. When I first looked
upon Quakerism, I may say, Fatuita^ Dogmatum me reddidit securum, I thought no
Fishes but silly Shrimps or P^outs could be taken with it; but alas, it is not
every Town in these Colonies, that has the privilege of Ipswich, where Quakers
that creep into many other places, find the Soil as disagreeable to them, as
the Serpents do in Ireland; I now see so many swallow the Hook, that some
Labors and Warnings for your preservation are loudly called for. And I have
this to say of it; It is among the Abominable Idolatries committed by the
Quakers, that their Apostle Fox in his Great Mystery, lashes out into such
words as these (as Mr. Faldo cites them) Thou makes a great pudder, that any
should witness, He is equal with God; Is not the Soul without Beginginning? it
is Infinite in it self, a part of God. As this one thing is enough to show the
wickedness of Quakerism; so the prevailing of Quakerism is enough to confute
the Thing; Souls* that can digest Quakerism sure have little of God in them:
they serve but as the Salt of the Flesh they live in; and have nothing
Infinite, but their madness. But I beseech you then, to Beware of Quakers and
of Quakerism. I entreat you to take heed, in the first place, of their
Heresies; and then of their Practices; especially the horrible want of Household
Piety, which they are noted for. I request you, therefore to profit under the
means of Grace, and receive the Truth in the Love of it, that you may not be
judicially given up to their strong Delusions. I Address you, in the words of
John, 1 Ep. 3.18, 26, Little Children, There are many Antichrists, whereby we
know that it is the the Last Time. These things have I written unto you,
concerning them that Seduce you. And in the words of Paul, 2 Timothy 3.13, 14.
Evil Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse; Deceiving and being Deceived.
But continue thou in the Things, which thou have Learned and been Assured of.
If ever you would see the Spirit of Antichrist, and of Deceiving, you may see
it in the Spirit of Quakerism. For my own part, I expect a world of Malice and
Railing from that Spirit which I have thus been Detecting of. When I was
preparing one of my Little Books for the Press, a Devil from the mouth of a
possessed person threatened me with much Disgrace for what I was about;
whereupon immediately, George Keith Printed a Ridiculous Pamphlet, on purpose
to Revile That very ^ook. But I have now more cause than ever, to look for all
sorts of Calumnies from George Keith and his Associates; especially, if Mr.
Cheiney have given them their true portraiture, when he says, For Pride and
Hypocrisy, and Hellish Reviling against the painful Ministers of Christ, I know
no people can match them; and if they should use the way, Mr. Hicks in his
Dialogue mentions, when he says, (and offers to prove it) One of your Friends,
meeting with a person that had writ against you, tells him, That if he did
write any more against them, they would Print any thing against him, that any
person would Report, be it what it would. If the Quakers want any Assistance
for the good work of adding to my Crown by their manifold Calumnies, Let 'em
call in all the Adversaries of New England for their help; they will all be so
charitable as to give it. And if Massachuset will not afford enough, let them
Travel to Connecticut, where they will doub^less find some Orlando Furioso that
will count it worth his while to ^yringe one Pamphlet after another, that they
may prove me an Imp^dent Youth. I have now run the venture of such a
Persecution; and I shall not swee^ away my short Life in endless Replies unto
those that resolve like the Scold, They will have the last word; but every
stone they throw at me, I will take and wear as a Pearl bestowed by my Glorious
Master, the Lord Jesus Christ, upon me; and if I may rescue any one poor Soul
from the Snares of Death, I shall count my self abundantly recompensed for all
that these can expose me to. As Jerome could say, Gratias ago Deo, quod Dignus
sum, quem mundus oderit: So I can truly say it, I bless God I have the Honor
to be by the Quakers buffeted and spit upon.

In sum, I have made these observations, upon the Quakerism, with which you
have now seen me Combating. I have observed, First, That places which have more
Eminently Sinned again the Light of the Gospel, are by the just Revenges of
God, most Smitten with that Spiritual Plague of Quakerism, which with a
pre^ence of Light Leads men into Perdition, as far as any Fools Fires can decoy
them. I have observed Next, That whereas it is the Tendency and Character of
every Truth, to, Abase the Creature; the main design of Quakerism is to Advance
and Exalt man; and to find that in man h^mself, which may be instead of
Savior, Scripture, Heaven, Righteousness, Ordinances, and all unto him. I have
Observed, Thirdly, That Quakerism has been a cunning Engine of Trade, which
will shortly fall; and as that falls, the whole I^religion will go out of the
World; Upon which it may be probably foretold, That ^he Days of prevailing
Quakerism may be Th^eescore Years and Te^; (...) reason of men's weakness, They
be Fourscore Years, yet the strength ^f it will then be wasted; it will be soon
(...) and Fly away. I have Observed, Fourthly, That while the Quakers do
abominably v^l^fy the undoubted Sacraments of our Lord Jesus Christ, they have
invented Sacraments of their own; Such as, THOU, and THEE, and* THE HAT; for
there must be Sacraments in the Kingdom of Darkness, as well as in the
Churches of our Lord. I have observed, Fifthly, That the Quakers in their
Disputations, do not love to be tied unto the Subject, of the Argument; but are
much for Digressions and Excursions; and especially such as may cast their
Antagonist into some Disadvantageous Passion; which plainly argues the Extreme
wretchedness of their cause. I have Observed, Sixthly, That the Quakers like
the Ancient Pharisees and Hypocrites Condemned by our Lord, will mightily
Applaud those that are Dead, and at the very same time spend whole volleys of
Curses upon the Living Saints, that are of the very same Creed and way. I have
observed, Seventhly, That he who has to do with the Quakers, has to do with
almost all the Heretics that ever appeared upon the stage; only with this
Difference, that former Heretics have had some Reason and these have nothing
but Clamor with them. Lastly, I have Observed, [and when I have Observed That,
I will have done observing; for the^ are not Stars in a Telescope, but M^^es in
a Microscope, which I thus Observe.] That in the Quakers and the Papists are
fulfilled some of the Signs, that the Coming of our Lord is at hand: while the
Papists do in their Transubstantiation, as in Mat. 24.26. say, Behold, Christ
is in the secret Chambers; which may be Rendered, in the Cupboards, (where they
put Bread:) The Quakers do bid us Look for Christ here and there in themselves;
(...) they do in Effect every one make himself a Christ; and they add, Behold
he is in the Desert; Go to Pensylvania, an American Desert, and you shall find
Him there. But the Coming of our Lord will shortly put an end unto these
Dotages. Amen.

Let the Lord Jesus come! In the mean time, As Doctor Holland when he took his
Leave of his Friends, would say, Commendo vos omnes Dilectioni Dei, and odio
Papatus; thus you must give me Leave to take this Leave of you* I commend you
to the Love of God, and the Dislike of Quakerism. Let none of you say to me, as
they did unto Moses of old, Who made thee a Judge over us? For I am so fa^ from
denying (as the no less Uncivil than Unchristian Quakers do, when they count
the Title of Mr. too good for the best men they know, or see) My Neighbors to
have C^^^mand over me; as that the utmost which I pretend in this Freedom with
you is to be,

Among the Meanest, and yet among the truest of your Servants, COTTON MATHER.
Sept. 1. 1691,
In aljis Mansuetus ero, at in Blasphem^ contra Christum ^on it (...) Zuing.

