AT A General COURT Held at Charlstown by Adjournment. Feb. 12th 1689/90.
THis Court taking into their serious Consideration the many Calls of God's
Providence upon his People, to be much and often in solemn manner imploring his
Favor; and having by Experience found it good to draw nigh to God, who will be
sought to by the House of Israel, Do therefore Recommend to the earnest
Supplications of all that fear God, the common Interest of the Protestant
Religion in the World, which has so many potent Adversaries; as also the
Accomplishment of such Scripture-Prophesies, as seem to be near the birth, and
must be ushered in with Prayer. More specially the present state of our own
Nation, with their Allies; that the Wars in Ireland may have a good issue; that
all Animosities amongst God's People may be removed, and their hearts united;
that King William and Queen Mary may have their Throne Established, and be made
great Blessings: That Peace and Truth may flourish in those Kingdoms under
their happy Conduct.

The Condition also of the Land we live in, which is under many awful Frowns of
God; That He will pardon the Sins that have so provoked Him; that He will
reform and heal us; that He will preserve us from the Rage of our Heathen
Enemies; that He will improve and prosper us in winning the Natives of the
Country, to the saving Knowledge and Obedience of the only True God; that so
there may be One Fold, and One Shepherd: That He will guard us against Foreign
Invasion; take away the prevailing and mortal Distempers of the Fever and Small
Pox. That He will provide for us a Settlement of our Liberties, giving us to
that end, Favor with our Sovereign: Defeating all Enterprises against us:
Preserving and giving good success to our Agents: affording Direction in the
management of all our arduous Affairs: That He will uphold our Churches, bless
our Seed-time and Harvest: that there may be no Famine of Bread, nor of Hearing
the Words of the Lord.

Now that all Persons, in their several Places; Ministers and People, may with
the more Intenseness and Solemnity apply themselves, to so great and seasonable
a Duty: This Court does Appoint the sixth of March next, to be Observed as a
Day of Public Prayer and Fasting throughout this Jurisdiction; Hereby
Forbidding all Servile Labor thereon.

By the COURT, Isaac Addington, Secr'.


