A Christian Epistle TO FRIENDS In General Of weighty Concern, for their
present and future Peace and Safety from the Soul's Adversary's subtle Devices
and Snares of DEATH.

To be carefully Communicated to the Children of Light, and Professors thereof
every where.

Being faithfully given forth, and Recommended from the Spirit of Christ; By
his Servant, George Whitehead.

Matthew 26.41. Watch and Pray -- Praying always --

Ephesians. 6.18. With all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit -- And watching
thereunto with all Perseverance.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at Philadelphia, 1691.

A Christian Epistle to Friends in General, etc.
Dear and Tenderly Beloved Friends, and Called of God every where;
IN a real and deep sense of my Heavenly Fathers Love and tender Mercy,
revealed through his most dear Son, our ever blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, which I am (with many more) livingly made a partaker of, does my Life
and Spirit very dearly and tenderly salute you, as truly and most heartily
wishing and praying, that divine Grace, Mercy and Peace, with all Spiritual
Blessings and Divine Favors in Christ Jesus, may be increased and multiplied
among you, and unto you, to your great Consolation, Peace and Prosperity in the
Love of God.

Dear Friends, I finding for some time of late a living and holy constraint and
pressure of Spirit to communicate some things of weight and concern unto you,
respecting your Safety, Peace and Prosperity in the blessed unchangeable Truth,
am opened and encouraged by the precious Life and Spirit of our God, to be
clear and free therein toward you all, and that in discharge of my tender
Conscience in the sight and presence of the God of my Life, whom I serve with
my Spirit in the Gospel of his dear Son, as I have sincerely done from my Youth
upward, blessed be his pure Name forever. And having had these many Years
experience in the weighty Servce of the Lord our God, through manifold
Exercises, Burdens, Spiritual Travels and Oppositions, I may not hide my
Talent, nor conceal those things my Lord and Master requires me to divulge for
the Safety and Good of his People in their several Conditions, States and
Attainment, as ha^ing long and truly seen the goodness of the Lord in the Land
of the Living, and the good and blessed Estate of his chosen and faithful Ones;
for which I praise the Name of the Lord (...) Redemer, in whom I have believed,
through his divine Goodness, never to be forgotten by any of us; as a (...)
being (...) ignorant of, or unacquainted with the many Wiles, various Workings
and Depths of Satan, the great Adversary of man's Felicity, and of the Peace of
God^s People, who works upon the diverse Inclinations, mutable Affections,
Wills, Weaknesses and Infirmities of the Sons of Men, to deceive, pervert,
deprave and corrupt them, that they may the more eeasily be led captive by him
at his Will, in their following their own unsubjected Wills and Spirits. You
therefore (my dear Friends) who have livingly felt, and tasted of the Lord's
Power and Goodness, and known his Work in your Hearts, in order to your
Deliverance and Redemption out of the Evil World, and the Corruptions thereof,
prize his tender Mercies and Goodness, and forget them not: Let the holy fear
of the Lord God be your Treasure and true Wisdom, and Understanding, the
Stability of your times in Righteousness: Let your sincere Love to the pure
Name and Truth of the Lord, and one unto another be continued in that
unchangeable Truth and Power of an Endless Life, whereunto the Lord has called
us; and I pray God increase your Love and Zeal for his Glorious Name and
Christian Tenderness, and Brotherly Affection one toward another, that Life
for evermore may be your Blessing and Portion, as it will be to all them who
dwell in Amity, true Love, and Unity of Spirit in our Lord Jesus Christ, which
is a most joyful, comfortable and blessed state, which too many Professors of
Truth are short of, for want of keeping near to the Lord, in his holy fear and
Love of his blessed Name and Truth, whose negligence and unfaithfulness to
Truth in themselves has caused a decay of Love, and want of Charity toward
others; and then instead of humbly waiting and depending upon the Lord, some
have exalted themselves in a Self-will, Self-conceit and Affection to
pre-eminence in Judgment over others, until thereby Divisions and
Self-separations have been caused and stirred up by them, to the great grief of
the Spirits of the upright, who have kept their Integrity to the Lord, his
Truth and People. And this Self-Exaltation, slighting and contemning others,
have been, and are the great Evils, Snares and Engines wherewith the Adversary
catches (...) that never were thoroughly subjected into true Humility,
Mortification, true Self-denial, or dying with Christ; such, though under
Profession of ^^uth, may make a great show and flourish for a time in outward
appearance, Leaves and Blossoms, yet they bring not forth Fruit unto
perfection, or ripeness in Christ. Therefore beware of Self-exaltation, beware
of an Earthly Spirit entering, beware of Covetousness, which is Idolatry: Let
not the Earth interpose betwixt any of your Souls, and the brightness of that
divine Glory which has appeared even in our Day and Times.

Spiritual Gifts may be lost, or fallen short of, if the Fountain of them, the
holy Spirit of Life it self, be not diligently minded and followed; and where
Love toward God and his Truth decays in any, their love toward his Servants
and People grows cold, and then their Gifts decrease and dye, as the Life of
them is withdrawn or departed from, or that L^ve lost which is the more
excellent way; for If I want Charity (or Love) I am nothing. What Gifts,
Openings, Discoveries, Visions, Revelations, Wisdom, Knowledge or Understanding
soever any have, yet still it is the heavenly Root must bear them, they must
keep low their Minds and Spirits to that from whence Life and Love springs, or
else they fail, wither, dye and become empty, uncharitable and hard-hearted;
and there the Enemy has his Evil Ends upon them, in betraying them, and
corrupting their minds (...) the Truth, from Life, from Love, from the
Innocence (...) Simplicity which is in Christ, the Way, the Truth and the Life;
and there is a danger in being too early and forward to censure and judge
others, and in judging, censuring and undervaluing others Gifts, Ministry and
Labors whom God has called into his Work and Service; for some thereby may
either lose their own Gifts, Life and Strength, or fall short of those heavenly
Gifts, which otherwi^e they might attain to, if they kept low and tender in
Humility, and Society with their Brethren, whereby they might also be
serviceable with them: For I have seen in my time some who never passed through
Judgment in themselves, yet very censorious, judging, detracting and whispering
against their Brethren, slighting them, their Ministry and Labors* who
themselves have greatly lost by it; and God in displeasure has suffered them
to discover their own weakness and nakedness, for their own abasement under the
righteous Judgment of Truth. And it is evident from this kind of exalted
censorious, whispering and envious Spirit (which works not for Love and
Union) have proceeded the several Divisions, Schisms and Seperations which have
happened, to the great trouble of the Church of Christ in our days, as in the
Primitive Christians days; And the several sorts of Apostates and Backsliders
from Truth, show what, and what kind and manner of Spirit they went and go out
in, by their Works and Fruits, whether in a Spirit of Pride and Ambition, in a
Spirit of Envy and Hypocrisy, in a scornful contemning Spirit, in a covetous
earthly Spirit, in a loose profane Spirit or in a drunken debauched Spirit of
Ranterism and fleshly Liberty, which come all from one evil Root and Seed,
according to the various corrupt Inclinations and Wills of Men, upon which the
Enemy works and appears with Baits and Temptations suitable thereunto, that he
may prevail the more. And it is certain, that the envious Apostates, and wilful
Adversaries were the most troublesome to the Primitive Churches of Christ and
his holy Apostles in their day, and so in ours. Therefore blessed and truly
happy are they that keep their Habitations in the Truth and love of God, and
live in Christian Love and Charity one toward another; for such walk in the
Light, where there is no occasion of stumbling, or scandal. And as 'twas
Evidence unto the Primitive Christians, that they were passed from Death to
Life, because they loved the Brethren, and that they had purified their Souls
through their Obedience of the holy Spirit unto unfeigned Love of the Brethren,
Even so now the same Evidence and Testimony remains and lives in and for all
them that dwell in the Love of God one toward another: For all Envy,
Prejudice, Back-bitings, Whisperings, Tale-carrying, Lying, Heats, Passions,
Provocations, Reviling, Railing, Clamours, Scorn, Contempt, Ill Language,
Flattery and Hypocrisy, are to be utterly put away, avoided, judged,
condemned, and forever excluded the Camp of God, for they proceed from the
false and degenerate (...), evil Seed and Spirit, and not from the true Seed
(...) is Innocent, and hurts no body by Word or Action, in Person, Name,
Reputation or Property, for that is tender in (...) these things: For false
Reports, Whisprings, Back-biti^^ and Tale-carrying cause Strife and Division,
and are condemned by the Law of God and Light of Christ, and expressly forbidden
by God himself, (...) not be as one that carries Tales up and down among my
People: Thou shall not receive a false Tale, nor raise a false Report against
the Lord's People, nor do his Prophets or Servants any harm. And all who
profess the Truth, or make mention of the Name of the Lord among us, ought to
watch over their own Spirits, Wills and Passions, and have a care of hurting
one another, or crushing any tender Spirit or Plant, or stopping or quenchig
any Spirituaal Gift or Testimony God has given, how little or low soever it may
be, or seem; for some or a tender Spirit are sooner hurt and wounded, than
healed. All keep in Christian Humility, Meekness, Patience, Gentleness, and
Tender heartedness one toward another. And Elders and Overseers in the
Churches of Christ must be Examples of Believers, both in Humility, Meekness,
Patience and Condescension, as Christian Patterns; and not self-willed, nor
soon angry, nor given to Passion, Striving, Heats or Contention: Such Christian
Examples and Behavior in the House and Church of the living God, tends greatly
to keep out and prevent Contentions, and contentious Spirits, and to the
comfort and encouragement of the upright-hearted, who are willing to serve the
Lord, his Truth and people.

My dear Friends, the Lord our God has been good to us, a tender Father through
all our Trials, Sufferings and Exercises, in upholding us by his free Spirit,
accompanying us with his presence, comforting us in our Afflictions, with his
renewed Mercies and multiplied Favors, in preserving us a living people to his
praise until this day, and affording us this present Liberty we have of late
enjoyed, and do partake of the benefit and advantage thereof, in our public,
peaceable and Religious Assemblies, for the Exaltation of the glorious Name,
holy Truth, and divine Power of the Lord our God. Wherefore we have great cause
to prize his tender Mercies and Goodness to us, and walk humbly under the sense
thereof, that a right use and improvement may be made of all the Mercies and
Privileges we do enjoy, and such a good use of the present Liberty, as that
none grow careless or negligent, indifferent or lukewarm because thereof, nor
any to sit down at ease in the Flesh, or in the Earth, and therein promise
themselves security from further Sufferings or Trials, because of the late
present enjoyment of liberty and ease from Persecution: This is on good use of
the present Mercy, nor safe Conclusion, for God has many ways to try his
people, and National Calamities and Distresses (whereof his own people
sometimes partake) are not at an end, nor the Judgments (incurred by Iniquity)
tur^ed away, because of the continued Provocations, Wickedness, Rebe^^ions
against God, their Abominations, Pride, Hypocrisies, Deceits, Falsehood and
Presumption abounding in this and other profess^ng Nations against the great
and righteous God, the Judge of all, who is so long sparing and forbearing, as
he is to (...) Nation, merely for his small Remnant and Seed's sake, which is
already gathered, and to be gathered.

Yet the great God will distress Nations, and cause the Earth to tremble before
him, and Overturnings and Desolations in the Earth before Calamities are ended,
or Christ's peaceable Kingdom be set up more generally in the Earth, or where
as yet it is opposed and resisted^ For the cause why Wars, Desolations, and the
devouring Sword are already in great Judgment entered so many Nations and
Countries, is because of the Crying Sins, Great Provocations, Persecutions and
Cruelties in the dark Places of the Earth.

And dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters, whom I truly love in the Lord, who
retain your Integrity and Love in the blessed unchangeable Truth, you cannot be
unsensible how that the Lords Harvest is great, and what need of faithful
Laborers there now is, an effectual Door being open in this time of Liberty,
the Lord in Mercy has granted for the good of many poor Souls, that they may
come and receive the Truth in the love of it; and that they who have been or
are of a fearful Heart, may receive strength, and know the Lord to be their
Savior and Redeemer, in this his Evangelical Day, and free and blessed
opportunity he has afforded. And yet though this Harvest be great, the diligent
and faithful Laborers are but few now raised up in Comparison of the greatness
of the Harvest, and necessity of the Work, many of our ancient Brethren, and
faithful Fellow Laborers and Helpers in Christ, being taken away, and gone to
their everlasting Rest, having faithfully served out their Day and Generation,
fulfilled and finished their Testimony with Joy and Peace, and obtained a Crown
of Glory, that shall never fade away.

And this very matter has been often seriously upon my Thoughts, and weighty
Considerations, What should be the Cause or Reason why so few faithful
Laborers, and clear Gospel Ministers have been of late raised up, or now
brought forth? (though some be in a good lively Testimony, blessed be the Lord)
and it clearly appears to me; First, That few are given up in their Spirits for
this weighty Service (as we were in the beginning) who are in some measure
gifted and qualified.

2 dly, Few sincerely seek the Lord, or have waited upon him with fervent
Desires, Prayer and Supplication, that they may be gi^t^d, endued and qualified
with Power, Wisdom, Faith, Patience, etc. for the Work of the Ministry of
Christ Jesus; whereas if any man want Wisdom, he should ask it of God, and he
shall not miss of a gracious Answer, to the desire of his Soul, who sin^^rely
asks, seeks and knocks at Wisdoms Gate. Whatsoever ye ask in my Name (says
Christ) believe that ye shall receive it, and it shall be given you. You know
Solomon's Request to the Lord, for an understanding Heart, to discern Judgment,
his choice of Wisdom, rather than Riches, or long Life, how it pleased God, 1
Kings 3.10.

Thirdly, Very few have their Minds and Spirits really and inwardly exercised
in frequent Prayer, and daily Supplication to God, or in heavenly Meditation,
or Spiritual Contemplation in Gods pure and spiritual Laws, Ways, Judgments
and Works, or in holy Scriptures, by the holy Spirit, which opens them, but too
many have their Minds, Hearts and Affections taken up with these fading
Objects, and Things below, minding Earthly Things, or overcharged with the
love of Riches, Cares and Cumbers of this Life, to compass the Earth, wherein
many a good Talent has been hid, and poor Soul buried in Captivity: Whereas it
requires an inward and serious Exercise of Spirit toward God, frequent and
fervent Prayer and Supplication to him, an inward and diligent Attention upon
him* who is the Giver of every good and Perfect Gift, to obtain both divine
Wisdom, and a weighty living clear Evangelical Ministry. For it is the
sanctified Hearts and Souls, who truly fear God, into whom only Wisdom en^ret^,
and m^keth them Friends of God, and Prophets. The Lord will have an inward,
spiritual, sincere and zealous People. Oh! inward Watchfulness, Prayer and
Supplication to Almighty God have been, and are too much neglected by many; I
pray God they may seriously examine, and find out the true Causes in themselves
with the Light of Christ Jesus, and bring all to the Righteous Judgment thereof.

Fourthly, If any of the Younger sort, who are in some mea^ure endued with
spiritual Gifts and Knowledge, do let up a slight and dis-esteem in their Minds
of their elder Brethren, who are experienced in the Work and Service of God,
and keep not in Society or Union with them, in the spirit of Love, and of a
sound Mind, but give way unto a singularity, abounding in their own sense, not
keeping low and humble before the Lord, nor little in their own Eyes; such
neither grow in Life, nor in divine Openings, nor increase in their Gifts, nor
come to attain to a weighty clear Evangelical Ministry and Service, but rather
loose dye and wither, unless they come into true Humility, Self-denial,
Reconciliation, Love and Union with their Elder faithful Brethren, who in the
Love of God would tenderly help them, and not hinder them in the Work and
Service of the Lord our God.

It is both a great Grief and Scandal also to see many of the Younger sort, who
frequent our Meetings, and even of Friends Children also, degenerating into
Pride, and height of Spirit, and Apparel, so nearly to imitate and border upon
the World, as too to many do, contrary to the Gravity, Modesty, Sobriety,
Plainness, Simplicity, Innocence and Humility, which Truth requires in Example,
as well as in Spirit, and which Truth at first led many into, and as still it
does lead and order them that truly love and obey it: In which I pray God to
settle and order his People, and that no plea nor excuse may be made to
maintain Pride, Va^ity or Immodesty in Apparel, which only gratifies vain airy
Minds and Spirits, and the Lust of the carnal Eve, and grieves the Tender, and
gives occasion of Reproach and (...) to them that are without, and to such as
are soberly and religiously inclined. Oh! it is precious to keep low and humble
before the Lord, and to walk as living Examples of Christian ^umility; A Lowly
Mind i^ content with low things, and loves Plainness And this is observeable,
that if never so much be truly and sincerely preached in Public against Pride
and Vanity in Apparel, etc. if it be indulged or connived at at home in
Children or Young Persons, by Parents, Guardians or Overseers, all Preaching,
Instruction and Warning proves to them but as Water spilt upon the Ground, and
takes no Impression, whilst through such Encouragement and Indulgence at home,
they embrace a spirit of Pride and Irreverence toward God, and disregard to
his Truth and People; and though some Formality, and something of the form of
Truth they may have by outward Education, it is not by the Work of Regeneration,
for it is but few in comparison, that really come in at That Door; and therefore
I have had often a godly fear upon me of the springing up of degenerate Plants
amongst us, and a degenerate Generation to the Dishonor of Truth, and our holy
Profession, after our days. And its they who are inclining and getting into
the Spirit of the World, and Liberty out of the Truth, who live not in
Humility, nor in the fear of God, that give secret strength to an Apostate
Turbulent Spirit, which has been the Churches Exercise of late Years, and that
are most easily catched with that Apostate Spirit, and feigned Words of the
Instruments thereof, whose Work is to sow Discord, and make Divisions, Schisms
and Seperations (which are F^ui^s of the Flesh) for if all had been faithful to
the Light, and kept in Humility and Love of Truth, and one another, ^here had
been no Enmity one toward another, nor smiting of fe^low Servants, but the
fear of God wou^d have preserved them out of those Snares of Death, which that
Spirit of Discord leads into. Howbeit, I am well satisfied i^ the Lord, that he
will never suffer a general o^ final Apostasy or Degeneration; the Brightness
of our Day, and Glory of our Sun of Righteousness shall never be extinguished:
Although too many, through the Adversary's subtilty and Temptations, together
with their own carnal and corrupt Inclinations, are apt to degenerate, and
their Minds to be exalted and alienated from the the Fear of God, from the
Cross of Christ, from Humility and Lowliness of Mind, from True and
Conscientious Tenderness, from Love to the Brethren, from Innocence, Plainness,
and Simplicity that is in Christ, both in their Spirits, Language and Habits,
who therefore ought to be faithfully admonished, and tenderly instructed, by
which means (together with a meek and gentle Behavior) many have been gained,
and many may yet be recovered out of the Snares of Satan, who have been taken
Captive at Unawares; Having Compassion of some, making a Difference, has often
reached the tender part in them; and in relation to others more deeply
prejudiced, I remember a cautious Saying of an Ancient and Faithful Brother
deceased, viz. Where we cannot make them Better, we must take heed we do not
make them Worse. The Lord keep his People in his holy Fear, watchful and humble
before him, in true Love and tender Heartedness, that they may receive Wisdom
from him to behave themselves, and to minister suitable to all Conditions.

And all Dear and Tenderly Beloved Friends, with all who are effectually
convinced of Gods holy Truth and Name, and do profess the same: In the holy
Fear of God, in his Light Watch and Pray constantly (without fainting) against
your Souls subtle Adversary, in all his Attempts, to beget into Self-exaltation
and Prejudice, to smite Fellow Servants, and cause Divisions or Offenses; for
that is the Enemy's Work.

And Friends, have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of
Persons: This was Ancient and Christian Counsel. So let not the Rich and High
contemn the Low and Mean; let not uncertain Riches puff any up, or exalt them
above their Brethren: Nor any Brother of high Degree (in Earthly Enjoyments)
slight or contemn their Brethren of low Degree; some sincere hearted and
serviceable Friends and Brethren have enjoyed plenty of the World's Goods, and
yet through Losses, Sufferings, Disappointments, or other's Unjust Dealings by
them, are brought low in the World, and they were esteemed when in Prosperity.
It would be very Unchristian and Sinful, to slight or dis-esteem them in their
Adversity, which is their Trial: The Poor of this World, who are rich in Faith,
whom God has chosen, are near unto him, their Faith is the more tried by their
Poverty and Lownes; and how soon That may be the Trial of many that are Rich,
they know not; therefore it is very unsafe for any to trust in Uncertain Riches,
or to be exalted or lifted up because of them, but rather humbly to depend upon
the living God, and trust in him, and love and esteem their Brethren in Truth,
how mean and low soever in this World, knowing that with God there is no
Respect of Persons, nor with them that truly bear his Image.

And pray, Friends, keep out all Disputes and Controversies which some busy
Spirits in the World are incident unto, as about outward Revolutions,
Governments, State Affairs, and Kingdoms of this World: Let not their Divisions
divide you, nor their Strife and Contentions about the outward Court and forms
of Religion, earthly Kingdoms and Crowns (that will fade) influence any among
you, to contend, or become Parties about them, but quietly serve and wait upon
God in your Places and Stations, where he has set you, and submissively leave
all to his overruling Power, Wisdom and Providence, to do or suffer things to
come to pass, as he pleases; for none may say to him, What do thou? (Though
Men, by men may be warned, as God shall require) and he knows what is best for
his People, and will cause all things to work together for good to them that
love him; his Kingdom come more and more, his blessed Will be done in Heaven
and Earth, who is Judge of all, and sees all Hearts, Intents and Designs of Men
throughout the whole World. And you know, that as we cannot make Flesh our Arm,
nor therewith fight for one or another, Stillness and Quietness, Innocence and
Good Will toward all Men, according to our Christian Principle, is therefore
the best and safest State and Condition, wherein we all may approve our se^ves
as the Lords hidden Ones, and of them that are quiet in the Land* be still, and
know that the Lord is God, and that he will be exalted in his Everlasting
Kingdom and Dominion, over all the Kingdoms of Men: Neither let the Worlds
Co^^^sions confound you, nor the Worlds Distractions distract you, or (...),
nor the removing of Mountains in the Earth, (...) the Lords Mountain, nor the
unstable Waters or tossing Waves toss you, or influence any of you, to
discompose or harrey you from your peaceable Habitations, but k^^p in your
strong Hold, your Rock and Foundation, Christ Jesus, (...) any thing divert you
from minding his Kingdom of Peace above all, which is not of this World, out of
which men's Lusts, and the ground and occasion of Wars, and Fighting are
excluded: For in Salem is his Tabernacle.

Oh! let all quietly wait upon the All-seeing Righteous Holy God, to see his
good End through all, and his Righteous Determination and Decision of the
Controversies amongst men: And keep in Innocence and peaceable Conversation
toward all, and Inoffensively under, and toward the Civil Government, giving
no real occasion of Offense, but as becomes true Christians, walk in Love and
Good Will toward all, both high and low; for herein has been, and will be our
Safety and Confidence through all our Trials, being preserved by the Power and
Goodness of the Lord our God, as his Peculiar People, who is our Stay, our Rock
and Refuge, blessed be his Name forever. Oh! forget not to praise the Lord for
all his tender Mercies and peculiar Favors and Goodness in our Preservation
until this day, knowing also, that they who sincerely and steadfastly trust in
his Name and Power, shall be as Mount Sion, that shall never be removed, and
that as his Servant David declared, It is better to trust in the Lord, than to
put Confidence in Man: It is better to trust in the Lord than to put Confidence
in Princes, Psalm. 118.8, 9. I pray God keep all his People in a steady
Dependence upon Him, and Confidence in Him to the End.

Finally, My tenderly beloved Friends and Brethren, having thus far cleared my
Conscience in the light of God, in the living sense of his Presence and Counsel
in these Matters, as (...) to several States and Dangers, I recommend all to
the Faithful and true Witness in themselves, to make the particular and (...)
Application, and to make every one sensible of the weight and lively
Impressions of these and all other Christian Cautions and Warnings, proceeding
from thence through any of the Servants of Christ, for the Safety and Peace of
all the Lords People among us, even to the least and lowest of his Flock, and
those convinced among us, who are called by his Grace to the Confession of his
holy Name and Truth.

The God of Peace be with you all, and bless you, and increase Righteousness,
Peace, Love and Union among his People every where, that all may be steadfast in
the Truth, true and faithful in their Day and Time, to the end of their Days;
Amen, Amen.

Your faithful Friend and Brother in Christ, George Whitehead.

THE END.

