Mr. Cotton Mather opposed by a Son of the Church.
Sir,
I Have seen your Invitation to the Lords Supper, and am grieved to see the
Sacraments so much wronged.

Denying the Sacraments to be Converting Ordinances is a very undoing wrong
unto the Sacraments, and this wrong men must do unto the Sacraments before they
can be Quakers, and when men have fully learned to do this wrong unto the
Sacraments; then they are (I think) more than Semi-quakers, and are in danger
to slight, neglect, and lay aside Sacraments and Scripture too; and then the
best thing that they have to hold unto is the Light within, the work of the Law
written in the hearts of Heathens that have no Scripture, Romans 2. 15.

The ancient Doctrine of the Church teaches, that an In^^^^ in Baptism is made
a Member of Christ, the Child of God, and an (...) the Kingdom of Heaven: If
you believed this Doctrine, then you would never deny Baptism to be a
Converting Ordinance; Or if you believed that an Infant by Baptism is Converted
from being no Member to be (...) Member of the Church (which is the Body of
Christ) then you would never deny Baptism to be a Converting Ordinance: And we
have the more reason to acknowledge Baptism to be a Converting Ordinance,
because it very much brings Intents under more means of further Conversion: for
it brings them under the care and oversight of the Church and Church Members,
that they may be Trained up in the knowledge and fear of God: Again, we have yet
further reason to acknowledge Baptism to be a Converting Ordinance, because the
sense and meaning of Baptism is the New Testament, which calls and obliges
all to repent and believe that they may be saved.

Denying the sense and meaning of Baptism to be the New Testament, and putting
false forces upon Baptism, and denying of Church Membership to be (...) Baptism
are three very undoing wrongs to Baptism: for they make Baptism to signify
nothing at all really, and make it of no effect, and to be very unprofitable
and in vain.

And denying the true sense and meaning of the Lords Supper and putting false
senses upon it, are very undoing wrongs to the Lords Supper, and make the Table
of the Lord very unprofitable, and contemptible.

Christ calls the Lords Supper his body and his blood, and the New Testament
in his blood; and I think it may with as good reason be so called as the letter
of the New Testament may be called the New Testament: for as the sense and
meaning of the Letter is the New Testament, so the sense and meaning of the
Lords Supper is the body and blood of Christ, and the New Testament in the
blood of Christ: Therefore I thus argue.

The New Testament in the blood of Christ is a converting Ordinance. But the
Lords Supper is the New Testament in the blood of Christ: Therefore the Lords
Supper is a converting Ordinance.

Obj. Why then should not the Lords Supper be Administered to all?

A. 1. Seeing you deny that Christ died for all, I wonder that you should make
any such Objection: for if Christ never died for all then it is impossible for
us to Administer the Lords Supper (or Baptism either) unto any without rendering
them false Witnesses or uncertain and fallible Signs, which is a most horrible
wrong to the name and credit of the Sacraments, and is such horrible profaning
and villifying of them as (I think) is worse then letting them alone as Quakers
and many others do: And if such as deny that Christ died for all do receive the
Lords Supper, I doubt they will do it with such a remembrance of Christ as will
not be for the better but for the worse.

2. If Christ died for all, and the Sacraments be converting Ordinances of any
means tending to conversion, these arguments considered together with the large
extent of Christ's commission ( in Math. 28, 19, 20.) Would be Argument
sufficient for administering the Sacraments unto all, if we had no rule left us
by Christ for some restraint of our administration of them; but it is well
known that we have rule and reason enough for some restraint of our
Administration of them, that the Whole Church may not be corrupted by suffering
of Dangerous Persons in it.

But I do not believe that Christ ever died for any in the Arminian sense, nor
in New England sense neither, and yet I do believe that Christ died for all,
and in what sense I do believe it, and upon what grounds, you may see in the
Explications unto which this Letter is prefixed.

Denying that Christ died for all is a very undoing wrong to Sacraments and
Scripture too, and it is of dreadful dangerous (...) as will further appear by
the aforesaid Explications.

You say baptism is to signify our inocculation into the Lord Jesus Christ, and
our Obligation to serve and fight under him; but the Lords Supper is to
signify our participation in all the saving benefits of our Lord Jesus, and
our augmentation in our conformity and obedience to him; and you speak of a
baptismal Vow: And I think these Notions have been received by many worthy men
before you; but I think they are very dark, unprofitable, and dangerous Notions
which have crept into the Church in times of great darkness, and serve for no
better end, than to make the Sacraments false Witnesses, or uncertain and
fallible signs, which is a most horrible wrong to the name and credit of the
Sacraments, and is such profaning and villifying of them as is worse then
letting them alone as Quakers and many others do.

The Sacraments do signify the death of Christ, and the New Testament in the
blood of Christ, whereby w^^^ obliged to believe and obey the Gospel; but it is
dangerous error (...) make them signify that we do believe and obey the Gospel:
And I believe that an outward inocculation, or incorporating into the Church
(which is the body of Christ) is effected by outward Baptism; but I think it
improper and unsafe to say this inocculation is signified by baptism.

And in the Lords Supper, our remembrance therein of the body and blood of
Christ, and of the New Testament in the blood of Christ, and Church Communion,
and Church Discipline, all these are benefits by the Lords Supper; but I think
it improper and unsafe to say that these benefits are signified by the Lords
Supper. You say baptism signifies our obligation to serve and fight under
Christ; and if by [our obligation] you mean the New Testament in the blood of
Christ, then we agree very well, but by [our obligation] I doubt you mean
something else, and I think it dangerous for us to make the Sacraments signify
any more or any less than the body and blood of Christ, and the New Testament
in the blood of Christ: we must not add nor diminish.

You grant that such as have not saving faith may and ought to come unto Christ
and God in Christ; And will you not grant that such as have not saving faith
may and ought to come to the Lords Supper? Do you make more of the Lords Supper
then you do of Christ and God in Christ? if you do, then you Idolize the Lords
Supper as much or more then Papists do. And yet (as aforesaid) you make the
Sacraments false, (...), or unceryain and fallible signs; And yet you cry (...)
up (...) very high privileges and such as none but true believers have any
(...) (is not this (...) doings.)

Many say true Believers have a right to the Ordinances: I cannot tell and it
may be themselves cannot very well tell what right they mean, and the use of
the word [right] in this matter is not only very unnecessary, but may be of
dangerous consequence, if all may and ought to be subject and obedient to all
the commands and Ordinances of the Gospel, then it may be granted that all have
a right to be subject and obedient to all the commands and Ordinances of the
Gospel; but it is such a right as is seldom or never intended by the word
[right] as it is commonly used amongst men, and the best right that any have to
all the commands and Ordinances of the Gospel, is they may and ought to be
subject and obedient unto them: therefore it is much planer and safer to say
all may and ought to be subject and obedient to all the commands and Ordinances
of the Gospel, then it is for to say all or any have a right to all the
commands and Ordinances of the Gospel.

You teach men to think that the Sacraments are no means tending to Conversion;
therefore no means tending to Salvation, and then we need not wonder if they
slight, neglect, and lay aside the Sacraments, when you have made it so
difficult for any to know whether they may and ought to come to the Lords
Supper or no; and when you have made them to think it is much safer for them to
let it alone, than it is for them to come to it.

The Sacraments are undone so many ways by such as seem to be the greatest
Saints in the World, that we need not wonder that so many slight, neglect, and
lay aside Sacraments and Scripture too, and cry up the Light within for the
best Light in the World.

No Ordinance can convert unless God work together with it, but the Lords
Supper is a very apt means for God to work conversion by, imputing men in
remembrance of the body and blood of Christ, and of the New Testament in the
Blood of Christ Crucified for them: And all that are under the Gospel may and
ought to go unto and wait upon God in Christ for Grace, mercy and salvation in
a way of subjection and obedience to all the commands and Ordinances of the
Gospel so far as they can through that assistance which God of his Free grace
is pleased to afford unto them; and none may hinder any from being subject and
obedient to any Command or Ordinance of the Gospel, so far as they can through
that assistance which God of his free grace is pleased to afford unto them
(except in such case wherein they have an express warrant, from the Word of God
so to do) but according to the Doctrine of your Invitation, I know not who can
come to the Lords Supper without sinful presumption of doubting whether he may
and ought to come to it, and he that doubts is damned if he eat, Romans 14.23.
And I think your work about the Lords Supper, and Baptism, and the Death of
Christ is very much Antitemple-work, and very dangerously tends to undo all the
Churches of Christ in the World and to make Antitemples and Quakers.

The sense and meaning of the Sacraments, and the ends unto which they tend,
are all so good, and so profitable, and so necessary that Quakers would be in
love with the Sacraments; if Ministers of your persuasion did not so undo the
Sacraments, and make them seem good for nothing but to set Christians together
by the Ears.

I am willing to be as plain as I can that all the world may thoroughly
understand what I hold; but you keep what you hold in very great darkness, as
if you were not willing that any should thoroughly understand what you hold.

I hold that God made Adam in a very happy Estate, and this great happiness lay
in this, that he was under a Law of active obedience unto God, he was under a
Law of works; do and live, and if he had continued so doing, his so doing would
have been very acceptable and well-pleasing unto God, and would have been
rewarded with eternal Life. But Adam by sin fell utterly from this happy
estate, and from being under this Law of works, do and live; and then nothing
that he could do would be acceptable and well-pleasing unto God: Therefore the
Law required nothing of him but passive obedience, thou shall die, and he must
have died eternally if Christ had not died for him. Therefore Christ died for
him and bought him with his own blood, and placed him again under a Law of
active obedience, under the Law of Faith (that is) under the Gospel: or else
Adam had never any more been under any law of active obedience any more than a
bruit is: Therefore if any will say that Christ never died for the Non-Elect,
they had as good say in plain terms, that all the Non-Elect are in the (...)
that Adam would have been in if Christ had never died for him, and that all the
Non-Elect are no more under any Law of active obedience than a bruit is, and
therefore no more under the Gospel than a bruit is.

You do not plainly (...) the beginning (...) you hold, but you seem to hold.

1. That Christ never died for the Non-Elect.

2. That all the Non-Elect are in the same condition that Adam would have been
in if Christ had never died for him, and that all the Non-Elect are no more
under any law of active obedience then a bruit is, and therefore no more under
the Gospel then a bruit is.

3. That it is no duty for the Non-Elect to believe and obey the Gospel.

4. That not believing and not obeying the Gospel is no sin in the Non-Elect.

5. That God will never Damn any for not believing and not obeying the Gospel.

For all these dangerous errors hold together as so many links of a chain that
cannot be broken: Therefore whosoever they are that do hold any one link of
this chain, they do consequentially hold the whole chain and every link of it,
although for some other reasons many of them may be in such difficulty about
them that they will not grant that they do hold them all; but they can never
well clear themselves from holding them all without condemning themselves for
denying that Christ died for all; neither can they ever well answer any that do
hold them all without condemning themselves for denying that Christ died for
all.

I hold that Christ and God in Christ and by Christ bought all fallen mankind
that he might (without wrong to that Law in Genesis 2. 17.) make them the subjects
of all that grace and good which he freely willed to bestow upon them, and he
freely willed to bestow common grace upon all, and special grace upon some, and
both these are from mere free grace and unmerited love, and that God bestows
more of either of these upon some, then upon others, is from the mere
free grace and unmerited love of God.

You seem to hold that all good is merited and a debt due from God unto all
those for whom Christ died; and hence it follows that you cannot tell how to
avoid granting Universal Salvation without denying that Christ died for all;
and this is the best reason you can give for your undoing of the plain literal
sense of so many Scriptures which plainly show that Christ died for all, and
this is the best reason you can give for your undoing of the Sacraments, as
aforesaid; and your undoing these things very dangerously tends to undo all the
Churches of Christ in the world, and to make Antitemples and Quakers, and to
b^ing all at last, to mere Heathenism,

It is (says one) an ominous and a dangerous thing for a man undertaking a
long Journey to mistake (...). As he must needs go wrong all the (...) so the
further he goes, still the farther out of the way.

They seem to be out of love with (...) and in love with Fundamental error; but
I think you and many others are wavering and halting in very much darkness and
difficulty between them both for want of a full and clear understanding of them
both: And that you may have a full and clear understanding of them both,
Explications of them both are very necessary. Court and Country are much lead
by their Ministers in matters of Religion: Therefore let their Ministers take
heed how they lead, lest at last they be found the principal undoers of the
Country.

The people of New England are now brought very low by the Hand of God against
them, and that they may know before they are undone, wherefore God is
contending with them, it is necessary that they have Explications of
Fundamental Truth and Fundamental Error. The Lord awaken them to consider such
Explications, that they may thoroughly understand the goodness of Fundamental
Truth, and the evil of Fundamental Error; and then they will easily understand
wherefore God is (...) contending, with them.

The more Fundamental Truth is Explicated, the more the goodness of it appears,
that it may be loved and embraced by all: And the more Fundamental Error is
Explicated, the more the evil of it appears, that it may be hated and rejected
by all. Therefore full and clear Explications of Fundamental Truth and
Fundamental Error are both of them very necessary.

If I am out of love with Fundamental Truth, and in love with Fundamental
Error; then let me have Explications whereby I may thoroughly understand the
goodness of Fundamental Truth, and the evil of Fundamental Error; lest God
require my Blood at your hands: And let all the People of New England have such
Explications, lest God require their blood at your hands; for they are in great
danger to be undone for want of such Explications.

The sense, consequences, grounds, and other arguments of fundamental truth are
all good: And the sense, consequences, grounds and other arguments of
fundamental error are all bad: And full and clear Explications of fundamental
truth, (...) consequences, grounds and other arguments of it, to be (...): And
full and clear Explications of fundamental error will show the force,
consequences, grounds and other arguments of it, to (...) they really are all
bad. Therefore (...) as are out of love with fundamental truth, and in love
with fundamental error will be (...) Explications: Therefore I shall not wonder
if such be (...) of against the following brief Explications:

But before I come to the Explications, I would say further: That the English
Nation now is in a very desperate dangerous Condition, and it is almost undone
already with undoing wrongs done unto the Sacraments so cunningly that almost
none can tell what they are, and where I am it is dangerous for any to labor
to discover them; but if they are not discovered, they will certainly undo the
English Nation: Therefore for the discovery of them, I have adventured this
Letter and the following brief Explications.

FINIS

