SOME Reasons and Causes OF THE Late Separation That has come to pass at
Philadelphia betwixt us, called by some the Separate Meeting, And Others that
meet apart from us.

More particularly opened to Vindicate and Clear us and our Testimony in that
respect, viz. That the Separation lies at their Door, and They (and not We)
are justly chargeable with it.

WITH An Apology for the present Publication of these Things.

Romans 16.17. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them.

1 Timothy 6.3. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness, etc. v.5. from such turn away.

2 Cor. 6.14. Be ye not unequally yoked together with Unbelievers, etc. and v
17. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, etc.

Rev. 2.20. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou
suffer that Woman Jezabel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to Teach,
etc.

An Apology for the present Publication of these Things.
WE are sorry that we should have occasion to publish such Account of things,
in the open View of all, who may read the following Account, or hear of it,
that may be occasion of Grief to many, especially who had better Thoughts of
some here-away, than the said Account does give of them; and it is too
probable, the Enemies of Truth and of all true Religion, will seek to take
Advantage there from, and think themselves greatly gratified thereby, so as to
rejoice the more in their Iniquity, and glory over the sincere Lovers and
Professors of Truth. But as on the one hand, we have been deeply afflicted with
sorrow to find some so highly pretending to Truth, and to the inward and
immediate Teachings and Leadings of the Spirit of Truth, which they have
greatly professed, and some of them have preached for some Years, so very
ignorant and unsound in some of the chief and Fundamental Principles of the
Christian Faith and Doctrine, and so resolute and confident in their Ignorance
and Error, that they have from time to time refused and rejected good and
seasonable Information, and means of Instruction, that have been in love held
forth unto them, partly in public Testimonies, and partly in private Meetings
^^d Conferences. So after our great and deep Affliction of Sorrow o^ their
account, and for the sake of many simple People that owned them as Ministers of
Christ, whom we saw to be greatly hurt, blinded and darkened with them, but not
further enlightened by means of them, notwithstanding of their great and high
pretenses to Light and Life, and to the Spirit and Power of God inwardly
revealed, we can and do sincerely say, on the other hand, God has greatly
comforted us, and we have great joy and consolation in the sense of his Love,
revealed and sealed to us by his holy Spirit in our hearts, being persuaded by
the same, that according to his Sovereign Wisdom, Goodness and Power, and great
Faithfulness, he will make these very things, to wit, the Discoveries that some
men have lately given of themselves, to work for good to many; and we may
sincerely and uprightly say, They, and not We, have discovered and made Public
these things; for when they heard true and sound Doctrine preached, concerning
Christ and the true Faith in him, etc. they have whispered against it, and
publicly rejected it, which yet has been greatly refreshing and edifying to
us, and to many others, having ^elt the Power of Christ accompanying that
Doctrine, and sealing to the Truth of it in our hearts; so that not only we
have owned and do own the Doctrine that has been preached among us, of late
Times, by diverse that God has raised up in a zealous Testimony to the Truth of
these things ( Denied by some, and Rejected by others, and meanly esteemed by
too many, as not Necessary, but Indifferent matters to Salvation, to be
believed, though true) but also, we have owned, and do own the Spirit by which
that Doctrine has been zealously delivered unto us, being persuaded, it was of
God; and we do not judge so rashly and uncharitably as some do, calling that
sincere and godly Zeal, that has appeared in some among us in public
Testimonies, Anger and Passion: But it is no new thing to hear Light called
Darkness, as well as Darkness called Light, and Good Evil, and Evil Good; we
believe, and are persuaded, that as to the main, it has been and is a sincere
godly Zeal, that has been of Gods raising in some of our Brethren, both to
preach in public Testimonies this Doctrine, so much of late contradicted by
some, and slighted by others, and to defend it with great freedom and boldness
in private Conferences and Meetings, and at some Monthly Meetings,
notwi^hstanding of what humane Weaknesses (as to Circumstances) might at times,
on great Provocations, attend some, that we believe God has forgiven, which
have been far greater on their side, than on (...), wherein some of them have
exceeded all bounds of Christian Moderation, to the pronouncing Dreadful Wo^s
against the Innocent (which none of us have done) and giving bad Names to such
who did not deserve it; thus putting the Sheep of Christ into Wolves and Bears
Skins, to render them odious, and to be the Object of Tongue and Heart
Persecution, which too much abounds in this part of the World, although by the
Mercy of God, and the good Laws of the Country, Persecution by Violence of the
Hands, is restrained.

Now that these men have been the Discoverers of their own Ignorance, Error and
Unbelief, is very apparent, because they not only dared to whisper against
found Doctrine in private, but openly in Meetings appointed to hear these
Differences, and even at Monthly Meetings, they have been so bold as to resist
found Doctrine, and show their Unbelief; and the Nature of our Meetings being
such, especially our Monthly Meetings, that too many come to them and sit in
them, hearing all things there (...), that are not qualified, either with
Christian Knowledge or Prudence, or indeed with humane Discretion, as men, to
conceal things that are not always seasonable to be published, insomuch that
scarce any thing has been said or done in a Monthly Meeting for a long time
past, but it is soon after publicly known: And we desire to reverence the
Providence of God, and to acknowledge his powerful Hand, Wisdom and Goodness,
and great faithfulness in this Discovery; for we are well satisfied it is far
better that the hidden things of Esau be searched and found out, than to remain
hid; for when Achan had Transgressed in the Camp of Israel, and had hid the
accursed thing, the Anger of the Lord was kindled against them until he was
discovered, and Judgment executed against him. And seeing it is so, that many
evil and hurtful Opinions, that are as poisonous Weeds, have had too much place
among us, but have so secretly lurked under Ground, and yet have brought forth
bad Fruit above Ground; for it is the Nature of Errors in Doctrine, to produce
Errors of Practice, and evil Conversation of Life, that we did not know that
such bad Fruits did spring from such bad Principles of Doctrine that were held
by them, but we did rather impu^e them to some other Cause, than to Ignorance
or Error in Judgment. We have great cause to rejoice and bless God that his
Light has made this Discovery among us; for the Light discovers Darkness, as
well of Error and Unbelief, in relation to Doctrine, as in matters of bad
Conversation; and we are fully persuaded, that it is an infallible sign of that
approaching Glory of Gods blessed Day that is more abundantly to be revealed
among us, and in us, which many of our faithful Friends have foretold, as nigh
at hand, and all the faithful have much longed and wai^ed for, and continually
pray for. And it will have a service to bring many to Truth, that have stood at
a distance, because of Offenses and Stumbling Blocks that have been laid in
their way, through the Ignorance of many, especially who have professed the
Truth with us, after some sort, but have not received the true and sound
Knowledge of it; and too many that have presumed to preach and pray in our
Meetings, their way both of preaching and praying has been very offensive to
many tenderhearted People, by their pretending greatly to the Spirits Leadings
and Movings, when they have expressed very unsound and unsavory words, and
have greatly discovered their unskillfullness in the Mystery of Christ, both
outwardly as he came in the Flesh, dyed and rose again, and is ascended, and
the great benefit of his outward Coming to men, as so known and believed by
them, and as inwardly revealed; so that many who have come to our Meetings have
been as a hungery Child that greatly needed the Breast, and thirsted for the
sincere Milk of the Word, having heard a great Noise of it, but when they came
to suck they did not find that which answered their desire, and went away
dis-satisfied, and the Breast it self was so daubed over with what was
unpleasant to them, as Mustard or (...) Sout is to the Mouth or Taste of a
sucking Child. But God having so ordered it by his great Love, that by his
mavelous Providence discovering these things, that has been a long and great
hurt and hinderance to the prevailing of Truth among u^, and causing his Light
to spring up more clearly among us, that Christ and the Faith of him, both
without us and within us, is sincerely and powerfully preached by some of Gods
raising up among us, more clearly and fully than many have formerly known,
although the Doctrine is the same in matter and substance, that the most
faithful and soundest Friends and Brethren have all along held from the
beginning; and we are infallibly assured, this present Exercise that is at
present so heavy and grievous to many honest hearted for want of a through
disce^ning and understanding the Mind and Counsel of God therein, and his
blessed Purpose, for the Advancement of his Truth shall greatly ^end to their
Comfort in due Time, and to the Comfort of many, to raise them up to give Glory
to God, with high Praises in their Hearts and Mouthe^, for what he has begun
to do, and will finish and perfect in his own time, for the Exaltation of his
own Name, and the Name of his dear Son, that the Mystery of him, even that
great Mystery of Godliness, which is Christ come in the Flesh, and God manifest
in the Flesh, even in that Body of Flesh, through Death to re^oncile us unto
God, with the blessed Effects and Fruits of it, inwardly witnessed by the
Revelation of him in us, may be yet more gloriously revealed, that the Souls
and Hearts of many may be affected with the same, and overcome therewith, to
love him, and live to him, who dyed for them, and ^ose again, and to love God,
and live to God through him, in all holy (...), who gave him freely unto them.
And though the Adversaries of Truth may for a small time rejoice a little, and
seem to be gra^ified and strengthened in their Enmity against Truth, and the
sincere Lovers and Professors of it, so as even to seem to glory over the^, yet
after a little time their joy will be turned into sorrow, and their great
glorying and seeming gratifyings, into Discontents and Fret^ings, when they
shall be made to see and acknowledge the Hand of the Lord in all these things
(to their great Amazement and Disappointment) for the good of all that love
him, and the Exaltation of his Name, and promoting Truth and Righteousness in
the Earth, that his Kingdom may come in greater Power and Glory, and his Will
may be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. And as for all such who are, by a
(...) Spirit, acted to Prophecy false things concerning us (and to pronounce
Woes against us) and our present Work and Testimony, as if both it and we
should fall and come to nothing (as some have done) our Faith and Trust is in
God, and our Dependence and Relyance is on him, whose we are, and whom we
serve, and for whose Glory and Honor we are zealously concerned in this
present Service, with true Humility of Mind, and earnest Prayer unto God, that
he will preserve and strengthen us to the end, and make our Almond Rods to bud
and blossom, while others that resist the Truth of our Testimony will wither;
for of a Truth, God is with us, and on our side, whose blessed Power and
Presence we feel, to encourage and strengthen us; and therefore let such who
gain-^ay the Truth of our Testimony, and from a rash, headstrong and wilful
Spirit, make opposition to the same, take heed what they do, lest they be found
Fighters against God (for what is of God will stand, let ever so many high and
bold Pretenders to that which they are not real Possessors, contradict it) and
lest that be fullfilled concerning them, that is written, Acts 13.41. Behold,
ye Despisers, and wonder and perish, for I work a Work in your Days, a Work
which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you, compared
with Hab. 1.5.

And further, the false Reports and Rumors that are already spread abroad
concerning us, by many, laying all fault upon us of this present Breach and
Division, and loading, not only us, but the Truth it self with many false and
bitter Aspertions, Reflections and (...), will be cause enough (we hope, to all
impartial People to whose (...) this shall come) to be a just Apology to us,
for the Vindication of Truth, and the sincere Doctrine of Christ, that is
greatly reviled in diverse great and weighty particulars, particularly the
Doctrine of Christ's being in Heaven in the true Nature of Man, and Substance of
the Seed of Abraham and David, which he took o^ the Virgin, according to which
he is called the Seed of the Woman that should bruise the Head of the Serpent,
and which was promised to man immediately after the Fall, and the Faith of him
and in him, as such, its being necessary to our perfect Justification and
Salvation: His Co^ing again and Appearing without us to judge the Quick and the
Dead, in the appointed Time that approaches; and the Resurrection of the Dead,
and Day of Judgment, when all Mankind shall stand before the Son of Man; it is
dreadful and astonishing to think what Vomit and Filth some of late have cast
out against these precious Doctrines and Testimonies of Truth, some ca^^ing
them Popery, some Presbyterian and Baptists Principles; but we must not reject
all that either Papists, or Presbyterians, or Baptists profess in words, and
which our Charity obliges us to judge, that some among them really and
sincerely believe, as that there is one God and one Lord Jesus Christ, and one
holy Spirit, and many other good and wholesome parts of Christian Doctrine; but
the greater is the Shame, and the Offense and stumbling Block is the greater,
in the way of many, that diverse plain and first Principles of Christ's Doctrine,
owned by all Christendom, or at least, for the most part, should be either
denied or questioned by any among us, that make so high Pretenses to the Spirit
of Christ, and yet are so ignorant of the Doctrine of Christ, whereas the
Spirit of Christ leads all who have it, to believe and own Chri^^s Doctrine,
and honorably and worthily to esteem of it, and the true Witnesses of it,
where ever it is preached.

And concerning Christ's Coming and Appearance without us, even the Man Christ
Jesus, in his glorified Nature and Body, that is not the Godhead, but the
Temple of it, in the Time appointed, that is (...) at hand than many are aware
of, which will be (...) dreadful to (...) the Workers of Iniquity, and
especially to all Unbelievers that do not believe that he will ever so appear,
although the Scripture Testimony is very full and plain thereto, and will be
very refreshing and ^ull of (...) to all that believe in him, and believe and
wait for him, that he wi^^ so appear, and that the time ha^te^eth, We (...)
all, not to (...) of it, for it is a great and necessary Doctrine of the
Christ^^^ (...), highly conducing to true Christian Piety and Godliness, that
he will come again and appear without us, to judge the Quick and the Dead, lest
they be found among such, and numbered with them, concerning whom he spoke,
with relation to that very time when he should so come to raise the Dead and
judge the World, Luke 18.8. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, shall he
find Faith on the Earth?

Some Reasons and Causes of the late Separation here at Philadelphia.
THe first Cause of the Separation betwixt them and us, was this, That at a
Monthly Meeting held at Philadelphia the 29th of the 11th Month last, T. --
having openly in the face of the Meeting accused G. K. for denying the
Sufficiency of the Light, and promising to bring his Evidence the next Monthly
Meeting, or then that he would acknowledge he had done amiss; And at the next
Monthly Meeting being required to give his Evidence, he brought W -- who was
known to be a prejudiced Person against G. K. and so could be no sufficient
Evidence agianst him, besides that, diverse were present at the Place and Time,
where and when W -- alleged he heard G.K. deny the Sufficiency of the Light,
etc. that cleared him, That they heard him both t^en and at all occasions, that
he delivered his Mind on that Subject alway^s bear ^estimony to the Sufficiency
of the Light to Salvation. And at the said Meeting, being the 26th of the 12
Month, T -- having said in the Meeting, (in answer to a Question put to him by
G. K.) That he had not learned that Less^n, whether the Body of Christ that was
nai^ed to the C^oss, crucified, buried, rose and ascended, etc. was the
Godhead, or somewhat that Christ took of the Virgin; At which many were
greatly offended to find him so ignorant, having been so long a Preacher. And
after much discourse about these matters, the Meeti^g did adjourn with
unanimous Co^se^t of them that staid, which was the far greatest part, and also
with the consent of T. -- himself, and these who went away before the
adjourning of it, said nothing against it, nor was the Meeting understood to be
broke up before the adjournment, only some few did go away, it being cold
Weather, and growing dark; the adjou^ning of the said Monthly Meeting was to
the next day about the eighth hour, at which time they me^ i^ the Schoolhouse,
where the Meeting used to be kept at tim^s in the Winter Season. And after much
discourse concerning T -- in the (...) Meeting, he being required to prove his
Charge, and to condem^ his (...) Ignorance and Unbelief; but refusing to do
either (though he said publicly in the Meeting, If he did not prove his Charge
against the next Monthly Meeting, he would acknowledge his Error, and yet did
neither) and going away from the Meeting, the Friends of ^he Meeting (some that
were present that were not in the Profession of Truth, removing at the desire
of Friends) did give a unanimous judgment conce^ning T -- A true Copy whereof
hereafter follows. And the said Judgment being desired by Friends that gave
it to be recorded in the Monthly Meeting Book, at the next Quarterly Meeting,
that happened within a few days after, a Party in the Meeting did withstand
it* and denied them that gave the Judgment to be a true Monthly Meeting, and
consequently their Judgment was void. And by this it plainly appears, the
Breach was on their side; for there is no Equity or Reason why they having
denied us to be a Meeting, that we should own them, seeing we were really a
Meeting, lawfully adjourned, consisting of at least Sixty Persons, most of
which used to keep Monthly Meetings, and owned to be Friends in the same
Profession with them.

And at the same Monthly Meeting on the sixth Day, W -- an ancient Preacher,
having renewed his former Accusation against G.K. charging him openly in the
face of the Meeting, That he preached Two Christ's, because he preached Faith in
Christ within, and in Christ without us, etc. and on the next day, at the
Meeting adjourned, he being sent for by the Meeting, to make his Charge good,
or else condemn his Ignorance and Error, but he refusing to come, the Meeting
did also give a unanimous Judgment concerning him (not one dissenting in either
of the Judgments, only one or two signifying their not thoroughly understanding
the case, declared their unclearness, but said nothing against it) the true
Copy whereof does also hereafter follow. And this Judgment also given b^ the
Meeting, being refused by a Party in the Quarterly Meeting to let it be entered
in the Monthly Meeting Book, gave us just Offense, because in so doing they
refused us to be a Monthly Meeting, and denied our Judgment, which we are
persuaded in our Consciences, by the Spirit of Truth, was a just Judgment
concerning these men, and we could do no less, both for the Peace of our
Consciences, and the honor of Christ Jesus, and also for the credit of our
Profession, in all parts of the World, where such a Profession is made, than to
give such a Judgment concerning these Men. [ Note, That G. K. ha^ no hand in
giving Judgment concerning these Persons and Matters, but was wholly (...) b^ing
the Person accused* And also, Note, that t^^y watch re^^sed our Judgments, were
present at the said (...), but when they perceived things to go contrary to
their Mind, they withdrew.]

Another thing wherein the said Party, both in the Quarterly and Monthly
Meeting gave us Offense, was, That whereas great Opposition had been made by
them against a late printed ^ook, entitled, The Christian Faith of the People
of God called Quakers in Rhode Island, vindicated, etc. several Friends
presented to this Meeting a Paper, desi^^^g the Meeting to be cautious not to
oppose the Rhode Island Friends Testimony to the Truth; whereupon, after having
read and duly considered the said Rhode Island Sheet, judgment was given by
us, approving it, and W. B. for printing it, but this also was refused by them
to be recorded in the Monthly Meeting Book, wherein they have given a
Threefold Instance that they have denied us to be a Meeting. A Practice that
we never knew before among the People ca^^ed Quakers, that ever such a thing
was suf^^red, that one party of a Monthly Meeting should deny their Brethren,
and leave them, and yet afterward lay claim to them, when they themselves made
the Separation.

Here follows a true Copy of the Judgments given at the Monthly Meeting held
at Philadelphia the 27 day of the 12 Month, 1691, 2, which was the Meeting
adjourned by consent from the 26 to the 27 day, where they met at the
School-house, as used in cold Seasons.
WHereas at the last Monthly Meeting T -- openly accused G. Keith with denying
the sufficiency of the Light, which G. K. denying, T -- insisted that ^e could
prove the same. And coming into this Meeting to prove his Charge, brought W --
as his Witness, whom the Meeting having heard, the said ^ -- by his own consent
lest the matter to the Judgment of this Meeting, which they having duly
weighed and considered, they do unanimously agree, and deliver it as their
sense, That the said T -- do give ^orth a Paper of Condemnation, of his falsely
charging G. K. and to clear the said G. K. of the said Charge. As also, it is
the sense of this Meeting, that the said T -- do give satisfaction to the
Friends of this Meeting, by a Paper, of his true Faith and Belief in Christ's
Resurrection, and as he is now in Heaven, in the glorified Nature of Man, which
is not the Godhead, he having given this Meeting great cause to question his
Belief therein; and that he ^orbear offering his Gift by way of Testimony in
our public Meetings, until he has given Friends and G. K. satisfaction in
manner abovesaid.

Whereas W -- having formerly accused G. K. with preaching Two Christ's, and the
Charge and matter having been fully debated at the last Yearly Meeting, before
public Friends, and others, who did deliver it as their Sense and Judgment,
That the said W -- had abused G.K. thereby, and that G. K 's Doctrine was right
and true in his preaching Faith in Christ within, and Faith in Christ without;
and the said W -- having never given any Satisfaction, but at t^is Monthly
Meeting did say, That what he had formerly said, in his Charge against G.K. he
did yet stand by and justify; The Friends of this Meeting do deliver it as
their Sense and Judgment, That the said W -- should condemn his Unrighteous
Charge publicly, by giving for^h a Paper of Condemnation for his so doing, and
that he desist offering his Gi^t by way of Testimony, till he has so done.

There being a Paper presented to this Meeting, signed by several Friends, in
relation to the Rhode Island Paper, entitled, The Christian Faith* etc.
recommending the service of the said Paper, etc. whereupon the said Paper being
read in this Meeting, the Friends thereof do unanimously agree, and give it as
their Sense and Judgment, That the said Paper is for the general good and
Service of Truth, and Friends, in this Country and elsewhere, and that it came
forth very seasonably for the Vindication of Truth and Friends; and that W.B.
ought not to be blamed, nor discouraged for printing the same.

Signed by order of the Meeting, by J. W.


But, that it may appear how weak and insufficient the Reasons are, that were
given by the said Party at the Quarterly Meeting, why we were no M^eting, we
think fit to give an account of them, with our Answers to them. One Reason was,
That a Monet^ly Meeting co^ld not adjourn, and there was no President for it:
But to this the Clark of the Meeting answered, That he had minuits to show, a
Monthly Meeting had formerly adjourned; And why could not a Monthly Meeting,
upon a weighty occasion adjourn, as well as any other Meeting? Another Reason
was, That the Clark and the Monthly Meeting Lo^k was gone: But to this it was
answered, The Monthly Meeting could make or constitute a Clark, as other
Meetings have done; for it is the Meeting that makes the Clark, and it is not
the Clark that makes the Meeting. A 3 d Reason was, There were few o^ the
Friend^ of the Ministry, or Elder Friends and Brethren, that were present at
the adjourning, or at the Meeting adjourned. To this it was answered, That
there were more, both Friends of the Ministry, and Elder Friends and ^rethren
at that Meeting that did adjourn, and met when adjourned, than has been at
many Monthly Meetings here, that have been approved. A 4 th Reason was, That
the matter o^ Difference being a matter of Doctrine, and betwixt Friends of the
Ministry, a Monthly Meeting could not be proper Judges o^ it. To this it was
answered, That the Difference being a matter of Fact, (and ^ot a matter of
Doctrine that could be called in Question by any Judicious Christian,) and the
Accusation being made to the Monthly Meeting, they were proper Judges of it;
and i^ the Difference had been a matter of Doctrine, we did, and do assert,
That the Monthly Meeting, to wit, consisting of a considerable Number of
F^^^nds of the Ministry, and other judicious Friends, were proper Judges of it;
but to lodge the Judgment wholly in Friends of the Ministry, and to deny all
other Friends to have a share in the Judgment, even when the Difference is in a
matter of Doctrine, we judge is an encroachment upon our Christian Liberty, and
savours too much of the Church of Rome; as also that other ease pressed too
indiscreetly at the Quarterly Meeting, when some that were known to be Parties
against G. K. did require of him his Submission to the Judgment of the Meeting;
He answe^ed (as we judge, soberly and Christianly) That (...) to the Judgment
of the Spirit of Truth in Friends; but to give an absolute Submission, he could
not, to any S^ciety of men whatsoever; for absolute Submission implies
absolute In^allibility, that no Society (...) pretends unto but the Church of
Rome, and therefore to introd^^e it among us, would be Rank Pope^y; at which
some (...) against G. K. were g^eatly dissatisfied, and one took out his
Pocket-^ook and writ down some words of G. K. to that effect before he had
finished the full Sentence, which we judge was very unfair, as well as unusual.

But whereas some from this would infer, as if G. K. denied any positive Power
of Judgment to a true Church, or Meeting of true Christians, met together in
the Name of Christ, where he is present in the mindst of them G. K. gave no
ground for any such inference, for he does readily grant, That a true Christian
Assembly has a positive Power of Judgment, when met together in his Name, and
that he is present in the midst of them, and is felt and witnessed to guide
them in true Judgment. But we all know, that it is possible at times, that
Partiality, and Prejudice, and Annimosities may prevail in Meetings, that may
pretend to meet in the Name of Christ, and also to have him present in the
midst of them, and yet where such things prevail, Christ is not in the midst
known to give true Judgment, or to guide men to give it, as Friends Letter to
us from London expressly declares. And therefore we judge, That No absolute
Submission should be required of any Member to the Judgment of that Society he
belongs unto in a matter of Truth or Christian Doctrine, or wherein the
Conscience is concerned; for it is time enough to submit to the Judgment of
Brethren, when a man has heard it, and has brought it to the Balance and Test
of that which gives true Judgment in every particular, that is in a qualified
Frame to understand it, even as Christ said, As I hear I judge, John 5.30. And
if any be st^ff and Refractory to the true Judgment of the Christian Society he
belongs unto, they may freely proceed to put into Practice Gospel ^iscipline
against him, without requiring his Submission, as it is in Worldly Judicatories.

But if any say, At last it was yielded in the Quarterly Meeting, that the
Adjourned Meeting in the School-house was a true Meeting, but an Appeal was
made from that Monthly Meeting to the Quarterly Meeting, and the Quarterly
Meeting offering to give a new Judgment in the Case, and in order thereto
ordered G K. to withdraw, he refusing so to do, hindered that ^o Judgment
could be given. But to this it was and is answered, That there could be no
Appeal from that Monthly Meeting to the Q^arterly Meeting, because most of the
Quarterly Meeting did con^^^t of the Friends that gave the Judgment at the
Monthly Meeting, and such as were over, were but a few in comparison, except
some Country Friends that did not care to meddle in that matter, and so to
appeal from the Monthly Meeting to the Quarterly Meeting, was in effect but to
appeal from the Monthly Meeting to a small part or Num^^^ of Persons in the
Quarterly Meeting, the most of which, and the most leading men, were known to
be prejudiced against G. K. and Parties against him; and G. K. did offer very
fairly in naming seven or eight Persons, that we know were his opposite Parties
(and had been mainly instrumental at former Meetings about a Year ago, and at
the time of the Yearly Meeting, to hinder Justice to be done, and true Judgment
to be past concerning bringing W -- to Conviction and Condemnation of his
Error) That if they would go out, he would go out also, but they who were his
manifest opposite Parties, and had manifestly appeared from time to time to
excuse and defend W -- and blame G. K. for his sound Christian Doctrine that he
has preached among us, refusing to go forth, we are satisfied G. K. did well
not to go forth, so as to submit to the judgment of these men, who had
sufficiently shown their Partiality against him, and some of which had unjustly
accused him, as can be well proved. Besides, things being duly considered,
there was no reason that G. K. should have gone forth, either at that Meeting
or any other, for G. K. was no otherwise concerned in that Difference with W --
and T -- than all faithful Friends, and the whol^ Meeting ought to have been
concerned, to wit, to defend one of the greatest Principles of the Christian
Faith, viz. That the Man Christ Jesus who was crucified, did rise from the
Dead, and is now in being, And That Faith in him is ne^essary to make men true
Christians; And therefore not G. K. alone, nor principally, but Christ himself,
and all his faithful Followers are concerned in the same; and in none of these
Meetings was any Charge of any Trespass proved against G. K. nor so much as
brought under the Consideration of the Body of the Meeting, only one or two
particular Persons fasly accused him, but the thing was never brought to any
due Trial. And here let it be noted, that both the Meeting of Friends of the
Ministry at R. E's refusing to answer G. K's Complaint against the dishonor
done to Christ Jesus, that W -- was guilty of, so as to bring him to any
Conviction or Condemnation of his Error, and also the Meetings at the House of
S. C. and A. M. at the time of the Yearly Meeting, wholly neglecting to bring
the said W -- to Conviction and Condemnation of his Error, although at the last
of six Meetings it was declared, That G. K 's Doctrine concerning Christ within
and Christ without to be One Lord Jesus Christ, was true, and that therefore W
-- was blame worthy, and yet after all this W -- persisted in his false Charge
against G. K. and has been greatly excused and supported by many, that this
has given such deep ground of offense, to all of us, with other thing
concurring, that because to this day nothing has been done (it being now above
a Year since complaint was made against W --) by these of the other side, who
meet in a Separation from us, either to bring W -- or T -- to Condemnation, but
suffer them to continue to preach and pray in their Meetings; therefore we do
justly judge, That the whole Meeting that meet in a Separation from us, that
owneth these men and tollerateth them in their great Errors and Trepasses, are
guilty with them, and accountable for their Errors; and therefore according to
Christ's command recorded in the holy Scripture, we ought to be separate from
them, although (as has been sufficiently proved) they began the Separation, and
they having begun it, we cannot in Conscience unite in Meetings with them here
at Philadelphia, until they give satisfaction to Truth in these weighty things.

The Second Cause of the Separation (which also we lay at their door) is, That
whereas in the Monthly Meeting in the first Month last, a Proposition being
made to change the Meetings, both at the Center and in the Town, and some being
for the said Change, and others against it, and having good Reasons why they
were against the said Change, ye^ a Par^^ in the Meeting, contrary to our
declared mind and assent, (...) over them that dissented, to change the said
Meetings; a (...) we have not known formerly allowed by Friends any where in
their ^onthly meetings, that one Party (suppose equal or greater in Number than
the rest) should assume a Power to appoint or change Place^ and Times of
Meetings without the Consent of their Brethren; for things, of that Nature
especially, use always to be done with unanimous Consent, and not by Plurality
of Votes, which is not the way of Truth; and because we were not free to stand
to the Arbitrary and Rash Determination, as to that Change, therefore we met at
the ordinary Meeting Place, as formerly practiced, and they began the
Separation, in keeping a Public Meeting in the afternoon at the Bank,
contrary to our declared sense and mind, only some of us met at a private
Family meeting in the Evening, at the House of G. K. that could be counted no
separate Meeting for that day. And afterward, we finding they were resolved to
continue in their way of Separation, and that some had endeavored to lo^k us
out from meeting at the Bank in the fore-noon, this put us upon seeking a new
place to meet in, in case we had been disappointed of the other; and though some
of us did declare our sincere intention and sense, that it were good but to
have one Public Meeting on first Days, to end about the second hour, and the
remaing part to be used for private Meetings in Families, yet their keeping up
their public After-noons meeting, has given us just occasion at present to
have a Public After-noons Meeting as well as they, for we hope they shall not
have any cause to say against us, that we are short of them in our Zeal for
good Meetings.

Things being thus far advanced, and the Separation being begun, and carried on
so far by them, and justly chargeable upon them, some of them having desired us
to make some Proposals, or Expedients for healing the Breach, and uniting again
as formerly, after some time we s^nt some Proposals to them, that we were
satisfied in our Consciences were most equal and just, and such as the Truth
required of us; but they are so far from being satisfied with most of them,
that they have the more blamed us, some insinuating as if we had transgressed
the Law, but we are not afraid of any such thing, providing true Liberty of
Conscience, according to the just and due bounds of it, be allowed to us; and
for our part, we are so well satisfied that all our Proposals to them (in that
Paper signed by fifteen of us) are just and equal, that if they please, we
shall freely consent to their Printing of them. The sum of which Proposals does
principally consist in these two things, 1st, That all such of the Ministry
among them, whom we can prove guilty of preaching false Doctrine, or of falsely
accusing the Innocent, or excusing and defending the Guilty, and contending
against some sound Principles of Truth, in Meetings appointed for hearing these
Differences, may be brought to Conviction and Acknowledgment of their Error and
Trespasses: And 2dly, Seeing (by a marvelous Providence that has discovered
it) that our Monthly Meetings here-away have consisted of a mixed Number of some
Believers and some Unbelievers, or of some men unsound in the Christian Faith,
that we agree together to put Robert Barclay's Doctrine (well approved of by
the best of our Friends in England, and particularly by G. F. and G. W.) into
Practice, in his Book called, The Anarchy of the Ranters, etc. see. 4. p. 32,
^3. and. 6. p. 48, 49. which is* To declare our Faith and Persuasion in certain
Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Faith and Religion, that by the same, as
well as by a good Life and Conversation, it may be known who are qualified to
be members of our Church; and that every one owned to be a member of our
Church, declare his Faith and Persuasion in every (...) these Fundamentals,
which is a secondary ^end (...) our V^i^n, the Spirit being the principal,
which may be easily done by answering to (...) plain Questions, with Yea or Nay.

And now, a Third and main Reason that we give for this Separation, well
warranted both by Scripture Testimony, and command of Christ recorded in
Scripture, and the truth of it sealed to us, by the Spirit of Truth in our
hearts, that whereas there are diver^ of the (...)* of most Gross and
Unchristian Errors against the Fundamental Doctrine^ of the Christian Faith,
who are public Preachers among them, and whose Ministry they fit under, and
some encourage them, others tolerate and suffer them; and that others even of
their Preachers are guilty of other gross Errors, and other Trespasses that
render them altogether unqualified for the Ministry, and to uphold or tolerate
them is to bring Reproach to Truth and ou^ holy Profession, and to the Body of
our faithful Friends, with all whom we remain in ^^ar Unity in all parts of the
World, hoping that faith^ul Friends and Breth^en that have an impar^ial account
and information of us, and do rightly and duly consider and examine the
Righteousness of our Cause, wi^^ encourge us therein, to the Disappointment of
such who affirm the contrary, but we being principally supported and encouraged
by the Spirit of Truth in our hearts, that as such men immediately guilty of
these vile Errors, some of which no Protestant Christian Society would
tolerate, neither Episcopal, Presbyterian nor Baptist, are to be turned away
and separated from; so that Society is to be turned away from, whoever they be,
that does uphold or tolerate them, and bring them not to due Conviction and
Condemnation, after due and sufficient notice is given unto them, as there has
been for a long time, from one Meeting to another, as concerning some of them,
now many Months since past, and nothing done effectually to bring them to any
Conviction, but that it seems they are resolved still to support or tolerate
them. Now the Scriptures that warrant us in this Separation (although as is said
first made by them) are these following, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 6.3,
4, 5. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. Tit. 3.10. Rev. 18.4. 2 These. 3.6. Romans 16.17. Rev.
2.14, 15, 20. and the same is expressly confirmed by the Doctrine delivered by
R. Barclay in his said Book, well approved by good Friends, who expressly says,
p. 5.^. We do sa^^ly conclude, that where a People are gathered into a Belief
of the Principles and Doctrines of the Gospel of Christ, if any of that People
go from their Principles, and assert (...) false, and contrary to what they
have already received, such as stand and abide firm in the Faith, have Power,
by the Spirit of God, after (...) Christian endeavors to convince and reclaim
them, upon (...) to SEPARATE from such,. 6. p. 52. and. 4. p. 33. ^e ^aith, The
Escapes, Fauls, and Errors of such who own, believe and p^o^ess the same
Do^tri^es and Principles of Faith with us, and go under the (...) Dis^^nction
and Denomina^ion, may by our Adversaries, justly be (...) not seasonably and
christianly reproved, reclaimed or (...). And therefore we judge, that we have
equal ground and cause of Separation, as well from that whole Society that does
not condemn th^s^ men, for their gross Errors in Fundamental Doctrines, as we
have to separate from these particular men, seeing they who tolerate them,
(...) by Scripture and R. B's book, are guilty with them, and the (...) of
these men may be justly imputed to them. Note, That whereas it has been said
by some, That they would have dealt with t^ese m^n (...) have been guilty of
those Errors, but that G. K. would not go forth, being desired to withdraw at
the Meeting at R. E 's and at the Quarterly Meeting: To th^^ it is answered,
That G. K. had good reason not to withdraw at both these times, because at
both these times these who (...) take upon them to be Judges, were his manifest
Parties against him, and so could not be in justice his Judges; but at the
Yearly Meeting he did withdraw at the Meeting's de^^re, and yet they did
nothing to bring W -- to Conviction; besides, it was not G. K. but the Truth it
self, that the Difference was concerning; and therefore there was no occasion
for G. K. to withdraw; and they have had sufficient time (...) to have done
it, but nothing that we can hear of is done.

(...) it is very strange, what some h^ve said, That no Error in Doctrine or
T^^^pass w^atsoeve^ o^ particular Persons, though tolerated by a Society (...)
were joy^ed with in (...) Profession of Truth, can be any just cause of
Separation, does equally blame all our Friends in their Separation from the
respective Societies they were formerly joined in Profession with, as some in
their Separation from the Church of Rome, others from the (...), others from
the Presbyterian and Baptists, and does equally (...) the Separation of the
faithful Martyrs in Q. Mary's days from ^he Popish Worship in England, yet well
approved generally by our (...). And surely for People of contrary Principles
and Spirits, and having a contrary Faith and Persuasion, in Fundamental
Doctrines, to be united together in one Worship, would make the greatest
Confusion imaginable, and be incomparably more like Babylon than the true
Church of Christ; and so to affirm is contrary to all common sense of any that
has the least true Notion of a Church, that ought to be as a Field or Garden,
as clean of Weeds as possible; for though the T^res are to be suffered to grow in
the Field of the World, yet they are not to remain in the Church, according to
Christ's Doctrine. (...) at this rate, the Weeds shall remain with the good Corn
and Herbs ^n ^he same Garden, yea, and exceed them, that cannot but greatly
(...) good Corn and Herbs. Beside, how can the Gardner delight in such a Garden
that is full of Weeds, and no care to separate the good Herbs from the Weeds.
And though it has been said by some, That as the faithful stand in the Power of
God, they shall have dominion over the unfaithful; but we find no warrant or
promise, that God will give them Dominion, if they obey not his Command, which
is To Separate and withdraw from such; and not to remain in fellowship with
them, for what part has a Believer with an Infidel? 2 Cor. 6.15.17.

The Names of some of the Friends that gave the aforesaid Judgments at the said
monthly Meeting the 27 of 12 Mon. 1691.
George Hutcheson, Paul Saunders, John Lynam, Ralph Iackson, Phillip James,
Richard Hillyard, Anthony Sturge^, Thomas Peart, Thomas Tress, John Loftus,
William Harwood, James Chick, Thomas Morris, John Mcc Comb, John Hutchins,
James Cooper, Thomas Winn, John Heart, Anthony Tailor, Abel Noble, Nicholas
Pearce, John Furnis, John Redman, John Williams, Ralph Ward, William Dyllwin,
John Duploveys* John Budd, William Bradford, William Paschall, Joseph Willcox,
Thomas Budd, Thomas Hooton, Thomas Paschall, Humphry Hodges, Henry Furnis,
Simercy Adams, Robert Waliis, Thomas Ienner, William Davis, Francis Cook, Henry
Johnson, Joseph Walter, Hugh Derborough, William Say, William Hard,
Postscript.
WE have seriously considered, how that of late Years especially many are crept
into a bare outside Form of the Profession of the People of God, called in
Scorn Quakers, and have assumed or suffered themselves to be called by that
Name, and have frequented not only their Public Meetings, but also their men
and women's meanings, and have taken upon them to act and be concerned in these
meetings, and some have presumed to preach and pray therein, that to our
certain knowledge, by manifest evidence of Words and Works, are not worthy to
be reputed members of a Christian Society or Church of Christ, because of their
great Ignorance and Unbelief in the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
whereof some here-away of late have given sufficient proof, to the great
Scandal of our holy Profession, by their plain and express words uttered before
diverse credible Witnesses, and sometimes by their unsound Doctrines published,
and g^oss Perversions of Scripture, to the Observation of many who are but of
weak understanding, and some of them have been detected of scandalous
Conversation, and have not given any convincing Evidence of their true
Repentance, and that there has been too much forbearance used by some toward
such, for their hardening and emboldning themselves against the Truth and
faithful Friends and Brethren, and that by the mavelous Providence of God
that has suffered such things to come to light, some have discovered their
woeful Ignorance, Unbelief and gross Errors by their late words, without all
shame or ^ea^, and that some others have appeared too manifestly inclined to
^loak, excuse and support them, which gives us too great occasion to suspect
them guilty of the same, or the like things; and that things are come to that
pass of late, that contrary Testimonies are born in meetings by -- one against
another, and yet both pretending to the Spirit of Truth; and great Disputes and
Contentions have been of late betwixt -- one against another, before not only
many called Quakers, but some others that never were of that Profession, and
that concerning several Fundamental and Principal Doctrines of the Christian
Faith, as first, Whether we are only to believe in Christ the Light within us,
or whether we are to believe both in Christ within us, as he is Light and Life,
and also in Christ without us, as he dyed for our sins, rose again, and is
ascended, as he was that great Sacrifice of Atonement for our sins, and is our
high Priest and Mediator, and Advocate with the Father for us in Heaven? 2dly,
Whether to preach Faith in Christ within, and Faith in Christ without us, be to
preach Two Christ's, or one only Christ Jesus, the measure of Christ within us,
and the fullness of Christ without us, in the Man Christ Jesus, being One Lord
Jesus Christ, as the Light of the Sun that is in the Body of the Sun in
fullness, and the measures of it that come into our Eyes, are but one Light and
one Sun, and as the Life that is in the Root and Branches of a Tree, is but one
Life, the fullness being in the Root, and the measures in the Branches. 3dly,
Whether it be a Doctrine necessary to be preached, and believed to make a
Christian viz. thoroughly and entirely in all necessary parts,) to believe in
Christ without us, as he is true and perfect God, and true and perfect Man,
etc. 4thly, Whether Christ has now any thing in Heaven that he had not before
the World was? or Whether Christ's Body that was crucified and nailed to the
Cross, and was buried, did rise again, and is ascended into Heaven? Some
Questioning, Whether it rose? some saying, It rose, but after it ascended into
the Cloud, Christ was separated from it: Some saying, It was no part of the
Virgins Substance, or of man's Nature that ascended into Heaven; and one saying,
He had not yet learned that Lesson, whether that which was crucified without
us, was the Godhead, or somewhat that he took of the Virgin; others saying,
This is a Nicity, and to be ignorant of such a thing, or not to believe such a
thing, does not hinder but that ^ man may be a true Christian, and a Minister
of Christ. 5thly, Some accusing and charging some of their Brethren as dividing
Christ, because they preach Faith in Christ both without us in the fullness,
and within us in the measure: Others justly charging them, Than they who preach
only Christ as within, do divide Christ in a false and wrong Notion of him.
6thly, Some accusing their Brethren for denying the sufficiency of the Light
within to Salvation, because they preach, That the Sufficiency of the Light
within (...) not to be set up in Opposition to the Sufficiency of the Man
Christ without us, in whom the Fullness is, as if the measure within us were
the whole Savior, excluding the Man Christ without us; and also because they
distinguish betwixt the first Ministration of Light common to all mankind, and
the second that is peculiar and special only to true Christians, or such who
have the Faith of Christ crucified, etc. revealed to them, both these
ministrations, with all other diversity of Operations and Gifts coming from one
God, one Lord, and one Spirit, who is over all, through all and in all, Eph^s.
4.6. And also, because they cannot set up the present measure of Light and
Grace to be sufficient for all time to come, but exhort men to wait and pray in
the help of the present measure of Grace received, to receive more Grace from
him, who has the fullness of it, even the man Christ Jesus. And lastly, that
they cannot set up the Sufficiency of the Light within in opposition to the
necessary and great outward helps and means of Salvation, such as the holy
Scriptures, and Preaching, and Teaching of faithful men. And beside these great
Questions and Disputes that have happened among us, there have been others
concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, and Day of Judgment, as, Whether the
Saints have got the Resurrection of the Body already? or Whether they get it
immediately after Death? or Whether they wait for it generally unto Christ's
Coming? and Whether Christ is to come without us, to judge the Quick and the
Dead? and Whether there is any Day of Judgment beyond the Grave? and Whether
there is any great and general Day of Judgment that the deceased are in
expectation of? And this is but a hint of these things that have been in
Question and Debate amongst us here-away in Pennsilvania and West-Iarsey, etc.
to which many other great and weighty things of Christian Faith and Doctrine do
so necessarily relate, that they stand or fall together. And it is no small
grief and wound to us to find some so little concerned about these things, as
if they were not so material as to cause any just Separation or Breach of
Fellowship, when we know, that for less Errors many of us have separated from
other Professions; and we cannot but declare before the World, our godly Zeal
moves us to a holy Impatience, that we cannot longer bear (some of us having
born the weight of these things for many months) such gross Ignorance and
Unbelief, and gross Errors, tending to the denying the Lord that bought us, and
making void his Death and Sufferings, without bearing witness against them, who
either hold them or support and defend them; and we are convinced and persuaded
in our Consciences, that God calls us to separate from such Unbelievers, and
not to be yoked together in Church Fellowship and Discipline with any that we
have not proof of by Confession of the mouth, that they are sound in Faith,
touching these necessary and Fundamental parts of Christian Doctrine, as well
as that their Conversation is such as becomes the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And we have been so much grieved with the Confusion and Disorder that
has lately happened in our Meetings because of these things, (more like
Babylon than a Church of Christ) that we have great clearness and peace in the
Lord, to retire and separate from such disorderly Walkers and Talkers, as we
have formerly done from other Professions, to meet together in the Name of
Christ, having the true Faith of him, and of his Promise, To be spiritually
present in the midst of us, and to wait upon him, and be refreshed and edified,
whether in Silence or any living Testimony of words that God shall be pleased
to enable any among us to bring forth. Yet we design not any Separation from
our Faithful Brethren here or any where else in any part of the World; for we
declare, we are one with all our faithful brethren in all parts of the World,
both in Spirit, Doctrine and Practice of true Christianity; and we faithfully
believe, that our Faith in all things does well agree to all our faithful
Brethren every where, and is the real, sound and upright Faith, as it has been
received, not only by Ancient Christians, in all Ages of the World, but also by
the most sound Ancient and Present Friends of Truth, called in scorn Quakers.
And we altogether deny and disown to be called the Disciples or Proselites of
man or men, being spiritually baptized into no other Name than that of Christ
Jesus, who was crucified for us and rose again, and whose Disciples and
Followers we only desire to be, and to follow none but as they follow him.

Some Testimonies taken out of R. Barclay's Book, called, The Anarchy of the
Ran^e^s, etc. well approved by good Friends generally in England and elsewhere.
1st. Concerning Doctrines and Fundamental (...) of the Christian Faith, he
says, p. 29. The Doctrines and ^^^damental Principles o^ the Christian Faith,
we own and believe, originally and principally because they are the Truths of
God, whereunto the Spirit of God is our Hearts has constrained our
Understandings to obey and submit to, etc. and in p. 52. he again expressly
mentions Fundamental Principles and Doctrines (...) the Christian Faith.
[N^^e, By this it appears, that sound Friends do own that there are
Fundamental Principles of the Christian Faith, altho^ diverse of that Party that
is now separate from us, said some time ago in a Monthly Meeting (as diverse can
testify) in contradiction to G. K. That the^e was but one Principle of Truth,
viz. the Light; and G.K. proving the contrary both from Scripture and Friends
Books, that mentions Principles; one replied, There was b^t one Fundamental
Principle, and yet here R.E. mentions Fundamental Principles, that argues
more than one; for though there is but one Foundation Truth, which is Christ
Jesus, yet there are diverse Fundamental Principles of Truth, i. e. such as do
necessarily belong to the Foundation, that without the Faith of them a man
cannot be said to be a true Believer or real Christian.]

2dly. Concerning the Church, he gives this Definition of it, p. 32. A Church
then in the Scripture Phrase, is no other than a Meeting or Gathering of
certain People, which (if it be taken in a Religious Sense, as most commonly it
is) are gathered together in the Belief of the same Principles, Doctrines and
points of Faith, whereby, as a Body, they become distinguished from others, and
have a certain relation among themselves, and a conjunct Interest to the
maintaining and propogating these Principles they judge to be right, and
therefore have a certain Care and Oversight over one another, to prevent and
remove all occasions that may tend to break this their conjunct Interest,
hinder the Propogation of it, or bring Infamy, Contempt or Contumely upon it,
or give such as on the other hand are or may be banded together to undo them,
just occasion against them, to decry and defame them. [Note, This is the
present case with us, and therefore to prevent Truth and faithful Friends being
defamed by Adversaries, we are weightily concerned in this public Testimony.]
And a little after p. 33. he says, The Power and Authority, Order and
Government we speak of, is such a Church, Meeting, Gathering or Assembly claims
toward those that have or do Declare themselves members, who own, believe and
profess the same Doctrines and Principles of Faith with us, and go under the
same Distinction and Denomination, whose Escapes, Faults and Errors may by our
Adversaries justly be imputed to us, if not seasonably and christianly
reproved, reclaimed, or condemned, etc. And p. 34. he says, We being a People
gathered together by the Power of God, into the Belief of certain Principles
and Doctrines, and also certain Practices and Performances, by which we (...)
be separated and distinguished from others, so as to (...) a part. And p. 48.
he says, The Principles, Doctrines and Practices necessarily depending upon
them (viz. into the Belief of which we were gathered by the Power of God) are
as it were the Terms that have drawn us together, and the Bond by which we
became centered into one Body and Fellowship, and distinguished from ot^ers;
and yet this not so the Bond, but (see his margen) that we have a more inward
and invisible, to wit, the Life of Righteousness, etc. And p. 49. he says,
Suppose a People really gathered into the Belief of the true and certain
Principles of the Gospel, if any of these People shall arise, and contradict
any of those Fundamental Truths, [Note, That he owneth Fundamental Truths, and
therefore according to him and sound Friends, there are more than one
Fundamental Truth, although Christ the original Truth is but one, yet the
Branches are many] whether has not such as stand good right to cast (...) a one
out from among them, and to pronounce possitively, This is contrary to the
Truth we profess and own, and therefore ought to be rejected, and not received,
nor yet he that asserts it, as one of us: And is not this Obligatory upon all
the members, seeing all are concerned in the like Care, as to themselves, to
hold the right and shut out the wrong? And p. 52. If the Apostles of Christ of
Old, and the Preachers of the Everlasting Gospel in this Day, had told all
People, however wrong they found them in their Faith and Principles, Our
Charity and Love is such, we dare not judge you, nor separate from you, but let
us all live in love together, and every one enjoy his own Opinion, and all will
be well; how should the Nations have been, or what way now can they be brought
to Truth and Righteousness? Would not the Devil love this Doctrine well, by
which Darkness and Ignorance, Error and Confusion might still continue in the
Earth, unreproved and uncondemned? And again, in the same p. 51, 52. he says,
Were such a Principle to be received or believed, That in the Church of Christ
No man should be separated from, no man condemned, or excluded the Fellowship
and Communion of the Body, for his Judgment or Opinion in matter of Faith, Then
what Blasphemies so Horrid, what Heresies so Damnable, what Doctrines of
Devils, but might harbor it self in the Church of Christ? etc. And p. 78, 79.
he says, (giving some of the Differences betwixt the Romanists, and the
generality of these called Protestants, on the one hand, and the People called
Quakers on the other hand) That whereas those in matters of Difference only
allow these of the Clergy, so called, i. e. the Ministry, to give a Judgment,
with other select Persons chosen, The People called Quakers exclude no member
of the Church to give his Judgment: And 2dly, Those say, The Decision is to
pass Conclusive by Plurality of Votes; which, as he says, the Quakers do not,
but allow that at times the plurality may be wrong, and the few may be right.
And p. 81. he says, If so be in such a Church (viz. as above described) there
should arise any Difference, there will be an Infallible Judgment from the
Spirit of God, which may be in a general Assembly, yet not limited to it, as
excluding others, and may prove the Judgment of the plurality, yet not to be
decided thereby, as if the Infallibil^ty were placed there, excluding the
fewer, in which a Meeting or Assembly upon such an account, there is no
Limitation to be of Persons particularly chosen, but that all that in a true
Sense may be reckoned of the Church, as being sober and weighty, may be
present, and give their Judgment, etc. And p. 85. he says, This Infallible
Judgment is only and unalterably annexed and seated in the Spirit and Power of
God, not to any particular Person or Persons, Meeting or Assembly, by virtue of
any settled Ordination, Office, Place or Station, that such may have, or have
had in the Church; No Man, Men nor Meeting, standing or being invested in any
Authority in the Church of Christ, upon ^ther Terms, than so long as he or they
abide in the living Sense and Unity of the Life in their own particulars.

ANd further, whereas the said Breach and Separation has made a great Noise,
and many false Reports are spread abroad concerning the same, many greatly
blaming G. K. and the rest joined with him in that Testimony against the false
and unsound Doctrines of some that go under the Profession of Truth, These are
to let all sober People and Friends know, that it is our great and earnest
desire to be united, and have the Breach effectually made up, and in order
thereunto we have made Proposals to them, which they have not answered. And on
the 14th of the 3d Month, 1692. some of us being with the two Old England
Friends, that lately came to visit us, and relating to them something
concerning the said Separation, and what Offers and Proposals we had made to
them, which they said were very reasonable, and many being present that
approved thereon, we got a Meeting with them, but the matter for which the
Meeting was procured, not suffered to be entered upon, and that Meeting passed
over; but still it was our desire to agree and unite, and therefore desired
them appoint another Meeting, which they said they would consider of, but not
hearing from the^^, as expected, we sent this following Letter, which has not
been answered.

Friends, ^. -- and A. -- etc.
WHereas we being in Company yesterday morning with T.W. and J.D. discoursing
something concerning the late Breach here at Philadelphia, and several Friends
coming in, we told, That it was proposed at the Meeting of public Friends at
Burlington, That let us but ag^ee in Principles of Doctrine, and all other
Personal Reflections and Differences should be buried, and that we still
proposed the same; which the Friends said was very reasonable; and many others
being present, said, That they did not question but that all that were
concerned would consent thereto, and be ready to embrace such an opportunity;
and they desired us to draw into writing the said Proposals, which we did thus,
viz. 1st. That both Parties should draw up into writing an account of their
sincere Faith and ^^lief in the Principles of the Christian Doctrine: 2dly,
That a time and place should be appointed for all honest Friends to meet
together to hum^^e themselves before the Lord, and in a sense of h^^ Power and
(...) to read, weigh and consider the said Principle^, and see if we could
agree therein: 3dly, That when we were agreed therein, all Personal Reflections
should be passed by and forgiven: 4thly, That all such as have given offense,
and hurt the Truth by their unsound Expressions, be brrught to a Conviction of
their Error. Which Proposals, all the Friends that were present well approved
of; but when it came to you, ye thought that a more private Meeting of Friends
of the Ministry, in the first place, would best answer to put things into a
method for a more public conclusive Meeting; The agreement and conclusion of
which was, That all Friend^ of the Ministry in Town present should meet, and an
equal Number of our side. At the time appointed we all met at S. E's, and
things were pretty fairly debated, but the matter proposed not come to;
therefore it is our desire, in the behalf of the rest of our Friends, that
another meeting (...) appointed to morrow, and where we left off last night to
begin, and so orderly proceed to weigh and consider of some Principles of
Christian Doctrine, to see if we can come to agree and unite in Doctrine and
Spirit, and so the Breach ^e made up; and though it be a time of much outward
business, yet we are willing to prefer so weighty a concern of Truth beyond all
outward and temporal Affairs, and hope you will do the like: The Reason w^y we
would have it to morrow, is, because many Friends are in Town now that may help
to accomodate things, and we know not when there may be the like Opportunity
again. We desire your answer this night or to morrow morning.

^. ^. m. 1692. T. B. W. B.


After this, being informed that some at their Meetings had pronounced great
Woes against us, and laid the Separation upon us, as the cause of it, and
prophesied of ^ur downfall, as other Seperatists have withered and come to
nothing, which greatly strengthened our Opposers, G. K. and his Friends found
great freedom to go to their Afternoons Meeting on the 22 of 3 month, and there
he ^ore a faithful Testimony in the Power of the Lord, which some of his
opposers acknowledged did attend him; after which, he told, That the occasion
of his and his Friends being there, was also to signify their desire to have
the (...) made up, and to be united to that Meeting, and that he and his
Friends had unity with the most there, as to the main, as also with a^l
faithful Friends every where else, and did frequent their Meetings in the
Country; but for the sake of some in this Meeting, that were unsound, which did
both preach and pray among them, and they wou^d not suffer them to be brought
to Conviction of their Error, m^de u^ not free to m^et with them. And also to
propose, that whereas some among them had lately judged us, that we thought it
very (...) unchristian that any should judge us before they had heard, (...)
and dealt with us, and therefore desired that a Meeting might be appointed to
morrow or on third day, to have things fairly debated, that it might be known
where the cause of the Separation lay; but no Meeting was allowed of or
appointed. Whereupon G.K. and (...) Friends went away to their own Meeting, and
after the other Mee^ing was over, two of them came to our Meeting, and opposed
G. K. in his public Testimony, as he had been twice before at other times,
though he has never opposed any of them in their public Testimony. The reason
why we give this short Relation, is, because it is already represented as if G.
K. came to their public Meeting to oppose and make disturbance the^e, which
G.K. says, the Searcher of (...), was not in the least his intent (as neither
he did) but to ^^ar a faithful Testimony, as it should please the Lord to
assist him, and to signif^e his and his Friends desire of Unity, and to request
a (...) with them, that it might be known where the Cause of the Separation
lay, but neither thi^, no^ our former Proposals being embraced, (...) fo^^d it
greatly necessary to make ^his public, to prevent false Reports, which a^e
many, and to let it be known, that the Cause and Continuance of the Separation
lye^h at their door.

Signed in behalf of many others, by Thomas (...), H^n^y F^^nis, George Keith,
John Heart, Richard Helliard Thomas Hooton.


An Account of our sincere Faith in the most necessary things of Christian
Doctrine, Faith and Practice, according to the Testimony of holy Scripture.
Given forth by some of us, in behalf of many Brethren, who are in scorn called
^uakers in Pennsilvania, etc. And are the things that we had drawn up to have
proposed to their consideration at the Meeting appointed for that end at S. E's
the 14 of 3 mon. 1692. but not suffered to be read there, neither can another
Meeting be procured, though much desired by us.
^ 1 Of God the Father, the Son and the holy Spirit.
WE believe in Epes. 4.4 5* 6. 1 Cor 12.4, 5, 6. Col. 1.16.
one God, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, and in one holy Spirit, and that these
three are one true God, the make^ and Creator of all things, visible and
invisible. Tha^ God is no Body, but a pure Joh. 4.24 1 John 1.5. Deuteronomy. 3.20.
Ps. ^ 47 4 5. Act. 15 18. Ps. 139. 1, ^, 6.7. Joh. ^1.17. ^cts 1.24.
Spirit, Light and Life, eternal and unchangeable, of infinite Perfection in
Wisdom, Goodness, Power, Justice and Holiness, knowing all things, past,
present and to come, present in all things, and able to do all things
whatsoever he pleases. That God has fore-known Romans 8.29 30. Ephesians 1.4 5. 1
Pet. ^.2.
all who are or shall be saved, from the beginning of the Wo^ld to the end of
it, having chosen (...) in Christ Jesus before the Foundation of the World, to
be holy, and through Holiness and Sanctification of the Spirit unto Eternal
Life and Glory. That as Gods Love and Grace is freely extended unto ^ Tim. 2.3,
4, 5.
all, where^y they may be saved, and none are excluded from the possibility of
Salvation by any Decree of absolute Reprobation; so whoever are o^ shall be
saved, from the beginning of the World to the end of it, they are saved by Ephesians.
2.8.
Grace, through Faith, and not o^ themselves, it is the Gift o^ God. And that
not only Christ (...) 42, 1, 1 P^t 2 6,
is Gods Elect, but all 2 ^im ^.10 (...) 9 23 cap ^ 7 and 2^ 2^. ^^* 3^* 32,
Ephesians 1, 4.
that shall be saved, from the beginning of the World to the end of it, are
Gods ^lect, chosen in Christ, their Elect Head and Root, as his Elect Body and
Members, according to the F^re-knowledge and Counsel of God, not (...) before
the believe and repent, (...) before the Foundation of ^he World* yet as with
respect to men's knowledge, they are said to be God^ Elect who ar^ sanctified
and renewed, o^ born again, and such are Gods Elect who cry day and night unto
him, whom he will avenge, Luke 18.7. and who put on, being the Elect of God,
holy and beloved, Bowels of M^^y, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness,
Long-Suffering, etc. Col. 3.12.

. 2. Of Man, before and after the Fall.
That Man consists of a Isa. 57.16
created Soul and Body, and that the Soul of man is neither God nor the Devil,
nor any part or measure either of God or the Devil, but an invisible Spirit,
endued with Reas^^^ and Understanding, Will, Affections, Memory, and Power of
Motion, capable to serve and obey God, by the help of his Grace, and to ^eceive
the To. 6.21, 22. Luke 1^ 22* 23.
Fruit of his Obedience, which is Life; or capable to disobey and transgress,
and to receive the fruit of his Disobedience, which is Death. To. 6.21, 22.
Luke 1^ 22* 23.
And that the Soul dies not with the Body, but surviveth after it. That God
made man upright, after his Genesis 1.26 cap. 3.22. 1 Cor. 1^ 2.
Image, Male and Female, and gave him dominion over the works of his hands, and
gave him a Law, which if he had obey^d, he had lived forever. That ^en. 1*^7
cap. 3.16, 17* 18*19. Romans 5.12
both the Death of the Soul unto Righteousness, and Bodily Sickness and Death
came by the Fall of Man, with many other Calamities, and that by one man sin
entered into the World, and Death by sin, etc. and a seed of sin and defilement
is sown by the Enemy in the hearts of Adams Posterity, but yet that is not
imputed to Damnation, but to such only as obey it.

. 3. Of Restoration by Jesus Christ, and Faith in him.
That Jesus Christ is the Prove. 8.23, 24. cap 30.4. M^c. 5, 6* Jo^ 19.^5. N^h.
9.^0. Joh. 15.26.
Son of God, and the only begotten of God from Everlasting, and one God with
the Father; and that he was the Redeemer and Savior of all that believed in
him from the beginning of the World, and gave them the holy Spirit to renew and
sanctify them, and that this holy Spirit did proceed from the Father and from
the Son* And that in the fullness of time Christ took on him the Heb. 2 16 Gal
4.4. Genesis 3.15 ^at 18 20 21 25
Seed of Abraham, and was made of a Woman made under the Law, the promised Seed
of the Woman, that should bruise the head of the Serpent, and was conceived of
the holy Ghost, and bo^n of the Virgin Mary. That Christ, as Man, had and now
has the true and entire Nature of Man, both of Mat 26 38 John 2 19, 20, 21 Col
1 20
Soul and Body, and that neither his Soul nor Body is the Go^head, but the
Temple of it. That he Rom ^ 25 1 Cor 15 3 4 ^
dyed for ou^ sins, and rose again for our ^ustification, and by the blood of
his Cross made Peace for us, and was a Sacrifice of Atonement unto God, and a
Prop^tia^ion not or our sins only, but ^or the sins of the whole World. That he
rose (...) the ^ead, and ascended into Heaven without us, in the same Body for
Rom 6 9 (...)*
Be^^g* which was crucified and buried, but most wonderfully and most
gloriously changed in Manner and Condition. And that in the same Body, ( i. e.
a heavenly glorious and immortal Body) he will come and appear without us to
judge the quick and the dead. That Joh 1 ^^ 14 16 17 cap 8 24 cap 14 1, 2. Gal
3 26 and 4 5 30 31 1 John 4 2 cap 5 1 4 ^ 6
Faith in Christ Jesus as he came without us in the flesh, and dyed for our
sins, and ^ose again and is gone into Heaven, and there remains our Advocate
and Mediator with the Father, in whom all Fullness of Grace and Truth dwells,
as well as he does inwardly come into our hearts to enlighten and quicken us,
is necessary to make a true Christian, and to beget us unto God, so as to be
his Children, born of the freewoman, Ier^^ale^ from above; and that without
this Faith none can be so born no^ have the Spirit of Adoption, witnessing to
them, that they are the Children of God. That the true James ^ 14 17 ^0
Faith in Christ Jesus, as he dyed for (...) and rose again, is not a ba^e
historical and litteral Faith, such as Hypocrites and false Christians have,
but is a living and faithful Faith, conforming them wh^ have it to Christ
Jesus, to live and walk as he did, and that this Faith is wrought in all who
have it by the Word of Rom 10 8 9 2 Cor. 4 13 Col 2 12.
Faith in the Heart, and by the Spirit of Faith, and by the mighty Power of God
that raised Jesus from the dead; and that in Gods ordinary way of working, Rom
10 17 1 Cor 1 21 22 23 Joh 20 31
this Faith is wrought and b^got in men by hearing the Word and Doctrine of
Christ faithfully preached, or if that be wanting, by the Testimony of the holy
Scriptures, in reading or hearing them read. That Gal 3 2 1^ 22 23 Col 1 6 27
Ephesians 3 17 17 18 Acts 10 44 45 1 Cor 12 4 5 6 2 Cor 3 7 8 9 Rom 3 1, 2.21, 22,
Psalm 147 19 20
all who are true and sincere Believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, as he dyed
for us and rose again, are under a peculiar and ^^ecial Ministration of the
Spirit, and have peculiar Illuminations and Revelations of God, and many
peculiar and special Operations, In^^uences, Gifts, and fruits of the Spirit,
that none others have, however just and conscientious they may be in their mere
Gentile state under the Law, and Ministration thereof, such as Cornelius was
before he receiv^d the Faith of Christ, by Peter's Preaching. That John 1 ^ Rom
1 18 19 20 cap 2 1 5
Christ the true Light does lighten every man that comes into the World, and
that by his general ^^luminatio^, common to all Mankind he does convince, teach
and instruct all who give attendance unto the same, the things concerning God,
and their Duty to him, as Ce^a^or, and does reprove for ^in and disobedience,
and brings the^ (...) under the Law, and Ministration thereof, which is of a
sa^^ing nature and tendenc^ in a general way; and (...) Gal 3 24
Schoolmaster to bring men (who gi^^ h^^d to ^t) to Christ, that they might be
justified by Faith. That none who are ^ince^e, according to the Mark 4 2^ Joh 3
(...) Jam 4 6 (...) 5 (...) 10 ^ 9 ^^il ^ ^ Act ^0 4 35
least measure of Light given to th^^, if the continue to fo^low the Lord, can
fall short of eternal Life and Salvation; for he will lead them from one degree
of Light and Grace to another, (as he led Israel of old out of Egypt, through
the red Sea, and the Wilderness, and through Jordan, unto the promised Land)
until he who has begun his good Work of Salvation in them, bring it to
Perfection. That Rom 10 8 9 Deutr 30 14 15 Heb 7 25 26 Mat 1 21 1 Timothy 2 5
Christ the Word and the Light is in every man (though not revealed or known as
such) and is sufficient to save every man, but Christ whole and undivided is
our all-sufficient Savior, able to save to the uttermost all that come unto
God by him; and as Christ without us, as he dyed and rose again, and is
ascended, and is our Mediator with God in Heaven, does not save us without
Christ in us, so nor does Christ in us save us without Christ without us, the
which Christ is one, the fullness Joh 1 15 16
without us in the Man Christ Jesus, and the measure of him in us; and the Ephesians
4 7 13 16 Cant 5 4 Mat 3 12
measure of the heavenly Gift of Christ works savingly in us, by the Power
and Strength of the Fullness; and none witness Christ perfectly to save them,
but who have Rom 10 8 9 10 Joh 3 14 15 36 cap 12 36
Faith in him as he dyed and rose again, and is gone into Heaven, and there
remains our Advocate and Mediator, as well as that they believe in him as he
is spiritually present in them, to enlighten, quicken and Sanctify them. That
as the sufficiency of Christ's Light and Grace within every man is not to be set
up in opposition to Christ without us, who has all fullness of Light, Grace
and Truth dwelling in him, and o^ w^ose Joh 1 15 15 Mark 4 25 2 Cor 8 9 James 4
6 (...) 1 2
Fullness we all receive Grace (...) Grace; ^o ^or is the present measure of
Light and Grace received, to be set in opposition to f^^der measures of Light
and Grace yet to be received. And the Sufficiency that any has o^ Grace, is
for the present time, but not for all time to come; and therefore every one is
to wait Isa 4^ 29 ^1
in the present measure already received, and by the help of the same to pray
to God in J^hn 14, ^3* cap 16 23* ^4. Mat 7, 7.8, Col 2, 3,
the Name of Christ Jesus, to receive a daily and hourly supply from God, out
of Christ's fullness (as out of a most rich Treasury and Storehouse) of more
Grace, that so ^e who has began his good work in them, having given them a
small measure of his Grace, may carry it on in them to perfection, by his
giving them a daily supply and increase of more Grace, which they shall all
receive, as they wait and pray for it, being found in all diligent Obedience
unto his present requirings.

. 4. Concerning Justification and Sanctification.
That Acts 13, 19* cap 26 18. Heb 5 9* To. 5.1
Faith, Repentance, Love, Hope, etc. and sincere Obedience to Gods Commands,
although they are necessary Conditions and Qualifications required, in order to
our I^st^fication and Remission of sin^, yet they are not the Foundation of it,
but Christ alone i^ the fo^ndation thereof, in whose Name, as he dyed for us
and rose again, (...) 4, 12. 1 Cor 3.11
Repentance and Remission of sin ^^ to be preached, and through Faith in his
Name, his Luke ^^^ 46, 47.
Obedience and Righteousness, as he dyed for us, and became obedient unto the
death of the Cross, is Rom 3, 24 cap 4, 5, 6, 7 11, Rom 5 16, 18, 19 Phil. 3,
8, 9, 10. Rom 8.34.
imputed or accounted to us for Remission of sin and Justification. 1 Cor 6, 9,
10, 11,
And none are justified but who are sanctified. That though there is a Luke 8, 3,
Faith that may be lost and fallen from, yet there is a degree in ^ Pet. 1, 7,
Faith and Sanctification, which the Soul having attained, does not lose nor
fall from it, and that is the Faith that is more precious than Gold that
perishes, which being tried with the fire, endures to the end of all
Temptations. That a Mat 12.20, Rom 6 18 22, cap 8, 2, 3.
Victory over sin, and a freedom from it, is possible to be obtained by the
Grace of God, here in this mortal Body, the which Victory and Freedom is not
received nor witnessed Phil 2, 12, and 1, 6.
all at once, but gradually, and the sooner it is witnessed that men are the
more diligent in the improvement of Gods Grace, and all helps and means that
God has given us for the same; and it is most safe for all to have a holy
jealousy over themselves, that they exceed not in thinking of themselves above
what is convenient, but to follow the Example of Paul, who said, 1 Cor 4, 4.
I know nothing by my self, yet I am not hereby satisfied, but he that judges
me is the Lord; and of Job, who said, Tho I were Perefect, yet would I not know
my So^l. Job 9, 21.


. 5. Concerning the true Worship of God, and the true Ministry.
That Mat 4 10 1 Cor 1, 2, 3 1 Timothy 1, 12 Rev 1, 4, 5. Acts 7, 59. Ephe. 6 18.
God and Christ, and the holy Spirit, are only to be Worshipped, and Prayed
unto, as on^ ^^tire Object o^ Wo^ship, Prayer and Thaaks-giving; and that all
(...) Wo^sh^p, Prayer and Thanksgiving is to be perform^d by the Rom 8.26 John
4, 24. 1 Cor 12.3 cap. 14, 15,
(...) Gods Spirit, as it is inwardly ^elt to move and enable unto the same;
and that this ^elp is to be waited for in true Silence and Stillness, from all
our own Thoughts, and all Self-movings, and Self-strivings and Workings in the
mere Will and Power of man. That none are true Ministers of Christ, but who are
1 Timothy 3, 2 3, 4, Tit 1 7, 8, 9. Mat 10, 8. 2 Cor 11.7
holy men who speak as they are moved by the holy Spirit, and are qualified and
endued with sound knowledge, power and virtue; and that the Gospel is to be
preached freely, without requiring or exacting any thing for the same.

. 6. Concerning the Commandments of God and Christ, and the holy Scriptures.
That besides the general Commandments of God, of Piety, Justice and
Temperance, given under the Law, briefly contained, for matter and ^^bstance,
in the Ten Commandments, the Romans 2, 15,
work or effect of which is writ on the hearts of all men, there are some
special Precepts and Commandments of God and Christ given to us under the
New Testament, as Not mat 5 34 cap 19, 5, ^, Heb ^^, 9 1 John 3 23 Jer 31, 33.
Heb ^, 1^, ^phe. 2, 7,
to Swear at all, Not to fight with Carnal Weapons, Not to pay Tithes, nor to
practice any part of the Ceremonial Law, nor to have more Wives than one at
one time; and also to believe the Doctrine of Christ, as delivered by Christ
and his holy Prophets and Apostles, in all the parts of it, and recorded in the
holy Scriptures. And the whole Law of God, teaching all Duties of Love and
Obedience, is after a more excellent and powerful manner, writ in the hearts of
true Christians and sincere Believers in Christ Jesus, than as it is generally
writ in the hearts of all Mankind, because the Gospel Dispensation, in the
clea^ Ministration of it, through Faith in Christ Jesus, has more plenty of
Grace, Power and Li^e attending it. That the holy ^ Tim 3* 16 1 Timothy 4.^, 1^.15
2 C^^ 3.6. Luk 24 4 1 Cor 2 2^ (...) 1 17 18 (...) ^.9, 18. 1 John 5 9 ^0.
Scriptures are given ^ort^ ^y divine Inspiration, and are profitable and
worthy to be read and meditated upon by the help of the holy Spirit that gave
them forth, and that frequently, for our (...) and Comfort, and increase of
Faith. That the (...) of Scripture as the Word of God; that they can only be
savingly understood by the illumination and revelation of that Spirit that gave
them forth; That they are useful to Believers, for their growth and encreas^ in
Faith and Holiness, and to Unbelievers, that they may believe, as God shall be
pleased to make them Instrumental to the same; and that they contain a full and
sufficient Testimony to all Christian Doctrine and Practice; and that the Truth
of them is believed principally for and because of the inward Testimony,
Evidence and Word o^ God, and of the holy Spirit, sealing to the Truth of them
in our hearts; and that they are the only outward Test, Touchstone and Rule,
whereby to try all Doctrines of men, so that whatever Doctrine is not according
to the holy Scripture, in matters of Faith and Life, is to be rejected and
denied.

. 7. Concerning the Future States of Men after Death, the Day of Judgment, and
Resurrection of the Dead.
That after Heb 9, 27 Luk 16, 22, Phil 1, 23, Rev 6.10.11.16.23,
Death comes Judgment, and that the Souls of all true Believers in Christ
Jesus, both Males and Females, immediately after Death go to God, and to
Christ, in Heaven; and that the Souls of them who dye in final Impenitency are
cast into Psalm 9, 17, Rev 2^, 15
Hell. That there is a General Day Jude 6, 2 P^t 2.4, mat 7.22, cap 25 3^, 2
These 1, 7, 8.9 ^0: Acts 17 31 Rom 12 10 2 Cor (...)
of Judgment yet to come, wherein all Nations shall stand before the Son of
Man, even the Man Christ Jesus, at his Appearance and Coming without us, as
well as at his Appearance and Judgment Seat within us, to receive according to
the D^eds done in the body, good or evil. That Christ is the ^^viour o^ t^^
who^e Man, both ^oul and Body; and that there shall be a R^s^^rection of the
(...) 3 21 mat ^^ 28, 1 (...) 14 cap 15 20.21.22, 42, 43, 44,
Body, both o^ the Just and Unjust, the Just unto Everlasting Life, and the
Unjust unto shame and Torment forever; and that the mat 22, 30, Acts 26.23, 1
Cor 15, 23, 50,
Resurrection of the Body is not received in this mortal Life, nor immediately
after Death, but the deceased Saints generally wait for it, until the Coming of
Christ, and that the dead in Christ shall rise first, when the Body that is
sown natural shall be raised spiritual; for Flesh and Blood does not inherit
the Kingdom of God, nor Corruption Incorruption.

. 8. Concerning Christ's Baptism and Supper.
That Christ's mat 3 11
Baptism is with the holy Ghost and Fi^e, whereof the outward Baptism with
Water was a Figure, the which Fire burns up the Dross and Combustible matter
of the Sins and Lusts that war against the Soul, and is that Isa 4 4.
Spirit of judgment and of Burning, by which the Filth of the Daughter of Zion
is to be purged away. That Christ's Joh 6.53, 5^ 55, 56, 1 Cor 16.17. Rev 3.20,
1 Cor 11, 24, 25 26*
Supper is his feeding all the faithful, with giving them his flesh to eat, and
his Blood to drink, and such have eternal Life in them, and they daily remember
and ^editate on the Lords Death, by the help of his Spirit in them, until his
Last Coming in the Clouds of Heaven, without them, as well as until his more
a^undant Revelation in them, and that it is their Duty, as well as great
spiritual advantage, to remember him mo^^ frequently, with Prayer and
Thanksgiving, both when they eat not, and when they eat, whether more
privately or more solmenly, as occasion offers.

. 9 Concerning Places and Times of Worship, etc.
That all John 4 21.22.23, 1 Timothy 2 8, Col 2.16*
Places and Times of Worship, in themselves considered, are alike under the
Gospel for the Worship of God, and no Place or Time is more Holy than another,
yet convenient Places and Times of Worship, with other necessary Circumstances,
are to be regarded; and the First Day of the Week is worthily set apart from
Bodily Labor, for ( b) Religious Duties and Exercises, both in public and
private, as well as other convenient times on Week Days, and for meeting
together to wait upon God both in Silence, and in the performance of any
outward Exercise of Religion, that his Spirit moves unto.

. 10. Concerning some other Necessary Things.
That Plain Col 4.6. 1 Pet 3, 3, 4, 5, Tit 2 2, 4, Rom 12 2.
Language and Plain Habit, with all manner of Temp^rance and A^stinence from
all vain Customs o^ the World, after the manner of the p^imitive Christians,
(b) and according to the Testimony of our An^ient Brethren, is to be preserved
among us, and whatever is of good Report. That all due care is to be taken
concerning Marriages, that Persons concerned may proceed orderly, and that none
marry within these Exodus 20, 19. 1 Cor* 5 1
degrees of Kindred, forbidden under the Law, which are also forbidden under
the Gospel

. 11. Concerning the Church, and the Qualifications of the True Members thereof.
That the Act. 2.49 Rom 10 8, 9, 10, Jam 2.18. 1 John 4.2, 3. mat 10* 32, 33.
Church of Christ is the multitude of sincere Believers i^ christ, who ought to
manifest their Faith to one another by the living Confession of the Mouth,
^lowing from the living Faith in the Heart, accompanied with the Seal and
Confirmation of a Holy and Christian Life and Conversation, which will be
sensi^ly Gal 2.9. Prove 14 7 Phil 1, 5, 2, 1. Acts 8, 37, John 10, 1, 2, 3 Isa.
44.5. mat 3.6. Act. 19 38. John 9 22, cap 12 42, 2 Cor. 9.13 1 Timothy 2, 10, cap 6
12, Heb 3 1, cap 4 14* and 1^ 23
discerned through a spiritual inward Gif^ of Disce^ning in them, as ^he Tree
is known by the Fruits, and such have a spiritual Fe^lowship and Communion
together in the Spirit of Christ, and in the Gifts, and Graces, and Comforts,
and Refreshments thereof, that ^low from ^i^st the Head and Fountain, through
Member to Member; and is Ch^i^t believed in, is the Door into the Church, in
the ^ight of God, so Christ, both believed and confessed unto, is the D^or into
the Church in the ^ight of men. And that in the Church of Christ, the holy
Ghost makes Acts 20, 28*
Overseers, Elders and Rulers, who are known, received and owned to be such by
the 2 Cor 4.2, cap 5, 11,
Manifestation of the same Spirit in all the true Members thereof.

. 12. Concerning Magistracy, and Obedience thereunto.
That it is the Duty of all Christians, to give all ready Obedience to
Magistrates in all lawful things, and to be subject to their Commands, not only
for Wrath, but for Romans 13, 2* 3 4, 5, ^ Pet 2, 13 14, 15,
Conscience sake; and if they command things unlawful, to make no resistance by
outward Force, but patiently to suffer under them, for Magistracy and
Government in the World is the Ordinance of God, and when d^ely performed,
according to Truth and Righteousness among men, belongs ^o that universal
Ministration of the Spirit, given in general to Mankind, by virtue of which,
whatever is lawfully commanded by Magistrates, will be answered by the Light of
God, and that just Principle of God in every man's Conscience, that will lead
and instruct him to obey the same.

Given forth in our own Behalf, and in behalf of many Brethren, who are of the
same Faith, By us, George Keith, Thomas Budd, John Heart, Richard Helliard,
Thomas ^ooton, Henry Furnis,


THE END.

