Water Baptism Plainly proved by SCRIPTURE TO BE A GOSPEL PRECEPT.

By Pardon Tillinghast, a Servant of Jesus Christ

Printed in the Year 1689.

Water Baptism Plainly proved by SCRIPTURE to be a GOSPEL PRECEPT.
BEing presented with a Paper, by a Friend of the Society of the People called
Quakers, it being a leaf or two of a Book late written by George Keith: The
principal Scope of the said Paper is comprehended in these particulars; 1. That
the Baptism with Water does properly and only belong to John's Ministry and
Dispensation. 2. That there is no Command from God for Water Baptism. 3. That
the Apostles practiced it only by permission for a time, as they did other
Ceremonies of the Law, and not by any Gospel standing Commission.


This being the substance of the Paper, it is needless to mention every Line, I
shall endeavor as the Lord shall assist me reply to these Conclusions*

The first of these being esteemed among these People as Goliath was in the Camp
of the Philistims, I trust by the improving of a Sling and a few Stones chosen
out of the Book of the Holy Scriptures to oppose and destroy, that a Gospel
Ordinance be not by them defied*

Therefore contrary to this Conclusion, I do assert, That the Baptizing
Believers in Jesus Christ with Water, is a part of Christ's Baptism, began by
John, but carried on by Christ; and to remain throughout the Gospel
Dispensation.

2. I do affirm, That the outward Form, and inward Power of Godliness may not
be separated, but remain and abide together in the Church of the Living God,
the Pillar and Ground of Truth.

First, For proof whereof, take notice of what is written by Mark, at the
beginning, 1.2. and third verses, noting John's Baptism to be the beginning of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God: as it is written, Behold I send my
Messenger, that shall prepare thy way before thee: Here is plainly noted, That
the Preaching and Baptizing by John, is a part of the Gospel Dispensation, and
although it were acted under the Law, as also Christ was under the Law, yet his
work related to Christ's Gospel Dispensation, and is plainly distinguished from
the Law and the Prophets, for it is written: The Law and the Prophtes were
until John, but (...) the day of John the Baptist, the Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take by Force; nor was Water Baptism any
otherwise John's, then the Law of God was called Moses's Law, he being the
M^nister thereof; and it was the Devils dispute, that the Law ended with Moses:
So also was Christ the Minister of that part of Christ's Gospel: nor is there
any mention of a third dispensation, that is neither Law-nor Gospel of John's,
as is imagined; Paul treating of the Ministrations, 2 Cor. 3. treats only of
two, Law and Gospel, Letter and Spirit: when one was to be chosen in the room
of Judas, he must be one beginning from the Baptism of John, so Peter, Acts 10.
begins the word of Peace by Jesus Christ at John's Baptism.

2. John is called Christ's Messenger, the Message of John was his, and upon his
account not John's*

3. John was sent to prepare Christ's way, teaching believing in him that was to
come; and as soon as Christ does manifest himself, declares him to be come:
saying, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. So that
it is plain, That baptizing repenting Believers in Christ with Water, was then
the way of Christ began and prepared by John.

4. John's Preaching and Baptizing, was the way provided of God for them that
believed and obeyed, to escape the wrath to come: for says John to some coming
to his Baptism: Who has forewarned you to flee from the wrath to come, Mat.
3.7 and is agreeable with Christ's words, Mark 16. He that believes and is
Baptized, shall be saved. Therefore it is said the Publicans justified God
being baptized of John, but the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of
God against themselves, being not baptized of John, his work and Ministry being
from Heaven.

5. Because Christ himself submits to it, as Gods righteous way suffer it to
be; so says he to John when he comes to him to be baptized of him, for it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness.

6. Because God bear witness to it from Heaven, both by voice, and giving the
Holy Ghost to his Sons Obedience.

7. Because the Lord Jesus himself takes up with water baptism, not only by
obeying to it, but also dispensing the same with John in his day* and when it
was told to John, that He, to whom he bear witness that was with him beyond
Jordan, the same baptizeth, and all men come to him; John is so far from
counting him therein an intruder into his work and Ministry, that he readily
and joyfully confesses, That, that work did of right belong to him, owning
that he received his Commission from him, and was sent by him; says he, a man
can receive nothing except it be given him from above; but declares him to be
from above, and above all, John 3. He that is of the earth is earthly:
therefore he must increase: but I a man of the earth must decrease; giving him
the pre-heminence both in the work of baptizing, and in all other things:
saying, after me comes a man that is preferred before me, for he was before
me; and of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace; and it is
plain by Scripture, that the Lord Jesus took up this work, to carry it on, even
of Water Baptism as i^ said, John 4.1. when the Lord knew that the Pharisees
had heard that Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John, etc. So that
he did it not in a corner, nor to a few, but out-went John in baptizing; but if
it be replied, that Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples, I answer,
that makes no more against what I have said, than for any to say, that Solomon
did not build the first Temple, nor Zerubbabel the Second; which although they
did not the servile Labor, yet all was by their Command, Commission and
Authority; even so was the baptizing done by Christ's Disciples, it was his
work, and by his Power and Command; whose assistance went along with them as
their Lord and Master, and that their baptizing was with Water, is plain:
first, because it is compared to the work of John: So it is presented both to
John and to the Pharisees. 2. Because it is said, Jesus himself baptized not,
but his Disciples; had it been only the Spiritual part of Baptism, it could not
have been so said, for baptizing with the Spirit, is only Christs' Prerogative;
yet is it said, Jesus made and baptized more Disciples than John, sure he did
it not to John as his Baptism, for that were to make John Lord, and Jesus
Servant, but they did it to him, and for him, as Lord of all, not as John's
first Testimony, that they should believe on him that was to come, but to him
whom they witnessed was come; but true it is this their Command and Commission
extended, but to the Land of Israel, as also John's did, and until they had
received from their Lord more Power, and larger Commission were there limited.

8. Therefore when the Lord had finished the work of Redemption by his death,
and was raised up from the Dead, and had all power given him in heaven and
earth, he then inlargeth his Commission and Command to his Disciples: saying,
go into all the world, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have
commanded, and lo I am with you always to the end of the world: he does not
tell them (as the simpleness and folly, or rather deceitfulness of the Quakers
would carry it) well, I have now put an end to Water Baptism, which did
properly and only belong to John's Ministry and Dispensation, and now your work
is to baptize only with my Baptism of the Spirit all Nations; nor did his
Disciples so understand his great Commission, Mat. 28. to intend.

9. When the Disciples had received the promis^d holy Spirit, that was to be
their guide and order to enable them to be Christ's Witnesses to the people in
the power of this Spirit, they went forth, the Lord working with them and
confirming his Word by signs following, Mark 16.20. But let it be minded, how
did these chosen Apostles and Disciples carry on this work of Christ; for now
it is undeniable, that the Ministration of the Spirit is begun, and by the Holy
Spirit, they are led it being poured on them to the admiration of all the
dwellers on earth, Acts 2.5. See their work first at Jerusalem, how powerfully
did the holy Spirit convince the Jews that had killed the Prince of Life, whom
God raised up; so that upon hearing Peter's testimony, not of killing the Light
within, as the Quakers Preach, but of that holy Child Jesus, who was of the
fruit of David's Loins according to the flesh, yet the only begotten Son of God,
according to the Spirit of holiness, they were pricked in their hearts, and
said to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren what shall we do?
Peter guided by the Spirit, answers: Repent and be baptized every one of you
(mind it, every one that expects Salvation) in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins, and you shall rece^ve the gift of the Holy Ghost; this can
be no otherwise taken then of Water Baptism, as to the first part, and spirit
baptism in the second part, otherwise to render it only Spirit, as the Quakers
suggest, is to charge the spirit of God in Peter with gross impertinencies and
tautologies, as if he should say, Repent and be baptized with the holy spirit,
and you shall receive the holy spirit: but the Spirits Teaching in it indeed is
plain, that repenting Believers baptized with Water (being a sign and Token
from God to them of the remission of sins) are the only true Heirs of the
promise of the Holy Ghost, which God does also give to them that obey him, and
to look for this blessed promise otherwise than in his own way, is as to seek
the living among the dead.

So again, Acts 8. Philip the Evangelist led by the spirit of God, went down to
the Cities of Samaria, and Preached Christ to them, to whom it is said, they
with one accord gave heed, and believing they were baptized both Men and Women;
and that this was Water baptism, is undeniable, because it is said after that:
when Peter and John were sent from Jerusalem to further that work of Christ
even to put them in Gods orderly way, they prayed for them, That they might
receive the Holy Ghost, for as yet he was fallen on none of them, only they
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, and verse 29. the Spirit said to
Philip go near, and join thy self to this Chariot to wit, of the Ethiopian
Eunuch, and having by the leadings of the holy spirit, Preached the Lord Jesus
to him, and the will of God touching Believers Obedience to the baptism with
Water for Remission of sins; (for without so considering it, though not at
large expressed) no reason can be given why he should say when he came to a
certain Water: Lo, here is Water, what hinders me that I should not be
baptized; he says, if thou believe with all thine heart, thou may; and
upon his Confession of his faith in Jesus, he commanded the Chariot to stand
still, and they went down both into the Water, and he baptized him, and the
spirit of the Lord caught away Philip: So that in all his work the spirit of
the Lord accompanies him, approving and allowing of what he did as an holy
Messenger of Christ: which of the Quakers have trod this path of Christ's holy
Spirits Teaching? but kicking against it: promote and set up the imaginations
and devices of their own hearts.

But let us trace their way yet farther, and see how Peter is guided of God
toward the Gentiles to take of them a people for his Sons Name, who is the
light to the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel,

Cornelius, Acts 10. being warned of God by an holy Angel to call for Peter,
who should speak words whereby he and all his house should be saved; and when
he is come, he says also, we are all here present before God, to hear all
things that are commanded thee of God: while Peter is (speaking; not mentioning
ought of the light within, although we deny it not where God would have it
spoken of) but testifying to Jesus of Nazareth whom God anointed with the Holy
Ghost, who went about doing good, whom they slew and hanged on a Tree, whom God
raised up and showed him openly, not to all but to chosen ones: To whom God
commanded to teach and preach him to be the Judge of quick and dead: this says
he is he to whom all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever
believes in him shall receive Remission of sins: while he is thus speaking,
the Holy Ghost fell upon all them that heard the Word to the astonishment of
them that came with Peter; then said Peter can any man forbid Water that these
should not be baptized, that have received the Holy Ghost as well as we; and he
commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus* Surely Peter stood
in the awe and fear of God, and leading of his Spirit, speaking nothing but
what God Commanded him, neither was there any ground here to use or comply with
any legal Ceremony to move him to this work of baptizing with Water, but only
as it was his Lord Christ's Commission and Command, and teaching of his Spirit;
for they were Gentiles, upon whom the Apostles of Christ laid not legal
Institutions and Commandments, but as Ministers of the Spirit, not of the
Letter, neither did, nor could enjoin them to any thing that Christ had not
commanded them: And here I desire it may be minded, and soberly considered by
all that read; the plain difference between the teaching of the holy Spirit in
the Apostle Peter, sent of Christ, and the Spirit by which the Quakers speak,
and are guided in this matter. Peter beholding Gods Promise fulfilled in giving
his holy Spirit to the Gentiles, makes that a forceable Argument to press their
Obedience to Water Baptism, Gods orderly way for the Planting of the Gospel
Church: but plain contrary to this, as light is to darkness, is that the
Quakers spirit leads unto; by which as John says, we may try their Spirit,
whether it be of God or no, who making a pretense to have the holy Spirit, and
to be acted and guided thereby, cry down water baptism, as of no use to them
that have the Spirits Baptism; but so did not Peter, who was sent truly of God,
and spoke as he commanded him, shows, that the receiving the Holy Ghost did
not exempt Believers from Water baptism, but rather strongly engage them
thereunto, as the order of Gods House, for so the words of Peter do
demonstrate; that all Believers in Christ did attend to this Order of
Water Baptism* else it had been impertinent for Peter so to have said: nay, not
only impertinent but sinful and wicked, to cause the Gentiles to be obedient
to Commandments of men; no Christian may dare entertain such thoughts of
Christ's holy Apostles and Messengers, who Preached not themselves, but Christ
Jesus the Lord; and says Paul to the Romans; I will not dare to speak of the
things that Christ has not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient by
word or deed; and again he says, if any man think himself a Prophet or
Spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the things I write are the Commandments of
God. Such were all the things they wrote or spoke by way of Commandment, to
believe in Jesus: yet we may see Keith and others, pretended Ministers of the
Spirit, but not guided by that Spirit Christ's Ministers were, but by a spirit
of delusion, dare thus plainly with Elimas the Sorcerer, being full of subtilty
and mischief, pervert the right ways of the Lord, abusing the Apostles of
Christ, as if they should command in Christ Jesus the Lords name, and that to
the Gentiles too, such things as were abolished Ceremonies, which says Keith,
they tolerated and used for a time by permission, and not by any Gospel
standing Commission; I own what Paul says, to the Jew, he became a Jew, to
gain the Jew, condescending to their weakness in some legal Ceremonies for a
time, for the sakes of some that believed, yet zealous of the Law; but it is
evident, they did not impose on the Gentiles nor Jews neither by way of
Command, any thing that Christ had not commanded them, as is plain, Acts 21.25.
as touching the Gentiles that believe, said James and the Elders, we have
written to them, that they observe no such things as Circumcision or legal
Ceremonies; but we see Peter commands in the name of the Lord Jesus, the
Gentile Believers and Jews also Acts 2. to be Baptized with Water, yea,
although they were first filled with the Holy Ghost; and it is worth noting
too, that although Peter was put in mind by the holy spirit, of the words of
the Lord Jesus, according to his Promise, John 14.26. he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, and in special that word,
John baptized you with water, but ye shall be baptized with the holy Ghost,
when he saw the Spirit poured on the Gentiles: yet this was no impediment to
Peter to forward those believers in the way of Christ's commands, and order of
his House, to that despised Ordinance of Water Baptism, stirring up their pure
minds, as after he exhorts the Saints to be mindful of the words of the holy
Prophets, and of the commandment of the Apostles of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; knowing that in the last days there would come Scoffers, walking after
their own lust, saying, where is the Promise of his Coming? and Paul to the
Theslalonians foreseeing that Antichrist and Man of sin arising, stirs up
the Saints to stand fast, and hold the Traditions they had been taught by word
or Epistle: and says Jude a Servant of Jesus Christ, contend for the Faith
once delivered to the Saints, and says Paul Cor. 1.11. I commend you Brethren,
that you remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances as I delivered them
to you: but these boasters of the Spirit being as clouds without water, carried
about with wind, make it their work to ^at out as a canker, as Hymeneus and
Philetus did the Faith of the Gospel, and Ordinances of the Lord Jesus,
wresting the Scriptures, as Peter by the spirit did foretell to their own
destruction.

But yet further we may observe the footsteps of Christ's Flock very exemplary
for the lovers of Jesus to go after, as the spirit of God by Solomon long ago
directed, Song of Solomon 1.8.

Acts 9. says Ananias to Saul, being sent of the Lord to him, the Lord having
called him to believe; and now why tarriest thou, arise and be baptized, and
wash away thy sins: that here was water baptism as well as spirit-baptism, is
evident, for though Ananias by Gods appointment put his hands on him, to the
end he might receive his sight, and be filled with the holy Ghost, yet there
was something for Saul to be active and passive in, to the will of Jesus of
Nazareth, that had called him even to arise and be baptized which must needs be
of Water, for as before has been hinted in order to receiving the holy Ghost,
it is only required to repent and be baptized; certain, Saul did repent, but he
must also give up himself professedly to Jesus, whom he had persecuted, as well
as other Disciples. So again, see Acts 16. this was Paul and Silas way to the
Converted Jailer and his Household, and to Lydia and her Household; upon their
believing: And now let me come to the Corinthians, Acts 18. there we find
Crispas the Ruler of the Synagogue believing in the Lord, and many of the
Corinthians hearing, believed and were baptized. I shall not need here to seek
to prove this Baptism with Water, because the Quakers readily own it, supposing
they have advantage against the baptizing with Water from this Scripture, for
says Keith, and it is usually coakt at by them: Paul says, I was not sent to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel; and it was strange to think, that Paul would
thank God that he did not so fully obey the Gospel Rule. Answ. first, if these
should be put to prove this water baptism, they would find it as difficult as
for others to prove the Commission, Mat 28. to intend Water, it being in
neither so expressed in so many words, and hereby we may see the shifts and
devices they make every way for their own ends, to oppose Truth, but be it so,
I shall grant this as the former and orderly way of Christ commanded by his
Messengers; for otherwise how should these every where as appears where the
Word is received, be found so obeying and yielding to it: the reason why Paul
so says, and thanketh God that he baptized no more of them, than Crispus, and
Gaius and the Household of Stephanas, was not, because it was not a Gospel
Ordinance, and comprehended in Paul's commission, for then he had done evil in
that he did in baptizing so many, and of the first fruits to Christ there, and
persons of great eminency, and were after employed as Ministers in the Gospel
as may be made appear to put them upon obedience to that Christ had not
commanded; this Paul dared not to do as is aforesaid, nor can it be rationably
so considered; the ground of Paul's so saying, is clear, was occasioned by the
divisions Satan had drawn them into; to dote upon men whom Christ employed;
some one Paul, some one Apollo, others one Cephas, not considering that they
were all of them by Profession Baptized to Christ Jesus; we are ready to
idolize them that did baptize them* upon this ground he thanks God that he
baptized no more of them, lest they should dote on him, and give him the honor
due to Christ; for says he, Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the
Gospel; with this word the Quakers, and many opposers of the way of Christ
please their vain fancies, as if they had a clear word for their opposition to
Water Baptism; but indeed that which is here inferred, is only this, although
baptizing was a Gospel command for every one that believed in the Lord Jesus,
to submit unto* and so be planted thereby into the likeness of his Death,
Burial, and Resurrection, yet it was not so bound to Paul or any other, sent to
Preach the Gospel, that they with their own hands must needs perform that work
of baptizing; but another Disciple although not so endowed for Preaching, might
be instrumental in that Service of baptizing, and therefore we find the
Apostles had such and such for their Ministers, as John, Timothy and others;
this is all that can be truly drawn from this of Paul, and makes nothing to the
purpose for which it is produced;

Christ having began his work by his Doctrine of Repentance, Faith, and Water
baptism, goes forward to complete by his Spiritual Baptism, beautifying his
Temple with gifts of his Spirit, this spiritual House of God was lively set
forth by his material Temple, whose foundation was of stones, cut out of the
Mountains, and also Timber-work; but the adorning of it, and finishing work,
was of silver, gold, and precious stones, very admirable: even so the
foundation of Gods Spiritual House and Temple, consisting of living stones, is
began with Water Baptism to Repentance; but his completing this spiritual
building, is with his spiritual gifts and graces, the Ornaments of his Temple,
and glory of his House, the true Church of Jesus Christ; and as in the former
Temple, the Stones and Timber was hewed and squared by Gods appointment; (...)
Gods outward Ordinances in his Church, of his own appointment, as well as the
glorious Ornaments of spiritual gifts: and to separate them, is, as if the
builders of the Temple, in the adorning and finishing it, should despise and
raze the foundation, because it was not all silver and gold, as the adorning
part so glorious to behold; indeed such foolish builders they are, that now go
about to raze out and destroy Gods outward Ordinances, which he has ordained;
as Baptism, laying on of hands, breaking of Bread, Church Discipline and Order;
as Solomon says, a wise Woman builds her House, but the f^^lish plucketh it
down with her hands.

The Beloved Disciple John, who was the least of the Penmen of holy Scripture,
and had been an eyewitness of the power and Coming of the Lord Jesus, as well
as Peter, who also had leaned on his bosom, and whose hands had handled of the
word of life: he testifies of the true Jesus Christ, saying, this is he that
came by water and blood, 1 John 5.6. Not by water only, but by water and blood,
and it is the Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is Truth: here
the Spirit by John brings those Gospel Ordinances appointed of God for a
remembrance of his death for them by the memorial of the Cup of Blessing, the
Communion of his Blood, and of the washing away their Sins, signified in the
water of Baptism, as was said by Peter to them, Acts 2. Repent and be baptized
every one of you* for the Remission of sins; and says An^nias to ^aul, ari^e,
and be baptized, and wash away thy sins: this being to Believers a sign given
of God, and a witness on earth that God has given to (...) eternal life in his
Son; for there are three that bear witness on earth to the grace of God in
Christ, as well as three in heaven; to wit, the Spirit, the Water, and the
Blood.

1. The measure of the Spirit given of God to his Saints, or baptizing them
with the Holy Ghost and Fire: not to every man in the world as the Quakers
affirm, wresting that saying of Paul to the Corinthians.

2. The Water of Baptism which has been abundantly proved to be of Gods
appointing, a comfortable sign and witness of remission of sins.

3. The Memorial of his blood given in command to his Disciples, and practiced
by Believers, Jews, and Gentiles; these are standing witnesses of the grace of
Life given of God in his Son. Christ having so commanded and ordained these
testimonies of himself, both by his own submission to the will of God herein,
and giving this forth as a part of his Law: that John might plainly declare
what Christ witnessed too in opposition to the spirit of Antichrist, that he
saw arising to oppose the true Jesus says as before: this is he that came by
water and blood, doubling this Sentence, not by water only, which was first in
Commission; but by water and blood: also the Author to the Hebrews, treating of
the first principles of the Oracles of God, and Doctrine of Christ, makes the
Doctrine of Baptism, and laying on of hands, as part of these, not laying again
the foundation of Repentance, Faith, Baptism, laying on of hands, Resurrection
of the Dead, and Eternal Judgment.

And says John, 2 Epistle 9. Whosoever Transgresses and abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ has not God, he that abides in the Doctrine of Christ has
both the Father and the Son: Therefore says Christ to his Church, That which
thou have already, hold fast till I come; to wit, till I come in glory: to give
to every one as his work shall be: yet a little more to the matter.

In short, says Keith, if they that are so zealous for Water Baptism, were
cordially zealous for the inward and spiritual Baptism, they might be the more
born with, as men bear with Children, that use likeness and figures of things
that suit with the ages and state of Children; and Charity might be allowed
them in that case to be as Children or Babes in Christ.

Here we may note the pride that this boaster is filled with, counting even the
Master Builders of Gods House, but Children in comparison of them; for as I
have before proved by the Testimony of many Scriptures, that Christ and his
holy Apostles, were zealous of Gods way and order, as to the outward form, as
Paul says to Timothy, hold fast the form of soundness which thou have heard of
me; and says he, I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that
thou keep this Commandment without spot, unrebukable, till the appearing of
Jesus Christ: commending Saints for keeping the Ordinances as he delivered
them, and in particular mentions that Ordinance of the Lords Supper; which
according as he received of the Lord, he delivered to them: but supposing them
cordially zealous for the inward too, he extends some Charity toward them as
Children and Babes in Christ, using figures according to their time and age:
but the Generation of Quakers it seems are got into an higher degree of stature
and fullness, thinking they are in an higher dispensation then they had
attained: but let him that thinks he Stands, take heed lest he fall;
although he grant there may be such a state of Childhood, as may use such
things for a time, as outward Ordinances, and wait therein for the inward and
spiritual appearances of Christ's Kingdom: but their Ministry and Dispensation
is above it, and are born Monsters, not Babes to be fed with Milk, as the
Saints heretofore; the least of their babes d^spising or outward Ordinances,
pretending to inward Revelations: but these says he who are altogether for the
outward Baptism and Supper wholly, and deny the inward and spiritual Baptism,
no such Charity for them; and truly I think so too: that such as wholly deny
the inward power of the holy spirit, resting in the outward form, to be no
other than he says: but such extremes are much alike, to pretend to the power,
and deny the form of godliness, is as hipocritical as the other is formal:
says Paul to the Romans, and thanks God for it; you have obeyed from the
heart, to the form of Doctrine that was delivered to you; but the will of God
is the form and power to go together, nor can it be proved that any Christian
did seek to separate the true form and order of Gods House, and yet pretend to
live in the power and life; and therefore when we find any attempting this, to
destroy one by exalting the other, we have just ground to suspect a spirit of
delusion to be at work.

And now because in his Paper he strikes as well at the Lords Supper, as at
Water baptism, as he that reads his Book may see at large; after he has daubed
with untempered mortar about it, sums up the matter that the common eating
that they use, is the eating the Lords Supper, whether two or three more, or
less, but the great design is plain to eat out the Lords Supper as nothing,
with the rest of Gospel Ordinances and Commands, under the pretenses of
spirituality, which indeed Believers are to walk in, in all their holy service
they perform, living in the spirit, and walking in the spirit; but to pretend
thereto, only to make void plain Commandments, is of no use: is but deceitful
and hypocritical: The Lord Jesus instituted that service, a memorial of his
death; and this he commanded them to do in remembrance of his; and the Saints
attended it not as common eating, but as a special appointment for a special
end; and Paul says, when ye come together to eat, ^arry one for another, and
if any hunger, let him eat at home; but these make all eating alike, but eating
the Lords Supper never was intended for satisfying hunger, the Lord, and his
Messengers also, guided by him, makes a plain difference as is evident, between
this and common eating, for Paul rebuking the Corinthians for rash and
disorderly acting in this Ordinance, that he had delivered them, according as
he had received it from the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. says, this your way of eating, is
not to eat the Lords Supper, but your own Supper; the Lords Supper being a
different thing from their own Supper; for they came together designedly to
this eating, as Acts 20. And we are required of the Lord to labor to be
unanimously together at this eating, to show thereby, that though they were
many, yet were one bread, and one Body, and in a special manner be put in
remembrance of the death of that Christ Jesus, who his own self bear their sins
in his own body on the tree of his suffering for them in the flesh, as Peter
says, 1 Pet. 4 1. so together by this outward obedience to the holy command,
be inwardly remembered, and by faith refreshed through his flesh, that is meats
indeed, and his blood, even that blood of his Cross, by which he made peace and
atonement for his Saints; and confirmed the new Covenant of his grace and
remission of sins, thereby also being put in remembrance of his second glorious
Coming to their Salvation, that wait and look for him; so says Paul, so often as
you eat this bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord, you show forth the Lords
death till he come: not come as the Quakers vainly imagine him to be come to
them, which is but a deceitful notion; for it is evident, That the Primitive
Saints put in this Gospel Order as has been proved; had the spiritual baptism,
and enjoyment of Christ in Spirit (which these do but merely boast of,
fulfilling that word of Solomon, Prove. 25.14. and (of Jude also, he that
boasts of a false gift is like clouds and wind without rain) but they had it
indeed, being destitute of no gift, waiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 1.7. who says, he shall confirm you to the end, that you may be
blameless in the day of Christ; which day, the Saints thus gifted from on high,
looked for, and hasted to, 2 Pet. 3.12. and says John, truly our fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 Epistle 1.3. yet looking for
another coming, according to his Promise, who told them, that he would see them
again after a little while, because he must go to the Father: and then their
hearts should rejoice: John says, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

And indeed herein did the wisdom and love of Christ greatly appear to his
Saints, foreseeing the delusions and deceptions that would arise; and many
subtle devises of Satan, to make void, and of none effect his sufferings for
them in the flesh, to appoint such remembrances of him, and tokens of his love,
to leave with them in the little time of his personal absence, that his
Redeemed should not be carried away with empty notions of false Christ's that
never dyed for them, to redeem them; nor with those voices, that should say,
behold he is in the desert: or behold, he is in the secret Chambers, agreeing
to this late voice of the Quakers Doctrine, who cry up only a light in the
secret Chambers of the heart for the true Christ: but said he, believe them
not, no, though they should show great signs and wonders to confirm their word,
for says Christ, I have told you this before, that being forewarned, you may
be fore-armed; not to wonder at those presumptuous assertions that false
Apostles, and deceitful workers transformed as Angels of light should come
forth with to deceive, but to look for the coming of the Son of Man, which
should so evident in his day to the whole world, even as the lightning that
shines from East to West; for says he, so shall the coming of the Son of Man
be: the Lord would not that his Redeemed should forget him, nor their Nature,
that he took on him; and suffered in; for he took not on him the nature of
Angels, but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. and says Paul, remember, that
Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised from the dead, according to my
Gospel: and least the delusion should be too much for these warnings, he
declares from heaven, Rev. 1* I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I
am alive for evermore, and have the Keys of Hell and of Death: the same voice
in substance he spoke from heaven to Saul, who is called Paul, Acts 9. I am
Jesus of Nazareth whom thou persecutest: the care and love of Jesus to his
Disciples in this matter, that they should not be mistaken concerning his
Nature, is plain, in that after he rose from the Dead, Luke 24 28. they being
terrified and affrighted at his appearance, knowing that he had been dead, and
supposing they had seen a Spirit: he says, why are ye troubled, why do
thoughts arise in your hearts? it is I my self, handle me, and see, for a
Spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have; and showed them his hands
and his feet; so does he to Thomas, John 20. showing them all, and Thomas in
particular, his hands feet, and side; all which they had beheld pierced with
nails and spears* All which he does to confirm their faith, that he was no^
barely a Spirit, but also Man's Nature; and though it was apt for them to take
him to be only a Spirit, as now is greatly designed by this generation: Satan
himself being very willing that imagination should go forward; but the Lord
would by no means let it go there, knowing how plausible soever this was, yet
it was a pernicious faithless notion, destructive to their Salvation; therefore
says he, see my hands and my feet; be not faithless, but believing: so said
the Angels to the Woman that went to anoint his Body in the Sepulcher; he is
not here, he is risen, come and see the place where the Lord lay: so that
indeed the great opposition against Water Baptism, and the Lords Supper,
Ordinances of Christ's appointment, that the Wisdom of God ordained, to be a
lively remembrance of the Man Christ Jesus, the only Mediator between God and
Man, is raised against the person of Christ Jesus, the Lord, whom the spirit of
Antichrist denies to be come in the Flesh; and yet carries it in a subtle
notion, that he is come in their Flesh, the better thereby to oppose and resist
the truth* can he do it effectually, without the eating out and destroying
these Ordinances that Christ ordained; (for I may say of them truly, as Paul
says to the Thessalonians, speaking of the Man of Sin that was to be revealed
in his time, which doubtless is now fulfilling) he that shall let, will let*
till he be taken out of the way, and then shall that wicked be revealed: the
form and order of Gods House, that was by the Saints maintained, was doubtless
a great let, I will not say, all the let to the Mystery of Inquiry that then
began to work in the Apostles Days* but if once he could take these away, then
shall that wicked be revealed more plain* whom the Lord shall destroy with the
Spirit of his Mouth, and consume with the brightness of his Coming; even him
whose Coming is after the working of Satan, with all power* Signs, and Lying
Wond^rs, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that Perish,
who received not the (...) of the Truth, that they might be saved, are given up
to strong delusions to believe a Ly, that they may be Damned: but says he,
^rethren, Stand fast, hold the Traditions you have been taught by Word, or by
our Epistle.

FINIS.

