Truth and Innocence DEFENDED AGAINST Calumny and Defamation, In a late Report
spread abroad concerning the REVOLUTION OF Humane Souls, With a further
Clearing of the Truth, by a plain Explication of my Sense, etc.
By George Keith.
To all Christian People, to whose homes this may come;
WHereas I have been lately accused by a certain Person, before diverse
Witnesses, for (...) the Author of a certain Book, called, The Two Hundred
Queries, printed at London eight Years ago, his Proof being, That four or five
Years ago he had it from my own Mouth; but being put to bring Evidence from
Witnesses, he said, He could prove it by such Circumstances which I told him,
that I could not deny. I answered him; It being so many Years ago, he might
justly question his Memory, seeing when I called him to bear witness to things
he had heard spoken but some few days or weeks past, he has said, He could not
remember them, his Memory being weak, and he had rather forget than remember
such things. He did also further charge me, That he heard me say, I believed I
should be moved of God to preach the Doctrine of the Revolutions, as he termed
it; but what Revolutions I meant, he did not tell; for there are many
Revolutions, and of many sorts; The which I do not remember I ever said to him;
and as he may understand the Revolutions, his so charging me may be an utter
Falsehood and Slander; for there are some sorts of Revolutions relating to the
Souls of men, that cannot be denied, if we own the Resurrection of the dead,
according to Scripture, and our conveyance and descent out of the loins of our
Ancestors up to Adam, according to the Scriptures; see Genesis 46. 26. Hosea 12.4.
Heb. 7.9, 10. and the word Revolution, is the true English of the Hebrew word
Gilgal, mentioned Josh. 5.9. Ezck. 10.13. and this with respect to men (see the
Hebrew Text, and Margen of the English Bible; also, the Hebrew word Te^upha is
translated three several times [ Revolution] by the Translators of our English
Bible, and set on the Margen by them; see Exodus 34. 22. 1 Sa^x. 1. 20. 2 Chronicles.
24.23. And whereas I declared, That I did not remember that ever I owned my
self to be the Author of that Book, or that I said, I did believe, that I
should be moved of God to preach the Revolutions; but on the contrary, seeing I
do not remember it, and my Memory is as good as his, if not better, I did and
do hold it to be rashly and foolishly ^^^^ged by him, and for which he may be
accounted a false Accuser; (...) can I think that ever I said such a thing,
because I never made the Opinion of the Revolutions, as delivered in that Book,
or as vulgarly held by its Alserters, a matter of my Faith, or as any divine
Opening; besides, his varying the Charge, as Witnesses can prove, saying first,
I knew not but I might be moved, etc. and last saying, I believed I should be
moved, etc. which differ widely, and make the whole justly incredible. But he
did so earnestly assert them, that he said, As God was in Heaven it was true;
which some of us that heard him, were greatly offended with, judging it to be
an Oath, as that Oath or manner of Swearing under the Law, As the Lord lives,
Jer. 5. 2. And I said to him, this is more than Yea or Nay, which Christ has
commanded us to keep unto in all our Communications, for whatsoever is more
than the^, comes of Evil; and many of us have suffered much in Old England for
refusing to swear in any case, even before a Magistrate. However, let it be
considered, whether it be not a Breach of all common Civility or Morality among
men, to make Public a thing secretly spoken (if the thing had been spoke by
me, as he affirms) that he thought might tend to my Prejudice; nor does it
excuse him, to say, I lately told somewhat he spoke to me in private; for that
was such a thing he might have spoke to any, and did not tend to his, or any
man's Prejudice, and was no secrecy. And whether his asserting a thing without
any Proof, but what we take to be a very great Oath, will be any sufficient
Witness or Evidence, in point of common Justice among men? for if this be
allowed, not only men's Fame and Reputation, but Property, Liberty and Life
itself lies at stake to be taken away most unjustly.

But to answer directly to his Charge; I do say, after the best Recollection of
my Memory that I can make, after so many Years past, I do not remember that I
said to him, I was the Author of that Book, and I know not how he can justly
think, considering these very Circustances he alleges, and some other
Circumstances whereof he cannot be ignorant, unless he has forgotten the
whole; for I told him, that diverse Persons were concerned in that Book, called,
The Two Hundred Queries, and after what manner. Besides, another Person has in
Print diverse Years ago owned that Book; and why then should he charge me with
that which another has owned. The most he can justly allege, Is, That I said
a considerable part of the Matter of that Book, which I had from another, I put
into Writing; which will not prove me to be the Author; for I often put into
writing other men's words, even such as are Adversaries; and many do write for
others that whereof they are not the Authors. But I further say, I never justly
could, nor do own my self to be the Author of that Book (how far I might be
concerned otherwise in it, in any part or in the writing of a great part of the
Matter of it, is not material nor necessary for me to determine, for others
were concerned; and he who accuses me of a thing which he cannot prove by
outward Evidence, by so doing rather proves himself a false Accuser, and
shows both his own Folly and Prejudice against me: And I say yet further, as
no man living can prove me to be the Author of that Book, so I had not the
least hand in the Printing it; for it was printed altogether without my Consent
and Approbation. And the Defaults (whether in the Transcribing, or in the
Printing it,) are so many, that it has quite altered the sense of the Queries
in many places, and made others of them Non-sensical; and there are things in
it for which I am no wise accountable, and which I never did own, or do own to
be mine; yet I cannot disown or blame the whole, but make a distinction; for
there are things queried in that Book, that are no wise unbecoming the best
Christians, and which mention nothing of the Revolutions, so called nor does
imply them, except by such remote seeming Consequences, which one may as
readily deny, as another may affirm, and they have no more necessary connection
with the Revolutions, than the Scriptures have, that are cited in them; and I
am not convinced, that it is a Trespass to query things that call not into
Question any one Article of the Christian Faith. But further, to clear the
matter, I do affirm, that I never said to any, nor did I ever conclude in my
thoughts, that the Doctrine of the Revolutions, as they are commonly
understood, or as delivered in that Book, was the matter of my Faith, or were
things inwardly revealed or opened to me by the Spirit of Truth, as I am free
to say concerning all things of my Christian Faith, which I both believe and
profess; nor have I ever had any Controversy, Strife or Contention with any
man about the Revolutions, so called, and I have been very shy and backward,
either to lend or recommend the said Book. But it is one thing what a man may
suppose to be a probable Opinion, or rational Hypothesis (either as touching
the Doctrine of the Revolutions, of which there are many (...) asserted by
Authors, or as touching any other Doctrine in Astronomy or Physic) and it is
far another thing what a man asserts to be his Christian Faith, grounded upon
the inward Evidence and Testimony of Gods Spirit in the Heart.

But as to my real sense of the Opinion of that called the Revolutions, which
do generally relate to Times past (and not with the least certainty to any one
particular Person to the time to come) ever since the Death of Christ. If any
hold any such Opinion or Doctrine of them (as I know none that do,) that does
teach, That men may delay their Repentance, or living a good Life, in hope that
they shall live again after Death* I do sincerely declare, I have always
abhorred any such Doctrine, and judged it Wicked and Abominable, and still I do
so judge, and hope so to do while I live; and I have upon many occasions born
my Zealous Testimony, both in public and in private to the contrary, viz. That
to entertain any such hope, to live again in order to Repent, and live a good
Life, after a man has neglected the present Opportunity wherein to Repent, etc.
in this present Life, is as Wicked as it is vain; for The Grace of God that
brings Salvation teaches us to deny Ungodliness and Worlaly Lusts, and (...)
live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. But
it teaches no man to delay his good living to any time after Death, either in
hope of a Purgatory, (...) the Soul is out of the Body, or in hope to live
again in a mortal Body; for NOW is the accepted Time, NOW is the Day of
Salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2. And it is the last Time, as John has declared, 1 John
2. 18. And also Paul, saying, Romans 13.11. And that knowing the Time, that NOW
it is high Time to awake out of sleep, etc. let us therefore east off the Works
of Darkness, and put on the Armor of Light, for the Times of Ignorance God
wincked at, but NOW commands all men every where to Repent, Acts 17. 30. And
as John said, Mat. 3. 10. And NOW also the Ax is laid to the Root of the Trees,
therefore every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the Fire. And therefore if any hold such Doctrine of Revolutions, that
puts men upon delaying their Repentance, or neglecting to live a good Life,
in hope to live again after Death, to Repent and Amend, as I have always
abhorred it, so I hope I shall always do, and bear my faithful Testimony
against it.

And whereas the said Person has accused me before diverse Witnesses, That my
manner of Preaching the Faith of Christ Crucified and Raised again, its being
necessary to make men Christians and Sons of God of the Free Woman, and
Children of the New Covenant, does infer my holding of the Revolutions, to wit,
that all pious Gentiles, dying without all hearing Christ crucified and raised
again preached to them, must of necessity live again in a mortal Body, in order
to hear that Doctrine outwardly preached to them, or then be damned. The which
Alternative I Possitively deny. And by this his Accusation, he has shown what
a Changeling he is, from better to worse, in so finding fault with my Doctrine
for Preaching or Printing the necessity of this Faith to Salvation, which he
has so frequently hold forth himself and owned and approved in my books. And I
propose it to the serious Consideration of all sincere Christians, Whether this
Difficulty (how much so ever real or seeming) does more (...) or (...), than
all (...) that universally assert the necessity of Faith in Christ crucified
and raised again, to make men true and sincere Christians, and that by this
Faith men are justified, sanctified, and attain to eternal Life; and that
therefore no Jew or Turk can be a true Christian, because they have not this
Faith, however otherwise just and conscientious they may be? And whether,
seeing the whole strain and current of the Scripture, both of the Old and New
Testament, is such as does demonstrate the necessity of this Faith and Gospel
to be preached to all Nations, to wit, That Christ Jesus the Son of God dyed
for our sins, and rose again for our Justification; and that it is plain from
express Scripture, That this Justification is not obtained, nor Salvation (to
wit) finally, fully and perfectly, without this Faith, I say, Whether in
opposition to, and in prejudice of the Revolutions, and for avoiding that
Doctrine, and laying it aside, we must and ought to lay aside the Preaching and
Faith of Christ as he outwardly dyed for our sins on the Tree of the Cross, and
rose again for our Justification, as a thing unnecessary and indifferent, as it
must needs be, if men may be complete and perfect Christians without this
Faith, and perfectly overcome all sin, and attain to a perfect state of
Sanctification without it, and may be Children of God, and Sons of the free
Woman, and have the Spirit of Adoption without this Faith? And if so, then does
not this wholly render Pious Paganism or Gentilism to be perfect Christianity,
and perfect Christianity to be nothing else than pious Gentilism? And does not
this make the Faith and Knowledge of Christ, both without us and within us, of
none effect? for it cannot be proved, that ever any had the true Knowledge or
Faith of Christ within them, but who had the true Knowledge and Faith of Christ
within them; for though Christ was and is in Pious and Conscientious Gentiles,
in their mere Gentile state, yet they did not know him, as such; nor did they
believe in him, as Christ, as all sincere Christians did and do. And shall not
this be of most evil tendency, thus to make void the Faith of Christ crucified
without us, and raised again, (in prejudice of, and in opposition to that
called the Revolutions, as my Accuser has done, though he himself has
declared his favoring of the Revolutions as a probable Hypothesis, and has
frequently, and but very lately declared the necessity of the Faith of Christ,
as he was crucified and raised from the dead without us, its being necessary to
Salvation, bringing for it, Romans 10.9. whereof many are Witnesses. And to say,
This Faith is necessary to such to whom it is preached, to make them
Christians, and perfectly to justify, sanctify and save them, but not to such
Pious Gentiles to whom it is not preached, as if they could be perfectly
Christians, and perfectly justified, perfectly sanctified, and perfectly,
wholly and fully saved without it; this most evidently does contradict the
Scripture, that holds forth the necessity of its being preached, that it may
be received, in Gods ordinary way of working; for which see ^^ke 24. 46, 47.
Acts 4. 10, 11, 12. cap. 10. 43, 44. cap. 11. 14. cap. 13. 46. cap. 28. 28.
compared with verse. 23. Romans 3. 30. cap. 8. 2, 3, 4. cap. 16. 25, 26. Ephesians. 3.
4, 5, 6. and 1. 13. Col. 1. 21, 22, 23, 26, 27, 28. And surely, if the Gospel
and Faith of Christ, both outwardly and inwardly was not necessary to be
preached to the Nations, to Salvation, then Christ's Command to the Apostles to
preach it, was a superfluous and unnecessary work, and in vain was it, that so
many Thousands should suffer Martyrdom and Killing for that Faith, and the
preaching of it. And at this rate the Gospel and Faith of Christ, both without
us, and within us, is not only an unprofitable, but a burdensome Yoke of
Bondage, laid on People, by having it preached to them, seeing they could have
been good and perfect Christians without it, if they had never had it preached
to them, and could have been perfectly Justified, perfectly sanctified, and
perfectly saved without it, in their mere Gentile state; which is a plain
overturning and overthrowing the Christian Religion, Faith and Gospel, and an
evident confirming what the Adversaries of Truth have cast upon us, the People
called Quakers, That their Christianity is nothing else but refined Paganism or
Gentilism; but I hope all the sincere hearted and true Lovers of Christ are and
will be otherwise minded, and stand up with holy Zeal to assert their true
Christianity, and Christian Faith and Religion to be altogether another thing
than the most refined Picus Gentilism, and differing from it as much as Gold
differs from Brass, or as the Light of the Day differs from the Light of the
Night, and that principally because they have the true Knowledge and Faith of
Christ as he dyed for them (without them) and rose again is gone into Heaven,
there making intercession for them, etc. and also living and ruling in them,
conforming them to his Death and Resurrection, which they could not have
without the Faith of him, as he was outwardly crucified and raised again.

But if any say, The Gospel and Faith of Christ, as he dyed and rose again,
though not absolutely necessary to perfect men's Salvation, yet is very profitable
to facilitate, and make the Work the more easily and speedily to be done. -- I
Answ. If not necessary, it may be concluded not profitable, nor of service to
make the Work more easy; for wherein is it more profitable, not being
necessary? for in all other things that are not absolutely necessary, but
profitable and serviceable, the profit and service is apparent, as when a man
may labor the ground to raise Corn, with Hoe and other Instruments, without
plowing, or a man may go from one place to another by walking, without riding
or sailing; but no such thing is apparent in this case, as if the necessity of
the true Knowledge and Faith of Christ, both without us, and within us, which
cannot be divided, be once laid aside, that it cannot be supposed to be
profitable, but rather it ought to be concluded both unprofitable and hurtful,
as enjoining more Precepts relating to God, to our Selves, and to our
Neighbors, than the Gentile Dispensation did or does; and for this cause it
is, that Christianity excels Judaism, and is far more profitable and
serviceable to perfect our Salvation, as containing fewer Precepts than the Law
under Judaism did; and at this rate it would follow, because Gentilism
contains fewer Precepts than Christianity, therefore Gentilism is the more
profitable, and does more facilitate men's Perfection, who are under it, even as
an Artist that can perfect his work with fewer and less chargeable Tools and
Instruments, is the most perfect, and is worthy of most praise; but because all
the Precepts of Christianity are spiritual, and given us by God and Christ, to
bring us to that spiritual Perfection that the Law, either of Judaism or
Gentilism simply considered, could not do, the Law being weak, through the
Flesh, and so could not make perfect; therefore it is, that on that very
account Christianity is the most excellent Dispensation, both for its
Spirituality, and giving more plenty of Precepts than Gentilism did or does;
for as Christianity has more plenty of Precepts that are highly spiritual, and
tending to a more high and spiritual Perfection than Gentilism, so it has more
plenty of divine Grace and of Life, to enable them who are under it, to perform
them, whereby they attain to the Perfection designed. But this Doctrine, That
the Gospel and Faith of Christ, both outwardly and inwardly, is not necessary
to perfect the work of men's Salvation, does most manifestly contradict the
whole current of holy Scripture, and is a most pernicious and pestiferous
Principle, altogether tending to the dishonor of God and Christ, and
contradicting his holy and divine Attributes of Mercy and Justice, Wisdom and
Power, and to the deceiving the Souls of men, that credit it, to lead them into
the Pit of Destruction, and therefore ought to be, (...) godly and servent
Zeal, witnessed against, and reproved, notwithstanding of the foolish and Idle
Clamours of the Ignorant, and Selfconceited, and Self-wised Men that oppose it,
whatever their Pretenses be, either in Prejudice of the Doctrine of the
Revolutions, so called, or any other whatsoever; for the Faith and Gospel of
Christ, as he is both without us, and within us, which cannot be divided, being
one of the greatest of Truths, how can it infer any Error or dangerous and
hurtful Consequence, either relating to the Revolutions or any things else; and
if any either do not or cannot see, but that the necessity of the Faith and
Gospel of Christ crucified and raised, etc. in order to perfect Salvation, must
needs infer the Necessity of the Doctrine of the Revolutions, at least after
some sort, but not as vulgarly understood, I do say, it is more tolerable to
admit the Consequent, than to deny the Antecedent; for the Consequent, in
respect to the Antecedent, is but a matter of small Moment (whether true of
false, I meddle not at present to determine) and if an Error, is but of an
inferior degree, and is rather an Error in that called Philosophy, than in
Divinity, and is rather a mistake in Opinion, grounded upon a pretense of
Reason, than any Error in the Faith, unless it can be demonstrated that the
said Doctrine does expressly, and without any far-fetcht Consequences contradict
some Article of the Christain Faith, the which remote and far-fetch't
Consequences are not allowable among vulgar Christians, however sincere,
because there may be a Fallacy, or at least a great uncertainty in them; but an
Error in the Antecedent, to wit, That the Gospel and Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, (as he was crucified for our sins, and rose agian for our
Justification, and is our Elder Brother and high Priest in Heaven without us,
making Intercession for us) is not necessary to be preached to the Nations for
Remission of Sin, and eternal Salvation, to finish and perfect it, is a most
vile and abominable Heresy, most worthily to be detested by all sincere
Christians, and the Assertors and Abettors of it most worthily to be judged No
Christians, yea, worse, than honest Heathens, who have never and Christ
preached unto them.

A further clearing of the Truth, by a plain Explication of my Sense when I
say, That Faith in Christ Jesus, not only as the Light in us, but (...) be
(...) and is Man without us, and as he dyed for our sins, and rose again for
our Justification, is necessary to perfect Justification, and finishing (...)
work of men's Salvation universally; and by which I show and demonstrate, That
my present Doctrine, concerning the Faith of Christ, is well consistent with
all my former printed Books, and with R. Barclay's printed Books, and
particularly his Apology, and with the Doctrine of our sound Friends and
Brethren, both ancient and lately raised, who have declared their Charity
toward all Pious and Conscientious Gentiles to whom the Gospel was not
outwardly preached by the Ministry of men. That they were not or are not
excluded from Gods Mercy and Salvation, although they have not had the express
Historical Knowledge and Faith of Christ, as Man without them, either outwardly
preached, or inwardly revealed to them.

THe Explanation of my sense in this weighty matter, I deliver in the following
particulars viz.

1st. By Faith in the Man Christ Jesus without us, which I assert to to be
universally necessary to men's eternal Salvation, I do not understand an express
distinct Faith in Christ, as being so necessary to all, whereby all that were
or shall be saved, must necessarily have such a Knowledge and Faith of him, as
to these great and weighty Passages and Cases delivered prophetically
concerning him, in the Old Testament, and Historically in the New Testament,
that were a fullfilling of the Prophecies of him, such as, 1. That he should
come in the Flesh at such a precise Age or Time of the World; 2. That he should
be born at Bethlem; 3. That he should be the Son of Abraham and David,
according to the Flesh; 4. or That his Mothers Name (...) Mary, or his own Name
Jesus; 5. That the place of his Death should be Golgotha, without the City of
Jerusalem in Judea; 6. That the manner of his Death should be by being
crucified, his Hands and Feet pierced, and his Side pierced with a Spear; 7.
That he should be betrayed by Judas, and sold for thirty pieces of Silver, and
sentenced to Death by Pontius Pilate, and accused and slain by the Jews, and
crucified betwixt two (...), whereof the one should be penitent, and dye
believing in him; 8. That he should be laid in a Sepulcher, where no man ever
lay, that belonged to Joseph of Arimathea; 9. That he should rise on the third
Day, and after forty days ascend into Heaven; 10. And lastly, That he should
appear to the Women first of all, after his Resurrection. These, and many other
very weighty and great Cases and Passages, belonging to his outward Coming,
Death and Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension, I do not say are necessary to
be known and believed universally to men's eternal Salvation; and this I have
called in my former printed Books, The Express, Clear and Distinct Knowledge or
Faith of his outward Coming, see my Book called, The Universal free Grace of
the Gospel asserted, page 117. printed in the Year 1671. and R. B. in his
printed Apology and Theses, printed in the Year 1676. calls it (as I do) the
distinct outward absolute Knowledge, ( i.e. the perfect) Knowledge of the
outward History, see his Latin Apology, These. 6. (the which Doctrine, as laid
down by him in his 6th Thesis, he calls an Hypothesis in that very place) and
others of our ancient Friends, who have writ in defense of the People called
Quakers, have called it the Historical Knowledge, viz. as containing the
knowledge of the abovementioned Historical Passages, and others the like; for
as concerning these great and weighty Passages and Cases, foretold by the
Prophets, and Historically declared to be fullfilled by the Evangelists and
Apostles concerning him; many of the faithful knew or believed few or none of
them before Abraham's Time, and even after Abraham, to whom Christ was promised
to be his Seed, and to come out of his Loins; the Doctrine concerning the Time
and Manner of his Coming, Death and Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension, was
gradually revealed to the Prophets, from Moses to Samuel, and from Samuel to
David, and from David to these who followed after, as Isaiah, Jeremiah, and
others, and still the nearer the Time approached of Christ's coming in the
Flesh, the Prophets did Prophecy the more clearly and expressly concerning him.

2dly, I do with great Assurance and Freedom affirm, as God has persuaded me,
and opened it out of the holy Scriptures to me, That the Faith of all the
Faithful, from the beginning of the World, was in Christ, as he should be that
Seed (...) the Woman that should bruise the Head of the Serpent, and whose Heel
the Serpent should bruise; which was the first Gospel Promise that the Lord
himself preached to our first Parents after the Fall; and though this Promise
was not committed to writing (so far as we know) until Mose, who was the first
(...)-man of holy Scripture, yet it was, without all doubt, faithfully
delivered and preached by Adam to his Children, and by the faithful of their
Children, such as Seth, to their succeeding Posterity, even until Noah; and if
it was lost again, it was restored to Abraham; for we have good cause to
believe, that the Church of God, from the beginning of the World, has never
failed in the Earth, universally, to this Day, nor will to the end of the
World, however at times it has been much obscured and hid, both under the Old
and New Testament. And by this Seed of the Woman is to be understood the Man
Christ, with the spiritual inward blessings of Grace, Light and Life flowing
from him, (and though the outward Name Jesus and Christ is sweet and
comfortable to every true Believer (by the Spirit of Christ) that knows it,
yet it is no more simply necessary, than the other (abovementioned) weighty
Circumstances concerning him) the Savior and Redeemer of the World, who should
be born in Flesh, and offer up himself a Sacrifice in his Body of Flesh, for
the sins of the World, and should dye and rise again, and by his Death and
Resurrection should bruise the Serpents Head, that is, conquer and break his
Power in all the faithful, so as perfectly to deliver them from Death, both
Spiritual and Natural, the Spiritual here, and the Natural hereafter, at the
Resurrection of the Dead: And by the bruising of his Heel, is understood his
Sufferings and Death in the Flesh, occasioned by the Devil's Instigation, as
all found Christians of all Professions generally acknowledge; and in Testimony
of this Faith it was, that the Faithful before the Law, and under the Law, by
Gods direction, offered up Sacrifices of clean Beasts, that were Types and
Memorials of Christ, the Lamb of God, that was to be slain and offered up for
the sins of the World, and the Faith of all the faithful, for the Remission of
sin, and cleansing and sanctifying, was not in the Sacrifices which they
offered, but in Christ, whom they represented, and of whom they were Types. And
before Christ came in the flesh, not only the People of Israel offered
Sacrifices, and practiced Circumcision, all which were Typical of Christ in the
Flesh, but many other Nations, as not only the Posterity of Ishmael and Esan,
but other Nations that learned it of them. And that Circumcision was Typical of
Christ, and had a special Relation to Christ, and Faith in him, as he was to
come in the Flesh, and to his Death and sufferings, is clear from Romans 4. 11.
where it is called, A Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. And as the Church of
God has never failed in the Earth since the beginning of the World, nor will
to the end of it, so nor has the Doctrine of Gods Salvation concerning the
Savior of the World, and the Mediator betwixt God and Men, who should be both
GOD and MAN, failed, or been wanting, as in respect of the essential parts of
it, even from being outwardly preserved, delivered and conveyed from from Age
to Age, in some measure and degree, for the benefit of Mankind in general; and
therefore in all Ages, even in the Darkest, Christ, as he was to come in the
Flesh, and be an offering for the Sins of the World, was sufficiently set forth
for that time, to be the Object of men's Faith, in those Ages and Parts of the
World, where these Types and Figures of Sacrifices, and Circumcision were
extant; and even these who did not practice them, yet might hear of them by
others, and it may be very probably defended by a rational Hypothesis, (and so
does R. B. call his Doctrine in his 6th Thesis, viz. an Hypothesis) that no
Nation under Heaven was so left destitute of all outward means, but that partly
by the Report of the Sacrifices of clean Beasts offered to the true God, and by
Circumcision, and other Types, Figures and Shadows that had been used from the
beginning, and partly from the Types and Figures given to Mankind in general,
in the whole visible Creation, the Mediator betwixt God and Men, the Savior
and Redeemer of the World, who should be both God and Man, or God manifest in
Flesh, and who, as Man, should dye for the sins of the World, and rise again,
was proposed (in some sort, though obscurely, answering to that Dispensation,
wherein Christ was the Mystery hid from Ages and Generations, that was in after
Ages clearly to be revealed) according to Ephesians. cap. 3. 5, 9. Col. cap. 1. 26.
Romans cap. 16. 26. and set forth to be the Object of men's Faith, and Hope of
Salvation, and Remission of sin, and Reconciliation with God, the inward Light
of the divine Word, that is the Light of men, that ever did in all Ages, and
ever does, and ever will enlighten every man that comes into the World, acting
or operating by its heavenly and divine Influence, upon their reasonable
Faculties of Understanding, and all their national Powers, to cause them both
know and believe, that God would be merciful to them, and forgive their sins,
upon their Repentance and Amendment of Life, for the sake of the Mediator,
Redeemer (...) of the World, who should be both God and Man; or if by an
unavoidable case, (as R. B. wordeth it in his 6^ These.) some or many are
excluded from this benefit of having it outwardly revealed to them, as others
had, yet that defect may be supplied by inward divine Revelation in all
extraordinary Cases, revealing at least the substance of that great Mystery of
the Mediator, the Savior of the World, by whose Death and Blood, men through
Repentance and Faith in him, should be reconciled unto God, and have their sins
both forgiven and purged or washed away.

3dly, But yet we ought not universally to confine this Faith of Christ (as
without us or within us) to the narrow bounds of outward Preaching it, either
by the Prophets in their Day, or to the Evangelists and Apostles in their Day,
or to the hearing or reading of the holy Scriptures, or to the outward Ministry
of Angels of Men, well knowing and believing, That as God gave it to our first
Parents without all Ministry of Men, and as he gave it to Abraham, to J^^, and
to the three Wise Men, that came from the East, to worship Jesus in Bethlehem,
so he has given it to many others, and can or may give it to as many as he
pleases without all outward Ministry; yet I say, in Gods ordinary way he is
pleased to give it by the Ministry of Preaching, and for this cause he revealed
it to the holy Prophets and Apostles, that by their Ministry and Writings, it
might be made known to all Nations, for the Obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 26.
and the said Doctrine, as outwardly delivered by their Ministry, and as
delivered by the Ministry of faithful men succeding them in the same Faith, God
is pleased to bless with a New divine Visitation and Illumination of more Light
and Grace, than was or is given to such where this Doctrine is not outwardly
preached, to bring them to the Obedience of that Faith. And to declare my Mind
with all Plainness, As I can find no Faith in Christ in all the Scripture, but
what has always a respect to Christ as that great Offering and Sacrifice for
sin without us, as well as to his inward and spiritual Presence and Appearance
in us, according to measure, teaching us and enabling us, to apply to us the
benefit of his Death and Sufferings, Resurrection and Ascension, and Mediation
for the Remission of our sins, and (...) Eternal Salvation, as the (...) of all
Grace and Truth dwelt and still dwells in the Man Christ Jesus without us,
and of whose Fullness we (...) more and more partake, who believe in him, and
in God the Father through him, and who pray to God in his Name, and Worship and
Obey him, so I can own no other Faith but this, to be the true Christian Faith,
that has for its Object the Man Christ Jesus, our alone Mediator without us,
in whom the Fullness dwells, as well as the measure of him inwardly revealed
in us; and without this Faith in God the Father, and in the Man Christ Jesus
without us, and in the Fullness that is in him, as the greatest and most
principal Object of our Faith, I can own none to be true Christians, or
Believers in Christ Jesus, who are the Children of God by the Freewoman,
Jerusalem from above, let their Pretentions be ever so great to Christ, as the
Light in them. As for Justin Martyr his calling Socrates a Christian, Socrates
might have had the Faith of Christ, according to the Substance of it, then but
obscurely revealed, and so might Pythagoras and Hate, who conversed with Jews;
for the least measure of the Light of Christ, in every true Christian, to whom
the Gospel Day of Christ is dawned, does most necessarily draw and lead the
Soul's Faith, Love and Devotion to the Man Christ without them, and to God the
Father, as dwelling in him most abundantly and gloriously, that so God out of
Christ, our alone Mediator, may continually supply us, as out of a most rich
Treasury and Storehouse, with all new and fresh Supplies, Aids, and
Assistances of his divine Grace, Light, Life and Spirit, to serve him
acceptably, and to enjoy the indwelling of God the Father, and of the Son, and
of the holy Spirit in our own Hearts and Vessels, daily more and more
abundantly, as our Faith, Love and Devotion is thus daily and continually
exercised upon him. Nor is there any real-danger, by so believing, or by so
preaching, to draw the Minds of People from the Gift of Christ in them (this at
most is but the Abuse or evil Use of this Doctrine, as the best of Doctrines
have been and may be abused, which all ought to watch against) but indeed, the
real, proper and necessary direct tendency of such Doctrine, rightly improved,
is to bring People still more and more to the Gift of Christ in themselves, and
to the more abundant enjoyment of him, as the Scripture Testimony, and the
Experience of Thousands and ten Thousands do sufficiently confirm. But such who
preach Faith only in the Light within, calling that Light Christ, as they have
learned by hearsay or reading, and yet are ignorant of that great Mystery of
Christ without us, they neither know Christ within, nor believe in him, as
such; for though Christ the true Light, be in all men, both Believers and
Unbelievers, yet only true Believers in (...) who believe in him as he dyed for
us, and rose again, and is ascended, etc. truly know him, the Light and Life in
them, and have the true Comfort and Enjoyment of him every way, and of all his
Blessings and Benefits; and such Preachers and Ministers, who have this Faith
of Christ wholly and Fully, it is no indifferent thing to them, to have it or
preach it; for as they daily live by it, so they daily labor in Word and
Doctrine to preach it, for the Hearers Salvation, and for bringing them to know
Christ in them, as Thousands can witness with me, that had we not believed in
Christ without us, as he dyed and rose again; and had we not been persuaded
that Christ dyed for us, and rose again, that God and Christ might dwell in us,
and that we might receive the inward and spiritual blessing and Benefit of him
in our hearts, we had not believed in him, nor known him, as in us. And such
Preachers who say, (as some do, whom I have heard, to my (...) and sorrow) That
men may be saved in Gods ordinary way, (as for Example, the Indians here in
America, or any elsewhere) without the Faith of Christ, as he dyed for us, and
rose again, by their honest and sober Living, according to the Requirings or
Dictates of the Light in them, and that not only so as to witness a beginning,
but a perfecting the work of Christianity and Salvation in them: They are not
like to be at great pains, to preach Faith in Christ crucified and raised from
the Dead, either to Indians or any others, or to encourage others to do it; for
this Faith not being necessary, where or to whom it is not preached, the
effectual way to make the Faith of it wholly an indifferent and unnecessary
thing, is not at all to preach it, but bury it in Oblivion, as some would do,
and so to bring our Posterity to be Indians or Heathexs, and as it was almost
quite buried and forgot by too many high Pretenders to the Light within. And if
God in his infinite Mercy in these American Parts, (where we have but few
Bibles, and very few other Books perused by many among us, that teach the
necessity of this Faith) had not raised a Godly Zeal in some to revive and
raise up this most precious and necessary Doctrine, concerning the Faith in
Christ, both Without us, and Within us, the Faith and Rememembrance of it would
have been (in probability) lost, in many Families, in a little time, especially
it being rarely preached by many high Pretenders to the Light within; and if at
any times mentioned by them, not held forth as the necessary Object of Faith,
but rather (...) occasioned, as other Historical Things of Scripture; (...) the
Conceit that some have, that the Scriptures are not Instrumental to our Faith
and Knowledge; the Light or Spirit being the only means, etc. as some say, and
to preach Christ without us, is to lead People to know Christ after the Flesh,
and to bring them from the Spirit to the Letter; but the great and
indispensible Necessity of Preaching it, is, that it may be believed to Eternal
Salvation; for it is not only necessary to be believed, because preached, but
because it is necessary to be believed universally in some measure, therefore
it is necessary to be Preached; so that the very cause of its Preaching, is the
Necessity of the Faith it self, in order to finish the Work of men's Salvation
universally; even as men gather Materials of Stone and Timber to build, and the
Building is not necessary for Materials, but the Materials are necessary for
the Building: This (...) the necessary Effect, That as a necessary Antecedent,
in an ordinary way.

4thly. And thus it manifestly appears, how there is no Contradiction nor
Contrariety betwixt the present Doctrine I Preach or Print, and any of my
former printed ^ools; nor betwixt my dear and worthy Brother and Friend R.
Barclay, nor any of my dear and worthy Friends and Brethren, who have said,
That Pious and Conscientious Gentiles are not excluded from Gods Mercy or
Salvation, who have not had the express Historical Knowledge and Faith of
Christ revealed to them, by distinguishing, first, betwixt the Express
Knowledge and Faith of that great Mystery, and the Implicit Faith and Knowledge
of it (for, to deny the Necessity of the express Faith, etc is to affirm the
necessity of the Implicit or Employed Faith) The Express Knowledge and Faith,
respecting those particular Cases, Passages and Circumstances abovementioned,
or any others recorded in the Scriptures, Historically related in them, This
Express Knowledge and Faith, I say, neither was nor is indispensibly necessary
to all men, but such only to whom it is revealed or preached, yet is most
profitable and comfortable to all to whom it comes: The Implicit Knowledge and
Faith of it respecting Christ as he was to come in the Flesh, (...) Death for
the Sins of the World, and be a Sacrifice (...) God for them Reconciliation,
and rise again for their Justification; (...) that the Substance of the
Doctrine (...) in that Promise, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the
Head of the Serpent, etc. and in the Sacrifices and other Figures of the Law,
and in the Figures and Types of the outward Creation, as inwardly opened to
men's reasonable Understanding by the divine Light of the Word in them, might
suffice to such who had no more given them; or by what other means and helps,
whether both outward and inward, or only inward, as at the instant of Death,
according to Job. 33. 22, 23. God was or is pleased to afford beyond our reach;
for we know but part of his ways, which are most equal, and yet are far above
our thoughts, and much more, as the Heavens are above the Earth. 2dly, By
distinguishing Salvation begun, and Salvation finished and perfected, and the
twofold inward States, Ministrations and Births, which are both of God and
Christ, the first making men at best Servants of God, or Sons by the
Bondwoman, or the Law of the first Ministration; and this may be had without
all Faith of Christ, as come in the Flesh, and this begins a good Work of
God in men, and may be called Salvation begun, and may be compared to Corn or
Fruit in the Blossom; the second making men Sons of God by the Freewoman, and
receiving the Spirit of God and Christ, as it is a Spirit of Adoption, and may
be compared to Corn or Fruit in the Kirnel* and this is never had, nor never
was had without the Faith of Christ, and the Faith of Christ's Doctrine, as to
the substance of it, to wit, that God was to save men by a Savior, who should
be both God and Man, and as Man should dye for our sins, and rise from the
dead, and thereby overcome the Power of Death, first in his own Person, and
last in his Members; this is the substance of the Gospel-Promise and Doctrine,
comprehending in it an inward enjoyment of God and Christ to all who have the
true Faith of him, as to the Substance of it, from the beginning of the World,
employed and folded up in that first Gospel-Promise concerning the Seed of the
Woman, and that the promised Seed of the Woman should be both God and Man, as
the Faith of all the faithful from the beginning of the World, is demonstrated
from Eve's words, expressing her Faith at the Birth of Cain, Genesis 4. 1. I have
got the Man the Lord; the Hebrew word is (...) which is one of the greatest
Names of God, so does Luther in his High Dutch Translation of the Bible
translate that place, and so does the English Cann, and so does the Hebrew bear
it, which yet has not this sense, as if Eve had been so for mistaken, as to
imagine, that Cain should be the Messiah or Savior of the World, as some have
thought, she did so miserably Mistake but as was common to faithful Men and
Women to do, to give Names to their Children, signifying their Faith of some
great blessing that they expected afterward to come, or some great Benefit
formerly received; thus Rachel called her first born Joseph, i.e. joined, with
respect to Benjamin that was born diverse years afterward; and Joseph named his
two Sons Names that did not relate to them, but to himself; and Eve named Abel,
that signifies Vanity, not with respect to Abel, who was the first Martyr for
the Faith of Christ, but with respect to the Vanity of Man's miserable (...) by
sin.

5thly. And that the Faith in Christ, as he dyed for us, and rose again, to
reconcile us unto God, is altogether necessary to men's perfect Justification
and Salvation, is evident from this, that as Paul reasons and proves most
clearly, both in his Epistle to the Romans and Galatians, By the Works of the
Law no Flesh is justified, but by the Faith of Christ; for the Law works
Wrath; and by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin; and the Law says, Cursed is
every one that abides not in every thing to do it, that the Law (...): And
this was not only the outward Law among the Jews, but the inward Law, or first
Ministration of Light, both in Jews and Gentiles; for as Paul said, He had
proved both Jews and Gentiles to be all under Sin, so that every Mouth is
stopped, and the whole World is guilty before God; for none but have sinned at
one time or another, and one sin brings Wrath, and the Curse on him that has
sinned, and no Obedience can remove this Wrath or Curse, without Christ, (...)
became a Curse for us, and gave himself a Ransom for us, and (...) the (...) of
(...) for us, the Just suffering for the Unjust; And none are justified by
Christ but through Faith in him, as he dyed for them, and rose again, etc. for
he that believes not is Condemned already; and therefore the Ministration of
the Law, whether outwardly writ on Tables of Stone, or inwardly writ on stoney
Hearts, is the Ministration of Condemnation, preparing for Christ, and leading
unto Christ; and such who are under the Law, ((...) them be ever so Obedient,
just and Conscientious, because they have sinned, and are not Perfect) are held
under it, shut up, as in a Custody or (...) as the Manslayer in the City of
Refuge, and are not perfectly instified, but are under fear, their Thoughts
Accusing and Excusing; for though they are Excused or Accused, or to say,
justified in some good things done by them, yet that can be no perfect
Justification, because their state is imperfect; and therefore, for that all
have sinned, all have absolute Necessity to (...) to Christ, and lay hold on
him by Faith, as he dyed for us, and rose again, and has, by his Obedience
unto Death, purchased for us Remission of sin, and eternal Redemption and
Salvation, and Life Eternal, without which Faith (as to the Substance of it)
there it no Remission of Sin, nor perfect Justification, nor Salvation; and to
say otherwise, is to contradict the whole current of Scripture, and to preach
another Faith and Gospel than Christ and the Prophets and Apostles Preached,
and therefore is not to be received, but (...), if an Angel from Heaven should
preach it.

FINIS

