Things to be Looked for.

DISCOURSES On the Glorious CHARACTERS, with Conjectures on the Speedy
APPROACHES of that STATE, which is Reserved for the Church of GOD in the LATTER
DAYS.

Together with an Inculcation of Se^^^ DUTIES, which the (...) and Approaches
of that State Invite us unto

Delivered unto the ARTILLERY COMPANY of the Massachusetts Colony: New England;
at their ELECTION Of Officers, for the YEAR 1691.

By COTTON MATHER.

Luke 12. 56. How is it, that ye do not Discern this Time? CAMBRIDGE: Printed
by Samul Green, and Barth Green, (...) Nicholas Bottolph, at (...)
Coffee-House, in Boston. 1691.

PREFACE.
THE Question put by the People to the Prophet, wir^^ the Success and F^ry of a
Mighty Conquero^^ threa^^ d them, Watchman, hat of the Night is it? Is it the
E^s^ing not attended, and answered with words no: ^^ether a like these of the
Apostle, ^he Night far spent, the Day is at hand. when the ^^tlemen of the
Artillery lately Commanded So they did, when they only Requested) of me. I
found I had formerly more once on like Occasions Preached and so much of
Military Duties, that my Thoughts, as it were by some Compulsion. ^^ed now unto
the PEACE hereafter to ^^pected; and my Second Thoughts assu^^d that I could
not readily do my Neighbors a Service, than by advising them about the come
upon us and war unto us. I am not (...), though I am ever too unserviceable, that
I have been l^ft in any thing to be so Dis^^^ ^^viceable unto my ^^^ntry as to
deserve their ^^eg^r; and now I let them set, that I my self so much it Cl^^ity
with them, as, To give the Time of the Day.

C. Mather.

Good NEWS in Bad TIMES.
Delivered On the 1d. of the 4^. 1691. Unto the ARTILLERY COMPANY of the
Massachuset-Colony, New England.
THE words which an A^^^l from Heaven once used unto the Shepherds, ^^bold, I
bring you Good News of Great Joy, are those which I may at this time Venture to
use unto all the P^^us, yea, even unto the Armed ^art of this Auditory; I have
Good News for you at this Day, wherein there is more than a little Enquiry
after News; and you shall have it, from Isaiah 2. 4.

They shall Beat their Swords into Ple^^sharts, and their Spears into
Pruningbooks; Nation shall not lift up their Sword against Nation; ^^ither
shall they learn War any more.

OUR Lord Jesus Christ has Glorious Things to Do for His Church in the World,
whereof ^is a Passage in the Sermon of Pe^^^, (...) has Spoken of them, by the
Mo^th of all His H^l, Prophets, [of which there is (...) pretense to Except any
but Jonah, whose Book is rather an History than a Prophecy,] which have been
since the world begun, Behold, One of those Holy Prophets, here Discoursing on
the Circumstances, ^^^nich the Church is ere long to arrive unto; Th^se are
among. The Glorious things that are spoken of thee, O thou City of God!

It was the manner of those Holy Prophets, to pass from the mention of the
dismal Tidings, or Tro^^les which they saw Sinful mankind Threatened withal, to
the mention of the more Comfortable State. Reserved for the people of God,
(...) the latter days. It Is from this Method of (...) ^aking, that the warlike
and woeful posture of the World at this Day, and the Ar^our in which your selves
are at this Time accou^^ed, have caused me to treat you, with Predictions of a
State apace coming on, wherein, They shall not learn War any more. And you will
be so (...) from Suspecting any Design to Disarm you, then there is said before
you a Text, which carries in it the Spoiling of all our Swords and Spears, that
I know you will join with, me in hearty Lamentations, because I cannot add,
Tois Day is this Scripture fulfilled in your Ears.

Thus our Es^^as here, having affixed unto the Ga^^s of the Temple, a Roll
where all might Read a Delineation of the Sins and Plagues, which were then to
be found upon his people, he quickly puts up another Prediction, Concerning the
Blessings, which God will bestow upon (...) Church, in the Days, when the
M^ssiah shall come to Judge among the Nations; and, Amen, ^v^n so Come Lord
Jesus! There are Various Blessings, which we find here ascribed unto The l^ft
Days; that is, the Days which are (...) come after present long Tyrannies of
Sin and Hell upon the World are Finished. One of those Blessings, is that of
Peace, which contains all Sorts and Stores of Desirable Things in its Retinue
--

To P^sci^us Ownes!

And this Peace is Elegantly Expressed unto us, by the Notion of men's Altering
and Employing their Weapons of War, to such Uses, as Peace affords at once
Opportunities and ^oitat^ous to; it is (...). Men shall then have no Occasion for
Swords and Spears; but apply themselves to Fit^^g rather than K^ssing of one
another. Swords and Spears have been such mischievous things, that methinks,
it is a very easy Sentence that is here passed upon them. To be Turned into
Plough shares, and into Traning books! when God ^nj^^ned a Sabbath every
Seventh Year to the Land of Cannon, as a Shadow of that State wherein this
Peace is to the Enjoyed. He for that Year for had much of the H^s^andry usual
in it. But now He comes to Paint out that State of Peace, it is from the Tools of
Hisb^^ary, even Plough^^^ and ^ra^ing books, that he Fetches the Colors of it.
It is no less the Disgrace, than the Humor of English men; that we must always
have a Prophecy about us; for the Prophecies which we too s^ndly ^^ore upon,
(...), either the C^^^ts of (...) (...) Astrol^^ or the Tales of some (...)
(...), and our Value for them is only from a Corrupt Nature on us, which herein
does often Cast Contempt upon the More sure Word of Prophecy. But it is the
Honor, as well as the Study, of Christians, to Penetrate into those
Prophecies, whereof the Inspired, and Un^^ring Word of God, is a most faithful
Be^st^r; of those Prophecies, we are advised, Blessed is be that Reads them;
and that man of God who Conver^^^ much with the Books which had them, was
called, A man greatly (...) loved.

It Is a Prophecy from the Oracles of God, which I have now produced you; and
l^^t you should Question it, the Holy Spirit has taken the pains to Record it
in the very Syllables of it, no less than Twice over for you, about the same
Time that the Evangelical Isaiah prophesied; there was the Humble Micah lent
upon the like Errands, of Heaven to the World; and if you look into the Fourth
Chapter of his Prophecies, you will see my Text Word for Word again Repeated
there. Now, I pray, what is this? if I may not say like Joseph in another Case.
It is because the thing is Established by God, and God will Shortly bring it to
pass.

For any to think that it is already come to pass, is altogether as Ridiculous
as to say, That the Thousand Years of Satan's binding, began at the Days of
Constamine. The bare proposal of such Cruel and Absurd Interpretation, is
enough to beget in us, a Distaste of all the Schemes that they give unto us. No,
it is a future State, that is here set before us. I is then a Doctrine, which, I
hope, Will, I am sure, Should, find a welcome Entertainment with you.

DOCTRINE.
There is a Wonderful STATE of External PEACE, which the God of Heaven will
make His People upon Earth, to be the Joyful partakers of.

You will give me leave to say, The people of God upon EARTH shall have this
Peace; for, I pray, where else would you look to site the use of Plough shares
and Pruning books?

There are three things, that here offer themselves to be Enquired into; First,
what, Secondly, where, and Thirdly, when will be that State of Peace, which is
intended for the People of God.

1. Let us in the first place Enquire, WHAT will be that State of Peace,
wherein we are told, Men shall not learn war any more?

N^w this we are to know, That it lies not merely in the Blessed Settlement and
Composure of Spirit, which Believers in all Ages, are the Subjects of. When our
Lord Jesus went away to Heaven. He left us that Legacy, in John 14. 27. Peace I
leave with you my Peace I give unto yea. Hence it is, that our Spirits are not
Royled and (...) in themselves by any of those dreadful Storms that come upon
the World; for, Being Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God. Hence it is,
that our Spirits have a Disposition to Love and Serve, the (...) that are our
Brethren in the World; for, Having Salt in our selves, we have Peace one with
another. Such a Spiritual Peace, is not all that we are to be Looking for; No,
the Peace promised unto us, is One by which the L^st Days are to be
distinguished; whereas All Days have admitted the Peace, No Days can Sp^^il,
or Quench that Peace, which Believers have in the Lord Jesus Christ, while in
the World they must have Tribulation.

Well then, The Peace promised unto us, is that External, as well as later^al,
H^rmony, Amity, Be Unity, which the Children of men shall have in and from the
future Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ. We are to Receive these two, as most
Faithful Sayings, and Worthy of all Acceptance.

First, The Lord Jesus Christ shall One Day, enjoy a Kingdom over and among the
Children of men in the World; and this, after a more Visible and Glorious
manner than has hitherto Appeared. Our Lord Jesus is a Blessed King; that is
One of the High Offices to which our Messi^s is Ano^nted by his Eternal Father;
and there is a threefold Kingdom, which He has already the possession of. He
has a Spiritual Kingdom, wherein He does by His-Word and Grace Rule over the
Consciences of men; thus it is said in Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of God, is
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy. He has also a Providential Kingdom, wherein
He Governs all the Affairs and Motions of the World, being entrusted with all
the Wheels which they turn upon; thus we find in Ezekiel. 1. 27. He, is, The man
upon the Throne. He has likewise at Ecclesiastical Kingdom, wherein He
Appoints and Prospers the Ordinances of a Church State amongst us, and acts as
The Head of the Church; it is possible that this may be partly intended, when we
^ead in Act. 1 3. He spoke of things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. But
besides and beyond all thus, there is a Davidical Kingdom (if I may call it so)
that belongs unto our Lord Jesus Christ; A Kingdom whereof the Reign of David
had not a little pr^sage and Shadow in it; A Kingdom, wherein His present
Spiritual, and Providential, and Ecclesiastical Kingdom, shall throw off all
the Eclioses that are now upon it; A Kingdom whereof 'twas the Ancient Song, in
Luke 1. 32,33. The Lord God will give Him the Throne of His Father David, and
He shall Reign over the House of Jacob forever, and of His Kingdom there shall
be no End. Compare Isaiah 9.7. and Jere. 13 13. and 29. 16. and 36 30. The
special property of this Kingdom lies in this; as the H^mane Nature is Exalted
above other Natures, thus the J^^^ish Nation is Exalted above other Nations,
upon this Account, That of them as Concerning the F^^sh, C^^ist came, who is
over all, God Blessed for ever. For That and some other Causes, a Distinct Body
of the Jewish Nation shall be Exalted unto a most particular Acquaintance with
our Lord Jesus Christ; Indeed at their First meeting with Jesus, He was unknown
unto them, as Joseph was unto his Brethren, but at the Next Encounter,
(especially if like their Countryman and Exemplar Paul, they should have a
Visible Apparition of Him; for which, P^^der 2 Timothy 1. 16. Zech. 12. 10. Marth.
24. 30. and Rev. 1. 7.) (...) they shall know Him: yea, then shall they be so
Co^v^rten and Advanced by our Lord Jesus in the World, as that by their means
the Earth shall be marvellously filled with Heavenly Influences transcending
any that the Bypast Ages have had Experience of. At present such is the
dreadful Interest of the Devil in the World, as that he is called, in Joh. 12
31. The Prince of this World. Yet, in 2 Cor. 4. 4. The God of this World.
Horrible to be spoken! But the World is a little while hence to have a New Face
upon it; and in that New* World, the Lord Jesus Christ shall have as much
Influence in the Hearts and Lives of men, as now the Devil has: Then shall
there be accomplished that Word, in Psalm 22. 27, 28. All the Ends of the Earth,
shall Remember, and Turn unto the Lord; for the Kingdom is the Lords, and He is
Governor among the Nations. This is Reckoned as part of our Lords Reward, for
all the Shame and Pain, and (...) Humiliation, which He has undergone in the
Lower World. He shall one Day have a Crown as Conspicuous to the World, is that
Cross which here He once hung upon. The Lord Jesus Christ shall then have such
a Kingdom, that the Generality of Mankind, shall yield an Entire and Sincere
Subjection to His Blessed Laws; and men shall every where Adore Him, as Their
King, their Lord, their Law giver. Then shall that promise be fulfilled, in
Ob^d. 21. The Kingdom shall be the Lord; and that in Isai 24 23 The Lord shall
Reign before His Ancient people Gloriously. The Devil once offered a Kingdom
unto our S^iour; he made use of some unknown Prospectives, partly for the
Refraction of the Median, partly for the Magnifying of the Object, by which he
gave unto our Lord in His Temptations, an Ocular View, of at least the whole
Roman Empire; and he made our Lord a Tender of that Empire, in case He would
Establish Divel-worship in the World: Antichrist afterward accepted this
p^ofer of the Devil; and became a Vicar, a Viceroy to him, but our Lord Christ
refused it; and the Issue is to be Agreeable: Antichrist shall shortly loose
his Dominion, as all men shall what they take at the Devils Hards, and on the
Devils Terms; but our Lord Christ shall thereupon Receive a Dominion wherein as
we are told [^and we have the Word of a God for it] in Das. 7 17 The Greatness
of for Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People of the
Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and all
Dominions shall serve and Obey Him. Mark, It Is a Kingdom [under] the whole
Heaven, that is propounded; I know not by what Rule then, it should be
Expounded, A Kingdom [in] the Toird Heaven. Briefly, Look back upon the Image
that N^bat^adi^g a^ had of the Four Monarchies, and you'^ see a Twofold State
on the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. First, that Kingdom has the State of
a small State; which l^es in the Homage that our Lord Jesus, has from a few
people here and there, while the Fourth [or the Roman] ^sonarchy is yet a live.
But then that Kingdom has the State of a Mountain; which will be when the
Glory of our Lord shall fill the whole Earth, upon the Dissip^tion of the last
Monarchy which is adverse thereunto. Then shall we have the Answer to that
Ancient Prayer, Lord, Let thy Man be Hallowed, Let thy Kingdom come, Let thy
Hell be done an Earth, as it is in Heaven!

Secondly, When the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ Appears, (...) will
Surcease, and all Peace, all Christ, Amity, and Unity will Succeed in the ^oom
hereof. The Kingdom of (...), whose (...) vane, as well as his Reign, (...)
(...) but a little Type of that Kingdom which belong to our Lord Jesus Christ.
When you Real Psalm, 7^ 7 In his Days shall (...) Righteous Fl^^^h, and there
shall be ^^und^^ce (...) Peace, while (...) in no Moon; as well as other Bright
and Sweet things in that Psalm for Solomon, you must Remember, A Greater than
Solomon is here. As the Jews will then have no Mo^^, that is, no Turk, to
afflict them in and with a Night of Oppression, so will the Gentiles likewise
then have, Ab^^dance of Peace Men shall (...) then be so Contentious and
Quarrel-some, (...) to D^light in War; ou^ our God has told us in (...) 2.1^.
I will (...) he Bow, and the Sword, and the (...) out of the Earth; and (...)
far 60 18. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Lead, Wasting nor Destruct on
within thy B^^ders; and in Isa. 66 12 Behold, I will Extend Peace to her, like
a Rio^^. Indeed, Every Description that we have of the C^^dition reserved for
the people of God, in the text Age, still gives us Notice of A Peace like a
River, that is, an Interminable Peace pertaining thereunto. The Inhabitants of
that World, shall not so much affect the Exploits of that Angel, that she near
two hundred Thousand Persons with one horrid T^^nder storm, as of that Angel
which Visited the Pool of B^th^sds to heal and help the Inconveniences of
Mankind; there shall be no Coesars it. That World, who shall Value themselves,
as the first of the Coesars did, that in their Time they have taken a Million
Pri^^aers, and made more than a Million C^reasis; nor shall there be any (...),
to boast, that with their own Hands, they have in their Time S^ain two Thousand
men. Those two things are Joined in the wonderful Name of our Lord Jesus, Isai.
9. 6. He is, The Father of the world to come, and. The Prince of Peace. He will
see that their shall be nothing but (...) in that world which we are now upon
the B^^ lets ^f. The First Adam has less a World among his Children, in which
there are Cai^s and (...) continually R^lling one another; but the second Adam
will have no such Doings in the World that shall be called, His. We are told in
Rom 13. 10. Love works to Ill to a Neighbor. But the World will then be full
of that Love, which all dispose men to do one another all the Good they can, as
being Subjects of One Monarch, yea, Members of one Body in the Lord Jesus
Christ. They that make the Seven Ch^^^s of (...). Lord Jesus has signalized by
His (...), to be so many Figures ^f all (...) (...) in the World, suppose
Philadelphia to be that which a (...) out the Temper of things in the Kingdom
of our Lord Jesus, truly. It Is a (...) Estate, which People shall then be (...)
(...) B^^therly Love shall manage all that is d^^e. A principle of Love shall
gain the After lent over all that E^v^ and Malice, which is now every where
(...); (...) that men shall seek One another (...), with the same I^^^grity and
V^^menty that they (...) pursue their (...); and they (...) no (...) (...) One
unto another. The (...) Psalm, is En^^tuled, ^word Hidden Things; as being upon
that Kingdom of (...) Lord Jesus Christ, which is called, (...) of God. Now
this is One of the Hidden Things, that are then to come to pass, in Psalm. 46 9.
He makes (...) to cease unto the End of the Earth. He cr^aks the Bar. and
(...) the Spear in sunder, He burns the Chariot is Tire. And will not the
Swords go with them, think you? It is a Sabbath, a Long, and a great Sabbath,
which the World shall then Arrive unto; and as of old, no Fire was to (...)
^dred on the Sabbath, small Fire, that is, all (...) is to be now Extinguished.
There shall then be no Armies, but Churches; and there shall be no Swords, no
Spears, w^rn by the Saints in the Approaching Age. There will be no A^t^ll^^ies
but ^^^l^l^jahs used among the Nations that shall Walk in the Light of the New
Jerusalem; nor will Tactics then be the study of Ingenious men. I^ is sore old
concerning this Time, in Isai. 11 6. The wolf shall (...) (...) the Law. Which
whether or no it shall, (as why may it not? Pray, ask of Calvin about it) be
fulfilled in a Natural Sense, will doubtless be fulfilled in a Political Sense;
it shall no more be said, That One man is a wolf to another; nor shall we be so
much worse than B^^itish as to devour the Creatures of our own kind any more.
Even an Heathen Poet, about the Time of our Saviors Birth had some rode
sore-sight of such a Peace; how, said he, we shall have a Time in which -- you
Miguos m^tuat Armerta Lious.

Now, instead of l^vading One another, in their Enjoyments, a Powerful Touch of
God upon the Spirits of men in all Corners of the World, will cause them to
Agree in that One (...), in Zeph. ^. 8 9 They shall call upon His (...).
Certainly, there will be no Fighting. when men shall all have One Consent for
the Service of God among them. The Pagan Historian, relates concerning the Time
of our Lords First coming, That there was then, (...) Pax, a^t Pactio; a Peace,
or at least a Truce among all the Nations; but a far greater thing of that kind
will be brought about, at the Day, which from Luke 17. 22. I see cause to call,
To First of the Days of the Son of man. This Iro^^ Age will then be out; and
such (...) Things as out Swords and Spears, will (...) Survive it.

II. But then let us in the next place Enquire, WHENCE will arise that State of
Peace, which will thus take away all Occasion to Learn War any more?

It Is possible that the Princip^^ Characters, which may have a Tendency to m^^e
this Happy Scare so ^^atable, may be but Suspicious Characters, in the Opinions
of many among the People of God. If you will believe such men as Justin Martyr,
who flourished in the Second Century [yes, or Irenaus, the Scholar of Polycarp]
It is very certain, That some things concerning the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus,
were Embraced in the Primitive Times, by all the Orthodox, which were
Forgotten, and perhaps Forbidden, when the Kingdom of Antichrist came upon the
Stage; nor will they be well understood and Received, until that Wicked One be
further Destroyed by the Dawn of the Day wherein in the S^^ of Righteousness
will Rise unto them that fear His Name. I shall therefore forbear all things
that may be doubtful to any one Discreet and Sober person among us; unless, as
we read in Math. 24. 3. The Disciples came privately to ask about, Tot End of
the world. And I shall further-more forwa^n all Persons to beware of all such
conceptions about the Kingdom of our Lord, as may Interfere with His continual
I^^^sion, or any of those Glorious Designs which He is Ascended into Heaven
upon; and of all such Conceptions as may carry a Sensual Aspect with them, or
Provide a C^rinthian and M^bom^^^ paradise (...) the Ke^^rr^ction of the Just.
But I shall now mention only a few U^qu^stionable Characters of the State now
hastening upon us; all of which will contribute unto the Peace thereof.

(...), The Peace of the Letter Da^es will flow from the mavelous Holiness,
and Righteousness of these Days. The Apostle has ^^^ly Determined it, in Jam.
4. 1. From whence co^^ (...) and B^anls among you? Come they not be^ce, Even of
your Lusts? The Lusts of Covetous, Amb^^ous, Revengful men, are those things
that now (...) them together by the Ears. That French Fitchrand that has of
late years k^pt a most all E^^^p: in a flame of War, had so little Modesty as
to Own in One of his Declarations, Toat the Glory of Empire was the Motive of
his undertakings: Truly, some such Lusts is the unhappy Original of Every War;
But in the Last Days, every such Lust, will be Restrained with more powerful
(...) than these Our Days afford. We are assured in Z^ch. 11.20. It that Day,
there shall and upon the Bridles of the H^ses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD. It seems
that men shall then Consecrate all that they are, and all that they have, unto
the Service of God; Every place will Swarm with such Hol^ men as will be always
performing of Obedience unto God themselves, and Exciting all others to that
Obedience. E^eki^ls Temple will then be built among the Nations: which T^mple,
will be Holiness of Holinesses, that is, most Superlatively Holy. You cannot
imagine that any Troops will then be Raised for the ^ischief of m^^kind, when
the very Bridles of the Horses will be marked with, Holiness to the Lord.
Holiness it self will then (...) be the Middle of the World. When once men are
(...), they will then be, as we learn from Jam 3 17 P^^ (...)! Gentle Easy to
b^ E^^^^^ted f^ll of (...) Good Fruits without wra^^h^g and without H^^^r.
(...) And we are also assured in Isai. 60 ^1 The (...) also shall be all
Righteous. It seems they shall then be ready to yield one another, all that is
Right; and neither in Ex^^^i^^s nor in Affections be prone to wrong one
another. There all then be that N^w E^rth whereof both E^ay and Peter tell us.
T^^reit shall dwell Righteousness. Wherefore, if there should then be (though I
know not there will be) any men of unpeaceable Dispositions, they will not be
so many or so mighty, as to break the Common Tranquillity, not will their
S^arks find Combustible matter to seed upon we have been advised, in Isai. 32.
17. The Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the Effect of Righteousness,
(...) and d^s^rance for. In those (...), will God bless the World with (...) a
plentiful and Gracious Effusion of His own ^^^sed Spirit, as we have never
hitherto seen any more, han^ some little p^aelib ti^^ns of: [ See Zech. 12. 8.]
It is Predicted in l^e^ 2. ^8 I will po^r out my Spirit upon all Fl^h i^ these
Days. When this had a Partial Fulfillment upon a little (...) of men, in the
Old Jerusalem above Sixteen Hundred year ago, What was the Effect of it? We
find, in Act. 2. ^6 They coeti^^^d Daily with ^et Accord in the Temple, and
they did Eat their Meat with Single^ess of Heart. But you are to Look for a
further, a greater Fulfillment of this Word in the New Jerusalem; even in the
Days that are now at hand; Blessed Spirit, That thou would Rend the
Heavens, and come down unto us! And when the Spirit of God has taken
Possession of the World, you may Easily Suppose, that men will be of Out
Accord, and that men will have but One Heart among them. When there shall be no
Evident and Outrageous Fighting against the God of Heaven in the World, He will
(...) then Plague us, as for That Cause He now (...), with ways among our
selves. We shall ^^e the Hundred and First Psalm very ^^^inently Ex^mplify'd,
in the Government of our Blessed Jesus; and when all the nicked are
Exterminated from the City of God, what can there be to discompose the Peace of
that City?

Secondly, There is like to be Peace in the Last Days, because in these Days,
the great In^endiari^s of the World, wi^^ be taken out of the way. As now, It Is
the Devil that is the Make^ate of the World; if you would know, what is the
Reason that men cannot let one another be ^^i^t, it is in Sh^rt, Because the
Devil is in them.

The Devil is that monstrous Valcas out of whose Forge our Swords and Spears
were at first Educed; though we must now have them in our hands to put by his
Passes at us. The same Devil that makes D^moniacks to tear and cut themselves,
does also cause men to Wound one another; and the same Devil that sometimes
does make Storms in the Air, does also make Wars on the Earth. As in Rev. 12.
17. We read of, A War, of which the Dragon was the Enkindler; so there is
indeed no War, which the Dragon is not the first Author and Raiser of. The
Devil is a most Bloody Destroyer, and Envies unto us, all the Comfort of our
Peace; hence there is rarely any Destruction, which this Angel of Death has
not some Concernment in. There is no War, for the most part, which has not
some ^^^stice on one side giving Rise unto it; now it may still be said, There
is the Hand of Satan there! Who was it that once Provoked the Numbering of the
People? Satan did it; and it is he that Provokes the wasting of the People
still; it is an unutterable Satisfaction unto Satan to receive some Thousands
of poor Souls falling into his greedy hands in one Morning from one Cruel and
crimson Spot of Ground! Such ^leals do our Wars often feast the Dragon with.
But in the Last Days, the Devil shall be confined unto a closer and a darker
Dangeon, than that in which he has been hitherto Imprisoned. We find in Rev.
20 1, 2. Our Lord Jesus then Comes down from Heaven, having a Great Chain in
his hand; and He lays bold on the Dragon, that Old Serpent, which is the Devil
and Satan, and binds him: So that the Devil shall then be kept under a Shorter
Chain, and the Roaring Lion shall not then, as he does now, Go about seeking
whom he may devour. He shall then, with his Angels, be in those more Exquisi^e.
Everlasting Chains under Darkness, for which they are now Reserved; and it
shall then be the Time of their Torment, not of their Walking, not of their
C^ealing, not of heir Empire still. It upon Shutting up the King of Babylon,
that Incessant Embroiler of mankind in his Grave, it was said, The whole Earth
is now at Rest and is Quiet, how much more will that be said, when Satan
himself is thrown down into the Pit? When the God of Peace will shortly tread
Satan under our Feet, we cannot but have The Peace of God.

Again, The Devils Eldest Son, that is, The Man of Sin, is the Grand B^ut^f^u
of the Universe. It Is the Sea of Rome that has shed more than a Sea of Blood,
by the Wars which it has more than an Hundred times Pushed the Nations of the
World upon. We see an horrible B^^st pountray'd in Rev. 13 7 And (it is added)
it was given unto him to make War with the Saints, and to overcome them. The
Blessed Wolderses of old, made that Scripture their Support, when the Popish,
horrid, infandous Cr^isades were published against them. A great part of the
War in the World, is but for the Persecution of them that own the Truths and
Ways of the Lord Jesus Christ; now there has not for more than this Thousand
years been many such Persecutions upon the Followers of the Lamb, wherein some
Horn, or some Limb of that Ravenous Beast has not been concerned. The most of
the Swords and Spears in the World, have been hammered out of those Hellish
Keys, which the Pope carries in his Hands.

The Terror of the Popish Arm^geddo^s, or Excommeni^ations, is that which has
driven Millions of men to such Battles, as they have perished in. But in the
Last Days, that Son of Perdition shall ^o into Perdition intended for him. It
will not be long, before all the Corners of the Earth will ring with the Etho's of
that thing in Rev. 18. 2. Au Angel, Crying mightily with a Strong Voice, Bad
(...) the great is fallen, in fallen. All men will shortly Dis^^ain and Refuse
the Cup of Abomieations, ^erdred by the Church of Rome; and be no more
Inu^xicated and Infatuated with her ^igotries. All the Orders of the Ravish
Clergy shall then be Hissed out of Humane Conversation; and particularly, the
Ignatian Fiery Brood, which does Finish and complete them all, shall then be
Extinct for ever. That City which now Scatters Fire-bals about the World, shall
be laid wholly Desolate, by such an Horrible Tempest, as that wherein Sodom was
overwhelmed of old; and in the Ashes of the Papacy will be buried most of those
B^a^^gles which now set more than all E^rope in a flame. Be sure, there shall
then be no Consistery of Cardinals to give Thanks, for the M^ss^c^e of Toirty
Thousand Protestants in France, and (...) the Butchery of-two Hundred Thousand
in Ireland, as they did some years ago; nor shall there be a Popish Alva to
brag, that in the space of one Six years he had Executed Eighteen Thousand
people, by the Ordinary Minister of Justice, bes^les a Million other
Dutcheries. Then that Monster of whom the Spirit Express; Speaks [compare I
Tim. 4. 1. with Dan. 11. 36 37,38,39.] under the person of A^tio^bus, who is
(...) continually G^^ng forth with great F^^y, to Destroy, and utterl to make
away many, shall be come to his end and (...) shall help him. And if we have
seen him strangely to miscarry in a strong and warm endeavor, to plant (what
proves no more Durable than) a Tib^rea^l^, in a Country that may be called, A
glorious hol Mountain Surrounded with the Seas, it will further argue his
immediate Coming to his End.

Finally, Who are they that break the Peace of the World, more than the Bad
R^lers of it? They are the J^rob^a^s of the world, that corrupt and poison
their. Subjects with such evil manners, as bring the vengeance of War upon
them: and the Capritio's, and Revenges of haughty Potentates do further
P^zcipi^te their miserable people into such confusion. But in the Last Days,
there shall be only Good men Entrusted with the Government of their
Neighborhood. You may take it for Granted. That the Lord Jesus Christ will
see, the World shall be well Ruled, when He takes the Rule of it into His own
glorious Hands; we are told in Isai. 32. 1. A King shall R^ign is
Righteousness, and Princes Rule in Judgment. Indeed, The Magistrates that shall
be the Vice-getents of our Lord Jesus in His Kingdom, shall Judge the World in
Righteousness, and the People with Equity. Hence it is mentioned among the
Alvan^^es of the Last Days, in Psalm 72 3. The Mountains shall bring Peace to
the People, and the Little Hills by Righteousness. There shall then be no
Mountain, or Superior Magistrate, and no Little H^^, or Subordinate
Magistrate, but what shall be a Saint of God; and Oh what Peace will the World
be now Swee^^ed with! He tell you, what it is that will then blunt all our
Swords, and Stears; The Lord Jesus has promised unto the Saints, in Rev. 2.
27. They shall Rule the Nation: with a Rod of Iron. Those Rods of Iron, will
N^llify our Swords and Spears for us! As yet it is a Rare Thing to (...) under
a Good Government; but the Last Words of David have given us Notice, in 2 Samuel
23 ^, 5. (...) for so I read them (...) There shall be a Ruler over men,
Righteous, Ruling in the fear of God -- though as yet He made Him ^^t to Spring
up. Then shall the Peace of the World be a Peace that none shall lnterrupt.
This, Thence will be the Peace of the Latter Days. Aspice Venturo Latentur us
Omni^ S^^l,

Ponder diligently, Isai. 1. 26. and Isai. 60. 17. and Ezekiel. 45. 8.

III. we shall then in the Last-pl^^ Enquire, WHEN shall men see that State of
Peace, which will make it needless for them to Learn War any more?

It must be Confessed, That many famous men have mistaken in their Conjectures
about the Approaches of that Peacable State. But the mistakes which they fell
into, may rather Adventage us, than Discourage us; and prove so ma Sea-marks to
prevent our Ship-wracks Nor is it any Presumption for us to make our Humble and
Modest Conputation of the Times; inasmuch as the Lord Jesus Christ has given
us a Revelation of them; wherein are Discovered some things which before His
Ascension were concealed from all mankind; and whereof He has said unto us,
Let him that has ^^i^do^, count the Number.

Indeed while the Church had yet some Ages to ly broiling in that Sea of Ice
and Fire, wherein, though they were tortured with a Fire of Miseries, ye cruel
and heavy Flakes of Ice over their Herds made it impossible for them, to get
out of those miseries, it was the mercy of God unto His people, that they did
not so clearly understand, How Long: It would have broke the Hearts of them, to
have Thought, How long, they were to ly under their Oppressions, and how many
of their Twelve-hundred and Sixty years, yet remained for their Suffering. But
according to the Order of the Angel in Rev. ^2 10. Scal not the sayings of the
Prophecy of this Book for the Time is at (...); so, the nearer that the Kingdom
of our Lord Jesus is at ^a^d, the more unsealed. Unfolded, Explaned, will be
the Sa^ings of the Prophecy. Those of you, that count it your wisdom to huff
and Scoff at all Endeavors to find, what Article in the Line of Time we are
upon, are very unthankful to the Lord Jesus, for the Letter which He sent unto
us from Heaven a while ago, to advise us about the Times and Seasons, which had
hitherto been only in the Power of the Father: And you forget that Solemn
Rebuke of our Savior to them of old, in Math. 16 3 O ye Hypocrites, cannot ye
Discern the Signs of the Times. The Import of the Repro^^ was this; If they had
not been fast Asleep, their Calculations might have taught them, That the
Seventy Weeks or the Four hundred and Ninety years, p^afixed by Dani^l for the
Appearance of the Messiah were well high Expired: but it was their Hypocrisy
that made them Careless and Listless in their S^^dies about the Times. Men
pretend, That the Knowledge of the Times is the Prerogatio^ of God alone; and
that His Word is not plain Enough to give them Information (...) and that it is
not much for our Edification to Search after the sense of His Word in such
(...) and so they neglect all Enquiries after the San^^ that are yet behind, in
the Glass of Time; when something else lies at the bottom; this now to a great
H^pecrisy!

Wherefore I shall do what is pleasing to the Lord Jesus Christ, If at this
time, I make some Supposals about the Advance of the time, when War shall be
Learned no more. Supposals, I call them, because I think I should be very
Modest, and Humble, no Caution is too much, in making them.

The first SUPPOSAL.
A Contrary and a Terrible Appearance of Things in the World, is no certain
Sign, that our Blessed State of Peace, is far Distant from us. Though we see
nothing but Swords and Spears in all hands, and nothing but Uproars, Horrors,
and Slaughters, so every Country; this does now Infallibly argue, To^re shall
be nothing but Wars in our Days. It is foretold, with reference to the Days,
wherein they shall not Learn War any more; In D^n 1^. 1. There shall be a Time
of Trouble, such as never (...) soul there was a Nation even to that same Time,
and at that Time thy People shall be Delivered. So then, the Blacken you see
the Troubles of the Age to grow, the sooner and the ^urer may be the Peace
which (...) are hoping for. What though (...) have the knife, which it as had
as a Sword or (...) S^tar, at his Throat; One Minnute may set all to rights
again. Pray then, let it not s^ight you to be in such a Mount! The Almighty God
usually chooses to make a Dismal Tragedy, wherein all men shall be overwhelmed
with Desperation and Astonishment; but all on the sudden, He descends from the
M^cbia of Heaven to put a New, Joyful, Pleasant Face upon it all; and as it is
said in Deuteronomy. 32. ^6. The Lord shall Judge His people, and Repent Him, for His
Servants, when He sees their strength is go^^, and there is none st^t up or
L^st. The unusual Agonies of War, and horrible Tumult, now in the World, may
only prove that Crisis, immediately upon which we may Enter into Rest. It is a
remarkable Prediction, in zech. 14. 6,7. It shall come to pass, in that Day,
that the Light shall not be clear nor dark; it seems we are to see a Cloudy,
Gloomy, Stormy Day; but now the Evening of this day! One would look for nothing
save Thick Darkness in the Evening, if the Day had been Scarce Twilight; No,
but it follows, At that Evening Time it shall be Light. well then, suppose we
are now getting toward the Evening of a Woeful Day; Suppose the Catholics
never to potent, and suppose the Reformed never so Feeble, all as once, in one
years Time you may see a Turn, that shall make you say with Amazement of Soul,
O Lord, Thou d^st Terrible Things, which we looked not for! When a Prince not
unknown unto us, had the Security to say in one of his Declarations, That there
was now nothing l^ft which could give any future Disturbine unto his R^^ig^,
the great God with in a few Months, brought those prodigious Hurricanes upon
his Kingdoms, which the whole World is justly surprised a^ (...) No Englishman
does need me to tell him, That God can in fewer Weeks undo all that men have
been many years plo^ting and Framing of. There is nothing which does so much
Threaten to defer our Peace, as the want of Preparation for it, in the Hearts
and Lives of men, and the Extreme Corruption of the World. But you Remember
that all the Heathenism and Frowardness of Israel could not keep them in Egypt
when once their four hundred and thirty years were out; we find, The sell same
Day it came to pass; and yet a few Days before, neither God not man could be
heard among them. When God shall give Order for introducing the Age of Peace
into the World, He says, in J^el 3. 13. Put ye is the Sickle, for the Harvest
is Ripe. When God seas that His Adversaries are grown Ripe in all their
High-handed Abominations, and Ripe as to their being Incorrigible and
Impenitent after all the means of cure upon them; He Will then give Peace to His
unfanctifyed people, by the Destruction of those Adversaries, and make this
Peace to be the mean of Sanctifying them. Not for your sakes, but for my Holy
Names sake, do I this, says the Lord God! Consider, Isai. 66. 7, 8. and Rev.
18. 8,10.

The second SUPPOSAL.
The Period of the Papacy seems to be at the Door; and our Blessed State of
Peace, will then be quickly Introduced. The Peaceable Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, has ever now and then begun a little to show it self; it begun to Open
a little in several Instances during the Primitive Times; especially at the
Abolition of Pagans! (...) in the Days of the great co stantive: but still
there was a Seal clap't upon it, because the Kingdom of Antichrist must first
come in play, which is to a bide, as Daniel tells (...), nuil the Time come,
that the Saints possess the Kingdom. Then Farewell Swords, Farewell Spears,
Farewell all the Lostrum ^^s of Death! Wars are at an end. Well, There is ground
for Hope that the Reign and Rage of Antichrist is within a very little while of
that End, which we are all wi^hing thereunto. We do not want for Demonstration,
That the Pope of Rome is the Antichrist: Indeed, the Word, Antichrist most
properly and Exactly Signifies, The Viear of Christ; if one would say in good
Greek, The Vicar of Christ, no fitter Term could be used, than, that of
Antichrist; so that, E^^^re Toe! the Pope unawares proclames himself to be
Antichrist, while he calls himself, The Vicar of Christ [see (...) Form of
Speaking, in the Greek Tex; of Act. 13 7.] Now it is more than Once or Twice,
declared unto us, That the Duration of the Antichrist an Empire is to be in for
Twelve hundred and Sixty years. If therefore we can tell when to Regin those
Twelve hundred and Sixty years, we may guess when to Conclude them without any
Difficulty. And now, it is admireble that no m^^ Notice has been taken of that
perspicuous Epoch. in Rev. 17. 12. The Tea Hores which thou ^amst are T^^
Kings, which have Received no Kingdom at yet, but Receive power at Kings one
Hour with the ^^st; the meaning of which is thus much; when you see Tom
Sovereign Kings appearing in the Roman Empire, you may take it for granted,
that the Tower of Antichrist is sai^ly Commenced. N^w all men know, that in the
fourth and fifth C^nt^ry, the Barbarous Nation made their Violent Assaults and
Inroads upon the Roman-Empire, and more than Once they dreadfully Sacked the
City of Rome it self; these Desolations of the Roman Empire In^i^ed and Obliged
Several Kingdoms in the bowels thereof to set up for themselves; of which by
the year Four Hundred and Fifty Six at furthest, there was the Number of Ten
Completed. No less punctual and positive are the words of the Apostle Paul, in
2 These. 2 7 8. He who now ^i^d^rs, will ^i^der, until ^e be taken o^t of the
(...), (...) (...) shall that wicked are be ^^l^d. Commen a (...) both Ancient
and Modern generally Agree, that the Imperial and Heathenish power flourishing
at Rome, was that which hundred, the Revelation of Antichrist; when therefore
you see that the (...) En^^re was broken to pieces, and that a Little Priest
had opportunity to (...) himself with a mix Religion among the ^atherous
Nations, you may be sure The (...) Ou^ was come upon the State. Hence when old
J^^on had the (...) him. That R^me was taken by the Go^^^^ (...) (...) out. He
that hundred is new (...) end we co^sid^r^a^t, that Antichrist (...) at (...)!
If then from thence you ^eck^n Twelve hundred and Sixty years, you may see
cause to thank, that whoever now Lives Twenty Five years more in the World,
will see a more (...) M^^^sitaton befalling of Antichrist, than he has ever yet
met withal.

To confirm us in this ^^count of Time, there is a (...) Harm (...) Conc^^^nce
of (...), in the Pe^^^m^tion, an Age and half (...) (...) know that the
Duration of Antichrist is adjusted by Time, Times, and half a Time; that is, by
Three Wars and as half, which contain Twelve hundred and Sixty Days. Now the
Time, and the Times of Antichrist seem to have been so Run our, that he seems
to (...) his last Half Time as that famous Reformation; there is a Confidence
of a thousand things besides, to ^avour this Apprehension. Will then, Date the
Reformation from the year Fifteen hundred and Seventeen, or ten years after, ^f
you will; the Half Time of Antichrist, you know must be about an Hundred and
fourscore years; and this again makes the Business to be Reasonably and
Seasonably Looked for within a Score of years. And that which yet further
fortifyes this Conjecture is, that in Rev 14 15,18. There are two ^^eps taken
for the Abolishing of Antichrist; there is first an Harvest, and then a
Vintage. Out Lord ^ad a mighty Harvest of Churches, gathered out of the Papal
Empire, at the Celebrated Reformation. But the Harvest leaves work for the
Vittage, which alwaye^ comes about a Seventh part of the year after it. Now the
Seventh part of the Twelve hundred and Sixty years which Constitute the Grand
year of Antichrist. is just an Hundred and-fourscore years; wherefore about so
many years from the Reformation, that is, within a Score of years, it is possible
we may see Popery cast into the great Wiat-press of the wrath of God. Behold,
how all things Conspire to tell us concerning the Day of the Divine Revenges
upon Antichrist, as in Zeph. 1. 14. The great Day of the Lord is near, it is
near and besteth Greatly; (...) (...) Voice of the Day of the Lord; there shall
the (...) man cry (...) I (...) not indeed (...) the very Year of (...) (...)
downf^ll; and you also ^now, That Rome was not built in a Day; but I am verily
persuaded, A great part of this Assembly may live to see those Blows given to
the men of Si^, that shall be more Mortal more direful Blows, then any that
have yet been given him.

It Is not unlikely, that after the next fatal Blows upon Antichrist the Perfect
Peace of the Church may Require some Time for the settling of it. But yet, be of
Good Cheer, It comes on apace.

The third SUPPOSAL.
There seem to be some Symptoms, upon the Turkish Empire, that speak hopefully
about our Blessed State of Peace, and say. It will come quickly. There are
Seven most Memorable Dispensations of Judgment upon the Roman Empire, which are
to make way for the Peaceable Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; and these are
Exhibited unto us, under the Notion of so many Tru^p^ts, all sounding like the
Cor^ets for Seven Days about Jeri^^^ of old, until the fall of Rome. The Three
last of these, are called, ^^^-T^^mp^ts, as being more woeful to the Roman
Empire, than the rest; and upon the last of all it is proclaimed, The Kingdoms
of this world, are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of His Christ; Then we
shall have done with our Swords and Spears^, Tears with Wars will all be gone:
Well, you cannot but allow me, with all sensible Interpreters, that the second
(...) Trumpet is the Turkish Empire; which begun to play its ^^c^k^ upon the
Roman Empire in the Tenth and Eleventh Century, and at last between the years
Fourteen and Fifteen hundred, Siez'd Constanti^o^le it self into its hands. All
those Execrable Plead^^ers whom we call, Conquerors, from the beginning of the
world, have hardly shed such Rivers of Blood, as these woeful Turks have done.
But how long must this game hold? There seems to be a Term allotted for them,
in Rev. 9. 14,15. Loose the Four Angels which are bound in the great River
Eupbrates; and the four Angels were loosed, which were ^r^p^red for an Hour,
and a Day, and a Month, and a Year, to stay the Third part of men.

There were four Sultames, (...) Kingdoms of Turks, h^vering about the River
E^^hrates; until they all united in the one (...) family, under which, by the
Year Thirteen hundred, they were making themselves a formidable (...) to the
Roman Empire, New cast up, an Hour, a little space for preparation; a Day, that
is one year; a Month, which is Thirty years; and a Year; which comes to Three
Hundred and sixty five or perhaps, but Sixty (...) years; according to the
Prophetical Cyphe^ of Days for Years; and one would Suspect, that within less
than Seven Years from this Time, the Turk should be under such Humiliations, as
might obstruct his ever giving Europe Trouble any more. If we should shortly
hear of a general Peace or Trace with him, it would add unto our Probabilities.
It Is also a matter of some Reflection that the Number Four is Mystical in the
Mohammedan Religion, as the Number Seven was in the Jewish; almost all
considerable things, have been terminated in Four among the Turks; and it is
moreover frequent for Empires to finish in the same Name that they began
withal. This had further blown up the hopes of some, when they lately saw one
having the Name of ^^ain^^t and the Fourth of that Name too, upon the Turkish
Throne that the Mahomen^^ Empire must be near its end. But let this Fancy pass
only for one Little pit in the Foundation, upon which we would build our
Progros^ica^^. (...) upon the Second we passing away; though who can tell what
the late Convulsions which deposed that Grand S^^^io^^ may work unto? And then
what followes^ It Is added, Behold, the Third we comes quickly! Now that we will
be Peace to the People of God; this Trumpet will blow at length all wars out of
the World. It may not be unpleasant for those of you, that have Guns in your
hands this Day, to Remark, what Note the Scripture here sets upon the first
life of Guns. When the Arms of the Turks are here describing, it is said, Out of
their Mouths issued Fire and smoke and Brimstone; it refers to Gun Powder which
was Invented not long before the Taking of Constanti^^^le, whereof a most
Extraordinary use was made of it. But when the Turks are once marched off, we
shall Quickly see those things that will cause us to beat our Guns, as well as
the Swords and Spears about us, into things of another Shape. It may over a
h^^m us with Admiration, to Look upon the Vast Sects (...) (...) among the
Ma^^^^s, who give (...) the Principal Articles of (...) that a step (...)
further, (...) than (...) (...) particularly Considerable, That multitudes of
People among the Turks, are lately come to hold, To^t (...) is God, and the
Redeemer of the World; Yea, to hold this Doctrine with so much Resolution, as
to choose Mart^rdo^e rather than to quit it. These are called among them. The
good f^llowers of the Messiah; and the more learned and civil of the Turks do
^ow so much fall in with these Chap M^ssahites (as they style (...)) that when
they would commend a Person, they put that Name, upon him. Behold yet another
Prog^oster of dying Ma^^metanism! Should the Interest of Christianity prevail a
little further there, who can tell what Events would come quickly thereupon!

The last SUPPOSAL.
Finally, (...) is there to stay for? Have we not seen already Fulfilled, Moses
if not All of those-things, which are to proceed the Happy State of Peace, that
is to come?

In general, It Is both the Moses and by Peter, with a Sufficient plainness
intimated, That the Six Days wherein the World was making, were a Type of the
Six thousand years, after which the Church is to enjoy a Blessed Sabbatism. Our
Lord, has told us, that these Days, or Years of Trib^lati^^ shall be
shortened for the sake of the Elect; and the more particular Prophecies and
Oracles of the Bible, seem to have curtailed that long line of later-Sabbatical
Time. some Hundreds of years. we then, that have good cause to count our selves
gotten at least Five Thousand, Six Hundred and Seventy Eight Yearsforward^ upon
that Li^e, may surely Lift up our Heads!

But that which adds to our Satisfaction is, The Dispatch that his been made of
those things that are to make way, for the Kingdom of our Lord. We have a Line
of Time, in the Revelation, drawn from the Resurrection of our Lord, unto that
Kingdom, wherein He will give Peace unto us; and a full Commentary upon what
had been said by Daniel about the Fourth M^^^rchy. First, There were Seven
Seals, or stay upon that Kingdom, all of which we have seen opened, so, that
the Kingdom, would have come, if there had not then been a Mack-Kingdom to get
the start of it. At the opening of the First Seal. we have seen a warrior come
from the East; namely, Vespasiat [and Tit^s] who was in the East, when
proclaimed Emperor; he had but a Bow, and his Horse was white; because the war
in this Time did not so much affect the Empire; nevertheless, he conquered
Judea, and Christianity was Established by the Conquest, which he made upon the
Jewish Temple and worship. At the opening of the Second Seal, we have seen a
Warrior, come from the West; namely, Trajas [and Adri^^] a Native of Spait,
which is in the West; he had a ^^d Horse, and a great Sword, because of the
Cruel and Civil Wars is his Time; occasioned especially by the general Revolt
of the Jews, who bu^cheted Six hundred Thousand persons in the first Outrage of
their Fury, and were not Subdued without the Slaughter of more than Two Million
People. At the opening of the Third S^^l we have seen as warrior come from the
South; namely, Severns [and Alexander] who was of ^n African, which in a
Southern Original; he had a Black Horse, with Balances, and Orders about Cor^
and O (...) and Wine; because of the Solemn Imperatorial Justice which then
took place; for never were Public or Private To^^ves more Exemplarily
Punished, than in those Reigns; and admirable Edicts about Corn and Wine and
O,^, were then also most Literally emitted unto the World. At the opening of
the Fourth Seal, we have seen, a Warrior come from the North; namely M^ximin
[to A^^lian] who was of a Turacian, which is a Northern Original; he had a
PaleHorse, with Deadly Consequents of Sword, Hanger, Death, and wild beasts,
because, this Tyrant perpetrated the most Bloody Cruelties upon all Sorts of
People; he was a Devil of a man, and just after him came another Tygre, who
oftentimes would Cut the Throats of three or four thousand in a Day. The
Barbarian in the East also then made Hideous havocks; there came likewise an
Universal Famine; a wasting Plague raged every where for fifteen years
together; at last, no less than Thirty Tyraats together, fell to shedding of
Blood, through the Extent of the Empire. At the opening of the Fifth Seal. we
have seen Soils under the Altar; and a most horrid Persecution, managed by
Di^^^sian, and them h^^ f^llow'd him; a Persecution which lasted in its Heat
for a years together; a Persecution, which, for a Sec^^^^^ (...) (...)
Bloodiness, in one (...) (that of Egypt) Massacred an Hundredd and (...), four
Thousand men, Persecution in which they prevailed so far, that they set up
their Tr^ump^^l Pillar, with a, Superstati^^^ (...) (...) upon them; and (...)
whence came the Era M^rtyr^^^, so famous in the Church of God. At the last, we
have seen the opening of the Sixth Seal, which produced the fall of Paganism in
the days of Constantine; to the days of T^^^dosi^^. Here was an Earthquake
that changed the face of all Aff^vr^; here the Devil, and the Religion, and
^his Priests, were Eclipsed, and fell to the Ground; ^here were the Temples and
Idols of Heathenis^m (...) vid o^^ of their places; here could one have seen
the Invisible Empire of the De^^^s, one might have behold all the ^ights of the
terrible, Consternation. In a word, here was a Tipe of what is to be in the
Fall of Popery, at the coming of our Lord, in the Seventh Seal, we should have
now seen the Peacable Kingdom of our Blessed Jesus, offer so many confounding
Judgments, upon the Adver^^ries of that Kingdom; but the Servants of God in
the New Jerusalem had still a Seal upon them. The Christian Emperors afforded
a Disguize for the Antichrist which was now to Rise and when the City of Rome
had been more than Twelve hundred years computing, As (...) Candita, now the
Empire breaking into Ten Kingdoms, that abominable City continues another like
(...) under another Lord. Antichrist was Conce^^^d as early as Twenty five
years after the A^ce^sion of our Lord; the Apostles give Notice of him (...);
and there was the Ro^t of his Number; and, by the way, it is all wonder, to sea
how that Number is every where Sacred in the Church of (...) Antichrist was
c^n^leated about Six hundred and Sixty years after th^^, when Image, worship
was pressed by this wicked ^^^nezar, with the Rain of such I (...) (...)
Emperors as refused i^. But between in it T^^^s, we might see Antichrist
Reigning in the World-at such a Ra^e, as that, although it has been an usual
thing for him to Date h^s Writings, R^gnant^ Christ's. yet our Lord Jesus Christ
is kept out of His Kingdom by his Insol^^cies. Wherefore upon the Seventh Seal,
we have S^ven Trumpets, all sounding the Alarms of the Divine vengeance against
the World, for their Continued Indisp^sition to the Kingdom of our Lord. The
Blood of the M^rtyrs formerly shed, and the Antichristian Superstitions (...)
worship, and Impositions of Conscience, already one (...) among the Christians,
loudly called for (...) Vengsance. At the First of the Trumpets, we have seen
an Hall-storm of Bloody (...) Invading the Roman Empire, until (...) (...) and
^ackd the City of Rome it self; they Rushed on suddenly, and every where
carried Blood and Fire with them. These Invasions fell upon the It (...)
Division, which was O^ T^^d of the Prefectors that the Empire had been divided
into. And it is a little Surprising, that the Gothic Troubles both began and
ended, with a Natural (...), which (...) tell ^s, was the Astonishment of the
World. At the Second of the Trumpets, we have seen a great Inundation of the
Ba^^^tions upon the Transalsiet parts of the Roman Empire, until the where
Prefecture of God, another Tured of that Empire. (...) the hands of the
Invaders, There, was a whole Mountain cast into a (...) of Blood; There the
Empire (...) lost is possession and Authority. At the Third of the Trumpets, we
have seen the Principal Upholder, and as it were, the Star and ^im^, of the
Roman Empire ^^lling; upon which, he Barbarians though they less off (...) yet
they kept the Roman (...) cut, (...) at most bitter Servitude; all was Wormwood
that they lived upon. The fall of the Bishop of E^^e, into a Carnal and Earthly
Tempet, was also (...) at this Time. Gr^^^^ the great, particularly now writes
of himself. Al^s, I am ^^^warely Advanced, but inwardly Fall^^! Under Cod^^r of
a Bishopric, I am sank into the world! At the Fourth if the T^umpets, we have
seen he sun and Moon and Stars in the Roman Empire Darked; by the Ceasing of
the Imperial Government in the West. It was Extinguished in the Year 455. when
Gerserticas made himself Master of Rome, and Plundered (...) for Fifteen Days
together. By this Time, Antichrist is got into this Throne; from whence Three
Trumpets more will fetch him down forever. The Eastern Emperor holding a
Correspondence with the Bishop of Rome, Contributed his w^^m^st Assistance to
A^^randize and so to Antichristi^^eize that Bishop, in hopes thereby at length
to Recover his Western Empire; and the ^reasons now committed against the
Kingdoms of the Lord Jesus, made men Ripe for the last (...) Trumpets of His
Judgments and Indignation. The First of those (...) to brought plague of (...)
upon the Earth; to which Perhaps, the sprit^^ of Prophecy in ^o^l had a Eye
many Ages before. From the (...) of (...) ignorance and ^laspheny now in the
World. O^ Mathome^, a Blade Actually possessed by the Devil took Occasion with
the Assistence of the a Mark, ^ahricate a New Antichristianism, in the East, in
tended for the Derision and Vexation of what was then Rising in the West. Both
Jews and Greek were to undergo a particular Oppression (...) his Tyrannies, and
therefore the Names (...) of Abiddo^ and of Apoll^o^ were put upon him. His
followers, called Saracens, were Arabians, and therefore most fitly called
Locusts; it as much a Arabia does use to afford such Insects; and the Hebrew
word Arbim, or Arpin, well enough points at Arabians, as well as it Signifies,
Harpies, the Poet Virgils description of which, is here after a sort Repeated,
by John, in his describing of these Arabians. These, as they had Crowns of
their Heads because all the Empires that had this Day taken up the East came
from them; so they had Stirgs in their Tails, inflecting and ^^susing the Ven^
me of a False Religion where they came; and One like Pluto (whom the Pb^ti^ians
called, S^rarpl, or, Prince of the L^c^sts) was a King ever them. This Eastern
Mock-Antichrist shortly (...) me owner of New Rome, while Old-Rome remained in
the hands of the Western; both of them aspire to the possession of Jerusalem,
as having the promise of the Universal Monarchy; both of them agree to slav^^st
the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus; but the s^m^r ^ave all manner of Ling^ing
Tormen's to the latter, for diverse times Five Moncks, which uses to be the
Summer Duration of the D^rst: especially, to that Third part of the Empi^e
which was in the O^dent, where the Al^om^^ ^^ns of Antichristiari^m were
obst^nat^ly committed by the G^acian Provinces, which have ^ot yet so Revolted
from Antichrist, but that he has his Influences on them as well as Pretersions
to them. Well, a while after ensued the Second of the Woe T^u^pets, which
produced the I^ruptions of the Turks, the Suce^^^^ of the Sar^ce^s, upon the
Empire. Four S^lt^n^s, or Kingdoms of the them, were settled about Euphrates;
but at last uniting under one Sovereign, they have ever fince proved such a
Plague unto the Antichristian World, as it has never seen before. They were
Originally such as had none but Horsemen in their Armi^t, (...) E^^ints that
Vomit out Sulphu^^an Powder, F^re and Smoke, were those by which they Killed
men, and shed more Blood than all that had been in the World before them.
T^a^indeed, a most Allusive thing to call them Horsemen; for they came out of
Persia; and Perse Signification Horse. Thus, in the Visions of Daniel, the King
of Gracla is called, a Goat; because the Gracians were styled AEgrades, which
has Wild Goats in the Signification it. Moreover, the Turks have sometimes
come into the Field with two or three hundred thousand Horse. The Angel that
^lowes in this Trumpet seems now to be, Cl^^gendo Ra^cus; the Woe seems to be
P^^ssing away. I confess, as these Wees came upon the Cries of the Retired,
Concealed, Persecuted Worshippers in the Temple of God; so the late ho^r^ble
Impressions of the Turks upon the Empire, most be Reputed, the Revenges of God
upon the Emperor (whatever contrary Advice his Co^fessor may have given him)
so the T^e^chetous and Nes^^dous Persecutions of the Pr^t (...), that
immediately ^^receded them. If therefore, the Emperor should now at all Re^ew
those Persecutions, us possible the Turks may yet make (...) O^ set more upon
his Ter^^ories, more d^^^^ing than any in the so-mer Generations. But it is to
be hoped, we have seen the last!

I do again therefore say, what it there to stay for? If our S^a^e of P^ace
must no^ (...) quickly; and indeed our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, is now in
Have for the Kingdom which He has been thus long waiting for. As for the
Seven, Vials, that carry on the L^st Plagues of Antichrist, if they are all
Reserved for the Seventh Trumpet, they will doubtless make a quick Work fit.
But it is not impossible, That they may all be under the Sixth Trumpet, only
that the Last being divided into those Two parts of the H^test and the Vintage,
the second part of it, will be Contemporary with the Trumpet in the Days
whereof The M^stery of God shall be Finished. In this ^me, it is very
Satisfactory to see, how the Air has been filled with Voices and Preachers
that Swiftly, flew throw the Antichristian Kingdom, at the Reformation. The
great City of the Latin Church, very strangely then ^^ll into Three Co^^^ions,
namely, The L^theran, the Calvizi^t, and that which yet remained with
Antichrist. According to this Hypotlesis which is that of the Excellent
J^rit^n's) the First Vial or Hourglass, of the Plagues upon Popery, ran out,
wh^le the Sea of Rome sell into that Infinite Corruption of the Tenth and
Eleventh Centuries, when have made it forever Obnoxious and Contemptible. The
Second Vial ran out, while the Bloody, Crois^d^s in the Eleven hand Twelfth
Centuries, carried vast Throngs of Wretched Creatures, to the Shambles in the
East; where three or four Years destroyed no less then diverse Millions of
woeful (...) ropeans. The Third Vial ran out, while the Losser Croisades that
followed Carried smaller L^gions in the next Century to the like Villainous and
(...) a Expeditions. There it was proper for an Angel to cry (...). Too^ art
Righteous, O Lord, for they have shed the Blood of Saints! Inasmuch, as in the
midst of these Cro^sades, the Ancient Waldenses and A^hige^ses had the most
horrid But ^arities perpetrated on them. The Fourth Vial ran our, while the
P^p^l Power grew to such an Height, especially toward the Thirteenth and
Fourteenth Centuries, as to Scorch men (...) Fire; until the Intolerable
Usurpations of it, said the Foundation of its Confusion. The Fifth Vial ran
out, while the City of Rome, at the Year 1305 lost the Pope, which was the Sun
of it; by the Popes Removing to A^igaion. This now crused the Schism of Two
Popes together, like the Sun and Moon in an Eclipse; hence followed cruel
Bloodshed's and Reproach; and the City of Rome set in Darkness for above
Seventy years together. The Sixth Vial ran out, while the Turks got over, the
^osph^rus which was the Second Euphrates that had been a (...) unto them; and
pushed on their Victories, till Charles the Fifth made them Raise the Singe
which they had Invested Vi^^^ with. It was in this period, that the (...) Law,
which does consist of Three parts, was Co^^pleated, Here the unclean Spirits
Compiled the L^ws, Orders, Oracles of the P^ped^m, and every Cinon ends with at
Ar^^ageddes, or an (...) hems and Excommunication, (for that is the English of
it) by the Fright whereof, the Subjects of the P^pedom have been kept in the
greatest Awe imaginable! it was the Fright of those (...) Thunder bolts, which
gathered the Popish Princes to the Barrels of ^^^mia in that Age; and what
further Barrels it may drive them unto, is yet with God! If these Illustrations
upon the Vials will h^ld, we have more Evidence yet for our great Assertion^
That the Day of Peace, will come quickly.

Thus have I said before you, a short Scheme of the Apocalypse. For the view,
that John had of these Things, you must suppose a Book of Leaves written both
on the ^^side, and on the Backside. This Book Rolled up in a Cylindrical Form,
under Seven Labels. fastened with Seven Seals. Then suppose the First Seal
opened, and the First Label removed; under the First Label had John the Vision
of the First Rider and so on, till the Seventh Seal was opened; each of the
Sculptures being Enlarged with Visions and Voices to illustrate it. All these
being thus opened and Removed, the Book might be Unrolled; then the First Six
Trumpets, with their Circumstances, appeared on the Backside of the Book; the
Book was then Eat^n, at the Beasts Kingdom not V^siorally exposed in it, until
afterward the Inside of the Book it self comes to be unfolded. Behold, how
these Wonderful Sights have now also been Exhibited unto our selves; the best
Expositor, (namely Ev^^nt.) has gloriously interpreted them.

Application.
But since these things are so, what shall we do (...) I have been making some
Essays upon The Time of the Day; a few more upon The Work of the Day, may well
accompany them. It will be well, if we may so have understanding in the Times,
as to Know what we ought to do with reference to the future Kingdom of our
David. Accept, I pray, of this Counsel then, (...) coming from the God of
Heaven to us; Labor it be found in such Frames, and such Ways, as the State
of PEACE ^ow advancing ^pe^ the World, would oblige us unto.

Particularly,

1. Why do Godly and Able men give themselves, no more to the Study of those
Truths which concern the Peaceable Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ? Since the
Accounts that we have about, The State of Peace to come, are things whereof our
Lord has said, in Rev. 22. 6 These sayings are faithful and Tr^e: they must
needs be worthy our Study, as being some of the Rays darted from Him, who is,
T^^e God of Truth. and since these are the matters, whereof the Apostle Peter
tells us, in a Per. 3. 16. There are in them, some things Hard to be
underst^^d; the more of Mystery there is in any such Truths of God, the more
Exquisite and Accurate should be our Study thereupon. The Truths which concern
the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, are not so ^^^intelligible, as that we
must throw them aside, as he of old the Obscure and Crabbed Lines of the Poet
P^rsi^s or cry out with Despair, I cannot Read, for the Book is S^al^d! No, the
Representation which our Lord has given us of those Truth, is called a
Revelation of them; and the Students thereof have therefore a Blessing
Pronounced upon them. David once ^^or'd the Grace of God unto him, which gave
him cause for that Exclamation, Lord, That (...) should speak to me, of
things to come! For us then to slight the Advice that we have had from Heaven
about the Things to come; for us to think that, Some Scripture is not
profitable; for unto ^aht z^ bred unto the sure Word of Prophets; my Brethren,
it is a Distemper which we cannot be Excused in. I confess, Apocalyp^lical
Stadies, are fittest for those Raised Souls, whose Heartstrings are made of a
Little Fiery Clay, than other men's; and it is to Then especially, that it take
leave to say, There is a World of Sweetness in Diligent and Regular Studies
upon the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus. When Jeremiah had been deeply engaged
therein, he ^dds, My sleep was sweet unto me! And John found the Book which had
these things in it, Rev. 10. 10. Sweet as Honey. I may tell you, That the very
A^gels of Heaven themselves, afford unto Holy men that (like Them) are have
upon such Studies, a Communion that is hardly is be uttered; Angelical Visits,
Angelical Comforts, Angelical Motions, are in a peculiar, though in an I
visible manner Vouchsafed unto such men of (...). And I shall tell you, that
the Food of such S^ud^es is marvellously Scattered all the Bible over; so that
you may almost every where, after some Digging, throw up some unsuspected
Intimations of this kind, whereas you will find impossible to forbear crying
out, with some Transport of Soul, I have found! I have found! There is likewise
a World of Safety, in Critical Studies upon out Distance from that Kingdom.
There are indeed very U^sa^e Computations, to which, and by which, many have
Exposed themselves. It has been Ridiculous to see, by what Chronology, by what
Cabala, and with what Temerity, some have Steered, in Fixing, The end of the
World; and there are many Temptations, into which men fall; when they find they
have been too Bold in their suppurations. But yet Modest Examination of (...)
the Time we are in, might prevent many a (...) step, that otherwise may be
taken by us. The Jews are so maliciously Apprehensive of this, That they, (...)
who (...) the Times: and when a Samuel considered h^w long Time the Jews had
^ow been in their Captivity, he cries out, Lord, I am afraid that the Jesus
whom the Christians worship, i^ indeed the J^st one? Pray, let them ^isk on.
But if the E^^aimites in Egypt, had Sufficiently weighed, That the Four Hundred
and Thirty years of their continuing as they were, (...) much of being out; I
suppose they would not have made such a Disastrous Expedition against the
Canaanites, as that which in Psalm. 78 9. is uttered among, The Dark sayings of
old. On the other (...), If Luther had been Apprehensive, that the Time
appointed for making better and better (...) than those which H^s and others
had made an hundred years before, upon the (...) was come on, what (...), with
his (...), must it have insur'd into him?

In a Word, An Acquaintance with Prophecy's may have more than a little
Influence upon the Accomplishments of those Prophecies. It was fore^^ul
perhaps, two hundred years before h^^d. in Isai 4^ 28. C^ras shall say to
Jerusalem, Thus shall be ^^ilt. It Is now reported, that the showing of that
promise unto Cyras, was the thing their afterward Excited him to Do what He
Read. Thus, if at this Day, any Potent Prince, would suffer himself on he
Convinced. That this were the Time for Distresses to be brought upon the (...)
of (...); how much Vigor and Conduct might the Affayrs of such a Prince he
thence inspired with? Doubtless, their present MAJESTY'S of Great BRITAIN, have
seen cause to Consider on the Pr^diction of the Incomparable JURIEU, in the
Dedication of his Excellent little Book enti^uled. The Balance of the
S^^ct^ary, and Rublished several years before the Late Revolutions in England,
which have so Eminently made good that Pr^^iction; God has placed you (says he,
speaking of the then Prince and Princess of Orange) for Miracles in Israel, and
for Signs, that he has intended your Highnesses to be the Principal
Instruments of that Grand Deliverance, which He has prepared for His Church,
when the storm shall be ever.

Well then, Let good Researches into Sacred Prophecy, meet with no more Ill
Resentments among the people of God. As for Profane persons, it is no wonder if
they Care for note of these Things. It is what Prophrey it self has assured us
of, in a Pet ^. ^, 4. There shall is the Last Dates come suffers, that shall
far, where is the promise of His coming? And it is well noted by our most
Learned Let, Our Lord counted it a pi^^c^ of (...), unto His Church, to Reveal
His Counsels so long before and Proclames them ^^th wise and Blessed, that
Study them; then by the Censure of the Divine word, they must be Fools and
Miserable, that neglect these Sacred Oracles. But for any Pious persons to give
those things a Discountenance, is an Evil that S^aroe can be Accounted for. And
yet as he Disciples himselves being told of our Lords Resurrection in Luke 24
11 The Words (...) unto them, (...) Tales, and they Believed (...) not; so,
there are still among the Disciples, those that Explode the Things which they
ought rather to Embrace, with many Ex^asies of Soul. Yea, such is their too
R^ah, but Strong prejudice against those things, that if they do not like the
first opposers of the Chiliad, da^^ly deny any Divine Authority to the
Rev^^tive of John, and the Second F^^stle of Peter, yet they cannot pa^^iently
hear to hear the Result of the m^st Es^^ate Meditations upon those Prophecies.
What is this, but a part of the Sleep, which the (...) in these days are to be
overtaken with:

But Awake, I beseech you, Awake, out of this unbecoming Sleep, and Read, and
Think, and Pr^ty, (...) the Father of Lights have given you some Light in those
Prophecies, which you should C^v^t the Understanding of. Indeed the First step
we are to take in our Studies, is. To get a large measure of Grace into our
Souls. It is said in Dan. 1^. 10. Note of the wicked shall understand, but the
Wise shall understand. Men that are without the Fear of God, will go little
better to Work than an I^^th (...) upon the Prophecies of our Lord; nor is it
likely that those who Drink any of the Ro^ish Pois^^n, should have a (...)
sharp enough to Pence into those Prophecies, much further than (...), who has
written a (...) to prove, that the present Reign of the Pop^, is the promised
(...) of our Lord. But let us he like Abraham, for our Friend-ship with the God
of Heaven, and we may make more hopeful Attempts in our holy Studies. What
says the Psalmist, in Psalm. 25. 14. The Secret of the Lord, is with them that
fear him and it is His Covenant to make them to know it.

II. But unto our E^adies on the Peaceable Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, we
should (...) our Prayers for it. Let us Long for, The State of Peace to come;
and join our Cries, in the (...) of the Martyrs, whom the Ten Primitive
Persecutions had Sacrificed, How long O Lord, Holy and Tr^e! It Is a Particular
in the Directory which our Lord has given us for our Prayers. Let thy Kingdom
come; now there will he all Peace in that Kingdom: and it is the Charge which
He has laid upon us, Keep not Silence, give the Lord no Res^, until He make
Jerusalem a Praise it the Earth; now you will have a Vision of Peace in that
Jerusalem. It is required of us, in Psalm. 122. 6. Pray for the Peace of
Jerusalem: for That should we Pray, and for the hastening of that Peace, that
shall be in and from the New-Jerusalem. Where God has given a Promise,
methanks, we should not think much of a Prayer; since our God has told us of
the Peace in the latter Daves, it becomes us to say, For this ^^use thy Servant
has found it his heart, to make his Prayer unto thee. And, who knows what
powerful and Effectual Jogs, our Prayers may give unto the wheels that may
bring on the most Comfortable Revolutions? You find in Rev. 8 4^ 5. The Prayers
of the Saints quickly bring T^^^drings, Voices, Lightnings, and Earthquakes
with them: and thus, the great M^^^c^hon, hoped, That God world (and He Did)
carry on the Reformation in Germany, because: many poor little Gracious Women,
did use to meet and Pray for that Blessing. Be sine, The Nearer we are to, The
Peace of the great Dry, the more Pra^erful should we be for the B^^rk of that
Day. When Daviel understood by (...), that the Deliverance of the Lords People
just at the (...), he ^ers himself to Prayer with Fasting before God; and
implores, in Dan. 9. 19. O Lord bear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do;
defer not, for they own sake, O my God; it seems, he was afraid (and much more
may we at this day be so) List the Salvations of the Church, might be (...)
beyond the Time Expected, because of men's (...) Behaviors under the Divine
Dispensations. I say then, Pray hard; and if our Prayers have had their S^^res
in Procuring the Peace of the World, we need no more doubt than Daniel did, of
a LOT in that Peace.

But we have both in point of Interest and inpoint of Gratitude. a further
Obligation to such Prayers as these. For, one main Thing, in that State of
Peace which we pray for, is, The Calling of so many Distinguished Israelites as
may make a mighty Nation, into the Sheep f^ld of the Lord Jesus Christ. When
the Israelites are brought (...) to Repentance and Conversion. Then it is, that,
The Times of Refreshing do come from the presence of the Lord. Now, the
Restitution of Israel will be ^^to us Gentiles, an Advantage Unspeakable and
full of Glory. This is largely discussed by the Apostle Paul, in his Chapter
upon it; where among other great Things, he says, in Rom 11. ^^. If their
Casting away, were the Reconciling of the world, what shall the Receiving of
them be, but Life from the Dead! It seems, nothing less than, A Resurrection
from the Dead, shall then bless the World, Moreover, Israel did once importune
of God, that we Gentiles might have the Br^^sts of His Institutions among us,
for the nourish^^^ of our Souls. Notwithstanding the E^vy (...) carnal among
them, they that had in them the Spirit of God, would say, as in Psalm. 67 2.3
^et say way be brown upon Earth, and thy Saving Health among all Nations; Let
the People Praise thee O God, Let all the People Praise thee; but the case is
now so altered, that if we have any Ingenuity in us, we shall do as much for
them! Thus, even by our Prayers for it, we are to, ^asten the Day of God. I
know not, That the Day of Isreal's Reduction has any Symptom of nearness, in the
late Exiccation of the D^^d Sea; so far that the Ruins of the old Cities in
it, of late years begin to appear [though I have Considered Ezekiel. 16. 5^, 55.]
But I know that a Spirit of Prayer for it, every where would be a Blessed
Symptom of it. It is that of which I may say, The whole Creation groanith for
it; Surely then, Our selves which have the first (...) of the Spirit, cannot be
without our Groans for the Acceleration of it. Our own Peace is this Enwrapped
in our Prayers. Besure, now Antichrist is come, we need not be afraid of
^praying, Pr^ mor^i Fi^is, ^as Tert^ll^^t^ tells us, the Christians of the
First Ages were!

III. And until the Peaceable Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ arrive, let the
Prospect of it. Comfort us, under all, The Sufferings of this present Time.

We find those two things conjoined, in Rev. 1. 9. The Kingdom and Patience of
Jesus Christ. We must have Patience though that Kingdom should be longer coming
than we think for, it we should have yet the more Patience because that Kingdom
will make amends for all the (...) ^^siculties that have preceded it; but let
(...) Kingdom give Comfort unto us, as well as Patience. We are now Surrounded
and harassed with innumerable Mischiefs; esp^clilly with Wars, that have all
sorts of Mischiefs Complicated in them. We are filled with Venation, when we
see the Vanity that Embroils Humane Affayrs, and Enflames people to Plunder,
Slaughter, and Captivate One another. But, Not si ^ale na^^, et ol^^ Sic Erit;
Let it comfort us to think, There will be no such horrible D^idgs, i^those
Times, that we are now (...) unto!

It Is possible indeed that you and I, may Die in the Storm; and yet a person of
Note, in the Close of a Worthy Book, Dedicated unto the present King of Great
Bri^tain, cheerfully says, I can send you the News of a Co^ti^^el ^^ercase of
the Flourishing State of the Church, very s^or^^l to begin, and to continue to
the ^^d of the World (...) and therefore I desire all Good People, to take
special care of their Health that they may be so Happy as to Live to see a fall
confirmation of (...) (...).

However, you know it was Engaged unto a Prince that lost his Life in a Battle,
a Chron. 34 28. Thou shall be gathered unto thy Grave is Peace. When you Die,
you shall go from not (...) Peace; (...) it is said of the Righteous, He shall
enter into Peace; and when the New Jerusalem, withal the Peace of it, shall
Come down from Go^^, out of Heaven, made no doubt of (...) being acquainted
with it.

But it is possible that many of Us, may Live to see the Peace of the Latter
Days, getting ^^orther on open us, than we are well aware. (...) not so
difficult in giving my Hopes leave (...) The Time to savor, the set Time is
(...) at! as to feel no Encouragement for the Prayer which the Prophet, made
upon such Hopes of old, in Psalm. 102. 24. O my God, Take me not away is the
midst of my Days. The Scripture seem to intimate, that just before the
Peaceable Time, when it shall be proclaimed, The Kingdoms of this World are
become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ! there shall be a little
Presage of it, in one of the Ten Kingdoms, which once made the Ten Hor^s of
Antichrist, by a Wonderful Arising and Ascending of our Lords witnesses in that
Kingdom. If then in some very Considerable Kingdom of Europe, where the
witnesses of our Lord Jesus have most F^^ished, or Pres^cted and Completed,
their Testimony for Him, you should see a large Number of lost People,
witnessing to the Kings, Office of Christ in His Church, and Enduring of Trials
like to those which our Lord Himself underwent, for witnessing THAT Good
Confession; If you should see that, (...) it was in our Saviors case, a
company of men like the Pharisees among the Jews, (possibly men of the same
True Religion) but under the Influence of a Romanist, should at last prevail so
far as to Scatter, break up, and Cut off, all the Congregations of these
witnesses and thereupon, send Gifts one to another, or keep a Day of
Thanksgiving as of delivered from some Dangerous Plo^; If you should see, just
Three years and an half, after this, a Royal Grd^t of Liberty for these
Witnesses to Revive their Public Worship, like what the Jews had of old, by
an Heathen Prince allowing them to Rebuild the Temple of God, (...) on which
the Prophet says, They were brought (...) of their Graves: Lastly, If then you
see the Rev^lutions of a mighty Earthquake presently come upon the Nation,
that shall Irresistibly carry on all the Interests of the Reformation there; I
say, if you should ever see such a Thing as this come to pass, near the close
of Our Twelve hundred and Sixty Days, behold, an Omen of Great things
immediately to follow thereupon; t'wil argue, That the last Slaughter of the
witnesses of ^ver, in that Kingdom, and that the Kingdom shall shortly after
become Eminent for all sorts of Encouragements given to Religion there, in the
Sight and Spite of all its Adversaries; t'wil argue, that the like work shall
quickly be carried on through the other parts of E^^ope, and that the
witnesses, like Elijab, dropping off the Me^tle of their Sackloth, shall every
where pass into a State of prosperous Holiness, beyond any that has been in the
former Ages. The Faithful Ministers of our Lord Jesus Christ among us, that yet
Preach and (...) the Crose, and Conflict with the Straits and wants of a
Sackloth Condition, have a particular Comfort thus provided for them, in the
Omens of our Days; Knew it, ye Witnesses of our Lord, the Old Clothes of the
wilderness, may be taken from you, sooner than many of you imagine, and you may
shortly Enter into that Rest, where, you shall have, The Garment of Praise, for
the Spirit of Heaviness!

Finally, Let us all Solace our selves in the Fore-thoughts of that Kingdom,
wherein all Peace will swallow up the Death which does (...) ^^lict us every
Day. When the Primitive (...) ^^ns were under their manifold Oppressions, they
Thought, they Talked, they Wrote so much on, The Kingdom! The Kingdom! that the
Silly Pagans Charged them with a Plot against the Roman Empire for it. But, we
may take the Comfort of, The Kingdom, which is to bring Peace unto us with it,
and yet he well able to, Silence the Ignorance of Foolish men.

IV. In the mean Time, let us A^trdate the Peaceable Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by obtaining and maintaining as much of it Now among our selves, as may
be Consistent with our present Circumstances. Or, as the Apostle has it, in 2
Pet. 3. 14. String yet Look for such Things, be Diligent that yet may be found
of him in Peace; If our Lord should now presently come to settle the Peace of
His Kingdom in the World. Indeed we cannot cause the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
to come, one Hour before, The Day which God has Appointed for the Judging of
the World, by that man, who He has Ordained. Nevertheless, to be making some
saint Imitations of it, would be no less an Advantage to us, than it is
I^cumbence on us. If we would have the Privileges of that Kingdom, we should
be found in such Dispositions and Behaviors, as that Kingdom will one Day
bring into the World; Yea, Let us, Press on, if by any means, we might attain
to the Resurrection of the Dead. We are told, in Math. 24. 46. Blessed is that
Servant, whom His Lord when He comes, shall slad SO doing: And our SO Doing,
that if the Kingdom of our Lord should now immediately break in upon us, we
should be found already Initiating our selves at the Works that Kingdom, THIS
is no small pare of the WATCHFULNESS, which especially in these Latter Days,
we are called unto.

And indeed, a proper PEACE, is the first thing, that I would hence take
Occasion to Recommend unto my Neighbors; by which PEACE, I mean, a Dismission
given to all Quarrels, Contentions, Animosities. If our Lord Jesus were now, To
be Revealed from Heaven, in Flaming Fire, let Him not find in broiling in the
Fire of wrath and strife, one against another; This Fire would but make us a
more Combustible Fuel unto That.

I do not lay any stress upon a Pretended Prophecy, lately found (they say)
among some old. Manuscripts of Venerable ^^ds, at Rome, which speaking of great
Revolutions to be in the Year 1688. adds, Cancta tamen m^ndi Sur^^m (...),
as^ue Deorsum
Imperi^, et Flictus u^^ique grandis ^^it.


But certainly, there is a Terrible Flood of Desolations, now Rolling over the
World: and in such a Flood it becomes all the Creatures in the Ark or Church of
God, that have any Antipathies unto one another, to lay them all aside.
Methinks, it becomes all Protestants to unite at this Day, and instead of
Smiting their FellowServants (...) for their Differances, many of which have
been in things that the Imposers have Confessed ^^different, consider, whether
the Lord will ol^^ (...) delay His co^^tr^. Arist^des and Them^s^ (...) the
Heads of two Great Factions in Athens, when they saw the Persians take
advantage of their Divisions, presently struck hands, and said, Here we lay
down all our Differences, until we have put at End unto the Per^^ta^wa^^: So,
Al^^biades and Nicias, two great men of Athens, being at Variance, when they
saw the Wickedness of one Hyperbol^, who sought the Banishment of one of them,
in order to the Destruction of ^^other, they secretly met, and made a
Reconciliation, and procured the Exile and Ruin of their Enemy. Cannot all
Protestants now at last see those Intrigues of our Popish Adversaries, which
are forcible Arguments for the like prudent, and speedy Accommodations? May our
God now (...) up many a D^^y, to Negotiate a Pacification among the Reformed
and Reforming Churches; and many a B^rrough^ to spread Uniting (...) among the
people of God! Singular Crow^s will our Lord Jesus in His Kingdom have to
bestow upon these Blessed Sons of Peace.

But let me, Secondly, bespeak a Sacred REST, as well as a settled Peace, in
the Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ. His Kingdom will be the Sabbath of the
Creation; and so much of the Sabbath as we have, so much of that Kingdom we do
as it were Take by Force aforehand, while the Substance of it is detained from
us. It Is no wrong to the History of the Creation, if we discern this M^stery as
also represented in it; Profound Writers have (...) (...) the way. The forlorn
Mass of (...) horribly defaced and Confounded by Sin, (...) of as God will not
own Himself the Author, (...) He will not say, It is Good; had yet the Spirit
of God presiding over the Waters or the People, and still preserving somewhat
of His Interest in them. This World of mankind, had One day, from Adam to
Abraham; in which men had first an Evening, or Dimmer, and then a Morning, or
Brighter Notice of the Me^siah, who is, The Light of the world. The Church
(...) self, was this while an unformed, and unshap'd thing in dispersed
Families; but they had some Light of the Massiah, though He were not to come
until some Days or Ages after; yet was the Light of the Church distinguished
by God from the Dark of the world, however He Blesses not the world in their
Separation from the Church. The World had a Second Day, from Abraham to Moses.
God now began to set apart His own People, from the Rest of the Waters; but the
Separation was hitherto Imperfect, there were other Godly persons yet left in
many other places. He called a people up, unto an Heavenly Church state; but so
small was the Number the people thus advanced in the Houses of a (...)
Patriarchs, that they were no more in Comparison with the rest, than the Clouds
are to the Seas; however, it was fit they should make some Figure in the Book of
God; for from them have come down the Rui^s of the Blessings on us all. The
World had a Third Day from M^^es to Jesus. The Separation of Gods People from
the Waters was now Completed, in the National Church of Israel; it was ripe for
a Blessing, yea, for a ^e^^ (...) one. The People of the most High, now (...)
as a Dry Land; the Church is not like the (...) (as the World is) barren,
rugged f^ll of Monsters; and though the Sea be always beating upon it, yet is
keeps her Ground. Yea, the Fruits of all Graces, Virtues, and good Works, in an
agreeable Diversity, are Conspicuous on it; if Weeds appear, they are to be
plucked up. The World had a Fourth Day, from Jesus to Antichrist. Now does our
Lord Christ, The Sun of Righteousness, Exhibit Himself; and the Church becomes
as a Moon, with her Borrowed Various Changeable Illuminations though not
without her Spots, depending on Him; and Stars, or Ministers, of several
Magnitudes, among which, the Apostles were of the First, are now S^^ning in the
Orbs of Heaven. The World had a Fifth Day, from the Rise to the Height of
Antichrist; or, from the Fifth Century to the Eleventh. Birds and Fishes are
the Emblems of the men, that make the st^^rs in these Ages. First, there were
men of Bold, Soaring, During Spirits, that would needs fly so high, as to Raise
Disputations upon the Trinity, the Generation of the Son, the Procession of the
Holy Ghost. In those Times, it is known how all matters ran upon the Flights of
the Arian, M^tedo^ian, Ent^chian, and such other Har^sies; the Flights were
sometimes Happy, and often Too far. Afterward, there are Spawned Vast Shoals
of other Creatures, that Live upon Filth and Mud, and upon Devouring one
another; they had the Multitude on their side, and they dwelt in the Abyss of
Ignorance; and those Great Whales, the Popes of Rome have had a particular
Consideration among them. The World has a Sixth Day, from the Height to the
Fall of Antichrist, which is between Seven and Eight hundred years.

Sorts of Beasts, and Insects and Serpents, have in these Ages been met withal.
But in the Close, our Lord Jesus Christ, our Second Adam, sets Himself in
espouse His Church, now under the Notion of a Want^, unto Himself. And wh^^ is
now to follow, but a Sabbath, wherein our Lord Jesus, will give His Church to
see that R^st, which Re^^ies for the People of God. It is possible, that the
Nation, which has discovered a peculiar Zeal for the Weekly Sabbath, may enter
sooner than other Nations, in o the Twilight of that Rest. But, bes^re, God
will wonderfully Break the Pe^ce of those, who do not carefully Celebrate the
Sabbaths which are the Figures of the Kingdom wherein we shall have Peace.
England saw this, in the Wars that quickly Ensued upon the Sports, which the
people were once Invited unto the Profanation of the Lords Day withal. It Was
the Expression of (...) Worthy Person, when (...) then heard the D^^^ns beating
for Dances and Frolicks on the Sabbath Day, I fear lest the Holy God P^nish
this I^iquit^ with beating up Drums for a March on this very Day! and you know
how that (...) was quickly brought upon the Nation. Thus, a person of Quality
reflecting upon, The Tears of Germany, Printed fifty years ago, saw cause to
say, he believed the Wars of Germany, would not be over yet, Because is a
Cat^logue of their provoking Evils, there was no Confession made of Sabbath
breaking too Common among them; and you again know what a Stage of Blood and
Fire the Empire is, to this very Day.

There is one thing more that I would be^^ (...) to accompany the Peace and
Rest of our (...) and that is, a Gospel CHURCH, to (...) pursued every where
with, A Zeal that shall E^t us up. We are now in those Earth quakes, that will
certainly Soak* down all the Houses that are not of a Divine Institution and
Constitution in the World; the Ordinances of an Evangelical Church order, are
those things That cannot be Shaken; and the way to be safe at such a Shaking
Time as is now before us, is to get as many of those Unshaken Things, among us
as we can. The Planting of Churches is one of those Good Things that are now
Required of us. The Vast Improvement of Navigation since the late Invention of
the Load sto^e and the Compass, his, like the other Changes of the World, the
Concerns of the Church in the Bottom of it; it makes us able to carry the
Gospel unto such Corners of the Earth, as have hitherto sat in, The Region of
the Shadow of Death. Now, It Is a great Scandal. That we should permit the Roman
Catholics, to Exceed us, in Diffusive and Expensive Missions, for the
Propagation of the Faith; and that so few of our Companies and Factories count
themselves concerned for the Conveying of Spiritual Things to the Heathen, from
whom we have so many Temporal: and by whom (which is dreadful to be spoken) Two
T^^ds of the World, are C^ver^d unto this day! Were man more Vigorous to
E^ang^^ge the World, or if the Spirit of our ^LIOT were more Universally
prevailing in them ( And within Twenty or Thirty years, you will see more of
This they would not only more Honor and Enrich themselves, but also more serve
The End, than they are well aware: I mean time, it belongs unto us, to see,
that (...) Our selves do not keep at a Distance from that Church State, which
our Lord Jesus Christ has appointed for us. That Church state is, The Kingdom
of Heaven; and it fits us for a further Kingdom. It Is not good being Abroad in a
Storm; and you forget not, who it was that said, O^^ Thing have I desired; That
I may dwell in the House of the Lord; for in the Time of Trouble, He shall Hide
me. But the (...) of Churches is a thing, about which we are at the same Time
to be Sollicitous. We find that when the Twelve hundred and Sixty Days of
Antichrist, are out; there are Thirty Days, and Forty Five Days more, which,
Blessed is be that waits and comes unto. It seems by This, that as Judas
Maccabius, after the profanation of the Mosaical Sanctuary, by Aetioch^s for
Twelve hundred and Sixty Natural Days, then spent Thirty Days in the
Purification of the Temple; and spent Forty five Days more, to prepare all
things, for the Dedication of it, thus, after the Strokes that God is now
giving to Antichrist, there may go some Years to S^^ety and Cle^nse the Church
of many Schisms, (...) Abuses now crept into it. Now, though I despair of
seeing any Church in all things answering The Pattern is the (...), until those
Days of Purification come; yet it is very pleasing (...) the Lord Jesus to see
us Do what we can, for the Forwarding of that Holy Work; the very Soul of our
Lord, is unspeakably pleased with it, when He sees, that it is our desire, and
study to have our Churches Exactly live they New-Jerusalem whereinto enters
(...) no^ what (...) Abominations and Fal^^y. Indeed, as when (...) Vig^la^ti^s
appeared Vigorously against (...) Abuses that were Crept into the Church in the
beginning of the Fifth Century, no less a man than John undertook the Patronage
of those Abuses, and bestowing the Name of D^r^it^^tins, with other bad and
b^se Language upon the man that had so faithfully Reproved them; it is possible
that some Great and G^od men, may now in like manner (...) upon our Endeavors
to Correct the Abuses that are got into the Church; but the Day is at hand,
when such Reformers will be acknowledged, the only Vigilant Servants of God.
Thus, although the World be now in a Midnight of Security, yet is that Cry
Raised among you. Behold, the Bridegroom comes, Go ye forth to meet Him! We
meet Him. when we Go forth to much of that Reformation, which His Coming will
more thoroughly fill the World withal.

V. And let us Beware of being found among those that most horribly perish, in
the (...), that are to precede the Peaceable Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.
When a People are to Enter into Rest, usually some Consuming Judgments do first
carry away an Untowardly, and Ungracious Generation, like the Is^a^lites whom
the matter of B^^l P^or proved fatal unto. But never was there such a
Prodigious Wast of M^n, as there will be, when God is just Leading a Chosen
Generation, into the Rest of His Kingdom in the Latter Days. Now there are
especially Two Things, that lay men open to the most formidable Plagues of our
Days; which (...) are, Popery and Persecution.

Where to find Antichrist, if not in Popery can tell? The Day Light in now a
little (...) brood for us, to take the Sor^y Puppet of the G^otian Antichrist,
for, you Min of Sin. It is Enough, to note, That Antichrist must have an
Empire, and yet an Empire founded in the (...), of a False Religion; it must
here withal be an Empire obtained more by Craft than Force; but an Empire,
whose Chief City must be seared on Seven Mountains and the Great City which in
the Days of the Apostle John, ruled over the Kingdoms of the Earth; it must be
a Continuation of the Fourth Monarchy, and a Revival of it, when it had
Received a Deadly (...); but it must be only an Image of the Roman Empire, a
Spiritual Sort of a Thing, which has no Arms, but the Superstition of is own
(...) to maintain it. Antichrist must have a Prophet, or a man that pretends
himself Infallible, to pronounces Oracles upon all Occasions; and a Corruption
of Relgiion, especially by a Doctrine of Demons of Inf^^iour Mediators: a
Worship of (...) of Pro^^ct is, and Guardians, is the Thing that Chiefly
Signalizes him; yet this Idolatry, being ^^led an Ad^^tery, must be Committed
by a Church of Christians, that once was the Spouse, of the Lord Jesus Christ;
it must be in the Temple of God, ^^tichirst must have (...) for the Supporters
of his Throne; among which there must be (...) old Kingdoms in his
Neighborhood, more peculiarly Siez'd into his hands; and at the same time, he
must utter very (...) his own power and greatness; he must ascribe to himself,
the Powers of the Lord Jesus Christ; and there withal make Bloody Wars against
the (...), and overcome them; as his Kingdom is to (...) S^^^n for ^ilthi^oss,
it must like-wise be an (...) for Cruelty; he must Interdict all Commerce with
such as will not pay Homage to him. Antichrist must Raise Paganism out of its
Grave, in a Disguize; and he must make a Noise of Innumerable Miracles. to
demonstrate what he Teaches; persons given to Lies; Legends, and Fables, must
be his Emissaries; and yet they most pretend great Austerity, by Forbidding to
Marry, and Commanding to abstain from (...). In a Word, the Mystical Babylon
must also drive a mighty Traffic, in the Sale of Spiritual Commodities; by
which means, the Court of Antichrist must be Excessively magnificent; and he
will Enslave the Children of men to all this, by first I^teriating of them. I
pray, go find if you can, any thing but the Church of Rome that can afford you
these Characters! -- Et Eris mibi magnns (...) Apoilo. No, It Is from some
Extraordinary Blindness, if men do not now see, the Church of Rome to be that
Babylon, whereof it is the call of God, in Rev. 18 4. Come out of her, my People,
that ye be not partakers of her Sins, and that ye Receive not of her Plagues.
It Is a thing whereof some Considerable pers^ts for many Ages, have been aware.
Among others, a whole (...) of Gallick Bishops, in the year, 991. Cried (...)
the Pope, He is the Antichrist who sits is the Temple of God. And it is
impossible without Admiration to read the Admirable Oration made by the Bishop
of Satisburgh, (...) the States of the Empire, in the year 1^40, in which he
calls. The Popes, The Priests of Babylon; and fl^ds at Rome, the Antichrist,
which had the Ten Hores, or Kings of Europe under him. It would not (...) move
sad than strange, if we should then be (...) loss to find the Seat of
Antichrist in our Days. Wherefore, Believe me, It Is not possible for a man to
Do a more Dangerous Thing, than to Continue in the Romish Communion, at such a
Time as this! As for those Kingdoms, wherein Popery has been Abolished, if any
man, be he High or Low, Rich or Poor, shall go to bring the people under that
Grand Cheat again, I will Read you the Fa^e of that man; The Curse of Joshus
never fell so hand upon the Rebuilder of Demolished Jerich^, as the Curse of
Jesus will fall upon the Authors of this Accursed Enterprise; neither shall
they prosper in it, any better than the Jews, who at the Invitation of the
Apostate Ju^^^, going to Re-edify their Temple, God sent a terrible Earthquake
that ever-threw all they had already done, and by Fire from Heaven burned up
the Tools, and some of those that used them. But as for those Kingdoms, which
yet Continue Impenitent and Incurable in their Popery, One may tremble to
foresee the Vengeance Impending over them. There is a Constagration intended
for our World, of which the frequent Mischiefs by Fire in our days may be our
Monitors. This Conflagration [Consider Dan. 7. 11, 12. and Isai. 66. 24. and
Ezekiel. 39. 9. 10. and Rev. 14. 20.] as it seems, will be so Leisurely and
Progressive, as to give an Opportunity, which we do not yet Comprehend, for the
Escape of such as are to people, the New World. But the first Efforts and
Effects of this Prodigious Conflagration, are like to be felt by Italy, whose
horrendous (...), together with the late Shakings and Breakings (...) Earth in
the bowels of it, would suggest (...) suspicions of such Events; and perhaps by
some other Countries involved in the like Incorrigible Popery. It Is with some
surprise, that I have read, what is related by, Di^^ Cassi^^s, (...) 66. about
the Burning of the Mount V^savins in the Time of Ti^^s V^spos^^, whereof among
other things, he Notes -- Quod Cla^got TUBARUM (...), But Italy may be
thoughtful, whether at the founding of the Seventh Trumpet. the whole Territory
there*abouts must not suddenly be turned into an Entire V^savins. Could I do
the part of an Angel, I would now lay my Hand upon as many as I could, that I
might hasten them away from the Reach of the Horrible Tempest, which may thus
come like a Start upon them: but, in this Discourse, I know, I shall be unto
them. As o^e that Macketh, or, As one who Dreams of a Dry Summer! Yet however,
I will call as Moses did, when he saw the Earth going ^o Gipe, and Fire to Rise
for Corah and his Companions, Depart, I pray you, from the Tents of these
Wicked (...), lest ye per^^h^^^ all their Sins.

But there is another thing, which even some of those that imagine themselves
to have shaken hands with Popery (whatever they may have in the Bellies of
them) are too prone unto; and that is, Persecution. When that Neba^badi^^^ar,
had seen an Image of the Four Monarchies, he made that very Image, I suppose, a
St^^t, which whosoever did not immediately D^^s^, was to be Burned for their
Disobedience. The has been done by Antichrist, for many Ages; he has Erected
an Image of the Preceding Monarchies, in his own Supremacy; and they that will
not own him for a God, shall be Burned in his Furnace (...) Persecution. But Woe
to all Popish persecutors, in, The Day of the Lord, that shall Burn like an
Oven! And if any have Renounced the Doctrine of Antichrist, yet for them to
retain so much of the Spirit of Antichrist, as to Persecute Conscientious
Brethren, is little to Consult their own Preservation, in that Fitry Day. It is
broadly intimated [in Math. 24. 48,49.] That just before the Coming of our
Lord, There shall be Church Officers, that shall molest their Follow-Servants,
who are desirous to have the Church Ordered by such Roles only as our Lord left
for the Government of it when He went away; and that shall show more favor to
a Common Dr^^kard, than to one, that shall be, A Faithful and wise Servant in
the House of God. It is intimated, That some sudden Providence will at last
Suprize and U^char^h [or assign a Portion with Unbelievers] those Evil men; and
I wish, we may all so take the Intimations, as to forbear all future
Persecutions. Let me plainly leave this Warning with you; That if any of you,
Venture to Persecute the Conscientious People of God [Yea, though it be no
Greater a Cause, than, A Scruple to Swear upon the Gospel, that any of them do
Conscientiously Expose themselves upon] You are like to be sound among; The
l^^est Persecutors; and be it known unto you, That if the the Last Persecutors
have the peculiar Unhappiness, to bear those Terrible Revenges, which the
Blood-sheds of all the former Ages have been calling (...) I say again, and,
The Lord God of the Holy Prophets, may make this Generation f^^l what I say; I
say, That all the Righteous Blood, (...) upon the Earth, from the Blood of
Righteous A^^ (...) unto the Blood of the Blessed Menures, when (...) lately
butchered with most Exquisite Cruelties, it shall be required of this
Generation. The Persecutors of this Time, do make themselves Parti^^ to all
those Wretches, that have the Cry of the Blood under the Altar, going up to God
against them; and let them know, That when the Day of the Vengeance of our God,
is come [and it comes apace] to Comfort all that mourn, They shall be de^lt
withal, as having the Guilt of all the that Blood, lying upon their miserable
Souls. Now, Consider this, ye Persecutors, left He tear you to Pieces, and
there be^^ne to Deliver you.

VI. But I Consider my self as appearing this Day in my Arms, among you; which
Arms, you see, are a few smooth stones In a Scrip with a s^^ag; I mean, a few
proper and useful Texts, in the Scripture, with a Sermon; and I may not Lay
down my Arms, until I have made some Addresses more particularly to the
Gentlemen, for whom it is that I now am in this Holy Service.

You, will then give me leave to tell you, That Your Swords and Spears are as
yet Repreiv^d from the Change into Plough shares and Pruningbooks, which they
shall one Day be Condemned unto. Indeed, as Joshua could once make Time Stand
still, while the people of God were to use their Swords and Spears; if it were
in our Power, we would make Time Run on so fast as presently to bring on the
Golden Age, wherein Swords and spears are all to be abolished: But in the mean
Time, I have this Exhortation for you; I Pray (...) as Good use of your Swords
and Spears as you (...). The Prophet speaking of the Times (...) shall
immediately precede those peaceable one, wherein they shall not learn War any
more; he says in Joel 3 9,10. Prepare ^^ar, Beat your Ploughs^^^s into Swords,
and your Praning books into Spears. Behold, how my Text is to be Inverted,
until the arrival of that Peaceable Day, which our Endeavors, cannot any more
Anticipate, than we can make it Midsummer in the Depth of Winter! Though it is a
no less Fr^n^ick than Wicked thing, for people to Raise Wars for the
Introducing of that Peaceable Kingdom, which our Lord Jesus will yet have in [
the] World; or to do like those mad Fifth-Monarchy men, who have thought their
Turbulent Insurrections would be Acceptable and Serviceable to the Holy Son of
God, whose Kingdom is not of [this] World. It is Convenient for me to leave
this Caution with you! Whatever Opinion shall have a Natural Tendency to move
Seditions, Rebellions, Mu^inies, and rob Casar of the Rights that belong unto
him; in Gods Name, Renounce it with Detestation; there is no such Opinion
countenanced by our Blessed Gospel of Peace. Yet our Duty to our God and our
King, has made it on many other Accounts necessary for us, at this Day, to be
Learning of War.

It Is the Learning of War, to which I must now for a while Encourage you; and
methinks, it should Wonderfully Quicken your Learning, when you understand, who
your Titor is. It was the speech of the Psalmist in Isal. 144. 1. Blessed be
the Lord my strength which teaches my Hands to War, and my Fi^g^rs to Fight.
Behold, what a (...) the Soldier has to be Learning of! So (...) it is in that
Honorable and Amiable Quali^^ that our Artillery-Company do this Day appear;
You are this Day to muster, as the Scholars of that Glorious God, who i^, The
Lord of Hosts; even of Him, who is the King of Glory, the Lord mighty in
Battle. If you meet with any persons that causelessly refuse to come into your
Company, pray, ask them, Why they play the T^uant so? But, now that you may be,
All Scholars, I am to say before you, a few Considerations which may close the
Exercise that we are now upon.

The First Consideration.
There is like to be much Occasion yet for men to L^ar^ War; Our Swords and our
Spears are yet like to have a Sufficient Employment for them. Our Lord mentions
it among the Signs of His Coming, in Math. 24. 6. Ye shall hear of Wars and
K^^ours of Wars. It Is a thing that seems to have at this Day, a Terrible and
Amazing Fulfillment in the World; what Gar^t can you read that has not Armies,
and Campaigas, and Sieges filling both Pages of it? I Remember, Lactantius who
Lived some Hundreds more than a Thousand years ago, has a Notion, That a
little before the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus come, there shall a Great Sword
fall from Heaven to Earth; to Signify that the Lord of the C^^le^ial Armies is
at hand. And who does not with Ho^^our Behold the Accomplishment of that
intimation? The Almighty God has (...) down (...) Bloody Sword into the World
which the Nations every where are cruelly Butchering one another with. The
Sword is every where making prodigious Alterations (...) Devastations; that
Monstrous Eater is even ^^^ing sat upon the Carc^ses of our Fellow-Sinners
throughout the Universe; and, O (...) Sword of the Lord, when will thou be
quiet! Surely, then, at such a Bloody Time as this, Men had need learn to
Handle a Sword well; and study the Art of War. We are fallen into that Age
whereof B^tl^^n said, Who shall there (...)? Now, my answer to that Question
is; A man must first become a Good (...), and then a Good Soldier, if he would
new be able to Live. Never was there an Age wherein that Counsel of our Savior
was more seasonable for the World, in Luke 22. 16. (...) that has (...) Sword,
Let (...) sell his Garment, and buy One. Lo^^ (...) most where you will, and
you shall see (...) Rolling is Blood; our very Garments then may justly go to
buy Swords for our De^ence against the Effusion of our Blood. And why should
New England be Confident of Security and Immunity, while Tum^lts, Up^oa^s,
Blood-sheds, are Tormenting the whole Sinful World besides. The Indians among
us and about us, are yet capable of giving s^re Annoyances unto us. It Is (...)
there has been a strange Decay upon those Taw^le ever since we came into the
Country; we see nothing short of a well-bo^^ing M^a^le, when we behold how they
Wither, La^gui^h, Perish, every Day! and if some E^rop^d^s had not by
Indefatigable Solicitations (...) a Peace among them, they might long the now
have Extirpated one another ^^om the face of the Earth. (...) when we see how
many Hundreds of them are now Surviving and how little the Interest of the
Gospel is either Pursued or Embraced among (...) we are altogether Asleep, if
we have not out (...) ^ensions. Are not some of those Canaarites Set Reserved
for T^oras i^ (...) Sides! Or if we should not from them have much further
Molestation, yet are we ignorant, That all the Princes in Europe, who own any
part of America, must needs have their Eye upon these Plantations? Except our
God give (and, let Him give) Remarkable Successes to our Nation at home, we
have dismal Reason in Look for that Fate, At first, the Lord more lightly
Afflicted the Land, and afterward did more gi^va^sly Afflict, her, by the way
of the Sea. But that which of all has the blackest Aspect upon us, is the
Divine Commination, In Lev. 26. 25. I will bring a Sword, that shall (...) the
Quarrel of my Covenant. Alas, the New*Englanders do not so Generally Own, or
Prize, or Keep, the Covenant of God, as that the Sword should find no Quarrel
here? We do not yet so Generally Appear before the Lord, in His House, as that
no man should desire our Lord.

The Second Consideration.
To Learn War, or, to use the Sword and the Spear, is not only a Lawful, but
also a Needful, yea, and a very (...) Thing. There is a Sect of men at this Day
in the World, who Succeed the old Me (...), as well as other old Har^ticks, in
declaiming against all Military (...); but this is not the only thing wherein
they show themselves no less unscriptural than Irrational, The Blessed John, of
old gave several Words of Command, unto the Souldierd in this Congregation, but
none of them was, Lay down your Ar^^ The greatest Favorites of Heaven
mentioned if (...) the Oracles of God, were men that carried Sword by their
Sides; who dearer to God, than David than Joshus, than the Warlike Judges of
Israel. The Thrice-Holy God Himself affects to be called. A (...) of War; and
when an Army was Raised once among the People of God, we find in Jud^. 5 23 The
Angel of the Lord said, Curse ye ^i^terly, then that came not thereunto. I
p^^y, what Warrant have we to Expect Miracles for our daily preservation when
in our Swords we may have the Man's by which the Church of God ^n's been
hitherto protected? And what but (...) can preserve those that have no Swords
to (...) off ^^aders which every place is Exposed (...)? It Is true, That though
the story of the T^^^an L^gion be a F^ble, yet there are Cases wherein, (...)
and (...), are to be our only (...); But for all that, Men have their Live^, I
(...), (...), which the very ^^ght of Nature teaches them to maintain by
stronger Arms against all (...) Injuries. Christianity never instructed men to
lay down that Natural Principle of Self-(...), which Principle sometimes calls
aloud, (...) a Sword? The Steel will always Command the Gold; men can have no
(...) (...) unto them, if they do not make sure of mig^t, whereby they may,
Vi^^ R^p^^l^re. That a (...); wh^^ Wr^^e it (...) (...) for a Christian: to be
a (...), was drive to this further Absurdity, that he (...) a (...) (...) to be
a (...) too, when the Blood of a Ma^^^^or might he thereby ^nlange^e^. But
What? Know we not, that the only Church which God had in the World, was a Camp,
when Israel was in the (...) ^^^derness; and know we not, that the Title of
(...) ^^^tain is more than once, with an unspeakable (...) Satisfaction
Challenged by our Lord Jesus Christ Himself! Or, shall I tell you? The very
Angels of Heaven are but so many Heavenly Armies; and they are described as,
All Holding Swords, being Exp^rt in War.

It Is therefore no Unreasonable thing, That Experience is Arms, has in all Ages
been the Original of Nobility. The ancient Romans preferred those to be their
Magistrates, who had first been their Soldiers; and, I pray, what are the
Esent^beons, or Coats of Arms, derived unto us from our Ancestors, but (...)
Engraven on Shields to Commemorate their Achievements in the Field! By Fears
of Arms, it is no rare thing for Persons of a mean Birth, to arise unto such
Grandeurs and Honors, as give a stop to all further Ambition. What was David
but a Shepard? The Persian Emperor Cambyses, was but the Son of a Carter; the
Turkish Emperor Ottoman, was but a Camel-driver; and it were a piece of
Baseness to e^vy the Advancements, in such a way attained. In short, As the
Field has first given most of those Digeities, which men do now Value
themselves upon, so it has bred those Endowments which have made men the
Admiration of the World.

The Third Consideration.
They that Learn War, had need Learn something else, and they that handle
Swords and Spears ought at the same time to be furnished with Qualifications
that shall be truly Extraordinary. ^^e assure you, such Edged Tools require
more than a little Wisdom in those that wear the (...) It is a place in the
Field, that gives a pet^^^claim to such a style as that of, His Excellency^ and
a Soldier truly should many ways have something of Excellency in him. He that
would he a Commander, should indeed have some Insight into all the Liberal
Arts; especially, those of the Mathematics; and he must be Master of such a
Carriage herewithall, as to Charm at once the Love and Fear of those that shall
be under him. But there are further Virtues, from which not so much as a
Private Statinel should count himself Excusable.

The first thing that Recommends a Soldier, would be Courage; a Courage like
that which inspired J^^ias C^^^ar to say, unto some that would have Scared him,
I (...) Sooner Die that be Afraid; a Courage like that of Sampsot, or David,
who' durst even take a Lion by the Tooth. Lost we should any of us, be called
unto any Sea Encounters' let me touch upon this one Instance more of such a
Courage, A stout A^hen an, pursuing the Persians to their Ships, when one of
their Boats was putting off the Shore, he got hold of it with his Right hand,
and kept his hol^t until h^s H^^d was cut off; he then laid hold of it with his
Left hand, and kept this hold until that Hand also was cut off; hereupon he
clapt-hold of it with his T^^th, until further Help came up. Such an Undaunted
and Obstinate Resolution well becomes a Soldier! he should Scorn to have any
We ^ds^ but what he may see without Looking o^e a Shoulder. L^t^ure Repeat unto
you the Words used by the Lord-General of Israel in his Military Or^tion of
old, Be of Good Courage, and let us play the men!

(...) the Liens Skin must sometimes be peiced (...) another; there is Canning
Requisite unto Soldier too; the Canning of well Employing and well-applying
the Weapons with which you are Entrusted; the Canning of Inventing and
performing a neat Stratagem when it is called for^ How Commonly does Policy out
do Paissance? The Policy to know and to take all Advantages is that, of which
the Wise man has told us, It Is better than Weapons of War! So Joshus found it
when Ai was to be Conquered; and so the King of Poland found it a few years ago
when he made an Army of an Hundred Thousand Museovites, all cast themselves at
his Feet, without giving any manner of Battle to them. But it is not for me to
Read Military Lectures before our Hannibals. I shall rather press upon you,
that which is, Toe one thing Needful for us all; It Is Piety, It Is Holiness, It Is
Religion that you should in the first place Labor to be Qualified withal.
Soldiers have been hitherto Reproached for a sort of Blades, in whom, there
is, Nulla Fides, Pittasque -- But O Confute that Clamor by your Godly
Conversation. It is piety to see a fine Soldier, with an unhappy BUT upon him;
as we read of one, in 2 King. 5. 1. He was a mighty man in Valo^r, BUT he was a
L^p^r; so it may be said of some. He is a (...) Soldier BUT a Dit^uthee. BUT a
Malignant Enemy of all that is H^ly and Just and Good. Such a BUT is a L^prosy
that sp^^lls all the rest. It is not the Atheist, but the Believer, that is the
Soldier to be lust accounted of. Indeed such Follows us he Furious and
Infamous Bucani^rs, may do (as they have done) many Things of a most Incredible
Adventure; but this I am sure of; the B^lei^^ (...) in the Eleventh Chapter to
the Hebrews, did th^^ of a far Greater Bravery. It is not to be supposed, That
men which carry about a Dirty and a Guilty Conscience with them, will have so
much of the Divine presence to smile upon their Enterprises, as those whom the
Blood of Jesus has Sprinkled from an Evil Conscience. Usually, They are not
the Debauched, Swearing, Cursing, part: of Mankind, that will acquit themselves
with the most Vigorous and Successful Gallantry; a Divine of some Note once
Preaching before K. Charles I^ delivered this passage, Sir, When, God Damn me,
Leads the Van, and, The Devil take me, brings up the Rear, never think that
your Armies will do you any Considerable Service. The English Nation had given
a more Uncontroleable Command unto all Europe (...) this Day; if it had never
been under any such Conduct; or if more of its Leaders had been more like the
Just and Good Prince now upon the Throne. A little Handful of Chaste, Sober,
Devout Persons, a small Army of Saints would be able to drive the whole World
before them; One would Chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to Flight; a
Praying Legion will be a Thu^dring Legion. In fine, a Soldier is Good for
Little if in an Article of Deadly Danger, he must cry out, I cannot Die, I dare
not Die! Let your Peace be made with the Omnipotent God, before you Encounter
with any other Adversary. First List your selves under the Banner of the Lord
Jesus Christ, before you go upon any other Warfare. You all have one very
Frightful, Ghastly, hideous Enemy, to look in the face; from a War with whom,
you can have no Discharge; it is said in (...) 15. 26. The last Enemy is Death.
Where (...) As your Commanders will anon in diverse points make a Trial of your
Soldiery, so I shall now try you with one material Question thereupon; it is
this, Can you Die? Give me leave to Exercise you a little before we (...)! Can
you Cheerfully stand amidst a Shower of Bullets, and bravely say, Death,
Strike, if tho^ dare! the Worst thou art able to do me, is to send me unto
Heaven before the Rest of my Neighbors! If you have, and I Bless God, I see
the Faces of some that have, thus far attained, I will call you, Soldiers
indeed; and Salure you in the Words of the Angel, The Lord is with thee, thou
mighty man of Valor!

The Last Consideration.
The most grateful and Co^dial of our Acknowledgements are due to You, that are
this Day Learning of War. Could I speak with a Voice, that should reach to all
the Soldiers of New England, or to all that are Studious to Countenance
Military Discipline among us, I would presume in the Name of all the Sensible
persons in the Country, to Express all possible Regards unto them, I would
Venture to say,

It Is to Yo^ under God, that we owe the many Comforts of our Lives; we should
soon be Robbed of all that is dear unto us, in the World, if it were not known
that there were such as You to set the Price of all. Our Plough Shares and
Praning books would not be able to seed us, if your Swords and Spears, were not
a Guard unto them. Our Shops would be soon Emptied by those that would Measure
our Wares by the Loag Ell, that is, the Pike, if Y^^ kept them nor. It is by
Your means, Gods Houses among us, have His Ordinance Undisturbed in them; and
that our Own Houses, are full of things that are as well Necessary, as
Convenient for us; And of this we are the more feelingly Convinced, because we
saw a visible Antipathy to the Military Spirit of New England, in those that
lately propounded unto themselves the Nipping and Creepling of those
Plantations. We do therefore Confess, that for us to Discourage you, is to
bespeak Losses and Ruins for our selves; and we Confess that when you have
been in any particular Services Exposed for us, it is not only an Abominable
thing for us to Cheat you of your Wages, but also a Dishonorable things if we
do not bestow some Signal marks of Love and Care upon your Families; We hope,
we wish, that Professing NewEnglanders will at last Exceed Pagan Ath^nians in
such a Gratitude unto the Well-deserving Soldiers of the Country.

But the Thanks that should be given to all that have the Spirit of Soldiery
among us, are particularly belonging to that Worshipful company, which by
asking a Sermon this Day, have declared the God of Heaven to be their Commander
in Chief. We Thank you, our most worthy Friends for this your Zeal of being
made Capable of Fight, yea, and to Die for your Distressed Neighbors. Your
Voluntary Association and Combination for the Learning of War, Obliges us to
count you Exemplary; and it becomes us thereupon to say, My Heart is toward
those that Offered themselves willingly among the People; Bless ye the Lord.
(...) Sob^^lty does further make us to Expect (...) from you but what is
Notable and ^^^udable; I would humbly speak it for your Encouragement; Here is
a Large ^^ad of Soldiers among whom this whole Day of Diversion will not
afford one man Drunk, or one Oath Sword, or one Curse D^^op^d, or one Health
swallowed, or one Observable Misbehaviour. You are in this respect, the Glory
of New England, which may Challenge the biggest part of the World by far, to
show the Like! But your Soldiery is that which adds to our Expectations from
you; for I will say this for the men of New England. There is not, I suppose,
that People under the Sun, which dare meet them upon Equal Terms; but
yourselves are to be esteemed as the Flower and Choice of our Forces: I hope,
that every one of You will have at Least a File of Ordinary Soldiers in him.

Go on then, ye Worthy Persons; and let nothing Dishearten you from the
Prosecution of your Generous Undertakings. You have our United Acclamations. Go
o^! A great Warrior of old, would be so Eager in his Barrels, that the very
Blood would Spirit out of his Lips; Could these Lips of mine name with as much
Earnestness and Vehemence, they should but Vigorously say, Go on! Go on! But
when I say, Go on, you must also suppose it said, Alm Right; otherwise to Go
on, will be to Go out of the Way. It Is probable, that one of your principal
Endeavors is, To be Good Marks men; but I hope, you are Singularly ^^^es^l,
(...) (...) at the Praist of God, in all you do; that you will have Holiness to
the Lord. Engraved upon all your Arms; and that you still say, It the Name of
our God will we set up our Ba^^^rs.

For that cause then, Accept the Blessing, which we now have to dismiss you
with; it is that which was used unto an Eminent Soldier of old; Since thou
Fightest the Bat^els of the Lord, Let ^^ey Soul be Bound up in the B^^dle of
Life with the Lord thy God. May this Artillery Company be a little Nursery of
Renowned Soulders: May all of you have Opportunities with Inclinations to Serve
your Generation according to the will of God; May you Live to the Day, and I
know not but some of you that are now in this Assembly, may Live to the Day,
when you shall B^^t your Swords into Plough shares, and your Spears into
Pruning books; but if you first fall Asleep, may every one of you be
Conquerours and more that Conquerours over the Destroyers of your Souls; and
may you be Transplanted from this Bandle, into those Regions, where the Lord
Jesus Christ is a Standard bearer unto many Thousands, and where a Crown of
Righteousness is bestowed upon all them that have Lived His Appearing.

The END.
Nocte Plu^^ To^a, Redeunt Spectacula mane, AEqua^^m Imperium, Cum pat^e
Christus habet. J. Stang^tori, Faellcitas Illtimi seculi.

Lact^^tii Assertio. VEniet igicur Summi et Maximi Dei FilinsVerum ILLE, cum
delerveri^ injostitiam, Judiciumque maximum fecerit, ac Justos, qui a Principle
suerunt, ad Vitam Restauraverit, Mill An^is inter Homines versabi^ur, Eosque
justissimo Imperio reger. Lib. 7. Cap. 24.

Hiera^^ymi Concessio. Quae Licet non ^equamur, tamen Condemnare non Possumus,
co quod multi vivorum Ecclesiasticorum et Martytum, is^a dixerint. Comment. in
Jer. 19.

Verbs Celebris Cujusdam Scriptoris. Neque debent a Nobis petere Adversarli,
out sequamur Proprium sensum Ver borum, Simile enim id esser, ac si,
qui^^peterer ab i^s, qui sunt in Pinere, our sequan^^r Vi^m Communem or Tritam.
Nemo sanus id qu^^it; ver cur Ingrediamur pet portam, non per Pe^^stram.


