A brief Answer to two Papers procured from Friends in Maryland, the one
concerning Thomas Budds favoring John Lynam, etc. the other concerning his
owning George Keith's Principles and Doctrines.
WHereas there is two Papers procured from Friends in Maryland, on purpose to
defame me, I think fit to give a true relation of the whole matter, and leave
it to the Consideration of all Impartial Friends of Truth: The matter then is
this, as follows. viz.

About twelve Years ago John ^ary and his Wife came to Burlington, and show a
Letter from (...) directed to him and three other Friends, in which they were
advised by G. F. to (...) Friends in West-Jarsey, and Friends not knowing of
the difference betwixt them and Friends in Maryland, they were ^^^dly received,
and her ^est^^o^y owned. When they went back Robert Stacy and my self took the
opportunity of going in th^^ Boat to the Meeting at West River, where some of
Rob. Stacy's old Acquaintance came to visit us, and much frequented our
Company, viz John Lynam and his Wife, Edw S^rson, and others, all of them being
strangers to me. Now I found Friends to carry it very straightly to us, but not
one of them did in the least inform me the reason of their (...) carriage all
the time of the Meeting, or that John Lynam and his Wife, and^. were out of
unity with Friends, (...) ^^rved that they were (...) ^o speak in their Meeting
and what information I had of the matter it was from some of the abovesaid
Persons that much frequented our company, and who no doubt would make the best
of their own Cause, which I had not favored, had Friends discharged their duty
to me, by giving me an account of their being out of Unity, etc. for when I
came to have a right information concerning them, I writ to Friends my sense
thereof, and did also write a Letter to John Lynam, etc. advi-sing them to be
reconciled to their Brethren; and the next time that I was at the Meeting at
West-River, which was about two years ago, where I publicly declared against
that Contentious Spirit in J. L. and his Wife, etc. declaring it (as they say
in their Paper) to be a killing Spirit, which I still own, believing that J. L.
and the rest, (having so many years continued in that contentious Spirit) had
lost their condition, and were thereby become very unfit to preach so ^ ^^^ntly
as they now do. But it is very strange that Copi^^ ^^uld be given out of the
Meeting-Book, to let People kno^ the hurt they say I received by a few days
accompanying with the said Persons, when at the same time they own their
Ministry, and John Lynam is one of the 28 Judges against G. K. and his Friends,
although a stranger to the Differences. But the reason of the reviving of these
old matters is to insinuate into People that I having once been mistaken, so as
to favor such bad Spirits as John Lynam and the rest, I might also be mistaken
in my Friend G. Keith. To which I say, That it was not suddenly that I joined
with G. K. but after diligent search and enquiry into the matter, and earnest
Supplication to the Lord, that he would guide me aright, I was drawn forth to
join with G. K. in his Christian Testimony, and witness Peace and Satisfaction
from the Lord therein. And not withstanding the 28 Judges say, that G. K. is
fallen from the High Places of Israel, as a man slain in his High Places, and
become Treacherous to the Spouse of his Youth, and as a man without the fear of
God before his Eyes; G. K. is a living man, and it is the Glory of God,
Prosperity of Truth, and Salvation of Souls that he travails for; and these
things are Slanders and Lies writ on purpose, by prejudiced men against him, to
slay him in his Reputation, and lessen Peoples Love to him and his Powerful
Gospel Ministry, and to hide their own Ignorance, Error and Unbelief in those
Fundamental Principles of Christian Doctrine, which are the Foundation Cause of
the present Difference and Separation.

The other Paper, which they also recommend to Friends, (signed by H^nry
Hosier, John True and Charles Hollisworth) says, viz. Understanding that
Thomas Budd is one with George Keith, owning his Principles, which for some
Years past he by his own mouth declared and cautioned several to beware of
saying, there were dangerous Doctrines that would break forth among us before
long by George Keith.

Answer; I do freely acknowledge that I am one with G. K. in his present
Christian Testimony, and own his sound Christian Principles; but that he does
hold any dangerous Doctrines, or that dangerous Doctrines are broken forth
amongst us who are joined with G. K. remains for them to tell wherein; if they
had known of any dangerous Doctrines among us, it had been more Christian in
them to have writ to us and told wherein we were in an Error, than to have sent
Papers privately abroad, insinuating as if there were dangerous Doctrines
broken forth among us; by which it appears, they are either ignorant of the
Doctrines and Principles we own, or unbelievers therein, and for their better
Information, I recommend to their perusal the Sheet called, An Account of the
Sincere Christian Faith of some of the faithful People called Quakers in
Pennsilvania, etc. wherein I hope will be found no dangerous Doctrines. But
that dangerous Doctrines are held by them that we meet apart from, will easily
appear by a few things mentioned, that are well known to be true, viz Tho
Fitzwater said to me, in the presence of diverse Witness, That he did not own
any Man Christ Jesus as Mediator in H^a^en without him, but the G race of God
within him; and though I complained against him to Friends of the Ministry at
their Meeting at Burlington, yet they dealt not with him, nor so much as blamed
him, which manifests they are one with him in his Unbelief. And the Act of
their Monthly Meeting may witness what dangerous Doctrines they hold, viz. That
the Light is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, viz. without the
Man Christ Jesus, and without the Faith of his Death, Resurrection, Assention
and Mediation, which is that something else we hold to be necessary to make a
man a true Christian, as well as to believe in the Light within.

And whereas they say, That I said after a mysterious manner, That a star would
fall, cautioning all to beware of the (...) that were coming. In answer, I say,
that several Stars are fallen, and many apostatized from the Faith, witness
(...) who said, That to preach Faith in Christ within, and in Christ without
was to preach two Christ's; and Arthur Cook put G. K. to prove by Scripture,
that we were to believe in Christ within and in Christ without. And in
opposition to G. K. affirming the necessity of the Faith of Christ without, as
well as in Christ within. Tho Lloyd said, That Christ within did all and argued
so^e hours, That we might be Christians good enough without all Faith of Christ
as he dyed for our sins, rose again and R^^^oing said, That he never read in
all the Scriptures of Christ without, if that Christ was separated from his
Body in the Clo^d, etc. Also, witness some here called Quakers at Philadelphia
men to fight, and signing Commission so to do, and turn (...) the Indians with
Powder and Lead to go to war with other Indians, and some called Ministers
among them being worldly (...) and have sentenced to Death, etc. and their
(...) by fining and Imprisoning of some of (...) the ancient Principles of
Truth and (...) they (...) apostatized from.

Printed in the Year 1692.


