The Great SIN of FORMALITY IN GOD'S WORSHIP OR, The Formal Worshipper proved a
LIAR and DECEIVER Being the Subject of a SERMON Preached in the Weekly LECTURE
in BOSTON.

By Joshua Moodey, Minister of the Gospel.

Mat. 15.8. This People draws nigh unto me with their Mouth, and honors me
with their Lips, but their Heart is far from me.

Jer. 7.8. Behold you trust in lying words that cannot profit.

Mal. 1.14. Cursed be the Deceiver which has in his Flock a Male, and voweth
and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing.

Boston, Printed by Benjamin Harris, and John Allen, at the
London-Coffee-House. And are to be Sold by Richard Wi^k^^^. 1691.

The great Sin of FORMALITY IN GODS WORSHIP
Hos. 11.12. Ephraim compasses me about with Lies, and the House of Israel
with Deceit.


THe Subject which I am at present to handle is the sin of Formality in Gods
Worship, which is the sin condemned in the Text, as none of the least of those
many and very great controversies, that the Lord has had all along with his
professing people, and at this day has particularly with our selves.

Take a brief explication of the Terms.

Ephraim was the Second Son of Joseph born in Egypt, and that name given him in
Remembrance of Gods making him fruitful in the land of his affliction, Gen
41.52. unto him Jacob, in his Blessing, gave the Preference to his Elder
Brother, Genesis 48.20. The name is sometimes used for the whole Tribe that
lineally descended from him, and here for the Ten Tribes, of whom he was the
Head or Chief, and is the same with.

[The House of Israel.] Israel signifies a prevailer with God, and was the new
Name which God gave to Jacob in memory of his Victorious combat at Peniel,
Genesis 32.28. And all his posterity, the whole visible Church, bare that Name of
Israel, until after the separation of the Ten Tribes from the two, when the
Name of Israel was frequently given to the Ten, and the Name of Juda unto the
two, so that Ephraim and Israel in the Text are homonymous Terms, or intend the
same people.

[ Compasses me.] Compassing is sometimes used for Worship, and in that sense
it is to be taken here. Thus Psalm. 26.6. Compassing Gods Altar, intends
Worshipping of God, offering up Sacrifice on his Altar, which was one principal
part of Worship. In the same sense is the phrase used Psalm. 7.7.

Christ has promised that where his people meet together in his Name, (as all
that are regularly Assembled for any part of Instituted Worship do) he will be
in the midst of them, Mat. 18.20. and if he be in the midst of us, we are then
compassing him about.

The Hebrew word in the Text is also sometimes used for Beleaguering or
Besieging a Town or City in an hostile way, and truly God accounts such
hypocritical worship little better than waging War against himself, and such
Compassers he looks at as his Besiegers, and they will sooner or later be dealt
with as such*

Some Expositors attribute it to the Prophet, as if he were beset with their
Lies and scandalous Reports, to the prejudice of his Ministry, which is one of
Satan's stratagems to prevent the Success of the Gospel, by reproaching them
that dispense it. Thus they served Jeremiah, chap. 20.^0. and 18.18. and thus
they lay snares for him that reproves in the Gate, Isa. 29.21. When Gods
Messengers are reproving sin, they may look for such Treats, (though I would
beg of this Auditory, that they would* be more kind to us, and to themselves
too, while we are according to our Commission, Isa. 58.1. showing God's People
their sin) It Is a good note of one upon the place. A Faithful Minister is the
Genter in which all the lives of Lies and Slanders meet. An ill case, if they
be silent God is displeased, if they speak men are angry.

But I rather take it in the foregoing sense, as referring to God in his
Worship.

[ With Lies and Deceit] These Terms also mean the same thing, unless you will
say the latter is Exegetical, and shows what was their aim and design in lying,
viz. to God, they pretended to great devotion in keeping up the external form
of Worship, without being sincere and real therein, and that was their lying,
whereby they thought (though it was wretched Atheism so to think) to put God off,
to deceive and put a cheat upon him, as if the Omniscient God could be imposed
upon.

But this will be more fully opened in Explaining the Doctrine.

DOCTRINE.

Formality in God's Worship is accounted by him as Lying and Deceiving, and so
is a very provoking sin. Formal Worshippers are looked at by God as liars and
deceivers, and thereby exposed to his sorest anger.

There are three sorts of False and Deceitful Worship, which God is Displeased
with.

1. When men Worship any other Person or thing than the one only, living and
true God, when they have and serve any other God before or besides the True
God; and this is gross Idolatry and a breach of the first Commandment.

2. When they Worship the true God but with False Worship, such as never came
into his mind, but is the mere product of their own Invention, which yet they
observe in stead of, or mix or join with his Institutions. This is a Breach of
the Second Commandment, and very offensive to a Jealous God.

3. When the object of the Worship is right, and the Worship it self is for the
matter, or as to the externals thereof true, but the miscarriage of it lies in
the manner of doing it, in that it is done with a Dissembling Heart, or in a
cold formal manner. And this sin is forbidden in the third Commandment, which
directs about the right manner of performing true Worship (both natural and
Instituted) to the true God.

The two latter may be intended here, and chiefly the third, or a mixture of
them both (for the Heart cannot be right where the Worship is wrong) yea in a
sense all three of them; For they had the Calves at Dan and Bethel, at best a
false Medium, nor could they any more excuse themselves from the missing it in
the object of worship too, than their Fathers, who though they proclaimed a Feast
to Jehovah before the Golden Calf, yet might be said to have chosen new Gods
(as Judge. 5.8.) and to Sacrifice to Devils and not to God, Deuteronomy. 32.17 And be
sure all this while their Heart was not right with God.

But I shall confine my Discourse unto such as are Professors of the true God,
who have also the right-way of Instituted Worship, but through the falseness of
their hearts do but lie to him in all they perform; a sin commonly practiced in
our Days by Professors of Religion.

Q. What is this Formal Worship, which is called Lying and Deceit?

A. It Is worth our inquiring into, because called by very hard names, very much
complained of in Scripture, and there is abundance of it among Gods visible
people, yea too much among those that may have the Root of the matter in them,
and also because it is very provoking to God, and mischievous to them that use
it.

Now I call that Formal Worship, which is opposed to that which is in reality.
Paul opposes a Form of Godliness to the power of it, 2 Timothy 3.5. Such
Pretenders make Perilous Times. He intends such Persons as used an appearance
without any reality, a show without any substance. They made a profession of
Godliness, and used much Pretensive Devotion in Worship, but there was nothing
in it, save an appearance and shadow only, Vox preterea nihil, an empty Form,
no powerful sincerity in their heart, nor good fruit in their life. And this
Vizard men put on to deceive, that they may walk incognito in the World.

Formal Worship is Hypocritical Worship, like a painted Tomb without, but
Corruption and Rottenness within, Fire without and Frost within, A flame in the
mouth but Ice in the Heart: A perfect piece of Pageantry, a Play, where he that
is in show a King, is in Reallity a Beggar.

Such lying Worship is thus Described by Christ Mat. 15:8, 9. Drawing near to
God with the Lips, when the Heart is far from him, near in look and gestures,
but far in heart and spirit, this is the spirit of an Hypocrite. When out of
any low, base, inferior end, men are drawn or driven to those duties which
indeed they have no Heart to, this the Lord accounts lying in his Worship. And
the more external Preparations, the more Cost and Grandeur there is in it, the
bigger the lie.

Christ reduces all our Obedience, whether in point of Worship or otherwise,
unto that one word Love, now if not loving Worship, its lying Worship; there is
an Idol in the Heart, which has their Love, while God has their Lips only, they
pretend Devotion to God, but the Idol in the Heart has the Heart all the while.

When the Heart and Body do not go together in the Service of God, the Body
shows much love, but the Heart is otherwise employed. Ezekiel. 33:31.

This lying worship is opposed to worshipping God in Spirit and Truth, John
4.24. Paul served God with his spirit, Romans 1.9. But their Spirits, Soul and
Hearts are not concerned or engaged, and so there is no Truth in their
services, because no Spirit in them, they are not spiritual and so cannot be
true, for it is Truth in the inward parts that God requires, Psalm 51, 6.
Ephraim was called a silly Dove without an Heart. Hos. 7, 11. And that is a
silly, sorry Sacrifice that has no heart in it, nor can it be acceptable to
God, Who chiefly minds the Heart, Jer. 30.21.22.

And as the heart is to go with it, so the Conversation is to be consonant
thereto. Want of either makes the worship a lie. As a man thinks in his heart
so is he, Prove. 23.7. But that is known to God only and himself. But when the
Conversation contradicts the Devotion his deceitfulness is Obvious to men also
Tit. 1.16. and there Christ gives this Direction for the knowing of men by
their fruits, Mat. 7.16. And if the Heart be false the Conversation will not be
right, for the Heart governs the Conversation. If the Heart go not with the
tongue, the Walk will to the Prudent observer (at least often) give the Tongue
the lie, but if heart and tongue join, the Conversation among men will evidence
(...) the sincerity toward God.

Now such Worship is called Lying deceiving


1. Lying, which is either Verbal or Practical.


Verbal lying when he speaks not the Truth ^n his Heart, Psalm. 15, 2. Affirming
that to be Truth which he knows to be untruth, or does not know to be Truth, or
denying that to be Truth, which he knows, at least thinks to be Truth, or knows
not but that it may be Truth.

Practical Lying is when a man pretends and professes what he neither intends
nor performs, when his works deny what his words Profess, this is practical
lying, he lies in his way, though he speaks right in his words, (...). 1.6. He
assumes the Name of Religion, but he practically denies the thing, which
consists not in words, but in Power, in Love, in Righteousness, Holiness*
Self-denial, Mortification, etc. to which he is a stranger: And this is the
Lying which the Lord blames them for here and threatens else where, Isa. 1.10.
-- 16. Isa. 58.1-7. with Psalm. 50.7.22.

2. It Is called Deceit also, They compass me with Deceit: Thus Mal. 1.14. He
that has a Male in his Flock, and offers a corrupt thing to the Lord, is called
a Deceiver, and such an oblation is a piece of mere deceit.

A Deceiver is a sly, subtle, underhand Dealer, one that plays Leger-de-main,
that cogs and cheats, and designs to put a sham upon another, and this is the
aim and spirit of a Formatist in Gods Worship; he contrives to put a cheat upon
God, indeed to mock him, Gal. 6 7. And such a Worshipper is called a Deceiver.

1. Because he defrauds the glorious God of his just due, and of the true
Homage and Service which belongs to him from his Creatures. It Is true, God
cannot properly be deceived, but he offers at it, does what he may toward it,
and like a foolish, ignorant Atheist, imagines he may do it; thinks God will
not see when he turns him off with a bad Sacrifice for a good one* a corrupt
and lame one for a sound one, Job 22.12* 14. Thus he robs God of his Right,
sends away the Heart about other business, and complements God with a little
Bodily Exercise, or Tongue-Devotion. The worm of his Lust does eat the Kernel,
and then with some seeming solemnity he makes the Heart-searching and
Heart-demanding God a Present of the empty shell. A very shameful and
affronting Cheat.

2. It may be called a piece of Deceit, because it does really deceive others:
men that can only judge by the outward appearance, are utterl^ deceived by him.
Samuel was deceived by Eliahs look, and Philip by Simon Magus's Profession.
Come see (...) for the Lord was enough to have Blinded a Jonadab, save that the
loud Trumpeting his own commendation was too much like an Hypocrite. Oh, thinks
a good and charitable Christian, this is certainly an Excellent Man, see his
Parts, Zeal, Affection, etc. and his aim being to seem Religious before men, he
puts himself in his finest dress when he appears upon the Stage in open view,
turns the best side outward when he has a great many Spectators; while a
sincere Soul whose business is to approve himself to God, is most engaged and
enlarged in his Closet, where none but he that sees in Secret (...) observe him.

3. But finally he is called a Deceiver, because he does most miserably and
fatally deceive himself, Jam. 1.22, 26. He puts a Paralogism or Fallacy upon
himself, argues falsely, and concludes fallaciously concerning himself. And it is
a proper punishment for him that thinks to deceive in his performance, to find
himself deceived in his expected acceptance. As Jacob feared lest his Father
might, this Deceiver shall find that the All-seeing God most certainly will
find out the Deceit, and reward him with a Curse instead of a Blessing, Genesis
27.12. Such persons may sport themselves with their own Deceivings for a time,
2. Pet. 2. ^3. but the Deceiver shall be deceived at ^^st. And he is the worst
Deceiver that deceives himself.

For a further discovery of this sin of Lying and Deceit in Gods Worship, let
us take notice of some of the Deceits used in Prayer, Hearing, Receiving the
Sacrament, and Sanctifying the Sabbath; and our particularizing here, will
offer much matter of Conviction as we go along.

1. Of Compassing God about with Lies and Deceit in Prayer.

Prayer is no small part of Instituted Worship, and to be made use of with
every part of Worship. And doubtless Gods own Children have need to pray with
David, That God would remove from them the way of Lying even when they are
Praying, Psalm. 119.29.

In solitary prayer when they enter into their Closets and shut their doors,
they are more happy than the most and best of Christians always are if they can
shut out all vain and impertinent thoughts from coming in. All such (and much
more wicked, blasphemous and unbelieving) thoughts are faults, and if allowed
are lies; though they are not wickednesses, they are infirmities, and if not
watched against and mourned over, will be charged on us as Lies and Deceit.

In our ordinary social prayers, how hard to keep our heart engaged in every
word of Petition, Confession or Thanksgiving uttered by him that is our mouth
unto God! vagaries are a sort of Lies, and wandering or diverting is Deceiving.

In extraordinary Prayers on Fasting and Humiliation Days there is a great deal
of deceit used. Especially when men fast for strife and debate, Isa. 58.^. rend
their Garments but not their hearts, water their their eyes, but do not afflict
their Souls, open their mouths, but keep their hearts shut, their heads hang
down for a (...) like a Bullrush, (though many arrive not to that, and so their
lying is the more open and obvious, and their sin goes beforehand unto
Judgment.) But they have no Sacrince of a broken heart and contrite spirit to
present the Lord withal. What is this but dissembling and lying, while they
pretend performance of the Duties of such a Solemnity, and yet neglect the
principal thing required? If there be not (on such days especially) in their
Addresses to God, hearty confessions of sin, deep Humiliation under it, and
Soul affliction for it, with serious resolution to turn from it; all that is
done without this, is nothing but lying and deceiving, and the greater the
expense in the external part of the duty, the greater the deceit if not rightly
performed.

To instance in the several parts of prayer.

1. There is Confession, and that either of Gods Glory, or our sin and vileness.

If we make Confession of Gods Glory and Majesty, and yet do not really and
practically believe what we say; We call him Father, but do not honor him;
Master, but do not fear him; Lord, but do not obey him; or Shepherd; but do not
hear his voice and follow him; what do we less than mock and lie to him?

We confess his Omniscience, but carry toward him in our hearts, as if he were
far out of our sight, that though he planted the ear, and formed the eye, could
neither hear nor see, but was like the deaf and blind Idol, Psalm. 115. come
with our hands full of sin, as if we thought he could not discern whether we
did lift up holy hands or no. 1 Timothy 2.8.

We acknowledge his Power in words, but doubt of his Ability to save us, and
engage not our hearts to take hold of his Strength and be at peace with him.

We confess his Wisdom, and yet will instruct and limit the Holy One of Israel,
and be our own carvers in point of the things we would have granted us.

We call him our Sovereign, but must have our own wills, and while we say, Thy
Will be done, are very impatient if ours he not complied with.

We verbally own his Goodness, but we lie in our hearts if we do not close with
him as Goodness it self, and make him the object of our highest love
accordingly.

We own his Mercy, but do not confide and hope in it: Confess him to be Just,
and yet pass not the time of our sojourning* before him in fear. We say it is a
fearful thing to fall into his hands, and yet by such kind of trifling in his
Worship do most directly deliver our selves up into the Hands of his Jealousy
and Justice.

We profess our love to him, but while our heart is not with him, we mock him
and lie to him, as she told Sampson, Judge. 16.15.

Thus while we confess all Gods Glorious Attributes in prayer, but do not make
him the object of our Faith, Love, Fear, Delight, etc. we do not lie to him.

Thus also in Confession of our own Sin and Vileness.

We often confess sin, but do not believe that we are such Sinners indeed as we
say we are, nor are sensible what an evil and bitter thing sin is. We call our
selves Sinners in the general, but when we come to particulars, are ready to
extenuate and excuse if not to deny it.

Again, if we confess the sin that we have no mind to part with, and
acknowledge those Iniquities that we keep in our bosoms with complacence and
delight, what is this but deceitful dealing with God? We seem very pathetically
in words to confess our own wretchedness and unworthiness, but God and our own
Consciences know that we do but lie unto him, while not humbled to this day,
Jer. 44.10. and are better opinionated of our selves than we pretend to in our
Confessions.

2. A second part of Prayer is Petition.

And there is also a great deal of lying and deceit. As for Instance.

When we ask outward things to spend them upon our Lusts and not that we may
sincerely use them for the Glory of God; this is asking amiss, Jam. 4.3. This
is deceitful Praying, to ask his mercies that we may fight against him with his
own weapons; what is it but Couzenage and Deceit? So when we ask Gifts only to
make a fine show among men, and get a Reputation for Religion; which is finally
to sacrifice Gods Gifts to our ambition and vainglory.

Or when we ask spiritual Blessings which we are not really concerned to
receive.

Austin has such a passage in his Confessions, that he often asked that of God
in Prayer, which he was in his heart afraid lest he should give. Many seem to
beg hard for Grace, when God knows, they do not desire it; ask Knowledge, when
they hate the Light, and cannot endure to come to it; ask to have sin personed,
when they cannot part with it, purged, while they hold fast their (...), and
refuse to let it go, this is downright lying before God, Jer. 8.5. Thus we pray
for the Sanctifying of his Name, Coming of his Kingdom, doing of his Will, but
in heart we are for neither of them.

Of such kind of addressing God in a Time of Affliction, the Lord pronounces
that it is but flattering and lying, and that because the Heart is not right
with God, Psa. 78.34 -- 37.

And so of our Thanksgiving, which is also a part of Prayer, when we say in
words, Lord, we bless and praise thy Name, but our hearts are not fixed to that
work, nor do we take due care to order our whole Conversa^ion so as may be most
for his Service and Glory. Verbal praising of God, with practical dishonouring
of him is plain lying.

So when we promise to him what we never intend to perform, at least never duly
care to perform; they that make solemn vows in the days of their distress, but
forget to pay them in the days of their enlargement, are but liars and
deceivers.

2. Of the Lying and Deceit in Hearing the Word.

When men hear, but bare hearing is all they do. Hear with the ear, but never
set the heart to all those things that are testified, which Moses advises them
unto Deuteronomy. 32.46.

Hear, but not as the Word of God, Acts 10.33. Hear, but do not take care, and
heed how they hear* Hear, but the heart goes after their Covetousness, Ezekiel.
33.31. Hear, but gaze and wander the while, and it may be fall fast asleep too.
(And by the way, sleeping at Meeting is visible and palpable lying, especially
if allowed, and not to the utmost resisted and striven aagainst: Eutychus was
taken in the manner, Acts 20.9 and made a solemn Monitor to waken all Sleepers.)

Hear, but come with an idol in their heart, hear and go forth immediately, and
all they hear is lost, the Word choakt, and so their labor proves in vain.

To hear without an unfeigned Resolution to no as well as hear, together with a
sincere endeavor to perform what they resolve, is lying and deceitful Hearing.

3. At a Sacrament men lie to God.

When they do not discern the Lords Body, do not make it their business to see
and converse with a Crucified Christ that is there held forth.

When they come to a Feast, but come not with an appetite, to a Wedding Feast,
but not with a Wedding Garment; come to receive a Gift, but either bring or put
forth no hand of Faith to take it.

When at the beholding of a Crucified Christ, there is no mourning over him,
nor for their sins that Crucified him, no activity of Faith, though the Lord
Jesus be evidently set forth as Crucified, for the drawing forth of their Faith
on him; no inflaming of their Love, by the dying Love of a dear Savior, which
they are then called to a fixed meditation on; the failure here speaks the
neglect of what is the principal end of a Sacrament, and therefore is no less
than lying and deceit in Gods account, however the external Deportment may
appear fair and commendable before men, that can only judge by the seeing of
the eye, and hearing of the ear.

4 So we may say of the Sabbath.

Which is a special season for the attending on Instituted Worship. If it be
not kept according to the Law of the Sabbath, if we do not Sanctify the
Sabbath, that God may Sanctify us on and by the Sabbath, Ezekiel. 20.12. If the
Sabbath be not remembered and prepared for, and sanctified as an Holy Rest with
and unto God, we do but mock God, and deceive our selves. If our
Sabbath-keeping be not a Delight, it is a cheat; If we only cease from servile
labor, but not from speaking our own words, and following our carnal and
sinful pleasures; or if we account only that part of the day to be Sabbath
which we spend in the Public Worship, and the residue of the time, both
before, after, and in the intervals of Worship, he spent as common time; the
whole of our Sabbath- keeping is Sabbath- breaking, and our pretenses
fallacious and deceitful.

These are some hints which the serious Hearer may easily enlarge in his
Meditations.

I should have added here something, 1. Of the greatness of this sin. 2. Of the
soreness of its punishment.


But that I choose to bring them in either as Motives to incline us to a true
and right performance of the Duties of Worship, Or as Disswasives from this sin
of Lying therein.

By way of Application.
First, I shall draw some Inferences from the Doctrine.

1. If there be such a thing as Lying and Deceitful Dealing in Gods Wors^ip. --
Then we have the less cause to wonder that there is so much Lying and Deceit
among men in their converse with each other. It Is a very lying Age that we live
in. Men lie one to another, in falsifying their words, breaking their promises,
yea, and more solemn Obligations. Men lie one of another by scandalous Reports
which they raise and broach, very much to the detriment of their Neighbors,
and reproach of Religion. Yea, there are that make it no small part of their
business to invent and frame Lies, and scatter them abroad to amuse the World
withal, and to draw forth men's sentiments, on which they make their Remarks,
and of which they make matter of Accusation. There is also much Deceiving and
Overreaching one another in Dealing, the weakest (though the honestest) goes
to the wall; I say there is much of this among men. Think it not strange, while
there is so much dissembling with God himself, you may look to meet with the
like among men. And it arises from the same principle, the Atheism that is in
all Mankind, that which makes them dare to lie to God, will not let them stick
at lying to men. Look for nothing but falsehood and mischief from him that makes
no Conscience of essaying to put his cheats upon the Great God. He that will
adventure to lie to God directly, will not stick more remotely to lie to him,
as all lying to men is, all sin being finally against God.

2. See what little cause we have to boast of any merit in any of our Services;
where there is so much deceit, there can be no Merit.

Outward Performances if they be only such, are mere lies, and therefore rather
provocations unto God, than obligations upon him. Hence when they trusted to
the Temple of the Lord, and to their Services and Sacrifices there, the Lord
tells them they trusted in lying words, Jer. 7.4. 8

But suppose they be sincere performances, worship done in spirit and truth,
there will be no room for trusting in or boasting of them; for the sincerity of
the heart is Grace, and that Grace tho inherent, yet is infused Grace, and the
exercise of that sincerity in Worship is exciting Grace, and all Grace takes
away all occasion of boasting.

There are some actings of pride in the best, to their shame and confusion of
face, when they reflect thereupon: but usually, or mostly they are false in
their Worship that trust to it, and of them it may be said, they trust to a
Refuge of Lies, and under falsehood do they hide themselves, Isa 28.25. Because
all their Worship is so. Were our Services never so good, yet if trusted in
when we have done them, we make a lie, an Idol of them, and shall find them to
be a lie to us; much more when there is so much (...) attending the best of our
doings, and so much lameness, leanness, and deformity in the chiefest of our
Sacrifices.

3. Hence see also the reason why God is angry often times at the Prayers of his
People, viz. Because he hates lying, of which he finds so much in them. Psalm.
80.4. And hence there is so little success in praying, so few Answers of their
Prayers. Those that are (...) services to God, will be lying Services to us
also, nothing will come of them but Provocation and Punishment.

We know that God hears not Sinners, Joh. 9.31. Liars and Decei^ers as they
shall not dwell with him, Psalm. 101.7. so neither shall their Services come
before him with Acceptance.

^ot none of us that are conscious to our selves of a great deal of that Guilt
in our Services, quarrel with God* and say, Wherefore have we fasted and thou
see not? Isa. 58.^3. That Context will answer them and (...), and this Text
will stop our mouths. It Is said, Hab. 3.7. The labor of the (...) fails, it is
in the Hebrew lies, i. e. their labor about the Olive in planting, pruning,
dressing, from which they expect some fruit, produces nothing, nothing comes of
it* so will the labor of such a Worshipper prove, his Prayer was a (...) to
God, and it is very just it should be so (...) a lie to him.

USE II. Of Conviction.
Let this Doctrine also be improved unto Conviction, and upon due, serious and
strict Examination, Conviction will follow. Is there not too too much of this
lying Worship to be found among us?

Here is a great deal of worship, and many Worshippers. And those Worshippers
that seek God daily, and approach into his presence frequently, are either
Regenerate or Unregenerate, (for we may not believe, that all outward
Worshippers are inwardly sincere) Now as to the Unregenerate, especially if
they are so knowingly, and continue so contentedly, all their worship is a mere
lie, all their devotion is a mere cheat, and so an abomination unto God; they
do nothing else but beleagure and beset him with lies, are always fighting God
with their lies, and many, perhaps the Body of Israel whom the Lord thus treats
in the Text, were such.

As to the Regenerate, they are not wholly freed from this way of lying, there
are some Remains of Guile and Hypocrisy, which like dead flies are dropping
into, and corrupting the Ointment, or Incense of their best Performances.

And for our Conviction, let us look back on the particular Instances given in
the several parts of Worship; besides, what further Reflections every diligent,
curious self-examiner may make upon himself Think with our selves what a Trade
of lying we have driven with God, how many of those Abominations we have
wrought in his sight, how many plain lies we have told him to his face; and let
us be vile in our own eyes, in that we have so often done that which is so vile
in his. The Lord expects very deep Humiliation for our so great and frequent
Dissimulation in his Worship; whatever Infirmities God may bear withal in his
Children, he will not tolerate lying in them; dealing falsely in his Worship we
must very particularly repeat of, and reform.

USE III.
Let this serve for a word of solemn Dehortation from this great and frequent
sin that is so commonly found in the midst of us. Oh all ye Worshippers of God
be persuaded to put away your lying, and let your deceit no longer lodge with
you* Do not come to the House of God to tell him a pack of lies from day to
day, Trouble him with no more deceitful and vain oblations, for shame leave off
lying.

Paul charges them, Ep^ 4.25. with Col. 3.9. to put away lying one to another.
But this Doctrine presents us with a more solemn and necessary charge, (and
that which if taken notice of, and complied with, would cure the other) Lie not
to the God of Truth.

Eli was mistaken when he said to Hanna, 2 Samuel 1.14. How long will thou be
drunk? put away thy Wine. But alas, that there should be such just cause to
say to many Worshippers in the House of God, How, long will you tell lies in
Gods Worship, put away your deceit from you.

To enforce this Disswasive,

Let us consider, 1. The Greatness of the sin. 2. The (...) of the punishment.
3. The good of performing true Worship in a right and sincere manner.


1. The greatness of the sin.

1. It is Lying. And I need say no more. It Is a sin though so generally
practiced, yet every where spoken against. It is a sin which man's corrupt
nature is dreadfully addicted to; they go astray from the Womb, speaking lies,
Psalm. 58.3. And yet it is a sin condemned by the light of nature, condemned by
the verdict of every man's Conscience that is not blinded or bribed, asleep or
seared. Men hate to be imposed upon with lies, and will be more ready to
forgive a very great fault than a little one, when aggravated with lying. It Is
reckoned among the seven Abominations that the Lord hates, Prove. 6. 16. -- ^^.
yea and accounted big enough to make two of the seven (if not three of them)
though in a different sense.

2. But more than so, it is lying to God, and that sin cost Ananias and Sapphira
their lives, Act. 5*4, etc. And it is no small wonder of Patience and
Long-suffering that the Lord makes no more such Examples among the great Troops
of lying Worshippers that compass him every day, especially considering what a
jealous God he is in point of Worship. To have a Company of Hypocrites come
before God from time to time, only to fill his ears with lies, must needs be
highly provoking, and it is very strange that the Angel of the Lord is not sent
forth to make them all dead Corpses; Spiritual Judgments are doubtless secretly
inflicted upon them* which are the more dreadful because the less observable.

3. It Is rank Atheism, nor could men persist in such a course if they did
realize the Being of God, or had not in their own imaginations framed to
themselves a God like themselves. According to our sentiments of God in our
Hearts, so are our Carriages toward him in his Worship* Deceitful Worshipping of
him speaks us very much deceived in our Conceptions about him*

4. It is extreme Insolence, daring boldness and presumption thus to impose
upon God, to fight against him with our Lies, to cover his Face and ask who
smote him.

5. It is folly in the very Exaltation of it, such formal Services are Fools
services. Solomon calls rash, sudden, hasty, unprepared Sacrifices, the
Sacrifices of Fools, Eccl. 5.1. I am sure, lying ones are such. It Is folly for
any thus to go about to impose on the Omniscient God, the height of folly once
to dream of deceiving him, and worse than madness it self to do so by him, if
they did not think they could deceive him.

6. It disposes to a vain, unprofitable, Atheistical Conversation in our whole
Deportment. As we are in our Worship, so we are in all our Walk. He that is
Formal and Atheistical there, will be so elsewhere.

2. The soreness of the punishment.
And you may well imagine that God will in Justice provide a strange punishment
for such workers of Iniquity; were it only that one Text, it were very dreadful
Mala. 1.14. Cursed be the Deceiver. If doing the work of the Lord deceitfully
does, then much more the doing of the worship of the Lord ^^^^^fully will bring
a Curse Jer. 48.10. Particulary,

1. All such lying worshippers will lose all that they have wrought 2. Joh. 8.
all our deceitful Hearing, Praying, Sabbath-keeping etc. will be utterly lost,
as to any real profit that shall ever come to us by them. Oh the many costly
laborious services that many Ignorant zealots have lost! the painful
performances of the Papists that are Lies are all lost, the fair outside shows
of the Hypocrite are all lost. Those that are least, or nothing in the Inside
are most in the outside, and they all whose Services are a lie (not having the
Heart in them) use to lie most splendidly of any; but they shall get nothing by
their lying, nothing from God, nothing of his Company or Blessing: a little
Reputation from men they may get, but what does that signif^? They do but
worship him in vain, Mat. ^^ 9. and therefore God bids such deceitful Offerers
to bring no more such vain oblations, Isa. 1.13. They were utterly in vain as
to the great end of them, Communion with God by them. There were a company of
Professing Believers, Joh. 2.23, 25 unto whom Christ could not commit himself,
they seemed to trust him, but he would not betrust himself with them, because
he knew their hearts, he knew they were Liars and Deceivers in their hearts,
and their outward profession without inward sincerity could obtain nothing with
Christ. Lying spoils all conversation among men, and hinders converse with
Christ, Pro. 19.^^. The poor man is better than the liar. He that (...) God
with his Heart, though his poverty allows him to offer no more than two mites,
shall be accepted of God, while the more liberal Contributions of heartless and
therefore deceitful men shall be rejected. The want of the Heart makes it a
lie, and every lie is lost to the Maker.

2. Nay more than so, such worship is not only lost to them, but very provoking
to God; they cannot anger a jealous God more than by such Deceitful Services,
his Anger smokes against lying Prayers, and the more of such prayers, the more
Anger.

Hence in the first Chapter following on the Text it is said, They increased
Lies and Desolations; what Lies did they increase? sure those lies in worship,
for which they were blamed in my Text, they continued in their formal worship,
multiplied their Sacrifices, and did the while but multiply lies; their new
Sacrifices were but Compassing God about with new Lies; and what did they
further increase thereby? why, they increased Desolation. Increase of such
Services* was increase of Lies, increase of Lies was increase of Provocation
unto God, and consequently of Desolation unto them. It Is hard to say, whether
people do more provoke God by their sins, or by their Prayers and Confessions,
performed with so much Guile and Hypocris^e, especially when by those Duties
they think to expiate their sins. While they are compassing God about with
Lies, he is compassing them about with Threatenings, which like a storm of Hail
shall sweep away their Refuge of Lies.

Outward Judgments are often sent by God upon a Professing People, as a
Testimony from Heaven against such Falsehood and Dissimulation. Is not this one
main cause of Gods Severity toward us at this day, viz. our prevaricating with
him in his Worship? either the total neglect of it in many, the deceitful
performances in some, or the unanswerable walking in all, has had a deep share
in procuring these Calamities under which we are now laboring. Does not the
Lord render his Rebukes in flames of Fire, for our coldness, or false Fire in
his Worship? The sudden stroke on Nadab and Ab^^^ was for their offering up of
strange Fire, and Lies is strange Fire. The Arrow shot out of such a deceitful
Bow flies back to the damage of him that shoots it, Hos* 7.16. Thus Paul tells
us, that for the abusing of that Ordinance sickness and death were sent among
them, 1 Cor. 11.30. And no way is an Ordinance more abused than by this way of
lying.

Spiritual Judgments, though more secret, and not so much taken notice of, are
yet more dreadful, and no less certain. As evil men and seducers in point of
Doctrine, so evil men and deceivers in point of Worship, wa^ worse and worse, ^
Tim. 3.^3. deceiving and being deceived, they ^eal Deceitfully with God* do
deceive others, (as has been already noted) and do most lamentably deceive
themselves into a false peace, till at length they find themselves
irrecoverably lost. Their worshipping imboldens them to sinning. They sin, and
then bring their Peace Offering, and so pay the old score, and then begin upon
a new, Prove. 7.14. As if by their Duties they had made amends for their past
sins, and obtained a Dispensation for the committing of more. Thus the Prophet
brings them in Jer. 7.9, 10. As Stealing, and committing Adultery, etc. and
then by Standing* i. e. Worshipping or Sacrificing) in Gods House, think
themselves delivered to do all those Abominations, i* e. delivered from the
wickedness already done, and licensed to hold, on the same Trade still. Thus as
some turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousness, Jude 4, so these turn the
Worship of God into Lasciviousness, and what greater Spiritual Judgment than to
be given up of God to this? It is rendered there as a mark of men of old
ordained unto Condemnation. Nothing more fatal, than by vain Services, to to be
left to vain Confidences, till unexpected Ruin at last overtake them. And that
is the last thing here to be considered; viz.

3. The final destruction of such Deceit(...) Worshippers whose Plagues will be
most wonderful. Hypocrites have the forest punishment allotted them. Every
piece of Deceitful Worship will be an Article in the Indictment. They make
themselves Twofold more the Children of Damnation than the poor Heathen that
never performed any duty of Worship to God in their lives. While some Drink and
Swear and Curse and Damn themselves to Hell, others pray and hear themselves
thither, and into a deeper and hotter Hell too then others arrive at. For men
to destroy themselves with a great deal of pains, labor, cost, splendour and
grandeur is the worst kind of Destruction.

Your Lying, Deceitful Services and Performances are both the pretenses that
you Compass God with, and the sparks that you Compass and comfort your selves
with, but the Reward you will receive at the hands of God will be to lie down
in sorrow, Isa. 50. ult. Such Worshippers of God are nevertheless counted
forgotters of God, and their Doom is, To be Torn in Pieces without any to
deliver them. Psalm. 50* 22.

The Benefit of True and Sincere Worshipping of God.

This is a large Theme, I shall but glance at a few hints. What is said of
keeping Gods Commandments in General. Great is the Reward Psa. 19.11. is
eminently true of the second Commandment, which gives direction about
Instituted Worship, see Exodus 20* 6. And if you referr it to the Third
Commandment, where the Lord threatens the Breaker of it, Not to hold him
guileless, it is a Meiosis, and forest wrath is intended therein, and on the
other-hand all manner of blessings are designed for the keeper of that Command.
If the Deceiver in Worship be Cursed Mala. 1, 11. Then the sincere Worshiper is
blessed. Blessed with all spiritual blessings, God accepts his Services,
remembers his Offerings, will give him pardon, peace, joy, the strength of his
Right Hand etc. see Psalm. 20.1 -- 6. He shall see the Lords goings in his
Sanctuary. And shall be able to attest to David's Experience, ( Psalm. 84.10.)
One day in Gods House is worth a Thousand.

Blessed with all outward blessings also. Seeking the Kingdom of God first, (of
which no small part lies in a right performing the worship of the Kingdom*) has
a promise of the Addition of all other things, (...). 6.33. God deals with a
professing people as they deal with him in his Worship. If we Compass him with
hearty sincere service, he will Compass us with favor as with a Shield Psalm.
1.12, Mercy shall Compass us, no good thing shall be wanting to us. While such
kind of formal worshippers of whom we have been speaking, say as they feel,
that it is in vain to serve God, we shall speak as we find, That it is good for
us to draw near unto God, Psalm. 23.28.

Directions for the Cure of this Malady.
1. Be sure we fix upon the right (and there is but one right) Object of
Worship. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve,
Mat. 4.10. The great God is the sole Object of Worship. Let us not make our
Bellies our God, Gold our Hope, the World our portion; nor our own
Righteousness* Wisdom, or Strength our Idol; nor our selves our Saviors,
Sacrifice not to our own Net, nor burn Incense to our own Drag. Hab. 1.16.

2. Be well acquainted with the Person whom we Worship, and that will oblige us
what we may to study a proportion between our Worship, and the Object of our
Worship.

The Knowledge of God will teach us that he is to be Worshipped, and also how
he is to be Worshipped, will make us fear to neglect it, and assist us in the
due performance of it.

To cure the Deceiver that had a Male in his flock, but offered a corrupt
thing, the Lord gives him to understand, and will^ him to consider that he was
a Great King, and had a Dreadful Name, even the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 1.14.

His being a Spirit will tell us that he is to be Worshipped in Spirit and
Truth, not after a carnal and lying manner.

Consider him as the first Being, and chiefest Good, and thence learn, that the
first and best of our Hearts, Abilities, Time, Spirits, Souls, are his due, and
that lame, blind, heartless, useless Services are very much unbecoming him.

His Sovereignty as it commands Devotion, so it will guard us from snuffing at
his Service, or slubbering over his Worship.

His Omnipresence will beget Reverence, and promote Sincerity. It Is no great
matter how men carry it before an Idol that has no eyes, but Reason, much more
Religion will direct us to look to our selves, when we have such an eye upon
us, and will be useful to prevent that commonness of Heart and Carriage so
unsuitable for his Presence.

His Omniscience will assure us that he will not be shamm'd nor imposed upon,
there is no mocking him with shadows or pretenses; he is not to be treated after
that manner. He will say to every Hypocrite, though under the greatest disguise,
why seignest thou thy self to be another person, I have heavy Tidings for thee;
and a Curse upon the Deceiver is heavy Tidings

His Omnipotence will represent him as a person that has in a readiness
wherewith to avenge all Affronts, and to assist all the Humble Souls that
desire to serve him better.

His Holiness tells us that we must lift up holy hands and hearts before him,
and purge our selves in order to our being Vessels fitted for our Masters use.

His Justice will caution us from taking his Name in vain, because he will not
hold us Guiltless; and when we take up his Worship without spirit, heart, life,
care, labor, seriousness, we take his Name in vain.

His Bounty and Goodness will quicken us to serve him with Enlargedness of
Heart, who has such a liberal hand to reward all his Servants.

His Truth and Faithfulness as they will put us beyond dispute about the
certainty of the Reward, if we serve him well, so of the Punishment, if
trifling and slightly therein.

Thus right Conceptions of God will notably influence you into right Worship,
and a due performance of it.

3. Study well the right way in which God will be Worshipped, and his own way
is the only right way. He has plainly told us in his Word, how he will be
Worshipped; if we bring him any other Worship than that of his own prescribing,
he will call it lying and deceit. Beware therefore that none spoil you through
vain deceit after the Traditions of men, Col. 2.8. A very good caution, for
Traditions of men in the Worship of God, will spoil our Worship, and spoil us
also, aand are rightly called deceitful and vain, because they take us off from
the only true, acceptable and profitable Service of God. Resolve upon it,
either Bible-Worship or none at all, all other being as, yea worse than none.
It Is lying worship if not warranted by God's Word, whatever pretenses it may
make to Decency in it self, or Authority from men, Traditions from our
Forefathers, or the Commands of the Church, God will say of it, Bring no more
vain oblations, and who has required these things at your hands? Nor will God
take it as an answer if we say that Ecclesiastical Authority enjoined it,
unless it agree with the Pattern in the Mount, and be prescribed by the Lord of
the House.

4. Let us offer up all our worship by Christ, God in Christ is the object of
Divine Worship. To go to God in our Prayers or other Services, immediately, to
God out of or without Christ is to lie in our services. That General Rule of
Doing all in the Name of the Lord Jesus Col. 2.17. holds most strictly in point
of worship. All our prayers are to be made in his Name, Joh. 14.41. And all our
praises are to be Offered up by him, Heb. 13.15. Otherwise whatever of Labor,
Care, Zeal, Cost, may be put into our Oblations, if there be nothing of Christ
in them they signify nothing at all with God; they are Lame, Blind, Lean and
Dead Sacrifices, and will be most displeasing in Gods most Pure Eyes, and the
savor of them very offensive to his Nostrils if not perfumed with the Incense
of his Merits which he is Offering up with the prayers of the Saints.

5. See that our Hearts be in the worship, fervently and frequently make that
necessary Prayer, Ps. 119.80. Let my Heart be sound in thy Statutes, especially
sound in thy Statutes and my performances about Worship, because God is
eminently Jealous there. Daily make David's prayer, That God will remove from us
the way of lying, Psalm. 119.29. And that particularly when we draw near unto
God in worship, that we may do it with a true Heart, Heb. 10.22. Engage the
Heart to go along with our Bodies and Tongues, when addressing the
Heart-searching God, yea and do not only carry our Hearts thither, but by an
extraordinary care and watchfulness keep them there, that they may not give you
the slip, and so render all your worship successless, because heartless. Then
only do you worship God in Spirit and Truth when your Hearts are sincerely
active in what you do. Dare not offer unto God that which cost you nothing but
a little Breath and Lip-labor, remember that your Heart gives value to your
two Mites, the least piece of Hearty Service is in high esteem with God.

6. Finally let our constant Walk be always consonant to our Worship, our
Deportment agreeable to our Devotions, our whole Conversations such as become
such Worshippers. A loose Conversation gives the lie to a specious profession.
If what be said in words is contradicted in works, God will call it lying and
deceit, Tit. 1.16. To be zealous and warm in our Worship but luke warm and
carnal in our Walk is most absurd and Contradictory. Let us Live our Hearing,
Praying, Sabbaths, Sacraments, etc. and then we worship well, And if we do
indeed worship well, our worship to God will observably Influence, all our
converse with men. And Oh how amiable and pleasant is an Harmonious Agreement
there! And how unseemly the contrary! That men walk no better before and after
worship, is an ill sign of their being insincere and false and deceitful in it.

To Conclude,

Thus you have heard one more very common and provoking sin declaimed against.
And note that when the Lord gave the Prophet Isa. 58.1. etc. his Commission To
show unto his people their Transgressions, And to the house of Jacob their
sins, this was the first sin that he directed him to lift up his voice and
sound his Trumpet against. There was much Worship, but little Holiness, many
Sacrifices but no Righteousness, frequent Approaches to God, but little Walking
with him. And it is evident that their design in these external performances was
to conceal or get allowance for their wickedness, as appears by quarrelling God
that he took no more notice of their F^sting, nor gave them expected Answers to
their Prayers, though the Lord sufficiently stopped their mouth, by letting them
know, that while they lived in such palpable neglect of the
Second-Table-Duties, their pretended compliance with the First, could very
little avail them. Of the like import is Psalm. 50. and Isa. 1. in the latter of
which he plainly tells them, That the multitude of their Sacrifices was to no
purpose, they did but trouble him, and not profit themselves: and God bids them
give over, verse 13. Not that he did abate them these Sacrifices, or will abate
us our Devotion; no, but bring no more vain Oblations; so does God say to us,
bring no more lying Services, make no more deceitful Prayers; let me have no
more of these formal, Hypocritical Assemblings. Upon the penalty of losing all
our Prayers, (and we had better lose all the Comforts we have in the World,
than lose our Prayers) Upon the penalty of having them turned into sin, (a
dreadful imp^ upon Jud^s that monstrous Hypocrite, as appears by comparing Psalm
109.7. with Act. ^.20. and that which every such dissembling Worshipper may be
afraid of.) Upon the penalty of losing all gracious converse with God, of
blocking up the way to prevent any good coming at thee for ever, of having the
Lord to kindle a fire in his Jealousy that shall burn to the lowest Hell, of
his rending thee in pieces, and there be none to deliver thee, I say upon all
these penalties, (and they are terrible ones) leave off, presently and utterly
leave off All lying and dissembling with God in his Worship.

Do not cast off worship because it is so dangerous to intermeddle with, but
engage in it sincerely, heartily, with Reverence and godly fear, shun the lying
and deceit that too often does attend it, comply with the sincerity and
painfulness, care and conscience that always should attend it. Sincerity will
God approve of and countenance; Infirmity, especially when bemoaned and
resisted, he will forgive and overlook, and all the expense we are at in
Worshipping God in spirit and truth, will be plentifully compensated by
fulfilling that promise, Exo. 20.23. In all places where I record my name I
will come unto thee, and I will Bless thee.


