The Danger of Taking God's Name IN VAIN. As it was Delivered in a SERMON

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in BOSTON.

Mal. 1.14. I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is Dreadful
among the Heathen.

Levit. 19.12. Ye shall not swear by my Name falsely, neither shall thou
Profane the Name of thy God, I am the LORD.

BOSTON, Printed by Benjamin Harris, and John Allen, at the London
Coffee-House. 1691.

The Danger of Taking God's Name IN VAIN.
Deuteronomy. 5.11. Thou shall not take the Name ^f the Lord thy God in vain; for the
Lord will of hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in ^ain.


IT is worthy of observation, that God in Delivering the Moral Law, which is
summed up in the Decalogue, or Ten Com^andements, gives eight of these
Commands Negatively, and but two Affirmatively, therein ^^stly and more
directly pointing at the Sins ^hereby the precept is in danger of being
Vi^lated* and herein he has Accommodated himself to the Infirmity of Fallen
Man, who (...) easier come to understand what he should ^ot than what he should
do: this also discovers (...) pro^eness there is in our hearts to hurry (...)
into Sin so that we stand in need of a prohibition with a Commination, as a
Thorn-Hedge, to keep us within Compass, and let us know, that one great end of
the Law, with respect to Fallen Man, is to be a Bridle to curb him in from his
Exorbitancies; and withal signifies, that it is no little part of the work of
Ministry, to Preach against Sin.

It is David's observation* Psalm* 1^9.96. I have seen an end of all Pers^^^^ion,
but thy Command is exceeding broad. These ten words would make ten Volumns, if
they were drawn out at length; each of them partakes in this quality, having a
very great depth and fullness in it, as by the Rules given for expounding of the
Commandments, will easily be Evinced.

There is in every Command something that is expressly declared, and a great
many more things that are necessarily included. This Rule is applicable to the
third Command, which is the Subject of our present Consideration, as much as to
any of the rest. The Command is given Negatively, and therefore speaks directly
of a sin that is prohibited in it; though there are also many sins contained
under the prohibition; but my present business is only to speak of that which
the words do in terms express.

Here then two things are to be observed.

1. The sin which is prohibited, and that is, Taking the Name of God in vain.
The word Translated, Take, firstly signifies, to lift up a thing, and it nextly
aims at the words of men, the taking up of Gods Name into their mouths;
although it also extends to thoughts and deeds; but it is the former that I am
at present to take notice of. The name of God is of great extent, for it
includes in it, every thing of God, in which he has made any discovery of
himself to the Creature: but more expressly it intends, any word by which the
Great God is understood, whether Essentially or Personally; and so, every one
of his Attributes, which are so many Letters in which he has written his Name
unto us, are here to be considered. The word, In vain; is sometimes used
Substantively, and then it signifies Temerity and falseness* sometimes it is
used Adverbially, and there it imports as much as, lightly, unnecessarily,
unprofitably.

2. The danger in committing of this sin is discovered, in a severe
Commination. For the Lord will not hold him guiltless, etc.

The word that is translated, To hold guiltless, ^^gnifies in the first
Conjugation, to be Pure, free, void; and in the Conjugation here used, it
imports the treating of one as so;. It therefore aim^ at Innocence in the
person, and Impunity the Consequent upon it. And there is a Mei^sis or (...) in
the expression; it is* q. d. he will certainly hold him a guilty person, and
deal with him as such an one: such manner of expressions are used in the
Scriptures, and contain a very awful threatening in them:

Hence, DOCTRINE:
It is a fearful sin for any vainly to take Gods Name into their mouths; and
Exposes them that so do, to Tremendous Judgments,



Though this be not all, yet it is one thing plainly pointed at in this command
and than which I scarcely know any thing that calls for a more solemn and
severe Testimony to be b^rn against it; it being a sin that is not only
practiced by the openly profane sort of men, but is also too lamen^ably allowed
in themselves by many that make an open profession of God and his fear, as will
be more than manifest when we have considered the nature of this sin
distinctly. There are therefore two thing (...) to be enquired into;

1. How or wherein men do incur the guilt of this sin? 2. what discovery may be
made of the grievousness o^ fearfulness of it?

1. How or wherein men do incurr the guilt this sin?

A. A Thing is then truly said to be done vainly, when it is to no good end or
purpose; when there is no benefit or advantage that accrues to men by the doing
of it; they neither profit themselves nor others: and consequently it is much
more so, when it proves pernicious, and turns to a great deal of damage; Gods
people are not to abstain from taking of his name into their mouths, but
contrarily, they are to be often making mention of it; but they then do it*
vainly, when they do it after any other manner then is becoming. Now the ways
by which men may bring themselves under the guilt of this sin, may be referred
to two Heads: It is committed, either in their ordinary communication, or in and
about Swearing.

1. In their Ordinary Communication or discourse: and there are many respects
in which men may be charged justly for taking the name of God vainly into their
mouths on this account; I shall instance in some of them.

1. By mentioning the Name of God without Reverend Thoughts of him: when men
use this Name as a word of course, and have not together with it the aw of his
Majesty upon their hearts, but they speak of him without considering who he is
whom they are speaking of: we should never think or speak of him, without due
reverence of him all they therefore that do not Honor and reverence Him in
their hearts, mention his name in vain; Mal. 1.^. Psalm. 50.16.17. and thus must
every unregenerate man needs do, because he is without this Reverence; ungodly
men have ^ot on them the (...) of God; impossible it is therefore for them not
to break this Command, if ever they speak of God.

2. By using of his name in any sudden and ras^ Exclama^ions. If the former be
a Sin against this Precept, this then must needs be so, for it is a proper
fruit and result of it: Rashness and Reverence cannot well be supposed to be
consistent one with the other; for Reverence will surely make men to
deliberate, and to think before they will adventure to speak. There are some*
who upon every sudden vexation that is given them, or distress that comes upon
them, will cry out, Oh Lord! Oh God! there are others that if any thing
frighten them, or some unexpected trouble comes upon them at unawares, will
earnestly say, Lord bless me, what shall I do! we have little reason to believe
them, if they should tell us, that these are Ejaculatory Prayers to God, when
as the Speakers neither know, nor have time to consider what they say; nor are
they for the present in any composed praying frame; no, it is a real taking of
Gods name in vain. The Jewish interpreters understand that in Levit, 24.11. the
Jsraelitish wom^ns for blasphemed the name of the Lord* of his expressly
mentioning the Name Jehovah, in a rash and irreveren^^ manner.

3. By speaking blasphemously or reproachfully of God. The word which is used
by the Hebrews for Blaspheming, signifies to Pierce or bore through a thing,
and the evil tongue is compared to (...) sharp and two-edged sword? when men
speak of God with any reflection upon him, or upon any of his Attributes, they
do, as it were, stab his name thorough with this sword: Reproaching and
Blaspheming are put together as Synonymical or Exegetical; 2 Kings* 19.22. any
thing that i^ either, said of him, or as^ribed unto him, which in unbecoming of
his Glory, is a Taking of his Name in vain; this they did egregiously, when
they said, Ezekiel. 8.12. The Lord ^^eth not, the Lord has forsaken the earth,
and hitherto belong all those f^ettings, ^^pinings and murmuring complaints
which men do at any time make against the Providence of God, when it goes cross
to their inclination: when they do change him foolishly.

4. By professing and maintaining of any False Doctrine. Doctrines in Religion
are nothing else but so many Predications of the Name of God. He is the Author
of Religion, he also is the object of it, for it point^ to him as its ultimate
end: The Profession of it is in Scripture called the Confessing of his Name;
whatsoever Opinion therefore* that men wi^^ maintain* and stand up in the
defense of which is unbecoming of God, and contrary to what is revealed of his
mind in the Holy Scriptures, is a reflection upon him, and putting of his Name
to the authorizing of a falsehood, and that must needs be to use it in vain;
this is therefore called vain (...) or ja^ging, 1 Timothy 1.6. and because it so
nearly concurreth God* the vanity of it must need reflect upon his Name.

5. By Impre^a^i^^^ or Cursings; either of themselves, or others; either
Positively, or Condi^iona^ly; and that whether Gods Name be expressly men (...)
implied in them: for because the accomplishing of such things as are Imp^^ca^ed
belongs to his Providence necessarily; hence he is really in (...) in all such
Execrations: There are indeed (...), and those Personal, Recorded in the Word
of God; but they are not to be drawn down into a president, except we were
extraordinarily Inspired, as they were who uttered them; and indeed, they are
but a Rhetorical denunciation of Gods Judgments, by inspiration; and oftentimes
against such for whom they did mean while pray, There are also general
Imprecations against Gods, and his people implacable enemies, which are
exemplary; such as that, Judge 5.31 so let all thine Enemies perish Oh Lord! But
there are those that are profane: and such is a man's cursing of himself; though
it be Hypothetically; as when men wish that they may dye upon the spot, or that
they may never speak a word more, or any other thing of like nature, if such a
thing which they say be not true, or if they do not do this or that: hitherto
belong Johs and Jeremiah's cursing of their day, which was a discovery of the
remainders and prevalency at that time of corruption in them; for men to
confirm any thing they say with such Imprecations, is more than yea and na^,
which our Savior Christ tells us is enough, and assures us that any thing more
(...) sin, Mat. 5.^7. there is also a profane Imprecation upon others too much
in practice, and that horrid one, so frequent in the mouths of some, Damme you,
where the Name of God is intended, though suppressed, who alone has the power
of Damnation, or whatever other mischief is wished to men: it is contrary to
Scripture Precept, which has commanded us, saying, Bless and Curse not, Romans
12.14.

6. By the using of Gods Name in Charms. God would have no Charmer to be
suffered amongst his people, Deuteronomy. 18.1^. The name comes of a word that
signifies, to Consociate: and the reason of it is, because such persons have
real society with the Devil^; who, that he may cheat men into familiarity with
him, transforms himself into an Angel of light: and has to that end, taught
men to use the name of God, or of Christ, or some notable Sentence that is
recorded in Gods Word, (which is also his Name) either for the keeping of
Devils out of places, or for the Curing of these (...) those Maladies that men
labor of, which is ^ndeed nothing else but plain conjuration, and (...)
horrible abusing of the Name of God to such purposes as serve egregiously to
the Establishing of the Devils Kingdom in the hearts of men.

7. By ascribing any of the Divine Properties to the Creature This sort of
Blasphemy is grown into a common complement with some men in the world, whilst
in their Adulatory Commendations of those with whom they would f^^tter
themselves into Reputation, they either ascribe unto them the Incommunicable
Perfections of God, or those which are Communicable, in the Abstract, which so
belong only to him; and cannot without his reproach be ascribed to the Creature
more than in the Concrete: and men addicted (...) insinuate, are too easily
bent to excess upon this account, if they be not very needful to their words:
In a word, when either God is levelled with the Creatures, or the Creature is
made equal to God, his Name is taken in vain: this was their sin, who ^o
flatter a proud Prince, put that Encomium upon his specious Oration, Act.
12.22. The voice of a God, and not of a man.

8. By making of profane Jests out of the Scripture, Gods Name is put upon his
Written Word* and it is greatly concerned in it, for which cause he is to be
Reverenced ^n all our mention which at any time we make of it, his Name
therefore must needs be villify'd by (...) such as turn it into scarril^^ as
all they do, that make sport there ^hal: when men use their wits in a facetiou^
Citation of the Scripture, or any portion of it, to make themselves or others
me^ry, this is to be wittily wicked; it is to degrade the Word of God from the
noble end that it was written for, which is to make me a wife unto Salvation,
to a vile and base employment, for the supplying of profaneness. Thus these
Jews of old abused that awful Scripture Expression, The burden of the Lord;
with which God had been wont to preface Prophetical Comminations of Judgments;
and they in contempt would merrily ask of the Prophet, What is the burden of
the Lord? for which he sorely threatens them with Destruction, Jer. 23.33, 34.

9. B^ Railing at Godliness in Gods People. Gods Name is put upon his people,
and it in nothing is more evidently to be read than in the^^ holy walking in
conformity to his Reveale^ W^^l. The Holiness of the Saints, is the Image or
Representation of Gods Holiness which is to be see^ upon them: and when this
becomes a reproach unto them, and men can ^i^us and jeer them for it, and make
it to be the very matter of their taunting and revil^ng of them, herein there
is great opprob^y reflected upon Gods Holy Name: The Psalmist therefore in his
complaint unto God, interested him in them, Psalm. 69.9. The Rep^o^c^es of them
that have reproac^ed are fall^n upon me; and what was that for, but his
Religions p^rformances,? ver. 10, 11.

2 In and about Sa^a^ing; An oath is properly a Solemn Invoca^ion of God, and
Appeal unto him, to be a Witness of the truth of of what we say: in it
therefore, we submit our selves to his Righteous Revenges if we do not Swear
the Truth; it is therefore always taken either explicitly or impl^citly in his
Name; that therefore must needs be peculiarly concerned in it; here ^hen this
sin is so much the more notorious, b^ how much the more there is of Solemnity
in the thing: and men may become gu^lty of this profanation, in two respects;
viz. Either in giving or in making of an Oa^h.

1. In the Giving or Administering of an Oath, those who do Administer it unto
others, do make mention of the Great and Dreadful Name of God; and they may
then be said to do it vainly.

1. When there is no need of or occasion for it. To call men forth to Swear, to
allow them, much more to compel them, in every trivial matter, when the thing
it self is not worth it, or the case may be as well determined without it. This
doub^less is not left at the pleasure of every vain person, who has no regard
to the Glory of God, nor considers the danger of profaning his Name, but is to
be regulated by the discretion of those who are empowered to give it, and the
blame will necessari^y fall upon them, if there be any male-adminis^ration in
this regard: and without any doubt, that which is it self Sol^mne, requires a
Solemn occasion to put it in p^actice.

2 Where Oa^hs are multipled more than needs, the main design of an Oath is to
put an end to a controversy by taking the highest step that men are capable of
for finding out the truth of any matter which depends upon Humane Testimony for
the clearing of it: but how often do men being in a multitude of supernumerary
and superstititious Witnesses in the management of their cause? a great many
that are not to the purpose, and others more more than is necessary; these
cannot be admitted indiscriminately without Guilt: Two or three Witnesses are
enough to one Article that is pertinent* and needs proof, ten then are too
many* and one is more than enough to that circumstance, which is impertinent.
And to th^s head may be annumerated, the admitting of cross and contradictory
Oaths, when men Swear diametrically opposite one to another, so that it is most
apparent that the one or the other must unavoidably come under the guilt of
Perjury; if therefore there appear to be a just reason to give the Oath to the
one of these Parties, it will consequently upon the same ground be rational to
with hold it from the other; both cannot be given without evident affront
offered to the Name of God.

3. When it is given to persons incapable: I (...) such as are Morally so: an
Oath is the Confirmation of something spoken by Testimony; in which Gods truth
is called in to ratify it; that which strengthens our Credit of a Testimony by
reason of the addition of an Oath to it, is a presumption that the man has so
much of the aw of God upon his Conscience that he would not dare to call him
who knows the secrets of the heart, to be a witness to a Lie, lest he should
pull down his vengeance upon him by so doing: where then it is notoriously
evident that men have no regard to God, or Conscience, or speaking the Truth,
how is it possible they should gain any Credit to that they say, by Swearing to
it? what reason then or equity can there be in it, that men's good Names,
Estates, Libert^es, yea and Lives should be disposed of by such men? and to
what purpose then can they be Sworn? It is then of great moment that the
persons be enquired after, their capacity well considered, and the Testimony
which they offer thoroughly examined in order to the Swearing of them, lest
otherwise the Name of God be taken in vain.

2. In the making Oath in any case;

An Oath may be distributed into a Promissory and an Asse^tory: either an
Obligation to do something, or an Affirming something to have been done.

1. A Promissory Oath is made; either to God, and then it is called a (...), or
to man, and is a solemn promise with an Appeal unto God. In both of these he is
called in as a Witness to the Since^ity of our engaging and real purpose of
performing accordingly, and his name is taken in vain in this respect.

1. When it is done rashly and without deliberation; the Wiseman tells us that
we should not hastily utter any thing before God, E^^l. 5.2. i. e. as a
Witness. This he applies to a Vow in particular, verse 5. and gives a reason
for it; because it is better not to Vow, than having so done, not to pay; and
it is a poor excuse to say, it was an error; now all (...) is the probable
issue of precipit^ncy: (...) do not premeditate, and afterward they repent
(...) the most forward in promising, are not (...) the most backward in
performing.

2. When it is in things that are unlawful. If men have no Physical Power to
fulfill it, because they promise that which is not their own, or above their
ab^lity of procuring; or no mor^l power to do it, because it is unlawful, as
being forbidden by God; and it would be a sin in them to keep promise: it is
th^r^fore an act of profaneness for men to Swear that they will do such things:
of this nature was Jeptha's Vow, which procured him so much trouble; such also
was Herod's promise which he swear to his Daughter-in-law. And to this head we
may subjoyn those Oaths that are ^^natory, when men bind themselves to do some
acts of revenge upon others; such was David's against Nabal and his house; and
such was theirs who bandied against Paul, and bound themselves in an Oath and a
Curse, not to eat till they had slain him, Act. 23* 12.

2. An Assertory Oath is that which is made for the confirmation of the Truth
of some matter of fact which we affirm to have been done, and in this respect
God's Name is taken in vain*

1. When the Assertion it self is false: especially if he that affirms and thus
confirms it, knows that it is not true: So diverse interpret the word, Vain in
our Text; viz. falsely: and indeed it is an high affront that is put upon God,
to affix his Name to a Ly, and that merely for the gaining of men's Credit unto
it, as if it were true; and must needs be very derogatory to his Truth, which
is to him exceeding precious.

2. When he that Swears does not of himself know the thing to be true, which he
testifies unto, he at least swears (...), and that is a great vanity, but it
is pernicious too because his very ignorance of the thing tells him that he
cannot Swear to it: here all Knights of the ^ost are condemned, who will for
hire make Affidavit to any thing that is put into their mouths. Such also must
needs be guilty, who swear positively to a thing which they have received only
upon report; let the Reporters be never so credible, and our belief never so
strong: yet all that we can safely attest, is only to the report, and not to
the thing it self; except we were eye, or car-witnesses of it: they also that
will testify to the thing it self, upon the presumption of the most convincing
circumstances, cannot escape; because it is possible the thing may not be for
all.

3. When it is done pa^tially. If men swear but one part of the Truth, and
suppress another essential part of it, by reason whereof the matter under
debate comes to be misrepresented, and injury is thereupon done unto the party
concerned; this will fall under the s^n before us: such was the Testimony of
Do^g against the Priests telling what was against them, but not what was f^r
them, on which account, David brands him for a ^^ing (...), Psalm. 52.1. Or if
men make additions, and foist in something more than is true, put their own
Commentaries into, and make them part of the Text; such was their Testi^^ny
against Christ, M^rk 14 58. We heard him say, that he would destroy this Temple
that is made with hands. Compare John 2.19.

4. When men do it trivially. An Oath is a solemn thing, and requires a solemn
occasion; for men then to use it in their ordinary Communications, is a great
breach of this Command: and to this is that expression of our Savior to be
applied, in Man. 5.34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all. We are not to
suppose that he wholly forbad the use of an Oath, when occasion required it;
and Religion had from the beginn^ng allowed it; but only that it should not be
used at all in common ta^k: they then that can hardly speak a word without
Swearing, as if it put a grace upon their Speech, must needs li^e in the
practice of the sin here forbidden?

5. When it is by another name than that of God, this is one thing that God
severely threaetens them for, Jer. 5.7. How shall I pardon thee for this? thy
Children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. It is Gods
Prerogative which he challenges to himself, that no other Name be made use of
in this Solemnity but his; it is therefore an ascribing of Divine Honor to any
person or thing that we thus Invocate; it is a putting of Gods Name upon it,
which cannot be less than Sacrilege: hither belong those words which some make
use of as words of course, Faith, Troth, Marry, and many of like Import.

2. What Discovery there may be made of the grea^ness, or fearfulness of this
Sin?

A. There has bin enough said to detest this, in the very display which has
bin made of the several particulars wherein men become Guilty of taking Gods
name into their mouths, in vain, but for the farther clearing of it up, give me
leave to subjoin these few Conclusions.

1. The Name of God is a great and a fearful Name, it must therefore be a very
great Sin to offer any Affronts or Indignities unto it: we have these Epithets
put upon it* Deuteronomy. 28.58. this glorious and fearful Name, THE LORD THY GOD.

The greater and more eminent any person is, the more Criminal it is accoun^ed
by all men to be, to speak any thing that is Indecent of him, that Derogates
from his Honor and Credit: now there is none so gr^^t as God is, and for that
reason, his Name is above all Honor and Praise. It is therefore said to be
fearful, because the world o^ght to stand in ^w of it, and be afraid to say or
do any thing unworthy of it.

2 This sin argues men to be without the Fear of God; for men to fall at any
time into it, says, that they did for the present lay it too much aside; but
if men live in the frequent practice of it, it gives a notorious character of a
profane Spirit: All Religion (...) in Scripture frequently called, The (...) ^f
God, because without a deep impression of it upon the hearts of men, they
cannot be Religious; wicked men are upon this account often called, such as
fear not God: and ^he sins which they allow themselves in, is a witness of it
in the Consciences of those that observe them: hence that, Psalm. 3^.1. The
Transgression of the Wicked, ^^ith within my heart, that there is no fear of
God before his eyes. Men most of necessity put away this Reverential Fear from
them, before they can dare to allow themselves in this sin; for if they were
under the aw of his Glorious Majesty, it would make them to reverence ^is Name,
and tremble at the very thoughts of Taking it in Vain.

3. This sin carries in it a grievous contempt of God, men must of necessity
first undervalue his Being, before they can profane his Name. There cannot
possibly be a more manifest discovery made, that men have low and mean thoughts
of God, than when they can pl^y with and abuse his Name* if men did entertain
the (...) opinion of him, Psalm. 111.9. H^ly and ^everend i^ his N^me; they
could not thus do. And can it be supposed (...), to despise him, whose Honor
and Glory is Great above all our conceptions.

4 It Scand^i^zeth the World. The very Light of Nature in the Consciences of
mere Heathen, teaches men highly to venerate him* unto whom they give the
acknowledgement of a Deity: the very Confessing of him to be God, carries in it
the yiedling and beleiving him to deserve all Honor and Fear, and the want of
it to be the Root of Atheism: God therefore pleads with his people about this,
from Natural Principles, Mal. 3.6. The Son Honoreth his Father, etc. q d. There
is as much Convincing Reason that the Notion of a God should stir up Holy Fear
in men as the notion of a Father should challenge Honor from a Child, and what
will Atheistical Men say, when they see us live without it? what a God will
they think men pretend to Worship, whom they can dare to offer such indignity
unto? whose Name they can play withal* and trample upon at their pleasure? The
Name of God will unavoidably be evil spoken of among profane men, for the sake
of such as call themselves the People of God, and yet do allow themselves thus
to do

5. God stands particularly engaged to vindicate his Name upon such: If we
think of the threatening with which this Command is guarded, it will certify us
how exceedingly provoking this sin is to God: when God says that he is
resolved that such as so do shall not escape unpunished, it tells us that he
cannot bear it; he stands upon the Honor of his Name, and his Holines^,
whereby he is bound for his Glory, will not part with any of it, Isa. 42.8 and
therefore we have th^^ f^ar^ul Commination, against those that lie under the
Guilt of this Sin, Mal. 2.2. and that S^n cannot be little, against which the
Threatenings of the Word of God are so great.

Use 1. For Humilia^ion; the Consideration of these things may well ca^l us all
into the Dust, and lay us exceeding Low bfore God; great Sins call for deep
Abasements; and there are two respects in which the present consideration
offers us occasion for being humbled.

1. Have not the b^st of Gods People cause to abase themselves before God, for
their self-neglect upon this account? Godliness indeed will ^each those i^ whom
it is Implant^^* not to drive a trade of committing this sin, that cannot be
the spot of Gods Children; but good men are in danger of being overtaken with
it, and oftentimes they are overtaken with it, for want of looking to
themselves lest they offend with their tongues, and therefore good men have
been branded with them in Scripture; and that it may lay us low, let us
Consider,

1. That our Inadvertency herein will greatly wound our Profession, it will do
it both in the thoughts of good men, and of bad men* those indeed will be
grieved at (...), whereas these will insu^^ over us; but to both it will render
us justly suspected for want of Sincerity; it will give men just occasion to
make a doubt, whether we do really stand in those Relations to God, which not
only require, but will also enforce our honoring and fearing of him, and if
our Names suffer upon the account, and men look upon us as no better than
profane ones, let us thank our s^lves, and remember, that we first made Gods
Name to s^ffer by our irreverend taking it into our mouths.

2. It will also wound our Consciences, however we may for the p^esent s^i^le
them, and keep them under Insensibleness of it, yet the wound is* given to
them, every time we day thus to do; and* the^^ will be a time, sooner or
later, when God will so (...) our Consciences as to Awaken them, and make them
^^rely to reflect upon us, and then the wound will (...) and put us to grief,
and if the Name of God be indeed precious unto us, it will be a very bitter
thought, and c^st us many sorrowful (...) and tears.

3. If we have been overtaken with this sin, and be not deeply humbled for it,
we cannot excuse our selves from having an hand in procuring of the Judgments
that are upon us this is one of the sins that brings them upon a people as soon
as any: a sin tha^ God is not wont usually to let go unpunished in this world:
and when Gods Hand is out upon a people, all that have this guilt on them, have
reason to s^^te upon their own breasts, and confess themselves involved in the
Indictment, and it should be a very humbling thought upon the hearts of such,
who ought to have stood in the Gap, and kept off the ^^dgments of God, to think
that instead of so doing, they have helped to open the gap wider, and make the
wa^ larg^r for the breaking in of the Judgments of God.

2. Let it humble us for, and set us on mourning by reason of this sin in
others And alas! Is there not a tremendous deal of it to be observed? is there
not enough in open view, to make us to wish with the Prophet, Jer. 9.1. Oh that
my h^^d were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears. And to engage us herein
let us consider;

1. Does not the Land mourn for this? is it not one, and not a little part
neither of Gods Controversy, which he is at this day managing wi^h us, and for
which he has brought us under so many terrible effects of his Displeasure. I
am sure God pointed his people of old, in a calamitous time, unto this, Jer
23.10. Bec^^se of Swearing h^ ^and mo^neth. Is it not a provoking thing to him,
who is (...) for his great Name, to see that even in N. E. in a Land of
Vprigh^^ess, a place of so eminent a Profession, his Name should be so lightly
set by, and so woefully abused, that it should ^e so pierced and shot through
every day, with the Curses and Oaths of ungodly men, and that it should be so
little regarded by a great many that make ^ore of a Profession; if these things
are so, we need not to be at a loss in our enquiring what is the meaning of
this his so great anger, the impressi^ns whereof are upon us in so many
terrible Providence? and when it is so, is it not high time for us to mourn
over it bitterly?

2. Except we thus do, we shall also be found to be guilty of their (...): God
is pleased gracio^^ly (...) accept of the ^ears and sorrows of (...) do no more
for the prevention of (...), who (...) lament and bitterly bewa^l it before
(...) this will not be accounted to ^e enough in (...) ^ho have the opportunity
(...) do more, and neglect it* but if we do not do (...) much we shall then be
found, and decla^^^ guilty of having fellowship with the (...) of Darkness, and
be fellow sufferers with them, at least in the outward Judgments of God, which
he brings as a Testimony of his D^spleasure at these things. If then we do not
mourn how shall we expect to have the distinguishing mark upon us, which God
appointed to be put upon those in Jerusalem, who sighed and mourned for all the
abominations which were committed in the midst of it? Ezekiel. 9.3.

Use. 2. For Exhortation: it calls upon us all to set our selves strenuously
against this Sin, if it be so grievous and p^ovoking to God, and if there be so
much of it to be found in the midst of us, it then concerns every one to use
our best Endeavors tha^ it may be Reformed an^ prevented* th^^ ^o the Anger of
God be not yet more (...) against us, and his Judgments not only continue, but
increase amongst us: and (...) our Direction;

1. Let every one reform it in himself, by a careful avoiding of all manner of
such Communication* as will be to the Profanation of Gods Holy Name If we have
been heretofore too forgetful of our selves in this regard, let it lay us low
before God, and drive us to hearty Repentance, and Renewing our Peace; but for
the time forward our business is to be more watchful over our selves than ever;
and that we man do it to purpose, take these three Rules for he^p.

1. Keep up the Fear and Reverence of God in your hearts, be sure that it be
there planted by or in a ^rue work of Conversion, and then take care to keep it
up in a vigorous disposit^^^; ^f we do indeed maintain this inward respect to
him which is his due, it will be of great efficacy to curb in the exo^bi^ancy
of our tongues; our Savior Christ has taught us, (...) out of the abundance
of the heart, the mouth speaks, so that if we can keep irreverence from our
hearts, our tongues will not be in danger of being influenced from thence* the
best cure and preventive of this sin is prescribed to us in the Prophet, Isa.
8*13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and your
dread; and for this end, be frequently thinking what a God he is: meditate
much, how great, how mighty, how holy, how just, how Omniscient he is, and
argue from thence how fearful a thing it must be to fall into his ^evenging
hand, which all they must expect to do, who presume to pollute his Name with
their defiled Lips.

2. Endeavor to express this Reverence in all your Communication, let it
influence every word you speak; remember, your Lips are your glory, your
tongues were given you to honor God withal; and that is done by pure and
undefiled language: if we did more accustom our selves to clean expressions,
this would be so pleasant, and so comfortable, to what the other foul and dirty
converse is, that it would make that hateful to us, and by that means break us
off from it.

3. Beware of (...) ^assions: the Tongue in man is a most ready and apt
Instrument for the affections to discover themselves by; and hence these are
the times when men are wont to allow themselves the grea^est Liberty, when
these are transported: when the passions have gotten the Re^ns in their Necks,
and the Curb loosened, they hu^ry men into strange Exorbitancies; and now th^i^
^ongues are their own, and who shall rule over them? now neither God nor man
are regarded; but whatsoever an enraged affection suggests; all shall come out
that lies next. When did that man blasphe^^ the Name of God, and curse, but
when he (...) engaged in a quarrel? Lev. 24.10, 11. When was it that (...) fell
to cursing, but when he was afraid of suffering for Christ, and thought himself
exposed? Mark 14.^1. when was it that David imprecated, but when he was enraged
at Nabal; 1 Samuel 25.21, 22. if we could always keep our selves in a quiet and
composed frame, we should be the less exposed to the danger of this sin.

2. Let us reform it as much as we can in others. This is a duty which we ow to
all our Neighbors, even all mankind, as there is occasion; by bearing some due
testimony against it, whenever we hear it: either by reproving of it, or, if
that will not obtain, by making complaint of such to those who have power to
punish it; they therefore are charged with sin, who hear the voice of Swearing,
and do not utter it, Lev. 5.1. we ought also to set before all men a contrary
example, and let them see in all our demeanor, what an high respect we bear to
Gods precious Name: But it is also one special thing, which all Superiors
ought to be exceeding careful (...), in respect of those that are under their
Charge: It highly concerns Magistrates in their place, to suppress it;
Ministers in their places to give in their solemn Testimony frequently against
it; Churches not to tolerate it in those that are in their Communion, and
there is a very great duty in this respect lying on Parents, and Governors of
Families: and let in a little Expostulate with such: what, I pray, is the
Reason, why there is hardly any passing the streets, wh^re many young ones are
gotten together, but we may hear Children that cannot speak plain, who have
learnt to Lisp and Stammer out Profaneness, and take Gods Name in vain, by
Irreverend Exclamations, possibly, yea too often, by Oaths and Cursings? it is
to be feared of too many, that they have learnt it of their Parents; and of
others that they are at least suffered in it, without a due Testimony born
against it; yea do not some make a sport of it; as if it were pretty and
becoming to have a Child st^mmer at Profaneness? well! let all such Parents
know, that if they do not take more care to suppress this Sin, and use a
greater inspection over, and severity against them for it; God will neither let
Parents nor Children stand Guiltless, but will make them Examples of his
furious Re^^nges; let us then take this Warning, and (...) at his Word, that so
we may not feel the Weight of his Hand.

FINIS.

