The Triumphs of the Reformed Religion, in AMERICA.

The LIFE of the Renowned JOHN ELIOT; A Person justly Famous in the CHURCH of
GOD,

Not only as an Eminent CHRISTIAN and an Excellent MINISTER, among the ENGLISH,
But also, As a Memorable EVANGELIST among the INDIANS, of NEW ENGLAND;

With some Account concerning the late and strange Success of the Gospel, in
those parts of the World, which for many Ages have lain Buried in PAGAN
IGNORANCE.

Written by COTTON MATHER.

Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when He comes, shall find SO Doing.

Boston, Printed by Benjamin Harris, and John Allen, for Joseph Brunning at the
corner of the Prison-Lane. 1691.

To the Right Honorable PHILIP Lord WHARTON. A no less Noble than Aged PATRON
of LEARNING and VIRTUE; And a Favorite of that Great KING Whose Throne is in
the Heavens, and whose Kingdom Rules over all.
May it please Your Lordship;
IF it be considered; that some Evangelical and A^ostolical Histories of the
New Testament, were by the Direct on of the Holy Spirit Himself, Didicated unto
a Person of Quality, and that the Noble Person Addressed with One such
Dedication, entertained it with Resentments that encouraged his dear Luc^^lius
to make a Second, the world will be satisfied that I do a thing but Reasonable
and Agreeable, when, unto a Narrative of many Evangelical and A^ostolical
Affairs, I presume to prefix the Name of one so Excellent for Love to God, as
Your Lordship is known to be: and One upon this account only, an Unmeet subject
for the praises of the obscure pen which now writes, that (...) Vitup^^^^? I do
not, I dare not, so far Intrude upon Your Honor, as to ask Your Patronage unto
all the New-English Principles and Practices, which are found in the Character
of our Celebrated ELIOT; for, as the Distance of a Thousand Leagues, has made
it impossible for and to attend the ( usual) Orders and Manners of asking first
Your Allowance for what I have openly Entitled you unto; so, the Renowned ELIOT
is gone beyond any occasions for the greatest Humane Patronage.

But that which has procured unto Young Lordship, the Trouble of this
Dedication, is, My Desire to Give You the Picture of One Aged Saint, Lately
gone to that General Assembly, which the Eternal King of Heaven, by the
Advances of Your Own Age in the way of Righteousness does quickly Summon Your
Self unto The Profound Respect which Our ELIOT had for Your Honor, will
doubtless be answered and requited with Your own Value for the Memory of such a
memorable Christian, Ministers and Evangelist; inasmuch as, Your Affections
like his, take nor their Measures from these or those matters of Doubtful
Disputation, but from such an universal Pie^^, and Charity, and Holiness, as he
was an Instance of*

No man ever complained of it that in the works of Chrysostom, we find seven
Orations not far as^^nder, in Commendation of Paul; nor is it any fault that I
have now wri^^en Out, in Commendation of a man whom a Pauline Spirit, had made
Illustrious. In describing him, I have made but little Touches upon his
Parentage, and Family, because as the truly Great Basil excuses his Omission of
those things, in his Oration upon Gordius the Martyr, Ecclesia hac tanquam
supervacua dimi^^ it. But I have related those things of him, which cannot but
create a good Esteem for him, in the Breast of your Lordship, who are a
Faithful and Ancient Witness against those Distempers of the world, whereby (as
the blessed S alvian Lamented it) Cogimur esse Viles, ut Nobises habeamur; and
Raise the sweetness of your Thoughts upon Your Approaches, which may our God
make both slow and sure, unto that State, wherein, The Least is Greater than
this JOHN. But if I may more ingenuously, Confess the whole Ground and Cause of
this Dedication, I must own, It Is to pay a part of a Debt; a Debt under which
You have laid my Country, when You did with Your Own Honorable Hand, Present
unto His Majesty the same Account, which I have here again Published Concerning
the Success of the Gospel among the Indians in New England.

My Lord, In one ELIOT, You see what a People it is, that You have counted
worthy of Your Notice; and what a People it is, that with ardent Prayers bespeak
the Mercies of Heaven for Your Noble Family. Indeed, It is Impo^^sible that a
country So full as New England is, of what is truly Primitive, should not be
exposed unto the bitter^est Enmity and Calumny of those, that will strive to
entangle the Church in a ^ardian Unreformedness, until our Jesus do shortly
Make them know, that He has loved, what they have hated, maligned, persecuted.
But if the God of New England have inclined any Great Personage, to intercede
or interpose for the prevention of the Ruins which ill men have designed for
such Country; or to procure for a People of an Eliot's Complexion in Religion,
the Undisturbed Enjoyment and Exercise of that Religion: it is a thing that
calls for our most sensible Acknowledgments.

It is an odd S uperstition which the Indians of this country have among them,
that they count it (on the penalty of otherwise never prospering more)
necessary for them, never to pass by the Graves of certain famous persons among
them, without laying and leaving some Token of Regard thereupon. But we hope
that all true Protestants, will count it no more than what is equal and proper,
that the Land which has in it, the Grave of such a Remarkable Preacher to the
Indians as our ELIOT, should be treated with such a Love, as a Jerusalem uses
to find from them that are to prosper.

Upon that Score then, Let My Lord Accept a Piesent from and for a Remote
corner in the New World, where God is Praised on Your behalf; a small Present
made by the Hand of a Rude American, who has nothing to recommend him unto Your
Lordship, except this, That he is the SON of ONE whom You have admitted unto
Your Favors; and, That he is Ambitious to Wear the Title of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships Most Humble and most Obedient Servant, COTTON MATHER

The LIFE of the Renowned JOHN ELIOT
Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque mori!

The Introduction.
'TWas a very surprising as well as an undoubted Accident which happened within
the memory of Millions yet alive, when certain Shepherds upon Mount Nebo,
following part of their straggling Flock, at length came to a Valley, the
prodigious Depths and Rocks whereof, rendered it almost inaccessible; in which
there was a Cave of inexpressible sweetness, and in that Cave was a Sepulcher*
that had very difficult Characters upon it. The Patriarchs of the Maronites
thereabouts inhabiting, procured some learned Persons to take Notice, and make
Report of this Curiosity, who found the Inscription of the Gravestone to be in
the Hebrew Language and Letter, Moses, the Servant of the Lord, The Jews, the
Greeks, etc. the Roman Catholics, thereabouts, were all together by the ears
for the possession of this Rarity, but the T^urks as quickly laid Claim unto
it, and strongly guarded it. Nevertheless, the Jesuits found a way by Fricks
and Bribes to engage the Turkish Guards into a Conspiracy with them for the
Transporting of the enclosed and renouned Ashes into Europe; but when they
opened the grave, there was no Body, nor so much as a Relic there. While they
were under the confusion of this Disappointment, a Turkish General came upon
them and cut them all to pieces; therewithal taking a course never to have that
place visited any more. But the Scholars of the Orient presently made this a
Theme which they talked and wrote much upon; and, whether this were the true
Sepulcher of Moses, was a question upon which many Books were published The
world would now count Me very absurd, if after this I should say that I had
found the Sepulcher of Moses, in America; but I have certainly here found Moses
himself; we have had among us. One appearing in the Spirit and Power of a
Moses; and it is not the Grave, but the Life of such a Moses, that we value our
selves upon being the owners of.

Having implored the Assistence and Acceptance of that God, whose Blessed Word
has told us, The Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance; I am
attempting to write the Life of a Righteous Person, concerning whom all things,
but the meanness of the Writer, invite the Reader to expect nothing save what
is truly Extraordinary. It Is the Life of One who has better and greater things
to be affirmed of him, than could ever be reported concerning any of those
famous men, which have been celebrated by the Pens of a Plutarch, a Pliny, a
Lacrtius an Eunapius, or in any pagan Histories. It Is the Life of One whose
Character might very agreeably be looked for among the Collections of a
Dorotheus, or the Orations of a Nazianzen; or is worthy at least of nothing
less than the exquisite Style of a Melchior Adam to Eternize it. If it be, as
it is, a true Assertion, That the least Exercise of true Faith or Love toward
God in Christ, is a more glorious thing than all the Triumphs of a Caesar,
there must be something very considerable, in the Life of One, who spent
several scores of years in such Exercises, and of One in the mention of whose
Achievements we may also recount, that he fought the Devil in (once) his
American Territories, till he had recovered no small party of his old Subjects
and vassals out of his cruel Hands; it would be as unreasonable, as
unprofitable, for posterity to bury the Memory of such a Person in the Dust of
that Obscurity and Oblivion, which has covered the Names of the Hero's, who
died before the Days of Agamemnon.

PRAELIMINARY I. The Birth, Age, and Family of Mr. ELIOT.
It Is the Life of the Renowned John Eliot, which is to be now put into our
Pages; a Life which Commenced about the Year 1604. And Expired, in the Year
1690.

THe Inspired Moses relating the Lives of those Ante-diluvian Patriarchs, in
whom the Church of God and Line of Christ was continued, through the first
sixteen hundred years of Time, recites little but their Birth, and their Age,
and their Death, and their Sons and Daughters. If those Articles would satisfy
the Appetites and Enquires of such as come to Read the Life of our Eliot, we
shall soon have dispatched the work now upon our Hands. The Age with the Death
of this worthy man, has been already terminated, in the Ninetieth year of the
present Century, and the Eighty sixth Year of his own Pilgrimage. And for his
Birth it was at a Town, in England: the Name whereof I cannot presently
Recover; nor is (...) necessary for me to look back so far as the place of his
Nativity; any more than it is for me t^^ recite the Virtues of his Parentage, of
which h^^ said, vix ea nostra voso. The Atlantic Ocean like a River of Lethe,
may easily cause us t^ forget many of the things that happened o^ the other
side. Indeed the Nativity of such (...) man, were an Honor worthy the
Contention of as many places as laid their Claims unto the famous Homer's; but
whatever places may challenge a share in the Reputation of having Enjoyed the
st^^st Breath of our Eliot, it is New England that with most Right can call him
Hers; his best Breath, and afterward, his la^^ Breath as here; and here 'twas,
that God be stowed upon him Sons and Daughters.

He came to New England, in the Month (...) November. A. D. 1631. among those
Blesses old Planters, which laid the Foundations of remarkable Country, devoted
unto the Exercise of the Protestant Religion, in its purest and highest
Reformation: He left behind him (...) England, a virtuous young Gentlewoman,
who^ he had pursued and purposed a Marriage unto and she coming hither the year
following, tha^ Marriage was Consummated, in the Month of October, A. D. 1632.

This Wife of his youth lived with him until she became to him also the staff
of his Age; and she left him not until about three or four years before his own
Departure to those Heavenly Regions where they now together see Light. She was
a Woman very Eminent, both for Holiness and Usefulness, and she excelled most
of the Daughters that have done virtuously. Her Name was Ann, and Gracious was
her Nature. God made her a Rich Blessing, not only to her, Family, but also to
her Neighbor hood; and when at last she dyed, I heard and saw her aged
Husband, who else very rarely wept, yet now with Tears over the Coffin, before
the good people, a vast confluence of which were come to her Funeral, say, Here
lies my dear, faithful, pious, prudent, prayerful Wife; I shall go to her, and
she not return to me! My Reader will of his own accord excuse me, from
bestowing any further Epitaphs upon that gracious Woman.

By her, did God give him six worthy Children; Children of a character which
may forever stop the mouths of those Antichristian Blasphemers, who have set a
false brand of Disaster and Infamy, on the Offspring of a Married Clergy. His
First born, was a Daughter; born Sep. 17. A. C. 1633. This Gentlewoman is yet
alive, and one well-approved for her Piety and Gravity. His next was a Son;
born Aug. 31. A. C. 1636. He bore his Fathers Name, and had his Fathers Grace.
He was a person of notable Accomplishments, and a lively, zealous, acute
Preacher, not only to the English, at New-Cambridge, but also to the Indians
thereabout. He grew so fast, that he was found Ripe for Heaven, many years ago;
and upon him Deathbed uttered such penetrating things as could proceed from
none, but One upon the Borders and Confines of Eternal Glory. It Is pity that so
many of them are forgotten; but one of them, I think, we have cause to
Remember; Well, (said he) my dear Friends; There is a dark day coming upon
p^^or New England; and in so dark a day, I pray how will you provide for your
own security! My Counsel to you is, get an Interest in the Blessed Lord Jesus
Christ; and that will carry you to the worlds end. His Third was also a Son,
born December 20 A. C. 1638. Him he called Joseph, and made a Joseph of him. This
person is at this time a Pastor to the Church at Cu^^ford, and One of great
Note, as well through the whole Country, as in the particular Colony of
Connecticut, which God has made him considerable to. His Fourth was a Samuel,
born, June 22. A. C. 164^. who died, a most lovely young man eminent for
Learning and Goodness, a Fellow of the College, and a Candidate of the
Ministry. His Fifth was an Aaron, born Feb. 1^. A. C. 1643. who tho he died
very young, yet first manifested many good things toward the Lord God of
Israel. His Last, was a Benjamin, born Jan. 29. A. C. 1646. Of all these three,
it may be said, as it was of (...), They died before their Father; but it may
also be written over their Graves, All these died in Faith. By the pious Design
of their Father, they were all Consecrated unto the Service of God, in the
Ministry of the Gospel; but God saw meet rather to fetch them away, by a Death,
which (therefore) I dare not call, Pr^^mature, to glorify him in another and a
better world. They all gave such Demonstrations of their Conversion to God,
that the good old man would sometimes comfortably say, I have had six Children,
and I bless God, for His Fre-grace, they are all either with Christ, or in
Christ; and my mind is none at rest concerning them. And when some asked him,
how he could bear the Death of such excellent Children, his humble Reply
thereto was this, My desire was that they should have served God on Earth; but
if God will choose to have them rather serve Him in Heaven, I have nothing to
object against it, but His Will be done: His Benjamins was made the Son of his
Right Hand; for the invitation of the good people at Roxbury, placed him in the
same Pulpit with his Father, where he was his Assistent for many years; there
they had a Proof of him, that as a Son with his Father, he served with him in
the Gospel. But his Fate was like that which the great Gregory N^z^^^zen
describes in his Discourse upon the Death of his honorable Brother, his aged
Father being now alive and present; My Father, having laid up in a better
world, a rich Inheritance for his Children, sent a Son of his before, to take
possession of it.

Praeliminary II.
Mr. Eliots, early Conversion, sacred Employment, and just Removal into America.

But all that I have hitherto said, is no more than an entrance into the
History of our Eliot. Such an Enoch as he, must have something more than these
things recorded of him; his Walk with God, must be more largely laid before the
world, as a thing that would bespeak us all to be Followers no less than we
shall be Admirers of it.

He had not passed many Turns in the world, before he knew the meaning of a
saving Turn from the Vanities of an Unregenerate State* unto God in Christ, by
a true Repentance; he had the singular happiness and privilege of an early
Conversion from the Ways, which Original Sin disposes all men unto. One of the
principal* Instruments which the God of Heaven used in tingeing, and filling
the mind of this chosen Vessel, with good principles, was that Venerable Thomas
Hook whose Name in the Churches of the Lord Jesus, is, As an Ointment poured
for thy even that Hooker, of whom worthy Master Fuller could write, As Latymer
would not stick it say, Saint Belney, so neither I to say, Saint Hooker^ that
Hooker, who having Angled many scores of Souls into the Kingdom of Heaven, at
last laid his Bones in our New England; it was an acquaintance with him, that
contributed more than a little to the Accomplishment of our Elisha, for that
work unto which the most High designed him. His liberal Education, having now
the Addition of Religion, to direct it, and improve it, it gave such a Biass to
his young Soul, as quickly discovered it self in very signal instances. His
first Appearance in the world after his Education in the University, was in the
too difficult and unthankful but very necessary Employment of a Schoolmaster,
which Employment he discharged with a good fidelity. And as this first Essay of
his Improvement was no more Disgrace unto him, than it was unto the famous
Hieron, Whitaker, Vines, and others, that they thus began to be serviceable; so
it rather prepared him, for the further service, which his mind was now set
upon. He was of worthy Mr. Thomas Wilson's mind, that the calling of a Minister
was the only one wherein a man might be more serviceable to the Church of God,
than in that of a Schoolmaster. Wherefore having Dedicated himself unto God
betimes, he could not Reconcile himself to any lesser way of Serving his
Creator and Redeemer, than the Sacred Ministry of the Gospel; but, alas, where
should he have Opportunities for the Exercising of it? The Laudian, Grotian,
and Arminian Faction in the Church-of- England, in the prosecution of their
Grand plot, for the reducing of England unto a moderate sort of Popery, had
pitched upon this as one of their cursed methods for it; namely, to creeple as
fast as they could, all the Learned, Godly, Painful Ministers of the Nation;
and invent certain Shiboleths for the detecting and the destroying of such men
as were cordial Friends to the Reformation. 'Twas now a time when there were
every day multiplied and imposed those unwarrantable Ceremonies in the Worship
of God, by which the Conscience of our considerate Eliot counted the second
Commandment notoriously violated; it was a time, when such memorable Bishops as
Wren, and Pierce, with others of that Conspiracy, silenced, censured, and
ruined such Ministers as would not Read a Book for Sports on the Lords Days,
or did but use a Prayer of their own conceiving before or after Sermon, or did
but Preach on an Afternoon as well as in a morning, or on a Lecture, or on a
Market, or did but explain the Church-Catechism, or in any wise discountenance
the old Pagan Superstitions or new beastly Debaucheries among their miserable
Neighbors. Moreover, 'twas now a time, when some hundreds of those amiable
people which had the Nickname of Puritans put upon them, transported
themselves, with their whole Families and Interests, into the Deserts of
America, that they might here peaceably Erect Congregational Churches, and
therein attend and maintain all the pure Institutions of the Lord Jesus Christ;
having the encouragement of Royal Charters, that they should never have any
interruption in the Enjoyment of those precious and pleasant things. Here was a
prospect which quickly determined the devout Soul of our young Eliot, unto a
Remove into New England, while it was yet a Land not sown; he quickly Listed
himself among those valiant Soldiers of the Lord Jesus, who cheerfully
encountered first the Perils of the Atlantic Ocean, and then the Fatigues of
the New-English Wilderness, that they might have an undisturbed Communion with
Him in His Appointments here. And thus did he betimes procure himself the
consolation of-having afterward and for-ever a room in that Remembrance of
God, I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, and the Love of thine
espousuls, when thou wentest after me into the Wilderness.

On his first Arrival to New England, he soon joined himself unto the Church at
Boston; 'twas Church-work that was his Errand hither. Mr. Wilson, the Pastor of
that Church, was gone back into England, that he might perfect the Settlement
of his Affairs; and in his Absence, young Mr. Eliot was he that supplied his
place. Upon the Return of Mr. Wilson, that Church was intending to have made
Mr. Eliot his Colleague, and their Teacher; but it was thus diverted. Mr. Eliot
had engaged unto a select number of his pious and christian Friends in England,
that if they should come into these Parts before he should be in the pastoral
Care of any other people, he would give himself to Them, and be for Their
Service. It happened, that these Friends transported themselves hither, the
year after him; and chose their Habitation at the Town which they called
Roxbury. A Church being now gathered at this place, he was in a little while
Ordained unto the Teaching and Ruling of that holy Society. So 'twas in the Orb
of that Church that we had him as a Star fixed for very near Threescore Years;
it only remains that we now observe what was his Magnitude all this while, and
how he performed his Revolution.

Part I. Dr. Eliot as a CHRISTIAN.
Article I.
His Eminent PIETY.
SUch was the Piety of our Eliot, that like another Moses, he had upon his Face
a continual shine, arising from his uninterrupted communion with the Father of
Spirits. He was indeed a Man of Prayer, and might say after the Psalmist, I
prayer, as being in a manner made up of it. Could the walls of his old Study
speak, they would even Ravish us with a Relation of the many hundred and
thousand fervent Prayers which he there poured out before the Lord. He not only
made it his daily practice to enter into that closet, and shut his Door, and
pray to his Father in Secret, but he would not rarely set apart whole days for
prayer with Fasting, in secret places before the God of Heaven. Prayer
solemnized with Fasting was indeed so agreeable unto him, that I have sometimes
thought he might justly inherit the Name of, Johannes Jejunator, or, John the
Faster, which for the like reason was put upon one of the Renowned Ancients.
Especially, when there was any remarkable difficulty before him, he took this
way to encounter and overcome it; being of Dr. Prestons mind, That when we
would have any great things to be accomplished, the best policy is to work by
an Engine which the world sees nothing of. He could say as the pious Robert son
did upon his Deathbed, I thank God, I have loved Faster and Prayer, with all
my heart! If one would have known what that sacred thing, The spirit of Prayer,
intends, in him there might have been seen a most luculent and practical
Exposition of it. He kept his heart in a frame for prayer, with a mavelous
constancy; and was continually provoking all that were about him thereunto.
When he heard any considerable News, his usual and speedy Reflection thereupon
would be Brethren, let us Turn all this into prayer! and (...) was perpetually
jogging the wheel of Prayer! both more privately in the Meetings, and more
publicly in the Churches of his Neighborhood. When he came to an House that
he was intimately acquainted with, he could often say, Come, let us not have a
visit without a prayer; let us pray down the Blessing of Heaven on your Family
before we go. Especially when he came into a Society of Ministers, before he
had sat long with them, they would look to hear him urging, Brethren, the Lord
Jesus takes much notice of what is done and said among his Ministers when they
are together; come, let us pray before we part! And hence also, his whole
Breath seemed in a sort made up of ejaculatory prayers, many scores of which
winged Messengers (...) dispatched away to Heaven, upon pious Errands every
day. By them he bespoke Blessings upon almost every person or affair that he
was concerned with; and he carried every thing to God with some pertinent
Hosannah's or Hallelujah's over it. He was a mighty and an happy man, that had
his Quiver full of these Heavenly Arrows! and when he was never so straightly
besieged by Humane Occurrences, yet he fastened the wishes of his devout Soul
unto them, and very dexterously shot them up to Heaven over the head of all.

As he took thus delight in speaking to the Almighty God, no less did he in
speaking of him; bat in serious and savoury Discourses, he still had his
Tongue, like the Pen of a ready Writer. The Jesuits once at Nol^ made a no less
profane than severe Order, That no man should speak of God at all; ^but this
excellent person almost made it an Order wherever he came, to speak of nothing
but God. He was indeed sufficiently pleasant and witty in Company, and he was
affable and facetious rather than morose in Conversation; but he had a
Remarkable Gravity mixed with it, and a singular skill of Raising some holy
Observation out of whatever matter of Discourse lay before him; nor would he
ordinarily dismiss any I ^e me without some gracious, divine, pithy Sentence
thereupon. Doubtless, he imposed it as a Law upon himself, that he would leave
something of God, and Heaven, and Religion, with all that should come a near
him; so that in all places; his company was attended with Majesty and
Reverence; and it was no sooner proper for him to speak, but, like Mary's
opened Box of Ointment, he filled the whole Room with the perfumes of the
Graces in his Lips, and the Christian Hearets ^a^red a greater sweetness in his
melt-se^son a Speeches, than the illustrious Homer ascribed unto the Orations
of his Nestor,

Whose Lip dropped Language than sweet Honey (...).

His Conferences were like those which Ter^tuhian affirms to have been common
among the Saints in his Days, Ut qui sciret Dominum audire, as knowing that the
Ear of God was open to them all; and he managed his Rudder so as to manifest
that he was bound Heavenward, i^ his whole Communication. He had a particular
art, at Spiritualizing of Earthly Objects, and Raising of high thoughts from
very mean things As, once going with some feebleness and weariness up the Hill
on which his Meeting house now stands, he said unto the person that led him,
This is very like the may to Heaven, it is up Hill! the Lord by his Grace fetch
us up! and instantly spring a Bush near him, he as nimbly added, And truly
there are Thorns and Briars (...) the may (...)! Which instance I would not
have singled out from the many thousands of his Occasional Reflections, but
only that I might suggest unto the good people of Roxbury, something for them
to think upon, when they are going up to the House of the Lord. It is enough
that as the Friend of the famous Ursin could profess that he never went unto
him without coming away, aut d^ctior aut melior, either the wiser or the better
from him; so, it is an acknowledgment which more than one Friend of (...)
Eliot's has made concerning him, I was new with him, but I got, or might have
got some go^^ from him.

And hearing from the great God, was an Exercise of like satisfaction unto the
Soul of this good man, with speaking either to him, or of him. He was a mighty
Student of the sacred Bible; and it was unto him as his necessary food. He made
the Bible his Companion, and his Councellor, and the holy lines of Scripture
more Enamoured him than the profane Ones of ^ul^ly, ever did the famous Italian
Cardinal. He would not upon easy terms, have gone one day together, without
using a portion of the Bible as an antidote against the infection of
Temptation. And he would prescribe it unto others, with his pro^a^um est upon
it; as once particularly a pious Woman, vexed with a wicked Husband,
complaining to him, That bad Company was all the day still infesting of her
House, and what should she an? He advised her, Take the Holy Bible into your
Hand, when the bad Company comes, and you will soon drive them out of the House;
the woman made the experiment, and thereby cleared her House from the Haunts
that had molested it. By the like was 'twas that he cleared his Heart of what
he was loath to have Nesting there. Moreover, if ever any man could, he might,
pretend unto that evidence of Uprightness, Lord, I have loved the Habitation of
thine House; for he not only gave something more than his presence there twice
on the Lords Days, and once a Fortnight besides on the Lectures, in his own
Congregation, but he made his weekly visits unto the Lectures in the
Neighboring Towns; how often was he seem at Boston, Charlstown, Cambridge,
Dorchester, waiting upon the Word of God, in the Recurring Opportunities, and
counting a Day in the Courts of the Lord better than a thousand? It is hardly
conceivable how in the midst of so many Studies and Labors as he was at home
engaged in, he could possibly repair to so many Lectures abroad; and herein ^e
aimed not only at his own Edification, but at the (...) and Encouraging of the
Lectures which he went unto. Thus he took heed, that he might Hear, and he took
as much heed how he (...); he set himself as in the presence of the Eternal
God, as the great Constantine used of old, in the Assemblies where he came, and
said, (...) hear what God the Lord will speak; he expressed a diligent
attention, by a watchful and wakeful posture, and by turning to the Texts
quoted by the Preacher; he expressed a suitable affection by feeding on what
was delivered, and accompanying it with hands and eyes devoutly elevated; and
they whose good hap 'twas to go home with him, were sure of having another
Sermon by the way, until their very Hearts burned in them. (...) truly said,
Non est vera Religio, q^^ cum Terrplo ^e^inquitur; but our Eliot always
carried much of Religion with him, from the House of God.

In a word, he was one who Lived in Heaven while he was on Earth; and there is
no more than pure Justice in our endeavors that he should Live on Earth after
he is in Heaven. We cannot say that we ever saw him walking any whither but he
was therein walking with God; wherever he sat^, he had God by him and it was in
the Everlasting Arms of God that he Slept at night. Methoughts he a little
discovered his Heavenly way of living, when walking one day in his Garden, he
plucked up a weed that he saw now and then growing there, at which a Friend
pleasantly said unto him, Sir, you tell us, we must be Heavenly-minded; but he
immediately Reply d, It is true; and this is no impediment unto that; for were
I sure to go to Heaven to morrow, I would do what I do to Day. From such a
frame of spirit it was that once in a visit, finding a Merchant in his Counting
House, where he saw Books of Business only on his Table, but all his Books of
Devotion on the shelf, he gave this Advise unto him, Sir, Here Is Earth on the
Table, and Heaven on the shelf; pray don't sit so much at the Table as
altogether to forget the shelf; let not earth by any means thrust Heaven out of
your mind.

Indeed I cannot give a fuller Description of him, than what was in a
Paraphrase that I have heard himself to make upon that Scripture^ our
Conversation is in Heaven. I write from him as he uttered it.

Behold, Said he, the Ancient and Excellent Character of a true Christian; it is
that which Peter calls Hol^ness in all manner of Conversation; you shall not
find a Christian out of the way of, Godly Conversation. For, first a seventh
part of our time is all Spent in Heaven, when we are duly zealous for and
zealous on, the Sabbath of God. Besides, God has written on the Head of the
Sabbath Remember; which looks both Forwards and Backwards; and thus a good part
of the week will be spent in Sabbarizing. Well, but for the rest of our Time!
why, we shall have that spent in Heaven, ere we have done. For, Secondly, we
have many days for both Fasting and Thanksgiving, in our pilgrimage; and here
are so many Sabbaths more. Moreover, Thirdly, we have our Lectures every week;
and pious people, will not miss them, if they can help it. Furthermore, fourthly,
We have our private Meetings wherein we pray, and sing, and Repeat Sermons, and
confer together about the things of God; and being now come thus far, we are in
Heaven almost every day. But a little farther, Fifthly, we perform
Family Duties every day; we have our morning and evening Sacrifices, wherein
having read the Scriptures to our Families, we call upon the Name of God, and
ever now and then carefully Catechize those that are under our Charge. Sixthly,
we shall also have our daily Devotions in our Closets; wherein unto
Supplication before the Lord, we shall add some serious Meditation upon his
Word; a David will be at this work no less than thrice a day. Seventhly, We
have likewise many scores of Ejaculations in a day; and these we have, like
Nehemiah, in whatever place we come into. Eighthly* We have our Occasional
Thoughts, and our Occasional Talks, upon spiritual matters; and we have our
Occasional Acts of Charity, wherein we do like the Inhabitants of Heaven every
day. Ninthly, In our Callings, in our civil Callings, we keep up Heavenly
Frames; we bay and sell and toil, yea, we eat and drink, with some eye both to
the Command and the Honor of God in all. Behold, I have not now left an inch
of time to be carnal; it is all Engrossed for Heaven. And yet, lest here should
not be enough, Lastly, We have our spiritual Warfare. We are always
Encountering the Enemies of our Souls, which continually raises our hearts unto
our Helper and Leader in the Heavens: Let no man say, It Is impossible to live
at this rate; for we have known some live thus; and others that have written of
such a life, have but spun a Web out of their own blessed experiences.
New England has Examples of this life; tho, alas, it is to be lamented, that the
Distractions of the world, in too many professors do becloud the beauty of an
Heavenly Conversation. In fine, our Employment lies in Heaven. In the morning,
if we ask, Where am I to be to day? Our Souls must answer, In Heaven. In the
evening, if we ask, Where have I been to day? Our Souls may answer, In Heaven.
If thou art a Believer, thou art no stranger to Heaven while thou live; and
when thou dyest, Heaven will be no strange place to thee; no, thou have been
there a thousand times before.

In this language have I heard him express himself; and he did, what the said;
he was a Boniface as well as a Benedict; and he was one of those

Qui faciendo docent, quae facienda docent.

It might be said of him, as that Writer characterises O^igen, Quemadmodum
do^uit, sic vixit, and quemadmodum vixit si^ docuit.

Article II.
His particular care and zeal about the Lords day.
THis was the Piety, this the Holiness of our Eliot; but among the many
instances in which his Holiness was remarkable, I must not omit his exact
Remembrance of the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy.

It has been truly and justly Observed, That our whole Religion fares according
to our Sabbaths, that poor Sabbaths make poor Christians, and that a strictness
in our Sabbaths inspires vigor into all our other Duties. Our Eliot knew this,
and it was a most Exemplary zeal that he acknowledged the Sabbath of our Lord.
Jesus Christ withal* Had he been asked, Servas^^ Dominicum? he could have made
a right Christian primitive answer thereunto. The Sun did not set, the evening
before the Sabbath, till he had begun his preparation for it; and when the
Lord's Day came, you might have seen John in the Spirit, every week. Every day
was a sort of Sabbath to him, but the Sabbath Day was a find, a type, a taste of
Heaven with him. He labored, that he might on this High-day, have no words or
thoughts but such as were agreeable thereunto; he then allowed in himself no
Actions, but those of a Raised Soul. One should hear nothing dropping from his
Lips on this day, but the milk and honey of the Country, in which there yet
remains a Rest for the people of God; and if he beheld in any person
whatsoever, whether old or young, any profanation of this day, he would be sure
to bestow lively Rebukes upon it. And hence also unto the general Engagements
of a Covenant with God, which 'twas his Desire to bring the Indians into, be
added a particular Article, wherein they bind themselves, mebquont amunat
Sabbath, pahketeaunat to^sobke pomantamog; i. e. To Remember the Sabbath Day,
to keep it holy, as long as we live.

The mention of this, gives me an opportunity, not only to Recommend our
Departed Eliot, but also to Vindicate another great man, unto the Churches of
our Lord Jesus Christ. The Reverend and Renowned OWEN in his Elaborate
Exercitations on, The Lord's Day, had let fall such a passage of this.

^^^juage, that the Observation of the Lord's Day is to be commensurate unto the
use of our natural strength, on any other day; from morning to night. The
Lord's Day is to be set apart unto the ends of an holy Rest unto God, by every
one according as his natural strength will enable him to employ himself in his
lawful Occasions any other day of the week.

This passage gave some scandal unto several very Learned and (...) Men; among
whom out Eliot was one; whereupon with his usual zeal, gravity and sanctity, he
wrote unto the Doctor, his Opinion thereabout; who returned unto him an answer
full of Respect, some part whereof! shall here transcribe.

As to what concerns the Natural strength of man (says he) Either I was under
some mistake in my Expression, or you seem to be so, in your Apprehension. I
never thought, and I hope, I have not said, for I cannot find it, that the
Continuance of the Sabbath is to be commensurate unto the natural strength of
man, but only that it is an Allowable mean of men's Continuance in Sabbath
Duties; which I suppose you will not deny, lest you should cast the Consciences
of professors into inextricable Difficulties.

When first I engaged in that work, I intended not to have spoken one word
about the practical Observation of the Day; but only to have endeavored the
Revival of a Truth which at present is despised and contemned among us, and
strenuously opposed by sundry Divines of the United Provinces, who call the
Doctrine of the Sabbath, F^gmenium Anglicanism. Upon the Desire of some Learned
Men in these parts, it was, that I undertook the Vindication of it. Having now
discharged the Debt, which in this matter I owed unto the Truth and Church of
God, tho not as I ought, yet with such a composition as I hope, through the
Interposition of our Lord Jesus Christ might find acceptance with God and his
Saints, I suppose I shall not again engage on that Subject.

I suppose there is scarce any one alive in the world, who has more Reproaches
cast upon him than I have; tho hitherto God has been pleased in some measure to
support my spirit under them. I still relieved my self by this, That my poor
Endeavors have sound acceptance with the Churches of Christ: But my holy,
wise, and gracious Father, sees it needful to try me in this matter also; and
what I have received from you (which it may be contains not your sense alone)
has printed deeper, and left a greater impression upon my mind, than all the
virulent Revilings, and false Accusations I have met withal, from my professed
Adversaries. I do acknowledge unto you, that I have a dry and barren Spirit,
and I do heartily beg your prayers, that the Holy. One would, notwithstanding
all my sinful provocations, water me from above; but that I should now be
apprehended to have given a wound unto Holiness in the Churches, it is one of
the saddest frowns in the cloudy Brows of Divine Providence.

The Doctrine of the Sabbath, I have asserted, though not as it should be done,
yet as well as I could; The Observation of it in Holy Duties unto the utmost of
the strength for them, which God shall be pleased to give us, I have pleaded
for; the necessity also of a serious preparation for it in sundry previous
Duties, I have declared. But now to meet with severe Expressions. It may be
it is the will of God, that vigor should hereby be given to my former
Discouragements, and that there is a Call in it, to surcease from these kinds
of labors.

I have transcribed the more of this Letter, because it not only discovers the
concern which our Eliot had for the Sabbath of God, but also it may contribute
unto the worlds good Reception and Perusal of a golden Book on that Subject,
written by one of the most Eminent Persons which the English Nation has been
adorned with. (...)

Article III.
His Exemplary Mortification.
THus did Eliot endeavor to live unto God; but how much at the same time did
he dye unto all the world?

'Twere impossible to finish the lively Picture of this pious and holy Eliot,
without some touches upon that Mortification, which accompanied him all his
days; for never did I see a person more mortified unto all the pleasures of
this Life, or more unwilling to moult the wings of an Heaven born Soul, in the
dirty puddles of carnal and sensual Delights. We are all of us compounded of
those two things, the Man, and, the Beast; but so powerful was, The Man, in
this holy person, that it kept, The Beast ever tied with a short Tender and
suppressed the irregular Calcurations of it. He became so mailed unto the Cross
of the Lord Jesus Christ, that the Grandeurs of this world were unto him just
what they would be to a dying man; and he maintained an almost unparalled
indifferency toward all the pomps, which Mankind is too generally flattered
and enchanted with.

The Lust of the flesh he could not reconcile himself to the least pampering or
indulging of but he persecuted it when a continual (...) by being upon higher
principles than Fully was acquainted withal, of his mind, Non est d^gnus (...)
qui unum dwin ^otum vol^t ^sse in (...) genere voluptat^s. The Sleep that he
allow himself cheated him not of his Morning-hours but he reckoned the Morning
no less a friend us to the Graces, than unto the Mases. He would call upon
Students, I pray look to it that you morning-Birds! and for many more than a
scorn of years before he dyed, he removed his Lodging into his Study, on
purpose that being there alone, he might enjoy his early- Mornings, without
giving the disturbance of the least noise (...) any of his Friends, whose
Affections to him else might have been ready to have called, Master spare thy
self. The Meat upon which he live was a Cibus simplex, an homely but an
wholesome Diet. Rich Varieties, costly Viands, and p^^nant Sauces, came not
upon his own Table, (...) when he sound them on other men's, he rare tasted of
them. One Dish and a plain one, (...) his Dinner; and when invited unto a
Feast, have seen him sit Magnifying of God, for (...) Plenty which His people
in this Wilderness we within a few years arisen to; but not (...) than a Bit or
two of all the Dainties taken into his own mouth all the while. And for a
Supper he had learned of his loved and blessed Patro^ old Mr. Cotton, either
wholly to omit it, or (...) make a small sup or two the utmost of it. The drink
which he still used was very small; he cared not for Wines or Drams, and I
believe, he never once in all his life, knew what it was to feel so much as a
noxious fume in his head, from any of them; good, clear water was more precious
as well as more usual with him, than any of those Liquors with which men do so
frequently spoil their own Healths, while perhaps they drink, those of other
men. When at a strangers House in the Summer time, he has bin entertained with
a glass, which they told him was Of water and wine, he has with a complaisant
gravity replied unto this purpose; Wine, it is a noble generous Liquor, and we
should be humbly thankful for it; but as I remember, Water was made before it!
So abstemious was he; and he found, that, Carere (...), his Abstinence had more
sweetness in it, than any of the sweets which he abstained from; and so willing
he was to have others partake with him in that sweetness, that when he has
thought the countenance of a Minister has locked, as if he had made much of
himself, he has gone to him with that Speech, Study Mortification, Brother I
study Mortification! and he made all his Addresses with a becoming Majesty.

The Lust of the Ey^, was put out by him in such a manner, that it was in a
Manner all one with him to be rich or poor. It could not be said of him, That
he sought great (...) for himself, but what estate he became owner of, was from
the Blessing of God upon the Husbandry and industry of some in his Family,
rather than from any endeavors of his own. Once when there stood several kine
of his own before his door, his Wife, to try him, asked him, Whose they were?
and she found that he knew nothing of them. He could not endure to plunge
himself into secular Designs and Affairs, but accounted Sacerdo^ in foro as
worthy of Castigation as Mercator in Templo; he thought that Minister and
Market-man, were not Unisons, and that the Earth was no place for A^run's holy
Miter to be laid upon. It was the Usage, of most Parisnes in the Country, to
have an annual Rate for the maintenance of the Ministry, adjusted commonly by
the select-men, of the Towns; which tho it raised not any exuberant Salaries
for the Ministers, who also seldom received all that the people had contracted
for, nevertheless in many places it prevented sore Temptations from befalling
those that were laboring in the Word and Doctrine; who must else often have
experienced the Truth of Luthers Observation, Duriter profecto and misere
viverent Evangeliy. Ministrisi^ex Libera populi contributione essent
sustentandi, However, for his part, he propounded that what stipend he had,
should be Raised by Contribution; and from the same temper it was, that a few
years before his Dissolution, being left without an Assistent in his Ministry,
he pressed his Congregation to furnish themselves with another Pastor; and in
his Application to them, he told them, It Is possible, you may think the burden
of maintaining two Ministers may be too heavy for you; but I Will deliver you
from that fear; I do here give back my Salary to the Lord Jesus Christ, and
now, Brethren, you may fix that upon any man, that God, shall make a pastor for
you. But his Church with an handsome Reply, assured him, That they would count
his very presence worth a Salary, when he should be so superannuated as to do
no further Service for them.

And as for the ^ytae of Life, the Life of it was most exemplarily extinguished
in him. The Humility of his Heart made him, Higher by the Head than the rest of
the people. His Habit and Spirit were both such as declared him to be among the
Lowly, whom God has most Ref^ects unto. His Apparel was without any Ornament,
except that of Humility, which the Apostle Elegantly compares to a knot of
Comely Ribbons in the Text where he bids us to be clothed, with it; any other
slanting Ribbons on those that came in his way he would ingeniously animadvert
upon; and seeing some Scholars once, he thought, a little too gaudy in their
Clothes, Humiliamini, Juvenes, Humiliamini, was his immediate complement unto
them. Had you seen him with his Leathern Girdle (for such an one he wo^e) about
his Loins, you would almost have thought what Herod feared, That John Baptist
was come to life again. In short, he was in all Regards, A (...) indeed; unless
in this one that long Hair was always very loathsome (...) him; he was an acute
Ramist, but yet he professed himself a lover of a (...) Doubtless it may be
lawful for us to accommodate the length of our Hair unto the modest Customs
which vary in the Churches of God; and it may be lawful for them that have not
enough of their own Hair for their own Health, to supply themselves according
to the sober modes of the places where they live. But the Apostle tell us,
Nature teaches us, that it a man have long hair, it is a shame to him (...)
where, by Nature Can be meant, no other than, the difference of Sex as the word
elsewhere is used.

Thus Mr. (...) thought that for Men to wear their Hair with a luxurious,
Delicate, Faeminine prolixity; or for them to preserve no plain Distinction of
their Sex, by the Hair of their Head and Face; and much more for men thus to
disfigure themselves with Hair that is None of their own; and most of all, for
Ministers of the Gospel to ra^ste it in Excesses of this kind; may prove more
than we are well aware displeasing to the Holy Spirit of God. The Hair of them
that professed Religion long before his Death, grew too long for him to
swallow; and he would express himself continually with a boiling zeal
concerning it, until as last he gave over, with some Regret complaining The
Lust is become insuperable! I know not whether that horrible Distemper
prevailing in some Europaean Countries, known by the name of Plica polovica,
wherein the Hair of people matted into ugly and filthy forms, like Snakes upon
their heads, which whosoever cut off, presently fell blind or mad; I say, I
know not whether this Disease was more odious in it self, than the sweeter,
neater, but prolix Locks of many people were to our Eliot. He was indeed one
priscis meribus, as well as Antiqua fide; and he might be allowed somewhat even
of severity, in this matter on that account.

My Reader shall have a Touch or two, from a Manuscript of his, which I have in
my hands, against (as he calls it) The violent and insuperable Lust of Long
Hair. He thus argues.

It Is a sin for a man to do that whereof he has cause to be ashamed, Pro. 14.
34. Romans 6. 21.

But it is a shame for a man to wear long hair, 1 Cor. 11. 14. Therefore it is a
Sin.

Obj. It was then so; but now it is a fashion and glory to do otherwise.

Ans. Nature is the same now as then; Unchangeable. It speaks as loud now as it
did then; only our Ears are so covered with Locks, that we cannot hear it!

Again, Long Hair on the Head, and No Hair on the Face, is the Habit of a
Woman, 1 Cor. 11. 16. But it is a sinful Abomination for a Man to wear the
Habit of a Woman, Deuteronomy. 22 5.

Therefore it is a sinful Abomination, for a man to wear long Hair on his Head,
and no Hair on his Face.

With these, and many other such persuasions did he endeavor to obviate the
Luxury, which he saw the times degenerating apace into; and he added hereunto
his own Example, as a continual and effectual Sermon against what he thought
was to be, condemned in the world.

For my own part, I cannot think Wigs unlawful things, but I must concur with
Mr. Eliot, so far as to think, that Immoderacy in them, as in Meats and in
Drink is very sinful.

Article IV.
His Exquisite Charity.
HE that will write of Eliot, must write of Charity, or say nothing. His
Charity was a Star of the First Magnitude in the bright Constellation of his
Virtues; and the Rays of it were wonderfully various and extensive.

His Liberality to pious Uses, whether public or private, went much beyond the
proportions of his little Estate in the world. Many Hundreds of Pounds did he
freely bestow upon the poor; and he would with a very forcible importunity
press his Neighbors to join with him, in such Beneficences. 'Twas a mavelous
Alacrity, with which he embraced all opportunities of Relieving any, that were
miserable; and the good people of Roxbury doubtless cannot remember (but the
Righteous God will!) how often, and with what Ardors, with what Arguments, he
became a Beggar to them, for Collections in their Assemblies, to support such
needy Objects, as had fallen under his Observation. The poor counted him their
Father, and repaired still unto him, with a filial confidence in their
Necessities; and they were more than seven or eight, or indeed than so many
scores, who received their portions of his Bounty. Like that worthy and famous
English General, he could not persuade himself, That he held any thing but what
he gave away; but he drove a mighty Trade at such Exercises as he thought would
furnish him with Bills of Exchange, which he hoped after many days to find the
comfort of; and yet after all, he would say like one of the most charitable
Souls that ever lived in the World, That looking over his Accounts, he could no
where find the God of Heaven charged a Debtor there. He did not put off his
Charity, to be put in his last Will, as many who therein show that their
Charity is against their will; but he was his own Administrator; he made his
own Hands his Executors, and his own Eyes his Overseers. It has been Remarked,
That liberal men are often long-lived men; so do they after many days find the
Bread with which they have been willing to keep other men alive. The great age
of our Eliot was but agreeable to this Remark, and when his Age had unfitted
him for almost all Employments, and bereaved him of those Gifts and Parts which
once he had been Accomplished with, being asked, How he did? he would sometimes
answer, Alas, I have lost every thing; my Understanding leaves me, my Memory
fails me, my Utterance fails me; but I thank God, my Charity holds out still; I
find that rather grows than fails! And I make no question, That at his Death,
his happy Soul was Received, and welcomed, into the everlasting Habitations, by
many scores got thither before him, of such as his Charity had been liberal
unto.

But besides these more Substantial Expressions of his Charity, he made the
Odours of that Grace yet more fragrant unto all that were about him, by that
P^^^fulness and that Peaceableness, which rendered him yet further Amiable. If
any of his Neighborhood were in distress, he was like a Brother born for their
Adversity; he would visit them, and comfort them, with a most Fraternal
Sympathy; yea, it is not eas^y to recount how many whole days of Prayer with
Fasting he has got his Neighbors to keep with him, on the behalf of those
whose Calamities he found himself touched withal. It was an extreme
Satisfaction to him, that his Wife had attained unto a considerable skill in
Physic and Chyrurgery, which enabled her to dispense many safe, good, and
useful Medicines, unto the Poor that had occasion for them; and some hundreds
of sick and weak and maimed people owed praises to God, for for the Benefit,
which therein they freely received of her. The good Gentleman, her Husband
would still be casting Oil into the Flame of that Charity, wherein she was of
her own accord abundantly forward thus to be doing of good unto all; and he
would urge her to be serviceable into the worst Enemies that he had in the
world. Never had any man fewer Enemies than he. But once having delivered
something in his Ministry, which displeased one of his Hearers, the man did
passionately abuse him for it, and this both with Speeches and with Writings
that revised him. Yet it happening not long after, that this man gave himself a
very dangerous Wound, Mr. Eliot immediately sends his Wife to cure him; who did
accordingly. When the man was well he came to thank her; but she took no
Rewards; and this Good man made him stay and eat with him, taking no notice of
all the Calumnies with which he had loaded him; but by, this Carriage he
strangely mollifyed and conquered the Stomach of his Reviler.

He was also a great Enemy to all Contention, and would ring a loud
Courfeu-Bell wherever he saw the Fires of Animosity. When he heard any
Ministers complain, that such and such in their Flocks, were too difficult for
them, the strain of his Answer still was, Brother, Compass them! and Brother,
Learn the meaning of those three little Words, Bear, Forbear, Forgive. Yea, his
Inclinations for Peace, indeed sometimes almost made him to sacrifice Right it
self. When there was laid before an Assembly of Ministers, a bundle of Papers,
which contained certain matters of Difference and Contention, between some
people which our Eliot thought should rather unite, with an Amnesty upon all
their former Quarrels, he (with some limitation of what Constantine did upon
the like occasion) hastily threw the papers into the Fire before them all, and
with a zeal for peace, as hot as that Fire, said immediately, Brethren, wonder
not at what I have done; I did it on my knees this morning before I came among
you. Such an excess (if it were one), flowed from his Charitable Inclinations
to be found among those Peacemakers which by following the Exemple of that Man
who is our Peace, come to be called, The children of God. Very worthily might
he be called an Ireneus, as being all for Peace; and the Commendation which
Epiphanius gives unto the Ancient of that Name, did belong unto our Eliot; he
was a most blessed and a most holy man. He disliked all sorts of Bravery; but
yet with an ingenious Note upon the Greek word in Col. 3. 15. he propounded,
That peace might brave it among us. In short, wherever he came, it was like
another old John, with solemn and earnest perswa^ives to love, and when he
could say little else, he would give that Charge, My Children, love one another!

Finally, 'twas his Charity which disposed him to continual Apprecations for
and Benedictions on those that he met withal; he had, an Heart full of good
Wishes and a Mouth full of kind Blessings for them. And he often made his
Expressions very wittily agreeable to the circumstances which he saw the
persons in. Sometimes when he came into a Family, he would call for all the
young people in it, that so he might very Distinctly lay his holy hands upon
every one of them and bespeak the mercies of Heaven for them all.

Article V.
Some Special Seize, that were the Effects of his Piety, and Charity.
But what was the Effect of this Exemplary Piety, and Charity in our Eliot? It
will be no wonder, to my Reader, if I tell him, That this good man walked in
the light of Gods Countenance all the day long. I believe he had a continual
Assurance of the divine Love, marvellously Sealing, Strengthening, and
Refreshing of him, for many lustres of years before he Died; and for this
cause, the fear of Death was Extirpated out of his heavenly Soul, more than out
of most men alive. Had our blessed Jesus at any time sent his Wggone to setch
this old Jaco^ away, he would have gone without the least Reluctantancies
Laboring once under a ^lavour and (...) asked him, How he did? and (...) Very
well, but (...) I expect a paroxysm (...) fear not; but unto that he answered,
Fear! No, no; I been't afraid, I thank (...) I been't afraid to Die! Dying would
not have been any more to him, than Sleeping to a wear man.

And another Excellency, which accompanied this Courage and Comfort in him was,
A wonderful Resignation to be Will of God, in all Events. There were fore
Afflictions that sometimes befell him; especially when he followed some of his
hopeful and worthy Sons two or three desirable Preachers of the Gospel, to
their Graves. But he sacrificed them, like another Abraham* with such a sacred
indifferency, as made all the Spectators to (...) This could not be done
without the Fear of God. Yea he bore all his Trials with an admirable patience,
and seemed loath to have any will of his own, that should not by wholly melted
and molded into the Will of his Heavenly Father. Once being in a Boat at Sea a
larger Vessel unhappily Overrun and Over (...) that (...) one which had no
small Concern, because Eliot's in the bottom of it; (...) without any
expectation or ever (...) any other way; and when he imagined that he had but
one breath more to draw in the world, it was this, The will (...) the Lord be
done! But it was the will of the Lord, that he should survive the danger; for
he was rescued by the help that was then at hand, and he that had long been
like Moses in every thing else, was now drawn out of the Waters. Which gives me
opportunity to mention one Remarkable that had some Relation hereunto. This
Accident happened in the Time of our Indian Wars, when some furious English
People that clamoured for the ex^rpa^ion of the (...) Indians, which were in
subjection unto us, as well as the Pagan Indians that were in Hostility against
us, vented a very wicked Rage at our holy Eliot, because of his concernment for
the Indians; and one profane Monster hearing how narrowly Mr. Eliot escaped
from Drowning, it is said, he wished this man of God had then been Drowned. But
within a few days, that woeful man by a strange Disaster was Drowned in that
very place, where Mr. Eliot had received his Deliverance.

There was indeed a certain health of Soul which he arrived unto; and he kept
in a blessed measure clear of those Distempers which too often disorder the
most of men But the God of Heaven favored him with something that was yet more
Extraordinary! By getting and keeping near to God, and by dwelling under the
shadow of the Almighty, he contracted a more exquisite sense of mind, than what
is usual among other Professors of Christianity; he sometimes felt a lively
touch of God upon his refined and exalted Spirt, which were not in any paper of
ours lawful or easy to be uttered; and he was admitted unto a singular
Familiarity with the Holy One of Israel. Hence 'twas, that as Bodies of a rare
and fine constitution, will forebode the Changes of the Weather, so the
sublimed Soul of our Eliot often had strange Forebodings of things that were to
come. I have been astonished at some of his Predictions, that were both of a
more personal, and of a more general Application, and were followed with exact
Accomplishments. If he said of any Affair, I cannot bless it! It was a worse
Omen to it, than the most inauspicious praesages in the world; but sometimes
after he had been with God about a thing, he was able successfully to foretell,
I have set a mark upon it, it will do well? I shall never forget, That when
England and Holland were plunged into the unhappy War, which the more sensible
Protestants everywhere had but sorrowful Apprehensions of, our Eliot being in
the height and heat of the War, privately asked, What News we might look for
next? answered unto the surprise of the Enquirer, Our next News will be, a
peace between the two Protestant Nations; God knows, I pray for it every day;
and I am verily persuaded, we shall hear of it speedily! and it came to pass
accordingly.

It is to be confessed, That the written Word of God, is to be regarded as the
perfect and only Rule of our Lives; that in all Articles of Religion if men
speak not according to this word, there is no light in them; and that it is no
warrantable or convenient thing for Christians to look for such Inspirations as
directed the Prophets that were the Penmen of the Scriptures. Nevertheless,
there are some uncommon Instances of Communion and Fruition, which in our days
the Sovereign God here and there favors a good man withal; and they are very
Heavenly persons, persons well purified from the Feculences of Sensuality, and
persons better purged from the Leaven of envy and malice, and intolerable
pride, than usually those vain pretenders to Revelations, the Quakers, are,
that are made partakers of these Divine Dainties. Now such an one was our
Eliot; and for this, worthy to be had in everlasting Remembrance.

It would not be improper, under this File to lodge the singular and surprising
successes of his Prayers! for they were such, that in our distresses we still
repaired unto him, under that encouragement, He is a Prophet, and he shall pray
for thee, and thou stall Live. I shall single out but one, from the many that
might be mentioned. There was a godly Gentleman of Charlstown, one Mr. Foster,
who, with his Son, was taken Captive by Turkish Enemies. Much prayer was
employed, both privately and publicly, by the good people here, for the
Redemption of that Gentleman* but we were at last informed, that the bloody
Prince in whose Dominions he was now a Slave, was resolved that in his
Lifetime no Prisoner should be released; and so the Distressed Friends of this
Prisoner, now concluded, Our Hope is l^st! Well upon this, Mr Eliot in some of
his next prayers, before a very solemn Congregation, very broadly, begid,
Heavenly Father, work for the Redemption of thy poor Servant Foster; and if the
Prince which detains him will not, as they say, dismiss him as long as himself
lives, Lord, we pray thee to kill that cruel Prince kill him, and glorify thy
self upon him. And now behold the answer. The poor Captived Gentleman quickly
Returns to us that had been mourning for him as a lost man, and brings us News,
that the Prince which had hitherto help him was come to an untimely Death, by
which means he was now set at Liberty. Thus (...) now know, That a Prophet has
been among us!

Part II. Or, Eliot, As a MINISTER.
Article I.
His Ministerial Accomplishments.
THe Grace of God, which we have seen so illustrious^ Endowing and Adorning of
our Eliot, as well Qualified him for, as Disposed him to, the employment
wherein he spent about Sin Decads of his years; which was, The service of the
Lord Jesus Christ, in the ministry of the Gospel. This was the work to which he
applied himself; and he undertook it I believe, with as Right Thoughts of it,
and as Good Ends in it, as ever any man in our Days was acted with. He looked
upon the Conduct of a Church, as a thing flo less Dangerous than Important, and
attended with so many Difficulties, Temptations, and Humiliations, as that
nothing but a Call from the, Son of God, could have encouraged him unto the
susception of it. He saw that flesh and blood would find it no very pleasant
thing, to be Qblig'd unto the over sight of a Number, that by a solemn Covenant
should be listed among the Volunteers of the Lord Jesus Christ; that it was no
easy thing to feed the souls of such a people and of the Children and the
Neighbors which were to be brought into the same sheepfold with them; to bear
their manners with all patience, not being by any of their Infirmities
discouraged from Teaching of them, and from watching and praying over them; to
value them highly as the Flock which God has purchased with his own blood,
notwithstanding all their miscarriages and in all to examine the Rule of
Scripture for the warrant of whatever shall be done; and to Remember the Day of
Judgment, wherein an Account must be given of all that has been done; having in
the mean time no expectation of the Riches and Grandeurs which accompany a
worldly Domination. It was herewithal his opinion, That (as the great Owen
expresses it) notwithstanding all the countenance that is given to any, Church
by the public Ministry, yet whilst we are in this world, those who will
faithfully discharge their Duty, as Ministers of the Gospel, shall have need to
be prepared for sufferings; and it was in a sense of these things that he gave
himself up to the sacred Ministry. A Stranger to Regeneration can be but poorly
Accomplished, for such a Ministry; and however God may prosper the Sermons of
such a man for the advantage of his Church: however the building of the Ark may
be helped on by such Carpenters as perish in the Flood; and the Tyrians may do
some work about the Temple, who arrive to no Worship in the Inner-Courts
thereof, and, as Austin Expressed it, a Stone-cutter may convey water into a
Garden, without having himself any advantage of it, Nevertheless, the
unsanctified Minister, how Gifted, how Able soever he may be, must have it
still said unto him, Thou lack est one thing! and that, One Thing, our Eliot
had. But the One Thing, was not, All! as indeed, it would not have been, Enough
God furnished him with a good measure of Bearning too, which made him capable
to, Divide the ^artght* He was a most Acute Grammarian; and understood very
well, the Languages which God (...) wrote his Holy Bible in. He had a sharp
(...) sight into all the other Liberal Arts, and made little (...) of them, for
the use of certain Indians, whose exacter education he was d^sitous of. But,
above all, he had a most emment skill in (...) and that which profane coffers
reproached as the Disgrace of the blessed A^^ing, all of whose Works always we
go down the (...) Gold, was the Honor of our Eliot, namely to be Scripture
thus I belong us, or, One mighty (...) the Word; which enabled him to convince
(...) and on all, occasions to show himself, A thorough Divine, and A Workman
(...) not be ashamed.

In short, he came like another (...), or Aboliub, unto (...) service of the
(...) And from one particularity in that part of his Learning, which lay in the
Affairs of the (...) it was, that in a little Book of his we have those lines,
which for a certain cause I now transcribe; Oh that the Lord would put it (says
he) into the heart of some of his Religious and Learned Servants, to take such
pains about the Hebrew Language, as to fit it for universal Use! Considering,
that above all Languages spoken by the lip of Man it is most capable to be
enlarged and fitted to express all things, and motions, and notions, that our
humane intellect, is capable of in this mortal life; considering also, that it
is the Invention of God himself; and what one is fitter to be the universal
Language, than that which it pleased our Lord Jesus to make use of when he
(...) from Heaven unto Paul!

Article II.
His Family-Government.
THe Apostle Paul, reciting and requiring the Qualifications of a Gospel
Minister, give Order, that he be, The Husband of one Wife, and one that rules
well his own House, having his Children in subjection with all gravity. It
seems, that a man's carriage in his own House is a part, or at least a sign, of
his due Deportment in the House of God; and then, I am sure, our Eliot was very
Exemplary. That one Wife which was given to him truly from the Lord, he loved,
prized cherished, with a kindness that notably represented the Compassion which
he (thereby) taught his Church to expect from the Lord Jesus Christ; and after
he had lived with her for more than half an hundred years, he followed her to
the Grave with La^enta^^^s beyond those, which the Jews from the figure of a
letter in the Text, affirm, that Abraham deplored his aged Sarah with; her
Departure made a deeper impression upon him than what any common Affliction
could. His whole Conversation with her, had that sweetness, and that gravity
and modesty beautifying of it, that every one called, them Z^cha^y and
Elizabeth. His Family, was a little Be^^^, for the Worship of God constantly
and exactly maintained in it; and unto the daily prayers of the Family, his
manner was to prefix the Reading of the Scripture; which being done, 'twas also
his manner to make his young people choose a certain passage in the Chapter,
and give him some (...) of their own upon it. By this method he did mightily
(...) and improve, as well as cry, their Understandings, and endeavor to make
them wise unto S^^tuation. He was likewise very strict in the Education of his
Children and more careful to mend any error in their Hearts and lives, than he
could have been to cure a blen^sh (...) their Bodies. No Ex^^^itancies or (...)
could find a room under his (...) his House any other than a School of Piety;
one might have there seen a perpetual mixture of a Spartan and a Christian
Discipline. Whatever Decay there might be upon Family-Religion among us, as for
our Eliot, we knew him, that he would command his Children, and his Household
after him, that they should keep the way of the Lord.

Article III.
His way of Preaching.
Such was he in his lesser Family! and in his greater Family, he manifested
still more of his Regards to the rule of a Gospel Ministry. To his congregation
he was a Preacher that made it is care to give every one their meat in due
season. It was Food and nor Froth; which in his public sermons, he entertained
the souls of his people with, speculations, or with such things as, Animum non
dan^, quia non habent; much less did he kill them with such po^son as is now
too commoly exposed by the Arminian and Socintan Doctors that have lately too
often fat in Moses's chair. His way of preaching was Very plain: so that the
very Lambs might wade, into his Discourses on those text and themes, wherein
Elephants might swim and here withal, it was very powerful, his Delivery was
always very graceful and grateful; but when he was to use Reproofs and Warnings
against any Sin, his voice would rise into a ^a^mth which had in it very much
of Energy as well as Decency; he would brandish the Swords, and sound the (...)
of God against all Vice, with a most penetrating Liveliness, and make his
Pulpit, another Mount Spirit, for the flashes of Lightning there in displaced
against the Breaches of the Law given upon that burning Mountain. And, (...)
observed, that there was usually a special Fervor in the Rebukes which he
bestowed upon Carn^^ity, a carnal frame and life in Professions of Religion;
when he (...) to brand the Earthly mindedness of Church Members, and the
Allowance and one Indulgence which they other gave unto themselves in seasual
Delights, here he was a right Bhanerges; he then spoke, as 'twas sad one of the
Ancients did, Quot v^^ba (...) Fulmina, as many Thunderbolts as Words.

It was another property of his Preaching, that there was evermore much of
CHRIST in it; and with Paul, he could say, I determined to know nothing but
Jesus Christ; having that Blessed Name in his Discourses, with a frequency like
that, with which Paul mentions it in his Epistles. As 'twas noted of Dr. B^aly,
that whatever subject he were upon, in the Application still his Use of it
would be to arive men unto the Lord Jesus Christ; in like manner, the Lord
Jesus Christ was the Loadstone which gave a touch (...) all the Sermons of our
Eliot; a glorious, precious, lovely Christ was the point or Heaven which they
still verged unto. From this Inclination it was, that although he Printed several
English Books before he died, yet his heart seemed not so much in any of them,
as in that serious and savoury Book of his Enti^^led, The Harmony of the
Gospels, in the holy History of Jesus Christ. From hence also 'twas, that he
would give that Advice to young Preachers, pray let there be much of Christ in
your Ministry; and when he had heard a Sermon, which had any special Relish of
a blessed Jesus in it, he would say thereupon, O blesseds be God, that we have
Christ so much and so well preac^ec^^ in poor New England!

Moreover, he liked no Preaching, but what had been we^^st^ated for; and he
would very much commend a Sermon which he could perceive had required some good
shinking and Reading in the Author of it. I have been present, when he has unto
a Preacher then just come home from the Assembly with him, thus expressed
himself, Brother, there was Oil required for the Service of the Sanctuary; but
it must be beaten Oil; I praise God, that I saw your Oil so well beaten to day;
the Lord help us always by good Study to beat our Oil, that there may be no
knots in our Sermons life undissolved, and that there may a clear light be
thereby given in the House of God! And yet he likewise looked for something a
Sermon beside and beyond the mere study of man; he was for having the Spirit of
God, breathing in it and with it; and he was for speaking those things, from
those impressions and with those Affections, which might compel the Hearer to
say, The Spirit of God was here! I have heard him complain, It is a sad thing,
when a Sermon shall have that one Thing, The Spirit of God, wanting in it.

Article IV.
His Cares about the Children of his people.
But he Remembered, that he had Lambs in his flock, and like another David he
could not endure to see the Lion sieze upon any of them. He always had a mighty
concern upon his mind for little Children; 'twas an affectionate stroke in one
of the little Papers which he published for them, Sure Christ is not willing to
lose his Lambs; and I have cause to remember with what an hearty, servent,
Zealous Application, he addressed himself, when in the Name of the Neighbor
Pastors and Churches he gave me, The Right Hand of Fellowship, at my
Ordination, and said, Brother, Art thou a Lover of the Lord Jesus Christ? Then,
I pray Feed his Lambs.

One thing whereof he was very desirous for poor Children, was the Covenanting
of them* he was very sollicitous that the Lambs might pass under the Lords
^ything Rod, and be brought under the Band of the Covenant. He vey openly and
earnestly maintained the cause of Infants Baptism, against a sort of persons
Risen since the Reformation, (among which indeed there are many godly men, that
were dear to the Soul of our Eliot) who forget that in the Gospel Church State
as well as in the J^^esh, The Promise is to Believer; and their Children: and
are unwilling to reckon Children among the Disciples of Jesus Christ: ^or to
grant, That of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: or to know, That the most
undoubted Records of Antiquity affirm Infant Baptism to have been an usage in
all the Primitive Churches; That even before the early days of Naz^an^^n,
Chrys^s^om, Basil, Athanaesius, Epiph^nius, in the Greek, and Ambrose Jerome,
Austin, in the Latin Church, all of which give glorious Testimonies for Infant
Baptism even Cyprian, before these assures us that in his days there was no
doubt of it; and Origin before him could say, 'Twas from the Apostles that the
Church took up the Baptism of Infants; and Clemens Romanus before him could
say, That Children should be Recipients of the Discipline of Christ; besides
what plain evidence we have i^ Ire^^eus and Justin Martyr; and that the very
Arguments with which some of the Ancient did superstitiously advise the delay
of Baptism (...) at the same time confess the Divine Right of Infants in it.
Our Eliot could by no means look upon the Infants of Godly Men, as Unholy, and
Unbelievers, and unfit Subjects to have upon them a Mark of Dedication to the
Lord.

Wherefore, when there was brought among as a Book of pious Mr. Norc^^'s,
whereby some became Disposed to, or Confirmed in, a prejudice against
P^edo-Baptism, it was not long before Mr. Eliot published a little Answer
thereunto; the first lines whereof presently discover what a Temper he writ it
with; says he, The Book speaks with the voice of a Lamb, and I think, the
Author is a Godly, though Faring Brother; but he acts the cause of a Roaring
Lion, who by all crafty ways, seeks to devour the poor Lambs of the Flock of
Christ. And so he goes on to plead the cause of them that cannot speak for
themselves. No man could entertain a person of a different persuasion from
himself, with more sweetness and kindness, than he, when he saw, Aliquid,
Christ's, or the Fear of God prevailing in them; he could uphold a most intimate
Correspondence with such a man, as Mr. Jesses ^s long as he lived; and yet he
knew how to be an Hammer upon their unhappy Errors.

But having once Baptized the Children of his Covenanting Neighbors, he did
not as too many Ministers do, think, that he had now done, with them. No,
another thing wherein he was very laborious for poor Children was, the
Catechizing of them; he kept up the great Ordinance of Catechizing, both
publicly and privately, and spent in it a world of time About the end of the
S^Century, before there had in the least begun to Start up New Officers in the
Church of God, we find there were persons called unto the Office of Public
Teaching, who were not Pastors, not Rulers, not called unto the Administration
of other Ordinances; those in the Church of Alexandria, were of a special
Remark and Renown for their Abilities this way; and their Employment was to
Explain and to Defend the principles of the Christian Religion, unto all with
whom they could be concerned. Here was the Catechist, with reference unto whom
the Apostle says, Let the Catechized communicate unto him in all good things.
Now, though some think, a Teacher purely as such, has no Right unto further
Church Administrations, any more than the R^bbt's or Doctors among the Jews,
had to Offer Sacrifices in the Temple; yet he who is called to be a Teacher,
may at the same time also be called to be an Elder, and being now a Teaching
Elder, he becomes interested in the whole Government of the Church, he has the
power of all Sacred Administrations. It Is the latter and more complete and
perfect character, which the Churches of New England have still acknowledged in
their Teachers; and such a Teaching (...) did our Eliot remember himself to be
He thought himself under a particular Obligation to be that Officer, which the
Apostle calls if Cor. 4. 15. An Instructor of the young; nor was he ashamed,
any more than some of the worthiest men among the Ancients were, to be called,
A Catechist. He would observe upon Joh. 21. 15. That, the care of the Lambs, is
one third part of the charge over the Church of God. It would be incredible if
I should relate what pains he took to keep up the blessed Ec^ho's of Truth,
between himself, and the young people of his Congregation; and what prudence he
used, in suiting of his Catechisms to the age and strength of his little
Catechumens. But one thing I must observe, which is, That although there may be,
(as one has computed) no less than five hundred Catechisms extant, yet Mr.
Eliot gave himself the Travail of adding to their number, by composing of some
further Catechisms, which were more particularly designed as an Antidote for
his own people, against the Contagion of such Errors as might threaten any
peculiar danger to them. And the effect and success of this Catechizing, bore
proportion to the indefatigable industry with which he prosecuted it; it is a
well-principled people that he has left behind him. As when certain Jesuits
were sent among the Waldenses to corrupt their Children, the returned with much
Disappointment and Confusion, because the Children of seven years old were
well-principled enough to Encounter the most Learned of them all; so, if any
Seducer were let loose to wolve it among the good people of Roxbury, I am
confident, they would find as little prey in, that well-instructed place, as in
any part of all the Country; no civil Penalties would signify so much to save
any people from the Snares of buisy Heretics, as the unwearied Catechizing of
one Eliot has done to preserve his people from the gangren of ill opinions.

There is a third instance of his Regards to the welfare of the poor Children
under his charge; and that is, his perpetual Resolution and Activity to support
a good School in the Town that belonged unto him. A Grammar S chool he would
always have, upon the place, whatever it cost him; and he importuned all other
places to have the like. I cannot forget the Ardour with which I once heard him
pray, in a Synod of these Churches, which met at Boston to consider, How the
miscarriages which were among as might be prevented; I say, with what Fervor
he uttered an Expression to this purpose, Lord, for Schools every where among
us! That our Schools may flourish! That every Member of this Assembly may go
home and procure a good School to be encouraged to the Town where he lives!
that before me die, we may be so happy as to see a good School encouraged in
every Plantation of the Country. God so blessed his Endeavors, that Roxbury
could not live quietly without a Free School in the Town; and the issue of it
has bin one thing, which has made me almost put the Title of Schola Illustris
upon that little Nursery; that is, that Roxbury has afforded more Scholars,
first for the College, and then for the Public, than any Town of its bigness,
or, if I mistake not, of twice its bigness in all New England. From the Spring
of the School at Roxbury, there have run a large number of the streams, which
have made glad this whole City of God. I persuade my self, that the good people
of Roxbury, will for-ever scorn to begrutch the Cost, or to permit the Death,
of a School which God has made such an honor to them; and this the rather,
because their Deceased Eliot has left them a fair part of his own Estate, for
the maintaing of the School in Roxbury; and I hope, or at least, I wish, that
the Ministers of New England may be as ungainsayably importunate with their
people, as Mr. Eliot was with his, for Schools which may seasonably tinge the
young Souls of the Rising Generation; A want of Education for them, is the
blackest and saddest of all the bad Omens that are upon us.

Article V.
His Church Discipline.
IT yet more Endears unto us the Memory of our Eliot, that he was not only an
Evangelical Minister, but also a true New-English one; he was a Protestant, and
a Puritan, and one very full of that Spirit which acted the first Planters of
this Country, in their peaceable S^cessi^^ from the unwarrantable things
elsewhere imposed upon their Consciences. The Judgment and Practice of one that
readily underwent (...) the misery attending the Infancy of this Plantation,
for the sake of a true Church Order, is thing which we young people should
cou^^ worthy to the enq^ired after; and since we sa^ him so well behaving
himself in the House of God it cannot but be worth while to know what (...)
thought about the Frame, and Form, and Constitution of that blessed House.

He was a modest, humble but very reasonable Nonconformist unto the Ceremonies,
which have bin such unhappy Apples of strife, in the Church of England;
otherwise the dismal thickets (...) America, had never seen such a person in
them. He could not count it lawful for him ordina^^^ to perform his Ministerial
Acts of solemn and public Prayer, by reading or using any Forms of Pray
composed by other persons for him, as thousands of Preachers do at this day.
And this, not only because an Ability to express the case of a Congregation in
prayer, is a Ministerial Gift, which our Lord forbids his Ministers to Neglect;
and a Minister that should only Read Forms of Sermons composed for him, would
as truly discharge the Duty of Preaching, as one that (...) only read such
Forms of prayers, would the duty of praying in it; but also because he could
not find that any Forms of prayer were used in an^ part of the Church, until
about four hundred years after Christ; nor any made for more than some single
Province until six hundred years; nor any imposed until eight hundred, when all
manner of Abominable Things began to be found in the Temple of God; and he had
over and above, his particular Dissatisfactions at the English Liturgy, for
weighty causes rather increased than abated since his first notice of them. He
could not wear a Surplice in and for the Worship of God; as well-knowing the
Original of that unholy Vestment, and agreeing with Dr. Abbot; who was no
Fanatic, and yet says in his Book of Antichrist, That all Priestly Garments,
whereby Ad^^isters are distinguished, from the rest of the Church, are a
special part of the character of the Beast. He could not use the Cross in
Baptism; forasmuch as Dr. Tailor himself confesses, it is An Unt^s^^uted
Ceremony retained as a part of External Worship; and so it is as much a
violatiion of the Second Commandment in the Law of our God, as the oil, cream,
salt and spittle, with which that Institution has been de^^led by the Roman
Catholics. Indeed, he thought with Learned Parker, That the Cross is the
greatest Devil among the Idols of Rome. He could not Kneel before the
Eucharist; inasmuch as it was a usage introduced about the thirteenth Century,
merely to suit and serve the Idolatry of the T ransubstantiation. He conceived,
that no protestation of ours could now free this gesture from the just
interpretation of Idolatry because of the antecedent interpretation put upon it
by those that first contrived it, enjoyed it, and have hitherto maintained it;
and it affrighted him to read what the Popish Writers assert about Kneeling, if
the Sacramental Bread remain Bread after the Consecration. He could not
understand a Bishop that should not be ejasdem Jurisdictions, and much less one
that should not be ejusdem O^dinis with a Presbyter; and when he saw the Clergy
of a whole Nation at length and of late so much Annihilate themselves, as to
Subscribe unto Canons which took away from every Parish-Minister, all
Obligation to teach or Authority to rule, in the Church of God, he soon said
upon it, Unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou United.

It afflicted him to see these, and more such as these, things continued in the
Church of England, by the Artifice of certain persons who were loath to have the
Refomation carried on unto those further Degrees which the most eminent of the
first Reformers had in their Holy Designs; and it filled him with a just
Horror, and sorrow! to see above twenty Hundred, faithful Ministers in one
Black Day turned out of their employments, and several Thousands of Christians
and Families in a little while Ruined, because they could not swallow down such
unaccountable superstitions.

We see what was not his opinion! but let us hear, what it was. It was his as
well as his master, the great Ramuss principle, that in the Reformation by
Churches to be now endeavored things ought to be Reduced unto the Order
wherein we find them at their Primitive, Original, Apostolical Institution And
in pursuance of this principle, he Justly Epoused that way of Church Government
which we call, the Congregational; he was fully persuaded, that the
Church State which our Lord Christ has instituted in the New Testament, is, In
a Congregation or Society of Professed Believers, Agreeing and Assembling
together, among themselves, with Officers, of Divine Appointment, for the
Celebration of Evangelical Ordinances, and their own mutual Edification; For he
saw it must be a cruel hardship used upon the Scriptures, to make them so much
as Lisp the least intimation of any other Church State prescribed unto us; and
he could assert, That no Approved Writers, for the space of two hundred years
after Christ, make any mention of any other Organical, Visible, Professing
Church, but that only which is Congregational. He looked upon the
Congregational way as a Largess of Divine Bounty bestowed by the Lord Jesus, on
his people, that followed him into this Wilderness, with a peculiar zeal for
Communion with him, in his pure Worship here. He perceived in it, a sweet sort
of Temperament, between Rigid Pre^^^^erianism, and Levelling Brownism; So that
on the one side, the Liberties of the people are not oppressed and overlaid; on
the other side, the Authority of the Elders is not rendered insignificant, but a
die B^llance is herein kept upon them both; And hence he closed with our
platform of Church Discipline, as being the nearest of what he had yet seen, to
the pattern in the Mount.

He could not comprehend, that this Churchstate can arise from any other Formal
cause, but the Consent, Concurrence, Confederation of those concerned in it; he
looked upon a Relation unto a Church, as not a Natural, or a Violent, but a
Voluntary thing, and so that it is to be entered no otherwise than by an Holy
Covenant, or, as the Scripture speaks, by giving our selves first unto the
Lord, and then one unto another. He could not think, that Baptism alone was to
be accounted the cause, but rather the effect, of Church-member-ship; inasmuch
as upon the dissolution of the Church to which a man belongs, his Baptism would
not become a Nullity: nor that meet Profession would render men members of this
or that C hurch; for then it would be impossible to cut off a corrupt member
from that Body Politic: Nor that meet Co-habitation would make Church Members;
for then the vilest infidels would be actually incorporated with us. And a
Covenant, was all that he now saw remaining in the Inventory.

But for the Subjects to be admitted by Churches unto all the privileges of
this Fellowship with them he thought, they ought to be such as a trying
Charity, or a charitable Trial, should pronounce, Regenerate. He found the
first Churches of the Gospel mentioned in the Scripture, to be Churches of
Saints, and that the Aposties writing to them, still acknowledge them to be
Holy Brethren, and such as were made meet for to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light; and that a main end of Church Fellowship,
is to represent unto the world, the Qualifications of those that shall Ascend
into the Hill of the Lord, and Stand in his Holy Place forever. He would
therefore have, Bona Men's, and Purum pectus, and Vita Innocens, required, as
Lact entius tells us, they were in his Days, of all Communicants at the Table
of the Lord; and with Holy Chrys^stom, he would sooner have given his
Heart-blood, than the Cup of the Lord, unto such as had not the hopeful Marks
of our Lord's Disciples on them. The Churches of New England still retain a
Custom which the great Justin Martyr in the second Century assures us to have
been in the Primitive Churches of his Time; namely, To Examine those they
Receive, not only about their persuasion* but also whether they have attained
unto a work of Grace upon their Souls. In the prosecution hereof, besides the
Enquiries of the Elders into the Knowledge and Belief and Conversation of them
that offer themselves unto Church Fellowship, in i^ expected, though I hope not
with any severity of imposition, that in the Addresses which they make to the
Churches, they give some written, if not oral Account, of what impressions the
Regenerating Word of God has had upon their Souls. This was a Custom which this
holy man had a mavelous esteem and value for; and I have taken from his Mouth
such as these Expressions very publicly delivered thereabouts.

It is matter (said he) of great Thankfulness, that we have Christ Confessed in
our Churches, by such as we Receive to full Communion there. They open the
works of Christ in their Hearts, and the Relation thereof is an eminent
Confession of our Lord; experienced Saints can gather more than a little from
it. It is indeed an Ordinance of wonderful benefit; the Lord planted many
Vineyards in the first Settlement of this Country, and there were ma Noble
Vines in them; it was their Heavenly-mindedness which disposed them to this
Exercise, and by the upholding of it, the Churches are still filled with Noble
Vines; it mightily maintains purity of Churches. It Is the duty of every
Christian, With the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation. As among the Jews,
usually most men did once in their life, celebrate a Jubilee; thus, this
Confession of Christ, is methinks, a sort of Jubilee; and every good man among
us, is at least once in his life called unto it. It is a thing that gives great
glory to the Lord Jesus Christ; and younger Converts are thereby exceedingly
Edified; and the Souls of Devout Christians are hereby very much ingratiated
one unto another. The Devil knows what he does, when he thrusts so hard to get
this Custom out of our Churches. For my part, I would say in this case, Get
thee behind me Satan; thou give an horrible offense unto the Lord Jesus
Christ. Let us keep up this Ordinance with all gentleness; and where we see the
least spark of Grace held forth, let ^s prize it more than all the Wit in the
world.

There were especially two things, which he was loath to see, and yet feared he
saw, falling in the Churches of New England. One was, A thorough Establishment
of Ruling-Elders in our Churches; which he thought sufficiently warranted by
the Apostles mention of, Elders that Rule well, who yet labor not in Word and
Doctrine. He was very desirous to have prudent and gracious men set over our
Churches, for the Assistence of their Pastors, in the Church acts that concern
the Admission and Exclusion of Members, and the Inspection of the Conversation
led by the Communicants, and the Instruction of their several Families, and the
Visitation of the Afflicted in the Flock over which they should preside. Such
Helps in Government had he himself been blessed withal; the last of which was
the well deserving Elder Bowls; and of him, did this good man, in a Speech to
a Synod of all the Churches in this Colony, take occasion to say, There is my
Brother Bowls, the godly Eld^^ of our Church at Roxbury, God helps him to
(...) great things among us! Had all our Pastors been so well accommodated, it
is possible there would be more encouragement given to such an Office as that
of Ruling Elders.

But the mention of a Synod brings to mind another thing, which he was
Concerned, that we might never want; and that is, a frequent Repetition of
Needful Synods in our Churches. For though he had a deep and a due care to
preserve the Rights of particular Churches, yet he thought all the Churches of
the Lord Jesus by their Union in what they profess, in what they intend, and in
what they enjoy, so compacted into one Body Mystical, as that all the several
particular Churches every where should act with a regard unto the good of the
whole, and unto the common Advice and Counsil of the Neighborhood; which
cannot be done always by Letters missive, like those that passed between
Corinth and Rome in the early days of Christianity; but it requires a
Convention of the Churches in Synods, by their Delegates and Messengers. He did
not count Churches to be so Independent, as that they can always discharge
their whole Duty, and yet not act in a conjunction with Neighbour-Churches; nor
would he be of any Church that will not acknowledge it self accountable to
rightly composed Synods, which may have occasion to enquire into the
circumstances of it; he saw the main Interest and Business of Churches might
quickly come to be utterly loft, if Synods were not often called for the
Repairing of Inconveniences, and he was much in contriving for the regular and
repeated meeting of such Assemblies.

He wished for Councils to suppress all damnable Heresies or pernicious
Opinions that might ever arise among us; for Councils to extinguish all
dangerous Divisions, and scandalous Contentions which might ever begin to flame
in our Borders; for Councils to rectify all Male-Administrations in the midst
of us, or to Recover any particular Churches out of any Disorders which they
may be plunged into: for Councils to enquire into the Love, the Peace, the
Holiness maintained by the several Churches; in fine, for Councils to send
forth fit Laborers into those parts of our Lords Harvest, which are without
the Gospel of God. He beheld an Apostolical Precept and Pattern for such
Councils; and when such Councils convened in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
by the consent of several Churches concerned in mutual Communion, have
Declared, Explained, Recommended the mind of God from his word unto us, he
reckoned a truth so delivered, challenged an Observation from the particular
Churches, with a very great Authority.

He therefore Printed an ingenious little Book ^aring this Title, The Divine
Management of Gospel-Churches by the Ordinance of Councils; constituted in
order according to the Scriptures, which may be a means of uniting th^se two
holy and eminent Parties, the Presbyterians and the Congregational. It is a
remarkable Concession made by the Incomparable Jurieu who is not reckoned a
Congregational man, in his Traite de L'Unite de L'Eglise, That the Apostolical
Churches lived not in any Confederation for mutual Dependence. The grand
Equipage of Metropolitans, of P^^nates, of Exarchs^, of Patriarks, was yet
unknown; nor does it any more appear to us, that the Churches then had them
Provincial, National, and Ecumenical Synods; every Church was its own
Mistress, and independent on any other. But on the other side, our Eliot who
was no Presbyterian, conceived Synods to be the Institutions of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Apostolical Churches themselves acknowledging a Stamp of Divine
Right upon them.

Such as these were the sentiments of our Eliot; and his deserved Reputation in
the Churches of New England, is that which has caused me to foresee some
Advantage and Benefit arising unto the concerns of the Gospel, by so* large a
Recitation as I have now made thereof.

The Reader has now seen, An able Minister of the New Testament.

Part III. Or, Eliot as an Evangelist.
THe Titles of a Christian and of a Minister, have rendered our Eliot
considerable; but there is one memorable Title more, by which he has been
signalized unto us. An honorable person did once in Print put the Name of an
Evangelist upon him; whereupon in a Letter of his to that person afterward
Printed, his Expressions were, There is a Redundancy, where you put the Title
of Evangelist upon me; I beseech you to suppress all such things; let us do and
speak and carry all, things with Humility; it is the Lord who has done what is
done; and it is most becoming the Spirit of Jesus Christ to life up him, and
lay ourselves low; I wish that word could be obliterated. My Reader sees what a
caution Mr. Eliot long since entered against our giving him the Title of an
Evangelist; but his Death has now made it safe, as his Life had long made it
just, for us to acknowledge him with such a Title. I know not whether that of
an Evangelist, or one separated for the employment of Preaching the Gospel in
such places where no Churches have hitherto been gathered he not all Office
that should be continued in our days; but this I know, that our Eliot very
notably did the Service and Business of such an Officer.

The Natives of the Country now Possessed by the New-Englanders, had been
forlorn and wretched Heathen ever since their first herding here; and tho we
know not When or How those Indians first became Inhabitants of this mighty
Continent, yet we may guess that probably, the D^vel decoyed those miserable
Salvages hither, in hopes that the Gospel of the Lord Jesus would never come
here to destroy or disturb his Absolute E^p^^ over them. But our Eliot was in
such all terms with the Devil, as to alarm him with founding the
Silver-Trumpets of Heaven in his Territories, and make some Noble and Zealous
Attempts toward outing him of his Ancient possessions here. Just before the
first Arrival of the English in these parts, a prodigious Mortality had swept
away vast Numbers of the poor Indians; and those Pagans who being told by a
Shipwracked Frenchman which did in their hands, that God (...) them, and
introduce a more (...) and worthy people into their plate, blasphemously
reph^j, That God could not kill them; were (...) with such a raging and wasting
(...), as left the very earth covered with their Carcases. Nevertheless, there
were I think, Twenty several Nations (if I may call them so) of Indians upon
that spot of ground, which fell under the Influence of our Three Uni^ta
Colonies; and our Eliot was willing to rescue as many of them as he could, from
that old usurping Landlord of America, who is by the wrath of God, the Prince
of this world.

I cannot find that any besides the Holy Spirit of God, first moved him to the
blessed Work of Evangilizing these perishing Indians; 'twas that Holy Spirit
which laid before his mind the Ideal of that which is now on the Seal of the
Massachuset-Colony; A poor Indian having a Label going from his mouth, with a,
COME OVER AND HELP US. It was the spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
enkindled in him a Fury, for the dark, dying damning souls of these Natives,
whom the god of this world had blinded, through all the By past Ages. He was
none of those that make, the Salvation of the Heather, an Article of their
C^ead; but (setting aside the unrevealed and extraordinary Steps which the Holy
One of s^rail may take out of His usual Pa^hes) he thought seen to be lost if
our Gospel be hidden from them; and he was of the same Opinion with one of the
Ancients, who said, Some (...) to prove Plato a Christian, till they prove them
selves little better than Heathen. It is indeed a principle in the Turkish
Alcor^n, That Let a man's Religion be what it will, he shall be saved, if be
conse^ention sl^^ live up to the F^les of it: but our Eliot was no Mohammedan.
He could most heartily subscribe to that passage in the Articles of the Chapter of
Engl. They are to be held accursed, who presume to say, that every man shall be
saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his life according to that Law, and Light of Nature; For Holy Scripture does
set out unto us, Only the Name of Jesus Christ's, whereby men must be Saved. And
it astonished him to see many dissembling Subscribers of those Articles, while
they have grown up to such a Phre^sy, as to deny peremptorily all Church State,
and all Salvation to all that are not under Diocesan Bishops, yet at the same
time to grant that the Heathen might he saved without the Knowledge of the Lord
Jesus Christ. No, it very powerfully moved his holy Bowels to hear the
Thunderclapps of that Imprecation over the heads of our Naked Indians, Pour out
thy Fury upon the Heathen that know thee not; and thought he, What shall I do
to rescue those* Heathen from that all-devouring Fury?

But when this Charitable pity had once begun to flame, there was a
concurrence of many things to cast Oil into it. All the good men in the Country
were glad of his Engagement in such an undertaking; the Ministers especially
encouraged him, and those in the Neighborhood kindly supplied his place, and
performed his work, in part, for him at Roxbury, while he was Abroad Laboring
among them that were Without. Hereunto, he was further awakened by those
expressions in the Royal Charit^, in the assurance and protection whereof this
Wilderness was first peopled; namely, To win and incite the Natives of that
Country to the knowledge and Obedience of the only true God and Savior of
Mankind, and the Christian Faith, in our Royal Intention, and the Adventurers
free profession is the principal end of the Plantation. And the remarkable zeal
of the Romish Missionaries compassing Sea and Land that they might make
Proselytes, made his devout Soul think of it with a further Disdain* that we
should come any whit behind in our care to Evangelize the Indians, whom we
dwelt among. Lastly, when he had well begun this Evangelical Business, the good
God, in an answer to his Prayers, mercifully stirred up a liberal Contribution
among the godly people in England for the promoting of it; by means whereof, a
considerable Estate and Income was at length entrusted in the hands of an
Honorable Corporation, by whom it is to this Day very carefully employed in the
Christian Service, which it was designed for. And then, in short; inasmuch as
our Lord Jesus had bestowed on us, our Eliot was gratefully and generously
desirous to obtain for him, The Heathen for an Inheritance, and the utmost
parts of the Earth for a Possession.

The exemplary Charity of this excellent person in this important Affair, will
not be seen its due Luster, unless we make some Reflection upon several
circumstances which he beheld these forlorn Indians in. Know then, that these
doleful Creatures are the veriest Ruins of Mankind, which are to be found any
where upon the face of the Earth. No such Estates are to be expected among
them, as have been the (...) which the pretended Converters in other Countries
have snapped at. One might see among them, what an hard master the Devil is, to
the most devoted of his Vassals! These abject Creatures, ^live in a Country
full of Mines; we have already made entrance upon our Iron; and in the very
surface of the ground among us, there lies C^per enough to supply all this
world; besides other Mines hereafter to be exposed; but our shiftless Indians
were never Owners of so much as a Knife, till we come among them; their name
for a^ English-in^^, was a Knife man; Stone was instead of Metal for their
tools; and for their C^^ns, they have only (...) B^^ads with Holes in them to
string them upon a bracelet, whereof some are (...); and of these there go six
for a penny; some are black or (...); and of these go three for a penny; this
Wampam, as the call it, is made of the Shellfish, which lies upon the
Seacoast continually.

They Live in a Country, where we now have all the conveniences of humane
life: but as for them, their hoasing is nothing but a few matts tied about
poles fastened in the earth, where a good are is their Bed-Clothes in the
coldest seasons; their Coothing is but a skin of a Beast, Covering their
Hind-parts, their Fore-parts having but a little Apron where Nature calls for
secrecy; their diet has not a greater dainty than their Nokehick, that is a
spoonful of their parched meal, with a spoonful of water, which will strengthen
them to travel a day together; except we should mention the Flesh of De^rs
Bears, Mo^se, Rackoons, and the like, which they have when they can catch them;
as also a little fish, which if they would preserve 'twas by drying, not by
salting; for they had not a grain of Salt, in the world, I think, till we
bestowed it on them. Their Physic is, excepting a few odd Spicificks, which
some of them Encounter certain cases with, nothing hardly, but an Hot-house, or
a Powam; their Hot-House is a little, cave about eight foot over, where after
they have terribly heated it, a crew of them go sit and sweat and smoke for an
hour together, and then immediately run into some very cold adjacent brook,
without the least mischief to them; it is this way they recover themselves from
some ^^feases, particularly from the French; but in ^hoft of their dangerous
Distempers, it is a (...) that must be sent for; that is, a Priest, who has more
Familiarity with Satan then his Neighbors; this Conjurer comes and Roars, and
Howls, and uses Magical Ceremonies over, the Sick man, and will be well paid
for it, when he has done; if this don't effect the cure, the man's Love is come,
and then is an end.

They five in a Country, full of the best Ship-Timber under Heaven: but never,
saw a Ship till some came from Europe hither; and then they were scared out of
their wits, to see the Minister, come sailing in, and spitting fire with a
mighty noise, out of her floating side; they cross the water, in Canoo's, made
sometimes of Trees which they burn and hew, till they have hollowed them; and
sometimes of B^rks, which they stitch into a light so^t of a Vessel, to be
easily carried over land; if they over-sett, it is but a little paddling like a
dog, and they are soon where they were.

Their way of living, is infinitely Barbarous: the men are most abominably
sl^athful; making their poor Sqaws, or wives, to plant, and dress, and barn,
and beat there Corn, and Build their, Wig wams for them; which perhaps may be
the reason of their extraordinary ease in Childbirth. In the mean time, their
chief employment, when they I condescend unto any, is that of Hunting; wherein
they'^ go out some scores, if not Hundreds of them in a company, driving all
before them.

They contnue in a place, till they have burnt, up all the Wood thereabouts,
and then* they, pluck up Stakes; to follow the Wood, which they cannot fetch
home unto themselves; hence when they enquire about the English, Why come they
hither! they have themselves very Learnedly determined the case, I was because
we wanted F iting. No Acts are understood among them, unless just so far as to
maintain their Brutish Conversation, which is little more than is to be found
among the very Bevers upon our Streams.

Their Division of Time is by Sleeps, and Moons, and Winters; and by lodging
abroad, they have somewhat observed the motions of the Stars; among which it has
been surprising unto me to find, that they have always called Charles's* Wain
by the name of P^^ukunna^^w, or The Bear, which is the name whereby Europeans
also have distinguished it. Moreover, they have little, if any Traditions among
them worthy of our notice; and Reading and Writing is altogether unknown to
them, though there is a Rock or two in the Country that has unaccountable
Characters Engraved upon it. All the Religion they have amounts unto thus much;
they believe, that there are many Gods, who made and own the several Nations of
the world; of which a certain Great God in the South-west Regions of Heaven
bears the greatest Figure. They believe, that every remarkable Creature has a
peculiar God within it, or about it: there is with them, a Sun-God, a Moon-god,
and the like; and they cannot conceive but that the fire must be a kind of a
God, inasmuch as a Spark of it* will soon produce very strange effects. They
believe that when any good or ill happens to them, there is the favor or the
anger of a God expressed in it; and hence as in a time of Calamity they keep a
Dance, or a day of extravagant ridiculous Devotions to their God, so in a time
of Prosperity they likewise have a Feast, wherein they also make presents one
unto another. Finally, they believe, that their cheef God Kautantowit, made a
man and woman of a Stone; which, upon dislike, he broke to pieces, and made
another man and woman of a Tree, which were the Fountains of all Mankind; and,
that we all have in us immortal Souls, which, if we were godly, shall go to a
splendid Entertainment with Kautantowit, but otherwise, must wander about in a
restless Horror for-ever. But if you say to them any thing of a Resurrection,
they will reply upon you, i shall never believe it! And when they have any
weighty undertaking before them, it is an usual thing for them to have their
Assemblies, wherein after the usage of some Diabolical Rites, a Devil appears
unto them, to inform them and advise them about their circumstances; and
sometimes there are odd Events of their making these Applications to the Devil.
For instance, it is particularly affirmed, That the Indians in their Wars with
us, finding a sore inconvenience by our Dogs, which would make a sad yelling if
in the Night they scented the approaches of them, they sacrificed a Dog to the
Devil; after which no English Dog would bark at an Indian for diverse months
ensuing. This was the miserable people, which our Eliot propounded unto
himself, the saving of! And he had a double work incumbent on him; he was to
make Men of them, ere he could hope to see them Saints; they must be civilized
er'e they could be Christianized; he could not, as Gregory once of our Nation,
see any thing Angelical to bespeak his Labors for their eternal Welfare; all
among them was Diabolical. To think on Raising a number of these hideous
Creatures, unto the Elevations of our Holy Religion, must argue more than
common or little Sentiments in the Undertaker; but the Faith of an Eliot could
encounter it!

I confess, there was one, I cannot call it so much guess as wish, wherein he
was willing a little to indulge himself; and that was, That our Indians are the
posterity of the dispersed and rejected Israelites, concerning whom our God has
promised that they shall yet be saved, by the Deliverer coming to turn away
ungodliness from them He saw the Indians using many Parables in their
Discourses; much given to Anointing of their Heads; much delighted in Dancing,
especially after Victories; computing their Times by Nights and Months; giving
Dowries for Wives and causing their Women to dwell by themselves at certain
seasons, for secret causes; and accustoming themselves to grievous Mournings
(...) Yellings for the Dead; all which were, usual things among the Israelites.
They have too a great unkindness for our Swine; but I suppose that is because
our Hogs devour the Clams which are a Dainty with them. He also saw some
learned men, looking for the lost Israelites among the Indians in America, and
counting that they had Thorow-good reasons for doing so. And a few small
Arguments, or indeed but Conjectures, meeting with a savourable Disposition in
the Hearer, will carry some conviction with them; especially, if a Report of a
Menasseh ben Israel be to back them. He saw likewise the Judgments threatened
unto the Israelites of old, strangly fulfilled upon our Indians; particularly
that, Ye shall ^^t the flesh of your Sons, which is done with exquisite
Cruelties upon the Prisoners that they take from one another in their Battles.
Moreover, it is a Prophesy in Deuteronomy. 28 68. The Lord shall bring thee into Egypt
again with Ships, by the way whereof I spoke unto thee, Thou shall see it no
more again; and there shall ye be sold unto* your Enemies, and no man shall buy
you. This did our Eliot imagine accomplished, when the Captives taken by us in
our late wars upon them, were sent to be sold, in the Coasts lying not very
remote from Egypt on the Mediterranean Sea, and scarce any Chapmen would offer
to take them off. Being upon such as these accounts not unwilling, if it were
possible, to five, the Indians found Israelites, they were, you may be sure,
not a whit the less, Beloved for their (supposed) Fathers sake; and the
Fatigues of his Fravails went on the more cheerfully, or at least, the more
hopefully, because of such possibilities.

The First step which he judged Necessary now to be taken by him, was to learn
the Indian-language; for he saw them so stupid and senseless, that they would
never do so much as enquire after the Religion of the strangers now come into
their Country, much less would they so far imitate us as to leave off their
beastly way of living, that they might be partakers of any Spiritual Advantage
by us: unless we could first address them in a Language of their own. Behold,
new difficulties to be surmounted by our indefatigable Eliot! He hires a Native
to teach him this exotic language, and with a laborious care and skill,
reduces it into a Grammar which afterward he published. There is a Letter or
two of our Alphabet, which the Indians never had in Theirs; tho there were
enough of the Dog in their Temper, there can scarce be found an R in their
language; save that the Indians to the Northward, who have a peculiar Dialect,
pronounce an R where an N is pronounced by our Indians; but if their Alphabet
be short, I am sure the words composed of it are long enough to tire the
patience of any scholar in the world; they are Sesquipedalia Verb^ which their
Linguo is composed of; one would think they had been growing ever since Babil
unto the Dimensions to which they are not extended. For instance, if my Reader
will count how many Letters there are in this one word, Nammat chekodtant a
mooon ganunnon (...) when he has done, for his reward l'le (...) him, it
signifies no more in English that our Lusts; and if I were to translate, our
Lyo^^ it must be nothing shorter than, Noowomen tam^oonkanuonnash. Nor do we
find in all this Language the least Affinity to, or Derivation from, any
European speech that we are acquainted with. I know not what thoughts it will
produce in my Reader, when I inform him, that once finding that the Dxmons is
possessed young woman, whereof I have here tofore given the world some account,
understood the Latin and Greek and Hebrew Languages, my curiosity led me to
make trial of this Indian language, and the Demons did seem as if they did not
understand it. This tedious language our Eliot quickly became a master of; he
employed a pregnant and witty Indian, who also spoke English well, for his
assistance in it; and compiling some discourses by his help, he would single
out a Word, a Noun, a Verb, and pursue it through all its variations: having
finished his grammar, at the Close he writes, Prayers and p^bits through Faith in
Christ Jesus will do any thing! and being by his Prayers Pains thus furnished,
he set himself in the ^^ear 16^6. to preach the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, among these Desolate outcasts.

It remains, that I lay before the world, the Remarkable Conduct and Success of
this Famous Man, in his great Affayr; and I shall endeavor to do it, by
Englishing and Reprinting a letter, sent a while since by my Father, unto his
Learned and Renoun'd correspondent, the Venerable Dr. Leusden at Utrecht: which
letter has already been published, if I mistake not, in Four or Five diverse
Languages. I find it particularly published, by the most Excellent Jurien, at
the end of a Pastoral Letter; and this Refflecton then worthily made upon it,
Cette Lettre doit apporter (...) grande Consolation, a toutes les bonnes ames,
qui sont alterees de Justice, and qui sont enflammees du zele de la gloire de
Dien. I therefore persuade my self that the Republication of it will not be
ungrateful unto many good Souls in our Nation, who have a due thirst and zeal
for such things as are mentioned in it; and when that is done, I shall presume
to make some Annotations for the illustration of sundry memorable things
therein Pointed at.

A LETTER Concerning the Success of the Gospel, amongst the INDIANS in
New England.
Written by Mr. Increase Mather, Minister of the Word of God at Boston, and
Rector of the College at Cambridge in New England, to Dr. John Leusden, Hebrew
Professor in the University of Utrecht.
Translated out of Latin into English.
Worthy and much Honored Sir,
YOur Leters were very grateful to me (a) by which I understand that you and
others in your famous University of Utrecht desire to be informed concerning
the converted Indians in America: Take therefore a true Account of them in a
few words

It is above forty Years since that truly godly Man, Mr. John Elliot, Pastor
of the Church at Rocksborough, (about a mile from Boston in New England) being
warmed with a holy Zeal of Converting the Americans, set himself to earn the
Indian Tongue, that he might more easily and successfully (b) open to them the
Mysteries of the Gospel; upon account of which he has been (and not
undeservedly) called, The Apostle of the American Indians This Reverend Person,
not without very great labor, Translated the whole Bible into the Indian
Tongue; (c) he Translated also several English Treatises of Practical Divinity
and Catechisms into their Language. Above 26 Years ago he gathered a Church of
Converted Indian in a Town called (d) Natick; these Indians confessed their
sins with Tears, and professed their Faith in Christ, and afterward they and
their Children were Baptized, and they were solemnly joined together in a
Church Covenant; the said Mr. Eliot was the first that Administered the Lords
Supper to them. The pastor of that Church now is an Indian, his Name is Daniel.
Besides this Church at Nature, among our Inhabitants in the ^A ssaeouses Colony
there are four Indian Assemblies, (e) where the Name of the true God and Jesus
Christ is solemnly called upon; these Assemblies have some American Preachers.
Mr. Eliot formerl^^nsed to preach to them once every fortnight, but now he is
weakened with Labors and Oldage, being in the Eighty fourth Year of his Age,
and Preaches not to the Indians oftener than once in two Months.

There is another Church, consisting only of Converted Indians, about fifty
Miles from hence in an Indian Town called Mashippang: the (...) Pastor of that
Church was an English Man, who being skillful in the American Language,
Preached the Gospel to them in their own Tongue. (f) This English Pastor is
dead, and instead of him that Church has an Indian Preacher.

There are besides that, five Assemblies of Indians Professing the Name of
Christ, not far distant from Mathipp^^g, which have Indian Preachers: (g) John
Cotton, Pastor of the Church at Plymouths (Son of my venerable Father-inLaw
John Cotton, formerly the famous Teacher of the Church at B (...)) has made
very great progress in learning the Indian Tongue, and is very skifull in it;
he Preaches in their own Language to the last five mentioned Congregations
every Week Moreover of the Inhabitants of Sacone in (...) Colony there is a
great Congregation of those who for distinction sake are called Praying
Indians, because they Pray to God in Christ.

Not far from a promontory called Cape Cod, there are six Assembles of Heathens
who are to be reckoned as Catechumens, amongst whom there are six Indian
Preachers: Samuel Treat, Pastor of a Church at Eastham, Preaches to those
Congregations in their own Language. There are likewise amongst the Islanders
of Non^ucket a Church, with a Pastor who was lately a Heathen, and several
Meetings of (...) who are instructed by the Converted Indians. There is also
another Island about seven Leagues long (called Marthas Utneyard) where are two
American Churches planted, which are more famous than the rest, over one of
which there presides an ancient Indian as Pastor, called H^acooms: John
Hiacoomes, Son of the said Indian Pastor, also Preaches the Gospel to his
Contrymen. In another Church in that place, john Tockinosh a Converted
Indian teaches. In these Churches ruling Elders of the Indians are joined to
the Pastors: The Pastors were chosen by the people, and when they had fasted
and prayed, Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton laid their Hands on them, so that they
were solemnly Ordained. All the Congregations (h) of the Converted Indians
(both the Catechumens and those in Church Order) every Lord's Day meet together;
the pastor or Preacher always begins with Prayer, and without a Form, because
from the Heart; when the Ruler of the Assembly has ended Prayer, the whole
Congregation of Indians Praise God with singing; some of them are excellent
Singers: After the Psalm, he that Preaches reads a place of Scripture (one or
more verses as he will) and expounds it, gathers Doctrines from it proves them
by Scriptures and Reasons, and infers uses from them after the manner of the
English, of whom have been taught; then another prayer to God in the Name of
Christ concludes the whole Service. Thus do they meet together twice every
Lord's Day. They observe no Holy days but the Lord's Day, except upon some
extraordinary occasion; and then they solemnly set apart whole days, either in
giving Thanks or Fasting and Praying with great fervor of mind.

Before the English came into these Coasts these barbarous Nations were
altogether ignorant of the true God; hence it is that in their Prayers and
Sermons they use English Words and Terms; he that calls upon the most Holy Name
of God, says, Jehovah, or God, or Lord, and also they have learned and borrowed
many other Theological Phrases from us

In short, There are six Churches of Baptized Indians in New England, and
eighteen Assemblies of Catechumens, professing the Name of Christ: Of the
Indians there are four and Twenty who are Preachers of the word of God, and
besides these there are four English Ministers who Preach the Gospel in the
Indian Tongue. (^) I am now my self weary with writing, and I fear left if I
should add more, I should also be tedious to you; yet one thing I must add
(which I had almost forgot) that there are many of the Indians Children who
have learned by heart the Catechism, either of that famous Divine William
Perkins, or that put forth by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and in
their own Mother Tongue can answer to all the Questions in it.

But I must end I salute the Famous professors in your University, to whom I
desire you to communicate this Letter, as written to them also.

Farewell, (...) Sir; the Lord preserve your Health for the Benefit of your
Country, his Church, and of Learning.

Boston in New England July 12. 1687. Yours ever, INCREASE MATHER.

(a) The Success of the Gospel in the EAST INDIES
AFter the Writing of this Letter, there came one to my Hands from the famous
Dr. Le^saen, together with a new and fair Edition of his Hebrew Psalter,
Dedicated unto the Name of my Absent Parent. He therein informs me, That our
Example had awakened the Dutch to make some noble Attempts for the Furtherance
of the Gospel in the East Indies; besides what memorable things were done by
the Excellent Robert Junius, in Formosa fifty years ago. He also informs me,
That in and near the Island of Ceyl^n, the Dutch Pastors have Baptized about
three hundred Thousand of the Eastern Indians; for although the Ministers are
utterly ignorant of their Language, yet there are Schoolmasters who teach
them, The Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Ten Commandments, a Morning Prayer, an
Evening Prayer, a Blessing before Meat, and another after; and the Minister in
his Visits being assured by the Master, who of them has learned all of them
seven things, he thereupon counts they have such a perfect number of
Seize, that he presently Baptises them. The pious Reader will doubtless
bless God for this; but he will easily see that one of our Converted Indians
has cost more pains than many of those; more thorough work has been made with
them.

(b) Mr. Eliot's way of opening the Mysteries of the Gospel to our INDIANS.
It Was in the year 1646, that Mr. Eliot accompanied by three more, gave a visit
unto an Assembly of Indians. of whom he desired a Meeting at such a time and
place, that he might lay before them the things of their Eternal Peace. After a
serious Prayer, he gave them (...) Sermon which continued about a quarter above
an hour, and contained the principal Articles of the Christian Religion,
applying all to the condition of the Indians present^ having done, he asked of
them, whether they understood? and with a general reply they answered, They
understood all. He then began what was his usual method afterward in treating
with them; that is, he caused them to propound such questions as they pleased,
unto himself; and he gave wise and good answers to them all. Their Questions
would often, though not always; refer to what he had new^^ Preached; and he this
way not only made a (...) of their pros^^^ by his Ministry, brought give an
Edge to what he delivered unto (...) of their Questions would be a little
(...), and required a good measure of (...) in the Minister concerned with
them; (...) this our Eliot wanted not. He would also (...) proper Questions
unto them, and at one of his (...) Exercises with them, he made the young ones
capable of regarding those three Questions,

Q. 1. Who made you and all the world?

Q. 2. Who do you look should save you from Sin and Hell?

Q. 3. How many Commandments has the Lord given you to keep?

It was his wisdom that he began with them upon such principles, as they
themselves had already some Notions of; such as that of an Heaven for good, and
Hell for bad people, when they Died. It broke his gracious heart within him to
see, what Floods of Tears fell from the Eyes of several among these Degenerate
Salvages, at the first Addresses which he made unto them; yea, form the very
worst of them all. He was very inquisitive to learn who were the Powawes, that
is, the Sorcerers and Seducers, that maintained the Worship of the Devil in any
of their Societies; and having in one of his first Journeys to them, found out
one of those Wretches, he made the Indian come unto him and said, Whether do
you suppose God, or Chepian (i. e. the Devil) to be the Author of all good? The
Conjurer answered, God. Upon this he added with a stern Countenance, Why do you
pray to Chepian then? and the poor man was not able to stand or speak before
him; but at last made promises of Reformation.

The Text which he first Preached upon, was that in Ezekiel. 37. 9,10. That by
Prophesying to the Wi^^ he Wind came and the dry bones lived; and it was an
observation made by one, who then justly confessed, there was not much weight
in it; That the word which the Indians use for Wind is Wauba^, and an Indian of
that Name was one of the first that here zealously promoted the Conversion of
his Neighbors. But having thus entered upon the Teaching of these poor
Creatures, it is incredible how much: time, toil; and hardship, he underwent in
the Prosecution of this Undertaking; how many weary days and nights rolled
over him; how many tiresome Journeys he endured; and how many terrible dangers,
he had experince of. If you briefly would know what he felt, and what carried
him through all, take it in his own words, in a letter to the Honorable Mr.
Wi^sl^^; says he I have not been dry night nor day, from the third day of the
week unto the sixth, but so Traveled, and at night pull off my Boots, wring my
Stock^^^, and on (...) them again, and so continue. But God steps in and helps.
I have considered the Word of God in 2. Tim. 2. 3. Endure hardship as a good
Soldier of Christ.

(c) His Translating the Bible, and other Books of Piety into the INDIAN TONGUE.
ONe of his Remarkable Cares for these illiterate Indians, was to bring them
into the use of Schools and Books. He quickly procured the benefit of Schools
for them; wherein thy profited so much; that not only very many of them quickly
came to Read and Write, but also several arrived unto a Liberal Education in
our College, and one or two of them took their degree with the rest of our
Graduates. And for Books, it was his chief desire that the sacred Scriptures
might not in an unknown Tongue be Locked or Hidden form them; very hateful and
hellish did the policy of Popery appear to him on this Account; Our Eliot was
very unlike to that Franciscan, who writing into Europe gloried much how many
thousands of Indians he had Converted, but added, That he desired his Friend
would send him the Book called the Bible; for he had heard of there being such
a Book in Europe, which might be of some use to him. No, our Eliot found he
could not live without Bible himself; he would have parted with all his Estate
sooner than have lost a Leaf of it; and he knew it would be of more than some
use unto the Indians too; he therefore with a vast Labor translated the Holy
Bible into the Indian Language. Behold, ye Americans, the greatest Honor that
ever you were Partakers of! This Bible was Printed here at our Ca^b^dge and it
is the only Bible that ever was Printed in all America, from the very
Foundation of the World. The whole Translation he writ with but one Pen; which
Pen had it not been last, would have certainly deserved a Richer case than was
bestowed upon that Pen which will and writ his Translation of Plutarch with.
The Bible being justly made the Leader, of all the rest, a Little
Indian-Library quickly followed: for besides Primers, and (...) and ^ome other
such Composures, we quickly had, the Practice of Piety, in the Indian Tongue;
the Reverend Richard B^^ters, Call to the Un^nverted; he also Translated, some
of Mr. Ship^^d's Composures; and such (...) likewise there was occasion for. It
cannot but be ho^ed that some Fish were to be made Alive, since the Waters of
the Sanctuary thus came unto them.

(d) His Gathering of a Church at NATICK.
The Indians that had felt the Impressions of his Ministry, were quickly
distinguished by the Name of, Praying Indians; and these Praying Indians as
quickly were for a more Decent and English way of Living, and they desired a
more Fixed Cohabitation. At several places did they now combine and settle; But
the place of Greatest Name among their Towns, is that of Natick.

Here 'twas, that in the year 1651. those that had heretofore lived like the
wild Beasts in the Wilderness, now compacted themselves into a Town; and they
first applied themselves to the forming of their Civil Government. Our General
Court, not withstanding their exact study to keep these Indians very sensible
of their being subject unto the English Empire, yet had allowed them their
smaller Courts, wherein they might govern their own smaller Cases and Concerns,
after their own particular Modes, and might have their Town-Orders, if I may
call them so, peculiar to themselves. With respect hereunto, Mr. Eliot on a
Solemn Fast made a public Von, That seeing these Indians were not Prepossessed
with any Forms of Government, he would with not them into such a Form, as we
had written in the Word of God, that so they might be a people in all things
ruled by the Lord. Accordingly, he Expounded unto them the eighteenth Chapter
of Exodus; and then they chose Rulers of Hundreds, of Fifties, of Tens; and
therewithal Entered into this Covenant.

We are the sons of Adam; We and our Forefathers have a long time been Lost in
our sins; but now the mercy of the Lord begins to find us out again;
therefore the grace of Christ helping us, we do give our-selves and our
Children, unto God, to be his people. He shall Rule us in all our Affairs; The
Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King; he will
save us; and the wisdom which God has taught us in his Book shall guide us. Oh
Jehovah, Teach us Wisdom; send thy Spirit into our hearts; take us to be thy
people, and let us take thee to be our God.

Such an opinion about the perfection of the Scripture had he, that he thus
expressed himself upon this occasion, God will being Nations into Distress and
perpi^^^ty, that so they may be forced unto the Scriptures; all Governments
will be shaken, that men may be forced at length to Pitch upon that firm
foundation, The Word of God. The Little Towns of these Indians being pitched
upon this foundation, they utterly abandoned that Polygamy which had heretofore
been Common among them; they made severe Laws against Fornication,
Drunkenness, and Sabbath, breaking, and other Immoralities; and they next began
to Lament after the Establishment of a Church Order among them, and after the
several Ordinances and Privileges of a Church Communion. The Churches of
New England have usually been very strict, in their Admissions to
Church Fellowship, and required very signal demonstrations of a Repenting and a
Believing Soul, before they thought men fit subjects to be entrusted with, The
Rights of the Kingdom of Heaven. But the seemed rather to Augment than Abate
their usual Strictness, when the examination of the Indians was to be
performed. A Day was therefore set apart, which they called, Natooton^th
earksuk, or, a Day of Asking Questions, when the ministers of the Adjacent
Churches, assisted with all the best Interpreters that could be had, publicly
examined a good Number of these Indians, about their Seize both in
Knowledge and in Virtue. And notwithstanding the great satisfaction then
received, our Churches being willing to proceed Surely, and therefore Slowly,
in Raising them up to a ChurchState which might be Comprehended in our
Consociations, the Indians were afterward called in Considerable Assemblies
convened for that purpose, to make open Confessions of their Faith in God and
Christ, and of the Efficacy which his word had upon them for their Conversion
to Him; which Confessions being taken in writing from their mouths by able
Interpreters, were scanned by the people of God, and found much Acceptance with
them.

I need pass no further Censure upon them, than what is given by my
Grandfather, she well-known Richard Mather, in an Epistle of his, Published on
this occasion; says he, There is so much of Gods work among them, as that I
cannot but count it a great evil, yea a great injury to God and His Goodness,
for any to make light of it. To see and hear Indians opening their mouths, and
lifting up their hands and eyes, in prayer to the Living God, calling on him by
his Name Jehovah, in the Mediation of Jesus Christ, and this for a good while
together; to see and hear them Exhorting one another from the Word of God; to
see and and hear them confessing the Name of Christ Jesus, and their own
sinfulness; sure this is more than usual! And tho they spoke in a Language, of
which many of us understood but little, yet we that were present that day, we
saw and heard them penform the Duties mentioned with such grave and sober
Countenances, with such comely Reverence in their Gesture, and their whole
carriage, and with such plenty of Tears trickling down the Cheeks of some of
them, as did argue to us that they spoke with the Holy Fear of God, and it much
affected our Hearts.

At length was a Church State settled among them: they entered, as our Churches
do, into an holy Covenant, wherein they gave themselves, first unto the Lord,
and them unto one another, to attend the Rules, and Helps, and expect the
Blessings of the Everlasting Gospel; and Mr. Eliot, having a Mission from the
Church of Roxbury, unto the work of the Lord Christ among the Indians,
conceived himself sufficiently Authorized unto the performing of all
Church-work about them; grounding is on Act, 13,1,2,3,4. and he accordingly
Administered, f^^sh the Baptism, and then the Supper of the Lord unto them.

(e) The Hindrances and Obstructions, that the DEVIL. gave unto HIM.
WE find four Assemblies of Praying Indians besides that of Natick, in our
Neighborhood. But why no more? Truly, not because our Eliot was wanting in his
Offers, and Labors for their good; but because many of the obdurate Infidels
would not receive the Gospel of Salvation. In one of his Letters, I find him
giving this ill report, with such a good reason for it; Lyn- Indians are all
naught, save one who sometimes comes to hear the Word; and the reason why they
are bad, is, principally because their Sachim is naught, and care (...) not to
pray unto God. Indeed the Sachims, or the Princes, of the Indians generally did
all they could that their Subjects might not entertain the Gospel; the Devils
having the Sachims on their side, thereby kept their possession of the people
too. Their Pa^waws or Clergymen, did much to maintain the Interest of the
Devils in this Wilderness* those Children of the Devil, and Enemies of all
Righteousness, did not cease to pervert the Right-ways of the Lord; but their
Sachims or Magistrates did More toward it; for they would presently Raise a
Storm of Persecution upon any of their vassals that should Pray unto the
Eternal God. The ground of this conduct in them was, an add Fear, that Religion
would abridge them of the Tyranny which they had been used unto (...) they
always like the Devil held their people in a most absolute servitude, and Ruled
by no Law but their Will, which left the poor Slaves nothing that they could
call their Own. They ^ow suspected that Religion would put a Bridle upon such
usurpations, and oblige them to a more Equal and Humane way of Government; they
therefore some of them, had the Impudence to Address the English: that (...)
motions about the Christian Religion might ever he made unto them; and Mr.
Eliot sometimes in the Wilderness, without the Company or Assistence of any
other Englishman, has been treated in a very Threatening and Barbarous manner
by some of these Tyrants; but God inspired him with so much Resolution as to
tell them, I am about the work of the Great God, and my God is with me; so that
I fear neither you, nor all the Sachims in the Country; I Will go on, and do you
Touch me, if you dare! upon which the Stoutest of them have shrunk and fell
before him. And One of them, he at length Conquered by preaching unto him a
Sermon upon the Temptations of Our Lord; particularly, the Temptation fetched
from the Kingdoms and Glories of the World.

The Little Kingdoms and Glories of the Great Men among the Indians, was a
Powerful Obstacle to the success of Mr. Eliots Ministry; and it is observable,
that several of those Nations which thus refused the Gospel, quickly afterward
were so Divel-driven as to begin an unjust and bloody War upon the English;
which issued in their speedy and utter Extirpation from the Face of Gods Earth.
It was particularly Remarked, in Philip, the Ringleader of the most calamitous
war that ever they made upon us; our Eliot made a Tender of the Everlasting
Salvation to that King; but the monster entertain d'it with contempt and anger,
and after the Indian mode of joining signs with words, he took a Button upon
the Coat of the Reverend Than, adding That he cared for his Gospel, just (...)
much ^s he cared for that Button. The world has heard what a Terrible Ruin
soon came upon that woeful Creature, and upon all his People. It was not long
before the Hand which now writes, upon a certain occasion took off the jaw from
the blasphemous exposed Skull of that Leviathan; and the Renowned Samuel Lee is
now Pastor to an English Congregation, sounding and showing the praises of
Heaven, upon that very spot of ground, where Philip and his Indians were lately
worshipping of the Devil.

Sometimes the more immediate Hand of God, by cutting off the principal
Opposers of the Gospel among the Indians made way for Mr. Eliot's Ministry. As,
I remember, he relates that an Association of profane Indians near our
Weymouth, set themselves to deter and seduce the Neighbor Indians from the
Right ways of the Lord. But God quickly sent the Smallpox among them, which
like a great Plague soon swept them away, and thereby engaged the rest unto
himself. I need only to add, That one Attempt made by the Devil, to prejudice
the Pagans against the Gospel, had something in it extraordinary. While Mr.
Eliot was Preaching of Christ unto the other Indians, a Daeman appeared unto a
Prince of the Eastern-Indians, in a shape that had some Resemblance of Mr.
Eliot or of an English Minister, pretending to be, The English-man's God. The
Spectre commanded him, To forbear the drinking of Rum, and To observe the
Sabbath Day, and To deal justly with his Neighbors, all which things had been
inculcated in Mr. Eliot's Ministry; promising therewithal unto him* That if he
did so, at his death his Soul should Ascend unto an happy place; otherwise
Descend unto miseries; but the Apparition all the while never said one word
about Christ, which was the main subject of Mr. Eliot's Ministry. The (...)
received such an impression from the Apparition, that he dealt justly with all
men, except in the bloody Tragadies and Cruelties he afterward committed on
the English in our Wars; he kept the Sabbath day like a Fast, frequently
attending in our Congregations; he would not middle with any Rum, though usually
his Countrymen, had rather dye than undergo such a piece of Self-denial; that
Liquor has merely E^^nanted them At last, and not long since this Doemon
appeared again unto this Fagan, requiring him to kill himself, and assuring him
that he should Revive in a day or two, never to die any more. He thereupon
diverse times attempted it, but his Friends very carefully prevented it; however
at length he found a f^ir opportunity, for this fowl Business, and Hanged
himself; you may be sure, without his expected Resurrection. But it is easy to
see what a stumbling block was here laid before the miserable Indians.

(f) The Indian-Churches at Mashippaug, and elsewhere.
THe same spirit which acted Mr. Eliot, quickly inspired others elsewhere, to
prosecute the work of rescuing the poor Indians out of their worse than
Egyptian-Darkness, in which Evil Angels had been so long preying upon them. One
of these was the Godly and Gracious Richard Bourn, who soon saw a great effect
of his Holy Labors. In the 1666. Mr. Eliot accompanied by the Honorable
Governor, and several Magistrates and Ministers of Plymouth-Colony, procured a
vast Assembly at Mashippaug; and there a good number of Indians, made
confessions touching the Knowledge and belief, and Regeneration of their Souls,
with such understanding and affection as was extremely grateful to the pious
Auditory. Yet such was the strictness of the good people in this Affair, that
before they would countenance the advancement of these Indians unto
Church Fellowship, they ordered their Confessions to be written and sent unto
all the Churches in the Colony, for their Approbation; but so approved they
were, that afterward, the Messengers of all the Churches giving their Presence
and consent, they became a Church, and chose Mr. Bourn to be their Pastor; who
was then by Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton Ordained unto that Office over them. From
hence Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton went over to an Island called Martha's Vineyard,
where God had so succeeded the honest Labors of some, and particularly of the
Mayhew's as that a Church was gathered.

This Church, after Fasting and Prayer, chose one Hiacoomes to be their Pastor,
John Tockinosh, an able and a discreet Christian to be their Teacher; Joshua
Mummeecheegs and John Nanaso to be ruling Elders; and these were then Ordained
by Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton thereunto. Distance of Habitation, caused this one
Church by mutual agreement afterward to become two; the Pastor and one Ruling
Elder taking one part, and the Teacher and one Ruling Elder, another, and at
Nantucket another adjacent Island was another Church of Indians quickly
gathered, who chose an Indian, John Gibs to be their Minister. These Churches
are so exact in their Admission, and so solemn in their Discipline, and so
serious in their Communion, that some of the Christian English in the
Neighborhood, which would have been loath to have mixed with them in a civil
Relation, yet have gladly done it in a Sacred One

It Is needless for me to repeat what my Father has written about the other
Indian Congregations; only there having been made mention of one Hiacooms, I am
willing to annex a Passage or two concerning that memorable Indian. That Indian
was a very great Instrument bringing his Pagan and wretched Neighbors, (...) a
saving acquaintance with our Lord Jesus Christ; and God gave him the Honor,
not only of so doing much for some, but also of suffering much from others, of
those unhappy Salvages. Once Particularly, this Hiacoomes received a cruel blow
from an Indian Prince, which, if some English had not been there, might have
killed him, for his Praying unto God. And after wards he gave this account of
his Trial in it; said he, I have two hands; I had one Hand for Injuries, and
the other for God; while I did receive wrong with the one, the other laid the
greater hold on God.

Moreover, the Powawes did use to hector and abuse the Praying Indians, at such
a rate, as terrified others from joining with them; but once when those Witches
were bragging, that they could Kill all the Praying Indians, if they would;
Hiacoomes replied Let all the Powawes in the Island come together, I Will venture
my self in the midst of them; let them use all their witchcrafts; with the help
of God, I Will tread upon them all. By this courage, he silenced the Powawes: but
at the same time also he Heartned the People, at such a rate as was truly
wonderful; nor could any of them ever harm this Eminent Confessor afterward;
nor indeed any Proselyte which had been by his means brought home to God; yea,
it was observed after this, that they rather Killed than ^ur'd all such of the
Heathen as would yet make use of their Enchantments for help against their
Sicknesses.

(g) Of Mr. Eliot's Fellow Laborers in the INDIAN-WORK.
SO little was the Soul of our Eliot infected with any Envy, as that he longed
for nothing more than Fellow Laborers, that might move and shine in the same
Orb with himself; he made his cries both to God and Man, for more Laborers to
be thrust-forth, into the IndianHarvest; and indeed it was an Harvest of so few
secular Advantages and Encouragements, that it must be nothing less than a
Divine Thrust; which could make any to Labor in it. He saw the Answer of his
prayers, in the Generous, and vigorous Attempts made by several other most
worthy preachers of the Gospel, to Gospellize our perishing Indians. At the
writing of my Fathers letter there were Four; but the Number of them increases
apace among us. At Martha's Vineyard, the old Mr. Mayhew, and several of his
Sons, or Grandsons have done very worthily for the Souls of the Indians; there
were fifteen years ago, by computation, about fifteen hundred Seals of their
Ministry upon that one Island. In Connecticut the holy and acute Mr. Fitch, has
made noble Essays toward the Conversion of the Indians; but, I think, the
Prince he has to deal withal, being an obstinate infidel, gives unhappy
Remora's to the Successes of his Ministry. And godly Mr. (...), has in that
Colony, deserved well, if I mistake not, upon the same account. In Massachusetts
we see at this day, the Pious Mr. Daniel Gookin, the gracious Mr. Peter
Thatcher, the well-accomplished and industrious Mr. Grindal Rawson, all of them
hard at work, to turn these floor Creatures from darkness unto light, and from
Satan unto God. In Plymouth, we have the most Active Mr. Samuel Treat laying
out himself to save this Generation; and there is one Mr. Tupper, who uses his
laudable Endeavors for the Instruction of them.

It Is my Relation to him, that causes me to refer unto the last place, the
mention of Mr. John Cotton, who addresses the Indians in their own Language
with an admirable Dexterity, and has done more than a little Service for them.
He hired an Indian after the rate of twelve pence per day for fifty days, to
reach him the Indian Tongue; but his knavish Tutor having received his whole
Pay too soon, r^n away before twenty-days were out; however, in this time he
had profited so far, that he could quickly Preach unto the Natives; and he has
ever-since being doing much for God among them: Having told my Reader, that ^he
(...) Edition of the Indian Bible was wholly of his Correction and Amendment;
because it, is not proper for me to say much of him, I shall only add this
Remarkable Story. Mr. Cotton, accompanied by the Governor and Major General,
and sundry Persons of Quality, made a Journey to a Nation of Indians in the
Neighborhood, with a free Offer of the Words whereby they might be Saved. The
Prince took time to consider of it, and according to the true English of Taking
Time in such cases, at length ^e told them, He did not accept the Tender which
they made him. They then took their leaves of him, not without first giving him
this plain and short Admonition, If God hate any mercy for your miserable
people, He (...) quickly find a way to take you out of the way. 'Twas presently
after this, that this Prince going forth to a ^attel against another Nation of
Indians, was killed in the fight; and the young Prince being in his Ministry,
the Government fell into the Hands of Protectors, which favored the Interest
of the Gospel. Mr. Cotton being advised of in speedily and prosperously.
Renewed the Tidings of an Eternal Savior to the Salvages, who have ever since
attended upon his Ministry; and the young (...), after he came to Age,
expressed his Approbation of the Christian Religion; especialy, when a
while-since, he lay a Dying of a tedious Distemper, and would keep Rea^ing of
Mr. (...) Call to the Viconverted, with floods of Tears in his Eyes, while he
had any theg^t to do it.

Such as these are the persons, whom our Eliot left Engaged in the Indian-work.
when he departed from his Employment unto his Recompense. And these Gentlemen
are so indefatigable in their Labors among the Indians, as that the most equal
Judges must acknowledge them worthy of much greater Salaries than they are
generously contented with. But one may see then, who inspired that clamorous
(tho contemptible) Persecutor of this Country, who very Zealously Addressed the
A. B. of Canterbury, that these Ministers might be deprived of their Little
Stipends, and that the said Stipends might go to maintain that Worship among
us, which the Plantation was Erected on purpose for the peaceable Avoiding of.

(h) The sacred and solemn Exercises performed in the Indian Congregations.
MY Fathers Account of the Exercises performed in the Indian-Congregations,
will-tell us what a Blessed Fruit our Eliot saw of his Labors, before he went
unto those Rewards which God had Reserved in the Heavens for him. Some of the
Indians quickly Built for themselves, good and large Meeting Houses after the
English Mode, in which also after the English Mode, they attended the Things of
the Kingdom of Heaven. And some of the English were helpful to them, upon this
account; among whom I ought particularly to mention that Learned, Pious, and
Charitable Gentleman, the Worshipful Samuel Sewal Esquire who at his own charge
built a Meeting house for one of the Indian Congregations, and gave those
Indians cause to pray for him under that character, He loves Our Nation, for
he: has built us a Synagogue.

(...) only remains that I give a touch or two upon the Worship which as
attended in the Synagogues of the Indians. And first, the very Name of Praying
Indians will assure us that Prayer is one of their Devotions; be sure; they
could not be our Eliot's Disciples if it were not so. But how do they Pray? We
are told, it is Without a Form, because from the Heart; which is as I remember,
L^tullions Expression concerning the the prayers in the Assemblies of the
Primitive Christians; namely, siut (...) g^iu de^ptutore. It is evident, that
the Primitive Christians had no stated Lanhuages among them; that no Forms of
Prayers were in their time imposed upon the Ministers of the Gospel; that ^^on
about the platform of prayer given us by our Lord, it was the opinion of Austin
himself, not-withstanding the Advances: made in his Age toward what we count
(...), that our Lord therein Taught (...) Words we should use in prayer, but
what Things we should (...). And whatever Scoffs the profanity of (...) has
abused that Phrase and Thing withal, (...) in his days counted it the Honor of
his Fathers public Prayers, That he had them from, and made them by the Holy
Spirit. Our Indians accordingly find, that if they study the Words of God, and
their own Sins and Wants, and Woes, they shall soon come to (...) Attainment,
Behold they pray! They can pray with much Pertinence and Enlargement; and would
much wonder at it, if they should hear of an English Clergy, that should Read
their prayers out of a Book, when they should pour out their Souls before the
God of Heaven.

Their Preaching has much of Eliot, and therefore you may be sure much of
Scripture; but perhaps more of the Christian than of the Scholar in it. I know
not how to describe it better, than by reciting the Heads of a Sermon, uttered
by an Indian, on a Day of Humiliation kept by them, at a time when great R^ins
had given much Damage to their Fruits and Fields; 'twas on this wise.

A little I shall say, according to that little I know.

Genesis 8. 20,21. And Noah built^an Altar, unto Jehovah; and he took of to my
clean Beast, and of every clean fom^ and offered burnt-offerings on the Altar.
And the Lord smelled a sweet favor, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not
again Curse the Ground. In that Noah Sacrificed, he showed himself thankful; in
that Noah worshipped, he (...) himself Godly. In that he offered Clean bea^^s,
he showed that God is an Holy God. And all that come to God, must be pure and
clean. Know, that we must by Repentance, purge our selves; which is the work we
are to do this Day.

Noah Sacrificed, and so Worshipped. This was the manner of old time. But what
Sacrifices have we now to offer? I shall answer by that in Psalm. 4. 5. Offer to
God the Sacrifice of Righteousness, and put your Trust in the Lord. These are
the true Spiritual Sacrifices which God requires at our hands; the Sacrifices
of Righteousness; that is, we must look to our hearts and ways, that-they be
Righteous; and then we shall be acceptable to God when we Worship (...). But if
we be unrighteous, unholy, ungodly, we shall not be accepted: our Sacrifices
will be stark naught. Again, We are to put our Trust in the Lord. Who else is
there for us to trust in? We must believe in the Word of God; if we doubt of
God, or doubt of his Word, our Sacrifices are little worth; but if we trust
steadfastly in God, our Sacrifices will be good.

Once more, what Sacrifices must me offer? My Answer is, we must offer such as
Abraham offered And what a Sacrifice was that? we are told in Gen- 22. 12. Now
I know that (...) fear me, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thy only
Son from me. It seems, he has but one dearly beloved, Son, and he offered that
Son to God; and so God said, I know thou fear me! Behold, a Sacrifice in
Dead and in Truth! such an one must we offer. Only, God requires not us to
Sacrifice our Sons, but our sins; our dearest Sins. God calls us this day to
part with all our Sins, though never so beloved; and we must not withold any of
them from him. If we will not part with All, the Sacrifice is not right. Let us
part with such Sins as we love best, and it will be a good Sacrifice!

God smelt a sweet favor in Noah's Sacrifice; and so will God receive our
Sacrifices, when we Worship him aright. But how did God manifest, his
Acceptance of Noah's Offering: 'twas by promising to Drown the world no more,
but give us Fruitful Seasons. God has chastised us of late, as if he would
utterly Drown us; and he has Drowned and Spoiled and Ruined a great deal of our
hay, and threatens, to kill our Cattle. It Is for this that we Fast and Pray
this Day. Let us then Offer a clean and pure Sacrifice, as Noah did; so God
will smell a favor or Rest, and he will withold the Rain, and Bless us with
such Fruitful Seasons as we are desiring of him.

Thus preached an Indian called Nishokkon, above thirty years ago; and since
that I suppose, they have grown a little further into the New-English way of
preaching: you may have in their sermons, a, Kukkooton^wehteaonk, that is, a
Doctrine, Nah^ootomtvehteaonk, or, an Answer, (...) Witcheayeuonk, or, a
Reason, with an Ouwot^ank, or, an, Use for the close of all.

As for Holidays, you may take it for granted, our Eliot would not persuade his
Indians to any Statted ones. Even the Christmas Festival i^ self, he knew to be
a stranger unto the* Apostolical Times; that the exquisite V^ss^^^* himself
acknowledges, 'twas not Celebrated in the first or second Century: and that
there is a Truth in the words of the great Chemnuius, Auniversariura Diem
Natalis Christi, celebratum f^^sse^apud vetustissimos nunquam* leg^^tur. He
knew that if the Day of our Lords Nativity were to be observed, it should not
be in December, that many Churches for diverse Ages kept it not in December, but
in January; that Chrysostom himself, about four hundred years after our
Savior, excuses the Novelty of December season for it, and confesses it had
not been kept above ten years at Constantinople: No, that it should be rather
in September, in which Month the Jews kept the Feast that was a Type of our
Lords Incarnation; and Solomon also brought the Ark into the Temple; for our
Lord was thirty years. Old when he entered upon his public Ministry; and he
continued in it three years and an half; Now his Death was in March, and it is
easy then to calculate when his Birth ought to be. He knew, that indeed God had
hid this Day as (...) did the body of Moses, to prevent Idolatry; but that
Antichrist had ch^se this day, to accommodate the Pagans in their Licencious
and their Debauched Saturnalia; and that a Tertullian would not stick to say,
Shall we Christians who have nothing to do with the Festivals of the Jews,
which were once of Divine Institution, embrace the Saturnalia, of the Heathen?
How do the Gentiles shame us, who are more true to their Religion, than we are
to ours? None of them will observe the Lord's Day, for fear lest they should be
Christians; and shall not we then by observing their Festivals, fear lest we be
made Ethnicks? In fine, it was his opinion, That for us to have stated Holy
Days which are not appointed by the Lord Jesus Christ, is a deep Reflection
upon the Wisdom of that glorious Lord; and he brought up his Indians, in the
principles which the old waldenses had about such unwarrantable Holydays.

Nevertheless, he taught them to set apart their Days both for Fasting and
Prayer, and for Feasting and Praise, when there should be Extraordinary
Occasions for them; and they perform the duties of these Days with a very
laborious Piety. One party of the Indians long since of their own Accord, kept
a Day of Supplication, together, wherein one of them discoursed upon psalm, 66.
7. He Rules by his power for ever, His Eyes behold the Nations, let not the
Rebellious exalt themselves. And when one asked them afterward, what was the
Reason of their keeping such a day, they replied, It was to obtain five mercies
of God.

First, That God would slay the Rebellion of their hearts. Next, that they
might love God and one another. Thirdly, that they might withstand the
Temptations of wicked men, so that they might not be drawn back, from God.
^ourth^ that they might be Obedient unto the ^^^^sils and commands of their
Rulers. Fifthly, that they might have their sins done away by the Redemption of
Jesus Christ; And lastly, that they might walk in the good ways of the Lord. I
must here embrace my opportunity to tell the world, that our Cautious Eliot,
was far from the opinion of those who have thought it not only warrantable, but
also commendable to Adopt some Heathenish Usages into the Worship of God, for
the more easy and speedy gaining of the Heathen to that Worship. The policy of
treating the Pegun R^^es as the Jews were to do Captives, before they married
them, to shave their Hair, and pare their Nails, our Eliot counted as
ridiculous as pernicious. He knew that the Idolatries and Abominations of
Popery, were fo^nded, in this way of (...) the barbarous Nations, which made
their Descent upon the Roman Empire; and he looked upon the like methods which
the Protestants have used, that they might ingratiate themselves with the
Papists, and that our Separation from them should become the less dangerous and
sensible, to be the most sensible and dangerous wound of the Reformation.
Wherefore, as no less a man than Dr. Henry Moo^ says about our Compliances with
the Papists, which are a sort of Pagans, Their Conversion and Salvation being
not to be compassed by needless Symbolizing with them, in any thing, I conceive
our best policy is studiously to imitate them in nothing; but for all
indifferent things, to think ^ather the worse of them for their (...) of them.
As no person of Honor, would willingly go in the known Garb of infamous
persons. What s^ever we Court them in, they do but turn it to our scorn and
contempt, etc are the more hardened in their own wickedness. To act upon this
principle, is the design and glory of New England! And our El^ot was of this
perswas^on, when he brought his Indians to a pure, plain, Sy^^pture Worship. He
would not gratify them with a Samariten sort of blended, mixed Worship; and he
imagined, as well he might, that the Apostle Paul's first Epistle to the
C^^tat^^ans had enough in it, for-ever to deter us all from such Unchristian
and unhappy Temporizing.

(I) A Comparison between what the New-Englanders have done for the Conversion
of the Indians, and what has been done elsewhere by the Roman Catholics.
IT is to be confessed, That the Roman Catholics have a Clergy so very
Numerous, and so little Encumbred, and are Masters of such prodigious
Ecclesiastical Revenues, as renders it very easy for them to exceed the
Protestants In their Endeavors to Christianize the Pagan Salvages. Nor would I
Reproach, but rather Applaud their Industry in this matter, wishing that we
were all touched with an Emulation of it. Nevertheless, while I commend their
Industry, they do by their Clamours against the Reformed Churches upon this
account, oblige me to tax diverse very scandalous things in the Missions which
they make propropaganda side, throughout the world; and therewithal to compare
what has been done by that little Handful of Reformed Churches in this Country,
which has in diverse Regards Outdone the furthest Efforts of popery.

The Seize which with Gods help we have carried up our Indians unto, are
the chief Honor and Glory of our Labors with them. The Reader will smile
perhaps, when I tell him, that by an odd accident there are lately fallen into
my hands, the Manuscripts of a ^esuite, whom the French Employed as a
Missionary among the Western Indians; in which papers there are, both a
Catechism containing the principles which those Heathen are to be instructed
in; and Cases of Conscience, referring to their Conversations. The Catechism
which is in the Iroquoise Language (a Language remarkable for this, that there
is not so much as one Labial in it) with a Translation annexed, has one
Chapter, abut Heaven, and another about Hell, wherein are such Thick^ull'd
passages as these.

Q. How is the S oil made in Heaven?

A. it is a very fair S oil; they want neither for Meats nor Cloths; it is but
Wishing and we have them.

Q (...) in Heaven?

A. No, (...) do nothing; the fields yield Corn, Beans, Pumpkins, and the like,
without any Tillage.

;Q what sort of trees are there?

A. Always Green Full, and Flourishing.

Q. Have they in Heaven the Same Si^n, the same wind, the same Thunder that we
have here?

A. No, the Sun ever shines; it is always fair weather.

Q. But how their Fruits?

A. In this one quality they exceed ours; that they are never wasted; you have
no sooner pl^ck't one, but you see another presently har^^ing in its Room. And
after this rate goes on the Catechism concerning Heaven. Concerning (...) it
thus discourses.

Q What sort of a Soil is that of Hell?

A. A Very wretched Soil; it is a fiery pit in the Center of the Earth.

Q. Have they any light in Hell?

A. No. It Is always Dark; there is always Smoke there; their eyes are always
in pain with it; they can see nothing but the Div^ls.

Q. What shaped things are Div^ls^?

A. Very ill shaped things; they go about with Vizards on; and they terrify men.

Q. W^^ do they (...) in Hell?

A. They are always H^ngry; but the Damned feed upon (...) Ashes and Serpents
there.

Q. Wh^ (...) (...) they in Drink?

A. Horrid water; nothing but melted lead;

Q. Don't they (...) in Hell?

A. No; yet they eat one another, every day; But anon, God restores and renewes
the Man that was eaten; as a cropped Plant, in a little time repullulates.

It seems they have not thought this Divinity too Gross for the barbaria^s. But
I shall make no Reflections on it; only add one or two Cases of Conscience from
their Directory.

It Is one of their weighty cases, Whether, a Christian be bound to pay his Whore
her Hire or no? To this Father Brutas. (...) ^^swers, Though he be bound in
Justice to do it, yet in as much as the Barbarians [and you must (...) their
Whores to be ^uth!] Use to keep no faith in such matters, the Christians may
^^onse whether they will keep any too. But Father P^^rr in with a most profound
Learning answers, He is not bound unto if all; in as much as no man thinks
himself bound to pay a Witch, that has Enchanted him; and this business is
pretty much a kin to that. Another of their difficult Cases, is, Whether an
Indian stealing an Hatchet from a Dutchman, be bound to make Restitution? And
it in very conscientiously determined. That if the Dutchman be one that has
used any Trade with other Indians, the Thief is not bound unto any Restitution;
for 'us certain, he gains more by such a Trade than the value of many Hatchets
in a year.

I Will tire my Reader with no more of this wretched stuff. But le^t him
understand that the proselyted Indians of New England have been Instructed at a
more Noble Rate; we have helped them to the sincere milk of the word; we have
given them the whole Bible in their own Language; we have laid before them such
a Creed as the primitive Believers had, with such Explications as we embark our
own Souls upon the Assurance of* And God has blessed our education of these
poor creatures in such a measure, that they can Pray and Preach to better
edification (give me leave to say it) than multitudes of the Romish Clergymen.
We could have Baptized many Troops of Indians, if we would have used no other
measures with (...) than the Roman Catholics did upon theirs at Maryland,
Where they Baptized a great crew of Indians, in some New shirts, bestowed upon
them to encourage them thereunto; but he Indians in a week or two, not knowing
how to wash their shirts, when they were grown foul, came and made a motion,
that the Roman Catholics would give more shirts to them, or else they would
Renounce their Baptism. No, it is a Through-paced Christianity without which we
have not imagined our Indians Christianized.

Nor have we been acted with a Roman Catholic Avarice and Falsity and Cruelty
in prosecuting of our conversions; it is the Spirit of an ELIOT, that has all
along directed us. It Is a Specimen of the Popish Avarice that their
Missionaries are very rarely employed but where Bever and Silver and vast
Riches are to be thereby gained; their Ministry is but a sort of Engine, to
enrich Europeans with the Treasures of the Indies; thus one escaped from
Captivity among the Spaniards, told me, that the Spanish Friars had carried
their Gospel into the Spacious Country of California, but finding the Indians
there to be extremely poor, they quickly gave over the work, because for sooth
Such a poor Nation was not worth Converting. Whereas the New-Englanders could
expect nothing from their Indians. We are to Feed them and Cloth them, rather
than receive any thing from them, when we bring them home to God. Again, the
popish Falsity disposes them to so much Legerdemain in their Applications as is
very disagreeable to the Spirit and Progress of the Gospel. My Worthy Friend,
Mynhee^ Daille, who has been sedulous and successful in his Ministry among the
Maqua's assures me, that a French predicator, having been attempting to bring
over those Indians unto the interest (not of our Savior, so much as) of
Canada, at la^^, for a cure of their infidelity, told them, he would give them
a sign of God's Displeasure at them for it; The Sun should such a day be put
out. This terrified them at a sad ^ate, and with great admiration and
expectation, they told the Dutch of what was to come to pass; the Dutch replied
This was no more than every Child among them could fore^^l; they all knew there
would then be an Eclipse of the Sun; but (said they) soeak to Monsieur, that he
would get the Sun extinguished a day before, or a day after what he ^^oke of,
and if he can do that, believe him. When the Indians thus understood what or
Trick the Frenchman would have put upon them, they became irreconcileably
prejudiced against all his offers; nor have the French been since able to gain
much upon that considerable people. The New Englanders have used no such
Stratagems and Knaveries, it is the pure light of true, which is all that has
been used for the affecting of the rude people, (...) 'twas easy to have
cheated into our Profession. Much less have (...) used that Popish Cruelty,
which the Natives of America have by some other people been treated with. Even
a Bis^^^ of their own, has Published, very Tragical Histories of the Spanish
Cruelties upon the Indians of this Western World. Such were those Cruelties,
that the Indians of length declared, They had rather go to He^ with their
Ancestors, than to the same Heaven which the Spaniards pretended unto; it is
indeed impossible to reckon up, the various and exquisite Barbarities with
which these execrable Spaniards, murdered in less than fifty years no less than
fifty millions of the Indians; it seems this was their way of ^ringing them
into the Sheepfold of our merciful Jesus! But on the other side, the good
people of New England have carried it with so much tenderness toward the tawny
Creatures among whom we live, that they would not own so much as one foot of
Land in the Country, without a fair Purchase and Consent from the Natives that
laid claim unto it; atheit we had a Royal Char^e^ from the King of Great (...)
to Protect us in our settlement upon this Con^^nent I suppose 'twas in revenge
upon us for this Conscientiousness, that the la^e oppressors of New England,
acknowledged no man to have any Title at all unto one Font of Land in all our
Colony. But we did and we do, think, notwithstanding the Ba^^ters of those
lories, that the Indians had not by their Paganism so forfeited all Right unto
any of their Possessions, that the first pretended Christians that could, right
Violently and yet Honestly sieze upon them. Instead of this, the people of New
England, knowing that some of the English were sufficiently coveteous and
encroaching, and that the Indians in streights are easily prevailed upon, to
sell their lands, made a Law, That none should purchase, or so much at Receive
any land of the Indians, without the Allowance of the Court. Yea, and some
lands which were peculiarly convenient for the Indians, our people who were
more careful of them than they were of themselves, made a Law That they should
never be bought our of their bands. I suppose after this it would surprise
mankind, if they should hear such wonderful Creatures as our late Secretary
Randolph affirming, This barbarous people were never civilly treated, by the
late Government, who made it their business to encroach upon their Lands, and
by degrees to have them out of all. But, how many other Laws we made in favor
of the Indians it is not easy to reckon up. 'Twas one of our Laws, That for the
further encouragement of the hopeful work among them, for the Civilizing and
Christianizing of them, any Indian that should be brought unto Civility, and
come to live orderly in any English Plantation, should have such Allotments
among the English, as the English had themselves. And, that if a competent
number of them, should so come on to civility, as to be capable of a Township,
the General Court should grant them Lands for a Plantation as they do unto the
English. Although we had already bought up their Claims unto our Lands. We
likewise had our Laws, That if any of our Cattle did any damage to their Corn,
we should make them ample satisfaction; and that we should give them all manner
of Assistance, in Fencing of their Fields. And because the Indians are
excessively given unto the vice of Drunkenness, which was a vice* unknown to
them, until the English brought Strong drink in their way, we have had a severe
Law against all selling or giving any Intoxicating Liquors to them. It were
well, if this Law were more severely Executed?

By this time I hope, I have stopped the calumnious Exclamations of the Roman
Catholics against the Churches of the Reformation, for neglecting to
Evangelize the Natives of the Indies. But let me take this occasion to address
the Christian Indians of my own Country, into some of whose Hands, it is likely,
this little Book may come.

Behold, ye Indians, what love, what care, what cost, has been used by the
English here for the Salvation of your precious and immortal S ouls. It is not
because we have expected any Temporal Advantage from you, that we have been
thus concerned for your good; No, it is God that has caused us to desire his
Glory in your Salvation; and our hearts have bied with Pity over you, when we
have seen how horribly the Devil Oppressed you in this, and Destroyed you in
another world. It is much that has been done for you; we have put you into a
way to be happy both on Earth while you live, and in Heaven when you Die. What
can you think will become of you, if you slight all these Glorious offers!
methinks you should say to your-selves, V^toh woh kitt^nne peh quo^ humunan
mishanant a mog ne mo^sag wadchanit^uonk! You all believe that your Teacher
ELIOT, was a Good and a B^ave Man, and you would count it your Blessedness to
be forever with him. Nevertheless, I am to tell you, that if you don't become
Real, and Thorough and Holy Christians, you shall never have a comfortable
sight of him any more. You know how he has Fed you, and Clothed you, as well
as Taught you; you know how his Bowels yerned over you, even as though you had
been his Children, when he saw any afflictions come upon you; but if he find
you among the wicked, in the Day of Judgment, which he so often warned you of,
he will then be a Dreadful Witness against you, and when the Lord Jesus passes
that sentence on you, Depart ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire with the Devil and
his Angels, even your own ELIOT will then say, Amen, unto it all. Now, to deal
plainly with you, there are two Vices, which many of you are too prone unto,
and which are utterly inconsistent with a True Christianity. One of those Vices
is that of idleness. If you had a Disposition to follow an Honest Calling, what
should hinder you from growing as Considerable in your Estates, as many of your
English Neighbors? whereas, you are now poor, mean ragged, sto^ved,
contemptible and miserable; and instead of being able, as your Enlish
Neighbors do, to support the ordinances of God, you are beholden to them, not
only for maintaining of those Blessed ordinances among you, but for many other
kindnesses. And have you indeed forgot the Commandment of God which has been so
often laid before you, Six Days state thou Labor! for shame, apply your selves
to such Labor as may bring you into more Handsome Circumstances. But the other
of those Vices, is that of Drankenness. There are godly English Neighbors, of
whom you should learn to Pray; but there are some of you that learn to Drink,
of other, profane, debauched English Neighbors. Poor Creatures, it is by this
Iniquity that Satan still keeps Possession of many Souls among you, as much as
if you were skill in all your woeful Heathenism; and how often have you been
told, Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? I heseech you to be
sensible of the mischiess to which this thing exposes you, and never dream of
escaping the Vengeance of Eternal F^re, if you indulge your selves in this
Accursed thing. I have done, when I have wished, That the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus may always Run and be Glorified among you!

The CONCLUSION, Or, ELIOT Expiring.
By this time I have doubtless made my Readers loath to have me tell what now
remains of this little History; doubtless they are wishing that this John might
have T^^ried until the Seco^^ Coming of our Lord. But, alas All-Devouring Death
at last snatched him from us, and slighted all those Lamentations of ours, My
Father, My Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof!

When he was become a sort of Miles Emeri^us, (...) began to draw near his End,
he grew still more Heavenly, more Savoury, more Divine, and Scented more of the
s^icy Country at which he was ready to put a shore. As the Historian observes
of ^ibe^ius. That when his Life and Strength were going from him, his Vice
(...) remained with him; on the contrary, the Grace of this Excellent Man
rather increased than abated; when every thing else was dying with him. It Is
too usual with Old men, that, when they are past work; they are least sensible
of their inabilities and incapacities, and can scarce endure to see another
succeeding them in any part of their Office. But our Eliot was of a F^mber
quite contrary thereunto; for finding many Months before his Expiration, That
he had not strength enough to Edify his Congregation with public Prayers, and
Sermons, he importuned his people with some impatience to call another Mi^stery
professing himself, unable to Die with Comfort, until he could see a good
Successor ordained, settled, fixed among them. For this cause, he also cried
mightily unto the Lord Jesus, our Ascended Lord, that he would give such a Gift
unto Roxbury, and he sometimes called his whole Town together to join with him
in a Fast for such a blessings. As the return of their Supplications, our Lord
quickly bestowed upon them, a person young in years, but old in Discretion.
Gravity, and Experience; and one whom the Church of Roxbury hopes to find, A
Pastor after Goa'^ own Heart.

It was Mr. Nehemiah Walter, who being by the unanimou^ Vote and Choice of the
Church there, become the Past^r of Roxbury, immediately found the Venerable
Eliot Embracing and Cherishing of him, with the tender Affections of a Father.
The good Old Man like Old Aaron as it were disrobed himself, with an
unspeakable satisfaction, when he beheld his garments put upon a son so dear
unto him. After this, he for a year or two before his Transla^tor, could (...)
be persuaded unto any public Service, but humble pleaded, what none but he
would ever have said, It would be wrong to the Seals of the people, for him to
do any thing among them, when they (...) Advantage otherwise. If I mistake not,
the last that ever he Preached was on a Public (...); when he fed his people
within a very dut^nct* and useful, Expression upon the Eighty Third Psalm; and
the concluded with an Apology, begging his Hearers to pardon the (...) and
meanness, and (...), (as he called it) of his Meditations; but added he, My
dear Brother here, will by'nd by mend all.

But although he thus dismissed himself as one so near to the Age of Ninety,
might well have done, from him public Labors; yet he would not give over his
Endeavors, in a more privare Splae^e, to Do good unto all. He had always been
an Enemy to Idleness; any one that should look into the little D^ary that he
kept in his Almoneck, would see that there was with him, No day without a Line;
he was troubled when he saw how much Time was devoured by that slavery to
Tobacco, which too many debase themselves unto: and now he grew old. he was
desirous that his work should hold page with his ^tfe; the less Time he saw
less; the less was he willing to have lost. He imagined that he could now do
nothing to any purpose in any Service for God; and sometimes he would say with
an Air peculiar to himself, I wonder for what the Lord Jesus Christ lets me
live; he knows that I can do nothing for him! And yet he could not forbear
Essaying to Do something for his dea^ch Lord; wherefore, thought' he. What
shall I do? And he then conceived, that though the English could not be benefi^ed
by any Gifts which he now fancied himself to have only the Ruins of, yet who
can tell but the Negro's might! He had long lamented it with a bleeding and a
burning passion, that the English used their Negro's him at their Horses or
their Oxen and that so little care was taken about their (...) and i^^mbrial
Souls; He looked upon it as a prodigy, that any wearing the Name of br^lltares,
should so much have the Heart of Devile in them, as to prevent and hinder the
Information of the poor Bl^chamo^rs, and confine the Souls of their miserable
Slaves to a destroying ignorance, merely for fear of thereby loosing the
benefit of their Vassalage; but now he made a motion to the English within two
or three miles of him that at such a time and place they would send their
Negro^ once a week unto him: for he would then Car^^ise them, and Enlighten
them to the utmost of his power in the Things of their Everlasting Peace;
however, he did not live to make much progress in this Undertaking.

At length, when he was able to do Little without doors, he tried then to do
something within; and one thing was this. A young Boy in the Neighborhood, had
in his infancy fasten into a fire, so as to burn himself into a perfect.
Blindness; but this Boy being now grown to some Bigness, the good old man took
him home to his house, with some intentions to make a scholar of him. He first
informed him of and from the Scripture, in which the Boy so profited, that in a
little time he could, even Repeat many whole Chapters Verbatim, and if any
other in Reading missed a word, he would mind them of it; yes, and an ordinary
piece of latin was become easy to the lad; but having his own Eyes closed by
Death, he could no longer help the poor Child against the want of his.

Thus, As the Aged Polycarp, could say, These Eighty Six years have I served my
Lord Jesus Christ; and he ^has been such a good Master to me all this while,
that I will not now forsake him* Such a Polycarp was our Eliot; he had been so
many years engaged in the sweet service of his dear Jesus, that he could not
now give it over: 'twas his Ambition, and his privilege, to bring forth Fruit
in old Age: and what veneration the Church of Smyrna paid unto that Angel of
theirs, we were upon the like Accounts willing to give unto this Man of God.

White he was, thus making his Retreat out of this evil world, his Discourses
from time to time ran upon, The Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ; it was the
Theme which he still had Recourse unto, and we were sure to have something of
this, whatever other, Subject he were upon. On this he talked of this he
prayed, for this he longed, and, especially when any bad News arrived, his
usual reflection thereupon would be, Behold, some of the Clouds, in which we
must look for the Coming of the Son of Man. At last, his Lord, for whom he had
been long wishing, Lord, come! I have been a great wa^^e ready for thy Coming!
at last, I say, his Lord came, and fetched him away into the Joy of his Lord.

He fell into some Languishments, attended with Fever, which in a few days
brought him into the Pangs (may I say? or joys) of Death; and while he lay in
these, Mr. Water coming to him, he said unto him, Brother, thou art welcome to
my very Soul. Pray, Retire to thy Study for me, and give me leave to be gone;
meaning that he should, not by Petitions to Heaven for his Life, detain him
here. It was, in these Languishments, that speaking about, the work of the
Gospel among the Indians, he did after this Heavenly manner express himself, I
here (...) Cloud (said he) a dark cloud upon the work of the Gospel among the
poor Indians. The Lord hevi^e and prosper that work, and grant it may live when
I am Dead. It is a work, which I have been Doing much and long about. But what
was the word I spoke last? I Recall that word, My Doings! Alas, they have been
poor and small and lean Doings, and I Will be the man that shall throw the first
stare at them all.

It has been observed, that they, who have spoke many considerable things in
their lives, usually speak few at their deaths. But it was otherwise with our
Eliot, who after much Speech of and, for God in his Lifetime, uttered some
things little short of Oracles on his Deathbed; which, it is a thousand pities,
they were not more exactly regarded and recorded. Those Authors that have taken
the pains to Collect, Apophthegmata Morun^^um, have not therein been
unserviceable to the Living; but the Apophthegm^ of a Dying Eliot must have had
in them a grace and a (...) truly extraordinary, and indeed the ^^lgar I^rr^^
of the signal sace^ness in the Song of a D^rg Swan, was a very Truth in our
Expiring Eliot; his left Breath smelt strong of Heaven, and was Articled into
none but very gracious Notes; one of the last whereof was, Welcome Joy! and at
last it went away calling upon the standers by, to Pray, pray, pray! which was
the Thing in which so vast a portion of it, had been before Employed.

This was the peace, in the end of this perfect and upright man; thus was there
another Star fetched away to be placed among the Rest that the third Heaven is
now enriched with. He had once, I think, a pleasant Fear, that the old saints
of his Aquaintance, especially those two dearest Neighbors of his, Co^ton, of
Boston, and Mather, of Dorchester, which were got safe to Heaven before him,
would suspect him to be gone the wrong way, because he staid so long behind
them. But they are now together with a blessed Jesus, Beholding of his Glory,
and celebrating that High Praises of Him that has called them into his
mavelous light. Whether Heaven was any more Heaven to him, because of his
finding there, so many Saint with whom he once had his Delicious and Caelestial
Intimacies, yea, and so many Saints which had been the seals of his own
Ministry, in this lower world, I cannot say; but it would be Heaven enough unto
him, to go unto that Jesus, whom he had loved preached, served, and in whom he
had been long Assured, there does All Fullness dwell. In that Heaven now leave
him; but not without Grynaus's pathetical Exclamations, [ O bea^um illum diem!]
Blessed will be the Day, O blessed the Day of our Arrival to the glorious
Assembly of spirits, which this great Saint is now rejoicing with.

Bereaved New England, where are thy tears, at this Ill-boding Funeral? We had
a Tradition among us, That the Country could never perish, as long as Eliot was
alive. But into whose Hands must this Hippo fall, now the Austin of it is taken
away? Our Elisha is gone, and now who must next year invade the Land? The Jews
have a saying, Quando Luminaria paliuntur Eclipsm, malum signum est mundo; But
I am sure, it is a dismal Eclipse that has now befallen our New-English World. I
confess many of the Ancients, fell into the vanity, of esteeming the Relics
of the Deed Saints, to be the Lowers and Ramparts of the places that enjoyed
them; and the dead Bodies of two Apostles in the City, made the Poet cry out,

A Facie Hostili duo propugnacula praesunt. If the Dust of dead Saints could
give us any protection, we are not without it; here is a Spot of American Soil
that will afford a rich Crop of it, at the Resurrection of the Just. Poor
New England has been as Glastenbury of old was called,; A Burying-place of
Saints. But we cannot see a more terrible Prognostic, than Tombs filling apace
with such Bones, as those of the Renowned Eliot's; the whole Building of this
Country trembles at the Fall of such a Pillar.

For many Months before he died, he would often cheerfully tell us, That he was
shortly going to Heaven, and that he would carry a deal of good News thither
with him; he said, He would carry Tidings to the Old-Founders of New England,
which were now in Glory, that Church-work was yet carried on among us: that the
Number of our Churches was continually increasing: and that the Churches were
still kept as big as they were, by the daily Additions of those that shall be
saved. But the going of such as the from us, will apace diminish the occasions
of such happy Tidings.

What shall we now say* Our Eliot himself used most affectionately to bewayl
the Death of all Useful Men; yet if one brought him the notice of such a thing,
with any Despondencies, or said, O Sir, such an one is Dead, what shall we do?
he would answer, Well, but God lives, Christ lives, the Old Savior of
New England yet lives, and He will Reign till all his Enemies are made his
Footstool. This, and only this, consideration have we to relieve us; and let it
be accompanied with our Addresses to the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, That
there may be Timothies raised up in the room of our Departed Paul's; and that
when our Moses's are gone, the Spirit which which was in those brave men, may
be put upon the surviving Elders of our Is^^el

The last thing, that ever our Eliot put off, was, The care of all the Chu^o^rs
which with a most Apostolical and Evangelical Temper he was continually,
solicitous about. When the Churches of New England were under a very
incomfortable prospect, by the advantage which men that sought the Ruin, of
those golden and holy and Reformed Societies, had obtained against them. God
put it into the heart of one well-known in these Churches, to take a Voyage
into England that he might by his Mediations at Whitehal, divert the Storms
that were impending over us. It Is not easy to express what Affection our Aged
Eliot prosecuted this Undertaking with; and, what Thanksgiving he rendered unto
God for any hopeful Successes of it. But because one of the last Times, and for
ought I know, The Last, of his ever setting Pen to Paper in the world, was upon
this occasion; I shall transcribe a short Letter, which was written by the
shaking hand, that had heretofore by writing deserved so well from the Church
of God, but was now taking its leave of writing for-ever. It was written to the
person that was Engaging for us, and thus it Ran.

Reverend and Beloved, Mr. Increase Mather. I cannot (...) Read Neh. 2. 10.
When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobijah the Servant, the Ammonite, heard of
it; it grieved them exceedingly, that there was come a man to seek the Welfare
of the Children of Israel

Let thy blessed Soul, feed full and fat upon this and other Scriptures. All
other things I leave to other men; and rest,

Your Loving Brother, John Eliot


These two or three lines manifest the Care of the Churches which breathed in
this great old, man, as long as he had a Breath to draw in the world. And since
he has lest few like him for a Comprehensive and Universal Regard unto the
prosperity of all the Flocks in this Wilderness, we have little now to comfort
us in the, loss of one so like a Patriarch among us, but only this, That our
poor Churches, it may be ^op'd, have him some interest in the Cares of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Who walks in the midst of the Garden Candlesticks. Lord! make our
Churches and keep them, yet Golden Candlesticks! Amen

But I have not obtained the end of this History, not may I set this History
come to an end, until I do with some importunity bespeak the endeavors of good
men every where to labor in that Harvest which the Blessed ELIO^ justly
^oanted worthy of his utmost pains and cares. It was the confession of I
Themist^cles, that the victories of Assistance would not let him sleep in
qu^e^ness; may those of our Eliot raise a like emulation in those that have now
seen the life of this evangelical He^^! When one Robert Barley man^ years ago
published a Book, wherein several (...) by which the name of that JOHN COTION,
who was known to be one of the Holiest Men then alive, was most injustiously
made odious unto the Churches abroad, were (...) with some Reflections upon
poor New England, whereof this was one, The way of their Churches has most
exceedingly hindered the conversion of the poor Pagans: of all that ever crossed
the American seas they are noted as most neglectful of the work of conversion.
We have now seen those Aspersions and Calumnies abundantly wiped away. But set
that which has been the Vindication of New England, be also the AEmulation of
the world: for shame, let not poor little New England, be the only Protestant
country that shall do any Notable thing for the propagation of the Faith, unto
those Dark corners of the Earth which are full of cruel Habitations. But the
Addresses of so mean a person as my self, are like to prevail but little abroad
with men of Learning and Figure in the world. However, I shall presume to utter
my Wishes in the sight of my Feaders; and it is possible that the Great God
who, disposes not the proper by the poor, may by the Influences of his Holy
Spirit, upon the Hearts of some whose Eyes are upon these lines, give a Blessed
Answer thereunto.

Wheresore, May the people of New England, who have seen so sensible a
Difference between the estates of those that sell Drink, and of those that
preach Truth, unto the miserable salvages among them, as that even this alone
might inspire them, yet from a nobler consideration than that of their own
outward prosperity thereby advanced, be encouraged still to prosecute, first
the Civilizing, and then the Christianizing of the Barbarians, in their
Neighborhood; and may the New-Englanders be so far ^olitick as well as, (...)
a particularly to make a Mission of the Gospel unto the mighty Nations of the
Western Indians, whom the French have been of late so studiously, but so
unsuccessfully Tampering with; lest those horrid Pagans, who lately (as it is
credibly affirmed) had such a measure of Devilism and insolence in them, as to
shoot a Volley of great and small Shot against the Heavens, in Revenge upon,
The Man in the Heavens, as they called our Lord, whom they counted the Author
of the heavy Calamities which newly have distressed them; be found spared by
our Long-suffering Lord, [who then indeed presently ^ore the Ground asunder,
with immediate and horrible Thunders from Heaven round about them, but killed
them not!] for a Scourge to Us, that have not used our advantages to make a
virtuous people of them. If a King of the West Saxons long-since ascribed all
the Disasters on any of their Affairs, to Negligencies in this point, methinks
the New-Englanders may not count it unreasonable in this way to seek their own
prosperity. Shall we do what we can that our Lord Jesus may bestow upon
Amer^^^^, which may more justly be called Golumba, that Salutation, O my Dove!

May the several Plantations, that live upon the Labors of their Negroes, no
more be guilty of such a prodigious wickedness, as to deride, neglect, and
oppose all due means of bringing their poor Negroes unto our Lord; but may the
Masters of whom God will one day require the Souls of the Slaves committed unto
them, see to it, that like Abraham, they have Catechized Servants; and not
imagine that the Almighty God made so many thousands of Reasonable creatures
for nothing, but only to serve the Lusts of Epicures, or the gains of
Mammonists; lest the God of Heaven out of mere Pity, if not Justice, unth those
unhappy Blacks, be provoked unto a vengeance which may not without Horror be
thought upon. Lord, when shall we see Ethiopians read thy Scriptures with
Understanding!

May the English Nation do what may be done, that the Welsh may not be
destroyed for the lack of Knowledge, lest our indisposition to do for their
Souls, bring upon us all those Judgment of Heaven, which Gildas their
Countryman; (...) them, that they suffered for their disregards unto (...) may
the ^esandous Massa^^^^ of the English by the (...) awaken the English to
consider, whether they have done enough to reclaim the ^^ish, from the Popish
Bigottries and Abominations, with which they have been Intoxicated.

May the several Factories and Companies, whose Concerns'ly in Asia, Africa, or
America, be persuaded, as Jacob once, and before him his Grandfather Abraham,
was, That they always own unto God certain Proportions of their Possessions, by
the honest payments of which little Quit-rents, they would certainly secure and
enlarge their Enjoyment of the Principal; but that they are under a very
particular obligation to Communicate of our Spiritual Things, unto those
Heathen, by whose Carnal Things they are Enriched: And may they therefore make
it it their study, to employ some able and pious Ministers, for the instruction
of those Infidels with whom they have to deal, and honorably support such
Ministers in that Employment.

May the poor Greeks, Armenians, Muscovites, and others, in the Eastern
Countries, wearing the Name of Christians, that have little Preaching and no
Printing, and few Bibles, or good Books, now at last be furnished with Bibles,
Orthodox Catechisms, and Practical Treatises, by the Charity of England; and
may our Presses provide good stores of good Books for them, in their own
Tongues, to be scattered among them. Who knows what convulsions might be
hastened upon the whole Mohammedan World by such an extensive charity!

May sufficient Numbers of great, wife, rich learned, and godly men in the
three kingdoms, procure well-composed Societies, by whose united counsels, the
Noble Design of Evangelizing the world, may be more effectually carried on; and
if some generous persons will of their own Accord combine for such
consultations, who can tell, but like some other Celebrated Societies
heretofore formed from such small Beginnings, they may soon have that
countenance of Authority, which may produce very glorious Effects, and, give
opportunity to gather vast Contributions from all well, disposed people, to
Assist and Advance this progress of Christianity. God forbid, that, popery
should expend upon cheating, more than ten times, what we do upon Saving, the
Immortal Souls of men.

Lastly, May many worthy men, who find their circumstances will allow of it,
get the Language, of some Nations that are not yet brought home to God; and
wait upon the Divine Providence, for Gods Leading them to, and Owning them in,
their Apostolical undertakings. When they Remember what Russinus relates
concerning the conversion of the lberians, and what Socrates, with other
Authors, relates concerning, the conversion, wrought by occasion of Er^^mentius
and AEdesius, in the Inner India, all as it were by Accident, surely it will make
them Try, what may be done by Design for such things now in our Days! Thus, let
them see, whether while we at home in the midst of wearisome Temptations, are
Angling with Rods, which now and then catch one Soul for our Lord, they shall
not be Fishing with Nets, which will bring in many thousands of those,
concerning whom with unspeakable Joy in the Day of the Lord, they may say,
Behold, I, and the Children which God has given me! Let them see, whether,
supposing they should prosper no farther than to Preach the Gospel of the
Kingdom in all the World for a witness unto all Nations, yet the End which is
then to (...) will not bring to them the more happy (...) wherein they shall
Stand, that are found so Doing.

Let no man be discouraged by the Difficulties, which the Devil will be ready
to clog such Attempt against his Kingdom with; for I will take leave so to
Translate the words of the wise man, in Prove. 27. 4. what is able to stand
before ZEAL I am well satisfied, that if men had the Wisdom, To discern the
Signs of the Times, they would be all Hands at Work, to spread the Name of our
JESUS into all the Corners of the Earth. Grant it, O my God; and Lord Jesus;
Come Quickly.

FINIS.
ERRATA
PAge 26. line. 7. for of. r. as. p. 48. l. 19. f. Ministry. r. Magistracy. p.
58. l. 3. r. Second. p. 77. l. 22. r. Corporation. p. 87. l. 16. r. Reflection.
p. 120. l. 1. f. Answer r. Question; [and add.] Sampoononk, or an Answer.


