A true Copy of three Judgments given forth by a Party of Men, called Quakers
at Philadelphia, against George Keith and his Friends. With two Answers to the
said Judgments.
The First Judgment.
AT a Monthly Meeting in Philadelphia, the 26th of 11 Mo^. 1691. Thomas
Fitzwater charged George Keith for denying the sufficiency of the Light, which
^. Keith denying, T. Fitzwater insisted that (...) could prove the same, and
being examined concerning his Proof (...) several Friends present stood up, and
said, They heard the said (...) Keith say, That he did not believe the Light
was sufficient without (...) else, namely, (...) Prichard, William Harwood,
Benjamin (...) Wil^iam Sout^^^, and several others. And after the matter in
Debate had been thoroughly heard, the aforesaid Credible Evidences giving their
Testimonies (...) ^bove-said, the Meeting saw no reason to give Judgment
against Tho. Fitzwater in thi^ particular above^mentioned; but the said Thomas
very readily left the matter to this Meeting and condemned the rash Spirit that
he spoke those words in, although the Charge in it self was true.

This is a Copy o^ (...) passed as a Mont^ly Meeting in Philadelphia, the ^6 of
3 (...) 1692. A. M.

The Second Judgment.
WE being prevented in our Meetings of late, to proceed orderly in business, by
reason of a Turbul^^^ and unsubdued Spirit, which has much (...) us, but having
(...) at this time, have con^^^ered (...)* and duly of a Charge exhibited
several Months past by George Keith against William Stock^al^, many if not most
of ^s being present at several Meeting, where the Allegations of each side were
heard; and as the Friends then present concluded on a Judgment in this matter,
but were prevented of pu^li^^ing the same, by reason of Geo^g^ Keith'^ (...)
beh^viour, and extreme Passion, which abruptly broke up the said Me^ting, we
declare ou^ concurrent (...) as (...), That whereas Proof was made by two
Witnesses, That William Stockdale should say, that Geo. Keith 's preaching
Christ without, and Christ within was preac^ing two Christ's, which W. Stockdale
denied the words so spoken; and alleged that Geo. Keit^ called him an Ignorant
H^athen, and gave him several villifying Expressions. Our Judgment is, That
Wi^liam Stockdale is reproveabl^, and el^me-worthy ^or (...) the said words,
they being an Offense to many sound and tender Friends, and that he condemn the
same. And as f^r G. Keith' manner of proceeding against him, we cannot own the
same to be pu^suant to Gospel Order, the said G. Keith having not alone dealt
with him in private before he had further prosecuted his Complaint; neither can
we hold him excuseable for his undecent expressions to W. Stockdale, he being
elder in Truth and in Years.

Given forth by the Meeting of Public Friends, at Philadelphia, the 4 th of 4
th Month, 1692. A True Copy, by Samuel Jenings.

The Third Judgment, and Condemnation, against G. K. (...) the several Monthly
and Quarterly Meetings in Pennsilvania, East and West-Jarsey, and elsewhere,
as there may be occasion.
BEloved Friends, In tender Love, and with Spirits bowed down before the Lord,
is this our Salutation unto you, earnestly de^^ing your g^owth and d^ily
preservation in the anti^nt (...), and in the simplicity of the Gospel of o^^
Lord Jesus Christ; and our hope and breathings are, that no (...) or wiles of
the Enemy shall prevail to turn you aside from your ^^^^fastness, or to cause
you to esteem ligh^ly of the rock and way of Gods Salvation unto you, but that
you be kept in the light and life, which was and is the just man's path* to the
end of ou^ days, Amen.

Now, dear Friend^, it is with sorrow of Spirits and grief of Souls, that we
signify un^o you the tedious Exercise and vexatious Perplexity we have met
with in our late Friend G^orge K^ith, for several Months past: With (...) and
^^mentation do we say, How is this Mighty Man fa^len! how is (...) Shield
vi^^^y c^^t away, as though he had no^ known the Oil o^ the holy Oyn^ment! How
shall it be told in Gat^ and published in the Streets of A^k^^on? Will not the
daughters of the (...) rejo^ce* Will not the daughters of the Uncircumcised
Triumph, when they hear that (...) upon the ^^aring Mo^ntains, and from the
high Places o^ Israel! Oh! how are we distressed for thee, thou as a man sl^in
in thy h^gh ^^^ces! Whilst thou walked in the Counsel of God, and went little
in thine own Eyes, thy Bow did abide i^ strength, thy Sword returned not empty;
from the sat of the Enemies of God thy ^ow turned not back; His Enemies were
then vile unto thee, and his Followers honorable in thy esteem. Oh! how lovely
w^^t thou in that day, when h^s beauty was upon thee, and when his Comeliness
covered thee! Why should his Ornaments exalt thee, which were given to humble
thee before him! and how thou art fallen from thy first Love, and are become
^reacherous to the Spouse of thy Yo^th! Consider where thou art fallen, and
Report, and do thy first Works.

But so it has happen^d Friends, lest any Flesh should glory, but become
Silent before the Lord, that this once Eminent Man and Instr^ment of Renown in
the Hand of the Lord, whilst he kept his first Habitation, and knew the
Government of Truth over hi^ own Spirit, and witnessed the same to be a Bridle
to his Tongue, was then serviceable both in Pen and Speech to the Churches of
Christ; But now, and of late, it is too obvious and apparent, that being
degenerated from the lowly meek and peaceable Spirit of Christ Jesus, and grown
cool in Charity and love toward his Brethren, that he is Gone into a Spirit of
Enmity, Wrath, Self-Exaltation, Contention and Janglings; and as a Person
without the ^ear o^ God before his Eyes, and without regard to his C^ristian
Bret^ren, and letting (...) the Reins to an Extravagant Tongue, he has broken
out into (...) ^^godly Speeches, R^^^ing Accusations and Passionate Threatenings
toward many of his Brethren and ^lders, and that upon slender Occasions; and
when some in Christian Duty have said before him his unsavory words and
unch^istian f^ame* he has treated them with such vile words and ^busive
language, such as (...) son of common c^vility would loath. It has been too
frequent with him* and that in a transport of Heat and Passion, to call some of
his Brethren in the Ministry, and other Elders, and that upon small
Provocations, if any, Fools, Ignorant H^athens, (...), Silly Souls, Liars,
Heretics, R^^ten R^nters, (...) gl^tonians, and o^^e. Names of that ^^famous
(...), thereby to our (...) own Shame. And further, his Anger and (...), being
Cruel against us, and not contenting himself with his ^arshness a^^inst
Person^, but he proceeded in bitterness of Spirit to charge ou^ Meeting with
being come together to cloak Heresy and (...), and publishing openly several
times, That there were more Doct^^^es of Devils and Damnable Heresies among the
Quakers, than among any Pro^ession among the Protestants. He has long objected
against our Discipline, even soon after hi^ coming among us, and having
prepared a Draught of his own, and the same not finding the expected Reception,
he seemed disguised since: He has often quarreled with ^s about Confessions,
declaring, That he knew none given forth by the Body o^ Friends to his
Satisfaction, and often charged most of us of being un^ound in the Faith: We
have offered in several Meetings for his satisfaction, and to prevent strife
among us, and for preserving the Peace of the Church to deliver a Confession of
our Christian Faith in the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the
A^thor of the Christian Faith, and in the word^ of the Apo^tles and Disciples,
his f^ithf^l Followers; or we would declare our ^elief in Testimonies of our
ancient Friends and f^i^hful ^rethren, who were genera^ly received by u^; or we
would concur and (...) upon a Confession, and have it transmit^^^ to the
^pro^^tion (...) the Yearly Meeting here, or the Yearly Meeting at Lo^^on; y^a,
it was offered (...) him at the same time, that a Confession concerning the
main matter in (...) should be gi^en out of a ^ook of hi^ own, (...) all wa^
^light^d a^ in^u^ficient* The Lord knows the trouble which we have had with
(...) Member, and the openness of our hearts and we^^ wish^^ toward (...)
notwithstanding his rage and violence against us, and of the endeavou^ of many
in this place to have (...) upon him by a f^iendl^ converse, and by other (...)
^s not inconsiderable to a b^otherly freedom; but our labou^ (...) seems to be
a^ water (...) upon the ground* And (...) Meeting having (...) and O (...)
dealt with (...) and (...)* he has not only slighted a^l Applications of
gaining him to a sense of his (...) Treatment and M^^carriag^* but in (...)
in^^^ting manner said to the Friends appointed by the Meeting to admonish him
(...) the Judgment of the meeting (...), and has of late set upon separate
Meeting here, where he has, like an open Oppos^^, no^ on^^ reviled several
Friends, by expo^^ng (...) Religion Reputations in mi^^ Auditories of some
hundred^, endeavou^ing to render them and Friends here, by the P^^ss and
otherway^, a scorn to the Profane, and the Song of the Drunkards, but he has
traduced and vi^lified ou^ worthy traveling Friends J D. and ^. W. in their
Powerful and savoury Ministry, whose service is not only he^e, but in most
Meetings in England, Scotland and Ireland well known to have a s^al in the
hearts of many thousands of the Israel o^ God: he has has also within a few
weeks appeared in opposition as it were, to the Body of Friends, by putting on
his Hat when our well received and recommended Friend J. Dickenson was at
Prayer, and that in a Meeting of near a thousand Friends and others, and so
going out of the Meeting, to the great disquiet there^f, and to the drawing
some scores into the same Opposition with him, by his ill Example; and he th^^
persisting in his repeated oppositions, hard speeches and continued separation,
and laboring, like an unwearied Adversary, to widen the Breach made by him,
and so abusing some of the neighboring Meetings by being as yet under that
cover of b^^ng owned by us, We are hereby brought under a Religiou^ constraint,
and to prevent other Meeti^g of being further injured by him, to give forth
this Testimony, ^^^ained as it were from us by his many and violent
Provocations, viz. That we cannot own him in such ungodly Speeches and
disorderly ^^^haviour, or in his separate Meeti^g, and that we disown the same,
(...) proceeding from a w^ong Spirit, which brings into Diso^der inwardly and
le^d into distraction and confusion outwardly, and until he condemn and decline
the same, we cannot receive him in his public Ministry, and would have him
cease to offer his Gift (...) such, among us, or elsewhere among Friends, till
he be reconcil^^ (...) offended ^reth^en* And as to th^se few of our Brethren
in the Gif^ of the Ministry wh^ a^e gone out with G. Keit^, into his
uncharitable and dividing Spirit, the miserable (...) whereof many of us have
sufficiently known in ^ld England, and other pa^ts) (...) judgment is, That
(...) become un^ualified (...) Work o^ the Go^pel, as (...) the G^idance of
Gods bl^ss^d and peaceable Spirit in (...) (from (...) thee proceeds the
effectual New Testament Ministry) and b^i^g t^rned (...) Fr^^ts t^ereof, are
gone to Vncharity and Contention. And now, all you who have walked in
fellowship and (...) with us, and (...) drawn asid^ through (...), or
otherwise, into this Spirit of Sepe^ation and (...) against our Meeting^
orderly established, and wherein we have been often and mutually refresh't
together, we cannot but in the fear of God, and in love to your Souls, admonish
you also of the Insecurity o^ your present^ s^ate, and that therein we cannot
have Unity with you, and unless you return (...) that Spirit, (...) and
Barrenness from the Lord will be your Reward. And so ^ear Friends, we exhort
you all to behave your selves in the Spirit of meeknes^ and peace (...) Truth,
upon all occas^ons, but more especially upon any discourse o^ conference with
any of them who are discontented among you, o^ started aside from you; and
avoid al^ Heats and Contentions in matter of Faith and Worship; and let not the
Salt of the Covenant be wanting in your words and actions, for thereby the
Savor o^ your Conversation will reach the Witness of God in them. The Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen.

Given forth by the Meeting of Public Friends in Philadelphia, the 20 th of
the 4 th Month, 1692. Samuel Jenings, John Delavall, William Yardly, Joseph
Kerckbridge, Walte^ (...), Hugh (...), Robert Owen, William Walker, John Lynam,
George Gray, John Symcock, Griffith Owen, John Bown, Henry W^^^is, Paul
Sa^n^^rs, John Blu^ston, William Cooper, Thomas Tha^kray, William Byles, Thomas
Lloyd, John W^^^ford, Nichol^s VVadn, William Watson, George Maris, Thomas
D^^k^^, Joshua F^a^ne, Evan (...), Richard Walter.


Here follows Two Answers to the said Judgments.
To all faithful F^i^nds in Pennsilvania, E^st and West-Jarsey, and to all
every where else in all parts of the World, to whose hands this way come, The
Salutation of Love.
WE in behalf of our selves, and many Breth^en, who are falsely called the
Separate Meeting at Philadelphia, having taken into our serious and weighty
Consideration, three several Papers given forth by them of the opposite side,
who have oppos^d us* and continue to oppose ^s in our present Testimony to the
Truth of Christ, and his blessed Gospel and Doctrine, viz. The first given
forth by the Monthly Meeting of the opposite side, the 20 o^ 3d Month, 1^92.
wherein they clear ^. Fitzwater of his falsely accusing G. K. for denying the
suff^ciency of the Light, sayi^g exp^esly in th^^ said Paper, That fo^r
credible VVitnesses giving their Testimony, that they heard G. K. say, he and
not believe the Lig^t was sufficient without somewhat else; the meeting saw
(...) reason to give Judgment against T. Fitzwater (...) particular, the said
Thomas condemning the rash spirit that he spo^e these words in, though the
^harge in it self was true. And G. K. having both at a Quarterly and Monthly
Meeting pr^ceeding, sufficiently proved, and which was confessed b^ ^. Lloyd,
as the Mouth of these Meetings, that by that somewhat else, G. K. had
fre^uently declared, he did not mean humane Learning, nor the Scriptures, nor
outward preaching (although the Scriptures, and outward Preaching are
Instrumental, in Gods ordinary way of working, together with the inward
operation of the spirit to men's salvation) as absolutely necessary, but the Man
Christ Jesus, and what he did and suffered for us on Earth, and what he now
does for us in Heaven, and the fullness that dwells in him. By which it
plainly appears, the said Monthly Meeting has excluded the Man Christ Jesus,
our blessed Mediator and Savior, from having any part of concern in our
Salvation, and therefore we do unanimously, and with one heart judge and
condemn their false Judgment, in clearing The Fitzwater, that has this
tendency, not only to condemn G. K. for hi^ sound Christian Doctrine, but is a
plain denial of the Man Christ Jesus, and the great Merits, and Value and
Effic^^ncy of his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, and his
Mediation for us in Heaven; a^ which a^e somewhat else than the People called
Quakers commonly understand by the Light, to wit, the Light in every man's
Conscienc^* And by this rash and inconsiderate Act of their Monthly Meeting,
proceeding from great Ignorance, Error and Unbelief in them, they have
sufficiently decla^ed th^mselves to be no true Believers in the Man Christ
Jesus, and therefore no Christians; and for this cause we cannot own them to be
our Christian Brethren, not join with them in any Religious Worship, until the
condemn themselves for the said Act, and give us some evidence of their
unfeigned Repentance and sincere Faith, by their open (...) and Declaration of
the Truth of Christ, which now they have denied.

The second Paper is given forth by a Meeting of these called Friends of the
Minist^y, signed by Sam. Jenings, as Clark of the said Mee^ing, wherein they
give too partial and defective Judgment against VVi^^iam Stockdale, not blaming
him for any Offense to God, or Christ, nor con^licting him for his sin of
Blasphemy, whereof he was guilty, in charging G* K^^or preaching Two Christ's,
because he preached Faith in Christ within, and in Christ wit^out us, wherein
he plainly denied Faith in Christ without us, that we judge Blasphemy against
the Son of Man. Also, the said Meeting has f^lsly judged and blamed G. K. for
calling W. S. An Ignorant Heathen; for seeing he denied Faith in Christ without
us, we judge it was his proper Name, and he was not worthy to be accounted in
the Truth, having discovered his so great Ignorance and Unbelief in one of the
great Fundamentals of the Christian Faith. Also, they falsely accuse G. K. for
not giving W. S. Gospel Order, whereas upon due examination, we find, that he
had given him sufficient Gospel Order.

The third Paper is signed by Samuel Jenings, John Simcock, Thomas Lloyd, and
others, in number 2^, all pretended Preachers, wherein they have passed a most
false Judgment against G. K. for his sound Christian Doctrine, and Godly Zeal,
in sharply reproving gross Antichristian Errors, that he had detected them
guilty of, partly by the (...) Confession of some, and partly by the Connivance
of others, and seeking to (...) and cover and defend the Guilty; and the said
three Papers, And the matter contained in them being sufficiently answered in a
late Book, called, The (...) of the Innocent, etc. which we having read and
(...) considered, (...) of, and allow to be given fo^th by our una^^^ous
Con^ent and Approbation, the particula^ things, in matter of (...), therein
contained, being all known to some of us, and the most princip^^ to most of us:
And we of this Meeting deliver it as our unanimous Judgment, that all these who
have given Judgment in the said three Papers abovementioned, have given a
false Judgment in the^ against the Truth, (...) against G. K. and his Friends
joined with him in this Testimony. And we do declare against their false
Judgment, and say, That G.K. and other Friends o^ the Ministry joined with him
in this Testimony, ought not to ^orbear the Exercise of their Ministerial Gift
that God has given them, notwithstanding the false Judgment of false Brethren,
that have joined together in a Faction against him, and his faithful Brethren,
but that he and his said faithful Brethren of (...) M^nistry ^^ght to be
encouraged and received by all faithful Friends every where, in the use and
exercise of their Ministerial Gifts, which we are persuaded they still have,
and the use and exercise thereof will tend to the Glory o^ God, the Prosperity
of Truth, and Salvation of Souls. And we also deliver it as our unanimous
Judgment, that all these 28 Persons that have signed that false Judgment
against G K. and his Friends, ought not to ^^wned (...) countenanced in their
preaching or praying, but denied, and all others that justify them, until they
condemn themselves for their said false and rash Judgment against G. K. and his
^rethren; and until they ^ive some public and open Confession and Declaration
that they are (...) in the Faith of Christ, they having given sufficient cause
to us, to ^^nclude, That at present they have not the sound Faith of Christ.
And though we have just cause to blame them for condemning us without all Hearing
and Trial, yet they have no cause to blame us, because we h^ve often sought and
requested a Meeting wi^h them to have things of Difference fairly debat^d and
tried, but (...) ^ever obtain it* and they having now made pub^^ck their false
Judgment against us, in three several Papers, we are concerned, for the Defense
of Truth, and our Reputation, both as Men and C^ristians, to give forth this
public Testimony against them, and to recommend it to all faith^^^ Friends to
consider and examine by the Spirit of Truth; and let both their public Papers
and ours be impartially weighed in the Ba^^ance of Truth, in order to which we
are willing that all their papers be printed as well as ours, that have been
published on both sides, that ^o the impartial Readers may have a fair
Opportunity to judge of both.

Given forth at our Meeting at the House of Phillip James in Philadelphia* the
3 d o^ 5 th month, 1692. in behal^ o^ many of our Brethren both in Town and
Country, who art one with us in this Testimony, though not now present. Ri^^ard
D^ngworth, Jo^n Wells, Phillip James, Henry Furnis, James S^a^^ick, James
Cooper, ^en. Wil^iam Da^^^, Robe^t Wallis, James Poulter, Nicholas Pierce,
Thomas Budd, Jo^n Barclay, William Brad^ord, James Co^per, jun. John ^^^tus,
John M^ C^^^b, James Ch^^k, John Ba^tram, Ab^l Noble, Joseph Walker, Thomus
Pasch^ll, Richard H^lia^d, Will^^m Wa^^e, Anthony St^^ges, Ralph VV^^d, Thomas
Pea^^, Jo^n (...), Peter Chamberlai^*


An Expostulation with Samuel Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and the rest of the
twent^ eight Unjust Judges and Signers of the Paper of Condemnation against G.
K. and his Friends. And Complaint for a Public Hearing and Trial before all
Impartial People.
WHereas Samuel Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and others being in Number 28 have
published a Paper against G. K. (...) the rest of his Brethren wh^ are ^oyned
with him in this Testimony for the Lord Jesus against whom they prophecy. Th^^
Dryness and Barre^ness from the Lord* will (...) hear ^^ward. We having read
and considered the said Judgment, do testify against it, as an un^ust and
unrighteous Act; But that which aggravates the Crime against them (...), that
they say, This Meeting having tenderly and orderly d^alt with him, etc. when
they know in their Consciences, they dealt ^o with G. K. (...) never sent for
him to their said Meeting, (...) and judged him altogether to his absence,
wherein they have done worse than the Baptists did in the case of Tho. Hicks*
for when Friends appealed to the People called Baptists for, ^^ice against T.
Hicks; they took their time and appo^nted (...) Meeting, and ^ or 4 days before
the said Meeting sent Letters to G. W. and W. P'^ H^uses to give them notice to
be at the Meeting, but they being so far from home that they would not have
timely notice, it is as (...) great Injustice for them to proceed and ^ry
Friends and T. H^cks in their absence; and upon Complaint they gave another
Meeting: But T Lloyd* ^ Jenings, and the rest are so far short of the Justice
of the Baptists, that they never so much as acquainted G. K. of their M^e^^ng,
or intent to proceed against him, nor never sent for him that we can
understand, only W Byles came to G.K 's house and asked for him; his Wife told*
he was from home, and she ^^pected him the next Morning, but they told nothing
of their business with him, but in all haste proceeded to judge him in his
absence before he came home. Is this your ord^rly dealing with him? Is this
your Justice? Is this your Christ an tenderness? your Charity, and your bearing
with him in Christian Spirit? for shame cease thus proceeding, or you will
(...) a stink in the Nostrils of the Nations where it shall be told. What!
pretend to Christiani^y, and fall short of Heathen Justice! John 7.50, 51. Act^
25.16, 17 Did the Baptists do unfair in proceeding to try Friends in their
absence? Then much more you* for they gave some Notice before of their
intending to Try Tho. Hicks* but you never so much as told G. K. of your so
Meet^n^: Wherefore allow us so much Justice as the Baptists did to ^ave another
Meeting publicly to try G. K. where all People may be present, that are
willing to ^ome, and whereof G.K. may have timely notice, and liberty to plead
his own Cause, and let all Impartial People judge; and through Gods Assistance
we shall make it appear, that your said ^udgment is unjust, and G. K. not
worthy of Condemnation. Was there ever such an Act done (...) any Christian
Society before to condemn a man without ever hearing of him, or suffering him
to speak for himself? Surely its far short of any worldly Court, where the
party shall have timely notice to prepare for his his Trya^, and liberty to
plead his own cause in the face of the Country, and where his Accusers are not
allowed to sit and give Judgment against him* But so it is, that these Unjust
and Unrighteous Judges have proceeded to try, judge* and publish their Judgment
against G. K. without ever hearing of him, when its well known the most of them
were his great Opposers: They might be sure this way to condemn him, when only
a Faction o^ them get together, and accuse him, and he nor any for him be
present to speak for him. But that which still hightens the Crime of Tho.
Lloyd, Sam Jenings, and the rest of the 2^ Unjust Judges, is, that they of the
Ministry should give such a false Judgment, and then impose it on all the
Meetings in these 3 Provinces, when most of the Friends thereof are great
strangers to the Matter in Controversy, not knowing which ^ar^y is in the
Right, but they must take said Judgment upon Trust from them* without enquiring
into the Cause and Verity thereof; and where they think their said Judgment
will not readily be swallowed down, they will follow it from Meeting to
Meeting, clothed with their Magistratical Robes, and if any Friends show their
dislike of having i^ imposed on them without their own consent, and
consideration of the matter, presently threaten to bind them to the good
^ehaviour, and to the ^eace* and call out for a Constable, t^ereby endeavou^^ng
to trample u^ down by their Magistratical Power and Authority, as Samuel
Jenings* Sam Ric^ardson, Thomas Lloyd, John Delavall and Anthony Morris and
(...) at a Monthly Meeting near (...), as is well known to many. Oh! whither do
you think these things will run? will it not give People ^ust cause to say, the
Quakers are turned Persecut^^s? But our Trust and Confidence is in the Lord
alone, who hitherto has pleaded the Cause of the Innocent, and carried his
People through all the Powers and Opposition^ that have hitherto risen up
against them in all Ages, and we doubt not but he will do the same for us as we
keep faithful to him, and to the Guidance of his holy Spirit, Light and Life in
our hearts. But are these your Proceedings Christi^^* or Protest^^^ like? or do
they not rather rel^^h of ^ank P^p^ry, for the Clergy o^ them of* the Ministry
to impose their Edicts on the Pe^p^e without their enquiring into the matter?
Is not this blind Obedience? Is not this believing as the Church believes, in
order to bring in Ignorance the Mother of Devoti^n? Oh! who but ignorant and
blind men, but can see these things! And yet now will ye stand in them, O ye
Unjust Judges! will ye not be willing to answer our just Complaint for a
Hearing? Will you come short of the Justice of the Baptists, who admitted of
another Meeting for a Hearing? But perhaps you will say, The Act of that
Meeting was Infallible, being made up of such a Body of the Ministry, (as
Arthur C^ok said lately in the House of G. K. That a Yearly Meeting could not
Err) But we desire to hope, that some of you will better consider of it, and
answer our justs complaint, and no^ lurk in holes and corners, but come open^
and defend your selves, and repent of the Error and false Doctrine you have run
into, and let a time and place be appointed and agreed on by both Parties for a
Public Hearing: If you have Truth and justice on your side, come forth and let
it appear before the World, and say not that such and such things are false,
but prove them to be so; and bring things to the Light, and let not Christ's
words be fullfilled on you, viz. You hate the Light because your deeds are
Evil, etc. Say not, that we are bold and daring thus to Challenge you^punc; for
its not wr^t in a presumptuous Spirit as relying on our own Strength or Parts,
but on the Lord alone, on whom is our Depend^nce, and who knows the ^nnocency
of our Cause, and therefore we are not afraid to bring it to the T^st, but
willing to appear openly, as hitherto we have done in Print, and not as your
Practice is to report false things secretly abroad, which we know not whom to
fasten upon* but what we publish in Print remains to be the A^^h^rs ^^ether
true or false; if false, why don't you refuse it* the Press is free and open
for you, as for any? But the matter in (...) Prin^e^ Books is true, and sta^ds
over your Heads, and which you will never be able to R^^ute.

But next* let us enquire, what have you condemned G. K. (...)? some of you
say, Partly for (...) of Doct^^ne, and partly for hard Words; But as for
Doctrine you have not mentioned what it is; and as for the hard Names you
mention, it is made appear in The Plea of the Innocent, etc. that they were
justly given by G. K. to them that deserved the same: But have his Opposers
given no hard Names, no unjust and false Reflections? yea, many. But why only
then must G. K. be condemned, and not they also who have given hard words and
false Names to G. K.? When G. K. complained against them for not giving
Judgment against W. Stockdale's Blasphemy Samuel Jenings could excuse it, by
bringing the Example and Practice of worldly Courts, saying, George, thou have
reviled thy Brethren, and in Courts we all^^ of Discount. So that according to
S. Jenings, W. Stockdale's Blasphemy must be discounted against G. K 's
Reviling his Brethren, as they account it, but can never prove. But if Discount
be allowable in this case, why are not G. K's hard words discounted against
those that have been given to him, so far as they will reach? And (...) it may
appear what hard Names have been given, we think fit here to mention, viz.

They say G. K. has called them,

1. Fools, 2. Ignorant Heathens, 3. Infid^lls, 4. Silly Soul^, 5. Liars, 6.
Heretics, 7. Rotten R^nters, 8. Muggletonians.

Th^^ of the other side have called G. K.

1 Brat of Babylon, 2. Accuser of the Brethren, 3. Apostate, 4. Worse th^n
Profane. 5. A Troubler of the Church, 6. A Person that no one could have
D^ff^r^nce with, that he was in danger of the Life of his Soul. 7. A Preacher
of (...) Christ's, 8. A Tell^^ of an Old S* Andrew^ (...). 9. P^p^* 10. Father
Confessor, 11. Liar* 12. Devil, 13 (...), 14. C^mpared him to a Wolf Tr^^r*
etc. 15 (...) that always endeavo^r^d to keep down the Power of Tr^th. 16. A
more vexatious Adversary than Hicks, Fa^do, Scanderet, or the worst of Enemies.
17. One that is fallen upon the s^^ring Mountains, etc. 18. As a man (...). 1^.
Be^ome Tre^^h^rous to the Spo^se of his Youth. 20. Fall^n ^^om his first Love.
21. Gone into a Spirit of Enmity, Wrath, S^lf-Exaltation, Contention* etc. 22.
Foaming out his own Shame. 23. A Person without the Fear of God before his
Eyes. 24. Le^ing loose the Reins to an Extravagant Tongue. 25* Broken out into
many Ungodly Speech^s, Rattling Accusations, Pa^^^onate Threatenings, being
Cruel, etc. like an Unwearied Adversary. With many more that can be proved.

Now let the Impartial Reader judge, which have exceeded in hard Words? and
whether they are not very partial to pass by all that has been said against G.
K. and condemn him for what he has spoke in i^s right place, as is made appear
in the Book called, The Plea of the Innocent* And yet when G. K. was the
Complainer for many Months, for Justice to be done to Truth, they could plead
for Discount, and put Blasphemy against Christ Jesus, in the Balance against
Reflections upon themselves, and yet now will not disount for hard words. And
also they have judged a whole Meeting without ever admon^shing of them. I^ this
be not Partiality, Injustice and ^nrighteous Judgment, tell us what is. And
clear your selves of these things, if you can.

Signed by us, in behalf of the rest of our Friends by order of our Meeting,
the 18 th of the 5 Month, 1692. Thomas Budd, R^chard H^^^rd, John (...), Th^mas
Paschall* William Bradford, James Cooper, Elizabeth K^^l^.


THE END
Books to be Sold by William Bradford in Philadelphia. 1692.
The Christian Faith of the People called Quakers in Rhode Island. 4 d. A
Catechism for Children and Youth, and such others as need to be instructed in
the first Principles o^ the Christian Religion. By G. K. Pr. 6 d. A Testimony
concerning the Resurrection o^ the Dead, Day o^ Judgment, and Christ's last
Coming and Appearing without us. By G. K. 3 d. Truth and Innocence defended,
against Cal^mny and Defamation, in a late Report concerning the Revolution of
Humane Souls, etc. G. K. 5 d. Some Causes and Reasons of the late Separation
that has come to pass here at Philadelphia* Showing, That G* K's Opposers were
the Cause of the said Breach and Separation, and most properly are the separate
Meeting. Together with an account of the sincere Christian Faith of G. K. and
his Friends* Price 9 d. The Plea of the Innocent, against the False Judgment of
the Guilty, being a V^ndication of G. Keith and his Friends, from the false
Judgment, Calumnies and De^amations of ^. Jenings, J. S^mcock, T. Lloyd and
others, being in Number Twenty Eight. Price 6 d. A Vision concerning Sep^ration
among Friends in Old England. By G. ^. A (...) and Exhortation to Friends to
beware of sedu^ing* Spirits* By S. Crisp. ^ d. A^ Appeal from the Twenty Eigh^
^udges, to the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment (...) faithful Friends,
called Quakers. A gr^^t Copy of three Judgments given forth by a Party of m^n,
called Quakers at Philadelphia, against G. Keith, etc. With (...) Answers to
the same. (...) Husbandry to New England, or an Experienced way to raise Quick
^^dges and Clover Grass; and the way to make Syder.
Note, That in some of Printed Copies of the Appeal from the twenty (...)
Judges, etc. there happened an Error in the Postscript, which pray amend, viz.
line 1. for Anthony Morris read Sam. Richardson.

And whereas it is reported, That the Printer being a favourer of G. K. he will
not (...) for any other, which is the reason that the other Party appear not in
Print as well as G K. These are to signify, that the Printer has not yet
refused to print any thing for either Party; and also signifies that he does
not refuse, but is willing and ready to print any thing for the future that
G.K's Opposer^ shall bring to him.


