AN EXPOSTULATION WITH Thomas Lloyd, Samuel Jenings, And the rest of the
Twenty Eight Unjust Judges and Signers of the Paper of Condemnation against
George Keith And the rest of his Friends. And COMPLAINT FOR A Public Hearing
AND TRIAL Before all Impartial People.

An Expostulation with Samuel Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and the rest of the
twenty eight Unjust Judges and Signers of the P^per of Cond^mnation against G.
K. and^ his Friends. And Complaint for a Public Hearing and Trial before all
Impartial People.
WHereas Samuel Jenings, Thomas Lloyd, and other^ being in Number 28 have
published a Paper against G. K. the rest of his Brethren (...) joined with him
in this Testimony for the Lord Jesus* against whom they prophecy, That Dryness
and Barre^n^ss from the Lord, will be their Reward. We having read and
considered the said Judgment, do testify against it, as an un^ust and
unrighteous Act; bu^ that which aggravate^ the Crime against them is, that they
say, This Meeting h^ving tend^rly and order^y dealt with him* etc. when they
know in their Consciences* ^hey dealt (...) with G. K. (...) never sent for him
^o their said Meeting, but try^d and judged him altogether in his abse^ce,
wherein they have done wor^e than the B^ptists did in the (...) Tho. Hicks; for
when Friends appealed to the People c^l'd Baptists for ^u^tice against T.
H^cks, they took their time and appo^nted a Meeting, and 3 or 4 days before the
said Meeting (...) L^tters ^o G. W. and W. P 's H^uses to give the^ notice to
be at the Meeting but they being so far from home (...) could not have timely
notice, it was re^ko^'d great Injustice for them to proceed and try Friends and
T. H^cks in their absence; and upon Complaint they gave another Meeting: But T
Lloyd S. Jenings, and the (...) so far short of the Justice of the Baptists,
that they (...) ^o much as acquainted G. K. of their M^e^ing or intent to
proceed against him, nor never sent for him that we can understand, only W.
Byles came to G.K 's house and asked for him, his Wife told* he was from home,
and she expected him the next Morning* but they told nothing of their b^siness
with him, but in all haste proceeded to judge him in his absence before he came
home* Is this your ord^rly ^ealing with him? Is this your Justice? Is this your
Chris^^an t^nderness? your Charity, and your bearing with him in* Chr^stian
Spirit? for shame cease thus proceeding, or you will (...) in the Nostrils of
the Nations where it shall be told What! pretend to Christiani^y and fall short
of H^athen Justice! John 7.50, 51 Acts 25.16, 17 Did the Baptists do unfair in
proceeding to try Friends in their absence? Then much more you: for they gave
some Notice before of their intending to Try Tho. H^cks* but you never so much
as told G. K. of your so Meet^n^: Wherefore allow us so much Justice as the
Baptists di^ to ^ave another Meeting pub^ickly to try G. K. where all Pe^p^e
may be present, that are willing to come, and whereof G. K. may have timely
notice, and liberty to plead his own Cause, and ^et all Impartial People judge;
and through Gods Assistance we shall make it appear, that your said Judgment is
un^u^t, and G. K. not worthy of Condemnation. Was there ever such an Act done
in any Christian Socie^y before, t^ condemn^ man without ever hearing of him,
or suffering him to speak for himself? Surely its far short of any worldly
Court, where the party shall have timely notice to p^epare for his his Tria^,
(...) ^^berty to plead his own cause in the face of the Country, and where his
Accusers are not allowed to sit and give Judgment against him: But so it is,
that the^e Un^ust and ^^righteous ^udges have proceeded to try, judge, and
publish their Judgment against G. K. without ever hearing of him, ^hen its well
known the most of them were his great Opposers: They might be sure this way to
condemn him, when only a Faction (...) them get together, and accu^e him, and
he nor any for him be present to speak for him. But that which still hightens
the Crime of Tho. Lloyd, Sim Jenings, and the rest of the 28 Unjust ^udges, is,
that they of the Ministry should give such a false Judgment, and then impose it
on all the Meetings in these 3 Provinces, when most of the Friends thereof are
great strangers to the Matter in Controversy, not knowing which Party is in
the Right, but they must take said Judgment upon Trust from them* without
enquiring into the Cause and Verity thereof; and where they think their said
Judgment will no^ readily be swallowed down, they will follow it from Meeting
to Meeting, clothed with their Magistratical Robes* and if any Friends show
their dislike o^ having it imposed on them without their own consent, and
consideration of (...), presently threaten to bind them to the good (...) ^o
the Pe^ce, and call out for a Constable, t^ereby (...) to tr^mple us down by
their M^gistratical Power and Authority, as Samuel Jenings, Sam. Richardson,
(...) Lloyd, John Delavall and Anthony Morris did lately at a Monthly Meeting
near ^rankford, as is well known to many. Oh! whither do you think these things
will run? will it not give People just cause to say, the Quakers are (...)
Persecu^^r^? But our Trust and Confidence is in the Lord alone, who hitherto
has pleaded the Cause of the Innocent, and carried his People through all the
Powers and Oppositions that have hitherto (...)* up against them ^n all Ages,
and we doubt not but he will do the ^ame for us* as we keep faithful to him,
and to the Guidance of his holy Spirit, Light and Life in our hearts. But (...)
these your Proceeding^ Christi^^, or Prot^stant-like? or do they not rather
relish of Rank Popery, for the Clergy or them o^ the Ministry to impose their
Edicts on the People, without (...) enquiring into the matter? Is not the (...)
Obedience* Is not this believing as the (...) believes, in order to bring* in
Ignorance the Mother of Devotian? Oh* who but ignorant and b^nd men, but can
see these things! And yet now will ye stand in them, O ye V^just Judges! will
ye not be willing to answer our just Compla^n^ ^or a Hearing? Will you come
short of the Justice of the Baptists, who admitted of another Meeting for a
Hearing? But perhaps you will say, The Act (...) that Meeting was Infallible,
being made up of such a Body of the Ministry, (as Arthur Cook said lately in
the House of G. ^. That a Yearly Meeting could not Err* But we desire to hope,
that some of you will better consider of it, and answer our just Complaint, and
no^ lurk in holes and corners, but come openly and defend your selves, and
repent of the Error and false Doctrine you have run into, and let a time and
place be appointed and agreed on by both Parties for a Public Hearing: If you
have Truth and Justice on your side, come forth and let it appear before the
World, and say not that such and such things are false, but prove them to be
so; and bring things to the Light, and let not Christ's words be fullfilled on
you, viz. You hate the Light beca^se your (...) Evil, etc. Say not, that we are
bold and daring thus to Cha^lenge you; for its not wr^t in a presumptuous
Spirit as relying on our own Strength or Parts, but on the Lord alone, on whom
is our Dependence, and who knows the Innoc^ncy of our Cause, and therefore we
are not afraid to bring it to the Test, but willing to appear openly, as
hitherto we have done in Print, and not as your Practice is to report false
things sec^etly abroad, which we know not whom to fasten upon; but what we
publish in Print remains to be the Au^hors, whether true or false; if false,
why don't you refute it, the Press is (...) and open for you, as for any? ^ut
the matter in our ^a^e Pr^^e^ ^^ooks is true, and sta^ds over your Heads, and
which you will never be able to (...).

But next, let us enquire, what have you c^^demned G. K. (...)? some (...),
P^r^ly (...) of Doctrine, and partly for (...); But as for Doctrine you have
not mentione^ what it is; and as for the hard Names you mention, it is made
appear in The Plea of the Innocent, etc. that they were justly given by G. K.
to them that deserved the same: But have his Opposers given no hard Names, no
unjust and false Reflections? yea, many. But why only then must G. K. be
condemned, and not they also who have given hard words and false Names to G.
K.? When G. K. complained against them for not giving Judgment against W.
Stockdale's Blasphemy Samuel Jenings could excuse it, by bringing the Example
and Practice of worldly Courts, saying, George, tho^ have reviled thy Brethren,
and in Courts we allow of Discount. So that according to S. Jenings, W.
Stockdale's Blasphemy must be discounted against G. K 's Re^iling his Brethren,
as they account it* but can never prove. But if Discount be allowable in this
case* why are not G. K's hard words discounted against those that have been
given to him, so far as they will reach? And tha^ it may appear what (...)
Name^ have been given, we think fit here to mention, viz.

They say G. K. has called them,

1. Fools, 2. Ignorant Heathens, 3. Infid^lls, 4. S^lly Souls, 5. Liars, 6.
Heretics, 7. Rotten Ranters, 8. Muggletonians.

They of the other side have called G. K.

1 Brat of Babylon, 2. Accuser of the Brethren, 3. Apostate, 4. Worse than
Profane, 5. A Troubler of the Church 6. A Person that no one could have
D^ff^rence with, but he was in danger of the Life of his Soul. 7. A Preacher of
two Christ's, 8. A Teller of an Old St Andrews Story. 9. Pope, 10. Father
Confessor, 11. Ly^r, 12. Devil, 13 M^ggletonian, 14. Compared (...) to a Wolf
Tiger, etc. 15 One that al^ayes endeavored to keep down the Power of Truth.
16. A m^re vexatio^s Adversary tha^ Hicks, Faldo, Scanderet, or the worst of
Enemies. 17. One that is fallen upon the soaring Mountains, etc. 18. (...) a
man slain. 19. Become Treachero^s to the Spouse of his Youth. 20. Fall^n on his
first Love. 21. Gone into a Spirit of Enmity, Wrath, S^lf-Exaltation,
Contention, etc. 22. Foaming out his own Shame 23. A Person without the Fear of
God before his Eyes. 24. Leting loose the Reins to an Extravagant Tongue. 25.
Broken out into many Ungodly Speeches, Railing Accusations, Pa^^^onate
Threatenings, being Cruel, etc. like an Unwearied Adversary. With many more
that can be proved.

Now let the Impartial Reader judge, which have exceeded in hard Words? and
whether they are no^ very partial to pass by all that has been said against G.
K. and condemn him for what he has sp^ke in i^s right place, as is made appear
in the Book called, The Plea of the Innocent. And yet when G. K. was the
Complainer for many Months, for Justice to be done to Truth, they could plead
for D^scount, and put Blasphemy against Christ Jesus, in the Balance against
Reflections upon themselves, and yet now will not disount for hard words. And
also they have judged a whole Meeting without ever admonishing of them. If this
be not Partiality, Injustice and Unrighteous Judgment, tell us what is. And
clear your selves of these things, if you can.

Signed by us, in behalf of the rest of our Friends by order of ou^ Meeting,
the 18 th of the 5 Month, 1692. Thomas Budd, Richard Hilliard, John Heart,
Thomas Paschall, William Bradford, James Cooper, Elizabeth Keith.


THE END.
Books to be (...) by William Bradford in Philadelphia* 1692.
(...) of the People (...) Quakers in Rhode Island* 4 d, ^ (...) by G. K. 3 d.
(...) late Repor^ ^oncerning the Revol^ti^n (...). G. K. ^ d. Some Causes and
Reasons of the late S^pera^ion that (...) com^ to (...) at Philadelphia.
Showing, (...) G. K'^ Opposers were the C^^se of the said Bre^^^ and
Separation, and most p^operly are the separate Meeting. Together with an
account of the sincere Christian Faith o^ G. K. and (...) Friends. Price 9 d.
The Plea of the Innocent, against the False Judgment of the Guilty, being a
Vindication (...) G Ke^th and his Friend^, from the false Judgment, Calumnies
and (...) o^ S. Jenings, J. Simcock, T. Lloyd and others, being in Number
Twenty Eight. Price ^ d. A Vision concerning Separation among Friends in Old
England. By G. F. A faithful Warning and Exhortation to Friend^ to bewa^^ (...)
Spirits. By S. Cris^. ^ d. ^ Appeal from the Twenty Eight I^dges, to the Spirit
of Truth and true Judgment in all faithful Friends, called Quakers. A true
C^ppy o^ three I^dgments given ^orth by a Party of men* called Quakers at
Philadelphia, against G. Keith, etc. With ^wo A^swers to the same. New
H^^bandry to New England, or an Experienced way to raise Quick H^dges and
Clov^r Grass; and the way to make Syder. Note, That in some of Printed Copies
of the Appeal from the twenty eight Iudge^, etc. there happened an Error in the
Postscript, which pray amend, viz. line 1. for Anthony Morris read Sam.
Richardson.
And whereas it is reported, That the Printer being a favo^re^ o^ G. K* he will
not prin^ for any other, which is the reason that the other Par^y a^p^ar not in
Print as well as G K. These are to signify, that the Printe^ has not yet
refused to print any thing for either Party, and also signifi^^ that he does
^ot ref^se, but is willing and ready to print any thing ^or the (...) that G. K
's Opposers shall bring to him.


