A Serious Appeal To all the more Sober, Impartial and Judicious People IN
NEW ENGLAND To whose Hands this may come, Whether Cotton Mather in his late
Address, etc. has not extremely failed in proving the People called Quakers
guilty of manifold Heresies, Blasphemies and strong Delusions, and whether he
has not much rather proved himself extremely Ignorant and greatly possessed
with a Spirit of Perversion, Error, Prejudice and envious Zeal against them in
general, and G. K. in particular, in his most uncharitable and rash Judgment
against him.

Together with a Vindication of our CHRISTIAN FAITH In those Things Sincerely
Believed by us, especially respecting the Fundamental Doctrines and Principles
of CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

By GEORGE KEITH.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at Philadelphia in Pennsylvania, in the
Year 1692.

A few Words of Preface.
WHereas Cotton Mather in his Preface, begineth with a gross Falsehood, to wit,
that it has been fully proved that Quakerism is Paganism; for it never yet
has been proved by him, nor any other, nor ever will be, to wit, That the
Religion professed by the sincere and faithful People, called in scorn Quakers,
is either Paganism, or any other thing than real Christianity; although there
may be some that may be called Quakers, but are not owned by us to be our
faithful Brethren, even as they are not all true Christians, who are so called,
nor were they all Israel who were called Israel; The Reader may expect what
full store of Lies he may be entertained with by Cotton Mather, when the first
two Lines of his Preface are such a notorious Lie.

And as for the Etymology of the Name Christian, which, as he alleges, one
that appears lately in Print, as an Advocate of the Quakers, gives as if
Christianoi were Christionoi, that is, Christ's Asses; he should have given us
the Name of that Advocate, that we might have found how truly he has cited
him. It has been thought that some of the Heathens, by way of Reproach, (...)
^evise such an Etymology of the Name Christianos, as if it were Christionos, i.
e. Christ's Ass; but I judge not that to be the true Etymology of that Name, but
that Christianos is as much as to say, A Follower of Christ, or one partaking
of that heavenly Anointing, which in all Fullness was poured by the Father on
Christ, and is derived in various Measures from Christ* according to the good
pleasure of God, unto all that bel^eve sincerely in him. But supposing that
Etymology, that a Christian Quaker is one of Christ's Asses, I propose it to the
serious Consideration of the People of New England, whether it be not much more
honorable and profitable to be one of Christ's Asses, so as to witness a
fullfilling that figure of Christ's riding (...) the Ass outwardly, as was
prophesied of him, than to be the Priests Asses in New England and elsewhere,
to be rid upon by them, as is too manifest they have been. And for his supposed
Load he has imagined he has laid on us, it touches us little, and returns
on himself, and will be his own Burden.

And concerning Christian Lodowick his Challenge to the Quakers in
Rhode Island, it is sufficiently answered, and he declared to be a gross
Calumniator.

CHAP. I.
WHereas Cotton Mather in his late Address seems to lay great weight on the
Opinion of Richard Baxter, (whom he calls Reverend Baxter) concerning the
Quakers, I thought fit to Transcribe some few Passages of Richard Baxter in a
printed Book of his, called, Directions for weak distempered Christians, that
may be of some service to that injured People, called in scorn Quakers. In page
142. of that Book, he says, From my own Observation, which with ^ g^ieved
Soul, I have made in this Generation, I hereby give warning to this and all
succeeding Ages, that if they have any regard to Truth, or Charity, they take
heed how they believe any factious partial Historian, or Divine, in any evil
that he says of the Party that he is against; for (though there be good and
credible Persons of most Parties, yet) you shall find that Passion and
Partiality prevails against Conscience, Truth and Charity in most that are
sick of this Disease, and that the Envious Zeal which is described, James 3.
does make them think they do God Service, first in believing false Reports, and
then in venting them against those that their Zeal or Faction does call the
Enemies of Truth. And a little after he says, page 143. Most Christian is that
Advice of Dr. Henry Moore, That all Parties of Christians would mark all the
good which is in other Parties, and be more forward to speak of that, than of
the Evil: And this (says Baxter) would promote the Work of Charity in the
Church, and the interest of Christianity in the World; whereas the overlooking
of all that is Good, and aggravating all the Evil (and falsely feigning more th^n
is True) is the Work of greatest Service to the Devil, etc. Now if both Richard
Baxter and Cotton Mather had well practiced this Ad^ice, they would not have
been so Uncharitable to the People called Quakers.

But seeing C. M. la^eth so great weight on his Reverend Baxter, as he calls
him (though I find not any where that he calls Paul, Peter or John, or any of
the Prophets or Apostles by such a high designation) even by Baxte^'s, own
Judgment, neither G. K. nor his Brethren, who are of his Faith* a^e guilt^ of
an^ Fundam^ntal Errors, that are repugnant to the Essence of the Christian
Faith: And it is a thing generally acknowledged by all Protestants, That where
any Man or Society of Men, err not in a Fundamental Article of the Christian
Faith, we ought to have Charity toward them, as our Christian Brethren, if in
some other things they are under some Mistakes, and that their Conversation and
Practice be free of Scandal. And that I may the more effectually make it
apparent, how that by the Judgment of Richard Baxter neither G. K. nor his
Brethren who are of his Faith, are guilty of any Fundamental Errors touching
the Christian Faith, I think fit to transcribe (faithfully) a Passage in his
forecited Book, page 84, 85, 86. where he undertaketh to describe the entire
Essence of the Christian Faith, as to the matter of it. The Foundation
Principle (says he) or Fundamental Matter is God the Father, Son and holy
Ghost, the secondary Foundation or Fundamental Doctrine, is those Scripture
Propositions that express our Faith in God the Father, the Son and the holy
Ghost: When we name three Persons as the Object of the Christian Faith, we
express Names of Relation, which contain both the Persons, Nature and Offices,
and undertaken Works; without either of which God were not God, and Christ were
not Christ, and the holy Ghost were not, in the sense of our Articles of Faith,
the holy Ghost; as we must therefore believe, That there is one only God, so we
must believe, That God the Father is the first in the holy Trinity of Persons;
that the whole Godhead is perfect, and infinite in Being, and Power, and
Wisdom, and Goodness, (in which all his Attributes are comprehended, but yet a
distinct Understanding of them all, is not of absolute necessity to Salvation;)
That this God is the Creator, Preserver, and Disposer of all things, and the
Owner and Ruler of Mankind, most Just and Merciful, that as he is the beginning
of all, so he is the ultimate end, and the chief good of Man, which before all
things else must be loved and Sought. Concerning the Son, we must moreover
believe, That he is the same God with the Father, the second Person in Trinity,
Incarnate, and so became Man, by a Personal Union of the Godhead and Manhood
[He omitteth his being conceived of the holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin
Mary, which was needful to have been expressed, it being a great Article of our
Christian Faith] That he was without Original or Actual Sin, having a sinless
Nature, and a sinless Life; That he fullfilled all Righteousness, and was put
to Death, as a Sacrifice for our sins, and gave himself a Ransom for us; and
being buried, he rose again from the dead, and afterward ascended into Heaven,
where he is Lord of all, and interceedeth for Believers; That he will come
again, and raise the dead, and judge the World, the Righteous to Everlasting
Life, and the Wicked to Everlasting Punishment: That this is the only Redeemer,
the Way, the Truth and the Life, neither is there access to the Father but by
him, nor Salvation in any other. Concerning the Holy Ghost we must believe,
That he is the same one God, the third Person in Trinity, sent by the Fat^er
and the Son to inspire the Prophets and Apostles; and that the Doctrine
inspired and miraculously attested by him, is true; that he is the Sanctifier
of these that shall be saved, renewing them after the Image of God in Holiness
and Righteousness, giving them true Repentance, Faith, Hope, Love, and sincere
Obedience, causing them to overcome the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, thus
gathering a holy Church on Earth to Christ, who have, by his Blood, the Pardon
of all their sins, and shall have Everlasting ^^^ss^dness with God: This (says
Richard Baxter) is the Essence of the Christian Faith, as to the Matter o^ it.

And now, as concerning that judged by Richard Baxter the Essence of the
Christian Faith, as to the Matter of it, I declare sincerely, without all
Equivocation or mental Reservation, in the true and genuine sense of the Words,
that I have transcribed out of his said Treatise, that I know not wherein I or
my Brethren, of my Faith and Persuasion differ from him in any one particular,
as to the matter of it, or substance therein contained; the only exception we
have, is against that unscriptural Term or Phrase of Three Persons, or a
Trinity of Persons, but we own sincerely, That our Faith ought to be, and is in
God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, and that these Names are Names of
Relation, respecting the Relations, as well as the Relative Offices, and Works
of those Three; and this being granted by us, in the sincerity of our Hearts,
we are excused or cleared by John Calvin, for whose Memory I suppose C. Mather
has as full and great esteem as for R. Baxter; for in his first Book of
Institutions, cap. 13. n. 5. he says expressly, Vtinam quidem sepulta (...)
(sc. inventa Nomina (as he expressly calls them) Trium Personarum) constaret
modo, hec inter omnes Fides, Patrem, et Filium, et ^piritum esse unum Deum, nec
tamen aut Filium esse Patrem, a^t Spiritum Filium, sed proprietate quadam esse
distinctos, neque enim tam precisa sum austeritate ut obnudas voculas
digladiari sustineam; In English thus, I wish (says he) the invented Names
(viz. of Three Persons) were buried, providing this Faith were manifest among
all, that the Father, the Son, and the Spirit is one God; and yet that the Son
is not the Father, nor that the Spirit is the Son, but that they are distinct
by a certain Property (to wit, in their Relative Attributes, as that the Father
did beget the Son, and the Son was begotten of the Father, and that the holy
Spirit did proceed from both) for I am not of such precise Austerity (said
Calvin) that for bare small Words I would contend; and withal he confesses,
That the Orthodox anciently did not agree about these Terms or invented Words,
that he acknowledges, were invented since the Apostles days, to guard against
the Arrian, Sabellian, and other Heresies. And therefore since we are
altogether free of these Heresies, and that we detest them from our very Souls,
no sober Christian will judge uncharitably of us in that respect. And as for
the word Distinct, if some of our Friends, taking it to signify distant or
separated asunder one from another, as in remote and distant places, have
refused it, in this and other matters, as indeed sometimes, at least vulgarly
it does so signify, as when we say, America is distinguished from Europe, by a
great and spacious Sea interveening, they ought not to be accused for so doing,
seeing in that other sense of the word Distinct, that is more in use among
Scholars, as when we say, Things are distinct when the one is not the other,
they own a Distinction, as that the Father is not the Son, the Son is not the
Father, (though he is our Father, and is, expressly called in Scripture the
Everlasting Father) and Christ's Manhood and Body is not the Godhead, and yet
one Christ; as the Body of a Man is not his Soul, and yet Body and Soul is one
Man; and in this second sense we do allow the word distinct. And as to the
Manner of receiving the Christian Faith, we grant with him, first, That it must
not only be received, as true, into our Understanding, by a special divine
Illumination, that is supernatural, but must be embraced by the Will, Heart and
Affections, as good, yea, exceeding good, and worthy of all acceptance, by a
special divine Motion, and working of the holy Spirit, that is supernatural, in
and upon the Will, Heart and Affections: 2 dly, That as touching all the
peculiar Mysteries and Doctrines of Faith, the Scriptures have been
Instrumental, by and together with the immediate working of the Spirit, to
beget in us the true Faith of them: But in this we differ, I suppose, from him,
as well as from C. Mather and his Brethren of (...)-England, that whereas they
hold, That the Spirit of God works in Believers Effectively, but not
Objectively, or by way of sensible Object, or sensibly and perceptibly by its
own Self-Evidence and Demonstration to men's Hearts and Souls; We affirm, That
the Spirit of God works in Believers, both Effectively and also Objectively,
or by way of sensible Object, or sensibly and perceptibly, by its own Evidence
and Demonstration to men's Hearts and Souls: And this, diverse called Protestants
have acknowledged with us, though denied by C. M. and his Brethren of
New England; but yet I suppose R. Baxter will not call this a Fundamental Error
in the People called Quakers, seeing it contradicts none of the Fundamental
Articles delivered by him in his said Treatise.

And if any say, or object, That if the Spirit works by way of a sensible
Object, upon the inward and spiritual Senses of Believers, this would make void
all use of the Scriptures, as being so much as the Instrument, or Instrumental
to our Faith. But I Answer, denying this Consequence, and by distinguishing the
Object of our Faith, to wit, that the Scriptures are the Instrumental and
secondary Object of our Faith, and the holy Spirit the principal and primary
Object of our Faith (as it is sensibly felt to work upon our inward and
spiritual Senses) together with the Father and the Son: Even as in outward and
natural Objects that work upon our outward and natural Senses, some are
principal, and others are instrumental; as in our natural sight of visible
Things on Earth, as Houses, Woods, Trees, Beasts, the Sun's Light is the
principal Object of our sight, but the things are at least the secondary and
instrumental Object thereof; or, as when we read on a Book, the Light that we
read with is the principal Object, and the Letters of the Book are the
secondary and instrumental; and though we cannot see the Letters of the Book
without some light, yet we may see light, yea, the Sun himself, if we have good
Eyes, without the Book; and so God, and Christ, and the Spirit may be inwardly
seen, felt and known, and is frequently seen, felt, known and enjoyed by the
inward and spiritual Senses of Believers, without all present use of Letters or
Books, when the Knowledge is Intuitive and Sensible. But as for the Doctrinal
Knowledge, as we acknowledge it is requisite, in order to bring us to so high
an enjoyment of God and Christ, as Vision, or Intuitive Knowledge, or
Intuition, so we grant, it is commonly wrought in us and increased by means of
the holy Scriptures, instrumentally working with the holy Spirit, and that
therefore the holy Scriptures are of great profit and service to all Ranks and
Conditions of People, yea, to such of the highest spiritual Seize, while
remaining in the mortal Body.

I do therefore with, and in behalf of my Friends and Brethren of the same
Faith and Persuasion with me, in all parts of the World, make this Solemn
Appeal to you, the more Sober, Impartial and Judicious People in Boston, and
elsewhere in New England, to whose Hands this may come, Whether Cotton Mather
is not extremely Uncharitable, and possessed with a Spirit of Prejudice and
envious Zeal, (to use R. Baxters phrase) against the Quakers in general, and me
in particular, as guilty of manifold Heresies, Blasp^emies, and strong
Delusions, to the rendering us No Christians, in the lowest degree or Rank
(while, I suppose, he has some Charity to some in the Church of Rome, called
Papists, and to Lutherans, A^minians, and diverse others, that differ widely
from him) yet agreeing in the aforesaid Fundamentals, when ^e hold the same
Fundamentals of Christian Doctri^^, and Faith, both with Rich. Baxter, and many
others, as so decla^ed by them. And notwithstanding of Cotton Mathers strong
Asseverations against us, as if we denied almost all, or most of the
Fundamental Articles of the Christian and Protestant Faith, yet he shall never
be able to prove it, That we are guilty of this his so extremely rash and
uncharitable Charge, either as in respect of the Body o^ that People, called in
scorn Quakers, or in respect of any particular Writers or Publishers of our
Doctrines and Principles, and Preachers among us, generally owned and approved
by us, as men of a sound Judgment and Understanding. And as for his Citations
out of the Quakers printed Books and Treatises, I would have you to consider,
that most of them all are borrowed, and taken not from our own Books, but from
our professed Adversaries, men known well enough to be possessed with Prejudice
against us, such as Thomas Hicks and John Faldo, and others, whom our Friends
in Old-England, and particularly George Whitehead and William Penn have largely
answered; yea, I do here solemnly charge Cotton Mather to give us but one
single instance of any one Fundamental Article of Christian Faith denied by us,
as a People, or by any one of our Writers or Preachers, generally owned and
approved by us. And if perhaps there be any Citations that C. M. cites out of
our Books, that he has read, that seem to confirm his Charge in one or two
particulars against us; I do sincerely answer, that I am at a loss to find them
in these Books, partly because diverse of these Books cited by him, I am
altogether a stranger to them, and know not where to find them in all America,
and partly because he not citing the Chapters, Sections, Parts or Pages of
them, that may be found here in America, I cannot, but with great pains and
expense of Time find them out; and I judge I can much better spend my precious
time, than in searching of them; and it suffices to me, and I hope does to
many others, that according to the best Knowledge I have of the People called
Quakers, and these most generally owned by them, as Preachers and Publishers of
their Faith, of unquestioned esteem among them, and worthy of double Honor, as
many such there are, I know none that are guilty of any one of such Heresies
and Blasphemies, as he accuses them. Yet we deny not, but as it has happened,
and does daily happen to Writers and Preachers belonging to all other
Societies, so it may have happened to some among us, to have at times in
writing or speaking, delivered things not so warily and cautiously worded, in
every respect, as need were: But in this case, all but prejudiced Persons, will
say, if it can be found, by comparing their words one with another, that their
sense or meaning is found, though not so altogether safely or cautiously worded
in every respect, Charity is to be allowed, and the best Construction ought to
be given to their words, or they themselves, or their Friends for them, in
respect of their absence or decease, who did best know them, ought to be
allowed to give their sense of them, as I have done, in the sincerity of my
heart, according to my best understanding and knowledge of them; and I think I
should know, and do know these called Quakers, and their Principles, far better
than Cotton Mather, or any or all his Brethren, having been conversant with
them in public Meetings, as well as in private Discourses, with the most noted
and esteemed among them for about Twenty Eight Years past, and that in may
places of the World in Europe, and for these diverse Years in America: And I
further say, That i^ any things, through inadvertency, have been said or writ
by any of us, and that it can be found so to be, and that a charitable
Construction cannot be safely and sincerely put upon them, but that they do
contradict the holy Scriptures, and the wholesome Doctrine therein delivered by
the holy Prophets and Apostles, we do sincerely deny and disown them, and
declare our being ready, with all possible sincerity, to disown them, upon due
notice and advertisment; for though we affirm, That the Spirit of God in us,
and all Believers, in every discovery it gives, is infallible, yet we have
never judged our selves absolutely infallible, nor did we ever place or fix an
absolute Infallibility upon any Man, or Number, or Society of Men since the
Apostles days; but through Gods mercy we are sensible of our danger of being
liable to Mistakes, as well as other men, if we be not duly humble, watchful
and careful to keep close and chaste to the pure openings, teachings and
leadings of the infallible Spirit of Truth. And we readily grant the great
benefit we have by the holy Scriptures, as being instrumental, by and with the
immediate working of the Spirit, to preserve us from Error, or if any be
overtaken in an Error, and beguiled by the Enemy, to Recover and Restore them
therefrom; therefore it is, that in all respects we prefer the Scriptures,
both to our own, and all other Writings; and if any Doctrine or Practice be
found contrary thereunto, upon due and impartial Examination, we say, it ought
to be disowned and denied; for the Scriptures of Truth, and the Spirit of Truth
that gave them forth, can never contradict the one to the other.

CHAP. II.
IT cannot, with any color of Justice, be expected by Cot. Mather, that I
should give a particular Reply to all things in his Book, called, An Address,
said or alleged against the People called Quakers in general or me in
particular, until such time that he give a distinct particular Answer to my
former Book, called, The pretended Antidote proved Poison, etc. particularly
directed to him and his Brethren, and to the several Chapters and Sections
thereof, which he has not so much as essayed; wherein, notwithstanding almost
the whole matter he does muster up against us in his late Address, is
sufficiently and solidly answered; and therefore until he give a full and
distinct particular Answer to the said Book, I judge not my self o^liged so
much as to notice many things contained in his said Address, being fi^l^d with
manifest falsehoods, perversions and abuses, sufficiently already Replied unto,
partly by others, and partly by me, but containing no new matter against us,
excepting his Personal Reflections against me, which yet I think not to spend
much Time or Paper to answer, most of them being so manifestly false and
foolish, that of themselves they fall and evanish; only I intend to give a
short glance or hint at some of the most considerable Abuses and Perversions he
mustereth up against us.

Page 3. He says, If I have one spark of Light in me, Quakerism i^ but a
profound and deadly pit of Darkness. Answ. This Assertion does not come from
any true Light in him, but from his Darkness.

Page 4. Quakerism, under pretense of advancing the spiritual Objects of
Religion, goes to annihilate all the Sensible. Ans. False.

Again, page 4. There is hardly any one Fundamental Article of that reformed
Religion, whereby we look to be saved, that is not undermined by Quakerism.
Ans. But of this he has not given one true instance: And as to what he
alleges, that some of us have said, The Letter is not the Word of God, to
wit, properly and without a figure, he himself has said as much, see page 59.
And that some of us have called their Books, Light risen out of Darkness,
Shields of Truth, etc. they understood it not, but metaphorically or
figuratively, by some Metonymy, as is common in all Titles of Books, but we
have always preferred the Scriptures to our Writings. And that the Scriptures
may be called the Word of God, in a figurative Speech, and also that the True
Sense signified in them, is the Word of God, I have acknowledged, and so I do
still; but that the inward Testimony of God in our Hearts, is more properly and
immediately the Word of God, than the outward Testimony of the Scripture, I
still affirm, with Augustine and other ancient Writers.

As for his citing William Penn's words agruing against that same Numerical
Body its rising at the Resurrection; it is clear that he understands the same
exact Number of the small Particles or Dusts, neither more nor less than what
is commonly buried; and what hurt is there in that? does not C. M. and his
Brethren generally say, as well as W. Penn, That at the Resurrection all shall
rise Men, and not Infants, nor lame, nor defective in a^y part; and yet how
many Thousands dye Infants, and defective in some Bodily Members?

That some have denied the Saints, as such, to be miserable Sinners, it ought
to be considered, that according to the common style of Scripture, Saints and
Sinners are distinguished, and the unconverted are called Sinners; for the
denomination of a thing is taken chiefly from that which is the greatest part;
but because in all Saints, even the weake^^, Grace and Holiness is the chief
and greatest part, therefore from that they receive their Denomination, and are
said to be righteous and clean, and not to do Iniquity. That one said, The
Scripture is not the means by which Faith is wrought, it can receive a candid
interpretation, as to say, the only means, excluding the inward Grace and
Operation of the Spirit; as some say, Medicine is not the means of a man's Cure,
though a Means, it is understood not the only means.

And whereas he querieth, If their Primmer has yet been corrected, wherein
they read, False Teachers preach Christ without, and bid People believe in him
as he is in Heaven? If he mean William Smith's Primmer, as I believe he does, I
Answer, Yea, it has been Corrected, in the folio Edition of his other
Treatises joined with it, as is plainly to be seen, thus, That false Teachers
preach Christ only without, but true Teachers preach Christ both without us,
and also within us.

And what William Penn argues as concerning Three Persons, he only argues
against the invented Names [ Persons] (as Calvin does acknowledge them, as
abovesaid) which in all proper Language does signify Substances, and not mere
Properties or relative Attributes, which W. P. will not deny to be in (...) Nor
are W. P's words so to be understood concerning Justification, as if he
excluded Christ's Righteousness, which he fulfilled in his own Person; but only
he denies that any can be justified by that alone, without Faith and
Repentance, etc.

As for Bodily Tremblings, that they are not so common among these called
Quakers, as formerly; as good or better Reason can be given, as that these or
the like unusual Motions that seized on the Bodies of some Presbyterians in
Scotland about fifty Years ago, are not now so common among them, which the
Author of The fulfilling of the Scriptures, does plainly acknowledge, was about
that time among them; and indeed many of these Tremblings and extraordinary
Motions that seized on the Bodies of some Presbyterians, and many called
Quakers, in these days, did proceed in great part, from the small experience
of, and little acquaintance that these Persons had at first with that sensible
manner of the working of Gods Spirit, and that there were but few at first that
could well advise them to bear with more composure and quiet of Body that
manner of workings, whereas by more frequent Experience, many did, and do at
this day, witness, and feel sensibly, not only as great, but often greater inward
Workings of the Spirit of God, on all accounts, and yet can bear them, and most
willingly and gladly submit to them, with little or no Observation, of any
Bodily Trembling; for as in going to War, and hearing the dreadful Sound of
Guns, Trumpets and Drums, the young Soldiers are often afraid, even to a degree
of Bodily Trembling, yet afterward, having more Experience, they feel not
either that Bodily Trembling, nor such fear that is the cause of it; and as
Water and Fire at its first breaking forth, is more violent, and yet afterward
is fully as effectual, without such Violence; so at the first hearing of
Thunder, and seeing the terrible Flashes of Lightning, Persons are much more
afraid, than after, when they are more acquainted with it, by frequency
thereof; so it might be, and was so, that the Power and Spirit of God did work
in former days with a more seeming Force upon many, and yet since does work as
effectually, now, and sometimes more without it, so as not to come under such
frequent Observation; and yet even Bodily Tremblings are still witnessed,
proceeding from the inward working of Gods Spirit, among us; as the Apostle
says, Knowing the Terrors of the Lord, we persuade men.

Page 12. For the words of Humphry Norton, alleged by C. M. I have made
inquiry at diverse, but can find no intelligence of any such words, in any Book
of his; but if any such have dropped from him, or any other, tending to deny the
Faith of Christ's being in Heaven in his glorified Body of Man without us, we
shall be far from excusing them; for we zealously believe, That the Man Christ
is in Heaven without us, in his glorified Body of Man, the same for Being he
had on Earth, but wonderfully changed in Manner and Condition, as is clearly
and fully expressed in that late Treatise given forth by our Friends in
Rhode Island, called, The Christian Faith, etc. Vindicated, etc. But yet we
cannot approve of the too carnal Conceptions of many carnal and ignorant
Professors, that have too carnal Imagination of Christ, and confine him
altogether to such a Remoteness, that they will not allow any Measure of him*
to dwell in Believers, plain contrary to the Scripture.

Page 12. And whereas he says, If they own those Principles, why will not they
give us leave to own them? I Answer; We blame you not for owning them,
providing ye did own them as ye ought to do, in the true and right Faith of
them, that proceeds from the Spirits inward Inspiration and Revelation,
sensibly working, by way of sensible Object upon the inward and spiritual
Senses of men's Souls; but this ye deny; and therefore it is not the matter, but
manner of your owning them, that we commonly blame, even as some said, that the
Lord lived, yet they swore falsely, because they did it hypocritically, not
knowing him to live in them; but yet sometimes in these very things, ye err
also in the matter.

Page 15. That the Quakers adore G. K. either for his outward Learning, and
make him their Head, or for any other thing, is false; nor does he seek any
such false Honor; it suffices him to be loved by his Friends, and neither he
nor his Friends make any other account of outward Learning, but to be the
footstool of Christ, and subservient to his Truth, and as the Spoils of the
Egyptians were made serviceable to the Israelites.

And that he says, This Keith it is, who has given the greatest advantages to
Quakerism, and that with no little Alterations; How this is consistent with his
representing me, as if I were Mad, page 44. and extremely Ignorant, does not
appear. And as for Alterations, great or small, that I have made in the Quakers
Principles, as rightly understood, delivered by our most Ancient Friends, of
best account in general, he has not proved. He calls my late Catechism, A
wily Catechism, wherein Quakerism is so disguised, as that one would almost
suspect him a real Protestant; and yet he will needs have it, that the Juice of
Toads is as wholesome a Potion: But it is strange that such a Wily Catechism, and
so politically contrived should proceed from a Madman, and extremely Ignorant,
as he would have me to be. But however, I say, that Catechism is writ and given
forth in true sincerity, without any disguise, and does as really bespeak me a
true Protestant, (as all true Quakers are) as it does seem to represent me to
be, and will be found to have nothing that is hurtful in it, but profitable and
wholesome, I hope, upon impartial Examination.

That the inward excusing or condemning Principle, as he charge on us, p. 15.
which all men are burn with, is the Man Christ Jesus, is not asserted by any
called Quakers, that I know, unless by a figure called Synecdoche, of giving
the Name of the whole to the measure, and by a Metonyme, as where in Scripture
the second A^am is called the quickening Spirit, and the Light of the World;
but the Quakers, so called, generally acknowledge, that the Spirit, Light and
Life dwells in all fullnes, ^^ly in the glorified Body of the Man Christ
Jesus without them, and the measures of it not separated from the Fullness,
more or less, (...) ^^eased to give in Believers. Nor do the Quakers say, that
men bring with them into the World these inward Illuminations and Convictions,
and other Operations of the Light or Spirit, whether common or special, that
men feel by experience in them, when at Age, although none can come into the
World but as the Almighty Power and Arm of God, who formed them in the* Mothers
Womb, does bring them, and as that eternal Word, without which nothing is made,
does appoint them in their several Ages and Generations. And for Christian
Lodowicks Challenge against our Friends in Rhode Island, it is already
answered, and they are cleared from his Calumnies, and our Christian Religion
sufficiently distinguished from either Paganism, Judaism or Mahumatism. And the
Exceptions he makes against my Catechism are soon answered, if his Perversions
were but detected. 1 st, That some who are left without either the help of the
holy Scriptures, or holy Men, do yet so rightly improve the inward help of
Christ's Light, as to be accepted with God; This he says is altogether contrary
to Romans 1.21, 22. But in this, as mostly every where, he perverteth my words
and sense; for he has left out my following words, [ according to the present
state] And what I mean by them I show a little after, That such who have a
measure of sincerity in their Gentile state, but having no Faith in Christ
crucified, are but Servants, and not Sons of the free Woman, but are under the
Law, and though accepted so far as sincere in the Servants state, as I proved
from Acts 10.1, 2, 34, 35. yet not thereby justified as Sons; for I have
acknowledged, that without the Faith of Christ crucified and raised again
without us, none are or can be so justified (yet they are as the Kings
Prisoners, and as the Manslayer was in the City of Refuge under the Law, till
he heard of the Death of the High Priest) and such are shut up under the
Safeguard of the Law, (as Beza translates it) unto the Faith that is afterward
to be revealed, Gal. 3.23. So there is a place of Refuge, although C. M. know
it not. Nor does Romans 1.21, 22. contradict it, for that place speaks not of
all Gentiles, but these of the worst of them. 2 dly, That some may be saved
without outward hearing or preaching, is granted by the Westminster Con^ession,
in the case of Infants, and Deaf and Dumb Persons; and therefore how devout and
Conscientious Gentiles can be saved, has not the least shadow of greater
difficulty to understand: And that none are eternally saved without the Faith
of Christ, I have granted in my Catechism, and other Treatises, and do still
grant, see Sect. 4. Quest. 10. but how this Faith is wrought in such, is best
to leave it until God be pleased further to open it, seeing, as the Westminster
Confession says, God works by his Spirit when, where and how he pleases;
and as Christ said, The Spirit blows where it lists, the greek word can
well be translated Spirit, and is so by some Translators. 3 dly, That the
Principle of the New Covenant is in all Men, is not contradicted by Ephesians.
2.12. but is confirmed by Romans 10.8, 9, 10. compared with Deuteronomy. 30.14. and
Christ's Parable of the Seed sown in four grounds. And why may not the Seed of
the New Covenant lie in the hearts of unregenerate Men for a Season, as the
Seed of Wheat may lie not having root in the cold dry ground for a Season, till
it be moistened and warmed with the Showers and Sun's warmth in the Spring. 4
thly, That having more Wives than one was unlawful under the Law, is not
contrary to Mat. 19.45, 48. for although Man had but one wife given him at the
beginning, yet the Law that permitted such a thing to men, as the like in the
case of Divorce came in afterward. And it is absurd to think that Abraham
sinned against the Law in his Conscience, writ in his very Nature (and
therefore commonly called the Law of Nature, in having two Wives at once; for
all sins against the Law of Nature are heinous sins, and of great aggravation,
as the Westminster Confession acknowledges. But seeing no such sin is charged
on Abraham, and that he was in great favor with God at that very time, it
cannot be said to be against that Law writ in his Nature, though it be against
the Law of the New Covenant now under the Gospel. 5 thly, That we are to wait
in Silence for some aid and assistance of the Spirit, to help us to pray, does
not contradict Acts 8.22. for as Peter commanded Simon Magus to pray, so he bid
him Repent and Pray; and that he had not the Spirit, was his own fault, as it
is the fault of all others (who have it not to assist them, both to wait and
pray also) Nor does men's want of the Spirit, because they depart from it, and
resist the gentle Motions thereof, excuse their neglect of Prayer, no more than
a man's want of Money excuses him to pay a just Debt, yet he must not go to pay
his debt with false Coin, no more should a man pray with a Hypocritical Spirit.
Nor, 6 thly, does Romans 3.28. prove that Repentance, as well as Faith, is not a
necessary Condition and Instrument of our Justification; for true Gospel
Repentance is not the Work of the Law, but of Faith; and his Reverend R. Baxter
does hold with the Quakers against him, That Faith and sincere Obedience are
necessary Conditions and Instruments of Justification, and to teach so, he does
not think Popish, as does sufficiently appear by what he has printed on that
subject; see his Aphorisms of Justification, page 80. where he says, Some
Ignorant Wretches gnash their Teeth at this very Doctrine, as if it were flat
Popery, viz. That Men are justified by Faith, as it is an inward Obedience. Nor
7 thly, does Romans 9.11. prove that Esau was a Reprobate before he was born, or
at any time afterward; yea, Cotton Mather, with his Boston Brethren, in their
former Book, dare not affirm, That Esau was a Reprobate, and that men are not
born Reprobates, (though some are preferred to others before they are born) but
become Reprobates after they have nothing good left in them, is clear from
Scripture, that calls reprobate men Dross, after the precious Mettle is
extracted from it, and Chaff that has no grain of Wheat in it. Nor 8 thly,
does Acts 8.38. prove that Christ's Baptism is with Water; for as the Practice
of Circumcision, after Christ's Resurrection, does not prove it a
Gospel-Precept, no more does the practice of Water Baptism, but both Christ and
John did teach, That Christ's Baptism was with Fire and the holy Ghost; but no
where is it said, that Christ baptizeth with Water. Nor 9 thly, does 1 Cor.
11.26. prove, That Believers may not feed upon Christ by Faith, and so sup with
him, and he with them, as well when they eat not, as when they do eat together
outwardly, remembering the Lords Death, with Solemn Prayer and Thanksgiving,
which we grant is good frequently to be done.

And thus I have fully answered all his frivolous and weak Objections against
my Catechism; so that he has not discovered the least grain of Error in it;
nor does any thing that I have said in my other printed Treatises contradict
the Doctrine of my Catechism, as he does falsely allege, perverting my words,
in most things, to a sense contrary to my mind, or to what they can bear, so
far is he from that Candor of giving them a favorable Construction. But I
intend not to follow him in his manifold Impertinences, to weary either my
Reader or my self, and shall come to give a brief and plain Answer to his Five
Arguments, whereby he would persuade the People in New England to turn away
from hearing me; the which Arguments savor more of bitter Prejudice and
extreme Folly and Rashness, than of any Wit or Judgment, and has nothing of
Truth in them, and might be easily retorted upon himself, where they have the
best seeming show, according to that Latin Verse, Fabula narratur mutat^
Nomine de te; i. e. Change the Name, and the Tale is told truly of thy thy self.

CHAP. III.
IN his first A^gument he accuses me to be guilty of a Lie, in matter of Fact,
and that I pretend to an assurance for it from the Spirit of God; and the Lie
he alleges in matter of Fact, is, That I charge their Confession of Faith for
holding, that the Scriptures ought to be believed for their own outward
Evidence and Testimony, and not for the inward Evidence and Testimony of the
holy Spirit in men's Hearts. And to prove this to be a Lie, he cites some words
of that Confession, which says, Our full persuasion and assurance of the
infallible Truth, and divine Authority of the holy Scriptures, is from the
Inward Work of the Holy Spirit, bearing witness by and with the Word in our
Hearts. And for a further Confirmation he alleges John Owen, saying, That the
Scripture be received as the Word of God, there is a twofold Efficacy of the
Spirit, etc. withal affirming, That I cover Lie with Lie. To which I Answer;
Cotton Mather, and not I, is guilty of two gross Lies or Falsehoods in this
Charge: first, That I pretend to an assurance from the Spirit, in matter of
Fact, concerning what they hold, is a manifest Perversion; for I bring my
assurance, in matter of Fact, not from the Spirit, but from their Confession of
Faith, which I have diligently examined; but the knowledge I have that their
Doctrine, in that particular, is false, I bring from the Spirit of God, that
has given me the understanding thereof, and is Truth and no Lie. 2 dly, That
he says, Their Confession does grant, that the Scriptures are to be believed
for the inward Evidence and Testimony of the holy Spirit in men's hearts; but
this it does not say, nor can it be gathered by any just consequence, to be
their sense, seeing they deny, with C. M. and his Brethren, all inward
objective immediate Testimony and Revelation of the Spirit. And whereas the
Confession mentions the inward Work of the holy Spirit, bearing witness by
and with the Word ( viz. the Scripture) in our Hearts. This does sufficiently
prove, That their Confession does not mean or intend any inward Testimony of
the Spirit, really and properly so called, as having a standing Evidence of its
own, but only borrowed from the Scripture, and therefore is no true and proper
Evidence at all, but only and altogether improper, yea, as improper as if I
should say, when I hear but one man give Evidence to the Truth of a thing, and
that I read it also in writ from his hand, that three Evidences or Witnesses
have given their Evidence to that Truth, as 1 st, the Man, 2 dly, my Ear that
heard him, 3 dly, my Eye that has read his writ: But what sober Man will say,
these are three Witnesses or Evidences? And would it not be a great Cheat to
say, That whereas the Law requires two Witnesses, and there is but one man
that gives witness to Cotton Mathers hearing, that C. M. should allege, his
Ears are other two Witness^s, because they have heard him, and so they are
three in a^: And as great a Cheat and Fallacy is it, to call the witness of the
Scripture the inward Witness of the Spirit, when they confess, the in^ard Work
of the Spirit, is only Effective, to open the Ear to hear the outward Witness
of the Scripture, but not to speak by any distinct Witness, to the inward Ear:
And it is like that other Fallacy, as if James being required to give his
Witness, he gives it not by himself, but by John, and John being required to
give his Witness, he gives it by James, but neither of them by himself, or at
least the one not, by himself; for when they are asked, By what do they know
the Scriptures to be the Word of God? they answer, By the Spirit: And again, By
what do they know the Spirit? they answer, By the Scripture. And thus the
Fallacy and Falsehood both of the Confession and of C. M. is detected, and G. K.
is cleared from being no wise guilty of any Lie in the case. And what I said of
John Owen is true, for the Title and design of his Book is concerning The
Self-Evidencing Authority of the holy Scriptures, only he confesses the
Spirits inward Work is necessary to let men see or know it; but that is no
proper Witness, more than a man's hearing is one Witness, and the thing heard is
another. I do therefore Appeal to all sober, impartial and judicious Readers,
Whether not I, but Cotton Mather, be not convicted of gross Lying or Falsehood,
and whether the Society he belongs unto, ought not to bring him to Repentance
for such Crimes, to use some of his own wo^ds.

His Second Argument is, That I am guilty of having committed most horrible
Blasphemy against the holy Spirit of God, which is the unpardonable Sin; And
thoug^ he does charge this one while positively, yet (...) while If I have not
the certain, yet ^earful Marks of it; and my Sin is very like that Sin; and yet
^g^in ch^^ging it positively on me, That I ^ave taken part (...) the ^har^s^e
(...) impardonable Injury to the Eternal Spirit of God ^ut how does (...) prove
any thing of this to have the lest show o^ shadow of truth? Why, because, as he
alleges, I called his and ^is ^ret^rens Prayers, more than once, a Conjuring
of the Dev^l, and do put on them the (...) of Charms and Spells; by which
Prayers, he alleges, he and his Brethren did cast o^t the Devil, that did
Bodily possess some ^oung People, and that therefore their Prayers were the
special Operations o^ the holy ^^ost, which I blaspheme, and that therefore I
have committed the Unpardonable Sin* but I Answer; 1 st, As I said in my Book
called, A Re^^tation, etc. I am little concerned whether or not th^se Young
People were bewitched, or had a Diabolical Possess^on on, further than to take
notice, That C. M. will have it to be ^o, to make the simple believe, that his
and his Brethrens Prayers did conjure the Devil, and cast him out; by which it
is most clearly apparent, to every one of common se^ce, that I did not mean
that his or his Brethrens Prayers were done by any Diabolical Art or Craft of
Conju^^tion, for I do not think them to be Conjurers, but that they would have
People believe, that by some divine Power of Exorcism, as was frequent in the
primitive Church, they did conjure the Devil, which is as widely different from
his Perversion, as East from West. Now I cannot believe that they had this
divine Gi^t of Exorcism, which was a Miraculous Gift in those primitive Times
(that Popish Priests do also pretend to h^ve, and many strongly affirm, they
have cured many by their Prayers) because the commonly say, That Immediate
Revelation, with the Gifts o^ Miracles, are ceased: How then can they have
them? And I appeal to all sober Readers, Whether Cotton Mather h^th not g^osly
pervert^d my words, that because I did not own them to have ^ divine Power of
Exorcism, whereby to conjure the Devil, as if I did affi^m their Prayers were a
Conjuring of the Devil, which instead of affirming. I strongly d^nyed, as the
R^a^er may see in my Book called A Reputation, etc. and by this, and his other
many Pervertions of my word, I may take measure, (...) he is too like to have
perverted grossly the words of my Friends, in his alleged Citations, that I
have not seen in their Books, when he does so palpably pervert my words to a
plain contrary sense, that is obvious to them of the weakest Capacity. Nor did
I call his and his Brethrens Prayers Charms and Spells, as he alleges; see my
Book p. 71, 72. only I said, That seeing they generally mock at any, at this
day laying claim to divine Inspiration and Revelation, I cannot own their
Prayers to be true, they are l^ker to Charms and Spells of superstitious
Persons, etc. But this will not infer that I did really call or judge them,
Charms or Spells; for I think they are not Witches, except in that sense used
by Pa^l, Gal. 3.1. because they bewitch (not the Bodies, but) the Souls of
People from believing and obeying the Truth; for I may say one thing is liker
to another thing, and yet not say, it is that very thing; As if I should say,
C. M. is liker to a Pharisee or Mass-Priest, than to a true Minister of Christ,
does it therefore follow, that I judge he is really a Pharisee or Mass-Priest?
or, to use his Phrase, were the Transmigration of Souls a Truth, if I should
say, Cotton M^ther is liker Demetrius the Silver-Smith (who accused Paul,
because his and his Brethren's Craft was in danger to be set at naught, Acts
19.27.) than to a true Minister of Christ, Does it therefore follow, that I
judge that C.M. is Demetrius risen again from the dead? By no means And for his
comparing me to Alexander the Copper-Smith, it is foolish and envious; I honor
and esteem highly both Paul's Doctrine and himself, and all the Prophets and
Apostles of the Lord; and therefore I do nothing resemble Alexander the
Copper-Smith; but C. M. and his Brethren do too much resemble, not only
Alexander the Copper-Smith, who opposed Paul, but Demetrius the Silver-Smith,
that they are in such fear their Craft be set at naught by the People called
Quakers, else why do they make such a stir about their Wages and Hi^e? Whereas
if they were true Ministers of Christ, they should preach his Gospel freely, as
the Apostles and others do, and as true Ministers of (...) now do. And His
accusing me of having committed the Vnpardon^^^^ Sin upon a mere Forgery of his
own, hatched in his Brains by (...) Father of Lies) puts me in mind of what I
have read in the Church History, writ by Lucas Osiander, How when two o^ the
Patri^i^o^ Rome, that were Christians, whom Pope Sixtus had Excommunicate, for
t^eir accusing him to have been t^o ^^miliar wit^ some o^ the consecrated
Virgins, had begged of him to be Relaxed, professing their Repentance, and
urging Christ's Doctrine, If thy Brother Trespass against thee, and return, not
only Seven Times, etc. thou shall forgive him; The proud Pope re^used to Relax
t^em, affirming, They had committed that Unpardonable Sin, because they had
offended him. And like to this the English Hobbs, who is no good Philosopher,
and a worse Divine, says, in one of his Boo^s, by way of a smart Satyr against
the Clergy, That i^ any offend a Clergyman (alias, a black Coa^) ^e will tell
them, they have committed that Unpardonable Sin o^ Blasphemy against the holy
Ghost, as Cotton Mather has he^e se^v^d m^, but without all just cause, I
bless God; and therefore the sober People of New-Englad have cause to consider
better, what (...) of men th^se are, who make Lies their R^f^ge, and their
Weapons where^y they fight against us. Nor do I yet find the ^east cause to
incline me to believe, that C. M's Prayers did cast out the Devil out of these
Children, as he alleges, seeing they say, Miracles are ceased, and Divine
Exorcisme was one of these Miraculous Gifts of Gods Spirit; and C. M. himself
helps us to understand (if these Children were really bewitched) how they
were cu^ed by some other means, that his and his Brethrens Prayers, to wit, as
he plainly conf^sseth, page 44. (compared with page 12.) That one thing in the
Childrens deliverance, was the strange Death of an horrible Old Woman, who was
presumed to have a great hand in their affliction: And page 12. he tells,
When the Witch was going to her Excution, she said, the Children should not be
relieved by her Death, for others had a hand in it as well as she. And thus
from C. M. we have found other means of the Childrens cure* th^n his and h^s
Brethrens Prayers, the which, seeing he calls them Dirt and Dung in his Book,
were not likely to be means of dispossessing the Devil out of those Children;
indeed, we read that Christ wrough^ a mi^acl^ with ^lay and Spittle, but no
where that I remember, that ever ^e wrought a Miracle with Dirt and Dung;
be^ide, he seems to b^ more guilty of Blasphemy, that calls their Prayers,
which he ^aith* are the speci^l Operations of the holy Spirit,) Dirt and D^ng,
a^ he plainly does. And with as little su^cess does C. M. see^ to defend his
fa^se Gloss on Christ's words, as if Christ had ta^ght, That Satan is not
divided against Satan: Whereas I said, Satan is divided against Satan, the^e
being no true unity in his Kingdom; and therefore it must fa^l, and not be
perpetual; nor in (...) do (...) he least wrest from ^h^ists Argument against
the Jews, because I did ^cknowle^ge, that ^h^ist argued most strongly against
them ad hominem. And supposing that Satan at times, did cast out Satan, yet
that is but that Satan may enter ag^in some more dangerous way, or fully as
dangerous; but whom Christ cu^eth, he so cures, that Satan by his means does
not again enter, but the holy Spirit of God, as was fullfilled in Mary
Magd^len. And whereas he says, He is mistaken, if he has not the generality
of Interpreters on his side; he has not showed who this generality is, and he
shows h^w little he is versed in Antiquity, otherwise he might have remembered
how O^igine, above thirteen hundred Years ago, does contradict him, and say the
same with me; for thus he w^iteth expressly, in his Comment on John, page 424.
of his 2d Tom. printed at Basil, 1557. C^m enim admis^ss^t ^sse quendam
Beelzebub, et (...) illi (...) p^^^idio (...), dissida^ veluti quo^ (...)
Satane; ope^a^i eo q^od secum ipse (...) et hec in quit; i. e. When Christ had
(...), that there was a certain Belz^b^b, and that ^e who did cast o^t Devil by
his Power, did wo^^ as it were a stri^e against Satan, beca^se he did (...)
against hims^l^, he said t^ese t^ings. As for his fal^e Insinuation, of my
ca^^ing Prayers, Charms and Sp^l^s, it is easily discovered, I own (...) true
Prayer, both Vocal and Mental, that co^eth in the e^^t degree from the
inb^e^thing, i. e. I^spiration of Gods Spirit, and have, through Mercy, foun^
the unspeakable advantag^ of it to my Soul, and do earnestly recommend true
Prayer in the Spirit of God to all, and so do all true Quakers, so called.

In his Third A^gument, p. 34. wherein he gives many supposed Contradictions,
that I give to myse^f in my (...) Books, and upon th^^ fa^se Supposition, as on
a false Foundation, (...) his Argument against me* I think not to spend Time
nor Paper to answer them all in particular; for let but the Reader see my own
words in my printed Books, and well consider them, and if h^ have but a little
sound Judgment, he will easily find, I have not contrad^cted my self in any
(...), though I could easily discover many Contradictions of C. M. to himself.
But to make me seem to contradict my self he has no bette^ way but to w^est and
pervert my words, as in the very first in^^ance he alleges, he perverteth my
words grossly as if by their (...), whom I did acknowledge to have had some
mea^^re o^ Tendern^ss, So^riety and Simplicity (in a printed Paper of mine)
some time a go, I did mean th^se, who near forty Years a go did p^t our Friends
to Death at Boston: Which is a manifest Perversion, enough to Discredit all he
says, having as little Truth, against me. Whereas by their Fathers I did not
mean the present Ge^eration, that takes in forty Years commonly, at lea^t in
vulgar sense, but th^se that lived sixty, or near seventy Years past, that had
some measure of Tenderness and Sincerity, and were no^ of a persecuting Spirit,
as the^e who put (...) Friends to Death; nor had the generality of the People
in New-E^^l^^d a hand in our F^iends Death; for many of them disliked it, as I
have been credibly informed, and some have acknowledged the Land of God against
the Land ever since, for those M^rder, and I wish many might see it, and repent
of it, that they might be forgiven, and Gods anger quenched toward them, that
has been (and remains to be) kindled against them. And he is as impertinent
in laboring to reconcile his own Contradiction that John Delava^^ charged upon
him, as if it were no Contradiction, either because the Assertions are thirty
pages distant, or because he did query, and not affirm; whereas the manner of
his Querying shows a plain Affirmation, in calling or bringing in their
deceased Fathers to expostulate with them for their Degeneration. And this is
all the Answer he gives to John Delavall's so^l^d and weighty Appendix, with a
scoffing airy Spirit, as his manner is, he compares to a Dutch Woman's
uninte^igible Babbling. And no less does he belly me, to accuse me, as it I said
or suggested in my ^ook, called, The Presbyterian and Independent Churches
brought to the Test, etc. That these Churches o^ Presbyterians and Independents
were false upon all accounts, beyond that of Rome it self: Than which there can
be no greater Perversion, and Belying of a man's words. I said no such thing*
nor do I think any such thing I have always judgded, and do still judge, that
all these Churches called Protestant Churches, whether Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Independent or Baptists, in many, yea, very many things, hold better Doctrine
than the Church of Rome, and in many things are nearer to the Letter of the
Scriptu^e, and to the Truth, and I have Charity, that some may belong to
Christ, as his Members, among the^ all, even the Church of Rome not exc^pted;
yet all this will not prove, that any one o^ them all is the true vi^ble
Church, restored to that purity of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, as was in the Apostles days, and was before the Church fled into
the Wilderness, and as will be at her full Return, which is approaching. He is
as weak and impertinent to charge it on me as a Contradiction to my self, to
say, That in some things in speaking or writing, we may (...) be not duly
watchful: And yet, That in many things we have been ta^ght in^al^ib^y by the
Infal^ible Spirit of God, to believe them, as to believe That God is, and (...)
given his (...) Son for us, and many (...) precious Truths; and if he has no
infallible belief and Know^^^ge of th^se things, and other Fundamental Truths,
he is neither Minister of Christ, ^or a true Christian, but a mere Sceptick.
Any ^olledge School Boy knows, that Contradictions lie not betwixt two
Particulars, nor two Universals, but one Particular and another Universal; as
if one should say, That he is in all things taught infal^ibly, and yet again
say, That in some things at mig^^ or did err, it would be a Contradiction; but
this I have not said. Nor is a Contradiction betwixt two Positives, but the one
Positive, the other Negative; and therefore it is no ^ontradiction to say, So^^
are Elected in Christ Jesus before the Foundation o^ the World, to be Holy,
etc. and yet to deny, That others are eternally or absolutely Reprobated; for
Elected and Reprobated are both Positives, and therefore not ^ontradictory, no
more than White and Black; as it is no Contradiction to say, Some Colors are
White, and therefor all o^^er Colors, (that are not White) are Black. It
seems that Cotton Mather, whom some, as he tells us, have called, The
College Boy o^ New England, has not well learned his Logic, or at lea^t does
not well remember it, since he was a Colledge-^oy; for he bewrays shameful
Ignorance (in the way of right Dispute) that College Boys might be ashamed
of. Nor is it any Contradiction to say, ^^at the Lord Jesus Christ is the alone
and s^re Fo^ndation and Gro^nd o^ Justification, and yet to assert, That Faith,
R^pentance, and sincere Obedience are necessary Conditions and I^struments
thereunto required; and if he will not believe me, let him a^k his admired and
(...) Baxter, as he calls him, who will tell him the same. But whereas he
alleges I say, A true Believer may be only in the first Covenant, citing my
Book, page 147. But this is no Contradiction, when by Believers, I mean such as
may have a true Belief that God is, from some true and real inward Conviction
and Sense, and yet not have the true Faith in Christ Jesus, as he dyed and rose
ag^in; for such a (...) Cornelius had, before Peter preached Christ to him,
also according to Christ's Doctrine in the Parable of the four Grounds, some may
believe in Christ for a time, and yet fa^l away, and that Faith is not a ^al^e
Faith, but true, in some so^t. Thus I have given a short hint to demonstrate
how groundlesly he would charge Contradictions on me, the other being more
obvious to the weakest Capacities, I shall let pass, only minding the Reader,
That the nature of a Contradiction is difficult many times to understand, even
in Natural things, so that it is reckoned the subtilest part in Logic or
Metaphy^icks, to understand thoroughly what are always Contradictions, and what
not; and therefore much more hard it is, to understand in spiritual things,
that contain many seeming Contradictions; for though the holy Scripture
contains no real Contradiction, coming from one holy Spirit of Truth, yet it
contains many seeming, which Atheists and Scoffers use to object. His
comparing me to Julian the Apostate, savoureth of the like Spirit of Envy, as
formerly, when with no more ground, he accused me of being guilty of the
Unpardonable Sin: It is a part of my Blessing, that being reviled and falsely
accused, I can pat^ently bear it, by the Grace of Christ in whom I believe, and
to whom I confess, even to the Crucified Jesus that was nailed to the Cross for
my Sins, whom my Soul loves, and whom Julian openly denied. But Cotton Mather
will gain no credit nor esteem, either to himself or his Cause by such Inhumane
and Extraordinary Revilings, rarely to be parallelled among the greatest
Railers.

His Fourth Argument has as weak and sandy Foundation as any of the rest, as
namely (as he says) That I renounce both the Religion and the Savior which
the Saints have hitherto ventured their Souls upon, etc. to wit, Christ Jesus.
And this he undertaketh to prove, Sathan-like, by wresting my words, and
omitting some of them, in the very Sentence he cites, that were altogether
essential to make up the entire period and sense; for I said in my Book, Your
Visible Churches are no true Churches of Christ; for the Religion ye pro^ess is
not the true Religion of Christ Jesus, yea, in Fundamentals, and in the very
Foundation it self, which is Christ Jesus, on which the true Church is built,
and every Member thereof; but ye who say, (note my following words, p. 137.)
all inward divine Revelation is ceased, ye (to wit, your visible Church) build
not on Christ, but on a mere Hearsay and Historical Report of him; for how can
ye build on him, when ye have no belief, that Christ is nearer unto you, than
in some remote place beyond the Skies. Where the Impartial Reader may see,
first, That my words expressly mention their visible Church, that does not build
really on Christ, but on a Pro^e^^ion of him, even by Cotton Mather's
Confession, That nothing is required to make up the Members of a visible
Church, but a Pro^^ssion of him, and o^ the true Religion: ^ut every judicious
Person will ^ay, it is one thing to profess Christ in words or show, and
another thing really to build on Christ, that everl^sting Rock; for by Christ's
Doctrine, none builds on the Rock, which is Christ, but he that hears
Christ's Sayings, and does them, and that is much more than barely to profess
him. But ^et I did not question, nor do, but that (according to my Christian
C^arity, moving me so to believe) diverse among (...) sorts and Societies called
Christians in Christendom, that hold the Fundamentals, as many do, do (...)
build on Christ, the true Foundation; and because they so ^o, in due time, the
Wood, H^y and Stubble of their Erro^s, in other thi^g^, while they build on the
true Foundation, will be burnt up by the divine Fire of the living Word, and
living Spirit of God in them; and their Lord Jesus Christ is mine, and mine is
thei^s, and I could be glad that I could en^ertain that Charity to C. M. but
however, I have not that unchari^able judgment of him (as bad as he is) that he
has committed that unpardonable Sin; for though he has reproached the
precious workings and operations of the holy Spirit, both in my faithful
Brethren and me, ca^^ing them Del^^sions o^ Satan, yet because I judge he does
it ignorantly, therefore his sin is pardonable, upon Repentance, which I pray
God may be given him, for that and all his hand Speech^s, and all other sins,
before it be too late. But because he cannot fix his false Charge upon me, of
denying Christ, he essayeth (but with as (...) success) to fix it upon my
Brethren, as dear Isaac Penning^on, whom I well knew to be a true Believer in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and a ^ince^e Lover of him, even the crucified Jesus,
and whose Sou^ I believe is in rest in Christ, in heavenly Glory. And as to hi^
words, We can never (...) Bodily Garment Christ, but that w^ic^ appea^ed and
dwelt in ^he ^o^y; it is easy to put a fa^^ and ch^ritable construction on it,
as well as on Christ's words, when he said, He that has seen me, has seen the
Father; and yet many saw Christ's Body of Flesh, that never s^w the Father: But
to clear the thing, I. P. speaks th^s in opposition to Socinian^, and others
tinctur^d with (...) Prin^^ples, as if the Manhood of Christ, that was born of
the Vi^gin ex^luding the e^ern^l lord, was the only and whole Christ; (...) his
Body of Flesh; therefore he is said to have come in the Flesh, and to have
taken Flesh. And if we consider Christ, as he was before the World was, by whom
all things were created, and in respect of his Godhead, the Body was not that,
but the Garment of it, when he assumed it. But when we consider Christ as Man,
as every other man, has both Soul and ^ody belonging to his essential
Constitution, as Man, so ^ad Christ, and still has a most glorious Soul and
Body; and we deny not, but according to Scripture style, Christ's Man^ood, yea,
and his Body, is called Christ, as when the Scripture says, that he was
buried, nailed to the Cross, buffited; and even his body was and is a part of
his Manhood, and his Soul the other and more Noble part, most wonderfully and
incomparably united with the Godhead, and most incomparably filled with all
fullness of the Godhead, and of Grace and Truth, out of whose fullness we all
receive, and Grace for Grace; and yet we do not judge that the Godhead is
circum^cribed within the Body of Christ; for the Godhead is Omnipresent as well
as Omnipotent and Omniscient. And whereas he querieth, saying, Let Ke^th tell
us honestly, whet^er he does not count his own Body to be the Body of Christ,
in the same sense that the visible tangible Flesh which hung upon the Cross,
was the Body of our Lord? I Answer, honestly, Nay, by no means, as I have
sufficiently formerly declared in my printed Books, and Testimonies on all
occasions; for as the Body of the Head is of far more Dignity than the Body of
the inferior Members, and has the Soul, or Spirit and Life of man otherwise
dwelling in it than the inferior Members, so much more the Soul and Body of
Christ has the eternal Word living and dwelling in the same, th^n any other,
and that incomparably, as Augustine well demonstrateth, lib. de agon^
Christian^, cap. 20 thus concluding, And there^o^e the Word does not so aff^^me
that Man (to wit, the Seed of Abraham) as the rest of the Saints, but much more
excellently, and sublimely; and God dwells in the M^n Christ so, a^ there is
no M^diator betwixt God and Christ, but God dwells ^n us, by and through
Christ, our alone Mediator, and for hi^ sake recei^e^h us to be so near un^o
him, that both the Father and the Son, and also the holy Spirit dwells in all
the Saints, yet the manner of Union, ca^^ed by some of the Ancients the
Hypostatical or Personal Union,) and manner of I^h^bit^tion in the Ma^hood of
Christ, (...), and b^yond all humane un^erstanding, excelling the manner of
Gods dwe^ling in all the Saints; wherefore the Man Christ only, and none other
Man nor Creatur is both God and Man* and is the Objec^ of divine Worship and
Adoration, together with the Father, and the S^irit, and none else. And for
Hicks quoting some words of mine, out of my Book of (...) Revelation, recited
by C. M. p. 44. on James 5.6. Ye have (...) just One, that is, Christ Jesus in
their Hearts, him they crucified. To this I answer; This I never understood
otherwise but figuratively, as when the Scripture says, That Apostates and
Wicked Men crucify the Son of God afresh; for I affirm expressly in my said
Book of Imme^iate Revelation, That the Life of Christ in men's hearts can never
be killed or crucified in it self, see my Book of Immed. Rev. 2d Edition, page
75. and page, 253, 254, 255. at great length, but men by Disobedience may
deprive themselves of the Comfort and Benefit of it, as well as of Christ's
Sufferings on the Tree of the Cross, and so in that figurative sense, according
to Scripture style, may be said to kill him, even as we are all to look to him
whom we have pierced, according to Zachariah's Prophecy concerning Christ's
outward Suffering on the Cross, and to mourn bitterly because of our sins,
which he did bear upon him, when he was pierced; and because Christ cannot (as
to himself, properly and strictly, in a strict litteral sense) be killed nor
crucified in men, therefore I do not believe that he can be said to be in us
that Sacrifice of Atonement and Propitiation that was necessary to be offered
up for the Remission of our sins, and appeasing the Wrath of God to us; and if
any think so, I am far otherwise minded; for it derogates from the great worth
and value of Christ's Sacrifice without us upon the Tree of the Cross; for the
Body that Christ was to suffer in as a Sacrifice for the sins of the World,
behoved to be a clean and holy Body, as it was, as a Lamb without Spot; and the
Death behoved to be a real Death, and not metaphorical or figurative; and
therefore Christ, as in us, could not be that Sacrifice of Atonement; for at
this rate, not only Christ had outwardly dyed in vain, but he had offered up
himself for a Sacrifice of Atonement, as often as there were Saints to live in
the World, and as many Saints, as many Offerings; all which is most absurd to
imagine. But yet it must be granted, that the Life of Christ in the Saints is
as sweet Incen^e before God, and is a Sacrifice in another sense, seeing even
the Saints are said to offer up themselves, through him, a living Sacrifice to
God; and also, the Life and Spirit of Christ teaching and enabling the Saints
to apply Christ's Sufferings, Death and Blood (that was shed on that outward
Cross) to them, does bring them into perfect Peace with God, so that his Wrath
is wholly appeased and quenched toward them, only for the sake and in virtue
of the great Sufferings of Christ on the outward Cross; and if this be the
sense of W. S. his words, and that they can be so construed, it is well; for
that is my upright sense, and is of many hundreds more, yea, of all my faithful
Brethren, called Quakers. And concerning what I. P. and some others have writ
of Christ's heavenly Flesh and Blood, and how the Saints fed upon it in all
Ages, Christ being that noble Vine Tree unto them, that yielded them his Grapes
for Meat, and the Blood of them for Drink, as Wine is called the Blood of the
Grape, and being their Apple Tree, their Fig Tree, yea, their Corn, Bread, Milk
and Wine, their Wool and F^^x, their Feast of fas things full of Marrow, etc.
All these are highly Mystical and Figurative or Metaphorical Expressions, and
are not to be literally o^ ca^nally understood, yet so, as the Metaphors hold
forth, that th^se outwa^d things, by which these inward Mysteries are
signified, are but the Figures, and the spiritual things are not the Figures of
the natural, but the natural are Figures of the spiritual, as the outward Light
is ou^ the Figure of Christ the spiritual Light, the true Light of the Soul*
but the spiritual Light is not the Figure of the natural; which is ^uite
otherwise than in vulgar Metaphors and Figures; and therefore b^ Ch^ists
heavenly Flesh and Blood that he had from the beginning, ^is not to be
understood any created material Body, but the living Word it self, according to
its divine Emanations, metaphorically only so called, according to Scripture
style, feeding and refreshing the Souls of the Saints in all ages, with
unspeakable Refreshment; And therefore by Metaphors and Allegories they have
given it such Names, according to its various Operation^. But that Christ is as
much, or after the same manner in the Quakers, or any Saints, as in the Manhood
and Body of Christ that s^ffered on the Cross, or that Christ has left behind
him that Body that suffered on the Cross, and was buried, as if that were the
Quakers Doctrine, as Faldo a^ledgeth, and C. M. from him, is abominably false:
I am sure no Qu^ker, that does rightly understand the Quakers Principles and
Doctrine, will ever say so, or ever did; althoug^ I shall not deny, but some
ignorant Persons that may go under the de^ignation of a Quaker, may have at
times spoke very ignorantly and offensively in that and other (...) to the
Scan^al of our holy Profession, and to the stumbling of the weak that could not
rightly discern betwixt our true and faithful Brethren, and others falsely so
called; but such there are among all Societies and Professions, that do not
rightly understand the Principles of that Profession they pretend to belong
unto; yea, how many Presbyterians and Independents, so called, to my certain
knowledge, understand not their own Principles, notwithstanding of their
public Confessions; and so, possibly some among us, notwithstanding our
public Confessions, well owned by the generality of our Friends, as especially
that noted Treatise by John Crook, called, Truths Princip^es, etc. that has
had a very general Reception by us, and with which my Doctrine, in all
particulars, does well agree, so far as I know, as also with other faithful and
sound Friends and Brethren.

In his Fifth Argument, w^i^h he ground upon my supposed marvelous Giddyness,
Ignorance and Falsehood, he shows himself marvelously (not only) ignorant, but
perverse; and after he has perverted my words, and belyed me in many things,
then he cries out Ignorance, and other things that are Scripture Truths, he
calls my Ignorance; whereas it is but his Ignorance that does not understand
better: And I doubt not, but Judicious and Impartial Readers, who compare his
Books and mine, will have another Judgment concerning me, and acknowledge, to
Gods Praise, the Gifts, both of sound Knowledge and Expression, with his
manifold other Mercies bestowed on me, for which I desire to praise him
forever. And for my saying, That Light being used as a Name of God, is no
Figurative or Tropical Expression; I have already above explained my sense of
it, That the Natural Light is the Figure of God, that Divine Light; but the
Divine Light is not the Figure of the Natural, as Figures of Metaphors and
Tropes in Natural things, commonly are quite otherwise: And Augustine De Genes.
ad Lit. lib. 4. cap. 28. expressly affirms, That Christ is Properly, and not
Figuratively, called Light; and yet who will say, that Augustine was not a more
knowing Man than Cotton Mather? and who can deny but Light is immediate, though
it comes through a Medi^m of the ^ir to our Eyes, and through the medium of the
Eye to the sense of sight; for do we not as immediately see a Candle, as we see
a Man, and yet the specie^ o^ image of both come to our Eyes through the medium
of the A^r? So that i^ this* as in many (...) things, he shows his own
extreme Ignorance, that is not worth time to mention. And that he reckons it
my Ignorance, that I say, Christ commanded not these words to be used in
Baptism, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, etc. commonly called the
words of Institution. As he can never prove any such Institution, so he has
Zuinglius (whom he makes his President in another case) against him; for
Zuinglius says expressly, Lib. de Bapt. page 66. tom. 2. Christus Jesus
Baptism, form^lam, qua uteremur his verbis non Instituit quem ad modum Theologi
bactenus falso Tradiderunt; i. e. Christ Jesus did not institute the form of
Baptism in those words, to be used as the Theologues have heretofore falsely
delivered. And he is intoxicated with a Spirit of Ig^^^ance, and not I (as he
falsely alleges on me) to assert, That Exodus 20.8, 9. so commands one day of
seven, as that it may be First as well as the Seventh: Whereas if Natural days
be meant, it cannot be the First, but the Seventh; for it is not said, Remember
to keep the First Day for Rest, and after ^^at labor Six days. And that he
denies and mocketh at an inward and spiritual Day, shows him extremely
Ignorant of spiritual Things, as well as his Scoffing shows his frothy airy
Spirit, scarcely to be paralleled. Is not the Day of Gods Power, Psalm* 110. an
inward and spiritual Day? And where it is said, Let us walk honestly, as in the
Day, Romans 13.13. and until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts,
2 Pet. 1.19. And is not this an inward Day? And that he reproacheth me with
Giddiness, for saying, The Sabbath is Christ, to wit, the thing figured by the
Jews Sabbath. In this he reproacheth as well his pretendedly much esteemed
Calvin, who says expressly the same, lib. 2. cap. 8. n. 32. of his Institutes,
where he says, Christ is the Truth, at whose Presence all the Figures evanish;
the Body, by whose sight the Shadows are left, He I say, is the fullfilling of
the true Sabbath. And a little after he charge it as Superstition upon them
that would make the Observation of the First Day of the Week, for a Sabbath, to
be a Divine Institution; and does fully agree with us, That it is to be kept by
choice, for good Order, and assembling together for divine Worship, and other
good Reasons, but not by divine Precept, injoyning the strictness of the Jewish
Sabbath. As for that silly Jest of Baxters, that C. M. pleases his airy mind
with, telling the Quakers, That their (to wit, Presbyterian) Bells are not
carnal, else they would not sound so high, he might have used it as much
against Paul, for saying, Our Weapons are not carnal, as implying, that the
Sword was a carnal Weapon; but according to Rich. Baxter there can be no carnal
Sword, for then it could not cut; whereas things are called Carnal from the
hand that uses them, as for other causes; and the L^vitical Laws were called
Carnal O^dinances in Scripture. And whereas he says, None preach the most
intimate Union and Communion with the Lord Jesus Christ, more than he and his
Brethren, is a most bold and impudent Untruth, seeing, 1 st, the^ say expressly,
That Christ is not at all within us, but only without us in Heaven, and no wise
in us, but by ^is Operatio^s; as if he and his operations could be divided* 2
dly, That they de^y the Workings or Operations of the Spirit o^ God in the
^aint, to be Objective, or that the Spirit works as any se^sible Object upon
the inward and spiritual Senses of the Sa^n^s: Hence with Jesuits and Papists,
from whom they have borrowed that Distinction, as I can prove, as namely from
Sacroboscus, a Jesuit, De^. decret. trident. p. 93* 94. they say, The Spirit
works Effectively and ^ubje^tively, but not Objectively: And therefore do
they not one whit more preach any nearer Union and Communion with Christ, than
the darkest Papists; yea, some Papists that own sensible Workings of the
Spirit, as some do, go far beyond them, ( viz. C. Mather and some of his
Brethren) in that particular. But that I have slandered the Assembly, in their
saying, The Souls of the Righteous are not perfected in Holiness till after
Death, which C. M. has twice cast upon me; I desire the Reader, for his
Satisfaction, and my Vindication, but to read the place that I cited, viz. cap.
32. n. 1. where they say expressly thus, The Bodies of men [after Death] return
to Dust, and see Corruption, but their Souls, which neither dye nor sleep,
having an Immortal Subsistence, immediately return to God, who gave them, the
Souls of the Righteous being THEN made perfect in (...), etc. Where it is
plain, that the Adverb of Time [ Then] refers to the words in the first line,
viz. After Death; yea, and as would seem then, when the Bodies return to Dust,
and see Corruption, that sometimes is a considerable time after Death, where
d^^d ^^dies are Embalmed; but this last part I suppos^ is (...) in them. And
seeing they plead for ^in for term of Life, (...), to the (...) in^tant, what
difference there is, that they ca^ make betwixt dyi^g in their sins, and living
in their sin^ for Term of Life, is not ^nte^ligible; for in Scriptu^e-phrase,
Not to have In^^uity p^r^ed ^^ay (...) men dye, and to dye in Ini^uity, is all
one; for the in^tant ^f Death is quick as a Thought. That I said, Notorio^sly
(...) Persons, Liars, Deceivers, Drankards, etc. are qualified Members of your
Church; I said it, according to what I found in your Confession, that requires
no more than an outward P^of^ssion of Religion, and that such scandalous
Persons may have; for if no scandalous Persons could make ^ Profession, but
that the very Profe^sion it self did exclude all scandalous W^^^ing, then there
could be no scandalou^ Profession, no^ P^of^ssors (...) are scandalous; but if
ye deny that, Baxter will b^tter info^m him, in the Treatise above mention^d;
beside that, I h^ve proved C. Mather a noto^ious Liar, and yet he is a M^mber
of their Church; and it is bu^ too well known, how many scandalous Persons of
all sorts, belong to the Presbyterian Church, as much, at least in some places,
as to the Episcopal, and as when the Presbyterian Church was National in
Scotland, and is now lately again become Natio^al in Sco^la^d, can it be
imagined, or was it ever known, that any Church in C^^istendom, that was
National, or did take in the whol^ Nation, ^ut had many scandalous Persons in
it. His last instance of m^ Ignorance, is, That I denied that Baptizing o^
Infants, was the Pra^ti^e of the Church during the first Century: but all that
he says here (...) me, is a bewraying his own Ignorance, and withal, his
Perve^^ion. For to prove that Baptizing of Infants was the Practice of the
Church in the first Century, he cites O^igine and Cyprian, none of which lived
in the first Century, and Agustine, that lived not till about the end of the
fourth Century, and Calvin, that lived not till at least fourteen hundred Years
after the first C^ntury, and they might be mistaken in their thinking that
baptizing of Infants was practiced in the first Century, as well as in other
thi^g^ they did too much take upon trust; and suppose some small matte^ ^s to
be found in Origin, concerning Infant Baptism, yet that is not Church ^istory,
and so contradicts not my Assertion; for Origin had some private Opinions that
were not generally received in (...) Church; beside that, wiser men than C. M.
h^ve thought, that R^ffinus, Origine's interpreter, has incerted that of
Infants Baptism, as well as some other things, into O^igine's Works, that were
not really his, and did not agree to his Time, and Erasmus, much better versed
in Antiquity than either C. M. or all his Brethren, has plainly acknowl^dg^d,
that Ra^^^nus did take too much liberty in addi^g things of his own, as could
be easily proved; and according to the best Chronology, Origin and Cyp^ian
lived together, to wit, a^out the middle of the third Century, ^. A^^t^dius
shows in his Thesa^^^^ C^^onologiae. And as for Tert^lians Authority, whom he
cites for infants Baptism, while their innocent Age was yet upon them; it is a
manifest ^alshood, if not a wilful Perversion, if ever C. M. has read
Tertullian upon the place, and proves him either Ignorant, or Forgerer; and to
show this, I shall faithfully recite Tertullians words, from my own reading (I
having well read in Tertullian, Cyprian and Orig^^e, and diverse others, I
suppose before Co^. Mather could well read in his Accidence or Grammar) in his
^ook, De Baptismo adversus Quintiliam, cap. 18. he says, Ai^ quidem Dominus
nolit^ il^os pro^ibere ad me venire, veniaut ergo dum adolescunt, etc In
English thus, Indeed the Lord says, forbid them not to come unto me; let them
therefor ^ome, when they grow up to Youth let them come; when they learn, when
they are taught whither they come; let them be Christians when they can (...)
Christ; w^y does innocent Age hasten to the Remission o^ Sins? (...) will be
more wary in secular things, that to whom Eart^ly S^bstance is not trusted,
that which is divine should be (...); let them know to ask Salvation, that thou
may seem to give to him that asks. Than which, nothing can be more clear,
that Tertullian was not for, but against Infants Baptism. But perhaps he thinks
to excuse himself, that he brings Tertullian's Authority by way of Query. And
for his citing Ireneus's saying, Infantes renascuntur, i. e. In^ants are born
again; either it is to be understood of Water Baptism, or it is against C. M.
who does not believe that Water Baptism is our Regeneration, as the Papists
commonly call it; and seeing nothing of Water is mentioned, it is no clear
Testimony. But s^eing he has mentioned nothing of Church History, he has not
proved me guilty of Ignorance, for saying, They can gi^e no Evidence in Church
History for In^ant Baptism. For his citation of Church History, concerning
Hyginus, to prove Infant Baptism, he should have named who the Writer of that
Church History is, and whether approved by true Protestants, seeing many
fabulous things are alleged by Papists concerning Antiquity. That called,
Quest. et resp. ad Orthod. is generally denied to (...) Iustine's, by all
judicious Protestants; and that Iustine says, in his Dialogue with Tryph. That
all alike might then receive Baptism, which is the spiritual Circumcision: As
it says nothing of Infants, so it is plainly against C. M. and his Brethren,
if he ^ean Water Baptism, who do not think that all who receive Water Baptism,
are spiritally circumcised, which is a Popish Opinion, and a manifest ^rror,
contradicted by daily experience. And his charging me with Hypocrisy, for
commending the dead Saints, but condemning the living Ones; classing W. P with
me; he shows his Fo^ly and Rashness in that, as in other things; let him tell
us what living Saints do we condemn; we do believe that God has his living
Saints now in the World, as he has had in a^l Ages of the World, even in all
Professions in Christendom, that hold the true Foundation, though upon it too
many build Straw and Stubble, which God will in due time burn up, as I have
abovesaid. Moreover, that Infants Baptism was not practiced until the third Age
or Century, and was not brought in by the Commandment of Christ, there are many
men of great Note for Learning, and Skill in Antiquity, far more famous for
Learning than Cotton Mather is like ever to be, that assert the same, as well
as I, and contradict Calvin's mistaken Judgment in that particular; for
Curcellaeus says, in his D^ssertations of Orig. Sin, That the Custom of
Baptizing Infants, was brought in without the Commandment of Christ, and did
not begin before the third Age after Christ was born; In the two former Ages
(says he) no sign of it does appear. And that the Ancients were of opinion,
That only the Adult are capable of Baptism, Valefridus Strabo, that lived in
the ninth Century, Ludovicus Vives, and Erasmus in the Church of Rome, and
Grotius and Salmasius, great Protestant Authors, do plainly acknowledge, and
Berengarius, and the Albigenses were of the same mind, as that learned and
judicious Protestant Writer C. M. Du Veil, in his Explanation of the Acts of
the Apostles, does show; see his Explanat. on cap. 2. v. 14. and cap. 8. v. 12,
31. and cap. 18. v. 8. And notwithstanding of his Insinuations to the contrary,
I challenge C. M. to give any one instance wherein I have not faithfully quoted
the Ancient Writers named by me, whether in my former Book, called, The
pretended Antidote, etc. or in this, in each particular. And were I so minded,
and saw a service in it to the People of New England, I could easily produce
sufficient plain Testimonies, from Ancient Fathers, so called, and Writers both
Greek and Latin, to confirm the Doctrine of the People called Quakers, in all
the principal and most material things wherein they differ from C. M. and his
Brethren; but the Scripture Authority being that of greatest weight, in respect
of any outward Testimony, I have chosen rather to make use of that. Nor will it
serve to justify C. Mat^er, his Exclamations against me, that seeing the
Quakers hold all these Doctrines which Baxter, and some other Protestant
Writers hold to be Fundamental, that therefore I should not have so charged
them, as I have done in my first Book, called, The Presbyterian and Independent
visible Churches brought to the Test; for if they and we agree in Fundamental,
then why are we so uncharitable to them, as not to judge them a true Church? --
To which I Answer; Although we hold all their Fundamentals, according to what
Baxter has delivered, as I have above showed, yet they hold not all our
Fundamentals; for it is a Fundamental Doctrine and Principle held by us, to
wit, The inward Revelation o^ Christ in all true Believer^, and That God
teaches all true ^elie^er^ by his inward Voice, Word and Teachings, or inward
divine Inspiration and Revelation, properly so ca^^ed, that is as well
Obj^cti^e as Effective, and by way of Object, working sensibly and inf^^^ibly
upon the inward and spiritual Senses of their Souls, and which their Souls and
Minds, if duly and fitly disposed and qualified, do infallibly apprehend; but
yet this Fundamental held by us, is plainly denied by C. M. and his Brethren;
and it is a Fundamental Error in them w^o h^^d it, as the generality of their
visible Church Mem^^r* do, That all such divine inward Objective Revelation and
Inspiration is ceased; and from this Fundamental Error, diverse other very great
Errors ^^ow, as so many unclean streams from an unclean Fountain; for if all
true and saving Knowledge of God and Christ, and all saving ^aith require true
divine inward Revelation and inspiration, properly so ca^^ed; and the true and
real inspeaking of God, and his internal Word and Voice that does as sensibly
and perceptibly operate, by way of Obj^ct, upon the inward and spiritual
hearing, o^ discerni^g ^aculty of the Soul, as any outward Voice or Wo^d of a
man does upon the outwa^d Hearing; then, if that be cea^^d, all true and saving
Knowledge and Faith, are ceased, and all true Love, Hope (...) Re^entance, and
all other Fruits and Virtues of the Spirit, because all these have a necessary
connection with the true saying Knowledge (...) ^aith; (...), a^l true
Preaching, Praying and Worship, and all true Obedience and Service unto God,
and all real and true Religion, a^l ^^pending upon the inward Principle of
inward divine Revelation and Inspiration, properly so called; and yet we do
re^dily ackn^wledge, a di^^inction betwixt these extraordinary divine
Revelations and Inspirations, that the Apostles and Prophets had, (...) they
were ^postle^ and Prophets, and these other that they had common to them, and
ordina^^ with all Christians; and for the latter we contend, that were and are
ordinary and common to all Saints in all Ages of the World, but not for the
former that were extraordinary, whereby they not only wrought Miracles, and
spoke with Tongues, but had Doctrinal things of Faith revealed to them, without
all outward teaching of Men or Books* whereas we do not say, any peculiar
Doctrine of the Christian Faith is made known to us without all outward
Teaching, but by it, Instrumentally, and by the immediate Revelation and
Inspiration of the Spirit, Principally; and we are sufficiently charitable,
that we judge, there are true Believers among them (though we cannot own their
visible Church) that either hold not these Errors with them, or if some hold
them in words, or Notion, and The^^y, yet as in respect of their Experience and
inward sense and feeling, hold them not, but the contrary; and such have better
Hearts than Notions; and though they err in holding an unsound form of Words,
through too much relying upon their Teachers, yet their inward sense and
experience does contradict them. And in all these twelve Particulars I first
charged upon them, I still affirm, they do grossly err, and they are such great
matters of Difference betwixt them and us, although they are not all
Fundamentals, that no Society holding such Errors, deserve to be esteemed the
visible Church of Christ, restored to that purity of Doctrine that the visible
Church ought to have, and had in the primitive Times, and yet will have, as she
comes to be fully restored to her primitive Purity. And though it seem a
strange and new Doctrine to C. M. and his Brethren, to distinguish betwixt the
Scripture, called by some the external or outward Word, and the inward living
Word of God that proceeds from the Mouth of God immediately, as every man's
word that proceeds from his Mouth, and goes into the Ears of the Hearers, is
his immediate Word; yet not only ancient Writers and Fathers, so called, did so
distinguish, but even these called the Reformed, who began the Reformation from
gross Propery. And for the ancient Writers I shall give but one, (though I
could give diverse besides) to wit, Augustine, of great esteem and fame with
Protestants, and particularly with Calvin, whose Authority he more uses in his
Institutions, than any of all the Ancients: In his 5th Book de Trinitate, cap.
11. Augustine says expressly, Proinde Verbum quod for as sonat, signum est
verbi, quod intus luc^t, cuj magis verbi competi^ vomen, nam illud quod
profertur caruis ore vux verbi est verbumque et ipsum dicitur propter illud, a
quo ut foris appareret assumptum est: In English thus; Therefore the Word that
sounds outwardly, is a sign of the Word that shines inwardly, to which the
Name of the Word does more agree; for that which is pronounced with the fleshly
Mouth, is the Voice of the Word, and it is called the Word, because of that
from which it is taken, that i^ might outwardly appear. Where I desire the
Reader to Note these two things, 1 st, That Augustine does acknowledge the Word
within, or internal Word. 2 dly, That the Name of the Word does more belong to
the internal Word, than to that which outwardly sounds in our fleshly Ears;
in both which he does contradict C. M. and his Brethren, who do not acknowledge
any inward Word in the Saints, since the Apostles days, and hold, That the
Scripture is the only Word that is the Object and Rule of our Faith. And that
famous Reformer Zuinglius (whom I the rather cite, because C. M. makes him his
President for his zeal against the Quakers, in the end of his Address) in his
Commentary De vera ^t falsa Relig. de Verbo Dei, cap. de Ecclesia contra
Emserum, says, Qui in Ecclesia Scripturam Caelestis Verbi explicari, audit,
etc. In English thus, Who in the Church hears the Scripture of the heavenly
Word explained, judges what he hears; but that which is heard is not the
Word it self whereby (to wit, chiefly) we believe; for if we did believe by
that Word which is heard or read, then all should become Believers; and after,
he says, It is therefore manifest, that we are made faithful by that Word
which the heavenly Father preaches in our hearts, whereby he does also
enlighten us, that we may understand, and draws, that we may follow. And
again, Who are instructed with that Word, judge the Word that sounds in the
Preaching, and strikes the Ears; but yet, the Word of Faith, which is seated
in the Minds of the faithful, is judged by none, but by it the external Word is
judged, which* God has appointed to be preached, although Faith comes not (to
wit, chiefly) by the external Word. Both which Testimonies of Augustine and
Zuinglius, do manifestly confirm the Quakers Doctrine against C. M. and his
Brethren, who acknowledge no inward Word in the hearts of the faithful* by
which their Faith is wrought, and will have the Word of Faith to be only the
written or outward Word, contrary both to Paul and Zuinglius, who give the
pre-eminence to the inward Word, and call it the Word of Faith. And as
Zuinglius holds for the Quakers in asserting the inward Word, against C. M.
and his Brethren, so in that called Original Sin, for thus he says expressly,
lib. de Baptismo, Paul, cap. 3. to the Romans says, That the knowledge of sin
comes by the Law; where, therefore there is no knowledge of the Law, (as in
Infants,) there can be no knowledge of sin; but where no knowledge of sin is,
there is no Prevarication, and so Damnation cannot be. And after, Because Paul
says, That Death is come upon all men, because all have sinned: Theologu^s
from these words judge, That that Disease and Contagion that is Heredi^^ry unto
us all, and is naturally lodged in us, is sin, that brings to us Damnation,
but they Err the w^ol Heavens wi^e: Wh^re it is to be noted, That Zuinglius
does acknowledge, That there is a sin^^l Disease and Contagion conveyed from
Parents to Children, but yet it is not imputed unto them to bring Damnation
upon any Infants; plain contrary to C. M. and his Brethren, who (...), That
many Infants, both of unbelieving and believing Parents, are eternally
Reprobated and Damned, only for Adams Sin imputed to them; Which is most hor^d
Uncharitableness, and horridly reflecting upod the Merc^ of God. And the same
Zuinglius, in his Chapter of the Eucharist, plainly asserteth, That Christ by
^is Flesh and Blood, with which he ^eedeth the Souls of the faithful, does
understand a spiritual t^ing, which only the Spirit gives, and not any Flesh
consisting of Veins and Nerves; with^l affi^ming, with Origin and A^gustine,
That Christ's Flesh and Blood, which he ^eedeth the Saints with, is called so by
an A^^egory and Similitude, but is really the Word it self, called also by an
Allego^y Bread, Wine, Milk, Honey, Marrow, Fatness, etc. Again, the same
Zuinglius in ^is Commentary de vera and ^alsa Relig* does thus comment on Paul's
words, Romans 1.19. The knowledge of God is manifest in them (so does he
translate the place, and so does the old English Translation) for God has
showed it unto them. We see here openly (says he) that (...) acknowl^dge,
concerning God, is of God, which we ascribe to (I know not wha^) Nature; for he
says God has manif^sted it; and what other thing ^s Nature, but a continuing
and perpetual operation of God, and (...) of all things? And ^g^in, in his Cap.
of God, he says, (...) of the Philosophers have spoken truly of God
somethings, it was from (...) God, who has scattered some Seeds of his
Knowledge even (...) Gentiles, although mo^e sparingly, and more obscurely. So
that Zuingli^^ had far more Charity ^owards honest and conscientious Gentiles,
than C. M. who (...) him very widely, as in the ^orm^^ particulars m^^tio^ed,
(...) in thi^ last, that he affirms, That (...) ^nowledge of God the Gentiles
have, o^ght to be attributed to God, and not to Nature; and therefore not to
man's Reason (as C.M. would have it) which is nothing but a natural Faculty of
the Soul. And Thomas Shepherd, that had been a Preacher at Cambridge in
N^w-England, in his Exposition of the Parable of the Ten Virgins, says
plainly, That that inward Law given to the Heathens, is falsely called the Law
of Nature; for it i^ of God; and so says Bachannan, in his Book, De jure Regni
ap^d Scotos; and a large Volumn might be printed of Testimonies both out of
ancient and lat^^r Authors, a^l of g^od e^teem for Piety and Learning, yea, and
even diverse Protestants, that do acknowledge, That the Illumination that is
generally in men, that ^eacheth them that there is a God, and shows them good
and evil, is a Principle above Humane Reason: As among English Protestants,
Henry Moore, cited by Increase Mather against the Quakers, and praised by
Baxter, as above, who says expressly, in his Moral Cabbalae, cap. 1. v. 1, 2.
of Genesis, By the Will of God every man living on the face of the Earth, has
these two Principles in him, Heaven and Eart^, Divinity and A^nimality, Spirit
and Flesh; but that which is Annimal or Natural operates first, the spiritual
or heavenly Life being for a while closed up at rest in its own Principle, etc.
but by the Will of God it is, that afterward the Day light appears, though not
in so vigorous Measure, out of the heavenly or spiritual Principle. And
carrying on the Process of Gods work in men's hearts, by way of Analogy, from
the First Day to the Seventh, concerning the Seventh, he says, Genesis cap. 2. v.
3. of his Mor. Cabb. So the divine Wisdom in the humane Nature celebrated her
Sabbath, having now wrought through the Toil of all the six days Travel; and
the divine Wisdom looked upon the Seventh Day as blessed and sacred, a Day of
Righteousness, Rest and Joy in the holy Ghost. And thus if C. M. had but some
ordinary Reading in English Writers, and did but understand what he reads, he
might have found an inward and spiritual Sabbath, or Day of Rest, not only in
the Scriptures, and the Quakers Books, but in Henry Moore, a man of far more
Sense and Learning, than I suppose C. M. will pretend unto: Also, he might have
found it in Calvin, lib. 2. Instit. cap. 8. n. 30. So that he shows his
Ignorance sufficiently, in comparing the finding o^ a spiritual or inward
Seventh Day, to the difficulty of finding the Quadrature of the Circle; which
if it were found, it is probable the Penury of his Learning would not suffer
him to understand. And what H. Moore says of the spiritual or heavenly Life
lying for a while closed or shut up at rest in its own Principle, is but the
same, in other Terms, with what we say, That the Life of Christ is crucified in
Unbelievers, viz. not in it self, but to them. And why should C. M. find so
great fault with this manner of Expression, that is according to Scripture,
when his reverend Baxter (as he designeth him) writes in a phrase that must
have a charitable Construction put upon it, otherwise it would look as odd as
any thing C. M h^s quoted out of any of the Quakers; for R. Baxter says,
conce^ning God, in his Treatise abovesaid, called, Directions to the
Con^erted, motive 12. page 34. Does it not wound you to thin^, that even th^^e,
H^, (viz. God) should be so straightened, and t^r^st into Corners by a hellish
Enemy, as if that simple Habitation were too much for him, and that (...)
Dwelling were too good for him (meaning the heart defiled with sin.) Now if any
should accuse Baxter with Blasphemy, he^e, in saying, ^od can be straightened, and
thrust into Corners by a hellish Enemy, would not C. M. excuse him, and say, it
is a Catachrestical or improper manner of Speech, and is not to be strictly
taken? and then, if he were not very partial, why does he not excuse such
Expressions in the Quakers Writings, that are capable of the same charitable
Construction? And it were an easy thing to gather may Phrases and Expressions
out of Presbyterian and Independent Books, that might seem very offensive, to a
degree of Blasphemy, if they were not charitably construed; yea, I find an
Expression in Calvin, which if C. M. could have found in a Quakers Book, we
should have had him cry out aloud, Blasphemy! for he says expressly, lib. 3.
cap. 2. n. 24. Quia C^ristus non extra nos est, sed in nobis hab^tat: In
English thus; Because Christ is not without us, but dwells in us; but if
^otton Mather say, ^alvi^ss fence is, That Christ is not only or wholly without
us, but also dwelle^^ in (...); as this is a charitable Construction, so let it
be given to such, or the like words, that may be found in the Quakers Books,
unless he could find, that their wo^ds could not bear such a favoura^le
Construction. But since C. M. finds so much f^^lt with me for saying, That
not only Conscientious Gentiles, but ^aithful Ch^istians shall kno^ more of God
and Christ after Death (which is the g^neral Expe^t^tion and Consolation of all
Saints, who know now but in part, but then shall know fully) and thereupon
(...) Quakers new P^rgatory shall ere long be erected: what says he to his
much esteemed Calvin, (...) on these words of Peter, 1 Pet. 3.19. B^ which also
he went and (...) to the Spirits in Prison, etc. plainly affirms, concerning
the Souls of the deceased before the Death of Christ, Indeed I willingly grant,
(says Calvin) that Christ did shine unto them by the Virtue of his his Spirt,
that they might know, that the Grace which often they had only tasted, was then
given unto the World; and by a probable Reason, that place of Peter, 1 Pet.
3.19. may be applied to this, where it says, That Christ came and preached to
the Spirits which were in Custody, or place of Expectation (they commonly
translate it Prison) for even the Context leads us thither, that the
^aith^^l, who before that time were de^eased, were made partakers of the same
(...) with us, beca^se he does amplify the Power of the Death (of Christ) from
thence, that it did penetrate even to the dead, while piou^ So^l^ did enjoy the
present sight of that Grace, which they ^arnestly expected; and on (...) hand,
it was made more manifest to the Repro^a^^, that they were ^xcluded from all
Salvation. But if C.M. think, that Calvin's words does not infer a Purgatory,
why should he surmize any such thing from mine? And though C. M. ignorantly in
his airy fantastical Mind mocked at some called Quakers, for calling the Flesh,
by way of Allegory, the Woman that should not speak in the Church, (although we
deny not but Women are there also to be understood literally, but yet not all
Women, nor in all respects) alleging, That the D^vil is the Fleshes Husband;
yet if he had been well read in Origin or Augustine, he might have found a
better account; but not to go so far backward, let his Reverend Baxter answer
him, who says, in the Preface to his Directions to the Converted, In a weak
Christian the Spirit is Master, but the Flesh is Mistress. And notwithstanding
that the said R. Baxter is too uncharitable to the People called Quakers, yet I
find in the said Book, he is much more charitable to them, than C. M. is, who
will not allow them the lowest degree among true Christians, Because, as he
will have it, they deny almost all the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith; for
thus Rich. Baxter expressly writes concerning Quakers, B^hmenists, and some of
the Religious Orders of the Papist^, in his 23d Character of a confirmed
Christian, page 66. But those o^ them that place their chiefest Happiness in
the Love o^ God, and the eternal Fruition o^ him in Heaven, and seek this
sincerely, according to their Helps and Power, though they are misled into some
superstitious Errors, I hope, I may number with those that are sincere, for-all
their Errors, and the ill Effects of them: And truly I have that Charity for
Rich. Baxter, that if he had known the Quakers better, and had had that
occasion of some more inward acquaintanc^ with them, he would have been still
more charitable to them, in his judgment of them; for the things he has judged
to be Errors in them, either they do not hold them, or they are not Errors, but
sound things of Truth, and many of them possibly owned by himself, but in other
Terms: It is the great Calamity of these Ages, that men are often confounded in
their Languages, and contradict one another in Words and Terms, when they agree
in one Sense of the same things: It may be hoped, and is earnestly to be prayed
for unto Almighty God, that all that are sincere Lovers of the Truth in all
Societies in Christendom, may have more Charity one toward another, and they
may acknowledge whatever is of Truth and Virtue one in another; and this would
prepare the way to bring them all to one Sheep fold, and to have one Shepherd,
as the Lord has promised, and which he will in due time fulfill, and that
Time is at hand, Amen,

CHAP. IV.
ANd thus having sufficiently answered what was needful, to the First Part of
his Address, which is the largest, I shall answer some things, but very briefly
to his latter part, partly because almost the whole of it is answered in my
former printed Books, directed to the People in New England, and partly because
very much of it is answered in the foregoing Sheets.

In the latter part of his Address, he has greatly changed the matter of
Debate betwixt us, in most things wrongly stating things, and calling things
our Principles which are not; whereas he should have kept to the Twelve
Article* I charged them with, eleven of which they did fairly own, and the
Twelfth I have sufficiently proved to belong to them, as much as the eleven;
and he should have given an Answer to my former Book, called, The pretended
Antidote proved Poison, which he has not so much as essayed, but instead
thereof he goes to change the matter of Debate betwixt us, in the things I had
charged them with in most particulars, and by most g^oss Perversions of our
Friends words, would fix on them Principles which they do no wise hold. And in
this New ^ssay, he sets down Sixteen Assertions, wherein he pretends to
contradict our Principles; but in most of them he does prevaricate, and goes
from the state of the Question, as in the First, where he grants, That he
does not mean, that the Paper or Letter of the Scripture, but the heavenly
Matter of it, is the Word of God; and thus he does not contradict us, for I
have told him and his Brethren more than once, Thas we readily grant, the
heavenly Matter, and true divine Sense of the holy Scripture, is the Word of
God: But the true state of the Controversy is, Whether the Scripture is either
principally or only the Wo^d of God, excluding any inward Word or Voice of God
in men's hearts; we say, there is an Inward Word and Voice of God in men's
hearts, which, as it does not contradict the Scripture, but agrees with it, so
it is another thing, and is of the greatest Efficacy, and gives or seals to
us, the assurance, that the Scriptures are of God, and divinely inspired. In
his 2 d Assertion, he does no less prevaricate, and mis-state the Controversy;
for I did grant in both my former Books, That there were Extraordinary and
Ordinary Revelations and Inspirations given to the Prophets and Apostles of our
Lord, and that we did not say, that we or others had these Ext^aordinary, but
the Ordinary, that were common to them with all Saints; the which ordinary are
nevertheless true divine Inspirations and Revelations. And as to what I said
out of some ancient Writers, tending to open the Distinction of Extraordinary
and Ordinary Revelations, the extraordinary being of a more high and sublime
Nature, as proceeding from a more high and excellent measure of the divine
Light or Spirit, that is well warranted in holy Scripture, and well approved by
Christian Writers of great esteem for Piety and Learning, that he and his
Brethren call Rabbinical Fopperies, in that they show their great Ignorance in
good Learning; for it is generally acknowledged by Christians, as well as Jews,
yea, and by Protestants of good Note, That the Hebrew Names of God, mentioned
in Scripture, being various, some of them are greater than others; and the
greater Names do answer to the greater Measures of the divi^e Light, and that
Name commonly pronounced Jehovah (which the most learned in the Hebrew Language
among Christians do confess, they know not how to pronounce, i^ consisting of
quiescent Letters, and having no proper Vowels of its own, as is acknowledged
by the most learned, and as Buxtorf in his Hebrew Lexicon says, the first that
presumed to pronounce it, was Petrus Galatinus, none o^ all the Greek and
Latin Fathers, so called, did presu^e to pronounce it or read it, for there is
no Tract of it in any of their Writings, though diverse of them were well
skilled in the Hebrew Language) is generally acknowledged to be one of the
greatest Names of God, by which God made himself known to Moses, Exodus 6.3. but
not to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and though it be granted, that the Letters of
that Name are recorded by Moses in many places of Genesis, and is to be found
in Hebrew, Genesis 2.4. and that possibly and very probably Abraham might have
known the outward Letters or Sound of that Name, yet that does not infer, that
either Abraham or any of these Fathers knew the inward force and efficacy
signified by that Name, and that so high Revelation belonging to it, that Moses
did know; for that would contradict Exodus 6.3. And though I do no wise approve
Rabbinical Fopperies, or Jewish Fictions or Fables, yet what I find either in
Jewish or Gentile VVriters, that does we^l accord with the divine Oracles of
the holy Scripture, I do well receive it and relish it. In his 3 d Assertion,
he does no less mis-state the Question; for we deny not, but affirm, That the
will of God expressed in the Scripture, is a perfect Rule for the Belief and
Practice of every Christian, as to all Doctrinals and Practicals of Religion in
general; but we say, it is not the only Rule nor the principal; for the Will of
God and his (...) is writ in the fleshly Tables of the Hearts of all the
faithful, and (...) writ, is greater, and of greater vi^tue and efficacy than
to have it writ in Paper; and though no new Doctrinals or Morals are to be
revealed to us, but what a^e sufficiently declared in the Scriptures, ye^ that
does no hinder, but that particular Calls, to Places, Persons and Nations, and
particular Prophesies or Predictions of things to come, may be newly revealed,
as is granted by diverse Pro^e^^ants, and by Fox in his Book of Martyrs, yea,
even Presbyterians, and Calvin does acknowledge, That even in his Time God did
raise up extraordinary Officers to restore the Church, if not Apostles, yet at
least Evangelists, lib. 4^* cap. ^. n. 4. And true Believers may have it
witnessed to them, (as many have had and daily have) by the inward Testimony of
Gods Spirit, That th^^ sins are forgiven them, and that they belong unto God,
and that without all local and argumentative way of Syllogisims, that as many
faithful Souls have not skill to form, so many Hypocrites deceive themselves
with such a way of arguing themselves to be sincere. But some Presbyterians
have acknowledged, That there is another far more evident, clear and
satisfactory way that some have, whereby to b^ assured, that their sins are
forgiven, without any such way of Syllogysm, as particularly my Countryman
William Guthergy, in his his printed Book concerning Personal Covenanting with
God, and he calls it A felt Arms full of the holy God, filling the Soul with
God, as he is Love, Life and Liberty; and though it is no audible Voice (viz.
to the outward Ear) yet it does countervail that of God to Daniel, O Man!
greatly beloved; and is like to that which passed from Christ to Mary, when he
said, Mary, and she answered Rabboni: And surely here was no way of syll^gis^g.
In his 4 th Assertion he does also fail in stating the Question; for, first, we
grant, That the Day of Salvation is expired toward many men now alive, and
they are left without any saving Light in them: 2 dly, we grant, That the clear
and bright Day of Salvation has not yet appeared unto many, but it is as yet
Night unto them; and to others it is as a little dawning; but to others clear
Day; which answers to that of Pa^l, Now is the accepted Time, now is the Day of
Salvation, to wit, to such who had Christ crucified and raised again, livingly
and effectually preached to them by Christ's faithful Messengers; but yet even
to such who are in the Night state, and are in Darkness, to who^ the clear Day
of God has not appeared, some divine Light shines in their Darkness, and that
Light, though ever so small, is of a saving tendency, and does prepare the way
of the Lo^d inwardly, as John's outward Ministration prepared the Way of the
Lord, as he came outwardly; and even inwardly, the Law and the Prophets go
before the clear Manifestation of Christ and his Gospel; so that the Law even
inwardly (as well as outwardly) is a Schoolmaster to bring them who are under
it, to Christ. Nor do we say, That the Light does reveal in every man all that
we must know, in order to Salvation, upon its first appearance, or in its first
Ministration; for we distinguish betwixt the various inward Ministrations of
the Light and Spirit, and teach, That the ^ormer makes way for the latter, as
it is well improved; and as he that goes up a Stair or Ladder, must begin at
the lowest Step or Round, and so by degrees, and in process of time, gets up
higher, until he come to the place where he would be; and as the sojourning of
the People of Israel in the Wilderness, had its several Removes, which were
Typical, of the Souls inward progress, from spiritual Egypt to the spiritual
Canaan, so the Souls of men have their several inward and spiritual Sojournings
from one degree to another, until they receive the end of their Faith, which is
the Salvation of their Souls, as it is written in the Psalms, They go from
strength to ^^^ength, etc. And it is a great Perversion in C. Mather, that
because I blame them for denying, That there is any Light in men generally,
that is sufficient to enable them to do any Work acceptable to God, as if
therefore I did hold, That every man has so much Grace and Illumination, as
does enable him to do any (i. e. whatsoever) Work acceptable to God: For, All
men Not to be able to do any work acceptable to God, And All men To be able to
do any or every Work acceptable to God, are not Contradictory, as being both
Universal; and therefore they are both false; and as two Universals are not
Contradictory, and are both false, so two Particulars are not Contradictory,
when the one is Positive and the other Negative, and therefore may be both
True; As it is true, That some men are good, and That some men are not good; so
it is true, That some good Works may be done by some men, and yet it is as
true, That they cannot at that time do some other good Works; for it is a good
Work to believe in Christ crucified and raised again, and to love him as such;
and yet we do not say, that the Light in every man does either teach or enable
every man at first so to do, for that cannot be done without some special
Revelation or Illumination; but yet that more common and general Illumination,
where it is well and duly improved, does enable men to do some other good
things, that prepares the Souls of men to receive that more special
Illumination that comes from the same Author and Fountain, and so is
Introductory to that more special; for the Law is Introductory to the Gospel
(and yet has the Gospel hid in it, as in a Seed) as one Natural Science is
introductory to another, as the Science of natural Physic is introductory to
the Science of Medicine, and common Arithmetic is introductory to the more
abstruse and recondite parts of Mathematical Learning; for the Operation of the
Law inwardly does so convince the Soul of sin, and does so discover to the Soul
its weakness and shortness in Obedience, notwithstanding of some things that it
does, which are good, after a sort, that it makes the Soul sick, and so to
need the Physiti^n, which is Christ, even crucified and raised again, as the
Mystery of him is inwardly revealed and applied to the Soul by the Spirit. In
his 5 th Assertion, he does also grossly prevaricate, and pervert the state of
the Question; for we do not say, That Christ is so in the Wicked or Unconverted
as he is in the Saints, but after a far other manner; for he is in the Saints
by Union and Communion with them, and gives great and glorious Manifestations
of his Glory; whereas in ot^ers, he is not in them by any Union or Communion,
yet he is so in them, as to operate in them, and to ^eveal and discover some
things in them, that are suitable to their present state, in order to their
Conversion: Nor do we say, That Christ is personally in the Saints, as some
imagine.

And as to his Question, How we shall know Light within from Thought within? I
Answer; If he mean by Thought within, a good Thought or Thoughts, they are
distinguished as the cause and effect; for the divine Light within is the cause
of every good Thought and Desire, as of every good Word and Work; but all evil
Thoughts proceed not from the Light, but from the Darkness; and the Light
within does as plainly distinguish betwixt good and bad Thoughts, and other
Motions, as the outward Light of the Sun helps us to distinguish betwixt
things white and black, or straight and crooked; but as blind men cannot judge
of Colors, so who are greatly blinded with Prejudice and Unbelief against the
Light within, (as C. M. is) can but very little distinguish or know good from
evil, except in things notoriou^^y gross; nor was it the true Light in Saul,
that approved him in his Persecution, but pricked him in his Conscience, and
witnessed against him, if he had hearkened to it; but as a man in his heat of
Passion hearkeneth not to true Reason, but is Deaf to it, though it be in him;
so men being blinded and hardened with sin, does not give due regard either to
true Reason, or the true divine Light, which are both in them notwithstanding;
and yet even those men when they become more cool and calm, may, and do hearken
to the dictates of both.

And for his other Question, Whether their Magistrates (viz. the Quakers) ever
had a Light which directed them to punish a filthy Woman for exposing her self
stark Naked before their Eyes in a public Assembly, to prove her Attainment of
that Innocence which is without shame?

I Answ. I remember no such thing that ever I heard tolerated by the Quakers
Magistrates; for we all judge, that any such Practice does really deserve
corporal Punishment; and I suppose the Passage he mentions, was that which
happened some time ago, where the Magistrates of that place, (though no
Quakers) did punish her, as I was informed, with Imprisonment, which the
Quakers (I believe in general) that heard of it, did judge, was too little, and
that she deserved much more.

In his 6 th Assertion, he does not fairly state the Question, and upon his
unfair stating it, does seek to fix upon us Blasphemies, and then cries out,
Away with such Blasphemies* as inferring that according to us, The Counsel (or
Decree) of God, (...) very Essence of God, being one therewith, does depend on
the free will of (...); Which is a most gross and wretched Perversion; for we
say, the Decree and Counsel of God, does extend to all evil Actions of men
permissively, but not effectively, i. e. so as not to be the Cause and
Determiner of them; and Gods Decree and Counsel has no Cause to depend upon,
without God himself, as he does falsely insinuate against us: Nor is Gods
Permission, as concerning Evil Actions, as Judas betraying Christ, and the Jews
crucifying him, a bare Permission, as if God only did look on, as an idle
Spectator, wh^^h is most absurd to imagine; but he most justly, most wisely and
most soveraignly bounds and limits all evil Actions of men, that they neither
do, nor can do any thing but what is for the glory of God, and the good of his
chosen, as it is written, The Wrath of Man shall praise thee, and the remainder
of it thou will restrain. But C. M. and his Brethren are too guilty of
Blasphemy, that affirm, That all evil Actions of Men and Devils, come to pass
by the Effective Decree of God, that does infallibly and inevitably determine
and move them to the same; and so say the Ranters, fathering all their wicked
Actions upon God And it is a gross Contradiction in C. M. to himself, to say,
That God does dete^mine all evil Actions by his effective Decree, and yet is
not the Author of them; for to effect a thing, so that it must be done, and to
be the Author of it, is all one, to all of common sense.

In his 7 th Assertion, he proceeds in the like gross Perversion, and
mis-stating of things; and as to the first part of it, fights against his own
shadow, and not my Assertion; for I granted, That God has chosen all the Heirs
of Salvation unto Faith and Holiness, as the means, and unto Eternal Salvation
and Glory, as the end, in Christ Jesus, before the Foundation of the World; and
also, I have granted, That all are not elected, nor are any elected who perish
finally; and yet this does not infer eternal Reprobation, because Elected and
Reprobated are not Contradictory Terms, as I have formerly declared; and yet he
has not proved that they are; but makes a noise strongly asserting what he
does not prove. Nor does it follow that Reprobation is before the Foundation of
the World, because Gods Decree and Purpose to destroy all finally Impenitent
Sinners, is before the Foundation of the World; for though Gods Decree be
before all Time, yet it does respect all Reprobates, as it does consider them
in Time, having ^efused all the tender Offers of Gods Grace and Mercy unto the
very last. And as Gods Decree of creating men, does not infer, that men were
created from Eternity, or that men's Creation is co-evous with Gods Decree, so
nor does it follow, that the Reprobation of men finally Impenitent is co-evous
with Gods Decree; for Reprobation is not the Decree of God, as C. M. does
strongly assert, but does no wise prove. And ^f some should say, (as I know
some do say) That Election, though in being before the Foundation of the World
in Christ, is not simply or only the Decree of God (as it is an Immanent Act of
God) but is somewhat by way of an Effect, resulting or flowing from God^
Decree, existing in Christ the Head and Mediator of all Gods Elect, before the
Foundation of the World: For as C. M. cannot disprove it, as contrary to
Scripture* so it is not inconsistent with what diverse so^er Protestants have
favored, to wit, That Christ was Mediator from the beginning; and consequently
had something to be as a clothing to his Godhead, altogether necess^ry to his
being Mediator from the beginning, although he was not incarnate, or clothed
with flesh, until the fullness of time, that he took flesh in the Virgins Womb;
and if Christ was Mediator from the beginning, partly invested with his
Mediatory Nature, though not with Flesh till the fullness of Time came, it is
both very easy and very comfortable to the Saints, to understand, how they
were elected in Christ their Head before the Foundation of the World, and that
this Election had its being, as the Effect of Gods eternal Love and Counsel, in
Christ, the head of his Elect Members.

In his 8 th Assertion he is wholly idle and impertinent; for we own as much as
he, That there is in God, the Father, the Son and the Spirit, and that they are
One in Being, and Three in relative Attributes and Properties; and we dislike
nothing but the unscriptural invented Names of [ Three Persons] for which
Calvin has sufficiently excused us, as I have above showed.

In his 9 th Assertion he wholly fights with his own shadow, and gives up
the Cause, acknowledging, That the Price paid by our Lord in his Death, was
indeed sufficient for all Mankind, and that the benefit of it is tendered and
proffered unto all Indefinitely, if they will believe; but he should have told
us how the benefit of it is tendered unto all, seeing many Millions of men
never had it outwardly preached to them, nor ever had any outward Testimony of
it by men; and if he would stand to this, the Controversy in this Particular
would be at an e^d. But for his Inferences and Consequences, which he would fix
upon ^s, most perversely, we utterly deny them to flow justly from our innocent
Faith, according to Scripture, which is, That Christ dyed for all men, etc. As
that, First, The Virtue and Success of our Lords Death depends upon the Free
Will of Man: 2dly, That man is the principal in his own Salvation: 3dly, That
the Number of Persons interested in our Lords Death, is not certain (for we
say, none have a true and real Interest in Christ, or in his Death, but sincere
Believers) 4thly, That Simon Peter was no more beholden to the Merit of our
Lord, than Simon Magus, or any that perish (Though it will be hard for C. M. to
prove, that Simon Magus was a Reprobate) And 5thly, That God in sending his
blessed Son to dye, had as full a purpose to save them that Perish, as them
that shall be saved: These, and the like absurd and Illogical or unreasonable
Consequences we altogether deny, they being only C. M's Perversion.

In his 10 th Assertion he does as grossly pervert the state of the Question, as
in any of the former; for we deny not, but affirm, That our Justification i^ by
the Righteo^sness or Obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ imputed unto us; but we
also say, It is imputed to none but such who have Faith, Repentance and sincere
Obedience; and that is true inward Righteousness, wrought in them by the Spirit
of Christ; and though Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience are not the
Foundation of our Justification, yet they are the Terms and Condition of it, as
I have sufficiently showed in my former printed Treatises; nor does Edward
Borough and VV. Penn, if their words be duly construed, contradict what I
have affirmed. But the true state of the Question is, Whether men are just
f^^d by Christ's Righteousness imputed to them, without any ^^ward
Righteousness, as the requisite Condition and Terms, in order to that
^^putation? And whether David, lying in his sins of Adultery and Murder,
requi^ed Justified? Which we deny.

In his 11 th Ass^rtion, although he states the Question in the Title, (...) we
can own it, to wit, That a sinless Perfection is not attainable in this ^orld,
as their Principle, but not ours; yet he miserably wrest^^^, perverteth, and
mis-applyeth, and jumbleth things in the Explica^ion, for that Scripture in
Philip* cap. 3 v. 12. does nothing contradict our Assertion, who affirm no such
degree of Perfection as wherein a man may sit down and make no further progress,
which Paul intended not to do* but still to go on more and more to Perfection:
And for that place in Romans 7.19. etc. it is not to be understood of the best
Condition of the Saints, when they are farthest advanced, but of their
struggling Time and State, before they obtain the Victory and Freedom, which
Paul does acknowledge in the same Epistle. And for any of the Quakers saying,
They have no sin in them, I know not any that is generally owned and approved
by us, that have said so; it is common to Ranters, and such as Tho. Cases Crew
that say so, but for the honest and sober People called Quakers, they do not
boast of their Perfection, but had rather by their innocent Walk and
Conversation, demonstrate their growth and progress in Sanctification, than by
a Talking of it.

CHAP. V.
IN his 12 th Assertion he does not fairly state the Question, especially in
the Explanation of it; for he should have distinguished be^wixt the state of
Servants and Sons of the Free Woman, and so betwixt Saints by way of In^hoation
or Initiation, and Saints by way of Confirmation, as betwixt Corn in the Bud or
Blade, or green Ear, when it is in danger of blasting, and ripe Corn that is
past all danger of blasting; for as to this latter, I did grant in my former
printed Treatises, in unity with my faithful Brethren, that there is a
confirmed state in Faith and Sanctification, wherein the Saints persevere to
the end of all Trials, and from which they cannot fall away; and the Faith of
such is more precious than Gold that perishes, and endures all Trials and
Tentations, even as true Gold endures the Fire, and loses nothing in it; but
all have not attained to this State, which is indeed the only proper state of
Salvation, that is as the Harbor or Port of Safety to the tossed Mariner; and
till the Soul arrive to this state, it is but as a Ship exposed to the Waves of
the Tempestuous Sea: Also, I readily grant, that none of Gods elect can finally
fall away; for his (...) is over them, so to preserve them, as that they do not
fall, or if they do fall, as in the case of David, to restore and renew them
again by Repentance. And C M. and his Brethren have granted, in that Book
called their Antidote, or The Principles of the Protestant Religion, etc. That
the ^^^porary Faith that may be lost, is not false; and if not false, then true
after a sort; although I grant, it is not that Faith of Gods Elect that is more
precious than Gold, that endures all fiery Trials, yet is of a saving
tendency, and such who have it, if they did well and duly improve it, might in
due time arrive to that Confirmation in Faith and Holiness, that cannot be
totally and finally lost: But whether the Faith that may be lost, and the Faith
that cannot be lost, differ in Kind or Specie, or only in Degree, it being too
Nice, and rather Philosophical, and too Logical, I did not (as I said in my
former printed Book) see cause to enquire, seeing it is a very great dispute,
among Scholars, what makes a Distinction of things, in Kind or Specie, some
affirming, That the Mettles and Elements differ not in Specie, others
contradicting, and saying they do.

In his 13 th Assertion, concerning Infant Baptism, or rather Rantism or*
Sprinkling, and in his 14 th Assertion concerning the Supper, he ^^ingeth no
n^w matter, but what I have sufficiently answered in my ^ormer Books, and
therefore shall say no more here as to them. But (...) he charge it upon us,
as if we did not believe Christ's coming again and appearance without us, in his
glorified Body to judge the quick and the (...), is that he cannot prove any of
us guilty, that is generally owned and received to be of our Faith, only we
have denied the gross and (...) Imaginations that some have vented, as
concerning Christ's ^ody, ca^ing it Natural and Earthly, which we believe is
spiritual (...) heavenly; and if any call it spiritual and heavenly glorified
Flesh, as w^ll as Body, we shall not contend against them; for we do
acknow^^^^^, (...) is the same in Being and Essence that it was on Earth, but
wo^^erfully changed in Manner and Condition; see our printed Sheet (...), The
Christian Faith, etc.

^n his 15 th Assertion he does most grossly prevaricate, abusing and (...) our
words, as because we own an inward quickening, and (...) with Christ, in our
Souls and inward Man, that therefore (...) future Resurrection of the Body
after Death, which we deny (...), against Ranters and vain Notionists; and we
believe, (...) Resurrection of the Body is not attained immediately after
Death, (although the Souls of the faithful immediately after Death go (...)
Heaven* or Paradise) but at Christ's coming and Appearance to judge the quick
and the dead; and the same Body that dies is raised, (...) sense* being ^^eed
and refined from all Dross of Corruption (even as Gold is the same when it
lies in the course Oar or Miniral, and when it is refined) but wonderfully
changed in Manner and Condition.

In his essaying to prove his 16 th Assertion, he shows himself extremely
weak, as if because God commanded the Jews to keep the Seventh Day for a
Sabbath, from the beginning of the World, in the fourth Commandment, therefore
he commands the Christians in the same fourth Commandment to keep the first
Day. But I need say no more on this Head, but refer him to his much esteemed
Calvin, for his Refutation, who in that does fully agree with us, as generally
do all the Protestants in France, and the Low Countries, and many in England
and Scotland.

In his 17 th Assertion he is as weak and abusive as in any of the former, That
he and his Brethren cannot own true Piety to be essential to a true Minister of
Christ, to make a necessary Provision for the everlasting Peace of renewed
Souls, which cannot be saved without their Assertion, viz. That true Piety is
not essential to a true Minister, for this would make their Conversion or Peace
wholly depend upon Grace in the heart of a Minister. But this is a most gross
Abuse and Pervertion, and a most silly trick or cheat, to palliate or excuse
their absurd Doctrine, which a Chi^d may discover; for the Contradictory
Assertion, viz. That true Piety is essential to a true Minister of Christ, does
not make, that the Conversion of the Souls depend^ (...) Grace in the Minister,
because many Thousands of Souls have been and are daily converted without any
Minister, good or bad, by reading or hearing the holy Scriptures, the holy
Spirit aiding and (...) therein, and this is generally confessed by all
Protestants. And if some think they were converted by means of some Ministers
that were afterward found to be Hypocrites, all that this can prove i^, not
that they are not converted, but that they are in some mistake about the man
whom they thought was the Instrumen^ of it, and was not. And for my saying, It
is no wonder that New England abounds with such Impious Ministers; I did argue
ad nominem, according to your Principle; for, to say, True Piety is not
essential to a true Minister of Christ, opens a door to let in a stood of
Impious Ministers upon the People of New England; and it is to be feared* this
absurd Principle has too much opened a Door unto them: And for all your strict
pretended Trial of men, before they enter into the Ministry, do ye try them
concerning their Piety? if nay, then ye open a door to them who may be really
Impious, if they have but wit enough to be Hypocrites, and only seemingly
Pious, if Yea, this contradicts your Doctrine, who say, ye have no certain way
to try whether men be really Pious or not; for ye reject all pret^nce to a
discerning of Spirits, whereby to know who are really Pious, and who not; and
the Marks given by Paul, whereby to try men, before they be owned to be either
Bishops (i. e. Overseers, or Pastors) or Deacons, were not outside Marks of
Holiness only, that Hypocrites may have, but to be really sober, just, holy,
temperate (Tit. 1.8.) and where these Virtues are, they do as certainly and
infallibly discover themselves in words and works, to the spiritual Discerners,
as Spices and precious Ointments or Perfumes, discover their sweet smell and
odor to them who have the right use of their natural smelling.

And as to his Question, How People may know whether we have an Immediate Call
to the Ministry? To this I Answer; There must be some spiritual Ability or Gift
of Discerning in such, who are able to know such a thing; for it is only the
spiritual Man that is able to judge of spiritual things; and whomsoever God
calls to the Ministry by his Power and Spirit inwardly revealed (that is
immediate) his Power and Presence, according to his faithful Promise, does go
along with them, so that some that hear them, though not all, are the Seal of
their Ministry, and the Blind are made to see, the Deaf to hear, the Lame to
walk, the Dumb to speak, and the Dead to live, to wit, spiritually. And as this
was Luther's answer to the Papists, that asked for some Signs to prove his and
his Brethrens Call, who did commonly upbraid them, That they never so much as
^ured a Lame Horse; so it may suffice for our Answer; for whether C. M. believe
it or not, we have had the Seal of our Ministry, that many by means of our
Testimony have had their inward Eyes opened, and have been turned from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God; and this inward Change has
had its evident Effects of Christian Piety, Sobriety and Justice in their
outward Conversation. But such who were blinded and hardened against the Spirit
of Truth, did not know Christ nor his Apostles and Ministers, and therefore we
cannot expect that such can know us. And this Question of C. M. may be easily
retorted upon him, that does so confidently affirm, That there are so many
Ministers in New England, that have and use all true Piety; let him tell us,
how he or they can prove, that they are really Holy, and that their Holiness is
not a mere outside Holiness, that Hypocrites may have? If he say, they may be
known by their Fruits, I query again, By what Fruits? Are these Fruits only
outward words and works, that Hypocrites may have; for there is nothing barely
outward but Hypocrites may have? But if by Fruits, he mean, that which has
some inward Virtue and savor of Life and Grace with them, that do infallibly
demonstrate themselves to be the Fruits of the Spirit, to such as have a
spiritual savor and discerning; as this would contradict their Principle, so
it makes for us, to answer his Question. Nor are there sufficient Testimonies
of ancient Christian Writers wanting, who did agree with us in our Assertion,
viz. That Hypocrites and Unholy Men, who have not the Spirit of Christ, are not
true Ministers of Christ, as not only Luther (whom I cited in my former Book)
who calls them Sectaries and Seducers, who know to preach much of Christ; but
seeing they feel him not in their Hearts, (as to be sure, such do not who have
no true Piety) they leave the right ground of the Mystery, cap. 11. Luth.
Mensal. But of the Ancients backwards, of above 1200 Years ago, I shall cite
two short Testimonies for this Assertion held by us, viz. Cyprian, who lived
about the middle of the 3d Century, and Athanasius w^o lived in the 4th
Century; for Cyprian, in his Epistle to Ianuarius says, How (...) he who is
unclean himself, and who has not the holy Spirit, cleanse or sanctify the
Water (viz. in Baptism) seeing the Lord says, Numb. 19. All that the unclean
touches shall be unclean -- And after, What Prayer can a sacriligous Priest,
and who is a Sinner, make for the Baptized, seeing it is written, God hears
not a sinner, but he that worshippeth him, and does his Will, him he hears;
but who can give what he has not, or how can he do spiritual things, who has
lost the holy Spirit? And in his Epistle to Stephen, Bishop of Rome, he with
his Colleagues, gathered in Council, in Africa, writes, saying, It behooves
that Priests and Ministers, who serve at the Altar and Sacrifices, be sound and
immaculate, seeing the Lord says in Levit. cap. 21. The man in whom there is
any fault, or vice, shall not approach to offer Gifts to God; and in Exodus,
the Priests who approach to God, let them be sanctified, lest the Lord forsake
them, Exodus 19. And again, When they come to minister at the Altar, let them
not bring a blemish, lest they dye. Which words of Cyprian, and his Colleagues
are as much against Impious as Heretic Ministers; and yet Pr^testants, who
judge Popish Priests to be great Heretics, allow of their Baptism, so far that
they do not baptize any that leave Popery, and join to them. And Athanasius, in
his Interpretation of the Parables, says, Whoever will do the Work of God, who
will teach others, or be profitable unto them, it behooves him to be in the
first place Virtuous, and to receive the Gi^ts of Gra^e from God, and to
possess the Fruits of the holy Spirit, and the Treasures of the Knowledge of
the good things of God, and then he can impart Gifts to others; for if any go
with his hands to anoint another with Oil, and have no Oil, how can he give to
others, what himself has not; and after the same manner we must judge of a
Teacher.

As for C. M's great Clamor for Maintenance, to him and his Brethren* for
preaching, from 1 Cor. 9.14. and Gal. 6.6. Let them first prove that they are
true Ministers of the Gospel, and have a divine and spiritual Gift and Ability
to preach it, and we should allow to such that Maintenance which the Scripture
mentions, which to be sure is neither any stinted Sallary, nor forced, which
yet many of the Priests of New England have had, and yet would have, if they
knew how, and which C. M. does plead for. Nor is he less Impertinent in his
seeking Shifts and Evasions to excuse their putting to Death our four Friends
in New England, one time telling us, There are Laws for i^, against the
Quakers, for speaking and writing Blasphemous Opi^ions, despising of
Government, etc. And so had the Jews a Law, as they said, against Christ, and
so had the Papists against the Martyrs, that they burned in Queen Mary's time.
But what the blasphemous Opinions were, that th^se were guilty of, who were put
to Death at Boston, has not yet been made appear, nor any other thing worthy
of Death or Corporal Punishment. And suppose (which yet I never heard
sufficiently proved) that some called Quakers said to People in New England,
things that were blasphemous, as, Thy Bible is the Word of the Devil, we deny
thy God, etc. as C. M. says, but does not prove; must the innocent suffer for
the guilty? if these that were put to death said no such thing, as ye can never
prove they did, they were unjustly put to Death, and their Blood yet lies upon
them that either shed it, or does justify the shedding of it; and it were far
better to C. M. not to take innocent Blood on him, if he were wise. Another
while again, These Laws were but begun to be executed, before the
New-Englanders grew sensible of their Error in making them, etc. But then, if
it was their Error to make them, why should C. M. use so many Evasions to
justify their executing them. Another while, The Quakers would not have born
New England men to have done the like, etc. But the Quakers have suffered a
great deal more disturbance, even in their public Meetings, and never used any
such Violence, even where they had Power. And his Example of a man's entering
into another man's House with the Plague upon him, without that others Consent,
is altogether improper; for the wide World, or any wide part of it, as
New England, differs far from a man's private Dwelling; and if this Example
had any force in it, it has the same for the Papists in France and Spain,
banishing and pu^^^ng to Death the Protestants there. But it seems C. M. is not
of our Saviors mind, who bid, suffer the Tares and the Wheat to grow together
in the Field (which he expounds to be the World) until the Harvest. And this
Example of C. M. is like that which I heard, that a New England Preacher gave,
to move the People to put the Quakers to Death, though they could not prove
them guilty of any fact worthy of it, That men use to kill the Wolves they
catch, as well these who have done no harm to the Sheep, as others who have
done harm, because it is the Nature of Wolves ^o do harm; and the way to
prevent their Harm is to kill them. And for all C. M's fair Pretensions of
Lenity to the Quakers now-a-dayes, yet seeing he calls us, at least the
Speakers among them, grievous Wolves, it shows his envious Mind, and h^w he
would have us treated, if his Persuasion could prevail; nor ought we to believe
his Protestations to the contrary, seeing he does so much contradict them, in
his so much justifying the putting our Friends to Death. But it is no new thing
that the Sheep should be put into Wolves and Bears Skins, as C. M. does to us,
in the Title page of his Book, calling it, Little Flocks guarded against
grievous Wolves, but the Title of his Book had been most true and proper,
Cotton Mather proving himself a grievous Wolf against the poor innocent Sheep
of Christ, called in scorn Quakers; for his fierce and ravenous Spirit against
the Quakers, is more like to a Wolf, than any thing that ever appeared in any
of us against him or his Brethren; and he c^n never prove, that ever any of us
stirred up the Magistrate to Persecution, against any that differed from us, in
any part of the World: But we can prove, that his Brethren, the Priests in
New England, did most earnestly stir up the Magistrates in New England, to
persecute our Brethren, and did prevail with them to do it; and if C. M was too
Young, or not born, in those days to join with his Blood thirsty Brethren, it
is well if his Father Increase Mat^er was not equally guilty with others of
them; and I find not as yet, but that C. M. does approve their deeds, and so
brings their sins upon him, as Christ said to the Pharisees, who in the like
Hypocritical Spirit, said, If we had lived in our Fathers days, we would not
have killed the Prophets, Mat. 23.30. And seeing, according to C. M. the
Quakers that were put to Death, were Mad, and fitter for Bedlam, than to be put
to Death; on which Concession John Delavall, in his Appendix to my Book,
proves by the Law of England, That these who put them to Death were
Murderers, and deserved Death for so doing: What says C. M. to this? Surely
nothing at all.

CHAP. VI.
HIs Apology for using You to one, and saluting with the Hat, is very weak and
silly, viz. Because to say you to a single Person, became a Custom when the
Common Wealth of Rome was turned into a Kingdom, first to treat Persons of
Quality in the plural Number with You, and so by degrees, its descended unto
all particular men: But if Custom be a sufficient Reason to justify a
Practice, then all the Superstitions and vain Inventions of Heathens and
Papists may be allowed; but the Scripture says, The Customs of the People are
vain, Ier. 10.3. And that he says, its descended into all particular men, is
false; for as I am informed, it is not used in Spain, nor I believe in diverse
other Countries in the World. And for his asking Scripture, for some of us
saying, Thou writes, Thou hears, so joining a Nominative Case of the Second
Person to a Verb of the Third: It is easily answered; It is not so much the
Incongruity with a Grammar Rule, that we find fault, in using You to one, as
the vain respect of Persons, and the gratifying a proud Spirit, and bowing to
it, who will not be pleased with Thou, although they give it to God in Prayer,
and to some Niger or other that they despise; also, to say You to one, when
there is more in company, makes Confusion in the sense, and renders it often
uncertain, whether one or more are intended; but to say, Thou writes, has no
such inconveniency, nor argues no vain Respect of Persons. Nor has he any
better A^gument for Saluting with the Hat, but Custom; but seeing uncovering
the Head, as w^ll as bowing the Knee, are Religious significations of our
Reverence to God in Prayer, we should not give them to the Creature; for it is
very proper that some what of Distinction be made externally betwixt our
Reverence to our Maker, and our Respect to Magistrates, Par^nts, Kindred or
Neighbors: But he concludes with a rare way to deal with us at last, viz. To
throw their Caps at us; which bespeaketh a very airy and frothy Spirit, very
unbecoming a Minister of Christ; yea, not well becoming any Colledge-Boy of
New England. When the Preachers are thus light and vain, what may be expected,
but that in Jeremiah is fullfilled, Ier. 23.32. They cause my People to Err by
their Lies, and by their Lightness, etc. And another Instance of his Lightness
and Airyness, is, as because one of us said (as he does allege) in a
Catechism, Let none reason about us, for there they can never know us, nor com
unto us, that is, in Reason: But nothing but a mere Spirit of Perversion would
turn the sense of this, as if the Quakers did renounce all true Reason; whereas
the sense that is obvious to all impartial men, is, Reason falsely so called, or
carnal Reason, that is certainly a great Enemy to all true divine and spiritual
Knowledge; for what is the Wisdom of the World that is foolishness with God, as
the Scripture declares, but carnal Reason and Reasonings? and therefore says
the Scripture, If any will be Wise, let him be a Fool; and again, Lean not to
thy own Understanding: And C. M. might as well mock at Paul, for saying, 1 Cor.
10.4, 5. The Weapons of our Warfa^e are not Carnal, but Mighty, and to throw
down Reasonings; the Greek word being (...): Where it is plain, that tho Paul
expresses no distinction betwixt Reasonings and Reasonings, more than that
Catechism, yet he does not mean all Reasoning of all sort, as to exclude or
destroy the use of it, even in divine Matters; for Paul makes most excellent
use of it, in proving Justification by Faith in Christ Jesus, and the
Resurrection of the Dead, and other divine things; also, Christ and the
Prophets did make most excellent use of true and right Reason, to wit, as
enlightened by the divine Spirit, and governed thereby, and in due subordination
thereto; and this use of it the People called Quakers approve, and according to
their measure have made, and do make good use of, even in divine matters; and
through Gods Mercy, many can say, their Reason, or reasonable Understanding, as
men, is greatly improved and perfected, by their acquaintance with that divine
Light of Christ in them, and no wise impaired. But if C. M. think, that bare
humane Reason alone, without all divine internal Illumination, can enable a man
to understand divine Things and Mysteries, he (...) more a Socinian than
Presbyterian or Independent. And the like silly and airy Jest he flingeth at
Isaac Pennington, withal grossly perverting his words, page 45. as because I. P.
would have them stripped of all their fleshly knowledge of the Scripture (which
according to Paul, he calls Knowledge after the Flesh, or to be wise after
the Flesh, which is Death, Romans 8.6. That therefore he would have them stripped
of the Scriptures. All which Perversions, and many more in his Book, with many
gross Lies that C. M. uses, show plainly how weak he is, when he has no better
Weapons to defend himself, and render us odious.

And whereas he would in the Conclusion, fix it upon G. F. That he thought
himself equal with God, and that the Soul of man were God, or a part of him:
But seeing he brings not this from G. F. but from Faldo* a most partial and
envious Adversary, it is not to be regarded; and VV. Penn has sufficiently
vindicated G. F. and also G. F. has cleared it in his Book, That he did
witness both the Son and the holy Spirit revealed in him, who (as he takes
notice by the Westminster Confessions acknowledgement) are equal to God the
Father. And what G*F. speaks of the Soul, its being a part (but more properly
a measure of the Spirit) of God; he does not understand it of the Soul of man,
that i^ essential to man, but of the divine Soul or Spirit in man, or to speak
with the Scripture, the Soul of God, as it is written, If any draw back says
God, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him: And again, Shall not my Soul be
avenged? etc. and though part or portion, with respect to God, be not so
proper, yet by a tolerable Catachresis, even in Scripture, it is used, Job
26.14. How little a portion is heard of him? But to speak properly, God has no
parts or portions, as he has no Bodily Members, which yet by a figure in
Scripture, are assigned to him* in condescension to our low Capacity. But for
his saying, That Souls that can digest Quake^ism, serve but as the Sal^ of the
Flesh they live in; s^^weth sufficien^l^, he has no Salt in him to savor with
the things of God. Indeed ^f Quak^rism were such a thing as he does represent
(...) to be, and would fain have People believe it to be, or that the 20th
(...) he says of it, were true, it were most ab^minable, and such who hold it
would be most unworthy, and not fit to be esteemed Men, far less Christians;
but blessed be God, our Religion is not that which he would (...) it to be, nor
are we suc^ as he describes; and it is a great Question to me if he does
really think these things, that he says (...) us, to be true, either in
general or in great part; and if he does not think so, the greater is his sin.

The other things, in the last two or three Pages of his Book, are so
notoriously false, as that The main design of Quakerism is to advance and exalt
Man, and that they do in effect every one make himself a Christ, and such like
Lying stuff, I shall not need to Refute, seeing every one that has the least
knowledge of us, knows them to be scandalous Lies: And for the advancing man
into Pride or vain Glory, it is so far from being any design of our Religion,
that it more than any tends to humble the Creature; for man can never be
truly humbled, until he see himself in the Light of God shining in his heart,
and that will greatly humble him, as it did Job and Isaiah, and all the holy
men of God were humbled, and kept humble, by bowing down and subjecting their
Minds and Thoughts, with all their Desires and Affections, to that divine
Spirit, Light and Life of Christ in them, that brings men to the true Denial
of Self, and to cease from all Self-Actings, Willings and Runnings, that only
proceed from their mere Natural Parts and Abilities, whether in Prayer or any
other Religious Performance; and however such Prayers and Devotions, that are
performed without the Spirit of God, may please man's carnal Mind, and give a
false and carnal ease and peace, and exalt Self in Man, yet they can neither
profit them, who use them, nor please God; for God who is a Spirit, will be
worshipped in Spirit and in Truth. And whereas in his 8th page he accuses the
Quakers for their horribly Prayer-less Lives, withal asking, how many
Prayer-less Houses and Prayer-less Tables are to be ^ound among the best of
them? I Answ. In that he is very uncharitable, as that the best of us had
neither Prayer in our Houses nor at ou^ Tables, which is false; for not only
the most grown up in the Truth, but even the least Babes in the Truth, are not
without frequent Prayer both in their Houses and at their Tables, although not so
very frequent vocally, yet sometimes vocally, as God is pleased to give an
utterance, and at other times only with our Hearts, which God accepts; for
vocal and external words of Prayer, are not so essential to Prayer, but that
true Prayer may be, and is most frequently without it; yea, Samuel Ruther^ord,
a great Presbyterian, says in his Epistles, Words are but the Accidents of
Prayer; yet Prayer with Words, uttered with the Mouth, as God is pleased to
enable us, we gladly own, both in our Assemblies and Families; and if any be
wanting, in their Families in Prayer, or any other part of Devotion, it is then
own fault, for which they must answer, and ought not to be charged upon the
innocent; And we believe Gods holy Spirit will be wanting to no^e, duly to
move them, and that most frequently to Prayer, who watch thereunto, both with
words or without them; And if they watch not unto Prayer, their Neglect of
watching, and likewise of Prayer is their sin, and chargeable upon them, and
they will bear their burden for it. But that any faithful (...) owned by us
has said (as C. M. alleges, not from any Quaker, (...) a partial Adversary)
That in many Years they have not had a motion to Prayer; we do not believe; if
any feel not their hearts moved to Prayer, and that most frequently, it is
their own fault and sin; for indeed every faithful Soul his Life is a Life of
Prayer, and ^e p^^yeth in his heart as frequently as he breaths in the air;
for true inward Prayer, rightly understood, is the continual Motion of the
heart toward God, The Spirit helping our Infirmities, with Groans that cannot
be uttered; for even Paul said, We know not what to pray for, as we ought, Romans
8.26. And also, he has solemn Times and that frequently, for solemn Prayer,
and Meditation, and Tha^ksgiving; but the most sincere Christians do not always
make the greatest show or outward appearance to pray, as the Pharisees did of
Old: And I might easily retort this Question, How many Presbyterians and
Independents have either Prayer-less Houses and Tables, or at least very formal
and Hypocritical, and are wholly Strangers to the true Spirit, Life and Mystery
of Prayer? Though we have Charity to some of all sorts; and as we judge neglect
of Prayer a great sin, so we judge bare Formality and Hypocrisy to be no less;
both which Extremes are to be avoided.

Some Collections of Passages out of Jer. Tailors Book, called, The History of
the Life and Death of the holy JESUS, Part 1. Sect. 9. of Baptism, N. 29.
Just as we use to deny the Effect to the Instrumental Cause, and attribute it
to the Principal, in the manner of speaking -- So we say, it is not the good
Lute, but the skillfull hand that makes the Music; it is not the Body, but the
Soul that is the Man, and yet he is not the Man without both. [Note And so the
Quakers commonly say, It is not the Scriptures, but the Spirit that reveals
to us divine Mysteries; yet by so saying, they deny not that the Scripture is
an Instrument of the Spirit, to reveal the Doctrinal Principles peculiar to the
Christian Faith, as Christ's Birth of a Virgin, his Crucifixion, etc. as much as
the Lute is the Instrument of the skillfull hand that makes the Music.]

Infants Baptism, Part 2. N. 8. No man can conclude, that this Kingdom of
Power, that is the Spirit of Sanctification, is not come upon Infants, because
there is no sign nor Expression of it; it is within us, therefore it has no
signification; it is the Seed of God: And it is no good Argument to say, here
is no Seed in the Bowels of the Earth, because there is nothing green upon the
face of it. And N. 19. For as the reasonable Soul and all its Faculties, are in
Children, Will and Understanding, Passions, and Powers of Att^^ction, and
Propulsion, yet the Faculties do not operate or come abroad ^^ll Time and Art,
Observation and Experience have drawn them forth into Action; so may the Spirit
of Grace, the Principle of Christian Life be infused, till in its own day it is
drawn forth; for in every Christian there are three parts concurring to his
integral Constitution, Body, and Soul, and Spirit; and all these have their
proper Activities and Times, but every one in his own Order; first, that which
is Natural, then that which is Spiritual: And what Aristotle said, A Man first
lives the Life of a Plant, then of a Beast, and lastly of a Man, is true in
this sense; and the more spiritual the Principle is, the longer it is before it
operates, because more things concur to spiritual Actions, than to Natural; and
these are necessary, and therefore first; the other are perfect, and therefore
last. And who is he that so well understands the Philosophy of this third
Principle of a Christians Life, the Spirit, as to know how or when it is
infused, and how it operates in all its Periods, and what it is in its Being
and proper Nature, and whether it be like the Soul, or like the Faculty, or
like a Habit, or how, or to what Purposes God in all varieties does dispense
it; that which is certain, is, that the Spirit is the Principle of a new Life
or a new Birth -- that it is the Seed of God, and may lie long in the Furrows,
before it springs up; that from the Faculty to the Act, the passage is not
always sudden and quick -- And a little after, Now what was lost by Adam, is
restored by Christ, the same Righteousness, only it is not born, but
super-induced, not Integral, but interrupted, but such as it is, there is no
difference, but that the same, or the like Principle, may be derived to us from
Christ, as there should have been from Adam, that is, a Principle of Obedience,
a Regularity of Faculties, a Beauty in the Soul, and a state of Acceptance
with God. And we see also, in men of Understanding and Reason, the Spirit of
God dwells in them, which Tatianus describing, uses these words, The Soul is
possessed with the sparks of the Power of the Spirit; and yet sometimes it is
ineffective and unactive, sometimes more, sometimes less, and does no more do
its work at all times, than the Soul does at all times understand. Add to this,
that if there be in Infants naturally an evil Principle, a Proclivity to sin,
an Ignorance and Pravity of Mind, a Disorder of Affections (as Experience
teaches us there is, and the perpetual Doctrine of the Church, and the
universal Mischiefs ^ssuing from Mankind, and the sin of every man does witness
too much) why cannot Infants have a good Principle in them, though it works not
till its own season, as well as an evil Principle? If there were not by Nature
some evil Principle, it is not possible that all the World should choose sin: In
free Agents it was never heard, that all Individuals loved and chose the same
thing, to which they were not naturally inclined; neither do all men choose to
Marry, neither do all choose to abstain; and in this Instance, there is a
natural Inclination to one part; but of all the men and women in the World,
there is no one that has never sinned; If we say, we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and the Truth is not in us, said an Apostle: If therefore Nature
has in Infants an evil Principle, which operates when the Child can choose, but
is all the while within the Soul, either Infants have by Grace a Principle put
into them, or else sin abounds where Grace does not super-abound, expressly
against the Doctrine of the Apostle. [Note, All this does most manifestly agree
to what I have said both concerning the Seed of Sin, and the Seed of Gods Grace
being in all men, in my printed Book, called, The Presbyterian and Independent
Visible Churches brought to the Test, page 90, 91, 92.

Concerning certainty of Salvation, page 3. sect. 13. n. 9. The sum is this,
All that are in the state of Beginners and Imperfection, have a continual
Certainty, changeable and fallible, in respect of us (for we meddle not with
what is in Gods secret Purposes) changeable I say, as their Wills and
Resolutions: They that are grown toward Perfection have more reason to be
confident, and many times are so; but still, although the strength of the
habits of Grace, adds degrees of moral Certainty to their Expectation, ye^ it
is but as their Condition is, hopeful and promising, and of a moral
Determination. But to those few, to whom God has given Confi^mation in Grace,
he has also given a Certainty of Condition; and therefore, if that be revealed
to them, their Condition is in self certain, but their Persuasion is not so,
but in the highest kind of Hope, an Anchor of the Soul, sure and steadfast.
[Note, This does manifestly agree to what I have said on that subject in my
foresaid Book, page 136.]

Conce^ning Faith, Part 2. Sect. 10. N. 4. For the Faith of a Christian has
more in it of the Will than of the Understanding: Faith is that great Mark of
Distinction which seperates and gives Formality to the Covenant of the Gospel,
which is a Law of Faith: The Faith of a Christian is his Religion, that is, it
is that whole Conformity to the Institution or Discipline of Jesus Christ,
which distinguishes him from the Believers of false Religions. And N. ^. It (
viz. Faith) is of the same Condition and Constitution with other Graces, all
which equally relate to Christ, and are as f^rm Instruments of Union, and are
washed by the Blood of Christ, and are sanctified by his Death, and apprehend
him in their Capacity and Degrees, some higher, and some not so high; but Hope
and Charity apprehend Christ in a measure and proportion, greater than Faith,
when it distinguishes from them: So that if Faith does the Work of
Justification, as it is a mere Relation to Christ, then so also does Hope and
Charity, or if these are Duties and good Works, so also is Faith; and they all
being alike commanded, in order to the same end, and encouraged by the same
Reward, are also accepted upon the same Stock, which is, that they are Acts of
Obedience, and Relation too, they obey Christ, and lay hold upon Christ's
Merits, and are but several Instances of the great Duty of a Christian, but the
Actio^^ of several Faculties of the New Creature. But because Faith is the
(...) Grace, and has Influence and Causalty in the production of the other,
therefore all the others, as they are united in Duty, are also united in their
Title and Appellative, they are all called by the Name of Faith, because they
are parts of Faith, as Faith is taken in the largest sense; and when it is
taken in the strictest and distinguishing sense, they are Effects and proper
Products by way of Emanation. -- N. 8. So that Faith and Charity, in the sense
of a Christian, are but one Duty, as the Understanding and the Will are but one
reasonable Soul, only they produce several Actions, in order to one another,
which are but diverse Operations, and the same Spirit. [Note, This does
manifestly agree to what I have said in my foresaid Book, page 129, 130, 131.]

Dr. Cave concerning Justification, in the Life of Paul, Sect. 9. N. 15. Works
of Evangelical Obedience, are not opposed to Faith in Justification, in that
Faith, as including the New Nature, and the keeping Gods Commandments, is made
the usual Condition of Justification; nor can it be otherwise, when other
Graces and Virtues of the Christian Life are made the Terms of Pardon and
Acceptance with Heaven, and of our Title to the Merits of Christ's Death, and
the great Promise of Eternal Life, citing Acts 2.38. cap. 3.17. Mark 11.25, 26.
1 John 1.7. [Note, And so does this well agree to the Contents aforesaid.]

Joseph Glanvel, Fellow of the Royal Society, in his Treatise of Witchcraft,
Part 1.. 13. page 49. says, Gods more near and immediate imparting himself to
the Soul that is prepared for that Happiness by divine Love, Humility and
Resignation, in the way of a vital Touch and Sense, is a thing possible in it
self, and will be a great part of our Heaven. That Glory is begun in Grace, and
God is pleased to give some excellent Souls the happy Antepast. That holy men
in ancient Times have sought and gloried in this enjoyment, and never complain
so sorely as when it was withheld and interrupted. That the Expressions of
Scripture run infinitely this way, and the best of Modern good men, do from
their own Experience attest it. That this spiritualizeth Religion, and renders
its enjoyments more comfortable and (...). That it keeps the Soul under a vivid
sense of God, and is a grand security against Temptation. That it holds it
steady amid the flatteries of a prosperous state, and gives it the most
g^^^nded Anchorage and support amid the Waves of an adverse Con^^^ion. That
it is the Noblest Encouragement to Virtue, (...) the biggest assurance of an
happy Immortality. I say, I con^^dered these weighty things, and wondered at
the carelessness and ^^^judice of Thoughts that occasioned my suspecting the
reality of so (...) a Privilege; I saw how little reason there is in denying
matters of inward sense, because our selves do not feel them, or cannot ^orm an
apprehension of them in our Minds. I am convinced, that things of G^^t and
Relish must be judg^d by the sentient and vital (...), and not by the noetical
Exercises of speculative Understandings: And upon the whole, I believe
infinitely, that the divine Spirit (...) its sensible Presence, and immediate
beatifick Touch (...) Souls, who are divested of carnal Self, and mundane
Pleasure, abstracted from the Body by Prayer and holy Meditation* spiritual in
their ^^sires, and calm in their Affections, devout (...) of God, and Virtue,
and tenderly affectionate to all the World; (...), and circumspect in their
Actions; enlarged in (...) in their Minds* These, I think* are the Dispositions
that are requisite to fit us for divine Communion; and God transacts not in
this near way, but with prepared Spirits, who are thus disposed for the
manifestation of his Presence, and his Influence: And such, I believe, he never
fails to bless with these happy fore-tastes of Glory.

Joan Norris, M. A. and late Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford, in his
Treatise, Reflections upon the Conduct of Humane Life, Reflect. 2. N. 9. page
69. says, The Right and only Method of Inquiry after that Truth which is
Perfective of the Understanding, is to consult the divine Logos, or Ideal
World; for this is the Region of Truth, and here are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge: This is that great and universal Oracle lodged in every
man's Breast, whereof the Ancient Vrim and Thummim was an expressive Type or
Emblem. This is Reason, this is Conscience, this is Truth, this is that Light
within so darkly talked of by some, who have, by their awkward, untoward and
unprincipled way of representing it, discredited one of the Noblest Theorys in
the World: [ Note, If perhaps some have been shore in that thing, yet it has
been well demonstrated by many or most of that People here by him reprehended.]
But the thing in it self, rightly understood, is true; and if any shall call it
Quakerism or Enthusiasm, I shall only make this Reply at present, That it is
such Quakerism as makes a good part of St Iohn^s Gospel, and of St Austin's
Works. But to return; This, I say, is that divine Oracle which we all may, and
must consult, if we would enrich our Minds with Truth, that Truth which is
Perfective of the Understanding: And this is the true Method of being truly
wise; and this is no other Method than what is advised us by this divine Logos,
the substantial Wisdom of God; Blessed is the man that hears me, watching
daily at my Gates, waiting at the Posts of my Doors, Prove. 8.34. And again,
says the same substantial Wisdom, Whosoever is simple, let him turn in hither. And
again, I am the Light of the World, he that follows me (or as the word more
properly signifies, he that consorts, or keeps company with me) walks (...)
in Darkness* This therefore is via Intelligentiae, the way and method of true
Knowledge, to apply our selves to the divine Logo^, to consult the Ideal World.
[ i. e. not Humane, but Divine Reason.]

THE END.

