THE BARREN FIGTREES DOOM. OR, A Brief DISCOURSE wherein is set forth the woeful
Danger of all who abide Unfruitful under GOSPEL-PRIVILEDGES, and GODS
HUSBANDRY. Being the Substance of Sixteen SERMONS Preached on Christ's Parable
of the FIG TREE.

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in BOSTON.

Mat. 3. 10. And now the Ax is laid to the root of the trees: therefore every
tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
Boston, Printed by Benjamin Harris, John Allen. 1691. Price (...)

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER
Christian Reader,
IT is a vanity no less common than dangerous, for such as enjoy the Gospel,
and have a relation to the Visible Church, to boast themselves because of Gods
Holy Mountain, as if they were therefore secure from all fear of evil:
supposing that the Covenant will be their safety, and saying, though we walk in
the imagination of our heart, no ill shall come upon us. The Design of this
Discourse, is to undeceive such Enfatuated Souls, by letting them see what
ground they stand upon, and how dreadful the place is, in which they are. It is
a singular favor of God to be taken within the pale, and enjoy the benefit of
the means of grace; but, as it may be abused, so their condition will be
tremendous who shall at last fall under this guilt. That which first gave
occasion to the Preaching of these Sermons, was the awful consideration of a
Duty Ministerial, due to such as, being born of Professing Parents, having
received the seal of Gods Covenant, and upon their asserting of this Covenant,
and putting of themselves under the Discipline of Christ's Appointment, have
been acknowledged, and admitted under our watch; and must therefore be
accounted for in the great Day. The thought that these should perish at last,
must needs be solemn. The hazzads which they lie exposed unto of so doing are
amazing. To deny them their Title to, and interest in the Gospel privileges,
seems to be to bid them go and serve other Gods: The fear lest they should by
the abuse of these aggravate their guilt and misery, cannot but fill serious
souls with great solicitude: Their great addictedness to vanity, and the small
discovery of their being in good earnest for Religion, looks portentously. The
awful hand of God which is our against them in several terrible Judgments, is
deeply affecting: and who that fears God would not do their utmost to pluck
them out of the sire, and save them from burning? These therefore are firstly
concerned in this Treatise; and it is for that reason commended to the^ in
special, who are called upon to consider what terms they are upon with God, and
invited with greatest solemnity to confer the rich opportunity they enjoy of
obtaining Salvation, with the danger of their incurring of double Damnation
upon their neglect; and together with thankfulness for the price that is in
their hands, to fear and tremble lest they should lose it, for want of an heart
to improve it. No^ yet are others excluded; the Heart-searching God knows who
they are, that have made the highest Profession, and are for all that unsound:
and such are here told what they are to expect at the hands of a Jealous God.
Let none be so uncharitable as ^o suppose, that whilst we allow men their claim
to the outward advantages of the Covenant, we indulge them in sin; the design
is to improve it unto the more forcible persuading to diligence in securing
their own salvation, and make them the more careful about it, because
otherwise, the nearer to heaven they have been exalted, the deeper are they
like to be detruded into Hell. God is wont to confer the Gospel upon men, and
endow them with the liberties of it, not merely because they are savingly
converted, but that they may have the means so to be; and here they are upon
terms with him, and stand Probationers for Eternal Life, or Everlasting
Destruction: If the following Discourses may; by the blessing of God, be made
serviceable to the making Sinners in Zion afraid, and drive them from carnal
confidence in that state which in it self can afford them no security, and so
to give all Diligence to get under the shadow of the Everlasting Covenant, and
thereby the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ may be Enlarged, and especially among
the Rising and Risen Generation; I shall with all thankfulness acknowledge my
Labor not to have been in vain in the Lord.

Who am Less than the least of all Saints; Samuel Willard.

Luke XIII. 6, 7, 8, 9. He spoke also this Parable: A certain man had a
Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon, and
found none.

Then said he to the Dresser of his Vineyard, behold, these three years I come
seeking fruit on this fig tree and find none; cut it down why cumbereth it the
ground.

And he answering said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I
shall dig about it, and dung it.

And if it bear fruit, well; and if not, then after, that thou shall cut it
down.


SERMON I.
THE Occasion of this short and pithy Parable, is declared in the beginning of
the Chapter. Our Savior had b^^ (C hap. 12.) Preaching a solemn Sermon in the
Audience of a Multitude; and after it, some of the company make report to him,
of a bloody act of Pilate upon some Galileans: he knowing their hearts, and
perceiving what improvement they made of it, in censure and not in
self-application; reflecting upon themselves as being warned hereby: he
therefore instructs them in the proper use which was to be made of that and
such other Providence as sometimes fall out tacitly reprehending them for rash
Judgment, in concluding those to have been unparalled Sinners: giving them to
understand, that in these ways of Divine Dispensation, The^ Judgments of God
were unsearchable, and his ways past finding out. That, though God sometimes
makes some Sinners notable Examples of his awful Severity, even in this world;
yet there are as bad as they, if not worse, spared in the day of his Patience;
and that therefore the best use the Living can make of such Exemplary
Providence, is to consider themselves, fee how much they deserved it; that it
was mere Sovereignty that made others and not them the Monuments of this
Severity; that this was a loud call to Repentance, and if they did not improve
it to that end, though they did now escape, yet Ruin and Destruction would
ere-long fall upon them: and farther to set forth the great peril they were
under, he ^^^joyns this Parable. It was therefore nextly referred to the
present state of the Jer^^, to show them upon what a precipice they then stood,
and what danger they then lay open to, notwithstanding the present lenity they
were partaker's in. But, because What is written, is written for our
Instruction. There is a profitable Improvement to be made of it by us.

One Desig^ of Christ's Parables is, by clothing Spiritual Things with Earthly
Language, to accommodate them the more to Humane Understandings, and to show
the rationality of them, by resembling them to such things as among men are
accounted highly rational; and so to insinuate into the Affections.

The scope of this Parable is to show what i^ the true and proper standing that
men have in the Visible C hurch, under all the Privileges therein conferred
upon them. Men are apt to mistake themselves in this, and to grow secure, but
Christ would have them to know the thing as it is. The Parable is only
proposed, the Reddition is left to ou^ Meditation, and is easily gathered from
the occasion. The Application is nextly personal; for the design is to express
the state of the Fig Tree, and not of the Vineyard.

The principal heads to which the matter of the Parable may be reduced, are
these:

1. The Subject about which it is spoken; A Fig Tree which a certain man had
planted in his Vineyard, verse 6.

2. The barrenness of this Fig Tree taken notice of particularly by the Owner,
ibid. And he came, etc.

3. The deliberation of the Owner with the Dresser about it, verse7. in which,

1* His Complaint against it; these three years, etc.

2. The Advice he gives to him that Dressed it, C ut it down why cumbereth it
the ground.

4. The Intercession of the Dresser for the fig tree, verse 8, 9.

These may be spoken to in their order; and several weighty and seasonable
Observations may be made upon each of them.

1. The S ubject of which the Parable is spoken: A certain man had a Fig Tree
planted in his Vineyard. The Spiritual meaning of these Parabolical Expressions
is to be enquired after: and here; What is meant by the certain man? What by
the Vineyard? What by the Fig Tree? And what by its being planted in the
Vineyard?

1. By the Certain Man, is certainly intended God, being to deal with men as
men, he resembles himself to a man; and it is not limited to this or that man
in particular, but expressed of any man, under such a respect; to show that it
is of universal consideration; and it is sure, that God not only challenges a
propriety in all the world as his; but more particularly in his Church, as
standing under special relation to him: and therefore,

2. By the Vineyard we are to understand the Visible C hurch. It is not to be
restrained to the Church of Gods Elect, and Effectually Called; for though his
Elect do till Conversion abide unfruitful, yet all his called ones do bring
forth fruit unto him; but here is a Tree in the Vineyard that bears none, and
i^ supposed never so to do: I know Gro^ius, to favor his Arminian notions,
interprets the Vineyard to mean the W orld, and the Fig Tree the Nation of the
Jews; but, though a particular Church, is sometimes resembled by a Plant, as a
Vine, Psalm. 80. and an Olive, Romans 11. and the Members of it to so many
Branches; yet the World is no where, that I know of, called in Scripture Gods
Vineyard, but the Visible Church often, Isa. 5. begin. 27.

3. By the Fig Tree we are to understand particular Professors, that are
related to the Visible Church; for Christ is here speaking to men personally,
upon occasion of those persons who came to such untimely ends: and it is not
unusual in Scripture, to express persons severally under the notion of Plants,
see Psalm. 52. 8.

4. By its being Planted in the Vineyard, we are to conceive, men's enjoying of
the Privileges and Benefits which are in the Visible Church, and Gods singular
care expressed to them, in bestowing of these advantages on them; which, what
they are, may be after considered.

I shall make some glances on this part of the Parable, it being introductory
to the main Design in those things that follow.

And there are two Observations here:

DOCTRINE I. The Visible Church is Gods Vineyard.
The Spirit of God is pleased very often to use this resemblance to express it
by.

The word properly signifies a place where Vines are planted and husbanded: but
in the common usage of it, is extended to a plat for Vines, Figs, and Olives,
all of which they were wont of old to Plant in their Vineyards. Men were used
to have their Vineyards, and so has God His; that is his Visible Church: Here
two things:

1. In what respect it is resembled by a Vineyard?

2. On what account it is said to be God^ Vineyard;

1. In what respect it is resembled by a Vineyard?

A. To distinguish it from the rest of the World; which is therefore compared
to a Wilderness, in Opposition to the Church: and hence all those things
wherein (...) is a difference between those two, and one is rendered in a better
state than the other, are here to be considered: we may in particular referr to
Isa. 5. 1, 2. where we have the principal things taken notice of, Viz.

1. A vineyard is a S elect-Plat of ground taken off from that which is common,
at the Choice of the owner. It is designed for a special use, and therefore the
prudence and pleasure of the Owner is employed in making choice where, and on
what spot he will have it, and by this Choice it is separated from his Other
Land, and devoted to such an use. Thus the Church is a particular Company of
men, taken from the rest of the world, at the pleasure of God, to be to him a
peculiar people. Though he is Lord of all the world yet he has not as yet
pleased to extend the bounds of his Church to all, but it is planted where and
as he sees meet, Christ therefore assigns it to his mere pleasure, Math. 11. 25.

2. Vineyards were wont to be planted on Fruitful Hills; so is the Church of
God, Verse. 1. An Hill for it is Conspicuousness and pleasant S^ituation, being
for delight as well as profit: The Visible Church is to be Visible; they are,
as it were, on an Hill, Mat. 5. 14. they are not to be ashamed of their
Profession, but to own it openly and before men. And a Fertile Place, fit to
produce profit to the Owner, suitable for the growth of Vines, and such Plants
as are to be planted in it. All places in the world, and all persons are in
themselves alike capable of being spiritually fruitful; but where God plants
his Church, he makes such places Fertile; and if there be any place where fruit
is brought forth to his praise, it is there.

3. A Vineyard is wont to be ^^enced in for its preservation, and safety from
damage: The barren Wilderness uses to be left open and common, for all manner
of wild Beasts to range in, and feed upon; but a Vineyard is Fenced, verse 2.
And as a Fence is to divide between that and the other ground, so to be a
security to it, that Beasts may not come in and devour it; because so all the
Industry and Cost of the Owner would be lost, and the Plants exp^^^d to be
trodden down and wasted. Thus has God made a Fence between his visible Church
and the rest of the World; he has set up a Wall or Hedge about it, to keep out
such as are Enemies to him and his people; and carefully preserves is from
mischief: this respects the special Providence of God, or that care which he
takes in looking after it, in being a Wall of Fire round about it.

4. A Vineyard is wont to be planted with Select-Plants. In the Wilderness
Plants grow of themselves; but in a Vineyard none are suffered, but such as are
set by the Keeper at the pleasure of the Owner, and he is wont to make choice
of such as are most likely and promising; and here the skill and choice of the
Husbandman determines. There is a special Providence of God in bringing men
into the visible Church, and giving them a Station there; he takes whom he
will, and leaves whom he will; and usually in the first Plantation of Churches,
there are men eminent and desirable, verse 2. He planted it with the choicest
Vines, Jer. 2. 21. I planted thee a noble Vine.

5. The Husbandman is wont to use greatest care and pains in Manuring of his
Vineyard: and this is expressed, verse 2. He gathered out the S tones, etc. and
there are two things in it; a removing of all impediments, that would hinder
the fertility of it, as throwing out stones, and weeding up such hurtful
Plants, as are apt to spring up, shade the other, and eat out the heart of the
Land; and the applying of all dunging digging and mending to it, that is
accommodable to make it bear. Thus has God been wont in his visible Church, to
give them all helps and advantages in Ordinances and Providence to further and
encourage them in Holiness, and Godly Conversation: there are no prudent
courses omitted or neglected: He therefore calls them to judge in this Affair,
verse 4.

6. Vineyards were wont to have Towers built in them, Verse. 2. They were in
danger of being Robbed, and for that Reason they set a Watch-house in the midst
of them, where they kept some or other to have inspection of the Vineyard, and
secure it from Thieves: This points to Gods special Care of, and Vigilant
Providence over his Church, looking after it, that it be kept from the inroads
of such as would be willing to do mischief in it: thus we have Gods declaring
his care in this respect, Isa. 27. 2. for this cause all such as Devour it, are
said to offend, Jer. 2. 3.

7. They used also to have a Wine Press placed in the Vineyard, Verse. 2. And
the use of it was to Tread the Grapes in, and press out the juice of them, and
so Prepare the Wine to be drunk; for both the Fat and the Press are
Comprehended in this word. This word, [ Winepress] is in Scripture used
Metaphorically for Gods Judgments upon his enemies and the afflictions that he
brings upon his people, and for the sufferings of Christ: Properly it was an
instrument of preparing the fruit for some noble Service; and it notes to us
all the helps which God affords to his People in his Church, for their faithful
serving him, and making their Obedience acceptable to him: and here the
Sufferings of Christ challenge the first place, without which we could not be
accepted; though all other helps to both Faith and Obedience are also
comprehended.

8. Vineyard is planted with a Design of the Owners Profit, All wise Agents
design something in what they do: no man plants a vineyard, but he would eat
and drink of the fruits of it; it is therefore with this expectation that he is
at the cost and labor with it; and so God looked that his Vineyard should
yield grapes, verse 2. This is spoken after the manner of men; God knows what
every one will do: but it is rational to expect in the ordinary course, that a
vineyard, well manured, will answer the Owners design; and why should not the
visible Church do so, in respect of God, who has been at as much expense upon
them?

9. All Plants in a vineyard do not answer the Owners end and expectation.
There are some that bear no fruit at all, others that degenerate, and their
fruit is sower, and not fit for the use for which it was planted; although some
other improvement may possibly he made of it: and all that are in the visible
Church, do not answer the husbandry that has been laid out upon them. As there
are fruitless branches in a vine, so there are fruitless fig trees in a
vineyard, that do just contrary to expectation, verse 2. but this will come in
an after consideration.

2. On what account the visible Church is said to be Gods Vineyard?

A. Not only on a general account, as the whole Creation is called his, but
upon more special and peculiar reasons, it is to be acknowledged for his
propriety, and that more especially.

1. Because he has done all that for it where* by it is made a vineyard, it is
all his doing; he planted, he fenced it, etc. all the cost and labor which
has been laid out upon it is his charge: God tells them that he planted them,
Jer. 2. 21. and whom shall the vineyard call Master, but him who made it so?
all the World lay in common, all mankind were alike by their Apostasy, and God
was under no obligation to them, or necessity lying on him to extend this
favor to any, or to these more than others, to bring them into such an estate
as that, but he, of his good pleasure, because he had a mind to make them his
people, dealt thus with them.

2. Because the visible Church, and they that are in it, are by Profession
devoted to him. There is an outward Sanctification, or Consecration of them to
the Service of God: They do by Covenant, declare that they are none of their
own but his. This properly belongs to the Profession of Christians, and they
that deny it, deny themselves to be such: they say they are Gods propriety, and
have given themselves up to him and his Service. Every time they renew their
Covenant, they anew assert it: this is their plea with God in trouble, Jer. 14.
9. We are called by thy Name.

3. Because he expects more Service and glory from these than from other men,
He will be glorified in all men; but he looks that these should glorify him:
he requires it, waits for it, and will be very angry at them if they do not pay
it him. He reckons that all which he has done for them more than others,
should engage them to love him more than they do, and to endeavor to bring
forth much fruit, whereby he may be glorified, Joh. 15. 8. and if they fall
short here, they frustrate these expectations, i. e. they come behind of what
in reason was to have been expected of them.

4. Because all the profit of the vineyard belongs to him. Who is the Owner but
he who receives the Rent of the vineyard; or he unto whom it is in Justice due?
It is true, God is not profited as to his eternal glory, by the best Services
of any of his Creatures; but his Declarative Glory is in this way advanced, his
Church therefore are peculiarly said to be to him for a name, and for a praise,
Jer. 13. 17.

USE I.
For Information: Learn hence;

1. That God is to be acknowledged in all the benefits which his Church
partakes in. All that they are or have more or better than the World, they owe
it to him. His Vineyard lay open till he fenced it off, and had done so still,
if he had not done it: are any place or people made to enjoy the Gospel and
means of Grace? they are of Gods providing and bestowing; and that these are
preserved to them in despite of all the malice of Satan, and rage of ungodly
men, is because God is concerned for and looks after this Vineyard of his (...)
yea, that there is a visible Church at this day in the World, and it is not
long ago extinct, no thank to the enemy, nor to the people of God themselves,
but to him; they may sing after the Psalmist, Psalm. 124. begin. Had not the
Lord been on our side, etc. nor is it any deserving of theirs, who have often
provoked him to lay them open; but only because they are his, and it has
pleased him to make them his people, 1 Samuel 12. 22.

2. That God is to be seen and adored in all the Tribulations that come upon
his Church at any time. Is it his vineyard? then certainly there can be no
breach made in its hedge, no beast of prey get into it to devour, nor inroads
be made upon it, but by his permission, and overruling Hand; and when it is
so, it is a witness of his displeasure; it faith there is some fault that he
finds with it, that it does not answer his expectation; that its returns have
not been according to the improvement: they are therefore to look beyond
instruments; yea his Church do acknowledge his anger in it, Psalm. 80. 18. and
this tells us what is the duty incumbent on the people of God, when at any time
it is so, viz. to fall down penitently before him, to confess our
unfruitfulness, and beg his mercy, and amendment of us; and in this way to wait
for his return again to his vineyard.

3. How dangerous it is for any to go about to harm the Church. All the damage,
mischief, st^oy that is done to the vineyard falls upon the Owner; he looks
upon himself as touched in it, and thereupon concerned to sue for reparation:
God accounts that they who touch his people, touch the apple of his eye, and
therefore when they suffer, they can plead, it is for thy sake, Psalm. 44. 21.
and thereupon they can argue, arise, plead thine own cause, Psalm. 74. 22. needs
then it must be a daring and dangerous attempt for any to set themselves to
pluck down the hedges, or bark the trees, or hurt the Vines; they resist God,
and who ever resisted him and prospered? and this may help the patience of Gods
people, and tell them what reason there is, why they should quietly and
confidently commit all such things to him, knowing assuredly that he will find
a time to right them, because his own glory is therein concerned.

4. That nothing is to be done in the visible Church without Gods Direction. If
it be his vineyard; of his planting, ordering, disposing, who then shall dare
to alter, or add to his pleasure about it? The Owner indeed may set Watchmen to
guard, and Husbandmen to dress his Vineyard; but they must wait his advise and
order in the management of it: and for them to add, alter, take away, without
consulting him, much more against his direct Command, is audaciousness, and
highly provoking; and if the Church be Gods Vineyard, we are sure that he has
stated it, put all the Plants in their Order and Method; for men then to
displace, bring an Order into his Church, that never entered into his heart, and
remove that which he has established, is high contempt.

USE II.
For Exhortation, these few Lessons may be here Learnt:

1. Are we Gods Vineyard? labor we then to bring forth our fruits unto God. It
is the complaint which he makes of Israel, Hos. 10. I. He is an empty vine, he
brings forth fruit to himself. It is the Apostles demand, 1 C or. 9. 7. Who
planteth a Vineyard, and eats not the fruit? Shall God be at all the Charge
he has laid out upon us, and shall he not have our fruits paid to him? shall
we seek our selves, and our carnal interests, and neglect to glorify God? God
forbid! The great study and care lying upon us is to be always enquiring, how
we may do most for God; how we may so live as he may have honor by us; and
then we live as those that are not our own, but a^^ bought with a price. Then
indeed we answer our end, when we bring honor to him, (...). 43. 21.

2. Let us go to him for all the Manuring that we need at any time. Do we find
Grace at a stay among us, and our fruitfulness impeded? it is his work to purge
us that we may bring forth more fruit, Joh. 15. 2. Do our hearts grow hard? beg
of him to dig them up again and make them mellow: are we barren? seek of him to
mend us: do we find the briars and thorns of carnal lusts growing up, and
beginning to stunt the graces of his Spirit in us? ask him to stub them upon
and let us cheerfully submit to his Husbandry in all these things.

(...) I Let this put us upon it the more to lament the degeneracy of the
visible Church. Is that Gods Vineyard? and is all the rest of the World a
Wilderness? and does that begin to look like a Wilderness too? are there
growing in it, instead of Plants of renown, the degenerate Plants of a strange
vine? does it bring forth instead of grapes, wild G rapes? it should deeply
affect our hearts when we take notice of this, to think, this is God's
Vineyard, and therefore how much of dishonor is there hereby brought to his
Holy Name? these are they from whom alone he expects fruit, and do they answer
his ends so little? let it be for a Lamentation.

4. Let us (...) him, and call earnestly for his help, when at any time the
Church is under Oppression. Who should be acquainted with the damages done to
the Vineyard, but the Owner? and let this be our great encouragement to pray
hard, and to pray believingly in times of Calamity, to consider that we can go
to God and say, thy Church, thy Chosen, thy Beloved are in distress* Thy
Vineyard is laid wa^^s. God has given us this hold of faith to fasten on; and
let us make the best improvement of it in the most cloudy and dark days of
Affliction, because he who has chosen Zion, will not forsake her.

SERMON II
DOCTRINE II. ALL visible Professors are Fig Trees planted in Gods Vineyard.
That Christ designs a particular person in our Text, has been already
observed; and that it is one that is planted in the Vineyard, is in so many
words expressed. That a true Convert, or one that is effectually and savingly
called, cannot be only intended, the whole frame of the Parable confirms. That
it cannot be applicable to any one of the Children of Men in general without
limitation, appears because the Heathen World are without the pale, and are
reckoned in the Scripture, to be in the Wilderness, and afar off: whereas this
must needs denominate some Relation to the Church of God; which can be none but
that of visible Professors.

By these I understand all such as have by an open act of their own,
acknowledged Christ and his ways, and yielded themselves ^o his Government in
his Church; together with their Children: for God always took parents into the
Covenant together with their posterity, as the Scripture fully confirms. Here
we may enquire,

1. On what account they are called Fig Trees?

2. In what sense they are planted in Gods Vineyard?

3. What advantages they do hereby enjoy?

1. On what account they are called Fig Trees?

A. That the people of God are in Scripture, particularly and personally
compared to Trees, is observable: sometimes to the Cedar for its stateliness
and perpetual greenness, P sal. 92. 12. and to the Palm Tree, for its growing
the faster under weight, ibid. and often to Fruit Trees: to the Olive, for its
excellent fruit, and great bearing, Psalm. 52. 8. and to the Fig Tree in our
Text. This is applied to Professors, not for what they always always are, but
for what they ought to be, and they contradict their profession if they are not
so: and what God righteously expects of them, on account of the manuring which
he affords them: and here let these things be observed.

1. The Fig Tree bears good and sweet fruit, thus we read, Judge. 9. 11. it is a
fruit-bearing tree, and its fruit is pleasant and wholesome; it was therefore a
great part of their Food in those Eastern Countries; and God expects of them
that are in his Church, that they should be fruitful; he loves no barren ones
there. Christ cursed the Pig-tree that had no fruit on it; and he expects that
they should bear pleasant fruit, the works of Righteousness, and true Holiness;
such as he himself may take pleasure in, and that may be truly comfortable to
themselves, God therefore commends their Obedience by such an expression, Hos.
9. 10. I saw your Fathers as the first ripe in the Fig Tree, at her first time.
Unfruitful Professors are a disgrace to their Profession; and wicked ones are
worse, who bring forth such fruits as are worse than none.

2. It is a Tree very profitable to the Owner, not only because its fruit is
good, but because it is wont to bring forth in great plenty: the Owner was well
paid for his labor in tilling and tending of it; this is intimated in Prove.
27. 18. who so keeps the Fig Tree, shall eat the fruit thereof; and who
indeed would take pains to cultivate that which will yield him no profit? God
expects that Christians should be profitable in their genera^ion, that they
live to some good purpose. It is true, God is not essentially benefited, by any
thing the Creature can do, all that it has and is, it from him; but there is a
great deal of honor redounds to the Name of God, his declarative Glory is
exalted by the fruitfulness of Christians, John 15. 8. and the contrary is to
his dishonor.

3. The Figtree requires Husbandry to make its fruit pleasant and profitable.
There is vast difference between those that grow wild in the Wilderness, and
such as are planted in a Vineyard, and there cultivated; they are neither so
fruitful, nor are their fruits comparable. Then is the Fig Tree most like to
answer its end, when it is planted in a good Soil, and looked after with
suitable care. God does not expect that from them that are out of the Church,
which he does from these: it is no wonder to see them barren to good works, and
bearing of wild unpleasant fruits, but from these better is looked for; and
indeed there are none that can please God, or know how to serve him acceptably,
but those who are brought under the enjoyment of the means of Grace; hence that
in Acts 17. 30.

4. The Fig Tree puts forth and bears early. As soon as ever the Spring comes,
this is one of the first Trees which by budding and setting, gives evidence to
it: it presently receives the influences of Heaven, and shows it self, Mat. 24.
32. God looks for early fruit of those that are of his visible Church; the
Professors who are born and brought up under the means, should begin betime to
devote themselves to his Service: they should receive impression by all the
influences of the means of Grace. God looks that the Children of the Church
should Serve him from their Childhood.

5. The fruit of the Fig Tree Ripens Gradually.

There are some figs are ripe and it for use before others, and all the time of
Harvo^t, there are some ready for use every day, till the bearing time be over;
hence we read of the First ripe Figs, Hos, 9. 10. Thus God would have
Professors to be bringing forth of their fruits every day, during the whole
season of their serving him, i, e. all their lives long, Psalm, 1, 3. Brings
forth fruit in his season, They should begin, and hold on in the service of
God, be always doing something which may be for his Honor, and the good of
their own Souls, and not be weary of it as long as they live, Psalm. 92. 14. T
hey shall still bring forth fruit in Old Age.

6. The Fig Tree easily parts with its fruits when they are ripe, for the use
of such as come to gather them. A little wind, or an easy shaking of the Tree,
makes them to fall, Nahu^. 3. 12. If they be shaken, they shall fall into the
month of the eater.

Thus should Professors be ready for every good work: they should be ripe and
forward for any thing wherein they may serve God; and profit others: as soon as
the wind blows; the Spirit of God suggests to them, they ought to attend him,
and put forth to acts of piety: when ever they find an occasion of doing any
thing for God, they should not be hard to be brought to do it; but do it with
all forwardness and Cheerfulness of mind.

2. In what sense they are planted in Gods Vineyard?

A. As they stand more nearly related to God in the Gospel Covenant* than
Heathen do. We are here to observe, that besides the Everlasting Covenant which
is Contracted between God and his truly called ones, there is another Covenant
relation between God and Men, which is not Common to all, but restrained to the
Visible Church, and such as are related unto that; he is for that cause said,
To know them above all the Families in the Earth Amos. 3. 2. And this is of a
larger extent then the former, Romans 9. 6. They are not all Israel, which are of
Israel. In that there are only God's chosen ones; in this there are others
besides. The Gospel N et which is ^hrown out, encloseth all sorts of fish in it
good and bad, which must in time be separated. Now these have Titles of
Specialty put upon them, they are called, S aints, Holy Ones, Gods peculiar
people, his husbandry, his building, his Children, etc. But if it be enquired
how they came by this Relation, and upon what bottom it stands, take these
Conclusions.

1. That God has his Elect scattered up and down among others, who must be
brought in to enjoy Salvation. These are, in their Natural State, strangers,
and far from God, but they must be saved: and it is certainly for their sakes
that God ever empaled a vineyard, set up a Church in the World. These lie among
the rubbish, have their dwelling up and down together with the rest of mankind;
but God knows them, will find them out* and provide for their Welfare, it was
for their sakes that Christ sanctified himself, John 17. 18.

2. That the Gospel is the great Instrument of Gods Appointment for Conversion.
Not that his power is limited or stinted to th^^ way in it self, but because he
has chosen it, as that which his Infinite Wisdom has thought most convenient,
and accommodable to his design: this therefore is said to be the power of God
unto Salvation, Romans 1. 16. and they that are without are declared to ^e
without hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. In the Gospel-way, God treats men according to their
own nature, by making offers, and discovering to them the way of life, and so
convincing and persuading them as reasonable Creatures: and in it are all those
discoveries made, which point men how they may be saved, and sent to quicken
and encourage them to attend upon the same.

3. That Gods Providence orders it that this Gospel shall be Preached there
where his Elect are seated. If he has any of his Chosen in such a place, he
takes care that the means of Salvation shall be brought unto them, because this
is the way that he has designed their Salvation by. That the spreading of the
Gospel in the world, and its coming to one place, and not to another, is under
the peculiar conduct of Gods Sovereignty, is clear from Scripture, see Acts 16.
6, 7. Now, because his Elect must be called, in order to their being saved, and
the Gospel is the ordinary Medium of Conversion, he having put this honor upon
it; he therefore Commissions it unto them, and his overruling hand causes
them to enjoy it*

4. That the Gospel, when it comes, is not Preached to these only, but to many
others. God is pleased to make use of the Ministry of men, in the dispensation
of his Gospel; and he does not tell them, (how then should they know?) who in
particular belong to the Election of his Grace; but he has bidden them to
Preach it to every Creature, Mark 16. 15. They are to cast their Net into the
Sea, and take whom they can catch, to offer Christ and Life by him, unto all,
to invite every one that hears them to come to him for life: the offers are to
be general, Isai. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 17.

5. The Gospel offers a Conditional Covenant to men. In all Treaties and
Transactions between God and Men, Prec^pts and Privileges are put together,
and there is a close connection made between them, there is a certain dependence
of the one upon the other, Mark 16. 16. God reveals a new Covenant in the
Gospel to men, he opens to them the terms of it, and requires that if they will
be related to him in it, they must put themselves under these conditions: and
in the visible Covenant, he accepts men on such conditions: they promise so to
do, and he promises that if they fulfill according to their engagement, he
will do so for them.

6. Hence men, by openly owning and submitting to Gospel Terms, bring
themselves under this Conditional Covenant. It is a grand mistake to think,
that there are none in Covenant with God, but those who are absolutely under
the Promise of Salvation: the very notion of a Covenant implies a dependent
Condition, to which the Privileges of it referr. The Visible Covenant then,
thus stands: God offers Christ, and Salvation by him, in the Gospel, tells men,
if they believe and repent they shall be Saved; presents the Gospel Ordinances
as means to work Faith and Repentance in them, and so bring them to Salvation:
they accept of the offer professedly, submit to the terms, and now they are
taken under the Covenant, and must stand or fall to the Conditions of it: when
they have thus done, they are said to be in God's Vineyard; and on this very
account it is, that a People in the Visible Covenant, have so many warnings,
and cautions given them, as, Psalm 50, Romans 8. 13. Heb. 12. 24.

3. What advantages do they hereby enjoy?

A. I may say with the Apostle in, Romans 3. 2. Much every way. Here let it be by
way of caution observed, that this state of professors, does not secure unto
them Eternal Life, because herein they do stand probationers for it, and may,
through their own Default, come short of it at last. But yet there are many
Privileges which such are made Partakers in, above these who are not in the
Vineyard; in particular.

1. They have the way to eternal life revealed to them, whilst others dwell in
Darkness and the Regions of the shadow of Death. These live in the Light of the
Gospel, and this is to be looked upon as a great Privileges, hence that, Math.
4. 15. 16. And it must needs be so, because they are thus brought nearer to
Salvation than the other, there is now hope Concerning them, whereas the other
are declared to be without hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. Salvation depends upon Revelation,
and God never uses to send his Gospel, but there where he has this life to
dispense: now it is to them that these Oracles are committed To. 3 2. And these
Oracles point men how they may obtain Salvation, it is therefore called the
Gospel of peace and salvation.

2. They have the offers of Eternal Life made to them. Wherever the Gospel is
enjoyed, there are made to men the Tenders of Salvation: They are not only told
that there is such a thing, but they are invited to accept of it, they are
called upon and counseled not to reject it: they to whom this Embassy is
committed, are to pray men to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5. 20. This the
Heathen live without; God does not so much as vouchsafe to ask them if they are
willing to have Christ and life by him: they are his enemies, and there is no
Herald sent to them to proclaim peace among them: but Christ pleads with those
that are in the Church, and complains of an affront given him, if they refuse,
Joh. 1. 40.

Nay* they have the Promise of Salvation made to them on C ondition: therefore
are the Promises said to be theirs, Romans 9. 4. for by having the Covenant, they
must have the Promise too, because it is Essential to it, and there cannot be a
C ovenant without it. It is true, it must be understood ^s a Covenant-Promise,
or else it is mistaken; so that none may arrogate it to themselves, but
according to the tenor of the Covenant to which it belongs, and this is a
great benefit, and belongs not to others, they are strangers from the Covenants
of Promise, Ephesians. 2. 12. God does not say to them, and engage that if they
believe they shall be saved; there is no such treaty passes between them.

4. Yea they have the means of Salvation, both outward and inward: and hereby
they are in the fairer probability of obtaining it. It is the privilege of a
tree that is designedly planted in a Vineyard, to have the Husbandry thereof
bestowed upon it, in order to its being a good tree. Thus they who are in the
Visible Church are under all means for their spiritual profit, none of which
Heathen enjoy: they have the outward dispensation of the Ordinances, and the
inward strivings of the Spirit of God; they have line upon line, etc. and all
the mercies and afflictions that befall them, are under the like dispensation,
made serviceable to the treaty of the Gospel, to persuade them to accept of and
embrace the Salvation offered.

5. They have the Seal of the promise afforded to them. Baptism, as light as
some make of it, is as a sign of Gods Grace, so a seal of the Gospel Covenant;
and is not only an honorary put upon such as enjoy it, declaring them to belong
to God in Covenant and putting his Name upon them; but it is also a
Confirmation of the Promise, and it says this for God, to all such as he
appoints it unto, that he will certainly and without fail be as good as his
word, to put it out of doubt that if They believe they shall be Saved.

6 They enjoy the outward special favors of God in Communion with his Church.
God has a special care for his Church, there is a singular protection that he
affords to it, and these have rich benefits by being of it. Every plant that is
set in the vineyard, has the privilege of the sense and the Tower: and,
although particular degenerate professors sometimes feel special Judgments upon
them, as there will be occasion to observe afterward; yet how long do men that
have no saving grace enjoy much by being of the visible Church? Cham escaped the
universal deluge, by being of Noah's family; and to be sure, whilst they carry
it soberly and Religiously, God is wont to protect them with the rest of his
people.

7. They leave the entail of these blessings to their posterity. God is wont to
receive parents with their children into his Covenant, and the promise runs
down to Generations: and where God has given saving grace to Parents, they
count it an high favor of God to them, that if their Children die in infancy,
they have the Covenant to comfort themselves in concerning them; if they
outlive them, though the Times are evil and threatening, yet they shall leave
them plants in the Vineyard, under the Covenant protection of God, and the
visible Heirs of all the means of Salvation.

USE 1.
For Information: Learn hence,

1. How injurious they are to these, who deny them a room in Gods Vineyard, who
disown and reject them from having any relation to the visible Church of
Christ; who reckon them among those that are without; and consequently debar
them of, and thrust them from these privileges; such there be, but what wrong
they do to these, nay how much they set themselves against Christ, is easy to
observe; are we wiser than he? or shall we dare to control him? shall he say, I
have planted these in my Vineyard, and shall we say they are in the Wilderness?
A great reason why many do thus, arises from their mistaking and misapplying
the word [ Church] and want of distinguishing between the Church of the
firstborn, and the visible Church, and the privileges which are peculiar, and
those that are common: Church, is sometimes taken for the Called and Converted,
every visible professor is not of this, Rom 9 6. all are not Israel, that are
of Israel. Sometimes for all such as are externally in Covenant with God, and
so it includes them, Psalm. 50. 5. There are some benefits that none do actually
partake in but the Converted, and these are the more inward saving benefits of
Christ, which are applied to them, and only offered to others. There are other
privileges are common, being given to the Church visible, and serviceable to
Conversion, as well as to Edification; and these have all visible Professors a
share in:

It is true, there are some of those, that every Professor may not ipso facto
partake in, there being qualifications requisite, by Christ's Appointment, to
fit them for them; yet all that are so visibly qualified, are not of the
invisible Church; and the other privileges are to fit, them hereto: and a
plant may be in the Nursery, though it be not as yet fit to set out; yet it is
so in the vineyard, and has both its Fence and Tillage belonging to it. It is
an awk-way to bring Souls to Christ, by disinteresting them in the
Covenant-hopes, which are their great encouragements, and they of old, thought
it was as good as saying, go serve other Gods, Josh. 22. 24, 25.

2. Are visible Professors fig trees? then what do briars and thorns in Gods
Vineyard? it speaks terror to all such as prove themselves so. How amazing a
thing will it be, when God comes to look into his visible Church, and instead
of finding them there to be fruit-bearing Trees, and such as answer the end of
their being there, he shall observe that it abounds with cursed Plants that are
appointed for burning? when he shall say, I planted thee a Fig Tree, how comes
it to pass that thou art degenerated into a bramble? will they not then be
speechless, like him that was found at the Supper, without a Wedding Garment?
let no such then be proud or boast of their Station; whatever their privilege
be, I am sure the danger is greater, and they shall find it, when he shall come
to take out of his Kingdom whatsoever does offend; when the Tares shall be
separated from the Wheat: and mean while the place they are in, exposes them
to be the sooner rooted out of the world, as will afterward be made evident.

3. Are visible Professors planted by Gods own order in his visible Church?
then certainly God looks for more from them than others. All privileges have
duties annexed to them; and every Tal^ent that any have received must be
accounted for. The Husbandman expects that his Vines and Trees that are under
his careful tilth, should g^ow faster, and bear better and more fruit than such
as are in the open field, neglected: and let me assure you that are Children of
godly Parents, that have partaken in the Seal of the Gospel Covenant, that have
acknowledged your selves to be of Gods People, openly owned his Covenant,
submitted to his Government, and promised Obedience to him; that you ought not
to live as others do, in the vanity of their minds; that you are not called to
uncleanness, but to Holiness, and if you resolve to do as others do, and live
as others live, you will greatly provoke the Holy God to jealousy against you.

USE II.
For Exhortation: And it may be directed,

1. To all visible Professors; let the consideration of this truth teach you,

1. A Lesson of Thankfulness to God for this great favor and dignity that he
has advanced you to. Think what a favor it is, and how much you are
privileged by it, think how it is with the Heathen World, who are without God,
without Christ, etc. and how comes it that you are not so? what are you by
nature better than they? whence came this but from the mere good pleasure of
God? it was only because it so seemed good to him to make you thus to differ?
Is there any distinguishing mercy in having the Oracles of God, the hopes of
Salvation, and all encouragements to further you in the pursuit of it? let him
have the praise of it?

2. To endeavor after fruitfulness: to bear much, and to bear good and sweet
fruit. Are you in the Vineyard? bear then: are you fig trees there? then bear
figs. Let your fruit prove that you are indeed Trees of Righteousness, such as
may be a credit to the Vineyard wherein you grow; and let this consideration be
a quickening motive to you to be more diligent in these endeavors; say, what
shall I render to the Lord for all these benefits to me? and the answer will
be, glorify God: and Christ tells you how that is to be done, Joh. 15. 8. often
rouse up yout backward Souls with such a thought; what do I do in the vineyard?
what have I all this price in my hands for? what will God say of me, if I
should prove unprofitable in my generation? will not the ground that I grow in,
and all this husbandry that is laid out upon me, rise up in the Judgment
against me, if for all I should prove barren?

2. To Children and young ones in particular; are you Gods fig trees? do then
as the figtree does: labor to put forth betimes, and to bear early fruit: is
it not springtime with you through Gods mercy? have you not all the means and
advantages of being good betimes? and let me assure you Children, that God
thinks it long before you set your selves to seek and serve him: and Oh how
acceptable would it be to him to see you make haste and not delay to devote
your selves to him, by forsaking of youthful lusts, and dedicating your
blooming years to him. How pleasant would it be to see little fig trees
bringing forth, and their branches laden with figs? might there be more of this
to be observed, it would be the most joyful token that can be, that God will
not forsake his little Vineyard in this Land.

SERMON III
And he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none.
WE have been considering of the Subject of the Parable; That which follows to
be observed is,

II. The barrenness of the Fig Tree taken notice of by the Owner; and here are
two things to be observed.

1. The Husbandmans peculiar inspection which he had upon this plant, He came
and sought fruit thereon. [He came,] i. e. to this particular Tree. Motion is
attributed to God after the manner of men, for he is every where by his
Infinite Omnipresence; but it intimates a peculiar observation, [ seeking] this
world is also accommodated to humane Understanding; seeking, properly implies
an enquiring after something that one is at a loss about; but God knows what
every one is, and will do: but it intends both a curious inspection and a
rational expectation. The word is sometimes used for earnest desiring, yea
importunately requiring a thing (...) God requires it, and well may he observe
whether they do answer this injunction of his. [ Fruit thereon,] Fig Trees are
planted for bearing, and visible Professors are put into the Church that they
may have opportunity for serving God: and well may it be expected that every
thing should answer its end.

2. The Husbandmans disappointment, or missing of his expectation; he found
none. Notwithstanding his best care in seeking, he could not find one fig upon
the tree; and this inferrs, that there was none, for if there had been any, be
would have discovered it: God to be sure, who is Omniscient, cannot but see and
know whether there be any thing done by the Professor that is truly good.

There are three Observations which we may gather, and briefly improve from
this passage.

DOCTRINE I. God expects that every one that is planted in his Vineyard should
bring forth fruits answerable to this Planting.
And this is a rational expectation. What Husbandman that sees a fruit-tree in
his Enclosure, would expect otherwise?

In clearing up this Doctrine, three things may be enquired into.

1. What fruit is it that God expects?

2. In what respect he may be said thus to expect it?

3. What reason there is why he may justly so expect?

1. What fruit it is that God expects?

A. Not any fruit of what kind soever; for if so, then God would never miss of
his expectation. All men are doing something o^ other; every man has his works
which he must be called to an account for, be judged by, and receive a
recompense accordingly, 2 C or. 5. 10. there are the fruits of the flesh, as
well as of the spirit; but there are some fruits that are reckoned as worse
than none, and let men have never so many of them, they are for all accounted
barren, Hos. ^0. 1. every man looks that his Trees should bear, according to
the kind they were planted for, and had a resemblance of: they do not go about
to gather figs of Thistles; but they promise themselves, that if they be
fig trees, they will surely bear figs, and good ones too; if therefore the Vine
bear grapes, yet if they prove wild and sower, they are as bad as none, Isa. 5.
2. They that are placed in the visible Church are fig trees, they seem at least
to be so, they bear such leaves upon them; not that God can be deceived in any,
he knows what they are indeed, but by their outward profession they declare
themselves to be such: they say they are Gods people, called by his name,
devoted to his service; they are visibly plants of Righteousness. The fruits
then which God expects of such are the fruits of righteousness; that they
should live a life of faith which works by love; that they should serve and
obey him in all things, should walk in an holy conformity to his revealed will,
should do the works of God; live answerably to the teachings of the grace which
has appeared to them, Tit. 2. 11, 12. In sum, that they walk in conformity
to the Rules of Gods Word, frame their lives in all things according to it:
these are fruits pleasing to him, and such as become his Vineyard, and those
wherein you may show forth his praise.

2. On what account he may be said thus to expect it?

A. Though God condescends to speak to us in our language, yet it becomes us
always to interpret him so as is becoming his Sacred Majesty. All things
therefore that imply any infirmity in men, are to be removed from our thoughts
in our interpretation of him, in what he declares to us. Here then let us
observe that when men are said to expect a thing, it implies, 1. That they are
at some loss about it before hand. 2. That they entertain it in an hope. 3.
That this hope depends upon probabilites that may be frustrated and so they may
miss. We are not to suppose any such thing concerning the great God, for, what
he desires, he does: he knows all things a forehand, for they depend upon his
All Efficiency, he cannot therefore be disappointed, or lose his hope. This
expectation therefore is not to be attributed to him in respect of his secret
will, decrees, or purposes; as if he had left any of them dubious or uncertain,
or depending on the creature, on which he must wait before he can determine
what will be, this is altogether incompatible to the Divine nature: But it must
be interpreted of his revealed will, in respect of the transactions that have
past between God and his People: for, as he treats with them as men, so he is
said to look for this or that from them, after the manner of men. It notes the
connection between the end and the ^utableness of the means for the advancing of
the end; here then observe in particular.

1. That there is some worthy end of God^ planting a Church in the World. God^
Works are all done in Wisdom: nor Wisdom always proposes to it self a worthy
end in all that it does. God does nothing in vain. There is a great deal of
Gods care, and singular Providence discovers it self in and about the affairs
of his Church; in the raising up of Instruments, and sending them forth into
the world, with a Commission to gather men out of it into his Vineyard; ^n
giving them his Gospel and Ordinances; in making of his Covenant known to them
there is something peculiar which God does to and for these, from what he does
for other men, he has not dealt so by all nations. There must therefore be
some peculiar and eminent design in it, or otherwise he would not have thus
done: and it is worthy our enquiry after, that so we may be able to give him
the honor that is due to him for it.

2. We are to distinguish between the end of the purpose and of the precept. If
we speak of Gods purposes, he knows all his works concerning them, before the
foundation of the World, and here he can never be at a loss or disappointed:
but that is secret to us, and therefore belongs not to our curious search,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. But then the precept of God is that in which he is pleased to
reveal himself to us, and shows us what is his will concerning our Duty, or
what he has seen meet to make a duty incumbent upon us; now in the preceptive
discovery of Gods Will to his people, he has told them what it is they ought
to propose to themselves as their end, and what are the means which they are to
make use of in order to their obtaining it; and this is that which we call man's
end, because he is commanded to seek it, and Gods end too, because he has
enjoined men to seek it, and which he intends also to bring about in all these
whom he has ordained to eternal life, Joh. 28. 28.

3. That the end which every one in the visible Church is called and pointed
to, is to bear fruit. It is true, God has a purpose of his own concerning
them, which shall never be frustrate, he will have his honor by them, whether
they fructify or no; which way soever it falls, he will have his glory, Paul is
a sweet savor of God, in them that are saved, and i^ them that perish. But
this is that which God enjoins them all in: this is his positive command, which
he has laid upon every one that are taken so near unto him: that they do serve
and obey him, Isa. 43. 2. This people have I formed for my self, they shall
show forth my praise. God requires this of every one, and what men require,
they are wont to expect: for, because all men owe Obedience to all the commands
of God, and his people are under peculiar, as well as general obligations
hereunto, who that is so related would not look that such should obey him? for
men then to fail in this respect, is to come short of their end; and God
complains as if he had done for them in vain, Jer. 2. 30.

4. That all the means that are used with them look directly this way. We are
wont to judge of men's designs, by their actions; and by their designs we
rationally judge of their expectations; for all men have a secret hope that
their designs will succeed, else they would not be at cost to promove them. Now
he that shall but rightly consider the nature and tendency of all that is done
by God to and for his visible Church, and every one in it, must needs say that
all has a direct and proper reference to their bearing the fruits of Holiness:
for what else does the Gospel Covenant oblige men to, but to glorify God? and
that is by a rightly ordered Conversation; what else do all the Gospel commands
serve to, but to show man the way ho^ he is thus to do? what are all the
promises for, but to give them all encouragment needful, to excite and engage
them hereunto? and what is the aspect of all the threatenings, but to awaken
them, and make them careful of their duty, and afraid to neglect it; and what
are all the afflictive providence they meet with for, but to purge them that
they may bear more fruit?

5. Hence God may truly be said on this account to expect it. Who would not be
obeyed in his just commands? and there are two things which among men, are wont
eventually to discover to us what they expected, and both these may be
attributed to God, according to scripture.

1. They are wont to be pleased when their expectations are answered; it gives
them a great deal of satisfaction, and we shall find that God is well pleased
with the obedience of his People, Heb. 13 16. with such Sacrifices God is well
pleased. He is therefore said to smell a savor of rest in such things: if Abel
offers his firstlings and the fat, God has a respect to him, see Heb. 11. 5.
he will therefore say to them that husband their Talents profitably, well done
good and faithful servant: and he has gracious rewards to bestow upon such,
wherein he testifies how grateful they are to him.

2. They are wont to be displeased, if they miss of their expectation, they
take it ill, and it is a matter of trouble to them; and the reason is, because,
they promised ^^^^selves the contrary. Now God in his Word ^ear^ witness to his
great displeasure at all such as are in his Church, who do not bear fruit* so
he did at this fig tree: verse 7. (...) which kindles his anger against his
people, and is the occasion of all the Judgments that are brought upon them:
when therefore the Scripture gives us an account of the many fearful Calamities
wh^^^ God made his people to undergo, this (...) made the procuring cause of
them; they did not obey him, but they sinned against (...) and all this
intimates that which unto men would amount to a seeking or expecting of fruit
from such as these are*

3. What reason there is why he may justly so expect?

A. If their be any reason for an husbandman to expect fruit, of a tree that he
has laid out cost and care upon, then well may God look for it of those that
are planted in his visible Church, for there is nothing wanting there as to
means for their help hereunto* therefore we have the demand, Isai, 5. 4. What
could I have done more? this will appear if we consider.

1. They have sufficient Conviction afforded them of the unreasonableness of
Disobedience, and reasonableness of Obedience. In the Word and Ordinances these
discoveries (...) ^^entifully made to them, in which the nature, and evil
fruits of sin are plainly see before them, the beauty of Holiness, and
rationality as well as profitableness of the Service of God is made clear by
several Demonstrations: They are but poor, dark and glimmering notions of these
things that the Heathen discover, by the best improvement of the light of
nature; but in the visible Church, these things are from time to time
exhibited, and the undeniableness of these truths made to appear.

2. They have here also sufficient direction afforded them, to point out the
way to them, in which they may serve God, and bear the fruits of obedience,
Mic. 6. 8. he has showed thee the way O Man! the world are unacquainted with
this, the way of natural obedience is but (...) to them, but that of Gospel
obedience is altogether hidden from them* To. 3.17. the way of peace have they
not known. But these have such discoveries, Psalm. 147. 16. he she^eth his word
unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments unto Israel. The Object of their
obedience, viz: God in Christ, is here made known in his Glorious excellencies
and perfections; the way how fallen man may serve God acceptably, i. e, by
Faith in Christ, and grace derived from him, is here declared: the Duties in
which he is thus to be obeyed, and the sins that are to be avoided, are here
deciphered, and from time to time explained unto (...).

3. They have plentiful warnings against sin, and encouragements to obedience
laid before them. God here tells them the danger of the one, and the great
benefit that shall accrue to them by the other; the threatenings and the
promises do fully exhibit these things: the death and destruction that by
living in sin they shall bring themselves to; the life and glory that is to be
enjoyed in fearing and serving God are urged upon them. God is often saying to
them, as Romans 8. 13. if ye live after the flesh ye shall die, etc. In the Law is
discovered the wrath of God against all Unrighteousness; in the Gospel, the
great salvation purchased by Christ, and applied to them that believe in him
and serve him, is made known.

4. All needful help is offered them, to enable them thus to serve God, and
bring forth fruits to his praise. Man indeed is in himself without strength, he
cannot serve God, his Moral Powers are enervated, and altogether disabled by
Original sin: but this is no excuse to him, because God has told him where his
help is, Hos. 13. 9. and he has promised his spirit to them that ask him yea
and bids them to ask him; nay the spirit himself offers his help to them, and
is grieved that they refuse him, and quench his motions in them, he is ready to
relieve their infirmities, to supply the^ with a new principle of Grace, and
str^^^h, and continued influence to help them to be fruitful.

5. All proper pains and endeavors are used with them, to bring them to bear
fruit to God. They are Gods Husbandry, I Cor. 3. 9 they have li^e upon ^ine,
etc. they have the dews and showers of Ordinances falling upon them
continually, counsels, reproofs, warnings, inward motions and stirrings of the
spirit in and with the outward dispensation of the Ordinances; many mercies to
allure them to Obedience, and seasonable afflictions to reclaim them from sin,
and quicken them to Holiness, to wea^ them from the World, and prompt them to
mind the things of highest concernment for their Souls.

6. All this is afforded to reasonable Creatures. Men that are able in other
things to consult, advise, and determine, according to the rules of discretion;
and why should they not so do in these too, which are set before them with as
clear Demonstration, and urged with greatest seriousness and solemnity, who can
^ell? and when we have put all things together, what can be said against it,
why God may not in all reason expect, that those who are thus advantaged above
others, should, do more than others, and make their profiting known to all men
by their fruits?

USE I.
For Information, in three particulars,

1. Dear^ hence, That Church Membership is not only a title of dignity, but
also an obligation to Services It is true indeed, it is an honorable thing, a
mighty stoop of God to sinful men, that he will take them so near to himself;
that he is pleased to make them his Vineyard; to put his name upon them, and
prefer them before the world, and it ought to be acknowledged to him: but for
men, (...) too many do, to pride themselves in this, and place their whole
confidence in it, without regarding how they use it, or what improvement they
make of it; to (...), The Temple of the Lord, and not regard how they live to
his dishonor, is directly contrary to the design, and will make all their
boastings to be vain. When God had (...) for his vineyard, he looked for
grapes, Isa. 5. 2. he did not plant it for a show, but for service, and all he
does for it, is to engage his people in it: Oh that this were more thought of?

2. Hence how inexcusable will they be another day, who have had a place in
Gods Church, and ye bear no fruit there? does God expect it? and has he so
much reason to look for it? and do they do what in them lies to cross his
expectations in it, and so disappoint him? as we may speak after the manner of
men; surely this will not be to their comfort, but their shame and ^orrow in
the day of reckoning, and let all that are in the visible Church think of it;
assure your selves that there i^ a time of harvest coming, when every. Tree
will be looked after, and the fruits will be proved what they are: no fruits,
and bad fruits will be condemned: and when God shall plead with you and say, I
did this and that for you, I laid out all this care and cost upon you; why then
is it that you have not served me? how comes it to pass that all this pains is
in vain? will you not then be speechless?

3. We here see the reason of Gods Judgments upon a visible Church, when they
do not bear fruit, when they grow to degeneracy, and fall under notorious
decays; when the fruits of righteousness grow thin among them; when Iniquity
begins to abound, and the first love is fallen from, and the first works are
neglected. If we search the records of the Word of God, and enquire how it came
to pass, that a people taken so near to God as his ancient people were, felt so
much of the smart of Judgments, why the Hedges were broken down, and the Wild
Bore of the Wilderness let in, etc. if we ask what occasioned these threatenings
against Ephesus, Sardis, La^dicea, Rev. 2. 3. here it issues, and how loud does
this speak to us in such a day of Gods anger as this is, to search and try our
ways, to see if we have not thus gone to decay?

USE II.
For Exhortation: Let this then be a loud call to every one in the vineyard to
be fruitful. Does God expect this of you? be advised then to answer his
expectation, let not this Husbandman lose his labor and cost; and for motive,
consider,

1. God will certainly be angry with you, if you do not thus do. It will be a
very great provocation to him; it will put him upon thinking what to do with
you; he will be weary of his vineyard. Should the Husbandman lose his cost and
labor, plant vines and they bear nothing, set fig trees, and they bring forth
unpleasant fruits; and after many essays to make it serviceable, it rather
grows worse, will he not be provoked to throw it up? and so God threatens. Isa.
5. 4. there is not a readier way to bring ruin God is not so engaged as not to
do it, what says he to Jerusalem? Jer. 22. 6. sur^^ (...) will make thee a
Wilderness, and Cities not Inhabited.

2. God will be no loser by you. It is n^^, with him, as it is with men; if
they are frustrated of their hopes, they lose all their expense; but God will
not, for he needs not so to do: If the plants in his vineyard will not serve
for fruit, they will do for burning, and therein also will he be glorified, and
by so much as these have had more cost and pains laid out upon them, by so much
more will the Justice of God shine forth in his Righteous Revenge, when his
wrath shall burn upon them in proportion to the expense which he has ^a^d out
for them: it is not he therefore but you that will be sufferers, Paul is a
sweet savor of God, and^ 2. Cor. 2. 15. 16:

3. Your fruitfulness will be your profit, it will turn to your account; God is
not advantaged in himself by your righteousness, Job 35. 6. if thou be
righteous, what profitest thou him? if you are wise, it will be for your
selves: the fruits of Holiness, which Gods People bring forth in this life, are
the seeds of Glory; there is a great recompense of reward that God has
provided to bestow upon such: Gods Name indeed has the honor of it, and he
deserves it; but the profit returns into the bosom of his people, the more
fruit you yield the more store is laid up for you in heaven, and you shall have
the comfort of it, when you rest from your labors, and your works shall follow
you.

4. How unreasonable is it that you should not serve and glorify God in your
lives? does not every thing he does for you bespeak it? is it not the voice of
all the privileges, of all the means that you enjoy? does not every counsel,
warning, promise call for it? every mercy invite you to it? every affliction
call upon and tell you that God expects it?

5. If you bear no fruit, you will have no plea for it that will stand you
instead, when God shall come to reckon up all his layings out upon you, all the
advantages which a day of grace has afforded you, your mouths will then be
stopped, and you will be filled with amazement. Be then advised, and to that end.

1. Avoid all impediments or hindrances. There are many which offer themselves,
from Satan, from the world, from your own hearts; as will be more particularly
i^^^nced hereafter; if you nourish these, they wi^^ prevent your bearing fruit
to God, it therefore concerns you to oppose them, and to be careful not to
expose your selves to them.

2. Improve all the advantages that are offered to you in Gods Vineyard. There
are many and great, as we have observed; but it is not enjoyment but
improvement that makes them serviceable unto us use the price that is in your
hands, work whilst the day lasts, set your selves to seek and serve God: this
is the way to be Plants of renown, and accepted of him.

SERMON IV.
DOCTRINE II. God does particularly and curiously look after every one that
lives under the means of grace, to see whether they bear fruit accordingly.
H E not only looks after the places in general where his Gospel is enjoyed,
and he has a visible Church, with a more critical eye than he does other
places; but this Observation, and exact inspection of his extends to every
individual there: he so looks after every one, as if there were but that one
and no more to set his observation upon. God is here compared to a curious and
provident Husbandman, who, having a vineyard, is often in it, and walks from
tree to tree at every season, and takes a full view of each, to see how it
sprouts, buds, blossoms, sets for fruit, etc. not omitting of one.

Here three things may be enquired after, 1. What is this curious observation
of God? 2. How it appears that he does this by every individual? 3. Why he so
does?


1. What is this curious observation which God makes?

A. We may come at something of this in the following Conclusions.

1. That there is an essential Omnipresence of God with all his creatures: This
is one of the Divine Attributes or perfections which belong to God; it belongs
to his prerogative, and is fully and frequently ascribed to him in the
Scripture: Because he is an Infinite, Immense and Uncomprehended Being, he must
needs therefore be every where: because place cannot contain him, he must of
necessity contain all place: hence that, I Kings 8. 27. behold, the Heaven, and
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee; the Heaven of Heavens, is the third
Heaven, which is the utmost limit of place, and there is none beyond it: hence
there is no getting away from him, or absconding ourselves any where, where he
is not, Psalm, 139. 7, etc.

2. Hence it follows that he must certainly be Omniscient. If he be every
where, he must needs know every thing. Not only does God assume this Atribute
to himself, but it also is necessarily inferred from his Omnipresence. We are
to conceive of God under the Notion of an Intelligent Being; knowledge is
therefore ascribed to him; and that not in the concrete only but in the
abstract, without an Hyperbole, Prove. 8. 14. I am Understanding, wheresoever
then God is, he is there by his knowledge: his knowledge is his Being, and must
be Inseparable from it; and, because his perfections are himself, and he is an
undivided Being, where he is, there he is in all his Attributes; although he
makes the manifestations of them to the Creatures according to his Pleasure.

3. This Omniscience of God must needs comprize in it a distinct knowledge of
all Creatures in particular, a^^ all their action. Universal Understanding
cannot be Confined merely to Universals or to Generals, but it must reach to
individuals; and that not merely as to their beings or natures, but their
actions too; none of these must be hid from him; nay it says that he minds,
regards, takes particular notice of them; he is for this reason said to count
them, Job. 31. 4. and, to be acquainted (...), Psalm. 139. 13 And this knowledge
is extended to the most secret things, even the Hearts of men, which are very
deep; the thoughts which others can hardly guess at; we are then assured that
there is no hiding of Counsel from him. God is all Eye, and that eye is fixed
upon all things, and therefore is said to behold them, and look upon them Psalm.
33. 13. 14.

4. Hence God cannot, in propriety of speech, be said ^o know one thing more
than another; or to observe one thing more intensly than another: if we
consider this observation as it is in God, it cannot be more or less, intended
or remitted; for God does all things like himself, he is the same God; he
cannot know or see one thing more distinctly or clearly than another; all
things come equally under his cognizance; he is no more intimately acquainted
with the things in heaven, than with those in hell; his actual knowledge of all
must be infinite, and in that which is infinite, there are no degrees: All
Beings are comprehended in him, Acts 17. 28. and therefore intimate
acquaintance with them all belongs to him; yea and all Beings are to be
improved by him for his glory; he must therefore know them thoroughly, and all
their motions, that so he may not miss of his glory by them.

5. There are yet some persons and things in which God will have more of his
declarative glory to shine forth than in others: it is Gods declarative glory
which is his last end (...) all his works; and he will be glorified in them
all; yet not in all alike: some things he will be more seen in than others; he
has not put into all things a like capacity of representing his perfections:
he has not laid out so much upon some as he has done upon others; and
therefore he does not look for so much from those as from these: he has given
to some creatures a more excellent being, and endued them with more noble
Faculties, and they have larger capacities, Job. 35. 9, 10. he providentially
bestows more advantages and helps on some than he does upon others; and he will
be no loser by any thing that he does, he will either receive, or recover more
from them, Luke 12. 48.

6. This glory of his is most of all concerned in his (Vineyard) or, Church:
there is a glory which he will have by irrational creatures, his works shall
praise him; but there is a special glory that he will have by men; hence there
are the great Attributes of his Justice and Grace are concerned about them, and
must be made to shine out in them; but among men, there are some whom he has a
more special respect to: all are under the conduct of special Government, and
to be led to be everlasting monuments of his glory: but he has a peculiar
people among these, a selected number* gathered out of these, whom he has done
more for, and expects more from, and will have (...) honor in and by the
result, and these are his Church: here he most of all manifests himself, and
they are to be molded into a Church to show forth his glory, Isa. 43. 21.

7. Hence he is said, after the manner of men, to have a special inspection
over these: because he lays out more upon them, and expects more from them; he
is therefore said to look more peculiarly after them: as one which has a plat
of ground planted with choice plants; and on which he lays out more than
ordinary cost, will he not expect more from it, and be more curious in
observing of it, and all the plants there growing; and takes but little care of
the rest of his ground in comparison of what he does for this; God is therefore
said to know them after a peculiar manner, Amos 3. 2. is said to wink at the
other, to suffer them to go on in their ways, as if he were careless or not
concerned about them; but for his vineyard, to be looking there for grapes, to
be visiting it, and coming again and again to it.

2. How it appears that he does thus by every individual?

A. Besides the consideration, of what has been already mentioned, that Gods
all-knowledge respects all individuals, both persons and actions, and that God
has (...) special glory that he is concerned for in his visible Church below;
these things are to be observed.

1. That God does particularly and personally either Commend or Reprove these.
It is not only his Church in General, or these and these bodies of Professors,
that he so expresses himself unto, but to persons also. An evident instance
for this we have in Cain and Abel, G en. 4. Begin. And this is intimated by
Christ in another Parable, Viz. of the Wedding Supper, where the Lord observed
that one person that had not on the Wedding Garment, and treats him
accordingly. If a Church do well in General, yet if it has within it such as
do otherwise, and provoke God, he tells them of such, and reproves them for
suffering them, Rev. 2. 14. 20. If the visible Church be gone to decay, and
there be a Noah in it that is righteous, God notes him, and commends him for
it: if there be one good Child in Jerebodoms wicked family, he is specified; if
there is one cursed Cha^ in Noah's family, he has his brand.

2. That Gods Mercies and Judgments are very signally observable in these; not
only do these respect the Church in general, or this or that particular Church,
but these and those individual persons in it. Not only when Gods People do walk
closely with him, have they more observeable and admirable deliverances
conferred upon them; and when they highly provoke him, do they meet with more
stupendous visitations, and Come down wonderfully; but this is oftentimes
apparent in particular persons. Sometimes when the Church is preserved in peace
and prosperity, yet particular Sinners in Zion are animadverted upon; and thus
the Fig Tree in the Text; when God is bringing of Judgments upon the body of a
Church, yet there are some who must first ^have a mark set upon them; for their
preservation, Ezekiel. 9. 3. And it shall go well with the (...) of Jeremiah:
Baruch and Ehedweleel shall have their lives given them fore prey, when utter
desolation is coming upon the whole Land.

3. That God is in Scripture recorded to take notice of such Individuals as men
would least think of. Such as we would account to be least of all thought of;
God Eyes them: the poor and despised in the World, whom men regard not, yet God
observes them, and takes notice how they carry it, and he accounts it his great
Glory so to do, Psalm. 102. 17. Such actions also as we might think lay most out
of Observation; their secret and re^ired duties which they are engaged in; let
but a Na^thanael get under a fig tree to pray, and it shall be recorded: nay so
curious is he in his Observation, that there cannot a tear fall from them, but
he puts it in his bottle, nor (...) ^igh pass, but he writes it down in has
^^ovh Psalm. ^6. 8.

3. Why God takes such a curious and distinct Observation of these, to see what
fruit they bring forth?

A. The ground of this will appear if we lay these things together.

1. That which God expects of his Visible Church, is fruit, this has bin
already cleared in the former Doctrine. God would be honored and served by
some in the World; other men pay him no Tribute, bring forth no fruits that he
can taste any pleasancy in; he therefore for that end planted his Church that
from it he might receive some revenue in the world; that all the world might
not ^y in Wickedness, and nothing but dishonor him, as all the residue of
mankind certainly and unavoidably do.

2. Hence God is honored by his Visible Church proportionably to the good
fruits which they bear. This is the proper and only way in the which they can
so serve to his praise, as to answer the end of their being a Church. The rest
of mankind shall answer his designs upon them, in some other way; for God will
have his honor upon all: but except these serve God, do the works of God,
yield the fruits of Obedience, they live in vain: and consequently, the more
careful and constant they are in these services the more honor they bring to
God. Every act of true Obedience has of this in it, when then these are
multiplied, God has great glory by such.

3. The Church consists of individuals, and consequently the honor which God
has by his Church, is by the individuals in it. The Church is an aggregate
body, it is made up of particular persons; and the duty of bearing fruit lies
upon every one of them: what therefore God expec^s of his Church is personally
expressed, as well as joyn^ly; a Vineyard consists of particular plants; by the
bearing of these, the fruitfulness of the Vineyard is known? and the way for
the Owner to know whether it answers its ends, Is to go from tree to tree, and
see how they bear; and in no other way is he acquainted with the state of the
whole. If every one in the Church be faithful to God, that is a faithful Church
indeed: so many as there are belonging to it that are otherwise, do make It to
come so far short, and to be unto such a degree barren; God therefore observes
each, because he will know the state of his Vineyard.

4. These individuals are there planted by his special Providence; men are
ready to think that all these things are casual, and merely eventual, and do
not see an higher hand in them; but gracious Souls acknowledge a peculiar
favorable Providence in it. They are lines that are here fallen unto them
Psalm. 16. 7. It is a Metaphor taken from the custom among men, in laying out
and bounding of men's Allotments. There is therefore a peculiar remark made upon
this; this and that man was born in Zion, P sal 87. (...). and as there is much
of Gods good will displaying of it self to them, in making it their portion to
be in his Church, so there it some special aim at his own glory in it,
concerning every one; and therefore according to our conception, God is
singula^ly concerned to look after these.

5. God must have glory by them that do not bear, as well as by them that do.
That it is awfully true, that all those that are in the visible Church do not
yield the fruit expected, will be considered in the next Doctrine; although
these do not glorify God; but come short of it, yet God must not, will not be
a loser by them. No man would willingly be a loser by any thing that he does,
if he could help it; God can help it, and he wilt. But he is not glorified in
the one, after the same manner that he is in the other; the one is found to the
praise of the glory of his grace, the others are to be made monuments of the
Glory of his Justice. The one are made happy in their glorifying G od; the
other are made miserable by it: it is therefore requisite that G od observe,
and have a particular knowledge of the state of each one, that he may get
himself a name in them accordingly, Romans 9. 22, 23.

6. There are particular and personal rewards that God has to distribute to
men, according to the fruits they bear. These Rewards God stands obliged to in
the Covenant Promises and Threatenings; for both of these belong to the
Gospel Covenant in which the visible Church is empaled: there is therefore a
Day of Judgment appointed, in which Christ will not only sit upon the world,
but also upon his Vineyard, in which he will give each one his recompense
according as he is found; and this is personal: for, we must every one of us
give an account of himself to God. In the dispensing of these recompenses, God
will proceed with men, according to their deeds, Romans 2. 6. and that will be
very diversely, verse 7, 8, 9. and it is of infinite moment, whether man be
adjudged to happiness or misery: and how shall the Judge of all the earth do
that which is right in all this, if he do not observe who bear fruit, and who
is barren? and the more curious must the observation be, if we consider, that
not only fruitfulness and barrenness, but the more fruits there are of either
sort, the more recompense is measured. Some bear more than others, and
therefore some are to have greater degrees of glory, and others more amazing
wrath to fall upon them; which how should it be, if God did not write all down,
and keep an exact account of all actions as well as persons?

USE I.
For Information in two particulars.

1. See here the Atheism of all such as are bold to sin, because they think
that God regards them not. For the Heathen, that know not God, thus to do, is
not so much to be wondered at; and yet even some of them will rise up in
Judgment against us, if we do thus: but for those that are taken so near unto
God, as all they are that are in his Church to be guilty of this, is an
astonishing thing; whether there be any among us that dare to say it in words,
may be questioned; but there are too many whose practices declare them to be
directed by these false principles, this is too evident; and indeed, that is
the root of all wickedness that is committed among Professors: God himself
acquaints us, tha^ hence sprang all the impiety and wickedness of the men of
Judah, Ezekiel 8. 12. They say God sees not; it may be they did not say it any
otherwise but in their hearts? and truly this is little if any thing better
than what the ^ool says, viz. There is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. would those that
are of the holy seed perpetrate such abominations as they do? would they that
have the name of God called upon them, and that are under the obligations of
the Gospel Covenant, live like Heathen that know not God? would they drive a
trade of sin and vanity, were they indeed persuaded that they are under the
watchful eye of the great God, which is making daily remarks upon what they do,
and taking a most distinct account of all their actions? surely it could not
be. If they thought that the flaming Eye of his Jealousy were looking intensly
upon them, it would make them a^raid of doing such things as they do,

3. Learn hence also the unspeakable folly of Hypocrisy. Such as make an high
profession, and pretend to be flourishing trees in the Vineyard; but mean while
think to put God off with leaves instead of fruit; or fruits which though they
seem fair to the eyes of men, are yet rotten at the core: Do such men think to
impose upon him? no, they deceive their own Souls, but God is not to be mocked,
he looks too curiously to be made to take a tree that is only full of leaves,
for one that is full of fruit. It is fruit that he is seeking for, and he will
discern whether there be any there or no: and he knows how to distinguish good
fruit from bad: his Vineyard brought forth grapes, but what then? possible they
were fair to look upon, but they were indeed ^owre and wild, and he discovered
it, and thereupon condemned it, as if it had born nothing at all; men may do a
great many things that are like Obedience for the matter of them. But if they
have not the right principle: are not the product of saving grace in the soul,
Gods curious eye will discover the difference, and what profit will they yield
when he shall reject them, and profess that he takes no pleasure in them?

USE II.
Let this be for a word of solemn warning to all that are in the visible
Church, to beware of barrenness there, and what greater caution can there be
set before Christians, than the consideration that God looks after every one of
them, to see how they behave themselves in pursuit of the profession which they
have made? for certainly God is not an idle spectator; and this will hereafter
be made awfully to appear. Think what a shame it is to be in the Vineyard, and
yet to be unfruitful; and then add to think, that the Lord of the Vineyard sees
this, and will let us sooner or later know that he sees it too; and can it be
for our comfort to be so found and charged by him in the day of accounts? do
not your own Consciences sometimes reflect and accuse you, and tell you how
unworthily you carry it, under all the care and husbandry that is laid out upon
you? now when they so do, add to say as the Apostle, 1 John 3. 20. if our own
heart condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all things: But,

USE III.
To quicken and encourage us all in our endeavors after fruitfulness. Does G
od take such particular notice of each of us? let every Christian carry this
thought upon his own heart, and make it an in^entive and engagement to him, to
endeavor to answer G ods ends in this respect* And there are these three
things which this thought should engage and excite us unto.

1. To see that we bring forth good fruit. If God be so curious, let it make us
to be so too. They that would approve themselves to an all-seeing and heart
searching God, had need to take heed to themselves, and beware of being imposed
upon. God not only looks whether we bear, but what we bear; let us do so too:
and here let us know, that the tree must be made good, if ever the fruit be
good: grapes are not gathered of thorns. It should make all that call themselve
Christians, to be afraid of living one day in a state of unregeneracy; for as
long as we so do, we do nothing at all that will turn to account. See that you
have a principle of Grace within, and then take heed that your lives be the
continued exercise of it,

2. To take care that we bear much fruit. When you have gotten grace into your
Hearts let in be your industrious endeavor to bring it forth into action
through your whole life and Conversation. The best of us have another Law in
our Members, which will be putting it self forth, and doing of such works as
must be burnt up: Grace must be carefully Nourished and Excited, else it will
be born down and suppressed by the Carnal part within us.

3. To be sure to bring forth secret fruits. Here is the least d^nger of
Hypocrisy. We may do many things which a love of Applause and Commendation from
men may excite us to but our secret service, which is done out of the reach of
the eye and observation of others, is that which is in the least danger of
decieveing us; because herein we have better evidence that we set God before
us: and that you may he truly thus engaged, here is your help; to be always
thinking, God is now ^t my right hand, his eye is upon me, and there are these
three Motives which the Doctrine before us affords, to put us upon Carefully
and Cheerfully doing thus.

1. If God sees, he will aprove us if we thus do. He looks with great
Approbation upon the Faithful Endeavors of his Children; it pleases him
highly to see them engaged for him and his glory in all that they do. And what
should please or satisfy us more or better, than that the God we profess to
serve, takes Content in our Duties, and Smells a sweet savor in them?

2. Thus only shall we answer the end of our being planted in Gods Vineyard.
The reason why God looks so exactly, is, as we heard, because he would not miss
his end, that if we answer it not one way, he may have it of us in another: And
remember, if we do thus, it is the way for us to be continued in the Vineyard,
and have the constant influences of his Grace; for to them that have, more
shall be given: God will not be wanting to us, if we take heed to be faithful
to him in our improvements, and therefore,

3. We shall not lose our labor. For if God observes in particular, then he
will not forget to reward us in particular. There is a great recompense
promised to them that are faithful, and it is a strong consolation to all such
as are so, to consider that he who has thus promised, keeps the account of all
the care and fidelity of his people, even to the most secret Duty which they do
in sincerity; and our Savior has given us this Assurance, That our father
that sees in secret will reward us openly.

SERMON V
DOCTRINE III. THere are those that are planted in the visible Church, that
bear no fruit.
This is a necessary inference from the owners Coming to this figtree, looking
for fruit, and finding none, for if God be aimed at in this owner, as we have
observed, he could not miss, or not find fruit, if there had bin any; Being
omniscient. And though there be but one tree named, (as in the other parable of
the man without a wedding garment, there is one mentioned which is enough to
intimate that such a thing may be, and so sufficient to put every one upon
self-examination;) yet it is certian that it intimates that there are more.

In the clearing up of this Doctrine we may consider, 1. The evidence that
there are such. 2. Who are so to be accounted? 3. How this comes to pass. 4.
Why God suffers such in the visible Church.


1. For the evidence that there are such; nay more, that the biggest part of
visible Professors are for the most part such, we have warrant sufficient from
the Scripture to conclude: nor do we find that the visible Church was ever
without such since the beginning. In Adams family there was a Cain who offered
unaccepted Sacrifice. In Noah's a Cursed Cham, whom the deluge had not washed
from his wickedness. Abraham had a scoffing ^shmael, and Isaac a profane Esau.
When Israel were in the Wilderness, and were accounted Holiness to the Lord,
yet there was many a vile wretch discovered, and a mixed multitude always
rebelling against God. What they were afterward, Gods frequent complaints by
his Prophets, do sufficiently discover. How it was with his vineyard, we see,
Isa. 5. begin. And the application of it we have, verse. 5. and if we we shall
descend to Gospel times, we shall find it so; Christ himself when he was here,
had a Judas in his own family; and what do the warnings and predictions of the
Apostles signify, but that there were too many of these in the primitive
Churches? and they warn us of worse and more degenerate times to come
afterward, but this will be most evidently discovered to us in the
Consideration of the next thing; viz.

2. Who are so to be accounted?

A. In general, all those that do not bear the right and proper fruit, will
come under this denomination; and those are only the fruits of Righteousness
and Holiness; all others are in Gods esteem barren: whatsoever fruits they bear
to themselves, if they bring forth none to God, they are Empty Hos. 10. 1. The
fruits that God looks for in his Church are good works, acts of true Obedience
to his revealed will; and to the making of such fruit there is a great deal
required. It is necessary that the tree be good before the fruit can be so.
Besides the matter of the action, that it be conformable to the Rule of Gods
word, there must be a principle of grace within from whence it must proceed,
and saving Faith in the Soul to purify the heart, and to work by love, without
which it is impossible to please G od, H^br, 11. 6. and it must be in
conjunction with a sincere aim at the Glory of God, as the ultimate scope of
the action. It must be a work of the Sanctifying Spirit, and that it cannot be,
if it fa^l of any of these ingredients; and hence in particular we may
conclude, such as these to bear none; viz.

1. All Profane persons that are in the visible Church; and it is a matter of
sad lamentation, that there are too many such, who call themselves Christians,
and yet are always doing the works of the flesh, of which we have a Catalogue,
Gal. 5. 19, etc. they mind nothing that is good, but are wholly addicted to
vanity and debauchery, and yet they can boast of their Church Priviledges, and
bolster themselves up in wickedness by them: such were they, Jer. 7. 9, 10. the
very lives and conversations of these declared them to be graceless, Isa. 3. 9.
the cursed fruits that they bear discover that they have an evil root of
bitterness in them; and charity must put out its eyes, before it can think
better of them: God will never acknowledge the vintage of Gomorrah to be fruit.

2. All Hypocrites. These indeed make a show as if they were green trees, and
are full of the leaves of an outward profession: they carry it fair to men, and
make a great stir in a profession, talk much of Religion, and frequent
Ordinances with a great deal of seeming zeal: they are very good Christians as
far as words will go; and possibly too they may have a show of fruit upon them:
they may do a great many things so far as the matter of duty reaches and in
that part of their conversation which lies open to the view and observation of
men, may use much severity and strictness: but these are not the fruits that
God accepts; they are not found b^t rotten. Our Savior compares them to
S^pulchres, Mat. 23. 27, 28. These trees are not good, how then should their
fruit be so? However they hope to recommend their lives to men, they do not
approve their hearts to God: they labor; but it is to make a Spiders web:
their arms are wrong set; they seek not the glory of God, but to be seen of
men; and they have all their reward when they have gotten the applause they
desired, for God will reject them.

3. All Legallists. I distinguish these from Hypocrites, because the other are
mere stage players and dissemblers, whereas these are real and conscientious in
what they do; they have an enlightened Conscience in them, and moral principles
that are active, and they are led by them. The duties of first, and second
Table are carefully practiced by them, and yet not, as the others to be seen of
men merely, but to answer their Consciences, and to earn Heaven and Happiness:
they are built upon the Old* Covenant, and hope^ to comply with the terms of
it: or they make the Gospel but a Covenant of works, and think that if they do
their best, God will accept them, and this makes them very laborious: but
still, all this is not fruit, it needs something to make it of the right Kind;
it is wrought by their own strength, and will prove loss. Of this stamp was
Paul in his Pharisaism, but see what an esteem he set upon this afterward,
Phil. 3. 4. etc,

4. In a word, all that are in a state of Unregeneracy. As long as men have no
principle of saving grace wrought in them by the Spirit of God, they do not
bear fruit; where there is not faith, there can be no exercise of it; and
whatsoever is not influenced by that, belongs to dead works; that which is
such, is pleasing to God, he takes content in it; but these can do no such
thing, Romans 8. 8. They that are in the flesh cannot please God; and the Apostle
assures us that all have not faith.

3. How this comes to pass? It may seem strange that there should be empty
plants in the Courts of Gods House, but we may be satisfied in this, when we
have weighed the case: Hence;

A. 1. Negatively. It is not because there is any thing wanting on Gods part as
to means of fruitfulness. God can leave this to men's own Judgments, if they
(...) will speak uprightly,1 Isa. 5. 3. 4. There are the same advantages
afforded to one and the other in the Visible Church: they enjoy the same
Gospel, and Ordinances, in which the Calls, Counsels, Invivitdtions,
Encouragements, are alike exhibited to them: the dresser of the Vineyard has a
charge given him concerning all, to look after them with care: the Ministry are
appointed to declare the whole counsel of God: they that bear no fruit live
under the same means that they do who bear the most, and there is nothing more
done med^ately for the than another. It is the same word that Convinces one
and prejudiceth another; there is nothing is here to be said for it.

2. Positively; let these things be observed,

1. There is a natural barrenness unto good in all Adams Posterity. Man indeed
was made at first in the Image of God, which was a fertile principle in him,
and both enabled and disposed him to the Service of God; but the fall has lost
him that power, and as he comes into the world in a state of Apostasy, he could
do nothing at all that (...) acceptable to God; his soul is become such a soil,
as no good plant will grow in it; it will bring forth nothing but thorns and
thistles. Man's impotency to holy duties, is one part of the misery fallen upon
him by sin; and it is such as has left him neither ability nor disposition to
it, Romans 3. 12. etc. for if a man must be good in order to his being capable of
doing good, the natural man is capable of doing none: for he is Conceived (...)
sin, and goes astray from the W omb, speaking lies.

2. There are also Cursed Principles of Corruption in natural men, that help to
increase this barrenness. Original sin in man is not merely morally Privative,
or a disabling of man from doing good, by emptying him of the Grace which he
had at the first; but there is something Morally positive in it too, i. e. all
the Moral powers of his Soul are habitually bent unto sin, his Heart is set in
him to do Wickedly, Eccl. 8. 11. So that he can as well withhold from acting as
from sinning; and by these renewed acts of such a principle, the habit is
fortified, which adds to the barneness of the Soul a deeper rooting and
confirmation in it; and nature, being strengthened by custom, is yet made more
unlikely to do any thing that may answer Gods expectation: it is more settled in
its evil way: and therefore God puts stress upon this argument, Jer. 13. 23. q.
d, Whatever might have bin hoped before, yet now they are next to hopeless.

3. Hence their Hearts do naturally and voluntarily resist the Spirit of God,
striving with them in the means. Instead of complying with and entertaining of
him, they do oppose him, and this men always do of themselves or by their own
inclinations, Acts. 7. 51. The way of men's Hearts, and the sight of their eyes,
to which they are addicted, and that by a rooted approbation and choice, are
quite contrary to the things that the Spirit of God invites men to in the Word
and Ordinances; so that wheresoever he comes to make offers of them unto men,
he finds a fixed enmity in them against these things, so that such not only
will not, but they cannot be subject Romans 8. 7. This is the fl^s^, that ^^sts
against the spirit, and needs must it be exceeding strong in natural men since
in the regenerate, the remains of it often brings them into Captivity, and so
it makes them that they cannot do the things that they would, Gal. 5. 17.

4. There is also many times a great neg^^ct in Parents of doing their Duty to
the^^ Children, in order to their being fruitful. They love to have Church
Privileges for their Children; they cannot bear that they should not be
acknowledged Christians, and not have the badge of Christ's Covenant upon them;
but alas! this is all they mind how woeful neglects of Duty are there (...) such
Parents? they do not teach their Children the Principles of the Oracles of God,
do not counsel and command them to serve God, do not restrain them from the
exorbitances that their youthful carnal minds naturally incline them to, do not
set them a good example of Holiness, b^t often give them an ill example* do not
pray with them, nor see that they attend upon the means of grace, and give an
account of their profiting: and Children thus left, will run after sin fast
enough; and God also thus punishes Parent's neglects.

5. They oftentimes fall into Snares and Temptations from Satan and his
Instruments. The Devil has a peculiar Design upon the Church of Christ; the
gates of hell set themselves against it (...) where the means of grace are most
clearly dispensed, and the best endeavors are used to bring Souls unto Christ,
Hell is most of all allarmed, and Satan uses all manner of stratagems to hold
such in his hands; and if, whilst they are visibly Christ's, he can keep them
spiritually his own, his ends are answered. He has also his Agents, l^ud
persons, whom he employs, to tempt, allure, and drew men away, especially young
persons, into vain company, to evil practices. and such things as may keep them
from seriousness, and engage them to the lusts of their own hearts; and if any
word comes close to their Consciences at any time, these Fowls readily pick it
up.

6. There is often a Judicial Blinding and Hardening fails upon them, by Gods
righteous Judgment, God affords them row^ing and awakening means, and they
sleep under them, and harden their hearts against them, and will not comply
with his calls and counsels, and God hereupon sends them a penal hardness,
whereby they are confirmed in it, so it was with them, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. and
such an one ^el^ upon them, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. yea this was the amazing errand which
God told the Prophet that he sent him upon, Isa. 6. 9, 10. and how can such
bear fruit, when Christ says to them as he did to the fig tree, Never more let
fruit be found on thee? Now all these things may satisfy us how it may so be,
that all the means may fail, as to men's being fruitful under the enjoyment of
them. But then the question still remains, viz.

4. Why God suffers such in his visible Church? this may also seem a mystery.
That he sees, and knows them, yea observes them we have heard; and that they do
not answer his expectation, and for that reason must needs be a provocation to
him: Why then should he let them be there?

A. In general; God knows how to advance his Glory, and gain his ends by them
in thus doing. Gods last end in all he does is his own glory, he has a name to
get by his works; and there are various ways in which he promoves it. As there
are diverse Attributes which he displays to us, so there are diverse Subjects in
which he will have them exalted, and whatsoever serves to the exaltation of
these, proportionably to the cost that is laid out upon it, is not in vain: now
that God both can and will do so in this affair, will be more particularly seen
in the consideration of these things.

1. God hereby declares his great Patience. This is one of the Perfections of
God, which he sets an high price upon: he tells us that he is a God that bears,
and for bears, and endures sinners with much long-suffering; and it mightily
commends him to the souls of his people that he is so; the discoveries which
they make of it, are to them matter of great encouragement; and in none is it
more evidently made to appear, than in these: that fruitless trees should be
let alone in the Vineyard, and have all the protection and husbandry of it
afforded to them; and though still they abide barren, yet they are not
presently cut down, but suffered there, this is great patience. It is nothing
so much to hear with a wicked world, that have not these means; these are
therefore called The ^^ches of G ods Goodness, Romans 2. 3.

2. Hereby he discovers the great wickedness which is in the hearts of men; it
would never have been known how vile men ^are* if they had not lived under the
means of grace. and there been waited upon with all the offers of grace, and
endeavors with them for their good. For men to Transgress in a Land of
Uprightness, to sin against all the counsels, warnings, invitations,
encouragements, obligations, of the Gospel, is the ^op of wickedness: and this
mightily clears up the righteousness of the Judgment of G od against ungodly
men.

3. This also discovers to his people evidently, that it is by Grace that they
are saved, Godly men have by this means before them continually such monuments
as the very looking on them, helps to convince them that it is not of
themselves, but the gift of God, that they are made fruitful; when they see
them of the same nature with them, under the same dispensations,
notwithstanding all to abide in their impenitency, and live unprofitably under
all the advantages of profiting; it tells them what hearts and natures they
have in them, and how much they owe to the praise of Gods Grace, that has made
them to differ.

4. Hereby these also are prepared to be the more eminent instances of Gods
Revenging Justice. Not only God's Grace, but his Justice too, are to be
eminently exalted in the visible Church: here are to be sound the more
stupendous monuments of his severity, where his mig^^y works have been done,
and men have no^ (...): It is not so much i^ Tire and Sidon, as Chorazin, etc.
not so much in Sodom or Capernaum. There are they who by their despising and
abusing the greatest mercies of God, do lay up the more treasures of wrath
against themselves; and therefore, when Christ comes to Judgment, there is a
peculiar vengeance, is to be taken upon such, 2 These. 1. 8.

5. Sometimes God does it for Gracious Ends, to make the more convincing
displays of his rich G race in them. God sometimes suffers barren trees to grow
a long while in his Vineyard, till one would think that all the hopes of their
bearing were now part; and they have bin dying and rotting so long till we were
almost concluding them to be past recovery and after this he comes and
Magni^fies his Mercy upon them, in recovering of them by a saving conversion,
and they are, as it were, born out of time. Such an one Paul tells us he was:
and by this means the great efficacy, and mighty influence of his grace, comes
to be made known, and his name is praised, by and for them.

USE I.
Learn hence, that visible-Church Membership give to no man security of his
Salvation, t^is therefore a vain thing for any man to boast of, or put their
confidence in it: and yet alas! how many are there who so do? It is only those
that have the fruits of the Spirit on them, that glorify God by faith in
Christ, and a well-ordered Conversation, that shall see his salvation. Men
indeed who are in the visible Church have opportunities and great helps thus to
do; but it is not the unfailing privilege of all that are there so to do: they
have means, but they despise and neglect them, and so they are never the
better. If this be a truth, that there may be barren fig trees in Gods
vineyard; it then necessarily follows, that men may belong to the number of
Gods visible Church, and enjoy all the outward advantages of it, and yet after
all that, fall short of eternal life, and come under condemnation: and this
should shake the carnal security of all such as cry, The Temple of the Lord.

USE II.
This Doctrine then should call us all to a more careful self-examination. The
very hearing of it may stir up every one of us to reflect upon our selves, and
say to our own Souls, how is it with me? what fruits do I bear? I am a plant in
the vineyard? I make a profession, but what do I do? wherein do I answer Gods
just demands of me? If I am in the Orchard, I should bear then, but do I? when
Christ told his Disciples that one of them should betray him, how did it put
them all upon solemn enquiry? every one said, is it I? If I should only say
that there is one in the Congregation, of whom it is true, that when God looks
for fruit on him, he finds none; it might rouse every one: but let me tell you,
I am afraid there are a great many such, and it may be of them that make a fair
show too, and pretend high: well, what does it speak to you, but that you
should bring your selves upon the trial; and to that end, labor to inform your
selves what is fruit, and what is not, and accordingly search into your hearts
and ways, and see how it is with you. Of what moment it is for you thus to do,
you will see when we come to consider the doom of the barren fig tree expressed
in the sequel.

USE III.
And let it awaken all to see to our selves that we be fruitful. Look to your
selves that you be really engaged in the Service of God, and doing of his
works: The thought that we may be barren in this regard, should make us the
more careful ^o look to our selves. that we be not so: it concerns every
individual to do so for himself and there are these three arguments that should
move us hereunto.

1. Consider that God expects fruit of every one in his Church. He looks for
it, and you can no otherwise answer the end of your being set there. This has
been already evidenced, and it has a mighty plea in it; for does not God
deserve it of you? Is it not an ill requital of all his care and cost said out
upon you, to deny it to him? is it not the most unreasonable thing that you
should stand within the fence, and take up room in the ground, and be of no
profit at all?

2. And God observes as well as expects: and should not this be a consideration
of weight with you, to think that whatever I am doing, Gods jealous eye is upon
me: if I am barren, he keeps the account of that, and if I am fruitful, he will
not forget that: He that knows that he is always under the watchful inspection
of the great God, had need to be careful of himself.

3. And if you be not fruitful, he will not always bear it: and this your very
reason may assure you of: though he be patient, yet be can be weary with for
bearing: and this is a solemn consideration, and should carry great aw in it to
all our hearts, you cannot promise your selves always to be indulged, unless
goodness leads you to repentance. And for your help here.

1. Be sensible of your native barrenness, and go to God to remove it: sense of
impotency is the first step to profitableness: A proud opinion of our own
righteousness, is the main remora to our Conversion. God only can teach us to
profit; when a barren heart is felt, and burdensome, he is ready to afford his
help to all those that come to him, and pray against it.

2. Beware of harkening to Satan, and resisting the Spirit of God. This is the
undoing of multitudes under the Gospel; Satan enveagles them with his
Temptations, and they comply with them: the Spirit of God comes and solicits
them and they regard him not. Hearken to him, and he will work your works in
and for you.

3. Improve the means with diligence. The means of Grace are suitable, but if
they be neglected they will not profit us. Hearken to Counsel, take warning,
receive instruction, embrace the Encouragements given you, and apply all to
practice.

USE IV.
Let this afford a solemn word of Advice to Parents, It is a favor of God to
you, that your Children are in the Vineyard: but rest not in it, God has made
it your duty to endeavor that they may be trees of renown there: your families
should be nurseries for the Church of God; and it is an Office that you bear,
to dress the nursery that is under your charge: if you neglect it, and your
Children thereupon prove to be unprofitable and wild Olives, briars instead of
Figtrees, it will be a Righteous Judgment of God upon you; and they also will
have reason to accuse you another day, Be quickened to your Duty; they will not
bear of themselves, pains must be taken, and though the blessing depends upon
God, yet he is wont to conferr it upon us when we are in the saithful use of
the means.

SERMON VI
Verse 7. Then said be unto the Dresser of his Vineyard; behold, these three
years I come seeking fruit of this figtree, and find none, cut it down, why
cambreth it the ground.
III WE now proceed to consider the deliberation of the Owner of the Vineyard
with the dresser of it; in which there are two things.

1. The complaint which he makes against this Particular fig tree.

2. The advice which he gives to him about it.

The Person spoken to is called the Dresser of the Vineyard. Men were wont
often to keep their Gardeners, to look after their vines and fruit trees, that
were skilled in that sort of Husbandry: and this cannot be meant of God, whom
elsewhere Christ calls The Husbandman, Joh. 15. 1. for it has been already
observed that he is intended by the Owner. Some apply this to Christ, unto whom
there is given a Mediatorial Dispensation of all affairs that concern his
Church: but I rather suppose that it aims at the Ministry of the Gospel, whom
it is certain that Jesus Christ, who is the Lord and Planter of this vineyard,
employs in the manuring of his visible Church: they are therefore said to be
Pl^nters and W^^erers, I Cor. 3, 6. and to be La^onrers together with God,
chap. 4. 1.

Before I proceed to the consideration of the deliberation it self, give me
leave to make a few brief glancing remarks, upon the person deliberated withal,
viz the Dresser of the vineyard. And here we may observe;

1. The dignity which Christ puts upon his Ministry, and the trust which he
puts in them. It is a great honor that is done unto men to put them into
places of trust. God has a singular respect to, and care which he takes of his
Church; to betrust any then with the office of looking after and dressing of
this Vineyard, argues a great deal of confidence that he puts in them, and
honor that he confers upon them. God is a great King, and these are his
Children, for to them pertains the Adoption; and it is a noble employment to be
made Tutors to a King's Children: men are wont to be curious in their choice of
such: and God is much more, in the directions which he has given about the
qualifications of such whom he will accept in this station. Moses mentions it
as a great preferment which God had advanced Korah and his Brethren unto, Numb.
16. 9.

1. Hence they who despise the office and work of the Ministry, despise God.
Such as reproach them, reproach God himself. It is not to be denied, but that
there are th^se who are preferred among men to the place of the Ministry, whose
unworthy Carriage in it, and mismanagement of it, makes them deserve to be
exploded, and not acknowledged to be called by God, or approved of him: but
this ought not to be interpreted as redounding to the ignominy of the work it
self, or the contempt of those whom God has made faithful in it. It is true,
Christ could do his work without them, but he has pleased to choose this way to
dispense himself in; and that employment which God himself has seen meet to
put honor upon, ought not to be vilified or thought light of, by such as
profess themselves to be his people, and to hope for his salvation.

2. We are here also acquainted with the Duty of Gospel Ministers. The Title
her^ put upon them, is not only a character of their dignity, but of their duty
(...) Their work is to dress the Vineyard. The word signifies one that is to
work about the vines; i.e. to do the business that appertains to the tending
and looking after them: and this intimates that there is no little care and
charge lying upon those that are engaged in the Ministry, no little labor
incumbent on them to be exercised withal; and this will appear from the
consideration of two things in the Comparison or Title.

1. A Vineyard has a great many plants in it, all of which belongs to the
Vine-dressers care, and every one of which calls for dressing. A Church is a
Company of visible believers, or professors, with their Children, in some there
are more, in others fewer: now each individual of these belongs to his Charge;
and it is a solemn Charge that Christ has laid upon him, 2, Tim 4. begin* A
Seasonable administration belongs to these and to that end, care is to be used
to know the state of the Vineyard; and that is by the several plants which are
in it, Not only Truths, but seasonable Truths are to be preached; and he that
has souls to look after, must needs have a great care lying upon him.

2. There is a deal to be done to and for the Vineyard, and the several plants
that are in it. He that has a Vineyard to look after, shall never want work:
there are so many things that belong to the dressing and tending of it; there
is digging, and du^nging, and weeding, and transplanting, and pruning, and
under-setting, and keeping up the hedge, and watching against wild beasts and
robbers: and all this is a constant work; if it be once done. It will be to do
again and again. There is no less lying on the Ministers of Christ, if they
will prove themselves faithful: there are Children, tender plants in the
nursery, to be looked after, and to be removed from those beds into the rows,
when they are fitted for it: there are grown persons, who should be labored
with that they may be prepared for full communion: and there are those that
have attained to it: each of these have their portion to be allotted to them.
There are the unbelieving, who are to be called upon and not let alone; the
Obstinate, who are to be solemnly warned; the Scandalous, who are to be,
according to their merit, censured; the Careless, that are to be seasonably
reproved; the Sorrowful, that must be comforted; the doubting Souls, that must
be satisfied; etc. there is the Word and Ordinances which are to be dispensed
to all in public; the sick that must be visited; Corrupters and Seducers must
be watched against; Families in private must be visited; etc. and an account is
to be given in to Christ the Lord and Owner of his Church, of all this, as they
expect a reward of Grace at his hands: and if they have wilfully neglected or
omitted their duty in these regards, they are in danger of being cut in sunder
by him, and made to receive their portion wi^^ Hypocrites.

USE I.
Hence how much do they mistake who think the work of the Ministry to be an
easy employment? Many there be that undervalue it, and account it a small
matter* and (...) to those in this Office who give occasion to have it so
thought, by their supine negligence: who with the Sluggard, let their Field be
grown over with nettles, for want of care and tendance. But certainly, they
that with any conscience study their Duty, and endeavor to be as much as they
can in the discharge of it, find it to be far otherwise. Paul thought the care
of the Churches, to be more than all the trouble and difficulty that he met
with otherwise, 2 Cor. 11.28. well then might he in the serious contemplation
of it cry out, who is sufficient for these things? certainly, without a great
deal of special assistance from the Spirit of God, they cannot in any competent
measure discharge their duty acceptably: it would be a burden too heavy for an
Angel to stand up under; what then is a weak man to undertake it? well might
Moses, and Jeremiah decline it, and had not God himself promised to be with
them, it had been madness in them ever to have engaged in it. That promise of
Christ to his Disciples, was very necessary and seasonable to back his solemn
Charge he had given them withal, Mat. 28. 19, 20.

USE II.
Pity and pray for, and encourage Christ's Ministers in their work. They need
no man's envy, but every man's compassion, and prayers too: they that are
sensible of the weight of duty lying on them, do earnestly desire i^ of every
one that fears God. How often have we Paul importunately asking it of the
Churches whom he writes unto? little do you know the sore Temptations, mighty
discouragements, and many sinking thoughts which these Servants of Christ
struggle withal, through sense of their own frailty, and the greatness of the
work incumbent on them, and the solemnity of the Charge under the aw whereof
they are, and the trembling thoughts of the amazing account they must shortly
give in to the Lord Jesus Christ: give them then many a lift, by your ardent
supplications for them. One of the Ancients was wont to say, he often wondered
^ow (...) was possible that any Minister should ever be saved: and truly, it is
rich grace that their hopes can only rely upon. Encourage them in their work;
let them know, That their labor it not in vain in the Lord.

3. We may here also observe, That Ministers may be faithful in their places,
and yet be unsuccessful. We find that the Owner of the Vineyard seeing the
unfruitfulness of his Fig Tree, finds no fault with the Vine-dresser, lays
nothing of it to his Charge; but his whole Complaint and Threatening is against
the tree it self. And he would not have treated so fam^liarly with him, if he
had not esteemed him to be faithful: And yet for all this, here is a barren
tree in the Vineyard: and we find that if men under the watch of the Ministry
do perish through their default, God will require their blood at their hands,
Ez^k. 33. 8. But yet they may do their work conscientiously, and men for all
that perish; but now they are quit, verse. 9. Here observe;

1. A Minister is then to be acknowledged faithful to his office relation, when
he does conscientiously attend all the duties of it, as he has opportunity and
ability. Fidelity in any duty, of any relation, must b^lock^ upon in an
Evangelical Sense, else the (...) must cry, Lord enter not into Judgment.
Faithfulness appears in a care to mind the work we are in, to discharge the
trust reposed in us, to spend and be spent in the work of Christ, and for the
good of Souls* to be instant in season and out of season? To divide to every
one the portion belonging to them, rebuke to whom rebuke, etc. And all this as
God gives them strength and advantage, not shunning any thing which God has
Commanded them to do.

2. That there are such placed by Christ in his Church, is evident. The love
and care which Christ has for it, cannot but put him upon it to provide such
for it: and when his people have bin never so degenerate, and offered the
greatest affronts to such as these, he has yet sent them, and enabled them to
bear all, and discharge their duty notwithstanding: It is he that thrusts out
laborers into his harvest; and he can make them laborers indeed: there have
bin such formerly; Paul was so, he could appeal to the consciences of this
Ephesians. Acts. 20. 29, 27. and he has the residue of the Spirit with him,
Men may put others in, and he may Providentially suffer it, for their
punishment; but he has required all to be such, and all that he sends in mercy
are so: there are none without their insirmities, but there are those that are
wise, and sincere, and diligent, and have his spirit upon them.

3. That these notwithstanding all their faithfulness, may miss of the desired
success of their Ministry. This is signified in the Text, and witnessed to by
the Scripture, and constant experience; and there may be a rational account
given of this, if we consider,

1. That it is not their fidelity, but Gods blessing which gives the success.
They are but Instruments used by God: their desires may be sincere, their
endeavors hearty, and industrious; but the hearts of men are not to be wrought
upon by them, but require Almighty Power to influence them. If they neglect
their Duty they deserve blame, but, ^ho Israel be not gathered, if they are
faithful, their work and their recompense is with the Lord: and they shall be
acknowledged by him: they always renounce themselves as to efficacy, only they
endeavor to do Service; they plant and water, but they referr the increase to
God, (...) Cor. 3. 5, 6. we have Christ himself complaining that his work was
unsuccessful, Isa. 49. 4. God dispenses his grace at his pleasure, John was a
burning and a shining light, but he was despised. Christ taught as never man
did, but they would not come unto him that they might have life, Joh. 5. 40.
and he gives us a reason for it, chap. 6. 44.

2. That God sometimes, sends his faithful servants on the most unsuccessful
errand. The direct end of the Ministry, is the Conversion and Salvation of men;
but God sometimes judicially orders it otherwise. What a famous industrious and
Evangelical Prophet was Isaiah? and ^yet see how his Commission runs, Isa, 6.
9, 10. And when God leaves men to their own lusts and hardness of heart, the
most softning means shall harden them the more, and the Gospel whose, proper
scope is life, shall become a Savor of death, 2. C rr. 2. 16. The more is laid
out upon them, the worse they grow: and yet even in this too will God be
glorified, and his servants shall not lose their reward, they are still a sweet
savor to God.

USE I.
Hence it is a hard measure to judge of a Ministers fidelity by his success.
There is a Sovereign overruling hand of God in these affairs, and it is to be
adored by us: to have nothing else to alled^e against any of Gods Servants, but
that there is little good done by all his labor, and possibly a people do grow
worse under it, and therefore he is not true to his trust, and there be nothing
else that appears against him, is an Harsh censure, ^s if they by their own
virtue and good will could make men good when they please. It may be their
affliction and sore grief, when it is not their sin; and calls for pity rather
then Censure; to see them casting out the Gospel not so often, and toyling all
night and catching little or nothing: their hearts have Sorrow enough already,
for this they need not to be loaded with more: thus might Isaiah, Jeremiah
Ezekiel, yea and Christ himself have been censured.

USE II.
This may teach us not to place too much upon men. It is a fault too frequent,
and of dangerous consequence, for us to tarry at Instruments, and either on the
one hand to adore them, or on the other to undervalue them. It is true, the
Gifts, graces, industry, prudence, which God bestows upon them are to be
acknowledged: but to have any man's person in admiration, to the contempt of
others, as if this must needs be the converting man, and not the other, is to
dishonor God, and give away his incommunicable glory to a Creature: nor can we
do such men a greater displeasure: Paul is as much dissatisfied at them, who
said they were for Paul, as those that were for Apollos; because they put too
much respect upon him.

USE III.
Hence fidelity and not bare success shall be the Ministers trial and crown
another day. I confess, that here in this life, they that bring in many to
Christ, have abundance of joy, and are highly beloved by them that have
experienced saving good by them; and they that comfort few or none, have
abundance of grief and sorrow. But when they shall come to stand before
Christ's Tribunal, and are to receive their reward, that man shall have no more
commendation than this: he did no more for God, though God did more by him:
nay, if there be degrees of reward according to what men have done and suffered
for Christ, I am sure this man has done as much, and suffered more: and if
this were not the support of the hearts of some of Gods Servants, they would
sometimes saint within them, Christ comforted himself with this, Isa. 49. 5.
Though Israel be not gathered, I shall be glorious in the eyes of the Lord.

4. We may here finally observe, That God oftentimes signifies his displeasure
against unprofitable Professors, to his faithful Ministers. Thus is the Owner
of the Vineyard here brought in, deliberating with the Vine-dresser,
complaining against, and threatening of the figtree. How God signified his mind
of old to his Prophets, is plainly intimated in Scripture, he used to appear to
them in dreams, visions by Angels, etc. whence their Prophesies were delivered
in the Name of the Lord: and sometimes they were against the body of the
people, when there was a general degeneracy, sometimes against particular
persons. How he discovers himself in these respects to his Servants in
Gospel Times, since extraordinary Revelations are ceased, ^ay seem to be more
difficult to apprehend: only we are told that we have a more sure word of
Prophecy: and out of doubt there is still a truth in that which is expressed,
Amos 3. 7.

Those of Gods servants that have obtained Grace to be faithful, as they are
exceeding desirous to do good, so they cannot but be very observant to see what
success their labors have; and as to the general state and frame of the people
they are sent to, it is practically obvious, by the entertainment they give to,
and improvement they make of the means of Grace which are afforded them. As to
particulars indeed, there may be some who notoriously discover themselves by
their lewd lives, and profligate carriages; others may act more closely, and
make a fair show, when indeed they are unfruitful, and so impose upon their
belief and charity; and yet some of these do often render themselves very
suspicious. Now God herein mainly signifies his mind to his Ministers in this
respect, not by telling them this and that in particular is an Hypocrite, and
has no true grace in him; but he touches their hearts with an appearn^^sion
of his displeasure, and stirs them up providentially to give warning to his
people and tell them of their danger, and to be much and frequent in insisting
upon these themes: and it is an observation worthy of remark, that when God is
about to manage a Controversy either more public, or more personal, there are
unaccountable applications in the Ordinances unto such, which oftentimes put
men into admiration, and if the reason of this be asked, it may be considered.

1. That God is wont to give Sinners in the Visible Church, fair warning,
before he falls upon them in his wrath. It is a privilege of sinners that are
under the means of Grace, to be told of their sins and have the denunciations
of Gods wrath laid before them, before it siezeth them, that so together with a
space to repent, they may have a loud call unto it: and this appertains to the
singular long suffering of God, which he extends to such, and will render them
the more inexcusable, if at last they by their impenitency force him to make a
way for his anger; he therefore first slays them by the mouth of his Prophets,
before he executes his vengeance upon them in his Providence; and because he
uses his Ministers as Instruments, by whom he gives these warnings to his
people, he therefore moves their hearts to eye and observe, and be deeply
affected with the things that give him provocation, and accordingly guides
their studies and meditations that way.

2. God often does it with gracious purposes, sometimes to his Ministers, to
quicken them to a more earnest and repeated diligent endeavor for the people,
both by interpo^ing with God in their more ardent prayers to him for his
Patience, and farther to call upon such, and by more particular and solemn
endeavors with sinners to quicken and awaken them to their duty; and by this
means, whether they will hear or forbear, these will have the more peace in the
issue, that they have used their best endeavors to do them good; and if they
have any grace in them, such apprehensions will raise it up, and put it upon
more than ordinary vigor and improvement, in laboring for and with sinners,
whose danger they see and fear. Sometimes to unfruitful sinners themselves, by
giving a blessing to such endeavors, and persuading them to hearken to their
solemn counsels, and accept of the calls to Repentance, that being rendered
fruitful, he may have mercy upon them and spare them: and when it is so, his
spirit sets in with, and gives efficacy to these endeavors.

USE I^.
Let this then be a word of warning to all Unprofitable ones. If Gods servants
who have obtained G race to be faithful, are at any time spirited and engaged
more particularly to bear a Testimony against your barrenness, and solemnly to
declare your danger to you, and press the many threatenings of Gods word upon
you; do not you flight or neglect it; count it not a light matter, or only a
pang of their Zeal; but think with your selves, God has been taking notice of
me with a jealous eye, he is highly provoked at my so long remaining
unfruitful, and is now sending me this rowzing message to alarm me, and give me
an opportunity, which if I neglect, I must expect some sudden wrath to fall
upon me. If his servants are thus afraid of his Judgments coming, well may I,
who ly so woefully open to them, do not say they speak at random, of their own
heads, or vent their passions, or discover their wishes: no, If they fear God,
they desire the good of your souls, and that you may be Saved from the evil
that is coming, expect the^ that if you do not amend your ways and d^ings, it
will not be long before God will come in earnest, either in some public
visitation or in some personal stroke that he will lay upon you, which will
make you to wish that you had hearkened to his voice, in the mouth of his
Messengers. If you thus do* and thereupon shake off your vain security and
carnal confidence; and, bewailing your barrenness, go to him, who only can do
it, to teach you to profit, and set your selves in good earnest to seek and
serve him with all your hearts; it shall turn to your account, and God will
turn away from his fierce anger, But if you shall notwithstaning this, persist
in your evil courses, and say in your hearts, I shall have peace
notwithstanding, and there is no evil nigh: if you say G od has not spoken by
them but they declare a vision of their own, and you go on in your sinful state
and ways, neglecting the admonitions thus given you in the name of the Lord;
God himself will come out against you in his anger, and by some awful token of
his displeasure, make you to know by a dear bought experience, that there leave
been Prophets among you.

SERMON VII
WE have been considering the Person deliberated with, it follows that we take
notice of the deliberation it self* in which as has been observed, there are
two things to be handled distinctly.

1. The complaint of the Owner against this particular fig tree, in which he
gives the ground and reason of the following sentence which he pronounces.

In which observe,

1. The great pains and patience which he had used with this tree in
expectation of its bearing: the Patience is expressed in that he had waited
three years upon it, suffering it all this while, in hope that it would bear in
so long a time at least why our Savior uses the definite number of three, is
diversely guessed; some think that he aims at the three years of his public
Ministry, which at had spent in that work, when this Parable was uttered, and
the year requested in the following verse, to aim at the fourth current, in
which he suffered: others suppose it to aim at the nature of the fig tree,
which if it be not wholly barren, will bear at least once in three years and
then it intends that God had waited upon the sinner as long as there were, any
rational hopes of his receiving good, or profiting; or till there was no
apparent remedy, as the Scripture sometimes phraseth it. Not that the day of
grace is ^o be limited to three years, but during Gods pleasure, and his pains
is intimated, in that all this while he kept coming and looking; which
signifies the frequent reiterated means of grace that are used With sinners,
and the often applications of the Spirit of God, to them, during the day of
Patience.

2. The missing of his expectation after all this; and find none: and that is
the aggravation of the provocation, that not only at first coming, but after so
often coming, it remained still as it was, unfruitful.

3. The ^^phasis put upon this complaint; looked: the word is sometimes used as
a note of attention, when some observable thing is pointed at, and therefore it
is also often used as a note of Admiration, when some strange thing that is to
be wondered at is mentioned which calls for Astonishment from the Beholders.

There are two Observations lie plain in the words.

DOCTRINE I. That God keeps an exact account of all the Patience and Pains that
he uses with sinners under the Gospel, and the improvement which they make
thereof.
Thus is the Landlord here brought in making of particular remarks upon what he
had done; and what he had observed.

There are several Propositions contained in this Doctrine, a brief explication
of which will serve for the clearing up the Truth contained in it.

PROPOSITION I:
That God uses a great deal of Patience with some sinners under the Gospel.
Though he affords them the means of Grace, and they do not presently give them
due entertainment, but neglect them, yet he does not always presently fall
upon, and cut themoff from these means, but suffers them to live a great while
under them, and waits upon them. Here observe.

1. That the Patience of God is Sovereign and Arbitray. It is an act of his
mere good pleasure: as h^ ows to no sinners a room in his Vineyard, or so much
as an offer of Grace; so, upon their neglecting to improve the means, and
refusing the offers of Grace made to them, he might righteously take away his
Gospel from them, or them from it; and although he would be severe, yet he
would be very just. The New Covenant is a Covenant of Grace, and all that i^
done for men in it, is therefore free: as he acts his pleasure in choosing who
shall be put into the Vineyard, he does it no less in determining their
continuance in it.

2. This patience is exerted toward some and not all. As God is Sovereign so
he makes use of his Sovereignty, to let us know that he is so. How many are
there that are born in places where the Gospel is enjoyed, who never live to
years of understanding, to have any offer of Grace made to them; of whom,
though God can work his Grace in them by his spirit, and has given godly
parents good reason to hope well concerning them, (but this dispensation is a
secret;) (...) this is a truth, that they are taken out of the Vineyard, before
they are capable of the moral means used in it. We find also such to whom the
Gospel has been offered, and at their, first refusal of it they have been
discarded, Acts 13. 45, 46. yea such an injunction Christ laid upon his
Disciples; Mat. 10. 14.

3. Hence also God uses his pleasure in the timing his Patience to these and
those. All that are waited upon have not the same measure of the day of grace,
and season for bearing fruit; but some a longer, and some a shorter time,
having no other bounds, but his will: nor has he told any sinners how long it
shall be: he would not have any such to presume, but calls all to improve the
present time; does not acquaint them when he will put an end to his Patience if
they repent not: some sinners are cut down in their full strength, others are
suffered to live and grow: old, and all this while God is patient, he bears and
forbears, for there is no hour in which they are open not to his displeasure,
and giving him provocation to fall upon them in his anger: and there are some
whom he will make to experience his forbearance to the uttermost, Romans 9. 23.

PROPOSITION II.
That in this day of Patience, God takes a great deal of pains with sinners, to
engage them unto fruitfulness. The Owner did not only tarry three years, but he
was all this while coming, i. e. upon all occasions; and he comes to seek
fruit. Gods coming to sinners under the Gospel, does not intend a mere
observation, but also the endeavors that he uses with them for their good, in
the application of means to them in such a way as to invite and encourage them;
and this will be evident if we consider, when God may properly be said to come?
Gods coming is not to be understood only in respect of his Omnipresence, for
that all Beings are equally sharers in, but it intends his application of
himself to them for the persuading of them to Repentance. There is therefore an
outward, and an inward coming here to be taken notice of.

1. God comes outwardly to men in his Ordinances, and in his Providence. These
are the external means which he makes use of, which are suited to the nature of
man, and have a voice of God in them. The Ordinances are primarily so, being
appointed of God to discover his mind and meaning to the children of men; in
which he reveals to them the way of profiting; declares what is his will and
their Duty; shows them their native barrenness, and where their fruit is to be
had; calls upon them to attend the things of their peace, warns them of the
dange^ of neglect, sets before them the gracious encouragements of Obedience,
and is continually putting them in mind of the things which they are apt to
forget. God indeed uses the Ministry of men in these respects, but they are
Ambassadors that represent God himself, 2 Cor. 5. 20. to hearken to them, is to
hearken to him; to despise them, is to despise him. Thus God comes every
Sabbath; and Lecture; in every Ordinance that is Dispensed, every Sermon that
is Preached, every counsel and warning that is privately given, Jer. 25. 4. 7.
Providence are so secondarily, viz. as they are used by God to back his
Ordinances, and lay men under the more sensible obligations to hearken and
yield Obedience to them; the Rod is therefore said to be have a voice in it,
M^^. 6. 9. and it is God that speaks by it to the children of men.

2. God comes also inwardly to m^^ and that is by his secret strivings with
their ^^^ts in these Ordinances and Providence. There are the near approaches
of God to them, which though others discern not, yet they themselves cannot but
be sensible of. The Spirit of God strave with the old W orld in the Ministry of
Noah. They that resist the Gospel are said to resist the Holy Ghost, Act. 7.
51. and that not only because they who preach it are C ommissioned by him to
their work, but also because he himself comes in and with it, and moves upon
the hearts of men, leaves some touches there, which are for their awakening,
and put them under Conviction, and upon consideration: There are oftentimes
secret whispers in men's Souls, which say to them, this is your concern, which
fasten this and that cord upon them; which under such Providence as they met
with, makes them to reflect and consider, which put them upon purposing and
promising, or at least upon thoughtful deliberation with themselves: and as
long as it is so, God is coming inwardly as well us outwardly. It is true, this
inward application i^ not tied to the outward; sinners therefore are not, by
every word or rod, put upon such thoughts; but it is often so, nor does this
always last as long as the other; men may have sinned away the spirit from
coming in the Ordinances unto their hearts, whilst God yet sees meet to be
coming to them in outward dispensations; but whilst both these are continued to
them, this is that which is properly their day of Grace.

PROPOSITION III.
2. That God keeps an exact account of all this patience, and these pains. He
has a Book of memorial, in which he enters upon the record all his layings out
upon them. Books of Register are in the Scripture ascribed to God, after the
manner of men, to intimate to us, that he has the exact account of such things
with him, that he keeps them in remembrance, and forgets none of them. For this
reason we have him so often, in his word, giving his people close hints of what
he had b^n doing for them at this and that time, and how long he had bin at it,
Jer 25.2. and elsewhere. He observes and keeps the account how many Sermons
they have heard, what Counsels were given to them here and there, how many
Sabbaths, they have had the advantage of, how many of his servants he has sent
to speak to them, what they said; how many applications his spirit has made to
their souls, how long it is from the first day to this And if any shall
enquire, what makes God so accurate in recording these memorials, There are two
reasons for it.

1. God sets an high value upon these favors of his which he thus affords unto
men. He looks upon them to be extraordinary kindnesses, That any should be
planted in his Vineyard, and there have the privilege of all the tendance of
it: he therefore says of such, that he has known them after a singular
manner, Amos 3. 2. and there is never a day wherein men are spared
notwithstanding their unprofitableness, never an approach that he makes to
them, but it is of great worth: they are favors which carry in them singular
demonstrations of his good will, and they bring with them the greatest
advantages to the children of men, who deserve none of them: God challenges
men, if they can to tell him, What he could have done more for them: well then
may he keep the records of them.

2. God intends to call sinners that have neglected them, to an account about
them. They are indeed free favors, if we consider our merit, and we could
never have claimed them, or Gods liberty who had no obligation from us to
bestow them upon us: but they are not so free as to be forgotten, or as if we
were no way concerned whether we use or abuse them: no, in the day of accounts,
which is coming, they are all to be reckoned for. When the Lord made up the
reckoning with his Servants, he dealt with each of them according to the number
of Talents which they had received of him. Sabbaths, Sermons, and Sacraments;
and Mercies, and afflictions must be answered for. Now that a true Reckoning
may be made, an exact account must be kept, men must be made Debtors in Gods
Book for all these Items; they must be charged in order to their being answered
for; and that they may so be, they must be Registered.

PROPOSITION IV.
That God also keeps the reckoning of all the improvement which men make of
these patient endeavors of his. We are therefore told what remark the Owner
made on his fig tree, after his so long coming and seeking fruit: ^e found
(...), and this is to be made at the foot of every visit that he made: he came
in such an Ordinance at such a time; and looked that there should be fruit upon
it, and found none; and at another time, and found none; and toties quoties:
Not only that they are barren at last, but how they are so progressively; how
they continue to be so from time to time, and then put the whole series
together. Thus we have one piece of Gods account on this matter drawn out, Amos
4. 6, etc. and if the reason of th^^ be asked, it will be evident, if we
consider;

1. That the account which God calls them unto is in order to recompense. For
this cause the day of Judgment is called the day of Recompense. The Apostle
tells as upon what account it is that we must all appear 2 Cor. (...). 10. When
therefore Our Savior gives as a description of the Great day, Math. 25. ^he
determines it in the distribution of re^ards to men; and this must be made with
respect to their bearing, or barrenness. Rewards have always an eye unto
something that is done, it is not therefore enough that God observes and
remembers what he nath done for men, but he also must have on the other side
the account of what they have done: how else shall the accounts be adjusted
between them; or by what rule shall he give them their rewards? especially if
we consider.

2. That there are two sorts of plants in Gods Vineyard, whose recompenses are
different. God therefore must not only observe what he does for them, but how
they carry themselves under it. There is a reward of Grace, and a reward of
Vengeance, a recompense of Life, and of Death; there are some that do bear
fruit, that do improve the patience and layings out of God faithfully, and for
these there is a Cracious remuneration; blessedness is secured to them by
promise, and they must receive it: but there are others that neglect the means,
and instead of yiedling the good fruits of holiness, do bring forth the vile
fruits of sin, and by that means turn the Grace of God into wantonness; these
are to be rewarded with misery; there are punishments appointed for them. These
therefore must be distinguished and known each from the other, which calls for
this particular account; and the rather, if we yet farther add,

3. That men's recompenses are to be proportioned according unto their rece^ts
and improvements. There is not only a distribution of rewards, to be made,
according as men are found fruitful or barren; but they are to be measured
according to the degres of either. It is true, the recompenses of fruitfulness
are of mere grace, and there is nothing we can do, that will earn any degree of
happiness for us; but yet if God please to proportion glory hereafter,
according as he measures out grace here, who shall forbid him? if the Lord will
say to him that has gained ten ^alents; rule over ten Cities, and to him that
has gained five talents, rule over five Cities, it is as he sees meet: and if
he will thus encourage endeavors in us, it is his Grace. But as to unfruitful
ones, it is certain that every offer of grace despised, is a new provocation,
every Sabbath neglected is a farther affront offered to the goodness of God,
and should he not make these men's sufferings to be accordingly greater, than
theirs who had less time, and fewer endeavors used with them, he would be a
loser in some of his works, which he must not be. The Declarative Glory of God
then calls for it: and because he will have glory answerable to his expenses,
he must keep the account: hence we read of his rewarding men according to what
they have done; and of the condition of some being far more tolerable than that
of others.

USE I
For Information in two particulars;

1. That a place in the visible Church is a dangerous station. It is inded a
great privilege; they that are here are nearer to Salvation than others: but
if they are under such a curious observation, and such an exact account be
taken of all their rece^ts and returns, needs must their hazards be very great.
Is all charged upon them, and are their Deportments under it set down to their
score? does God write down every thing? it will then be a large scrowl that all
such will have to be called to an account for: and O that bareless sinners
would think much of this; it might serve greatly to put the aw of God upon
their hearts.

2. Hence see the great folly and danger of all such as boast of their
privileges, and regard not the improvement of them. How many are there who
talk high of what they enjoy? they are placed in Gods House, they are favored
with all the benefits of the Gospel: but in the mean while, they are regardless
to themselves, and to their lives; they take no heed to themselves how they
live under these liberties; and yet they value themselves according to these
things: and what multitudes are there who have found that this kind of
computation has proved their undoing? these must needs run a fearful risk and
will be sadly disappointed, when after they have boasted and bragged of their
great enjoyments, they shall be summoned to answer for all, and a fearful
scrowl shall be drawn up against them, of their horrible neglect, contempt and
unprofitableness under all? when they shall sadly be convinced, that it had
been better for them to have grown in any other Soil in the world, then to have
had a place in the Vineyard?

And therefore,

USE II.
Let every such one be exhorted to keep a strict account of these things. If
God does thus, it then loudly calls upon us to do so too; and to move us
hereto, Consider,

1. The neglect of this duty is one great reason of the barrenness of
professors. A careless frame of spirit; a neither regarding the operations of
the Lord, nor observing the framings of their own^souls; this makes multitudes
to live as if they had neither duty nor danger before them: and how often have
we God complaining of his people that they would not consider, mentioning it as
the leading cause of all the other things which he had to Article against them
for? this not laying of things to heart made them secure and regardless, of
themselves.

2. This reckoning, if any thing, will quicken you to present duty. I am sure
that it carries matter of awful awakening in it, and helps to convince us how
much we are concerned to see that our matters be good; to think that we have to
do with a God, who is so strict in observing and recording, and is consequently
like to be so exaction reckoning, with us. Paul thought it to be an argument of
strong persuasion, 2 Cor. 5. 11.

3. This is the way to know you present state. We are all dobtors to God for
all that he is thus doing for us; and according to our Improvement of these
things, so the account stands between him and us; in this way then we come, to
a reckoning with God. We know what we are indebted to him, by reflecting upon
all that he has been doing for us; but we know upon what ground we stand with
him, by a right computing what fruit there is of all this in us.

4. Thus also we shall come to know how it is like to go with us in the day of
Judgment. Then it will be strictly e^quired both what we recieved, and how we
improved: then the faithful servant shall have his e^ge well done: and then the
unprofitable servant shall recieve his Condemnation, and surely it is good for
us to know before hand if we may, whether we are like to stand or fall in the
Judgment, and for our Direction in this Affair, let us take these Rules.

1. Be frequent and distinct in observing all the ways in which God comes to
you. There has been a summary account of this given in the explication of the
Doctrine: and if God distinctly observes them, do you do so too; and that both
outwardly and inwardly: and be very particular: remember this Sabbath, that
Lecture, this mercy, that afflection, etc: what was spoken in your hearing, and
what there was whispered in your hearts: and reckon, not only the seasons that
you did enjoy; but what you might have enjoyed if you had not willingly, at
least negligently omitted; for God certainly does so; and you must expect to
hear of it again.

2. Examine you selves particulatly what use you have made of these things. Set
down the improvement over against the enjoyment: this is the way to have the
accounts clear. Say to your own Souls, God came to me at such a time in his
Word, and spoke thus, what impression did it make on my heart and life: he came
in such a mercy, what did I render to him for it? he spoke to me by such an
affliction, how did I resent it? what is my profiting by all these things? and
that your account may be full, enquire after your carriage both in the time,
and afterward: what impression did it leave on your hearts? did you entertain
God speaking to you, or did you reject him? and how did it in^^^ence your
after-conversation: did you soon forget it, or has it made you to be more
careful and critical in your steps?

3. Draw particular Conciusions from hence: and more especially these two.

1. Let the Conviction of barrenness quicken you to repentance, and diligence.
How many, if they would draw up the accounts faithfully, will find that they
have ill requited God, and never born any fruit? and who is there but may sadly
say, I have not come up as I ought, to an answerableness to what God has been
doing for me? and what does this call for, but that we go to God and bewail it,
repent of it, and seek to have the accounts adjusted by Christ our Surety? and
to ask of him grace that we may be up and doing, and redeem the time that
remains, in better diligence, serving him more and better.

2. Let it mightily encourage us to renewed industry in bearing fruit, to think
that God keeps such an account. As the consideration of this solemn truth
should make us both fearful and careful in our work, because be puts it on
record what he has done for us, so to remember that he also enters down all
that we do in our whole life, should make us not only af^^aid of mis^
improvement, but also cheerful in a constant vigorous improvement, as knowing
that, if it be so, our Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

SERMON VIII.
DOCTRINE II. It is an high Aggravation of the guilt of sinners in the visible
Church that they remain barren after long Patience, and great paint used with
them.
HEre lies the Emphasis of the Complaint, that he had tarried so many years,
and come so frequently, and the fig tree continues barren: and he speaks it as
a strange things, that calls for observation; Behold! That the sins of men do
admit of aggravations, or are greatned by circumstances, is evident from
Scripture. Not only are some sins in themselves more heinous and Scandalous
than others; but the same sins in themseves, may be made more provoking and
deeper died; and there are diverse ways in which they come so to be, and among
other rules by which this is to be judged of, here is one: VIZ: The greater
obligations that God has upon men, to repent of and turn from their sins to
him, ^he greater must the provocation needs be. This was it that made S^lomons
sin the more observable, because God had appeared to him twice: this aggravated
David's sin, because God had done so much for him: this made the sins of
Capernaum so terrible, because Christ had done so many wonderful works among
them: this put an Emphasis upon the sin of the Woman Jez^be^, that God had
given her a space to repent, and she repented not. Now among these obligations,
the most comprehensive are these two contained in out Text, viz, Gods long
patience with them, and his often coming to them; and here we may enquire, 1.
When men may be said to remain barren under all? 2. Whence it is that they so
do? 3. Wherein this appears to be so great an aggravation of their Guilt?


1. When men may be said to be barren after all?

A. It has been already expressed under a former Doctrine, what are the
Characters of a fruitless tree in the Vineyard. All I shall here add is only to
observe, that there is a twofold barrenness that may be taken notice of in
professors that sit under the means of Grace, and have long enjoyed Gods
patient strivings with them, VIZ; total and partial.

1. Total barrenness is when men, after all, remain in their natural state,
unconverted to God. Every Child of Adam, in his unconverted state, is barren:
he is utterly incapable of bringing forth any fruit that is acceptable to God;
he is a briar and thorn, and cannot bear figs. The sinner, before conversion,
has no saving principle in him, and therefore he cannot serve G od; his best
moral actions are but glitering abominations: as long therefore as he abides
thus, and does not truly turn to God, he is the same man that he was born:
whatsoever men obtain by means, though they get a great deal of literal,
knowledge in the things of God, and obtain so much of a civil and moral
conversation, as the young man in, Mat. 19. yet if* he be not savingly changed,
if he be not thoroughly turned to God, he is an empty vine, his works are dead
works, he is still dead in trespasses and sins. Nature under all its moral
refinings, is but nature still; grace is another manner of thing, and he is a
stranger to it; he is yet in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity.

2. Partial barrenness is when Professors do not bring forth fruit answerable
to their tilling. When Christians have a new principle of grace in them, and do
bear real fruit, but it is little they bring forth, nothing in comparison with
the cost and Pains that is laid out upon them: and good scarce deserves to be
called so, in them from whom far better is expected. God does not afford to all
his people alike advantages; and a tree may be counted fruitful for one Soil
that may be reputed unfruitful in another: and it is apparent, that some
Christians that enjoy the same helps, that grow in the same Vineyard, do
abundantly less for God than others do; now these may be said in a degree to be
barren: and although the Doctrine more especially arms at the former, yet these
also come under the consideration of it.

2. Whence it is that they are so? i. e. that they abide unfruitful after all
endeavors patiently used with them.

A. There are these things here to be observed:

1. In respect of total barrenness?

1. That man's natural barrenness cleaves to him so close, that no creature can
remove it. They cannot bear, except they be changed, and there is no power in
themselves, nor in any man or Angel to do it for them. It is a work of Divine
Power to make any soul spiritually fruitful: the stock, and root and branches
are dead; and as a dead tree cannot bear, so art cannot put life into it, a
Miracle only can, Joh. 1. 13.

2. That hence the means, though proper as means, yet have their efficacy
absoultely depending on him who has made them means. Every man cannot wield
Goliab^^ Sword. The word indeed is compared to a two-edged Sword, but none can
make it to cut by the Spirit: An Instrument is then serviceable, when one that
is able and skillful applies it; the Word then converts, when the Spirit makes
it a converting word. If God touch Lyd^a's heart, whilst Paul is Preaching; she
shall yield to the call: if he puts quickening efficacy into it, men shall be
quickened by it, else they remain dead in trespasses and sins, for all the
endeavors of moral Instruments.

3. There is a natural resistance in the hearts of men, to all the endeavors
which are used with them in the means. The con^enerate corruption which men
lying with them into the world, has in it a strong in mity against all which
is good, Romans 8.7, ^. and by virtue of this they set themselves to resist the
Spirit of God, and so withstand all the calls and counsels that are given them,
despising the goodness and forbearance of God, and turning the Gospel grace
into wantonness: and thus will all men do as long as they are left to
themselves, by reason of the wickedness that is in their hearts.

4. That God does often judicially leave men to their own choice. He gives them
up to their hearts lusts, they resist his grace, and he calls, and convinceth^
and waits, but they will not near him, and thereupon he suffers them to take
their course, because they will not receive instruction: and it is righteous
with him so to do, because they in this resistance, shut their eyes against
rational conviction, and are wilful against the clearest light; and whilst it
is so, let him wait never so long, and come never so often, they will be never
the better, but abide barren still.

2. In respect of partial barrenness.

1. There is a root of corruption, tending to unfruitfulness, in Gods children
in this life, Paul has his body of death which pesters him; and what is the
tendency of Death but barrenness? a dead womb is a barren womb; a dead heart, a
barren heart. The acts of grace are life acts, death therefore is directly
contrary to them, and this was the things which made Paul so unable to do the
things that he would.

2. There are a great many Temptations that the Children of God do meet with to
hinder them in their constant serving of God. The World we live in, is a place
of Temptation, and every thing is full of it: and the tendency of it is to
abure or discourage the Christian from his work. There are the Temptations of
carnal pleasures, of worldly encumbrances, of difficulties and threatening
dangers in Duty. Riches have their shares, and so has poverty: peace has its
allure-ments, and persecution it is affrightments.

3. The corrupt part that is in us, often takes advantage by these Temptations
to obstruct the Christian in his business. It is by these things that the Law
in his Members brings him into Capativity? and if the Spirit of God leaves him
to himself to try what is in him, it is always so: he either dallies with
allurements, and diverts unhappily to these things, and spends his time with
them; or he stops at discouragements, and sits still disheartened; and by these
means he neglects the work of God, which causes the fruits of Holiness to grow
very thin upon him, as the grapes on the vines after the Vintage, Micah. 7. 2.

3. Wherein this appears to be so great an aggravation of their Guilt?

A. This will be seen by laying those things together.

1. That it is the duty of sinners to hearken to the voice of God. Whatever
pleas men may pretendedly make of their own impotency, it gives them no
discharge from the obligation^ of Duty which is lying upon them. God is the
rightful Lord and Lawgiver; and his commands have an Obedience due to them from
the creature, who cannot with hold it without the guilt of rebellion. Besides,
the Gospel takes off all excuse here; because it looks upon men as being
without strength in themselves, and has accordingly provided and offered all
help to them in Christ, whose spirit is ready and able to do all that is
wanting. Now it is certain that God requires fruit of all that enjoy the means:
he looks for it, Text. It is his will that they bear it, 1 These* 4. 3.

2. That this Patience of God gives men a great deal of opportunity to bring
forth fruit, if they had an heart to it. This life is a time of serving God in;
that which follows is the time of reward: the longer therefore men live in Gods
Vineyard, the greater season they have of doing him service: every day that
they are there continued, puts a new price into their hands, which, when once
Gods patience is at an end, men must never more expect to enjoy: and hence the
more of it is now allowed them, which they improve not, the more opportunity is
lost: it gives them space to bethink themselves, to reflect upon their Ways and
courses, to recover their lost time, and to redeem their season, by a better
and more diligent improvement of it.

3. The means afforded them are very proper as means, to the end of
fruitfulness. Means indeed are to be looked at in their proper place, and
acknowledged as so; and in this respect there is nothing wanting to them, which
is proper and suitable in this affair. Our fruit is a reasonable service, To.
^2. 1. the means which God comes to us in, are very well accommodated to such a
service, for its help, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. They serve to inform the understanding
in the Doctrines of Salvation, and tell men wherein God is to be served; what
is the fruit that he expects and will accept; where strength i^ to be had, and
how to be improved; to establish the Judgment in the excellency of Obedience,
and great benefits of serving God; to convince the Conscience of all sin and
disobedience: to territy sinners from their sinful unprofitableness; to
encourage holiness, by all the precious promises which are made to all such as
bear fruit: and what more can be desired in means.

4. Hence this patience, and these pains which God uses are leading to
Repentance. If the Goodness and Forbearance of God exercised toward heathen
are so, Rom, 2. 3. How much more are these Gospel endeavors so, which he lays
out upon men that are under the dispensations of it? They lead by way of
Conviction showing men what reason there is why they should so do; and they
lead also by way of Invitation: there is an Invitation in the things
themselves, patience says that God is not willing these sinners should perish,
else he needed not to have waited no them, who every day gave him provocation;
and that has a loud call in it. Every time God, comes in an Ob^i^ance or
Providence, he does therein bespeak men: and to be sure all the secret
approaches of the spirit of God to their hearts in and by these, have a close
call in them.

5. Hence the more men have of these, and continue unfruitful under them, the
more is God despised, and his favors abused. Bartenness under Gods patience
and pleading with men, adds contempt to unprofitableness, and by this means
all the expense that is laid out upon them comes to be lost, as to their
benefit, and they do what in them lies to frusstrate God of his just
expectation. For a tree in the Wilderness to bear nothing is not so much, but
when it is transplanted into the Vineyard; and has stood there from year to
year, under all the care and tendance which is here used, still to bear
nothing* it has so such labor and time spent upon it in vain, ^^^ners have
now the Guilt of neglecting so Many endeavors, spending so many days (...) no
purpose, trampling upon so many calls and counsels: and if God sets a great
value on these things, their Guilt must needs be greatly heightened, who slight
and contemn them all.

6. Hereby unregenerate sinners the more discover their impen^^enc^^ and
desperate hardness of heart: yea indeed, they are made the more obstinate and
lard-hearted. Unprofitableness under the means that God uses with men in his
house, makes them more ^ooted in sin, and they that are not converted by them,
are set farther off from it, and that not only judicially, but naturally too;
for sin gets h^ad and ripens no where faster, then under the Gospel, which,
where it is not a favor of life, will be a favor of ^ea^h i. e. it will leave
men more dead, more unbelieving; set them farther off from God, and under a
greater Moral Difficultie^ of Conversion; and this also is an aggravasion.

7. Hereby Believers discover the strength of their natural corruption, and do
also carry it ^^worthy of their vocation. It is unbecoming for Gods children to
fall into any unprofitable frame, because they are newborn that they might
live to the glory of God; And that honor which God has by them, is by their
bearing: but for them to live^ and continue unfruitful notwithstanding all the
means, which are so advantage^ons to stir up and nourish their graces, to rou^^
and encourage them: must needs be exceeding unworthy, and consequently very
offensive to God, as being contradictory to their profession, and I losing of
the greatest part of the benefit which they enjoy: it therefore evidenceth that
they give way to the body of death, and indrilge that lust which they ought to
be always mortifying, else (...) would not be so, and this must needs bring
guilt upon them.

USE I.
This shows us the way how men come to be the amazing monuments of Gods wrath.
When God has a purpose to suffer sinners to bring upon themselves, the most
astonishing impressions of his indignation, and to fill up such a measure as
shall make them peculiar Instances of his revenging Justice: he places them in
the Church, gives them leave to fit under clearest Gospel light, and to enjoy
all the advantages of the means to the highest, to have line upon line, and to
suffer them to stand a long while in this state, un^^ they have despised a
world of endeavors used with them, and tired out a long conti^^ed patience,
before he falls upon them, and cuts them off; that by abusing the best of
^ercies, and wearing out the most restrained forbearance, they may fall at last
under the load of so great guilt, as will drag them down into the depths of
destruction: and by this means, though for the present he seems to be a loser
by these men, yet he does fully recover his injured glory at their hands in the
winding up: Hence,

USE II.
Let it be for an awakening word of terror to all unfruitful Professors, who
have been a long while under Gospel dispensations. One would think it should
fill the hearts of sinners with consternation to consider of this Truth; that
all the while they live under the enjoyment of these favors of God, they are
increasing their account and enflaming the reckoning. Does every neglected
opportunity add one article against you, and increase the score of your guilt,
think then how much there is heaped up against you, and ask your own souls how
you shall endure, when all this shall come to be charged upon you^* but give me
leave to turn this terror into a word of advice; therefore.

USE III.
Let it be a loud call to old sinners that are under the Gospel. Are there none
among us, that have not been three, but thirty, forty, fifty years in the
Vineyard, under the means of grace, and strivings of the spirit of God, and
have not to this day brought forth and fruit that God will accept of, but have
lived in their natural state, neglected their Souls, and not regarded to
improve the Opportunities they have had? Let this Doctrine awaken you, and put
you upon making haste to get your sin pardoned, your guilt removed, and your
souls made fertile; and to move you thereto, let me offer these considerations.

1. Think how much Guilt you have already contracted to yourselves. Know it,
whatever pretense of respect you have shown to the Gospel and the means of
Grace, yet your barrenness is a witness against you that you have indeed
neglected and despised all: count up how many Sabbaths you have lived* and
remember so many days have been profaned by you; and so many Sermons as you
have heard, so many witnesses you have laid against you: so many of Gods
Messengers as have labored in vain amongst you so many accusers you will have
another day, if you repent not: If once rejecting Christ's ^all, If once
refusing to comply with the striving spirit, be enough to ruin you for, ever;
how will you be able to stand up under the weight of such innumerable
provotations? and will you go on still? say, is it; not high time for you now
at length to look about you and bestir yourselves.

2. Remember what an Holy God you have to do with, Never delude your selves
with a vain confidence in abused mercy, God knows how to cloth himself with
Vengeance. and kindle up his fury into a fire unquencheable, if you dare to go
on to itritate it by your impenitence. His Holiness stands engaged for his
Honor and will not give away his Glory. His Holiness will not suffer him to
lose all the cost and patience laid out upon you. Though fury be not in him yet
he will burn up briars and thorns. that resolve to continue to be such: though
he can bear with, yet he will not acquit the Guitly if they continue to be so:
they are at present a burden to him, and he is pressed by them but he will case
himself of these his Enemies.

3. You have as yet the invitation and opportunity to be fruitful. You are
still in the Vineyard: wonder at it, and take the encouragement of it, and let
it awaken you to improve it. God is still patient, and let that lead you to
repentance: there is hope concerning you, but still there is great danger a^
you may afterward hear: let your danger excite you, and your hopes draw you to
lay aside any longer delays, and put your selves upon present expedition; go to
Christ for pardon, and wait upon him for grace, ask of him his spirit, beg hard
that he will purge you, that you may yet be fruit-bearing trees in his
Vineyard: and though it be at the ^inth or eleverth hour, yet if you be serious
and faithful, it shall be well.

USE IV.
Let this also serve to quicken decaying Christians, who yet have the root of
the matter in them. Are there any such among us, that have fallen from their
first love, and are grown into a great measure of barrenness, who have
sometimes flourished in the Courts of God? be awakened and ^owzed up to
remember the first works and do them, and to excite you hereunto, consider,

1. You greatly dishonor God, and grieve his holy spirit by this. All the
fruit that is born unto God in this world is produced by true believers; if
then you come short too what shall he do to his Vineyard? this is a very ill
requital of God, for all that he has done for you more then others: to others
he has given the means of Grace, and it is their great iniquity that they
despise them, but he has given you grace with the means, and that is
unspeakably more; he may therefore well expostulate with you in a solemn manner.

2. You are also yourselves great losers by it The more fruit that you bear,
the more Glory you shall have. Will it not be a great loss, though you be saved
by fire, yet to have a great many of your works burnt up? you will also dye
with the less comfort: the reflection of your minds upon so much
unprofitableness, under such glorious advantages as you have had, will be a sad
thought in a dying hour, when you are going to give up your accounts: Hence.

1. Be much in mortifying the lusts that are in you. It is from the prevalency
of them that your fruitfulness is obstructed: if they be subdued and kept
under, Grace will thrive and put forth; but as long as they are indulged that
will be at an under: go then to the Father, the great Husbandman, and pray to
him that he will purge you, that so you may bear fruit.

2. Stir up the Graces that are within you. God has given you a saving
principle, but it must be exercised; it will not bring forth fruit without your
careful and diligent Improvement of it: and call upon the Spirit of Grace to
help you: This will be a good way for you to recover your lost time, and by
double diligence to be the more fruitful, from the Consideration of your former
decays.

SERMON IX
WE have considered the Owners complaint, that which follows is,

2. The advice which he gives to the Vinedresser about this tree; in which
there are two things observable;

1. The word of command given out for its excision; Cut it down. The word, in
its usage is almost appropriate to Husbandmen or Gardners; and it signifies
more than a meet cutting down, viz. an Extirpation. When trees are dead or
barren, they used to cut them up by the roots; and make fuel of them for the
fire, that so room might be made for the planting of others in their place: and
it here Allegorically designs the utter ruin and destruction of the barren
professor. Only here a difficulty arises which must be obviated, viz. How
comes the Vine-dresser to be commanded to do it? especially upon the former
interpretation given, which told us that he represented the Gospel Ministry;
the ministers work being to aim at the conversion and salvation, and not the
destruction of those whom he is sent unto: for which reason some interpret God
himself, others, Christ to be here intended, who has the Keys of Heaven and
Hell, the power of life and death. It might be sufficient here to answer, that
simil^tudes do not run on all four, and therefore Parables are not to be
over-strained: and it might suffice to say, it intends that God will not always
bear with unprofitable unregenerate sinners, that live under the Gospel, and
that he gives his Servants notice of it. Men are wont to cut up trees in their
Gardens by the hands of their Servants, who look after them; God will do this
to these with his own hand, only he would have his Ministers to give them
faithful notice of it. But I supose there is something more in it then so: Let
us then here observe, that there is a twofold cutting off of sinners according
to Scripture; the one is Ministerial, the other Providential.

This latter is Gods prerogative, and he does it by those Judgments which he
brings upon them, in which also he often uses the Instrumentality of second
causes. Sometimes he does it by war, sometimes by pestilential diseases,
sometimes by the hand of civil justice to which he suffers them to expose
themselves; and he has many ways to accomplish it by; but in this the Gospel
Ministry is not concerned. The former of these belongs properly to them, as
they are the Ambassadors of God, sent to treat with men about the affairs of
the Kingdom, who, if men will not accept of the terms of the treaty, and comply
with the Articles offered them, are, after all means used to bring them to it
unsuccessfully, to proclaim war against them. They are first to call and
counsel, and plead with sinners, and if that will not do, then are they to warn
them, and if they accept not of that, their business then is to threaten them,
and tell them what they are to expect; and this the Spirit of God, calls
killing of them, Hos. 6. 5. and in this sense must Jeremiah's Commission be
interpreted, Jer. 1. 10.

2. The equity and prudence of this Command is vindicated; and that is proposed
in interrogatorily, to show the unanswerableness of it, why cumbers it the
ground? The word translated, cumber, signifies to make a thing useless and
unserviceable; not only to burden a thing, but to damnify it too: and we may
look upon that to be a cumber, which is an unprofitable burden. It serves here
to intimate to us what great hurt unfruitful professors do in the Visible
Church, which calls for their being cut down. there are three Observations may
be gathered from these words.

DOCTRINE I. That God will not always bear with fruitless professors in his
Visible Church.
This Doctrine arises from the connection of the edict here given out, with the
complaint made in the former part of the verse. It is q.d. I have been thus
long waiting to no purpose, and I can bear no longer. We have already taken
notice, that God uses much patience with many sinners, and that this patience
of his is arbitrary, but we now come to observe, that though he bear a great
while, yet he will not so do for ever; that he may be weary with forbearing,
that sinners may by their continuing impenitent tire him out, and incense his
indignation against them; that if they have a day of grace given them to repent
in, and they repent not, it will come to an end Here we may enquire into,

1. The evidence of the Doctrine, that it is so,

2. The ground of it, or the reason why it is so.

1. For the evidence of the Doctrine, or that it is so: and here we need to
look no farther than the Scripture warnings, threatenings, and examples which do
abundantly illustrate it. For Warnings and Threatenings how many might be
produced? let a few suf^^ce. What did God say to and of the ^old World in
Noah's time? Gen.6.3. My spirit shall not always strive. He says indeed that
it shall be long, but assures them it shall have an end: and how did God urge
his advice upon the Jews by his Prophets, but by such a consideration? see Isa.
55. 6. seek the Lord while ^e may be found; intimating that he would not else
be ever so, and Jer. 4. 4. Circumcise, etc. lest my fury, etc. When God says
lest, it intimates that there is such a thing, for he does not fright them with
bug bears; and a like expression we have (...) 6. 8. Be instructed, etc. thus
also he presi^^^ the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. As for Scripture Examples,
giving us to understand that it has been so; that God has been weary with
forbearing, and caused his anger to break in upon such as have been his visible
people, and enjoyed Vineyard-priviledges; they are for our admonition, and tell
us that what God has done, he may do again, yea and will too upon the like
provocation given him: And here; if we speak of a people in general, Israel of
old stand for monuments of this to the end of the world: how near God had taken
them to him we find upon record; they were the only people that he had in the
World; they were his vineyard which he had planted, and fenced, etc. Isa. 52.
begin. and God sends Jerusalem to Shiloh, Jer. 7. 11. to see what he had done
there; and see what the Psalmist faith of that, Psalm. 78. 58, etc. and he sends
us to Jerusalem, which met with as fearful a desertion, as we have it
pa^hetically represented by the Prophet in his Lamentations. If of particular
persons, see what is said to Jezebel and her paramours Rev. 2. 21. etc. and
doubtless it was verified. Yea how often did God witness against these and
those for their rebellion against him? But

2. For the ground of it, or the reason why it is so, we may gather it up in
these conclusions.

1. That though Gods Patience be himself, and therefore Infinite, yet it is
exercised according to his Wisdom and pleasure. Attributes considered as in
God, are God, for he is one individed Essence, and pure act, and therefore
every virtue which we ascribe to God, must be acknowledged to be Infinite in
him: but yet as they are made to shine out in his works of Efficiency, we are
to account them voluntary, and managed according to the Wisdom of God: he
therefore measures them out to the Creature more or less, according to his own
discretion. For men therefore to argue from the Divine Nature of Gods love,
mercy, forbearance, etc. to please themselves with an opinion that he must be
boundless in his expressions of them to the creature, is a vain fancy, and*
that which God warns men against, lest they should so cheat themselves into
ruin, Isa. 27. 4.

2. That God must and will be glorified in all those Attributes of his which he
displays to the children of men. God does all things for himself; his own glory
is his own last end in all his works of Efficiency, and therefore he manageth
the whole discovery of them, with an eye fixed on this end: he had been
glorious in himself, if he had never manifested any of his Perfections to the
creature; but if he do thus make himself known, he will bring about his
declarative glory by it: it is that which is dear to him, and he will not part
with it. If therefore he be patient with sinners, and wait upon them when he
might destroy them; if he deferr his revenge, and suppress his anger, he will
have the honor of this, he will get to himself a name by it.

3. That for which God waits upon sinners under the Gospel is to see if they
will bear fruit. That which is the end of a tree's planting, is that which a
man expects of it, and for that it is he lets it grow, and waits from year to
year to see if it answers the end, Text. Men are planted in Gods Vineyard on
purpose for fruit; there are none standing there of whom it is not expected.
Now the Husbandman knows that time must be allowed to trees planted, for their
fructifying; and he is wont to think, that though such a tree does not this
year answer his expectation, but goes over, and bears nothing; yet it is
possible it may make amends for it the next year* and if then it also misseth,
yet if it does but blossom, and bid fair for it, though all fall off and die
away, he is willing to try one season more, as being loath to cut it down if it
may be prevented: but still all his patience is, because he supposes it may at
last bear: Thus God expresses his waiting upon sinners to be upon such a
presumption, Zeph. 3. 7.

4. That all the while that any remain unfruitful in Gods Vineyard, they cast
contempt on Gods Patience. For this reason impenitent sinners are said to
despise it, Romans 2. 3. God looks upon himself to be scorned, and his lenity to
be trampled on by such persons; for hereby they do withstand and directly set
themselves against the very design of the Gospel, they do, as to the present
efficacy, make void all the pains and endeavors that are laid out upon them;
they turn the grace of God into wantonness: God waits for their repentance, and
they answer it with obstinacy, and impenitence, which is directly contrary: and
when is mercy despised, but when it is abused? and what greater abuse can be
offered to it than this?

5. Hence God is hereby greatly dishonored, and therefore must needs be very
highly provoked. For Sinners to offer an affront to any of Gods Attributes, is
a reflection of dishonor upon him. Men count themselves disparaged when they
lose their labor; and Gods Honor is trodden upon by Sinners when they abide
unprofitable in his vineyard, If then he be bound for his glory in all, and ^e
Jealous for his great Name, it must be an high provocation that is thus offered
to him; and we must not think that he cannot resent it; no, he declares that
his holy Spirit is grieved by such things, Psalm. 78. 40. and they vex him, Isa.
63. 10. and therefore God himself is brought in making that complaint, Amos 2.
13. I am pressed under you as a Cart that is pressed with sheaves. God speaks
as a man, who though he bears, and is patient, as to any discovery of himself,
yet is inwardly weary, and finds a burden which he would willingly be eased of:
intimating that he is displeased at such things; and he is wont to express this
di^pleasure of his, partly in the solemn warnings of his Ordinances, partly in
the rebukes of his Providence, which he lays upon such, in sore and heavy
affliction; to signify, that though for the present he bears with them, yet he
is dissatisfied at them.

6. That impenitent sinners grow worse and worse under the Patience of God, and
so add to the provocation. The means of grace under which men are continued
during the long-suffering of God, are either a savor of life, or of death. Now
impenitency or unprofitableness makes them to be a favor of death, and that is
by hardening them in sin; and therefore we find that evilmen are said to grow
worse, and this is a natural effect in such; for their hearts being naught,
they misimprove all the means to nourish their corruption, and so grow more
obstinate, which operation being directly contrary to what the Gospel calls
for, which is that they should grow better by it, must needs lay in the more
anger of God against them, and therefore the longer they thus abide, the more
must his jealousy be enflamed against them.

7. Men at length grow hopeless, and then Patience is bootless. For if the
proper end of G ods patience be to wait for fruit of them, to see if it will
not at last repent them of their barrenness; if they will not think of their
ways, and turn their feet unto Gods Commandments; then the design of it is at
an end, when all expectation of this is over: as long as the Owner supposes
that his tree may in time become serviceable, there is some reason for his
letting it stand in the Vineyard, but when all grounds of so looking for it
fail, and he utterly despairs of any such thing, what should he let it stand
for any longer? That there is such a state which sinners do in time arrive at,
we are told, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. not that any are gone so far as to outdo
Almighty power, but so as to despise all manner of means, and grow obstinate
and remo^sless, so as that all endeavors do appear to be utterly in vain, when
they show their determinate resolution and wilfulness, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Isa.
1. 5.

8. Hence God is now put upon it to recover his own glory of them, by bearing
no longer. He has now, to speak after the manner of men, for born as long as
he can: he has waited to have glory from them by their serving of him, and
given them a gracious opportunity for it, but there is ^one comes, nor like to
come, but on the contrary he is more dishonored every day: and now he must
look after his honor, and recover it himself. His glory he must have by them;
he would have had them given it to him willingly, but they would not, he
therefore must have it forcibly: and now his worn out Patience turns into the
greatest fury against them; hence that threatening, Prove. 1. 24. As a Creditor
that betrusts his Debtor from time to time, and is frequently asking his honest
payment, but none comes; he still credits them, but has nothing but words and
promises, no performances; at length he fees it bootless to wait any longer,
and now he sues him for it, and recovers it in a way of Justice; and there is
all reason for it, unless he would lose all; but this God will never do, and
why indeed should he?

USE I.
Hence learn how vain a thing it is for any to think that the Visible Church is
a place of security for such as bear no fruit. I am not here going about to
undervalue the visible Covenant, or cast contempt on the Gospel Vineyard: it is
a great privilege, and consequently an high favor of God for any to have a
room there; but this privilege may be abused, and that may prove men's bane. If
men think the Sanctuary to be a shelter for wickedness, a place where they may
safely sin, and be out of the reach of danger, they woefully cheat themselves.
It is to be feared that there are too many of the children of the Covenant,
that think all is well with them, because they have a place among the people of
God; there must therefore no evil come unto them; and because God bestows all
visible privileges upon them, therefore they are so in his favor as they
never shall be in hazard of knowing his displeasure: G od waits and (...), and
they think it must always be so: but the Lord assures us that this is to trust
in lying words; thus to presume is for them to make a Covenant with Hell, and
be in league with death. Know it, Divine vengeance can fetch a criminal from
the city of Refuge, slay a Joa^ at the Altar, find out a barren figtree in the
midst of the Vineyard. Because God has been patient a great while, it allows
not that he must be so still; nay it is to be expected that he will not be so
much longer, a day of grace will wear out, and indeed in this place is the
greatest danger; and therefore;

USE II.
Let it serve to awaken carnal and fruitless Professors out of this security,
you that have been many years in the vineyard, and barren still, be roused up
by this consideration; God has born with you a great while; but seriously
consider that, the day of Patience has its limits, and will come to an end.
And that I may urge this Truth upon you in its solemnity, give me leave to lay
some awful considerations before you.

1. Consider that you have to do with a God who will not be mocked. It is true,
he is agracious, and merciful, and long-suffering God, but beware of
misimproving these Discoveries; know it therefore that he is an Holy G od too,
and jealous for his great Name; he shows his rich mercy to you in that he gives
you the privileges of his house, and lays out so much upon you in it; in that
he bestows on you the Gospel favors, and waits that he may be gracious to you;
but he is not to be trampled upon, his goodness is not to be despised; he will
be glorified in them that draw near unto him; be not therefore deceived, think
not that he will be trifled withal by sinners; he is a terrible God in his
Church, and all they there that will dare him to it, by their living in sin,
shall find him to be so to their cost.

2. Consider the Covenant under which you stand. has its threatenings as well
as its promises. There are indeed great and precious promises held out to all
those that are in the Covenant; but they are also under severe menace; and by
virtue of their station in the visible Church, they are equally related to the
one as to the other. Do not forget that the Gospel Covenant has its
conditions, and accordingly as men are under them, so it speaks to them comfort
or terror. It says, if you believe you shall be saved, but it says too, if
you believe not, you shall be damned; it says, if you bear fruit you shall be
commended, but it also assures you, that if you bear none you shall be
condemned: yea, as it has better promises, so it has more severe threatenings
than the first Covenant had. Think it not to be enough to say, I am in the
Covenant, and so to run away with a carnal confidence, that all is well: But
put your selves upon a thorough search, and enquire what part of the Covenant
you stand under; there is a vast difference between being under the
Covenant-promise, and threatening; nothing is more comfortable than the former,
nothing more amazing than the latter: and know it, that if you abide barren
still, this is your condition, and you may well expect to have the threatening
accomplished upon you.

3. The day of Gods patience may be nearer an end that you are aware of. This
deserves to be well thought of^ and, to give some weight to this argument, be
advised to consider.

1. In general, that God frequently falls upon such sinners, when they least
expect it. Not but that they have reason and sufficient grounds for this
expectation; if they would entertain them; for indeed their very barrenness is
enough to excite it in them: but when they, through carnal confidence and vain
security; indulge themselves in the expectance of many more days of
tranquillity, shut their eyes against convictions, and so live without fear of
evil; then God breaks in upon them, and makes them to feel the impressions of
his indignation; when they say, To morrow shall be as this day; and much more
abundant, when they despise warnings, and trample upon threatenings, and say,
the Vision is for many days to come. Thus our Savior declares that it shall be
done to the unfaithful S teward, Mat. 24. 50 51. this Paul tells us shall be
the lot of such as neglect a day of grace, 1. These. 5. 3.

2. More particularly take these two Rules.

1. That you may be under all the means of Grace, and strivings of the Spirit
and yet Gods patience be near worn ^ut. The Husbandman, as long as the fig tree
is in the Vineyard; and he is waiting for fruit of in, neglects not the
husbandry of it, but gives it the tendance that is proper, and he is wont to do
so, till he resolves with himself that there will no good come of it, and so to
remove it away. Thus God does by men in the visible Church; let them be never
so sinful and vain, yet they shall have the Ordinances, and possibly many
convictions of the Spirit, awakenings and terrors, which are a witness that
Gods day of Patience is not at an end with them; but it does not say but that
they may speedily be cut off: the man without the W edding Garment is taken
from the Table: this therefore is no plea sufficient to build your confidence
upon.

2. That God frequently withdraws his Spirit from the means, as the first
effect of his departure from unfruitful sinners. He possibly neither takes the
means from them, nor them from the means for the present; but he secretly
withdraws from them, and leaves them only under outward dispensations, without
any inward impressions upon their hearts; he makes their hearts fat, and
leaves senceleness and remo^cele^ness upon them: the Spirit of God departs
from them, and then the means ripen them the faster, and make them the more
stupid and ^ottish; and the going away of the Spirit it an awful desertion,
and, though not regarded by sinners, yet greatly discovers the wrath of God
against them Hos. 9, 12.

4. Be persuaded to think whether Gods Jealousy be not kindled against this
people. Are there not many awful tokens of his Anger, and such as speak so much
to us, that he is almost weary with forbearing? Look where we will, and observe
the frame of things, the state of affairs at home, abroad, in public, in
private concerns, and they all witness that God has a controversy with us, and
that it is begun: and how many are taken by it? and now let us ask, why is all
this? what means the heat of this anger? is it not for the barrenness of Gods
people? is it not because he has been coming to sick fruit* and finds it not?
I am sure every unprofitable soul has reason to think of it, and that with
trembling too, and to say, will not this Judgment find me out? and suppose it
should sieze me in particular, will it not be a righteous Judgment upon me?
when God is bringing of his Judgments upon his visible people, they that forget
God, had need to consider with themselves.

5. Think how woeful your condition will be, when God has done waiting, and you
prove unfruitful: Gods day of patience, is your day of grace; when that ends,
this ends; and when that is done it will be an evil case that you will be found
in. When God says, I am weary with forbearing, let Sinners in Zion be afraid,
and look to themselves: it is for your sakes that he is angry, and therefore
you will stand just in the way of his indignation: and how terrible a thing it
will be, to be made the monuments of it, when with the day of forbearance, all
hopes will cease, and the wrath of God will make a way for it self to fall upon
you, will be evident by the next Doctrine, let Sinners then entertain the
consideration of this truth with fear and trembling.

SERMON X
DOCTRINE II. A Fearful Destruction waits upon such as have wearied out Gods
patience by their barrenness.
HEre is the sentence which the Owner pronounces on the fig tree, upon his
complaint; Cut it down: stub it up, root it out, let it no longer have any room
in the vineyard, but make it fit for the fire. Their danger then is very great,
they stand on the very brink of ruin. That Gods patience may he tired out, and
is so by multitudes under the Gospel, has been already observed; and now we
see what becomes of such as these they are to be cut down: God faith it, and he
does not speak words but things. That this Doctrine may be made manifest, we
may consider.

1. What is contained or implied in this cutting down?

2. Why it must come to this when Gods patience is wearied?

3. Wherein the dreadfulness of this destruction may be discovered?

1. What is contained or implied in this cutting down.

A. The Metaphor here used, sutably represents those Judgments of God which
fall upon unprofitable ones, in the progress of them; we may therefore take up
the allusion in several particulars.

1. Cutting down a fig tree in the vineyard argues the Owners great displeasure
at it. It says that he can bear it no longer there: as long as he afforded it
dressing, it showed that he had a favor for it; but this action Proves that
now he has none. Cutting down a timber tree may be with approabation, to put
it into the building which he judges it meet for; but cutting down a
fruit-tree is from disapprobation, because he sees it unworthy of his care.
Hereby therefore is expressed that God is exceeding angry at men; that his pity
and compassion is ended, and his wrath is kindled. God has no passions in him,
properly essential to him, but we ascribe them to him with respect to his
Providence. The Scripture therefore signifies such things to be the fruits of
his indignation, Jer. 4 4. Lev. 26. 28. Job. 20. 28. Godly men are taken away
by death, but it is to make pillars of them in the Celestial Temple; to
transplant them into the Heavenly Paradise; but these are cut down to show that
God hates them. And

2. Cutting down is Properly for destruction. This is the true import of the
word here: it is not a promise, but a threatening, when a tree is cut down and
rooted up, it is by that very act destroyed; it kills it, it presently dies
upon it, it withers up, the sap and leaves are presently gone, there is
henceforth no more possibility that it should bear any fruit; it puts an end to
all hopes of any such thing. Christ therefore intends that God will destroy the
sinner; he before seemed to have some sap in him, and bear the leaves of a fair
profession, it may be: but new as the Fig Tree Cursed by Christ, he withers up
to the very roots* The Apostle speaks of some in the Visible Church, whose end
is destruction, Ph^l. 3. 19. A Tree may be moved for its better growing, but it
is cut down to put it beyond hopes of any such thing.

3. When the Owner cuts down the tree, he now puts an end to all his husbandry
about the Tillage of it. Tillage and extirpation are contraries* he may prune
it, and cut off many exuberant branches from it, for its advantage, that it may
bring forth more fruit and grow the better; but i^ (...) cuts it down, this is
no part of Husbandry to the tree, but a putting of an end to it. It t^erfore
signifies, that God will no more do any thing for such a person: he shall have
no more offers of Grace, no more strivings of his Spirit, no more dews of
Ordinances; he puts an end* to all warnings, counsels, persuasions, entreaties:
He says to the Clouds that they rain no more upon him, Isa. 5. 6. it puts a
full period to his day of grace, withdraws from him all the means of good.
There is a vast difference between afflicting his professing people, and
cutting them down; a man may be afflicted for his good, but if he be cut down,
it is for his hurt.

4. There is an instrument used by the Husbandman, for the cutting down of the
tree withal. This is fitted and prepared for the purpose. Men use an ax in this
service, and they are wont to sharpen it that it may do it effectually. Thus we
read, Matthew. 3. 9. The ax is laid to the root of the tree. This is the ax of
Divine Vengeance, and God is usually pleased to do this by the instrumentality
of second causes, fitted by him for the purpose: these are for this reason
called his Instruments in Scripture; his Ax* his Saw, h^s Sword: He sometimes
indeed makes them only rods, and then indeed it is for amendment; but at other
times they are Swords, Instruments of Excision, Ezekiel. 21. 9, 10, 11. sometimes
God sends a Sickness, and that is Commissioned to take away his life, and it
does it, and no means can save him alive; it chops him down, and there is an
end of him here: sometimes he delivers him up into the hands of an Enemy, and
he slays him without pity: these do it but instrumentally; they are Gods Tools,
and it is he who makes use of them for this purpose.

5. There are usually diverse strokes given for the cutting a tree down, it is
not ordinarily done at once, but several blows; it is a successive action;
every stroke does something toward it, but the thing is accomplished by
degrees, it falls not till the last be given: and thus God often proceeds
gradually to the destruction of such sinners; he first kills them by Prophets,
and afterward by his own hand; he first smites them with spiritual plagues,
and after that with temporal judgments. It is true, God sometimes to show his
power and the strength of his hand, uses a sharp ax, and strikes a fearful
blow, by which he cuts them down at once, but for the most part he does it by
diverse Judgments successive; and it is to be observed that every thing which
God does to them, after once he has clapped the curse and seal of his wrath upon
them, is a stroke given toward their cutting down, a step directly to their
ruin Rev. 20. 20.

6. Cutting down is in order to casting out. When the Husbandman is come to
this work, it says that he is resolved this tree shall stand here no longer;
and therefore as soon as that is done he presently throws it out of the
vineyard; it is there to continue no longer: if he had intended it a room in
his Orchard, he would have let it grow still, for it was because he could not
endure to see it there that he thus dealt with it. Thus God, when he comes to
bring this Judgment upon unfruitful professors, he removes them by it out of
the visible Church, he takes them away from all relation, to, or benefit of the
privileges that hitherto they had enjoyed there. There is an Ordinance of
Christ, instituted in his Church, whereby men are cut off from communion with
his people, which is a ministerial cutting them down, and is a sigure or token
of what God himself will do to such if they repent not, but go on to provoke
him.

7. C utting down is for some other use. When the Owner cuts up his fig tree,
and casts it out of the Vineyard, he does not throw it away and make no
improvement of it; no, though it will not bear figs, yet it will make fires;
and so it will not be altogether unprofitable, though it answers not the end of
its planting, yet there is an use that he puts it to; he therefore makes it up
into faggots, and so burns it as he has occasion for it; and such is the
improvement which God makes of such as did not serve and glorify him in his
Church; he cuts them down, he destroys them; but still he makes use of them;
though they are not fit to be vessels of honor, yet he makes them vessels of
dishonor, and that also turns to his honor and glory. There is an hell which
G od has prepared for the exalting of the glory of his revenging Justice in;
and there are the monuments on whom this glory is exalted, and in whom it is
manifested eternally: now such as being fruitless in the vineyard, provoke God
to cut them down, are thus disposed of by him, and he is so glorified in them
for ever: he is known in his Judgments which he executes; thus are the tares
and the chaff, which grow together with the good grain in the field, disposed
of, Mat. 13 30. 3. 12. thus, the tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn
down and cast into the fire, verse 10.

2. Why it must come to this when Gods patience is wearied?

A. This will be evident by the consideration of these things?

1. These were all of them heirs of destruction before in their natural state.
All those that are planted in Gods Vineyard, were at the first transplanted out
of the Wilderness; there was no difference in them from others, but what God
was pleased to make by bringing them under the Gospel, so the Apostle tells his
Ephesians, Ephesians. 2. 12: yea he assures them that, They were by nature Children
of wrath even as others, verse. 3. All mankind were fallen under condemnation
by sin; God in his mercy picks up whom he pleases among these, and puts them
under the means of Salvation, where he makes the offers, and proposes the
terms of it unto them; but still this is their natural estate, God therefore
puts his people in mind of what they were, when he first looked upon them,
Ezekiel, 16. 3: God for this end appointed a remembrance to be solemnly observed
by the children of Israel, and to be after at the appointed time openly
acknowledged, Deuteronomy. 26. (...), Now men's merely being in the visible Church does
not really alter this state, but only puts them under the advantage for it, and
affords to them a mer^ful treaty, in which God transacts with them about it.

2. Hence it was only Gods m^er patience which reprieved them from that
destruction all this while. There was nothing in them to lay him under the
obligation to do it. Men are not in themselves any things the better Morally
for being in the visible Church; they have the same nature in them, the same
evil heart cleaving to them. It alters indeed their outward estate, but that in
it self does not change their hearts; nor are they at all changed, as long as
they remain barren, that very thing is an evidence that they are the same men
still: It therefore can be nothing but patience that keeps ruin from them. It
cannot be thought rationally, that God is the less provoked by them, because
they are within the pale, whilst they abide unfruitful, than he is with others,
or that their sin is less, because they are there, no, but a great deal more:
they are a trial to his patience, they live upon it, it is that only keeps them
from perishing.

3. The end of patience being thus altogether frustrate, there now remains
nothing else but destruction for them. Why did God bear and wait? it was not
for nothing; no, it was to see if they would comply with him, and do him
services; if they would repent of their sins, and believe in Christ, and do
good works, but they do no such thing, but continue to be obstinate, they
out-stand all the essays that are used with them, and dishonor God by so
doing, and now they are fit for nothing else the sentence was our before, it
was only stopped upon this trial; and after all it avails not; what else is there
to be done, but to give i^ (...) scope? hence that, John 3.18. he that believes
not, is condemned already. We find therefore that God upon this very ground,
enters into a solemn deliberation with these, Hos 6. 4. Oh Ephraim, what shall
I do unto thee, etc. and Jer. 5. 7. How shall I pardon thee for this?

4. And this abuse of his patience must needs heighten the provocation, for now
it is reduced to this exigence, that there is no other course remains to be
taken. When upon trial made, men prove hopeless; things are brought to that
pass, that there is nothing else not be done; and not only so, but all that
has bin thus done for them, would else be wholly lost, and God should have no
Glory at all by it there is so much more guilt added as there have been means
used, and neglected offers of Grace made and despised: If therefore sinners in
the World must perish, for their falling short of the Glory of God; sinners in
the visible Church much more for offering abuse and contempt to these essays
that have been used with them, to bring them to Repentance. It is certain that
such though they have outward privileges above them, yet in reality they are
to God esteemed no better than Heanthen, Amos. 9: 7: Are ye not as Children of
the Ethiopians to me? Oh Israel! says the Lord. Those wild Theevish, Cursed
inhabitants of Arabia were as good as they: nay these are worse, because they
have sinned against greater mercies.

3 Wherein the dreadfulness of this destruction may* be discovered.

A. That the destruction of all sinners is a fearful thing, must be
acknowledged by all such as have any acquaintance with the nature of the
threatening of the Law, and the curse which is contained therein; but the ru^ne
of those that have had the privilege of the Gospel, and a room in the
vineyard, and are there cut down, is more peculiarly amazing and terrible, as
having some aggravations in it which the other has not, especially if we
consider;

1. That God has threatened these with more intolerable punishments: and he
stands concerned for it in point of honor, that so he may be no loser in the
end by any of his Creatures, which he should be, if he should not make such to
be more eminent and observable instances of his displeasure. This therefore is
the doom which Christ has past upon the places where he had bin most
conversant, and those with whom he had taken the greatest pains, Mat. 11. 20,
etc. If then they that suffer the easiest hell, suffer beyond our conception,
how much more astonishing must the suffering of these be?

2. That those have more to lose than others. The punishment of loss, is no
little part of the misery ^of sinners; and indeed that makes way for the
Punishment of sense, which is introduced and greatly aggravated by it. The
higher men have been lifted up the greater i^ their fall, now ^these have been
exalted to Heaven, Math. 11, 23. The Vineyard privileges we have seen to be
many and great, all these are lost at once when the sinner is cut down. They
were taken near to God, they were under his peculiar favors, they were not far
from the Kingdom, they had fair and good hopes set before them; and all helps
to have brought them to life and salvation; but now they are thrown our of all;
they are little things that others lose, in comparison with what these are cut
off from.

3. That hence they have more to torment them with the thought of when they are
cut down. No little part of the misery of the damned consists in those
reflections of Conscience, which as a never dying worm will be gnawing upon
them, and the more will it torment the man. How much then will this man's
Conscience have to afflict him withal in the place of miseries? there to
remember that he was once near Salvation he had all the opportunities for it,
all the tenders of Grace made to him, and the strivings of the Holy Spirit
following of him, so many days of patience waiting upon him; all of which he
negligently, nay wilfully slighted; Christ would have gathered him, and he
would not; God would have saved him, and he rejected it; heaven and happiness
waited upon him to be made his, and he scorned them. These though poor Heathen
will not be acquainted withal. There is no wood will burn so fiercely and make
so hot a fire, as that of a barren fig tree, when it is cut down, and cast into
unquenchable flames.

USE
All the Improvement that I shall make of this Doctrine, is in this one Use;
Let it be a warning-peal to all the Sinners in Zion; to awaken you from your
security; and make you afraid any longer to live unprofitably under the Gospel
and Ordinances: and if there be any solemnity in this truth, make it your own,
and lay it to heart; and there are these two things which I would entreat of
you that you would, for that end, employ your serious thoughts about.

1. Think what reason there is for you to expect that Gods patience is almost
wearied out with you: possibly you may be ready to please your selves with
contrary imaginations; and say there is no fear at all; but be not brutish and
so^tish: and that none concerned herein may be omitted, in this warning, let me
press it upon:

1. Young Sinners, you that are in your prime, and ready to think that this
admonition little concerns you: you will say that God has waited but a little
while upon you, and therefore you may well expect a longer day: but remember
what you were told under another Doctrine, that Gods patience is arbitrary; and
that where he has afforded more of light, and clearer dispensations; and used
more earnest endeavors, ^e may count three years a great while, but let me ad^;

1. Consider that God is ever and anon taking away of such as you are. How many
young persons have been slain by the Sword? how many such have been cut down by
the late raging sickness? and does this say nothing to you? if you ^y in your
youth, and in your sins, this threatening is then verified upon you: this
present season is your day, and it may be all the day that you shall ever have;
and when God comes to expose such as you are in his Providence, it speaks
loudly to you, and tells you that his day may be near an end with you.

2. Consider that if you ripen in wickedness apace, it is a sad sign that you
are making great haste to be ready for cutting down; and are there no young
ones among us that are concerned in this? who not only live in a state of
unregeneracy, but also grow vain, and profane, and lewd! are there none of our
Children that have learnt to curse and swear, and profane Gods holy Sabbaths?
that shake off the yoke of family Government, and keep company with riotous
persons? that have been privately by their Parents, and publick^y in the
Ordinances warned, and reproved, and yet have despised all, and wilfully pursue
their old courses, and grow worse and worse after all; and have you not heard
that when it comes to this, that persons will not be reformed, they are then
next to past hope? and what but destruction belongs to such? and if it be so,
with you, as young as you are, you are old enough for God to make monuments of
his holy jealousy, see for this, Jer. 5. 7, 8, 9.

2. Old Sinners; you that have been suffered a great while in the vineyard, and
yielded to the Owner of it no profit at all; have not you abundant reason to
look continually when Gods patience shall turn into fury, and that fury fall
upon you in its weight? surely you have cause to dread the thoughts of it every
hour; Consider then,

1. How much you have done to weary him out. You have much more cause to wonder
that he has born with you so long; than to promise your selves that he will
wait upon you longer; how often have you grieved him, vexed his holy Spirit?
what innumerable affronts have you put upon him? count over the many Sabbaths
which you have enjoyed, the Sermons that you have heard, the Convictions that
you have had, the mercies that have been bestowed upon you, the afflictions
that have come to awaken you, and the ill improvement that you have made of all
these, the grievous contempt that you have cast upon them all: What Husbandman
would have suffered such a tree so long undestroyed, that had been planted and
cherished in his Orchard?

2. Consider the Ax lies at your root. God has brought it thither; are there
none of the forerunners of your ruin come upon you? are there no spiritual
beginnings toward it? does not the spirit of God begin to withdraw his
strivings in the means of grace? do you not find your selves more careless and
secure under, and more impenetrable by the Word of God which is dispensed to
you (...) are you not more delighted with, and more violently set in your
hearts to live still in your sinful courses? are there no temporal forerunners
of this? do not Gods Servants proclaim his wrath awfully against you? does not
Gods Providence raise up evil, and fearful judgments against you? are there not
those infirmities and sicknesses, which are the presage of death upon you?
these all have a voice in them.

2. Think now what a terrible thing it is to be cut down for your barrenness,
Do not make a mock at destruction, but be afraid of excision; consider
therefore.

1. What a loss you will then sustain. Then will you lose all at once, and for
ever. You are then cast out of the vineyard, and all the advantages of it are
gone, no more to be recruited: then you will have no more Sabbaths, no more
counsels, and instructions, no more warnings and calls, no more secret
strivings of the Spirit of God, no more day of grace, no more hopes of
salvation to Eternity. Is it a light matter with you now to think of losing all
these? I can assure you that it will not be so in the recognition: when you
shall look back from the pit whither you are going, and from whence there is no
returning, and there remember all these things, it will be a far more bitter
momento than Jerusul^ms was in the Land of Assyria.

2. What an account you will have to give in to God when he shall come to cut
you down. Then will you wish that you had never grown in such a Soil, been
within such a pale, enjoyed so much cost and labor as was laid out upon you:
then will you wish that you had grown in the remotest Desert, where God and
Christ had never been heard of. When God shall count up to you all that he has
done for you, all the privileges which you enjoyed by his benignity, all the
free offers that he made to you, and endeavors which he industriously used
with you, to per^wads you to give up your selves to his fear, and service, and
all the patience with which he waited upon you, and all the wilful scorn and
contumely which you cast upon this; and it will be a most fearful reckoning.

3. What plagues you will then suffer. Did you not know and consider what shall
be then done with the fruitless fig tree, when it is cut down, what more
especial examples of Gods severe revenge such shall be made, who had once all
the means of grace waiting upon them, what a seven times heated furnace of
fiery indignation these shall be cast into, one would think it should make
their hearts ache, and their joints tremble; and Oh that God would in rich mercy
set home the impression of these thoughts upon you now; that yet at the least
in this your day, you would mind the things of your peace, before the last sand
of Gods patience be run out, and so these things be bidden from you: might it
but drive you to Christ, bewailing heartily your barrenness, and earnestly
supplication of him for his sanctifying Spirit, to make your fruitful, there
would be still hope in Israel for this thing.

SERMON XI
DOCTRINE III. That unfruitful Professors are not only unprofitable in, but
also very hurtful to Gods Vineyard.
THis the Landlord insinuates as a reason why he will have this figtree to be
cut down, why cumbers it the ground! Not only, why does it bear no fruit; why
does it do not good? why does it make me to lose all my cost and care about it?
The word [ cumber] as was formerly intimated, signifies, to render a things
idle, to make it to do no work; and it is the ground that it does this
detriment unto: and under this resemblance we may take the occasion to observe
how not only useless, but mischievous too, barren professors are in the visible
Church: and there are several things by which it may be illustrated.

1: A barren fruit-tree in a vineyard is a very great disgrace to it. The
credit of a vineyard, is that it yields much fruit: this is it which gains it
esteem, and makes it to he preferred before the wilderness. Every tree then
that bears proportionably, confers its share to this credit, and consequently,
any one that bears nothing diminishes from it, and is oftentimes more taken
notice of than the others that do bear; and it is certain, that there is a
great deal of reproach that accrues to the Church of Christ, by the occasions
of those in it that do not bring forth the fruits which God requires of them.
As God expects more, so men look for more of such than of others: and as it is
a shame for such who make an eminent profession, and have so many advantages
for it, to do nothing for the glory of God, so the reflection is wont to be made
upon the whole, and the Church of Christ which they appertein unto must have
dirt cast upon them for it; and they shall suffer more reproach for one such,
than get commendation from an hundred exemplary Christians, from the world, who
envy the^^ their reputation, and wait for matter of scandal against them. This
is one argument Paul uses with the Jews to convince them, Romans 2. 24. men are
ready to measure all by that one, these are your Church Members, these are the
Children of the Church, tha^ have owned the Covenant, and openly professed
their subjection thereunto, and yet such they are, and so they live; and what
shall judge of the rest of them? Thus Christ's Vineyard gets a bad name by such
as these.

2. A barren tree in the vineyard, takes up the room which might be better
employed. There is a considerable quantity of ground allowed for a tree to
stand and grow in: he who plants an Orchard, allows convenient distances, for
the trees to spread themselves in, and to have the advantage of the Sunbeams,
that so they may have the help afforded them that is requisite for their
flourishing, and bearing of fruit: now if the tree be unfruitful, all this
ground is lost, and left, idle, as to any profit, it is as good to have nothing
at all upon it, as that which yields nothings; and that must needs be a cumber:
and in the mean while it occupies the place in which another that would bear,
might stand: The same ground would do for a fruitful tree, that is lost upon a
barren one; and if there were such as one there, the same ground and the same
tillage would be serviceable for something; whereas this turns to no account at
all. Unregenerate Sinners, that do nothings for God, take up as much room in
the visible Church as others, they have a like outward privileges with them;
but the room they occupy is lost as to them: if in their stead there were such
as love God, as fear and serve him, such means and advantages would forward
them abundantly, and what a cumber must God needs account this to be?

3. Hence, a barren tree in a vineyard draws away the sap and strength of the
ground to no purpose. The ground spends, and its virtue is as much exhausted by
maintaining a barren tree, as one that bears never so much fruit: it sucks away
its virtue, and makes it require as much mending, and all for nothing: and this
is really mischievous to it. It is the same Soil to appearance, the same
fruitful hill in which Hypocrites and formal Professors are planted, that
sincere Christians grow in, for G ods vineyard is upon a fruitful hill, Isa. 5.
1. and the same means are used with them, the same cost is laid out upon the
one and the other, so far as concerns means, for God demands what he could do
more, verse 3. and it is by a formal improvement of these, that an Hypocrite
maintains his profession, and makes such a flourish in those leaves which he
bears. It is from the vineyards fatne's that he sucks up his formality, makes
his brags and boasts, and by which he upholds himself, or else he would wither
away quickly; and by this means it comes to be spent unprofitably, and to
damage.

4. Hence, all that is done to the barren tree, is thrown away upon it. All the
digging and mending, all the showers and dews which fall upon i^, all the warm
sun, beams that influence it turn to no account, because it is barren still:
for if it bears no fruit it does nothing to answer the end for which it was
there planted. And thus it is in respect of such as bring forth no spiritual
fruit in the Church of God: not only do they themselves miss of their end and
Gods just expectation, but all that is done for them does, for the present,
prove frustrate also: That God will be no loser in the and by them, is no thank
to them, they do all that in them lies to defeat him; and did not his Infinite
Wisdom know how to make his penniworths out of them, he should never get any
thing by them. But however, the direct and next end of all means being their
serving G od, and doing good works, this is altogether frustrated by them* all
the Sabbaths they enjoy, and Ordinances they partake in are lost, all the dews
of Heaven that fall upon them are dried up, and no good comes of them; all the
mercies and afflictions that are expended on them make them worse. the Stone
wall, and Wine Press and Tower are kept up and repaired in vain as to them:
and, in as much as they belong to the Vineyard, that is also damnified hereby.

5. A Barren tree in a vineyard does damage to all the plants that grow near
it. It is not only useless in it self, but others that are planted within it is
verge and shadow are ^^amnified by it, they are great sufferers for its
vicinity, it draws away the sap from them which might have nourished, and made
them more fruitful; it shades them, keeps off the influences of the Sunbeams
from them, and so they are stunted, their flourishing is prevented by it, and
their fruit has neither so good a color nor taste as else it would and this is
much to the vineyards detriment. And truly empty and barren professors in the
visible Church, do a great deal of harm to others in the society which they
belong unto, and especially to such as they have the most intimate converse
withal: and there are several ways in which they are harmful to others and
hinder bearing: especially;

1. Such as these encourage one another by evil counsels, and society, in their
unprofitable and pernicious courses: and by this means they wonderfully hinder
the efficacy of the means of grace upon them, how many good motions of the
Spirit upon their Souls are by these ways quenched; the word of God takes hold
of this or that barren soul in an ordinance, and leaves awaknings upon him, and
this is one step to fertility, if it were followed; but he gets among his vain
lewd companions, and they draw him away again to his former courses, and make
him to lose all those impressions which he had upon his mind: and if they
observe any disquietment to be upon his spirit, they either, mock or collouge
him out of it. How do vain young men strengthen each other in wickedness, and
harden one another hearts against the fear of God! how often have there been
good hopes that these and those might have been persuaded to return to God, and
lay hold on Jesus Christ, if they had not lived in such houses, or associated
themselves with such persons, where they have been encouraging one another in
wickedness, and been learning each of the other to laugh at the counsels and
warnings of God, and to make a mock of sin, and flout at Godliness, thus are we
told, Eccl. 9. 18. one sinner destroys much good.

2. Their example is pernicious to many, and especially the example of those
who talk much, and speak high of Religion, and have made a more open profession
of the Covenant of God: and this more principally in reference to such as have
a peculiar relation to or dependence upon them; such are Parents in respect to
their Children, Family Governors relating to them that are under their watch;
when possibly they keep up a form of Godliness, as to matters of external
worship; they read the Word, and pray in their families, and Catechize their
Children; are constant in frequenting Ordinances; and in the mean while, they
are careless in their conversation, are vain and frothy in their communication,
quarrelsome and give ill language in their passion, deceitful in their dealings
with men, loose in their ordinary carriage, and too excessive in their
allowances of themselves in the using, or rather abusing the things of this
life: oh what an influence have such examples upon others? how can they draw
them down into self-Justification? and plead, that if such things were not
consistant with Christianity, these would not so do: such persons are the
Devils Decoys with which he draws men into the snare, and keeps them from
devoting themselves wholly to the Service of God, and doing the works of
Righteousness, see how Paul acquits himself from any such things as this, 1
These. 2. 10. Ye are Witnesses, and G od also, how holily and justly, and
unblameably we behaved our selves among you that believe.

3. They many times damp the graces of true believers; and thereby they prevent
their bearing so much fruit as else they would. The fruit that God looks for,
is the exercise of those Graces which he has put into us. They therefore that
have no Grace, can bear no fruit; they that have it, may be hindered by occasion
of some obstruction given to their grace in its exercise: a bearing tree may by
some casualty miss a season; and how os^ does the Society of Carnal professors
hinder Christians in their work? Gods Children draw out each others Grace, by
mutual excitation; and they are many times damped and suppressed by vain
communication; and carnal professors do much this way, by offering vain
converse, unprofitable discourse, and often by stirring up the corruptions of
the Godly, for they also have a body of Death, which is sometimes set on going,
and advantaged by the communication of others, and none more like to do it,
than such as are themselves without the root of the matter in them.

4. These do oftentimes set themselves to oppose the power of Godliness; and
this produces pernicious effects among visible professors, and it is not
unusual that these that are most zealous for set forms, are most opposite to
the power. Such were the Ph^rifees, who were great, sticklers for the
traditions of their fathers, but would neither enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
themselves nor suffer them that would. And it is certain, that when men dwindle
away into formality, the Life of Religion is wanting, how then should the good
fruits of it appear? and what woeful ruins this hath-brought to Christianity,
and how it has almost brought the Visible Church into a Wilderness of
profaness and immorality, is awfully to be observed and while men spend their
time and thoughts in things of little or no moment, mere shadows, they lose the
substance, and there is but a lifeless carcass of Religion left among them.

6. All this barrenness turns to the owners damage. He in the mean while has
not his revenue coming in: it is his cost and care that is laid out on the
Vineyard, and he loses it when this and that tree returns him no fruit. Gods
name is greatly dishonored by such professors; it is his tribute which is due
to him from his vineyard, that by this occasion is not paid to him: and this
also is to the grief of his people that feat him: all that, being in the
Church, are sincerely devoted to God, and set for his glory, are greatly
grieved, when they see that he is not acknowledged by such as bear his name,
and partake in his Gospel favors, Psalm. 119. 165. Rivers of tears run down
mine eyes, because men keep not thy Law: and as long as such are in the
vineyard, the Godly are kept in mourning, and their hearts are sorrowful, and
this is a great cumber to them.

USE I.
For Conviction; it shows the great equity of Gods cutting down such as these.
It says that there is no injustice with God when he so does; nay that he does
nothing but what is proper and requisite: let it therefore tell all such, what
reason you have to expect it; If a tree does no good, and a great deal of hurt,
what shall be done with it else? and that you may see and be convinced of this,
let me offer these things:

1. Gods tenderness has been already declared to you, in and by all that
patience which he has used with you, and the cost that he has laid out upon
you. God will for ever be acknowledged, and you shall be enforced to confess,
that he did not deal with you as he might have done, that he did not execute
all the rigor of his Justice upon you which you deserved: hear how Christ
expostulates with Jerusalem in this regard, Mat. 23. 37. your very station in
his Church: all the offers of grace made to you; and all the strivings of his
holy spirit with yea, and all the long time wherein he waited upon you, will
witness for him, that you undid your selves, that you were the blameable cause
of your own destruction: every time that he came and said to you, Oh turn! why
will you die? receive instruction and live, which you slighted, will say that
you undid your selves.

2. Gods Wisdom is now deeply concerned in this matter. If after all, you
remain barren, you cannot expect but that a, wise God will deal with you so, as
shall commend that wisdom of his to the world: and therefore, what would be
acknowledged to be wisdom in him that owns a vineyard, in his dealing with a
barren tree in it, must be much more Justified in Gods dealings with, and
proceedings against you, for not serving of him, here then,

1. There is no loss to the Owner in cutting such a tree down. It never did any
good by standing there; it brought in no profit to the husbandman; his revenue
will be never the less when that is gone: and what glory will God lose by you,
when you are destroyed? you never did him any service since you were born; he
has been at a great deal of cost upon you, but there has no good at all come
of it; you have stood in the vineyard, but all that you have done has bin to
make a show, to take up a room there; but if none in his Church should do him
more service than you have done, he might even throw it up to the waste
Wilderness again, for any revenue that is paid him; and is it not wisdom to
remove an unprofitable Creature from the earth, and lay out no more upon it to
no purpose?

2. There is a great deal of harm occasio^ned by letting such a tree stand any
longer. It cumbers the ground: it does mischief in the place that it takes up;
and is it not prudence in the Owner, to root up a tree that not only does no
good, but much damage? if he could Bear with the former, yet this is an
intolerable provocation. Every unregenerate sinner among Gods people does
mischief, others are the worse for him, and therefore it is fitting that God,
who is resolved to be no loser by any, should take such away from doing any
more: so many years as they have been born with, (...) exercised his patience.

3. Hence it is for the good of others that such should be cut down. God ^^th a
care for his vineyard in general and for those Plants in it in particular as do
bea^ (...): It is for the sake of the Righteous ones there that he keeps it up!
and therefore he will take care for their good. And indeed there is great
benefit accrues to others by such Judgments of God: It sometimes does good by
awakening of others that were unfruitful before, and hastening their Conversion;
the destruction of one impenitent sinner, is sometimes the occasion of the
repentance of many: sometimes it gives great advantage to Gods Children, by
removing hindrances of their growth out of the way, and awakning and exciting
of the graces that are in them.

4. It is the only way that is now left for God to get honor by such as these
what would you have God to do with you? serve and honor him you will not, he
has tried and waited, and all to no purpose, you grow worse and worse after
all, and shall he lose by such as you? shall he make a Creature, and do all for
him, and have no honor by him? if he have, in what other way is it to be had?
Let this then stop every mouth, and vindicate an Holy God in all the severity
which he proceeds unto after his patience is wearied out

USE. II.
For Information in two particulars.

1. This tells us how admirable Gods for bearance is toward unregenerate
sinners under the Gospel. That he should wait so longfrom one year to another,
and see how they neglect his grace, and dishonor his name, and yet still he
holds his hand back, and not fall upon them in his sury, pluck them up and cast
them out of his vineyard: are they such a cumber, do they do no good and
withal do such a world of harm to others? It must needs be a matter of
astonishment to think that God should not long ago have bin weary with waiting
upon them, that he has not rid himself of Creatures so burdensome to him: Nay
it should commend the grace of God to his own Children, who consider how little
th^^ bear, how short they come of answering Gods just expecta^ion, yea and how
much their little fruitfulness does bring of dishonor to God, and offer of
scandal to the Gospel.

2. Here see a reason why God sometimes takes away his Gospel, and the means of
grace from a people. There is a parity of reason between a tree in the
vineyard, and the vineyard it self; especially if we consider that it consists
of individual trees: If then a fig tree waited upon to no purpose, abiding
barren after all, must come to cutting down at last, what may be expected
concerning an Orchard of trees, when they come to be all, or most part so? The
whole ground that they grow in is lost, and cumbred by them. Well then may it
be expected, that God will not long keep up the fence about such a piece of
ground, so unprofitable to him. It may therefore put a people upon serious
enquiry, when God begins to lay them waste by desolating Judgments, whether it
be not so with them: and it is an awful truth, that though God sometimes keeps
up the pale, continues the Gospel, for the sake of a few that are precious to
him, and do honor him by their fertility; yet when degeneracy overspreads, and
those few can do no good, he plucks up the ledges, and lays open the vineyard;
and if it be a thing so pernicious for a vineyard to be barren, God is to be
Justified, and his prudence to be acknowledged in such a dispensation of
severity as this is.

USE III.
This may serve to humble and abase us for all our barrenness. Are there not
too many of us that have never done any thing for God in sincerity, that have
brought no glory to his name at all, that have lived in their sins, and
despised all the means used with them? and is it not a matter of shame and
sorrow to you, to think what kind of creatures you are, what G od esteems of
you, and what you do really prove your selves to be? a mere burden to the
places you live in? Oh! how low should it lay us? how vile should it make us to
be in our own eyes, to think that we are not only good for nothing, but that we
also do mischief? the places we dwell in suffer by us; we do not serve God our
selves, and we hinder others also from serving him as they might, and we hereby
expose them to the anger of God, and pull down a great deal of his wrath upon
our people; and it is enough to make the best of us to blush at our selves,
when we consider that so much barrenness, so much cumber: that all our short
comings in living answerable to our profession, and G ods expense upon us, are
not only to our own loss, but the damage of the whole.

USE IV.
Let it be a word of awakening to every one, especially to such as have been in
Gods Vineyard, and have not to this day closed in with Christ, or glorified God
by believing in his Son, and giving themselves up to his service. You think it
is no great matter; but you here see what an account God puts upon it: you
please your selves that God can easily bear with you, especially, if you do not
run out into these scandalous excesses that some others are overtaken withal:
but you see here what is the brand that is set upon a tree that does not bear,
merely for that; not because it bears wild grapes, but because it bears no good
fruit, it is a cumber: and one would think that should be enough to terrify
you, to think that you are so far from being profitable, that you are a burden
to God; how loudly does it speak the dreadful peril that you are in? it tells
you what you may every moment expect from him. Who would not ease himself of a
load, and discharge his ground of a cumber! God gives this for a reason why
this tree is to be cut down; and if you are so, it says that you are under the
peril of this doom every day; and what is the voice of this Conviction, but to
stir you up to be no longer so? and let it also rouse the believers to more
renewed endeavors after fruitfulness, considering that if no fruit makes one a
cumber, little fruit is little better; and consequently that the way for you to
become great blessings to the Church of God, and acceptable to God himself, and
to enjoy a stable settlement of abode in his Church, and to do much good there
in your Generation, is to be abounding in the service of God, and deeply
engaged in those works of holiness and righteousness, which he has required of
his people. This will be the way to prevent excision, and to enjoy all merciful
tillage, and the tender care of God for you.

SERMON XII
Verse 8. And be answering said unto him, (...) it alone this year also, till I
shall digg about it and dung it.
(...) THe Fourth and last part of the Parable comes now to be considered Viz:
the interposition or intercession of the Vinedresser for this tree, in which be
humbly sets himself to delay the execution of the sentence that had been past
upon it, and accordingly pleads with his Lord for a little forbearance; we are
not to think that man is more patient than God is, but it shows us what is man's
duty and what use God is pleased to make of man in his providential
dispensations. Here then observe.

1. The thing he petitions for, Let it alone this year also.

2. A reason of his request, Till I shall dig about it, and dung it. Under
which is contained a promise of his using renewed endeavors with it.

3. The Issue which he joins with his Lord in upon a double Hypothesis, verse
9. of which afterward.

1. Let us observe the thing which he petitions for, Let it alone this year
also. Where consider.

1. The mercy it self which he pleads for; Let it alone: the word signifies, to
remit: and is often used for the pardoning of sin; but it here intends, a
suspending of the sentence past; and the meaning is, do not cut it down, but
let it still stand in the vineyard: and enjoy the benefit of it.

2. The limitation of this request, This Year; i.e. one season more; he is
modest in his request, and yet he would fain have one trial more be made of it.

3. An argument insinuated in the word, also. q. d. thou have had much patience
toward it already, and it is but a little that I ask; it is but one trial
more, and that cannot be so much as thou have made already. To Wave all
particular observations that might here be made, we may from the whole gather
this,

DOCTRINE. It is the disposition of Gods faithful Ministers to be very earnest
with him to stay his judgments, when they are ready to break in upon and
destroy barren Professors.
When they see the tokens of Gods anger appearing, and are apprehensive of the
great danger impending; they presently address God, and go to him with greatest
importunity, entreating him that he would at least spare them a little give
then a little further trial, and see what may be do^^ with them. That G od is
pleased to discover his displeasure to them, and give them some signal to ^ens
that there is wrath out against such, and really to break forth in some
terrible dispensations, sometimes discovering it in its moral causes, and
sometimes in the Face of his providence, has been already evidenced. And what
is it they now do? do they sit still, and do nothing? or do they rejoice in it,
and seek the fartherance of it? no, but they do all they can to prevent it, and
this is one thing, they apply themselves unto G od by humble and earnest
supplication, they turn importunate beggars at the Throne of G race in their
behalf. Instances for this we have several in the word of God, in such as have
been the most eminent: How observable is the example of Abraham, in his
interceeding for Sodom, on supposition that there might be a shattering of
Godly persons in it? and how does be grow upon G od in his pleading? Genesis 18.
How eminent was Moses also upon this account how often are we told of the great
provocations that G od had taken at Israel? and as often we find Moses upon his
Face, begging and pleading as for his life, and not letting G od alone, Forty
days at a time did he spend more then once upon this very score. How ready is
Aaron to step in with his Censer between the living and the dead, when he saw
the Plague was now begun? How did Joshua fall down and pray hard when Israel
fled before their enemies?

How did the prophet Jeremiah pray for a degenerate People near destruction,
even till God bad him to pray no more but to let him alone? and these are to
Cheractarize such as are in public place among Gods People, and to let us know
what spirit they are of. Here then may we enquire,

1. Whence it is that this disposition comes to be so active in Godly Ministers?

2. Wherein it appears acceptable to God, and advantageous unto Barren Souls?

1. Whence is it that this disposition comes to be so active in Godly Ministers?

A. We may come at this in a few steps;

1. There is Planted in Man by Nature a Love to Mankind. Merely sensible
creatures have such an instinct of Nature in them, that they stand affected to
their own kind. Ravening Wolves, and Cruel Tigers do participate in this: And
this had a more peculiar impression upon reasonable creatures, whose
understanding has a capacity of reasoning it self into, and stirring up of
these affections. And although it be one of the unhappy fruits of man's
Apostasy, that it has woefully depraved this principle, and made men without
natural affection having at least destroyed the gracious impression which was
upon this principle, yet there is the root of such an inclination abiding in
the hearts of men, and a disposition in them to exert it in a natural, though
not in a gracious way.

2. The Grace of God, where it comes, restores this principle again to its
regular activity. It is the work of Sanctifying grace to restore the lapsed
nature of man to a capacity of acting according to the Image of God which once
it had upon it. It Sanctifies the understanding, by discovering to it what is
the love which we ow one to another, and wherein it ought more peculiarly to
exert it self, according to the state and condition of the object of it, and
shows them that their souls are more deeply concerned in this than their
bodies; that their eternal well-being is more to be sought than their temporal
solicity. And it Sanctifies the Will by enabling it to elect accordingly: and
this influenceth the Affections making them to desire, long after, and
sollicitously pursue this design: it turns that love which before was carnal
into an holy love.

3. This love makes them exceeding loath that any should perish; and
consequently grieved at the apprehension of the danger of it. It is an
Affection full of compassion; and therefore misery and danger of the Object
greatly moves it. How much of this was exemplarily found in the man Christ, who
wept over Jerusalem? Luke 19. 41. and made that bitter moan over it, Mat. 23.
37. and this made Paul to speak with tears in his eyes to his Philippians,
Phil. 3. 18, 19. Godly Men cannot but be deeply concerned to see Sinners
running to ruin, and ready to drop into destruction; to think that such as are
capable of glory, should fall into endless misery; to see the hand of God up,
and ready to strike that blow which will cut them off for ever from all hope;
fills their souls with deepest commiseration of them, and makes them wish it
might be prevented.

4. This lothness and grief of theirs puts them upon studying and endeavoring
all they may to prevent it. For that is the very nature and use of this
affection; and it is very prevalent in the souls of Gods people. Such an one
will now entertain himself with these thoughts: Is there nothing that I may do
to save this soul? may I be no ways instrumental of good to him, that so he may
not go down to the pit? are there no endeavors that may be used with or for
him, that may, by the blessing of God, prove beneficial to him? he is willing
and desirous to do his utmost, and omit nothing that comes within his reach,
that may be serviceable to this purpose. This made Paul to be so laborious, if
by any means he might save men.

5. This makes them to go to God and plead with him, that he would spare them a
little longer. They are not without hope that if they might have a little more
time allowed them, they might at length be persuaded to mind the things of
their peace? to be sure they know, that if they are once cut down by the hand
of Gods vengeance, there will then be no more opportunity for them for ever,
that all hopes are then gone, that then the day of grace is done: but whilst
there is life and means, there is hope: and this makes them to pray hard for
them, and follow the Throne of Grace in their behalf: and the more their danger
is, the greater importunity it urges them unto: This made Samuel so restlesly
importunate for Saul.

6. Gods faithful Ministers are usually more deeply sensible of the miserable
condition that such are in, than others are. Every true believer has more or
less of this sense? it flows from the Grace that is in them: but those Gracious
souls whose peculiar business lies in the contemplation of the Scriptures, and
acquainting of themselves, that so they may acquaint others with the great and
awful truths therein contained, must needs have some special impressions of
these things made upon their hearts, and this must needs work answerably on
their affections. That was it which so engaged Paul he knew the terrors of the
Lord, 2. Cor. 5. 11. Yea, and God oftentimes gives them more experimental
knowledge of themselves and that adds unto the Affection matter of incitement.

7. The special relation which these bear to such, makes them peculiarly
sollicitious for them. They are not only related to them as their fellow
reasonable Creatures, but also as God has Commissionated them to bring the
Gospel of peace unto them, and labor with them for their saving good: they are
therefore tende^^ ^^em; they are their charge and they are (...) them as so
many children they have travailing pains for them, that they may be made
partakers in saving Grace and brought to Christ: thus Paul argues with his
Galations, Gal. 4. 19. And who is so much grieved at the childrens disafter as
the mother, and therefore none will beg harder for them then show.

8. They must needs be exceeding loath that all the labor which they have laid
out upon these should thus be lost. Gods Servants, that have obtained the grace
to be faithful, have been spending themselves in solicitous endeavors after
the salvation of all those that are under their watch; they have labored with
God and with them; and the joy they have looked for, has been to see them
saved: In hope of this they have been cheerful under all; and must they perish
at last, and so all be thrown away? this, in this life, is exceeding bitter to
them; Paul speaks it with grief, Gal. 4. 11. and such a thought puts a peculiar
impression upon this affection, and raises them to the more earnestness in
their pleadings with God.

9. And they truly design the glory of God in all this. All believers are set
for God's glory; his Ministers are specially advantaged for the promoving of
it: now it is the glory of Gods grace which they are nextly and directly to aim
at the furtherance of; for they are a Gospel Ministry; and that is then most
gloriously advanced, when men are made the monuments of this Attribute. When
therefore they see such to whom this grace has been offered, now ready to be
made a Sacrifice unto Justice for their contempt of it, they, not being
hopeless but that Grace may still be advanced by them, put in for a little
respite to be afforded them: and though love to man excite pity in them, yet love
to God, and the honor of his Name regulates them, as will be afterward made
evident.

2. Wherein it appears acceptable to God, and advantageous to barren souls,
that these are thus earnest with God for them?

A. This will be evident by the Consideration of these things;

1. That God has by his Holy Spirit put such desires into his Servants. They
are the product of his Grace in them; and therefore we shall find that such as
have been most eminent for Holiness, and most acquainted with God, have been
most fervently engaged thus: Abraham Gods friend, Moses, who was in the Mount
with God, Paul, that had been in the Third Heaven, and seen glorious things
there: and that which is the fruit of Gods grace in us must needs be acceptable
to him; whether be intends to do the thing or no, yet it pleases him that his
Servants should request it of him; for that may be our duty to ask, which it is
not Gods Sovereign Pleasure to grant; for the command, which is revealed, and
not the decree, which is secret, is the rule in prayer. The Prophets therefore
interposed most earnestly when God threatened most sharply.

2. God has therefore in the Scripture made i^ their duty thus to put in and
plead, when they see his Judgments coming upon his people. When they apprehend
that G od is angry, and discover him as if he were coming to cut Sinners down
in his wrath, now God ^^uld have these step in: for this reason; when God had
threatened a terrible Calamity upon his people Israel, we find this to be urged
as a precept at such a time, Joel. 2. 17. and Moses by Gods Appointment, sends
Aaron with his Censer, when the plague is begun. These are some of those that
are appointed to stand in the gap, and if when God comes in Displeasure, and
finds them not there, it fares ill with his people.

3. God has oftentimes a purpose to delay the execution of the sentence; and
he honors these his Servants to be the instruments in it. God sometimes
intends to give peculiar instances of his long-sufferance; and therefore when
Sinners may be thought ripe for ruin, ready for cutting down, and the sentence
is past in the threatening; he will yet give them a farther trial; now when it
is so, he is wont to stir up the hearts of his servants to put in, and beg with
greatest and undeniable importunity for it, whereupon he grants it to their
requests; and it is for their sakes that he does it. Thus we find, that G od
had certainly destroyed Israel, but that Moses interposed, and stood between
him and them, and turned his wrath away, Psalm. 106. 23. and this shows his
approbation.

4. Hence it follows, that they do many times prevail with God. Though
sometimes it is come to that, that though Noah, Job, Daniel should pray for
them, they should only deliver their own souls; yet it is not always so; if it
be possible, such prayers shall prevail, and God not seldom does thus answer
them. There is many a Sinners life is saved by the earnest importunity of Gods
Servants with him, they had died else: God gives their lives to these prayers,
to testify what an interest they have in him, and convince sinners themselves
o^ their gracious acceptance with him. The very scope of this part of the
Parable, is to let us know, that God spares many after they have provoked him
to denounce some severe threatenings against them, and to tell us how it comes
about that he so does: it is not for any worthiness or merit of theirs, but
because they have a deep share in his favor, and he will thus signalize it.

5. By this means the Judgment that was ready to cut them down, is deferred.
When the Ax of Divine Vengeance was lifted up, and just falling down upon them
to give them a deadly blow, these hold Gods hands, and keep them from doing
execution: and now the Sinner is suffered to live a while longer; the mischief
which he was falling into is diverted from him; and this is an advantage; every
day and hour in which the condemned Creature is saved out of the pit, is a rich
favor to him, Lam. 3. 22. It is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed; and
the rather because,

6. Thus they have a farther opportunity given them to seek an escape from that
destruction, if they have but an heart to make use of it. How many wretched
sinners have great reason to say; if I had died at such a time, when I was just
at brink of the pit, and had a Sentence of Death upon me in my own
apprehension, I had then certainly perished; I had gone to everlasting
burnings; but God has spared me, and given me a longer day of grace. Till the
tree is cut down, all hopes concerning it are not utterly lost; but when it is
destroyed, and the root is dead, then all hope is gone: and needs must it be a
very great privilege for a sinner to have farther day given him, and a price
continued in his Hand to get Wisdom; if he Wants an Heart to it, it is his own
wickedness; that he has the opportunity, is Gods indulgence.

USE I.
Learn hence how much Sinners are beholden to Gods faithful Ministers. As
little as they love them, yea as much as they despise and possibly hate them,
yet they little know how much they do for them: many a time when Judgment was
ready to have broken in, and Gods anger was kindled, and began to burn, these
have stepped in, and given a stop to it. It is true, they dealt plainly and
openly with such as live and lie in sin, and despise the offers of grace made
in the Gospel; and this is their faithfulness: they have discovered Gods anger,
and cannot but cry aloud, and call earnestly unto men; they cannot let them
alone; they speak home, and this many times vexes sinners; they love not to be
disquieted; and this makes such to cry out of them, as if they were the only
Troublers of Israel. Yea they are often put upon it to denounce the threatenings
of the Word of God against men that will not repent; and foolish creatures are
ready to say, we see what they would be at, they desire and long for our
mischief: but little do they think the mean while, what deep resentments they
entertain upon their hearts of these things; how the danger they are in affects
them. As they cannot let sinners alone, so neither can they let God alone: they
are as earnest in their supplications to him for them, as they are in their
warnings of them: did you know what pleadings, what entreaties, what
importunities, they are using in their behalf; how loath they are that you
should perish, how earnest they are with God that he should save you, that he
would turn you, and have mercy upon you, it would make you to entertain better
thoughts of them: nor can all your unworthy reflections upon them, turn them
from so doing, though they grieve and account it to be hard measure, so David,
Psalm. 35. 13, 14. and Jeremiah, chap. 18. 20.

USE II.
This tells us how sore a Judgment of God it is upon a degenerate people, when
he takes such away from them. Well might that King let fall such a doleful
lamentation as he did, over the bed of a dying Prophet, 2 Kings 13. 14. My
Father! my Father! the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. The death
of pious Ministers, in a time of sore calamity, when G od is contending with
his people in grievous Judgments, carries a great deal of the revelation of
Gods displeasure in it, and is therefore an ill omen unto such a people, and if
it be not laid to heart, it bodes so much the more awfully: read how the
Prophet comments upon it, Isa. 57 1, 2. these are they who are to put into the
breach and make it up; and if they fall there, it says, that God will be held
back no longer by their prayers, but the gap shall stand open, that mischiefs
and miseries may come in as a Flood. What shall we then say of the late awful
stroke of Gods hand, in the decease of that aged and faithful servant of
Christ, the renowned Eliot? He died late enough for himself, but too soon for
us; whose Faith and Prayers were singularly serviceable for the interest of
this poor People; and eminently observable it is, that God so ordered it in his
Providence that lest he should go away unlamented, the unhappy tidings of our
sore loss and calamity at Falmoth, were brought the very day of his
incineration, to put us into mourning, and add solemnity to His Obsequies; and
I believe New England. has not many such gap m^n to lose, I could not but,
upon so invi^^^g an occasion, drop this interest tear u^^n his Tombstone.

USE III.
Hence we must Cautiously interpret those imprecations, which Gods Faithful
Prophets have sometimes used against impenitent sinners, on Scripture Record.
We shall find of them in the Psalms, and Prophecy, of Jeremiah: and some are
ready to make a wrong improvement of them, and justify their own passionate
wishes against others by them: It may be said of them, that they were men of
like passions; and all that is recorded concerning Holy Men in Scripture, is
not commendable; some such expressions might be the boiling over of their
corruption. But I suppose, there may be a better account given of them than so:
viz: that they were men inspired, and delivered prophesies, and therefore did
not declare their own desire (as least in such as were personal) but Gods
purpose, which they sometimes delivered in plain Enunciations, sometimes in
Rhetorical imprecations, according as the Spirit of God suggested to them:
hence we find, that they were mean while praying and interceding with God for
their People, and protesting their integrity in so doing: and God is put upon
it more than once, ^o forbid Jeremiah from praying for that People.

USE IIII.
Let this Consideration be an argument to persuade with sinners to hearken to
such as these, when they speak to them from God. If they are so earnest with
God to Spare you, let them then be bid welcome, when they are earnest to
persuade you To Break off your Sins by Repentance; to convince you of your
barrenness, and unprofitableness, and excite you to fruitfulness: one would
think this should give them a welcome reception: though they come to testify
against your sins, and persuade you to part with your lusts and vanities and
betake your selves unto God: and to this end that you may, be persuaded of
these three things.

1. Believe that they, know what is your concern. That they see your danger,
and understand how the case stands between God and you; else they would not be
so importunate with God, if they did not see evil to be threatening of you; and
if they discover the tokens of Gods indignation, it is not to be slighted. God
is wont to let them know what he is about to do, and to touch their heart with
a deep sense of it: if therefore they tell you of an evil day nigh and
accordingly warn you of the danger you are in by reason of your present state,
it is not to be slighted, or made a light matter of. If they are faithful, God
trusts them with his secret, and they cannot but truly declare the mind of God
unto you as they find it; and it is your fo^y and damage too to be persuading
yourselves, and suspecting them, that Baruck sets them on.

2. Believe that they love you. It is hard to persuade sinners who love their
sin, to think that any can love their persons that set themselves against their
corruptions: Ahab hates Micaiah, because he never speaks good of him; and
therefore thinks that he hates him: ask yourselves; if they did not love you,
would they be so foolish as to expose themselves, to your anger, that they may
do you good? did they not love you, would they set themselves so earnestly to
implore God for you, and seek your preservation? They hate your sins indeed,
because they know that they will undo you, if not forsaken: but they love your
Souls, and therefore seek their Salvation. If they did not love you, they would
not willingly stand between an angry God, and angry sinners. Would you but
solemnly think what it is for that they are treating so seriously with you, you
would be persuaded of this, that they are unweariedly bent to seek your
salvation; and if this be not love, what is.

3. Think then that it is your interest to hearken to them. It fares with Gods
Ministers as it did with Joshua, Israel fly before their enemies; Joshua falls
upon his Face and prays; and God says to him, what make thou here? up,
Israel has sinned, Thus Gods servants see the owner of the vineyard angry, and
hear him speak of cutting down such a fig tree, they beg of him to spare it a
little, not to be so angry; and God says to them, go see if such an one will
be reformed, amended, and bear fruit, else I will certainly Cut him down. For
this reason therefore they come unto you: and for this end they set themselves
to convince, reprove, warn, counsel, entreat, you. And let it be a Solemn word
to urge this advice upon you, to consider that if they cannot after all prevail
with you to entertain their Counsels, they will not be long able to hold Gods
hands; but he will say to them, pray no more for that sinner. It may be this
year also he may wait, but if still you continue as you were, what shall become
of you next, the Lord knows, But if you, hear your Souls shall live.

SERMON XIII
2. I proceed to the consideration of the reason of the Vine-Dressers request;
under which he obliges himself to his farther and more endeavors with it for
its help to bear; till I shall dig about it, and dung it. The two expressions
here used do signify two known pieces of Husbandry that are wont to be
employed about trees, to make them to bear: They that are skilful Gardeners
when they see a tree to fail in point of fruitfulness, are wont to dig about
the Roots, and lay them bare for a while, and afterward to apply dung to them,
and to cover them again, as a proper expedient to attain their end by; and
these Metaphors do signify the improvement of all suitable and proper means
with sinners, to bring them to Repentance, and new Obedience: Not that Gods
Servants have not been doing of this before, for men are not to be judged truly
faithful, that neglect to urge and press the Truths of the Word upon Sinners,
and endeavors to prevail with them to come unto God, and believe in Christ: but
it intimates that they will persist in it; and that this consideration quickens
them to more earnestness, and diligence in it; and it may also design a more
particular and personal application unto such: and herein we are made to
understand,

1. What is the efficacy of the discovery of Gods Anger ready to fall upon
sinners in the heart of his Servants, viz. to rouse them up to a more earnest
pursuit of their work, and for that end, to desire a farther respite to be
given.

2. What is the reason why God is pleased to stop the execution of his
threatenings after he has denounced them, viz. that sinners may have more
endeavors, and more sedulous, used with them for their Conversion; Hence,

DOCTRINE. Gods Servants request, and he sometimes mercifully grants a reprieve
to barren Professors, after solemn threatenings; that they may have farther
means used with them to render them fruitful.
It is true, there is only the int^cession it self expressed in the parable,
but our Saviors design is to intimate, both that there was such a delay
granted, and how it was obtained, and what was the motive for the one to ask,
and the other to grant; and it is determined in this. There are two things
whereof a distinct account may be here enquired after?

1. What influence this reason has into the desires of Gods servants, to make
them so earnest for a year longer?

2. On what account this argument and plea of theirs prevails with God?

1. What influence this reason has into the desires of Gods servants, to make
them so earnest for a year longer?

A. It is certain that desires have their motives, and rational desires are
moved rationally. Now when Christ's Messengers see the eminent danger that is
over the heads of sinners, and the ax of Divine vengeance ready to cut them
down; as humane pity cannot but stir in them the bowels of compassion; so there
is not a little in this consideration to raise these desires in them to greater
measures of ardency: and that in a double respect, viz. both with respect to
themselves, and referring to those for whom these desires are:

1. In regard of themselves. There is a self-interest which Gods Ministers have
in this affair, which stimulates these desires in them; and we may take a brief
distinct account of it in these things.

1. They are sensible of the awful charge of souls lying upon them, and the
solemn account they must be called unto for them. ^^^^re is no man that is duly
qualified for the work of Christ in the Gospel, who has not his heart affected
with the frequent consideration of this; who does not often think with himself,
God has put these souls under my watch, and made it my duty to give them
faithful warning from him, of their misery and danger, and the duty which is
required of them; and has enjoined me to be instant with them, in season, and
out of season: to observe their state, and case, and accommodate counsels to
them accordingly, and to be very earnest with them for their good; to deal with
them plainly, and to withold no necessary and seasonable Truth from them.
They often ponder on that as spoken to them, Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18. Son of man, I
have set thee a watchman to the House of Israel, etc. and think with
themselves, I must appear ere long before the dreadful Tribunal of the great
Judge, and then Jesus Christ will ask of me, what is become of those souls whom
I so solemnly enjoined thee to look after? where are those Sheep and Lambs whom
I gave thee a charge to feed for me.

2. They are also in some measure acquainted with their own sinful infirmities
and Temptations. God is pleased to manage his treaty with sinners about the
things which concern their peace, by men of like infirmities with themselves;
and he is wont to make such as he sends upon this errand to apprehend it
deeply: which apprehension has been wont to make them many times too backward
in accepting the Cmomission, as judging themselves insufficient for so weighty
an undertaking, and therefore we have that of Moses, Exodus 4. 13. Oh my Lord,
send I pray thee by the hand of him whom thou will send: q. d. any rather than
me; and of Isaiah, chap 6. 5. I am a man of unclean lips; of Jeremiah, chap. 1^
5. I cannot speak, for I am a child; of Paul, 2 Cor. 2. 16. who is sufficient
for these things? they feel so much of a dead and insensible frame in
themselves, so much want of a tender and compassinoate pity for souls, so many
discouragements ready to prevail over them, to make them omit their duty, or be
deficient in it, which renders them apt to be jealous of themselves, and
suspicious least they should give God just provocation against them,

3. Hence when they see Gods Judgments threatening of sinners to cut them down,
they reflect upon themselves and are afraid. Tho^ as to their integrity, and
sincere desire to he faithful, and endeavor after it; they have the witness of
their consciences; yet they suspect their deceitful hearts; and now be think
themselves whether they have done all that they might, and had the opportunity
of doing, to have prevented this: have they chosen suitable and seasonable
subjects to insist upon? have they been distinct and particular enough in their
applying of them? have they spoken plain and full? have they been earnest in
it? and that both in their public Preaching, and private advice, as there has
been opportunity? and are now ready to think, i^ I had been more earnest and
importunate, more solemn and serious, more zealous and affectionate, such a
sinner might possibly have been persuaded.

4. This fear puts them upon the resolution to be more intensly engaged in
this, if God shall give them a farther opportunity. Fear of Gods displeasure at
them, makes them to renew their purposes, and so in quickens them in their
work. This was i^ that made Paul to study the art of persuasion, to think that
he as well as they to whom he Preached, must appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. they therefore draw up this resolve in
themselves, that if God shall afford them more liberty to treat with such, they
will be more solemn with them, tell them more plainly of their sins, and of
Gods Judgments; plead harder, and entreat with more tenderness and compassion
than ever: and all this to discharge the obligation lying on them, and satisfy
their own consciences, and so provide for their more comfortable appearing
before their Judge.

5. Hence, that they may have farther opportunity, they importunately beg for
the sinners reprieve. They know that if he be now cut down, he will be put
wholly beyond their farther care and charge; they can then no more pray for
him, nor plead with him; and if they have not done all their duty to them, it
will then be too late to endeavor it: so that their request is mainly built
upon this plea, let him live, raise him up this once from death, spare him a
while longer, give him a farther day, that so I may use more and more
industrious endeavors with him before he goes hence, than ever I have done.

2. With respect to them for whom these desires are; viz. the sinners whom they
see upon the brink of ruin. As it is their love to them that makes them to ask
a year more for them, so a principal motive; is, that they may try farther with
them, and there are these things that come into this consideration.

^. They know that sinners are converted and made fruitful by the use of means.
That this is the ordinary way in (...) which God is wont to dispense his grace
to the souls of men: when therefore God intends to have a people to his praise,
^e plants them into a vineyard; he sends the Gospel to them, and affords them
his Ordinances. If God has much people in Corinth, Paul must tarry and preach
there; for the gathering of them in: if therefore those that have so long been
unprofitable, be at last made to serve God, they must be continued under the
Ordinances: if the fig tree ever comes to bear fruit, it must be be let grow in
the Vineyard, and be there manured.

2. They also know that God is wont to give a blessing to his Servants industry
in the use of means. Though all success depends absolutely upon God, and we
cannot by all our care and endeavors bring home one soul to Jesus Christ; yet
because God has appointed the Gospel to be the instrument of Conversion and
salvation; and has required his Servants to use diligence and constancy in the
dispensation of it unto men, he is therefore wont to encourage their industry,
by giving good success unto it; not but that he uses his Sovereignty here, but
he frequently does so: Paul, who labored more than all the Apostles, won more
Souls unto Christ than any of them: Diligence must needs be nearest to success.

3. Hence the Sinners danger, moving their compassion, engages them to be more
industrious with them. When they see, unregen^^ (...) men, by neglecting a day
of grace, to ^^ve provoked God to just anger, and that ^ger to discover it self
in the tokens of his righteous severity, their hearts are thereupon ^^irred in
them, and they commiserate their dolefully dangerous condition, and that puts
them to study what is their duty in this case, to prevent it: and because all
that is in their power to do, is to be more earnest and instant in laboring
with them for their good; now they shake off all their indispositions, and give
themselves up to their work; they say, if I will not have this sinner to
perish, I must pluck him as a brand out of the fire, I must cry aloud, and not
spare him, but show him his transgression, and plead harder than ever with him.

4. Hence they are not willing to despair but hope still concerning them.
Despair of doing good, is that which e^eryates the spirits, and puts a damp
upon all activity, yea makes men to cast off all endeavors: whereas on the
other hand, hope oils the wheels, warms the heart and gives activity to
compassion: they are not therefore willing to think that sinners are hope^ess:
though they have been careless and obstinate, yet it is possible that God may
give them repentance, and they may come in at last: their hand heart may be
softened, they may be brought to see the evil of their doings, and made to mourn
for and turn from them; God can change them and means may be blessed unto them
for good; they are not out of the reach of Almighty power to convert and save
them.

5. This therefore makes them beg time for farther trial. They do it not with
any design to aggravate the sinners guilt, though it unhappily proves so too
often in the event; they would not make any man's miseries more and greater, if
they could help it, but all they do in this regard, is in hope that it may be
their Salvation; it is because they are not willing that these should perish:
and because all their hope is in a farther probation, which only will allow
unto them the opportunity of using means for their good, or unto sinners the
opportunity for repentance: They do therefore seek unto God that he would grant
this their request, and for that reason the vinedresser asks but one year more
because it is merely for probation that he desires it.

2. Upon what account this argument and plea of theirs prevails with God to let
sinners alone a little longer?

A. We are not to suppose that men's pleadings, can alter Divine Purposes. Or
make God to take up other resolutions concerning any than he has from eternity
determined in himself. But this is to be well remarked that God puts this into
the hearts of his servants and he puts these arguments into their mouths, and
suffers these pleadings to prevail with him to answer their requests; and he
has holy designs in all this. Now the reasons why God is willing to forbear,
that he may so give his servants farther opportunity to take pains with
sinners, after they have continued barren under so many means, and so much
patience as has been already afforded them, are such as these.

1. He does it to give his Ministers the opportunity to discharge their
Consciences, toward such Sinners: that so, whether these will hear or forbear
they may save their own souls; and may have peace in themselves, in that they
have done their duty to the utmost of their power. By this means their savor
comes to be more sweet unto God, whether these be saved or perish. It is true,
Gods Ministers need pardon of all their defects every day; and if God should be
strict, they could not stand: But as it cannot but be their great grief to
think, these and those sinners are gone, and we have not discharged our duty to
them: so, on the other hand, it will afford them great inward peace, though
they cannot infallibly determine, what effect it has wrought on them for their
eternal good, yet that they have been faithful, and done their utmost as
instruments in this affair. We see how cheerfully Paul can take his last leave
of his Ephesians on this account; when he can say, Act. 20 26, 27. I am pure
from the blood of all men, for I have not shunned to declare unto you all the
counsel of God; and God would have the souls of his faithful servants comforted
in their work.

2. God sometimes intends that some sinners shall be newborn out of time.
There are some of Gods Elect, that are by his holy pleasure suffered to stand
for a long while in his vineyard, and to grow worse and worse under and by all
the pains and cost that have been expended upon them: yea to run up to such an
height of wickedness, as to provoke him to break in upon them with his
Judgments, and to threaten them with destruction; and when he has laid them up
in the irons of affliction, he then bores their ears to instruction; and so he
brings them in at the last to be made the eternal monuments of his glorious
Grace, and to show his mighty power, by making them astonishing instances of
his praise. Such an one was Manass^h, and Paul tells us that he was such an one
too, born out of time; when therefore it is so, and such are ready to perish,
he is pleased, together with putting it into the hearts of his Servants to
importune him, also to let them live yet longer, that there may be an
opportunity to instruct and help them to Salvation: and herein also he mightily
honors his Servants, by giving them the lives of such at their request.

3. And God sometimes does it to make his ^r^th the more illustrious upon them
at last in their destruction. It is an awful expression of the Apostle, Romans 9.
22. What if God willing to show his wrath, and make his power known, endured
with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath, fitted to destruction. Sinners
have provoked God to destroy them; such as have enjoyed Vineyard-priviledges,
even all the means of Grace, and despised them, have greatly added to this
provocation: and now, what if God sees meet to let them alone, after they have
greatly incensed his anger against them, that they may fill up an extraordinary
measure, and thereby be made the more eminent and singular instances of his
wrath in the day of his vengeance! who shall lay any thing to his charge? and
though the desires of his Servants have another designed aim than this, yet if
he sees meet to suffer their sincere endeavors, and more than ordinary labor
which they are at with such, to turn to their more fearful account; herein he
is no loser, nor shall his Messengers lose their reward.

USE. I.
This Doctrine affords us a rule of probable conjecture, what God will do with
a professing people, when his judgments are upon them for their barrenness.
Whether he be like to proceed in a way of anger or to suspend his wrath. All
serious souls are thoughtful at such a time, what God intends to do, and would
be very glad if he would show them a token for Good; It is true, the best and
most desirable token is, when his Judgments work them up to an universal
repentance and reformation: that says that God will certainly return to them,
and do them good: but mean while, it is no contempt^ble presage that God will
yet spare, and delay to execute all his wrath on such a people if he produce
these two things in his servants.

1. If he makes them earnest and importunate with him to spare his people. When
God had given that advice, Joel. 2. 17. We have that animadversion, made upon
it, verse 18. then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people.
Where there is a real praying ministry in a place, though God may afflict, And
sorely chasten such a People, for their provocations, yet there is great hope
that he will not lay them wall: he must call these off, and stop their mouths
before he can do that work, these, like Jacob, have power with God, and their
servent prayers of faith, with which they do importunately and unweariedly
follow him to hold hands; especially when that is in conjunction.

2. That he quickens them to be more solemn in their work, when they are much
enlivened in their Ministry which he has committed to them; when they do
imitate Christ's Mediation in both parts of it, they pray hard to God to pardon
and heal his people, and they as earnestly warn and entreat sinners to repent:
this speaks as if God were resolved to renew the treaty with his people, and
for that reason, spirits his servants rightly for the duty incumbent on them in
the management of it. Let all then that fear God, and tremble at his Judgments,
pray hard to him, that he would thus pour out of his spirit upon his
Ambassadors, in this the day of his sore Controversy with us: that when there
are so many indications of his anger and dark clouds impending over us, in
respect to the whole state of our affairs, there may be this dawn of the light
of Gods countenance upon us, to encourage us to hope and believe that he will
not thus leave us nor forsake us.

USE II.
This tells us that all the time that is afforded to a sinner, after some
eminent deliverance is bestowed upon him, is probation time. It is an
opportunity given him on very purpose, to see if he will yet at last improve
the day of grace, and return to God. Such deliverances are not evidences that
God is reconciled to them, and that their state is now good, because God has
heard prayers for them, and has spared them from just now going to the pit:
no, but they in their distress made promises, that if God would restore them,
and give them a little more time, they would not live as before they had done:
if they might have their life given them: and a few more Sabbaths and
Ordinances allowed them, they would husband them better; and they who prayed
with them, promised that they would dig about them, and dung them; this is the
ground on which they were restored, and now they live upon trial, whether they
will do so or no: and there are three things wherein this probation is to be
taken notice of.

1. It gives them a new opportunity to return to God, and live to his praise.
It affords, them not only farther time, but also a renewed season; it suffers
them to stand still in the vineyard; it stops the ax of revenge from cutting
them down; it gives them leave to go to Gods House, and there to hear his Word,
and to be called upon, counseled and warned to repent; it lengthens out the
day of their visitations, and holds the things of their, peace still before
them: now, all the opportunities of grace which are bestowed upon men, are
properly trials which God uses with them; for he will have his own glory by
them in the conclusion.

2. Nay the very ^eason upon which God gives them more time, is to see if they
will do better now than they did before. It is upon a supposition that it will
repent them after such dangers and deliverances, of their former neglects and
that they will be thereby quickened to husband such an opportunity better; God
says, surely such a sinner, whom I have brought from the gates of the grave,
who has been restored to a new life, and that when he was almost beyond hope,
will lead a new life; he will surely receive instruction, and hearken to the
calls of the Gospel, surely he will not after this forget God, and return again
to his old vain and sinful courses.

3. Hence if this be neglected the time is like to be short, The parable
mentions but a year; and probations after provocations are ^ot wont to be long:
when Judgment is begun, God is in haste. To show his pity, and how loath he is
that sinners should perish, he will still hear a little longer: but, to show
his Holiness, he will not tarry long if the end be not answered. And there is
great reason why God should now use speed, because if such eminent deliverances
of his will not work on their hearts, but they out-grow, and get them over,
there is little expectation that they should after that get any good by
forbearance; for by this carriage of theirs they are the more desperately
hardened in their sins.

USE. III.
For Exhortation to sinners; such as have had more observable sparing mercies
afforded unto them: you have been brought low by your iniquity; God has laid
his hand heavy upon you; you were under a sentence of death in, your own
apprehension, and the terrors of it made you afraid; you then reflected, and
remembered how unprofitably you had lived, and how woefully you had despised all
the means of Grace: then you earnestly called for prayers, and made a great
many solemn promises; and God has heard prayers for you, and granted you the
desire of your souls and you are now escaped, and returned to his house again.
Let the truth in hand urge these three lessons upon you, and put them in
practice.

1. Beware of turning to your former courses again. It was our Saviors advice
to one whom he had healed, Joh. 5. 14. Behold, thou ar^ made whole, sin no
more, lest a worse thing befall thee. If you find any temptation so to do* check
your selves with this thought, certainly God did not deliver me for this; this
will be an ill requital of the Lord for this great benefit to me; and know it,
that if you do return to your vomit, after such afflictions, it had been better
for you, if you had died under such ^^stroak of Gods hand, and been then sent
down to the pit: little do you know what an aggravation this will will be to
your guilt.

2. Be sure therefore now hearken to the solemn and earnest strivings with you
in the Ordinances. Think when you come to the House of God again, what a mercy
it is that when you were going to silence, God said return and live: now
remember what it was for, viz. that you might have these means given you to
invite you to Repentance, that are not afforded to them in the grave: If then
he directs his Messengers to plead hard with you, and to lay your condition
open before you, hearken as for your lives, for indeed it is your life; bless
God that you have such another price in your hands, and be afraid of living
unconverted one Sabbath more, left your hearts should grow harder again: and
therefore,

3. Tremble so much as to think, that the next Judgment should come, and ^ind
you barren still. Remember, though you have escaped one, yet you are not
secure; God has more ways, and more Judgments to fall upon sinners by; beware
of security: It is good to be often thinking, that as you are in Gods hand, so
if you should by abusing this mercy of his, and living impenitent after it,
stir up his indignation, and bring another visitation upon you, what little
reason there will be, that you should expect another deliverance; what credit
would God give to your promises, who have already so broken them with him? what
aggravated provocation will be thus offered to him, to forbear no more? and
what matter of horror and despair will it supply your minds withal, to think
that such mercies, and such endeavors have been so lamentably despised by you.

SERMON XIV
Verse IX. And if it bear fruit, well; and if not, then after that thou shall
cut it down.
3. IT follows that we proceed to consider of the issue that the Vine-Dresser
comes to with his Lord about this Fig Tree: He desires but one year more to
make some farther experiment upon it; and what then? why here is a double
Hypothesis or Supposition that he makes about it, viz. either it will after
this bear fruit, or else it will still remain barren; and upon each of these
supposals he raises a rational inference or conclusion. We may in the first
place take the Hypotheses themselves into consideration. The Vine dresser dares
not to promise any thing positively, concerning the fig tree; being uncertain
what will be the return of all his labor and pains; the farthest that he can
say, is, it is possible it may hear, and possibly it may not? however, if his
Lord be but willing to try, he is willing to lay out his labor upon it:

Hence,

DOCTRINE. All the endeavors which are used by men for the rendering of Sinners
fruitful, are uncertain as to the issue.
They that use them have no assurance that they shall obtain; they are not
certain that sinners shall be converted, and made serviceable to the glory of
God: they know not but that after all is done, they will remain as they were,
as far from grace and holiness as ever. In prosecution of this Doctrine we may,

1. Enquire upon what grounds the evidence of this Truth is built, and

2. Resolve a doubt which is apt to be raised on this consideration.

1. In the enquiry into the grounds of the evidence of this Truth, we may take
up with these conclusions.

1. That God knows who are appointed to obtain grace and salvation. We are not
therefore to charge this uncertainty upon him, though men be at a loss, yet he
is at none: this the Apostle vindicates, 2 Timothy ^^. 19. The Lord knows who are
his. He not only knows them in the gross, or number; but who they are
personally and individually; not only how many they are, but what are their
names, and in particular: he is a chosen vessel, Acts 9. 15. and this must
needs be, because his free Election is the first link in the Chain, whereof
eternal glory is the last, Rom 8.29, 30. when therefore it was a time of the
greatest obduration upon the Nation of the Jews, Paul satisfies himself in
this, Romans 11. 7. The Election has obtained it; so that in this respect, here
is the greatest certainty that can be, because Gods purposes are Unchangeable.

2. That the means of grace are nextly and directly appointed for the benefit
of these. It was for the Redemption and Salvation of Sinners, that Jesus Christ
came into the World; but for which he had never engaged in the work which he
undertook: and to that end that his redeemed may be brought to participate in
the good which he has procused for them, the Gospel is promulgated, and the
offers and invitations to accept of peace are made to sinners: and this is the
reason why the Gospel is sent to this place, and not to that, because God has
some of his chosen ones here, whom he has loved with an everlasting love, and
whom he designs to call by these means, into the grace where by they may be
saved: nor can it be said that ever the Gospel was sent unto such a place,
where there were none of that number dwelling; though possibly there have bin
more of them in some places than in others: it is therefore called the Gospel
of Salvation.

3. Hence all these wheresoever they are, shall sooner or later be brought in
by the means of Grace. There is no uncertainty in the thing it self as to the
futurition of it; that shall be a truth in the winding up, Acts. 13. 43, As
many as were ordained to Eternal Life, believed; these may possibly lie a great
while in their sins, and abide barren under manifold essays used with them,
there may be a great deal of time and cost for the present lost upon them; they
may out-stand the three years of Patience, and fall into the one year of
probation, before they bear an, fruit; but it is certain they shall turn to God
before they die, they shall not be cut down for their barrenness; they shall be
born to God, though it be out of time.

4. But the Gospel means are sent to more than are chosen. Our Savior more
than once uses that assertion, many are called, but few are chosen, by which
he does not intend effectual vocation, for that belongs^ to none but the few
who are chosen, but the outward calling of the Gospel, by which men are brought
into the visible Church, and are invited to come unto Christ, believing on him,
to seek grace from him, whereby they may be ^nabled to serve him, it is
therefore such a call as men refuse to close cordially withal. Those whom God
has set his love upon, are, before their conversion, among the rest of the
world, they are alike as to their natural state; and those unto whom the
dispensation of the Gospel is committed, do not know how to distinguish these
from others, and are therefore enjoined to come unto such a people, and make
offers of grace universally to all that hear them, Isa. 55. 1. Ho! every one
that thirsts come, Rev. 22. 17. whosoever will, let him take the waters of
life freely; and Christ is by them as much offered to one as to another, and
they are as seriously and solemnly invited to come in unto him; and accept of
his grace; and if they refuse to entertain these offers, they will be
inexcusable, and their guilt will be aggravated, Joh. 15 21.

5. We cannot know antecedently to conversion who are chosen, i. e. by any
ordinary notes or signs. God did sometimes immediately reveal this to his
Extraordinary Ambassadors of old, although not always: but there are no ruies
given us, by which we may conclude positively that such are Elected, and
thereby encourage our selves particularly to use endeavors with them that they
may be called; there being no Scripture Rules on which we can proceed: and
therefore such a Faith has no foundation. There is no^^ing in their good
natures; for God sometimes chooses the most rugged dispositions, when he
passes by the most ingenious; that young man, Mat. 19. bad fair, but he fell
short: not by any impulse on our spirits, making us to be more earnest and
sollicitous for them than others; for God may thus encourage endeavors in us,
to make them thereby become the more inexcusable.

6. Men cannot convert whom they please. The new birth depends not on the wills
of men Joh. ^. 13. Our good will may animate us to our duty and because our
love to them makes us very loath that they should perish, it will excite
industry in us: and Gods end is thus accomplished by us; but our G race cannot
infuse it, though we have never so much of it in us. W hat G odly Parent would
lose one of his Children? What Godly Minister would lose any of his Flock? W
hat Godly Christian would see any one of his neighbors perish if this could
be? If it could be in his power to bring them home to Christ there should none
of them ly out from him. Men* work is, in their place to endeavor this, but
the efficacy of it depends upon an higher virtue; I. Cor. 3.6: I have planted,
Apollos has watered, but God gave the increase.

7. As none but God can bless the means with success, so he does his pleasure
in it: Christ, speaking of Regeneration, tells us, Joh. 3.8. The wind blow^th
where it lists, so is every one that is born of the Spirit of God: As it is
of grace, so that it may appear to be so. God takes and leaves as he sees meet,
Romans 8. 18. He has mercy on whom he will have mercy. All the labors of his
people are under the Sovereign Dispose of his hand; they may throw out the Net,
but it is he who must bring the fish into it, if they take any, or else they
may toil all night and catch none: nor is he obliged to do it, he is neither
obliged to sinners to convert them, for it is by grace that any are saved; nor
is he engaged to such as seek and endeavor it, for he can recompense their
labor fully in another way, if he please to frustrate it in the thing it self.

8. There are none that know whether God will give his blessing to, or
withold it from their utmost endeavors. If he do afford it, their labor
shall be succeeded, if he restrain it, sinners will remain impenitent under
all. This God has kept as a secret with himself; and therefore all our
endeavors must needs be under uncertainties, and the issue must be dubious to
us. Doubtless God has holy ends in keeping his Servants in suspense; however,
they are to do their work, without any demurr. Ezekiel must deliver his
Message, whether the people will hear or forbear.

2. Here is a doubt which calls for some resolution, viz. Is it not matter of
great discouragement on the spirits of Godly men to labor under such
uncertainties, or what is it that (...) animate them to their work.

A. Flesh and Blood may possibly take discouragement at it, and be ready to
think, what shall I lose all my labor, and possibly, instead of bringing men
to Christ, and Salvation, make them worse, and increase their condemnation? but
Grace will teach us other lessons. Here then let these few things be considered
for our satisfaction in this point.

1. That there is all reason that God should have the sovereign disposal of his
won gifts. That he be acknowledged to be supreme, and arbitrary in his
dispensing of himself to the children of men, must needs be his indisputable
prerogative, who shall find fault with him for doing with his own what he will?
if ^e should have left all the whole race of man kind in their natural estate,
and bestowed his grace upon none of them, there would have been no ground for
(...) ^ind fault with him, or lay any (...) to his charge; for all were
forfeited, and fallen into his hands, and liable to his revenge; if then he
will give his special favors to some and not to others, and that according to
his own pleasure, without acquainting us with the reason of it, it concerns not
us to dispute, or make any demurr in our thoughts about it: the highest reason,
and ultimate resolution of these things, which ought to set us down satisfied,
is, what if God will, Romans 9. 22.

2, That every Christian is under an indispensible duty in his place, to
endeavor all that he can to promove the salvation of others. Ministers in
their place, Parents in their place Governors in theirs, and neighbors in
theirs: this is a general duty that influenceth every relation that men (...)
according to the different manner (...) it is to be attended: and this is (...)
lay men under strong engagements (...) ^^^^vour it to the utmost; considering
that otherwise they will bring themselves under guilt, (...) not be able to
answer it unto God, (...) ^e shall call them to an account about it. For men to
take any discouragement in a known duty, is to hearken to Satan's temptation,
and to provoke God to anger against them. Though success be a great
encouragement in duty, yet that which firstly ought to engage the conscience of
one that fears God, is that it is his will. Duty is our part, success is his,
we may desire it, and ought to pray for it; but when we have done all, we must
leave it with him, Ezekiel. 9. 11.

3. That this uncertainty carries motive in it to do duty to all. As we do not
know that we shall prevail with them, when we have done all; but that they may
continue in their impenitency; so on the other hand, we do not know but that we
may be instrumental of doing them good, that which carnal reason takes
discouragement from, that grace encourages it self by. I am sure it is an
argument which the spirit of God makes use of to animate us to this constancy,
Eccl. 11. 6. If we did certainly know that such an one would grow worse by all,
and at last perish after he had used utmost endeavors with him for his
salvation, this would make us to despair, and that would quite dishearten us
from doing our duty; but as long as we know not what the event shall be, we now
fetch our encouragement to obey Gods Precept from the precept it self under
which we are, and so commit it to the Providence of G od with humble
submission: as becomes us.

4. There is a great deal of Hope notwithstanding this uncertainty. Hope is the
spring of action; it is that which thrusts men forward into all their business.
Thus it is done in the world, and in the management of all the affairs of this
life, men go upon it. The Husbandman sows in hope; the Merchant adventures his
Estate to manifold perils in hope; there is no assurance in these things; all
that they can say, is, if God wills it shall prosper; and they withal observe
that this is the way in which the Providence of G od is to be served, and unto
which he is wont ordinarily to give his blessing. Now there is as good hope
here: G od is pleased to convert sinners by the use of means; it is the way
that he has appointed for it, it is not therefore impossible but that he may
give his blessing to our endeavors, and make them to succed; nay, it is very
probable, that if he makes us diligent and earnest, he does intend to give us
the desired success: the W ord of G od gives us as much encouragement to this,
as to any thing else, and more too.

5. That if these endeavors do succeed, we are well paid for all our labor.
The joy and comfort of it, will give us abundant satisfaction. If we may but
save a Soul from going to the pit, if we may but win a sinner over unto Christ,
and be instrumental of bri^^ing him in unto him, that he may have service from
him we shall never think much of any thing that we have done for the obtaining
of it: All these travailing pains are now forgotten, for the joy that there is
one born to Christ, who shall serve him here, and live with him for ever. If
the honor of God be very dear, and the Souls of sinners very precious to us,
this will be our joy. and our triumph both now, and in the day of Christ's and
the very hopes and forethoughts of it are enough to put life into our
endeavors.

6. But supposing that we should fail in our desires and hopes on this account,
we shall be no losers still. Our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. It
will indeed be our present grief and bitterness of heart, but we shall not lose
our recompense. The rewards which God bestows upon his people, are not
according to the success, but according to their integrity and faithful
industry. If we pray for the conversion of these or those, and they be not
converted, Our prayers shall return into our own bosoms, if we take pains with
them and all com^^ to nothing as ^o them, but seems to be as water spilt on the
ground, yet God will not forget our labor of love, but will remember us in the
day of Recompense: with this Christ comforts himself, Isa. 49. ^.

USE. I.
This may serve to caution us against carnal confidence on the one hand, and
despair on the other. This caution concerns all these whose business it is to
endeavor the conversion of sinners unto God; these are two dangerous rocks
that we must carefully steer between if we would keep a right course in this
duty.

1. Beware of carnbal confidence. Let us not make too large and positive
promises to ourselves with respect of our labor: let us not say and conclude,
that because we find our hearts to be mightily carried out for the good of them
whom we have to do withal, so as to make us unweariedly industrious with them,
and to use all manner of endeavors that we are capable of; that therefore they
must needs be converted, as if by our own grace or industry we were able to do
it in and for them; or as if by our care we had obliged God to a necessity of
doing it for us, upon our laying ourselves out; this is a carnal conclusion,
and it flows from ignorance, and pride, and presumption, and it thereupon
offers unto God no little provocation, to withdraw his blessing, and so to
disappoint our expectation lest otherwise we should be lifted up with
self-applause, and burn inodnse to our own not, and so rob him of the honor of
his work.

2. And let us avoid despair of doing good* whatever seeming discouragements
there may be before us, what though a great deal of the pains which we have
taken seems to be lost, and sinners are as far from being fruitful as ever;
nay, they grow worse, and more rooted in their wicked courses; what though we
have tried all the ways that we can think of with them, and all seems to do
them no good, but rather hurt; yet let not this make us to cast off our
endeavors, to despond and to say it is in vain for us to do any thing more,
but let us say as Peter did to Christ, Luke 5. 5. we have toiled all the ^ight
and taken nothing: nevertheless at thy (...) I will let down the net. We cannot
be (...) that the time is past, or that this sin^^^ (...) not be still turned
unto God; he (...) it, and for ought we know he will (...) it may be at the
next throwing out (...) will come into the net, and be ta^^^

USE. II.
This Doctrine tells us that it is no good Rule to judge of men's fidelity by
their success. It is a thing which is too much practiced among men; but the
truth in hand will convince us how not only uncharitable, but also how
ungrounded a conclusion it is, for, if men are but instruments in Gods hand,
and used by him at his mere pleasure, to do what work he sees meet to do by
them, and have no certainty of the efficacy of their endeavors; then, for
others to say, that because there is not such fruit of their labors as were to
be desired, therefore they believe no^ at all or are not industrious, or
sincere in what they do, is a very censorious inference: that, because such a
Minister brings name more souls to Christ, than such another does, therefore
this man is not so faithful or so painful as he: because this parent has
towardly and hopeful Children, and that other has such as are rebellious, and
Scandalous, therefore he is careless and negligent of them, is a conclusion
which the premises will not prove. It is indeed a duty for every man to examine
himself; and such events have great motive in them, to put them upon it, the
more Solemnly to enquire, if such a Providence be not a punishment of such a
neglect, and if they discover it, to bewail and reform it; but that is must
needs be so, is contrary to the evidence of the Doctrine, and a placing of too
much upon men.

USE III.
This truth also affords us a word of warning, to beware of negligence and
boasting. Both of these we are too prone to, and either of them will certainly
do us damage.

1. Take heed of negligence. How many are there who indulge in themselves sloth
and neglect of duty, by this very argument, Viz. that all the pains that men
can take will do nothing, except God has appointed such an one to salvation;
and if he has, then he will bring him home to himself, whether I take pains
with him or no: thus are we apt to abuse the Decrees of God for the indulgence
of our our own sinfulness and ^loth. Nay the inference it self which is thus
(...) is false; and savours of ignorance; (...) who has appointed the end;
has (...) the means too; and it is accor^^^ (...) Scripture to say, it this
had not been (...) had not fallen out: yea, it is awful to consider, that
sometimes God appoints our neglect to be the occasion of their perdition, when
we do so neglect, what says the Scripture? I Sam. 3. 13. I will judge his
house for ever, for the iniquity which he knows; because his sons made
themselves vile, and he restrained them not; and when it is thus, our sin is
nothing the less, yea, we become Accessaries. God had appointed the sinner to
perish; and yet see what God says to the Prophet, Ezekiel. 3. 18. He shall die in
his sins, but his blood will I require at thine hand.

2. Take heed of boasting yourselves. If God shall succeed your painful
endeavors, and make you instrumental of the saving good of those that are
under your charge. Beware of being lifted up in your minds and arrogating it to
your selves: but let it on the other hand humble you, and lead you to admire
the rich mercy of God to you: and therefore, if you see others as painful as
you, not so successful, do not insult over them, or prefer your selves before
them: remember all these things are under uncertainties, and are the arbitrary
dispensations of Gods Providence, who blesses when and as he sees meet. Give
God the Glory then, and say with Paul, I am nothing. Know it, that if your
hearts begin to be puffed up, as if by your own virtue you had done this; he
can soon put a blast upon your labors, and teach you by sad experience, that
it is not your rising early and sitting up late that can accomplish any thing
without him.

USE IV.
This may also teach us to have a care of placing to much upon men. It is true,
all the gifts, and graces, and industry, which one has and uses more than
another, is of God, and he is to be acknowledged in it: but when they are best
furnished for their work, and most faithful in the discharge of it, they are
men still: they are but instruments in the hand of God; and Paul uses this as
an argument to discover the vanity of his Corinthians by, in saying, I am of
Paul, etc. I C or. 3. (...). who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but
Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord give every man. It follows not
that because such a Minister is able, p^ons and painful, that therefore he must
needs convert more unto God than another that is not so furnished as he is;
that because we have Parents that are Godly, and are very diligent in doing
their duty for us and to us, that we must of necessity be saved: If God has
placed us under such, we have a great dea^ of reason to bless him for it, for
every good and prefect giving is from him: but know it, that they may do all
that lies in their power, and yet you may get no good by them; and if you
confide in this, it is the way to get none.

USE V.
Let it be to exhort every Christian in his place, to do his duty, and so
commend it to God. I do not say but that it is good and profitable for us, yea
and we ought also to do it ^o observe that success our labors do ^^nd, that we
may either take encouragement by the blessing of God upon them, to be the more
cheerful in our work, and that God may have the praise from us: or to be
quickened and awakened by the unsuccessfulness of them to more diligence: But if
we have no certainty here, then it calls upon us to do these two things in
conjunction.

1. To be faithful in doing what God requires of us. This is our province; we
then know our place, and acknowledge it, when we take the command to be our
obligation, and do what we do in Obedience thereunto: when we remember that we
are Gods Servants, and that it is his work which we are employed in, and he
will look after it, and carry on his own ends, in and by it: the love of God
must constrain us in the^e things as it did Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 14. It is for us to
say, however God disposes of things, my work is to be faithful, that I may
have a clear conscience, and peace before his Tribunal.

2. To commend our labors unto God, and that, not only by a submitting of them
to his Providence, without taking of his work out of his hands, which is one
part of this duty; but also by earnest prayer to him, confessing that all our
endeavors without him will do nothing; call upon him, and beg hard of him,
that he will confirm our work, and make our way prosperous. If we are
uncertain, and all depends upon him; it says that we should pray over all that
we do: pray before, that God would direct and assist us; pray after, that God
would bless this Sermon, that counsel, the other reproof for their good: we may
else spend and be spent, and all we can do, turn to no account; but if we can
prevail with God in their behalf, and he be pleased to send forth his spirit,
and give a blessing to our endeavors, then shall they be fruitful, and we
shall quickly see them, of unprofitable to become profitable.

SERMON XV
IT follows that we consider the Hypotheses severally, together with the
inferences which the Vine-dresser draws from them. The first thing that he
supposes is, That this figtree, after he has dug about it and dunged it,
may possibly bear, though it were before barren; and truly, if he had not had
some hope of this, he would not have asked liberty to make any farther trial
upon it: The inference which he draws from hence is not expressed in the Text,
but intended: It is and Ellyptick kind of expression, and very frequent in
Scripture Dialect; in which there is something left to be supplied: what that
is here, is to be gathered from that which is concluded upon the latter
Hypothesis, for contrary suppositions, infer contrary conclusions. Our
Translation suitably supplies it with the word, [well] q. d. all shall be well;
there will then be no occasion to cut it down, but it will be profitable for it
to stand; it will be both honorable and serviceable in the Vineyard; it will
not repent thee of this for bearance; nor shall I be sorry for the pains that I
shall have taken with it; and it shall be well with that too; the reproach of
its barrenness shall cease, and it shall be out of the danger of the threatening.

Hence,

DOCTRINE. If after all patience and pains used with them, Barren Souls become
fruitful, all shall be well.
Though they have been long in Gods Vineyard, under the dispensation of Gospel
means, and enjoyed all manner of endeavors that have been used with them, have
worn out the greatest part of a day of grace, and withstood thousands of calls
and counsels, doing God no service all this while, but dishonouring him; have
cumbred the ground, provoked God to anger against them, and stirred him up to
proceed to threaten them with e^tting down: if yet at the last it repents them,
and they loath themselves for their sin, and return to him again with all their
heart, and with all their soul, all shall still be well at the last.

There are three respects in which the Truth of the Doctrine does discover it
self; the proposing and clearing of which will suffice for the Explication and
Confirmation of it.

1. It shall be well with the sinner himself, Though he has done so much to
undo himself, and has brought himself so near to the brink of Eternal Ruin,
and had almost sinned himself beyond hope, yet this shall turn the scale, and
recruit him again.

There are three things in which this may be discovered.

1. His former barrenness shall not be charged upon him. All the guilt of it
shall be removed: it was a great height that he was arrived unto; he had been
all this while heaping up provocation, and filling a terrible account: but upon
his returning to G od, all these scores are c^ost, and his person is justified;
his sins are blotted out as a cloud, an act of oblivion it past, and his
iniquities shall be remembered no more against him, Ezekiel. 18 21, 22.

2 God will repent him of the evil which he had threatened him withal. It is
true, repentance cannot properly be in God, because it argues something rash,
imprudent, inconsiderate in him that acts it, of which the Infinitely wise God
is incapable: but it is ascribed to him on the account of his providence. God
sometimes threatens sinners, and in those threatenings, there is a reserve, in
case of their repentance: and then, when the sinner repents, God is said to
repent, viz. when he revokes the threatening, and does not put it in execution,
hence that Jer 18. 8. the meaning of such language is, the sinner is now out of
the danger of those judgments; he shall not die, hence that advice Zeph, 2.
begin. which intends not the eternal purpose of God, but the threatening of the
law which was denounced against them.

3. Hence his estate is now safe. He is put into a state of life and salvation;
he is past from death to life; God is atoned to him, and loves him, and accepts
of him: he shall abide in the vineyard as long as God sees meet to use him for
his service there, and then he shall be transplanted into the Kingdom of Glory:
he is numbered among the Children and entitled to the inheritance, he may now
say as the Prophet Isa. 12. 1. I will praise thee for thou wast angry with me,
but thine anger is turned away. Now the evidence of this comfortable truth will
appear in these things.

1. The design of the whole day of grace, is to give sinners an opportunity to
repent that they may be saved. That is it indeed that makes it a day of grace,
because in it men have not only a space, but with it a call to return to God
that they may live: it is to invite them to, and afford them the means for it,
as long therefore as this day lasts, God signifies hereby that he is
reconcilable to sinners, that he delights not in their death, but had rather
that they should turn and live: for which reason he calls upon them so to do:
it is the day of their visitation, in which he holds our before them, the
things of their peace, and therefore gives them offers that if they do accept
of them, they shall have peace.

2. Hence the lengthening out of this day is on purpose to continue this
opportunity to them: when sinners under the G ospel, though they neglect it,
and hearken not to the voice of G od in it, are yet spared, and the wrath of G
od does not fall upon them in its weight, it is to afford them a farther trial;
it is to see if it will at last repent them of their sins, and they will be
persuaded to return unto God with all their hearts. Thus G od interprets his
patience exercised toward Jezebel her self, and charge it upon her as an
aggravation of her guilt, that she did not so improve it, Rev. 2 22. when the
sinner is cut off there is no more room for this, but whilst he is spared,
there is a price continued in his hands.

3. Hence all the Evangelical Calls that are Ministerially given to the sinner,
carry the encouraging promise in them. God stirs up the hearts of his Servants
to offer mercy to sinners that have been careless, to invite and excite them to
Repentance, and they are to make conditional promises to them, that if they do
still repent and return* God is willing to receive them into his favor. They
do not publish these ^earms of their own heads, but they do it by Commission;
they are Ambassadors, and they have it in their I^^^ctions thus to do, Jer. 3.
12, 13. and the Word of God has a great many of these, which look this way,
and have not other limitations but to the present call, let it be when it w^ll,
Jer. 3. 1, 2. Isa. 55. 7. and that forec^^ed, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22. and the purpose
of these is, ^o remove all doubts out of the minds of such as are ready to be
discouraged.

4. The sinner is now brought under the promises which a faithful God cannot
sail of performing. The Gospel promises are propounded unto men upon condition,
if that be fulfilled in and by the man. God is under the obligation, his word
is past for it; pardon, and peace, and glory are now the man's by Covenant: and
whenever any are made fruitful Christians, when they bring forth unto God
according to his will, the condition is fulfilled in them; they are the men of
and to whom God has said that he will do them good. There must be faith and
holiness put into the man, before he can bear spiritual fruits, and to them the
blessing is assured; and God is as good as his word; it is impossible for him
to ly: such a soul therefore must needs be in a safe state, if all the
blessings that are laid up in the promise, and purchased by the Blood of Christ
can make him so.

5. Nay this fruitfulness is a declaration of Gos everlasting love to him. It
is an evidence that God has chosen him in Christ before the foundation of the
world. Electing love is he first grace, on which all the rest de^^nd: the
sinner cannot remove his own barrenness, or empower himself to serve God; if
ever he be made fruitful, it is God (...) do it in him: he only can take away
(...) natural unprofitableness of his, and in (...) the principle of a new life
into him, the (...) birth is the spirits work; the man is ^old under spiritual
death till he comes (...) breathes life into him: and this is done according
unto his pleasure; he shows this mercy to whom he will; and the only motive
^^ch he has before him to do it in time, ^s because he purposed it from
eternity: Now therefore the secret of God breaks into light; and though before
none knew of it, and the^sinner might seem to be without hope; now he comes to
know that God had appointed him to be an heir of eternal life before the world
was: his condition it therefore as lafe as Unchangeable Love can make it.

2. It shall be well also in respect of Gods glory. It shall be no grief to
him, he shall never repent that he did spare the sinner, and give him a farther
time of trial, but be abundantly satisfied in it; we read Luke 15. 9. There is
joy in heaven: etc. and there is reason why God should take content in it,
because it will bring him honor; the thing will be to him for a name, and a
praise; this will appear if we consider,

1. That which God peculiarly designs by the Gospel, is the glory of his Grace.
It is true, his justice is also greatly illustrated by it, in as much as
sinners under it do aggravate their guilt, and bring the more fearful Judgments
upon themselves: But the Gospel is properly a discovery of Christ in his great
work of Redemption, and all this is for the riches of the glory of his grace,
Ephesians. 1. 6. and where his grace is exalted, there God is greatly glorified, for
he shall be praised in all his Sai^ts, and his other perfections are magnified
in and with this: his Justice in that way wherein he revealed his grace by
Christ, and upon his satisfaction; his Holiness, in that he gets him an
everlasting name and renown in this way, his power in that he is able to bring
about this great salvation; his Wisdom in the contrivance of the way to
accomplish it; hence therefore the whole treaty of the Gospel, that is held
with Sinners, carries in it a demonstration of this Grace.

2. There is a more special and eminent degree of glory that redounds to God by
this. When a sinner who has so obstinately withstood all endeavors that have
been used with him; has been for so many years growing harder and harder, and
by all this laying in so much provocation, through the multiplied affronts that
he has offered to God, shall at last be brought over to him, and become a
plant of renown in his vineyard; here are more illustrious discoveries of his
grace in this one: he is a most admirable monument of mercy. As the mighty
power of God is manifested, in the turning of an heart that has been so long
glewed to his Idols, so his unchangeable love is here commended: If any thing
could have made him to alter his design, so much, and so long continued
provocation would have done it; Paul therefore speaking of himself, who was
brought in after he had so long set himself against Christ, speaks of it with
admiration, I Tim. 1. 16.

3. Hence all the dishonor that he had before done unto God, gives luster
unto this grace. Grace is properly a free favor bestowed upon another, which
he had not merit of, nor could have challenged to himself of him that bestowed
it, had he not done it of his own bounty, it had never been conferred; and
there are two special enhaunements of it, viz. the greatness of the favor
bestowed, and the great unworthiness of the Subject that participates in it:
The more there may be said way he should not, the more there must needs appear
of the condescendency of him that does it. Now as it is sin that most of all
speaks the unworthiness of men, so the more aggravations there are in it, the
farther does it set the man off from this, and renders him the more unworthy;
and there can be nothing that more aggravates sin, than that a man should,
under all the offers of mercy, and means of repentance, go on in a course of
sin, notwithstanding all the strivings of the Spirit of God with him: this
therefore is grace indeed: when Paul would evalt it, he tells us what he was
before it came, I Tim. 1. 13. A Blasphemer, a Persecuter, and injurious.

4. And the sinner is now made, not only a monument, but also an instrument of
Gods Glory. As he before dishonored him, so now he serves him; he bears fruit,
and it is for God, and he is glorified by it, John 15. 8. and usually it comes
to pass, that though he is born so much out of time, and so has but a short
opportunity allowed him wherein to glorify God in this life, as having spent
the greatest part of his time in vanity; yet he is more deeply engaged than
ordinary in Gods Service, and more strenuously endeavors to make up his lost
way, and redeem the little spot of time that is allowed him, being quickened
thereunto by the thought of his former unprofitableness. What have did Paul
make in the work of Christ? he labored more than all the rest of his Fellow
Apostles; and though he came in after them, yet he came not behind the chief of
them, and this is much to the glory of God.

3. It shall be well in respect of Gods people; and those of them more
especially who have been the deepest concerned for the sinner, and taken the
most pains with him, For,

1. They shall now reap the fruit of all their labors. They were a long time
making of sad complaints, that they had labored in vain, and were ever and
anon almost ready to faint and despond, and to corclude, surely there will
never any good be done upon this sinner, he is even grown altogether hopeless,
all our pains have been thrown away upon him: but now their labor appears not
to be lost, because they are brought in unto Christ; and it is a full
recompense: although a man be at a great deal of expense, and use long patience
about any design that his heart is deeply engaged in, and it be a great while
before it comes to take effectually, yet if at length it be compassed, the man
is not frustrated; now they can heartily glorify God in such as these are;
Gal. 1. 23, ^^.

^. The desires of their hearts are thus accomplished, and so their Joy is
fulfilled. The great thing which they longed for, and which carried them forth
in all their endeavors, for which they cheerfully attended all the duty lying
on them, was the conversion of sinners; this was it that they waited to see,
and cast many an earnest look for the discovery of it: and therefore when they
do come to fee it, they cannot but rejoice, as a mother does in a child, or a
Conqueror that takes great Spoils, it makes them to forget all the labor and
toil which they have bin at, and their hearts are comforted in it: all the
grief which they were sinking under before, for fear of the issue, is now
turned into joy, to see them brought home to Christ; their mourning over those
perishing Souls is turned into a dance. They are glad on Gods account, that he
shall have honor now by such an one, who before did nothing but dishonor him;
they rejoice on the Sinners account, that he shall now obtain salvation, and be
happy for ever in the favor of God; and they rejoice on their own account, to
think what comfort they shall have in these in the day of Christ.

USE I.
For Caution. Let none from hence presume to delay their returning unto God.
There is an evil spirit in men naturally, that leads them to abuse the most
precious Truths of the Word of God, and to turn the richest cordials into the
most deadly poison. It may be there are some who hearing this Truth, do
thereupon say in their hearts, if it be so, we will then allow our selves a
while longer in our sinful courses, we will take a little more pleasure in the
ways of our hearts, there is no such danger: if at last we bear fruit, we shall
do well enough. If there be any that do nourish such an evil root of bitterness
in them. I warn you in the name of God to beware to your selves, left it prove
your utter destruction. I am sure such inferences lead to desperate
conclusions; and if men once come to settle upon them, their condition is next
to hopeless; let me therefore urge these two considerations upon such.

1. Though if you do bear fruit there is no danger of your final miscarrying,
yet there is great danger whether you shall bear or no; if you were as sure of
true Repentance at last, as you may be that God will certainly accept of you,
if you do indeed turn to him, the hazard would be taken off: but the Devil
cheats you, by persuading you to draw unwarrantable conclusions from uncertain
premises: be then advised to balance this consideration with these two on the
other hand.

1. The God only can work this change in you. If it were in your power there
were the more to be pleaded: If the sinner could turn himself when he pleased,
he might be the more bold, but converting grace is the gift of God, if he does
not work it in you, you can never do it for your selves: you can as easily
create a world, as put grace into your own hearts, whereby you may live to Gods
glory. Now God offers this grace to you, ne now pleads with you about it, he
says, to day, if you will hear his voice; but he has given you no assurances
that he will take your time, or wait your leisure to do this work in and for
you.

2. That Gods day of grace is limited. It is true, he has not told us how long
he will lengthen it out to this or that sinner; but in general we are assured
that it has its fixed bounds beyond which it shall not pass, and that it is to
some longer, to others shorter, as it pleases him: he has said, Genesis 6. 3. My
Spirit shall not always strive; and therefore has given that advice to men,
Isa. 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be found; call upon him while he is
near; and this is a solemn consideration; which every unprofitable soul under
the Ordinances ought often to entertain his thoughts withal: and particularly
in the end of every Sabbath; here is one day more of my season past and gone, I
am one Sabbath nearer to the end of my day of grace, which if once it comes to
be past, and Gods time be over, I am then beyond all hopes of recovery, and
there will be no more possibility for ever of my returning to God: and now say,
what comfort can you gather from your presumed supposition, when the Assumption
must be, but I am not like to return for ever.

2. If ever this work do truly pass upon you, it will then bitterly repent you
of your delays; however you indulge a carnal mind, and corrupt heart with such
presumptions for the present; if once the grace of God comes to be put into*
you, and you be indeed made fruitful, this will embitter the reflection to your
thoughts: Then will you wish that you had come in to God before, complain of
your selves, lament all the lost time that cannot be recovered, cry out of your
selves for fools and madmen that had such a price in your hands, and had so
woefully neglected it: then will you see that all your former time was lost
time, and say, Oh that I had been wise; how much might I have done for God?
what treamres might I have laid up to my self for eternity, whilst I grat^^^ed
my carnal lusts, and spent many for what is not bread? There is nothing that
grieves (...) a soul more, than that he has lost his youth, and strength, and
vigor from the Service of God? you have laid in enough for this Repentance
already, beware that you do not by your delaying provide more for it.

USE. II.
Let this serve to encourage such as have long lived barren in Gods vineyard.
It is no new device or stratagem of Satan, that great enemy of Souls, when he
can no longer nourish security in men's hearts, and thereby animate them in
their delaying to entertain the calls of the Gospel; but they begin to have
touches upon their hearts and their consciences reflect on them conviction of
their sin and danger, and rouse them up to return and fleck after God in
earnest, now to lay matter of discouragement before them, and drive them off
from repentance, by persuading them that there is now no hope for them, it is
too late, they have sinned beyond a pardon, such sinners as they have nothing
now to expect but ruin, there is no mercy to be expected from God by them: and
thus from presumption he would precipitate them into desperation. This doctrine
in hand, will speak a word of hope to any such, and help their sinking Souls
with some thing to catch hold upon to support them, and to answer all their
doubts and fears, which Satan and a misgiving heart are ready to oppress them
withal; and there are these considerations which will stop the mouth of them
all.

1. That if God were not willing to accept of you returning to him, he would
not continue to call you. You say, I am afraid that if I should seek unto God
he will not accept of me; but every new call that is offered to you is a
contradiction, to such a suspicion: What Gods servants speak to you in his
name, and according to his word, that he says, now they say to you in his
name, if after all you will hearken to his invitation, and yield yourselves up
to him you shall live, and not dye. And they have his warrant so to say; they
recieved a command to make such a Proclamation unto you. God does not dissemble
with you if he says return and they that do so shall live: if he incites you
to come and you do come he will in no wise cast you out. He is in earnest; be
never said to the house of Jacob, seek me in vain.

2. That if your hearts do eneline to accept of his call, it is his spirit that
has done this in and for you. It therefore is an evidence that his day is not
done; for as long as God strives with sinners, their day is not over. Your
natural inclination was to have withstood all calls and counsels for ever: it
is a great work that is wrought by God in the Soul, when it is turned so as to
be willing that he should do the work for it, and to desire that he would do
it. If your barrenness be your burden, and you are made to groan under it, and
long to be delivered from it, it takes off all reason of doubting whether God
be willing or no: for it practically says in you, that he does desire it, and
gives you reason to believe that he is doing it for you, how else came you by
this?

3. That there is merit enough in the satisfaction of Christ to answer for all
your sins and provocations. Though you have heightened them by your contumacy
and long resistance of God; yet Justice is fully atoned, there is a complete
payment made to it by the blood of Christ, and therefore read, Mat. 12. 31. yea
and by the accepting and pardoning of such an one as you are, there will be
abundant evidence of the great extent of the virtue of these merits of his: it
will appear to the glory of Christ, how wondrous a Savior he is, what a
treasure there is laid up in his satisfaction; and therein will God also be
glorified.

4. That God, Angels, and good men, will greatly rejoice at this: How glad was
the Father of the Prodigal, that his son was returned after his profuseness? W
hat joy is there in Heaven at the conversion of a lost Sinner? and how much are
the hearts of Gods People refreshed, when they see one that has been a long
time dishonouring of God, by bringing forth the works of darkness, now to
honor him, by bearing the fruits of Repentance? and the way for you to farther
this joy is to make haste, and use no more delays; now to come over to Christ,
and seek his grace. There are none that will be grieved at it; but Devils and
Ungodly Men, and the more they are enraged the better. Be not then discouraged,
though you have done all this wickedness, yet at the last give your selves up
in an everlasting Covenant, to God, and bring forth the holy fruits of true
Obedience unto him; and so shall your Repentance be unrepentable.

SERMON XVI
THe second supposition now comes under our consideration, together with the
issue proposed by the Vine-dresser. The thing that is supposed is, that after
all is done, this fig tree may not bear: he does not know that it will, nor
dares he to engage that it shall; only he offers this conclusion, then after
this thou may cut it down. q. d. Excision is the last thing, let therefore
all other ways be tried with it, before it comes to that, and if at last they
appear to fail, that may be done after all: the tree will be where it was, and
vengeance may fall upon it when it appears desperate: and there is something
more in it than this, viz. he does tacitly make a promise, that if all these
essays shall come to nothing, and it still abides to be barren, he will no more
interpose or speak one word for it. Our Saviors Design in this is to show,
what final impenitence under the means of Repentance will bring men unto: it is
to verify the truth of what he asserts, verse 3. except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise peris^^. Some sinners have more of severity used with them, others
are the subjects of more patience, and thereupon they are ready to insult over
these, and be carnally confident of themselves: but he lets us here (...), that
though some be longer going to the pit than others, yet they arrive there at
the last, as well as they that made the shortest cut unto it: and this is to
make men afraid of withstanding the offers of grace that are made unto them in
the day of it. Hence,

DOCTRINE. If sinners continue unfruitful after utmost endeavors used with
them, they shall perish without remedy, without pity.
Though if they bear fruit at the last, they shall be spared, yet if finally
they will not be brought unto it, but remain in their natural barrenness, they
must perish in the end: though God has spared them once and again as being
loath that they should die, yet he will then spare them no more.

There are three things intimated, as contained in the Doctrine.

1. That God will certainly bring destruction upon them in the end. There shall
be no escaping for them: all the patience with which he has waited upon them,
and good will which he has shown unto them, loving and kind entreaties which
he has urged upon them, will not secure them from his wrath, or be any
evidence to them that he will save and not destroy them: sinners are ready to
say so; but God would have them to know and be assured of the contrary, Psalm
50. ^^, 22.

2. That their Church Priviledges will not save them. Many are ready to think
that the Sanctuary shall shelter them, whatever they be, how obstinately soever
they refuse to hearken to the voice of G od, yet the Temple shall save them;
they are in the vineyard, and no evil can come at them; this was the carnal
confidence of these Jews, which our Savior Christ would put them from
entertaining, and bring them to see that impenitence would break an hole in the
wall, and open a way for wrath to come upon them, and all they could challenge
could not secure them, and see Jer. 9. 25, 26.

3. That when it comes to this, they shall then have none to plead for them.
That a sinner under the Gospel may sin himself our of all pity, and beyond the
prayers of the Godly: they may go on so far in their obstinacy, that even they
who have been most sollicitous for them, and have many a time with tears begged
of God, to spare and forbear them, shall have done on this account, leave off
praying for them, and stand in the gap between an angry God and them no longer:
and now the way to Gods wrath stands open, and there will be none to obstruct
it; none to stay his hand or keep him back from vengeance; the hearts that
before melted for them, shall now be hardened against them, and they shall
readily comply with, and rejoice in the Judgments of God that shall fall upon
them, Psalm. 52. 5, 6.

This is a solemn Truth, and many sinners are hard of believing it* having
taken up strong persuasions about the mercy of God, as if it were inconsistent
with that thus to do by them: But the Word of God is full of conviction on this
account, enough to take off such vain opinions from men's minds if they will
believe that.

This Doctrine may be cleared and confirmed in these conclusions.

1. That God can be highly provoked with sinners in the visible Church. Indeed
he is no where so incensed against any sinners as those that sin there: all
that belong thither are not such as he has set his heart upon: he hates sin
wherever he sees it; his pure eyes cannot behold it without detestation, and it
is most grievous to him where he has used the most of means to draw men from
it, and where he expects holiness. The Church is a company of holy ones, by
separation for God, by profession, and by external denomination; Holiness is
that which God calls for, and they are devoted unto: if therefore they be
otherwise, he must needs take it in ill part, and it must stir up his jualousy
against them. The Scripture affords us many instances of Gods anger that has
been stirred against such as have been taken near unto him, and born the name
of his people upon them, how often was God angry with Israel in the Wilderness,
and in the land of Canaan? how many ways did he take to testify his displeasure
against them? hence that, Jer. 11. 15. W hat has my beloved to do in my house,
seeing she has wrought lewdness with many, if men in covenant with God, will
live in sin, he will not bear it, nay the very Covenant threatening is out
against them? and that is a witness of his Displeasure.

2. That nothing is more provoking to God than for these to persist in
wickedness; notwithstanding all means possible used to reclaim them. Although
all sin be provoking to him, yet obstinacy and unreclaimableness in it renders
them that commit it most of all displeasing in his sight: and this is
aggravated proportionally to the means that have been used with them; and that
is accumulated, when these have been carried on after signal tokens of his
anger and eminent deliverances out of his hand, and renewed endeavors with
fresh and en^reased importunity urged upon them Though men sin, yet if they
will be reclaimed, by afflictions, by deliverances, by earnest calls and
entreaties, God can readily pass by all this provocation, and be atoned to the
sinner; but if he harden his heart under all this, and goes on still in his
loose and sinful ways, not giving ear to the voice of God: if he remains
unchanged, impenitent, and in his natural state; this carries the greatest
offense in it; this is the complaint of Christ, Math. 23. 37. How often would I
have gathered thy children, but ye would not. This was it that made Gods anger
to burn so ho^ly against Jerusalem, 2. Chro. 36, 15: 16. This is his very
quarrel with them, Amos. 4. 6. Yet have ye no^ returned to me says the Lord.

3. That there are fearful threatenings out against the finally impenitent. The
truth is, all the terrible menaces of the Word of God are most properly
belonging to such as these. It is not this or that sin in it self, that holds
the sinner bound under the curse; for, let it have been what it will, of what
sort or degree soever, yet if men do truly repent of it, that will turn away
the wrath of God, and take off the threatening from them: but it is impenitency
added to (...) that continues a man under the curse, and p^^^^^rance in it,
that makes his case to be ^em^^^less. When God sent his Prophets (...) the most
fearful denunciations of wrath, they were still to add invitations to
repentance, and make encouraging promises of mercy in case they did prevail:
but they were withal to assure them, that if they did not return those
Judgments should take place upon them without avoidance; Isa. 1. 19, 29. Psalm.
7. 10, 11. This is it which makes inquity to be their ruin. If they had
hearkened to the voice of God, believed his word, and obeyed his counsels, he
would have turned his hand upon their enemies, and faved them; but because they
would not so do, therefore did his wrath fall upon them.

4. That God has sixth a time how long he will wait for the sinners conversion,
before he puts these threatenings of his in execution. God is pleased first to
threaten before he strikes the blow: and because this is one of the courses
which he uses with men to persuade them to return, he gives them time
afterward, and calls aloud to them to consider and amend: Now this is Gods
long sufferance; and the duration of it depends upon his mere pleasure. But
though we cannot tell how long it shall be, yet he knows for he has appointed
it in his holy purpose; he tells how long the old world shall be waited on,
Genesis 6. 3. thus long he will tarry no longer: he has set every sinner a day,
and his call is limited unto it: it says, to day, while it is called to day:
i. e. whilst it is a day of grace and patience; and because it is a day, it
therefore has its bounds, and will have an end; it will not continue always:
God can bear a great while, but he will not do so for ever: he can, as patient
as he is, be weary with forbearing, and he will so be when that day is run out.

5. That if the sinner withstands Gods time, he will unavoidably bring these
threatenings upon his own head. Though Gods menaces be conditional, yet they are
real: he never intended them merely for the affrighting of man, but is resolved
that they shall take place according to the true (...) port of them. He faith
(...) ^^ner repents (...) so says, tha^ (...) neither (...) any (...) sinners
(...) whilst (...) pen to (...) he will (...) and though (...) shall be no
longer than the (...) and when the day of patience is at an end, the day of
vengeance will tread upon the heels of it, and shall have no mercy in it, Isa.
27. 11. He that made them will have ^o mercy on them, and be that formed them,
will show them no favor. So. Ezekiel. 7: 2: 3. 4. This is a day of revenges, and
God will then make all his words good, and sinners experience shall thoroughly
convince them, that he did not speak in jest, though before they laughed at all
forewarnings, and seemed to desire the day of the Lord.

6. That Gods holiness and justice do stand engaged for the sinners
destruction. It must therefore needs be: this renders it unavoidable. Sinners
please themselves with dreams of mercy, as if there were no other Attribute in
God but that, concerned about them: but know it, that if ever any sinner be
saved, mercy and truth must meet together, righteousness and peace must kiss
each other. Final Barrenness cut^ off the man from saving mercy, because
Holiness and Justice do forbid it. Holiness, is God bound for his own Glory, so
as not to bear any thing that stands in the way of it; now as it is Gods glory
to forgive the penitent, so it would be a wrong to it to spare the obstinate;
he would lose the glory of his Truth in his threatenings, yea the glory of his
having honor by the creature that will pay him none. Justice also stands in
the way; for every sinner is devoted to destruction by the Law-threatning, to
which the Justice of God stands obliged; there is but one way to salve this
Justice in the justifying of a sinner, and that is by the imputation of the
Righteousness of Christ to him, which must be according to the condition of the
New Covenant, which the sinner by his obstinacy keeps himself from, and
therefore has no claim to the privileges of it; and so he must needs perish.

7. That gracious Souls desire the sinners salvation only in Gods way. It is
true, every sanctified soul has a love to the souls of others, and earnestly
desires that they may be saved* and is willing to do all that he can for the
procuring of it: but yet grace has taught every one that truly fears God, to
subordinate all his aims, ends, desires to the glory of God, which is the
ultimate end that all ought to propound to themselves in every thing. These
desires are therefore limited, as to the way for the accomplishment of them, he
would have the sinner to be saved, but he would not have him to be faved in his
sins, for that would bring dishonor to God, but he would have him to be
converted and changed, sanctified and made fruitful, and so to be saved;
because this is the only way in which God brings men to salvation, so as to be
glorified in it: and for this end it is that he does so much labor for his
conversion, and pray so earnestly unto God, that he would change his heart: how
often is Paul begging for grace in behalf of those whom he writes unto?

8. That these, if they find their last essays frustrated, are apt to grow
discouraged. There is indeed too much pronitude in the hearts of Gods people to
sink under discouragement when they ought not, and they are fain to labor with
their own misgiving spirits to animate them: but it is of God many times, and
yet very righteously, and in anger to sinners, to take away all hopes from his
Servants: and though he does not say in so many words, as he did to the Prophet
Jeremiah, pray no more for them, for I will no^ hear thee, yet he sometimes
providentially stops their mouths, and they look upon such as beyond their
hope, and thereupon all their endeavors with and for them begin to grow
languid and faint.

9. And when it comes to this, there is now nothing to hold back Gods hand of
revenge from falling upon such sinners. Whilst these stood in the gap, they
kept off the Judgments of G od, at least from cutting down and rooting out
those sinners; whilst they were earnest with G od to spare and try them, his
hands were held back, and he knew not how to destroy them: but now God has, by
silencing of them, made a way to his Wrath, the breach stands wide open, and
there is nothing in view but ruin, ready to fall upon sinners; all means
having been tried to the utmost, and nothing remaining unessayed, all patience
having been vilely abused and trampled upon, all hopes are now quite gone, and
what shall God do with them now but cut them down?

USE I.
For Information in three particulars;

1. This Doctrine certifies us that gracious souls will be satisfied in the
Judgments which God will execute upon impenitent sinners: There will be so much
of equity in Gods proceedings against them, so much inexcusableness in them,
who have had so great patience, and so many endeavors afforded unto them, that
they will have nothing at all to object against it: and indeed though it cannot
but grieve the souls of Gods children at present, to see how wilfully
unreclaimable sinners die, yet they cannot but justify God in his righteous
Judgments upon them. The vine-dresser cannot but say, his Lord may well cut
down such a fig tree, as no means will make to bear fruit. How much more then
shall they for ever acquiesce in the final doom that shall be past in the great
day, when their grace shall be perfect, and Gods Righteousness shall be openly
declared? and it ought to be an awful consideration for sinners to think of,
that if you now will die, you shall have no pity then, but all the Redeemed of
Christ will, in that day, Rejoice in the Judgment.

2. That God will be no loser by all the long-suffering which he extends unto
men, though they are not made better by it. This is the force of this plea: It
can be but cut down at last, and that will be a sufficient declaration of
righteous revenge; and this tells us, that God both can and will proportion the
miseries of ungodly men, to the cost that has been laid out upon, and despised
by them; which may convince all unregenerate sinners under the Gospel, upon
what an awful account they stand, and are spared from time to time, if they
shall at the last miss of eternal life.

3. This then shows us the desperate madness of secure sinners, that have been
let alone after threatenings; and how many such are there among us, who have
been under the sentence of destruction; Gods hand has been up, ready to fall
upon them, but it has been held back, the Judgment was stayed, and they
escaped: they now say with Agag, The bitterness of death is past: and hereupon
they grew more secure, and careless of themselves, and unmindful o^ the great
concerns of their souls than ever; they forget their promises, and abide
contentedly in their former unfruitfulness, as if they had been delivered to do
all these abominations! Is this the improvement which you make of a time of
trial? Oh foolish and unwise! and do you think thus to escape the wrath of God?
Had you your lives given you for a prey for this? Will it not be bitterness in
the latter end? know it, God will not thus have done with you, he has an
account that he will shortly call you unto, and a sad one it will be for you.

Hence,

USE II.
Let it be for a word of solemn warning to all such. All you that abide in your
sins, notwithstanding God has given you such sair opportunities, and such
awakenings calls to Repentance: you have been spared at this time, and at that
time, and you promise your selves that it shall ever be so: but let me have
leave to enter this caution; be assured that there will a time come, when you
shall not be spared any more; cutting down is like to be the end of all such as
you are^ G od is not slack, as men count slackness, he is willing that you
should repent and escape his fury; but he knows that he can cut you down when
he will; and if you will in no other way glorify him, it will unavoidably come
to this at the last: and if you are resolved in your way, and if you will not
be persuaded to take the warning, and accept the counsel given you, let me only
entreat you to remember it one day that you have been seriously and solemnly
told of it beforehand, but you would not lay it to heart.

USE III.
This may also be for a word of Trial unto spared sinners. If the case stands
thus with you, that you are now upon the Trial with God, and if upon it you do
not bring forth fruit to his praise, you must for all this be destroyed, it
loudly calls upon you, seriously and thoroughly to examine your selves, under
which of these Hypotheses you now stand. The difference is vastly great, if you
bear fruit well, but if not, you see what is your doom: and does not this call
for your reflection upon this? does it not say, that it infinitely concerns you
to know what improvement you have made of this mercy of God that has spared
you? will it not be a fearful thing to be mistaken here? and that you may be
guided aright in this self-examination, take diligent notice of the condition
expressed in the Text; it does not say if you grow worse, and fall into grosser
abominations than before you indulged your selves in; if you grow more lewd,
and more debauched; which yet it is to be feared, is the woeful effect of
sparing mercies upon too many unhappy creatures, whom their deliverances have
emboldened in sin; but if you (...): If the Judgment found you unconverted, and
leaves you unconverted, and (...) about your conversion, this is (...) to bring
you under the sentence, whatsoever reformation it may work in your (...)
^^versation, however you may (...) from some sins which you formerly lived in,
and do some duties which heretofore you lived in the neglect of, yet if there
be no^ a through change wrought in you, (...) not effectually brought home to
(...) be it, (...) is still a truth as to you, that (...) fruit: God reputes
you barren still: the end of Gods trial is not attained in you, and ^ou^ly open
to the doom that is here declared. This then is the question that you are to
put to your own souls, Am I converted to God? am I brought in to Jesus Christ?
by a living faith? am I thoroughly turned from sin unto God? be not deceived,
for God is not mocked? read the sentence you are under, and tremble at it, Mat.
3. 10. Now the ^^x is laid to the root of the trees; therefore every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

USE IV.
Let it be for a loud call to barren souls in the vineyard, at last to bear
fruit, and to make ^^aste so to do: It is God only who (...) word powerful, and
work that (...) but yet there is a calling of the (...) by Gospel invitati^^^
and this Truth speaks very loudly to all those that have been a great while
unprofitable, and on whom uncountable means of grace have seemed to have been
thrown away; who have been wearying out of a great deal of Gods forbearance;
and yet he affords them one season more, one opportunity longer; let this
Doctrine awaken you to a diligent improving of it, to be no longer barren; let
the time past suffice you, to have lived in sin and vanity: as you would escape
this fearful destruction, use all possible endeavors, and go to God in Christ's
Name with the greatest importunity begging of him that he will make you
fruitful: and that I may press this Exhortation upon you forcibly, let me offer
these things to your serious consideration.

1. Think how long you have already resisted the Spirit of God. Although he
has not told sinners how long he will tarry waiting upon them; yet he has
said that it shall not be always, and that is enough to put upon you
thoughtfulness: it is good to compute the time that you have had, and is past
by you, so many years forbearance, so many strivings with your Souls in them,
so often addresses made to you with the tenders of his Grace; all this says
unto the sinner, that his day is wearing up apace, and that it will not be long
ere it be spent. And there is reason also to fear, that the (...) of means have
bin used with you, and the more earnest persuasions have been pressed upon you,
the shorter time you are like to have; because such urgent strivings and
importunities, are a declaration that God is in haste.

2. Think what an Holy God you have to do withal. Never cheat your selves into
a vain opinion, that because he is a merciful God, therefore you shall do well
enough with him; how may thousands are there now rueing that fully in the place
of Torments? you are in all these transactions concerned with a God who will
not always be trifled with; and who will not suffer sinners to tread upon his
honor, or cast contempt upon his glory, without calling of them to a severe
account for it, and making them to feel* the smart of it: if therefore you will
not serve him, he will honor himself upon you; but how little will that be to
your comfort.

Hence;

3. Affect your hearts by thinking how fearful this destruction must needs be.
How dismal a thing it will be for you, after all this to fall into the hands of
revenging justice. Think, if I bear no fruit, I must needs be destroyed at
last, and will not all these things be then remembered against me? and how much
better would it then have been, if I had been cut of by such a streak that fell
upon me, and I was endangered by? had I not better have perished so many years
ago, than to have been let alive to fill up so much more wrath, and lay in so
many heavier aggravations of guilt, to make my woes of much the more
intolerable.

4. Know it that if now at last you will hearken to the voice of God, and
accept of his grace to make you fruitful, all shall be well still* if yet
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, you will give glory to God,
you may escape this fearful sentence. This very last threatening which I am now
urging upon you, it sent to you in mercy, and I am commaded to tell you of it
before it comes to pass; that so you may have, at least, one more advantage
presented before you to escape it: and oh let it not be despised if you
neglected the last sabbaths encouragement, yet if you will entertain this
sabbaths terror, and be peswaded to repent and return to God, it is not yet too
late for you to escape the curse, and obtain the blessing.

5. Think this may be the last call that every shall be sent unto you, there
will be a last I am sure to every impenitent sinner, and it is not improbable
but this may be so to some or other on whom it is now urged; There have past
very few Sabbath of late, in which some have not come to the House of God to
hear their last: what need have you then to take heed what entertainment you
give hereunto, you are figtrees in the vineyard you have had many a three years
liberty of it, God has sought fruit of you, and found none, he has bin
greatly provoked hereby and brought many Judgments in the midst of you, and yet
has by the importunity of his servants been prevailed with to deferr and tarry
a little longer; but he tells you he is in have, his word says so, his
providence says so, oh do not then loyter any longer, the matter is of
infinite concernment, and it will in a few days more be determined, you have
the choice now before you, and you must make it speedily: either conversion o^
destruction, and the Lord make you wise in it, for yet a little while, and
according as your choice is, so must it be with you through all eternity:

FINIS,

