ADDRESSES to OLD MEN, and YOUNG MEN, and LITTLE CHILDREN.
In Three DISCOURSES

I. The OLD MAN'S Honor; or, The Hoary Head found in the way of Righteousness.

A Discourse Recommending unto OLD MEN, A Saving Acquaintance with the Lord
JESUS CHRIST.

II. The YOUNG MAN'S Glory; or, a Wreath of Graces for the Head of Youth.

A Discourse Recommending unto YOUNG MEN A blessed Victory over the Devil.

III. The LITTLE CHILD'S Lesson; Or, A Chi^^ wise unto Salvation.

A Discourse instructing and inviting LITTLE CHILDREN to the Exercises of Early
(...).

To which may be added, A short Scriptural Catechism, accommodated unto their
Capacities.

By COTTON MATHER.

Boston: Printed by R. Pierce, for Nicholas ^^^tolph, at the Corner Shop, next
to Gutteridge's Coffee-House. 1690.

SEnum est Prophetare. Etiamsi videas aliquando Juvenem Prophetantem, non
dubites de eo dicere, si secundum Interiorem Hominem Senu-Propterea est
Propheta. Orig Hom. in Ps 36.

De Verbo Divino, Capit hic Infans, Panem Rubustior AEtas, (...) Optato curva
Senecta cibo.

The Dedication of The Old Man's Honor.
To my Honored, and Worthy Friend, Major JOHN RICHARDS.
Sir,
WEre there nothing else to command my Regards for you, besides the Old Age,
which your Out-living of Threescore Winters has brought you to the Border^ of,
That were enough to give you a room in my Esteem and R everence, and
Veneration. I cannot but approve the care of the Greek Language, to make no
more than (...) Letters Difference between the words for Old age, and Honor;
and I cannot but applaud that condition of the World, whereto refers that
famous Distic^^ Magna fuit quondam Capitis Reverentia Cani,

Inque suo pretio Ruga Senilis erat.

The Marks of Respect put upon Old age among Ancient Lacedaemonians have been
the matter of (...) pleasant and famous Histories; and the mode^^. Venetians
owe not a little of their Prosperity as well a Reputation unto the Figure which
is allowed Old age among them. That people is not like long-lived, among whom,
Fathers and Mothers, those that have lived long, are not acknowledged; that
plant whose Younger Branches put a st^^ght (...) the Elder, is for that cause
by the Ingenious Bota^^^ called, Herba Impia, or a Wicked Cudweed When Old such
an one, is used as a Term of Disgrace, and when Javenis vetulo non
assurrexerit, I still think that I see none of the smallest among the Verbal
and Real (...) of the World. But something beside, and beyond your mere
Approaches to that Age, which will place a Silver Crown of Gray-hairs upon your
Head, it is that causes me now to Dedicate unto you, the little Treatise of,
The Old Man's Honor, now laid before you. It Is because you have, The Old Man's
Honor, adorning of you; not only by having Served your People, both as a Ruler
to them at home, and as an Agent for them abroad, when God gave you
Opportunity; and we know the Name of that people with whom i^ was a Law, that
none but Good Old Men should have the Honor, either Magistratum Gerere, or
Legationem Obire; but chiefly by your Acquaintance with Him that is from the
Beginning. Many years are now rolled away since you began that blessed
Acquaintance; and I am well satisfied that the most fruitful old Polycarp, you
will profess self not yet weary of your Glorious Master. As my Duty to Desire,
so I have Reason to Expect, the nearer you come to be an Old Man, the more well
put off the Old Man, which is Corrupt ^^ording to Deceitful Lusts; that while
you are Old Man you will be found in the Old Way, ^^^ein you will find Rest for
your Soul; and (...) ^ou will be One of those in my Dear Flock, whom after I
have Preached unto others, I do not my prove a Castaway [ which let Free Grace
pre^^^] I shall meet at the Right Hand of the Lord Jesus Christ with
unspeakable joy, and whom I shall spend an Happy Eternity in the praises of a
merciful Creator and Redeemer with; All which is humbly prayed for, by

Sir, Your most Affectionate Friend and Servant, C. Mather.

THE OLD MAN'S HONOR OR, The HOARY HEAD found in the way of RIGHTEOUSNESS.
I John II. XIII. I Write unto you FATHERS, because ye known Him that is from
the Beginning.
HISTORY tells us that the Ancient cedoemonians in their Public and (...)
Festivals, did use to have Three made among them; the first, of Old Men, (...)
made a Song to the Spectators, of this (...)

We have been Young and Strong all heretofore, Till Age forbad our doing any
more;

The Second, of Young Men, who had this their Song, We still are Young and
Strong, and will maintain
Our Cause against all that on Earth remain.


The Third, of Children, who sang, And We that on the Stage look now so small,
As we succeed, hope to surpass you all.


It were a Spectacle very much more Desirable and Considerable, if Christians
of all Ages might ^his Day stand forth among us; and in the Capa^^^ not only of
Men, but also of Saints, give (...) a good account of themselves. Behold, in
^^^ext represented unto us, What should be (...) experience, and what the
Resolution of all Ages, (...) would march off with the praise of God as (...)
of Men! If Old Men would Expire joyful^^^ ^^ey should be able to say, We have
been well (...) ^uinted with our Savior. If Young Men would (...) Happily,
they should be able to say, We (...) t^^ly Victorious over our Destroyer. If
(...) would Grow up Hopefully, they should (...) to say, We have already
acknowledged God (...) Father. For me to recommend these At^^ents unto the
several Ages here, will be a (...) of my Endeavor to give the Food in due
(...) ^^son unto that Household of the Lord Jesus, which am an unworthy Servant
in; and, Unto thee, O (...) Glorious Lord, I now how my knee, that in this
(...) taking, thy Grace may be sufficient for me.

We have before us, an Inspired Epistle, which not only as Austin observes, has
been Unquestionably and Universally received as Canonical; but also Jerome
testifies, has as Unquestionably and Universally been ascribed unto the Holy
Apostle John. There is indeed running through the whole Epistle, the plain
Character of the Spirit breathing in that Apostle, of whom one of the Ancients
does report, That when through extreme Age, he was unable to Walk or Speak to the
Church, he would be carried by the Disciples thither, and with his Aged,
Feeble, Broken Voice, only say unto them, My Dear Children, Love one another.

Our Apostle in our Context, is pressing the ^^neral Duty of Conformity to the
Lord Jesus Chr^^ and under that Head, the particular Duty of C^^rity toward
all our Brethren; and hereupon (...) addresses all Christians of several Ages,
therewithal very pertinently and elegantly declaring to them the Reasons of his
thus Addressing them.

All Christians are first addressed under the name of Newborn Babes; for
indeed we all should be like Babes for our Humility, for our Innocence, for our
Placability; or else, our Lord has told us, Y^^ shall not enter in o the
Kingdom of Heaven. But these Babes are then ranked under three Denominations,
Fathers, Young Men, Little Children; to each of these does the Apostle say, I
write unto you; For truly, our God has His Children in all Ages, and all Ages
ought very much to be conversant with the written Word of God.

Let us begin at the first, and of them: note,

First, The Persons apply d unto. Fathers. By these are meant, not merely
Fathers in Grace, but likewise, Fathers in Age; the Expression intimates Old
Men, that are in the School of the Lord Jesus Christ, And mark, the old Apostle
calls them, Fathers; which was not from any Relation of theirs to him, but from
his Reverence to them. It Is to teach us. That, Old Men should have much Respect
and Honor from us; we ought still to (...) them as our Fathers, and use no
Terms unto them, which discover not our sense of something ^^erable in them,
but remember that Charge of (...), in Lev. 22. 19. Thou shall Honor the Face
(...) ^^he Old Man, and Fear thy God; there is no (...) of the Great God where
the Face of an Old (...) is not beheld with Regards of Honor.

Secondly, The Character and Privilege of these persons. It Is, Ye have known
Him that is from (...) Beginning. By that is meant, our Lord Jesus Christ; of
whom this very Apostle elsewhere ^^aks, in John 1. 1, 2. In the Beginning was
the (...), which Name he (and none but he) in every one of his Books, put upon
the Lord Jesus Christ; and he adds, The same was in the Beginning with God. But
if you ask, why the Lord Jesus Christ, is here called, He that is from the
Beginning (...) I answer,

It Is first, to assert the Divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ; against those
Carpocratians, are Ce^^^fans and Ebionites, who were the Antichrists, (...)
appearing in the Days of John. Those Heretic^^ affirmed our Blessed Lord Jesus
to be a Mere man (...) but in opposition to them, it is here said, That (...)
Lord had a Being from, and at, and Indeed influite^^, before the beginning of
the World.

It Is also to commend the Lord Jesus Christ upon the score of His Antiquity;
old men love to pretend unto the Knowledge of old Things; and it is here
intimated, That as they knew Him, so there was nothing older than He for them
to be conversant withal.

Let this then be the Doctrine which our Thoughts may at this Time a little
dwell upon.

DOCTRINE.
That a peculiar Acquaintance with the Lord Jesus Christ, who is God as well as
Man, is the (...) Attainment of old men walking in the Ways of GOD.

We have three Propositions here to be regarded.

Proposition I.
All men, and particularly Old Men should study a peculiar Acquaintance with
the Lord Jesus Christ^ All men should be of the same Resolve with That Man in a
Cor. 2. 2. I determined not to know any thing, but Jesus Christ, and Him
Crucified. This was the Determination of one whom the Ancients do nor unfi^ly
call, An uns^^table Admirer of the Lord Jesus Christ! and there was no Occasion
for that Famous and Learned Philosopher among the Ancient Heathens to pity the
Apostle Paul upon this account, that such Rare Parts as Paul's were, should be
thrown away upon the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. A Needless, Bootless pity! For
No (...) can any where find a fitter Subject for his Acquaintance, than the
Lord Jesus is; not have ^ay of those Doctors who have worn the pompous Titles
of subtle, and profound, and Angelical, bin worthy of the Titles, unless this
Acquaintance have made them so.

Si Christum discis nihil est si coetera nescis.
Si Christum nescis nihil est si coetera discis.
But Old Men should have a very particular Disposition hereunto. For having
tried an Acquaintance with all other Things, they can upon a long Experience,
resent the ^a^^ty and Vexation that is in them all, and (...) out, I have seen
an end of all persection in the world. It is therefore time for them to
Resolve, I have determined to know nothing but Him that is from the Beginning!

If you Enquire, (...) is a peculiar Acquaintance with the Lord Jesus Christ?

I^ imports, First, A Speculative or Notional (...) of the Christian Religion,
and especially (...), That Great M^^tery of Godliness, God ^^a^^^ in the flesh.
Old Men should become well informed about the Natures of Him, who is God and
Man in One Person; about the Offices of Him, who is the Prophet, the Priest,
and the King of our Souls; about the Endowments of Him, who is both Able and
Willing to save us unto the uttermost; about the Benefits of Him, who bestows
upon us Justification, and Sanctification and Redemption, and all the
Inheritance of Adoption; in fine, about the Conditions of Him, who Humbled
himself, and became obedient unto Death, Wherefore God has highly Exalted Him.
These are the points of our Catechism, and the first Principles of the Doctrine
of Christ; it is a shame for any, but above all, for Old Men, to be Ignorant of
these principles.

But here is not all; a Devil once could say to our Lord Jesus, as in Lue. 4.
34. I know thee, who thou art. Wherefore it imports, Also, a Fiducial and an
Experimental Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. Knowledge is put for Faith, in
Isa. 53. 11. By his Knowledge, my righteous Servant, shall justify many. We
ought so to know the Lord Jesus Christ, as to prize Him, and Love Him, and
Apply our selves unto Him, and appropiate Him unto our selves, and say unto
Him, like the Disciple, My Lord and my God; or with the Believer, My Beloved is
mine, and I am His! And Knowledge must be with Taste, as in I Pet. 2. 3. Ye have
tasted that the Lord is Gracious. We ought so to know the Lord Jesus Christ, as
to he very Really sensible of the Beauty and Sweetness that is in Him, and like
that woman once, we should feel Virtue going forth from Him unto our Souls; or
like Paul, find upon our selves the power of what is in our Lord. Old Men are
miserable Non-proficients, if they do not arrive to such a knowledge of our
Lord Redeemer. In a word, All men, and especially Old Men should so know the
Lord Jesus, as to lead a life of Communion with Him.

But if you Enquire, WHY we should be studious of such an Acquaintance with the
Lord Jesus Christ? Briefly,

First, We have nothing so Noble to be acquainted withal, as the Lord Jesus
Christ. It was once asked in Cant. ^. 9. What is thy Beloved more than another
Beloved? and the Answer was, O He is altogether Lovely. Thus if any demand,
What is the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, more than any other Knowledge!
the Answer may be, It Is the Knowledge of him that is altogether Lovely. Gram^^^
and Rhet'rick is the Knowledge of Speech; Lo^^ is the Knowledge of Respect and
Reason; Physics are the Knowledge of Qualities, and Mathematics are the
Knowledge of Quantities. But sure, None of there Things are comparable to our
dearest, glorious Lord Jesus Christ; of whom it is said, in Col. 1. 19. In him
does all Fullness dwell. To be acquainted with Him, it is to know the brightest
Thing in the Third Heaven it self; it is to Know those Mysteries, which the very
Angels do bend themselves to pry into; it is to Know that, which with (...) we
should count our selves Losers by every thing that would obstruct us in the
Excellent Knowledge of.

Secondly, We have nothing so Useful to be acquainted withal, as the Lord Jesus
Christ. For,

The Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ will fill us with a blessed variety of
other Knowledge. As now, Would we know God? we are told in 2 Cor. 4. 6. T he
glory of God is to be seen in the Face of Jesus Christ. Right Notions about the
Wisdom, and Power, and Justice, and Goodness of God, are shaped in our Minds,
by the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus; when we know Him, we are like Moses, put
into the Clefts of a R^^k, where the glory of the great God now passes before
us. Or, would we know our selves? The Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, will
help us to know what our sins are. Well sings the Christian Poet, (...) Who
would know Sin, Let him repair

Unto M ount Olivet.

The Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ will help us to know what our plagues
are. We may pass a judgment upon our own Wounds by the pla^sler in Him provided
for us; and by what was Exacted from our S urety, we may guess what our own
Debts have been. And we may come likewise to know our Duties, by the Knowledge
of the Lord Jesus Christ. He has been a complete Copy and a perfect Pattern for
us; and His Call unto us is, Lock on me and do likewise. In short, Jesus Christ
is the Key that unlocks all the Scriptures. We have scarcht the Scriptures, and
known them to good purpose, when we have Dug so far into them, as to find them
all testifying of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Knowledge of Him exposes to us the
Pearl of great Price in that Sacred Field. All men should know these things,
but for old men to be un-instructed in them, is remarkably disgraceful and
pernicious.

Again, The Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, will afford an unspeakable
satisfaction to our Souls. An Artist, that has met with some New, though but
small, Discovery, with a strange Satisfaction cries out, I have found, I have
found! But above all, the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, is a River of
honey to them that are made partakers of it; hence could the Psalmist say, in
Psalm. 17. 5. I will behold thy Face, I shall be satisfied. This Manna will
fully answer the vast craving raging Appetites of an Immortal Soul; whatever
fiery thirst was once in such a Soul, yet now, It shall never thirst. We read
in Phil. 2. 1. about, Consolation in Christ; the Knowledge of Christ places us
amidst the Springs and Veins of an interminable consolation. All men should
seek for such a Satisfaction; but it is particularly incumbent upon old men,
who may complain with Bartillai, that they are past the relish of those worldly
pleasures in which others labor to delight themselves. Once more,

The Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, will convey an Eternal Salvation to
our Souls. A man may go to Hell, with all other Sciences about him; and sink
into that horrible devouring Pit, with such a shriek as that, Qualis Artifex
pereo! Behold an Artist, going to be Damned! The Floor, the hideous Floor of
Hell, is paved with the skulls of admirable Scholars. You know who said, No's
cum nostr^s Doctrinis mergimur in Infernum. Who better Scholars than the Devils
themselves? All the Learning that many have, serves only as a bag of Gold about
a Drowning Man; it sinks them the deeper into the scalding Floods of the Lake
that burns with fiery Brimstone: But the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ is
a saving thing. He that calls in Isa, 45. 22. Look unto me, and be saved, also
says, O know me, and you shall be saved. A Look to Him, will bring an Healing
to our Dying Souls; as a Look to the Coper Serpent, once did unto the
Israelites.

This Knowledge will cause us to escape the pollutions of the World; this
Knowledge will cause us to grow in Grace; and in fine, this Knowledge has no
less a thing spoken of it, than that in Joh. 17. 3. It is Life Eternal. The
fame that makes it thus Necessary for All men, makes it for Old men more
eminently so. Old men have a Night coming upon them; and they above all, had
need get their Lamps lighted with such a Knowledge, as may light them into the
Chambers of Everlasting Glory.

Proposition II.
It Is the special Attainment of Old Men walking in the ways of God, that they
have this Acquaintance with the Lord Jesus Christ. For,

First, The Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ is a special Attainment in
whomsoever it is. It cannot be said of all people. They have known him that is
from the Beginning. It Is the distinguishing favor of God, that has made some
Acquainted with the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ; and hence 'twas the
Rapturous Doxology of our Lord, in Mat. 11. 25. I thank thee, O Father, because
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and Revealed them unto
Babes. Those few, that have the true Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, are
those to whom, the most high God may say, You only have I known, among all the
Families of the Earth. And as there is a singular Difference or Dignity in this
Attainment, which renders them that have it, the happy Servants that may see
the Glory and hear the Wisdom of Him that is, A Greater than Solomon; so there
is a singular Excellency in it, upon this Account; that it finds a singular
Acceptance with God; we are told in Joh. 6. 29. This is THE work of God, that
ye believe on Him, whom He has sent; God is pleased with no work that we can
do, so much as this, that we so know his Son, as to put our trust in Him; and
it brings a singular. Advantage to men; it is wished in 2 Pet 1. 2. Grace and
Peace be multiplied unto you, through the Knowledge of Jesus our Lord; may we but
well Know our Lord Jesus, that is the way fo^^^ manner of grace and peace to be
multiplied unto us.

Secondly, Old Men walking in the ways of God, are usually those that have most
of this Attainment. The God of Heaven does gradually give unto Christians, a
more large and clear insight into the Covenant of Grace, and so they have a
growing Acquaintance with the Lord Jesus Christ, the Mediator of that Covenant.
At our first Conversion we have indeed so much knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, as Draws us to Run after Him; but we find that Knowledge increasing as
long as we live. It Is with us, as it was with Apollos, in Act. 18. 2^, 26. This
man was instructed in the way of the Lord but after this, there was Expounded
unto him the way of God more perfectly. The old Christian comes to know more
perfectly the Alsufficiency of the Lord, Jesus Christ, and to know more
perfectly his own infinite Need of such a Redeemer. The old Christian has had
more Teaching then we that are younger men; he has been taught by Ordinances
and been taught by Providence, and been taught by the Spirit of God
accompanying of both; and he has over and above been taught by an old
Experience; Experience has taught him that he has no Righteousness and no
Strength of his own: Experience has taught him that the Lord Jesus Christ, is
one mighty to save; he goes to the Lord Jesus Christ as one whom he has had an
old Acquaintance with, he was been inured unto the Trade of Believing on that
Almighty Lord.

Proposition III.
The Godhead of the Lord Jesus Christ is to be acknowledged by all that would
pretend unto any true Knowledge of Him. We do not know Him that is from the
Beginning; unless we own that He is without all Beginning, unless we think him
to be as the Philosopher expressed it, [ Presbytato^^ ^oon Ontoon] The most
Ancient of all Beings; and unless we are sensible of the Challenge made by
Wisdom for Him, in Prove. 8. 23. I have been declared Princess, from the
Beginning. No Arian, or Socinian has a Knowledge of our blessed Jesus, enough
to Entitle him to the Denomination of a Christian in the Churches of God. Our
Lord is indeed a real and a proper man; but it is the Marble Rock upon which
our whole Christianity is founded, that He is more than so; for it is his Title,
in Rom 9. 5. God over all blessed for ever. Thus the Name of the most High, (or
Gneljon, which the Poet means I suppose by Anchialus) the peculiar Name of God
among his ancient people, is given to our Lord Jesus. Let it be observed,
first, That the Names of GOD are put upon our Lord. The Lord Jesus Christ is
the Redeemer, of whom Job says, In my Flesh I shall see God. The Lord Jesus
Christ is the Angel, of whom Jacob says, He is the God that Redeemed me from
all Adversity. It Is the Lord Jesus Christ, whom John, in 1. Joh. 5. 20. calls,
The True God, whom Paul calls, in Tit. 2. 13. the Great God; and whom Isaiah in
Cap 9. 6. calls, the Mighty God. What though He once were smitten with many
Sorrows in an evil world? still in his deepest Obscurity, He was, as we may
read that clause in Isa. 53. 4. A smitten God. Yea, it is Jehovah, who says in
Zech. 12. 10. They have pierced me; Behold, the Incommunicable Name of Jehovah
given to a crucified Jesus; unto which Name answers that in the New Testament,
the Lord which is, and which was, and is to come. Hence also our Lord exhibits
Himself by that Name, in Joh. 8. 58. I AM. And elsewhere He is called, the Lord
of Glory; that is, the most gracious Lord.

And as the Incommunicable Names, thus also the Incommunicable Attributes of
the Almighty God, belong to our Blessed Savior. Shall we speak of Eternity?
Says our Lord in Joh. 17 5. I had glory before the world was. Shall we speak of
Omnipotance? 'Twas said by our Lord, in Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them; or shall we
speak of Omniscience? 'Twas said by our Lord, in Rev. 2. 23. I am He that
searches the Hearts and Reins. None but a God may speak at such a rate as this!

What shall I say more? let it be observed,

Secondly, That the Works of God are performed by our Lord Jesus Christ. The
Creation of the World, is the Work of God; but of our Lord Jesus Christ, is it
said, in Joh. 1. 3. All things were made by Him. The Government of the World,
is the work of God; but of our Lord Jesus Christ, is it again said, in Heb 1.
3. He upholds all things by the word of his power. It Is undoubted, That none
can forgive sins but (...) nevertheless it is said in Mat. 9. 6. The Son of Man
has power to forgive (...) Who but God can send the Holy Spirit? yet said our
Lord Jesus in Joh. 16. 7. I will send the Comforter.

In a word how many Miracles has our Lord Jesus wrought, and this in his own
Name How often were the Sick Healed, the Dead raised, the Possessed Resened, by
the Hand of this, Blessed Redeemer, coming in his own Name unto us! And hence
also, let it be observed, Thirdly, That the Rights of God are pertaining to our
Lord Jesus Christ. None but God may be the Object of our Worship. Yet we are
commanded in Joh. 5. 23. To honor the (...), its we honor the Father. And
Joshua adored (...) Captain to the Hosts of the Lord. Our (...) should be to
none but God; yet the Dying ^^phen, in Act. 7. 59. They stoned Stephen calling
(...) God, and saying, Lord Jesus. Our Faith should be in none but God; yet we
read in Romans 15. 12. There shall be a Root of Jesse, in Him shall the Gentiles
trust. We may Swear by none but God; yet the Apostolical Oath ran in such Terms
at those in Romans 9. 1. I say the truth in Christ. Hence also, it is into the
name of Christ, that we are Baptized, when we receive the first of our
Sacraments; which implies his being a God unto us.

The Lord Jesus Christ is no less than God; and oh how much is our Love to Him
obliged, our Hope in him strengthened by that Consideration!

In our Improvement of these things,

IMPROVEMENT I.
We may Infer from hence, as we go along, how foolish, how absurd, how wicked
are the Defpisers of the Lord Jesus Christ. If the Lord Jesus be God as well as
Man, and if an Acquaintance with Him be an Attainment in us, then 'twere very
reasonable to Admire Him, Adore Him, and Magnify Him for ever; to Despise him,
is of all Follies the most abominable.

But are any so absurd and wicked? I would to God, there were None. But I am to
tell you, All that Neglect a Christ, so far Despise a Christ. Say sincerely,
Have you made sure of a Christ or no? Have you Accepted him, Embraced him,
thoroughly Closed with him? Can you certainly and joyfully say, Christ is mine?
It is to be doubted, that many must confess this thing to have been left undone
all this while. But what is the reason of this horrible Neglect? Why, men are
so taken up with secular and sensual matters, that they have no leisure to
acquaint themselves with a precious Jesus? A filthy Lust, and a wretched World,
are the things for the sake of which, a Matchless Christ is Neglected by
Impenitnent Unbelievers; it may be said of them, as in Mat. 22. 5. they made
light of him, and went their ways; One to his Farm, another to his Merchandise.
Did not the Jews Despise a Jesus, when they preferred a Barabbas before Him?
every Unbeliever does as had as this comes unto; and there are two terrible
considerations to be therefore laid before all such woeful Creatures.

Consider first, The time will come when there shall None of you all Despise an
Inestimable Jesus. As 'twas said in Isa. 13. 12. I will make a man more
precious than fine gold, even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir: So there
will a time come, when whole Wedges, yea, and whole Mountains of the finest
gold, will not be so precious to your poor Souls, as that man who is from the
Beginning. When you shortly see a God angry, with you, a Soul going from you,
and an Hell gaping for you, how much do you think, a Christ will then be worth?
The Day is at the door, when the most ^^^^inate Sinner among us all, will
pierce the very Heavens, with such a lamentable cry as that, O for a Christ, a
Christ! a thousand worlds for a saving Acquaintance with Him!

Consider Secondly, The holy Jesus will then despise, all such as have not
seasonably Repented their slighting of him. It is said in Psalm. 73. 20. O Lord
thou shall despise their Image. Thus, the Shadow, (the ghost) of such a sinner,
appearing before Christ, the Judge of departed Spirits, with importunate
Petitions for pity, and pardon, and mercy, will be answered with nothing but an
infinite Contempt. The Lord Jesus will then contemn the Souls of such
miscreants, and when they shriek, what will become of me? He will say, Let the
Devils take them, if they will, I will make no provision for them. He will then
also contemn their prayers, and when they Supplicate unto him with never such
raging Ardors, Lord, Lord, open to us! He will only Reply, I know you not.
Wherefore, Hear, ye Despisers, and wonder, that ye may not perish.

But of these things, there must be a further Improvement made.

IMPROVEMENT II.
It remains, that Old men be now called upon, to do several good things which
the Lord then God requires of them. As the Prophet Joel, chap. 1. 2. began a
Sermon so; Hear this ye old men; this is the preface that I am to give unto the
rest of my Discourse, Hear, this ye old men; O hear that your Souls may live. I
have not forgotten, that I am to Entreat old men as Fathers, and therefore, my
Fathers, I do with a most filial Affection (...) you, to attend unto a few
Directions; which have this to challenge your earnest heed, that they are not
Mine, but Gods.

The first Counsel.
I entreat you Fathers, that you be not content with a common measure in the
more common knowledge of him that is from the Beginning. He is called, the
Ancient of Days; O that all ancient men would study to know much of a Subject
so agreeable! You best know, what you have all this while been contriving and
labo^ring for the getting of; but an old man once under the inspirations of the
Almighty, gave that advice to Solomon, in Prove. 4. 7. Wisdom is the principal
thing, therefore get Wisdom. And surely, an old man himself is not unconcerned
in that Advice! A common knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, indeed is not
enough to make you happy; but I am sure, the want of such knowledge will render
you both wretched here and undone for ever. He was a wise man that said, in
Prove. 19. 2. That the Soul be without knowledge, it is not good; but it is not
so bad being without any Knowledge, as being without the knowledge of the Lord
Jesus Christ. This ignorance will prove the woeful mother of two things. It will
render your Unbelief incurable. As it was said, in I Cor. ^. 8. Had they known,
they would not have Crucified the Lord of glory; so may it be said, those that
remain in their Distance from the Lord Jesus Christ They refuse the Lord of
glory, because they have not the Knowledge of Him. And it will also render your
Destruction unavoidable. It was of old complained, in Hos, 4.6. my people are
destroyed for the lack of knowledge; but the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus is
that, the lack whereof is most of all destructive; the world will one day with
hot Thunderbolts be set on a light Fire for it. Well then, look to it, Fathers,
that you been't unacquainted with the Great Mystery of Godliness. If you have
never yet studied that Mystery, I pray begin, and count not your selves too old
to learn; that man is too old to (...), that is too old to learn. The Ancient
Heathen had an higher opinion than so, of their meaner Learning. Socratos would
go to School when an old man, pleading that it was better to be Opsimathes than
Amathes, better to be Late-learned, than to be Unlearned. How much ought old
men, to think thus of that Learning without which All men must find, That He
that made them, will not have mercy on them, and He that formed them will show
them no Favor? It Is to be feared, that there is a lamentable ignorance about
the Lord Jesus Christ, in many that have lived unto old Age under the Gospel of
that blessed Lord. A famous Divine tells us, of an old man, who had enjoyed the
constant Preaching of the Word, and yet when he lay on his Deathbed, he still
thought, Jesus Christ was an amiable Youth, and other things too ridiculous to
be recited. And he has been a scandal to me to see, how little many old men
among our selves do understand about The Covenant of Redemption, and some other
i^^portant Articles. But, O get a little more knowledge of Jesus Christ, before
you go; lest that most forlorn and fearful case be yours, in Job ^^. 12. They
shall die without Knowledge. To be corporally blind with Age, is not unusual;
But for men to be Spiritually blind in Age is very dreadful. The Gray Hairs on
the outside of your Heads, are not more Honorable, than the wrong Thoughts in
the inside of them are pernicious, while you have not a good knowledge of the
Lord Jesus Christ, Old Luther did not reckon it a shame to profess himself,
Discip^^um Catechism^, one that still was every day learning his Catechism.
Whether it be a shame or no, for you that are old men, to be students in your
Catchisms, I am certain, it is a more burning shame for you to be ignorant of
the points which your Catechisms are to teach you. You have not so much as the
beginning of true knowledge, till you know Him that is from the Beginning. The
Apostle rebuked it, as a shameful Deficiency in those, Heb. 5. 12. For the
time, ye ought to be Teachers, yet ye need that one Teach you, which be the
first principles of the Oracles of God. They say, old men are twice Children;
but O for shame, do not want the instruction which when you were first
Children, you ought to have had about the Lord Jesus Christ. Nay, albert, you
knew never so much about the Lord Jesus Christ, yet there is a vast deal more
behind still to learn. Old men, study a blessed Jesus, till you fathom yet more
of his matchless Excellencies! If one of the Roman Emperors, had such a value
for knowledge, as in his old Age to be a sort of pupil still, and say, It Is
good for old men to be learning still; surely, it becomes you to have as much
value for the peerless knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ.

In a word, since you are so near to your Eternal Sabbath, you should gather a
double portion of this Manna for your Souls; and follow these Directions in it.

First, Pray much for the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. Would we have
this Knowledge? we are counseled in Prove. 2. 5. cry after it; he that writ
that Counsel did himself obtain knowledge by asking for it. It is said, in Jam.
1. 5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it. A sincere Prayer will do more,
toward the Unveiling of Christ's FACE, and the Unsealing our EYe, than the
prayeriess Enquiries of many years. Now that the Eyes of your Bodies are almost
out, O follow the Lord Jesus with such a cry for your Souls, as once that poor
Son of sorrow made, Lord, that we may receive our sight! Those Ministers that
study much on their Knees, will Preach best, and those Christians that wrestle
much on their Knees, will know most, of the Lord Jesus Christ. Be continually
praying like Moses, Lord, I beseech thee, show we thy glory; and let not your
Declining Sun set with you, till by ardent prayer, you have got the Day Star to
arise in your Hearts.

Secondly, Think much for the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. The custom
of Isaac will very much befriend the Knowledge of Jesus; that young man has
left a pattern for old man to follow. Old men, you have now time to think; O
spend as much as you can of that little time in Meditations upon the Lord Jesus
Christ. It Is said of Moses in Exodus 19. 3. That he went up to God, and then the
Lord called unto him, come up? The Jewish Expositors have this gloss upon it;
That Moses first made a spiritual Ascent by Meditation, and then he was
favored with a bodily Ascent unto very heavenly Communions. Meditation, 'twill
carry you up into the Mount of God, when you are so old, that you cannot Ascend
a Chamber in your Houses without help or pain; yea, twill carry you within the
Vail of God, and bring you to the view of, Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant. Every day then discourse unto your selves on some Divine Subject,
until you feel some lively Impression of it, on your Souls; and have special
Eye to the Lord Jesus Christ in your Assiduous Meditations: said the Psalmist,
Psalm 119. 100. I have more understanding than all my Teachers, for thy
Testimonies are my meditation; I understand more than the Ancients. Behold the
way, for you that are Ancients, to get much Understanding of the Lord Jesus
Christ; let your daily meditation be on those Oracles of God, whereof he says,
They testify of me.

Thirdly and lastly, Frequent the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the
knowledge of him; these are the glasses, of which we are told, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Therein we behold the glory of the Lord; and so, we attain the knowledge of the
Lord. Old men, as long as ever your legs can carry you, O be getting into those
Galleries where you may find the Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, attend upon His
Worship, tho you do it as good old Jacob, learning on the top of a staff. Be
glad of every App ointment, wherein you have that Invitation, behold, the Lamb
of God; be glad of every Opportunity wherein you may have that privilege, to
see the goings of the great King in the Sanctuary. Repair to all the
Ordinances, of the Lord, saying like (...) (...) Greeks of old, we would see
Jesus! we would (...) Jesus! But for this end, especially repair to the Supper
of the Lord. It is an horrible thing to see an old man turn his back on the
Holy Table, and it is a sorrowful thing for such an one to die ou^ of
Church Fellowship. The psalmist could say, in psalm. 92. 13, 14. they that are
planted in they House of the Lord, shall bring forth fruit in old Age^ it is a
barren old man that is not found in the house of the Lord. I beseech you, that
before you go out of the world, you get into the Church (...) when you are at
the Sacrament in the Temple, you may like old Simeon, take up the Lord Jesus in
your Arms, and sing, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace; for
mine Eyes have seen thy Jesus here.

I remember an Apparition of our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, wherein he seems to
have something of an old man upon him; it is said in Rev. 1. 1. His Head and his
^^irs were white like Wool, (...) white as the Snow. O that old men, that all
of you, whose heads are white with Age, would he restless till you have a sight
of Him.

The second Counsel.
With a common Knowledge of, I entreat you, Fathers, endeavor to get a saving
Interest in, him, that is from the Beginning. O make sure of that, before the
end of your days come upon you.

Consider, first, You cannot be far from the end of your days in this evil
world. You may sadly look backward on the few days that have already passed,
and as it were, stolen, from you; and you may then look forward, assuring of
your selves, I have not near so many years to Live, as those that have already
gone from me like a tale that is told; it was but yesterday that I came into
the world, and now before to morrow, I shall be gone out again. It was the
Emphatical Expession of the Apostle, in I Cor. 7. 29. this I say, Brethren, the
time is short, (...) the Greek word carries it, the time is Fur^^^ ^. d. you
are like Mariners, just ready to (...) shore. Even so, this I say, Futhers, the
Sail of (...) is just furling with you; you are just putting into the harbor,
where you shall step a shore on the (...) of a long Eternity. An old Grecian
walking once very slowly, said unto a Stander by, After this fashion I am
stepping into the Grave; and another old Grecian that felt his Ancles failing
him, complained, that death had bitten him by the Legs. You cannot stir many
steps, without many such admonitions of the Mortality, which you are near unto.
It cannot be long, before you pass into your Eternal State; the vital Ty between
your Spirits and your Bodies, will not much longer hold together; there are but
a few Sands now left in the bottom of your Glass, and your Light is within one
Inch of going out. You may say like Father Isaac, in Genesis 27. 1. Behold, now I
am old, and I know not the day of my death; but you may also say, since I am
old, I do know that my Death cannot be many days off. It was the Speech of as
good an old man, as ever lived, in Josh. 23 2, 4. I am old and stricken in Age;
behold this day I am going the way of all the Earth. If you are old, I am sure
you are going. Young men may Die, but old men must; and I am to tell you about
the day of your Death, as the Prophet speaks about the Day of the Lord, It is
near, it is near, and it ^asteneth greatly.

Consider Secondly, The End of your Days, will be but the beginning of your
never-ending Miseries, if you die without a saving Interest in Him that is from
the Beginning. It Is none o^t he that is from the Beginning, who can deliver you
from the woes and plagues that will never have an end. We are told in I These.
1. 10. It is Jesus who delivers from the wrath to come; without an Union to
Him, that wrath will come upon you, and after it is already come, it will be
still to come, there will be more of it still to come throughout, Eternal Ages.
You that are near to your Death, are as near unto the Worm that never dies, and
unto the Fire that never shall be quenched, if a speedy Conversion prevent it
not. It is a dreadful word in Joh. 8. 24. Ye shall die in your sins. Be not so
thick of Hearing in this your old Age, as to be deaf unto this Warning of God;
If you do not quickly get out of your sins by a closure with the Lord Jesus
Christ, you I die in them; but so to Die is to die under the formidable Curse of
the Omnipotent God, and it is to Die exposed unto the Vengeance of Eternal Fire.
Poor old man, Thou have already seed many bitter dismal doleful days, and had
thy Heart often broken with those Evil Days; but be assured, all the past black
Hours of thy life are but the beginning of sorrows; if thou do not
immediately get an Interest in Him that is from the Beginning. If an old man
don't get out of old Adam before he die, he will find an old Hell prepared for
him; and this also circumstanced with very dreadful Aggravations. How many sins
does a man commit in one Fifty or Threescore Years! But old men, if you are
still out of Christ, the God of Heaven remembers all your old sins, as fresh as
if they had been done but this very morning. Our Lord said of some that were
Dead and Damned many years before, in Joh. 10. 8. They ARE Theives. Even so,
the old man out of Christ IS in the account of God, the same sinner that once
he was; it may be said of him, as once it was of some, He is not purged from
his old sins. But what a prodigious load of sins then lies upon such an old
man, to sink him into the Sulphurous Abyss of Hell! Hence 'twas said in Isa.
65. 20. the Sinner an hundred years old, shall be Accursed. It is promised as a
great blessing, to live near an hundred years; but if a man be a Sinner at that
Age, his Age will be but a Curse unto him, he shall have cause to wish that he
had never seen such an Age as that. Such a wretched old man must not only
perish, but also go down to the Pit with heavier Loads of Confusion and
Vexation than those that had not lived so long; that as 'twas said of one, It
had been good for that man, he had never been born; so it may be said of this
man, It had been good for him, he had never lived half so many years in the
world. When he is Roaring in the Fiery Vaults below, I am tormented in this
Flame! he will add this Lamentation and Execration thereunto, Why dyed I not
from the Womb? why did I not give up the Ghost when I came out of the Besly? It
was of old given, as a Resolve to the problem, Quis miserrimus Senex egenus.
What is the most miserable sight in the world? Answer, an old man in want; an
old man without bread. But I Will tell you a far more miserable sight; and that
is, An Old man in sin; an Old man without Christ, an Old man without Grace; an
Old man tumbling down into the pits of Eternal Desolation.

Consider, Thirdly; It is not as yet altogether too late for you to Begin the
work of getting a saving Interest in Him that is from the Beginning. It Is
indeed a thousand pitties that you have thus long delayed this work; which is,
the One thing Needful. If you should now be brought home unto Lord Jesus
Christ, you must bewayl your selves, like Paul, in I Cor. 15. 8. Alas, I am as,
one born out of due time. But it is not altogether too late! It Is true, that
the Regeneration of an old man; (...) a thing very improbable; as it was said
in Joh. 34. How can a man be born, when he is old? So may we fear, How can a
man be Newborn, when he is old (...)? When the Devil has had an old possession
of and prescription for, an Immortal soul, it is not easy to cast him out; Sin
and Lust has a stronger Hold. of an Old man, than of another. But yet it is not
altogether impossible; it may be said unto the Christless old men in the
Congregation, There is yet Hope in Israel concerning you. There is a Door of
Hope yet kept open for you; and after all your multiplied Iniquities and
Abominations, Yet return un^o me, says the Lord, and I will not cause my Anger
to fall upon you. As it is said, in Heb. ^. 7. To day, after so long a time,
harden not your Hearts. Even so, although you have slighted the Lord Jesus
Christ, so long a time; although you have been Disobedient unto the Calls of God,
and unfruitful under all the means of good, so long a time; yet if now, after
so long a time, you will come in unto the Savior of your Souls, he will have
mercy on you. The blessed Lord Jesus Christ is this Day making an Offer of
Righteousness and Strength and Life unto us all, and the old men among us, as
well as the rest are concerned in it. Our Lord once came unto one that seems to
have been a pretty old man, and said unto him, as in Joh 5.6. Jesus knew he had
been a long time (...), and said unto him, (...) thou be made whole? Thus does
our gracious Lord come unto those, old men among us, that have been a long time
in the Calamities of their Natural Estate, and he says unto them, Old man,
shall I have the^^, and heal thee and help thee? Old man, shall I be the Lord
and Savior of the Soul? I am willing to make thee happy, if thou will yet
(...) sent, before I shut the Door of mercy on thee. O (...) no means Despair,
but Accept, of this Glorious Grace. Once the Devil told you, it is too soon
(...) perhaps he now tells you, it is too late! but believe not that old Liar,
whether he speak fair or hand unto you. In the Primitive Times, there was one
Victorius a very old man, converted unto Christianity; and the Church would not
receive him for some time, for thought they, old sinners do not (...) thus to
return unto God. But he made his Conversion so apparent, that they sang Hymns
about it in the Christian Assemblies, and it was every where proclaimed, Old
Victorius is become a Christian! old Victorius is become a Christian! Even so,
that shout may yet come to be made over the oldest Unbeliever here, That old
Sinner is brought home to the Lord Jesus after all. We had in this Country, an
Instance of one, that was made a New Creature, after he had spent an hundred
years in the Tents of wickedness. But methinks, the Tender of a full Pardon to
an old Rebel, should break the very hear^ of him; O how can you now forbear
making that Reply unto that merciful King, the Lord Jesus, Behold, we come unto
thee, for thou art the Lord our God.

Well then, let every (...) man immediately Retire to think upon the rueful
Necessities of a never dying Soul, just ready to fly away into the Regions of
Eternity. Think on them, till you see your selves horribly perishing, in an
incurable guilt, and blindness, and slavery, unless the Lord Jesus Christ
become your Surety for good. Hereupon, with much Humility and Sincerity, and
with a most unutterable Agony, resign your Souls into his blessed Hands,
begging of him, and hoping in him, to do for you, all that which He does for
any of his Chosen Ones for evermore; yea, for the more safety and sureness,
renew this work, and keep doing so, till at your last Breath, you receive the
end of your Faith, even the Salvation of your Souls.

If you had been converted unto the Lord Jesus many years ago, yet would you
now see cause to complain with old Austin, Lord, it was too late, when I first
began to love thee! O what haste ought you then to make, in returning now to
the Bishop of your Souls, from whom you have been miserably wandering for so
long a time?

It is a great oversight in an old man, if he have not made his Will, and so
disposed his Affairs that when he comes to Die, he may have nothing to do but Die.

^ut O see to it in the first place, that the first Article of your Will be
well dispatched, and assured, by your giving of your Souls unto the Lord Jesus
Christ.

The third Counsel.
Govern the little that remains of your Lives, by the Rules of Him that is from
the Beginning. The Apostle tells Old men, in I Joh. 2. 7. I wri^ unto you an
old Commandment, which ye had from the Beginning. It becomes you to follow the
wholesome Rules, which He that is from the Beginning has given you; inasmuch as
they are Old Commandments, which you have had from the Beginning. Let me a
little insist upon one of those old Commandments which you find in Tit. 2. 2.
That the Aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound, (...) Faith, in Charity,
in patience.

Behold six virtues, which all Old men should (...) studious of.

The first Virtue that well becomes an old man, is that of Sobriety. The Greek
word for this may bear an Allusion to those Ancient Sacrifices, which had no
Wine used in them. An Old man should be no lover of Wine; or any Strong,
inebriating, intoxicating Liquors. If old Noah will be Drunk, he shamefully
exposes his Nakedness to all Spectators. It Is very deplorable, to see how many
Old men, degenerate into the worse-than-beastly Vice of Drunkenness, and this
oftentimes after a long and a strict Profession of Religion. They often imagine
(and often it is but an Imagination) that their Stomachs call for Cordials; and
hereupon, first they sip now and then at a Cup, which quickly so far bewitches
them, that they can swallow down very scandalous quantities. They come to be
never well, but when Rhum or Sack or some such poison is upon their palates,
and they soon lose all that savor of Religion which would be their Glory. But
what is the Word of the great God? It is, Woe to the Drunkard! It is, The
Drunkard shall not inherit the Kingdom of God^ O shun this destroying vice,
knowing the Terror of the Lord. For them that Stagger with Age, at the same
time to stagger with Drink; to see an old man Reeling, Spewing, Stinking with
the excesses of the Tavern; it is too loathsome a thing to be mentioned without a
very zealous Detestation. What Heart would not have bled at the fight of old
Lot overtaken with Drink, and that after so many mercies as had been bestowed
upon him? Be sober. But the word may also be rendered, Be watchful. Old men are
prone to be st^epy; whatever your Eyes may be, yet let not your Minds be so. Be
watchful against all the Assaults that a busy Tempter may make upon you. Be
watchful unto all the Duties that the Most High God obliges you unto. And be
so watchful, that the Last Enemy may not surprise you at unawares.

The second Virtue, that much adorns an Old man, is that of Gravity. The Greek
word implies both Majesty and Modesty. An old man should keep up some Authority
among his Juniors; and be able to say with him of old, Men have hearkened and
waited, and kept silence at my Counsel, if I laughed on them, they believed it
not. A trifling, and childish, and frolicksome sort of carriage, all Buffoonry
in an old man, is very disagreeable; it was old Chrysoftoms Expression, That
(...) old man of a Juv^nile Conversation is extremely ti^ diculous. We cannot
Reverence you, unless your grave Looks, as well as your gray Hairs, demand
(...) of us. But nothing is more Nauseous and Odious in an old man, than the
Levity of Lasciviousness. For old men to talk bawdily and filthily, and for old
men to discover that the cursed Fires of the^^ Youth are not yet extinguished
in them, Out upon it! For those Eyes that are sunk into their Sockets, to be
yet full of Adultery for those Mouth^ that are going to be filled with earth,
to be yet full of Rotten Communication; it is, how incongruous! An old man
should (as one says) be glad that Age has delivered him from a Madman that
once had power over him. Unchastity in any man renders him the Abhorred of the
Lord; but in (...) old man it is more peculiarly fulsome, nasty, and that which
also renders him the Abhorred of the Neighborhood. As the old Eleazar chose
rather to Die, than to eat forbidden Swines Flesh, a brutish Lust should be
more abominable unto every old Professor.

The third Virtue that should set off an old man, is that of Temperance. The
Greek word also signifies Discretion. An old man should be a wise man; for, no
fool so bad as the old fool. An old man should as the phrase imports, Keep his
mind under Government; and restrain and repel inordinate Affections.
Mortification is but proper for them that are just ready to Die. Be pruden^^
(...) ^ary in your whole Behavior, and be moderate in (...) your inclinations
toward the pleasures, or the profits, or the honors of this deceitful world.
You know who said, Among the Ancient is Wisdom, and (...) the length of days is
Understanding.

A fourth Virtue, necessary to an old man is Orthodoxy. You must be sound in
Faith. You are (...) be our Teachers, our Tutors; our Eyes are upon you for a
Tradition of the Faith once delivered unto the Saints. If you be wavering in
any ^^int of our Faith, it will cause us much more to ^umble and stagger at it.
You that have had the Word of God so long, should now at least be well ^^red,
and well settled in the principles of Christianity; and not be tainted with any
Skepticism or ^^eresy. When we see an old man that leans upon a Reed, we should
not see, A Reed shaken with the Word. May you that are just upon Dying, not
only be careful to Die in the Truth, but be as ^^^dy to Die for it, as that
blessed old Babylas, who at Ninety Years of Age, going to his Martyrdom cried
our, Return to thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has now dealt bountifully with
thee.

A fifth Virtue requisite in an old man is Charity. You must be sound in
Charity; that is, you must labor to do all the good you can. An old man should
like old Bradford, Be always doing of son Good, with Tongue, or Purse, or some
other way. Perhaps you have a long while been Serving your Generation; yet you
are to do a little more Service^ and be Serviceable until you are by your Great
Master called away. Husband well every minute of the Little Time that is left,
by being always employed for the good of them that shall come after you.
Albeit your age may excuse you from Serving in civil or military Offices among
your Neighbors, yet should you be charitably pursuing of their Good, as far as
ever you can. There are especially two ways of Doing good, in which you may be
very Serviceable. One is, by charging of us. Call us often before you, and lay
the Charge of God upon us, That we know and serve the God of our Fathers.
Another is, by praying for us. He much in prayer for the Rising Generation; and
since you are past the doing of any thing in the Field, get into the Mount,
that you may there procure for us the Salvations of the Lord. It was the
Expression of our Venerable old Eliot, when he grew toward Ninety Years of
Age; Every thing now fails me, I have nothing left; but I thank God, my Charity
holds out still, that rather grows than fails. That every old man were of such
a Spirit!

A sixth Virtue required of an old man is Patience. Old men, are often froward,
and peevish, hard to please; you should lay aside that Morosity. One that calls
his Book, The old man's Physician, has largely, luculently, pathetically
represented the mischiefs which old men endure, by perturbations in their
Minds. Bear patiently the Infirmities of that Old Age which you are now arrived
unto. Tully mentions an old man, who being Aged seven years above an Hundred,
used still to say, Nihil ^a^eo quod Accusem Sen^^tutem; I see nothing in old
age to be complained of. Be not then full of complaints; and grow not weary of
Living. Do not impatiently long for Death, not say with old Elijah, It is
enough, now, O Lord, take away my life. Grow continually in your submission to
the will of God, and under all your Trials call upon your selves as once the
Martyr did, Hold out, faith and patience, a little more, Heaven will quickly
make amends for all. These things does the Apostle speak to Old Men: But, I
hope, the old women will take the pains to Read what follows: Likewise that the
aged women be of a Behavior that becomes Holiness, not false Accusers, not
given to much Wine, teaching that which is good; that they may teach the young
women. The good God make you all such Mothers in Israel.

The Fourth Counsel.
Endeavor now to live as those that are just now going to Him that is from the
Beginning.

Wherefore,

First, Be sensible of, be affected with, the change that will immediately be
made upon you. What is a Senex, but a Seminex: An old man, is half a dead man.
It was the petition in Psalm. 90. 12. Teach us to Number our Days. Let that
Sacred Arithmetic be your Exercise; compute, How few days of your Appointed
Number can be still behind. ^e willing to hear of Dying; and not like (...)
English Queen, who cast a Minister (...) of her Favor, for telling her in a
Sermon, That old time bad sprinkled his Meal upon her Aged Head. Promise not
your selves always, to rub out still (...) Luster of years more in the world;
although, one of the Ancients has told us, Nemo tam Decrepi^oe Sen^ctutis est, ut
non se putet unum adbuc Annum (...) victurum. Ever mark it, when you hear an
Old Man brag how strong and hale he still is, and how likely to live at least,
one dozen more of years, it is a thousand to one but that Old Man is within a
few months of his unsuspected end. I pray; look often into your Coffins; and if
you have no other Monitors of your Mortality, let your own Children, and your
own Bodies, perform that Office for you. Perhaps you see your own Children
becoming Parents, and the third and fourth Generation is arising from you. The
fight of them gives no little pleasure unto the yet living Ancestor, who
commonly proves, the Older the Fonder; but methinks it should give you a solemn
Warning too, and cause you to Remember, That you are now marching off apace.
You must needs also feel your crazy Bodies under daily and speedy Approches to
a Dissolution.

Non habitus, non ipse color, non gressus euntis,
Non species eadem que fuit dute manet.
Will you take a short view of your picture, (...) it is drawn by a Pencil of
the Sanctuary, in the last lines of an aged and an able Preacher.

The Sun, the Light, the Moon and the Stars begin to be Darkened with you; that
is, your parts are under a Decay, your Fancy, your Judgment, your Memory are
now failing of you. Again, The Clouds come one upon another after the Rain;
that is, you are troubled not only with concontinual Defluxions, but also with
a vicisitude of returning and various Infirmities. Once more, The Keepers of
the House tremble; that is, your Hands now shake and shrink, and must lean upon
a staff. Wherewithal, The strong men bow themselves; that is, your Thighs and
Legs now buckle under you. And then, The grinders cease, because they are
diminished, that is, your Teeth grow weak and few, and are almost all rotted
out. Furthermore, Those that look out of the Windows be Darkened; that is, your
eyes become Dim, and Clouds disturb the visive powers in them; but give then
your thanks to God, that has of late years bestowed the Invention of Glasses
upon the world. Furthermore, The two Leaves of the Door shall be shut toward
the Street, with a falling of the sound of the Millstone; that is, your mouths
now have but little to do, and your Meals become tender seldom. Besides, there
is Rising at the sound of the Bird; that is, you cannot lie long asleep; nor
sleep late in a Morning. Moreover, The little musical Instruments are brought
low; that is, you become Deaf, and thick of Hearing. Likewise, there is a
tearing of that which is High, and a trembling as walking; that is, you cannot
without some Difficulty go up a pair of Stairs, and are in danger of tumbling
at every stone in the street. Herewith be Almond-tree flourishes, that is, you
have your leads as full of gray hairs, as the Almond-tree of white Flowers.
Also, the Grasshopper is a urden; or, as the word may be rendered, the backme;
that is, your Backs are so feeble that in^ead of carrying any thing else, they
can (...) ear themselves. In fine, Desire fails; that is, (...) Meats or
Drinks, or the other Delights of humane Life; all this is, because you are
going to the House where you are to dwell for ever. All these things intimate
that it cannot be long before the Silver Cord of your spinal marrow will be snap
t^^ or before the Golden Bowl of the Membrane that covers your Brain, will be
broken; that it cannot belong before the pitcher of your Arterious Vein be
cracked at the right ventricle of your heart, which is the Fountain from whence
it fetches your blood into your Lungs; that it cannot be long before the Wheel
of your great Artery, be split at the left ventricle of your Heart, which is
the Cistern whereby it is carried into and thorough that noble Bowel; in a word,
that it cannot be long, before the circulation of your Blood be fatally and
forever stopped, and that Liquor of Life corrupt in a total stagnation of it.
Old men, behold what symptoms are upon you, and seriously perswad^ your selves,
that your Dust will quickly return (...) the Earth, as it has been there, and
your Spirit shall Return unto God that gave it.

Secondly, Believe that till your Change comes, you shall be sufficiently
provided for, by Him that ^s from the Beginning. It Is a mere paradox of
Original Sin, it is a Mystery of Iniquity, that the Older men grow, they often
grow the more Earthly, and the more careful. As it is hard to say whether the
Greek Name for an old man, intimates one Looking to, or one Loving of the
Earth; So, Old Men too much lay their Hearts where their Heads are going to be
laid; Solum unum hoc vitium adfert senect us homini^us: Attentiores sumus ad
rem omnes, quam sat est; the fear of want comes upon them; and they are then
most anxious about living in the world, when they are just going out of the
world. Hence they become infinitely sparing and sor did, and they scrape to lay
up, without any Bounds. It is needless to bring Augustine for a Voucher, That
cum cuncta vitia in seen senescat sola Avaritia Juvenescit. But, Fathers, your
dishonor your selves. You are at this pains to hoard u^ Legacies and Portions,
for those that perhaps will not thank you for them; and you fearfully disoblige
the kind Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ. Said the Psalmist in Psalm. 71.
17, 18. O God, thou have taught me from my youth; now also, when I am Old and
Gray Headed, O God forsake me not. Why, good Sir, you need not fear it. Who is
it that has fed you from your Youth? and clothed you, from your Youth? and
kept you, from your Youth? Why, the fame Lord will still provide for you. He
that is from the Beginning, has looked after you hitherto from the Beginning;
and will he leave you now! No, He has said, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee. The Philosopher said, Before Old Age, my care was to live well;
but now under Old Age, all my care is to Die well. And indeed you have nothing
else to take any care about; let the promise encourage you to confine your
Cares unto Dying in the Lord. It Is horrible to see with what a possession the
Devil holds the Soul of many a poor Old man, when he has made them lay aside
their dependence upon that unfailing promise of God. The very design of the
Apostle in our Context here, is to correct the sin of worldiness, particularly
in Aged Men. Let them that may have done with Hopes, have also done with Cares
about the world.

Thirdly, Rejoice that when your Change comes, you shall go to the Enjoyments
and Embraces of Him that is from the Beginning. Say with Aged Paul, in Phil. 1.
23. I desire to Dislodge, and be with Christ, which is by far the best of all.
Death is a fort of a Cloud now before your Eyes; but there is a Bright as well
as a Dark side of that Cloud. Look on it, not as a Destroyer of your life, but
as a Messenger of your Lord; it is but a Wagon that our Joseph, our Jesus,
will shortly send for you, to fetch you thither, where you shall behold his
Glory: O be Ravished at the Thought of this, and Rejoice in the Hope of the
glory of God. If it in any measure afflict you to think, what you are going
from: then think joyfully, what you are going to. Think, that you are going
from a World wherein your Days have been few and ill, and wherein you never
can expect them to be otherwise a but think that you are going to a world of
undisturbed Happiness, where there is Fullness of joy in the presence of your
Lord, and there are Pleasures at his Right Hand for evermore. Methinks life
should become a matter of patience, while a^ath should be rather a matter of
Desire with you, under the apprehension of the Joy that you are now To near
unto. Methinks the Terrors of Death should be no more to you than they were to
old Mr. Dod, who under a threatening Sickness being told, there was hope of his
Life, replied, Alas, this is just as if a weather-beaten Mariner arrived unto
his Haven, should be told he must put out to Sea again. My Fathers, how can you
forbear longing to be in the Fruition of Him that has loved you, and washed you
from your Sins, in his own Blood!

Fourthly, Let all the little spot of time between this and your Change, be
wholly spent in a Communion with Him that is from the Beginning. An Impartial
Reflection will give you to see that you have lost a world of time, since you
first came into the world; and how much ought this to fill you with an
unalterable Resolution that you will well Husband the little inch of time which
yet re^ains. As 'twas said in Ephesians. 5. 16. Redeem the (...) because the days are
evil; to you I say, Redeem the time because your days are ending. O spend it
all in a most close and sweet Communion with your blessed Savior; and as
Israel made more way toward Canaan in a year or two at last than they did in
forty years before; so do you toward Heaven in this reduced Age; and procure
that Commendation, Thy last works are more than the first. It is required of an
old woman, in I Tim, 5. 5^ she continues in Supplications and Prayers night and
day. So should an old man abound in Supplications to God night and day, in
Meditations on Christ night and day, in preparations for Death night and day^
It Is convenient that you should now Retreat and Retire from the business of the
world, and that the best part of your time should be taken up ^o serious
Devotions. You should now more than ever engage in such a walk, as you may
expect like Elias to be snatched up into eternal Glory from Let not a day now
pass you without many salleys of your Souls toward a sublime Acting of many
Graces in it; and let not a night come upon you^ without renewing your peace
with God, and your close with Christ. Get near to him, keep near (...) him,
dwell always in him. You have one foot in the Grave; where should the other be,
but in Heaven? Let your whole talk, and your whole walk, be full of Heaven, and
Initiate your selves as much as you can, at the Employments of that Heaven,
where I now commit you into the Blessed Arms of Him that is from the Beginning.

The Dedication of The YOUNG MAN'S Glory:
To the Praying and Private Meetings of YOUNG PEOPLE in BOSTON.
More especially to two or three such Assemblies, in the North-part of the TOWN.

IT was an Observation long since made by a Renowned Ancient, That our Lord
Jesus Christ ^ave the most sensible and pathetick manifestations of his Love to
the Youngest of his Disciples; and it is a common temper in the Owner of every
Orchard, more particularly to take notice of a new Fruits appearing on a young
^ree, then of much larger Quantities on a Tree of longer standing: It becomes
me therefore to acknowledge it with a singular Affection, that there are in
this poor Town so many scores of young persons, who having taken upon them a
more serious profession of Religion, do endeavor to quicken and strengthen one
another in it, by meeting together for the (...) of Devotion every week;
especially in the Evening after the Sabbath, which is a spot of time too meanly
and vainly and impertinently^ not to say perniciously, spent by multitudes in
the midst of us. I count it not the smallest Happiness of my life that I have
been for perhap^ more (...) a dozen years acquainted with some of those useful
Meetings; as having in them had more than a little of my Education, and my
Preparation, for my public Ministry. The sense of my Obligations to them, has
caused me some while ago to ask their Acceptance of a little Book, Entitled,
Early Piety Exemplified, and intended in a particular manner for their
Edification; and for the same cause it is, that I now put into their hands
another little Discourse, recommending unto them, A victory over the Wicked
One; it is because I am desirous that in their Journey Heaven-wards, they may
not prove like young Travelers, that at first gallop furiously, but soon tire,
and come late or lame home at last; and that while they are upon the Road, they
may not be thrown backwards by the Serpent in the way, the Adder in the path
waiting for them.

Brethren, I can from a troublesome Experience tell you, that when once you
come to Renounce the Service and (as then you must) oppose the Interest of the
Devil, he will quickly persecute you with his unwearied Molestations; and you
are yet in too good terms with him, if you do not already find him, You
Adversary going about like^ Roaring Lion, When Sampson was entering upon the
work of God, (...) was not long before the Lion Roared on him, For my own part,
I mourn bitterly to think, that I have done so little toward Destroying and
Confounding the Kingdom of the Devil; for which, the writing and spreading of
Books is none of the least Expedients; but something I have done; and the
Wicked One, has like a Dragon, been spitting Fire at me for it. While I was
preparing for the Press, one of those little Books which I have sent abroad,
the Devil from the mouth of a possessed person, in the Audience of several
standers by, threatened me with much Disgrace for what I was about. Whereupon
presently and ever-since, those great Agents of the Devil, the modern leaders
of the poor deluded Quakers, have in one Pamphlet after another been loading of
me with most virulent and malicious Reproaches, in hopes, That some will stick;
but the dirt they cast happily proves like that of Oysters; it more cleanses
than defiles, The same disturbance, that was given to the Devil by that little
Book, I am willing should arise unto him from all the rest of my poor
composures; and I suppose he will have it from This, which particularly treats
him as our Enemy, and professedly pursues a victory over him. This (which was
once a) Land of Uprightness, now is not without some people in it, than which I
believe, the Devil has not more devoted and resolved Vassals in all his
Territories; people that have sinned against, until they have sinned away, all
the strivings of Gods Holy Spirit, and that are now full of all fraudulence and
craftiness, and the Enemies of all Righteousness. I do expect that if their
father can have his will, these will quickly be inspired with a rage that will
vent it self a thousand ways against all my poor Endeavors to annoy that
Wicked One. And since, it is especially by Printing of Sermons that I labor to
give most provocation to the Devil, 'twill be no more surprise to me, if I find
the Devil assaying by the Printing of Slanders to take his Revenges on me; than
it was to a man so much better and greater than my self, as Athanasius, to read
the Libels of a wicked Generation against him, wherein as the Historian tells
it, Cades, Adulteria, Furta, quicquid Atrox confingi poter a^ sancto Viro
objiciebantur; all manner of Devilism, was by the Devil forged of that good
man; but as 'twill be my Honor herein to endure no other Buffetings than what
have been bestowed upon th^^ best of men, so I have already published, in the
fifteenth, sixteenth, and seventeenth pages of the Discourse which God helped
me to make at our last Anniversary Election, all the Answer that I count it
worth while to give unto whatever Calumnies a buisy Devil may go to afflict me
with.

I mention this rather to alarm you, than to comfort my self, and I advise you
that if the Devil now assault you with various Temptations, to divert you and
seduce you from the good ways which you are now walking in, you would not think
strange of the trial, as though some strange thing happened unto you. My Dear
Brethren, go ou^^ hold out, persevere; I would say to you as Austin said unto
his, when (...) Roman Empire became Christian, I pray don't think the Devil i^
(...) Christian yet. And let me never be so unhappy at no see the Lion fetching
away out of my Flocks, any of the Lambs which I am to be feeding of. Part of
your Food is now laid before you;

by your unworthy Pastor, Cotton Mather.

THE YOUNG MAN'S Glory. OR, A Wreath of Graces for the Head of YOUTH.
I John II. XIII. I write unto you, YOUNG MEN, because ye (...) overcome the
Wicked One.
THat we have the Word of God (...), (...) a thing to be with many
Thanksgivings ascribed unto the Grace of God; everlasting Praises are due from
us to, Him, that has written the great things of his Law. And one Expression of
our gratitude unto Him for it, (...) be for us to count our selves therein
written unto; to judge our selves as much concerned (...) the Scripture, as if
it were a Letter with our Names in the superscription of it. But that we may
not give the least way to a contrary, and a culpable inadvertency, the Holy
Spirit of God has particularized in his Addresses, and applied himself unto the
several Ages of men. It Is unto young men, that we now see an inspired Apostle
writing; and unto pious, gracious, Christian young men; such young men as all
men may behold a pattern in. A very glorious Attainment is here acknowledged in
such young men as believe in and belong to, the Lord Jesus Christ; and the
Expression is adapted unto that condition which young men are naturally
ambitious of. We read in Prove. 20. 29. the glory of young men is their
strength: it is that which they value themselves upon. The age of young men is
accomodated unto wrestling, and fighting, and such Athletic Exercises, and
their Humor is more than a little delighted in their victories over their
Antagonists. Well, there is a cursed Enemy which all young men are to contend
withal; which Enemy is the Devil, called here by the name of, the Wicked One;
and godly young men are so happy as to have the upper-hand of this wicked
Enemy, they prevail and prosper in their Encounters with him. Behold then this
Doctrine for our present Meditations.

DOCTRINE.
The Wicked One is an Enemy, which it is the singular and special Honor of
Religious Young Men to be-victorious over.

Proposition 1.
We are to look upon the Devils as a Wicked One. That there are Devils in the
world, is unquestionable to all but those absurd Sadduces, that say, seeing is
believing, and will believe nothing but what they see. And yet if even seeing
would convince them, after their contemning of the Scriptural Evidence which
may be read in Jude 6. and Mat. 18. 16. and Luc. 4. 33. and many other places,
we have in a manner seen such Beings as Devils are. That is, we have seen such
preternatural operations in some Enchantments and Possession^ among us, as
could never have been without the Existence of certain spiritual and rational
Substances, as are full of all Wickedness against God, and enmity against man.
Would you know what a Devil is? The Apostle gives a description of him, in Ephesians.
6. 12. a spiritual wickedness, that is, a wicked Spirit. Hideous Droves of
those wicked Spirits, being fallen Angels, are made prisoners within the
Atmosphere of that Earth which we walk upon (...) the High Places of our Air,
are, as the Apostle intimates, the Receptacles of those wicked Spirits. But now,

First, we may look upon all the Devils as ONE. On what account? Briefly,
although as to their Indu^^tion they are several, yet they are One for their
Unanimity. It is their agreement and union in mischief, on the score of which
they are to be called One.

The Devils are many for Number; their Troops amount unto many Regions. We read
in Luc 8. 30. about a Legion of them, that kept a Garrison in one single
person; though a Legion contained perhaps twelve thousand and five hundred in
it. Very probably there are far more Devils than men in the world; and they
swarm like the Frogs of Egypt in every one of our Chambers. Yet are they one in
their design, one in their Interest; they make as it were one grand: Enemy of
Mankind and one mystical body of Wickedness. They have their Devilish
Confoederacies, and are not divided among themselves: there are no Mu^^^es. in
the Armies of Hell, for want of pay: nor do they complain of hard Marches, though
they are always compassing of the Earth. They have one Commander ^over them;
for there is a Government; a Monarchy in the infernal Regions, the Commander
whereof is called in Mat. 12. 24. Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils. They have a
grand Segniour among them; one of peculiar Dignity and Influence; this chief
Devil we may call the Devil; but in the same term we likewise comprehend all
the Slaves, and Officers, and Emissaries of that Hellish Tyrant.

Secondly, We may also look upon the Devils as a Wicked One. The Greek word
here notes one who takes pains to do amiss. [ ponefos from ponos] That is
properly a Wickedness; to do an ill thing, with counsel and study, and labor
in the doing of it; this is just like the Devil indeed! it is ^ard, in I. Pet.
5. 8. He walks about, seeking whom he may devour. The Devil is called, a wicked
one, partly as an object for our batred; it is to provoke (...) detestation of
him, our indignation at him. As the Holy One, is a Name of honor, so, the
wicked one is for a name of hatred set before us. He is also called a wicked
one, partly, as an object for our contempt. Tho he be like a Lion, yet he has
not Righteousness to make him as bold as a Lion. Wickedness is accompanied with
Weakness; as one says, it would put a mettle into a Coward to fight with such a
wicked one as the Devil is.

Proposition II.
The Devil, who is an Enemy to all men, is to young men a peculiar Enemy.

That the Devil is the Enemy of us all, is a thing very sensible unto us; and
his power is called in the sacred Oracles, the power of the Enemy. If you ask,
how the Devil is our Enemy, the Answer is obvious; he is our Accuser, and he is
our Destroyer. The Devil does every day accuse us; it is his character, Rev. 12.
10. the Accuser of our Brethren which accuses them before God, day and night.
There is a Court some-where kept in the invisible world, at which the Devils
prefer as many complaints as they can against us; it is in this Court that they
represent us as doing the things for which the wrath of God should come upon
the Children of Disobedience. The Devil would also very fain destroy us; as he
urged against a good man, in Job 1. 11. put forth thin^ Hand now, and touch his
bone and his flesh. The Devils pray and plead, like so many Atto^nies, that a
Judgment may be granted against us all; and they are not satisfied unless they
themselves be made the Executioners thereof.

If you ask, why, the Devil is our Enemy, the Reply is likewise easy; it is from
his malignant spite at God, and spleen at man: The Devils cannot endure that
the Name of God should be owned in the world; now it is our privilege that we
both do the Service of God, and bear the Image of God; but because the Devil
would be in the Throne of God, therefore he is unwilling that God should have
any Children or Subjects upon the face of the Earth. Moreover, the Devils
cannot brook it, that any should be above them; as it is intimated, that pride
was the condemnation of the Devil. Because he sees man Saved, and himself
Damned; man Advanced, and himself Degraded; hence he will do us all the Hurt he
can.

But he that is thus an Enemy to all men, is to young men, more eminently so.
As the Apostle speaks to Christians, thus I may to young men, in I Pet. 5. 8.
The Devil is your Adversary; young men, the Devil is remarkably ambitious to
make a prey of your precious and immortal Souls. The Devil is an Abaddon and
Apollyon; for to give him his due, to him does appertain the Name, which the
Apocalypse justly puts upon a great Son of his. But young men do most of all
find him such an one; that as our Lord said unto young Peter, in Luc 22. (...)
31. Behold, Satan has desired to have you. So may it be said unto young
persons, Behold, Satan is peculiarly desirous to have you in his ravenous,
devouring Jaws. The Devil goes ranging, raging, roaring about the world; and
young men are those whom he is most concerned for the catching and spoiling of.
Some have observed, That most of the Temptations recorded in the Scripture,
still fell upon younger men. Be sure the Tempter falls foul upon them with a
particular eagerness, and energy. And this for two causes.

It Is first, because the Devil sees a great likelihood of prevailing on young
men. Young men have much matter in them, for the Devil to work upon; there is
much folly in young men, it is said in Prove. 7. 7. I beheld among the simple
ones, ^^^rscerned among the youths, a young man void of Understanding: there is
much vanity. in young men, it is said in Ecl. 11. 10. Youth is vanity. Now the
Devil beholds the natural folly and vanity of young men, as a very agreeable
Tynder, for the sparks of his insinuations to fall upon. He thinks with
himself, This rash young man will suspect none of my hooks and snares; now will
be consider his latter End. He thinks, This wild young man will take me at my
wor^ and never consider the Chambers of death, which I am bringing him unto.
For this cause he sets upon young men with greater expectation; and hence
usually with greater frequency and industry than he does assault other Ages.
The Lusts of young men after those three baits of the Devil, pleasures,
profits, grandeur, are more lively and stirring; and hence a particular
activity of Hell shall be bestowed upon them.

Secondly, It Is because the Devil sees a great advantage in prevailing on young
men. The gaining of young men thereunto, is a thing most signally useful to the
Kingdom of the Devil. It secures the Kingdom of the Devil in their own Souls.
If men are converted unto God, it is usually in the morning of their days, if
they do not then gather the Manna of Christ and Grace, it is a thousand to one
but they miss of it for ever. God says in Eccl. 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in
the days of thy Youth; and the devil knows, that if the Creator be not then
Remembered, it is likely that he I be forgotten for ever. The strong armed one
is very studious to get and keep a strong hold in the Soul of a young man; as
being sensible, that in Age, it will be harder to cast him out. We read in the
Gospel about a very painful Dispossession; but this was the reason of it, Marc.
9. 21. This evil spirit came unto him of a child. If the devil make sure of a
wretched sinner, till his youth he over, 'twill not be easy to eject him; every
new Act of sin, has given him a new hold of the Soul. The Devil haunts the soul
of a young man, giving interruption to all the motions of the blessed Jesus,
and howling, What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God? Art thou come
hither to torment us before our time? But Alas, if the Devil been't shaken off,
before the time that age grows upon us, he will ordinarily defy the holy
Spirit upon him; and he will have a confidence that any blind and lame Devils
will be strong enough to maintain the Castle, against our glorious David. It
also promotes the Kingdom of the Devil among their neighbors Young men have a
special fitness for the Devils ^^^usiness; they lay themselves out with more
ser^^our, and more success; they keep more company, and so they diffuse their
poison further, than can be said of other people. When that Nebuchadnezzar had
work to be done, we find in Dan. 1. 4. he will have young men brought before
him, skilful in all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge. Thus the furious
Nebuchadnezzar of Hell, singles out young men, that their skill and their wit,
and their vigor help to carry on his Affairs, the more effectually. Good old
Austin therefore said unto a young Gentleman, Diabolus cupit abs te ornari; the
devil would be glad if such Accomplishments as yours might be employed for him.

From this it is, that all young men may have their hearts aching to think, how
much they are exposed unto the devil; as 'twas cried unto that Champion. The
Philistines be upon thee Sampson; so may it be alarmed into the ears of young
men, The Philistines of Hell are your peculiar Enemies, O young men, and those
Enemies are upon you every day.

Proposition III.
Religious young men have the honor to be victorious over the Devil; some and
such young men have the honor that unto them it may be said, Ye have overcome
the Wicked One.

First, That Religious young men are victorious over the devil, is evident from
the instances of the victory. To instance a little,

First, Religious young men there are who overcome the devil, in respect of the
general and natural Estates which they are escaped from. What in the condition
of them that continue in their unregenerate Estate? Alas, it is that of
Band-slaves, and Captives to the devil. It may be said of unrenewed Sinners, as
in a 2 pet. 2. 19. They are overrcome and brought into Bondage; and it may be
said of them, as in 2 Timothy 2. 26. They are taken Captive, (and as it were
carried away alive) by the Devil at his will. The devil has conquered all
unrenewed Sinners, and he does horribly lead them, act them, rule over them; he
is a sort of a Prince and a God unto them. But when a Sinner in Converted, he
is brought out of this miserable state; he is, according to that in Acts. 26
18. Turned from the power of Satan unto God. The devil does not any longer
domineer over a Sinner, that is born again; he gets rid of his former
Taskmasters, like Israel escaped from Pharaoh and his Armies. Now it is the
privilege of some young men, that they are thus brought home to God. We read
of one that could say in I King. 18. 11. I fear the Lord from my youth; now to
fear the Lord is to fight the devil, with a blessed victory indeed. There have
been young Josiahs, that have sought the Lord while they were yet young; there
have bin young, David's, that have had God for their Hope; their Trust, their
Teacher from their youth; and there have been young Samuels, that have been
waiting on God, and bearing from him, in their early days As one says, Wisdom,
gravity, prudence, temperance, are not always confined unto them, that have
wrinkled faces, furrowed Brows, dim eyes, palsy hands, leaning on a Staff. So
may we say of this divine victory.

Secondly, Religious young men there are, who overcome the devil, in respect of
the particular Trials that are made upon them. The devil makes these and those
particular Batteries upon young men; he says, I Will now trip up the heels of
this young man, and immediately applies all his Engines to draw the poor young
man into some abominable thing. The devil is conquered in such Encounters, when
he cannot proceed and prevail in them; it is said in Jam. 4. 7. Resist the Devil,
and he will flee from you. The Devil is merely overcome, when a tempted Soul,
silences his Banters, with saying like our Lord, Get thee behind me Satan, or
as Job answered a Fool, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks. As
on the other side, when David sends for a Mistress, when Peter denie^^ his
Master, when Confessors come to Recant th^^ Cause of God, then the Devil gets
the day, and goes with flying colors out of the Field. But it is the
privilege of some young men, that they come off well in their spiritual
Combats. We read of such a young man in Gen 39. 9. who being solicited unto
sin, vanquished and extinguished the solicitation, by answering. How shall I
do this wickedness, and sin against God? There are young men that will not be
gulled by the proposals of the Devil; but know how to fli^ht them and scorn
them all, and with an holy bravery, make him weary of tendering them. Some young
men are before all the Devils of Hell, as young Jeremiah was before those of
Earth; Defenced Cities, Iron Pillars, Brazen Walls; the devils fight against
them, but cannot prevail against them.

Secondly, That it is a singular and special Honor unto young men to be thus
victorious, is evident from the qualities of the Enemy. It is said in Prove. 16.
32, He that rules his own spirit, is better than he that takes a City; and
indeed there have been those great Plunderers and Murderers, whom we call
Conquerors, in the world, that have taken Cities, when they could not subdue
the passions and Phrensies of their own Spirits.

Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit Moenia --

But what is it then to be Conquerors over those vast throngs of Spirits which
assail us from the world which is not seen, and is Eternal? Indeed the victory
is not purely our own, it is said in Romans 8. 37. We are more than Conquerors,
through him that has lived us. Nevertheless, the victory becomes ours, because
he that has loved us, makes us active in it; the Lord of Hosts employ's the
hands of the young David when it is He Himself that lays the G^liah of Hell
sprawling on the ground before us; and the victory makes for our Honor.

Young men, have you overcome the Wicked One (...) Then.

First, you have overcome a potent Enemy. 'Twas said in Judge. 14. 18. What
stronger than a Lion (...) But you have been too hard for a stronger Lion, than
that which Roared upon Sampson of old. Though they say, The Lion is not so fierce
as he is painted, I am sure, it is impossible to paint or speak what a Lion the
Devil is.

The Devils have us at a mighty disadvantage, upon this account; it is said in
Ephesians.6. 12. We fight not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and
powers, and spiritual wickednesses; the Devils are spiritual, and that renders
them very powerful; they can smite us when we cannot see them; they can attack
us and surprise us, by undiscoverable stratagems. Add unto this, That the
devils which fall upon us, may say, as they said in that poor man of old, We
are many; and these many devils have our hearts on their parts; there is in us
a party for them. It Is a piece of most Heavenly Gallantry to overcome such an
Enemy.

Secondly, You have overcome a subtle Enemy. He has those things that are
called in 2 Cor. 2. 11. His Devices.

There are above twenty names put upon the Devil in the Scripture; and not a
few of them are forch'd from his Deceitfulness. Hence particularly, this Father
of Lies, is called in Rev. 12. 9. The old Serpent; he has not only the paw of
the Lion, but also the head of the Serpent, and he has wiles as well as darts
to molest us with. The devils have the experience of more than five thousand
years to furnish them with skill; and you know who says Multitude of years
teaches Wisdom. How easily might these old Soldiers out-wit us a company of
raw, new, unexperienced little Folks, that are but of yesterday, and know
nothing! how many ^^ricks, and Arts have they to manage their malicious
Intreagues withal? For such a cunning Enemy to be overcome is wonderful!

Thirdly, you have overcome a restless Enemy. It Is said of him in I Pet. 5. 8.
He goes about. Like his eldest Son, Cain, he is A Vagabond: he gave that
account of himself, in Job 1. 7 I came from going to and from the Earth. But it
is to trepan and rume us, that he goes about. This Prince goes in progress,
rides a Circuit through his whole Dominions to see how his business is carried
on^ and all his Vassals are also traveling in the prosecution of this devilish
business. No Beasts of prey do toil with such a painful, watchful,
indefatigable Industry, as the Devils do for the ruin of Souls; they lull
others asleep what they can, but they never can take any sleep themselves; I
may say of them, They wonder up and down for Souls, and grudge if they be not
satisfied. For such a busy Enemy to be overcome, how great a thing is it!

It remains that I entreat the younger men as Brethren, upon such Articles as
these.

Application.
1. Brethren, do not by any means continue the Slaves of the Wicked One. You do
not, you cannot conquer the Devil, as long as the Devil shall command you.

Young men; There are too many of you, that are to this day in the Devils
Vassalage; and that have the curse of C^am upon you, to be the Servant^ of
servants. Let me tell you plainly, fairly, faithfully, who among you, are yet
the Slaves of the Wicked One.

I am to tell you, That all wordly young men, are among those miserable slaves.
The Devil i^ called in Joh 12. 31. The Prince of this world: Wherefore you
young men, that are merely set upon this world; you that for the sake of this
world, neglect God and Christ, and your own Souls; you that follow after no
Riches, no Delights, no Honors, but what this world affords; alas, the Devil,
although he be but a chained Prisoner, is yet the Prince whom you yield the most
Absolute Obedience to.

I am, again, to tell you, That all Ignorant young men, are under this wretched
Slavery. The Apostle expresses (...) Col 1. 13. God has delivered us (...)
power of darkness, and has transplanted us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.
Therefore you young men that are yet in darkness; you that are ignorant of God
and Christ, whom to know (...) Life eternal: you that are ignorant of the evil
that is in sin, which is an evil^ and a bitter thing; be assured, that the
Prince of darkness is the Ruler of you^ ^^^undone Souls.

I am once more, to tell you, that all unconverted young men are under this
woeful Slavery. To all that are not born from above, belongs the Description in
Ephesians. 2 2: They walk^ according to the prince of the power of the Air. Young
men, don't you walk as the Devil would have you to walk? if the devil say, Live
without prayer, and without Christ and without God; an unconverted young man
lives accordingly. If the devil say, Go and be wild and (...) and mad with
(...) cu^^antons; an unconverted young man does accordingly. If the devil bid
such a young man to scoff and puff at all the means of his good; there will be
no withholding of him. Ah! poor young man; it may be said of you, as in Joh. 8.
44. Ye are of your father [and Master] the devil, and the Lusts of your father
you do. The Tyrannical Ceremonies which he has enjoined upon his wretched,
woeful Vassals discover what a Tiger your Master is; horrible pilgrimages,
whippings, cuttings, t^^stings, and miserable Tortures we know to be the
devotions of the poor Pagans whom the devil is yet a Leader to; read Purch
(...) pilgrims, and be astonished. Yea, this Tyrant will be not content unless
the very life and blood of men be sacrificed unto him. It Is well known what was
done this way among the cursed Athenians of old; and among the Romans
afterward. The poor Heathen could fall into no calamity, but presently there
must be found men among them to be made Katharmata for a public Expiation. The
King of Moab must after the Phaeni^ian manner make a sacrifice of his own Son,
and so must King Ahaz do no less than burn the Children of his Bowels; the
Devil has been a devouring Moloch to the world. Behold what your Master is!
But, ye inconsiderate youths, what will become of you, if you continue thus
Enslaved? Briefly, all the blows, and all the plagues, that fall upon the
Devils, must also fall upon your unhappy Souls. Your doom at last will be that,
in Matthew. 25. 41. Depart ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. As, the Devil and his Angels, thus the Devil and his
Vassals, must be together punished in Everlasting Fire. In the Day of the Lord
that shall burn as an Oven, the Lord Jesus Christ will say to the impenitent
young man, since you like so well to be with the Devil, you shall now go and be
with him for ever.

O consider of it, and follow this one Counsel, Change your Service. Young men,
are you not old enough to be bound ^n^o some Service that may be for your
future and endless benefit? Behold, such a Service I shall now set before you.
I pray, have the Service of the Devil; he is an bard master, and you shall have
no wages from him, unless eternal vexation and confusion. It Is a bad counsel
sometimes given unto young men, that they should Runaway from their masters;
but as to this master, it is a good counsel, O Run away from him. You beat him,
if you leave him. Wherefore Tear and Break your Covenant with Satan, for he has
made you his own, by Covenant as well as Conquest. Had you written and signed
such a Covenant in your Blood, as the monstrous Witches use to do, there were
yet room for the annulling of it; how such then may that which is less
Explici^, be Lamented, Repented, Nullify'd? Well then, repair to that Rightful
and Righteous Lord, unto whom you ow all manner of Service; Repair to God in
Christ, and say as in Isa. 26. 13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee,
have had dominion over us, but by thee only will we make mention of thy Name.
Even so, say unto him, Lord, I have hitherto been a Slave of the Devil, and I
mourn to think that so much of my youth has been lost in this unhappy Slavery;
but behold I now return to my glorious Creator and Redemer; Lord, I desire that
I may, Tresolve that I will, for the time to come, approve my self thy Servant,
wholly devoted unto thy Fear for ever.

O that such blessed Indentures were now made between the God of Heaven and the
young people here.

II. Having so shaken off the Tyranny of the Wicked One, then, young men,
endeavor to overcome him, in all your particular Encounters with him;
endeavor, that the Devil may find you too strong for him, whenever he shall
make his bloody Assaults upon your Souls.

There are two things that I am now to set before you: the first is, In what
you should be; the second is, By what you may be, victorious over the Wicked
One.

First, IN WHAT? There are many things; wherein you should overcome the Devil.
In general, I would only say,

Let not the Devil overcome you, when he tempts you to any sin whatever; and
especially to the sins which your age is more peculiarly disposed unto.
Whenever the Devil urges you to an evil thing, rebuke and repel his
Temptations, with such an Answer as our Savior once gave unto him, in Mat. 16.
23. Get thee behind me Satan. Courageously, reply, Satan, have done, and,
Satan, be gone! and make him turn his bark upon you, by turning of yours upon
him. But there are some sins (...) which, your age is more eminently inclined,
an^ by which it is most of all endangered. I pray, let These be the Objects of
your more undoubted victory, and therefore of your more solicitous
watchfulness. It was the Advice of the Apostle to that young man, whom old
Chrysostom I remember, very justly styled, a wonderful youth, in 2 Timothy 2. 22.
Flee youthful lusts. As there are the Lusts of every place; the Prophet notes
it about the Chaldeans, they were a bitter and hasty and furious people; and
the Apostle notes it about the Cre^tans, they were a people grievously given to
Lying: the Levity of France, the Haughtiness of Spain, the Revengfulness of
Italy, and the Drunkenness of Germany, has been the Remark of us Englishmen,
who perhaps give too great l^^^ences of all those vices. Thus there are
likewise the (...) of every Age; and youth has its particular (...), which are
called in Job 13. 26. The Reproach of our youth. Young men, it is in and by
these Lusts, that the Devil will have the most likely Lo^^ for the throwing of
you; O that you may be (...) to us here! Indeed, the best E^^ght with these, is
a ^light from them; here, (...); these are the Enemies whereof the Captain of
our Salvation has given us that word of Command, Fl^^! But what are they? what
be the Names of them?

First Overcome the Devil, when he Tempts you to the youthful sin of
Evil-company keeping. Where may you look to see a Carnal young man? The wise
men has told us, in Prove. 7. 7. I behold among the simple o^^s, I discerned
among the youths, a young man. The Devil would fa^^ de^^cy young men, into the
Knots, and Bo^^s of what they call, Good Fellowship; he would persuade them to
Merry-Meetings, and link them with such Associates as will Drink and Drab and
Game, and be infinitely wicked, and help to drown one another in perdition. But
when you are thus tempted, by the Devil, forget not the caution of your
Savior, My Son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. If you have been
seduced into a Society and Intimacy with ungodly persons, ^magine that you hear
that Counsel from on High unto you, Depart from the Tents of those wicked ones,
(...) you perish in all their sins! and that you hear that Thunder of Heaven
over you, A Companion of Fools shall be destroyed I Think with your selves,
whether you would be willing to spend your Eternity with such Companions; and
whether it be not convenient for you (...) to say, Depart from me, ye
evildoers, for I will (...) the Commandments of my God! unto those wild
Creatures, unto whom the Lord Jesus will one day say, Depart, ye cursed, into
everlasting Fire? O let not the Devil cause you now to be Familiar with the
Robbers and the Cutthroats of your Souls; and with hose of whom your Deathbed
Groans will be, Lord, gather not my soul with such unhappy sinners.

Secondly, Overcome the Devil when he tempts you to the youthful sin of
Uncleanness. It is a passage relating probably to the young men of Sodom, in
Job 36. 14. They die in youth, their life is among the unclean. The
Uncleanness into the Quagmires whereof young men too often plunge themselves,
to use the Apostles cleanly language, it is a shame to speak of them. It Is a
monstrous and a cursed wantonness, wherein young people too often indulge
themselves; and some things that are counted the parts of a gentile breeding do
but cast oil into the Hellish Flames of that wantonness: I mean particulars
promiscuous Dancings, against which the faithful Servants of God in all Ages
have born their very zealous Testimonies. The Apostles in Romans 13 13. and in I
Pet. 4. 3. condemn that which we translate Rioting and Revel^ing, and they join
it with Uncleanness; now the most accurate and renowned Critics in the Greek
Tongue, affirm Dancings to be intended by the word that is used there. Hence
Chrysos^om calls a Dance, a Diabolical practice; and says, The Devil is one of
the Company where it is (...). Austin made no stick to say, The miserable Dancer
Knows not, that as many paces as he makes in Dancing, so many steps be takes
to Hell. And the Ancients with one mouth call a Dance, a work of Satan, which
all Baptized persons are bound unto the R^nu^^iation of. Yea, whole Councils
and Synods in the primitive Times have bitterly stigmatized promiscuous
Dancings; and in later Ages the Waldenses declaimed against them as, The
processions of the Devil.

The Reformed Churches in France made this an Article of their Discipline,
Dancing is to be suppressed, and those who take the liberty to dance, after
they have been several times admonished, shall be Excommunicated. The Reformed
Churches of Holland have made it an Article of theirs, They that go to dances
shall be Reproved; and if after diverse Admonitions they persist, they are to be
Excluded from Communion. And whole Armies of Protestant and Judicious Divines
have spent their Arrows upon this Debauching Le^ity. Yea, a (...) Papist,
having the devotion of a Dnexelius has not stuck to say, A dance is a Ring,
whereof the Devil is the Center, and all his Angels the Circumference. Yea, a
civil Pagan, having the discretion of a Cicero has plainly said, It is only for
a Drunkard, or a Madman to be a Dancer. I desire young people to come away from
all promiscuous dancings, lest the same Devils which usually fetch away alive
one of the Crew in the Dances of our Indians, do as terrible a thing to your
Immortal souls. But herewithal,

Avoid all Uncleanness whatsoever; and particularly, beware of having light
thoughts about some sorts of Uncleanness wherein many young people have been so
infatuated as to excuse themselves. There are abominable self-pollutions which
many that would be loath to commit other kinds of Uncleanness, look upon as
little, venial, easy peccadillo's; albeit these are the Effeminacies, whereof
we are assured, in I Cor. 6. 9, 10. They that live in them, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. O study a spotless and gracious chastity; make not your
hearts the Ovens that have the impure Flames of Hell constantly flaming there;
if an unclean Devil would solicit you to any Filthiness, reply upon him as the
young Joseph did, How shall I do this mickedness, and sin against God? and with
the famous young Nicetas, even spit your very Tongues in the face of any that
shall urge you to throw your selves into the deep ditch, into which they fall
that are abhorred of the Lord.

Thirdly, Overcome the De`vil, when he tempts you to the youthful sin of
Drunkenness. It Is a sharp Irony in the Speech of the Wiseman to the young man,
Eccl. 11. 9. Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in
the days of thy youth. And the Devil persuades many a foolish young man, to
think or act, as if this were a liberty in good earnest allowed unto him. Alas,
how common is it for young persons to be at merry Bouts, and there to disguise
themselves by a sin so much worse than Beastly, that the very Bruits themselves
cannot be frequently or easily compelled into it! But I beseech all young
people to beware of this pernicious vice, from which I had almost said, None
returns to take hold on the path of life. The careful Father that heard his
young Son was given to Gaming and Whoring, and some such things, yet encouraged
himself with hopes that Age would Cure him: but when he heard he was become
addicted unto Drunkenness, with despair he cried out, Nay then, I have no hope
concerning him. Diligent Enquires have been able to find but one or two
Notorious Drunkards in an Age, made sober men; Drunkenness is Vitium maximo
adheventia; it is rare that any leave it off; see deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20, 21. The
devil gains and keeps a strange hold of men, by this Iniquity; and hence those
Barbarous Nations which have not our liquid ways of Intoxication, yet have
other modes of drunkenness; by which the devil retains his possession of them.
But O Remember the Reckoning that is to come at the last! Of Drunkenness we are
told in Prove. 23. 32. At the last, it bites, it stings; and indeed how should
it otherwise? for it breaks not one, but all of the Commandments; Ebrietas in
se culpas complectitur omnes. Hence, how many Drunkards have at the last roared
out, Alehouses are Hell-houses! Know it, that at the last, you shall for every
cup of pleasure here (as one expresses it) receive a gallon of Woe. Let all
young people take up a just prejudice against this youthful, but woeful vice;
and bear in mind that word of God in Isa 28. 1. Woe to Drunkards. Young men,
'twill bring a woe upon your Nanes; your Credit irreparably falls and breaks
every time you Reel with Drink. 'Twill bring a woe upon your Estates; they will be
quickly melted at the Tavern, and you must be left without both Friends to
assist you and Clothes to cover you. 'Twill bring a woe upon your Bodies;
Crudities and Obstructions that are the parents of all Diseases, are the hasty
offspring of this Excess. But above all, 'twill bring a woe upon your Spirits;
'twill befot the Reason with a foaming madness; 'twill inflame the Consotence
more than if you had swallo'd flaming Sulphur; 'twill plunge the Soul into
intolerable and interminable Miseries. It Is a thousand to one, but you may die
Drunk like Ammon and Elab at last, if you live so, and yet I can hardly say you
live, inasmuch as you are dead while you live. It Is a profane and lying Speech
sometimes used, That a drunken man gets no Harm; we often see such woeful
creatures drowned, which is indeed but a proper vengeance on them, for a
Drunken is an old English word for a drowned man. Yea, sometimes we see them
also horribly burned unto Death; scarce two weeks are past si^ce we saw two
such Tragical Accidents. However, the irreclaimable Drunkard cannot escape the
vengeance of eternal Fire, he must be Tormented for-ever in those Fires, from
whence his vain and sad cries will be continually going up, O for a drop of
w^er to cool^ry longue! We pity that King who of old lost a Kingdom for a cup
of drink; but the drunkard will do a more lamentable thing; he loses a Soul for
a cup of drink, a loss which the gain of the whole world would not compensate;
and he procures himself a ba^^shm^ht and an exclusion from the Kingdom of
Heaven for ever.

Fourthly, Overcome the devil, when he tempts you to the youthful sin of
Haughtiness. We read concerning a Novice, in I Tim. 3. 6. there is danger least
being lifted up with Pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Devil. Truly,
young people are but Novices; whatever good they have or do, they are but newly
come to it; it will be a wonder if the devil do not look them, as he did
Rehoboam into Ruin, by their Pride, unto which they are too naturally disposed
by their self-ignorance and their small experience. In many Obsessions we see
the devil (...) lymp^nizing the Bodies, which he has (...) into; he swells them
most unreasonably. But O let not the devil cause you to swell with any proud
Apprehensions of your selves; be not proud of your own Abilities, your own
Excellencies, your own performances; but let a most humble modesty accompany
your whole Behavior. The Devil will trip you into some grievous fall, when
once he has got you lifted up with pride. But, there is also a more childish
kind of pride, which the airy minds of young people, are too prone unto; and
that is, A pride in Apparel. There is a certain flant of Gayety and Vanity in
Attire, wherein young people do too often manifest their inward inclinations to
Extravagancies; and sometimes they go so far as to transgress the seventh
Commandment in it. We that are Protestants may blush to read what rebukes the
graven sort of Roman Catholics themselves have bestowed upon such
Exorbitancies. One of them has written a whole Book of Reprehensions to Naked
Breasts and Shoulders; and others of them have published whole Discourses,
Contre les vains Ornemens de^femmes, against the vain Ornaments of the Female
Sex. Young People, would you have Ornament's. The Apostle says in I Pet. 5. 5.
Be Adorned with Humility; Humility it self is represented there as the most
comely knot of Ribons in the world. Let your Garments not want any Decency, but
let your virtues be your chiefest Ornaments. [study I pet. 3. 3, 4, 5.] To use
the Expressions of a^ Ancient; I pray, ponder, whence you came; that will make
you blush; ponder, what you are; that will make you sigh; ponder, where you go;
tha^ will make you shake. Mortify your Pride with all humbling Thoughts; and be
able to say with young David, in Psalm. 131. 1. Lord, my Heart is not haughty;
nor mine eyes lofty.

Fifthly, Overcome the Devil, when he tempts you to the youthful sin of
Inconsiderateness. It is mentioned as the rashness of many a young man, in
Prove. 7. 23. He is as a Bird hastening to the snare, and he knows not that it is
for his life. How few young persons are there, that ever trouble themselves
about, wherefore's? and what if's? and the greatest consequences? For the most
part they put none of their concerns into Balances, and they come under that
reproof, My people do not consider.

But let young people now consider, that the God of Heaven is uttering over
them such a wish as that in Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that they were wise, that they
would consider their latter end? We read about a young Isaac, that it was his
manner, to walk in the Fields for Meditation. O that young persons were so
wise, as to Retire and Consider upon the circumstances of their Souls! Retire
and look upward; consider who made you, and what he has prepared for you, If
you seek Him. Retire, and look downward; consider the Everlasting Fire and the
Never-dying worm, which is reserved for the Torture of all impenitent
Unbelievers. Retire, and look backward; consider the sin in which you were
born, and the many Follies and Errors which you have lived in. Retire, and look
forward; consider the death, and the Judgment, and the Eternity, into which you
are hastening apace every day. Retire, and look inward; consider, whether you
have yet made your peace with God, and whether you are yet arrived unto a
blessed Union and Communion with the Lord Jesus Christ. Let every young person
become like that Ephraim, and that Prodigal, whom in the Bible we find
considerately bemoaning of themselves. If the Devil offer you at any time a
B^^t, presently consider whether some cruel Hook be not covered with it; and be
able to say like that young Saint, in Psalm. 119. 59. O Lord, I thought on my
ways, and I turned my feet unto thy Testimonies.

Sixthly, Overcome the Devil, when he tempts you to the youthful sin of
Apostasy. Of many young persons may that complaint be made, in Hos. 6. 4. your
Goodness is as the morning cloud, and as the early Dew it go^th away. It Is not
unusual for persons in their youth to have many Convictions on their minds;
they have some troubles, O what shall I do to be Saved? and they have some
wishes, O that I may die the death of the Righteous: But what comes of all? They
frequently vanish like the morning cloud, any the early Dew; (...) these people
never could be really young Saints, yet from being seemingly such, they become
old (...), as a wretched Proverb has expressed it; and this is from the
Seduction of that old Devil, who is himself the firsh and worst Apostate that
ever was. But, young men, if you have lest off any of your old sinful ways,
tremble to return like a D^^ to that vomit, like a Swine to that quagmire, any
more. Let not the foul Spirit which will cause you to leave off the thing that
is good, Renew his Interest in you; it will quickly render you seven times
worse than you were (...). Tremble at forsaking of those Devotions and
Societies whereat you have sometimes had your Hearts burning within you;
Tremble at Embracing any more those Abominable things, which you have
pretendedly given a bill of Divorce unto; such B^^ksladings will ^ndanger your
hearing that voice from Heaven, which thunderstruck the miserable Sp^^^ upon
his Apostasy, Hence! Hence! thou vile Apostate! and carry away the Sentence of
thy Eternal Damnation in thy Soul! Forget not that word of the Lord Jesus, in
Luc. 9. 62. No man having put has hand to the Plough, and looking back, is sit
for the Kingdom of Heaven. And forget not that word of the Lord Jesus, in Heb
10. 38. If any man draw back my Soul shall have no pleasure in him.

Lastly, Overcome the Devil, when he tempts you to the youthful sin of
Mispending precious time. We are told of some young men, in Job 32. 2. In whom
old age is perished, or, as it may be rendered, In whom time is perished. Little
do the most of young people know or weigh the worth of Time; it lies like a
dead Commodity on their hands, and because they have so much of it they
contrive that monstrous thing which they call, pastime, to get it off. But God
forbid, that you should any more allow your selves in such a transcendent
madness, as the ill husbandry of Time. O this invaluable Jewel! Time! this
Treasure, the Enjoyment whereof is of all things the most uncertain, this
Treasure, the Improvement whereof is of all things the most important; be no
more spendthrifts of it; but be always either doing or getting of some good
while you have time by the Forelock. Young people, you reckon upon a long time;
but you must reckon again. It has been said, The old man has death before
his-Face, but the young man has death behind his back; Death may be as near to
you, as to your Grandfather. Besides were you to live unto Gray-hairs, how
fast will one year after another slip away! no Post, no Ship, no Eagle, moves
with such velocity. Be assured, let the Devil tell you what he will, it wont be
long before your time will all be flown away; I may say as in I Cor. 7. 29. The
(...) is short. But when this time is gone there will be two dismal issues of
your mispending it. First, you must be accountable; it is a warning of Heaven
to every young man, Know thou, that God will for this bring thee into Judgment.
The great God will make that solemn demand, What have you done with the time
that I lent you? And then also, i^ will not be recoverable; what the Wiseman
says o^ Love, may be said of this, when once it is gone from us, If a man would
give all the substance of his House for it, it would utterly be contemned.
There though we cry never so bitterly, Lord, Lord, for a little of the time that
we have lost, no tears of (...) will fetch back one hour of it. Wherefore, that
much of your little Time, say of every day ^agazin^ used of a fair day, It Is
pity such a day should be lost; squander none of your life away in Diversions
wholly impertinent: prize your Time now, as you will when it is just expiring;
and follow the Divine Counsel in Ephesians. 5. 15. Walk not as Fools, but as Wise,
Redeeming of the Time.

These are some of the things In what you are to overcome the Wicked One. But,

Secondly, BY WHAT? And in general, the direction for us, is that of the
Apostle, in Ephesians. 6. 11. Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
stand against the wiles of the Devil. For a B^lt, let the truths of God, be
unto you as the girdle of your Loins; and unto the knowledge of divine Truths,
add Sincerity of Heart and Integrity of Life before the Lord. For a
Breast Plate, put on Righteousness; preserve the vitals of your inner-man
harmless by a thorough work of Sanctification, and a Conscience void of offense
toward God and Man. For a pair of Shoes, go to the Gospel, which declares and
settles a peace between God and us; that the Counsels and Comforts thereof, may
prepare us for all our Trials! For a shield, hold up your Faith against the
venomous darts of Hell that may be hurled at you; let that put you under the
conduct of the Lord Jesus, and be to you the Evidence of things not seen. For
an ^^delmet, get a lively Hope that you shall be saved or ever; and hereby let
your Heads be guarded aall^t all hard thoughts of God: and of his Grace:

This is a defensive Armor against the Devil, which better befits every young
person, than that of Saul did the young David of old. But there is one
offensive weapon, with which we are to manage our Combat against the Devil;
and there are two Stratagems to be annexed thereunto.

In short, there are two particular Directions, for our Encounters with the
Wicked One; and the quoting of two Texts may lay them sufficiently before us.

The first proper Direction for us, is that in Ephesians. 6. 17. Take the Sword of
the Spirit, which is the word of God. Compare our Context, I Joh. 2. 14. If
young men would overcome the wicked one, they must have the word of God abiding
in them.

The Bible is a spiritual sword shaped and formed by the Inspirations of the
Eternal Spirit; and for a Conflict with the Infernal Spirit, it is a sword
whereof I may say as David of Goliah's, There is none like it. When the
blackest and fiercest of all the devils made an Onset upon our blessed Savior,
and this with all the three Batteries which he once fatally overthrew the first
Adam withal, how did our Lord overcome the wicked one? It was by replying upon
him, It is written, and by holding up against him the Scripture of God. It is
remarkable that all the swords or words used by our Lord for the overcoming of
the devil were fetched from that one Book of Deuteronomy; but how rich a
Magazine may the whole Bible then be unto us?

Let all young people then study the Word of God; we read in Psalm 119. 9. Of a
young man thus cleansing of his way. There was once a young Gentlewoman, that
before she was Nine years old could say, all the New Testament by Heart. O that
all young persons would every day seriously and pensively Read the Bible, till
their Hearts were become, as Jerome called his Friends, The Libraries of the
Lord Jesus Christ, Young people, see that you become ready at Scripture; and
learn to Fence with a sentence of Scripture against all the passes that the
devil is making at you. All the Commandments, all the Promises, all the
Threatenings of the Bible, will be like so many swords all-edge, for your
service against the wicked one. Let the devil see, that you bear in mind what
is written in Eccl. 11. 9, in Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. and other such awful places.
These Writtens will be more terrible to the Devil, than the Handwriting on the
wall, was to the Babylonian Emperor; such is his Antipathy to them, that if
you thus Resist the Devil, he will flee from you.

The second proper Direction for us, is in Mat. 26. 41. Watch and Pray, that ye
enter not into temptation.

When the Devil is busy with us, it is by these two Duties that we may overcome
him and his Temptations.

First, Be watchful. Or, in Solomon's Dialect, Be fearful. Here, quite contrary
to what is in other Warfares, The best Soldier is he that fears always ways.
Be always on your guard; and continually suspect that the wicked one has an ill
design upon you. Be so watchful, as to keep an Eye upon the Season which the
devil may be most likely to make an Hour of temptation. Is it with you a time
of Security? Are you grown formal, flighty, weary in Religion? Are your Graces
in a slumber? Then wake presently; if you ben't now very watchful, the Devil
will serve you, as the Watchmen did the sleepy Soul, in Cant. 5. 7. Smite you,
wound you. Or, are you very confident of your selves? are you ready to say, I
shall never be moved? Then also wake presently; for if you be not now watchful,
the devil will break your bones, as much as he did presumptuous Peter's, when
our Lord said unto him, in Luc. 22. 31. Satan has desired to have you. Or, Is
it with you a time of prosperity? Are you Outwardly under the smiles of God? Do
Riches and Honors come in upon you? Be sure the Devil will now have a blow at
you, if you be not very watchful: this was wise Agurs apprehension. For this
cause it is said in Prove. 1. 32. The prosperity of Fools shall destroy them; it
furnishes the Devil with opportunities. When we have an high Sail, he will try
to overset us. Or, are you Inwardly happy in the Light of Gods Countenance?
Have you newly been sealed with Assurances of his Favor? Be sure you shall now
also find that the Devil will not let you alone. When Paul had been in
Raptures, we find in 2 Cor. 12. 7. he is not long free from the Buffetings of
the Devil. If we have been in the Mount with God, it is well if you been't
quickly pushed upon breaking both Tables of the Law. And yet also persuade your
selves that in a time of Adversity too, you shall not be free from Temptation: He
that fell upon our Lord, when he was hungry, will fall upon us when we are
troubled. You had now need beware lest you either despise the chastening of the
Lord, or faint, when rebuked of Him; for you will be shrowdly tempted unto both
of these.

Be so watchful as likewise to mind the Subject which the devil visits with his
Temptations. It Is the Heart, that the devil falls upon; wherefore, as the wise
man says in Prove. 4. 25. Keep they heart with all diligence. Be vigilant about
the tempers and postures of your own hearts, take notice of the Bi^ss which is
upon them. Know what part you are most vulnerable in; and be not like those to
whom our Savior said, Ye know not what spirit you are of. That part of your
disposition, which like a Dlilah, is most likely to betray you into the hands
of the hellish Philistines, be most exact in your observations of; and let not
the devil therein circumvent you, and entangle you.

Finally, Be watchful as to keep always alive within you; a sense of the Love
of God in Christ. That is the peace of which we are told in Phil. 4. 7. It
shall keep our hearts; it is a military word, To keep as in Garrison. O get a
relish of the divine Love in the Mission and Passion of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and in our admission to the saving benefits thereof; this will be a sort of a
garrison for our Souls, and free us very much from the disturbance of our
Temptations; it will not be easy for the devil now to disturb the serenity and
satisfaction, and holy inclinations of our minds. If we begin at any time
therefore to lose the lively sense of this Love, be so watchful as immediately
to recover it; and so, though the Archers of Hell may sorely grieve us, yet like
young Joseph, we may have our Bow abide in strength.

Secondly, Be prayerful; and like Paul, beseech the Lord thrice. He that would
be little in Temptation, let him be much in Supplication. When the devil is
galling of you, do like those Warriors in (...) Chron. 5. 20. Cry to God in
the Battle. Keep continually praying unto God, that he would gird you with
strength unto your Battles, and subdue, under you the Devils that rise up
against you. The Trumpet^^ of Gideon did not more fright the Midianites, than
your prayers will the Devils that are vexing you. The woeful day wherein the
Devil gave poor Origin such a bloody overthrow, was a day wherein ^is prayers
had not been carefully enough attended. The best posture to fight the Devil in,
is upon our knees. There was a woman once in this Land, very strangely
possessed with diverse devils who would audibly speak within her, while her self
knew nothing of it; these Devils very audibly spoke of diverse ^ischiess they
would inflict upon her, but (...) they made this answer to one another. Ah!
(...) runs to the Rock, she runs to the Rock! and they could not here her
there. Why, see to it, that by your daily prayers you Run to the Rock; a Dove
in the clefts of that Rock, will be defended against all the Vultures of Hell
that would seize upon it. But unto Prayer, join a true Faith in the Blood of
Christ; look upon that as the meritorious and also as the exemplary cause of
all your Successes against the Devil. A filly Papist, will sign himself with a
Cross, that the devil may have no power over him. Behold, the right way of
signing our selves with the Cross. Encourage our selves from the view of the
Lord Jesus hanging there.

And let this be accompanied with a strong Faith in the Grace of Christ. Let
that be the Fountain from whence we derive all our strength against the devil.
A good woman troubled by a devil, said unto him, Satan, don't meddle with a
poor silly woman; but if thou have any thing to say, speak it unto my Advocate,
the blessed Jesus, and see whether he cannot answer thee. O let us beg the Lord
Jesus to give us a little of that Grace, by which he did himself once heat the
devil here; and let us hope in Him us in that Redeemer, Who knows how to
succor the Tempted.

The Dedication of, The little Child's Lesson.
To the CHILDREN Dwelling in the North-part of BOSTON.
VEry terrible and sorrowful are the Presages which many Learned, Holy,
Thinking Men have had about the State which they have suspected New England as
running apace into. One of our Seers has long since in public writings told
us, The Gospel, I fear, is going, the Lord Jesus is departing from these
Coasts. Another of our Watchmen foretold it a great while ago unto us, That God
would punish the wantonness of this people, with a sad loss, and want, of Able
Men. And a third of our Shepherds, did not stick to tell us many years ago, I
am verily afraid such a dismal night is toward us and such sore Afflictions,
that the Lord will fill the hearts of all that shall be saved in those days
with such Anguish of Spirit, as never more in the worst days of our
Eore-fathers. These and many more such as these, have been the dark thoughts
which our Fathers have had concerning our condition; and our Hearts are
wonderfully hard, if we tremble not at the late and large steps of Providence
toward the fulfillment of such Predictions upon us. But among all the deadly
Symptoms which threaten us with a speedy Ruin, there is none more ghastly,
than the ignorance, the wildness, the lewdness found in so great a part of the
Rising Generation. Multitudes of our Children are very much Un-Catechised, as
to the principles, and sadly Unnurtured and Ungoverned as to the practices of
Christianity. Our Children are miserably both neglected and indulged; though too
much be made of them, in gratifying of their unruly wills, nevertheless too
little is made of them in providing for their immortal souls; and, some of you
have no^ the Knowledge of God; I speak this to the shame of your ungodly
Tutors. It was the last and worst of all the Egyptian plagues, That a Child was
dead in every house. But may it not now be reckoned among the New-English Ones,
that in so many Houses all the Children are dead in trespasses and sins, and
have their Eyes closed and muffled by a most unhappy Ignorance. It Is This that
of all our dismal Omens looks blackest upon us; and it should awaken the
vigorous endeavor of every sensible Christian to prevent that woeful Degeneracy
in which There will arise another Generation that know not the Lord; and by
which the God of our Fathers will be so provoked at us as to say with the
expense of all his Arrows upon us; What shall I do unto thee? What shall I do
unto thee?

Here was the consideration that produced the little Discourse, which I now put
into the hands of Children, and especially of those Children which are the
Lambs; that I have received a special charge from the Lord Jesus Christ about
the Feeding of. Our Savior, in a certain place; has intimated, That His
little Children have the Angels of Heaven marvelously concerned about them; be
sure those Mintsters forget the denomination of Angels put upon us in the
Oracles of God, that have not their very hearts within them working and yerning
toward the Little Children that are under the watch of their Ministry. For my
own part, I must be impatient until I see the little children here so well
instructed, that a Papist; or which is much what one, a Quaker, shall be as
unable to seduce them, as the Jesuits were to corrupt the well educated
Children^ of the Waldenses when they were sent among them; and until I see also
the Little Children here as forward in all Piety, as the Wellinformed Children
of the Ancient Jews were in the Law of Moses, the six hundred and thirteen
Precepts whereof they had by heart before they were thirteen years of Age.

My dear Children, when Pharaoh could not hinder the people of God from going
to serve the Lord in the Wilderness, he still objected against their therein
having the company of, their little Ones; this is the desire, this the design
which the Devil, is here with great fury managing; that so he may have his long
enjoyed America, all return into his bloody hands. But you have now before you,
some of our cares to engage our Little Ones with us, in the Service of our God;
O that the Little Ones among us, might become greatly solicitous, to know the
God of our Fathers, and serve Him with a perfect hearts, and a willing mind. It
raised surely some Agony in the mind of David, when there befell him the
disaster, whereof he afterward gave that Report, Thy Servant kept his Fathers
Sheep, and there came a Lion and took a Lamb out of the Flock. In like manner,
when I understand that any of you are ignorant, or naughty and vicious
Children, methinks I see the horrid Lions of Hell, fetching some of my poor
Lambs away, and how shall I answer it, if I do not go out after them! The
following pages are some of my Essays to pluck you out of your Eternal
Perdition; and I hope you will read them seriously, frequently, very
profitably. I have personally with more private Addresses, notwithstanding the
toil of my public Employments, treated with many scores of you; I have seen the
tears, and heard the vows, with which many of you have declared, That you would
be the Servants of God as long as you live; and I shall be a witness against
you, if after this you be of them who draw back. But I do now before all the
world, renew my Applications to you for your early Repentance and Obedience.
Hence as I have studied in a Sermon to touch your Affections, I have labored
also to help your Understandings, by a Scriptural Catechism, annexed thereunto;
and though I am far from not encouraging any of you to prize and learn those,
excellent Catechisms which are now commonly used among us; yet I was willing to
offer you one more, because it pretends to these few little Singularities.

First, The Answers are all of them, the express words of sacred Scripture;
which have in them a force beyond the purest words of any Writing else. And now
also, you are at once taught with case not only to Assert, but also to Confirm
all the Doctrines of the Christian Religion. Besides, the Answers are for the
most part short, and not seldom explained in the Questions, to which they do
belong; and as for the younger of you, I have distinguished a few of them by
little Stars, that you may single out them, to begin the charging of your
infant-Memories therewithal. More over, there is in so brief a sheet as this,
perhaps a fuller Collection of Divine Subjects for you to be acquainted withal,
than I have yet seen in so small a Room; and whoever lives to Preach upon each
of the Texts quoted here, may, therein go over, An entire body of Theology. I
now leave you in the Arms of the Lord Jesus, The great Shepherd of the Sheep,
that he may seed you, and lead you to the Fountains of Living, Water
for-evermore. Amen; My dearest Children; and I pray, do you also say, Amen!
Amen!

Cotton Mather.

THE LITTLE CHILD'S LESSON.
I John II. XIII. I write unto you, Little Children, because ye have known the
Father.
BEhold the Aged, Beloved, Inspired Apostle John, applying himself to
Christians of all Ages; wherein, as it has been observed long since, Dat ^uique
or (...) qua ^psi conveniant, he speaks things marvellously convenient and
agreeable to them all. The last Subjects of the Apostolical Address, are the
least that can be written unto; namely, Little Children; for even among such,
there may sometimes be found the true knowledge of God. Our holy John thought
himself concerned in the Charge, which ^e had overheard the Lord giving unto
(...) a little before he left the world, Feed my Lambs (...) and accordingly he
does here take a most paternal and pathetick notice of the Lambs, in the Flock
of the Lord Jesus; indeed the Greek word in our Text, rendered Little Children,
carries Feeding In the Notation of it. We have before us the Attainment of
devout and pious Children, in the School of the Lord Jesus Christ; it is, They
have known the Father; by which Father, is meant the God of Heaven. Little
Children scarce know any man or thing so soon as they know their Father; nor
are they so fond of any man or thing as they are of their Father. Now it is the
prerogative of some little Children to know the great God, as their Father;
yea, to love Him, and serve Him as their Father too, which is implied in the
knowing of Him. This therefore is the Doctrine to be remembered by you little
Children, that are now before the Lord.

DOCTRINE.
It is the particular privilege of gracious Little CHILDREN, to Know the
Almighty God, as an Heavenly Father to them.

Lo^ the Ensuing Propositions give Right Thoughts about this matter to us.

Propositin I.
The God of Heaven is a Father to gracious our little Children. Religious
Children when they are sitting perhaps upon the knee of an Earthly Father, may
remember that there is another Father, whom they belong unto; namely, A Father
which is in Heaven.

But in what Respects may gracious little Children call God, Their Father.

First, Gracious little Children may look upon God as their Father, in respect
of Creation; for indeed all Creatures thus have Him, for their Father. It Is
intimated in Job 38. 28. He is the Father of the Rain, and of the Dew. But he
is especially thus a Father unto all Spirits; it is said, in Heb. 12. 9. He is
the Father of Spirits; and thus the Angels, are styled, The Sons of God. Hence
man also, every man may say unto God, our Father; we all owe unto God, our
Production and Original; and, as the Apostle Paul speaks in the words of the
Greek Poet, Aratus; in Acts 17. 18. We are his Offspring. Thus, little Children
should betimes be sensible of this, I am newly come out of the hands of the
great God; it is God that made me, and shaped me, and bestowed my life and my
Being on me.

Secondly, Gracious little Children may look upon God as their Father, in
respect of Susception; He undertaketh for them. God owns a Paternity unto
gracious little Children, by undertaking of their Patronage. Indeed, there is a
contract and a consent of them concerning it (...) they desire of God, that he
would Undertake the Office of a Father for them; and they say to him, as in
Isa. 63. 17. Doubtless, thou art our Father. They see that their natural
Fathers cannot Relieve all their wants, and Remove all their woes, and prevent
all their fears; and hence the glorious God, upon an humble Request of theirs,
becomes concerned as a Father for them. It Is (...) especially, when they have
no other fathers to look after them; it is said of God, in Psalm. 69. ^. He is a
father of the fatherless. When gracious little Children are left as Orphans in
a wide and a wild world, they may assure themselves, My best father is yet
alive; tho my father do for sake me, yet the Lord will take me up.

Thirdly, Gracious little Children may look upon God as their Father, in
respect of Adoption. God in his free grace, accounts them his Children, through
the Sonship of the Lord Jesus Christ; and thus, as it is said in Joh. 1. 11.
They have power to be called the Sons of God. Gracious little Children are
united unto Him that is the Savior of the World. As young as they are, the
Almighty Lord of Lords, and King of Kings counts them old enough to be married
unto Himself. In the Ancient, Eternal, Well-ordered Covenant of Redemption, the
Lord Jesus Christ was made a public person, representing of all his chosen
Ones; he was thus constituted by an Eternal Agreement between God and Him; and
gracious little Children say their Amen, to that Agreement; those little (...)
put themselves under the wing of the Lord Jesus Christ, and cry unto him, O be
our Surety for good. Now Christ and they are one; the Reckoning of God from all
Eternity, and the Spirit of God in fullness of Time, has made them so; and thus
these little Children become the Children of the great God. For the Name of God
is, The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; the Word of God is, He shall, cry unto
me, Thou art my Father. It now follows, that all gracious little Children
arrive unto that Advancement, in Rom.8.16.1^, Children of God, and joint Heirs
with Christ. Now they have a New Name upon them, and the Lord Jesus now speaks
unto them in such Heartbreaking terms as those, My Father is your Father, and
my God is your God.

Fourthly, Gracious little Children may look upon God as their Father, in
respect of Regeneration. It Is the pre-eminence of all Converted persons; that
they are Born again by the Word of God. But who is their Father? We are told in
John 1. 13. They that believe, are born of God; and there are some little
Children to be found among true Believers. These are not by generation the
Children of God; for thus God is a Father only to the Lord Jesus Christ. But
they are by Regeneration so. The Almighty God says to the Lord Jesus Christ as
Jacob to Joseph of old, Thy Sons shall be mine. But as for little Children that
are brought home to God, by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost, these are the
Children of the Lord Jesus Christ; they are called in Isa. 53. 10. The Seed of
that Lord they are born of him, and born twice perhaps within one seven years.

Proposition II.
Gracious little Children endeavor to Know God, as thus an Heavenly Father to
them.

But what is implied in this Knowledge?

First, Gracious little Children would not be without the saving and sincere
Knowledge of God. They know the truth of that in Joh. 17 3. This is Life
Eternal, to know the only true God; they know the truth of that in Prove. 19. 2.
For the Soul to be without knowledge, it is not good. And this awakens them to
seek the Knowledge of God, with such cares and cries as the Wise man in the
Proverbs advised his Children unto. Gracious little Children complain of
themselves, as he did of old, in Prove. 30. 3. I have not the knowledge of the
Holy; and so they become willing to learn; they are willing to learn what God
is, what His Three Persons. and what His Infinite Perfections are; they are
willing to learn what He does in the World, as Creating and Preserving of all
things; and as Redeeming his Elect; they are willing to learn what He says in
the Word, what Mysteries, what Histories, what Commandments, what Promises, and
Threatenings He has therein set before us. They think that without some
Knowledge of these things they must grind like ^^mpson with his Eyes put out by
Hellish Philistines; and they tremble at such a Doom as that, in Isa. 27. 11.
It is a people of no Understanding; wherefore he that made them, will not have
mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no Favor. There is no
need of whipping them to their Catechisms; to be learning of them, is as
Pleasant and welcome an Exercise unto these Children, as any that they can be
put upon.

Secondly, Gracious little Children would not be without an assured Knowledge,
that in the furthest and the sweetest sense, God is indeed a Father to them;
they would have an Assurance of their being Adopted and Regenerated by the
Lord. They look upon God, as the best Father in the World; and as the son of
Jesse sometimes could say, in I Sam. 18. 23. Seems it unto you a light thing
to be a Kings Son-in-law? So it is not a light thing in the Opinion of these, to
become the Children of that God, who is a great King, and whose Name is
Dreadful. Gracious little Children are sensible, that they have been the
children of wrath, and the Children of Hell, and that while they were in their
sins they have had the Devil for their father; but when they read the eighth
Chapter to the Romans, they count it a thing of inexpressible importance for
them, to get into the liberty of the Sons of God. It affects them to see how
the children of men are divided, in 1 John 3. 10. Either the children of God,
or the children of the Devil; and they can by no means bear to continue the
children of so black a father as the Devil is. Hence they do most heartily,
readily, cheerfully close with the motions which the Son of God makes unto
them; and as it is said in Gal 3. 26. Ye are all the children of God, by faith
in Jesus Christ; so, these Children do by faith accept of the Lord Jesus Christ
as offered unto them in the Gospel; it is the language of their Souls, Blessed
Lord Jesus, be thou mine, and let me be Thine; (...) thou bestow Righteousness,
and grace, and life upon me; and let me be for Thee and not for another.

Thirdly, Gracious little Children study to pay unto God the Acknowledgements
which are due unto a Father, yea, unto an Heavenly Father. The Carriage of
Children to a father is imitated in their Deportment before the Lord. And,

First, They place on God, the Affection which is due unto a father. A father,
is a Name all made up of love. As the fatherly love of God unto gracious little
Children is very mavelous; for thus it is said in 1 John 3. 1. Behold, what
manner of love, the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the
Sons of God! So the Filial Love of these Children unto God, is likewise,
Behold, what manner of love! They love none so much as God, but though they love
their fathers more than all Creatures, yet they love their God with greater
outgoings of their little Souls.

Secondly, They pay to God, the Reverence which is due unto a father. They dare
not therefore (...) rude, saw^y, impudent, in the special presence of the Lord;
nor Talk, nor Sport, nor Sleep, when they should be worshipping of Him. It Is
the voice of God in Mal. 1. 6. A son honors his father; if then I be a
Father, where is my Honor? Gracious little Children give unto their God the
Honor of a father; if they speak of God, it is in a most humble, serious,
awful strain, they will not say, O God, or, O Lord, or say, God bless me, and,
Lord bless me, with a frothy, carnal, heedless interjection; if they speak to
God, it is with an exceeding veneration: while they are at prayer, they compose
themselves unto a very diligent Attention and Intention of Soul; once more, if
they hear from God, they set themselves as in the sight of him, who is greatly
to be feared and had in Reverence; while they are in the Assemblies where the
Word of God is Preached unto them, they would not use the least wildeness for a
thousand worlds.

Thirdly, They yield to God the submission which is due unto a father. They
will by no means dispute the will of God, but render a most full, profound,
absolute Obedience thereunto. Our Lord Jesus could say unto God, as in Luc. 22.
42. Father, not my will, but thine be done; and gracious little Children will
herein say after that Holy Child Jesus. As for the will of God in his Precept,
they are very ready to do it; they say, Lord, what would thou have me to do;
and they do whatsoever they understand he does bid; they would fain do, The
thing that good (...) and what the Lord has required of them. As for the will
of God in his Providence, they are very ready to bear it; they say The will of
the Lord be done! and they bear what strokes, what pains, what sorrows, his Rod
may lash them with; so they are subject unto the father of Spirits, and live.

Fourthly, They have a Dependence on God as Children on a Father. Gracious
Children are praying Children, they will not easily let a day pass them without
praying to God, and they go unto God as unto a father in their prayers. There
was a very little Child whose prayers were so frequent and so fervent, that a
Neighbor which discovered them cried out, The prayers of that Child will sink
me to the bottom of Hell. Gracious little Children will pray at such a rate as
to condemn the prayer l^ss lives of all the Neighborhood.

But how is that? briefly,

Gracious little Children, will use to pray with Boldness. As a Child will go
boldly to his Father upon all occasions; thus will these Children be ever now
and then coming to God, and as the Apostle speaks in Heb. 4. 16. Come boldly to
the Throne of Grace. When they see the infinite Majesty and Purity of God, they
do with much fear approach unto Him; but when they see, that God is their
father, this does again encourage them. They been't loath to go tell this father
of theirs, what they all, in all of their Distresses; no, they go to God; and
cry, Abba, father! and in all things make known Requests unto God.

Again, gracious little Children, will use to pray with Comfort. These Children
are comfortably persuaded of success in their Cries to God, as Children in
theirs unto a Father; and they argue at that rate, in Mat. 7. 11. If ye, being
Evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your
Father which is in Heaven. As L uther would say, That word, my Father, used by
a praying Saint, all the Rhetoric and Eloquence in the world could never equal
it. Thus, these, when they say unto God, my father, they promise themselves
that no good thing shall be denied unto them. Since God is their Father, they
expect that their Father will Pity them, that their Father will counsel them,
that their Father will supply them; and make them happy for-ever.

Fifthly, They have a Resemblance of God, (...) Children of a Father: gracious
Children (...) like their father; and are as the Apostolical expression has it,
in Ephesians. 5. 1. followers of God as dear Children. Yea, they are not (...)
Pictures, which may have something of the (...) and feature in them, but they
are Children that will talk and walk just like their ^^ther. Thus our Lord says
in Luc. 6. 35. (...) and do ^like to God, and you shall be the children of the
Highest. In short, what is grievous to God is grievous also to gracious little
Children, that, have his Image on them. These Children are grieved at their own
sins, because God is grieved at them. When Casar saw an intimate (...) of his,
among the Murderers, that were assaulting of him, he most bitterly cried out,
What, my Child among them! Thus a Child whose heart God has touched, thinks
with himself, If such an one as I sin, it will be as if a Child should go to
stab his Father; and so it stabs him at the heart indeed, when he sees how many
sins he has Offended the great God withal. These Children are also grieved at
the sins of others, because God is grieved at them. It is related of Croesus,
that he had a dumb Son; which Son seeing a Soldier about killing of his
Father, he was in such an Agony, that though he never spoke before, yet now he
spoke, and shrieked, O don't you kill my father! Thus, if a Child belonging to
God, see any body profane and wicked, it is as if he saw one (...) at his
Father; he is in a just passion at it, and (...), O don't serve my Eternal
father so! If any (...) of his play-mates, or school-mates, go (...) do any
naughty thing, he will zealously (...) them for it. In a word, These gracious
Children, are loath to do any thing that may (...) displeasing to such a Father
as the blessed God. If such a Child be tempted unto Sabbath-breaking he thinks,
What shall I dishonor my father so as to take the Devil for my play^^ (...)!
If he be tempted unto Cursing, Swearing, Lying, or the calling of wicked Names,
he (...), No, my Heavenly Father does cast Children into those flames where
they shall not have a (...) of water to cool their Tongues, for such crimes as
these! He abhors all that is contrary to the thrice-Holy-God.

Proposition III.
It is the peculiar privilege of gracious little Children thus to know the
Almighty God.

These three things are to be affirmed.

First, There are some little Children, that have and own, God, for their
Father. Such a Child might S amuel be; of whom we find in I Sam. 3. 1. that
while he was a Child, he Ministered unto the Lord; he kept waiting on God, and
serving of God, in his House continually; and had a most intimate Communion
with him there. Such a Child might also David be; who was able to say in Psalm.
22. 9. Thou did make me Hope when I was upon my Mothers Breasts; thou art my
God from (...) Mothers Belly; he speaks, as if before he had (...) weaned,
there had been some hope and some fau^^ on God, beginning to dawn in his little
Soul. And such a Child seems Timothy to have been (...) unto whom 'twas said in
2 Timothy 3. 15. From (...) Child thou have known the Scriptures; he was in (...)
very Infancy acquainted with the mind of the great God. The Father of Origin
took him to be such a Child, when he would kiss the breast of the lovely youth
while he lay asleep, as a young Temple to the Eternal Spirit of God. Some
little Children have been so devoted unto God, as to prove the most Eminent
Witnesses and Confessors for him; the bloody Papists butchered four hundred
such precious Infants at once among the Waldenses long ago. When the Noble
Ro^^anus was Martyred, in one of the Primitive Perscutions, a little Child but
seven years old, bravely suffered with him, for asserting the Christian
Religion, which (said the child, unto his furious Persecutors) I learnt of my
christian Mother, with whose Milk I sucked it in. Yea, many children then
accompanied their courageous Parents, in receiving the Crown of Martyrdom. And
certainly, those were very well disposed little children, who in the horrible
Marian Days, came about the Martyr Lawrence; as he was dying in the flames,
and ^ry'd out, Lord, strengthen thy servant and keep thy promise! Lord,
strengthen thy servant, and keep thy Promise.

Moreover, some worthy men, have made Collections, of Histories, concerning
little children, that have given wonderful Instances of an Early Piety before
they left the world. The Excellent Janeway, has done excellently well this way,
in his Tokens for Children, which little Books, I most affectionately Recommend
unto the perusal of (...) you all. He tells of one child admirably wrought
(...) upon by the grace of God, when between two (...) and three years old. He
writes of a Boy remarkable for Devotions, which died at the age of twelve
years, and being, in his lingering sickness, ^old of a fair Estate which he
might live to enjoy, bravely answered, I had rather have the Kingdom of Heaven,
than a thousand such Inheritances! I desire to die, that I may go to that.He
writes of another, which having walked with God from the fourth to the twelfth
year of his Age, then died, professing, This is a most wicked world, it is
indeed good to live with my Parents, but it is better to love in Heaven. He
writes of a Girl also remarkable for Devotions, which being converted unto God,
when eight or nine years old, not long after died in the midst of incredible.
Raptures, wherein she cried out, Oh! If you knew what Christ were! Oh! If you
had but one taste of his infinite sweetness, you would a thousand times rather
go to Him, than stay in this wicked world^^ I would not for ten thousand and
ten thousand worlds part with my Interest in him; or go back from the
everlasting Joys which I am now near unto. He writes of another brought home to
God, when between four or five years old; which would sometimes be thinking, O
(...) (...) they doing, that are already in Heaven! and being (...) last
smitten with the marks of the Plague (...) out upon her, she cried out, Behold,
God (...) marked me, for one of his own; the Lord has (...) told me, that I am
one of his dear Children (...) several other such Examples, have been Recorded;
not only by that man of God, but also by Mr. White, Mr. Ness, Mr. Bidbank, and
sundry other such holy Men.

Yea, and the place where our selves do live, has not been without such
Examples; and those; of both Sexes. Unto such as have been already Published,
it were easy to add many more.

To Male-children, I might particularly mention one who at the age of twelve
years, among other expressions of an unusual seriousness and gravity, wrote
from his Lodging at Cambridge to his Father in Dorchester, -- These very
syllables.

'Tho I am thus well in my Body, yet I question whether my Soul do prosper as
my Body does; for I perceive yet to this very day, little growth in grace; and
this makes me question, whether grace be in mine heart, or no. I feel also
daily great unwillingness to good Duties, and the great ruling of Sin in my
heart; and that God is angry with me, and gives me no Answer to my prayers, but
many times he even throws them down as dust in my face; and he does not grant
my c^ntinual Requests, for the spiritual blessing of the s^s^ning of my hard
heart. And in all this, I could yet take some Comfort; but that it makes me to
wonder, what God's secret Decree concerning me, may be. For I doubt whether God
is ever wont to deny grace and mercy to his chosen, (though uncalled) when they
feek unto him by prayer for it; and therefore seeing he does thus deny it to
me, I think that the reason of it is most like to be, because I belong not to
the Election of Grace. I desire you, that you would let me have your prayers,
as I doubt not but I have them; and rest.

your Son, Samuel Mather.


This was he, whom twenty years afterward, all Ireland had a Blessing in;
contradicting that Needless Proverb, soon ripe, soon rotten.

To Female Children, I might mention, Ann Greenough, the Daughter of Mr.
William Greenough Deceased; who left the world, when she was but about five
years old, and yet gave astonishing Discoveries of a Regard unto God and Christ
and her own Soul, before she went away: When she heard any thing about the Lord
Jesus Christ, she would be strangely transported and ravished in her Spirit at
it; and had an unspeakable Delight in Catechizing. She would put strange
Questions about eternal things, and make Answers her self that were extremely
pertinent. Once particularlarly she asked, Are not we dead in Sin? and
presently added, But I will take this way, the Lord Jesus Christ shall make me
alive. She was very frequent and constant in secret prayer, and could not with
any patience be interrupted in it. She told her gracious Mother, That she there
prayed for her! and was covetous of being with her Mother, when she imagined
such Duties to be going forward. When she fell sick at last of a Consumption,
she would not by any sports be diverted from the Thoughts of Death, wherein she
took such pleasure that she did not care to hear of any thing else. And if she
were asked, whether she were willing to die? she would still cheerfully Reply,
Ay, by all means, that I may go to the Lord Jesus Christ.

Indeed-sundry such little Children, have there been among us; but now, as he
that heard a story of two faithful Friends, presently said, I would I were a
third with them! So, I hope every one of the little Children that have seen
these Examples, will say, O that I may be a third! O that I might be like one
of these happy Children! But,

Secondly, There are few little Children, that have and own God for their
Father. Indeed, those few little Children, that are descended of Believing
Pareuts, have the same God that their Parents have chosen both for themselves
and theirs, until they are old enough to revoke or to renew the choice; the
Children are included in what their Parents do, and have, until they can stand
upon their own Legs; and at what age that is, our God has not, that I remember,
expressly spoken; which ought therefore to hasten the cares of little Children,
about their own Salvation. Hence we read concerning the children of Believers
in I. Cor. 7. 14. They are holy; God accepts them, and regards them, as
consecrated unto himself. But of those little Children that are come to a
Capacity of acting deliberately and rationally about Eternal Matters, how few
are there that carefully say, Let God be a father to me! We may with a special
Reference to little Children speak in such terms as those, in Psalm. 14. 2,3.
The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children of men, to see of there were
any that did understand and seek God; they are all gone aside, they are
all-together become filthy; there is none that does good, no, not one. Even so,
it is a rare thing, an hard thing, among little Children, to find so much as one
that has an awful Respect unto all the Commandments of God. About the
generality of little Children, it may be complained as in Jer. 4. 22. they are
sottish Children, and they have no understanding, they are wise to do evil, but
to do good they have no knowledge^ or it may be complained as in Isa. 1. 4. A
seed of evil Doers, children that are corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord.
I confess, there is (...) and then a Child which has the Seeds of grace ^odged
in its Infant Soul, and less or more sprouting forth* according to various
Temptations; but, how few do ever thoroughly turn to God until their Childhood
be all expired!

Thirdly, Very glorious is the privilege of those Little Children, that have
and own God, for their Father. It Is a glorious privilege to be Interested in
the fatherly Regards of the great God; but so these gracious little Children
are.

It Is their privilege, that God has the Love of a Father for them. As 'twas
said of a dutiful and a towardly Child, in Genesis 44. 20. His father loved him;
unspeakably and infinitely more loving is the love of God unto all gracious
little Children. A father loves his Children more than all his Riches in the
world^ and so does God love these Children more than the whole world besides;
unto such a Child, the great God says with a peculiar Emphasis as in Isa. 43.
4. I have loved thee!

It Is their privilege, that God has likewise the pity of a Father for them.
When a Child is in sickness, or distress, the heart of a father even yearns
toward it. But the heart of God moves with a more compassionate pity toward
gracious little Children in all their Troubles; thus it is said in Psalm. 103.
12. As a Father pities his Children, (...) the Lord pities them that fear him.
He feels (...) sorrows with a most parental Sympathy; and if at any time he
Chastise them with necessary Afflictions, he says upon it, My Bowels are
troubled for them, I will surely have mercy upon them.

It Is moreover their privilege that God has the pardon of a Father for them. A
Father will bear with many Infirmities in his Children; but God passes by more
far away in gracious little Children. Though they desire to do and be better, yet
they are attended with many daily childish weaknesses; but then our God says,
in Mal. 3. 17. I will spare them as a man spares his own Son, that serves
him. Yea, if through Temptation they fall into grosser Scandals, nevertheless
when they come to loath and judge themselves for their miscarriages, the Lord
will be as ready to forgive them, as David was to forgive his Rebellious, but
Relenting Absalom.

Once more, it is their privilege, that God makes the provision of a Father for
them. Children shall not want, so long as they have a Living and a Tender
Father, able to look after them. But God will provide for gracious little
Children, after a manner which Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, and heart
has not conceived. We are told in Psalm. 34. 10. They that fear the Lord, shall
not want any good thing. These belong to the Family of the Almighty God; and,
Their Heavenly Father knows what things they have need of. He will furnish them
with all suitable mercies both Temporal and Eternal.

Finally, It Is their privilege, that when they ma^e any allowable prayers, God
like a Father will hear them all. If Children go to a Father for any convenient
thing, it is but, Ask and Have; much more is the blessed Access and Success
which gracious little Children have in their Supplications to the Lord. Of
their prayer, we may say as in Prove. 15. 8. It Is his Delight. God propounds to
them, Children, what do you want? What would you have? Children, when shall I
do for you? And he delights to see them, spreading their Ails before him. Though
their prayers are but like the Chatterings and Lispings, of Children, yet the
Lord says concerning them, Let me hear thy voice, for it is sweet; their
prayers make a most Heavenly Melody in the Ears of the Eternal God.

Behold, ye pious little Children, what (...) you are privileged with! And yet
(...) for your Everlasting Comfort, that it is an (...) Father, who will do for
you such things (...). The best Father else may leave you Fatherless, and ^^en
you will sit wishing in your solitary hours, (...) that it were with me, as in
months past, when my Father was alive! But you are now privileged with a
Father worth infinitely more than ten thousand of any that can be taken from
you. It was the encouragement of the Psalmist, in Psalm. 27. 10. When my Father,
and Mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. It Is an allusion to the
Journeys of Israel through the Wilderness; when the three first Squadrons were
passed on before, the fourth and last Squadron were to gather up the sick, and
the weak, and the same, that had been left behind. Thus, though thy Father be
marched away, and has left thee a shiftless little creature here, yet the Lord,
he is thy Father still, and he will take thee up.

But for the brief Improvement of these things.

Application.
1. Let all Parents endeavor that their Children may be those gracious Ones
which may know God for their Father. Methinks, you that are the Fathers of
these poor little Creatures, if you had any bowels in you, should be concerned
that they may have an Heavenly Father, to do that which you ^^sire, but, cannot
perform for them. Let me (...) Name of God, lay before you two or three (...)
^^^estions to be thought upon.

(...) have you no Kindness for your poor children It Is by your means, that
they are now born defiled, depraved, horribly polluted, with Original Sin, and
fearfully perishing under the wrath and curse of God; and what amends will you
make 'em, for this infinite wrong? It was the law for a man that had wounded
another, in Exodus 21. 19. He shall cause him to be thoroughly healed. And will
you do nothing toward healing those prodigious wounds, which your Falls have
caused your Children to lie bleeding under? Your poor Children, can you endure
to see them starving, burning, dying before your Eyes? but thus they are till
by Conversion they are become gracious little Children. We read in Lam. 4. 3.
Even the Sea Monsters draw out the Breasts, they give suck to their young ones.
If you will do nothing for the Souls of your poor Children, you are worse than
the cruellest Sea Monsters in the world.

Secondly, Have you no Regard for Gods Command and Glory? Why, the Immortal
God, who made your children has committed them into your Hands, and said, as
the Princess of Egypt unto the Mother of Moses, Here, take this Child, Nurse it
for me, and I Will give thee thy wages. It Is the charge which God has given you,
about your Children, in Ephesians. 6. 4. Bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition
of the Lord. And this is the way to propagate and continue the Service of God,
unto after-generations; you that make it not your study, to see your Offspring
become gracious little Children, are willing that God could never have any
honor in the world, after this Generation shall be expired.

Thirdly, Have you no Regard for your own Credit and Comfort? It is said in
Prove. 23. 24. The father of the Righteous shall greatly Rejoice: Truly, if you
had gracious little Children, you might, you would Rejoice exceedingly. Which
of you had not rather have a Joseph than an Esau, for his Age to lean upon? And
when you leave your Children, or your Children leave you, how much would you
give to have just Hopes, of having their Company in the sweet Joys, of the
Third Heaven for-ever? Besides, it will be a blessed mark upon your Souls, it
will be a sign that you are among the Children of Abraham, if you Command your
Children to keep the way of the Lord.

Would you be informed then, what you may do for your poor Children? Do you
ask, as Manoah of old, How shall we order the child, and what shall we do unto
him? There are four things by which you may save the Souls of your little
Children; yea, there are five things to be observed, that God may be a Father
to them.

The first thing necessary for your poor Children, is, your Authority. 'Twas
said in Lev. 19. 3. Ye shall fear every man, his Mother and his Father; the
Mother is first mentioned, because that she commonly first loses her Authority.
Look to it, that you keep up a Fear of you, in the hearts of your Children, and
make them (...) to Refuse any fit thing that you shall Enjoin upon them.

Another thing necessary, is, your Instruction. 'Twas the Report of the
Wiseman, in Prove. 4. 3, 4. I was my Fathers Son, he taught me also; and
without this he had never proved so wise a man. Let your Children be most
frequently, seriously, exactly Catechized; and let your Admonitions teach them,
how they should think, how pray, and how live, before the Lord.

A Third thing necessary, is, your Inspection. As our Lord asked His Household,
in Joh. 16. 31. Do ye now Believe? So, do you ask your Children, what their
Experience, and what their Behavior is; penetrate as far into their
Circumstances, as that you may assist them against their Difficulties.

A Fourth necessary thing, is your Example. Resolve like him, in Psalm. 101. 2.
I will walk within my House with a perfect heart. It is no rare thing to find
it of the Son, He did according to all, that his Father did. Let your Children
see by your Piety and Charity and Zeal, how they may please God; and never
expose, like disguised Noah, your Nakedness, unto them. And unto all these
things add your Prayer; your fervent and constant prayer, to God. Pray with
your Children; and let not your Houses be liable to that hideous Thunderclap,
in Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy Eury on the Families that call not on thy Name. A
doleful Meeting must you have with your Children in another world, If you there
have them article at this rate against you, Lord, if this Bloody Father of mine
had learnt me to acknowledge thee, I had never come to this place of Torment.
But pray for your Children too; and be like those who, in Mat. 19. 13. brought
little children unto Jesus O carry them to God in Christ, with your importunate
Cries, That He would heal their spiritual Diseases; That He would cast every
evil Spirit out of them; and that according to His promise, He would circumcise
their Hearts to fear His Name for ever.

H. But then, My little children, of whom I travel in Birth again, until Christ
be formed in you; I pray, let it be your endeavor to be those gracious Ones,
which God may be an Heavenly Father unto. It Is impossible to express, how
willing, how ready, the Lord is to be the Father of you all. He has already
been a Father to many thousands of such as you; and there are doubtless more
little Children in Heaven, even in the Fathers House, than there are persons of
any other Age. How much may this encourage you; but in the mean time, consider,
my dear Children, consider what your condition is. A Little Child once became a
very holy Child, and being asked the reason of it, he said, Why, I was the other
day in the burying-place, and there I saw a Grave shorter than any self. Truly,
if you will repair to the Graves among us, you will see many an one of your own
Dimensions (...) (...) young as you are, you are old enough to Die; the
Lambs-skin is in the Market as well as the Sheep's. But O consider what will
then become of your never-dying Souls, if you have not before then made sure of
an Interest in God as a Father for you. What a terrible thing will it be for
you to be then clapped up in chains of Darkness among black Devils against the
Judgment of the Great Day! When the Last Judgment comes upon the world, who
shall then appear before the dreadful Tribunal of the Lord Jesus Christ? It is
said in Rev. ^0. 12. I saw the Dead, small and great stand before God; the
smallest of you all must then have a Sentence of Weal or Woe passed upon you; a
Sentence that will fix you in your state, for infinitely more than as many
millions of Ages as the Ocean has drops of water in it.

But, I again say, consider what will become of you, if God be not as a Father
concerned for you. You cannot then escape the Vengeance of eternal Fire, which
Fire has millions of small Chips, as well as of great Logs, horribly burning
in it.

My Children, consider what has been set before you, and immediately turn it
all into most importunate Supplications. We read, That when little Children
were carried unto the Lord Jesus Christ, He Blessed them; how much more will He
bless those little Children that (...) themselves go unto Him! Go then unto the
Lord; go daily, go seriously, go heartily unto him, and beg of him, Lord, be
thou a Father to me, and help me to be as one of thy Children for-ever.

You may remember that when little children mo^ked the Prophet, there came two
Bears which devoured some scores of them. To slight the Counsels, is in a
manner to mock the Prophets of the Lord Jesus; and you will become a prey to
Devils that are worse than Bears, if you are guilty of that Impiety. It Is my
wish for you, that you may so hearken to the Messages of Heaven, us to be the
Joy and Care of Holy Angels all your Days. Come, ye Children, hearken to me,
(...) I have Taught you the Fear of the Lord.

FINIS.
PAge 1^. l. 23. r. Barzillai. p. 15. l. 9. f. gracious r. glorious. ibid. l.
14. f. Omnipotence ^. Omnipresence. P. 40. l. 26. r. and seldom. P. 42. l. 20.
r. Senescant. P. 53. l. 26. r. Individuation. P. 59. l. 16. r. might help. P.
85. l. 18. r. outwardly happy. ibid. l. ult. f. we r. you. P. 59. l. 1. r. the
Attempts of the Holy Spirit.


