The Serviceable Man. A Discourse Made unto the GENERAL COURT OF THE
Massachusetts COLONY, New England, At the Anniversary ELECTION 28. d. ^ m. 1690.

By COTTON MATHER Minister of the Gospel.

Dies brevis, opus multum, merces magna, Pater-familias urget, operarij ne sint
pigri.

Boston, Printed by Samuel Green, for Joseph Browning at the corner of the
Prison (...) next the Exchange. 1690.

VOted by the Deputies, that the Reverend Mr. Cotton Mather have the Thanks of
this House Returned for the Sermon Preached at their Request on the Day of
Election, and that it be forthwith Printed.

May 29. 1690. Ebenezer Prout Clerk.

To my Country.
ABove Seventy Years have Rolled about, since a Frenchman, who was by a
Ship-wreck made a Captive among the Indians of this Country, did before his
Expiration, as if under some Inspiration, tell those tawny Pagans, That God
being angry with them for their wickedness, would not only destroy them, but
also people the Place with another Nation, which would not live after their
Brutish manners. And accordingly, tho those Infidels blasphemously Replied,
God could not kill them; yet the Almighty God immediately after this visited
them with a Pestilent and Prodigious Disease, which swept them away in such
vast multitudes, that our first Planters thereby found the Land marvelously
Emptied of its Primitive Inhabitants, and yet almost Covered with their
unburied Carcases; while the Survivers were smitten into awful and humble
Regards of the English, by the Terrors which the Prophecy had Imprinted on
them. Thus, Thou have brought a Vine out of Europe, O Lord, Thou have cast out
the Heathen and Planted it! But we are very stupid, if we do not read an
Admonition to our selves, in this Ancient and Famous Providence. Indeed I am
not without my lively and grounded Hopes, That our Good God will not ever (or
at least, as yet) Remove the People which is now enriching this part of the New
World, for Another Nation to succeed in the room thereof; however there are Ill
men enough that have desired it. But we are surrounded with myriads of Dangers,
and whether we consider our Corruptions within us, or our Enemies without us,
we may see our selves in a Storm, that calls for the Help of every man aboard.
Never did my distressed Country more want the Service of all that are in the
least capacity to Do for us, than At such a time as this! Behold therefore one
little Sermon more sent abroad for the Direction and Encouragement of us all,
to Do all we can for the Service of a People which is well worthy of our All. I
now take no further care about it, but Recommend it unto the Blessing of Him,
who is the Hope of New England, and the Savior thereof in the Time of Trouble.

Cotton Mather.

The Serviceable Man.
TO THE GENERAL COURT AT THE Election; 28 d. 3. m. 1690.
Nehemiah V.19. Think upon me, my God, for Good, according to all that I have
done for this People.


THat you are this Day Assembled for a Revival and a Renewal of your
Anniversary Elections, is, I suppose, intended by you, as no less a part of
your Obedience to their Majesty's, who upon the Address of our Convention to
Them, Declaring, That they accepted Government of this People according to the
Rules of the Charter, did in answer thereunto, Order A Continuance in the
Administration thereof: than it is a part of your Deference to so great and
just a Judgment, as that of the English Nation Assembled in Parliament, That
the Invasion of our Charters was Illegal and a Grievance, and that they ought
to be restored unto us. Bu^ the Word of the Almighty God has been still one
usual stroke in our Annual Solemnities, and something of that are you now to
attend unto.

In the Words now Read, we find not only the Prayer, but also the Picture of a
no les^ worthy than famous Magistrate, and it will be no unprofitable
Meditation, to reflect a little upon the occasion of it. The Truth and Manner
of the Return which the Jew^ made out of their Babylonish Captivity, ha^ been
declared in a Book written by Ezra, a great Man greatly concerned in that
Return. But the Fruit and Event of it is now related in a Supplement unto that
History, written by Nehemiah a Renowned Governor of that Restored People; for
whom it was no more improper to Record His own Acts, than it wa^ for the Great
Julius Caesar to write his Commentaries. This inspired Historian, was doubtless
a very young man, when he first applied himself unto the more open and public
service of his Country; for the Transactions of more than fifty years are
comprised in this Narrative of his Administrations; nevertheless God made him a
true Nehemiah to his Country men; that is, A comforter from the Lord. The good
Providence of God, had made this Nehemiah, a blessed Instrument of Rebuilding
and Resettling Jerusalem, which had been miserably Ruined by Chaldean Invasions
and Oppressions; from whence, in the twelfth year of his Government, he goes
back into Persia, where he had been an eminent Officer in the Court of
Artaxerxes Longimanus; but from thence he soon repeats his Journey of above
nine hundred miles, and revisits his beloved Jerusalem, with a new Commission,
by virtue of which he sets himself to Redress diverse Disorders, under which
that little Commonwealth was laboring.

The common People at this time were very Poor and Low; for they had usually
many Children in their Families that called for more Bread than their single
hands could purchase for them; and yet they had heavy Taxes which the the
Necessity and Calamity of their Affairs compelled them to the payment of. The
People had no way, but the Borrowing of Money to defray all these Charges; but
the Rich Lenders took them at this Disadvantage, so as not only to squeeze the
cruel Interest of twelve in the Hundred from them, but also to seize upon their
Lands which they had Mortgaged for the Principal: Yea they hooked the very
persons of their Brethren into Slavery. Very loud complaints were now made, of
these oppressions; whereupon the Governor called a General Court, and procured
the Relaxation of these Difficulties; he seems to erect a Bank of Credit among
them, and render Credit so passeable, that the indigent people might still
enjoy their Livings, and yet have Credit enough to demand from one another what
their Exigencies called for. In the Speech which this Honorable Person made
upon this occasion, he mentions his own Exemple as one Article, for the
conviction of those who did in this time of Distress Exact upon their
Neighbors. They had just before been under a Governor who not only made his
Domestic Expenses to stand the People in Five Pounds a Day, besides large
quantities of Provisions, for his Table; but also he had his little creatures
about him, whom he used as Tools for the getting of Money, as often as he or
they found a want thereof. But says our Nehemiah: So did not I, because of the
fear of God! No, he would make none of those great Bargains, for which he had
an opportunity in the Poverty and Penury of the People; but instead thereof, He
denied himself of what was his Right. He refused the Salary which was due unto
him as a Magistrate; and this, though he spent more time than ordinary in the
Affairs of the Government: yea, He employed his own Servants in those matters
for which there seemed a lack of Hands; and He fed many scores above an
hundred, of those that were proper Subjects for his Invitations, out of his own
Estate. It was not with any Vanity that He mentioned these things, but he
brought them as a demonstration of his Desire, to ease the People of their
Burdens.

Our Text, is the Epiphonema of this Narrative. No prudent Magistrate needs to
be told that he ought to be a Man of Prayer: They that are to Act for God in
Government should very much Be With God in Devotion. One of the greatest
Magistrates that ever lived, could give that account of himself, in Psalm. 109
4. I give my self unto Prayer: but the Words in the Original are so elliptical,
as to be only thus much, I Prayer, as if he had been all made up of Prayer.
Such a Magistrate was our Nehemiah here; every business would he both begin and
conclude with Prayer; and Prayer was like his very Breath, issuing from him
with a constant Respiration. It Is one of his Prayers that we are now to be
entertained with: We will suppose that he Prayed in Faith; and so there are two
or three things in the Prayer.

First, We have the Declaration of a pious Ruler. He says, I have done for this
people; he had been serviceable to the People of God. What had he done? Why, he
had Addressed the King, on the behalf of his Ruined Countrymen; he had
undergone a Travel of many Leagues to promote their Safety; he had entered upon
the Administration of the Government, when it would have broke the Heart of any
man alive to have meddled with it; he had parted with a large portion of his
Riches, for the use of the Public; he had born with great Abuses from his
Enemies; and whatever he saw amiss in Church or State, he courageously set
himself upon the Reformation of it^ This had he done! But then,

Secondly, We have his joint Supplication and Expectation thereupon. Sais he,
Think upon me, my God, for Good, according to all this. That Expression, Think
upon me, may also be Translated, Remember me. And we may not imagine, that any
thing is looked for in a way of Merit, but all in a way of Mercy here. Hence we
have it in those Terms, in Neh. 13.22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this,
and spare me according to the Greatness of thy Mercy.

This prayer, is the Result of an observation made, upon that Goodness, and
Kindness, Pity, which appears in the usual Providence of the most High,
toward them that are serviceable to the people of God.

This then is our DOCTRINE.
The God of Heaven has Good Thoughts for those men, whose Good Works render
them Serviceable to His People.



I. It Is to be taken for granted, as we go along; That our God has, A People in
the World; and indeed He ever had so. The World has always been Blessed with a
People, who have chosen the Lord Jehovah for their Best Good, and their Last
End; a people who have chosen the Lord Jesus for the Redeemer of their Souls, a
people who have Believed and Practiced according to the Scriptures of Truth:
it is the people, whose Denomination is that, in Isa. 63.18. The people of thy
Holiness; or Gods Holy People. The people of Israel was once His people, but
upon their Abdication from God; we have now among the Gentiles, a Surrogate
Israel. Such a people, and a Church of them too, there has been upon Earth, in
all Ages Visible. If the Existence of such a people were ever to be questioned,
it was when the barbarous and horrible Darkness of Popery, had covered the face
of Europe; and yet even then too, we are not at a loss to find such a people,
in the very Bowels of the Papal Empire. The Popish Historians themselves do
confess, that the Waldenses were a people who from the very days of Constantine
had withdrawn from the conceived Corruptions in the Apostatical Church of Rome.
Nor were they called Waldenses, because Waldo was their Father, but because
they had their Dwellings in the Valleys, that are ever famous for them.

A People, implies a Multitude of men, and therewithal some Combination or
Association of them. Blessed be our God, there is a Number among the children
of men, who by Agreement, may be called, His.

II. It Is also to be taken for granted, That every man should study to be
Serviceable unto the people of God. This people, in its Militant Condition
here, has many things to be Done for it; and our God has so Disposed of us, as
to make us need the Help one of another. The people of God may say unto us, as
in Philem. 19.. Thou owe unto me, even thine own self. We owe the utmost
Service unto the Great God, as our Creator and Preserver; but He has made His
People the Receivers of his Rents; they have His Letter of Attorney for all the
Goodness that we can extend unto them. The people of God are continually in
circumstances, that call for the Assistence of all that are Well-affected unto
the Dust of Zion. We cannot with any face pretend to be of them, if we now
withhold, any of that care, or cost, or Time, with which we may be Serviceable
to them. They make up, The Mystical Body of Christ; and we are worse than
silver Hands, or wooden Legs, in that Body, if we are not so sensible of, as to
be Serviceable in, their Difficulties It was for the Good of this people, that
the Son of God, underwent all the Troubles and Sorrows of His deep Humiliation;
and we are None of His, if we count it any Humiliation unto our selves, to do
any thing that may be for the Good of such a people.

III. But the Main Assertion, which lies before us, is, That the God of Heaven
has Good Thoughts for the men that study to be serviceable unto His People.

We are not so carnal, as to dream of a strict propriety in the Expression,
when Thoughts are ascribed unto the Infinite God: The Thoughts are properly,
those Conceptions o^ Characters of Things, which the Under^g fetches out of the
Imagination, in our Souls. But there is no such Composition in our God, as to
Admit of any such Successive or Dependent Motions in Him, He is a pure Act, and
when we call Him so pure a Thing as a Spirit, it is too Gross a Name to be
taken without a Figure; it is but by way of Analogy and Similitude. By the
Thoughts of God, then are meant, only those Acts of Him, which pass upon his
Creatures. When we enquire, What Aspect the Almighty bears unto us, or rather,
What Aspect He makes us bear unto Him, we ask after His Thoughts concerning us.
Well then; The Thoughts of God about the men that are serviceable to His
people, are, For their Good; it imports, that God will favor such men as
those, with such Acts of His, as may demonstrate his Good Will unto them. The
Serviceable Man may say, My God will think upon me for Good; i. e. my God will
Say that of me, and will Do that for me, which will be marvellously
comfortable. If we would know the Thoughts of God, we must look into the Words
of God; there is a Rule Revealed unto us, by our God, according to which He
will Judge of us, and He will Deal with us all; and if we would know the
Thoughts of God, it is but seeing what that Rule does pronounce upon us. To
that Rule therefore we will now repair; and we shall find that this Rule will
enable Serviceable Men, to say as in Psalm. 40.5. Many, O Lord my God, are thy
Thoughts to usward: If I would speak of them, they are more than can be
Numbered.

Particularly,

First, The Good Judgment which God passes on them, is part of his Good
Thoughts for the men that are Serviceable to his people. Our God is considered
as a Judge, when Thoughts are Attributed unto Him here. What is the Good
Thought, which God has for a man that studies to be Serviceable? It is, This
man i^ a good man. When Barnabas was endeavoring to be Serviceable with a very
mighty Industry, there was that Thought presently entered in the Book of God
upon him, in Acts 11.24. He was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost. Every
man undergoes a Trial, by that God, whose Flaming Eyes do search and knit
Eyelids T^y the Children of Man; and in this Trial, those men that study to Do
much for the people of God, have a sentence passed on them, like that on Job,
Behold, a perfect and an upright man! or like that on David, Behold, a man
after Gods own Heart! or like that on Nathanael, Behold, an Israelite indeed!
An Inclination to be Serviceable proceeds from such a Love to God, and such a
Love to Christ, and such a Sympathy with His People, as will procure to a man,
that place in the Divine Account, (1 John 3.14.) This man is passed from Death
to Life; in as much as he Loves the Brethren. When a man shall always be Doing
of Good, the God of Heaven gives this as a censure of him, Behold a man that
has the Spirit of the Lord Jesus in him! The Serviceable man discovers a good
principle Reigning in him; a principle of great Respect unto the Interest of
God; thence our God Thinks well of such a man; His Thoughts are, Here are one
of those good men that are upright in Heart. It is not only a just man, but
also a good man, that shall always be seeking to make many others the better
for him.

Secondly, The Good Purpose which God fulfils to them, is a further part of the
good Thoughts, which He has for the men that are Serviceable to His People. Our
God has Thoughts, that is, He has made both Purposes and Promises, to bestow
wonderful Blessings upon the Serviceable man! The Thought of God is Transcribed
into Prove. 28.20. A Faithful man shall abound with Blessings. And who is the
Faithful man, but one that studies to Do much for the People of God? Let us
particularly put into our own Language, a few of those good Thoughts, which God
will have concerning the men that are truly Serviceable.

First, One Good Thought in the Purposes of God concerning them that are
serviceable to His People, is, I will be the God of that serviceable man.
Behold, the most comprehensive Good that can be Thought of! When our Nehemiah
could say, I have done for this People, he could also say, Think upon me for
good, O MY God. Why That is the Good which God will Think to make such a man
partaker. This man shall have that Liberty and Assuran^^ which may enable him
to call me HIS Go^ There is that Engagement made by God (...) the Covenant of
Grace, Jer. 31 33. I will (...) their God. This is that which Divines have
truly called, the Head, the Soul, the Substanc^ and the very Marrow of all the
Covenant; an^ men that are very serviceable unto the People of God, are most
eminently concerned i^ it. Such men above any in the world man say, Deus,
quantus quantus est; Totus Noster est. As good and as great as the Infinite God
i^ He is All ours. The Serviceable man commonly ventures the Loss of all other
things he spends his Time, Saps his Estate, expose his Esteem, and runs the
risque of his ver^ Life, that the People of God may fare the be^^ter for him;
and Looks for no worldly gain by what he dos. Well, but shall he be a Loose by
it? No, The great God Himself shall b^ the gain of such a man; he shall be able
to say concerning the Al sufficient God, This is m^ own God, and He shall Bless
me; and he shall find that in God, which will Recompenc^ all the Losses which
his Public Spirit runs the Venture of. The Almighty God says to the Serviceable
man, as in Genesis 15.1. I am thy Exceeding Great Reward. He says, my power shall
be His to Releeve Him, and, my wisdom shall be His to Direct Him, and, my
goodness shall be His to comfort Him. Such a man is wholly for God, and
thereupon God will be for him; hence ever now and then in the Scripture, when a
man was beginning to be more eminently Serviceable unto the People of God, we
find the Lord comforting him with such a word as that. Fear not, I am with
thee! Now who can wish for more than this? Here may I make a stop and say,
Behold this is all my Salvation, and all my Desire.

Secondly, Another Good Thought in the purposes of God, concerning them that
are Serviceable to His People is, I will make that Serviceable Man to be an
Honorable Man.

There are no small Honors in This World, which God Thinks to confer upon the
man that shall study to be Serviceable. I will mention some of the Honors and
the Roses that shall be cast upon such a man; whereof the First shall be This,
That Wicked Men will Traduce, Abuse, Malign such a man at a monstrous Rate;
those Vassals of the Devil, cannot but be in a Hellish Rage at any man that
shall be Serviceable unto the Flocks of the Lord Jesus* of whom they would fain
make a prey. It Is the property of those Tories, that as in Neh. 2.10. It
grieves them exceedingly, if there come a man to seek the Welfare of the
Children of Israel. Hence an Elijah shall be railed at as, A Troubler of
Israel; a Paul shall be stormed at, as. A mover of Sedition. They will invent
all the ways imaginable to fix Reproach upon such a man; they will make
Stories, and Forge Letters, and contrive a thousand shams; in hopes that some
Dirt will stick, whereof they have Cart loads to spare. Such a man shall be,
The Song of the Drunkard, and those people whose Tongues are no Slander, will
try whether a Slander cannot be fastened on him by the venomous Tongues, which
they use as, their own. An Athanasius must be called a Sathanasius; A Calvin
shall be made a Name for a Dog; An Huss. must be dressed with pourtraictures of
Devils round about him; a Luther long since, and since him, a Voetius, may live
to see horrible tragical Romances printed of the Confusions befalling of them.
If a Jeremiah be drawn forth into Service, notwithstanding that excuse of his,
I am a Child; he shall soon have cause for that complaint, in Jer. 20.50 I
heard the defaming of many, Report, say, they and we will Report it; if you
will but form some Ill-Report, say they, Let us alone to blow it all about the
Town* Pardon me, that I enumerate This among the Honors of a Serviceable Man.
I should seriously examine, whether I had not been guilty of some great fault,
if I should receive any Terms but those of Reproach from those Asps that rarely
meet together but only to exchange Poisons with one another* And the Apostles
were of this Opinion long before me, in Acts 5.41 They rejoiced, that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame.

But there is another Honor that the Serviceable man is the Subject of; and
that is, the Service it self, which God helps him to do: When God singles out a
man for this and that Service to His People, it is an Honor from Heaven
bestowed upon him; the very Angels of the third Heaven do account it so. It Is a
Disgrace inflicted by God upon a man when He so lays him aside, as to accept
of no Service at his hands; very dishonorable was the Fate of an unhappy
Prince, whose Name you know, in Jer. 22.28 Is He a Vessel, wherein is no
pleasure? wherefore they are cast out, he and his Seed. So it is a special and
signal Honor, for a man to be remarkably serviceable in his Generation. They
are the Achievements or the Services of men, which afford unto them their only
Honors. When the Honors of a worthy Person were to be recounted, we read in
Acts 9.39. They showed what she had made. It is not, what we have got, but it
is what w^ have done, that renders us truly Honorable Now this is the
privilege of the Serviceable Man; when once the Heart of a man comes to be set
upon the doing of good, commonly the good God will say upon it, w^ll, it shall
be so: thou shall even do what I see thy heart set upon. It Is the word of our
Savior, To him that has it shall be given.

There is yet a further Honor befalling the Serviceable man; and that is, a
preciou^ Name and Room in the Hearts of godly men. Those that are themselves
the Excellent in the Earth^ will count this man more singularly excellent, and
will say of him, Thou art worth ten thousand of us. It was the comfort of a
very Serviceable man, in Esth. 10.3. He was accepted of the multitude of his
Brethren, and seeking the wealth of his People. Now Acceptance among truly
godly men, is the truest Honor in the World; and no perfume so sweet, as a
good Reputation among them that have in them the Spirit of God. Austin I
remember tells us, That the Emperor Theodosius reckoned this a greater Honor
than his being Emperor. There is this peculiar Advantage in it, That the
Serviceable man, will have many vehement and effectual Prayers of Righteous
men, continually employed unto Heaven for him; of one such man 'twas said in
Psalm. 72.15. Prayer shall be made for him continually. The people of old, spoke
a good word unto the Lord Jesus, for a certain Captain that had obliged them by
being Serviceable; said they, He is a Worthy Man, that now wants thy pity; for
he loves our Nation. If such a Man come into a Sickness they will pray him well
again, as once they did Epaphroditus; if he come into a Prison they will pray him
out again, as they did Peter once; whatever Distress comes upon him they will do
him the Honor to meet and pray for his Deliverance. Behold an Honor, which
all the Grandeurs of a Princes Court, are not to be compared with! It was thus
esteemed, by a Person of Quality once in this very place; who having been to
visit a mean but a good man in his Diary for that day left this Reflection upon
it; A glorious Saint makes a mean Cottage, a stately Palace. Were I to make my
choice, I would rather abide with this poor Saint in his poor Cottage th(...)
in a Palace with any one of the Princes that I know of, at this day in the
World.

This Honor will attend him, while he is Alive; but after he shall be Dead and
Gone, his Honor shall still outlive his Funeral; with considerable
Augmentations of it. We read of one very Serviceable person, in 2 Chronicles 32.33.
All did him Honor at his Death; and we read of an Holy Minister, who had set
himself to Serve the people of God, with great Hazard and Trouble, in the
Princes Court, 2 Chronicles. 24.16. They buried him very Honorably, because he had
done good in Israel. Men that are greatly Serviceacle, have this Honor, that
as they Live Desired, so, they Dy^ Lamented. The Tears of the most Honorable
Peasons in the Kingdom were once dropped at the Death of a Prophet which had been
the Chariots and Horsemea of Israel. A Serviceable Josiah, shall be Honored at
his Death, with a Mourning, bitter enough to be made a Proverb for future Ages.
God causes the Names of such men to Live, after their Bodies are incinerated in
their Graves; as it was said in Josh. 1.2. Moses my Servant is Dead; so, shall
Serviceable men after their Decease be still mentioned, as, The Servants of the
Living God; and perhaps for a long while after, The Service which the man has
done, shall be told as a Memorial nf him. Yea it is very likely, That God will
Honor the Children of such a man; and Raise Them up to Notable Improvements,
when their Blessed Father shall be Beholding the Face of God in glory. It is
said in Prove. 20.7. His Children are blessed after him: A Serviceale David
shall go home to God, but he Leaves a Son behind him, that shall do the mighty
Service of building a Temple for the Lord. This Honor of his Offspring, is an
Honor still unto the Serviceable man; though it is possible, When his Sons came
to Honor, he knows it not. It is no little Honor to us,. When Those that
are of us, do build the old wast places, and serve the Generations that come
after us. But this is not all.

There are more glorious Honors in The World to come, which God Thinks to
confer upon the Serviceable man. During the Day of Judgment, there are amazing
Honors that such a man shall be partaker of. All the Service which is now done
by him, shall then be published and proclaimed throughout the whole Church
Triumphant; and as we are told, 1 Pet. 1.7. shall it be found unto praise and
Honor and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ^ We have not given a Cup of
Water to a Disciple of the Lord Jesus, much less have we done a piece of
Service for many such, but we shall hear of it again, at That Day, which, Do
thou hasten, O our God! One of the chief Things then done in the New Jerusalem,
will be to recount the Services that we have here been doing of; and the Lord
Jesus will then make the Streets of that Heavenly City to ring with such
Notices as these; Behold, what Services were done for my people, by this my
Servant, when he was a Soldier in the former World! Yea, you must permit me to
tell you, Tha the Service which is now done, will be Requited with an Admission
to a far greater Service in that great Day of God; for then shall be fulfilled
that Song of the Redeemed, Rev. 5.10. We shall Reign on Earth! Those dear men,
whose Ambition here 'twas to be the Servants of every one, shall then be the
Rulers and the Judges of the World; God will make them the Angels of the New
World, as a Remuneration of their Services unto this; and they shall sit down
with the Lord Jesus in his Throne. In my saying of which, I allow you to take
me for such a Chiliast, as old Papias and Jrenaeus, and Justin Martyr professed
themselves to be. Moreover, throughout the Days of Eternity, there are
perpetual Honors to be further heaped upon such a man, unto them that are
Serviceable, belongs that Consolation, in Mat. 5.12 O Rejoice, and be exceeding
glad* for great is your Reward in Heaven. The Lord Jesus will one Day make a
vast Army of them, and He Himself, as a mighty Standard Bearer, marching in the
Head of them, will conduct and carry them away to those Heavenly Regions, where
they shall be For ever with the Lord. Says our Lord, in John 12.^^. Where I am,
there shall my Servant be. He will bring the Serviceable men, into those
Regions of Light, where they shall be Vessels of Honor before the Immortal God
for ever. And they shall have this Honor among the rest that shall betide them
there; That they shall be Admitted into the Society of the blessed Angels; they
shall be the Eternal Brethren and Companion of those Ministering Spirits, whom
our Serviceableness is but an Imitation of.

That I choose to Rank the Good Thoughts of our God, mostly under the Head of
Honor, is but an Accommodation of my Discourse unto the work of the Day before
us. But

Thirdly, To speak summarily; There are all kinds of Gracious Thoughts, in the
purposes of God for the Serviceable man; and it is easier to touch a little
upon the general Qualities of those Thoughts than to enumerate more specal
Instances.

In short then; The serviceable man may be brought into sore straits; and
indeed, whoever plunges himself into the Interests of mankind, must find
himself enough perplexed and entangled with them. But yet he may refresh his
own Soul with such a Thought as that, in Psalm. 40.17 I am poor and needy; yet
the Lord Thinks upon me^ God has Thoughts for him; and what kind of Thoughts?

Briefly,

They are Fatherly Thoughts which God has for the serviceable man; the Lord
says of him, as in Jer. 31.20. He is my dear Son, he is my pleasant Child, I do
earnestly Think upon him. The Beneficence of a serviceable man, renders him
indeed the Genuine. Child of such a Father^ Hence they are also very Merciful
and Bountiful and Compassionate Thoughts which God has for him. It Is a full
Text, in Jer. 39.11. I know the Thoughts that I think toward you, says the
Lord; Thoughts of Peace and not of Evil. The Lord seems to please Himself with
His Thoughts for such a man; and calls him aside, as a Father will a Child,
saying, Little do you know what I think to do for you. If one would in one word
speak all that we can wish for, it were Peace; but That is it which God Thinks
to bestow upon us.

More than this, They are Omnipotent Thoughts. It is said in Prove. 19.21. There
are many Thoughts in a man's Heart; nevertheless the Counsel of the Lord, that
shall stand* Our Thoughts one for another are little feeble insignificant
things; but the Thoughts of our God are Effectual, and He sais, I will do all
my pleasure.

Once more; they are Everlasting Thoughts. The Lord says, in Jer. 31.20. I
Remember him still that is, for ever. The Blessed God never has cause to say,
my purposes are broken off, even the Thoughts of my Heart; nor is He liable to
that Mischance which befalls the biggest Monarch of the World, by the coming of
a Day Wherein his thoughts do perish.

To say no more, God will so Think of the Serviceable man, as to Hear him, Save
him, Own him, Do all for him, that his matters may require. He is one that has
many Thoughts of God; and we are told, in Mal. 3.16. There is A Book of
Remembrance for him, and He shall be mine says the Lord, in the Day when I
make up my Jewels. It is reported of Tamerlain the Warlike Scythian, that he
had always by him a Catalogue of the Services which any of his Followers had
performed for him; the perusing of which, was his daily business in order to
the Requiting of them. A more desirable Book of Remembrance, has our God, for
those that are serviceable to His People. Their Services are turned into
Memorials; as 'twas said of old unto Cornelius: and accordingly, from the
Hebrew word [(...)] in my Text comes the Name of that Azcarah or Memorial which
accompanied the Ancient Sacrificers. God will so Remember them, as to make them
know, that He has been well pleased with them; He will be more careful than
ever Ahashuerus was, to have a Serviceable Mordecai well requited!

Application.
But it is the Transferring of this Doctrine into the state of New England,
that is the Province at this time to be served by me; the State of the Country
is to be as much my Text, as any Verse in the Fifth Chapter of Nehemiah. I
behold a Representation of this Country within these Walls this day, with
their Invitation, to speak unto them, in the Name of Him, that we own for our
King, our Lord, our Lawgiver. But never had any man more cause to suspect his
own Ability of speaking unto such an Assembly on such an occasion as is now
before me, than that Son of yours by whom you are now Addressed. Alas I may
make the complaint of the Prophet, in Jer. 1.6. Behold, I cannot speak; and add
his Reason for it too, with a thousand more: But if I am a Child, you know that
the little Stamerings and Chatterings of your Children are not heard without
your satisfaction in them Nor while I am thus pressing others to be
serviceable, do I dare omit what Service may be done by my Speaking here: But,
O Lord God of my Master, I pray thee send me good speed this Day!

There is one Position and Three Deductions which I now expect your Attention
to;

The POSITION.
The People of New England are a People of God. There have been very critical
and ingenious Attempts made by some Learned men to find lost Israel in America;
though it be not easy to find any other Track of them, than this; that the
Tartars are the Ten Tribes, which Dr. Fletchers Dissertations have rendered
almost evident; and the Northern Indians of this mighty Continent are of a
Scythian Original which will be almost as evident unto him, that shall read the
Disquisitions of the Learned Hornius. But behold, you may see an Israel in
America, by looking upon this Plantation; may Peace be upon this Israel of God!
It is notorious, That a Settlement in this part of America, was first
endeavored by some that had no designs but those of a Secular Interest: but
the God of Heaven blasted all those Designs, and broke up one Plantation after
another by very terrible Frowns of His Holy Providence. Until at length a
number of Pious and Worthy men transplanted themselves into this Wilderness,
with Designs of practicing the Religion of the Lord Jesus here, without such
Obstructions as in Europe they feared thereunto; and then, the Great God smiled
upon the undertaking with Mercies little short of Miracles. It Is the prerogative
of New England above all the Countries of the world, That it is a Plantation
for the Christian and Protestant Religion. You may now see a Land filled with
Churches, which by solemn and awful Covenants are Dedicated unto the Son of
God; there are I suppose, more than an Hundred of those Holy Societies among
us, which would, in Luthers Judgment, render the meanest Village more glorious
than an Ivory palace; in these Churches you may see Discipline managed, Heresy
subdued, Profaneness opposed, and Communion maintained, with a careful Respect
unto the word of God in all; you may see faithful Ministers, and sincere
Christians, and multitudes of Souls Ripening apace for the Kingdom of God; you
may see proportionably as much of God among them, as in any spot of Ground
which the Children of Adam walk upon; if our Degeneracies cause you not quickly
to Ioose the Sight. By our Profession at least, there is Holiness to the Lord,
written upon all the circumstances of this People; and we do, we may speak in
such a Style, as that in Isai. 63.19. Lord, we are thine! We may look upon the
Lord, as the God of our Fathers; and we still make some claim unto Him. The
very Grandchildren of the good old Planters here, are every day coming in to
lay hold on his Covenant; and they speak after that manner, in Jer. 14.9. O
Lord: we are called by thy Name, Leave us not.

Well then, Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have done
for this People.

There are these Inferences hence to be insisted on:

Deduction I.
What will be the Thoughts of our God concerning them that shall Do all they
can Against His people here? The man that shall do Service for the people of
God, has this wish going to Heaven for him, Remember me, O my God, concerning
this. Well, the man that shall do mischief to the people of God, is also to be
Remembered; it is said in Neh. 13.29 Remember them, O my God, because of what
they have done. Believe me, The Almighty God will make those Agents of the
Devil know that He Will Remember them! those Tobijahs and Sanballats will not be
forgotten.

This people of God, is part of that Israel, whereof it may be said, His
Adversaries be round about him. The Enemies of New England have not been few or
small; and it is because we are, A people of God, that we still have such
Enemies. We have indeed been a persecuted people, and Wars have been made upon
us, for our keeping the Commandments of God, and having the Testimony of Jesus
Christ. Into the List of our present Enemies, who would not put those, who
the other Day, let fall their cursed and cruel Intimations, That it was
convenient this Territory should be possessed by another people! and those that
were so politic as to inform us now and then, That it was not for the Interest
of our Superiors that we should Thrive! and those that have had the vanity to
publish unto the World in Print, their Proposals, That the Religion of this
people made it unsafe to allow them here. And with these, who would not reckon
those Pagan and Popish Neighbors, that are making the Inroads of a Bloody War
upon us? These are our Declared Enemies! But ^n the same Herd, you may see many
others, whose Drivers, have heretofore been in other Countries in former Ages.

Among our worst Enemies, may be Accounted, in short, All that go to Destroy or
Frustrate the Great Ends which this Plantation was first erected upon. But what
were those Ends? The Question was often put unto our Predecessors, in Mat.
11.7. What went ye out into the Wilderness to see? And the Answer to it, is not
only too Excellent, but also too Notorious, to be dissembled. Let all mankind
know, That we came into the Wilderness, because we would quietly worship God,
without that Episcopacy, that Common Prayer, and those unwarrantable
Ceremonies* which the Land of our Fathers Sepulchers, has been defiled with, we
came, because we would have our Posterity settled under the pure and full
Dispensations of the Gospel, defended by Rulers that should be of our selves,
and Governors that should proceed from the midst of us. Hence those are the
fatal Enemies of this people, that shall go to Debauch and infect the Rising
Generation among us, and corrupt them with evil manners; and learn them to
Drink and Drab, and Game* and profane the Sabbath, and Sin against the Hope of
their Fathers; or, those that shall go to Decoy them, and much more Compel
them, unto those Remainders of Popery, which the first Reformers were hindered
from sweeping out of the English Nation; among which, I would set a special
Remark upon Superstitious Holy Days, which have too much obtained among our
unwary Children. These Enemies do us the worst office in the world; for they
do, like Balaam, go to make us offend our God, and thereby loose His Presence
and His Favor; it was the old Roman way of Conquering Cities, they first used
Stratagems to get their Go^ds out of them; a right Romish Policy. If the
New-Englanders once forget their Errand hither, they are immediately deserted
by that God, who says, Woe to them, when I depart from them.

Unto those Enemies we may Annumerate those False Accusers, who are continually
misrepresenting of us, in the Court which we have so much Dependence on. There
is nothing more easy to be demonstrated, Than that the people of New England
are the most Loyal People in all the English Dominions; our greatest pretenders
to Loyalty among the Adversaries, we have seen cursing of their King, and their
God, and looking upward, under not a Tenth part of such Inconveniences, which
yet never so much as Raised one Disloyal Thought in our selves. We that never
were any Charge unto the Crown, unless when our Charters were taken from us;
have yet approved our selves the most Faithful Subjects of the Crown, and been
Earlier still than any of the American Plantations in Testimonies of true
Allegiance thereunto. Nevertheless, as of old, when Cyrus, who had given the
Jews a Charter, was gone off the Stage, and Cambyses was Enthroned after him,
there were a company of Samaritans, who exhibited an Information against that
people of God; said they in Ezra 4.12, 13. Be it known unto the King, the Jews
are Building a Rebellious and a bad City; if it be builded, they will not pay
Tribute and Custom, and the Kings Revenue will be Endamaged. This is one of
those Injuries which have been done to us. There are some too nearly Related
unto the Accuser of the Brethren, who are perpetually making against us those
groundless and wicked complaints, with which they first put us into Bear skins,
and then themselves intend to do the Dogs part upon us. To pass by the old
Stories, what Ridiculous and Extravagant Calumnies were the Last year published
against us, and laid before the High Court of Parliament? by which we had been
undone, if God had not provided on the Spot, a Vindicator for us. And what
Petitions, what Remonstances, what impudent Lies, may stil^ be made against us,
is less known to us, that it is by whom they are made; the men that first cause
the miscarriages among us, have usually been those that have Complained of
those miscarriages; and you know whom they take for their pattern in doing so.
But what would they have? Are they so Foolish as to foresee no Consequences, or
are they so wicked as to desire those which were the other day upon us? Forgive,
them, they know not what they do? While these Enemies are seeking to involve
our Civil Concerns in Confusion, there are Sectaries and Seducers that are
using their Batt'ring Rams upon our Sacred Ones. And among those, the Quakers
are certainly the most Malicious, as well as the most Pernicious Enemies. They
were once in a ready way to have broken up all the Good Order whether Civil or
Sacred, in the Infancy of this Plantation; which occasioned the Authorlty whom
they would have undermined, then to turn a Sharp upon them, by Laws not so
severe as those in the Realm of England against (their Fathers) the Jesuits,
on the same Account: yet those Troublesome Heretics, who had no Business here
at all, but the overthrowing of our whole Government, would push themselves on
the Swords point; and though Repeated Banishments with merciful Entreaties to be
gone, were first used unto them, nevertheless, two or three of them would
rather Die, than leave the Plantation undisturbed. It is possible a Bedlam had
been fitter for those Frantic people, than what was inflicted on them; and for
my own part, I must profess with regard unto such Heretics, Ad Judicium
sanguinis Tardus sum; nor have I the least inclinations to Hereticide as a fit
way to suppress their Errors; yea, since the Government has been too safe, and
strong, for those Foxes to throw down our wall; we have now for many years
indulged them an Entire Liberty of Conscience, nor is there (nor do I bespeak)
the ^^ast prospect or intent of giving them interruption in it; but still by
Writing, Railing, and the Arts peculiar to themselves, they are Laboring to
Unchurch all the Lords people here; they would fain have us give up our whole
Christianity, for their New Digested and scarce Refined Paganism, and have
prevailed with some obscure and Remote Nooks of the Country, so to do.
Especially every Shepherd is an Abomination to those EEgyptians: and one of
some Figure among them, an Ignorant and Malignant Apostate, who has this Mark
of the Unpardonable Sin upon him, that he calls those Prayers of ours, with
which the Holy Spirit of God, has helped us to vanquish the very Devils
themselves (...) so many Conjurings, and Charms, and Spells; this man has
vomited more venomous Pamphlets against these Churches, and all the Ordinances
therein observed, than any that have gone before him; only God has helped some
of us lately to furnish our Churches with an Antidote. But what will be the
Thoughts of our God, concerning them that are thus Doing Against His people
here? I suppose there are some of them now, in this Great Assembly, come with
no better Ends, than he who of old presented himself among the Sons of God. I
shall for their sake, use the more Freedom, and plainly say; That the Thoughts
of God about them; are not such as they can have any comfort in. I am to tell
you, That New England has an Advocate in Heaven, who has put in a dreadful
Memorial against you all; it is that in Neh. 6.14. My God, Think thou upon them
according to these their works. Ye Fool hardy men; Do but look into the
Scriptures, and you may know the Thoughts of the Omnipotent God concerning you.
There are Terrible Threats in the Book of God, which will discover the more
Terrible Thoughts in the Heart of God against men of your Complexion: It is the
Thundering voice of the Great God, in Psalm. 34.21. They that Hate the Righteous
shall be Desolate; and yet the Great Quarrel with New England has been, its
having so many Righteous in it. Some of us may Remember when this very Pulpit
had that loud and fair Warning sounded in it, in Zech. 2.8. He that touches
you, touches the Apple of Gods Eye; and who of the Auditory then present,
quickly and sadly found the Fulfillment of it upon themselves. As, There are
Scripture Menaces, thus there are Scripture-Exemples too, to strike Terror
into the Souls of them, who shall go to pull down miseries, upon a people of
the Saints of the most High. Shall we speak of lesser men? The Jewish Writers
tells us, of one Shebna, who though he Lived in Jerusalem, was very deep in the
Interests of S^nnacherib, and a secret Rotten Adversary to the people of God,
though he were a Professor among them; but God gave that Commission unto His
Prophet, in Isa. 22.15. Go, get thee unto this Treasurer, even unto Shebna, and
say, Behold, the Lord will violently turn thee, and toss thee like a Ball into
a large Country, There shall thou Die! Or shall we speak of greater men?
Sennacherib himself had been a Bloody Adversary to the people of God, and
nothing would satisfy him, unless Jerusalem too might feel the smart of his
Arbitrary Government; but what came on him at last? we read in Isa. 37.38. As
he was worshipping in the House of his God, his two Sons smote him. The Jewish
Rabbis tell us, That he had vowed to make a Sacrifice of his two Children,
unto his False God, which they understanding were thus aforehand with him. But
why do I descend unto particular instances? All the Bible is full of that
vengeance which falls upon the Heads of those that are Enemies to the people of
God. We are assured in Psalm. 105.14. He has suffered no man to do them wrong,
Yea, He has Reproved Kings for their sakes! What got the Egyptians by pursuing
after the people of God into the Wilderness, whither they Retired, that they
might worship him? I assure you, That was the Thing that filled up the measure
of all their sins; they were then ripe for the Last plague of God upon them. If
they that wrong one Saint of God, be more undone, than a man thrown into the
Sea, with a millstone about his Neck, what will be the Fate of him that shall
wrong a whole people that is Holy to the Lord. Some it may be set themselves
against the people of God, out of Revenge; and this with some shadow of Reason
and Justice on their side; but This also will not excuse them. Achitophel is
deep in the Conspiracy against David; why, David had abused Bathsheba, who was
the Grandchild of Achitophel. Yet you know what came of him! If they be
David's, or a Beloved and Repenting people, which we are prejudiced against; God
will make it a dangerous thing to meddle with them.

But if the Scriptures will not affect you; then I pray, look upon your own
unhappy Predecessors, unto whom God has made this poor People such a Burdensome
Stone, as to break the Backs of all that have been heaving at it. The
Observation has been a thousand times made, by more than ten thousand Persons,
That Remarkable and Lamentable Disasters have still followed the Adversaries of
poor New England. It has been a Country of Witnesses or Confessors for the
Lord Jesus; and it is said in Rev. 11.6. If any man will hurt them, Fire
devours them: one had as good eat Fire as go to do such a People any Harm.

What is become of those that have heretofore made their bitter Invectives
against this innocent People; and compassed Sea and Land, with attempts to put
a stop unto the Work of the Lord Jesus here? What is become of those that
bragged Their Arms were long enough to reach us, and would have Spoil't us if
they had Reached us with those bloody Popish Arms? Were there never any Ships
broken in Ezion Ge^^r for us? yea, What is become of whole Nations that have
taken up Arms for the Distressing of us? their Captains and their Counselors,
and their Families, where are they? Even so do Thy (and our) Enemies perish, O
Lord*

I beseech you to Read the History, lest you make a part of it. Let me tell
you, The people of God in this Wilderness, have had many (...) Leviathans Heads
to feed upon; and one would think, none but Leviathans or creatures made
without fear, should follow these: methinks it is a Frenzy to walk in a Track
which thus evidently leads down to the Congregation of the Dead The Famous
Mitchel (...) of that open and awful protestation, (...) that Man, be he
Churchmember, or (...) Freeman or No, who shall go about to (...) Betray the
Liberties of this people; (...) for him, that he were thrown into the (...)
Sea; And his Words have not yet (...). But what then becomes of them that
propound unto themselves no less than our Extirpation? verily, our God will
Think on them with a Vengeance. How far our God may yet Scourge us, we cannot
say; we have been undutiful enough to be worthy of Plagues that shall be Sore
and of long Continuance. Nevertheless we know what God Thinks, to do with the
Rods after all; they shall be thrown into the Fire of His Enemies. But now,
Consider of this; ye Hardy Fighters against God, Lest He tear you in pieces,
and there be none to Deliver you.

Deduction. II.
What Thoughts then ought we to have of those who Do what they can for this
people of God? Indeed the Blessed God says unto us in Jsa. 55.8. My Thoughts
are not as your Thoughts. But yet we should be studious, That our Thoughts may
be as His Thoughts. Well then, since God Thinks for Good upon them that are
Serviceable to His People, pray let us have none but Good Thoughts for them,
that are Doing for us.

New England has had, and still has its Friends, that have laid us under
Everlasting obligations; and now God forbid that we should be Ungrateful to any
of those worthy persons, that have been Exposed for us. It Is Folly as well as
Baseness in us, to Discourage any of our Public Servants, by the Ill Treats of
Ill Thoughts concerning them. The Services that have been done for this people,
by those worthy men that are now Dead and Gone, ought for ever to Live in our
Thankful memories. Posterity should know, Who those were that laid the
Foundations of our Heaven and our Earth; Who those were that most contributed
unto the Good settlement of these Colonies* and who those were that have born
the Brunt of our Day; but alas, we are so much worse than the old Pharisees,
that we even suffer the monuments over their Graves to moulder away without any
Reparations; I pray, go find if you can, the Tomb-stones of some Venerable
persons to whom New England owes an Everlasting Remembrance! Even The Families
of men that have deserved well should still be Reaping with us, an Harvest of
Respect and Kindness, out of all the Service that they did for us in the former
Generation* David could say concerning a Deserving man, in 2* Sam. 9.1* Is
there yet any left, that I may show him kindness for his Fathers sake? It Is
particularly uncomfortable to see how meanly the Families of Deceased Ministers
are provided for; many an Excellent Minister has been wonderfully Serviceable
to a people all his Days; and yet their poor Widows and Orphans are ^^st into a
more shiftless condition than any of their Neighbors* and far from being
con^^dered, as once the Excellent Dr. Twisses were; ^id not that God, whose
Household they pecu^^arly belong unto, very strangly look after them, they would
be Extremely miserable. A Disingenuity which renders us worse than many parts
of the Christian world abroad. But if those that are Departed, must be
Forgotten, however let not the Public Spirits that are yet Alive among us be
Damped by our Ingratitude. Are there any persons whose continual Thoughts are
how to make us Good; let us continually have Good Thoughts for Them; even a
Pagan Ptolomy, would bestow a more than common Respect upon those, by whose
Interpretations the Law of God was conveyed unto him. Are there any men so
Generous, as to stand in the G^ps of New England? or to spend their whole Time
and Strength, and to forego all the Delights of their Habitations, for our
Service? Oh Think upon them for Good; Requite them not with Censure or Neglect,
after all that they have done; and make none of them so sick of their Country,
as to say with him of old, Ingrata patria, Ne mortui quidem habebis ossa. I
doubt lest This very Day, discover too much of our Ill Thoughts for some whom
we do not know how much we are beholden to. O Let us Think well of all, who do
not Think much of any thing, for our Good* But, Among those that I would humbly
Recommend unto your Thoughts for Good, I would set a particular Note upon our
Valiant Soldiers, who are Venturing their Live^ for us in the High places of
the Field* Let us rather part with all we have, than leave any part of their
Wages unpaid unto them; and if any of them happen to be wounded or maimed, let
us Extend unto them the utmost of our Charity. We cannot have too many Thoughts
for Good, unto those Bone-Walls which are to receive the first onsets of our
Enemies. And while I mention these, I cannot make my self to forget another
sort of Public Servants that are every Day too meanly treated with us all; by
those, I mean, our Faithful and prudent Schoolmasters. I cannot forbear
noting it as our Folly that They usually have such a Durum opus et Ingratum, as
we make Theirs to be.

Ingratitude unto our Soldiers will render us worse than the old pagan
Athenians, who not only did Public Honors to them that perished in their
Battles, but also provided for the Comfortable Education of their Children;
(...) than the old pagan Romans, who gave to (...) Courageous Champion of
theirs, besides lar^^r presents, as much Land as a Plough ^ould run over in a
Day.

Ingratitude unto our Schoolmasters, will ^ender us worse than a Pagan Crito,
who ^ould never suffer his master Socrates to ^ant; or than a Pagan Zeno, who
would give his master as much again still as he asked for his Tuition. God
forbid, that in the Moral Virtue of Gratitude, any Pagans, ^n the world should
outdo us that have Christianity to improve us.

Deduction. III.
But O that we may be now Awakned un^o the Doing of those things for this
People, which the Good Thoughts of our God may Recompense us for.

Though poor New England be an Outcast, yet ^et her not be one, whereof it shall
be said, No man has cared for her! Methinks, I see poor, shaking, sickly
New England, Stretching out her Trembling Hands unto us all, and begging of us
with Deadly Groans, Have pity (...) me, O ye my Friends, for the Hand of the
Lord has touched me! may our pity effectually be speak our Service to this
Distressed people of God.

There are These Questions then which the rest of my Discourse must be placed
on.

Our First Question is,

What is to be Done for this People?

And the First Answer, That I should offer unto it is, We should set ourselves
to Think, what we have to Do. We all have our Talents that ly by unoccupied,
because we do no oftener Think what they be, and what is to be Done therewith.
May we now like David of old, Sit down in our Houses, and Think, What is there
that I may do for the House of my God? To be often contriving with our selves,
What may I do for this people of God? is to have Good Thoughts in Our Hearts;
and the Great God will have none but Good Thoughts in His, for the men that are
much used unto such Noble meditations. Might we all be prevailed with all to Do
This, we should soon see what Else to do; and I might spare all the rest that I
have to say.

But if I must pass to a further Answer, it shall be This, Be sure Those things
are to be Done for us, that Ill men, are most loath to have us do. The
Antipathies of them that Hate us, will be a Notable Direction unto our
Services: thus one of the Ancients argued, Christianity must needs be a good
thing; why? Because Nero could not endure it. Those are usually the Best men,
and the best things that are most barked at by men of a visible Impiety. We may
then make our worst Enemies to Do for us, whether they will or no; and seth a
Treacle out of the Vipers that are gnawing out our Bowels. We say, Malice is a
Good Informer; may we take Information from the Malice of evil men; For, Fas
est and ab host doceri.

But if you press me to a more particular Answer still; I will in one word
express the most considerable Thing that is to be done for us; It Is,
Reformation! Reformation! Reformation! We have many and many a time confessed,
That our Apostasies from God have procured unto us all the Calamities, which we
are now Groaning under. And we have lately had ^ very large Admonition from our
Honorable Rulers, to Reform our many provoking Evils. O that all ranks and
kinds of people among us, were in earnest about the universal Reformation of
our Manners. When the French recovered Calice from the Hands of the English, a
French Captain insultingly asked an English Officer, When shall we see you at
Calice again? but he made that wise Repartie upon him, Sir, when your Sins come
to be greater than ours. Truly so, it must be ascribed unto the Greatness of
our sins, that we are brought into any of our inconvenient Circumstances: and
it is the voice of our God unto us, Lev. 26.23, 24. If ye will not be Reformed,
I will punish you yet seven times for your Sins. We are beset with Devourers on
every side of us, and the subduing of them all, would be to Do for us a great
thing indeed* Behold an effectual way to Do it, in Prove. 16.7. When a man's Ways
please the Lord, He makes even his Enemies to be at peace with him. A Prince in
Germany hearing that a Neighbor Prince intended a War upon him, immediately
set himself upon the Reforming of the people under his Government; but this
Adversary of his within a while after Enquired, What Preparation his Neighbor
was making to oppose him, and being informed, That his chief Preparation was
Reformation, He Replied, Nay, then, let the Devil Fight him for all me, if he
be at that, he will be too hard for me to meddle with him. O That in like manner
we were all very Busy, at Finding, and Mending, whatever the Holy God may be
offended at us for; it is the sigh that the Compassionate God, is making over us,
O that my people had hearkened unto me, and New England had walked in my ways!
I should then soon have subdued their Enemies, and have turned my Hand against
their Adversaries! Believe it, we don't begin at the right End, if here be not
the Beginning of our Services for our Country.

If I might go on, to a second particular among the Things to be Done for us, I
would propound, Union, and applaud Union, and I would invite you with a Blessed
Harmony, to sing that Song, Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity! There the Lord commands the Blessing! The
unreasonable Quarrels, Contentions, Animosities, that have been among us, must
be apace extinguished, or silly Chickens that we are, we make our selves a prey
to the Roman Eagles, and the Indian Vultures. Travel to the East or to the
West, and see whether our Invaders have made any Impressions, but where the
Divisions of the people had made them vulnerable. I remember old Austin tells
us, that he came once into a City, where the people had a custom one day in a
year to meet, and throw stones one at another, till many of them were killed;
and yet because it was a Custom they would not leave it off. I beseech you let
no such Thing be among the Customs of New England! and let not the perverse
Spirit of Egypt be found among us. 'Twas said, in Hos. 10.2. Their Heart is
divided, now they shall be found Faulty; and upon such a Fault it will soon be
added, Now they shall be found undone. It was an Ancient Remark upon
Old-England, Singuli pugnant, and universi vincuntur; it will be well if
New England may not imitate her Mother in it. Is there no Balm for our Wounds?
Behold, The God of Heaven has been pouring Blood into them; and shall they
Rankle and we Rangle still* The Romans had a Temple Dedicated Jovi Depositorio;
the Senators went thither, and laid down their mutual Dissensions before they
went into the Senate House. O That we could now Depose all our own Little
Humors, and Forgive one another, Love one another. Help one another, and
Sacrifice all our passions to the Common Good!

There should have been at least one thing more entered into the Catalogue of
our Facienda, and that is, The Regulation of our Plantations, as to several
Disorders prevailing in them.

Of those Disorders, there is none more fatal, than that so many of them, have
Lived without the Ordinances of God among them. It Is probable, that a large
part of the Americans are the Posterity of those Canaanites, who after the Wars
of Canaan, did set up their Pillars in Africa, with that Inscription on them,
We are of those that Fled from the Face of Joshua the Robber. But alas, there
are found among us that are newly become Americans, Those of whom it may be
said, They Fly from the Face of Jesus the Savior; for they take pains to get
where they can Enjoy Nothing of Him. God from Heaven has lately witnessed
against this wickedness, by destroying those Plantations, that had not His
Defense, because they had not his Glory with them; and we are immeasurably
sinful, and absurd, if the Warnings affect us not. But is it not also possible
to Settle and Endow Schools in all our Plantations; and therefore to Compact
them from time to time into closer Cohabitations? Doubtless, men of ingenuity,
might instruct us how at once we may Advance our Husbandry, and yet Forbear our
Dispersion; and moreover at the same time fill the Country with a Liberal
Education; the want of which, has a more Threatening Aspect on us, than the
worst of our other circumstances. What more Desirable Thing is there to be done
for us, than This? That our people may be, all Taught of God. And while we are
thus Doing for our selves, may we not leave Undone the work of Christianity
among the poor naked woeful Indians, that remain in our Neighborhood; nor
forget in the first place to Civilize them, that so we may the better
Christianize them. A no less Honorable than Profitable Thing will be Done for
us, if we suffer not that work to Die, with the Late Reverend Apostle of it; and
I therefore beg, That a Committee may immediately be Ordered to inspect and
direct and report that Affair.

There is one thing more to be Done for us; and I shall propound it in words
like those of the Prophet, Deliver thy self, O New England, from every thing
that may make thee look like a Daughter of Babylon. I have the confidence to
tell you, That the Mystical Babylon, is just entering into that Vintage, which
will cause horrible and fiery plagues to impend over the Heads of those that
shall have the Superstitions of Popery polluting of them. We cannot more
consult our own Welfare, than by such an entire and open Departure from Rome,
as the Holy God will now speedily dispose the European World unto. I dare
publish it, as my Humble Conjecture and Persuasion, That the last Slaughter of
the Lords Witnesses, is over; and that we are got more than two years Depth,
into those Earth quakes which will shake yet, until they have shaken the Papal
Empire to pieces, and shaken out the very Hearts of them, that shall not come
out of her. If therefore we would be safe, at such a Time, the best thing to be
Done, is this, Let us not so much as Touch the Unclean Thing, nor hide so much
as a Rag or Pin of a Babylonish Garment with us. For the Children of this
Country to maintain any part of the Romish Worship, would indeed be not only a
wild Indiscretion, but also a vile Apostasy; and those persons are far from
discerning the Signs of the Times, who think it worth the while for them now to
forego that Great Antipapal Principle, That no party of men whatever, calling
themselves, The Church have any just Authority, to appoint any parts or means
of Divine Worship, which the Lord Jesus Christ has not in the Sacred Bible
Instituted. Let us keep the second Commandment, and our God will show Mercy to
us, for more than one Generation. If we cannot find that any Forms of Prayer
were used in any part of the Church, until about Four Hundred years after
Christ; nor any made for more than some single Province, until six hundred
years; nor any imposed, until Eight hundred, when all manner of Abominations
were introduced; surely it becomes Us to be particularly Averse unto such as
may have somewhat worse than their Novelty, to Create our suspicion of them;
and it becomes us much more to be Non Conformists unto such other Church Rites
therein advised, as were not so much as conceived, until the Man of Sin was
born* Could I speak with a voice as loud as the Last Trumpet, I should not feat
to tell you, The God of our Fathers will blast that Worldly Wisdom which counts
it a convenience for us to Dissemble our Non Conformity to whatever vain
Worship, has nothing but the Traditions of men, to be a Warrant for it.

But is there Nothing else to be Done for us? Yea, much more, than the
Languishments and Anguishes, which a sharp Sickness has newly cast me unto,
have left me strength enough to mention. And some Things to be Done for us,
were perhaps not so fit to be mentioned by one, whose profession obliges him
chiefly to the Silver Trumpets of the Gospel. Nor will I think, with Cato, That
I may not make a Speech, without that Conclusion, Carthage est Delenda; or
saying, A Neighbor Country must be subdued.

I shall therefore add no more, but what was required to be Done, in Isa. 37.4.
This is a day of Trouble and Rebuke, wherefore Lift up thy prayer. O that the
Spirit of Prayer were mightily Awakened, in every corner of the Land! If our
sinning (as one says) do not make us leave Praying, our praying will make us
leave Sinning; and then All is well. We are in a Storm, wherein that call is
justly given to us, O awake, and call upon thy God: May we then awake, and be
sending up that cry continually, Awake, awake, O Arm of the Lord, for our Help.
May our Closets, our Houses, our smaller Meetings, and our greater
Congregations, be filled with all sorts of Prayer; and may we with most Ardent
Supplications represent the whole case of this Land, unto Him that is the Hope
of New England, and the Savior thereof in the Time of Trouble! These are the
Things to be Done for us.

But it is more than time to call for our Second Question; which is,

Who are to Do these things?

Now in General, Here is Work for us All. We ought Every one of us to Serve our
Generation, before we fall a sleep, or it will be but an uncomfortable Sleep
that we shall fall into. We are, in Publico Discrimine, and that man is a Wen
or a Scab, rather than a member of this Body Politic, who shall decline the
Service of his Country.

If there were a Room here for Particular Addresses*

I. I would in the first place, Entreat my Fathers in the Ministry, to Believe,
That They have a Singular Advantage to Serve and Save this people: my Fathers,
if you do but now and then ask your selves, What Service is to be done? you
will soon find enough and enough to do. May That be Done; and may you contemn
all the Opposition of Ill men in doing of it, what though you hear Hard Things?
Even an Heathen counted that a comfort, Male de Te loquuntur Homines, sed Mali.
And a more useful man than any of us Died with that Prayer, Lord Forgive, my
Sins of Omission.

II. But I do with a particular Ardour bespeak and beseech my own Generation,
to begin the Doing of their part, that this People might yet Flourish in the
Courts of our God. Oh that the Rising Generation here, might not come behind
their Fathers in Zeal, though we come after them in Age.

We are told in 2 Chronicles. 21.12. There came a Writing to Jehoram from Elijah the
Prophet; saying, Thou have not walked in the ways of thy Father. It has been
by all Interpreters Commonly Judged, That Elijah was now in Heaven when this
Letter came from him; and I was my self of that Opinion, till the old Greek
(...), written, I suppose, by Eusebius, has Inclined me to the Contrary^ But,
if our Fathers were to write unto us from that Heaven, unto which they are
gone, I am thinking, What they would say? Would they not write in very
Disgracing Terms unto us, and say, Alas, you don't walk in our ways: we left
in your Hands, a work to be done for the People of God; but you have thrown by
that work, and found something else to be concerned about. We hoped that you
would have trod in our Steps, and that we should have shortly congratulated
your Arrival to the Glorious place, which we are Triumphing in; But we now
fear, That we have dropped you and lost you forever: and that we shall never see
you more, till we behold you wringing your Hands and Gnashing your Teeth among
the Goats at the Left Hand of the Lord. Jesus in the Day of His Appearing.

My Brethren, Though it may be said of us, They are a Generation of Sinful men
risen up in the stead of their Fathers. Yet Oh Let it not be said, They Arose a
Generation which knew not the Lord. It was a pungent word used by one on such a
Day as this, That the Books to be opened at the last Day, will contain
Genealogies in them. How, How shall we hold up our Faces, when out of those
Books it shall be Read; Such an one, the Son of such an one; His Father did
much for the People of God; but he, Nothing at all?

Come then, and be you concerned for the Good of the people, which you belong
unto, and Oh Tremble at suffering the work of the Lord Jesus here to miscarry
in your Hands, which as you may see this Day, it is coming apace into.

III. But the Things that are to be done for this people, come into no Hands
either with more Opportunity, or with more Importunity, than into those
Honorable Ones, which the Government of this Territory is now devolved into.

It Is to YOU, much Honored, that I now Address my self; and I know not what
better message to bring you, than This; That whereas you are the Ministers of
God unto us for Good, He will certainly Think upon you for Good, according to
all that you Do for His People here. It is more than a little that has already
been done for us, by your prudent and pious management of our Affayrs, which we
should Accept always with all Thankfulnes^* The Pains of Governing always are
such that Luther justly reckoned them among the three sorts that were
Intolerable. But never were they Greater at any time, than since you have been
entrusted with the Administration of our Government. That one of your Number
who can count, I suppose, Threescore years from the Time that first he took a
seat among our Magistrates, has not seen many such Troublesome years, as those
that are now Running with us. But we hope that you will still be Doing for us,
and that the Fatigues which you have undergone, have not so tired you, as to
make you say, I will not be an Healer; Choose me not a Ruler of such a
Difficult, and Unworthy people! We do this Day commit ourselves unto your Care,
and we will now look upon you as our Fathers. The first Thing that we ask you
to do for us, is, Bless us, even us also O our Fathers; it is that you would
carry us in the Arms of your prayers, unto that God, who has made us Yours. We
beseech you to take a froward and a sinful Congregation into your Arms, as Moses
did of old; and not let the Great God Alone, till by your means He become
Favorable to us. There is a peculiar Authority in your prayers; which is one
of the Considerations, that makes us prefer such a Magistracy as yours, before
the Shadows of those Brambles, that would be better skilled at Fleecing of us,
than at praying for us. If Hezekiah join with Isaiah, no Assyrians will be able
to stand before them. But we do also promise our selves, That while you Speak
for us to our God, you will toward us Act for him, who has made you such (...)
and Vicegerents of Himself, as to put His own glorious Name upon you, and who
has given you, A Sword which is not to be Born in vain. You are this Day
betrusted with an Interest as precious as any upon the Face of Gods Earth, even
the Sacred and Civil Enjoyments of many Thousands, whose Names be written upon
the breast of the Lord Jesus; and we persuade our selves, That you are
Thoughtful of the Account which is to be given in the Day, when a Well done
Good and Faithful Servant, will be worth ten thousand Worlds. The Best and the
Most that you can Do for us, is vigorously, and impartially to Execute the
wholesome Laws, which the Successive General Courts have Enacted for the
Suppression of all Vice among us; and to Encourage all Inferior Officers, as
Constables, Jurymen, Tything men, in the Discovering of all Offenders against
those Holy Laws. You are doubtless persuaded, That a Feeble Executor of the
Laws, is more Criminal than a Direct Violater of them; and it is the
Expectation of the Almighty God, that every man of you should approve himself a
Phinehas, for zealous Testimonies against the Sins that bring Humane Society
under the Blows of His provoked wrath.

Indeed, there is but only this one word of God, that I am Sollicitous now to
Entertain you with; it is that in Josh. 1.5, 6. I will not fail thee, nor Forsake
thee; Be Strong, and of a Good Courage. May there be that Courage in you, as to
forbear no Legal and Righteous Act, notwithstanding the Opposition of our
Incendiaries; that Courage as to be Affrighted by no little Bug-bears from the
doing of what must be done for the Common safety of us all. While you are
obtaining the Good Thoughts of God for your selves, you will have cause to say
before Him, as in Neh. 6.14. My God, Think thou upon those, that would have put
me in Fear. But Oh let your Faith be above your Fear, in your doing of your
Duty; and Remember that you are the Heart as well as the Head of all the People.

We ask you to Do Nothing for us, but what has a Tendency to maintain our due
Dependence on the Authority of England, and to preserve and Enlarge the English
Empire. But the Cheef Things that we Solicit you to do for us, are such as may
keep us from falling under the Displeasure of our God* so that you may
reasonably expect no Disturbance but from such as have a mind to approve
themselves, The Children without a Yoke. Methinks, there is no call that comes
from the Lofty Battlements of Heaven unto you, with more Emphasis, than that
which both my Granfathers long since chose for the subjects of the Sermons they
Preached upon such occasions as that which we now have before us; that in Hag
2.4. Be Strong, Be Strong, Be Strong, for I am with you, says the Lord of
Hosts. May you be so Strong, as to wade through all that may be formidable to
Flesh and Blood, and Exercising unto Patience; and so Strong while you sit at
our Helm, as to Believe, that though the Devil may be so much a Devil still (for
as Austin said unto the secure Christians, under the Christian princes; Let me
tell you, The Devil is not turned Christian yet!) as to raise an horrible
storm, for sinking of this Little Vessel, which has the Interests (not only of
Caesar, but) of Jesus in the bottom of it, yet our Glorious Lord will seasonably
Awake for our Deliverance.

And at the same time also, may you Be Quick, and in all your Applications use
that Expedition, which we so often miscarry by our failing in. It Was to his
Expedition that Alexander of old ascribed his conquest of the world; and
Expedition might yet make this place a Quiet Habitation. But here I am to Stop.

These things have I spoken in Gods Name, and the Mountains of Israel will
easily Hear what has been said; but, Much Honored, vouchsafe to Hear a word or
two in Man's Name, and I shall have done*

The Colony has Two sorts of people in it. There is among us, first, a party of
Malcontents, who are bitter, though it may be secret Enemies to all the Good
Order, which the Ancient Constitution of New England has molded us into. I
cannot imagine that They should Entrust me to Represent them; for, Thou come
not into their Secret, O my Soul.

But might I treat with you in Their Name, I would then broadly say! Nothing
that you do shall satisfy us; Let the Justice and the Wisdom of your Actions
be never so profound, we will Calumniate all you do; All the Requital that we
will make you for your indefatigable Endeavors to make us happy, shall be to
Reproach you, and Expose you; whatever Disaster happen to us, we will presently
say, It Is you Moses that have killed the Congregation; and because the Indians
Lay but as quiet in the Winter before the Revolution, as they have done another
Winter since, we will say, That the coming of the Government into your Hands, is
the cause of all the mischief which in the Summer they saw a Time to Do. We Will
Refuse to bear any part of the Public Charges, and yet if the Drought of the
Public Treasures make it imposible for you to do many Things that you are more
forward than any of us to do, we will Article against you, because those things
are left undone. In a word, If we could but find a Captain, we would return
into any Egypt, rather than under your Guidance, Encounter the Difficultes of a
Wilderness.

But, Blessed be God, There is among us, I Judge a Greater party of Sober,
Discreet, Religious men; men that are True Englishmen and Right New-Englanders.
It Is in Their Name, that I presume to say,

From the very Bottom of our Souls, we Thank you, Our most worthy Patriots, for
all your Studies in the Prosecution of our Prosperity. We will Believe your
Actions to be Just and Wise, though our Distance at some times do not admit us to
see the Reason of them. We will think; that you have Understanding in the
Times, to know what we ought to do, and we will be at your Commandment; nor
will we be such Foolish and Absurd Members as to fall out with our Vitals. We
will pray to our Wonderful Councellor for your Direction in your Arduous
Affairs every Day that comes over our Heads: and if in any thing you take a
wrong Step, we will impute it unto the Defects of our Prayers. We will obey
your Government while you Live, we will Embalm your Memory when you Die; and we
will Hope to Spend a Blessed Eternity with you in Praises to God, for the Good
which by your means, He has done unto us here These are the Things which this
Great Assembly, will add their Joyful, AMEN, unto.

FINIS.

