A FAITHFUL Warning and Exhortation TO FRIENDS To Beware of Seducing Spirits,
And to keep on the Armor of Light, in Sincerity and Simplicity, as their best
Armor in all TRIALS

Written by a Lover of Sincerity, and Traveller for Sion's Redemption, and for
the Removing of all Oppresions from off the Souls of them who have believed,
STEPHEN CRISP.

Reprinted and Sold by William Bradford at Philadelphia, in Pennsilvania, in
the Year 1692.

A Faithful Warning and Exhortation to Friends.
Dear Friends;
YOu know how that God in his infinite Love has visited us with a very
glorious Day, in which his Son of Righteousness is so r^^en upon us that the
heavenly warm^h thereof has quickened and enlivened us, and made us to stand
up and serve him in our Day and Generation; and the Virtue of that blessed Life
in Christ Jesus being revealed in the Souls of them who have truly believed,
has given them great Power over Death, and has made them able to grapple with
Satan in all his diverse appearances, and to overcome him; so that which way
soever he has hitherto sought to eclipse the Glory and Brightness of this
great and notable day of the Lord, he has hitherto been frustrated in his
purpose, and his Instruments have been made ashamed of their Work; for all that
are true Children of the day, do find that their standing is by Faith, and not
by Knowledge, and are by their Faith kept in a holy dependence upon the Power
of him that can overcome all things, and bring them under; so that whatever
does arise against the Truth the Fa^^h of them that are in it, lets them, even
in the beginning of it, see to the end of i^, and gives them a certainty in
themselves, by which they are settled in patient and quiet waiting to see the
thing they believe brought ^o pass; and this is their Victory, even their
Faith, and who dwells in this Faith, are not w^^ry, neither do they faint in
all the various Exercises they meet withal in the way, but can endure
Contradiction without discouragement, knowing, that whatever it is that ris^th
up against the Power and Purpose of God, shall in time be laid low.

And this is the same Faith that was once delivered to the Sa^uts in the
primitive days, when Christ the Resurrection and the Life was preached unto
them, (...) they beli^^ed, and by whom they were enabled both to do and suffer
(...) will was, and to withstand the Torrent and Sea of Contradi^^^ons they
then met withal, and the Word of God grew mightily, and their Zeal and Courage
grew for the Name of God, so that no stratagem devised against them could
prosper, as long as they kept in the simp^^city o^ the Gospel, and h^ld their
Faith which they had in a pure Con^orence* here were then great Fortifications,
that made them so prevalent and immutable, viz. Simplicity and Cleanness of
Mind; and as long as this continued, they continued of one Heart and Mind,
glorifying God, and building up one another, and comforting o^e another, and
were as Ep^t^es written in one another hearts.

Now when the Devil saw that it was impossible to stop this glorious work of
God, by all he could do, by stirring up the Priests and Rulers against them,
but their strength was in the Lord, they standing in their simplicity and
pureness of Mind; then the Adversary sought out ways, means and instruments how
to disturb their progress, by drawing one or other among themselves from that
simplicity of the Gospel of Christ, in which they had been of one heart, and
had believed and practiced the same things, without vain Disputations, and
having found some unstable Souls fit for his purpose, he wrought powerfully in
them to move Questions, which had a tendency to draw others forth to striving
about the Question, then one would have it THUS, and the other would maintain
it to be SO, neither of them minding whether the Question it self tended to the
use of edifying the Church; but a great stir was quickly raised, and that about
some few Jewish Rites, and about some right or wrong Descents in Geneologys,
one would prove it Thus, and the other So; and here was a door opened to let in
the Carnal Wisdom* to be the Weapons of this War, by which the pure innocent
Minds of many were corrupted, and some whole Households subverted; which when
the Devil ^ad thus far prevailed, he went no further, and gave Courage to some
of these his High-minded, Heady, Unruly Servants to go abroad through the
Churches, and preach up these his Questions, as Doctrines, and to seduce and
draw away who they could from the simplicity of the Gospel, and these were so
prevalent as to be witch and betray many; so that they were imboldned to
withstand the true Apostles in that glorious work in which Christ Jesus had
employed them; so that now a great deal of their work was to warn the poor
flock of Christ of these Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, and to give our
Testimonies of their own sincerity, and against these deceitful Workers* and to
open and unfold the mysterious working of that evil Spirit, and how it wrought
cunningly to make void the Offense of the Cross, that they might carry on the
Name and outward Profession of Christianity, with more Reputation and less
Reproach than at the first, for this was the design, to get the Christians into
a false Liberty, and to loosen their hearts from that sincerity and
watchfulness which was taught them in the beginning, and to what a height the
subtle Serpent carried on (...) work in that day, you may read at large in the
Scriptures of Truth, and what sad and woeful work it made in Corinth, in
Galati^, in Smyrna, in Thiatyra, and in La^dicea, and also in Achaia, and what
sorrow and labor it cost the good Apostles, and how the good Spiri^t was
grieved by these things, and the Hearts of the Righteous made sad thereby.

Yet the Enemy had in those days another Stratagem as bad as all the rest
whereby he sought to lay waste the work of God; for after the Gospel came to
spread abroad, and many were convinced, both Jews and G^ntiles, many Greeks
also came to acknowledge the Truth who had been great seekers after ^atural
Wisdom, and had sought ^o fathom natural Causes and Effects, and had studied
many ^urious Arts and Philosophic Strains and methods, which suited well with
the^^ Heathenish Worship and Religion, for them to endeavor to find out the
benevolent or malevolent Influences of Mars, Saturn, upit^r, o^ the other of
the Gods whom they worshipped; but when they came to the acknowled^^ent of the
one only true and living God, the Creator of all, and of Jesus Christ whom he
had sent, (...) they ^ound their curious Arts needless, and their Books fit ^or
nothing but the fire, and burnt in one City as many as were worth, 50000 pieces
of Silver: But alas! the Spirit that made ^se of them was not burnt in several,
but wrought cunningly to bring many of those their Tricks and Qu^^ks ^n among
the poor Believers, and endeavored to make them believe they were such knowing
men, and had such rare things to acquaint them with, far beyond the Apostles,
and then they went to work with the Opposition of Science (as they falsely
cal^ed it) and then ^very thing must be questioned and disputed that had not a
Philosophic or Natural Reason, to demonstrate to the Senses or Understanding:
and, hereby was the Faith of some made void, and many were spoiled of their
Sincerity and Uprightness by these vain deceits, and then came in looseness in
Conversation; then, a Nicholas with his Ranterism, a Jez^bel with her pre^ended
loose and wanton Prophecy's; a Balaam with his Covetous Design upon the People,
might find some to side with them: for the holy Tie and Covenant of their
Religion of bearing a daily Cross that was broken; but alas! alas! the effect
of these things was very lamentable.

And Dear Friends, having briefly touched at these things, and set these
Proceedings of Satan against the Truth among the primitive Christians before
you, I now come to tell you in great plainness and since i^ what has for some
Months lain upon my Mind relating to this subject, and concerning the day in
which we live, and the Dispensation of that Everlasting Gospel which is now
preached again unto us, in which we found the very same blessed Effects as they
did; for when we had believed therein, it brought (...) into great Simplicity,
and into cleanness of Mind, and into an unfeigned Love and Unity one with
another; and from what Parts or Countries soever w^ came, we all spoke the same
things, and the querking, querying, disputing Wit was brought down and cast out
from among us, though we could query and dispute the Opposers that were without
in defense of the Truth, yet we had then no such occasion among them that
professed Truth; for we were of one Heart, Mind and Judgment, and in that
universal Love we labored to build up one another in our most holy Faith, and
to publish and make known the blessed Name of Jesus, in whom we had believed,
and many were daily added to the Church, and came to partake of the same Faith
and of the same Love, and grew into the same simplicity of Mind, wherein we
found a harmonious rejoicing in Spirit when ever we saw one another: In this
state did the Truth preserve us, and our Faith, was firm in that Name and Power
by which we were called, that the Lord would go before us and prosper us in his
blessed Way, in which he caused our Souls to take great delight, and take up
the daily Cross cheerfully, and deny our selves for the sake of him that called
us.

But the old Enemy of Truth envied this our tranquillity quickly, and began to
work in some where he found a ground to work in, and sought to lead them from
the simplicity of the Truth, and to exalt their minds in the sight of things
opened by the Truth, and so did not abide in the tender fear of God, and in the
humility of the innocent Seed, but flew up into airy Notions and Imaginations,
some into a false L^berty, and others into strange Imaginations of their own
growth to some high state, and so gr^^ head^ and unruly, and were ha^dned,
against Exhortations; rather judging themselves fit to ^each* than to be
taught, and these drew several after them, through an affection that was not
subject to the Cross and became an occasion of O^fence and Stumbling to many
who were enquiring after the Way of the Lord, and a great exercise and sorrow
to such as kept in the Travail and Labor for Sion's Redemption; but those that
abode in the faith, knew that the Power in which they had believed, would
arise, and crush down and bruise under that lofty airy Spirit, and all that
abode in (...)* and did not repent and return to their first love, and do their
first Works, and according as we believed it came to pass, and their works with
which they sought to amuse and astonish the Nations, were confounded and
brought to naught, and diverse that did adhear and cleave to that spirit, were
lost and scat^er'd, (...) grew into Prophanness and Uncleanness, and strove
against the Power of God that wrought in his People, to reclaim and regain
them, till at length the very Power of God turned against them and cut them off
who had been the Troublers.

Yet did not the Serpent leave off attempting to betray the Innocent, but found
out other Instruments fit for his purpose, whom he raised up under pretense of
some New D^scoveries, accompanied with a voluntary Humility, and a seeming
Self-denial, when indeed the design was to Exalt Self and Man's Work, Wit and
Reason, above the Eternal Power of God, and through feigned Pretenses to obtain
(...) Dominion over the Heritage of God, and to impose and ob^rude upon them
things which were no^ taught by the living Spirit, Christ, Jesus in themselves,
nor had received by Doctrine nor Message from the true spiritual Laborers in
the Gospel, by which means the Minds of many were betrayed, and they were
exe^cised in contending about some outward signs or (...) of their separation
till the weighty matter they should have minded, viz. How to be kept in the
love of God, and in the Heavenly Unity, was in a great many lost and forgotten,
and instead thereof a secret Root of Bi^terness grew up, and a ha^red against
the Prosperity of the Church of God, and the faithful Servants and Ministers of
it, insomuch that they lost the very fence of Gods blessed Presence amongst us,
and reckoned he had fo^^aken us, and thereupon many of them also ^orsook us,
and were as another People, and were puffed up with great Expectations of our
downfall, and their own Exaltation, and began to (...) their design o^
S^peration into other ^^ations, to the hurt (...) them* so that the render Love
of God, that had wrought in the hearts of the faithful Laborers and Ministers
of the Gospel, to the gathering them out of the World, now wrought again
effectually, to gather many of them out of this S^lf-Seperation, and with great
Patience and Longsuffering did we travail and labor with many, and the Lord
beheld our sincerity and care, and blessed his work in our hand, so that the
Eyes of many were opened to see the crafty Snares by which they were en^angled,
and power was given them of God to break through, and testify against the
crafty Wiles of them that had deceived them, and the Lord arose in his great
and mighty Power in and among his People, and set an Eternal Judgment on the
head of that spirit, and its work of Dissension and S^peration, that it had
wrought, and it could then proceed no further, but withered, and came to
naught; and those who wilfully resisted the offers of the love of God, and of
his People, they grew more and more corrupt and perished wholly from the way of
the Lord, and the ^ociety of his People, and turned back* some into the worlds
worship and religions, and others into gross pollutions that are therein, and
the Churches of Christ who stood faithful and true to the leading of his
Spirit* came to have rest from that extreme labor and travel which they had
lay^ several years under, by reason of these things; and God fulfilled the
Prophecy, of diverse of his faithful Servants, who by their faith, had seen, and
by the spirit had testified at the beginning of that spirits work, what the end
of it should ^e; for many there were, who saw, That it was from the Earth, and
thither it would return, and there it was swallowed up, and all its substance;
and as many as denied to be warned, perished with it: Then did the Souls of the
faithful give glory and honor to God, in whose hand is Power and Dominion, and
he reigns on high in his Strength, and is King of Saints, and the Defense of
his S^on, now hence ^orth and for evermore.

These Exercises put and stirred up all the faithful to great vigilence and
watchfulness, for the keeping the Enemy out for the future, at least ^s much as
in them lay; and those that were faithful and ancient Friends, both Men and
Women, found it incumbent upon them to meet together to wach over the Flock,
and to see to the Conversations of them who pro^est the Truth, that it might
answer to their Professions; and where the cont^ary appeared, to deal with
them, and to reclaim them, if possible, or else to deny them, and to clear
Truth and Friends of them, and their disorderly Courses; and in this good work
the Lord blessed them, and showed his Presence among them, and gave them Wisdom
and Understanding, and they took care of the Widows and Fatherless, of the Poor
and A^flicted Families among them, and had the care upon them concerning
M^rriages, that none might com together in a disorderly manner, but that all
things might be clear on either side, and the consent of Parents might be
obtained before Marriage, and that all things might be kept in good order and
savoury in the sight of God and Men; and diverse Epistles were written from
several elder ^rethr^n for their encouragement and direction in this good work;
for we knew it was Gods Work, and would tend to the limiting of loose and
unruly spirits, who sought liberty more than sincerity, and sensuality more
than Christ's Governmen^, and their subj^ction to the divine Power of God. And
when some exalted spirits came to see unto what this work would tend, they took
offense thereat, and sought to weaken the hands of the faithful Friends in this
good work, under pretense that all must be left to the Witness of God; and if
People did not find judgment in themselves for what they did, they must not be
judged by others, being themselves gone from Truth's judgment, and hardened
then they cried out of Innovasion and Imposition and such like. And hereupon
were many again seduced and subverted, and drawn away from their stedfastness
in the Truth, and beg^n to appear against the good Order of the Lords People
and to reflect upon the godly care that lay upon them, with unhandsom and
unsavory Speeches and Writings, till a secret root of bitterness and enmity
got into several that had been convinced, and in this root the Enemy wrought
with great craft and subtil^y to draw them ^he blessed Unity that is in Christ
Jesus, the true head of the true Church, and begat them into many ^ealousies
and groundless sears of an Apostasy, while in the mean time he drew them so far
to apostatize from their first love and their first works, that they proceeded
to expose Friends both in particular and in general, to the reproach and scorn
of the World, as much as in them lay. All which wa^ born and suffered with much
long-suffering and patience, and a great travail lay upon many to endeavor the
redu^^ment of them that did thus oppose themselves; for we knew our sincerity,
and knew that the Lord would stand by us, and bless our work and labor of Love
and blast their work of Enmi^y, and that their striving against the Lord and
his blessed work in the hand of his innocent People, would not, nor could
prosper, we doubted not at all but he that stood by us, and helped us from the
beginning, would still stand by us, and give his Truth and People the victory
over every tongue and pen that rose up in judgment against us, as he has done
to this day, and their work is manifest, and they can proceed no further,
blessed be his Name forever.

Now dear Friends, I have made this brief Relation of the forementioned
Passages, that they that are young in the Truth may see, and they that are
older may be put in mind, how the old Adversary of Truth has already wrough^
in this our day, and what has been the end and tendency of his work in all his
various Appearances, even as in the primitive days, to stop the bright shining
of the Gospel; if he could; and whereas he is not able to do that, his next
work is to see whom he may devour, that is, whom he may so ensnare and ^ntrap
with his subtle Bates and Gins, as that he may, first, Draw them from the
simplicity of the Truth; next, into an exaltedness in Knowledge; then, into
prej^dice and enmity against those that stand in the way to hinder their
exalted N^tions; and by this time he has taught them to break the Law of
Charity, and to think evilly of the Upright, and to disesteem the blessed ^^^ty
and F^llowship that is in the Truth, and then they are fi^ted for Schism and
Separation upon one specious pretense or another: Therefore how Watchful ought
every one to be, for the keeping out this destroying Spirit, which has brought
several already to that pitch of enmity and defiance to the Truth and People of
God, that if it had been told them in the days of their render convincement,
they would have been ready to say, with Hazael, Is thy Servant a Dog, that he
should do these things?

And Friends, know this for certain, that Satan is still working, and seeks to
winnow you, and where there does remain, after a long convincement, a lightness
and an airyness in any, such are easily driven with his pernicious Winds; and
to this purpose he has stirred up some in several C^ties and Countries, such as
he knows are fit for his purpose, who never knew a real Mortification upon that
earthly sensual Wisdom that is from beneath, but have too much saved that alive
in themselves, which God did in their first convincement pass a sentence of
Death upon; and these, as they cannot reach to a partaking of the Life of Truth
in themselves, no more can they reach nor attain to the hidden Mystery of the
Unity that the Lords People have one with another in that Life of Truth, but
another life and a power they have, and in it they grow headstrong and fierce,
D^sp^sers of them that are born of the spirit, yea, they grow in Wisdom from
one degree to another, but its neither pure nor peaceable, gentle no^ e^sie to
be entreated, by their Fruits ye may know them; for from this wisdom they are
often found starting some subtle and abstruce Questions, to amuse the Minds of
the simple, and to cause the weak in the faith ^o err, and to draw away
^nstable Souls after them, as if they had brought forth some New D^sco^eries,
and then here is work for disputing Wits, by all which the Minds are drawn
farther and farther from the true Watchfulness, that becomes those that have
such an Enemy ^o deal wi^hal.

H^nce it is that all those Janglings are sprung about the ^orbidden Fruit,
what it was, and whether good for food, or not good for food? upon which some
have closed with that primitive and first Error, with which Eve was ensnared,
and have judged i^ good for food yea, and have fed upon it too, till their
knowledge has grown greater in the evil than in the good. Hence it is, that
another starts Questions about ^^e Mortality or Immort^lity of the Soul:
Another, of the state of (...) Soul after the Death of the Body, Whether it
abides a single Essen^^, or cease^h to have any singular Essence or Being:
Another, about the state of the Body after Death: Another, about how many
Bodies one and the same Soul may or m^st ^^ve at sundry times: Another, how
long wicked Men or Angels m^st and are the Wr^^h of God for Rebellion: Another
comes forth and says, There is no such thing as ^rath or Anger in God, and all
that ^s written thereof in holy Scripture is but metaphorically spoken: And
many more such like Fancies and doting Questions does this Birth bring forth,
for the trial of your Faith and St^d^astness in the Truth, by which the Enemy
is, as I said, trying and winnowing to see where he may meet with his own, and
may deceive and draw away some from the Faith and Unity, and teach them some
other Way and Doctrine besides the narrow way of Regeneration.

Now my dear and well beloved in the Lord, you are Witnesses unto this day in
how great simplicity and plainness of Spe^ch we have preached the Word of God
among you from the day the Lord sent us forth to this day; we came not to you
with ^inticing words, we needed not Logical nor Philosophical Demonstrations;
for our Testimony had the Demonstration and Evidence of the Spirit of Truth in
your hearts and our words, or the Word of God in our mouths, has not altered
nor changed unto this day, but remains the same as eve^ it was. The great
D^ctri^ of the Gospel was and is Regeneration without which there is no
entrance, the only means and way to attain it, was and is that Light and Grace
that comes by Jesus Christ, and sancti^ies and purifies, and brings to him, by
whom the entrance is ministered into the Kingdom; these things have we declared,
and these things ye have believed and in this Faith are many of our faithful
B^^thr^n fallen asleep, and their precious Souls are at rest wi^^ the Lord; and
herein if ye abide steadfast to the end, ye shall do well.

And as concerning all such who do seek to trouble any of your minds with the
things abovementioned, or any other such subtle and crafty Questions, keep you
your habitations in the power of God* and you will daily come more and more to
discern the tendency of them, how it is a spirit that works against the Cross,
and ^eeks to cause the offense of it to cease, that they might bear (...) (...)
of Truth, and live in a loose Conversation without con^^^^ or judgment, and you
will see them come to naught, like ^^^ers before them.

And for the carrying on this kind of Libertism, all these strange ^otions are
hatched and spread about to corrupt the Minds of whom they can; for the Devil,
who is the Author of them, knows well how to apply them to the adva^cement of
his own Kingdom, and for the easing, or rather hardening the Consciences of such
who receive these things, that they may thereupon make off the Sense which
sometime they had of the Righteous Judgment of God, and slight the judgment of
his People, and give the reigns to their Lusts and passions, and yet all the
while make (...) P^ofessi^n and outside appearance among the innocent People of
God. O Friends! these are blots and spots that are among us, these are they by
whose means the holy Name of God is blasphem^d and his blessed p^r^ Way evil
spoken of by many, and the hearts of the ^pright made sad from day to day;
these are such as cost the Apostle tears, when he writ I told you (...)* them
before, and now (...) weeping, they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ: These
cause the feet of some to stumble, and others to perish from the Way of the
Lord, and yet all the while carry a secret Bolster under them t^ bear
themselves upon, having let in a belief or supposition, either that there (...)
no such Wrath and Judgment to expect from the hand of God, as has been largely
spoken and written of by the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, and all the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel, unto this day; or if there be Wrath and
Judgment to be revealed, it will be but for a time, and then they shall (...)
restored to Glory and Happiness, or if they fall short of a due fitting and
preparing for the Kingdom of God on this side the Grave, its no great matter,
for they shall have other O^portunities, even in th^^ World hereafter, when
they shall be born in other Bodies.

Some few secretly boulster themselves up, and endeavor to possess others with
the supposition or notion of the ^^nite P^^^shment of Wicked Men and Devils, in
the World to come, as where the holy Scriptures mention, viz. Everlasting Fire,
the sin against the holy Ghost never to be forgiven in this World, nor in that
which is t^ come; Eternal Judgment, Vengeance of Eternal Fire, The Smo^^ (...)
their Torment shall ascend up forever and ever, etc. (as plainly d^clared by
Christ and his holy Apostles and Gospel Minister) these they limit only to
Ages. Another he boulsters himself up with a belief, That if he does evil, his
Hell is only here in his own Conscience, but when he leaves the world all
things will be as if th^^ had not been, and the Soul shall dye with the Body,
and (...) ^^nihilation as well as th e Body, ^r shall be swallowed up out of
all particularity, as a drop of Water into the Sea, and so then what matter.
And this is the evil seeds man, sowing these cursed seeds o^ fleshly Liberty
and Ranterism, even in our day, and has prevailed upon some to their
destruction; and they that are seduced, as the Apostle says, do wax worse and
worse, seducing whom they can by these their pernicious ways, the consequences
whereof are woeful and lamentable to consider, and has cost me and many more
great sorrow and grief; and truly Friends the weight of these things was heavy
upon my mind for some time, and it lay upon me to give a warning to all that
have an ear to hear, lest they suffer their minds to be corrupted by the subtle
laying in wait of Sa^an and his Instruments; for though I know there is many
thousands who know the price and value of their immor^al Souls, and many who
have truly traveled for the Redemption of Souls, who do not stand in need to
be warned of these subtle designs, but do live in that which comprehends the
Devil and his crafty working, yet I am drawn forth in love and tenderness to
the weak and such ^s are not yet grown to a stability in the everlasting and
elect seed of God, to exhort them, To take heed to themselves, and to be
stirred up to faithfulness and diligence, and to approve their ^^ar^s in the
sight of God, in sincerity and lowliness, that so they may feel his secret
preserving Power to keep them ^om these Gins and Nets of the cunning H^nters,
who lie in want to bega^l and betray whom they can

And Friends, to you who have not known the depths of Satan, have a few things
to offer to your serious consideration, 1 st, You know in what manner you were
convinced, and how your understandings were opened, and you brought to the
acknowledgment of the Truth, was it not by the shining of that true light of
Christ Jesus in your souls, which by its inward working showed you that your
souls were made subject to a power of darkness, that had defiled them and made
them unfit for God to dwell in and to take delight in, then you saw what a
contrariety and disproportion there was between the pure Light and your impure
Souls, whereupon judgment from God was manifest for the curbing, limiting and
destroying that power that had thus defiled the Minds and Consciences; and when
ye came to believe this judgment to be the very judgment of God, ye submitted
to it, as right and due unto you; and as ye thus submitted to it, ye quickly
found some power to with-stand the T^mptations of the dark power that had
captivated you; and did you not then feel your Souls somewhat eased, and a
hope raised, That as ye abode faithful unto that light, you might obtain power
to withstand your souls Enemy in all his appearances; so that the Faith that
was delivered unto you in the b^ginning* was, that your souls should be so
sanctified, fitted and prepared, as to become a Habitation for God, and that he
would so strengthen you, that ye should be able to stand against the Devil and
his Power, who sought to defile and destroy the soul; and they that have been
diligent, and kept this Faith, have sound it to be a Shield and a Defense in
the times of their Trya^s and Temptations, so that they have found Victory by
(...) and their Souls have come to know a deliverance from under the Enemy's
Power, and have received ability to serve the Lord, and have felt the blessed
freedom and ^^berty in the truth, which they so much desired and longed for.

Now, wherefore has all this work been to redeem the Soul, and to convert it,
and change it from under the dark Power, and to bring it under the heavenly and
glorious power of Christ Jesus? I ask them that have known this work, Was it
^n^y for a few days or years that we were to continue here in these Bodies? or
was it not the effect of the eternal Love o^ God in Christ, that in him our
Souls might be eternally happy? I know such as have truly known this Travel, d^
know the Soul to be more worth than the value and worth of the whole World, and
they are not liable to the seducements of such as would undervalue the Soul.
But alas! there is too many that never knew what it was to travel for souls*
neither in themselves nor in others, but have received a sight and knowledge of
things at a distance, in a speculative way, as lookers on, and these having
grown up into a Profession by a sight, without a real work in themselves, are
very ready to be seduced, and to seduce others, and wanting the substance that
never waxes old, are always ^^ching after some new thing, which for a time
seems to be delightful to them, till a newer thing is presented, and then they
are for that also, and so are always gadding and changing their ways, till at
last they are by the mastering subtilty of their Souls Enemy (who has power in
such unstable Minds) led back again into the world, or into diverse sects, heaps
and opinions, that are of the world, and a ^al^e Liberty gets up in them, in
which they grow heady and stub^orn, and look upon every one that seeks to
reclaim them as their Enemy, and let in hand and bitter thoughts against them,
and the Enemy fills them with Prejudice, and in that state they seek for the
failings of others, and feed upon them, as Bread, to streng^hen themselves* and
so grow more and more estranged from the innocent*Life that is in Jesus, and
that he has given for food for the Children of the Kingdom.

O this is a sad Condition! and I have often with deep sorrow lamented the
state of some, to whose hands peradventure this may come, when I have seen what
a good beginning they have made in the way of God, and have been as pleasant
plants, and hopeful to bring forth much fruit to the honor of God and comfort
of his People, and especially to the comfort and salvation of their own
immortal Souls; and yet after some good progress made in the Lords way, for
want of a diligent watchfulness and keeping close to the daily Cross and
Self-denial, have laid themselves open to the spoilers, who have cunningly got
an entrance into them, some in the affectionate party, some in the wise
reasoning party, some through sowing the seeds of prejudice, and some one way,
and some another, and have beguiled them of the simplicity, and drawn them from
the sincerity that is in the Truth; and so they have both lost their first love
and their first Works also.

And of these, some are so far dead that they have lost all sense and feeling
of that love of God that works in the ^earts of his People, for the regaining
of them, and to such I shall say little, but tell them, My Soul shall mourn for
them in secret, until the Lord eases my Spirit concerning them: ^ut for the
rest, who yet do retain something of a love to the Lords People, and have
sometimes an ear open to hear counsel, to these I say, God has put it into my
heart to warn you, That ye strengthen those things that are ready to dye,
before the Lord appear against you for your hard words and hard Thoughts, and
come down into humility, and feel after the first Tenderness and brokenness of
heart, which once you felt, and hold a fast to the Lord, feed no more upon your
carnal Reasonings, hearken no more to those ^ed^c^rs that have drawn you from
your stedfastness in Christ Jesus, and your place in the Body; for be ye
assured, as your food is, so will your Life be; and if ye will still feed upon
the airy Notions of that carnal Wisdom, into an airy light and wanton life ye
will grow, and if your food be to lick up the dir^ and foulness that you can
find here and there, and to feast thereon, then be liable to vo^it it up again,
as some have done, this will nourish nothing but the Serpent's Life, which the
Power of God will overcome. But dear Hearts, sink down, sink down while yet an
Arm of Love is reached out to you to receive you, and wait in lowliness to be
brought into that heavenly House, where there is meat indeed and drink indeed;
and remember that express sentence of our Lord, who said, Except ye eat my
flesh and drink my blood, ye have no life in you: This is the holy No^rishment
that nourishes up the Heir of the Kingdom, into which many are entered, and
many of the dear People of God whom ye count lightly, of, are traveling to
obtain an entrance.

And Friends, let me use yet one Argument more with you to persuade you to turn
into the unity and fellowship of the Truth and Power of God, in which ye
sometimes took delight with us to walk in it, and that is an Argument from your
own Experience, to wit* the feebleness that has fallen upon many of you, since
^e departed from the heavenly Unity with your ancient Friends and Brethren*
what a decay of strength and courage in the bearing f^rth the several
Testimonies for the Name of Christ as they were received from the beginning,
and by the faithful Followers of him, are to this day kept and accounted of, as
of more worth than a little outward liberty or estate, or such like.

But O my Friends! how is this tie loosned? and how is fleshly Reasonings
gotten up to shun the Cross, and the sufferings that attend the Gospel, and an
unreadiness in many to give up for his Name's sa^e, so that they are as if they
had lost their spiritual Armor, and their fervent zeal and love to the Truth,
and the Testimonies of it, which once were dearer to them than their all in
this World; and it is indeed impossible that the Love to God and his Truth
should remain in its former strength, when the love to the Brethren decays,
they came together and they will go together: And the want of this love to God,
and to his People, is the ground of declining Truth's Testimony, and using
indirect ways to shift and shun the Sufferings that comes for Truth's sake, by
which the hands of Traths ^^^mies are strengthened, and many stumbling Blocks
have been laid in the way of the weak; I beseech you to consider these things,
and lay them to heart, while there is a day and opportunity to return to your
first love, and to your first zeal for the Truth.

And Dear Friends, I might go into particulars to lay before you wherein this
decay of love and zeal for God and his precious Truth is manifest in many, but
I spare you, knowing there is a faithful and true Witness for the Lord, that
will (if you mind it) ^^ew you more particularly wherein any has failed, and
to that Witness of God I do recomme^d what I have written to you, which will
testify that I have written in true love to your Immortal Souls. And whoever
slights this tender Warning and Exhortation sent to them in the love of God,
will but harden their own hearts more and more, and lay themselves open to the
Se^^cing Spirits, to be carried away by the Wiles of subtle m^n, who seek to
draw from the Foundation that God has laid, and to bring you again to trust to
uncertainties, and to fill your Minds with ^^necessary things, and to neglect
the weighty matters, and the one thing needful* Therefore Friends, wait to feel
the daily rene^ings by the holy Spirit in your selves, and that will renew your
love to God and to his Truth, and the Testimonies of it, and to the Brethren
that have labored in it for the good of your Souls, and to all the faithful
F^llowers of the Lamb of God every where, and that will renew your love and
zeal to the Truth, and to the Testimonies of it, and keep it fresh, and give
you a sense of the exceeding great value of it; and then you will see that the
service of all that is given you, is but to serve the Lord in his Truth; and in
the holy Faith you will have a sense of the Reward of all in your own Bosom,
that ye loose and suffer for the Lords sake, and in this you will have an
Inheritance with all the sanct^fi^d Children of Light; Which that ye may all
possess, and none fall short of, is the earnest Desire and Prayer of your
faithful Friend in the unchangeable Truth.

S C.

THE END.

