Holwell's PREDICTIONS: Of many REMARKABLE things, which may Probably Come to
PASE, from the YEAR 1689. Until the YEAR. 1700. Written 1682.

Cambridge* Printed by S. G. for Benjamin Harris, at the London, Coffee-House
at Boston. 1690.

Of the Astrologicall Judgment of the YEAR. 1689.
IN this Year, there is no Material Direction of the great Conjunction 1603.
nor of the New Star 1704. but on the 4 th day of January Saturn meets with the
Quartile of Jupiter, the third time Saturn is in Scorp^^ 5 35. and Jupiter
5.35. Aquarius, and on the 22 th. day of September Saturn is opp^sed by Mars*
Saturn being 6 degrees of Scorpio and Mars 6 degrees of Taurus. There is also
two famous Eclypses of the Moon, the first falls March 25 th day, at 7 of the
Clock at Night, in 15 degrees of Libra visible, the second is the Moon Septem
19 th. day, at 2 of the Clock in the Morning, in 7 degrees of Aries. Were it
not for the Quartile of Saturn and Jupiter* Jupiter being in the House of
Saturn, we might expect to have our Troubles ended in ^he World. For the Moon
being Eclyps'd in the second face of Libra threatens a Rot to fall among
Informers and Trapanners, and Catch-poles, and they shall suffer for their
former Knavery; the Sun being in Aries, the Land of England shall take part of
this Blessing but the Opposition of Saturn and Mars from Scorpio and Taurus
bring affliction to Ireland and Russia, Folonia, Swedeland, and Norway; the
City of Algiers now is much afflicted, by having their Ships destroyed and
their Men taken Captive, Ireland is full of affliction, Swedeland and Norway,
are at War up to the Ears, while Austria and Alsatia lament their former
losses, Hamburgh will go nigh to beat variance with the King of Denmark, and
come to damage thereby.

Of the Astrological Judgment of the YEAR. 1690.
IN this Year, the great Conjunction 1603. comes by direction to the place of
the new Star 1572. which Star appeared in 1654. of Taurus, having of 5345. of
North Lat. and it was of a Jovial color, this direction is of a notable
signification. In this Year also there is a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars on
the 20. of November in the 23 th* degree of Scorpio.

All Europe up in Arms, nothing expected but an universal change, which I fear
will come to them* Now let them do what they ^an, this Conjunction will fall in
Quartile to the Conjunction 1682. Now Italy where are all thy Princes, now shut
the Stable door to prevent the case of a Horse that is already stole. Oh! what
dangers and troubles are thou like to undergo! Oh! what unspeakable Villainies
have thou been guilty of! Oh! what unlooked and unhoped for Death art thou like
to endure, all caused by thine own wretched Villainies, strange Apparitions in
the Air, so likewise in men's minds. The Sea rages with mighty Tempest, and
whatever now the Mock-star came to declare to thee as to future Contingences,
shall now and in this Year be made manifest to the purpose! Oh! what running
too and fro will there be of Ambassadors to make an Union among themselves, but
all will be in vain, for the bank being broke, the inundation must needs
follow, alas poor Ireland, are not thy troubles at an end? I could wish they
were, thou are pointed at this Year to suffer a little more. England be thou
content, for thy condition is better than thy neighboring Nations.

The Comet that appeared in 1680. comes to an Opposition of Mars, and to a
Quartile of Sol and Venus in the great Conjunction 1603. Spain now and Portugal
suffer much by the Sword, Plague, and scarcity of Food: France is still at
division among themselves, that Kingdom is nigh to an Universal Catastrophe,
many of her Towns will be laid wast now near these times.

Of the Astrological Judgment of the YEAR, 1691.
THis Year has notable Directions, ( viz.) the Sun, Moon, and Venus. all of
their meet with (by direction) to the Quartile of the Sun, and Moon, and Venus,
that is, they come, to the Quartile of there own place, the midheaven of the
Full Moon preceed the appearance of the New Star, meets with the place of the
Conjun^tion of Saturn and Jupiter, 1682. and in this Year also, have we a very
considerable Opposition of Saturn and Mars, on the very degree of Scorpio, as
the Conjunction fell on, that is, Saturn is 23 degrees in Scorpio, and Mars 23
degrees in Taurus; there is also this Year two Eclypses of the Sun, the first
will be February the 18 th. day, at 5 of the Clock in the Morning, in 10.
degrees of Pisces, the second will be on the 13 th. day of August at 6 of the
Clock at Night in 1 degree of Virgo visible. The first will not from these
Configurations and Directions, do I judge that this will be a Year of great
action. Ireland still continues in trouble, and suffers great loss, Russia and
Sweedland are in great perplexity, they are both involved in that trouble, they
cannot be easily rid of it, it would have been better for the Sweed not to
concern himself with War, for he shall be a looser by it, the Moon being with
all her Quartiles in Virgo; in th^se Countries shall be popular Tumults and
Insurrections. Croatia now suffers much, nor is France free, no not Paris her
self. Oh! what Consultations are there, how to cut off the Protestant Party by
a Massacre, or some such means? but they shall make the Proverb good, he that
diggeth a Pit for another, shall fall in it himself; for they have been the
chief cause of all Europ's Troubles that are now on Foot, the Troubles that
were from 1672 to 1682, were nothing to these that are like to be about these
times, indeed the Trine of Saturn and Jupiter last Year, did cause a great many
to endeavor for to make a Reconciliation of those differences, but the
Animosities among men were so great, that they were not able to complete any
thing; but it is possible, that some League was made there between some
Princes, to join against others, Saturn and Jupiter make this Year there first
Opposition from Sagitarius and Gemini, Saturn being in 5.48 of Sagitarius, and
Jupiter in 5.48 of Gemini, Saturn being so near the place of the great
Conjunction 1603, and there is opposed by Jupiter, this brings strange and
unheard of Translations upon the Stage of the World: Spain still is a looser,
and drinks deep of the Cup of affliction. Now London this Opposition points a
little at thee, a great deal of Faction is like to be in thee, thou harb'rest a
crew of Villains that seek thy Ruin, there will be a pay day for them. France
look thou to thy hits, thou of all Nations will be the greatest Sufferer, and
you may find about these times that God is just. Hungaria is made like unto a
Wilderness by her Devastations. But be thou content, after thy Storm is over
(which as yet must last a little longer) thou shall enjoy a long peace.

Of the Astrological Judgment of the YEAR. 1692.
ALL the Directions that will be this Year, is only Mercury to the Quartile of
his own place, but there is the second Opposition of Saturn and Jupiter, Saturn
being 14.11. of Sagitarius, and Jupiter 14.11. of Gemini. There is also a very
remarkable Conjunctoin of Saturn and Mars in 15 degrees of Sagitarius, very
near the New Star, 1604. There is also no less than 5 Eclypses this Year; the
first falls on the 23 d. of January (an Eclypse of the Moon (...) of the Clock,
in 14 degrees of Leo; the second is of the Sun, on the 6 th. of February, about
5 of the Clock at Night, in 28 degrees of Aquarius, these two are not visible,
the third will be an Eclypse of the Moon on the 18 th. day of July, at 4 of the
Clock in the Morning, in 6 degrees of Aquarius; the fourth will be of the Sun
August the 2d. day at 9 of the Clock in the Morning, in 20 degrees of Leo, and
the last will be of the Sun on the 27th. day of December at 2 of the Clock in
the Afternoon, in 17 degrees of Capricornus. Both these two of the Sun, and the
last of the Moon are visible.

Now comes the tripple Conjunction 1682, to operate to the purpose: The Sun
suffering an Eclypse upon the very degree of that Conjunction, and the Moon
suffers an Eclypse upon the very degree of the Conjunction May 1683. Alas poor
Italy, how art thou afflicted? Spain is also Partakers with thee, thou art
threatened with scarcity of Grain, many of thy People will dye for want of
Bread, and those that are left will be Rebels against their Governors, it
declares damage to Kings and great Persons, (viz) their Death, or Banishment, a
Pope if there be any about these times* will dye: France and England are
intoxicated with Tribulation, but in what nature, time will best declare: The
Hungarians drink deep of the Cup of Affliction, a great Famine is threatened
them, and in all the East part of Germany: France is more concerned than
England, nay she shall quake for fear: Alas, Bohemia thou art in a bad
condition, and so is Sicily, the Tartars, and the Sweed, are much concerned
this Year.

Of the Astrological Judgment of the YEAR. 1693.
IN this Year 1693. Mercury in the great Conjunction, comes to the Quartile of
the Conjunction it self. And in this Year (viz) April the 22d. day, Saturn and
Jupiter make the third and last Opposition, Saturn being in 21.16. of
Sagitarius, and Jupiter 21 16. And there is also an Opposition of Saturn and
Mars, in July following, Saturn 16.0 in Sagitarius, and Mars 16 in Gemini:
There are also Four Eclypses of the Luminaries this Year, two of the Sun, and
two of the Moon; the first is of the Moon on January the 12th. day, at 4 of the
Clock in the Morning in 1 degree of Leo visible, and a great one; the second
will be of the Sun on the 23d. day of June near Noon, in 12 degrees of Cancer,
this will be a very great Eclypse as has happened this 40 Years; the third will
be of the Moon July the 7th. near 10 of the Clock in the Morning, in 25 degrees
of Cancer (...) the last will be of the Sun on December the 16th. day a
Midnight, it will be a great Eclypse, but not visible.

The Judgment of this Year differs but little from the last. Bohemia is
afflicted with a scarcity of Grain and other Provision fit for Food. The Commit
that appeared in 1680, has lately passed the Quartile of Saturn, Saturn is in
Cancer and the Commit in Aries: Hence are England and Scotland concerned, the
last time that Saturn was in Opposition of Jupiter was in the Year 1634, and
then there was a great Plague in Rome, some such like Distemper will rage there
this Year, a great many of the great men will dye of that place, whether
Cardinals or Popes, let time declare, they have before now had 2 or 3 Popes in
a Year, I also fear that a many Towns about in England, will have a Plague or
some Distemper as bad. Spain, Hungary, and Dalmatia, are still in a
distraction, what must Spain still be a loser? Those places under Cancer will
be afflicted with Calamity* a Mortality will rage within the Countries;
Ceranado Burgandy, and Holland, men shall be very much given to Knavery, many
Diseases to Woman, sudden and (...) Deaths to the meaner sort of People. The
City (...) must expect to have share of this years Transactions, if some of thy
Magistrates should be brought to Justice, then say I am a true Prophet, many
Villainies will be acted in thee, some Plots will be discovered, and the Actors
brought to Punishment.

Of the Astrological Judgment of the YEAR, 1694.
IN this Year there is no direction of the great Conjunction 1603, nor of the
New Star 1604, but we have a notable Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, December
the 10, in 6 degrees of Capricornus. Besides there is a visible Eclypse of the
Sun, in Opposition to the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars* on the 12th. day of
June at 5 of the Clock at Night. The second Eclypse of the Sun is on December
6, at 5 of the Clock at Night, in 25 degrees of Sagitarius, the place of the
Sun in the great Conjunction. The first Eclypse of the Moon is January the
first day at Noon, in 22 degrees of Cancer, not visible. The second of the Moon
falls on the 26th. of June at 12 of the Clock at Night in 15 degrees of
Capricornus.

From these foregoing Configurations, I draw these following Judgments. The
Sweeds and Tartarians are up in Arms, and so are the Muscovites; the Tartar
Invades Muscovy, and brings great Calamity upon that Country; the Dane or some
other Country invades Sweedland* there shall be a great destruction to a many
Cities, and a great slaughter of their Inhabitants; the Hollender draws near to
an end of that manner of way of Government* yet shall no Crowned head ever
conquer it, the Change will come by the Peoples Consent. Scotland is much
disquieted, and will go nigh to Rebel; Burgundy shall taste of the Cup, and
Venice will go nigh to be taken by the Turk, or come to damage by him;
Constantinople will have the Plague rage; York will taste of the evil of this
Year, neither shall Oxford be free, there is a bitter portion for that City to
drink, which GOD in his Mercy divert; Brandenburgh will feel the smart of War;
Ireland thou must come in for a share of suffering: In short, such will be the
subtilty of the Roman Clergy, that they by their insinuating shall draw most if
not all the Princes of Europe to their destruction, all which shall but make
way for their own, which will be completed in a few Years now.

Of the Astrological Judgment of the YEAR, 1695.
IN this Year we have no Directions of the great Conjunction, nor of the New
Star 1604, that are considerable; therefore we look to the other Configurations
of the Planets and Eclypses. We have a famous Opposition of Saturn and Mars,
Saturn being in 8 degrees of Capricornus, and Mars 8 degrees in Cancer, it
falls on the 12th. of August. There are four Eclypses this Year. The first is
of the Moon, which falls on May the 18th. day at 10 of the Clock in the
Morning, in 7 degrees of Sagitarius the place of the great Conjunction 1603,
but not visible. The second will be of the Sun on the first of June at 5 of the
Clock at Night, in 21 degrees of Gemini, the Ascendant of London and visible.
The third will be of the Moon on November the 10th. day (...) 8 of the Clock at
Night, in 28 degrees of Taurus, near the Pleiades and visible. The last will be
of the Sun on the 16th. day of November, in 15 degrees of Sagitarius, near the
place of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter 1663.

From these Configurations, I find that the Sweed is (...) in Arms against a
Potent Enemy the Tarter, both afflic^^^ the Muscovite and the Polander, he does
great mischief (...) Christendom, (viz) he will destroy a great many Towns in
those Countries lying next him, and carry their People Captive. The Eclypse of
the Sun in Sagitarius brings great affliction to Spain, with the destruction of
their small and great Cattle, great Outrages, and Robberies, and Inhumane
Murders committed in Hungaria, Dalmatia, yea, and in England too, if not in
London; it declares the Death of a many of the Nobility in these places under
Gemini, Mars is Lord of the Ascendant of the figure of the Eclypse, and is in
Taurus in Opposition to it, from whence may be expected popular Insurrections
in those places under Gemini; Ireland cannot as yet be free from trouble, nor
Holland, Scotland, and Burgundy.

In this Year Saturn and Jupiter makes their first Trine from Capricornus and
Virgo, Saturn being in 8.8. of Capricornus, and Jupiter in 8.8. of Virgo, this
Trine were it not for the weakness of Jupiter might produce peace to the World,
there will be great Meetings and Treaties for Peace, but the strength of Saturn
and the Conjunctions of Saturn and Mars in Capricornus, hinders the good design
of Saturn, and instead of Peace, flings Europe in worse^ Broyls than before.

Of the Astrological Judgment of the YEAR, 1696.
IN this Year, the Ascendant of the New Star comes by direction to the body of
Mercury in Scorpio, and the Mid-heaven to the Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter, 1682 There is also a notable Conjunction of Saturn and Mars on the
16th. day of December. There is also two remarkable Eclypses of the Moon, the
first falls (...) May the 6th. at Midnight, in 27 degrees of Scorpio ^isible;
and the second falls on October 30 about 4 of the Clock in the Morning, in 18
degrees of Taurus also visible.

The Figurations of this Year make me to judge that the Turk is not as yet in
Peace, neither has the Tartar returned into his own Country, the Mosc^vite is
still very much disturbed* and will not rest in Peace f^r some years. The
Hollander about this time receives very much damage by Inundations, and their
lose of their Ships abroad; Ireland cannot be free from the
Malevolent-influence of the Stars, the poor English that inhabit there will
suffer much; thou treacherous Irish forbear to do so much mischief, if thou
does attempt to Invade England, you must expect to return if you could,
although at the first you may seem to get the better, yet it will be but a
lightning before Death: Thou must not expect to be a free People, not this 20
Years thou art like to have but small Crops of Corn, whether it will be from
the Barrenness of the Earth, or because the Corn was destroyed upon the ground
by a rebellious sort of People, or both, time will best discover; a Person
little less than a Queen should dye this Year in some Country under Taurus* The
Eclypses of the Moon in Scorpio, declares Seditions, Murders, and all manner
of wretchedness: In this Year there is no less than two Trines of Saturn and
Jupiter from Capricornus and Virgo* Saturn being in 23 d^grees of Capricornus,
and Jupiter 23 degrees of Virgo; strong will be the endeavors of the Princes
of the Earth for Peace, and most People are in hopes of accomplishing that so
much longed for thing, but behold, they have brought things as to every one's
thinking* to a Conclusi^n; then comes the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in
Capricornus, and destroys all their hopes in a moment, and bloody Wars succeed.

Of the Astrological Judgment of the YEAR. 1697.
IN this Year we have no direction of the great Conjunction, nor of the New
Star 1604, but about August the 27th. day there is an Opposition of Saturn and
Mars, Saturn being in 2 degrees of Aquarius* and in 2 degrees of Leo; and there
are 3 Eclypses this Year; the first is of the Sun, on the 11th. day of May, at
one of the Clock in the Morning, in 1 degree of Taurus; the second is the Moon,
on May the 26th. day at 8 of the Clock in the Morning, in 16 degrees of
Scorpio; the last is of the Moon October the 19th. day at 8 of the Clock at
Night, in 7 degrees of Taurus visible. There is also the first Square of Saturn
and Jupi^er this Year, Saturn being in 1.3. of Aquarius, and Jupiter is in 1.3
of Scorpio.

H^rd is the fate of poor H^lland, Scotland and Ireland, for to endure so long
a time of sorrow, yet thou art not alone, for Tartary, and Moscovia, shares
with thee, for the P^land^r now beats the Tartar, and sends him home with a
Flea in his Ear: Now does the Turk gain ground upon Italy, now does he feel the
effects of the triple Conjunction to purpose; This first Quartile makes a
beginning, which will continue ^^ow until almost all Italy is lost, which will
be in 3 or 4 years after this; yet is poor Oxford afflicted, that City will
find what it is to have a Comet appear in their Sign, but be thou patient, when
thou have been tried, thou will appear like burnished Gold, it is in vain to
contend with so Potent an Enemy as thou have to deal with; this being all she
has to boast of, that her sufferings are not alone.

There is a Family in Europe that had its rise to greaness about the Year 1344,
that Family now will find a downfall for ever, the Name of Percys had their
Original about the year 1067, under a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
Virgo, and the Conjunction in Pisces 1642, 3, brought that Name and Family to
nothing.

Of the Astrological Judgment of the YEAR, School.
IN this Year we have no Directions of the great Conjunction, only we have the
Mid heaven of the appearance of the New Star 1604, to this Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter 1682, we have also a famous Conjunction of Saturn and Mars
in 18 degrees of Aquarius in Opposition to the Conjunction 1682, and 1683.
There is also a famous Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars in 22 degrees of
Scorpio, August 29. We have also two Eclypses of the Sun, the one in Aries,
England's Sign, the other Libra. The first falls March the 31st. at 7 of the
Clock at Night. in 21 degrees of Aries not visible. The second will be
September the 24th. at 4 of the Clock in the Morning, and therefore not
visible, it falls in 11 degrees of Libra, there is all the second Quadrate of
Saturn and Jupiter; this Year Saturn is in 19.28. of Aquarius and Jupiter in
19.28. in Scorpio.

This is like to be a Year of much action, for now Saturn transites the
Conjunction 1682, by an Opposition, and Jupiter by a Quadrate, great shall be
the effect of this Quadrate, it threatens Italy with no less than Confusion and
a total subversion of the triple Crown, although it may not be fully completed
this Year, yet this Year (...) a great assay to it, the Sea shall swell with
great Navies of Ships, and there shall be great Sea Fights; England thou shall
have a hand in it, thou shall be victorious: Now France's Power is brought low,
the late War has destroyed thousands of his Subjects, few or none of them but
has suffered to purpose through the pride of an insulting King* and the envy
of the Roman Clergy, the valiant Tartar received a great Thunder stroke; but if
you will look for the Bolt, you must go to Ireland The Eclypse of the Sun in
Aries destroys the Sheep and Hogs, it denotes the Death of a Woman of great
note, and also lamentable woe to most men, and in Libra denotes the Death of
Kings and Nobles; it stirs up Sedition and Trouble about Customs and
Privileges it is the Forerunner of a Famine, and those places under Aries and
Libra are most concerned.

Of the Astrologicall Judgment of the YEAR: 1699.
THis Year we have the great Conjunction 1603* comes by direction to the
Opposition of Mercury, and the Sun to the Opposition of Mars, and Venus to the
Opposition of Mars, and the Moon to the body of Mars also, and we have the New
Star 1604. comes by direction to the Quartile both of the Sun and Venus,
besides the effects of the last Conjunction of Saturn and Mars last Year, and
the Opposition of Saturn and Mars this Year. Besides, we have no less than Four
Eclypses this Year. The first will be an Eclypse of the Moon, on March the 5th.
day at 8 of the Clock at Night, in 26 degrees of Scorpio, visible. The second
will be of the Sun on March the 21st. day about 8 of the Clock in the Morning,
in 11 degrees of Aries. The third will be an Eclypse of the Moon on August the
30th. near Noon, in 17 degrees of Pisces. The last will be an Eclypse of the
Sun, on the 13th. day of September about 11 of the Clock in the Morning, one
degree of Libra, and much about the time of this Eclypse there happens the
Opposition of Saturn and Mars, which will aggravate the effects thereof.

Great will be the Action of this Year, those Villainies that have for many
years been kept as a Secret, will now be made known to every one. All Nations
will be troubled with Rumors of Wars, every Religion preparing Armies. Traffic
prohibited both by Land and Sea, the Main Sea shall hugely swell with mighty
Tempests, so that the Sea banks in many places shall overflow their accustomed
bounds, Inundations universally every where, now H^ll^nd look to thy self,
terrible Sea Fights will be the ^ear occasioning the water to look more red
than the Red Sea, the water turned to Blood, War and Blood shed over all the
Earth; one Nation shall send so many Men to the Wars* that it for a time shall
seem to be desolate of Men; in the Eastern part of the world a whole Army shall
be destroyed by Fire from Heaven, with their Wealth and Treasure: There shall
also be a great drought and want of Water, and the Earth shall be so parched
that there will be no food for Cattle: Great Pl^^^es and War shall cover the
whole face of the Earth, (...) destroy Mankind, that there will not be
sufficient Laborers to get in Harvest, and the Vermin shall so destroy the
Fruit on Trees, that all (...); a general Famine and Dearth of Corn will (...)
spread (...) Europe, so that Thousan^^ shall starve (...) want of Bread; yet at
the last we have a Sextile of Saturn and Jupiter, each of them being in their
own House: Now shall one* appear suddenly, a great Conqueror, the World filled
with the same of this Man, who shall all of a sudden give Peace to all Europe.
Oh! Happy time.


