AN EPISTLE OF TENDER LOVE AND Brotherly Advice To All the Churches of Christ
Throughout the World.

Who are gathered into the one living Faith and walk in the Light, and therein
have their Fellowship one with another.

From a Friend and Brother in the same Fellowship, who has long Travailed, and
still Travails for Zions Prosperity, and for the gathering Zions Children out
of Egypt and Darkness, that they may walk and dwell in the Light of Zions
Savior, which is Christ, the Lord, Whose Outward Name is, Stephen Crisp.

Reprinted and Sold by William Bradford at Philadelphia in Pennsilvania, in
the Year 1692.

An Epistle of Tender Love and Brotherly Advice to all the Churches of Christ
throughout the World, etc.
DEarly Beloved Friends and Brethren, gathered out of the World by the Eternal
Arm and Power of the Mighty God, to bear his holy Name in your Generation; My
Love and Life in the fellowship of the Universal Spirit, Salutes you all, and
my Prayer to God is, you may be kept steadfast and unmovable in the Grace of
God, and in the Communion of his holy Spirit, that ye may bring forth Fruit in
abundance, according to the abundant Mercy and Grace bestowed upon you, to the
Glory of God, and to your mutual Joy, Comfort and Edification.

And that you may so do, let your Eye be kept daily to the Lord, and behold and
take notice of the wondrous Works that he has wrought in you and for you,
since the day ye were first quickened by his Immortal Word, and stirred up to
seek after him, and to wait upon him; how Good and Gracious he has been to
you, in bringing you from the barren Mountains, where your Souls languished for
the heavenly Nourishment, where you knew not the Lord, nor one another, but
were without a Comforter, or any to sympathize with you in your Mournings: Oh!
how has he pitied your Groanings, and had Compassion on your Sighings, and
brought you into acquaintance with those that were in the like Exercises; and
then he taught you to believe on him that was able to help you: And those that
were thus taught of the Father, and felt his drawing Cords of Love prevailing
upon them, these came to Christ their Savior, and in him beg^n to feel a Unity
one with another, in the Faith you had received in him, whereby you believed he
would give you of his Spirit to teach and guide you in the way of Truth,
Righteousness and Peace: And thus was the Foundation of your Holy Communion
laid, and a lively Hope raised in each particular Soul, that he that had begun
this blessed Work, would carry it on; and this hope made you, that ye were not
ashamed to make a public Profession of his Name before the World, but
cheerfully to take up his Cross, and deny your selves of your former Pleasures,
Friendships and Delights of this World; this hope has been your suppo^t in
many sharp Trials and bitter Combats you have had with the Enemy of your
Soul's Peace within, and with the Enemies of God's holy Way and Truth without;
and in all your Conflicts you have found him nigh at hand, to put forth his
Power on your behalf, as you have depended upon him for his assistance; and by
these Experiences of his goodness your Faith has been strengthened; and by the
same Word of Life that quickened you, many more have been reached unto, so that
you have seen a daily Addition of strength in the particular, and also an
addition to your Number, to your great Comfort and Encouragement; and many have
come to wait upon the Lord among you, and many are daily enquiring after the
way to Sion, with their faces thitherward: These things are worth your
remembrance, and serious considerations, that you may look upon these great
Mercies, as Obligations upon your Souls to walk humbly before the Lord, and to
be devout and fervent in your Testimony for that God that has done th^s great
things for you.

And Friends, consider of the great Works that this mighty Arm of the Lord has
brought to pass in the general, as well as in the particular; how many
Contrivances have been framed, and Laws and Decrees made to lay you waste, and
to make you cease to be a People, and how have the Wicked rejoiced thereat (for
a season) crying, Ah, ha, thus would we have it; they are all now given up to
Banishments, to Imprisonments, to Spoils and Ruins; now let us see if that
Invisible Arm they trust in can deliver them. Oh Friends! how has your God
been your support in the midst of all these Exercises? and when he pleased, how
has he quieted the sharpest Storms, and turned back the greatest Floods and
Torrents of Persecution that ever you met? and how has he confounded his and
your Enemies, and brought Confusion upon the heads of them that sought your
hurt? Were not these things wrought by the Power of God? Did your Number, your
Policy, your Interest, or any thing that might be called your own, contribute
any thing to these your great Preservations and Deliverances? If not, then let
God have the Glory, and acknowledge to his praise, These have been the Lords
doings, and are mavelous in our Eyes.

Again, Dear Friends, Consider how the wicked One has wrought in a Mystery
among your selves, to scatter you, and to lay you waste from being a People, as
at this day; how many several ways has he tried, raising up men of perverse
Minds, to subvert, and to turn you from the Faith, and from the Simplicity that
is in Christ Jesus our Lord, and to sepereate you from that invisible Power
that has been your strength, and to separate you one from another, and by
subtle Wiles to lead into a false Liberty above the Cross of Christ, and
sometimes by sowing Seeds of Heresy and Seditions, endeavoring to corrupt the
Minds of whom they could, with pernicious Principles; but Oh, how have their
Designs been frustrated, and the Authors thereof confounded and brought to
naught; and how have you been preserved as a Flock, under the hand of a careful
Shepherd, even unto this day, which ministers great cause of Thanksgiving unto
all the faithful, who have witnessed the working of his preserving Power in
their own particulars.

Also, my Friends, it is worth your Considerations, to behold, how tha^ by this
invisible Power, so many faithful Watchmen are raised up upon the Walls of
your Zion, that in most of your Meetings the^e be Men and Women upon whom God
has laid a concern to be taking care of the good of the whole, and to take the
oversight upon them, to see all things kept in good and decent Order, and to
make due Provision for the comforting and relieving the Necessities of the
Needy and Distressed, that nothing be lacking to make your way comfortable; and
these have not been, nor are brought under this Charge by any act of yours, but
God has raised up Pastors and Teachers, Elders and Deacons of his own Election
and Choice, and bowed their Spirits to take upon them the Work and Service to
which they are appointed, for the Lords sake, and for the Body's sake, which is
the Church, to whom it may truly be said, a^ in the 20th Chap. of Acts, verse.
28. Take ye heed to the Flock of God, over which the holy Ghost has made you
Overseers, etc. And such ought to be hearkened to in the discharge of their
Trust, as those that must give an account to him that called them, and gifted
them for their several Works and Services in the Church.

And by these ways and means has the Lord established among you a heavenly
Government, and built as it were a Hedge about you, that ye may be preserved
from Generation to Generation, a People fitted for the Glory that is, and shall
daily more and more be revealed among and upon the faithful, who delight in
that Power that called them to be Saints, and to bear a Profession for the holy
Name of God, against the many Names and Ways that men in their changeable
Minds have set up, that the Name of the Lord alone may be exalted.

And dear Friends and Brethren, I entreat you, that the Considerations of these
great and weighty things which God has wrought for you, and among you, may
have that deep and weighty Influence upon your Souls, that ye may find your
selves engaged to answer the Love and Mercy of God in your Lives and
Conversations, and in all that you have to do in this World, that ye may show
forth the honor of God in all things, that the Light which has shined in you
may shine forth through you, unto others, who sit in Darkness, that all men may
know by your innocent and harmless Conversations, and by your close keeping to
the Lord, that ye are a People who are assisted and helped by a supernatural
Power, which governs your Wills, and subjects them to his blessed Will, and
that guides and orders your Affections, and sets them upon heavenly and divine
Objects, and that gives you power to deny your own private Interests, where
they happen to stand in Competition with the Interest of Truth; for these, and
these only will be found the true Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ, who can
deny themselves, take up a Cross dai^y, and follow him in the Guidance of his
Regenerating Power, which brings Death upon self, and crucifies the old Nature,
with its Affections and Lusts, and raises up a Birth in you, that has a Holy
Will and Desire to serve the Lord, and do his Will in the Earth; and such as
these are Instruments in the hand of God for him to work by, and to do Works of
Righteousness, of Justice, of Charity, and all other the Virtues belonging to a
Christian Life, to the honor of God and for the comfort and benefit of his
Church and People.

And all you, dear Friends, upon whom the Lord has laid a care for his Honor,
and for the Prosperity of the Truth, and gathered you into the good Order of
the Gospel, to meet together to man^ge the Affairs thereof; Take heed that you
have a single Eye to the Lord, to do the Lords business in the Leadings of his
Spirit, which is but one, and brings all (that are given up to be governed by
it) to be of one Mind and Heart, at least in the general purpose and Service of
those Meetings, although through the diversity of Exercises, and the several
Degrees of growth among the Brethren, every one may not see or understand alike
in every matter at the first propounding of it; yet this makes no breach of the
unity, nor hinders the Brotherly-kindness, but puts you often upon an Exercise,
and an inward traveling to feel the pure peaceable Wisdom that is from above,
to open among you, and every ones Ear is open to it, in whomsoever it speaks,
and thereby a sense of Life is given in the Meeting, to which all that are of a
simple and tender Mind, join and agree: But if any among you should be contrary
minded in the management of some outward Affair, relating to the Truth, this
does not presently break the Unity that ye have in Christ, nor should weaken
the Brotherly Love, so long as he keeps waiting for an Understanding from God,
to be gathered into the same sense with you, and walks with you, according to
the Law of Charity; such an one ought to be born with, and Cherished, and the
Supplications of your Souls will go up to God for him, that God may reveal it
to him, if it be his Will, that so no difference may be in Understanding, so
far as is necessary, for the good of the Church, no more than there is in
matters of Faith and Obedience to God: for my Friends, it is not of absolute
necessity that every Member of the Church should have the same measure of
Understanding in all things; for then where were the Duty of the strong bearing
with the weak? then where were the Brother of low degree? Where would be any
submitting to them that are set over others in the Lord? which all tends to the
preserving Unity in the Church, notwithstanding the different Measures and
different Growths of the Members thereof; for as the Spirit of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets, so are the Spirits of all that are kept in a true
Subjection to the Spirit of Life in themselves, kept in the same Subjection to
the Sense of Life given by the same Spirit in the Church* and by this means we
come to know the one Master, even Christ, and have no room for other Masters,
in the matter of our Obedience to God; and while every one keeps in this true
Subjection, the sweet Concord is known, and the Oil is not only upon Aaron's
Head (though it be poured on there) but it reaches the Skirts of his Garment
also; and things are kept sweet and savoury, and ye love one another from the
greatest to the least in sincerity, and (as the Apostle says) without
Dissemulation; and this Love excludes all Whisperings of Evil Things; All
Backbiting, Tale-bearing, Grudgings and Murmurings, and keeps Friends Minds
clean one toward another, waiting for every Opportunity to do each other good,
and to preserve each others Reputation; and their Hearts are comforted at the
sight of one another; and in all their Affairs, both relating to the Church,
and to the World, they will be watchful over their own Spirits, and keep in
the Lords Power, over that nature and ground in themselves that would be apt to
take an Offense, or construe any Word or Action to a worse sense than the
simplicity thereof, or the intention of the other concerned will allow of.

And whereas it may often fall out, that among a great many, some may have a
different Apprehention of the matter from the rest of their Brethren,
especially in outward or Temporal things, there ought to be a Christian Liberty
maintained for such to express their sense with Freedom of Mind, or else they
will go away burdened; whereas if they speak their Minds freely, and a
Friendly and Christian Conference be admitted thereupon, they may be eased, and
often times the different Apprehension of such a one comes to be wholly
removed, and his Understanding opened, to see as the rest sees; for the danger
in Society does not lie so much in that, some few may have a differing
Apprehension in some things from the general Sense, as it does in this, namely,
when such that so differ do suffer themselves to be led out of the Bond of
Charity, and shall labor to impose their private sense upon the rest of their
Brethren, and to be offended and angry if it be not received; this is the Seed
of Sedition and Strife, that has grown up in too to many, to their own hurt.

And therefore my dear Friends, beware of it, and seek not to drive a matter on
in fierceness, or in anger, nor to take Offense into your Minds at any time,
because what seems to be clear to you, is not presently received; but let all
things in the Church be propounded with an awful Reverence of him that is the
Head and Life of it; who has said, Where two or three are met in my Name, I
will be in the midst of them, and so he is, and may be felt by all who keep in
his Spirit, but he that follows his own Spirit, sees nothing, as he ought to
see it. Therefore let all beware of their own Spirits and natural Tempers (as
they are sometimes called) but let all keep in a gracious Temper, then are ye
fit for the service of the House of God, whose House ye are, as ye keep upon
the Foundation that God has laid* and he will build you up, and teach you how
to build up one another in him, and as every Member must feel Life in
themselves, and all from one Head, this Life will not hurt it self in any, but
be tender o^ the Life in all; for by this one Life of the Word ye were
begotten, and by it ye are nourished and made to grow into your several
Services in the Church of God; it is ^o man's learning nor artificial
acquirements, its no man's (...) greatness in this World, its no man's eloquence
and natural wisdom, that makes him fit for Government in the Church of Christ,
unless he with all his endowments be seasoned with the heavenly Salt, and his
Spirit subjected, and his Gifts pass through the Fire of Gods Altar, a
Sacrifice to his Praise and Honor, that so Self be crucified and baptized in
Death, and the Gifts made use of in the Power of the Resurrection of the Life
of Jesus in him; and when this great Work is wrought in a man, then all his
Gifts and Qualifications are sanctified, and they are made use of for the good
of the Body, which is the Church, and are as Ornaments and Jewels, which serve
for the Joy and Comfort of all, who are partakers of the same divine Fellowship
of Life in Christ Jesus our Lord; and thus comes many to be fitted and
furnished to good Words, and to good Works, which are brought forth in their
due Seasons, for Edification, and building up the weak, and for repairing the
decayed Places, and also for defense of them that are feeble, that hurtful
things may not come near them.

O Friends! great is the Work the Lord has called you to, and is a fitting you
for, who innocently wait upon him; and the Lord has opened my heart unto you,
and laid it upon me to exhort and beseech you to have a care, that ye quit your
selves as ye ought, in what God requires of ye. And for the more particular
expressing what lies before me in the matter, I shall set down a few particular
Observations for your benefit and advantage; and my Souls desire is, that my
Labor of Love may have a good Effect in all your Bosoms, that God may be
honored thereby. And Friends, ye know the chief Business, to which ye are
called in your particular Men and Women's Meetings, is under these two Heads,
Justice and Charity; the first to see that every one has right done him, and
the other to take care there be nothing lacking to the Comfort of the Poor that
are made partakers of the same Faith with you.

And when ye meet about these things, keep the Lord in your Eye, and wait to
feel his Power to guide and direct you, to speak and behave your selves in the
Church of God, as becomes the peaceable Gospel: And beware of all brittleness
of Spirit, and sharp reflection upon each others words; for that will kindle up
heats, and create a false Fi^e; and when one takes a liberty of a sharp word
spoken out of the true fear and tenderness, it often times becomes a Temptation
to another, and if he have not a great care, it will draw him out also, and
then the first is guilty of two Evils, first, being led into a Temptotion, and
then secondly, he becomes a Tempter to others; therefore all had need to be
upon their Watch, neither to tempt, nor to be tempted; and let none think it
sufficient Excuse for them that they were provoked; for we are as answerable to
God for every evil Word spoken upon Provocation, as without Provocation; for,
for that end has the Lord revealed his Power to us, to keep and preserve us in
his Fear and Counsel in the time of our Provocations; and therefore if any man
through want of watchfulness, should be overtaken with Heat or Passion, A soft
Answer appeaseth Wrath, says the Wise Man, and therefore such a time is
fit^^st for a soft Answer, lest the Enemy prevail on any to their hurt, and to
the Grief and Trouble of their Brethren; for it is the proper Duty of Watchmen
and Overseers to spare the Flock, that is, let nothing come nigh them that will
hurt them, and wound and grieve them; nay, the good Apostle was so careful over
the Flock of Believers, that if there were any doubtful matter to be disputed
of, he would not have them that were weak in the Faith at such Disputes,
muchless ought them that are weak, to see those that are strong descend from
their strength, and go into the weakness where they are not able to bear, for
that is certainly, the Weak that cannot bear: Those that really live in the
Strength and Power, they can bear even Burdens for them that cannot bear their
own. The Apostle in the place before mentioned, when he sent for the Elders of
Ephesus to Mil^^^^, and left a Charge with them, before he said, Take heed to
the Flock of God, he said, Take heed to your selves: And indeed, we are none of
us like to discharge our selves well toward others, but by taking heed to our
selves, to be kept in that sober innocent frame of Spirit, which the Truth
calls for.

In the Next place, my dear Friends, when ye are called upon in point of
Justice, to give a Sentence of Right between Friend and Friend, Take heed that
neither Party get possession of your Spirit aforehand, by any way or means
whatsoever, or obtain any Word or Sentence from you in the absence of the other
Party, he not being yet heard: There is nothing more comely among men than
Impartial Judgment: Judgment is a Seat where Interest, nor Affection, nor
former Kindnesses may come: We may make no difference of the Worthiness or
Unworthiness of Persons in Judgment, as we may in Charity; but in Judgment, if
a good man, being mistaken, has a bad case, or a bad man a good case,
according to his case must he have Sentence. It was a good Saying, He that
judges among Men, judges for the Lord, and he will Repay it. Therefore let
all be done as unto the Lord, and as ye are willing to answer it in his
presence; and although for a time some may be discontent thereat, yet in time
God shall clear up your Innocence as the Sun at Noonday; and they that kick at
Sound Judgment, will find but hard work of it, they do but kick against that
which will prick them; and, however such through their Willfullness, and their
abounding in their own Sense, may hurt themselves, yet you will be preserved,
and enjoy your Peace and Satisfaction in the Discharge of your Consciences in
the sight of God.

And as concerning Practical Charity, ye know, its supported by Liberality, and
where Liberality cease, Charity waxes cold, yea, so far cease; where there
is no Contribution, there is no Distribution; where the one i^ sparing, the
other is sparing: And therefore let every one nourish Charity in the Root, that
is, keep a Liberal Mind, a Heart that looks upon the Substance that is given
him, as really bestowed upon him for the support of Charity, as for the support
of his own Body; and where People are of this mind, they will have a care of
keeping back any of Gods part, for he has in all Ages, in a most singular
manner espoused the case of the Poor, the Widow and Fat^erless, and has often
signified by his Prophets and Ministers, a special Charge upon Rich m^n that
had this World's Goods, That they should look to it that they were faithful
Stewards of what they possessed, and that they might be ^ound in good Works, and
might not suffer their Hearts so to cleave to uncertain Riches, as to neglect
the Service God had given them the things of this Life for, either to give them
up when called for in a Testimony or his worthy Name, or to communicate of them
to those that were in Necessity.

Now as concerning the Necessities of the Poor, there is great need of Wisdom
when we meet together about that Affair; for as I said before, though the
Worthiness or Unworthiness of Persons is not to be considered in Judgment, yet
in This it is; and you will find some that God has made Poor, and some that
have made themselves Poor, and some that others have made Poor, which must all
have their several Considerations, in which you ought to labor to be
Unanimous, and not to be taken up with an Affection to one Person more than
another, but every one to love every one in the Universal Spirit, and then to
deal out that Love in the Outward Manifestations thereof, according to the
measure that the Lord in his Wisdom, working in you, shall measure forth to
them.

And as to those who by Sickness, Lameness, Age, or other Impotency, are
brought into Poverty by the Hand of Providence, These are your peculiar Care
and Objects, pointed out to you to bestow your Charity upon; for by them the
Lord calls for it; for as the Earth is the Lords, and the Fullness of it, he
has by his Sovereign Power commanded in every Dispensation, That a part of
what we enjoy from him, should be thus employed. The Israelites were not to
reap the Corners of their Fields, nor to gather the Gleanings of the Corn nor
Vintage, it was for the Poor: And in the time of the Gospel, They were to lay
apart on the First Day of the Week, a part of what God had blessed them with,
for the Relief of those that were in Necessity; Nay, they did not confine
themselves in their Charity to their ^wn Meetings, but had an Uni^ersal Eye
through the whole Church of Christ, and upon extraordinary Occasions sent their
Benovelence to relieve the Saints at Jerusalem in a time of Need. And all that
keep in the Guidance of the same Universal Spirit, will m^ke it their ^usiness
to be found in the same Practice of Charity and Good Works, to do Good, and to
Communicate, forget not, says the Apostle: So they that forget not this
Christian D^ty, will find out the Poors part in the Corners and Gleanings of
the Profits of their Trades and Merchandizings, as well as the Old Isra^lite
did the Corners and Gleanings of his Field; and in the Distribution of it, will
have a regard to comfort the bowels of such who are by the divine Providence of
God put out of a Capacity of enjoying those outward C^mforts of Health,
Strength and Plenty, which others do enjoy; (...) while they are Partakers of
the same Faith, and walk in the Way of Righteo^sness with you, submitting
themselves patiently to the D^spensation of Gods Providence toward them, they
are of your Household, and under your Care, both to visit and to relieve, as
Member of one Body, of which Christ Jesus is Head; and he that gives to such
Poor, lends to the Lord, and he will Repay it.

But there is another sort of Poor, who make themselves poor through their
Sloth and Carelessness, and sometimes by their Willfullness, being Heady and
High-minded, and taking things in hand that are more than they can manage, and
make a flourish for a season and then through their own Neglects are plunged
down into great Pov^r^y; these are a sort, the primitive Churches began to be
troubled withal in the early days of the Gospel; for the Apostle took notice
of some that would not work at all, and sharply reproved them, and said, They
that would not work should not eat; and these are commonly a sort of
Busybodies, and medlers with others matters, while they neglect their own,
and run into a worse way than the Unbelievers, while they profess to be
Believers, yet do not take a due care for those of their own Household.

The Charity that is proper to such, is, To give them Admonition and Reproof,
and To convince them of their Sloth and Negligence; and if they submit to your
Reproof, and are willing to amend, then care ought to be taken to help them
into a way and means to suport themselves; and sometimes by a little help in
this kind, some have been reclaimed from the Snares of the Soul's Enemy: But if
they will not receive your wholesome Counsel and Admonitions, but kick against
it, either in their Words or Actions, Friends will be clear of such in the
sight of God; for its unreasonable to feed them that will not be ruled by you,
they break the Obligation of Society by their disorderly walking; for our
Communion does not stand only in frequenting Meetings, and hearing Truth
preached, but in answering the blessed Principle of Truth, in Life and
Conversation, and therein both the Rich and the Poor have fellowship one with
another.

There is another sort that are made Poor by the Oppressions and Cruelties of
Others: These Oppressed Poor cry aloud in the Ears of the Almighty, and he will
in his own time avenge their Cause; but in the mean time there is a Tenderness
to he extended to them, not knowing how soon it may be our turn, and if there
be need of Counsel and Advice, or if any Appli^ations can be made to any that
are able to deliver them from the Oppress^rs in such cases, let all that are
capable be ready and willing to advise, believe and help the Distressed; and
this is an acceptable Work of Charity, and a great Comfort to such in their
sharp Afflictions, and their Souls will bless the Instruments of their ease and
comfort.

And, my dear Friends, as God has honored you with so high and holy a
Calling, to be his Servants and Workmen in this his great and notable Day, and
to work together in his Power, in setting forth his Praise and Glory in the
Earth, and gathering together in one the scattered Seed in this and other
Nations: Oh! let the Dignity of your Calling provoke and encourage you to be
diligent Attenders upon his Work and Service you are called to, and let not
your concerns in the World draw you from observing the times and seasons
appointed to meet together; but you that are Elder set a good Example to the
Younger sort, by a due observation of the hour appointed, that they that come
first one time, may not, by their long staying for others be discouraged, so as
perhaps they may be last another time; but when the time is come leave your
business for the Lords Work, and he will take care your business shall not
suffer, but will add a Blessing upon it, which will do more for you than the
Time can do, that may be saved out of his Service.

And when ye have to do with Perverse and Froward or Disorderly Persons, whom
ye have occasion to Reprove and to Rebuke for the Truths sake, and you find
them stout and high, and reflecting upon ye, then is a time for the Lambs
Meekness to shine forth, and for you to feel your Authority in the Name of
Christ, to deal with such a one, and to wait for the pure and peaceable Wisdom
from above, to bring down and confound the earthly Wisdom. And in this frame of
mind you labor together to pull the entangled Sheep out of the Thicket, and to
restore that which is gone astray, to the Fold again, if ye can; but if you
cannot, yet ye save your selves from the Guilt of his Blood; and if such do
perish, his Blood will be upon his own head: But on the other hand, if ye
suffer these perverse Spirits to enter, and their Provocations to have a place
in you, so as to kindle your spirits into a Heat and Passion, then you get a
hurt, and are incapable to do them any good, but words will break out that will
need Repentance, and the Wicked will be stiffened and strengthened thereby, and
you miss the service that you did really intend. Therefore, dearly Beloved,
keep upon your Watch, keep on your spiritual Armor, keep your feet shod with
the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace, and the God of Peace will be with you,
and crown your endeavors with good Success, to your Joy and Comfort, and will
bring up his Power over your Adversaries and Opposers more and more, to which
many shall bow and bend in your sight, and will bring shame and confusion upon
the Rebellious, who harden their Hearts and stiffen their Necks against the
Lord and his Christ, and Kingdom, which he will exalt in the Earth,
notwithstanding all that Satan, and all his evil Instruments can do to hinder
the growth and progre^^ of his blessed Truth; for of the Increase of the
Government, and of the Peace of the Kingdom of Christ there shall be No End.

And now Friends, I having cleared my Conscience of what lay upon me for some
time, to write unto you, by way of Remembrance, and as the Exhortation of my
Life unto you, I remain travailing in Spirit for the Welfare of Zion: And
although the Outward Man decays, yet in the inward man I am comforted, in
beholding daily the great things that our God has done, and is still doing for
them that have their sole dependence upon him. So committing you to the Grace
of God, for your Directer and Preserver, in these and all your several Services
unto which God has called you, that by the Operations of his mighty Power ye
may be kept blameless and unspotted of the World, to his Honor and your
Comfort, and to the universal Comfort and Edification of the Church, that so
Praises and Thanksgiving may fill your Hearts and Mouths, your Families and
your Meetings; for he is worthy, who is our Tower, our Support, the Lord of
Host, the King of Saints, to whom be Glory, Honor and Renown, through this,
and all Generations forever and ever; Amen

From your Friend and Brother, in the Communion and Fellowship of the Gospel of
Peace and Purity, Stephen Crisp.

THE END.

