THE Plea of the Innocent Against The False Judgment OF THE GUILTY

Being a Vindication of George Keith and his Friends, who are joined with him
in this present Testimony, from the False Judgment, Calumnies, False
Informations and Defamations of Samuel Jenings, John Simcock, Thomas Lloyd,
and others joined with them, being in Number Twenty Eight.

Directed by way of Epistle to faithful Friends of Truth in Pennsilvania, East
and West-Jersey and elsewhere, as Occasion requires.

John 7. 50, 51. Nicodemus said, Does our Law judge any Man before it hear him?

Acts 25. 16, 17 It is not the manner of the Romans, said Festus, to deliver
any man to die, before that he which is accused, have the Accusors face to face,
and to have License to answer for himself, concerning the Crime laid against
him.

Psalm 58. 1, 2. Do ye indeed speak Righteousness, O Congregation! Do ye judge
Oprightly, O ye Sons of Men! yea, in Heart you work Wickedness, you weigh the
Violence of your Hands in the Earth.

The Plea of the Innocent, etc.
Directed by way of Epistle to faithful Friends of Truth in Pennsilvania, East
and West-Jarsey, etc.
Dear Friends and Brethren every where, to whom this may come;
WE dearly Salute you in the Love of God: The occasion of this present Writing
is in Vindication of the Truth and Us, the detamed Witnesses of it, and
particularly of George Keith, from the false Judgment, Calumnies, false
Information and Defamations of S Jennings, John Simcock and Thomas Lloyd,
pretended preachers, and others joined with them, being in Number twenty eight,
in their late Ep^tle sent to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in
Pennsilvania, East and West Jarsey.

First of all, whereas they pretend to give an Account to these Meetings of the
Tedious Exercise and Vexations Perplexity they have met with in their late
Friend George Keith, for several Months past. In this they have dealt most
unfairly, and unjustly with him, in that they have given no account of the
Occasion of that called by them the Tedious Exercise and Vexations Perplexity,
etc. which because they have not given, we (...) fit to do the Truth and all
Friends of it, to whose hands this may come, that Justice, as to give you a
true Information of the Cause and Occasion of the late Difference that has
happened betwixt diverse of them, that has signed their Epistle and these the
chiefest among them, and G.K. which was this, viz. About fifteen Months ago,
William Stock tale, an Ancient Preacher, having accused G.K. of preaching Two
Christ's, because he preached Faith in Christ within, and Faith in Christ
without; the which G.K. hearing, after he had privately dealt with him, laid
his Complaint first before (...) twelve of the Friends of the Ministry, met at
the House of Robert Ever, who having done nothing in the said Meeting to being
W.Stockdale to due Conviction or Condemnation for his said Error, but rather
for the most part did excuse and defend him, as can well be proved by diverse
Credible Witnesses then present, only two of the said Friends of the Ministry
then present, viz. John Hars and John D lava^ dissented from the rest; then
G.K. did again lay his (...) before Friends of the Ministry at the last Yearly
Meeting in Philadelphia in the first week of 7 Mon. 1691. and (...), (...) to
have their (...) and judgment, Whether he was guilty (...) preac^ing Two
C^^ists? or (...) W. S. was not guilty of (...), or saying (...) within and
Christ without are Two (...)? and no less than six several Meetings were had
about this matter in that time of the Yearly Meeting, and the first Meeting
continued about ten hours, viz. from about nine in the fore noon, to the time
that Candles were lighted in the Evening. And it must need, be granted, That it
was a time of tedious Exercise and vexatious Perplexity in all the six
Meetings; but who was to be blamed for it, deserved your serious Examination.
Is it not matter of Astonishment, that such an easy Question being proposed to
so many men called Ministers of Christ, all highly pretending to the Spirits
immediate teachings and leading^, and to be in a degree of Christianity above
all other Professions in (...), (there being assembled of these (...) Ministers
out of these three Provinces about forty or fifty, if (...) more) six Meetings
could not determine it, viz. (...) to preach Fair, in Christ (...) us, and
Faith in Christ without (...) was to preach Two (...), or One? Whereas G.K. had
many Witnesses to clear him, that he always said, when he treated on this
(...), that Christ within us, and Christ without us was but one (...) are of
the Gift of Christ within us, and the Fullness without us, in the Man Christ
Jesus, being one Lord Jesus Christ; a sincere Christian, though in the lowest
degree, and but a (...) Christ, could have (...) determined ad resolved thi^
Question, and given ju^gm^nt against W. S. being guil^y of (...) against the
Son of M^n, (though not against the holy Ghost) for his blasphemous Assertion,
That to (...) in Christ within, and Faith in Christ without, was to preach Two
Christ's; for according to him, Christ without is a false Christ, (...) being a
great Owner in Precence and words of Christ within; and yet which will be
matter of Admiration to all Impartial Person that (...) it, who have the least
true Knowledge in the (...) yo^ Christ) t^i^ great and solemn Assembly of so
many high Pretenders to (...) Meeting gave but a very slender and partial
determination and judgment concerning it; which yet, such as it was, was not
intimated by any Order of the Meeting, as themselves have acknowledged. And
indeed such was the Partiality, as well as the Ignorance and gross Unbelief
that openly and manifestly appeared in the^^ Meetings, whereof sufficient Proof
can be given, and that of diverse owned and esteemed great Preachers among us,
that is scarcely credible, a hint whereof we think necess^y to give for your
true Information. In one of these six Meetings T. Fitzwater, in Prayer, said, O
God, that dyed in us, and said dow^ thy Life in us, and took it up again, etc.
After he had ended his Prayer. G. Keits, G. Hatchison and J.Hampton (but f^w or
none others) greatly blamed T.F. for his Prayer, for it appeared to them as
Blasphemy; and surely it is not only contrary to Scripture, but to the (...)
Testimony of Friends, That God is Immortal, and cannot dye; year, G.H. in his
Book called Judgment sixth, exprelly faith, God cannot dye; yea (...) or
imbona^g^, with other words ^o that effect, and so cannot dye: Another called
Robert Young, a great Preacher among them, openly said, as many can bear
witness, in one of these Meetings, That he did not find Christ without in all
the Scripture, further positively affirming That Christ, when he ascended into
the Cloud was separated from his Body, and though one or two checked him a little,
for his assertion, yet no further notice was taken of it to bring him to any
Condemnation for his Elasphemy. Also, Arthur Cook, in one of these Meetings
accused G.K. for saying, at the Meeting at R. ^wer's house, That Christ's Body
that was (...) and buried, is gone into Heaven, and was and is in Heaven, even
the very same Body; which G.K. most freely acknowledged he had so affirmed, and
that Christ's Body was not changed in Being or Substance of Body, but in Manner
and Condition. And whereas at one of (...) Meetings G.K. had complained against
J. Sinaock, that he had questioned G.K. at the (...) Meeting at R. Ewer's,
saying, Dia Christ's Bones rise? which G.K. affirmed, and proved from Scripture;
but the said J.S. boldly denied that he asked any such Question, until John
(...) and (...) Bradford affirmed they heard him question it. And not only John
Sinaock and Arthur Cock, and others did openly blame G.K. both at the Meeting
at K.Ewer's, land at other Meetings at the Yearly Meeting, for imposing a
Novelty upon his Aniunt Brethren, but more especially and principally Thomas
Lloyd, who was the great Attorney for W. Stockdale, and the great Mouth of all
these that opposed G.K. in his Testimony to these (...) Fundamental Principles
and Doctrines of the Christian Faith, did (...) object against G.K' s Imposing
an Unscriptural Faith on his Brethren, all which is so openly known to many,
that we judge, they scarce have the Confidence themselves to deny it; but what
was this Unscriptural Faith that they did blame G.K. for imposing on he Ancient
Brethren? even no other but this, That we ought to believe in Christ without us
in Heaven, as well as in Christ within for Salvation; and That Christ is in
Heaven, having the true Nature of Man, both O, Soul and Body, the same he had
on Earth for Being, but wonderfully and must gloriously changed in Condition
and Manner, and is not only God in Heaven, but both God and Man, and yet one
Lord (...) Christ; and many are Witnesses, how at the School-house Meeting, as
well as at these other Meetings aforesaid, T. Lloyd argued, That Faith in
Christ without us, as he dyed for our sins, and rose again, was not necessary
to on Salvation; which his Son-in-Law. J. Delavall openly contradicted,
bringing for his Proof Romans 10. 9, 10. And at one of these Yearly Meeting, T.
Lloyd said, Christ within did all; which J. Wilsford contradicted, saying, That
he did not believe, for Christ (...) did somewhat when he dyed for us. And at
another of those Meetings (...) Jenings having rudely and uncivi^ly stopped G.K.
in his Testimony, when he was recommending to them, seriously to consider,
whether it was not their Duty to preach (...) outwardly more than they did,
said, I, thou preached Christ without less, others might (...) more; whereof
diverse present took great notice, and was very offensive to them, as well as to
G.K. and did signify that S. Jermings was too much a Preacher at his own will,
as well as prejudiced against G.K. that because he would not seem to follow
G.K. he and others would not preach what G.K. preached, though true. And this is
but a hint of many more things that could be mentioned, as Instances of their
gross Ignorance. Unbelief and Balsph^my that some of them showed themselves
openly guilty of at these Meetings, and others their being guilty of gross
Partiality and Hypoc^i^se, laboring to cover these men in their impious
Blasphemies against Christ Jesus the Son of Man, was it therefore any matter of
Wonder or (...), (...) G.K. being Zealous and servant for the true Faith, and
Doctrine of Christ, so much openly c^nt^adicted by some of them, and (...) by
(...) at these Meeting of (...) was stir^ed in (...) to use sharp (...) against
them, which yet were all true, and therefore no Railing, nor yet ^lame. worthy?
even as it is said of Pa^l, That his Spirit was stirred in him (...) be (...)
the Cuy ( viz. of Athens) wholly given to la^^latry. And (...) that G.K. did
exceed at times, the ^ue Bounds, by great provo^^tions on their side, is it not
great Hypocrite and Partiality of their men so severel to judge him, and wholly
to conceal, not only their own Ignorance, Error and Blasphemy, but extreme
Passion, the rude, uncivil and unmannerly Speeches they uttered against him,
both in these Meetings, and aften since, calling him, Reviler O his Bethren,
Act se^ of the B^cthren, Brat of Babylon, One that always endeavored to keep
down the Power o^ Truth, drawing from the Gift of God; calling him also, Pope,
Primate of Pen^silvania, Father Con^essor, accusing him of Railing, Envy,
extreme Passion, and a Turb^^ent and (...), and not only so, but most uncivilly
and unchri^tianly, yea, inhumanely otherwise treating him in these Meetings,
often six or ten all at once speaking to him, and some pulling him by one
sleeve, and others by the skirts of his Coat, more like Mad-m^n than Sobe^; and
some bidding him go out, and when he essayed to go out, and prayed them to let
him go, others pulling him back, and det^ining him; so that greater Confusion
was scarce ever seen in any Meeting pretending to Cristianity; and ^hy do they
co^ceal all this their ^ude, and (...), and inhumane Carriage, as well as
uncivil words toward G.K. but to demonstrate them Vartiality and Hy^oc^isie,at
least to given a fair occasion to demonstrate it, and what Partial and
Hypocritical men they are, whom God has in great measure already discovered,
and we doubt not will further discover in due time.

And many of these men have discovered no less Ignorance and Error in the late
Difference that has happened betwi^t G.K. and I.Pit^wate^ who has openly in
the face of a Monthly Meeting (...) G.K. for denying the suffic^^ney of the
Lig^t; and the thing at (...) is come to this Issue, that by the Act of a
Monthly Meeting, hold at Philadelphia the 20. 3. m^n. G.K. is condemned for
saying, I Have Light is not sufficient without something else; and at the next
Monthly Meeting following T. Lloyd did acknowledge, in the open hearing of all
present, whereof many are ready to bear witness, and which we judge they will
not deny, That by that something else they knew that G.K. did hold (as he has
often declared, both in public Testimonies, and other occasion^. Discourses) The
Man Christ Jesus without us, and what he did and suffered for us on Earth, and
what he now does, or us in Heaven; Wheresupon G.K. said If' this be a
Guiltiness, That the Light within does not save us, or (...) not sufficient
without the Man Christ Jesus, and his Death, Resurrection, Ascension and
Mediation for us in Heaven, I own my self guilty; but by their thus condemning
G.K. for his sound Doctrine, and clearing T.F. they have declared openly their
being no Christians, and therefore it is no Railing not Ungodly Speech to call
them Ignorant Heathens, for it is their proper Name due to them, seeing they
will not own any thing else, not the Man Christ Jesus, but only the ^^ght in
them to be sufficient and necessary to their Salvation; but for a more full
account of their thus publicly renouncing the Man Christ Jesus we refer to two
Papers of Minutes writ by G.K. of what passed at the last Quarterly and Monthly
Meetings about this matter. But whereas some of them say, They have not cleared
T.F. let an impartial men, who read their act recorded in their Monthly
Meeting Book, (a copy of which with great difficulty we have at last obtain^^)
judge whether their words in the said Act does not clear him, when they say,
The Meeting saw no Reason to give Judgment against him, in this particular
abovementioned, as much as when the Grand Jury bringeth^n their Verdict of an
Ignoran^^us into the Court, does (...) clear the Person accused for that time?
and whether this their cleaning of him, is not further confirmed by their
allowing and countenancing him to preach and pray in their Meetings, and the
last clause of their Paper concluding That T.F's charge in it (...) was true.

2dly, Whereas in their Epistle they use a great many words in Commendation of
what formerly G.K. was, and now once he walked in the Counsel O God, and was
little in his own Eyes, and his Brethren honorable for his esteem, and that he
was lovely in that day, when the Beauty o, the Lord was upon him, and his
Comlin^ ^ covered him; and other high words of Commendation, scarce given to
many fa^ more worthy than he. It is very apparent, that all this is b^ton
purpose, first to raise him up as it were on high, that they may seem the more
to throw him down in othe^^ deep put of Infamy and false Judgment they have
given against him, together with their deceitful and ^ pocritical Lamentation
over his Fall from the high places o, Israel, as a man stain in his high
places; this is not unlike to their Predecessors, the Persecuting Clergy of the
Church of Roine, who before they burnt that worthy Servant of Christ John
(...), they caused be put on him hi^ Priestly Robes, and then afterward script
him of them, on purpose the more to defame him, and (...) him vile before the
People; the which as they were doing, that worthy Servant of Christ called to
remembrance that (...) V^^ture which (...) put upon Christ to mock him with
(...), as Fox does relate it in his Book of (...), page 739. ^om. 1. But we
would have these men to know, that C.^. needs none of their hypocritical and
mock Lamentation, but rather let them in good earnest weep for themselves, and
for (...) great Ignorance, Error and Unbelief, that some, if not all of the^
have sufficiently discovered themselves guilty of; and most of them of their
great Prejudice and Hypocrisy, and all of them of their (...), and rash and
false Judgment, which will be their own burden, and for which we wish them true
Repentance. And seeing their Accusations against G.K. lie much in bare
generals, we see no cause further to take notice o^ them, as they contain bare
generals, as his (...) guilty of Anger, Envy, Cruelty, Treachery, and other
false and reproachful Speeches they give out against him, but to show, that for
want of particular matter against him, they thus labor to ^^fame him so much
in bare Generals, a way common to all (...) and false A^cusors. And for the
Hard Words they alle^ge he used to call some of them, as Fools, Ignorant
Heathens, (...), Silly Souls, Lya^s, Her^ticks, Rot^en Ranters, Muggletonians,
etc. G.K. says, and that in the uprightness of heart, that he never gave such
Names to any of them, but to such as he can prove did deserve them, and for
which he can appeal to an impartial men that profess Christianity, whether they
to whom he gave such Names, did not deserve them; as when one of them said to
him in his own house, in the hearing of some present, That seeing to preach
Faith in Christ without, did give Offense to (...) Brethren, and was like to
make a Division among Friends, it was best to let it alone, as Paul said
concerning eating of Flesh, (...) it did offend his weak Brother; this W.
Gabitas said to him, whereupon G.K. said, (as he solemnly declares, and as
some do witness) Thou silly Soul, or little Soul, do (...) compare the
preaching of Christ crucified to eating (...) flesh? And to call men Fools and
S^ts, yea, blind and dark (...) that deserve it, has been the practice of some
very eminent Friends for no greater cause than some have given, who have openly
renounced the Faith of Christ without them, as necessary to th^^ Salvation, as
we can sufficiently prove some of them have done, who deservedly may be called
Ignorant Heathens, Infidels and Heretick^; and if G.K. did call some of them
Liars, he can prove they were such, and that is no Railing to call a Liar by
his true Name; so did Christ call such as deserved it, and so did Paul; and
diverse of them that have signed that Epistle, have called G.K. openly in a
Meeting Liar, and other unworthy and base Names, without all just ground; and
therefore it is base Partiality in these men to condemn G.K. for that which
they are guilty of themselves, some of them having not only called him Liar,
but Apostate, and worse that Profane, as particularly S. Jenings, in the
hearing of diverse credible Witnesses; and Arthur Cook, (who is of their side,
though his hand is not at their Paper, being absent) at the School-house-Meeting
did openly call him Muggletonian for affirming, That Christ had the true Body
(...) Man in Heaven, the which Body was not every where; of this many can bear
witness; and at the same time the said A.C. would not acknowledge that Christ's
appearance to Paul, mentioned I Cor.15.8. was without him, alleging it was
Only within, and put G.K. to prove, Where we read in Scripture of Faith in
Christ within and Christ without, as also to prove, that Cornelius was faithful
to the Light within, or had the Light within. And T. Lloyd has used very
unciv^^ exp^essions to G.K. in some of those Meetings, one time saying, No man
could differ with G.K. but he was in danger o the Lie of his Soul by him, which
G.K. was greatly offended with, and judged the most uncharitable saying that
ever any of his greatest Enemies gave him, this T.L. knows himself guilty of,
and has labored since to put a cloak upon it, but that could not cover it;
and at another time said, G.K. had been a more vexatious Adversary to Friends
than F^licks or Scand^ret, or the greatest Enemies; and at other times he has
said to G.K. Mast I tru^kle under these? which seemed very strange to G.K. and
some others, and seemed to proceed from great Pride and Self-conc^^^, is which
G.K. answered, A thou art not to truckle under me, so (...) and to truckle
(...) or thee, but let us both truckle under Truth. And it is but too apparent
that T. Lloyd, S. Jenings, J. Simcock, A took most especially, and others of
them concerned in Government and Magistracy, take occasion on that account to
exalt themselves, and lord it over G.K. and his Friend, and seek to oppress and
^un him down, because of their worldly Power and Greatness, and of this many
are sensible, that these places of wo^oly Government have done them much hurt,
in other respects, and especially that of late they countenanced the use of the
carnal Sword, and some -- hired men to fight, for recovering a Sloop from the
(...) ateers, and all this is allowed and countenanced by the Authority of
these men, who have joined in false Judgment against G.K. but if they had known
their own state aright, they would rather and in the (...) place have, ^^dged
themselves for that which has brought our Profession under such great
Reproach. And for (...) them Renters who deny Faith in Christ without, as
necessary to Salvation, and only proses^ Faith in Christ the Light with^^ t^em,
as we can prove diverse of them do, G.K. has for his Example G.F. whom he has
heard call such Ranters, who say, They believe only in Christ the Light in
them, and not in the Man Christ (...) them; also he has the Example of G.
Whitehead, who faith to Jiff. Bullock, (...) not see the consistency of
Salvation by the Light (...), And by the Man Christ Jesus, ar^ gone from the
Light into Imaginations; And by this (Cen^u^e of G.W.) it does manifestly
appear that the Monthly Meeting of the other side here at Philadelphia, who
meet ap^rt from us, is gone from the Light into Imaginations (and what is the
but (...)) for they have declared by their late Act of their Monthly Meeting,
the 2^. 3. mon. 92. That they see no reason to give Judgment against T.F. for
a^cusing G.K. that he denied the Sufficiency of the Light, seeing four Credible
(...) gave Testimony, That they card him say, he did not believe the Light was
sufficient an (...) something else; and at their last Monthly Meeting it was
confessed by T.L. as the Month of the Meeting, (...) by that something else,
(...) knew G.K. meant the Man Christ Jesus without us, and what he did and
suffered, or us on Earth, and what he now does for us in Heaven, to wit, his
Intercession for us, etc. Wherein they have declared themselves exactly to be
of the mind of J. B^llock, (a great Adver^sary to Truth and Friends, and whom
G.W. has well answered) who do not (...) the consistency b^twix^ Salvation by
the Light within, and by the Man Christ Jesus; and therefore by the Judgment of
G.W. they are gone with J.B. from the Light into Im^gi^ations, and may be
justly reckoned Adversaries to Truth and to faith full Friends, as well as J.B.
And not withstanding of their accusations against G.K. as if he were not in
unity with Truth and faithful Friends, G.K. has many hundreds to bear him
witness, (...) he is in unity with Truth and faithful Friends, not only (...)
Old-England, but in all places where they are; and they have heard him on all
occasions earnestly to declare his being in unity with all faithful Friends
every where, and that he does believe that there are many that are faithful,
and have had the true Christian (...) from the beginning, and that they still
continue in it, and that the Faith and Doctrine he does preach, is the same
that Ancient Friends had from the beginning, and which all ^ound and faithful
Friends at present have. And as for his giving hard Names and Words to any, it
was but conditional, upon ^upposition of their holding such Errors, which they
did term to favor and argue for, except to two or three, to where he was more
positive, because of their boldly asserting these Errors, some of which are now
boldly and openly asserted by them generally.

Thirdly, whereas they say, That G.K. charged their Meeting with being come to
cloak (...) and (...), and that there were more Doctrines (...) Devils, and
Da^^able Herefies among the Quakers, then among any Professions of the
Protestants. In this they are very unfair, and give a (...) Relation, as can be
proved by credible Witnesses, he did not charge the whole Meeting, but a Party
or Faction of them, that swayed and influenced others, for there were diverse of
that Meeting that stood for G.K. at that time, which was the Meeting held at
Burlington last, though J.Delavall and W.Byles are now declined, and G.K. did
say, That (...) such Damnable Here^ies and Doctrines of Devils were tolerated
in any Prostant Society, as these (...) did among them; but he never charged
the Body of Friends with these things, but always made a distinction; and G.K.
might well say so concerning them that have opposed him here, who hae
exceedingly labored to cloak that damnable Herefie of W.S. That to preach
Faith in Christ within and without, (...) to preach two Christ's; and with the
like Industry have they labored to cover T.F. whom they heard utter Blasphemy
in his Prayer, and never brought him to conviction for it; and though T.Budd, at
the last Meeting of Ministering Friends at Burlington, charged him with saying,
That (...) owned (...) Man Christ Jesus as Mediator in Heaven without him, but
the Grace of God within him, yet they gave him no check for i^; and at the last
Yearly Meeting, in the presence of diverse Friends be argued against G.K. That
Christ was only a Spirit in Heaven, and had nothing of the Body (...) Man in
Heaven; this is he also who said to G.K. at another Meeting, he had not learned
that lesson, whether it was (...) or somewhat else that Christ took o, the
Virgin, that was nailed to the Cross. And at a late Monthly Meeting that party
has cleared the said T.F. and told, That the Light is (...) without any thing
else, excluding the Man Christ Jesus, and his Obedience, Death Resurrection,
Ascension and Mediation for us in Heaven, all which are something else than the
Light; and G.K. might well say, no Protestant Society would tollera^e these
damnable Here^^es nor indeed would the Church of Rome. Also, some of their
chief Members are guilty of denying^'s Day of Judgment, and any Resurrection
but (...) they have already attained, owning no Resurrection but Christ, and
having attained to Christ, they reckon they have attained to all the
Resurrection they expect, as Rob.Owen, one of the (...) Judges, and Will.(...),
one of the Evidences against G.K. And J.Wil^ord, another of the false Judges,
said lately on a first day Meeting, That Christ was a Mediator for no Drunkards
(...) Wicked Persons, but for his own Disciples, expressly contrary to
Scripture Testimony in many places, Isa. 53. 12. Isal. 68. for it is by the
Merits and intercession of Christ that all men, even wicked men of all ^orts
have a day of (...), and are inwardly enlightened by Christ, and such who
improve it no^, but live and dye in their sins, (...) not but that it is a
benefit in it (...). Also, the same Person, (...) time ago at a Meeting in
East-Jarsey, said in Prayer, Lord (...) not dote on the Body, to neglect the
Life; which was very offensive, and is an unfavou^^ i^reve^^n^ expression to
every Pious Christian; for to dote on it, is too much to love it, but this none
can do; for we cannot too much love the Lords glorious body, nor any thing of
him, but the more truly we love his Body, the more we enjoy of his Life
inwardly, and the more we enjoy of his Life^^ us, and love it we love his Body,
and prise and esteem still more and more all the Sufferings of his Soul, and
his Bodily Suffering, Death, Re^urrection and A^^ention in that Body, hoping
that he will change our low Body, and fashion it like to his glorious ^ody. All
which, and other gross Errors; being con^^dened, some denying Gods Presence in
all his Creatures, arguing (...) God be in Herbs and Grass, than who trample
(...) Herbs and Grass, (...) on God [Horrid Blasphemy!] as one argued, and
charged G.K. of Blasphemy (...) Mo. Meeting, for saying, God was present in all
his Creatures, even Grass, Herbs, etc. Hence a new dispute has risen among
some, (...) God be present in (...)? some a^gning, they are ^^part of the
Creation. Are not these things enough to make (...) Ears to tingle; by all
which, and much more that can be proved, it may sufficiently appear, what great
reason G.K. had to say, No such (...) Herefies, etc. are (...) in any Christian
Society, as are among (...) away, called, ^uakers. Another preaches, (...)
Christ (...) at once, and makes them free of all sin; and when we are perfect
we are Kings, and are not to beg or pray to God for then (...) And openly in a
Meeting at J. Goodsonn's, S.Jenings accused G.K. as also did J.Simcock for
preaching Faith in Christ without us, (...) it the Professors Faith, and the
Faith of all (...), that did not profit them. And T.Ducker; another great
state-man (the.) and Preache^, declared at the Meeting at Rob. Errors when G.K.
made the first Complaint to them against W.S. that he could not determine,
whether that Body that was crusified, was in Heaven or not; but, said he, let
the Church determine it, if the Church determine it, we shall, I hope, submit,
which was more like a blind Mass-Priest, than a judicious Protestant Minister.
And S.Jenings has sufficiently discovered his great Ignorance, as in some
other things (and joining with them that (...), the Light is sufficient without
something else, and requiring G.K. to give an absolute Submission to their
judgment, which G.K. calling Kark Popery, S.J. took out his Pocketbook and
writ it down before G.K. had ended the sentence) so in openly declaring in a
men's Meeting, That to do Gods business, we needed Gods Wisdom and Fomer, but to
do our own business, as men, we needed it not; which G.(...), (...) Rob.
T^^ner, J.Heart, and several others, publicly testified against, but the
Meeting gave no judgment against him. And notwithstanding (...) S.J. has
severely blamed G.K. that he refused to submit to him and his Associates, who
were joined in a Faction against G.K. for his faithful Testimony, yet he has
refused to submit to the judgment not only of the men's Meeting here at
Philadelphia, in a small world^ matter betwixt T.B. and him, but refused to
submit to the Judgment of a Meeting of the most eminent Friends, viz. G.F. G.W.
and others, appointed at London to hear the difference betwixt (...) and him,
concerning the Trust committed to him by E.B. as his Deputy Governo^^, the
which; though he refused to submit to their Judgment, yet they judged him guilty
of betraying his Trust and the came away from England in dis-unity with the
most faithful Friends at London, on that very account; and had he had his due,
Friends here would sc^r^e have suffered him to preach and pray in Meeting, far
less to have ruied in their men and women's Meeting, a since he has done, first
in West-Jarsey, of whose too severe Government, People in that Province were
generally weary, and of other his proud and lofty Carriages, and now here in
Pennsilvania, who has already shown himself too high and impe^ious both in
Friends Meetings, and (...) Courts, as is out too we^^ known to many, and yet
this ignorant presumptuous and insolent man has been one of the main Opposers
and Threatners of G.K. threatening him, That they will let him know that the
(...) their Judgment, yet they shall judge him; but seeing they have given
false Judgment against him, a G.K. could expect no better from his declared
Opposers, and Adversaries both to Truth and him, it is no cause of Offense for
G.K. to say, be trampled their Judgment as Dirt under his feet; for Dirt is
good for something to fatten the Land, but false Judgment is good for nothing,
except to discover what ignora^ and prejudiced men these are against the Trut^.
Another of the false Judges is one W. Walker, Novia, who began to preach before
he had the outward sober carriage of a Friend, known to be a prejudiced person
against G.K. for reproving his false Doctrine, first in private, then more
publicly, he having said in a public Meeting, That a man might speak, unsound
word in the (...); and at another time in a public Meeting, he hid us mass
that she Scepter might depart from (...) and c. that (...) come; and many other
most gross and impertinent things he hith spoke in Meetings, fathering an upon
the Spirit. And a for J. Delavall his declining from G.K. and turning most
severely against him and his. Doctrine, but of late formerly preached by him,
is insufficient known to many, as well as his accusing of G.K in a thing he
could not prove, but essayed to do it with a dreadful Oath, saying, A God was
in Heaven is was true, which to be sure is as real an Oath, as that was under
the Law, The Lord lives. Another of the false judges is Paul Saunders very
lately a great pretended Friend of G.K. and who has greatly owned in words
G.K's Doctrine, and came to that called our separate Blessing, at least one
first day, as joining with us, and yet now has joined with these false judges
against us, and yet but a few (...) before, he told G.K. That he believed are
long they would thrust him out from among them, for it lay on him to preach
among them, what that something else was, that was necessary to their
Salvation, besides the Light, to wit, the Man Christ Jesus without us. Let none
be Offended that we name these (...) Names, for seeing they have named G.K. in
their Paper containing false Judgment, and put their Name to it, we hope none
can justly blame G.K. or us that love him, to name their Names to thing we can
prove sufficiently against them; besides, some of them have complained that in
our Book, Some Causes (...) Separation, we named not Names, and therefore
seeing it is desired, we have named some; and it were an easy matter to give
such a Character of every one of them that have signed that Paper of false
Judgment, as may render them unqualified men to give Judgment in such a weighty
case, not only for the Ignorance of most of them, as well as their Prejudice,
but for the great suspicion that some of them lie under of a scandalous Life,
as (...), Uncleanness, etc. and as for W. Yardly and N. Walve, as we can prove
them both very ignorant men, so they are not of a very good Fame among their
Neighbors, and for that distaste, some stay from Meetings, as we are informed.
And one George Gray from Barbados, almost wholly a stranger to these matters
of difference, taking all on trust from them, except what has lately happened
in some late Meetings, has showed himself too foolish and rash, as well as
ignorant; and the like may be said of (...), of Long Island, wholly a stranger
to any Differences, but what he had by report, and who lately before diverse
Witnesses at the house of W. Bradford, openly declar^d himself an Unbeliever,
as concerning Christ's coming without us to judge the quick and the Dead, which
is a great Article of the Christian Faith.

4 thly, As concerning their blaming G.K. for objecting against their
Discipline, and his preparing a Draught, Which he presented them, G.K. gave no
just Cause to be offended at this; hundreds here away of the more sincere sort
of Friends, do object, as well as G.K. against the too great laxness of
Discipline amongst us, and that there is but little inspection into the good
Lives and Manners of them that profess Truth among us, far less into their
Faith, so that men may almost believe any thing, and yet be owned, if they come
to Meetings, and use plain Language and plain Habit, and be not grossly
scandalous. And as to his Draught that he prepared and presented to the Yearly
Meeting, 1690, he was very moderate in it, and did not press it on them; and he
is so far from being ashamed of it, that he has now sent it to Friends in Old
England, to consider of.

5 thly, Their blaming G.K. for his earnest desiring that they and we might
agree to draw up some Principles and Doctrines of Faith in the most necessary
things, to qualify our Church Members, and distinguish Believers from
Unbelievers, has no just ground, but is rather worthy of Commendation; for
hundreds see the necessity of such a thing among us, especially here-away. And
for his saying, That he knew none given forth by the Body of Friends, it is
true he has so said, and if they know any in the Confession or Declaration of
Faith in all necessary things, and sufficient to end the present Differences,
let them produce i^; we know that particular accounts of Principles and
Doctrines have been given forth by diverse particular Friends, as G.F G.W. E.B.
J.C. and diverse others, but not by the Body of Friends or any Yearly Meeting,
so far as we know, except the Rhod^-Island Sh^et, which they do so much (...)
For their offering to give a Confession in (...) words, when they have given us
to know, they have a sense contrary to Scripture, (...) more can (...) us, than
when (...), (...), Muggletontans, etc, say they will give us a Confession of
their Faith in Scripture words; They have greatly blamed G.K. for imposing
unscriptural words and terms on them; and yet when asked, what these terms are?
they never, did or can show, unless that some of them have said, to preach
faith in Christ within and (...) us, is unscriptural. And what else can it be
but gross Unbelief and Paganism to find fault so much with preaching Faith in
Christ without us, and his being in Heaven in the same body that suffered,
being necessary to our Salvation; for though the words [ without us] or (...)
same Body] be not express Scripture words, yet seeing they are according to the
true sense of Scripture, who can blame G.K. or any other to preach them, viz.
That Faith in Christ, asked dyed for us and rose again, unnecessary to our
Salvation, and that Christ's Body that was (...), and buried, rose again, and is
gone into Heaven? Surely none but Insiaels and Rankers, but no sincere
Christians will deny these things; and yet all the Imposition they can allege
on G.K. is, That he did preach Faith in the Man Christ without them, as well as
Faith in Christ the Light in them; and that Christ bate the true Body of Man in
Heaven, and in that Body he will come and appear without us to judge the quick
and the dead. And the 27. 4. mo. at Frankford Mo Meeting in discourse without
door before many Friends, T. Lloyd blamed G.K. for imposing unscriptural words
on them, G.K. pressed him again and again to show in any one particular, but he
would not give one instance; then G.K. desired him to answer one Question, viz.
Whether to believe that Christ dyed for our sins, and rose again, was necessary
to our Salvation? but T.L. waved it, saying, I will prove out of thy Books,
thou vast not of that Faith sometime ago, which G.K denied, well knowing what
is in his own Books. And it may be noted, that T. Lloyd, S.Jinings, J.Delavall
and S. Richardson, came to the said Meeting to countenance the reading of their
Papaer of false Judgment against G.K. and his Friends, having put it into the
hands of W.Prestan to read, who offering to read it, declaring, That nothing
ought to be read in their meeting without the general consent of the Meeting;
but this un^uly and disorderly man, (who has otherwise showed his Prejudice
against G.K. and particularly that when G.K. was declaring at another Meeting,
W.P. interrupted him and called him Liar, when yet it was proved that he was
the Liar himself at that very time) did presume to read the Paper against the
mind of most of the Friends present; and T.L.S.J.S.R.J.D. and A.M. were so far
from giving any check to this (...) proceeding, and (...) upon the (...)
Liberty and Right of the Meeting, that they encouraged it, and one of them,
without the least occassion given, did threaten to bind an honest Friend to the
Peace, S. Jenings calling out for a Constable. Thus these who by their Place
should be good Examples of (...) and good Order, are Transgressors of it.

6 thly, For their (...) to refer the Differences in matter of Doctrine either
to the Yearly Meeting here, or to the Yearly Meeting at London, by their
drawing up a Confession, and transmitting it to them, which they blame G.K. for
refusing; G.K. faith, that he told them he had good cause to refuse referring
it to the Yearly Meeting here, there being a Faction that prevailed in the last
Yearly Meeting to hinder Justice to be done to the truth, but he did not refuse
to refer the Difference to Friends in England, as having any (...) that they
would concern his Doctrine, but it he had promised any such Reference or
submission as was required, it would have been called a breach of his Promise,
if he had preached any of these Doctrines disputed betwixt them and him, and if
God had moved him to preach them, he should either have disobeyed that Motion,
or seemed to break his Promise; and therefore he refused to come under any such
eye, especially seeing it could not be expected that an Answer could come from
England in less than a years space; And by a marveolus Providence of God,
within a few days after this debate, Friends Letters came to us confirming
G.K's Doctrine in every Particular then in Difference betwixt him and them, and
since that they cry out, Who denies these things? when it is well known, and
can well be proved, many did deny them. And whereas they further say, That they
would have given a Confession one of a Book^o, of G.K's concerning the main
Matter in Controversy, is but a deceitful Cover, like to others; that Book
gives them no strength in the matter of Controversy; but if they think it
does they should have mentioned it; for nothing is more deceitful than are
Generals; However, let it be well noticed, they grant there is a main matter of
Controversy in Doctrine betwixt us; but they should have told what that main
Matter of Controversy is, to wit, Faith in Christ without us, as dyed and rose
again, being necessary to our Salvation, according to Ram 10.9.10. but this
they dare not openly do, fearing the People, us the Pharisees feared the Jews
of old, in the Case of John.

7 thly, Whereas they say, This Meeting having tenderly and orderly deals wise
him for has abusive Language, and disorden^y Behavior, etc. There cannot to a
thing more falsely, hypocritically and Impudently alleged; for they did not so
much as call him before them at that time, so far as he can understand, although
one of them lately told G.K. that they sent W.By^es for him, but nothing of
this was intimated to any of his Family, and he being absent from the Town, and
knowing nothing of their further Intention against him, did not purposely
absent himself; it was unchristian, and most of Heathen Justice, to condemn him
and his Friends, without hearing them, they never yet having has any fair
hearing to clear themselves; for even Nicodemcos could say, John 7.91 Does our
Law judge any man before it hear him? And did not our Friends at London blame
the Baptists for clearing Tho. Hicks, and condemning W.P and others without a
fair hearing of them; nor was that enough that they sent for them, for they
being then absent, was sufficient excuse, and sout was to G,K if they had sent
for him; nor was he ever brought upon Trial, in order to any Conviction, before
these of the Ministry, but that MockTryal that they had at Burhington last,
where A Cook accused him of being guilty in two particulars, viz. That four of
five years ago be (...) him (...) Friends of the Ministry at the yearly Meeting
at the Center, for mis^ucting the Scripture. To which G.K. answered, he did not
blame them, so far as he can remember, but caution them, not to mis-(...) the
Scripture, as many can witness, which was seasonable and necessary, seeing too
frequently Scriptures are both mis-quoted and mis-interpreted, as particularly
not long ago in a public Meeting A Cook did expound these words, (...). By
(...) Stripes we are healed, not of Christ's Stripes that he suffered without
us, but of the stripes that he given us in our hearts; and when T.(...) prayed
in a pub Meeting, Lord Jesus, who art still crucisied without the Gates of
Jerusalem; and at another Meeting, told, That was crucisied Christ without the
Gate, when their Minds went from the Light in them; and according to this
perverse Exposition, when the Scriptute faith, Let us go forth therefore unto
him without the Camp, Heb. 13. 13 the sense would be, Let us go forth from the
Light in ^; which to be sure is very false and absurd Doctrine. And further,
G.K. did expostulate with there against A.C. that he should so many years
conceal this, and now being it forth, was contrary to Gospel Order: The next
thing whereof A.C. accused G.K. was, That be heard him revise his Brethreno
(...), to Friends of Rhode Island, ^ading some of them Heat^ens, etc. To which
G.K. answered, that be denied, that he reviled any of them, but if he had A.C.
had no witness to prove it, and the Scripture faith, Receive not an Aicusation
against an Elder, but before two of three Witnesses: A.C. said, Friends, ye
(...) the Scripture says the Ear tries words, as the Mouth tastes meat; if I
speak from a true Spirit, ^ye have a (...), and then what need of Witnesses? To
which G.K. replied, This is a great abuse, for at this rate one might accuse
A.C. of Adultry, and if he can get but some men pretending to a Spirit of
Discerning, say, that he speaks true, though the thing be false, he shall be
condemned: This is an Invention that A.C has hit upon when the Priests that
accused Christ, had not found out, or had they found it out, it would not have
done, for the Law required Witnesses, and so does the Gospel; but the
prevailing Party in the Meeting was so far from giving check to this most (...)
and unchristian way of of accusing G.K. without Witnesses, that they suffered
S.J. to assault him with a new Charge, which he could not prove. And there fore
their usage and dealing with G.K. at this said Meeting was most unfair and
(...), in that G.K. was the first Complainer, and they had delayed doing
justice to Truth, in bringing W. Stockdate to Condemnation for his B^^phemy,
for about ten Months, and now they permitted any Accusation to be made against
him, without Witnesses, which gave him just cause to tell them, he declined
their Judgment, because they had manifested themselves to be his opposite
Party, and prejudiced again him. And yet after all this for them to abuse
Friends, by writing to them such a gross Falsehood, That they had tenderly and
orderly deals with G.K. is Abominable Hypocrisy.

8thly, Nor are they more fair and just in accusing G.K. for Traducing and
(...) the two Old England Friends, T.W.and J.D. But they cannot prove, that
G.K. either said or did any thing but what was just and christian concerning
them; and it is too manifest that they were abused, deceived and biased by
them of the other Party with Flattery and false Insinuations they gave against
us, letting us have scarce any their Company; and they being thus deceived
concerning us, used many indirect Reflections, mentioning Haman, Baal, Saut and
A^on, which the Hearers generally understood, they did intend G.K. and when he
asked them, If they did mean (...), and in pronouncing Woes, etc. they were not
positive to clear him, yet G.K was exceeding sparing toward them until after
they had openly blamed him and his Friends for the Separation, and prophesied
against us, which caused G.K. to tell them they were deceived concerning us,
and for their better understanding (...) them appoint a Meeting for that end,
which they not embracing, and J.D. comparing our differences here, which are as
great as ever any was among any professing Christianity, To Childrens falling
out about Trifles, caused G.K. and (...) others to go away to their own
Meeting, but G.K. put not on his (...) until he was out of the Gallary, and out
of the hearing of J.D.

9 thly, Whereas they say, They would have G.K. cease to offer his Bise among
them: What great Nonsense, Confusion and Contradiction is this in them, to
suppose that G.K. has a Gift to offer, after they have rendered him as had as
the worst of men possibly can almost be, as fallen us the searing Mountains,
slain in his high Places, gone into a Spirit of En^mity, Wrath, Self-Exal
(...), etc and as Person without the Fear of God before (...) Eyes, in his
Anger and Envy being Cruel against them, with much more. Surely if all this be
true, G.K. cannot be s^d to have the least grain of true Piecy; for he who
(...) his Brother is a Mart^erer, and no Murt^eror has (...) Life ab^ding in
him; and according to Friends Doctrine and Principle, No Imp^^ss^er Wicked Man
has any Ministerial Gift to offer, as this Paper supposes or allows him to
have: This Confusion and Self(...) of their Paper, shows (with many other
things in it) what a false, spirit it has come from: And many hundreds have a
true judgment and (...) of G.K. that he continues in a living sense to God,
and (...) a living Ministry, which has a living Seal from the Spirit of God in
the heals of hundreds, and that he is no such man as they in their Prejudice
and Ignorance describe him to be. And for their blaming us for the (...), in
that they have given false Judgment against us, for it lies (...) in door, as
appears by our Book, Some Causese; the Separation,etc. (...) they have not
taken notice of, nor can they contradict; for all the matter therein is truth,
only there was mistake of one man's name, viz. 8,mercy (...), who was not at the
Meeting, but we could have fet down many (...) to make them up sixty, at least,
and the matter in that Book (...) at their door to answer, if they be able.

10 thly, Whereas they sa^, G.K. at Meetings since the separation, like an open
Adversary, has revised several Friends, by exposing their Religious
Reputations in mixed A^dirories of some, hundreds, etc. This is altogether
Ealse, for it is no revill^^ to speak the Truth; and they cannot prove than
G.K. has spoke any thing or them on what is true, although they have reported
both publicly and privately many false things, and among the rest their late
de^amatory Paper of Condemnation; and (...) but just and reasonable he should
defend himself, and his Testimony.

And now in the Conclusion, we do first Solemnly Appeal to God, the Righteous
Judge of all men; from the fate Judgment of these (...) men against us, and
next all faithful Friends and (...) in America. and in Old England. Scotland
and Ireland. or else-(...), to judge between and them, as the unerring and
infals^ble spirit shall be found and (...) to give them true Judgment a
^Discerning; and with great Assurance, Peace and Joy in the lord, to him we
commit oxy Righteous (...)

G K T B

Some brief Observations on their seeming condomnation of William Stockdale
which is rather, as to the main, a clearing of him, and condemning him only as
to some Circumstance, and more severely and (...), and most falsely condemning
G.K.
First. WHereas they say, They being prevented in their Meetings of late to
proceed orderly in business, by reason of a Turbulent (...) unsubdued Spirit
(meaning without all doubt in G.K.) but having respite at this time, have
considered, etc. This is great Hypocrisy and Deceit in them; why were they
prevented in their Meetings of late? did G.K. by his Spirit lay violent hands
either on their Tongues or Pens, that they might not have given true Judgment
against W.S. in a case so plain, that a company of Children well instructed in
the first Principles of Christianity (the eldest of them not exceeding fifteen
years) could have given a just decision in less than one quarter of an hour?
But how could G.K's Spirit hinder them at the Yearly Meeting, when he went out
at their desire though there was no cause for his so doing, more than for any of
them, for it was not G.K. but Christ Jesus that was mainly concerned in this
Affair, for whom, and for his Glory, if they had any zeal for him.) they ought
to have been as much concerned as G.K. but it is fullfilled in them what is
writ in Scripture of some, that loved the praise of men more than the praise of
God. But why did they take no time since the Yearly Meeting? Why did they not
take a quiet time to do it in G.K.'s absence, when he was almost six Months
absent in N. England, betwixt his first Complaint and that Meeting at
Burlington last first Month, having gone twice into N. England, and was each
time absent about three Months? And why did they nothing at the Meeting at
Burlington against W.S. but heard false Accusation, without all Proof, against
G.K? Why are they so partial and hypocritical to pretend they had not time till
now the 41.4. mo.92 for about 15 Months past? Why did they nor call and appoint
an extraordinary Meeting of Friends, as they have (...) done upon a far less
occasion, as when then presently called a Meeting at the house of Sa^^el
Carpenter, to pass Judgment against the Publishing of the Rhode Island Sheet,
called The Christian Faith, and against William Bradford for so Printing it,
though he was warranted to print it be the d^^re of the Mo Meeting (...)
Rhode Island, which has as great Authority to print without them, as they here
have to print without these, unless they here (...) say, that Philadelphia is
the Church of Rome in America as Samuel Jenings caused it the Metropolitan,
little considering that the Apostasy came in by such means.

Secondly, Whereas they say, The Friends then present concluded of a Judgment
(...) matter, prevented of publishing the same by reason of George Keith (...)
Behavior, and exticam Passion, which abruptly broke up the said Meeting. But
this is another piece of their Hypoc^^e, they should have said, if they would
have said truly, what Judgment was given, ye were prevented of publishing of it
by the unruly behavior, and proud and insolent Carriage, as we^ as unjust
proceedings of Sam.Jenings and A^tbar C^ok, who would not suffer the Judgment
given to be published, after G.K. was ca^^d into the Meeting, until G.K. should
be ^^yed for (...) his Brethren, which G.K. fervently and earnestly
contradicted, crying out against their injustice, and Arbitrary Method,
contrary to the way of worldly Co^^ts, in the like case, though some time alter
S.J. was pleased to say, That Courts allowed of Discount; So that according to
J. the (...) of W.S. shall be discounted for, and set off, against G.K's
reviling his Brethren, if he had been guilty thereof, which they can never
prove. And whether A. Cook was not guilty of extreme Passion, who did in a
Quarterly Meeting, whereof many can bear witness, pronounce a Curse against
G.K. saying, George, thou best made this B^^ec, and Woe be to thee from the
Lord, and yet none of that Party reproved him for so doing?

Thirdly, Wherereas they give their Judgment, That W.S. is reproveable and
blameworthy for uttering the said words ( viz. That G.K's preaching Christ
within and Christ without, was preaching two Christ's) they being an Off^nce in
many sound and tender Friends, and that be condemn the same. It does plainly
appear, that their Judgment is but a ba^e shadow, or formality of Judgment,
rather than any substantial, effectual, weighty and sollid Judgment against
him, which if it had been, they would have aggravated it with other words and
expression, and principally blamed him for his words of Unbelief and blasphemy
against the son of Man, greatly offensive to God; but instead of that they say,
They being Offensive to many sound and tender Friends: Why are they so severe
to G.K. against whom they cannot justly charge any thing, either in Doctrine or
Life, saying of him, He being a Man without the (...) of God before his Eyes,
etc. Is it a greater Offense to them, that they are dishonored, or that the
worth Name of Christ is dishonored, by an open de^yal of him, as W. Stockdale
did, by saying, To preach Faith in (...) within and Faith in Christ without, is
to preach Two Christ's; for at this rate, Christ without is to him but a false
Christ; and this to them is so small a fault, that to deny Christ without us,
they will not say in their Judgment, it is an Offense to God, but they say, It
is Offense to many sound and tender Friends; Oh! great Hypocri^e, and want of
Zeal to the Glory of God and Christ, though they are full of Zeal to their own
Honor, that w^^ stink, and do^^ already (...) this their great Partiality and
Injustice, as well as their great ignorance, Error and Unbelief?

Fourthly, But why do not the words of their Judgment run thus, That W.S. did
say, to preach Faith in Christ without, and in Christ (...), was to preach two
Christ's, etc but that they are guilty themselves of not having this Faith; for
not long ago, A Cook questioned G.K. at a Men's Meeting, which many can witness,
(...) of late, some of them say, they have a reverend esteem of Christ without,
of his Death, Sufferings, Resurrection and A^^ention yet none of them preach it
as a necessary matter of Salvation, to believe it, that ever we heard of,
except John D^lavall, who has of late changed his Faith, and got a say worse.
And it cannot be supposed, that they hold Faith in Christ without them to be
necessary to their Salvation seeing many of them that belong to the Monthly
Meeting, have given their Judgment, That the Light is sufficient to Salvation
without something (...), which is a plain excluding the Man Christ Jesus from
having any part in our Salvation, and leaving him only the bare Name or Title
of a Savior; and if so, then they had as good have wholly cleared W.S.

Fifthly, It is great Confusion and Contradiction in these of that side, to
condemn W. Stockdale, if they wore in good earnest, and to clear Tho. (...);
for if the Man Christ Jesus be our real Savior, and that his Death,
Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation for us without us in Heaven, has any
part in our Salvation, them the Light does not save us without somewhat else;
and therefore T.F. is guilty of Condemnation: But if T.F. be cleared, then the
Man Christ without us is no real Savior at all, and ought not to be preached,
nor Faith in him, but only the Light within, and W.S. at this rate is in the
right of it, and they have done (...) to pass Judgment against him. I know no
way to reconcile this, but to say, their Judgment against W.S. is a
Mock-Judgment of show, without any Reality.

Sixthly, They unjustly blame G.K. for not giving (...) Gospel Order, and take
(...) notice how W.S gave him (...) at all, either of (...) to G.K alone by
himself; but to him in the presence of two others that were with him; and for
what (...) had by Hearsay from another, was no just ground of Offense to him,
until it was confirmed by W.S. himself, as it then was; and therefore not being
to him alone, it was no Transgression of Gospel Order, that he did not speak to
him alone afterward, but why should Sam^^l J^nings blame G.K. for no^ giving
Gospel Order to William Stockdale, when he knows in his Conscience, he never
spoke to G.K. in private, by way of Admonition, before he again and again
accused him to Friends of the Ministry, for Reviling his Brethren, which is a
false Accusation.

Seventhly, That hey blame him for (...) Will: Stockdale an Ignorant (...), ^he
being, as they say, elder in the Truth, and in Tears. Then according to them, a
man may be in the Truth, and a good Christian, and say, Christ without is (...)
the true Christ. -- but why is (...) a bad Name? for if every honest Heathen be
a true Christian, as he is, according to that Principle held by their Monthly
Meeting, That the Light is sufficient without the Man Christ, and without the
Faith of his Death, Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation, which is that
something else than honest Heathen is a (...) Christian; and therefore by their
own Principle, to be called a Heathen is no Reviling, and to be called
Ignorant, is no Reviling, when a man is so; (...) also, T. Lloyd has argued
much, both at the Yearly Meeting, and at the Mo. Meeting adjourned to the
School-house, Than an honest Heathen was a (...) And seeing harder Names have
been given by some of best Note among Friends, to them that denied Women's
Meetings, etc and other lesser things belonging to the Skirts of Religion,
having called them Incar^^ Devils, Wretched Apostates, Wolves, Dogs, see
Judgment fixed, Pres^^. let all sincere Christians judge, whether they who deny
the Lord that bought them, deserve not much more sharp Reproof? and yet no such
Hard Names did G.K. give them.

Given forth in Behalf of Themselves, and their Friends concerned with them in
this Testimony; and by Order of our Meeting, By George Keith, Thomas Budd.

THE END

