A Modest and Impartial NARRATIVE Of several Grievances and Great Oppressions
That the Peaceable and most Considerable Inhabitants OF Their Majesty's
Province OF NEW YORK IN AMERICA Lie Under, By the Extravagant and Arbitrary
Proceedings of Jacob Leyster and his Accomplices.

T He Reader is hereby advertised, That the Matters contained in the following
Declaration and Narration, were intended to have been presented to the Mayor's
Court in New York, the 21th of January last past, but that the Fury and Rage of
this Insolent man Leyster, was grown to that highth, that the day before, by
his order, several Persons of Note were violently seized, and diverse Houses
broken open, so as it was not thought safe to proceed in such Method. For which
reason its thought well to publish the same, for information of all into whose
hands it may come, but more especially for the benefit of our fellow
Inhabitants, who are abused by the false Pretentions of this common Violater of
our Laws and Liberties, (...) by the following Narrative will plainly appear,
Wherein, the Courteous Peruser is desired to take notice, it has been our
great Care to relate nothing but Matters of Fact, of which we have substantial
Credible Evidences.

The Narrative, etc.
OUT of the deep Sense we have of the good Providence of Almighty God, in their
Majesty's happy Accession to the Imperial Crown of England, etc. In the first
place, We, in a most Christian manner, with Hearts and Hands lifted up to
Heaven, give Glory to Almighty God, for this so happy a Revolution, whereof it
has pleased the most High to appear the principal Author. In the next place,
We cannot but declare and publish to the World our Hearty and Thankful
Resentments of the Noble, though Hazardous Enterprise of the late Prince of
Orange, our now most Dread Sovereign, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith etc. the Noble Hero of this Age, for the
Protestant Religion, and the Preservation of the Laws and Liberties of the
English Nation unviolated, manifesting hereby, that as in Duty bound, so in
point of Gratitude, we can do no less than Dedicate our Lives and Fortunes to
their Majesty's Services, with our most serious and continued Prayers for their
Majesty's long and happy Reign over us, being well satisfied in our selves,
that what our Native Land so plentifully enjoys under their Reign, to wit, the
Laws and Liberties of the English Nation, We (though inhabiting a remote part
of their Dominion) shall share with them in the common Propriety.

In consideration whereof in all Humble and Obedient manner, as Dutiful
Subjects to their Majesty's, and Wellwishers to this their Province of
New York, We can do no less than in the presence of God, and to the World,
declare our Abhorrance and Dislike of the Unreasonable, Illegal and Arbitrary
Proceedings of some men inhabiting with us in ^his their Majesty's Province,
who have usurped Authority over us.

Against all such Proceedings of theirs, hereafter faithfully and impartially
set down, and against them, as the Actors thereof, we do hereby publicly
Declare and Protest.

Now to the end the Reasonableness of this our Protestation may appear unto all
to whose hands it may come, we count our selves obliged to give a brief Recital
of the Care of our late Lieutenant Governor Francis Nicholson, for the more
peaceable quiet and satisfactory governing this their Majesty's Province.

To obviate all suspicion of Jealousies that might arise in ill affected
Turbulent Spirits, our said Lieutenant Governor by and with the consent of so
many of the Council as here resided (upon the whispering of the late happy
Change) did convene together the Mayor, Aldermen and common Council Men of the
City of New York, with all the Commission Officers of the Militia of this City
and County; at which Convention our said Lieutenant Governor proposed to admit
of part of the Train-bands of this City and County to take their turns of
Watching and Warding within their Majesty's Fort, under their own Officers; And
further offered, with the advice and consent of his Council, Civil and Military
Officers, there met and assembled, That the Customs formerly paid by the
Inhabitants of this Province, should still continue, only with this alteration,
that whereas formerly it was expended and laid out in defraying of the Charges
of the Government, and Soldiers in pay in the Garrison, it should thence
forward be employed in the fortifying and putting this City in a posture of
Defense against a Foreign Enemy, on which the Welfare and Safety of this
Province so much depends.

In pursuance of the same, an order issued forth from the said Convention,
signed by the Lieutenant Governor, his Council, the Mayor and Alder-men of this
City, and most of the Commission-Officers of the Militia, none showing so great
a dislike to it as Jacob Le^sler, one of the Captains of the Train-bands of
this City, who at that time had a Ship laden with Wines, the Customs whereof
amounted to upwards of one hundred Pounds, the payment of this he utterly
refused, alleging, The Collector being a Papist, was not qualified to receive
it, denying the then Power to be legal; but whether for that or his own private
Interest, let the impartial judge.

The turbulent mind of this Person not being satisfied in denying the payment
of the usual Customs, though appointed for the use aforesaid, he sets himself
upon inventing ways how he might overturn the Government, which was then
peaceable and quiet. The first thing he falls upon was to stir up and ann^mate
the People of the East end of Long Island to advance, with sufficient Force to
take Possession of the Fort, lest it should be in danger of being delivered up
to a Foreign ^ower; this readily took with them, whose Minds were already
heated by the Example of Boston, in clapping up of our Governor Sir Edmund
Andros, and after some Consultations amongst themselves, they put forward in a
Hostile manner, increasing as they came along the Island, until they were so
far advanced as the Town of Jamaica, being then about Eighty in Number, where
they halted, and sent up three of their principal Leaders to discourse the
Lieutenant Governor, who upon their coming convened his Council, the Mayor and
Alder-men of this City, and the Commission-Officers of the Militia of City and
Country, into which Convention the Persons sent were admitted; where after some
long debates, they seemingly went away satisfied, at least so far as that they
and the men accompanying them, returned home to their own Towns and
Habitations, without doing the least hurt or damage to any.

This Stratagem failing our Massanello Leyster, in a short time after a Rumor
was spread amongst the quiet Inhabitants of this City, of a horrible Design,
there was of Murdering them, their Wives and Children, as they were Worshipping
of God in the Dutch Church within the Fort, and the Sunday prefixed, when this
cruel Act was to be accomplished; Capt. Leyster in the mean time instigating
and stirring up the Inhabitants to Self-preservation against this imaginary
Design, which so far prevailed with part of the Inhabitants, as that the Friday
before the Sunday marked out by this Report for the pretended Massacree, they
rose in a Hostile manner; the first who appeared in Arms were some under
Leyster's Command, who (as the Plot was laid) went to the House of their
Captain, and threatened to shoot him if he would not head them. This no ways
surprised the courageous Captain; a substantial Reason why, himself being the
sole Contriver of it: Yet whether prevailed most, the want of Valor, or the
Apprehensions, if he should miscarry in this bold Attempt, the Country would be
destitute of one so fit as himself to Command, we leave to the Judicious to
determine.

However it was, it seemed not good unto this Champion to venture himself, but
commits the Conduct of his men unto one Stoll, famous for nothing, unless his
not being worth a Groat; up marches Stoll with his brisk followers, and to the
Fort Gates they draw near, where they met with a very civil Gentleman, one
Hendrick Cuyler, left under Capt. Abraham Depeyster, who commanded that part of
the Train-bands, who by turn had the Guard in the Fort that day; this Persons
Civility was such, that its hard to determine whether Stoll and his party
without were more desirous to enter, than he within was ready to open the Gates
to them. In fine, Entrance they had, with great Acclamations and Joy on both
sides, that so Meritorious a Design was not prevented.

How far this valiant Lieutenant Cuyler, in this base act of his, has answered
the Law of Arms, or the Trust reposed in him, we will not now determine; but
sure we are, the season they took for accomplishing this their Unman-like
Contrivance, does not a little add to their Crime, it being at that juncture of
time when our Lieutenant Governor and the ^onventment (whereof we have before
made mention) were consulting for the more orderly, quiet and peaceable
governing this their Majesty's Province, who at this sudden Change were
startled, and acted what was left in their Power, publicly protesting against
this rude Action, and the Actors thereof.

By this time their great Champion Leyster being well assured all danger and
hazard was over, he most courageously girds on his Sword, marches stoutly up to
the Fort, in order to his carrying on the Game he had so fairly begun, where he
is joyfully received, and a Consultation immediately held, how they should
obtain the Keves of the Fort, which the Lieutenant Governor had in C^^o^y,
being in the City Hall, where he was in Consultation as is already hinted.

The Evening approaching, Capt Lodwick and his Company advances to the Fort to
mount the Guard, as his turn was; some time after his being in the Fort nothing
would satisfy the tumultuous Multitude, but that three or four Files of men
must be sent, under the Command of William Churchill, Sergeant, to Capt.
Lodwick, to fetch the Keys from the Lieutenant Governor. A fitter Person for
such a Message could not be sent than this Churchill, infamous for his Mateno^s
and [urbu^ent Spirit] With much Insolence this impertinent impudent Fellow
rushed into the Room where the Lieutenant Governor was, and demanded the
Keys; the Lieutenant Governor commanded him to call his Captain, who was
prevailed with to come, hoping thereby to appease the People unto whom the
Lieutenant Governor delivered the Keys, and Capt. Lodwick returning to the
Fort, the expectations of the Multitude being answered, after publishing Ja.
Leisler Colonel all leave the Fort to Capt Lodwick and his Company, who stayed
their usual time, and it was then agreed upon amongst the Captains, that each
should take his turn to reside in the Fort as chief, till their Majesty's
pleasure should be further known

The Lieutenant Governor, his Council and Convention aforesaid, taking into
their serious Considerations what danger the Moneys was in, paid by the
Inhabitants of this their Majesty's Province, as well for Customs as public
Taxes, which at that time was secured in the Fort. The said Convention agreed
upon and ordered, the Moneys should be removed to the House of Frederick
Phillips, one of the Council, a man of known Credit, and the most considerable
for Estate in their Majesty's Province.

This was concluded on the day our Usurper Leisler, by his instruments, seized
the Fort, being the 31 th day of May last past. But to no purpose was this
Agreement of the Convention; for those who had made themselves Masters of their
Majesty's Fort, were resolved to command the Money too, being the Sum of Seven
Hundred Seventy Three Pounds, which they peremptorily denied the Removal of,
when demanded by the Lieutenant Governor, in pursuance of the Order aforesaid.
How they have disposed of this Money, is not our present business to enquire;
we leave that until the happy Arrival of a Governor legally commissionated
from the King.

The Fort being thus in Possession of the Captains of this City, by turns, all
the Violence used for several days, was, that upon the arrival of any Vessel,
great or small, a file of Musketeers were sent on board, the Masters and
Passengers carried to the Fort, and the Letters taken from them, some whereof
were opened, and publicly read amongst the People. Never the like known in
this place, under any former English Governor.

This is too little to satisfy the insatiable Ambition of this Grand Usurper
Leyster, who could not content himself with the station Nature had fitted him
for, and placed him in, but his soaring aspiring mind, aiming at that which
neither his Birth nor Education had ever qualified him for, to wit, to be their
Majesty's Lieutenant Governor of this Province, making no matter of Conscience
how illegally he attained thereunto, whether by Usurpation or otherwise. It
being his turn to command in chief in their Majesty's Fort the third day of
June past, he caused an Alarm to be bea^^ that he might accomplish his Wicked
Designs, the intent of this Hubbub being only to ensnare those of the
Inhabitants, who till that day had kept themselves clear of these Actions.

The Inhabitants unanimously appeared in Arms that day, to stop the Mouths of
their Gainsayers, and were hea^^ by their Colonel Nicholas Bayard, though many
of them sensible it was only a Sham-Alarm, as it afterward proved.

They being all drawn up on a plain before the Fort, and no appearance of an
Enemy, Colonel Bayard gave command to that Captain, whose turn it was to work
on the Fortifications of this City, That he and his Company should repair
thither; and to the other Captains he gave command, that they should dismiss
their men. But this not answering the end of those who were made privy to the
design of Leyster, they march into the Fort without their Captains, who stayed
so long on the Plain, until they were told, If they went not in, the
Commonality would pull down their Houses, and they would be in danger of their
Lives. To prevent which they followed their Companies, (instead of leading
them) into the Fort, where a Paper was prepared to be signed by every one, the
Contents being, That with their Lives and Fortunes they would defend the
Protestant Religion, and keep the Fort for King William and Queen Mary, until
their Majesty's further Order.

This being done, Leyster begins to think himself sure of his Point.

Gabriel Munveill, one of the Captains of the Train-bands, well considering the
ill effects that such Proceedings would produce, wisely procures his discharge
from the Lieutenant Governor, and no more appeared amongst them: The rest of
the Captains continued their Command, more, as we are ready to believe, to do
what in them lay, to prevent Mischief, and check the Insolence of this proud
Usurper, whose immoderate desire after Greatness and Dominion over his
Fellow Subjects, so far infatuated him, as that upon all occasions, (especially
if any strangers present) he has publicly made his boasts, how he contrived
and laid the whole Design, as is before related.

The next invention of Leyster was to annimate and stir up the People to the
choice of Committee Men, upon pretense of writing a Letter to the King, in
behalf of the Country, and to consider the Reparations of the Fort, which was
of absolute necessity. However legal, this company of men assembled were (who
afterward termed themselves, A Committee of Safety) we leave till a fitter
time to dispute. But we cannot pass by the Method of their being chosen, which
we are sure, was altogether illegal and disorderly, there being not one third
part of the Inhabitants of this their Majesty's Province that condescended
thereunto, nor was it ever intended by Leyster they should, least by that means
his expectations should be frustrated. In fine, A company of these men elected
by the far least Number of the Inhabitants, coming together in the Fort, two of
them endued with more honesty, and a clearer discerning than the rest,
perceiving the main drift was to set up Leyster, and make him Commander in
chief, fairly and wisely withdrew themselves, and after the first time
appeared no more amongst them.

The first fruits of this unsafe Committee, as we have cause sufficient to term
them, was to make Leyster Captain of the Fort, requesting of the other Captains
of this City, that they would yield him their assistance when desired.

Now begins this Usurpers greatness, which he is no ways wanting in improving
(with the assistance of his Committee men) in all the Illegal Arbitrary Acts
man in so short time could be guilty of. His working Brain stands not still
with commanding the Fort, nor were his desires fully answered thereby: Nothing
less than Lording and Domineering in all Causes [Ecclesiastical, Civil and
Military] will satisfy this man, who was and is much a-like qualified for them
all.

The Laws and Liberties of the English Nation (with which we have good cause to
judge, he is little acquainted) he thinks no crime to violate, not regarding
the Noble Example of the late Prince of Orange, our now most renowned Sovereign
King William, who for prevention of the Violation of our Laws and Liberties,
has so eminently appeared, to the end they might be preserved in their due
Channel.

This our proud Usurper finding the sweetness of an Arbitrary Power, agreeable
with his Arbitrary Mind, deems it a fault in any, who objected the Law against
his Illegal Proceedings, upon all such oc^asions, he would angerly answer, What
do you talk of LAW, the SWORD must now Rule. As if that which was judged so
Heinous in our Native Land, would be deemed Meritorious in these parts of their
Majesty's Dominion.

Our neighboring Colony of Connecticut being full of Disorders amongst
themselves, albeit they had assumed their former Government, a general Court of
that Colony fitting, take upon them to send two Persons to discourse those, who
(by Usurpation) had taken Possession of their Majesty's Fort of this Province
Information being given unto the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of this
City, met and assembled at the Mayor's house the 22d of June last past, that
Major Gold and Capt. Fitz were sent by Connecticut Colony, with orders to
proclaim their Highnesses, Prince and Princesses of Orange, King and Queen of
England, etc. That Board requested Alderman William Merit to go to the Fort,
where those two Gentlemen were, and desire the favor of them to come to the
Mayor's House, which he accordingly did, and they complied with the Request:
Being come to the Mayor's House, he signifies to them, The information was had
of their coming to this place with directions to proclaim King William and
Queen Mary, and desired they would acquaint them what Orders they had for it,
that so they, (of this City) might be ready to show their forwardness to act in
the same with such Honor and Splendour as the occasion required.

Major Gold and Captain Fitz answered, They came upon us such account, but came
to the Persons that had the Fort in Custody, to discourse about some particular
Matters from their General Court; and that they did not know before they came
from home but that the King had been already proclaimed here. That when they
came to Town, going to the Fort, as they were sent, they having the
Proclamation about them, Mr. Jacob Leyster desired them to let him have the use
of it to proclaim the King and Queen here.

The Inhabitants being in Arms to this intent, by beat of the Drum the Mayor
and A'dermen of this City (though not thought worthy to have any notice of it,
till after they were proclaimed at the Fort) went to the City Hall to attend
the Solemnity. Which being performed, Leyster desired the Mayor and those with
him, to go up to the Fort and drink the King and Queens Health, which they
showed their readiness to do. No sooner were they come into the Fort, though by
invitation of Leyster himself, but he tells them, The People were so much
incensed against them, that it would not be safe for them to continue long
there, and gave them his friendly advice to be gone. An Entertainment not
unlike the Person that gave it.

Their Majesty's being proclaimed in this Province, and a printed Proclamation
coming to the hands of the Mayor and Aldermen of this City, That all Justices
of the Peace and She^^^s should continue till further order, except Papists,
they (...) the same publicly to be read, requiring the Inhabitan^^ to take
notice thereof accordingly. This madded our proud Usurper, being averse to
nothing more than a civil Government, which he knew must needs curb and be a
check to his Insolency.

Therefore to prevent this he gives his Malicious Spirit the full swing, and
endeavors afresh to inflame the common People, by branding of those who were
in Commission of the Peace with being Popishly affected, for no other reason
than that they would not join with him in violating all our Laws and Liberties.
His envious malicious Mind could not have vented it self in a more pernicious
Falsehood than this; for upon due Examination it will be found, that not one
Papist or Popishly affected, throughout this their Majesty's Province, were in
Commission of the Peace, and that many whom he has thus wickedly Scandalized,
have always been of far greater Reputation, both in Church and State, than
himself.

The Malice of this man's spirit has been so general against all that would not
say as he did, that the Dutch Ministers of the Reformed Churches within this
Province, have not escaped the Lash of his inveterate Tongue. Nor has his
Endeavors been wanting to create the same Disorders and Confusion in Church as
he has already done in Government.

How far what is already related, evinceth this Usurper Leyster to be an enemy
to and infringer of the Laws and Liberties of the English Nation, we leave to
the judgment of the Impartial. Yet lest all that he had hitherto acted were not
sufficient to declare his Aversness to the Laws and Liberties of the Freeborn
Subjects of England, he further proceeds to Action. And

On the 25th day of June last past, going into the CustomHouse, where was
present Commissioners appointed by the Lieutenant Governors, Council, Mayor,
Aldermen and common Council of this City, Colonel Nicholas Bayard, one of the
Council, Mr. Paulus Richards, Mr. John Haynes, and Mr. Thomas Wenh^m, Merchants
of this City, who were authorized by the Convention aforesaid, to receive the
usual Customs paid by the Inhabitants of this their Majesty's (...) and the
same to keep, until Orders came from (...) Majesty's. The reason why this
Convention took upon them to authorize the Gentlemen before mentioned, was the
particular Recommendation of the Lieutenant Governor, considering the
circumstanoes of Matthew Plowman, Collector, and that he was not qualified, as
their Majesty's Proclamation, bearing date the 14th of February, 1688.
directs.

This Violator of our Laws and Liberties, going into the Custom-House, as is
above hinted, abuses the Gentlemen then present with scurrelous Language,
peremptorily demanding of them, By what Authority they sat there? To whom they
modestly replied, That when he satisfied them what Power he had to examine
them, they would return him answer, but in the mean time desired him to go out
of the Custom-House, where then he had no business.

In a little space after, this Usurper comes the second time, with his POWER,
which was neither the Laws of England, nor this Province, nor yet a legal
Commission, but a Company of men with SWORDS and GUNS, (according to his usual
Maxim, The SWORD must Rule, and not the LAWS) and by force of Arms turns them
out of the Custom-House. In which Violent Action of this Usurper, Colonol
Bayard narrowly escaped with his Life, who has wisely, ever since, absented
himself, lest by the Instigation of this Malicious man he might be Murdered
unawares.

The next Exploit this Violent Leyster falls upon, is to fulfill a Promise, he
was heard to make in the beginning of our Troubles, That in two Months time he
would do all the English Rogues business for them, so that Two of them should
not be seen to walk together. In pursuance whereof, on the 14th day of August,
he sends several Armed men, with no other Warrant than their SWORDS and GUNS,
to the House of Mr. Thomas Clark, a Merchant in this City, who at that time was
under some Indisposition of Body, which they no ways regarded, nor the
Entreaty of his Wife, (then big with Child) who begged of them not to be so
Rude, his Children being frighted. They replied, They mattered it not, if they
were all Killed: And in a Violent manner they carried this Freeborn Subject of
England, and Freeman, to the Fort, where Leyster lays to his charge a Paper
delivered by him unto the Committee, but principally that he should say, The
next time the Drum beat an Alarm, he could raise four hundred Men. For no other
reason is this Freeborn Subject of England confined a close Prisoner in the
Fort, without any Warrant of Commitment, wherein the cause of his Confinement
ought plainly, and especially to be set down, as the Law directs; neither was
there any due Process of Law against this their Majesty's Subject, thus
arbitrarily debarred of the Liberty of his Person. By which, this Usurper has
made the greatest Breach and Inrode upon the Laws and Liberties of the English
Nation, that was possible for him to do, as the Gentlemen learned in the Law,
both by Study and Practice, have sufficiently demonstrated by found and sollid
Arguments, That the Violation of a Man's Person is a Crime of a deeper Dye, and
higher Nature, than that of his Estate, for as much as nothing in the World is
so near and dear to a man as the Liberty of his Person. This Villainous Usurper
Leyster not regarding the great care and pains of the Supreme Powers of
England, met and assembled in Parliament, for these many years past, to
preserve the Subjects Liberties unviolated, and to that end, how many excellent
Acts have passed, which are as so many Walls and Bullwarks against all
Arbitrary Usurpers, who though for a time may flourish, and meet with applause
by their deluded Followers, its not probable can terminate in any thing less
than utter Confusion and Destruction to themselves and Shame and Ignominy to
their beguiled Abettors, only made use of as so many Tools for the better
accomplishing their own wicked Ends, who then are to be laid aside, and new
Favorites taken in.

Nothing seems so consentaneous to this abuser of our Freedom and Liberties, as
the French Kings Maxim [ Sic Jubeo sic volo] who by Birth, we are ready to
believe, may claim the greatest share in him, or at least, by his Actions, he
equally scorning, with that proud Tyrant, to give any other Reason for his
Arbitrary Actions than his own unlimitted Will and Pleasure.

The many Abuses particular Persons have met withal, by having their Goods
taken from them, without either Warrant or legal Proofs, would be too tedious
here to insert. Upon all such Occasions, the Actors being demanded, By what
Warrant they committed this Violence? they would usually answer, (clapping
their hands upon their Swords) Here is our Warrant.

The keen edge of this man's Malice could not be taken off by his Cruelty to one
of them, whose Ruin he had before avowed, but he goes on to fulfill his
wicked Promise And,

On the 16 th day of August past causes another Alarm, to that end and
purpose, as some of his own party were heard to say, some days before it
happened, that shortly there would be an Alarm, in order to the taking hold and
securing some not well affected to their Actions, which were such as this
Violent Leisler intended as the Subjects of his unbridled Envy. And accordingly
in a violent manner, by force of Arms these following Persons were dragged to
the Fort, to wit, Mr. William Merit, Mr. Jacob Dekey, Mr. Brandt Sch^yler, Mr.
Phillip ^rench, and Mr. Robert Allison, Merchants, and considerable Traders in
this City and Province, Mr. John Merit, Son to Mr. William Merit, Mr. Edward
Buckmaster, Mr. Derrick Vanderburgh, who were committed the same night of the
Alarm, without either Warrant or legal Process.

The next day Capt. John Tuder meeting with the courageous Lieutenant Cuyler,
upon some words between them, was in like manner dragged to the Fort, as his
fellow Citizens were the night before.

Mr. Thomas Clark, after some days imprisonment, was brought to that weak
Condition, that he was more like to Dye than live and was carried home in a
Sedan, by order of his Jailer, Leyster.

Also, Mr. John Merit, after 24 hours Confinement, himself being ill, his Wife
much indisposed, and his only Son lying on its Deathbed, had his liberty.

Alderman William Merit, the Grandfather of this Child, greatly desiring to
see it before dead, made application to his cruel Jailer, Leyster for leave to
visit the Child, offering any Security he should demand for his return thither;
or if he pleased to send a Guard of his Soldiers with him, he would satisfy
them for their trouble; but nothing could prevail with this Barbarous Man, who
resolved to keep the said Merit, with the others before named, during his own
will and pleasure, close Prisoners in the Fort, which continued for the space
of Twenty One Days, and then were set at liberty, as yet being strangers to
their Crimes that deserved so severe Punishment.

On the twenty fifth of August comes to this place one Mr. Jacob Milborn from
England, as he gave out; we are obliged to mention his Name, by reason of the
great part he acts in our future Troubles. This man's affected ambiguous way of
expressing himself, renders him unfit for the Conversation of any but the
Vulgar, who in this Age are so apt and ready to admire and applaud that they
understand not. This Persons decayed Fortunes were such, that not unlike a man
ready to be drowned, letting go a sure hold, catches at a Twig; so he in like
manner relinquisheth his old Acquaintance and Friends, and joins with our
Usurpers, whom he revives, by telling them, That in the middle of May last, he
was in England, where all things were settled, by the common Voice of the
People, in peace, under King William, who was an Elective King, and had
submitted his Regal Power wholly to the People, so that it was now become a
Maxim, Vox Populi est Vox Dei, and the King was only a Servant to his Subjects.
By this our Usurpers were encouraged in their old manner of Reasoning, when
objected against their illegal Proceedings, What Law or Warrant they had to
back them in their Actions? They would always Reply, By what Law, Warrant or
Commission did the Prince of Orange go into England, and act as he has done?
And how do you think King William can take that amiss in us, who have only
followed his Example? The very rehearsing of this Disloyal Comparison, is
sufficient to cause an Abhorrance and Detestation in every Loyal Subject.

The next fruits of this Milbornes News, is, that the Committee of Safety, as
they termed themselves, take upon them to give forth an Order to the
Inhabitants of this their Majesty's Province, signifying, That whereas several
of the Inhabitants had already turned out their old Officers, they should
proceed in Election of Civil and Military Officers in the several Counties of
this Province. Some Counties accordingly did, by the appearance of small
Numbers, turn out the old Justices of the Peace and Military Officers, and
chose new. A Method formerly never allowed of, under any of our Kings Reigns,
it being always granted to be the undoubted Perogative of the King to
commissionate his Justices of the Peace, and Military Officers. However, when
we are better satisfied that it has been his Majesty's gracious Will and
Pleasure to separate this Branch of his Perogative and bestow it on the People,
we shall readily show our Thankful Reception; but till then, we think it the
Duty of all Loyal Subjects, not to appear in such Elections.

The 29 th day of September being the time appointed for the choice of Aldermen
and common Council-men, in a Charter of Privileges, granted to this City by
Colonel Thomas Dungan, when Governor of this Province; accordingly the
Inhabitants met in the several Wards, and chose as usually, no Ward being
attended with so much Disorder in their Election as that whereunto Capt.
Leyster belonged who, its evident, resolved right or wrong to have his
Son-in-Law, Robert Walters, to be returned Alderman ^^r that Ward: The Method
he took for doing it, was thus; Coming into the place where the Inhabitants
were assembled, in order to their Choice, he finding the Vote was like to be
carried against his Son Walters, in the first place he objected against Capt.
Anthony Brockholst's Vote, a considerable Freeholder of that Ward, his being a
Papist; and afterward says, I vote for my Son Walters, my Son Jacob votes for
his Brother Walters, and my Son Walters Votes for himself, that is three, put
them down: By this means was his Son Walters returned for that Ward.

The usual day of publishing the Mayor, Sheriff, Town Clark Aldermen and common
Council of this City for the succeeding Year, was on the 14 th day of October,
the Birth day of the late King James, in the mean time comes forth an Order
from the Committee, impowering all the Protestant Freeholders of this County,
on the (...) day of October to elect Mayor Sheriff and Town Clark at which
Election, the far greatest Number of the Inhabitants not appearing (well
knowing, that by the express words of the Charter, that Power was solely
reserved in the Governor's breast, to appoint these three Officers) the least
Number of the Inhabitants, in pursuance of the Order aforesaid, met and
assembled together, and by majority of Voices chose one Peter D' Lanoy Mayor,
Johannes Johnson Sheriff, and Abraham Governor Town Clark, against which
Persons we object not so much, as the Method of their being chosen; neither
shall we be offended, if it shall please his Majesty to add unto our former
Privileges this likewise: The Gentlemen named being thus chosen, were
published on the customary day.

By this time Mr. Millborne recovers of a fit of Sickness, that had hitherto
rendered him incapable of acting any thing else but affording his Chamber
Advice, which upon all occasions was consulted by our Usurper Leyster; now
being restored, in great measure, to his former Health, he vigorously joining
with this Usurper and his unsafe Committee, a notable piece of service is
immediately assigned him by them, which was to go up to Esopus and Albany, in
order to the bringing those Counties into the same Condition and Disorders as
hey had done this and the neighboring Counties near adjacent. In pursuance
hereof, he goes on board a Sloop, and sails forward to Albany, with fifty men,
who had listed themselves as Volunteers, to assist that place, if occasion
were, against the French; upon his arrival there, by the great care, conduct
and prudence of Peter Skuyler, Mayor of that City, assisted by the Recorder,
Aldermen, Common Council and Military Officers, the designed purposes of this
dark Politician were happily frustrated, so that he returns back to this place
under some Disappointment.

The 8 th day of December arrives per via Boston, one Riggs, with two Paquets
from his Majesty, King William, whereby we hoped to have had deliverance from
the Usurpation, Slavery and Cruelties of Leyster; but our Expectations were
soon at an end, the Superscription of the Paquets being thus,

To our Trusty and Well beloved Francis Nicholson, Esquire, Our Lieutenant
Governor of Our Province of New York in America; or in his Absence, to such as
for the time being take care to keep the Peace and administer the Laws of Our
said Province.

This Infringer of our Laws and Liberties, Leyster, peremptorily assumes the
Paquets to himself, saying, He was the man to whom they were directed in the
Lieutenant Governor's absence. But upon what pretense he deems himself the
Person except it be for his Breach of the Peace, and Obstructing the due course
of Law ever since he has possessed himself of the Fort, Arbitrarily and
Illegally ruling by the Sword, is sufficiently evidenced to the Unbyassed
Reader, by the foregoing Lines.

Frederick Phillips and Stephanus Van Cortland, both of the Council, and left
in Trust by the Lieutenant Governor for the keeping of the Peace, and legally
Governing of this their Majesty's Province, which they carefully and honestly
would have discharged the Trust reposed in them, if they had not been prevented
by this Violator of our Laws and Liberties, and that with more Renown and
Reputation to their Majesty's, as well as the better Satisfaction of their
Liege People inhabiting this their Majesty's Province.

The two Gentlemen of the Council before-named, being sent for to the Port, by
the request of Mr. John Riggs, (the Paquets being by him, at that time not
delivered) they signified to Leyster, and those present with him, That they
were ready to observe such Orders as His Majesty had given in His Paquets to
His Lieutenant Governor, then absent, from whom they, together with Colonel
Bayard, had Instructions to keep the Peace, and administer the Law of this
Government, which they always were ready to have fullfilled, if had not been
Obstructed.

At this our Usurper Rages, and vents his Passion in his usual Billings-Gate
Rhetoric, calling them, Popishly affected Dogs and Rogues, and bids them
immediately go out of the Fort, for they had no business there A strange
Entertainment to them, who for these many Years past have always, as
Counselors, officiated under the several Governors of this their Majesty's
Province, and at that time were those who were left in Trust by their Majesty's
Lieutenant Governor. However, seeing there was no Remedy but Patience, (this
Violent Usurper resolving still to Govern by the SWORD) they quietly went to
their Own Homes.

Their Majesty's Paquets being thus assumed by our Usurper, he immediately
abuses his deceived Abettors, by affirming to them, He had received a
Commission to be their Majesty's Lieutenant Governor, and that all their
Actions were well approved of. This readily gained Credence with the Vulgar,
who are too apt and willing to be beguiled by their Popular Leader. From this
time forward he assumes the Title of Lieutenant Governor, and according to the
Instructions given in the Paquets, he swears some, who were of his Committee of
Safety before, to be Counselors now, as also some few more of the Inhabitants,
much alike unto these Persons, neither of the highest Rank nor Reputation; but
such as our Usurper was well assured were for his turn. This being done they
proceed to Action

NB. On the 16th day of December an Order comes forth, entitled, By the
Lieutenant Governor and his Council, signed underneath, Jacob Leyster.

The Contents as follows.
By the Lieutenant Governor, etc. and Council.
WHereas there is an Act of Assembly, dated One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty
Three, entitled, A continued Bill for defraying of requisite Charges of the
Government, and many of the Inhabitants of this Province, nothwithstanding they
have subscribed to comply with the same, have disputed it, when required
thereunto.

These are therefore to give Notice unto all Persons within this Province, that
the Customs and Excise settled by the said Act, has and does still remain
good, and of full Force, and that the Collectors and Receivers thereof, are
empowered to do their duty therein; All Persons being hereby strictly required
to obey the same, as they will answer the contrary at their Peril. Given under
my Hand at Fort- William, this sixteenth day of December, 1689.

Jacob Leyster.

This Order of the pretended Lieutenant Governor and Council, being set up in
all the Public Places of this City did not a little Alarm the considerate
Inhabitants, who there by clearly saw the willingness of this Usurper and his
Abettors, to enslave them and their Posterity, so that he might command their
Purses. A strange Change in a little time! for this Leyster in the beginning of
our Troubles, was the first man that disputed the payment of the Customs,
consulting with several of the Inhabitants, how those Arbitrary Impositions
might be pulled down. Further, how contrary this Order of our Usurper, and
Abettors, is to their own so often repeated Maxim, [ That whatsoever was acte^
by a Papist Governor, or under his Authorit, was ^pso facto null and void, and
of no effect in Law.] I there yet remain any Candor or Ingenuity in this
violent Man and his Abettors, it will be more honorable for them publicly to
Recant so plain an Error, than still to persist in it; for we pray of the
Unbyassed Reader, what else is the intent, purport and meaning of this Order,
but to enforce a Law made by a Papist Governor, and under his Authority,
which, by their own Argument, is void in it self. So that they must either own,
this their dark unintelligible Oracle, has much deceived them in this point of
his Politics, or its evident to the World, they have assumed upon themselves a
Power to le^y Taxes, Customs and Benevolences, upon the Inhabitants of this
this their Majesty's Province, without and contrary to their own Consent,
notwithstanding the many wholesome Laws that have passed, under the several Kings
Reigns in the Realm of England made for the preservation of the same; as also
contrary to a a^ticular Branch of that Act which their order has reference
unto, that in express words says thus, That no Ad Tax, T^lla^e, Assesment,
Custom, L^an Benevolence or (...) whatsoever, shall be laid, assessed, imposed
or ^evied on ^^y his Majesty's Subject within this Province, or their (...) p^n
any manner or color of Pretense, but by the Act and Consent of the Governor,
Council and Representatives of the People in General Assembly met and assembled.

Now to the end we may further make out to the World the Unreasonableness as
well as the Illegality of this, we cannot omit to advertize the Impartial
Reader, That in the Year 1683. arrived to this Province Colonel Thomas Dongan,
appointed his Majesty's Governor under his Royal Highness the Duke of York,
the Lord Proprietor of this Province, who in a short time after his arrival
here, according to particular Instructions given him by his said Royal
Highness, did issue forth Writs to the several Counties within this Province,
for the electing of Members to serve in General Assembly, which accordingly was
done, and the same were convened, and begun their first Session on the (...)
day of October and the first Act that past this Sessions, was that their Order
refers to, wherein our Representatives wisely provided against the critic
Lawyers of this Age, who too nicely distinguish betwixt the Kings Subjects
inhabiting Within the Realm of England, and those inhabiting his Dominions
abroad, denying the Latter the Privileges confessed to be the undoubted
Birthright of the former: upon which our said Representatives, prudently in
the first part of that Act endeavor to secure unto themselves and Posterities
what was the Birthright of every Freeborn Subject of England. This being
done, They continue this Act for the defraying of the necessary Charges of this
Government, which begins thus,

The Representatives of his Royal Highness's Province of New York, convened in
General Assembly, Have, for and in consideration of the many Gracious and Royal
Favors expressed and extended to the Inhabitants of this His Province, and
also for the bountiful Confirming and Reserving to them and their Posterity,
the Rights and Privileges, Liberties and Immunities before recited and
expressed, and for the better defraying of the necessary Charges and Expense of
this Province.

How far this Act is binding upon the Inhabitants of this Province, will
further appear, by duly considering another Clause of this very Act, which runs
thus,

That all Bills agreed upon by the said Representatives, or the major part of
them, shall be presented unto the Governor and his Council, for their
Approbation and Consent; all and every which said Bills, so approved of and
consented to by the Governor and Council, shall be esteemed and accounted the
Laws of this Province; which said Laws shall continue and remain in force
until they be repealed by the Authority aforesaid, that is to say, the
Governor, Council and Representatives in General Assembly, by and with the
approbation of his Royal Highness, or expire by their own Limitations.

Now that this Act of the Assembly, in a strict sense, cannot be allowed to be
a Law of this Province, and so not binding upon its Inhabitants, We Humbly
offer these Reasons.

1 st, For that by the Authority aforesaid, this Act never was assented unto,
the approbation of his Royal Highness being always wanting, who was so far
afterward from appoving of it, that he utterly disallowed the same, and that
first by a Letter to his Governor, Colonel Thomas Dongan, and afterward
coming to the Imperial Crown of England, he publicly disallowed that Act, by
sending over a Commission, under the Broad Seal of England, to the said Colonel
Dongan, to be Captain General of this Province, and with seven Counselors to
govern the Inhabitants thereof, any five of which Counselors made a Quoram,
and the majority of that five, with the Captain General, were empowered to make
all Laws. A Method contrary to what the afore-recited Acts prescribes.

2 dly, Our Second Reason why this Act is no ways binding on the Inhabitants
of this Province, is, That the Customs, Impositions and Excises granted unto
his then Royal Highness, his Heirs and Successors, in the said Act, were given
in Consideration of his said Royal Highness Confirming to the Inhabitants the
Charter Privileges, making up the first part of the said Act, which never was
enjoyed by the Inhahabitants, nor confirmed to them, but the contrary, as is
proved.

3 dly, For that hitherto we are ignorant of any Law, either made within the
Realm of England, or this their Majesty's Province, by which the Inhabitants
thereof are obliged to pay unto his Majesty the Custom and Excise set down in
the before-recited pretended Act of Assembly: When any such Law is produced,
those of us who have signed to pay unto King William the Customs due unto him,
when legally demanded, shall readily comply; but until that be done, we cannot
see those Notes, given by several of us for peace and quietness sake (importing
no more than what is above written) are any ways Obligatory. However, when it
shall please Almighty God, a Governor arrives to this Province from King
William, we are ready to submit this point, as well as all other Abuses and
Irregularities done unto us, then to be decided in a legal way and manner. To a
Governor, so arriving, we shall not be backward to assist, either with our
Persons or Estates, for the more orderly and peaceable governing this Province,
and defraying the Public Charges thereof, in such a way and manner as shall be
legally agreed on.

On the 23d of December, about seven or eight a Clock in the Evening, Jacob
Dekey, junior, Son to Jacob Dekey, already mentioned, with Corn^lius Depeyster,
Son to the Widow Cornelio both Lads, were violently carried away to the Fort
by force of Arms, without Mittimus or legal Process, alleging, They had
defaced and torn down the Order of the pretended Lieutenant Governor and his
Council, which upon a due Examination will evidently appear, was standing
several hours after their Commitment. How solicitous this Cruel Usurper is to
vent the Fury of his Rage against both Young and Old, is evident to all, by the
illegal Confinement of these two Lads, for no other cause but his own Arbitrary
Will and Pleasure.

The same night an Indian Slave belonging to Phillip French was dragged to the
Fort, and there imprisoned.

The next day Mr. French falling in amongst some of Leyster's Crew, resented
the Injury done unto him, by the illegal detaining of his Slave so highly, that
some of the standers by immediately went and informed against him, so as that
in a short time after, as the said French was walking in the public Streets of
this City, about his lawful Affairs, John Burger, Sergeant to this Usurper
Leyster, attended with six Musketeers, lays violent hands to him, and tells
him, he was his Prisoner, and to the Fort he must go. Mr. French replied. Not
unless you carry me, which accordingly they did, in the nature of a dead Corpse,
though living, where he soon meets with the Entertainment of a close
Imprisonment.

Some hours after the Commitment of this his Majesty's Subject, by his own
particular Request, Capt. John Tud^r and Mr. James Emet, both allowed Attorneys
of this Province, made application to his Jailer Leyster for a Copy of his
Mittimus, in order to their taking such care for their Clyents enlargement, as
the Law allowed of, and directed unto. All the answer they obtained at that
time, was, That he could do nothing without advising with his Council, and they
should meet in the Evening, when they might re-attend. This they carefully did,
though to little purpose; for they were denied entrance into the Fort that
Evening several times; nor could they be admitted to speak with their Clyent,
so that near twenty four hours were expired ever this Usurper few cause to
deliver the following Papers, which for the Readers satisfaction, we shall here
recite verbatim.

Fort-William, December 24. Anno 1689.
W Hereas Complaint is made to me, That Mr. Phillip French has, in a most
insolent manner, contemned this Government, threatening to tare off (if it had
not been already done) the Proclamation for continuing his Majesty's Customs
and Excise, according to an Act of Assembly, etc. although it was forbid all
Persons at their Peril.

These are in his Majesty King William's Name to will and require you to bring
the said French before me and Council, to answer for the same. Given under my
Hand and Seal the date abovesaid.

Jacob Leyster.

To Surgeant John Burger, and his Assistants.
At a Council held in New York the 24th of December, Anno 1689.
Present, Lieutenant Governor, Samuel Edsall, Thomas Williams, Hendrick
Janse, Mas. Cuyler, Benjamin Blagg, John Van Cousoenkeven, Alderman.

W Hereas Phillip French has behaved himself very Contemptuously against the
Lieutenant Governor and Council, as by Evidence taken before him, does appear,
and continues in the same, being examined before them.

Ordered, That the said French be forthwith committed to safe Custody within
Fort-William, till further Consultation in this matter.

A True Copy, Examined by Jacob Milborne, Secretary.

Now whether the Reason of this Usurper's defe^^ing the delivery of the Warrant
and Order or Council, above ^anscribed, may not rationally be construed, as
some do, that the Warrant directed to Sergeant John Burger and his Assistants
was written several hours after Mr. French's being close Prisoner, or not, is a
question we shall not now insist on.

The Warrant and Order of Council, above-written, coming to the hands of the
before-named Attornyes, on the behalf of their Clyent, they apply themselves
afresh to the pretended Lieutenant Governor and Council sitting on
Christmas Day in the Evening, to whom they signified, That having perused the
Warrant and Order of Council, by which Mr. Phillip French was committed close
Prisoner within the ^ort, they found nothing contained in either, but what,
according to the known Laws of England, as well as this Province, was Baylable,
and for that end and purpose they appeared before them, on the behalf of their
Clyent, to offer Bail to the Valve of Twenty Thousand Pounds, if desired, for
his appearance in any Court of Record within this County, there to abide such
Determination as by leg I Process should be made against him, for or by reason
of the Charge alleged against him in the aforesaid Warrant and Order of
Council.

All the Arguments used by these Gentlemen of the Law, no^a^es prevailed with
this cruel Leyster, and his Nominal Council, whom he is making use of, as his
Tools, for the better cloaking of his own Arbitrary Illegal Actions and
Intentions. It seems as if this Usurper was of the same Opinion with some
Soldiers in Plutarchs time, who wondered any would be so importunate to preach
Laws and Moral Reasons to Men with SWORDS by their sides; as if Arms knew not
how to descend to Rational Inquiries. All the Satisfaction given to this so
lawful demand of Bail on the Prisoners behalf, was only some small diversion
our late Upstart Statesman, Mr. Milborne, (now advanced to the Secretaries
Office by his New-made Lieutenant Governor) was pleased to afford them, by
dropping now and t^en his wonted obscure Sentences, asking the Prisoner's
Counsel. Whether they would submit the Determination of their Clyent's Cause to
the Lieutenant Governor and Council? Who thereupon modestly enquired, In what
Capacity they fare there, whether Military or Civil? Answer was made by
M^lborne, Both. The Uncertainty of this Reply, as well as its Unreasonableness,
yielded fresh matter to argue upon; and which centred here, the our dark
Politicion demanded. How they would help themselves, or by what me^^s they
would (...) relieved? ^ow ^n it might have been fitly replied, In the same way
and manner as you, not many Years past, recovered Forty Five Pounds by a legal
Course, against Sir Edmund Andros, for nine hours false Imprisonment. For
notwithstanding the many endeavors used by our Usurper to quash the various
Reports coming to us, many ways, of a Governor hastening from his Majesty for
this Province, we are not discouraged in our Expectations of, and well wishing
for his safe arrival, and then we doubt not but to see some of our Usurpers
receive the just Demerits of their illegal Arbitrary Doings.

The 4 th January Captain John Tuder, by particular Warrant from Mr. Phillip
French, applied himself to the Mayor of this City with the Kings Writ of Habeus
Corpus, returnable to the next Mayor's Court, which was the 7th of the same
Month: This Writ of signed by the Mayor, was safely conveyed to Mr. French,
and by him d^^vered to his Keeper, who forthwith acquainted the head Jailer,
Leyster, therewith, who immediately ordered the Windows where the said French
was confined, to be nailed up, and that a more strict watch should be kept over
him, as if the Cruelties already exercised toward this Freeborn Subject of
England, were not sufficient, who hitherto has been denied the access of his
Friends and Acquaintance; no, not so much as his Counselors at Law admitted to
come near him. A Usage more Cruel and Barbarous than the most Notorious Fellon,
Traitor or Rebel commonly meet withal.

The 7 th of January being come, and the Mayor's Court sitting, Mr. John Tuder
diligently attended it, expecting to havemet his Clyent there, by virtue of the
aforesaid Writ, waiting a considerable time, and no appearance of Mr. French,
he informed that Court. That the Mayor was pleased on the 4 th Instant to sign
his Majesty's Writ of Habeas Corpus for the bringing the Body of the said Mr.
French, together with the Cause of his Commitment before that Court, where he
was ready to argue on the behalf of his Clyent the matter of Law that might
arise; but seeing he was disappointed, by the aforesaid Writ being disobeyed,
he should take upon him to open to the Court the nature of the said Writ, which
(said he) is a Writ granted in the Subjects favor, to prevent the illegal
detainure of any of the King's Subjects falsty imprisoned. So that a Violation
of this Kind, was a Crime of the deepest dye, and every Subject was nearly
concerned therein, none knowing whose turn it might be next to have their
Liberties subjected to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of this Man, [ Leyster.]

Also, to the Bench he directed himself in this manner, You who are the Mayor
and Aldermen, for the time being, of this City, and so consequently the Patrons
thereof, it behooves you to take care, the Ancient Liberties and Freedoms of
this City be not infringed, and that its Inhabitants be not in this manner
dragged, by a Marshal Force, to the Fort, and there kept close Prisoners.

Our Usurper's Oracle, Milborne, being present in the Court, after a long
continued Silence, Learnedly expresses himself thus. I do affirm to this
Court, That Mr. French is none of the King's Subject, without giving any
further Reasons. At which the standers by hissed, and some publicly charged
him with being the principal Author of our present Troubles.

On the 12 th of January certain Advice coming to this place of a Ship designed
to this Port, whereof one Prents was Master, being struck on some Rocks near
New London, and Mr. French being chiefly concerned in the Loading, was forced
to submit to this Proud Usurper, and to Petition him by the Title of Lieutenant
Governor, who had before menaced him, if he would not give the Title of
Lieutenant Governor, he would put him where HE SHOULD NEVER SEE THE FACE OF
MAN MORE. TO prevent which, and the exigency of his Affairs at that time, he
gratified the Ambitious humor of this man, Leyster, and thereby obtained his
Liberty, upon his and Mr. Thomas Winham's entering into a Recognizance of Five
Hundred Pounds to the King, for the said French his good Bahaviour during
Twelve Months and a Day from the date thereof.

To return again to our Account of the two Lads first imprisoned. Cornelius
Depeyster, by the humble petition of his Mother, was set at liberty. Jacob
Dekey is still under Confinement, albeit his Enlargement has been much
endeavored by his Master, Mr. John Barbary, a considerable Merchant in this
City, who went to his Jailer Leyster, and offered Two Thousand Pounds Security
for his Man's appearance to answer a legal Process against him to which end and
purpose a Copy of his Mittimus has diverse times been demanded, but could not
be obtained, nor no Bail would be taken; Nothing will serve this proud Usurper,
Leyster, nor release this Lad, but his Parents sending in a Petition, directed
to Jacob Leyster, Lieutenant Governor, and his Council, wherein they must beg
Forgiveness for Faults they are ignorant of their Son's being guilty of. A
strange and unheard of Method to force People to pay Homage to his Person!
Children must be taken from the^ Parents, Servants from their Masters, Husbands
from their Wives. Masters from their Familes, (...) on no other account than
their denying (...) Usurper Leyster, a Title that no way appertain (...) to him.

And we dare this Proud Man to produce, if he can, any Actions against those
Inhabitants he most maliciously Characterizes as Popishly Affected, so much
savouring of POPERT as these we charge him with, and are ready to prove against
him when a convenient time and opportunity present.

For, we pray the Unbyassed Reader, what is the difference betwixt bloody
Bishop Bonner's Coal hole, and this Cruel Unmerciful Usurpers Dungeon and
Bullet Hole, the former being fitted and prepared for the poor Protestants,
that would not idolize their Consecrated Wafer, this latter for the quiet
Inhabitants of this their Majesty's Province, who cannot in their Conscience
ascribe that Honor to him which is only the Right of the KING to infer upon
him, and then its time enough for his Subjects to Obey.

The 13th of January this Usurper, Leyster, sends under the Command of
Lieutenant Churchill Twenty Soldiers over to Long Island, the next day they
came to Jamaica, where they in a violent manner, by force of Arms, broke open
the House of Mr. Daniel Whitehead, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
appointed by our Lieutenant Governor Sir Edmund Andros, and being entered into
the House, they in like manner aforesaid brake open several Chests and Boxes,
but found not what they looked for, and so returned the next day without doing
any more Mischief, as we yet hear of.

On the sixteenth of January, the public Post, Mr. John Perry, setting out
from the House of Colonel Lewis Morris, toward Boston, was not advanced on his
way above a quarter of a Mile before he was laid hold on by Warrant from our
Usurper Leyster, and brought back to this place, New York, with his Letters,
which were opened and perused at the will and pleasure of this Arbitrary Man,
who, its plain and evident unto all that are not wilfully blind, has made it
his Contrivance how to Ruin the Inhabitants, and hinder the Prosperity of this
Province, ever since his taking upon him to govern by the SWORD, which he has
in great measure effected, by his continual Breach of the Peace, and
Obstructing the due Course of Law and Justice. But lest this were not
sufficient, he resolves to destroy, as much as in him lies, the Commerce and
Trade of this Province. A more ready way than this could not have been taken by
him for that purpose, to obstruct and hinder Advice, which is acknowledged by
all to be the Life of Trade; for how can this be given o^ received, where
intercepting men's private Letters, is become so Modish with our pretended
Rulers, as that they are so far from counting it a Crime, as by their Actions
they deem it a Virtue.

Before we draw to a Conclusion of this our Declaration and Narration, which is
already swelled beyond its ^ntended limits, We cannot omit transcribing two
other Branches of the Pretended Act of Assembly, they seemingly make such a
pudder about, which upon an impartial Enquiry (allowing it to be an Act
binding, though that we cannot do, for the Reasons already given) these our
Usurpers will be found the greatest Violators thereof. The Branches we think
fit to insert are these following, viz.

That no Freeman shall be taken and imprisoned, or be discized of his
Freehold, or Liberty, or Free Customs, or be Outlawed, or Exi^ed, or any other
ways destroyed; nor shall be passed upon, Adjudged or Condemned, but by the
Lawful Judgment of his PEERS, and by the Law of this Province.

Justice nor Right shall be neither sold, denied, or deferred, to any man
within this Province.

That in all cases whatsoever, Bail by sufficient Surety shall be allowed and
taken, unless for Treason, or Felony, plainly and especially expressed and
mentioned in the Warrant of Commitment.

How far these our Usurpers Actions evinceth their little Regard unto the
pretended Acts of Assembly, except it be to that part which would bring Greast
to their Mill, let the Unbyassed Judge.

This Arbitrary Proud Person, Leyster, having thus far exalted himself above
his Brethren, disdains to own his very Kindred, unless they will entitle him
Lieutenant Governor, nor will he free them from his Bullet-Hole on any other
Terms.

A plain Demonstration of this he has given by his late carriage to Mr. Lucas
Keerstead, who after the usual manner was forced to go to the Fort; when he
came before this Usurper, he softly applies himself thus to him, Cosen
Leyster, What is your Will and Pleasure? At this he flies out in a great Rage,
How dare you call me Cosen? Then he spoke to him by the Name of Captain, but
that would not do, and he was told, that if he gave him not the Title of
Lieutenant Governor, he would be put amongst the B^llets. To avoid ^^ch, he
gave him that Title, and then was suffered to go home.

Its Arange this Violent Man, Leyster, who otherwise is so Politic, should be
at a stand, when this plain Question is put to him, Who gave you this Name? Why
does he not answer, as in truth it is, My Godfather Mr. Milborne, and his
A^^ant Vain Glory, together with my God-mother Ambition, who have engaged on my
behalf, that I should cleave to the Infernal. Prince and his Works, Hug and
embrace all the Pomps and V^nities of this Wicked World, and as I had hitherto
been so, I should still continue a faithful Servant to that Black Prince of the
Air, as long as the many Headed Beasts, the Rude Multitude, would stand by me.

To Sum up all, We readily submit the decision of this Question to the
Considerate Peruser of the foregoing Lines, Whether those branded by Leyster,
as King JAMES his Men, or himself and his Rude Crew, deserve that Title most?

Sure we are, that upon a serious perusal of the Declaration, entitled, The
Declaration of the Lords Spirit^al and Temporal, and Commons assembled at
Westminster, Die Martis 12. Februarij, 1689. several Articles therein exhibited
against the late King James, and declared Illegal, are and have been most
notoriously committed by this Usurper and Abettors, some whereof we shall here
insert and set down as in the said printed Declaration, viz,

That levying Money for or to the use of the Crown, by the pretense of
Prerogative, without Grant of Parliament (...) for longer time, or in other
manner than the same is or shall be granted, is Illegal.

That Excessive Bail ought not to be required, nor Excessive Fines imposed, nor
Cruel and Unreasonable Tu^^shment inflicted.

That this Arrogant Man, Leyster, is palpably guilty of both these Branches
before recited, we prove thus, viz.

That by his Instruments he has and does exact (by pretense of Prerogative,
and for the use of the Crown) Customs, Impositions and Excises, never granted
to the Cro^^^ which that he might the better accomplish, he has taken upon him
to erect a Court of Exchequer, constituting, as Members of the said Court, viz.
Sa^^el Ed^a^^ Benjamin Blagg, Joha^is Pro^^ct, H^ndri^h Jans^n, John
Cowenhoven; who began their Sessions on the 20th of January, the 18th of the
same Moneen several of the Inhabitants received Summons to appear at this
unusual Court on the day above said, to give their Reasons why they would not
pay the Monyes they were indebted to the King for Custom.

The Persons so summonsed unanimously made choice of Mr. Thomas Clark to appear
for them, who went to the Fort, where this Court was sitting, and being
admitted, he first enquires, Whether any there had a Commission from King
William to be Baron of his Exchequer? and if any, that his Commission might be
publicly read: and-afterwards proceeded to show the Unreasonableness of their
Demands; but all to little purpose, the Court proceeding to enter Judgment
against the Inhabitants, for whom he appeared, only giving them eight days
time to consider, whether they would voluntarily pay their (illegal) demands,
which otherwise would be levied upon them by Distress.

About four a Clock in the afternoon of this day, was in some measure verified
and Expression our Usurper not long since, was pleased to utter to a Person of
good Reputation in this Province, who enquiring of him, By what Power he did
such Actions? To whom he answered, That he was invested with such a Power, as
in a little time he could Command the Head of any man in the Province, and it
would be forthwith brought him. something like hereunto was this day
fullfilled; for giving Command to William Churchill, and several Soldiers with
him, assisted by some of the Inhabitants of this City, namely, Abraham Brazior,
Abraham Clomp, Wit Timber, and diverse others, they go to the House of Col.
Nicholas Bayard, and by force of Aims enter the same, breaking open several
Doors and Locks, in order to the seizing of the said Colonel Bayard, whom (as
some of them said) they were ordered to take dead or alive. Colonel Bayard for
his own security had left his own House, and (...) ^otten into his Neighbors,
near his backside, viz. one Mr. Richard Elliot, a Cooper, whose House in like
manner by Churchill and his Attendants, was broken open, where they laid hold
of Colonel Bayard, and in a most Abusive manner dragged him to the Fort. In
this Riotous Tumult was stolen out of the House of the said Elliot, three Silver
Spoons.

But the unlimited Will of this Violent Rapacious Usurper was not yet satisfied
with the taking and imprisoning of Col. Bayard, nor his Malice thereby fully
answered; for in like manner he vents his Fury against Stephanus van Cortlan^t,
late Mayor of this City, whose House likewise was broken open, and most of his
Doors and Locks spoiled, though they were frustrated of their Design, by his
escaping out of their cruel hands for that time.

Also, Mr. William Nicols was laid hold on by the men of Breuckle at the
Ferry-house on Long Island, and was brought over in the Evening and carried to
the Fort.

The next Morning the Ferry-man was in like manner brought to the Fort, where
these three Subjects of their Majesty's are Illegally imprisoned, and with whom
how Barbarously they intend to deal, Time will best discover.

We shall end this our Declaration and Protestation, Narratively set down, by
naming the principal Authors of our present Miseries, which are those
following, viz.

Jacob Leyster, Jacob Milborne, Samuel Edsall, Peter D'Laney, Dr. Samuel
States, Dr. Ger. Beckman of Flackbus. Thomas Williams, Benjamin Blagg, Hendrick
Jansen, Hendrick Cuyler, John Cowenhoven,
Against whom we wait a fair opportunity legally to proceed. Dated in New York
this 21 th of January, Annoque, Domini 1690.

FINIS.

