A MEMORIAL BETWEEN JEST and EARNEST, From IGNORAMUS the First, Relating to the
Past and Present STATE of the NATION.

Presented to all the Honest Ignoramusses of the Lords and Commons of ENGLAND.

Fear God, and Keep his Commandments; and Love your Neighbor as your Self; and
this is the whole Duty of Man. At Philadelphia, Printed by Philaletes for the
Author. 1691.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I would not have any honest Gentleman, whether Spiritual or Temporal, to take
any Offense at the Reflections in the following Memorial; this being designed
only to Mark out Knaves; and for them, let them fret in their Greece. This
Memorial also is not made to please Flattering Courtiers, Evil Councellers,
Evil Lawyers or Gospellers, or any Philosophical Critticks in Learning; but is
made for the service of the Plain-Hearted and Truly Honest Man; it is Printed
for his Sake; hoping he may receive some Good and Benefit by it; which if he
do, the Author has his Hearts desire: And hereby gives Notice, that what
further Information shall be given him for his next Memorial against particular
Persons and Things, he desires his Friends not to send them by Post, for he
will not receive them that way, or give any Credit to them; but desires they
may be sent by some particular Hand, or by long Sea, and to give it under their
Hand, that they may Justify the several Charges, if Required thereto.

To all the Honest LORDS and COMMONS of ENGLAND.
GEntlemen, the great God, by his Wonderful Providence, has brought about such
a Revolution in England, as doubtless no History can parrallel, unless that in
Sacred Writ, of delivering the Children of Israel out of Egypt; and this, I
think, is little Inferior to that, if we consider it in all its circumstances:
And now, Gentlemen, having a King after our own Hearts, one that is as Truly
and Rightfully our King as ever was in England, I know not what can be more
clearly Demonstrated, unless God had sent us one immediately from Heaven it
self, and said from thence, by a loud Voice, You Good Men of England, this Man
I have sent down to be your King: We have the Voice that is next unto this,
that is, Vox Populie, The Voice of the People; and that by a common saying is
Vox Dei, the Voice of God: And you Gentlemen, the Good People of England, have
engaged this our King upon as Good and Glorious a Work as ever by a Man was
undertaken; that is, to pull down the Great French Bear, that most Christian
Turk, the Great Tyrant of the Earth, and Hater of Mankind; you have promised to
this our Good King, to stand by him with your Lives and Fortunes; and he in
order to facillitate this Great and Good Work, has engaged potent Allies both
by Sea and Land to help you; and now things stand in so fair a way, and you
have laid your Hand to the Plough, look not back; for not only our King's
Honor, but Yours, and all that is dear to you is Engaged to go on; and leave
not off until by Gods help you have finished the Work; it is a solid, great and
good Work; and no Trifling and Jesting Business; therefore it concerns you
Highly, Faithfully and Dilligently, without loss of any more time Heartily to
assist the King in this Business; and your Assistance must be a threefold
Assistance. The First, with advice; the Second, with Money and the Third with
(...) if other of these in their place and time is wanting, you cannot expect
to have the Work done. All Men agree, that Money is the Sinnews of War, and Men
the Flesh and Bones to these Sinnews; but it is good Advice that is the Blood
and Brains; that makes these Sinnews, Flesh and Bones to move regularly;
therefore says the Wiseman, With good Advice make War; and when once begun, I
am sure Good Advice is absolutely necessary to carry it on: therefore I say,
Advise the King what Men to choose as most fit to be used in all Places and
Offices, both Civil and Military; its not beneath the King in this Great and
Weighty Affair to take your Advice, as believing him to be a Wiseman; and the
wisest of Kings has said, In the multitude of Counselors there is safety; you
have seen the false steps that have been already taken, and what Loss and
Damage, besides Disgrace, that has been thereby; and who have been the
Advisers therein, nor only in the never to be forgotten miscarriage in the
Fleet last Year, but those before in Yrland and England it self, and else
where; I say, it is your duty to Advise the taking in of Faithful Laborers
into this Harvest, Men of approved Honor, Courage, Honesty and Integrity; the
King will stand in need of the help of all the Hands and Hearts of his Good
Subjects in this Work, here will be Work for all the Dogs to Bait this Bear.
It Is not all the God Dammy-Dogs in England that will take this French Bear by
the Nose and pull him down; no, it must be all the Dogs together whether
Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent, Annabaptist, Quietist and Jansenist; all
sorts must have a Hand in this Work; yea, Papists themselves, all but that one
sort of Jesuited Papists, and those are the fast Friends of this great French
Tyrant, and will betray all to him where ever they are Entrusted; therefore if
any such be in England, in any disguise, they are not to be Trusted, but a
watchful Eye ought to be upon them. A Second Sort, not to be Employed nor
Trusted, are those that have been the Betrayers of the Nation under the late
Reigns, those that in former Reigns had brought the Nations almost to Deaths
Door, are the Men that would make the Cure and Recovery of them as Tedious and
as Chargeable as they can, that so the Nations might never have time to call
them to a Reckoning: I will never choose him to be my Doctor, that has once
endeavored to Poison me: I will never put him in a great Post to help pull
down France, that has been a chief Instrument to raise him up to his Greatness;
that has been a Pensioner to France, and made his own Fortunes by Betraying the
Nations to him, as far as was in his Power. I hope, Gentlemen, amongst the
Honest Lords and Commons of England, there is not such a Barrenness among you,
but that a Number sufficient may be found out as may be able with the King to
carry on this great Work with Courage and Conduct; such as have been Faithful
to the Nations Interest under the late Reign and (...) are; It is the (...)
Purses of the Honest Lords and Commons (...) King, wi^^ (...) that must (...)
this (...) and if any be (...) in faithfulness (...) this (...) I (...) what
will soon follow; that is, you will become Vassals and Peasants to France,
which then to be, is better to be out of the World; for matters are now so
Constituted, there is no medium: Have a care of taking any more false steps,
lest you tumble down, and the (...) ketch you in his Teeth; if he does, he will
Te^ (...) to pieces, without mercy; for he knows none; and then, as we have an
English Proverb, Instead of ketching a Tarter, a Tarter has caught you; which
God prevent. Your Neighbors will be soon weary in helping you, if you play any
more foul play with them, and will not take right measures to help your selves;
and if it be Work enough for you altogether, I doubt you will find it too hard
a Task for your selves alone, if they be justly provoked to leave you to his
Rage; for the Bear would willingly give them Honorable Terms, so that they
would but leave you alone, to be under his Paws; therefore show your selves
Wise and Honest Men whilst you have so good Neighbors to help you: In order
therefore to the speedy carrying on this Great and Good Work, lay a good
foundation, clear away all the Rubbish, begin first amongst your selves, see
your own House first swept and cleansed; from all Filth of Dust and Rubbish,
and cleansed from Cobwebs and Spiders, and other Vermin: choose such to
Represent you that are Men of Honor, Virtue, Courage, Wisdom and Honesty; and
not by the Great Estate, the Great Titles, the fine Laced Coats, the fine
smoothed Tongues, who only can make thereby fine Speeches, to make the better
Bargains for themselves by making Markets of you. Choose none to Represent you
that are of little narrow Souls, Self-designing and Self-seeking Fellows, that
will Sell you to the French King for a Place or Pension; Let none Represent you
that have had either: Sell not your Birthright for a Mess of Pottage; Sell not
your Liberty for Strong-Beer and ROAST BEEF: Let not the Black-Gown of Lawyer or
Gospeller be Consulted by you, in your choice, but if they will make a Noise
for this or the other, unless you know them well in your own Judgment to be
Honest Men; be you sure otherwise to go contrary to them; for those two sorts
are seldom in the right, if they are, its for the most part against their
Wills: without you make a good Choice your selves, and cleanse your own House
of the Dust and Rubbish, you cannot expect to persuade the other House to
cleanse theirs.

We have now a King that is Hearty with us in this Great and Good Work, not
only to help pull down the Great Tyrant of France, but also is desirous to have
us well Established at Home, upon a Good, Honest and Just Foundation; I mean,
our Ancient and Just Rights and Privileges and I am sure, no Honest English
Man desires more; and therefore let us be Hearty and Honest to the King in
sticking close to him to help, that both these Great and Necessary Works may be
both finished in His Time: In order to it, pull down those amongst your selves
that stand in the Way, and hinder both; it is the Work of those that betrayed
Us and our Liberties under the Late Reigns to hinder a Reformation in this all
they can; therefore let none of them Represent you: if you would have a good
and easy pair of Shoes, you will choose the best Workman you can; if you are
Sick, you will have Advice of the most skilful Doctor; so now, while we have a
King that is Hearty with us in this Great and Necessary Work engaged in against
this French Tyrant, choose (...) Represent you as will be Courageous in this
Great Work, and will go on Roundly in it; and by faithful Advising Him, make
the Work as easy to Him and as speedy as may be; choose not such as have been
old State Quacks, and tried Experiments upon you, and Robbed you of your
Treasure and Liberties, and which is worst of all, of your best Blood, which is
never to be recovered again: Choose such as will serve you Heartily out of Love
to their Country and Good of the Public, without Little Self-designing Ends
and Tricks of Places and Preferments; if you neglect this Opportunity, God
knows whether ever you may have another: if it be not now done in this King's
time, Your Attempts ever after may be in vain, and to as much purpose as giving
Aqua vitae to a Dead Man; if you do not the Work now, while we have such
Powerful Alleys, we cannot expect to do it when we are alone; but may justly
expect to be pulled down our selves, as a Just Judgment of God upon us. You
have Spectacles of this Bear's Clemency to His own Subjects with you; do you
expect better Quarter from His Apostolical Dragoons then Born Frenchmen? do
you believe Father Peter's and the Rest of His Brethren have more Tenderness for
you than He had for them? do you believe the Devil is turned Saint since then?
You can have nothing but Fire and Sword if that day comes; but the Lord give
you Wisdom to Act as Men, to prevent it; therefore take Time by the Forelock,
that it may not be said of England, Post est Occasio Calva. A House of Commons,
rightly and wisely Chosen, under such a Wise and Valliant King as we now have,
what Great Works may they not do in a little time; may not only break the Yoke
of the French Tyrant, but also make His Dear Brother and Alley the Great Turk
to pull in His Horns; this is a Brave and Honorable Work becoming the Commons
of England.

But it may be Objected, There is a Sort of a dead Weight of Spiritual and
Temporal Wickedness in High Places in a few little Men, laden with a great deal
of Sin and great Titles, and these will hinder the Good Work all they can. Do
but you take care of a Good House of Commons, and then the other will purge of
it self; a Good House of Commons, full of the Living Weight of Honor and
Honesty, that will weigh down all the Dead Weight of the other, and affright
them into their two little Senses; if the Head be good, and the Body sound at
Heart, its no matter whether there be a fine Laced Coat on, or a Feather in the
Cap; keep the Fountain clean, and then the Streams will be sweet and clean; for
it is the Commons make the Good Lords, as the Clark makes the Justice;
therefore Honest Brother Commoners, see you well to your Duty, and take this
along with you, You can never serve your God truly, if you will for private
Gains and Ends be a Traitor to your Country: Let him be Clothed with what
Titles he pleases, and have a Cloak with what Badges of Honor can be given,
yet it will not hide his Knavery, the Devil cannot hide his cloven Foot; and
though an Ill Man be Clothed like an Angel of Light, yet his Work will show him
to be a Child of Darkness, and a Son of Perdition; and his Words, though smooth
as Oil and Butter, yet will be discovered to be as drawn Swords.

When Kings took the Cream of the Milk, the best and choicest of the Commons,
and conferred Titles of Honor on them, they became their Honor well, and made
good Lords, and things went on well, and good Laws were made, when both Houses
studied the public Good; but in the late Reigns, when the Scum of the Pot, the
Dregs and Dross of the Commons were advanced to Titles of Honor, as too many
were, what can you expect from such Creations of such Creatures to such
Honors? Surely Trim Tram, like Master like Man; when the Righteous bears
Rule, the People Rejoice; but when the wicked bears Rule, the People Mourn.
Woe to that man, or that Nation, that shall call Good Evil and Evil Good; and
that shall call Light Darkness, and Darkness Light. All the Priests in the
World shall never make me believe, that in the little Wafer of Bread, after the
Priest has in a few words conjured with a Hocus Pocus over it, that it
contains the Real and whole Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, as it was
offered up upon the Cross; no more than I will believe all the Irish Evidences
in Swearing a Plot of the Lords and Commons to seize the Body of King Charles
the Second at Oxford; nor no more will I believe those will help to save us
under this Reign, that helped to ruin us in the former; but that, (on the
contrary) they will do all they can to embarras the present King's and Nation's
Affairs, and make our Deliverance as difficult as they can; every Tree is known
by its Fruit; I will see good Fruits of they(...) Repentance before I will
believe their Conversion i(...) true, and that they are hearty in with us: Men
tha(...) are in Honor, and understand not, are like the Beasts tha(...)
perish; and A Man that is in Honor for Betray(...)ing his Country, it becomes
him exactly as well as A(...)mour does a Hogg on Horsback, or a Jewel in a
Swine Snout: And here I will subjoyn the Speech of Noble and Brave Lord, spoken
in the Lobby of (...) House of Lords, just after he came out of the House(...)
as I supposed, in a heat, and not well pleased; what was then debating in the
House, he spoke the purpose following, and as near as I can reme(...)ber will
give you his own words, I being then present; To God! we shall have such a
House shortly, that a man of Honor or Honesty will scorn to come within their
Walls; one is made a (...) for a Court Job, and another for Betraying his
Country, and a third for Ten Thousand Pound, and a fourth because he is the Son
of a whore; that shortly the honest Mob will come and tear us all to pieces for
being a Company of Rogues: whereas formerly the Nobility were the Honor of the
Nation in screening the people from Arbitrariness and Tyranny, and go forth in
the Heads of the People in fighting (...)eir Battles, and for doing them
Justice, when by other Courts they were oppressed, whereas now they are for
Suppressing and Destroying the People and their Liberties. It is the Honor
(...) bear to this Noble Lord that makes me mention it, to show the World the
Opinion of an Honest Lord, and to quicken you the Honest Commoners to cleanse
your House, and then you may help your Neighbors to cleanse theirs. How can
you see the Moa^ that is in your Brother's Eye, and cannot see the Beam that is
in your own Eye.

Gentlemen, I Repine not at the Ruin of my self and Family in your Service, for
your Sakes, and for the preserving of you; No, I am so far from it, that I
bless God for it; and count it all Honor that I was born for your sakes, and
for your service, and that God so wonderfully called me out in it in so
crittical an hour, and that he enabled me faithfully (I thank him for it) to
discharge my Duty therein to you; and I am still ready with my Life to serve
you, if that will do you good, if you will but be doing your Duties to help to
serve and save your selves, now God has put an Opportunity into your Hands; but
if you will not, you cannot say but you have had fair warning. I am at present
in the midst of a people that will, I hope, do the part of honest and
reasonable Men to keep and preserve their Liberties, and consider the dear
Price their Forefathers paid for them: I know some of our Crack-brains call
them a sort of Thick-scull'd People, Dull, and Phlegmatic; but they have
showed to the world they are a brave thinking and wise People; though but a
little spot of Ground to the rest of the world, yet have not only in some
measure, though hardly on all sides, envied and be(...)et by the Tyrants of the
Earth, preserved their (...)iberties, when our Generation madly parted with
(...)ll theirs at once, which our Fathers but just before (...)ad so hardly
strugled for. I wish it might not be (...)id by other Nations of our Nation in
this Genera(...)on, that we are an Unthinking People; and that (like (...)
French) Our Sculls are so thin that our Brains are (...)vaporated, and are
become a Bedlam Land, rather than wise and Sober People. I say, these People
have not (...) preserved with great Struglings good part of their (...)berties,
but procured us an Opportunity to have (...) keep ours, if we have but wisdom
to see it. (...)hank God and Them for preserving my Life when (...) for;
therefore (as in gratitude bound) I will (...) their good and service with all
the little talents that are left me, and that God has entrusted me with, to
the utmost of my power, whilst I have a day to live. I find among these people
a sense of the Evils and Mischiefs of the growing Power of France here; even
the Papists themselves are sorry at the French's taking of Monts, all but such
as are Jesuited Papists; whereas I hear in England you have (...), who call
themselves Protestants, that Rejoice in the taking of Monts; I cannot but
believe they are Jesuited Papists in M(...)uerade, to be sure are no Friends to
King William and Queen Mary, and the Protestant Religion and Interest, ^or the
general Liberty and Good of Mankind: Have a strict and watchful Eye upon such
men in your Choice of your Representatives; be sure oppose whom they are for.
If two things were truly and honestly done, it would go a great way toward
your speedy coming into good order of Settlement in Government; and that is,
Impartially to have laid open the Cheats and Tricks of the Lawyers and
Gospellers; for the latter of them I can lay my finger and point to a man that
promised it on this side the Water; there are two of them that well understand
it, and can do it to the life; but for one of them, I give him over, as being
past hope of recovery to do any good thing, like as in another case a man said
of himself, when he was Cardinal, he had a little hope of his being saved;
but when he was Pope he had none at all. But for the other person, I have
some little hopes that he is not past Grace, but has some sparks yet left to
serve his Country, and Mankind in general. For a man to display the Lawyer and
his Tricks, that I leave amongst you to find out an honest man, that is willing
and able to do it to the life. God grant it may not as truly be said of England
in this day as our Savior Christ said of Jerusalem, O! that thou had seen
the things that belong to thy Peace in this thy day, but now they are hid from
thine Eyes. Gentlemen, do but what is in your Power, and what is your Duty to
do, required both by the Law of Nature and the Law of the Land; when you do
that, you shall have Peace in your selves, though you miss of the Good you
aimed at: When your own House is cleansed, you may impeach the Ill Men in the
other; and until you do that, you cannot expect to do any Great Things: but on
the contrary, while your Representatives should be doing their Duties in their
places for the Nation, they make use of your Sholders to lift them up into an
Office, whereby to make their own Houses Great, and yours Little, and care not
if yours were burned, so they might but warm their hands by it: if you make not
some of these Examples of your Justice, you must never expect to be well
served, but on the contrary always betrayed; without a due Regulation be in
these great Points, you will be always groping in the Dark, and never come to
Light: If the Blind lead the Blind, they must all fall into the Ditch at last:
and without speedy Care taken, you must fall into the Ditch the French King,
the Priests and Jesuits, with the Lawyers and Gospellers, and our old State
Quacks, have made for you: if you effectually cleanse your two Houses, and lay
a good Foundation, then you may hope the Superstr^^^^^^ will stand fast; but if
you build upon a Sandy Foundation, that must be blown down in a Storm, and such
a Storm as never yet the like was seen in the World, that I believe is near at
hand; God grant it be not a Hurricane to poor England; the Clouds are very
thick and dark; God give you Wisdom.

But methinks I hear some Object, and say, The Commons of England are for a
Commonwealth.

If by a Commonwealth is meant a Common Good, that I dare say every honest man
is for; but if by a Common Wealth is meant a Government without a King; that I
do believe is not meant nor designed by any honest Man: But I do believe, that
there are a sort of persons that do buz such things into the King's Ears, to
make him jealous of his People, and thereby to disable him from doing any great
things, and by that means serve the Interest of France, and may have good store
of Levvedores for their pains: but I doubt not but the King will see through
the Designs of this sort of men, that they are nothing but Shams and Lies, done
on purpose to abuse him, and to secure themselves from the Justice of the
Nation. This farther I will boldly say, Those that buz these things in the
Kings Ears, if any such be, they are the Kings greatest Enemies, and would
Mislead the King to follow the Course of the last Reigns, on purpose to bring
all into Confusion, knowing no other and better way to serve their dearly
beloved French King, and themselves escape Vengeance. I doubt not but the King
sees his rtue Interest, and will stick by those good Motives that induced him
to hazard all to Rescue these Nations from Popery and Slavery; and the King is
so wise a Man, that no old or new treacherous corrupted Courtiers shall ever
make a Division and Jealousy between him and his People; it is that which they
foment for their own Interests, but hope they shall never attain it: I dare be
bold to answer for the honest People of England, they are willing to keep in
their old state of Kingly Government; between a Common Wealth, and an Absolute
Government of Tyranny: but the old Troublers of our Israel will prevent our
Peace and good Settlement, if they can.

I know, in some foreign parts it has been cast in the Teeth of the English,
That they are a Quarrelsome, Disquiet, and Troublesome People, and are never
satisfied, but are almost every Age Quarrelling with their Government,
falling-out with their Kings, and no King can please them.

For Answer, I dare affirm, that the plain honest People of England are as
Quiet and as Governable a People, as any People in the World; but if in an
Ill-designing King's Reign, he shall, with the Help of his Flattering and Ill
designing Courtiers and Evil Counselors, with some picked out of the Scum of
the Commons, shall with them endeavor to undermine their Liberties, and invade
their Properties, and by Oppressing some and Destroying others, by illegal
Practices, then none can wonder if the Commons stir in defense of their
Religion, Lives and Liberties, as was our Case under the late Reigns; and some
evil men are so impudent already as to be nibling at the same sport again; but
I hope the King sees it, and will hearken to the Voice of his Commons, and then
things will go well; for it is the Strength of the Bodies and Purses of the
Commons must do the French Business, and not a few flattering Scicophants, that
were against his being King, and would now lift Him out of the Throne again, if
the Commons did not stand by Him; those false Flatterers, with the help of the
Jesuits Journey men, are making way for the French King as fast as they can;
they some of them above board make a Noise for King James, but in reality join
with the Jesuits for King Jews; He that has but half an Eye may see it; and
most of the Priests are at that lay now, that they care not if the Devil were
King, for then they cannot miss of being his Priests and Favorites, and have
Power from him to plague the rest of M^nkind besides; Therefore, Gentlemen,
when you have swept your House, order your Representatives to look among the
Laws, and see where the Jesuits and Priests have had a Hand in making any of
them* away with them, abrogate them out of Hand: and for my part, I (...)
against any Bloody Laws barely for Religion; I am not for Hanging, Dravving and
Quartering of a Priest Quatinus as such, unless He disturb the Government; but
I think it would be an excellent Law, to Geld all Priests that busy themselves
about Government and State Affairs; it is the only way to tame them: if You do
not some such thing, you must never expect to have Quiet. And some others also
must feel your Justice in Terrorem; it seems to me, without it the Vengeance of
God against the Nation cannot be appeased, nor any thing Prosper you undertake
until that be done.

Gentlemen, was it not high time for the Commons to stir in this last
Revolution, when all lay at the last gasp, brought to pass by the then Evil
Ministers of State and Evil Counselors, with the Help of the Priests and
Jesuits? The Kings themselves could never have carried on the Metaphor without
such Tools. And do you think, if the same Hands are again used, they will not
be for doing again the same things? Yea, and bring the Nation into a more
Desperate Case than before, or they will miss of their aim. And will the
Jesuits with their Partners and Journeymen, and their Friends in England, let
go their Hold in England? No, not until their Fingers are chopped off; there is
a way will break all their Measures, and that very quickly too, if you can but
once hit on it; but Temporizing will never do the Work; the Plough will never
do good Work, and go on cleverly, that is drawn by an Ox and an Ass, let one
Plough be drawn all by one Sort, and another by another Sort; and see which
makes best Work, and most riddance; a faithful, willing, dilligent Servant will
dispatch more in a Day, than he that is only an Eye-Servant will do in two; if
you will do fine Work, you must use fine Tools; and if you will do Honest Work,
you must employ Honest Men.

Is it not a fine sight (as I have seen) to have a Priest come into a
Coffe-House, and set himself at upper-end of the Table, and there to hold forth
for an Hour or two together upon the Topics of Politics, and never a Word of
God all the while, unless it be to strengthen the Belief of his Assertion with
a God damn me; and then (...) instruct their Auditors, who they must choose for
(...)liament Men, and who for Mayors and Sheriffs, and who for Aldermen and
Common-Council-men, and the like? And others that do it not so publicly, but
come in lesser Numbers to carry on the Metaphor, that are the Plurality men,
and go to Taverns, and bowse good Sack. A third Sort there are, that apply
themselves at Gossippings and Christenings, among the Women, to charge them,
that they lay their Commands upon their Husbands to choose such and such, as may
be Drudges and Tools to the Devil and the Priest.

It is plain to me, that many of the Priests in England, are the Jesuits
Journey-men, and carrying on their Work: when the Fox Preaches, then it is high
time for the Geese and Hens to look to themselves; and when the Priests Preach
upon Topics of Polliticks, and make a noise of the Church, then it is high
time for the Commoners to look to their Rights and Privileges, and to have a
care of their Beef and Puddings, and their Cabbidge and Bacon: You see plain
enough in the late Revolution what made the Great men in the Church make a
noise, and cry out Murder, Murder, Popery, Popery, Help, Help, when their own
Pudding ^^me to be touched, Magdalen-Colledge seized, and the Bishop of London
turned out, and the rest expected to follow after; then they began to make a
Noise, but never before; when they could Domineer, and Lord it over the Bodies
and Consciences of the rest of Mankind; and they could Hang, Whip and Pillory,
^^ain and Destroy as many as they pleased, all was well (...) them: the Honest
People of England made a Noise (...) before of Popery and Slavery, but the
Priests saw it not, they felt it not; nay, by most of them it was accounted a
Plot of the Fanatics against the Church, that did then but talk of Popery and
Slavery; they then could hold the Clothes of St. Steven College, and vvarm
their hands at the Fire that burned his Bowels, and Sing, O be Joyful, to see
him Quartered; but when the dear Magdalen-Colledge, their great Goddess Diana
comes to be touched, then all the Church cries out, Help, Help, Murder, Murder,
Good Prince of Orange come help us; O! help, help; but when that was done, they
were quickly weary of him again; when their turn was served, they were for
sending him back again; they only wanted to have King James put into a Box,
tied Hand and Foot, locked fast up, and the Key in their keeping, and so to
take him out to speak at their pleasure, and to put him in again at their
pleas(...)e, when he had done their Work: but the Honest Lords and Commons were
there too cunning for the Priests; in setting up King William and Queen Mary to
be King and Queen, and they declared for the Birthright and Natural Liberty of
all Mankind, the Liberty of Conscience in the Worship of God: Alas! here was
all the Fat in the Fire presently; the Priests could by no means in any
Conscience allow them to be their King and Queen; but a world of sputter is by
the Scholasticks about de facto and de jure, and the World filled with a great
deal of stuff, which would make a Reasonable Man almost Sp -- but the Papers
however may serve for an Honest Occasion -- Doctor Sandcroft, His Quandum Grace
of Canterbury, I never heard he was troubled in Conscience for having his Hand
in Ruining of any Family, as mine amongst others is one; and I do here
challenge him to show any Reason for it, either by the Law of God or the Land
if he can by either make me Guilty, I will still surrender my self, and undergo
the Pu^^shment for all; (But only for my coming into Eng^and with the Prince of
Orange) if King James come again,) that done by me may be Judged High Treason:
there is a Parcel at their Prayers Praying and Hoping for that Day; and saying,
O Good King James, help us; O most Christian King, Good King Lewis, help us; O
Good Prince of Wales, O pretty little (...), help us; But Alas! they are busy
upon other (...), and cannot hear you; seeing you and the (...) have cast them
off; they are setting up another Church between Yours and Rome, of which
Fat(...) Peter's is to be the First Head, they say, Their Church shall have no
Pope nor Bishops, as being a parcel of Saucy Fellows, that kick out and in
Kings at their pleasure, when the Fathers of the Jesuits do say, it is a
prerogative Royal that belongs peculiarly alone to their Order; therefore Good
Master Doctor, you may spare your pains, in calling upon those Saints, and save
your Breath to cool your Pottage, as I shall do mine with you, Mr. Doctor, at
this time: But there are some others Your Partners, concerned in my Ruin, that
I must talk to; but this being designed only for the Public Good of my
Country, I shall let those Gentlemen alone until a more fiting Season, unless
they Repent, and make Satisfaction; I know no Reason of my violent Prosecution;
I declare in the Presence of God and to all the World; unless it was that I
would not be a Tool to hang up my Honest Contrymen, and give them as a
Sacrifice to Popish and priestly Rage and Malice.

But, Gentlemen, I am so far from Repining for being Ruined upon that account,
that I had rather take my share with Brave Essex, Russel, Sidney, Cornish, and
College, in doing my Duty for my Country, and its Preservation, or lie in the
Dust by the Honest Cobbler of Gloucester; much rather than to have Titles of
Honor, and live in Pomp and State, obtained by my Perfidious and Treacherous
Acts against my Country; The Name of the Righteous is of everlasting
Remembrance, but the Name of the Wicked shall rot and perish.

Now Gentlemen, seeing God has so wonderfully wrought out your Deliverance, and
brought you out of Bondage, from a worse then Egyptian Bondage and Slavery; see
to the keeping of your just Bounds of your Liberties and Privileges, that no
Flattering Courtiers, New or Old, or evil Counselors break over your Bounds;
either keep your Mounds or give them all up into their Hands, that they may Eat
you up at Pleasure, as Storks do Frogs; it has been my Turn to be Eaten up, and
who of you that are Honest may be next, you know not; therefore prevent it for
the future; let me and some others be a warning to you for your Good; but if
such Beasts of Prey have such a Power that you cannot help it, nor there is no
Remedy, but you must be Eaten up, then it matters not much who it is that does
it* by the Mahumetan Turk rather than by the Christian Turk, by the Mufty
rather than by the Jesuit, and by any of them rather than by a little Court
Paracide or evil Councellor; I hope, Gentlemen, Your Wisdom will prevent
either; you have now an Honorable, Heroic and brave Work on your Hands to
muzzel this great French Bear; set your selves right in order for the Work, and
be Honest and Hearty to God, the King and the Country in it; if it be not well
done, I will lay all the fault at your Door: I dare be bold, to say, We have a
King that is Hearty in it; if any more false steps be taken, I shall lay it to
your Charge, for your neglect in not speaking round out the Truth to the King;
for I dare say for him, he will do His Part to remove all Obstacles that lie in
the Way; and I am as confident that Light and Darkness, GOD and the Devil are
as soon to be Reconciled as Great King William of England, and Little Lewis of
France; therefore let not any little Interests of Ill Men mislead you to your
Ruin, but be Plain and Honest with God, and the King, with the Nation, and Your
Neighbors and Alleys in this Work, and let not tricking Priests or Courtiers,
or the Noise of a Church mislead you. I could enlarge much more, but I am loath
to tire your Patience, by coming into Particulars of past and present
Miscarriages of Persons and Things, of their failings and falseness to God,
their King and Country; but hope these general Heads will awaken you to your
Duties, and deter others from persisting in their Evil Ways; but if this will
not do, my next shall not be in Parables, Allegories and dark Sayings, but
shall speak out to you in plain Particulars, as Nathan did to David, if Men
will not Repent; for the Day of Judgment is at Hand, and all the Books must be
laid open, and every secret Thing must be made manifest; in the mean time be
assured, I am and by Gods Grace always shall be the Servant of all Honest men,
and Yours in particular, whilst I am

IGNORAMUS.
From my Chamber in Philadelphia, this 24 of the second Month, called April,
1691.

