REVOLUTION IN New England JUSTIFIED, And the People there Vindicated From the
Aspersions cast upon them By Mr. JOHN PALMER, In his Pretended Answer to the
Declaration, Published by the Inhabitants of Boston, and the Country adjacent,
on the day when they secured their late Oppressors, who acted by an Illegal and
Arbitrary Commission from the Late King JAMES.

Printed for Joseph Brunning at Boston in New England. 1691.

TO THE READER.
I T is not with any design or desire unnecessarily to expose the late
Oppressors of that good Protestant People which is in New England, that the
Authors of the ensuing Vindication have published what is herewith emitted. But
the Agents lately sent from thence could not be faithful to their Trust, if
when the People whom they Represent are publicly (as well as privately)
aspersed, they should not (either by themselves, or by furnishing some other
with materials for such an undertaking) vindicate those who have been so deeply
injured.

As for Mr. Palmer his Account which he calls Impartial, he has wronged New
England thereby, in some other particulars besides those insisted on, in the
subsequent Apology. For he does endeavor to make the World believe that the
Massachusetts refused to answer to the Quo Warranto prosecuted against their
Charter: Than which Misrepresentation nothing can be more untrue or injurious.
An Account concerning that matter has formerly (and more than once) been made
public, in the which it is most truly affirmed, That when the Quo Warranto was
issued out against the Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Colony in New
England in the year 1683. the then King did by his Declaration enjoin a few
particular persons to make their Defense at their own Charge, without any
public Stock; which showed that there was a Resolution to take away that
Charter: Yet the Governor and Company appointed an Attorney to answer to the
Quo Warranto; but the Suit was let fall in the Court of King's Bench, and a new
Suit began by Scire facias in Court of Chancery, where time was not allowed to
make Defense. The former Attorney for that Colony brought several Merchants to
testify that in the time allowed (which was from April 16. till June 18.) it
was impossible to have a New Letter of Attorney returned from New England. The
then Lord Keeper North replied, That no time ought to be given. So was Judgment
entered against them before they could possibly plead for themselves. By this
the Impartial Reader may judge what ingenuity and Veracity is in Mr. Palmers
Account.

There is lately come forth another Scandalous Pamphlet, called New England's
Faction Discovered. The Author has not put his Name to it: But it is supposed
to be written by a certain person known to be a Prodigy for Impudence and
Lying. The Reflections in it not only on New England in general, but on
particular persons there as well as in England, are so notoriously and
maliciously false; as that it must needs be much beneath a great Mind to take
notice of such Latrations, or to answer them any otherwise than with contempt.
When we are treated with the Buffoonry and Railery of such ungentiel Pens, it is
good to remember the old Saying, Magnum Contumeliae remedium, Negligentia.

As for what Mr. Palmer does in his Preface insinuate concerning the
New-Englanders being Commonwealths-men, Enemies to Monarchy, and to the Church
of England, that is such a Sham as every one sees through it.

There are none in the World that do more fully concur with the Doctrine of the
Church of England contained in the 39 Articles, than do the Churches in New
England, as is manifest from the Confession of their Faith published in the
year 1680. Only as to Liturgy and Ceremonies they differ; for which cause alone
it was that they, or their Fathers transported themselves into that American
Desert, as being desirous to worship God in that way which they thought was
most according to the Scriptures. The Platform of Church Discipline consented
unto by the Elders and Messengers of the Churches Assembled in a General Synod
at Cambridge in New England in the year 1647. shows that they are as to
Church Government for the Congregational way. The judiciously Learned Mr.
Philip Nigh has long since evinced, that no Form of Church Government (no not
that which is Episcopal) is more consistent with Monarchy, or with the King's
Supremacy, than that of the Way-Congregational, which some will needs call
Independent. But there are a sort of men, who call those that are for English
Liberties, and that rejoice in the Government of Their present Majesty's King
William and Queen Mary, by the name of Republicans, and represent all such as
Enemies of Monarchy and of the Church. It is not our single Opinion only, but
we can speak it on behalf of the generality of Their Majesty's Subjects in New
England, that they believe (without any diminution to the Glory of our former
Princes) the English Nation was never so happy in a King, or in a Queen, as at
this day. And the God of Heaven, who has set them on the T hrone of these
Kingdoms, grant them long and prosperously to Reign.

E. R. S. S.


THE Revolution in New England justified.
THE Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance, which a sort of men did
of late when they thought the World would never change, cry up as Divine Truth,
is by means of the happy Revolution in these Nations, exploded, and the
Assertors of it become ridiculous.

No man does really approve of the Revolution in England, but must justify
that in New England also; for the latter was effected in compliance with the
former, neither was there any design amongst the People in New England, to
reassume their Ancient Charter-Government, until His present Majesty's intended
descent into England, to rescue the Nation from Slavery as well as Popery, was
known to them (for indeed to have attempted it before that would have been
madness.) They considered that the men then usurping Government in New England
were King James's Creatures, who had invaded both the Liberty and Property of
English Protestants after such a manner as perhaps the like was never known in
any part of the World where the English Nation has any Government: And the
Commission which they had obtained from the Late King James was more Illegal
and Arbitrary, than that granted to Dudley and Empson by King Henry 7th. or
than it may be was ever before given to any by King James himself, or by any
one that ever swayed the English Scepter, which was a Grievance intolerable;
and yet they desired not to make themselves Judges in a case which so nearly
concerned them, but instead of harsher treatment of those who had Tyrannized
over them, they only, secured them that they might not betray that Country
into the hands of the Late King, or of King Lewis, which they had reason enough
to believe (considering their Characters and Dispositions,) they were inclined
to do. They designed not to revenge themselves on their Enemies, which they
could as easily have done as a thousand men are able to kill one, and therefore
when they secured their Persons, they declared (as in their Declaration Printed
at Boston in New England is to be seen) that they would leave it to the King
and Parliament of England, to inflict what punishment they should think meet
for such Criminals. Their seizing and securing the Governor, was no more than
was done in England, at Huli, Dover, Plymouth, etc. That such a man as Mr. John
Palmer should exclaim against it, is not to be wondered at, seeing he was one of
the Governors Tools, being of his Council, made a Judge by him, and too much
concerned in some Illegal and Arbitrary Proceedings: But his Confidence is
wonderful, that he should publish in Print that neither himself nor Sir Edmund
Androsse, nor others of them who had been secured by the People in New England,
had any Crimes laid to their charge, whereas the foresaid Declaration emitted
the very day they were secured, does plainly set forth their Crimes. And in the
Preface of his Book he has these words; viz.

We appeared at the Council Board where the worst of our Enemies, even the very
men who had so unjustly imprisoned and detained us, had nothing to say or
object against us -- By these Enemies he speaks of, we suppose he means those
who were lately sent as Agents from Boston in New England; He has therefore
necessitated us to inform the World, that the following Objections (though not by
his Enemies, yet) by those Agents presented at the Council Board.

Matters objected against Sir Edmund Androsse, Mr. Joseph Dudley, Mr. Palmer,
Mr. Randolph, Mr. West, Mr. Graham, Mr. Farewell, Mr. Sherlock and others, as
occasions of their Imprisonment in New England.
IT is objected against Sir Edmund Androsse, that he being Governor of the
Massachusetts Colony after notice of His present Majesty's intention to land in
England, issued out a Proclamation, requiring all persons to oppose any descent
of such as might be authorized by him, endeavored to stifle the News of his
Landing, and caused him that brought this Kings Declaration thither to be
imprisoned as bringing a Seditious and Treasonable Paper.

2. That in the time of his Government, he without form or color of legal
Authority made laws destructive of the Liberty of the People, imposed and
levied Taxes, threatened and imprisoned them that would not be assisting to the
illegal Levys, denied that they had any Property in their Lands without Patents
from him, and during the time of actual War with the Indians, he did supply
them with Ammunition, and several Indians declared, that they were encouraged
by him to make War upon the English, and he discountenanced making defense
against the Indians.

3. As to all the other persons imprisoned, they were Accomplices and
Confederates with Sir Edmund Androsse, and particularly Mr. Dudley, Mr.
Randolph, and Mr. Palmer were of his Council, and joined with him in his
Arbitrary Laws and Impositions, and in threatening and in punishing them who
would not comply. Mr. West was his Secretary, and guilty of great Extortion,
and gave out words which showed himself no Friend to the English. Mr. Graham
was his Attorney at one time, and Mr. Farewell at another, both concerned in
illegal proceedings destructive of the Property of the Subject. Mr. Farewell
prosecuted them who refused to comply with the Illegal Levies, and Mr. Graham
brought several Writs of Intrusion against men for their own Land, and Mr.
Sherlock, another person imprisoned, though not named in the Order, acted there
for some years as an High Sheriff, though he was a stranger in the Country,
and had no Estate there, during his Shrievalty he impannelled Juries of
Strangers, who had no Freehold in that Country, and extorted unreasonable
Fees.

These particulars were not only presented at the CouncilBoard, but there read
before the Right Honorable the Lords of the Committee for Foreign Plantations,
on April 17, 1690. when Sir Edmund Androsse, Mr. Palmer, and the rest concerned
were present, and owned that they had received Copies thereof from Mr.
Blaithwaite. It is true, that the Paper then read was not signed by the Agents
aforesaid, for which reason (as we understand, nor could it rationally be
otherwise expected) the matter was dismissed without an hearing: Nevertheless
the Gentlemen who appeared as Counsel for the New England Agents, declared,
That they were ready to prove every Article of the Objections; which shall now
be done.

1. That Sir E. A. with others whom the People in New England seized and
secured, did, after notice of His present Majesty's intended descent into
England to deliver the Nation from Popery and Arbitrary Power, to their utmost
oppose that glorious design, is manifest by the Proclamation Printed and
Published in New England, Jan. 10. 1688. signed by Sir E. A. and His Deputy
Secretary John West, in which K. James's Proclamation of October. 16. 1688. is
recited and referred unto. Sir Edmunds Proclamation begins thus; Thereas His
Majesty has been graciously pleased by His Royal Letter bearing date the 16th
of October last past, to signify that He has undoubted Advice that a great
and sudden Invasion from Holland, with an armed Force of Foreigners and
Strangers will be speedily made in an hostile manner upon His Majesty's Kingdom
of England, and that although some false Pretenses relating to Liberty,
Property and Religion, etc. And then he concludes thus -- All which it is His
Majesty's pleasure should be made known in the most public manner to His
Loving Subjects within this His Territor, and Dominion of New England, that
they may be the better prepared to resist any Attempts that may be made by His
Majesty's Enemies in these parts, I do therefore hereby charge and command all
Officers Civil and Military, and all other His Majesty's Loving Subjects within
this His Territory and Dominion aforesaid, to be vigilant and careful in their
respective places and stations, and that upon the approach of any Fleet or
Foreign Force, they be in readiness, and use their utmost endeavors to hinder
any Landing or Invasion that may be intended to be made within the same.

2. And that they used all imaginable endeavors to stifle the News of the
Prince's Landing in England, appears not only from the Testimony of the People
there, and from the Letters of those now in Government at Boston, but from the
deposition of Mr. John Winstow, who affirms that being in Nevis in Feb. 1683. a
Ship arrived there from England with the Prince of Orange's Declaration, and
intelligence of the happy change of Affairs in England, which he knew would be
welcome News in New England, and therefore was at the charge to procure a
written Copy of that Princely Declaration with which he arrived at Boston about
a fortnight before the Revolution there. He concealed the Declaration from Sir
Edmund, because he believed if it came into his possession, he would keep the
people in ignorance concerning it; but intimation being given that Mr. Winstow
had brought with him the Declaration, he was therefore committed to Prison
(though he offered two thousand pound Bayl) for bringing into the Country a
Treasonable Paper. For the satisfaction of such as are willing to be informed
in this matter, Mr. Winstow's testimony as it was given upon Oath before a
Magistrate in New England shall be here inserted. It is as follows.

John Winstow aged 24 years or thereabouts, testifies and says, that he being
in Nevis some time in February last past, there came in a Ship from some part
of England with the Prince of Orange's Declarations, and brought news also of
his happy proceedings in England with his entrance there, which was very
welcome News to me, and I knew it would be so to the rest of the people in New
England; and I being bound thither, and very willing to carry such good news
with me, gave four shillings six pence for the said Declarations, on purpose to
let the people in New England understand what a speedy deliverance they might
expect from Arbitrary Power. We arrived at Boston Harbor the fourth day of
April following, and as soon as I came home to my house, Sir Edmund Androsse
understanding I brought the Prince's Declarations with me, sent the Sheriff to
me; so I went along with him to the Governors house, and as soon as I came in,
he asked me why I did not come and tell him the news. I told him I thought it
not my duty, neither was it customary for any Passenger to go to the Governor
when the Master of the Ship had been with him before, and told him the news; he
asked me where the Declarations I brought with me were, I told him I could not
tell, being afraid to let him have them, because he would not let the people
know any news. He told me I was a Saucy fellow, and bid the Sheriff carry me
away to the Justices of the Peace, and as we were going, I told the Sheriff, I
would choose my Justice, he told me, no, I must go before Doctor Bullivant, one
picked on purpose (as I Judged) for the business, well I told him, I did not
care who I went before, for I knew my cause good, so soon as I came in, two
more of the Justices dropped in, Charles Lidget and Francis Foxcroft, such as the
former, fit for the purpose, so they asked me for my Papers, I told them I
would not let them have them by reason they kept all the news from the people,
so when they saw they could not get what I bought with my money, they sent me
to Prison for bringing Traitorous and Treasonable Libels and Papers of News,
notwithstanding, I offered them security to the value of two thousand pounds.

Boston in New England, Feb. 4. 1689. sworn before Elisha Hutchinson Assistant.
John Winslow.

By these things it appears that it was absolutely necessary for the people in
New England to seize Sir E. A. and his Accomplices, that so they might secure
that territory for their present Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.

3. That Sir E. A. etc. did make Laws destructive to the liberty of the
Subjects, is notoriously known, for they made what Laws they pleased without
any consent of the People, either by themselves or representatives, which is
indeed to destroy the Fundamentals of the English, and to Erect a French
Government. We cannot learn that the like was ever practiced in any place where
the English are Planters, but only where Sir E. A. has been Governor: For
whereas in New England by constant usage under their Charter Government, the
Inhabitants of each Town did assemble as occasion offered to consider of what
might conduce to the welfare of their respective Towns, the relief of the poor,
or the like, Sir, E. A. with a few of his council, made a law prohibiting any
Town meeting, except once a year, viz. on the third Monday in May. The
Inhabitants of the Country were startled at this Law, as being apprehensive
the design of it was to prevent the people in every Town from meeting to make
complaints of their Grievances. And whereas by constant usage any person might
remove out of the Country at his pleasure, a Law was made that no man should
do so without the Governors leave. (...) Fishing Boats, coasters, etc. were to
enter into a thousand pound bond, whereby Fees were raised for himself and
creatures. This Law could not pass at Boston, because many of Sir Edmund's
Council there opposed it; but then a Juncto of them meeting at New York, passed
it; and after that Law was made, how should any dissatisfied persons ever
obtain liberty to go for England to complain of their being oppressed by
Arbitrary Governors?

4. But besides all this, They made Laws for the Levying Moneys without the
consent of the People either by themselves or by an Assembly; for in order to
the supporting of their own Government, they did by an Act bearing date March
3. 1686. raise considerable sums of Money on the Kings subjects in that part of
his dominions, viz. a penny in the pound on all Estates personal or real,
twenty pence per head as Poll Money, a penny in the pound for goods imported,
besides an Excise on Wine, Rum and other Liquors.

It has indeed been pleaded that all this was but what the Laws of the
Country before the change of the Government did allow. But this is vainly
pretended, for there was no such Law in force at the time when these sums were
levied, the former Laws which did authorize it, were repealed October. 10. 1683.
some years before Sir E. A. and his accomplices had invaded the Rights and
Liberties of the people there. Moreover, in those, parts of the Country where
there were never any such Laws in force, particularly in Plymouth Colony, this
Money was levied, which they heavily complained of. Yet further, in another Act
dated Feb. 15. 1687, they did without any color of ancient Law make an
additional duty of Impost and Excise, which raised the duty, some ten
shillings, some twenty shillings per Pipe on Wines, and so on other things. Nay
they levied moneys on Connecticot Colony contrary to their Charter, which was
never vacated, than which nothing more Illegal and Arbitrary could have been
perpetrated by them.

5. They did not only act according to these Illegal Taxes, but they did
inflict severe punishment on those true English men who did oppose their
Arbitrary proceedings, as shall be made to appear in many instances. When the
Inhabitants of Ipswich in New England were required to choose a Commissioner to
tax that Town, some principal persons there that could not comply with what was
demanded of them, did modestly give their reasons, for which they were
committed to Goal, as guilty of high misdemeanors, and denied an Habeas
Corpus, and were obliged to answer it at a Court of Oyer and Terminer at
Boston. And that they might be sure to be found guilty, Jurors were picked of
such as were no Freeholders, nay of Strangers; the Prisoners pleading the
privileges of English men not to be taxed without their own consent, they were
told that the Laws of England would not follow them to the end of the Earth,
they meant the privileges of the English Law, for the penalties they resolved
should follow them quo jure qudque injurid. And why should they insist on, and
talk of the privileges of English men, when it had been declared in the
Governors Council, that the Kings Subjects in New England did not differ much
from Slaves, and that the only difference was, that they were not bought and
sold? But to go on with the matter before us; In as much as the Prisoners
mentioned had asserted their English Liberties, they were severely handled, not
only imprisoned for several weeks, but fined and bound to their good behavior;
Mr. John Wise was fined fifty pound besides costs of Court, deprived of the
means of his subsistence, and gave a thousand pound bond for good behavior.
And Mr. John Appleton was fined fifty pound and to give a thousand pound bond
for good behavior, and moreover declared incapable to bear Office, besides
unreasonable Fees. After the same manner did they proceed with several others
belonging to Ipswich. Likewise the Towns men of Rowley, Salisbury, Andover,
etc. had the same measure. And the Kings Subjects were not only oppressed thus
in the Massachusetts Colony, but in Plymouth. For when Shadrach Wild^^^ the
Town Clerk of Taunton in N. E. did, with the consent of the Town, Sign a modest
Paper signifying their not being free to raise money on the Inhabitants without
their own consent by an assembly, the honest man was for this committed close
Prisoner, and after that punished with a Fine of twenty Marks and three Months
Imprisonment, and bound to find sureties by Recognizance to appear the next
Court, and to be of the good behavior. As to the matter of fact, the persons
concerned in these Illegal and Arbitrary Judgments will not have the face to
deny them; if they do, there are Affidavits now in London which will evince
what has been related whenever there shall be occasion for it.

It is a vanity in Mr. Palmer, to think that he has answered this by
affirming, but not proving, that the Ipswich-men assembled themselves in a
riotous manner; for that saying of his is very false. The World knows that New
England is not the only place where honest men have in these late days been
proceeded against as guilty of Riots, when they never deserved such a censure
any more than these accused by Mr. Palmer. But the truth of what has been thus
far related is confirmed by the following Affidavits.

Complaints of great wrongs done under the Ill Government of Sir Edmund
Androsse Governor in N. E. in the year 1687.
We John Wise, John Andrews senior, Robert Kinsman, William Goodhue junior, all
of Ipswich in New England, in the County of Essex, about the 22d day of August,
in the year above named, were with several principal Inhabitants of the Town of
Ipswich met at Mr. John Appletons, and there discoursed and concluded that it
was not the Towns Duty any way to assist that ill method of raising Money
without a general Assembly, which was apparently intended by abovesaid Sir
Edmund and his Council, as witness a late Act issued out by them for such a
purpose. The next day in a general Town-Meeting of the Inhabitants of Ipswich;
We the above named John Wise, John Andrews, Robert Kinsman, William Goodhue
with the rest of the Town then met (none contradicting) gave our assent to the
vote then made.

The ground of our trouble, our crime was the Copy transmitted to the Council,
viz. At a Legal Town meeting August 23. Assembled by virtue of an Order from
John Usher Esquire. Treasurer for choosing a Commissioner to join with the Select
men, to assess the Inhabitants according to an Act of his Excellency the
Governor and Council for laying of rates; the Town then considering that the
said Act does infringe their Liberty, as free born English Subjects of His
Majesty by interfering with the Statute Laws of the Land, by which it was
Enacted that no Taxes should be Levied upon the Subjects without consent of an
Assembly chosen by the Freeholders for assessing of the same, they do therefore
vote that they are not willing to choose a Commissioner for such an end without
said privilege; and moreover consent not that the Select men do proceed to lay
any such rate until it be appointed by a general Assembly concurring with the
Governor and Council. We the complainants with Mr. John Appleton and Thomas
French all of Ipswich were brought to answer for the said vote out of our own
County, thirty or forty Miles into Suffolk, and in Boston kept in Goal, only
for contempt and high misdemeanors as our Mittimus specifies, and upon demand,
denied the privilege of an Habeas Corpus, and from Prison over ruled to answer
at a Court of Oyer and Terminer in Boston aforesaid. Our Judges were Mr Joseph
Dudley of Roxbury in Suffolk in New England, Mr. Stoughton of Dorchester, John
Usher of Boston Treasurer and Edward Randolph. He that officiates as Clerk and
Attorney in the case is George Farwell.

The Jurors only twelve men and most of them (as is said) Non-freeholders of
any Land in the Colony, some of them Strangers and Foreigners, gathered up (as
we suppose) to serve the present turn. In our defense was pleaded the repeal of
the Law of Assessment upon the place. Also the Magna Charta of England, and the
Statute Laws that secure the Subjects Properties and Estates etc. To which was
replied by one of the Judges, the rest by silence assenting, that we must not
think the Laws of England follow us to the ends of the Earth, or whither we
went. And the same person ( John Wise abovesaid testifies) declared in open
Council upon examination of said Wise; Mr. Wise you have no more privileges
left you, than not to be sold for Slaves, and no man in Council contradicted.
By such Laws our Trial and Trouble began and ended. Mr. Dudleyaforesaid Chief
Judge, to close up the debate and trial, trims up a speech that pleased himself
(we suppose) more than the people. Among many other remarkable Passages, to
this purpose, he bespeaks the Jury's obedience, who (we suppose) were very well
preinclined. viz. I am glad, says he, there be so many worthy Gentlemen of the
Jury so capable to do the King service, and we expect a good Verdict from you,
seeing the matter has been so sufficiently proved against the Criminals. Note
the evidence in the case as to the substance of it, was that we too boldly
endeavored to persuade our selves we were English Men, and under privileges:
and that we were all six of us aforesaid at the Town meeting of Ipswich
aforesaid, and as the Witness supposed, we assented to the foresaid Vote, and
also that John Wise made a Speech at the same time, and said we had a good God,
and a good King, and should do well to stand for our Privileges. -- Jury
returns us all six guilty, being all involved in the same Information. We were
remanded from Verdict to Prison, and there kept one and twenty days for
Judgment. There with Mr. Dudley's approbation, as Judge Stoughton said, this
Sentence was passed, viz. John Wise suspended from the Ministerial Function
fine fifty pound money, pay cost, a thousand pound bond for the good behavior
one year.

John Appleton not to bear Office, fine 50 l. money, pay cost, a thousand pound
bond for the good behavior one year.

John Andrews not to bear Office, find 30 l. money, pay cost, five hundred
pound bond for the good behavior one year.

Robert Kinsman not to bear Office, fine twenty pound money, pay cost, five
hundred pound bond for the good behavior one year.

William Goodhue not to bear Office, fine twenty pound money, pay cost, five
hundred pound bond for the good behavior one year.

Thomas French not to bear Office, fine 15 l. Money, past cost, 500 l. bond for
the good behavior one year.

The Total Fees of this case upon one single Information demanded by Farewell
abovesaid amount to about a hundred and one pound seventeen shillings, who
demanded of us singly about sixteen pound nineteen shillings six pence, the
cost of Prosecution, the Fines added make up this, viz. Two hundred eighty and
six pounds seventeen shillings money.

Summa Totalis 286 l. 17 s.

To all which we may add a large account of other Fees of Messengers, Prison
charges, Money for Bonds and Transcripts of Records, exhausted by those ill men
one way and another to the value of three or fourscore pounds, besides our
expense of time and imprisonment.

We judge the Total charge for one Case and Trial under one single Information
involving us six men abovesaid in expense of Time and Moneys of us and our
Relations for our necessary Succor and Support to amount to more, but no less
than 400 l. Money.

Too tedious to illustrate more amply at this time, and so we conclude. John
Wise, John Andrews Senior, William Goodhue Junior, Thomas French, these four
persons named, and Robert Kinsman.

These four persons first named appeared the twentieth day of December, and
Robert Kinsman appeared the one and twentieth day of December, 1689. and gave
in their Testimony upon Oath before me Samuel Appleton Assistant for the Colony
of the Massachusetts in New England.
6. That those who were in confederacy with Sir E. A. for the enriching
themselves on the Ruins of New England, did Invade the Property as well as
Liberty of the subject, is in the next place to be cleared, and we trust will
be made out beyond dispute. When they little imagined that there should ever be
such a Revolution in England as that which by means of His Present Majesty this
Nation is Blessed with, they feared not to declare their Sentiments to the
inexpressible exasperation of the people whom they were then domineering over.
They gave out that now their Charter was gone, all their Lands were the Kings,
that themselves did Represent the King, and that therefore Men that would have
any Legal Title to their Lands must take Patents of them, on such Terms as they
should see meet to impose. What people that had the Spirits of Englishmen,
could endure this? That when they had at Vast Charges of their own conquered a
Wilderness, and been in possession of their Estates Forty, nay Sixty years,
that now a parcel of Strangers, some of them indigent enough, must come and
inherit all that the people now in New England and their Fathers before them,
had labored for! Let the whole Nation judge, whether these Men were not
driving on a French design, and had not fairly Erected a French Government. And
that our Adversaries may not insult and say, these are words without proof, we
shall here subjoyn the Testimonies of the Reverend Mr. Higginson and several
other worthy Persons, given in upon Oath, concerning this matter --

Being called by those in present Authority to give my Testimony to the
Discourse between Sir Edmund Androsse and my self, when he came from the Indian
War, as he passed through Salem going for Boston in March 1688/9. I cannot
refuse it, and therefore declare as follows, what was the substance of that
Discourse. Sir Edmund Androsse then Governor being accompanied with the
Attorney General Graham, Secretary West, Judge Palmer, the Room being also full
of other people, most of them his Attendants, he was pleased to tell me, he
would have my judgment about this question; Whether all the Lands in
New England were not the Kings? I told him I was surprised with such a
question, and was not willing to speak to it, that being a Minister, if it was
a question about a matter of Religion, I should not be averse, but this being a
State matter, I did not look upon it as proper for me to declare my mind in it,
therefore entreated again and again that I might be excused. Sir E. A. replied
and urged me with much importunity, saying, Because you are a Minister,
therefore we desire to know your judgment in it, then I told him, if I must
speak to it, I would only speak as a Minister from Scripture and Reason, not
meddling with the Law. He said, the Kings Attorney was present there to inform
what was Law. I then said, I did not understand that the Lands of N. E. were
the Kings, but the Kings Subjects, who had for more than Sixty years had the
possession and use of them by a twofold right warranted by the Word of God. 1.
By a right of just Occupation from the Grand Charter in Genesis 1st and 9th
Chapters, whereby God gave the Earth to the Sons of Adam, and Noah to be
subdued and replenished. 2. By a right of purchase from the Indians, who were
Native Inhabitants, and had possession of the Land before the English came
hither, and that having lived here Sixty years, I did certainly know that from
the beginning of these Plantations our Fathers entered upon the Land, partly as
a Wilderness and Vacuum Domicilium, and partly by the consent of the Indians,
and therefore care was taken to Treat with them, and to gain their consent,
giving them such a valuable consideration as was to their satisfaction, and
this I told them I had the more certain knowledge of, because having learned
the Indian Language in my younger time, I was at several times made use of by
the Government, and by diverse particular Plantations as an Interpreter in
Treating with the Indians about their Lands, which being done and agreed on,
the several Townships and proportions of Lands of particular Men were ordered,
and settled by the Government of the Country, and therefore I did believe that
the Lands of New England were the Subjects Properties, and not the Kings Lands.
Sir E. A. and the rest replied, That the Lands were the Kings, and that he gave
the Lands within such limits to his Subjects by a Charter upon such conditions
as were not performed, and therefore all the Lands of New England have returned
to the King, and that the Attorney General then present could tell what was
Law, who spoke diverse things to the same purpose as Sir E. A. had done,
slighting what I had said, and vilifying the Indian Title, saying, They were
Brutes, etc. and if we had possessed and used the Land, they said we were the
Kings Subjects, and what Lands the Kings Subjects have, they are the Kings, and
one of them used such an Expression, Wherever an Englishman sets his foot,
all that he has is the Kings, and more to the same purpose. I told them that
so far as I understood, we received only the right and power of Government from
the Kings Charter within such limits and bounds, but the right of the Land and
Soil we had received from God according to his Grand Charter to the Sons of
Adam and Noah, and with the consent of the Native Inhabitants as I had
expressed before. They still insisted on the Kings right to the Land as before,
whereupon I told them, I had heard it was a standing Principle in Law and
Reason: Nil dat qui non habet; and from thence I propounded this Argument; he
that has no right, can give no right to another, but the King had no right to
the Lands of America before the English came hither, therefore he could give no
right to them. I told them, I knew not of any that could be pleaded but from a
Popish Principle, that Christians have a right to the Lands of Heathen, upon
which the Pope as the Head of the Christians had given the West Indies to the
King of Spain, but this was disowned by all Protestants. Therefore I left it to
them to affirm and prove the kings Title. They replied and insisted much upon
that, that the King had a right by his Subjects coming and taking possession of
this Land. And at last Sir E. A. said with indignation, Either you are Subjects
or you are Rebels, intimating, as I understood him according to the whole scope
and tendency of his Speeches and Actions, that if we would not yield all the
Lands of N. E. to be the Kings, so as to take Patents for Lands, and to pay
Rent for the same, then we should not be accounted Subjects but Rebels, and
treated accordingly. There were many other various replies and answers on both
sides, but this is the sum and substance of that discourse --

John Higginson aged seventy four years. Stephen Seawall aged thirty two years.


John Higginson Minister in Salem personally appeared before me, Dec. 24. 1689.
and made Oath to the truth of the abovesaid Evidence --

John Hathorne Assistant.

Captain Stephen Seawall of Salem appeared before me, Dec. 24. 1689. and made
Oath to the truth of the abovesaid Evidence.

John Hathorne Assistant.

Joseph Lynde of Charles-towne in the County of Middlesex in N. E. being fifty
three years of age, testifies and says, That in the year 1687. Sir Edmund
Androsse then Governor of New England did inquire of him the said Lynde what
Title he had to his Lands, who showed him many Deeds for Land that he the said
Lynde possessed, and particularly for Land that the said Lynde was certainly
informed would quickly be given away from him, if he did not use means to
obtain a Patent for it. The Deed being considered by Sir E. A. he said, it was
worded well, and recorded according to N. E. custom or words to the same
purpose. He further enquired how the Title was derived he the said Lynde told
him, That he that he bought it of had it of his Father-in-law in Marriage with
his Wife, and his said Father from Charles-towne, and the said Town from the
General Court grant of the Massachusetts Buy, and also by purchase from the
Natives, and he said, my Title were nothing worth if that were all. At another
time after showing him an Indian Deed for Land, he said, that their hand was no
more worth than a scratch with a Bears paw, undervaluing all my Titles, though
every way legal under our former Charter Government. I then petitioned for a
Patent for my whole Estate, but Mr. West Deputy Secretary told me, I must have
so many Patents as there were Counties that I had parcels of Land in, if not
Towns, finding the thing so chargeable and difficult I delayed, upon which I
had a Writ of Intrusion served upon me in the beginning of the Summer 1688. the
Copy whereof is in Charles-towne's Men's complaint, and was at the same time
with that of Mr. James Russel's, Mr. Seawall's, and Mr. Shrimpton's, it being
for the same Land in part that I showed my Title unto Sir E. A. as above, being
my self and those I derived it from possessed, enclosed, and improved for about
Fifty years, at which time I gave Mr. Graham Attorney General three pounds in
Money, promising that if he would let the Action fall I would pay Court
charges, and give him Ten pound when I had a Patent completed for that small
parcel of Land, that said Writ was served upon me for, which I did because a
Quaker that had the promise of it from the Governor, as I was informed in the
Governors presence should not have it from me, the said Lynde, having about
seven Acres more in the same common Field or Pasture, about a Mile from this
forty nine Acres near unto the Land that the said Governor gave unto Mr.
Charles Lidget, of diverse of my Neighbors, which I concluded must go the same
way that theirs went, and therefore though desired to be patented by the said
Lynde with the forty nine Acres, he could not obtain a Grant for it. About the
same time Mr. Graham Attorney General asked the said Lynde what he would do
about the rest of his Land, telling him the said Lynde that he would meet with
the like trouble about all the rest of his Lands that he possessed, and were it
not for the Governors going to New York at this time, there would be a Writ of
Intrusion against every Man in the Colony of any considerable Estate, or as
many as a Cart could hold, and for the poorer sort of people said Sir E. A.
would take other measures, or words to the same purpose. The said Lynde further
says, That after Judgments obtained for small wrongs done him, tryable by
their own Laws before a Justice of the Peace, from whom they allowed no Appeals
in small Causes: he was forced out of his own County by Writs of false
Judgment; and although at the first superior Court in Suffolk, the thing was
so far opposed by Judge Stoughton as illegal, as that it was put by, yet the
next Term by Judge Dudley and Judge Palmer, the said Lynde was forced to answer
George Farewell Attorney aforesaid, then saying in open Court in Charlestown,
that all Causes must be brought to Boston in Suffolk, because there was not
honest men enough in Middlsex to make a Jury to serve their turns, or words to
that purpose; nor did Suffolk, as appeared by their practice, for they made use
of Non-Residents in diverse cases there. I mention not my damage, though it is
great, but to the truth above-written I the said Lynde do set to my hand --

Joseph Lynde.
Boston the 14th of January, 16^^.
Juratus coram me John Smith Assistant.

And that the practices of these men have been according to their Principles,
destructive to the Property of the subject, is now to to be declared. It is a
thing too well known to be denied, that some of Sir Edmunds Council begged (if
they had not had secret encouragement no man believes that they would have done
so) those Lands which are called The Commons belonging to several Townships,
whereby Plymouth, Lyn, Cambridge, Road Island, etc. would have been ruinated,
had these men's Projects taken effect. And not only the Commons belonging to
Towns, but those Lands which were the Property of several particular persons in
Charlestown, were granted from them. And Writs of Intrusion were issued out
against Coll. Shrimpton, Mr. Samuel Seawall, and we know not how many more
besides, That their Lands might be taken from them, under pretense of belonging
to King James. And Island in the possession of John Pittome anciently
appropriated to the maintenance of a Free School, was in this way seized. How
such men can clear themselves from the guilt of Sacrilegious Oppression, they
had best consider. Mr. Palmer swaggers and hectors at a strange rate; for he
has these words, ( p. 29.) I should be glad to see that man who would
hare-faced instance in one particular grant of any man's Right or Possession
passed by Sir E. A. during his Government. -- And what if we will show him the
men, that dare affirm as much or more than that? what will he do? Me me adsum
qui feci, in me convertite Ferrum.


We will produce those that have said (and sworn as much as all this comes to.
For John Pittome has upon Oath declared, That James Sherlock, Sir Edmunds
Sheriff, came on Dear Island on the 28th of January 1688. and turned him and
his Family afloat on the Water when it was a snowy day, although he was Tenant
there to Coll. Shrimpton, and that the said Sherlock put two men (whom he
brought with him) into possession of the said Island (as he said) on behalf of
King James the Second. Let him also know, that Mr. Shepard and Mr. Burri^ of
Lyn, and James Russell Esquire of Charles-towne in New England have declared upon
Oath as follows.

Jeremiah Shepard Aged forty two years and John Burril aged fifty seven years,
we whose names are subscribed being made choice of by the Inhabitants of the
Town of Lyn in the Massachusetts Colony in New England to maintain their right
to their properties and I ands invaded by Sir Edmund Androsse Governor, we do
testify that (besides Sir Edmund Androsse his unreasonable demands of Money by
way of Texation, and that without an assembly, and Deputies sent from our Town
according to ancient custom, for the raising of Money or levying of Rates) our
Properties, our honest and just and true Titles to our Land were also invaded,
and particularly a great and considerable tract of Land called by the name of
the Nahants, the only secure place for the Grazing of some thousands of our
Sheep, and without which our Inhabitants could neither provide for their own
Families, nor be capacited to pay dues or duties for the maintenance of the
public, but (if dispossessed of) the Town must needs be impoverished, ruined,
and rendered miserable, yet this very tract of Land being Petitioned for by
Edward Randolph, was threatened to be rent out of our hands, notwithstanding our
honest and just Pleas for our right to the said Land, both by alienation of the
said Land to us from the Original Proprietors the Natives, to whom we paid our
Moneys by way of purchase, and notwithstanding near fifty years peaceable and
quiet possession and improvement, and also enclosure of the said Land by a
Stone Wall, in which tract of Land also two of our Patentees were interested in
common with us, viz. Major Humphreys, and Mr. Johnson, yet Edward Randolph
Petitioning for the said Land, Sir Edmund the Governor did so far comply with
his unreasonable motion, that we were put to great charges and expenses for the
Vindication of our honest rights thereto, and being often before the Governor
Sir Edmund and his Council for relief, yet could find no favor of our innocent
cause by Sir Edmund, notwithstanding our Pleas of Purchase, ancient Possession,
Improvement, Enclosure, Grant of the General Court, and our necessitous
condition, yet he told us all these Pleas were insignificant, and we could have
no true Title unless we could produce a Patent from the King, neither had any
person a right to one foot of Land in N. E. by virtue of Purchase, Possession
or Grant of Courts, but if we would have assurance of our Lands, we must go to
the King for it, and get Patents of it. Finding no relief (and the Governor
having prohibited Town Meetings, we earnestly desired Liberty for our Town to
meet, to consult what to do in so difficult a case and exigency, but could not
prevail. Sir Edmund angrily telling us that there was no such thing as a Town
in the Country, neither should we have Liberty so to meet, neither were our
Ancient Town Records (as he said) which we produced for the vindication of our
Titles to said Lands worth a Rush. Thus were we from time to time unreasonably
treated, our Properties, and civil Liberties and Privileges invaded, our
misery and ruin threatened and hastened, till such time as our Country groaning
under the unreasonble heavy Yoke of Sir Edmunds Government were constrained
forcibly to recover our Liberties and Privileges.

Jeremiah Shepard. John Burril.
Jeremiah Shepard Minister, and John Burril Lieutenant, both of Lin, personally
appeared before us, and made Oath to the truth of this Evidence, Salem. Feb. 3.
1689/90.

Assistants. John Hathorn. Jonathan Corwin.



James Russel Esquire on the behalf of the Proprietors of the stinted Pasture in
Charlestown, and o^ his own personal account, declares as follows.

That notwithstanding the answer made to Sir E. A. his demand by some Gentlemen
of Charlestown on the behalf of the Proprietors, which they judged
satisfactory, or at least they should have a further hearing and opportunity to
make out their Rights, there was laid out to Mr. Lidget adjoining to his Farm
in Charlestown a considerable tract of Land (as it is said one hundred and
fifty Acres) which was of considerable value, and did belong to diverse persons,
which when it was laid out by Mr. Wells there were diverse bound marks showed by
the Proprietors, and some of them, and I had Petitioned for a Patent for my
particular Propriety, yet the whole tract was laid out to the said Lidget, who
not only did cut down Wood thereon, without the right owners consent, but
Arrested some for cutting their own Wood, and so they were deprived of any
means to use or enjoy their own Land. And notwithstanding there was about
twenty Acres of Pasture Land and Meadow taken from the said Russel, and given
to Mr. Lidget, yet afterward there was a Writ of Intrusion served upon a small
Farm belonging unto the said Russel, unto which the aforesaid Pasture Land did
belong, and had been long improved by Patrick Mark his Tenant, (and others good
part thereof) above fifty years, so that to stop Prosecution, the said Russell
was forced to Petition for a Patent, he having a Tenant who was feared would
comply in any thing that might have been to his prejudice, and so his Land
would have been condemned under color of Law, and given away as well as his
Pastorage was without Law. Further the said Russel complains, that he having an
Island in Cascobay, called Long Island, which his honored Father long since
bought of Mr. Walker, and was confirmed to James Russell by the General Court,
and improved several years by Captain Davis, by mowing as Tenant to the said
Russell, and the said Russell hearing it was like to be begged away, caused his
Writ to be entered in the Public Records in Mr. West's Office, which he paid
for the Recording of; notwithstanding Sir E. A. ordered Capt. elements (as he
said) to survey the same, and he showed me a Plat thereof, and said, If I had a
Patent for it, I must pay three pence per Acre, it being 650 Acres. He was
further informed, That if the said Russell would not take a Patent for for it,
Mr. Usher should have it --

Per James Russell.

Jan. 30. 1689/90. James Russell Esquire personally appeared before me, and made
Oath to the truth of what is before written.

William Johnson Assistant.

Had not an happy Revolution happened in England, and so in New England, in all
probability those few ill men would have squeezed more out of the poorer sort
of people there, than half their Estates are worth, by forcing them to take
Patents. Major Smith can tell them, that an Estate not worth 200 l. had more
than 50 l. demanded for a Patent for it. And if their boldness and madness
would carry them out to oppress the Rich after such a manner as has been
showed, what might the Poor look for? Nevertheless, their Tyranny was beyond
any thing that has been as yet expressed: For if men were willing to bring
their Titles to their Possessions to a Legal Trial, they were not only
threatened, but fined and persecuted, and used with barbarous Cruelty. When some
Gentlemen in Boston resolved in a Legal way to defend their Title to an Island
there, Sir Edmund's Attorney threatened that it might cost them all that they
are worth, and something besides, as appears by the following Affidavit.

The Deposition of Captain Daniel Turel, and Lieutenant Edward Willis Sworn
say, That upon a Writ of Intrusion being served on Deer-Island belonging to the
Town of Boston, and let unto Colonel Samuel Shrimpton by the Select Men of the
said Town, the Rent whereof being of long time appropriated toward the
maintenance of a Free School in the Town, we the Deponents two of the select
Men of the said Town, do testify, That meeting with Mr. James Graham upon the
Townhouse, and telling him, that if Colonel Shrimpton did decline to personate
the case of the said Island, we the select Men would. The said Graham said, Are
you the Men that will stand Suit against the King? We the Deponents told him we
would answer in behalf of the Town. The said Graham replied, There was no Town
of Boston, nor was there any Town in the Country; we made answer we were a
Town, and owned so to be by Sir Edmund Androsse Governor, in the Warrant sent
us for the making a Rate; then the said Graham told us, We might stand the
Trial if we would, but bid us have a care what we did, saying, it might cost us
all we were worth, and something else too, for ought he knew, and further these
Deponents say not --

Jan. 30. 1689. Daniel Turel. Edward Willis.


Captain Daniel Turel and Lieutenant Edward Willis appeared personally before
me, and made Oath to the truth of what is above written.

William Johnson Assistant.

One of Sir Edmund's Council and Creatures, Petitioned for an Island belonging
to the Town of Plymouth; and because the Agents of the said Town obtained a
voluntary Subscription from the Persons concerned to bear the charge of the
Suit; they were treated as Criminals, and against all Law, Illegally compelled
to answer in another County, and not that where the pretended Misdemeanors
were committed. And Mr. Wiswall the Minister of Duxbury having at the desire of
some concerned transcribed a Writing which tended to clear the right they had
to the Island in Controversy, and also concerning the abovesaid voluntary
Subscription, both Transcribed in the Winter 1687. A Messenger was sent to
bring him to Boston on the 21th June 1688. he was then lame in both Feet with
the Gout, fitter for a Bed than a Journey, therefore wrote to the Governor,
praying that he might be excused until he should be able to Travel, and engaged
that then he would attend any Court, but the next Week the cruel Officer by an
Express Order from Sir E. A. forced him to Ride in that condition, being shod
with Clouts instead of Shoes; and when he came before the Council he was there
made to stand till the anguish of his Feet and Shoulders had almost overcome
him; after he was dismissed from the Council, the Messenger came and told him,
he must go to Goal, or enter into Bonds for his appearance at the next Superior
Court held in Boston, and pay down 4 l. 2 s. in Silver. His Sickness forced him
to decline a Prison, and to pay the Money. At the next Superior Court he
appeared in the same Lame and Sick condition, and the extremity of the Weather
cast him into such a violent Fit of Sickness, that he was in the judgment of
others nigh unto death, and he himself thought that he should soon be out of
their Bonds, and at liberty to lay his Information against his Oppressors
before the Righteous Judge of the whole World. After all this having been
forced a third time out of his own County and Colony near Forty Miles, he was
delivered from the Hands and Humors of his Tyrannical Oppressors, who had
exposed him to great difficulties, charges, and to 228 Miles Travel in
Journeying to and from Boston, directly opposite to the place where he ought to
have been tried, had he been guilty of any of the pretended Misdemeanors, none
of which his worst Enemies ever had the Face to read in open Court, or openly
to charge him with to this day. Now shall such Men as these talk of Barbarous
Usage who have themselves been so Inhumane?

Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes! 7. As for Sir E. A. his
supplying the Indians with Ammunition in the time of actual War with them, the
following Testimonies confirmed the people of N. E. in the belief of it.

Lenox Beverley aged about twenty five years being Sworn, says, That he being
Soldier at Pemyquid the Winter time 1688. where was Captain General Sir E. A.
Knight, there came to the Fort where Sir E. A. then was, two Squaws, the one
Madocowandos Sister, and the other Moxis Wise (as was said,) and two other
Indian Women that went along with them; they were in the Fort with Sir Edmund
two days, and when they came forth they seemed to be half drunk, this Deponent
and Peter Ripley was commanded to Guard these Squaws from Pemyquid to New
Harbor, being in distance about two Miles, and as we passed on the way
Madocowandos Sister laid down her Burden in the Snow and commanded the Deponent
to take it up, whereupon the Deponent looked into the Basket, and saw a small
Bag which he opened, and found it to be Gunpowder, which he judged five pounds
weight, and a Bag of Bullets of a greater weight and the weight of the Basket I
took up, was as much as the Deponent could well carry along, and the other
three Squaws had each one of them their Baskets, which appeared rather to be of
greater than lesser burden, than that the Deponent carried, which were all of
them laden, and brought out of the Fort, and Madocowandos Sister said she had
that Powder of Sir Edmund, and added, that she was to come again to him within
four days --

Boston, Aug. 17. 1689. Sworn in Council. Attests Is. Addington Secretary.
Lenox X Beverley his mark.

Gabriel Wood of Beverly aged about twenty four years, testifies, That being
one of the Soldiers that was out the last Winter past, Anno 1688. in the
Eastward parts, and under the command of Sir Edmund Androsse, and being then at
Pemyquid with him, was commanded by him the said Sir E. together with so many
more of the Soldiers as made up two Files to Guard and safely Conduct three
Indian Women from Pemyquid aforesaid to New Harbor, which said Indian Women
were all laden, and to my certain knowledge one of the said Women had with her
in her said Journey a considerable quantity of Bullets, which she brought with
her from Pemyquid aforesaid, and to my best apprehension, she had also a
considerable quantity of Powder in a Bag in her Basket, but I did not see that
opened, as I did see the Bullets, neither dared I be very inquisitive, the rest
of the Soldiers in company with me seeing the Indians so supplied with
Ammunition (as we all apprehended they were by our Governor and Captain
General Sir E. A. aforesaid) we did very much question amongst our selves,
whether the said Sir E. did not intend the destruction of our Army, and brought
us thither to be a Sacrifice to our Heathen Adversaries --

The mark of Gabriel
[A] Wood.
Gabriel Wood of Beverley in the County of Essex, personally appeared before me
at Salem in N. E. Jan. 29. 1689/90. and made Oath to the Truth of the above
said Evidence.

John Hatherne
Assistant.
8. That the Indians declared they were encouraged by Sir E. A. to make War
upon the English, is most certainly true, although the Lying Author of that
Scandalous Pamphlet, called New-Englands Faction discovered, has the impudence
to say, that it is certainly false. Two Indians, Waterman and David, testify
that the Maquas Indians sent a Messenger to Pennicock, to inform that Sir E. A.
had been tampering to engage them to fight against the English. Another Indian
called Solomon Thomas, affirmed, that Sir Edmund gave him a Book, and that he
said that Book was better than the Bible, that it had in it the Picture of the
Virgin Mary, and that when they should fight at the Eastward, Sir Edmund would
sit in his Wigwam, and say, O brave Indians! Another Indian named Joseph (who
was in hostility against the English) bragged that the Governor had more love
for them than for the English. Another Indian named John James, did of his own
voluntary mind declare to several in Sudbury, that Sir E. A. had hired the
Indians to kill the English: The men to whom he thus expressed himself,
reproved him, and told him that they believed he belied Sir E. A. and therefore
they secured him, and complained to a Justice of Peace, by which means he was
brought to Boston, but Sir E. instead of punishing, was kind to the Indian,
when as both the Justice and the Sudbury man had (to use Mr. Palmers phrase)
horrible usage, by means whereof an Alarm and Terror ran through the Country,
fearing some mischievous design against them. That this Relation is not a
feigned story, the ensuing Testimonies make to appear.

The Testimony of Waterman, and David, Indians, says, That the Maquas sent a
Messenger to Pennicock to inform, that Governor Edmund Androsse hired the
Maquas to fight the English, and paid down to them one Bushel of white Wompon,
and one Bushel of black Wompon, and three Cartloads of Merchants goods,
trucking Cloth and Cotton Cloth, and Shirt Cloth, and other goods. The
Maquas said, That the English were their good Friends: and said, they would not
fight them, for the English never wronged them, but the Maquas took the pay on
account of the Maquas helping the English to fight their Enemies the last War.

Witness our hands David's X mark. Watermans Q mark.

Test. Cornclius Waldo senior, Moses Parker, Thomas Read.


The two Indians abovementioned Waterman and David, appeared the 4th day, of
May 1689. and to the Council then fitting owned the above-written to be truth;

Isa. Addington Secretary.

Rochester in the King's Province, Sept. 16. 1688. Samuel Eldred junior of
Rochester came before Arthur Fenner and John Fones Esquire two of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace, and did declare upon Oath, that on the Evening before an
Indian whom he had seized, by name Joseph, did in an insulting and vaunting
manner say, There was 500 at Martins Vineyard, 700 at Nantucket, and 400 at
Chappaquessot, all very well armed, and in a better manner than him the said
Samuel Eldred, and that our Governor did not dare to disarm them, for that the
Governor had more love for them, the said Indians, than for His Majesty's
Subjects the English. The said Indian being brought before us, and examined,
did confess the greatest part of what was sworn against him, and owned that he
was one of them that were in hostility against the English in the late Wars,
upon which the said Indian was committed to Gaol.

Per Arthur Fenner, John Fones.


The Testimony of Joseph Graves aged 46 years or thereabout, and Mary Graves
about 30 years, of John Rutter aged about 40 years, witness that on the 2d day
of January 1688. Solomon Thomas Indian, being at the house of Joseph Graves, in
the Town of Sudbury, said, that when the Fight at the Eastward should be, if
the Indians had the better of it, as the English did retreat, the Friend
Indians were to shoot them down, but if the English get the day, we say
nothing, and that in the Spring French and Irish would come to Boston, as many,
and all won Indians, for that was the first place that was to be destroyed, and
after that the Country Towns would be all won nothing. And further, the said
Solomon said, that the Governor had given him a Book, which said Governor
said, was better than the Bible, and all that would not turn to the Governors
Religion, and own that Book, should be destroyed. In which Book he the said
Thomas said was the Picture of our Savior, and of the Virgin Mary, and of the
Twelve Apostles; and the Governor said, when we pray, we pray to the Virgin
Mary; and when the Fight should be at the Eastward, the Governor would sit in
his Wigwam, and say, O brave Indians! Whereupon John Rutter told the Indian,
that he deserved to be hanged for speaking such things, but the Indian replied,
it was all true. Upon the hearing this discourse, we resolved to come to
Boston, and acquaint Authority with it, but by reason of the sickness of Jos.
Graves, we could not presently, but as soon as conveniently we could, we
accordingly appeared at Boston with our Information, which the said Joseph
Graves carried to Mr. Bullivant a Justice of the Peace.

Joseph Graves, John X Rutler signum. Mary Y Graves mark.


Boston, Jan. 28. 1689. Joseph and Mary Graves came and made Oath to the truth
above-written,

Before me William Johnson Assistant

That when the English secured some of the Indians mentioned, and brought them
before Sir E. A. Justices, they were basely and barbarously used for their
pains, the following Affidavits show.

Sudbury in New England, March 22. 1688/9. Thomas Brown aged about Forty four
years, and John Goodenow aged about Fifty four years, John Growt senior, aged
near Seventy years, Jacob Moore aged about 44 years, Jonathan Stanhope, aged
about 57 years, and John Parmiter aged about 50 years, all Inhabitants of the
Town of Sudbury aforesaid, do witness that we heard John James, Indian, of his
own voluntary mind, say, That the Governor was a Rogue, and had hired the
Indians to kill the English, and in particular, had hired, Wohawhy to kill
Englishmen, and that the Governor had given the said Wohawhy a gold Ring,
which was his Commission, which gold Ring the said Wohawhy sold to Jonathan
Prescott for two shillings in money: Whereupon we replied, Sirrah, you deserve
to be hanged for what you say. John James the Indian replied, What you Papist,
all one Governor. I speak it before Governors very face. This discourse of
John James Indian, was at the place, and on the day above-written.

Thomas Brown, John Goodenow, Jacob Moore, Jonathan Stanhope, John Parmiter.


Thomas Brown and John Goodenow, two of the Subscribers above, having received
this Declaration from John James the Indian, we thought it our duty forthwith
to inform Authority, and did with the Indian presently go to Water-town to
Justice Bond where the said John James did voluntarily give his Testimony
before the said Justice Bond, which after he had taken, the said Justice Bond
ordered us the said Thomas Brown and John Goodenow to make our appearance
before the Governor Sir. E. A. or one of the Council with the Indian, which
accordingly we did, when we came to the Governors house; after long waiting in
a very wet and cold season, we were admitted unto the Governors presence,
where we were detained until eleven or twelve a Clock at night, and after a
very unkind Treat, we humbly prayed his Excellency, he would please to
discharge us of the Indian, but he told us no, and joaked us, saying, we were a
couple of brave men, and had the command, one of a Troop of Horse, and the
other a Company of Foot, and could we not know what to do with a poor Indian?
Further, he asked us what money we gave the Indian to tell us such news, and
commanded us still to take care of the Indian till his pleasure was to call for
us again, and this as we would answer it. Thus being severely chidden out of
his presence, we were forced with the Indian to seek our quarters where we
could find them. The next morning we were preparing to go home again to Sudbury
(being 20 miles or more) being Saturday, we were again sent for by the
Governor by a Messenger, to wait on the Governor with the Indian, which we
did, and waited at the Exchange or Council-house in Boston, from nine a Clock
in the morning till three of the Clock in the afternoon, where in the face of
the Country we were made to wait upon the Indian with many squibs and scoffs
that we met withal; at last we were commanded up before the Governor and his
Council, where we were examined apart over and over, and about the Sunsetting
were granted leave to go home, it being the Evening before the Sabbath.

Thomas Brown, John Goodenow.


On Monday Morning following being the 25th of March. 1689. Jacob Moore, Joseph
Graves, Joseph Curtis, Joseph Moore, Obadiah Ward, were by Thomas Larkin as a
Messenger fetched down to Boston, where after Examination, Jacob Moore was
committed to close Prison. Joseph Moore, Joseph Graves, Joseph Curtis, and
Obadiah Ward were sent home again, paying the said Larkin twelve shillings per
Man. On the next Monday Morning after, being the first day of April 1689.
Samuel Gookin the Sheriff of Middlesex and his Deputy came up to Sudbury, and
commanded Thomas Brown, John Goodenow Senior, John Growt Senior, Jonathan
Stanhope, John Parmiter, forthwith to appear at Boston, at Colonel Page's
House, but it being a Wet and Cold Day, we were detained at Judge Dudleys house
at Roxbury, where after long waiting, had the kindness shown us, to have an
examination every man apart before Judge Dudley, Judge Stoughton, Mr. Graham
and others, and were bound over to answer at the next Superior Court to be
held at Boston, what should there be objected against us upon his Majesty's
account. Thomas Brown, John Goodenow Senior, John Growt Senior, were each of
them bound over in three hundred pound Bonds, and each man two sureties in
three hundred pound Bond a piece. John Parmiter and Jonathan Stanhope, were
bound in a hundred pound a piece, besides the loss of our time and hindrance of
our Business, the reproach and ignominy of Bond and Imprisonment, we shall only
take the boldness to give a true account of what money we were forced to expend
out of our own Purses as follows, to the Sheriff and other necessary Charges.

l. s. d. Thomas Brown. 2 00 00 J. GoodenowSenior. 2 00 00 J. GrowtSenior. 0
10 00 J. RutterJunior. 3 05 00 J oseph Curtis. 0 17 00 1. s. d. J acob Moore. 3
00 00 J onathan Stanhope. 0 15 00 J ohn Parmiter. 0 15 00 J oseph Graves. 3 15
00

Boston the 21st. of December. 1689. J urat. cor. Issac Addington Assistant.
Thomas Brown. J ohn Goodenow. J acob Moore. J onathan Stanhope. J oseph
Curtis. J ohn Parmiter.


Although no man (...) accuse Sir Edmund merely upon Indian Testimony, yet let it
be duly weighed (the premises considered) whether it might not create suspicion
and an astonishment in the People of New England, in that he did not punish the
Indians who thus charged him, but the English who complained of them for it.
And it is certain, that some very good and wise men in New England do verily
believe that he was deeply guilty in this matter, especially considering what
might pass between him and Hope Hood an Indian, concerning which Mr. Thomas
Dantforth the present Deputy Governor at Boston in New England, in a Letter
bearing date April I. 1690. writes thus --

The Commander in chief of those that made this spoil ( i.e.) the spoil which
was made in the Province of Maine on the 18th of March last, is Hope Hood an
Indian, one that was with sundry other Indians in the summer 1688 seized by
some of Sir Edmunds Justices and Commanders in the Province of Maine, and sent
Prisoners to Boston, Sir E. being then at the Westward, where he continued
absent many weeks; upon his return finding the Indians in Prison, fell into a
great rage against those Gentlemen that had acted therein, declared his
resolution to set them at liberty and calling his Council together, was by some
opposed therein, and among others, one Gentleman of the Council accused this
Hope Hood to be a bloody Rogue, and added that he the said Hope Hood, had
threatened his Life, and therefore prayed Sir E. that he might not be enlarged,
but Sir E. made a flout and scorn of all that could be said. At the same time
some of the Council desired Sir E. that this Hope Hood might be sent for before
the Council, to which he replied, that he never had had a quarter of an hours
conference with any of them, and that he scorned to discourse with any Heathen
of them all, yet all this notwithstanding, at the same time whilst the Council
was thus met, did Sir Edmund privately withdraw himself, and repair to the
Prison where this Hope Hood was Prisoner, and did there continue with him two
or three hours in private, the truth of what is above related is attested by
sundry Gentlemen that were of Sir Edmunds Council, and were then Ear Witnesses
and likewise by others that saw Sir E. at the Prison; and it is now verily
believed that at that very time he consulted the mischief that is now acted by
the said Hope Hood and Company.


Thus Mr. Dantforth.

9. That Sir Edmund Androsse discountenanced making defense against the
Indians, is complained of by five Gentlemen who were of his Council, and much
concerned at his strange actings in that matter as in the account annexed to
this Apology is to be seen. It is also confirmed by the Affidavits of two
honest men --

Henry Kerley aged about fifty seven years and Thomas How aged thirty five
years or thereabouts, both Inhabitants of the Town of Malborough, do both
testify that in the Fall of the year, 1688. When Sir Edmund Androsse came from
New York to Boston, sometime after the Indians had killed some English men at
North-field in New England, coming through our Town of Malborough, the said Sir
E. A. examined this Deponent Henry Kerley by what Order we did Fortify and
Garrison our Houses, I answered it was by order of Captain Nicholson, the said
Sir E. then said, he had no power so to do. He the said Sir E. examined what
Arms we made use of, and carried with us on the Watch, and what charge was
given us, answer was made by the Deponent, they carried Fire Arms, and the
charge was to keep a true Watch, to examine all we met with, and secure
suspicious persons that we met with, the said Sir E. said what if they will not
be secured, and what if you should kill them, answer was made by the Deponent,
that if we should kill them, we were in our way, then Mr. Randolph being there
in the company said, you are in the way to be hanged. Sir E. A. said further
that those persons that had left their Houses to dwell in Garrisons, if they
would not return, others should be put in that would live there.

Boston the 27th of December. 1689. Jur. Henry Kerley, and the 2d of Janu. 1689.
Jur. Thomas How. Cor. If. Addington. Assistant. Henry Kerley. Thomas How.


That Sir Edmunds High Sheriff was a Stranger in the Country, and one that had
no Estate there needs no proof, and that Strangers who had no Freehold, were
Impannelled for J urors is notoriously known. So it was in the case of the
Ipswich-men as has been noted, and when that Reverend person Mr. Charles
Morton, was causelessly and maliciously prosecuted, he was not only compelled to
answer (contrary to Law) in another County, and not in that wherein the good
Sermon they found fault with, was Preached, but that if possible, they might
give him a blow, there was summoned to serve as a Jury man, one J ohn Gibson no
Householder nor of any Estate or Credit, and one J ohn Levingsworth a
Bricklayer, who lived in another Colony two hundred Miles distance. When those
in Government will use such base Artifices as these to accomplish their
pernicious designs, how should any man's Estate or Life be secure under them?

11. That the persons objected against, were some of them guilty of great
extortion is manifest from what has been related, and may yet be further
proved, for (as by some instances we have already seen, and shall now hear
more) they compelled men to take Patents for their own Lands, which they, and
their Fathers before them, had quietly possessed till these covetous Creatures
became a Nuisance to the Country, and it may be none more Criminal, as to this
particular, than Mr. Palmer and Mr. West. -- A Friend of their own viz. Mr.
Randolph does in several of his Letters bitterly complain of them upon this
account. In a Letter of his of August the 25th 1687. he writes thus.

I believe all the Inhabitants in Boston will be forced to take Grants and
Confirmations of their Lands, as now intended, the Inhabitants of the Province
of Maine which will bring in vast profits to Mr. West, he taking what Fees he
pleases to demand. I shall always have a due Honor and Respect for his
Excellency, but I must buy his Favor at three or four hundred pound a year
loss. And in another to the same, J une 21. 1688. he has these words. I went
to one Shurte, TownClerk of Pemyquid to know what Leases were made lately, and
by whom, and for what quit Rent, he told me that above a year ago Captain
Palmer, and Mr. West produced to them a Commission from Colonel Dungan, to
dispose of all their Lands to whoever would take leases at five shillings the
hundred Acres quite Rent. They let there and at a place called Dartmouth twelve
or sixteen Miles distant from Pemyquid about one hundred and forty Leases, some
had eight hundred or ten hundred Acres, few less than a hundred, some but three
or four Acres, and all paid 2 l. 10. s. for passing their Grants of 100 Acres
of Wood Land, with twenty Acres of Marsh where ever it could be found, but this
bred a great mischief among the People; few or none have their Land measured or
marked, they were in haste, and got what they could, they had their Emissaries
amongst the poor people, and frighted them to take Grants, some came and
complained to the Governor, and prayed him to confirm their Rights, which he
refused to do, the Commission and whole proceeding being Illegal, having notice
they were to be under his Government, they resented it, but it served their
turn. The poor have been very much oppressed here, the Fort run all to ruin,
and wants a great deal to repair it, Captain Palmer and Mr. West laid out for
themselves such large lots, and Mr. Graham though not there, had a Child's
Portion, I think some have eight thousand or ten thousand Acres. I hear not of
one penny rent coming in to the King, from them who have their Grants confirmed
at York, and the five shillings an hundred Acres was only a Sham upon the
People: at our return we saw very good Land at Winter Harbor, enough to make
large settlements for many people. The Governor will have it first measured,
and then surveyed, and then will dispose of it for settlements, Mr. Graham and
his Family are settled at Boston, he is made Attorney General, and now the
Governor is safe in his New York Confidents, all others being Strangers to his
Council. 'Twas not well done of Palmer and West to tear all in pieces that was
settled and granted at Pemyquid by Sir E. that was the Scene where they placed
and displaced at pleasure and were as Arbitrary as the great Turk, Some of the
first setlers of that Eastern Country were denied Grants of their own Lands,
whilst these men have given the Improved Lands amongst themselves, of which I
suppose Mr. Hutchinson has complained. In another, May the 16th 1689. he says;
I must confess there have been ill men from New York who have too much studied
the disease of this people, and both in Courts and Councils, they have not been
treated well.


Thus does Edward Randolph, a Bird of the same Feather with themselves confess
the truth, as to this matter, concerning his Brother Palmer and West.

And that Oppressive Fees have been extorted by Indigent and Exacting Officers
is declared by Mr. Hinckley the present Governor of New-Plymouth in his
Narrative of the Grievances and Oppressions of Their Majesty's good Subjects in
the Colony of New-Plymouth in New England, by the Illegal and Arbitrary Actings
in the Late Government under Sir E. A. which Narrative is too large to be here
inserted, but it is possible it may be published by it self, whereby it will
appear that every corner in the Country did ring with complaints of the
Oppressions, and (to speak in Mr. Palmer's phrase) horrible Usages of these ill
Men. Some passages out of Mr. Hinckley's Narrative respecting this matter, we
shall here Transcribe, whose words are these which follow.

The Bill of Cost Taxed by Judge Palmer seems also to be the greatest Extortion
ever heard of before, as thrice twenty Shillings for three motions for Judgment
at the same Term, (and was it not their courtesy they did not move ten times
one after another at the same rate) and Taxed also, five pound for the Kings
Attorney, and one and twenty Shillings for the Judges, and ten Shillings for
the Sheriff, and other particulars as by the said Bill appears, and that
which makes it the greater Extortion is, that the whole Bill of Cost was
exacted of every one of them, which each of them must pay down, or be kept
Prisoners till they did, though all seven of them were jointly informed against
in one Information. Thus Mr. Hinckley.

The cry of poor Widows and Fatherless is gone up to Heaven against them on
this account; for the Probate of a Will and Letter of Administration above
fifty Shillings has been extorted out of the hands of the Poor, nay they have
been sometimes forced to pay more than four Pounds, when not much above a Crown
had been due. Let Andrew Sergeant and Joseph Quilter among many others speak if
this be not true, who were compelled to Travel Two Hundred Miles for the
Probate of a Will, and to pay the unreasonable and oppressive Fees complained
of --

Besides these things, under Sir Edmund's Government they had wicked ways to
extort Money when they pleased. Mr. William Coleman complains (and has given
his Oath accordingly) that upon the supposed hired Evidence of one Man he
sustained Forty Pound damage in his Estate. And there were complaints all over
the Country that Sir Edmund's Excise-men would pretend Sickness on the Road,
and get a Cup of Drink of the Hospitable People, but privately drop a piece of
Money, and afterward made Oath that they bought Drink at those Houses, for
which the Innocent Persons were fined most unreasonably, and which was extorted
from them, though these Villainies were declared and made known to those then in
Power. William Goodhue, James and Mary Dennis might be produced as Witnesses
hereof, with many more. Some of Sir Edmund's Creatures have said, That such
things as these made his Government to stink. Also John Hovey and others
complain of sustaining Ten Pound damages by the Extortion of Officers, though
never any thing (they could hear of) was charged upon them to this day, John
and Christopher Osgood complain of their being sent to Prison nine or ten days
without a Mittinius, or any thing laid to their charge, and that afterward
they were forced to pay excessive charges -- It would fill a Volume, if we
should produce and insert all the Affidavits which do confirm the truth of
these complaints.

In the time of that unhappy Government, if the Officers wanted Money, it was
but Seizing and Imprisoning the best Men in the Country for no fault in the
World, and the greedy Officers would hereby have Grist to their Mill. Thus was
Major Appleton dealt with. Thus Captain Bradstreet. Thus that worthy and
worshipful Gentleman Nathaniel Salsto^istal Esquire was served by them and
barbarously prosecuted, without any Information or Crime laid to his charge;
for he had done nothing worthy of Bonds, but it was the pleasure of Sir E. and
some others thus to abuse a Gentleman far more Honorably descended than
himself, and one concerned in the Government of N. E. before him, but (to his
Eternal Renown) one who refused to accept of an Illegal and Arbitrary
Commission, when in the Reign of the Late K. James it was offered to him --

We have now seen a whole Jury of complaints which concur in their Verdict
against Sir E. A. and his Confederates. Were these things to be heard upon the
place, where the Witnesses who gave in their Affidavits are resident, they
would amount to legal proof, as to every particular which was by the Agents of
the Massachusetts Colony in N. E. objected against Sir E. A. and others Seized
and Secured by the people there.

Moreover, there are other matters referring to Sir E. A. which caused great,
and almost Universal Jealousy of him. For, 1. His Commission was such as would
make any one believe that a Courtier in the time of the Late King James spoke
true, who said Sir E. A. was sent to New England on purpose to be a Plague to
the people there. For he with three or four more (none of them chosen by the
people, but rather by that Implacable Enemy who prosecuted the Quo Warranto' s
against their Charters, had power given them to make Laws, and raise what
Moneys they should think meet for the support of their own Government, and he
had power himself alone to send the best and most useful Men a Thousand Miles,
(and further if he would) out of the Country, and to Build Cities and Castles
(in the Air if he could) and demolish them again, and make the Purses of the
Poor people pay for it all. Such a Commission was an unsufferable grievance,
and no honest Englishman would ever have accepted of it, or acted by it --

Secondly Jealousies were augmented by his involving the Country in a War with
the Indians, by means whereof he has occasioned the Ruin of many Families and
Plantations; yea the Death, or Captivity of we know not how many Souls. For he
went (with the Rose Frigate, and violently seized, and took, and carried away,
in a time of peace all the Household Good; and Merchandises of Monsieur Casteen
a Frenchman at Penobscot who was Allied to the Indians, having Married the
Daughter of one of their Princes whom they call Sagamores or Sachems; and when
this was done, it was easy to foresee, and was generally concluded that the
French and Indians would soon be upon the English, as it quickly came to pass.
After the Flame was kindled, and Barbarous Outrages committed by the Indians,
Sir Edmund's managery was such as filled the Country with greater fears of an
horrid design. For Bloody Indians whom the English had secured, were not only
dismissed, but rather courted than punished by him.

3. It cannot be expressed what just and amazing fears surprised the People of
New England, when they had notice of the Late King James's being in France,
lest Sir E. A. whose Governor and Confident he was, should betray them into
the Power of the French King, other circumstances concurring to strengthen
these fears. The Mohawks and other Indians were in hostility against the
French, and it was very advantageous to the English Interest to have it so, but
Sir E. caused them to make a Peace with the French, whereby the French Interest
in those parts was strengthened, and the English weakened. Mr. Peter Reverdy (a
French Protestant) in his Memoirs concerning Sir E. A. complains of this.

After that Sir E. A. and his Accomplices were secured, such reports and
informations came to hand, as made New England admire the Divine Providence in
accomplishing what was done against the late Oppressors. They then saw the
persons from whom they suspected the greatest danger, were now incapable of
betraying them --

If an unaccountable Instinct and Resolution had not animated the Inhabitants
in and about Boston,to seize on those few men, the People there believe N. E.
would have been in the hands not of King William but King Lewis e're this day:
For in Sept. 1689. several Vessels belonging to N. E. were taken near Cansir in
America by some French Men of War. The Prisoners since at liberty, inform, that
the French told them, that there was a Fleet of Ships bound from France
directly for Boston in N. E. but some of them were taken by the English Ships
of War, and three or four of them lost at New Foundland, and that Sir E. A.
had sent to the French King for them to come over, and the Country should be
delivered up. And the Lieutenant of a Frenchman of War professed, that if Sir
E. A. had not been imprisoned, they would then have gone to Boston. This shows
what a good Opinion the French had of him, and such reports so testified made a
stranger impression on the spirits of the People throughout the Country: And
that the World may see we do not write Fictions of our own, the subsequent
Affidavits are produced and here inserted.

John Langford of Salem testifies, That he being in the Ketch Margaret of
Salem, Daniel Gygles Commander, they were taken by the French Ships off of
Tarbay in America near Cansir on Tuesday the 17th day of September last past,
and being put on board of the Admiral, viz. The Lumbuscado, and in the said
Ship carried a Prisoner to Port Royal, and then did hear several of the Company
on board the said Ship say, that they came directly from France, and that there
was ten or twelve Sail of them Ships of War that came in company together, but
some of them were taken upon the Coast of France, and some were lost since, and
that they were all bound directly for N. E. and that Sir E. A. late Governor
of N. E. had sent to the French King for them to come over, and the Country
should be delivered up into his hands, and that they expected that before they
should arrive, it would have been delivered into the hands of the French.

John Langford.

Benjamin Majory of Salem Jersey-man also testifies, That he being taken the
same day, and at the same place in the Ketch Diligence, Gilbert Peter's
Commander, as is abovesaid in the Evidence of John Langford, he heard the same
related, by several of the company on board the other French Ship of War that
was in company with the Lumbuscado; viz. The Frugum, so called, that there was
ten Sail of them came out directly from France together; that Sir E. A. late
Governor of N. E. had sent to the King of France for them to come over, and he
would deliver the Country into their hands, and that they were bound directly
for Boston in N. E. but had lost most of their Ships coming over.

The mark M of Benjamin Majery.

John Langford and Benjamin Majery both made Oath to the truth of these their
respective Evidences in Salem, November. 23. 1689.

Before me John Hathorne
Assistant.
Joshna Conant testifies, That he being Commander of the Ketch, Thomas, and
Mary of Salem, he was taken by three French Ships off from Tarbay, near Cansir,
upon Tuesday the 17th of September last, two of which were Ships of War, the
other a Merchant-man, and being put on board the Admiral, viz. the Lumbuscado,
and therein carried to Port Royal, a Prisoner, Mr. Mero told me that the French
on board told him, that there was ten Sail of them Ships of War came out in
company together from France, and that they came directly from France, and were
bound to Boston in N. E. and that Sir E. A. had sent to the French King for
them, and that the Country was to be delivered up into their hands; but having
lost several of their Ships in their Voyage, and hearing that Sir E. A. was
taken, and now in hold, should not proceed at present, but threatened what they
would do the next Summer.

Joshuah Conant.

Joshuah Conant personally appeared before me, and made Oath to the truth of
the abovesaid Evidence. Salem, November. the 23d. 1689.

John Hathorne Assistant.

Phillip Hilliard of Salem, Jersey-man testifies, That he was taken by the
French in a Ketch belonging to Salem; viz. The Thomas and Mary, Joshua Conant
Commander off from (...) near Cansir, this Autumn September. 17. and being
carried on board the Lumbuscado, did on board the said Ship hear several of the
company say, that there was about twelve Sail of them Ships of War, came out in
company together from France, and were bound directly for Boston in N. E. and
that Sir E. A. the late Governor there had sent into France for them to come
over.

The mark 8 of Phillip Hilliard.

Phillip Hilliard personally appeared before me, and made Oath to the truth of
the abovesaid Evidence. Salem, November. the 23. 1689.

John Hathorne Assistant.

James Cocks of Salem Mariner testifies, That he was taken by the French in
the Ketch Margaret of Salem, Daniel Gygles Commander on Tuesday the 17th of
September last past off from Tarbay near Canfir by two French Ships of War, who
had one Merchant-man in company with them, and he being carried on board their
Admiral, viz. the Lumbuscado, he there met with a man he had known in London,
one of the said Ships Company, who was a Biscay born, named Peter Goit, who
told him that there was thirteen Ships of them came out of France in company
together, and that they were bound directly for Boston in New England,
expecting that the Country was before, or would be at their coming delivered
up to the King of France, and told him, before they could get clear of the
Coast of France, several of their Ships were taken by the English Ships of War,
and the rest of their Fleet taken or dispersed and lost about New Foundland.

The mark SS of James Cocks.

James Cocks personally appeared before me, and made Oath to the truth of the
abovesaid Evidence. Salem, Nov. 23. 1689.

John Hathorne Assistant.

But as to one of the Crimes objected against Sir E. A. and his Arbitrary
Accomplices, Habemus confitentem reum. Mr. Palmer cannot deny but that they
levied moneys on the King's Subjects in New England, contrary to the
fundamentals of the English Government, which does not allow the imposition of
Taxes without a Parliament. The New-Englanders supposed that their late
Oppressors had been guilty of no less than a capital Crime by their raising
Money in such a way as they did; and we are assured that one of them after he
received, and before he acted by virtue of his illegal Commission from the Late
King, professed, that if ever he had an hand in raising a penny of Money
without an Assembly, his neck should go for it; and yet no man that we know of
had a deeper hand in it than this person had. But Mr. Palmer, for the
justification of this so soul a business, lays down several Positions which he
would have no man deny; One of his Positions is, That it is a fundamental Point
consented to by all Christian Nations, That the first discoverer of a Country
inhabited by Infidels, gives a right and dominion of that Country to the
Prince in whose service and employment the discoverers were sent. These are his
words, p. 17. We affirm, that this fundamental Point (as he calls it) is not a
Christian, but an unchristian Principle. It is controverted among the
Schoolmen, an dominium fundatur in gratid. Papists are (as Mr. Palmer is) for
the affirmative, but the Scripture teaches us to believe that (...) the Heathen
Nations, and the Sons of Adam, and not the Children of Israel only, have a
right to the Earth, and to the Inheritance which God has given them therein,
Deuteronomy. 32. 8. When Mr. Palmer has proved that Infidels are not the Sons of
Adam, we shall consent to his notion, that Christians may invade their Rights,
and take their Lands from them, and give them to whom they please, and that the
Pope may give all America to the King of Spain. But let him know, that the
first Planters in New England, had more of conscience and the fear of God in
them, than it seems Mr. Palmer has. For they were not willing to wrong the
Indians in their Properties; for which cause it was that they purchased from
the Natives their right to the Soil in that part of the World, notwithstanding
what right they had by virtue of their Charters from the Kings of England. Mr.
Palmer's Position is clearly against Jus Gentium and Jus Natural, which
instructs every man, Nemini injuriam facere. He that shall violently, and
without any just cause take from Infidels their Lands, where they plant, and by
which they subsist, does them manifest injury. And let us know of Mr. Palmer if
Christian Princes have power to dispose of the Lands belonging to Infidels in
the West Indies, whether they have the like Dominion over the Lands belonging
to the Infidels in the East Indies, and if these Infidels shall refuse to
consent that such Christians shall possess their Lands, that then they may
lawfully Vi and Armis expel or destroy them, as the Spaniards did! We may send
Mr. Palmer for further instruction in this point to Balaam's Ass, which
ingenuously acknowledged that her Master (though an Infidel) had a Property in,
and right of Dominion over her, Numb. 22. 30. But this Gentleman has some
other Assertions which he would have us take for postulata, and then we shall
be his Slaves without all peradventures. He tells us in page 17, 18, 19. that
the English Plantations (in particular New England) are no parts of the Empire
of England, but like Wales and Ireland, which were Conquered, and belong to the
Dominion of the Crown of England, and that therefore he that wears the Crown,
may set up Governments over them, which are Despotick and Absolute, without any
regard to Magna Charta, and that whereas in Barbados, Jamaica, Virginia, etc.
they have their Assemblies, that is only from the favor of the Prince, and not
that they could pretend Right to such Privileges of Englishmen.

And now we need no further discovery of the man. Could the people of N. E. who
are zealous for English Liberties ever endure it long, that such a person as
this should be made one of their Judges, that so by squeezing them, he might be
able to pay his Debts? And can any rational man believe, that persons of such
Principles did not Tyrannize over that people when once they had them in their
cruel Clutches, and could pretend the Authority of the late King James for what
they did? In our opinion Mr. Palmer has not done like a Wise man thus to
expose himself to the just resentments and indignation of all the English
Plantations. If ever it should be his chance to be amongst them again, what
could he expect but to be looked on as communis Hostis, when he thus openly
declares that they have no English Liberties belonging to them? -- That worthy
Gentleman Sir William Jones (who was Attorney General in the Reign of King
Charles the second) had certainly more understanding in the Law than Captain
Palmer, and yet Captain Palmer (we suppose) is not ignorant that when some
proposed, that Jamaica (and so the other Plantations) might be governed without
an Assembly, that excellent Attorney (not like Captain Palmer but like an
Englishman) told the then King, That he could no more Grant a Commission to
Levy Money on his Subjects there without their consent by an Assembly, than
they could discharge themselves from their Allegiance to the English Crown; and
what Englishmen in their right Wits will venture their Lives over the Seas to
enlarge the Kings Dominions, and to enrich and greaten the English Nation, if
all the reward they shall have for their cost and adventures shall be their
being deprived of English Liberties, and in the same condition with the Slaves
in France or in Turks! And if the Colonies of N. E. are not to be esteemed as
parts of England, why then were the Quo Warranto' s issued our against the
Government in Boston as belonging to Westminster in Middlesex! Are the English
there, like the Welsh and Irish a Conquered people? When Mr. Palmer has proved
that, he has said something. They have (through the Mercy of God) obtained
Conquests over many of their Enemies, both Indians and French, to the
Enlargement of the English Dominions. But except Mr. Palmer and the rest of
that Crew will say, That his and their domineering a while was a Conquest, they
were never yet a Conquered People. So that his alleging the case of Wales and
Ireland before English Liberties were granted to them, is an impertinent Story.
Besides, he forgets that there was an Original Contract between the King and
the first Planters in New England, the King promising them, if they at their
own cost and charge would subdue a Wilderness, and enlarge his Dominions, they
and their Posterity after them should enjoy such Privileges as are in their
Charters expressed, of which that of not having Taxes imposed on them without
their own consent was one. Mr. Palmer and his Brethren Oppressors will readily
reply, Their Charter was condemned. But he cannot think, that the Judgment
against their Charter made them cease to be Englishmen. And only the Colony of
the Massachusetts had their Charter condemned. And yet these Men Ventured to
Levy Moneys on the Kings Subjects in Connecticott Colony. For the which
Invasion of Liberty and Property they can never answer. Indeed they say the
Corporation of Connecticott surrendered their Charter. But who told them so? It
is certain, that no one belonging to the Government there, knows of any such
thing; and how their Oppressors should know that Connecticott made a Surrender
of their Charter when the Persons concerned know nothing of it, is very
strange. We can produce that written by the Secretary of that Colony with his
own Hand, and also Signed by the present Governor there, which declares the
contrary to what these Men (as untruly as boldly) affirm. Witness the words
following.

In the Second year of the Reign of King James the Second, we had a Quo
Warranto served upon us by Edward Randolph, requiring our appearance before His
Majesty's Courts in England, and although the time of our appearance was
elapsed before the serving of the said Quo Warranto, ^et we humbly petitioned
His Majesty for his Favor, and the continuance of our Charter with the
Privileges thereof. But we received no other favor but a second Quo Warranto,
and we well observing that the Charter of London and other considerable Cities
in England were condemned, and that the Charter of the Massachusetts had
undergone the like Fate, plainly saw what we might expect, yet we not judging
it good or lawful to be active in surrendering what had cost us so dear, nor to
be altogether silent, we empowered an Attorney to appear on our behalf, and to
present our Humble Address to His Majesty, but quickly upon it as Sir E. A.
informed us, he was empowered by His Majesty to Receive the Surrender of our
Charter, if we saw meet so to do, and us also to take under his Government.
Also Colonel Thomas Dungan His Majesty's Governor of NewYork, labored to gain
us over to his Government. We withstood all these motions, and in our
reiterated Addresses, we Petitioned His Majesty to continue us in the free and
full enjoyment of our Liberties and Properties, Civil and Sacred, according to
our Charter. We also Petitioned that if His Majesty should not see meet to
continue us as we were, but was resolved to annex us to some other Government;
we then desired that in as much as Boston had been our old Correspondents, and
a people whose Principles and Manners we had been acquainted with, we might
rather be annexed to Sir E. A. his Government, than to Colonel Dungans, which
choice of ours was taken for a resignation of our Charter, though that was
never intended by us for such, nor had it the Formalities in Law to make it
such. Yet Sir E. A. was Commissionated to take us under his Government,
pursuant to which about the end of October 1687. he with a Company of Gentlemen
and Granadeers to the number of Sixty or upwards came to Hartford the Chief
Seat of this Government, caused his Commission to be read, and declared our
Government to be dissolved, and put into Commission both Civil and Military
Officers throughout our Colony as he pleased. When he passed through the
principal parts thereof, the good people of the Colony though they were under a
great sense of the injuries sustained thereby, yet chose rather to be silent
and patient than to oppose, being indeed surprised into an involuntary
submission to an Arbitrary Power --

Hartford, June 13. 1689. Robert Treat Governor. John Allen Secretary.


Thus did Sir E. A. and his Creatures, who were deeply concerned in the Illegal
Actions of the Late Unhappy Reigns, contrary to the Laws of God and Men, commit
a Rape on a whole Colony; for which Violence it is hoped they may account, and
make reparation (if possible) to those many whose Properties as well as
Liberties have been Invaded by them --

Captain Palmer in the close of his partial account of N. E. entertains his
Readers with an harangue about the Sin of Rebellion, and misapplies several
Scriptures that so he might make the World believe that the people of N. E.
have been guilty of wicked Rebellion by their casting off the Arbitrary Power
of those ill men who invaded Liberty and Property to such an intolerable degree
as has been proved against them. But does he in sober sadness think, that if
when Wolves are got among Sheep in a Wilderness, the Shepherds and Principal
men there shall keep them from Ravening, that this is the Sin of Rebellion
condemned in the Scripture? How or by whose Authority our Lawyer comes to play
the Divine we know not. But since he has thought meet to take a Spiritual
Weapon into his hand, let him know that the Scripture speaks of a lawful and
good Rebellion, as well as of that which is unlawful. It is said of good
Hezekiah that the Rebelled against the King of Assyria and served him not, 2
Kings 18. 7. Indeed reviling Rabshakeh upbraided him, and said as in verse 20.
thou Rebellest (not unlike to Captain Palmer) saying to N. E. thou rebellest.
Hezekiahs predecessors had basely given away the Liberties of the people, and
submitted to the Arbitrary Power of the Assyrians, and therefore Hezekiah did
like a worthy Prince in casting off a Tyrannical Government, and asserting the
Liberty of them that were the Lords People, and God did signally own and
prosper him in what he did, and would never permit the Assyrian to regain his
Tyrannical Power over Jerusalem or the Land of Judah, though for their trial he
permitted their Enemies to make some Devastations among them. The like (we
hope) may be the happy case of New England. Mr. Palmer tells us, that N. E.
has valued it self for the true profession and pure exercise of the Protestant
Religion, but he intimates that they will be termed a Land full of Hypocrisy
and Rebellion, Irreligion, and a degenerate wicked people, p. 39. And is this
the Sincerity and Christian Moderation which he boasts himself of in his
Preface? Surely these are the Hissings of the Old Serpent and do sufficiently
indicate whose Children the men are that use them. Since he will be at
Divinity, let him (if he can) read the Apologies written by Justin Martyr, and
Tertullian and there see if Pagans did not accuse Christians of Old just after
the same manner, and with the same Crimes that he wickedly upbraids that Good
and Loyal People with. Who are they that use to call the Holiest and most
Conscientious men in the World, Hypocrites, Liars, Rebels, and what not? but
they that are themselves the greatest Hypocrites, Liars, and Rebels against
Heaven that the Earth does bear? It is hard to believe that Captain Palmer does
not rebel against the light of his own Conscience, when he affirms as in Page
(38) that in N. E. every thing that has any relations to their Majesty's is
neglected, and unregarded without any recognition of their Authority over those
dominions. He cannot be ignorant of the humble Addresses which the people in N.
E. have from time to time made to their present Majesty's, acknowledging their
Authority. He knows that on the first notice of their Majesty's being
proclaimed King and Queen in England, both those now in Government in N. E. and
the body of the people with them; did (without any command) of their own
accord, with the greatest joy proclaim their Majesty's in N. E. he knows that
their Majesty's have no subjects more cordially and zealously devoted to them
than those in N. E. are, or that do with greater fervor pray for their long
and happy Reigns, or that are more willing to expose themselves to the utmost
hazards in their service, and yet this man that knows all this, to cast an
Odium on that Loyal and Good people, insinuates as if they were Rebels, and
disaffected to the Present Government, and designed to set up an Independent
Common Wealth, and had no regard to the Laws of God or Men. After this lying
and malicious rate has he expressed himself -- What Rational Charity can be
extended so far as to believe that it is possible for him to think that what
himself has written is true? When Sanballat wrote that Nehemiah and the Jews
with him intended to Rebel, did he believe what he had written? no, he did not,
but feigned those things out of his own heart. The like is to be said of those
Sanballats that accuse the people of N. E. with thoughts of Rebellion. And so
we have done with Mr. Palmer. What has been said is sufficient to justify the
Revolution in N. E. and to vindicate the People there from the Aspersions cast
upon them by their Enemies. Several Worthy Gentlemen have under their hands
given an account concerning some of Sir Edmund's Arbitrary proceedings, which
is subscribed by five (and more would have concurred with them had there been
time to have communicated it) of those who were of Sir Edmunds Council during
his Government there, and for that cause their complaints carry the more weight
with them, which shall therefore as a Conclusion be here subjoined.

Reader,
T Here is such Notoriety as to Matter of Fact in the preceding Relation, that
they who Live in New England are satify'd concerning the Particulars contained
therein. If any in England should Hesitate, they may please to understand that
Mr. Elisha Cook, and Mr. Thomas Oaks ( who were the last Year sent from
Boston to appear as Agents in behalf of the Massachusetts Colony) have by them
Attested Copies of the Affidavits ( at least wise of most of them) which are in
this Vindication published, and are ready (if occasion serve) to produce them.

FINIS.

