AN ABRIDGMENT OF THE English MILITARY Discipline, Compiled by the Late Duke of
Monmouth.

Printed by Especial Command, for the Use of Their Majesty's Forces.

God Save KING William and QUEEN Mary.

Printed at London, by their Majesty's Printers; Reprinted at Boston by Samuel
Green, And Sold by Sam. Phillips at the west end of the Exchange 1690.

AN ABRIDGMENT Of the English Military DISCIPLINE.
WHen a Regiment or several Companies are Commanded to draw out, It is
necessary that the Major and Adjutant (or at least the Adjutant) be there to
give each Company its due Post. The eldest on the Right, the second on the
Left, so till the youngest come into the Center. And all Companies (and Bodies
of Men) are to draw up at first at the same Order they March at, both in Bank
and File, the single Companies observing to leave room for the Sargeants and
Drums to stand on the Right and Left of each Company.

Before you form your Battalion, remember always to draw out the odd Men from
every Company, forming a Rank in opposition at fifty paces distance from the
Head of each Company, thereby to have no broken Files, which is much the better
and quicker way to complete your Files, than after your Battalions are formed.

When your Companies are thus disposed, the most ready way to form a Battalion,
is by these words of Command.

Have a care to form the Battalion. Musketeers to the Right and Left outward.
Pikes to the Right and Left inwards, March, interchanging Ground.
When Pikes and Musketeers interchange Ground, the first Rank of Pikes pass
before the first Rank of Musketeers. And it is always to be observed, that
(after any Command for moving) no Man stir before the Word of Command, March be
given, thereby to make them all move together.

When they have thus changed Ground, they are not to Face to their Leaders till
the Word of command be so given. At which time they are then in Battalia, but
at close Order in File. And now it is to be observed that the Officers are no
more limited to their particular Companies, but are all concerned in the whole.
He that Commands, is to see how many Sargeants there are present, and dispose
of them in this following manner, viz. if a Battalion consist of eight or ten
Companies, or more; and the Companies have each two Sargeants, and three
Corporals, (who are designed to do Sargeants Duty) it is necessary to place two
on each Rank to the right and left, and the rest in the Rear; but if the number
of Sargeants be fewer, then there can be but one to each Rank, on the Right and
Left: the remainder always to be in the Rear, making a Rank parallel to the
Soldiers at three Paces distance frow the last Rank.

The Sargeants being placed in this manner: the Drums are to be disposed of,
one half on the right, and the other on the left, ranging directly with the
first Rank of the Soldiers, unless there be many Drums, and the Ground
straight; And then they are to be formed into two Ranks, on the Right and Left,
to range with the two first Ranks of the Soldiers; And they are always to
have their Drums slung, unless Commanded to the contrary.

The Hoboys to be on the right of the Drums, which are on the Right of the
Battalion, ranged in the same Rank with them.

The Commission-Officers are to take their Posts at the head of the Battalion
as the Colors are drawn. But the more particular placing of the Officers will
be directed hereafter.

Now it is to be observed, that though the Files are still at their close Order,
the Ranks are to have their Distance of Twelve large Feet, which the Sargeants
are to be very diligent and active to see kept very even.

The Officer in Chief is to place himself before the center of the Pikes, about
forty paces from them, the better to observe what is done, And that he may be
more easily understood by the whole Body, He is to be on Horseback.

The Words of Command are to be given ^e^^urely, that the Soldiers may have
time to perform the Exercise without confusion. And above all, Silence is to be
kept very strictly. And the first Word of Command before you begin the
Exercise, is, Silence.

When every thing is thus disposed, The next Word of Command is,

Files, Open to the Right (or to the Left) to your Order. March.

At which Word every individual man turns to the Hand named, and after a little
pause, the Sargeants on the Flank lead the Ranks (which are then Files)
directly, forward, as slow as possible, by the least Steps they can make, with
their Halberts Advanced, the Iron upwards; observing always for a Rule, To
mind the Front, that is, if they move to the Right, every man is to observe his
Left hand man. And if they move to the Left, his Right hand man.

As soon as the last man but one of the first Rank stirs his Foot, they are to
be commanded all to Halt. And no man is to stir after that Word.

In this manner of opening of Files, no man is to stir till his Leader be four
foot from him; And then to move and keep at that distance, which will make them
three foot distance from each other, when Faced to the Proper Front.

As soon as they are Commanded to Halt, The next Word of Command is,

To your Leader.

The Captains and Lieutenants are to carry their Pikes Comported always when
they move to the Right or Left, and the Colors to be Advanced. The Sargeants
are to be very mindful to keep the Ranks even, and at twelve large feet
distance, and the Files at three. And for the better keeping Files straight
(after they are Opened to their Order) every man is to look to his Right and
Left hand man, and to see that he has an equal distance from both, especially
the File-leaders, by whom all the rest are governed.

The next thing is to Draw the Officers from the Front of the Battalion to the
Rere, which is done by these Words of Command.

Have a Care of the Exercise.

At which Word of Command, the Musketeers are to pull off their right hand
Gloves, and put them under their Girdles.

Officers take your Posts of Exercise in the Rere. March.

Which is to be done by the Officers Facing to the Right about, The Captains
Marching at a good round pace in one Rank, and the Lieutenants and Colors in
another, Two paces behind the Captains, who as well as the Lieutenants are to
carry their Pikes Advanced.

When they are come into the Rere, the Lieutenants and Ensigns are to be in one
Rank, Eight paces from the Sargeants, and the Lieutenants and Ensigns Eight.
The Captains being from the last Rank of Soldiers Thirteen paces, and the
Lieutenants and Colors Eleven.

At the same Word of Command or Signal for the Officers to take their Posts of
Exercise in the Rere, Six Sergeants of those that are Posted in the Rere are to
March through the Intervals of the Files into the Front and Post themselves
Forty six paces from the First Rank of Soldiers, that is, Six paces advanced
before the Commander in Chief, where they are to Range themselves so as to make
a parallel Line with the Battalion, and to keep the Front clear and
undisturbed. And at the same word of Command, the Pikemen are to join their
Left hands to their Pikes even with their Shoulders.

Now the Musketeers being Shouldered, and the Pikes Advanced, Silence being
Commanded, and none to speak but the Officer in Chief He is to proceed as
follows.

Order your Pikes. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right. To
the Right about. as you were. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left. To the
Left. To the Left about. as you were.
Exercise of the Fire-lock.
Musketeers, have a Care to the Exercise, and carry your arms well.

Lay your Right hands on your Muskets. (...) your Muskets. Rest your Muskets.
Cock your Muskets. Guard your Muskets. Present. Fire. Recover your arms.
Half=bend your Muskets. Clean your Pans. Handle your Printers. Prime. Shut your
Pans. Blow off your loose Corns. Cast about to Charge. Handle your Chargers.
Open them with your Teeth. Charge with Powder. Draw forth your Scowrers.
Shorten them to an ^^ch. Charge with Bullet. Ram down Powder and Ball. Withdraw
your Scowrers. Shorten them to a Handful. Return your Scowrer. Poise your
Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets. Poise your Muskets. Order your Muskets. Pikemen
take heed. advance your Pikes.
Charge. To the Front. Charge. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right. To the
Right.
Charge. To the Right about. as you were.
Charge. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left.
Charge To the Left about. Charge. as you were.
advance your Pikes. Shoulder your Pikes. Charge to the Front. as you were.
Charge to the Right. as you were. Charge to the Right about. as you were.
Charge to the Left. as you were. Charge to the Left about. as you were. Port.
Comport. Charge to the Front. Trail. Charge as you were. advance your Pikes.
Musketeers fake heed. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets. Musketeers
make ready.
At which time the Musketeers are to perform distinctly every Posture of the
Musket together, and being ready, (which is understood to be Cockt,) they are
to guard them with their Thumb on the Cocks, and to bring up their Muskets
straight before them, their left hands the height of their mouths.

And the Pikemen at the same Word of Command ( Make ready) are to bring their
Pikes straight before them also to the Recover, their left hands the height of
their mouths. Both Pikemen and Musketeers always observing whenever they
Recover their Arms before them, to bring their right heels to their left
insteps. And when the Pikes Charge, and the Muskets Rest, to fall back with
their right feet in a direct Line. The Pikemen and Musketeers are to take care
to bring down their Pikes and Muskets together very quick, especially the Pikes
with a jerk, as if they were to strike with the^ Observing to bring the Pikes
down at a convenient distance from one another breasts to prevent clattering
and to close them to their breasts after they are charged. They must also
observe to bring them up straight before them as quick before they turn, which
keeps the Arms from clashing one against another.

In all Facings the Soldiers must keep their Left Heels very firm and fixed.

Charge.
Charge. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right.

Charge. To the Right about Charge. as you were. Charge. To the Left. To the
Left. To the Left. To the Left.
Charge. To the Left about Charge. as you were
Recover your arms Half-bend your Muskets. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your
Muskets.
At which time the Pikemen are to bring their Pikes from being Recovered before
them to their Right Thighs to their Advance.

Poise your Muskets.

At which word of Command the Pikemen are to join their Left Hands to their
Pikes even with their Shoulders.

Order your arms. Pikes to your inside Order, Lay down your arms. ^uit your
arms. To the Right about.
March.

When they are clear of the Officers in the Rere they are to disperse, and at
the Beat of Drum to draw their Swords and run to their Arms with an Huzza,
observing to keep the points of their Swords upright.

Return your Swords. Handle your arms. Order your arms. Pikes to your Outside
Order. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets. advance your Pikes.
Officers take your Posts at the Head of the Battalion.

March.

At which time the Officers are to March back in the same Method to the Front
of the Battalion as they went from it. The Six Sargeants likewise that Advanced
from the Rere, are to return thither to their Posts.

Memorandum, At any time whatever, when the Soldiers have laid down their Arms
and quitted them, upon Beating the Drums they are all to draw their Swords and
run to their Arms with an Huzza.

Observing always to keep the points of their Swords upright for fear of
mischief.

The Exercise of a Battalion having MatchLock-Muskets.
The Musketeers being Shouldered and the Pikes Advanced.

Have a care of the Exercise.

At which time the Musketeers are to pull off their Right hand Gloves and put
them under their Girdles.

Officers, take your Posts of Exercise in the Rere.

March.

At which word of Command the Pikemen are to join their Left-hands to their
Pikes even with the top of their Shoulders.

Order your Pikes. Lay down your Matches. To the Right. Four times. To the
Right about. as you were. To the Left. Four times. To the Left about. as you
were. Lay your Right hands on your Muskets. (...) your Muskets. Rest your
Muskets. Handle your Match. Blow your Match. Cock and try your Match. Guard
your Pans. Bringing your Muskets Recovered before you. Blow your Match.
Present, and Open your Pans. Fire. Recover your arms. Return your Match. Clean
your Pans. Handle your Primers. Prime. Shut your Pans. Blow off your loose
Corns. Cast about to Charge. Handle your Chargers. Open them with your Teeth.
Charge with Powder. Draw forth your Scowrers. Shorten them to an ^^ch. Charge
with Bullet. Ram down Powder and Ball^ Withdraw your Scowrers. Shorten them to
a Handful. Return your Scowrer. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets.
Poise your Muskets. Order your Muskets.
Then follows the Exercise, of the Pike being exactly the same with that
before in the Exercise of the Fire-Lock.

Exercise of the Pike, and Match-Lock-Musket together.
Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets. Musketeers, make ready.
At which time the Musketeers must leisurely and distinctly perform every
posture of the Musket together, and being ready they bring up their Muskets
straight before them, with their Two Fore-fingers guarding their Pans, the
height of their Mou^^s, and bringing their Right Heels to their Left-Insteps.
The Pikemen at the same word of Command ( Make Ready) are to bring their Pikes
before them to their Recover, Their Right Heells also to their Left Insteps,
the But-end of their Pikes in the Palm of their Hands, and are to Charge as the
Musketeers Rest their Arms, and Face as the Musketeers Face.

Charge.
Charge. To the Right. Four times. Charge. To the Right about. Charge. as you
were Charge. To the Left Four times Charge. To the Left about Charge. as you
were.
Recover your arms. Return your Match. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your
Muskets.
At which time the Pikemen bring their Pikes to the Advance from the Recober.

Poise your Muskets.

At which time the Pikemen join their Left Hands to their Pikes even with the
top of their Shoulders.

Order your arms. Pikes to your inside Order. Lay down your arms. Quit your
arms. To the Right about.
March.

As soon as clear of the Officers in the Rere, They are to disperse, and upon
the Drums Beating the Preparative, They are all to draw their Swords, and run
to their Arms with an Huzza, Carrying the points of their Swords upright. And
when they come to their Arms, they are to stand with their Swords poised before
them as they do their Muskets.

Return your Swords. Handle your arms. Order your arms. Pikes to your (...)
Order. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets. advance your Pikes. Cake up
your Match.
Officers take your Posts at the (...) or the Battalion.

March.

Directions for the Posture in Exercising the FireLock-Musket.
In Exercise both of Pike and Musket, the feet are to be at a moderate
distance; for if they are too wide asunder, or too near together, it weakens.
And in their Exercise they must be sure to keep the left heel fast^ and to set
their feet right, or else they can never handle their Arms as they ought.

Lay your Right Hand on your Musket. Turn the Barrel toward you, the Lock
uppermost, and lay your right hand (your fingers extended) just behind the
Lock, close the But-end of your Musket to your Shoulder, that the Muzzels may
be all of a height. Poise your Muskets. Grasp your Musket hard, facing to the
Right with a quick motion upon your left heel, keeping your Musket directly
before you the height of your Cravat, your right elbow on your side, your feet
neither too near, nor at too great a distance; but so, that by turning the
point of your left toe to the front and that of your right as you face, your
left heel being exactly against the middle of your right foot, you are in the
posture for resting, which is the reason of Facing to the right, that you may
be in a readier posture to rest, but when you intend to Shoulder, or Order from
Poise, you keep faced to the Front. And that the Soldiers may never mistake,
they are to take it for a general Rule, That they are never to face to the
Right in Poising, but when the Word of Command is given before to lay their
right hands on their Muskets. At all times when they Poise, they are to keep
their Muskets directly before their noses, but not at arms end extended, (...)
to let their right elbows rest upon their ^odies, which makes the Muskets more
on a direct Line, and is much easier for the men to hold them. Rest your
Musket. Let your Musket sink down to your lef^ hand, that arm hanging as low as
may be without stooping with your body, and receive the Musket into it just
where the Scowrer enters into the Stock; Be sure your hand touch no part of the
barrel; the Musket is to be held but a little sloping from perpendicular half a
foot from your side. Be sure to let your left arm hang down free as low as you
can without stooping (and not hugg your Musket up above your waste as was used
formerly) keeping the right hand upon your Muket behind the lock, your fingers
extended. Cock your Musket. Place your right Thumb upon the Cock, and your
fingers behind the Trigger, and with the help of closing it to your Thigh, you
cock it, keeping it still rested with your Thumb upon the Cock. Guard your
Musket. Keeping your Thumb upon the Cock, and your fingers behind the Trigger,
you bring up your Musket with a very quick motion straight before you to the
Recober, your left hand as high as your mouth, about half a foot from it
without stooping. Let not your Musket sink, but keep it at the height: Always
observing when they bring up their Muskets before, (which is Recovering the
Musket) to bring their right heels to their left insteps; and be sure to have a
care of tossing the Muzzel of the Musket backwards, but keep it straight
upright perpendicular. Present. Fall back with your Right foot, so that the
left heel be against the middle of it, raising the Butt-end of your Musket to
your shoulder; That is, between your breast and your right Shoulder, which
locks it fast; but little of the But-end to appear above the Shoulder, your
right elbow not at all, or very little higher than your Piece, having your
fingers ready to pull the Trigger, you must bend your Left Knee, and keep the
right very stiff, your Piece must be levelled breast high, and no higher. Fire.
Let them be sure to draw their Trigger at one motion, keeping their bodies very
steady, taking aim, and their Muskets fast to their shoulders, till they have
the Word of Command to recover their Arms. Recover Your Arms. Sink the Butt-end
of your Musket till you bold it perpendicular in both hands, the left hand as
high as your mouth, and the right under the Cock. Bring up your Musket always
(when you recover it before you) with a very quick motion, bringing up the
right heel to the left instep. Half bend Your Musket. Falling back with the
right Leg, rest your Muskets together, and laying their right Thumbs upon the
Cock, and their Fingers behind their Triggers, with the help of closing them to
their Thighs, they half-bend, which done, they place their right hands behind
the Lock keeping them rested, their Fingers extended. Clean Your Pan. Pressing
the ball of your Thumb into your yan, you wipe it; having done that, you hold
your right hand behind the Lock again of your Musket, that every posture many
appear the better. Handle Your Primes. The great end of it to the back of your
hand, between your Thumb and forefinger, your Arm backwards. Prime. At which
time they level their Muskets to be exactly upon a line, not one Muzzel higher
than another, putting in a proportionable quantity of Powder at the side of the
Pa.., and not on the top, keeping their left Toes directly to the Front. Shut
Your Pan. With your two first Fingers, At this Word casting back your Primer,
bring up your right heel to your left instep, and your Musket straight up
before you, recovered with the Barrel toward you, your left hand always a^
high as your mouth, and with a very quick motion; your Thumb on the top of the
Steek^ Blow off your loose Corns. Be sure to blow all together at one strong
blast, bringing your pan up to your mouth standing upright, and not putting
your mouth down to your pan. Cast out your Arms after your blast, not letting
your Musket sink from the Posture 'twas in before. Cast about to Change. You
advance with your right Leg turning your Musket the Barrel downwards, so
bringing it to your left side a little backward in your left hand, be sure none
of your fingers touch the Barrel. The right Foot is to have the Toe directly to
the Front as if you were to Fence, your right Heel being over against the
middle of the left Foot, ballancing your Muskets in the left Hand the Muzzels
directly to the proper Front half a foot from your Body all of a height, and
your right Hand joined to the Muzzel of your Muskets, your Thumb extended to
the side of the Barrel. Handle your Charger. With a full Gripe hold it even
with the Muzzel of your Musket about an Inch from it underneath your Musket.
Open it with your Teeth. Bring it up to your Mouth standing upright with your
Head, and not to bring your Head down to it, as soon as you have done this
bring the Charger within an Inch of the Muzzle underneath, as before, and cover
the mouth of your Charger with the ball of your Thumb. Charge with Powder. When
you have put the Powder into the Barrel, you hold your Charger again underneath
your Musket as before. Draw forth your Scowrer. You are to let fall your
Charger and turn your hand, your little finger next the muzzle and draw it at
three Motions, being drawn, dart it, that is, hold it level the height of your
Eye, your Arm extended. Shorton it to an Inch. Turn the great end of your
Scowrer toward you, and slip your Hand till within an Inch of the end, letting
it rest against you body a little below your right breast, sloped all of a
height. Charge with Bullet. Take the Bullet our of your mouth, putting it into
the Barrel, and then put the great end of the Scowrer after it just into the
muzzle of the Piece, and so stand till the next Word of Command. Ram down
Powder and Ball. With a full Grasp, your Thumb and Forefinger from the muzzle,
your Thumb on the top of the Scowrer, keeping a handful of the Scowrer in your
Hand. Withdraw your Scowrer. Turn your Hand, your Thumb and Forefinger toward
the muzzle, and when your Scowrer is clear, which is to be done at three
Motions, dirt again as before. Shorten it to a handful. Turn the small end of
your Scowrer to your Breast and slip your Hand till within an Handful of the
end of it, holding it to your Body, a little below your right Breast sloped
till the Word of Command. Return your Scowrer. Replace it in the stock of your
Musket, pressing it down with your Thumb, and then without any Word of Command
grasp the muzzle of your Musket with your right Hand, your Thumb straight our
upon the Scowrer, keeping your Musket clear from your side some half a foot,
the muzzles all of a height directly to the Front. Poise your Musket. Bring up
your Musket before you with your Left hand and falling with your Right Leg
even to your Left, grasp your Musket with your Right Hand under the Cock, and
poise straight before your Nose, (keeping Faced to the Front) letting your
Right Elbow Rest upon your Body. Shoulder your Musket. As formerly: Poise. As
before. Order. Sink your Right hand a little, Take hold of the Stock with your
Left Hand upon the place where the Scowrer goes into the Stock, then sinking
that hand, take hold o^ the Muzzel with your right Hand, and let the But-end
easily sink near the ground, where you make a little stop so that the Muskets
may come to the ground all together, your Musket all this while perpendicular,
and your Thumb at last straight out on the Side of the Muzzel, being set down
to the ground all together that it seem but one Thump. Place the But-end close
to the right Foot about the middle of it, your right hand an Inch below the
Muzzel the lock from your Body. Lay Down your Musket. Turn your Musket with the
Lock upwards, and stepping forwards with your Left Leg and Right Hand lay it on
the ground in a very straight Line. You must never lay down or handle your
Musket but with one Hand, viz. the Right Hand. Quit your Musket. Fall back with
your left Leg even to your right, and stand up. Handle your Musket. Stepping
forward with your left Leg, lay your right Hand near the Muzzel of your Musket.
Order your Musket. Lift up the Muzzel of your Musket and fall back with your
left Leg even to your Right, turning the Lock of your Musket, outward by the
middle of your Foot.
Directions for the Postures in Exercising the Pike.
Pikemen take heed.

Advance your Pikes Lift up your Pike in a direct Line near your Side with your
right Hand as high as you can will reach, and take it with your left Hand as
low as you can, your fingers straight out, and with that hand raise it till the
Butt-end comes into your right hand, then place it between your Breast and your
Shoulder, and be sure to keep the Butt-end close to your Thigh which keeps your
Pikes upright. To the Front. Lay your left hand on your Pike even with the top
of your Shoulder, your Fingers straight out, and bring the Pike right before
you with a quick motion, ^t the same time drawing in your right Heel to your
left Instep. Be sure to keep your Pike straight upright which will be done best
by putting your right hand well from you. Charge. Fall back with your right Leg
so that the Heel of your left Foot may be directly against the middle of your
right Foot. Bring down your Pike extreme quick with a jerk, as if you were to
strike one with it, and Charge Breast high, your left Elbow under your Pike to
support it, yielding your Body forwards, and bending your left Knee that you
may stand the firmer and with more ease, always observing to hold the Butt-end
of your Pike in the Palm of your hand, and your left Toe pointing directly with
the Spear of your Pike, your Feet at a convenient distance neither too far
asunder nor too near that you may stand strong.

Of all things you must look that your Feet are set right or else you can never
handle your Arms as you ought. It Is to be observed in charging your Pike to
bring it down at some distance from one another Breast so to prevent
Clattering, and to close it to your Breast after it is Charged.

To the Right. Four times. Turn your left Toe to the Right, bring up your right
Heel to your left instep, and your Pike Recovered straight before you with as
quick a Motion as in Charging, then having turned, fall back with your right
Leg as before. Charge as before. To the Right about. Turn your left Toe to the
Right about bringing your Right Heell to it as before, and your Pike Recovered
as before, always with the same quickness. Being turned, Charge as before. as
you were. You turn your left Toe to the Left about, bringing up your Pike
Recovered, your left Hand never to be higher than your Mouth, and your right
Heel as before, and being turned, you fall back with your right Leg and Charge.
You must be sure always to bring your Pike straight up, and not to swing it
about, for them 'twill clatter against the other Pikes. To the Left. Four
times. To the Left about. as you were, Advance your Pikes.


Bringing up your right Heel to your Left Instep and your Pike first before
you, you fall out with your right Foot even with your Left, and bring your Pike
to your right Thigh.

Shoulder. Lay your left Hand on your Pike even with your Shoulder, your
fingers extended, bringing your right Heel to your left instep, and your Pike
right before you, then fall back with your right Leg, and put back your right
Arm as far as you well can, and holding your Pike half a foot from your Side,
cast your Eye toward the Spear which you must keep directly to the Rere, your
Pike sloped, and forsaking it with your left hand, bring up your right Leg, and
lay your Pike on your right Shoulder, your Elbow close to your Body, The
Butt-end half a foot from the ground and in the middle of the distance, That
is, between your Legs. Charge to the Front. Fall back with your right Leg, and
put back your right Arm as far as you can, be sure to keep the Spear directly
to the Rere, and your Pike sl^^ed at the same height with the Spear as when it
was shouldered, neither higher nor lower. Then with your left hand bring the
Butt-end of your Pike backwards, turning the head of it with your right hand,
then forsaking it with that hand, take hold of the Butt-end, and Charge Breast
high, the palm of your hand open against the Butt-end, and your left elbow
under your Pike, your left Toe pointed directly with the Spear of your Pike,
and be sure to Charge directly forward, and not to the Angles, your left heel
just against the middle of your right foot. Shoulder as you were. You raise
your Pike with both hands, then forsaking it with your right hand, and turning
the head backwards with the left, the Spear directly to the Rere, take hold of
it again with your right, as high as you can reach with ease, and stand with it
as before from your body sloped as before, then Bringing up your right Leg, and
forsaking your Pike with your left hand, lay it on your shoulder: When you
stand with your Pike from your side, you continue it but a very short space. Be
sure always to keep the Spear directly to the Rere, and not to cross your pike
in the exercising it. Charge to the Right. Fall back with you, right arm and
leg as before, and be sure to keep the Spear to the Rere, sloped at the height
as when shouldered; and turning your left Toe to the right, fall with your
right leg behind your left, so that the middle of your right foot may be over
against your left Heel. While you do this, bring your pike up, and turn the
Butt-end backwards by your right side; and taking it in the palm of your right
hand, Charge. Shoulder as you were. Bring your left Toe to the left, bringing
your right foot with the middle against your left heel, and your pike up, then
with your left hand turn the head of the pike to the right: That is, directly
to the Rere, which must be done together to prevent clattering, then taking
hold of it with your right hand, stand with it in both hands, at a little
distance from your body as before, sloped at the same height as when
shouldered, then bringing up your right leg, l^^ it on your shoulder. Charge to
the Right about. Fall back with your hand and leg, as before, and stand with
your Pike from your side in the same posture; then turning the left Toe to the
right about, bring the Butt-end of your pike to the right side, and falling
back with your right Leg, Charge, the Spear of your pike all this while kept to
the Rere the height you are Shouldered: For you must take great care not to
throw the Spear of your pike higher, or drop it lower. When you are faced to
the Right about, level your pike breast high, and Charge as before. as you
were. Turn your left Toe to the left about, and advancing your right Foot one
ordinary pace, so that the middle of it may be against your left heel, then
with your left hand bring the Butt-end by your left side, keeping the Spear
exactly to the Rear, the same height as before, taking great care neither to
cross your Pike, or to toss the Spear too high, laying your right hand as high
as you can easily reach, stand with it from your body as before, then bring up
your right leg and shoulder. Charge to the Left. Fall back with your Leg and
Arm as in the rest, then turn the left Toe to the left, and with your left hand
turn the Butt-end of your Pike to the Right, and bringing up your right Leg,
Charge. as you were. Raise the Spear of your Pike with both hands, and turn
your left Toe to the right, and fall back with your right Leg and Arm, the
Spear directly to the Rere, holding your Pike from your side, as before, then
bring up your right Leg, and Shoulder. Charge to the Left about. Fall back with
Arm and Leg, as before, then with both hands bring the Pike over your head
keeping the Spear very exactly to the Rere, neither higher nor lower than when
Shouldered; Then turning your left Toe to the left about, and bringing up your
right Foot with the middle of it against your left Heel, Charge. As you were.
Bring your Pike over your head with your left hand, falling back with your
right leg, and putting back your right Arm as before, keeping the Spear
directly to the Rere without crossing, hold it from your Body, then bring up
your right Leg and Shoulder. You must be sure to take care to set your Feet
exactly, or else you can never Exercise well. Port. As Charging to the Front,
but that you sink not the Spear of your Pike so low, and instead of letting the
Pike rest upon your left Elbow,' it is to rest between the Thumb and Forefinger,
and you Elbow close to your Side. Comport. You bring your left Hand as far back
as you can, and stretching out the right as far as you can, at the same time
stepping forward with your right Foot, Grasp the Pike with your right Hand as
far as you can reach, have a care not to toss the Spear too high; then
forsaking it with your left Hand, and falling back with your right Leg even
with your left, Close the Pike to your side, the Spear of your Pike about the
height of your Head. Charge to the Front. Extend your right Arm as much as you
can advancing your right Leg at the same Motion, and putting your left Hand as
far back as you can, bring forward your Pike, then stepping back with your
right Leg, take hold of the Butt-end of it with your right Hand and Charge,
taking care not to throw the Spear of the Pike higher than it was when you went
to Charge: when you Charge, Charge always Breast-high. Trail. Face to the
Right about, and let the Spear of your Pike fall behind you; quit your right
Hand from the Butt-end of it without stirring your Left, you must take care not
to bob up the Spear of your Pike, which is very ungraceful. Charge as you were.
Turn to the Left about, and taking the Butt-end of the Pike on the palm of your
right Hand, Charge, as before, always taking care not to toss your Spear
higher than the Charge Advance your Pikes. Bring up your right Heel to your
left Instep, and your Pike before you to the Recover you fall out with your
right foot even with your left, and bring your Pike to your right Thigh. Order
your Pikes. Lay your left Hand on your Pike even with the top of your Shoulder,
your fingers straight out, and sinking your left Hand, and raising your Right,
take your Pike so, th^^ when the Butt-end is on the Ground, your right Hand may
be against your Eye, keeping your Pike near your Head, the Butt-end to the
Latchet of your Shoe. When near the Ground hold a little while still, that the
Butt-ends may all touch the Ground together, and make but one thump. Pikes to
your Inside Order. Place the Butt-end of your Pike on the Inside of your right
Foot about the middle of it. Be sure to move your Pike, and not your Foot. Lay
Down your Pikes. Stepping forward quick with your left Leg and stooping all
together, lay it down streigh only with your right hand. Quit your Pikes.
Falling back with your left leg even to your Right, stand up altogether. Handle
your Pikes. Stepping forwards with your left Leg quick and stooping together,
laying your right Hand only on your Pike as far as you can reach. Order your
Pikes. Raise the Pike only with your right Hand and fall back with your left
Leg: you must be sure when you are Commanded to Handle your Pikes, to get the
Butt-end within the middle of your right Foot. Pikes to your outside Order.
Place the Butt-end of your Pike on the outside of your Foot just to the Latchet
of your Shoe. Be sure to move your Pike, and not your Foot. Advance. As Before.
Exercise of Pike and Musket together.
The Pikes being Advanced, and the Muskets Shouldered, The Word of Command is,
Musketeers make ready.

They are to perform all their postures, and the Motions exactly together till
they stand Guarded with their Muskets before them, their Thumbs on the Cock, at
which time also the pikes are to be Recovered before them, the Butt-ends in the
palms of their Hands and their pikes upright, Their left Hands the Height of
their Mouths and no higher.

At the Word Charge, They are to bring down both Muskets and pikes together at
once, and the pikes with a jerk as if they were to strike one with them. They
must be sure to turn their Left Toes that way they Charge, and their Left Heel
directly against the middle of their Right Foot. When they Charge, they are to
Charge directly forward. But the pikes are not to Charge close to one another
Breasts at first, because that makes a clattering, but they are to Charge a
little way from one another Breasts in bringing down their pikes, and after
they are Charged then to close them to their Breasts.

To the Right Charge. Four times. To the Right about. Charge. as you were.
Charge. To the Left about. Charge. Four times. To the Left about. Charge. as
you were. charge.
The pikemen turn as the Musketeers, bringing up their Right Heels to their
Left Insteps. As they turn they extend their Arms, and hold their Muskets
straight before them, Their Left Hand as high as their Mouth, pulling back
their Arms and falling back with their Right Legs when they are Faced

The Soldiers do not bring down their Arms, till the Word of Command, Charge.

They must be sure to bring up their Pike and Musket as quick as they bring
them down straight before them ere they turn, or else the Pikes will clatter.

As before. Recover your arms half-bend your muskets. Poise your muskets.
Shoulder your Muskets.

The Musketeers Shouldering, The Pikemen (who stood Recovered) falling out with
their Right Legs, bring their Pikes to their Thighs to their Advance.

Poise your Muskets.

At which word of command the Pikemen are all to join their Left Hands to their
Pikes the height of their Shoulders.

Order your arms. Pikes to your Inside Order. Lay down your arms. Quit your
arms. To the Right (...)
March.

When clear of their Arms they are to disperse and upon the Beat of Drum, to
run to their Arms with an Huzza, their Swords drawn and the points upwards.

Return your Swords. Handle your arms. Order your arms. Pikes to your outside
Order. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets. Advance your Pikes.
In Ordering their Arms, They must be sure to make a little stop before the
Buttends come to the ground, that they may come down all at one Thump. After
laying down their Arms, and quitting them they are all to stand up together,
and no man to stoop afterward.

When they March from their Arms, they must be sure to step all together Front
and Rere with their left Feet, and to March close to their Arms.

When they lay their Right Hands on their Swords they must take hold of the
Scabbord with their Left Hand.

When they have drawn their Swords, they must hold them up straight before them
as they do their Muskets when poised.

When they return their Swords, they must do it all at one Motion, and as soon
as they have put up their Swords, they must all stand upright to their Arms
looking to their proper Front.

The Pikemen must always when they stand to their Arms (lying on the ground)
get the Butt-end of their Pikes to the middle of the in side of their Feet.

The easiest and readiest way to teach Soldiers the use of their Arms, that
they may do it exactly to the Drum, is to give every File-leader the word of
Command in writing of that part of the Exercise, viz. The posture of the Pike
and Musket only, That every File-leader may instruct his File so as to do it
exactly to the Drum.

EXERCISE of the Granadiers ON FOOT.
A Great part of the Exercise of the Granadiers on Foot is the same with that
of the Musketeers.

Granadiers are to draw up at the same Order in Rank and File as Musketeers,
only they draw but Three deep, being supposed to be Shouldered.

Lay your Right Hand on your Fire-lock.
As the Exercise of the Musketeers. Poise your Fire-lock. Rest your Firelock.
Co^k your Firelock. Guard your Firelock. Present Fire. Recover your arms.
Then they are to lay their Right Hand on their Dagger Call over to the Left.
Holding it fast before your upright. Draw your Dagger. So that the flat side
may be toward you when recovered. Screw it into the Muzz^^ of your Firelock.
Recover your arms.

With a quick motion seizing the Firelock under the Lock with the Right Hand.
Charge. To the Right Four times. To the Right about. As you were.
Charge. To the Left Four times. To the Left about. as you were. Recover your
arms.

They are to seize their Daggers with their Right Hand. Call over to the Left.
Holding them before them the flat side toward them. Withdraw your Dagger.
Return your Dagger.

As the Musketeers. Poise your Firelock. Half-bend your Firelock. Clean your
Pan. Open your Cartridg-box. Handle your Primer.
As the Exercise of the Musketeers. Prime, Return your Primer. Shut your Pan.
Blow off your loose Corns. Cast about to charge. Handle your cartridge. Open it
with your Teeth. Charge with Powder and Ball.
Putting them together into the Muzzle of the Fire-lock, Hold it there Draw
forth your Scowrer. Shorten it to an Inch.
As the Musketeers. Ram down Powder and Ball. Withdraw your Scowrer. Shorten it
to a handful. Return your Scowrer. Poise your Fire-lock.
Upon which word of Command the Ranks are to close forward to six foot, the
Sargeants taking care to plant their Halberts at the due distance. Shoulder
your Firelock. Seizing the sling with the Left Hand. Poise your Firelock. Sling
your Firelock.
Your Left hand on the bottom all of a height, the Right Leg advanced, and
their Right Hands all of a height. Handle your Pouch. Together. Open your
Pouch. The Right Hand extended before you. Cake forth your Granade. At once
Shut your Pouch Falling back with the Right Foot even to the left and facing.
Uncase your Fuse. The left hand to the Left side, both Arms extended. The three
Ranks are to do it together. Handle your Match. The first Rank only falling
back with the right Leg. A strong Blast. Blow your Match. Fire your Fuse.
At which word of Command the second Rank is to March 6 foot before the first,
with their Matches ready to blow. Deliver your Granade. Blow your Match. Fire
your Fuse
The third Rank perform as the Second. Deliver your Granade At which word the
two other Ranks are to lay their left hands on their Hatchets. Blow your Match.
Then they are to raise their Hatchets. Fire your Fuse. At which time the
Sargeants are to take care that the first Rank stand, the second March six foot
before the first, and the third six foot before the 2d. with their Hatchets
raised, expecting the word of Command. The first Rank is to raise theirs also.
Deliver your Granade. Stepping forward with the left Leg. Fall on. As in
handling it. Recover your Hatchet Into the Frog of the Belt Return your
Hatchet, As the Musketeers. Poise your Firelock, Shoulder your Firelock.
The first Rank make ready their Firelocks, The Second Rank handle their Pouch.
And the third Rank their Hatchets. Granadiers make ready At which word of
Command the second Rank is to open their Pouch and take forth their Granade,
and the third raise their Hatchets. The first Rank present. The second Rank are
to shut their Pouch, and uncase their Fuse, and handle their Match. Fire.
Without any other word of Command the first Rank are to cast over to the Left,
draw their Dagger: screw it into the Muzzle of their Firelock, Recover their
Arms and Charge the second Rank to march six foot before them. Recover your
aims. Blow your Match. Fire your Fuse.
Then they poise their Firelocks, and make ready, the third Rank March as the
second with their Hatchets. Deliver your Granade. At the same time the 3d Rank
is to March twelve foot before the first charging, The second to six foot, and
the first return their Hatchets and make ready their Firelock. Fall on. Recover
your Hatchets.
At which time they half bend their Firelocks. Recover your arms. Call over to
the Left. Withdraw your Dagger. As before. Return your Dagger, Poise your
Firelock Shoulder your Firelock
The Sargeants are to take care that the Ranks open forward to twelve foot, and
to continue marching till they come to their ground, and there to halt without
any word of Command. Face to the Right about, March As the Musketeers as you
were Poise your Firelock Order your arms Lay down your arms Duit your arms Face
to the right about
When clear of their Arms they are to disperse, and upon the Beat of Drum they
are to run to their Arms with an Huzza, their Daggers drawn and their points
upwards. March. As the Musketeers Return your Daggers. Handle your arms. Order
your arms. Poise your Firelock. Shoulder your Firelock.

Directions for the postures in Exercising of the Musket (that is, the
Match-lock Musket) being that part which is not in the Directions already
Lay down your Matches At four Motions, viz. First, Turn a little the Butt-end
of the Musket gently, slipping it as it lies on your Shoulder, and lay your
right hand on your Match. Secondly, Extend your right hand and Foot before you,
turning your Musket again in its place. Thirdly, You stoop, bringing the Match
near your right Foot within side, bending the left Ham. Fourthly, You quit it,
and stand up bringing your right Foot even to the Left. Lay your right hand on
your Muskets. As in the Exercise of the Fire-lock. Poise your Muskets. Rest
your Muskets.
Handle your Match. Take your Match from between your third and fourth Finger,
with your Thumb and first Finger of your right hand, the palm turned from you,
extend your right arm toward your right-Hand-man. Blow your Match. Bring up
the Match to your Mouth without stooping to it, turning your Head a little to
the right; and having blown a quick strong Blast, cast out your Arm again to
the Right. Cock and try your Match. Bring your Match to the Cock with a
compass, and press it down with your Thumb, Supporting it with your two next
Fingers, (...) which the Middle finger guides it, and is to be kept between it
and the Pan. Pull your Cock down to the Pan, and Raise or sink so your Match,
that it may fall just in the middle of it. Guard your Pan. Your two first
fingers upon the Pan you^ Thumb behind it, bringing up your Musket straight
before you, that Hand by which the Pan is guarded, being even with your Mouth
about half a foot from before it without stooping, or letting your Muzzel of
your Musket either hang backward or forward, but keeping it straight upright
perpendicular, with your right Heel to your left Instep. Blow your Match. Bring
your Match up to your Mouth without stooping, then blow a quick strong blast,
after which extend your Arms straight forwards, let not your Musket sink, but
keep it at the height you blow, your Cravat in the middle of the space between
your two hands. Present and open your Pan. Raise the Butt-end of your Musket to
your Shoulder, keeping your Fingers upon the Pan, and let it lie level before
you^ open your Pan, which having done, bring your Hand back to your Trigger,
raising a little your right Foot. And immediately letting it fall, the Butt-end
of your Musket is to be between your Breast and your right Shoulder, which
locks it fast, but little of the Butt-end to appear above the Shoulder, your
right Elbow not at all, or very little higher than your Piece; you must bend
your left Knee a little, and keep the right very stiff: your Piece is to lie
Breast-high. Fire. Be sure to draw the Trigger but once, and keep your Body
steady taking Aim. Recover your arms. Sink the Butt-end of your Musket, till
you hold it perpendicular in both Hands, the right being behind the Pan, your
Fingers extended, and the Left the height of your Mouth, bring up the right
Heel to the Left Instep. Return your Match. Hold your Musket in your left Hand,
the Barrel toward you, your, left Elbow, resting on your Body, take your Match
between you Thumb and Forefinger of the right hand your Thumb on the top of
it, as when you Cock it, and turning the Palm of your Hand from you, place one
end of it between the third and fourth Finger of your left Hand and the other
end between the First and Second finger, and then join your right hand again
under the Pan of your Musket your fingers extended. Clean your Pan. With the
Ball of your Thumb, pressing it into your Pan, you wipe it. At this Word of
Command, you rest your Musket, falling back with your right Leg, and when you
have wiped your Pan with your Thumb, you lay your right hand again on your
Musket behind the Pan on the Notch of your Musket, your fingers extended.

As Firelock. Handle your Primer. Prime. On the side of the Pan, and not a top.


Shut your Pan. With a full Hand, that is, with the Palm of it, the Fingers
extended, at which Word casting back your Primer, bring up your right Heel to
your left Instep, bringing your Musket straight up before you, your left Hand
the height of your mouth, and your Right under the Pan.

As the Fire Lock Blow off your loose Corns. Cast about to Charge. Handle your
Charger. Open it with your Ceeth. Charge with Powder.


As the Firelock Draw forth your Scowrer. Shorten it to an ^nch. Charge with
Bullet. Ram down Powder and Ball. Withdraw your Scowrer Shorten it to an
handful. Return your Scowrer.


As before. Poise your Musket. Shoulder your Musket. Poise your Musket.


Order your Musket. Sink your right Hand a little, take hold o^ the Stock with
the left Hand where the Scowrer goes into the Stock, then sinking that Hand,
take hold of the Muzzle with you^ right hand, and let the Butt-end easily sin
near the Ground where you make a little sto^ so that the Muskets may all come
to the Ground together, your Musket all this which perpendicular, the Butt-end
close to your right Foot, about the middle of it, your Right hand an inch from
the Muzzle, and your Thum^ straight up to it, the Barrel of the Musket
backward, your Match, one end between the first and second Finger of your left
hand, the other end between the third and fourth finger a larger inch from the
Cole.
The Exercise of the Pikes is to be as other times with the Fire-lock.

Directions for Exercising the Pike and Match lock-Musket together.
The Pikes being Advanced, and Muskets Shouldered.

Musketeers make Ready. At which Word of Command, the Musketeers are to perform
leisurely and distinctly every posture of the Musket together, and being Ready,
they bring up their Muskets strait before them, their two first fingers
Guarding the Pans the height of their mouths: And bringing up their right
Heels to their lest Insteps; the Pikemen at the same word of Command to Make
Ready, are to bring their Pikes before them to the Recover, and their might
Heels also to their left insteps, the Butt^nds of their Pikes in the palm of
their Hands. Charge. Falling back with their right Legs, they all Rest their
Muskets together, their two first Fingers guarding the Pan, they must be sure
to keep the Muzzels all of a height very well sloped, and clear of their
Bodies, Resting directly to the proper Front, with their left Toes directly
that way they Face, their left Heels being just against the middle of their
right Feet. The Pikes at the same Word of Command, Charge, are to fall back
with their right Feet, bringing their Pikes down as quick as '^is possible (or
as if they were to strike with them) They Charge Breast-high, pointing their
left Toe with the Spear of the Pike directly to the Front, the left Elbow under
the Pike to Support it, etc. As is mentioned in the Exercise of the Fire-lock.

As with the Fire-lock. To the Right Four times To the Right about. as you
were. Charge. To the Left. Four times. To the Left about, as you were.


As before. Recover your arms. Return your Matches. Poise your Muskets.
Shoulder your Muskets. Poise your Muskets, Order your arms. Pikes to your
inside Order.


As before. Lay down your arms, Quit your arms To the right about.


March. When clear of their Arms they are to disperse and upon the Beat of Drum
to run to their Arms with an Huzza, Their Swords drawn and the points upwards.

As Before. Return your Swords Handle your arms, Order your arms, Pikes to your
outside Order. Poise your Musket. Shoulder your Musket. advance your Pikes.


Take up your Matches. Which is to be done at four Motions (...). They advance
their right foot, and hand without turning their Shoulders, their Arms extended
before them. Secondly, They seize the Match, bending with the right Knee.
Thirdly Raising themselves, they bring their right foot into its place, and
slipping a little the Musket, and tu^^ing the Butt-end a little, they bring the
Match to the left hand. Fourthly, They quit they Match with their right hand,
and turn the Musket again into its place with the Left.
For drawing up a Battalion, and placing the Officers for parade to Receive the
King or any Prince of the Blood, or General.
WHen a Regiment is to draw up, the foregoing method of placing the Companies
is to be observed, and the Ranks are to have twelve large feet distance and the
Files three. The Musketeers are to slope and carry their Arms well. The Pikemen
to order their Pikes close to their bodies, holding them near their heads and
to the Latchet of their Shoes and not to their Toes. The Sargeants are to be
posted, (as is said before) two or one on the right and left of every Rank, and
at the same distance the Soldiers are at in the File, and the rest on the Rere,
three paces distance from the last Rank of Soldiers, their Halberts all
Ordered, and their Hats off, the Drums on the right and Left ranging even with
the Front. Rank of the Soldiers, and at the same distance one from another as
the Soldiers, the Ho-boys on the Right of the Drums, and the Drums on the Right
in the same Rank.

For placing the Officers.
The Lieutenants are to be divided equally, half at the Head of the right Wing
of Shot, and the other at the Left. The Ensigns are to be at the Head of the
Pikes upon the same Line with the Lieutenants, and each of them two paces
distant from the Body. The Captains likewise are to be divided equally, and
placed on each Wing two paces before the Lieutenants. None are to stand before
the Ensigns, but he only who Commands in Chief, who is to be two paces before
the Captains, (that is,) six paces from the pikes, unless when a Regiment makes
but one Battalion and the Colonel and Lieutenant- Colonel are both present,
then the Lieutenant Colonel is to be posted on the left hand of the Colonel.
The Major (who always is to be on Horseback) in a direct Line before the
Sargeants on the right Angle a little advauced before the Line of the Captains.
And the Aid-major on the Left Angle in like manner on Horseback.

To receive the King or Queen, the Pikes are to be Advanced, and the Muskets
Shouldered, but to all others the Pikes are to be Ordered.

If there be a Company of Granadiers, it is to be drawn up on the Right of the
Battalion three deep about two or three paces distance between the Drums of the
Battalion, and that of the Granadiers.

Of Saluting.
When the King approaches, the Drums are to Beat the March, and the Officers to
Salute one after another as the King passes by, keeping the Spear of their
Pikes directly forwards to the proper Front and not cross.

As soon as ever they have Saluted, They are to pull off their Hats without
making a Leg, but standing upright, keeping their Hats off till the King or the
Person they Salute be passed by them.

The Ensigns are to Salute with their Colors all together at one Motion,
bringing them down near the ground directly before them, then taking them up
all together at one Motion, they pull off their Hats in the same form the
Captains and Lieutenants did, keeping their Hats off without bowing till the
Person whom they, Salute be past.

The Sargeants (as is said before) are to stand with their Halberts Ordered,
and their Hats off, and to face the same way the Battalion does as also the
Drums, and the Commission-Officers likewise. For if the King, (or whatsoever
Person is Received) goes round the Battalion, the Battalion is to face toward
him, every one being to keep his Post, only (as is said before) facing as he
goes round

This manner of Saluting the King or the General is meant for a private Review
of a Battalion, for if it be in the field, and the Army drawn up, every
Battalion is to Salute with Pikes and Muskets Charged, which is to be performed
in this manner, the King or General approaching, the Musketeers are to be
Shouldered, and the Pikes Advanced, then the Colonel or Commander in Chief
gives the Word.

Recover your arms. Which is (as is said before) to bring the Pikes and Muskets
directly before them, The Butt-ends of the Pike always in the palm of the Hand,
and the Right Heel to the Left Instep. And as soon as ever the Drums strike^ the
March, both Pikes and Musketeers are to Charge at one Motion quick, and to keep
their Arms so charged, till the King or General be past, and then the word of
Command is, Recover your arms. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets.
At which time (as is said before) The Pikemen bring their Pikes to the advance.

Of Marching and Posting the Officers, and of Saluting in Marching.

If the Battalion be to March, the first thing is to make the Files close,
either to the Right or Left to their Marching Order, which is a Foot and an
half, or so near to one another, that every Soldier may have the free use of
his Arms, and not to crowd one another, which is a dangerous consequence: The
best way to avoid which, is for every Man to keep half a Foot from his
Right-hand-Man.

Single Companies may March Shoulder to Shoulder, but in greater Bodies there
must be more allowance.

The first word of Command is (the Pikes being Advanced, and the Muskets
Shouldered)

Files Close to the Right (or to the Left). To your Close Order. March At which
Word every Man turns to the Hand named, and accordingly Closes to the ^istances
and Hand named, Observing (as said before) the Front: That is, either their
Right or Left-hand-Men.

As soon as they are Closed to the Order you could have them, the Word of
Command is,

To your Leader. The Sargeants at the same time are to be careful in keeping
the Ranks at their Twelve ^rge Feet distance.

As soon as the Battalion is thus disposed, if March in a Body, all the
Lieutenants are to be in the Rere at the same Distance from the Soldiers as
they were at in the Front: And the Sargeants which were in the Rere, are to
assist on the Flanks, to see that the Ranks March exactly even, and at their
distance.

When the word is given to march, both Front and Rere step all at a time with
their left Feet, setting them down all together, so that they may be heard.
They are then to march very slowly, and the Pikes to march even with the Wings
of Shot. And great care is to be taken that the men do not press one upon
another, but march directly forward without inclinig to either hand.

As soon as the Body is marched as far as is intended, they are to be commanded
to Halt.

To the Right about. And the Drums beating a Retreat, the Lieutenants lead them
in the same Order and Method as before, back to their Ground, which being come
to, the Command is, Halt. To the Left about. (Or,) as you were (That is, to the
Left about Lieutenants take your Posts in the Front of the Battalion. March. At
which Word the Lieutenants return from the Rear into the Front; and the
Sargeants that were before in the Rear, return thither again from the Flanks.
Of Marching in Three Divisions.
If the Battalion be to March in three Divisions, the Captains are to be
divided, one half at the Head of the first Division of Shot, and the other half
in the Rear of the last Division; one half of the Lieutenants in the Rear of
the first Division of Shot, and the other half at tho Head of the last Division
of Shot.

The Colors are to March at the Head of the Pikes which are to be Advanced,
the Colonel or Lieutenant Colonel, or (in their absence) the Officer in Chief,
is to March two paces before the Rank of Captains at the head of the first
Division of Shot; the Captains and all other Officers keeping the same distance
from the Soldiers as they were Posted at, at the Head of the Battalion when
Drawn up; and taking great care that they keep that distance exactly, and no
more, viz. The Captains four paces from the Soldiers, and the Lieutenants and
Ensigns two, or at least at proper distance to Salute.

The Officers that are to March in the Rear of the Division are to fall after
them as they March off, and not before. And the Sargeants that were Posted in
the Rear, are to take care of the Pikes in their Marching.

The Drums are to be divided equally to the Divisions, and to march between the
Second and third Rank.

The Granadiers are to march about twenty yards before the Battalion.

The Equipage of the Colonels and Officers of the Front is to march a little on
the Left Hand between the Granadiers and the Battalion. The Ho-boys are to
march at the middle Distance between the Commander in chief and the Granadiers.

Whenever a Division is commanded to march, they are to step together at once,
both Front and Rere with their left feet, and to march slowly.

In Marching, both Colonel, Lieutenant. Colonel, and all Officers are to march
with their Pikes underhand comported, taking care not to droop the Spear too
much, nor swing their hands in marching, but to keep them steady.

As soon as they come near the King or Person whom they are to Salute, they are
to shoulder their Pikes, and to take care to do it together, that is, every
Rank of Officers as they approach the King to shoulder their Pikes together,
and to carry them level upon their shoulders, and when they come to salute, to
be very exact in doing it together that it may seeem as if but one man saluted.

The first Rank of Captains are not to begin ^o Salute till the Colonel or
Commander in Chief has done Saluting. And the Officers must take can above all
things, that they neither stand still when they Salute nor mend their pace, so
as to get too far from the men, and to take care in the Salute, not to do the
Motions too quick.

The Ensigns are to take care to b^ing their Colors down all together before
them without waving them to either Hand, and to take them up all together
without standing still or mending their pace.

As soon as the Officers have Saluted, they must pull off their Hats, and keep
them off till they are past by the person they salute without bowing, And
when-they are past at a convenient distance, they are to bring their pikes
again underhand.

The Sargeants are to march with their Halberts Shouldered, the Butt-end
upwards, and are always to march with their Hats off, when they pass by the
person that comes to view the Battalilion, whether the Officers Salute or no.

None is to Salute the same person but once standing, and once marching.

The Major and Aid-Major have no fixed Post for Marching, but are always to
attend the Colonel or Officer in chief to receive his Order.

No Sargeant or Corporal is at any time to Carry or hold the Colors in the
absence of the Ensign, but only a P ikeman.

If a Battalion be Attaqued in Marching They are immediately to Draw up, Facing
either the same way they March, or by Wheeling either to the Right or Left as
the Ground allows, or as they are Attaqued. For the readier performance of
which, it is most necessary to practice a Battalion to it is in Exercising.

If a Battalion be Attaqued Marching in three Divisions (or more) and thereby
the Divisions obliged to Wheel to the Right. The first Wing of Musketeers is to
Draw up on the Right of the Granadiers, and the Pikes on the Right of the Right
Wing of Musketeers, and the Left Wing of Musketeers on the right hand of the
Pikes, which takes up much less time than Marching round the Rere.

As soon as ever there is occasion to Prepare for being Attaqued on a sudden,
or that the Commander in Chief is disposed to draw up a Battalion in that
method, he commands the Rere halfFiles of Musketeers to double their Front to
the Left in Marching. And as soon as ever the Officer in Chief gives Command to
the Musketeers to Make Ready (which is to be Cockt and guarded) or in Exercise
to make the Motion of it by Recovering their Muskets before them, the Pikemen
at the same word of Command are to Port their Pikes, and the Drums to Beat the
Preparative, which gives Notice to the Rere, that they are to Draw up. The
Ensigns at the same time are to give their Colors to the Right-hand-men of the
respective Companies, who are to Retire with them immediately to the Center of
the Pikes, and the Ensigns to take the Pikes which the said Soldiers carried,
and are to march at the Head of the Pikes.

The Drums that marched between the Ranks of the Musketeers (as also those of
the Granadiers) are to join themselves to those Drums that march with the
Pikes, And the He boys to join with the Colors.

As soon a^ ever the Drums beat the Preparative, every Division (except the
first) is to march up with all the speed they can, keeping their Order, the
first Division marching no faster than it did before. The Ranks i^ marching,
are to close forward to six foot, which the Sargeants are to be very careful to
see kept very even and in good Order.

The Granadiers are to be divided into three equal parts, one third with the
Captain at the Head of the Pikes, some eight paces from the first Rank, and the
two other parts on the Right and Left of the Battalion. Those at the Head of
the Pikes are to be Commanded to Present and Fire when the first Rank of
Musketeers are commanded to Bu^^l, and as soon as ever they have Fired, they are
to make ready their Granado's, and after the two last Ranks of Musketeers (who
fire before the Front Rank) have Fired, then they are to deliver their
Granado's and to put their Daggers into their Firelocks.

Those Granadiers on the right and left of the Battalion, are to Fire as the
Musketeers Fire, that is, the two last Ranks to Fire with the Musketeers, and
as soon as Fired, are to ^ut their Daggers into their Firelocks. The Front rank
of Granadiers having their Granado's ready, are to kneel when the first Rank of
Musketeers kneel, and after the two last Ranks have Fired, they are to stand
up, and when the first rank of Musketeers Fire, they are to deliver their
Granado's, and immediately to fix their Daggers in their Firelocks. And when
the Musketeers Club their Muskets and Fall on, they are to Charge with their
Daggers as aforesaid.

When the Battalion has Marched (so near that the Granadiers may throw their
Granado's so as to fall among the Enemy) with the Officers, both Captains,
Lieutenants and ^nsigns in one rank at the Head of the Battalion two good paces
from the first rank of soldiers with their Pikes in the same posture with the
Pikemen, which they are to observe, the Commander in Chief gives the Command to
alt, at which word of command the Drums are to cease from beating, and all the
Officers in the Front stand at the Head of the Battalion in one rank, as is
said before, ^^o paces from it with their Pikes ported. Four of the Sargeants
that Marched with the Pikes before they drew up, are to draw up with them, two
with the first rank, and two with the last, on the right and left of each rank,
the rest of the Sargeants are to be on the flanks, and to assist the Officers
in the Rere, who are to be the same Officers that marched in the Rere of the
Divisions before they were drawn up, and to continue in the Rere of the
Battalion, and to take care of it. Only the eldest Captain that was there, is
to come up immediately to the front, at the Head of the left Wing of Shot. And
the Sargeants are immediately (upon the Battalions drawing up) to be very exact
in making the ranks even at six foot distance, The Files are to be kept at the
same distance (a is said before) so that every Soldier may have free liberty to
use his Arms; the best rule for which is, That every Soldier keep half a foot
from his right-hand-man.

As soon as the Commander in chief has commanded them to Alt, The command is

First Rank of Musketeers Kneel. Which they are to do by falling back with
their right Legs, and not stepping forward with their Left, and keeping their
Muskets so low, that the two other Ranks may Fire easily over them.

At the same time that the Command is given for the first Rank to kneel, the
whole Rank of Officers at the Head of the Battalion, retire at one time into
the Intervals, just behind them of the first Rank of Soldiers, but are to take
care that the Soldiers perform their Duties. The Officers (as is said before)
are to have their Pikes in the posture conformable to the Pikemen. And those of
the Musketeers are to kneel as they do.

When the first Rank is commanded to kneel the two other Ranks of Musketeers
are to close forwards, as also the five Ranks of Pikes as close as they can
with convenience to use their Arms, without any other Word of Command.

Two last Ranks Present. Which they are always to do Breast high and the first
of the two is always to sloop without any Word of Command. And the Pikes at
the same word of Command are to Charge their Pikes, and to continue so Charged.
Fire. Recover your arms. At which Word of Command, the Front Rank stands up
without any other word of Command, having their Muskets Recovered straight
upright before them, ready Cock and Guarded. The Front Rank Present. Fire.
Recover your arms. Club your Muskets. Fall on. Which they do with an Huzza, and
the Pikes are to continue Charged, and the Drums to bear the Preparative again.
^alt. At which time the Drums are to cease Beating. Reduction. Poise your
Muskets. At which word of Command the Pikemen Recover-their Pikes before them
from their Charge, and the Granadiers take the Posts they had before they were
divided. Shoulder your Muskets. At which word of Command the Pikemen bring
their Pikes to their Thighs to the advance. And the whole Rank of Officers
Advance together two paces before the Head of the Battalion.

Ranks open backward to twelve foot Distance.

March. Rear half files of Musketeers that Doubled, To the Right about, as you
were. March. Officers, Colors, and Drums, and Ho-Boys to your proper Posts.
March.
If you would Fire a Battalion in Exercise more than once before you fall on,
instead of Clubbing your Muskets after the first Firing, the Musketeers are to
make ready as they March, and the Pikes port, and so proceed as before
mentioned.

Memorandum, Every Right-hand-man of the Pikes of each Company is always to
March with the Ensigns Pike.

The Drums are to beat the Preparative whenever the first Division draws up,
whether it be of a Battalion or single Company, which is the best way to give
Notice to the Rere that they are to Draw up: The pikes at the Drums beating the
Preparative (if they are Shouldered) are then to Advance, unless the Musketeers
be commanded to Recover their Arms, and in such case the pikes are to port, but
never otherways in Drawing up, but to be kept Advanced. Nor are the Ranks to
close forward, or to mend their pace in Marching, but to Draw up as at other
times, unless the Musketeers are commanded to Recover their Arms (or to make
ready) which is the same posture, and then they are always to March as is
before mentioned.

Of Marching by Sub-Divisions.
If a Battalion be to March on the Long March by Sub-Divisions, the Files are
first to be counted, and according to the largeness or narrowness of the way
they are to March, they must be divided accordingly, Posting one half of the
Captains at the head of the first SubDivision of Shot, and the other half in
the Rere of the last. The Lieutenants are to be divided to every Sub-Division
of Shot, that they may take care of them. The Colors are to be divided also to
March at the Head of every Sub-Division of Pikes. The Sargeants are always to
March on the Flanks, and are never to Lead or bring up a Division (unless
Commanded.) The Sargeants that are posted in the Rere of the Battalion, when
drawn up, are always to take care of the Pikes when Marching.

When they March by Sub-Divisions, they are to March Shoulder to Shoulder in
Files, but not so as to crowd one another. And tho there may happen to be more
men in one Rank than another, yet no Gaps are to be left in the Ranks, but they
are to March (as is said before) Shoulder to Shoulder.

The Captains and Officers are always to March with their Pikes underhand,
except only when they pass by a General Officer, or come before a Guard to
Relieve it, or off the Parade, and then they are to be Shouldered.

Of Defiles.
To pass a narrow Defile, the readiest way to perform it, and to Draw up again
in order as soon as past, is to make the Ranks File; if to the Right, the
Right-hand-man is to File first, and the rest of his Rank is to follow him;
then they are to Rank again as they were, which is better than Files Filing,
because it immediately makes a Front to the Enemy.

If the Ranks be great, let them File two a Breast, beginning with the two
outwardmost File-leaders.

For larger Defiles, the Commander may draw off as he judges the way will
easily ^^ceive.

Of Wheeling.
When a Battalion is to Wheel to alter the Front, either to one hand or to the
other, or to bring the Front where the Rere was^ (...). The Command is, to
Wheel either to the Right or the Left first. If to the Right, you say,

Wheel to the Right.

March.

At which Word of Command every man in the Battalion moves, and Wheels from the
Left to the Right, only the man on the right Angle turns very slowly, being as
it were the Hinge on which the rest move. In this way of Wheeling they must
observe both their Right and Left-hand-men. And the first Rank is to take such
a compass of Ground, as neither to press one another out, nor yet to make a Gap
or Interval in the Ranks; The best way to avoid both which is, for every man to
be sure to observe what distance he is at in File when he is commanded to
Wheel; and if he Wheels to the Right; to be sure to keep that very same
distance from his Right-hand-man; And the Ranks are to observe their Leaders
well, and to close quick to the Left in the Rere The same method must be
observed to the Right if the Battalion be Commanded to Wheel to the Left.

Of Wheeling when a Battalion or a Body of Men March in Division.
When upon a March, the word of command is given to Wheel, if it be^ to the
right, the right-hand-man keeps his ground, and only turns upon his Heel, at
the same time the left hand-man moves about quick till he makes an even Line
with his right-hand-man, and that the Officer bids him Stand.

The Second Rank must not begin to Wheel till they have taken the ground of the
first; so every Rank successively is to March directly forward up to their
Leaders Ground, before they begin to Wheel, upon which depends this way of
Wheeling.

Before they come to Wheel, the Soldiers are to observe that hand in Marching
to which they are to Wheel. For as the Right-hand-man is to be observed in
Marching when they Wheel to the Right, so they must observe the left Hand in
Marching, when they are to Wheel to the Left, but when they are Wheeling they
must observe the contrary Hand.

Of Wheeling by single Ranks.
When an Officer is Marching a Body of Men, and there be occasion to Form them
on a sudden into a single Rank, either to make a Guard, or to line an Hedge,
the words of Command are these,

Ranks to the Right (or Left) Hand, Wheel.

March.

If they are to Wheel to the Right, the Right-hand-man of every Rank is to
stand, and only turn to the Right on the Ground he stands on, and the rest are
all to Wheel together into one rank at the word of command, March. The Colors
are to Wheel in before the rank, and the Drums to take their Posts at the right
and left of the rank, as also the Sargeants.

When they are so Wheeled, they may either be Closed to the right or to the
left, that there may be no Gaps in the ranks.

Reduction.

Form your Ranks to the Left (or) as you were.

March.

For the performance whereof, the left-hand-man of every rank is to stand, and
only turn to the Left. And at the word March, the rest are to Wheel into their
places as they were.

Of Wheeling backward by half Ranks.
To Wheel backwards by half ranks upon a long March, the following Directions
are to be observed.

The number of men ought to be even in every rank, and the right and the
left-hand-man of every rank being ordered to stand, and only to turn to the
right and left inwards, the following words of Command are to be observed.

By Half Ranks Wheel to the Right and Left backward.

March.

At which word of Command, the Half-ranks separate, and fall back to the right
and left-hand-men, forming two ranks in opposition to one another The Officers
and Colors are to separate accordingly, and to take their Posts, ranging
themselves before the Soldiers to make a Guard.

The Sargeants and Drums are to be on the right and left.

Reduction.

By half-Ranks to the Right and Left Inward, form your Ranks as you were.

March.

The Directions are the same as before: For the right and Left-hand-man of
every rank is to stand, and only turn to the right and left inward, and the
rest at the Word March are to Wheel, and they will be in the same Marching
Order that they were.

Closings and Openings.
Ranks close forwards to Order, Three foot. March. Ranks close forwards to
close Order, A foot and half. March. Ranks open backward to Order, three foot.
March. Ranks open backward to open Order, Six foot. March. Ranks Open backwards
to double distance, twelve foot. March.
In this way of Opening backward, the ranks are to fall back without changing
aspect observing their right-hand-man, and their Leader.

Files close to the Right, March Files close to the Left, March Files close to
the Center, March Files open to the Right, March Files open to the Left, March
Files open from the Center, March
When Files open from the Center, they are to face from the Center, and if
there be an odd File it is to stand, which is the Center File. Also when Files
are to open to the Right or Left, they are not to stir, not so much as changing
aspect, till the Word of Command, March be first given; and then they are
immediately to Face to the hand named, and to take their distance commanded
every one from his Leader.

When they open to the Right, they must always observe their left hand men.
And when they open to the Left, their Right Hand men.

If they open to the Right, the Second File from the Right, first takes its
distances by little Steps, and letting his Leader go as far from him as the
distance he is Ordered, before he stir, the rest of the Files do the like
successively; and the left hand File is not to move at all. In opening of Files
they are to move extreme slowly and directly forward.

Doublings.
Ranks to the Right double. March. Ranks as you were. March. Ranks to the Left,
Double. March. Ranks as you were. March.
The Ranks that double are to observe their Right Hand man to move at the same
time with them.

They are to begin the Motions with the Foot next the hand named, and to come
into this doubling, the even Ranks are to double into the odd; and if the odd
Ranks are to double, Face the Body to the Rear, and the same word of Command
will perform it, on else it may be done by this Word of Command.

Odd Ranks that stood, To the Right about, Double the even Ranks.

To Reduce the Ranks.
The Ranks that double are first to face to the contrary hand, and they with
the contrary foot come into their former Ground; but they are not to stir, not
so much as to alter their aspect till the Word of Command, March be first
given. And ^tis a constant Rule upon all Doublings of Ranks or half Files, that
though they are to turn to the contrary hand they Doubled on from the Ground
they Doubled to; yet when they come to their own ground, they are always to
turn to the hand they doubled, which brings them directly after their Leaders.

The doubling of Files is performed in the same manner, and is the same thing
with the Reduction of doubled Ranks.

Doubling of Front half-Files by the Rear half-Files, with the Reduction.
Rere Half-files to the Right hand, Double your Front, March.

Rear Half-files, as you were.

March.

Rear Half-files to the left hand, Double your Front.

March.

Rere Half-files, as you were.

March.

If it be upon a March, the Rere Half-files are to move into the Front with a
quicker motion, The Front Half-files still continuing theirs. But all must
observe the Right Hand men.

And for Reduction, Let the Rear Half files without facing about, stand till
the Front Half-files have passed by, and then fall after their proper Leader;
But if the Front Half-files are to be doubled by the Rere the Body standing
still, the Rere Half-files are to March extreme slow, observing well their
Right Hand men, that every Rank may double at one time. And in the Reducement,
as in the Doubling of single Ranks, no Man is to stir till the word of Command
March be first given, And then they are all to turn together to the contrary
hand they doubled on. And when they come upon their own ground they are always
to turn to the same hand they Doubled to.

Doubling of Rere-half-files by the Front Half-Files, with the Reduction.
Front Half-files to the Right about, Double your Rear Half-files.

March.

At which Word of Command, the Front half-files, or the three Front Ranks turn
to the Right about, and passing on the right Hand of their followers, or the
Rere half-files, they are to double into them; and as soon as doubled, to face
to the Left about to their Leader, without any word of Command.

Reduction.
Front Half-files, as you were.

March.

At which word, the Front Half-files are to, March slowly, observing to keep
three foot from their Right Hand men, which makes them incline to the Left and
brings them directly upon their former ground.

In Doubling to the Left about, the same thing is to be done, only observing
the contrary hand.

Of Firing to the Front.
Soldiers are to be Exercised to Fire all manner of ways, in keeping of
Ground, gaining of ground, and losing of ground.

To make them Fire in keeping of Ground, it is necessary that the Body be as
close in Rank and File as can be conveniently with the use of their Arms.

One way it thus, Musketeers make ready all
At which time the Musketeers are to be Cockt and Guarded, and their Arms
straight before them, the Pikes ported. And when the Musketeers Present, the
Pikes are to be Charged.

The five first Ranks, Kneel, The Rear Rank Present, Fire. Fifth Rank stand up,
Present, Fire. Fourth Rank stand up. Present. Fire.
And so of the rest. And as they have Fired, they are to Charge again and to be
in a readiness against the first word of Command.

This way of Firing may be performed either by two Ranks, at a time, or three
ranks, the first kneeling, and the second stooping, or the two first stooping.

It Is necessary also to exercise them to Fire gaining ground, which is to be
performed in this manner.

The Battalion Marching, the Commander in Chief Orders.

The first Rank of Musketeers, make ready alt.

At which time the whole Battalion Alting, He is to command the first rank of
Musketeers to

Present, and Fire.

When they have Fired they are to Recover their Arms without any word of
Command, and to File off very quick to the right and left into the Rere. When
the first rank presents, the next rank is to make ready in course without any
word of Command, and as the first rank Files off, the next makes good the
front. and so the Battalion is to march again, and every Rank to Fire in this
Method.

The Pikes are to Charge when every Rank Presents without a word of Command.

Of Firing to the Flanks.
If upon a March a Body of men be forced to Fire to both Flanks, the way of
doing it is thus, The Ranks being at six foot distance, intervals of about six
foot distance are to be left between the Divisions of Musketeers and the Pikes,
which the Officers must have a great Care to keep open, by causing the
Musketeers to incline to the right and left after every Firing to the Flanks,
which is to be performed in this manner.

The Right and Left hand files of Musketeers, make ready.

Which they are to do and keep along with the Body, and not to Face to the
Flanks till they are bid Present.

As soon as they have Fired, they are to Face to the Rere, and so are by a
Sargeant to be led athwart it very quick, and so up between their own
Divisions, and the Pikes as soon as the outermost Files face to the flanks to
Present, the next file of the right and left is to make ready without any word
of Command, and to keep along with the Body ^^ll the outtermost files be clear
of them, that is, till they are bid Present, which is the next word of Command,
the Commander in Chief is to give after he bids the two first files make ready.
The files that fire are to fall back with their right feet, and not step
forward with their Left.

In Exercise, this way of Firing is to be continued till all the files have
fired.

Of Firing to the Rere.
This way of firing is performed almost the same way as firing to the front
Retreating.

The Rere Rank of Musketeers, make ready

At which time the Rere rank stands Cockt and Guarded.

Present.

Fire.

When they are bid Present, they are to turn upon their Left foot To the Right
about, and cast their right leg backwards, then Present and Fire. And
immediately as soon as fired without any word of Command, they are to recover
their Arms, and at a good round rate within three foot of the Body to the right
and left outward to March up into the front, and there place themselves.

As soon as the last rank is bid Present, the next rank of Musketeers is to
make ready of course without any word of command, but not to face to the rere
till they are bid Present.

As soon as the first rank is commanded to Present, the Pikes are to march till
the rere rank of Pikes come even with the next rank of Musketeers, which is
standing cockt and Guarded, so that there will be room left in the front for
the rank of Musketeers that fire, to come up, and place themselves even with
the first rank of Pikes, and so every rank successively is to do the same by
the same method; the Officers and Sargeants are ^o see the Soldiers move away
quick without noise (which of all things is most to be avoided) and that they
place themselves right on the files.

The word make ready is made use of but once, after which (as is said before)
when the rere rank is bid Present, the next rank is to make ready.

Of Firing the Street-way.
If a Street, or any way be to be defended against Horse, where they can Charge
only in front, the best Method is this; if there be fewer Pikes than
Musketeers, which most commonly happens, the Rere half-files of Pikes are to
double the front by these words of Command.

Rere half-files of Pikes to the Right Hand double your front.

March.

Then Musketeers to the Right about.

March.

As soon as they are clear of the Pikes.

Musketeers, Face to the Right and Left Inwards. March.

By which they are to join in the Center o^ the Pikes.

Then Face to your Leader. The Officers must take care to see that th^^ Shot
and the Pikes Wing alike, and that the Musketeers be at no greater distance
from the Pikes than only to give room for the Colors, Drums and Ho-boys to be
between.

The Captains are to be in the first rank of Pikes, and the Lieutenants with
the Musketeers. As the Body is greater or lesser, a Sargeant or more is to
cause the two first ranks of Musketeers to Face to the Right or Left.

As soon as the Officer in Chief has given Command,

Port your Pikes. The two first ranks of Musketeers, make ready.

March. At which word the Sargeants are to bring up the two first Ranks either
to the right or left, as is Ordered beforehand, who filing two and two up into
the Front, march athwart it ^^der the Pikes, carrying the Muzzels of their
Muskets so as they may neither knock against the Pikes, nor yet do their
Leaders any Mischief.

Being placed under the Pikes, they are to ^^ce to the proper front without any
word of Command, and to make two ranks.

That there may be always some fire reser^ed, it is best to Fire but one rank at
a time, the second standing cockt and Guarded, both of them being as close to
the Pikes as they ^an with the convenience to use their Arms.

First Rank of Musketeers kneel. Which they are to do by falling back with
their right foot, and not stepping forward with their left; and to be sure to
keep their Arms straight upright before them, their left hands the height of
their mouths,

First Rank Present. Fire. As soon as they have Fired, they are to recover
their Arms without any word of command, and to File off to the contrary hand
they came upon, as quick as it is possible, and are to be Led by a Sargeant
close by the body into the Rere, and there placed in their right Files.

When the Musketeers are bid Present, the Pikes are to Port very low without a
word of Command: And as soon as they have fired, the Pikes are to Raise their
Pikes again to the height they were at, without a word of Command, which is to
avoid being shattered with the Shot.

The Subaltern Officers must take care that the next Rank of Musketeers be
always ready just at the Angle to march under the Pikes in the room of the
second Rank; which upon the firing of the first, is to take the place of it.

If the Street to be Defended be very broad, an interval must be made (besides
the passages on the flanks) wide enough for two men on a Breast: for otherwise
the long intermission between the Firings will give the Horse opportunity to
Attack them.

Reduction. Musketeers Face to the Right and Left outward. March.

As soon as they are clear of the Pikes.

Musketeers to your proper Front.

March. Till even with the first Rank of Pikes.

Rere half Files of Pikes, to the Left about as you were.

March. Which done, the Officers, Colors, Drums, and Ho-boys are to be
commanded to their proper posts.


Of Firing by a running Fire for Show.
A Battalion being drawn up for Parade, if they are to fire by a running fire,
they are to take it either from the right or from the left, but commonly it is
begun on the Right.

The manner is thus

After the Musketeers are commanded to make ready (which is Cockt and Guarded)
they are to be Ordered to Present in the Air, giving Order to the Officer on
the right to make the first man (after they are presented) begin to fire;
because if the Word be given aloud, they will all take it, and fire a Volley
instead of a running Peal.

Every File-leader is to Fire as quick as it is possible after his
right-hand-man, and every File is to take care to fire with their Fileleader.

Words of Command for forming the Hollow Square.
The Battalion being drawn up, the Ranks a^ Twelve Foot distance, and the Files
at Three, the Muskets Shouldered, and the Pikes Advanced, the Command is.

Colors, Drums and Hoboys, to the Center of the Pikes. March.

Ranks close forward to Dwer. (Which is three large feet)

March.

The three outwardmost Files of Pikes on the Right and Left, double your Files
to the Right and Left inwards. March.

Rere half-Files of Musketeers, to the Left hand double your Front. March.

Files, close all to the Right to your close Order. March.

To your Leader.

Pikes, Face square.

Pikes, close forward every way to close Order, March

Pikes to your proper Front.

Left Wing of Musketeers, to the Right about.

Both Wings of Musketeers. alt March.

Musketeers, Face to the Left, alt. March.

Face to your proper Front, all.

Officers and Sargeants take your Posts. March.

Granadiers take your Posts in the angles, March, Face square.

Musketeers make ready. At which word of Command the Pikes are to Port very
low, and to continue so, and not to Charge when the Musketeers present.

First Rank kneel, Which they must do so low, and hold their Muskets so, that
the two last Ranks may fire over them.

The two last Ranks Present. Fire.

Recover your arms. At which word of Command, the first Rank stands up with
their Muskets Recovered stra^^ before them ready cockt and guarded, and the two
Ranks that have Fired, Load again.

Front Rank Present, Fire.

Recover your arms At which word of Command the Pikemen Recover their Pikes
from their Port.

To your Leader. March, alt, Face Square, et.

After which Method they may be made to March them, and Fire to every front,
the Soldiers always observing that facing to their Leader, is to face that way
wherever the Commander in chief is; but to face to the proper front, is only
that way the front of the Battalion properly stood before this figure was
formed.

Reduction of the Hollow Square.
They being all faced to the proper front, the Words of Command are as follow.

Granadiers take your Posts on the Right of the Battalion. March. The Right and
Left of each Wing of Musketeers, Face to the right and left outward. March.
alt. The Three files of Pikes of the Right and Left that Doubled, as you were,
March. Musketeers, face to the right. March. alt. To your Leader, Rear
half-files of Musketeers that doubled, To the right about, as you were. March.
Ranks open backward to twelve foot, March. Colors, Drums and Ho-boys, to your
former Posts March. Files close to the Right to close Order. March. To your
Leader.
Directions how to Form the Hollow Square.
The Battalion being Drawn up, the Muskets Shouldered, and the Pikes Advanced,
you must first of all Command the Colors, Drums and Ho-boys to the center of
the Pikes: Which done, you are to make the ranks close forward to three large
feet distance: Then you must make the three outwardmost files of Pikes on the
right and left, to double into the three Files of Pikes which are next them on
the right and left. After which you are to make the Rere half-files of
Musketeers to double their front either to the right or left; which being done,
you must make all the Body close their files to close Order, and after having
faced them again to the proper Front, you are to make the Pikes face Square,
and close forward to close Order, as they then are faced every way; which done,
you must make the Pikes face again to their proper front. Then you command the
left Wing of Shot to face to the right about; which being done, both Wings of
Shot are to march till clear of the Front and Rere of Pikes. After you have
made the Musketeers to Alt, both Wings are to face to the Left, and are to be
led by the Sargeants cross the Front and Rere of Pikes. That is to say, the
right Wing of Shot to be led (as near the Pikes as they can march) round, till
the Head of the Shot comes even with the left Rere Angle of the Pikes; and the
left Wing of Shot is to be led in like manner round the rere of the pikes, till
the Head of the Shot comes even with the right front Angle of the pikes.

Then you must command them all to Face to the proper Front. The Officers are
to move with the Musketeers as they move, by which they will naturally fall
into the Posts where they are to be, viz. The Lieutenants divided equally into
the four Angles, as also the Sargeants. The Captains are to be divided in the
following manner.

First Captain To the proper Front. Second Captain To the Rere. Third Captain
To the Right Flank. Fourth Captain To the Left Flank. Fifth Captain To the
Right Front Angle. Sixth Captain To the Left Front Angle. Seventh Captain To
the Left Rere Angle. Eighth Captain To the Right Rere Angle,
The Officers to take care that every Front of Soldiers do their Duty, and the
Captains that are in the Center of each Front are to retire into the first rank
when the Musketeers make ready, and are to kneel when the Soldiers kneel, and
to perform the same with their pikes that the pikemen do. When you have done
this, you place your Company of Granadiers (being divided into four equal
parts) in the four Angles, and if there be not room enough for them to stand in
the Angles without, you must take some of the files, and place them within the
Angles with their Daggers in their Firelocks, keeping the rest on the Angles
without three deep, the two last ranks of which are to fire with the
Musketeers, the Front rank making ready their Granado's, as soon as ever the two
last ranks have fired, they are to put their Daggers into their firelocks, and
stand charged, and when the first rank of Musketeers present, the first rank of
Granadiers are to deliver their Granado's and as soon as done, they are to
unsling their firelocks, and put in their Daggers, and stand charged as the
rest.

When you give the Command to Face Square the Musketeers on the right and left
are to Face outward, and those in the Rere to face to the right about, The
three outwardmost Files of Pikes on the right and left are to Face outward,
and the Rere half files of the rest of the Pikes are to Face to the right
about. Those men that are in the Angles, are to face toward the Points of the
Angles, the Musketeers must close, backwards as near to the Pikes as they can
with convenience to use their Arms, that the Pikes may reach the farther over
them.

The Ensigns are to keep their Colors Advanced and flying, which are to be
Posted within the Square after this Method.

If there be ten Colors, the three Colors on the right are to be against the
proper front of the Battalion, the two Colors next to them are to be against
the right flank. The two Colors next to them are to be against the Rere, and
they are all to Face as the Body faces, and to March as they do. The Drums and
Ho-boys are to divide themselves equally to make as much room as they can
within the Square.

The Musketeers being commanded to make ready, They are all to make the motion
of Cocking and Guarding, and at the same time the Pikemen to Port their Pikes
very low, (as they stand faced) without any word of Command, as also the
Officers.

Tou must fire only the two last ranks together, that is, The second and third,
the first of which being to stoop, the front rank or the first rank of all is
to kneel, holding their Muskets, so that the two other ranks may fire clear of
them. As soon as ever the second and third rank have fired and Recovered their
Arms, the first rank is to stand up without any other word of command with
their Muskets Cockt and Guarded ready to Present. And at the same time the two
other Ranks which have fired, Load their Arms again and make ready. The Pikes
are to continue Ported very low all the while till all the three ranks have
fired. After the front rank stands up, they are to be commanded to present and
Fire, and after that to Recover their Arms, the Pikemen at the fame word of
Command being to Recover their Pikes. The front rank which fired last and all
the rest that have not Primed and Loaded their Arms, are to do it (or in
Exercise to make the motion of it) as they March, and are afterward to
Shoulder. The Granadiers are to be Ordered as is before ^^^tioned.

The reason why the Pikes do not Charge when the Musketeers Present, but
continue Ported, is, That the Musketeers in firing may not shatter the ends of
them with their Shot, but when the Musketeers have fired, if there be occasion,
the Pikes may be made to Charge from their Port in the twinkling of an Eye.

Of the Saluting Posture standing.
An Officer is to stand in the same Posture with his Pike Ordered as a private
Soldier, only his Arm stretched out, holding his Pike at the Arms end, the
Butt-end at the same distance from his Right Foot, which keeps it upright.

To Salute Standing.
The Officer is to fall back with the Right Arm and Leg keeping the Spear of
his Pike directly (...) the R^a^ sloped, just about the same height as Soldiers
Pike is when it is Shouldered, his Left To to the Front, and the middle of his
Right Foot against his Left Heel, his Left Hard stretched (...) straight before
him, he is to take hold of the Pike and turning it with his Right Hand, to quit
that place he had hold of with his Right Hand and taking hold of the Butt-end
with his Right Hand be is to bring the Spear of the Pike close to the ground
but not to touch it, his Fingers of both (...) straight out as soon as ever he
has broug^^ Spear so low, he is to raise the Pike again and to bring the Spear
backward directly to the Re^^ at the same Height 'twas at, and bringing up his
Right Foot at the same time, brings his Pike us to the Order 'twas at, and then
he is to pull of his Hat without bowing, and to keep it off (...) the Person be
past whom he Salures. He must be sure to observe to do every Motion leisurely
and not too quick. And take Care to have his Salute timed so that he may be
ready to pull off his, Hat just as the Person he Salutes comes right against
him.

In Saluting he must take care always to stand Faced directly to the Front, or
that way the Soldiers Face, and to Salute just so, let the Person he Salutes
come which way he will.

To Salute Marching.
As soon as the Officers approach the Person they are to Salute, They must be
sure to Shoulder their Pikes from their comport all together, and to take great
care that they do not swing them round but only turn the Spears directly
backwards, and lay them as level as it is possible to carry them on their
Shoulders, their Elbows out.

When they Salute they must take great care to do every Motion exactly together
and leisurely. And therefore 'twould; be necessary for One ^^^^ve the Word to
the rest. And they are to take care that in Sal^ting they neither stand still
nor mend their pace.

The first motion in Saluting is to dart their Pikes leisurely directly forward
upon the same level as they are Shouldered, stretching out their Right Hand as
far as they can, advancing at the same time with the Right Foot, and then
advancing with the Left Foot, bringing the Right Hand back, they turn their
Pikes the Spear directly forward bringing them ^ne the ground, and then raising
them again, They bring them to their Shoulder upon a direct level as they were;
Which done, They pull off their Hats without bowing, and keep them off till
they are past by the Person they Salute.

They must be sure to time their Salute so, as to be ready to pull off their
Hats just as they come over against the Person they salute.

Of the Exercise of Horse.
THE Exercise of Horse, consisting in fewer words of Command than that of Foot,
is more generally known; and there is little alteration to be made from former
Practice, but what is rather for Show than Use.

When a Troop or Squardon is to Exercise, they must have their Carabines and
Pistols Laden, and when the Corporals have been through the Ranks, and seen
that they be all ready, th^^ Officer in Chief Command s Silence, and proceeds
as follows.

Words of Command
Lay your Right hands on your Swords. Draw your Swords. Put your Swords into
your bridle=hands. Lay your hands on your pistols. Draw your Pistols. Cock your
pistols. Hold up your Hands. Give fire. Note that after they have given Fire,
they must still keep their Hands up till the Word of Command be given to Return
their Pistols. Return your pistols.
The same words of Command are given for the other pistol. And then as
follows.

Lay your hands on your Carabines. advance your Carabines. Cock your Carabines.
Present your Carabines. Fire. Let fall your Carabines, Take your Swords from
your bridle-hands. Return your Swords.
All which Motions the Officers are to see done exactly at the same time, and
therefore must not give the Words of Command too fast.

When a Body of Horse is Drawn up, the Officers are to stand close to their
men, only he who commands must be an Horse length before the rest of the
Officers; and the same is to be observed in marching, for nothing is more
unseemly than Officers to be at too fa^ a distance from their men.

It is thought requisite to make an Alteration in the manner of Wheeling of
Horse; For, whereas formerly when a Squadron of Horse was Commanded to Wheel
(if it were to the Right) the Right Hand Men Closed to the Left, by which the
Ranks were apt to be put out of Order; And therefore the Practice now is, That
the Right Hand men keep their Ground only Turning their Horse Heads to the
Right, whilst the Left comes about; In which Motion they must observe their
Left Hand men.

It is also necessary to practice Horse (...) Facing to the Left About.

When a Squadron of Horse is to Charge another, it is better they should do it
with their Swords in their Hands, than either with Pistols or Carabines.

The Exercise of Granadiers on Horseback

WHen they are on Horseback, then the common Exercise used by Horse is most
proper for them, only they must strictly observe, that whenever they March,
Wheel ^ace or Alt, they keep three foot distance be^wixt every file, that they
may have room to Dismount their Horses, March through, or face about. And being
thus Marched into the ^ield, their Arms Charged, and their Hatts on, the word
of Command being given to Alt, the Officer in chief Commanding Silence, is to
proceed as follows, viz.

Granadiers have a Care. Sling your Muskets. Having your Left hand on your
Sling. Put on your Caps, Right and Left Hand men of each Rank keep Mounted.
Clear your Right foot of the stirrup, At which time they are to Handle their
Muskets, and to cast them backwards over their Cloaks. Dismount Which is to be
done quick and all together. make ready your Links. Link your Horses to the
Left, March March clear of your Horses Which may be done by the second or third
Rank Marching through, and as soon as clear, handling their Muskets: Shoulder
your Muskets. Marching and the Sargeants and Corporals taking care of the
Ranks, etc. and that the Files open in their marching to three foot distance.
alt. Lay your Right Hand on your Muskets. Poise your Muskets. Facing to the
Right. Rest your Muskets. Cock and Guard. present. Fire. Recover your arms.
Half-bending your muskets. Call about to the Left. Draw your Dagger. Fir them
in your Musket. Recover your arms. Charge to the front. ^o the Right, Charge
four times. ^o the Right about Charge. as you were. To the Left, Charge four
times. To the Left about. as you were. Recover your arms. Cast about to the
Left. Having your Right Hand on your Dagger. Withdraw your Dagger. Return your
Dagger, Poise your Musket. Clean your Pan. Open your Cartridge box. Cake out
your Primer. Prime. Return your Primer. Shut your Pan. Bringing your Musket up
quick before you. Blow off your Loose corns. Cast about to Charge. Take out
your Cartridge Immediately after shutting the Cartridge box. Uncap your
Cartridge with your Teeth. Load with powder and ball. Draw forth your Scowrer.
Shorten it to an ^uch. Place it in the Barred. Ram home powder and ball.
Withdraw your Scowrer. Shorten it to an Handful. Return your Scowrer. Poise
your Musket Before you. Shoulder your Musket. Poise your Muskets. Seizing their
Slings with their Left Hands. Sling your Muskets. Handle your Pouch. Stepping
forward with your right Leg your Left Hand at the bottom all of an height, your
right hand hold up all of an height. Open your pouch. Take forth your Granade.
The Right Hand extended before you. Shut your pouch. The left hand held up all
of a height, shut them all together at one motion. Uncase your Fuse. falling
back with your Right Leg even to your Left, and facing to the front. Handle
your Match The left hand to the left-side, both Arms extended. The three ranks
doing it together. Blow your Match. Te first Rank only falling back with the
Right Leg, blowing a strong blast, The first Rank Fire your Fuse. Deliver your
^ranade. Afterward they are to unsling their Muskets.
At which word of Command the second Rank is to march through on the Right six
Foot before the first, with their Matches ready to blow

Blow your Match. Fire your Fuse. Deliver your Granade. Unsling and stand Cockt
and guarded.
At which word of Command the Third Rank is to march through on the Right, Six
Foot before the Second.

Blow your Match. Fire your Fuse. Deliver your Granade. Unsling and stand cockt
and guarded.
At which word of Command the first or proper Front is to march through six
Foot.

First Rank present, Fire. After which they are to fix their Daggers in their
Musket.
Which the Second and Third Ranks are to perform in the same manner
successively by the same words of Command.

Recover your arms. Cast about to the Left. Withdraw your Daggers. Return your
Daggers. Poise your Muskets To the proper Front. Shoulder your muskets. To the
Right about. Taking up your first ground and opening your ranks in your march.
To your Leaders, Poise your Muskets: Rest upon your Arms, Lay down your Arms.
To the Right about. March. Breaking their ranks, then the Drum beating they
draw their Swords, facing to the Left about, running with a Huzza to their
Arms. Return your Swords Handle your Arms. Recover and Poise. Shoulder your
Muskets. Poise your Muskets. Face to the Right about. Sling your Muskets. March
to your Horses The second and third ranks marching and standing at their Horses
head Facing to the front. Unlink your Horses. Fasten your Links.When done they
are to shorten their Bridles. Put your foot into your Stirrup At which times
they must lay their Muskets over their Saddles. Mount Which must be done all
together and the proper Officers are immediately to take care of the Ranks.
Handle your Swords, Draw your Swords. Place your Swords in your Bridle Hands
Handle your Pistol which is always the Left first. Draw your Pistol. Cock your
pistol Keeping your Thumb on the Cock assisted by the left hand. present The
Cock equal with your Head in height on Exercise. Fire Still holding it up till
he the next Word of Command. Return your Pistol. The same for the Right Pistol
Handle your Muskets Unsling your Muskets Mount your Muskets.
Here if you order your Muskets to be Charged you may proceed as follows,

Cock your Muskets, Present you Muskets, Into the Air Give Fire Keeping the
Muzzel still up till the next word of Command. Sling your Muskets Handle your
Swords By taking your Swords in your Right Hands. March
After which the Officer may proceed to Marchings, Facings, Wheelings, or what
other Exercise he shall think fit and proper for them on Horseback, and to show
them the Method of charging their Arms on Horseback as well as on Foot, and the
Words of Command are to be given so distinctly that the other Officers may have
time to see every particular person exactly observe the same, and that they be
accustomed to fire at Marks both on Horseback and on Foot.

Exercise of Dragoons,
It Is to be supposed, that when the Officer in Chief comes into the Field, he
finds the Dragoons Drawn up in three Ranks, with their Muskets Advanced.
Whereupon Silence being Commanded, the Word is,

Dragoons have a Care. Sling your Muskets, Make ready your Links, Clear your
Right Foot of your Stirrup, Dismount, Standing at your Horses Head.
When they Dismount, the six Outside men are to continue mounted, that they may
take care of the Horses.

Link your Horses to the Left,

March clear of your Horses. and Shoulder as you March. Alt.

Then the Battalion is to be Formed in the same Method as the Foot, by evening
the Banks and Streightning the Files; The Surgeants and Corporals falling into
the Flanks and Rere of the Battalion, and the Commission Officers Forming a
Rank in the Rere, which is done by the following Words of Command the Officer
in Chief standing about Twenty Paces distant from the Front of the Battalion in
the middle of it.

Have a care of the Exercise,
Officers to the Right about, Take your Posts in the Rere of the Battalion^
March. Dragoons have a Care At which they pull off their Right Hand Gloves, and
place them under their Girdles. Lay your Right Hand to your Musket, Poise your
Musket. Rest your Musket. Cock and Guard. Present. Fire. Recover your Arms with
the Cock half-bent. Rest upon your Musket. Handle your Dagger. Draw forth your
Dagger. Fir them in the Muzzel of your Muskets. Poise your muskets. Charge to
the Front.
Charge. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right. To the Right.

Charge. To the Right about. To the Left about.

Charge. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left. To the Left.

Charge. To the Left about. To the Right about.

Recover your Arms. Rest upon your Muskets. Handle your Dagger. Withdraw your
Dagger. Place your Dagger. Poise your Musket. Rest your Musket. Clean the Pan
with the ball of your Thumb. Open your Cartridge-Box. Handle your Primer. Draw
forth your Primer. Sink and Prime. Return your Primer. Shut your Pan with your
two Fore fingers. Blow off your loose Corns, Recovering your Arms as the same
time. Cast about to Charge. Handle your Cartridge. Take out your Cartridge.
Immediately after shutting your Cartridge-box. Open it with your Teeth. Charge
with Powder and Ball. Draw forth your Scowrer. Shorten it to an ^nch. Against
your right breast. Put it into the Muzzel of your Musket. Ram down Powder and
Ball. Withdraw your Scowrer. Shorten it to and Handful. Against your Right
breast. Place your Scowrer. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Muskets. Poise
your Muskets. Rest upon your arms. Lay down your arms. Duit your arms. To the
Right about. March clear of your arms.
When they are from their Arms, they are at the first Beat of Drum to return to
them with an Huzza, and as they run, Draw their Swords: And then every Man is
to stand over his own Arms.

Return your Swords. Handle your arms. Rest upon your arms. Poise your Muskets.
Sling your Muskets. To the Right about. March to your Horses Unlink your Horses
S^^rten your Bridles. Put your Left Foot in the Stirrup Mount. Fasten your
Links. Unsling and Advance your Muskets.
For Firing on Horseback.
Their Muskets being advanced on their Right Thigh.

Join your Left Hand to your Muskets. Cock and Guard. Rest your Muskets on your
Bridle-hand Present. Fire. Recover your Arms with the Cock Half-bent.
Then they are ready to march, Wheel or Face with or without their Daggers fixed
in their Muskets as the Officer commanding shall think fit.

Of Encamping.
THE Major General for the day, having with him such of the Guards of Horse as
shall be thought fit, and ordered by the General for the Security of the Camp,
is to March before the Army that he may have time to view the ground and to
Settle the Camp, not far from Water if it may be with convenience, Which being
done, He is to order the Quarter-MasterGeneral to Set out the Ground to the
Majors of the Brigades, who thereupon Set it out to the Adjutants of each
Regiment, who divide it for each Troop or Company. The Major General in the
mean while is to Ride about the Camp to Post the Main-guards as he finds best
for the Safety of the Army, and is to order the Quarter Master General what
ground or Village he shall take up for the Kings Quarters, as also some
commodious place for the Park of Artil^ary, and another for the Bread-Carts
which is commonly near the Center of the Army with (...) Hospital.

When every thing has been done as above mentioned, and the Camp all Marked
out, Then the Major General is to send an Ald de Camp to give Notice to the
General that all is ready. And at the Entering into the Camp the Major General
is to meet the General to give him a full account of every particular, The
Adjutants General of Horse and Foot attending always on the General that they
may be ready to Execute his Orders, and make Detachments without delay.

It is the usual Practice to Camp an Army in two Lines, The Second distant from
the First Three hundred Paces; That is, From the Head of the first Line to the
Head of the Second, whereof One hundred and twenty are for the E^camping of the
First Line, so that there remains One hundred and eighty Paces for the distance
between the last Tents of the first Line and the Head of the Second. And if the
Army Encamp with a Reserve, Then the same distance is to be observed by them.

The Horse are to be Posted on the Wings, and the Foot in the Middle in such a
manner that the Lines of the Camp look toward the Enemy and be Covered behind
by a River, Brook, of March, if it may be with Convenience.

Every Squadron consisting in Three Troops, and fifty men each Troop, must be
allowed fifty paces. And every Battalion consisting of sixteen Companies and
fifty men in each Company, must have One hundred paces allowed for their
Encamping.

All Troops or Companies of Horse of Foot consisting but of fifty men are to be
Encamped on one Row of Baraques or Hutts; But when Troops or Companies consist
of more men, there must be two Files of Baraques or Hutts.

It is to be observed that in each Squadron or Battalion, The Colonels Company
be always ^^on the Right or Left, And there make their Row of Hutts. Behind
them must be left a space for the Street. Then the Second Company make their
Row of Hutts, near to which the Third makes theirs, leaving the space of two
Foot only between their Hutts, which is called the By Street. And the same
thing is to be observed by the Horse.

The Hutts of the Foot always open toward the Street, the Baraques of the
Cavalry always toward the Horse Heads.

The Hutts of the Quartermaster and Sargeants are always to be at the Head of
the Troopers and Soldiers, And the Officers Tents behind.

The Camp of the first Brigade of the Army is on the right hand of the first
line, That of the second on the Left, the Third is Posted on the right of the
Second Line, the Fourth on the Left, and the rest in the Center according to
their Seniority. This is to be observed among the Horse as well as Foot.

The Dragoons are never to be Encamped in the Body of the Army, but have their
Camp at the Head or on the Wings on that side where the greatest danger is,
serving always as an Out-guard for the Army.

Every Regiment is to have a Guard at the Head of their Camp, and the Major
General for the day, takes care to place the great Guard in a proper place and
distance from the Army toward the Enemy, choosing for that Effect a place
where all ^he Av^^^es may be discovered. There it is to continue during the
day, and at night is to draw off near the Army at the Head of the Foot.

When an Army Encamps near an Enemy, and there be no River to divide them, the
General oftentimes Entrenches his Camp, and makes his men pass the night under
Arms.

The Colonel, or Officer of Horse who Mounts the Guard, is to send off an
Out-Guard, or Advance-guard consisting of twenty four Troopers, Commanded by a
Lieutenant, whom he Posts where he sees most convenient in a place from whence
the Country about may be easily discovered;

The Duty of him who commands the great Guard, is to let no person whatsoever
pass without an Order, to look every where about, and to send Notice to the
General whenever he discovers any Troop or Forces.

It is to be observed, that the measure of ground beforementioned, is meant
only for Encamping of an Army, for if it were to be Ranged in Battle in case of
Service, the distances between the Battalions or Squadrons are to be greater
than in a Camp. It must be endeavored as much as may be, that the second ^^ne
be equal to the first, keeping the same distance upon the Right and Left.

The Particulars of Encamping a Battalion:
WHen the Quartermaster has, his Ground allotted to him for Encamping a
Battalion (which is commonly One hundred Paces) he is to divide it in the
manner following, viz. He must allow seven Foot Square to each Hut, two foot to
the By-streets and fifteen foot to the great Streets. Every Company consisting
of Fifty Men, ought to have Ten Hutts; And there must be the distance of two
foot between the Hutts. The Kitchins must be marked out at twelve foot distance
from the last Row of Hutts, and are to be placed just over against them, so
that the Streets may be open quite through for the Officers to pass easily to
the Head of the Camp as there shall be occasion: The length of the Kitchen is
to be nine foot, and the breadth Six foot: There must be thirty Paces distance
between the Soldiers Kitchins and the front of the captains Tents; forty Paces
distance between the Captains Tents and the front of the Tents of the Subaltern
Officers; and the remaining Ground is for the Encamping of the Field-Officers,
and the Captains Equipage. The Suttlers are to Encamp behind the Officers
Tents: The Colonels, and Field-Officers and Staff-Officers Tents are to be in
the Center of the Battalion, behind the Tents of the Captains.

There must be twenty or thirty Paces between one Battalion and another: The
Sargeants Hutts are to be at the Head of the Soldiers, to open the contrary
way; That isto the Front.

The Pikes (whether they are placed against a Cross or in a Stand) must be
allowed at eighten Foot distance from the Hutts. The Muskets at eighteen foot
distance from the Pikes, That is before them:

The Colors and Drums are to be set within the hollow of the Pikes; the
Halberts of the Sargeants that march with the Shot, should be placed with the
Muskets, and those of the Sargeants that march with the Pikes, with the Pikes.

The particulars of Encamping a Squadron:
WHen a Quartermaster or Horse has Ground allotted to him for a Squadron,
which is commonly fifty Paces, he is to divide it in the following manner, viz.
He must allow three Paces for the length of Baraque, and two paces distance
from the opening of the Baraques to the Stakes to which the Horses are
fastened, and three Paces for each Horses standing, and ten paces for the
Street.

To the Second Troop is to be allowed two paces distance, three paces for their
Baraques, and one pace distance for the By-Streets:

The Third Troop must have two paces distance, three paces for the Baraques,
and three paces for the Horses, after which there will remain fifteen paces,
which makes the distance from one Squadron to another:

If the Squadron be stronger, they must have more Ground, this being only for a
Squadron of one hundred and fifty men in three Troops, each Troop making but on
row of Baraques:

The Colors are to be placed at eighteen foot distance from the Front of the
Baraques, in the same Line with the Pikes:

There are commonly ten or twelve Baraques on a row for every Troop of fifty
men, and there must be at least two paces distance from one Baraque to another:

For the Kitchins belonging to the Troops, the Officers Tents, and the Suttlers
which attend upon the Troops, the same measures are to be observed in
proportion as are used for Encamping of Foot: By a pace is meant three Foot.

Orders for Battle.
THO there can be no certain Rules given for any Order of Battle, which depends
chiefly upon the Circumstances of place, and other accidents; yet these short
Directions are to serve for an Example, to show the nature of the thing by a
single Battalion.

You must first of all Command Silence, at which time the Ranks are to be two
good paces distant, and the Files closed in such manner, that every Soldier
may March at his ease, and so load and Fire; which will be best effected by
every ones keeping the distance of half a foot from his Right-hand-man; so that
they may have liberty of moving their Elbows as they March.

You must command them to March very slowly, to observe the Right in marching,
and to preserve^ the Intervals, which are always to be fifty or sixty paces at
least, and (if the Ground will afford it) more; that fifty or sixty of a
Battalion may pass through them with ease, nothing having ever proved
prejudicial in Battle, than the having intervals too strait.

None is to speak but the Commander in Chief, or the Major (by his Order) who
is always to attend his Commands.

To a Battalion of ten Companies, there are supposed to be (besides the Colonel
and Lieutenant Colonel) eight Captains, and nine Lieutenants, who are to be
Posted in the Form of Battle as follows:

Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel, and five Captains at the Head of the Pikes.

1 st and 3d Captain at the head of the right division of shot.

2 d and 4 th Captain at the head of the Left Division of shot.

^th Captain in the Rere of the Pikes.

7 th Captain in the Rere of the left Wing of Shot.

8 th Captain in the Rere of the right Wing of Shot.

1 st and 3 d Lieutenant at the head of the right Wing of Shot.

2 d and 4 th Lieutenant at the head of the left Wing of Shot.

5 th Lieutenant on the right Flank.

6 th Lieutenant on the Left Flank.

7 th Lieutenant in the Rere of the Pikes.

8 th Lieutenant in the Rere of the left Wing of Shot.

9 th Lieutenant in the Rere of the right wing of Shot.

Which Rule is to be observed whether the Colonel or Lieutenant Colonel be
present or no, by placing the Eldest Captains at the head of the Pikes, and so
proceeding in the method before specified, the youngest being posted in the
Rere, whatever the Number of Officers may be, unless the General or Commander
in chief give order to post them otherwise, as there may be occasion.

Advancing against the Enemy in Battle out of Musket Shot, the Captains and
other Officers at the head of the Battalion are all to March in a Line with
their pikes in their hands two good paces before the men, and are often to look
behind them, because otherwise they may insensibly get too much before the
body, and the Soldiers by following to^ fast, fall into Disorder, whereof great
care is to be taken in marching against an Enemy.

When the Musketeers come within Shot, and march ready with their Muskets
guarded, the ranks should be closed forwards to Swords point; the Distance of
Files is to be preserved, as has been said already.

In a Battle, the Captains and other Officers are to march in a Line; but
coming within Shot of the Enemy, and the Musketeers marching ready Cockt and
Guarded, when the first rank is commanded to kneel, the whole line of Captains
and other Officers is to Retire each of them into the Intervals of his Files
next behind his Post, yet so that they may look to the right and left of the
Battalion.

The Offier commanding the Rere, is to observe that the Battalion keep
marching, to cause the Soldiers to close forwards easily without noise or
confusion. His chief care is, to command the pikes to march always even with
the wings of Shot; for it often happens that in marching any considerable time
in Battle, the Wings advance, and form a half Moon, so that the pikes in the
middle being extremely pressed upon, the Battalion falls into confusion; but
provided the motion of the pikes be equal with the Right and Left, the
Battalion cannot be disordered in its March. Above all, care must be taken to
preserve the distance in rank and File, according to what has been said already.

The Granadiers (when there are any) are to be Drawn up on the right of the
Battalion, and to augment it without intermixing with it, or troubling the
order of it, they being a separate number of men, that are to be always reday
f^r whatsoever shall be commanded them

The Commander of a Battalion may be on Horseback at the Head of it, when the
Captains are on Foot, with their Pikes in their Hands, in as much as he is to
be stirring to all parts, to see that they March as they should; and above all,
that none speak except himself, or the Major by his Order; and is to alight
when the Musketeers make ready, and to march with his Pike Charged against the
Enemy.

When an Army is drawn up for Battle, the usual distance between the Lines is
three hundred Paces.

Of Garrisons and Guards.
THe Officers usually placed in a Garrison, are a Governor, a Lieutenant
Governor, a Major, Aid-Major, and Captains of the Gates.

It is the Governors part to have a continual care of the preservation of the
Place entrusted to him. His Office is to appoint the Guards, Rounds, and
Patrols, to give the word every evening, visit the Posts, keep the Officers and
and Soldiers to their Duty, charge them to be diligent, and to send out
frequent Parties as well to learn News of the Enemy, as to raise contributions
from the Neighboring Country.

The Lieutenant Governor, or Officer in chief commands in the place and
Government in absence of the Governor, with the same Authority.

The Major sees the Guards mounted, the Rounds and Posts assigned, he regulates
the Sentinels, goes every evening to receive the word from the Governor, and
gives it about upon the place of Arms, to the Quartermasters and Sargeants of
the Garrison. He goes his Round Major, visits the Corpse of Guards, and sees
that all the Soldiers Arms are fixed and in good order; he causes necessary
Ammunition to be distributed among them, orders the Gates to be opened and
shut, and gives the Governor an exact account of all that passes in the place

The Aid Majors are more or less in number, according to the greatness of
Places; They go the Rounds with the Major by turns, and the Duty of their
Places differs nothing at all from his, they being as Assistants to him.

The Care of the Captains of the Gates is to go Evening and Morning to the
Governors House, to receive the keys of the Gates, that they may open and shut
them.

There is usually in every Garrison (especially a Frontier Town) a Commissary
of Artillery, a Store-keeper who keeps account of all the Ammunition, and
distributes it according to the Governors, order, a certain number of Gunners,
whereof there is always to be one on the Guard at the Batteries, a Commissary
of Provisions who has the charge of the Corn, Flower, and all that may serve
font be Sustenance of a Garrison.

The Officers who are in a Garrison, owe all Obedience and Respect to the
Governor or Commander in chief, and they cannot be absent for any reason
soever, without a permission from him in Writing or from the Person that
commands there in his absence.

In Garrison, some men are to be placed at the Gates, whose care is only to
observe Strangers that come in and go out, and according to the comparing the
Memorials which they and all the Innkeepers of the Town are to bring every
evening to the Major; it is known how many Strangers are every night in the
place, what they are, and where they Lodge.

The hour of mounting the Guard is different in Garrisons, according to the
inclination of the Govarnours; in some places it is done at the break of day,
because at the time when the Gates are opened (which is the usual hour of
Surprises). Two Thirds of the Garrison are in Arms; others mount it at ten of
the Clock in the Forenoon, or toward the Evening; but the most usual time is
at two of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Whilst the Drums beat for the Guard, the Sargeants or Corporals are to go to
the Major's House, who makes them cast Lots for the Posts and Rounds and writes
them down in a Register kept for that purpose.

Having done so, they return to their Companies or Squadrons, who gather
together before the Captains Quarters, and if they do not mount by whole
Companies, but by Detached men (which is the most practicable way of doing
Duty) the Sargeants Lead them in good order, Drams beating as far as the place
of Arms, to that part where the Guards of the Post which has fallen to their
share, ought to meet.

When all the Detachments are Drawn up on the place of Arms formed ready for
the Guards, the Major or Aid-major makes the Officers draw Lots for the Posts
and Rounds, beginning by the Cap^ains, and ending at the Sargeants.

At the places which are weakest, and where there is greatest danger, there
ought to be a stronger Guard commanded by a Captain, with a Sub-Lieutenant or
Ensign, and two or three Sargeants.

The Guards being Set, and the Officces having taken their posts, the Major
begins to make the Guard of the place of Arms (or the main guard) march off,
then those of the Gates and Bastions: and lastly, those that are without.

Whilst the Guard is mounting, the Officers of the Guard that is to be
Relieved, put their Soldiers in Arms and draw from the Guard, that they may
leave the Place to the Guard that is to Relieve them, and Post themselves over
against them, every Officer standing in his Post at the Head of them.

The Officers of the Guard that is Relieved Delivers to them whatever orders
there are, the Corporals do the like to their Comrades, they charge them with
the Furniture of the Corpse of Guard, and inform them of the number of Sentinels
that are to be set, as well by night as by day, and of what they have to do
extraordinary.

The Consignations being made, and Sentinels believed, the Officers of the
Guard that is relieved March off their Soldiers to the place of Arms; where
when they have Drawn them up; they dismiss them.

The Officers of the Guard that have Mounted, Command the Soldiers to set down
their Arms, by these Words of Command, the Pikes being Advanced, and Muskets
Shouldered.

Recover your arms.

Ranks, File off by Division to the Right (or Left)

March.

Set down your arms in good Order.

As soon as the Arms are set down, the Officers are to Order the Corporals to
take care that they be in condition to Fire, and that the Bandaliers be
provided with Powder and Ball, Flints or Match, and to give strict Command to
the Sentinels that are a^ the Gates, never to suffer any stop of Wagons or
Carts upon the Bridges, charging them to stop the Carriages that come in or go
out, until they know that no others are coming to meet them.

When a Stranger on Horseback or Foot, offers to come into the Town, the
Out-Sentinels are to stop him, then to call the Corporal, who gives notice of
it to the Officer, and the Officer send one or two Musketeers with him to the
Governors House.

At what distance soever a Sentinel discovers any Troops, he ought to give
notice thereof to the Corpse of Guard, and the Officer causes immediately the
Barrier to be made fast, or a Bridge to be drawn, letting no body in, unless
the Major or Aid-Major bring Orders for it from the Governor.

When it is time to shut the Gates, the Bell is, rung to call in those that are
abroad in the Fields, and the Aid-Majors, or Captains of the Gates, attended by
some Musketeers of the Main Guards come to the Governors House for the Ke^^,
and as soon as they come to the Gates, the Officers draw the Guard in two
Ranks, and order the Musketeers to stand Guarded, and send some of the Pikemen
to help to draw up the Bridges.

After the Gates are shut, one half of the Guard is to be drawn upon the
Rampart to pass the night in the Corpse of Guard of the Curtains or Bastions.
The Corporals send some Soldiers for Firing and Candle, and the Sargeants go to
the place of Arms to receive the Word, which is no sooner given but the
Sargeants of the Guard carry the Word to their Officers and give it about among
the Corporals who command the Sentinels to suffer no body after that time to
pass upon the Ramparts without commanding them to Stand, and giving Notice of
it to the Corpse of Guard.

The Taptoe or Retreat is beaten either at Nine or Ten, as the Governor
directs.

When the Major goes the Round, the Officers of the Guard receives him by the
Corporal and two Musketeers, and give him the Word once only; that is, at his
Round Major.

When the Governor, Lieutenant-Governour or Commander in Chief go^^ the Round,
the Officers having Ranked their Soldiers before the Guard without Arms, send a
Corporal and four Musketeers to receive them ten paces off. And are to give
them the Word as often as they please to Demand it. All other Rounds without
exception ought to give the Word to the Corporals of Lanspelades of the Corpse
of Guards, who receive it with the point of their naked Sword at the Breast of
him who gives it.

^In Garrisons that are well guarded, the Rounds go every quarter of an hour;
to the end the Rampart may never be unfurnished. And that there may be an
exactness in it, they carry Meddals of Lead from Guard to Guard, so that if
these be any neglect it may be found where it was.

The Rounds are made with Light, and so soon has a Sentinel percieves any, it
is his Duty to cry, Who comes there? so loud that he may be ^heard by the next
Corpse of Guard. He who goes the Round should Answer.

The Round, Or, The Round Major. Or, The ^obernours Round.
The Sentinels by whom he passes should always rest their Arms, and never
permit any whomsoever to come too near them. When he draws near a Corpse of
Guard, the Sentine before the Arms shall ask him very loud,

Who comes there? So soon as he Answers, The Round.
The Sentinel is to call to him to Stand.

And to the Corporal to Come forth,

Thereupon the Corporal is to come immediately out of the Corpse of Guards, to
draw his Sword and Ask,

Who comes there? When he is Answered, The Round, He is to say, Let him who has
the word, advance.
Then the Round Advances and gives the Word into the Corporals Ear so low that
he cannot be heard of any body else. But if one should give any other Word than
what is true, he ought to be stopped, And the Officer of the Guard is to be
acquainted with it, who either keeps him all night a prisoner, or disposes of
him as he thinks proper.

Though all Sentinels rest their Muskets in the night, and stand with their
Pikes charged when any Round or Officer comes by, yet in the day the Muskets
are to be Shouldered and the ^ikes Ordered.

The Out corpse of Guard make Round about the covered ways, but give no Word,
They being only made to bearken and every Soldier goes the round by turns.

The Patrolls are made in the Streets by a Sargeans (...) six Musketeers of the
Main-Guard to cause the Soldiers to retire to their Quarters, the public
Houses to shut their Doors, and to hinder the Disorders that may be committed,
stoping and carrying to the Guard all that are found in the Streets without
Light and disorderly.

At what hour soever the Alarm is Rung all the Companies are with speed and
diligence to assemble before their Captains Quarters, who are to lead them to
the Posts that have been appointed them by the Major.

At the break of day the Drums beat the Reville, the Aid-Majors and Captains of
the Gates come to the Governors for the Keys, and the Officers of the Guards
bring off the Soldiers that passed the night on the Ramparts, and rank them in
two ranks, and make them stand with their Arms guarded whilst the Gates are
Opening. The Majors sends a Sargeant with some Musketeers to skout in the
Suburbs and in the Hollow Ways about the Town, and draw the Bridge upon them,
until they come back. When they bring an account that there is no Danger the
rest of the Bridges are let down. The Corporals place, the Out-Sentinels whom
they inform of what they have to do. The Majors and Captains of the Gates carry
back the Keys to the Governors House, and the Officers make the Soldiers for
down their Arms.

In Garrisons that are well provided with horse The Governor places daily a
guard of fifty Troopers, and sends every morning an Officer with some Horsemen
to Beat the Road a mile or two round the place.

Every Officer of a Guard is to answer for his Post, and no man, not so much as
his Colonel can command him in any thing except the Governor of the place or
he who commands in his absence.

All Governors or Commanders in chief ought to have a Sentinel at their Door,
and as often as they pass by any Corpse of Guard the Officers are obliged to
draw out their Soldiers before the guard in a rank without Arms and stand at
their Head.

I f the Governor or Commander of a Place be a Lieutenant General, he is to
have a Guard at his door consisting of a Lieutenant, Sargeant and thirty men
who are to be under Arms as well as the other Corpse of Guard every time he
passes, but the Drums are not to Beat the March.

If the Commander of a Place be a General, he is to have a Guard of fifty men
commanded by a Captain, a Lieutenant, a Sub-Lieutenant or an Ensign and two
Sargeants, and all Corpse of Guard are obliged to be under Arms when he passes,
and the Drums to beat the March.

When any Prince of the Blood, or General of an Army passes through a Garrison,
the Governor furnishes them with a Foot-guard; and at their Entry and
Departure Salute them with Cannon.

Memorandum, All field Offiers and Commanders of Battalions are exempted from
mounting of Guards.

That the Regiments and Troops of Guards are never to R^ule with any other
Regiments or Troops, but are always to choose their posts,

That the Sargeants of the Regiments of Guards are never to receive orders in
the Ring with any other Sargeants, but in a Ring Separately.

General Directions.
T He Officers are to take gneat care that their Soldiers keep themselves
cleanly and handsome in their clothes, as well as their Arms in good Order. It
being as much the Duty of an Officer to see that a Soldiers clothes, and shoes
and stockins be as they ought to be, as their Arms and especially upon Mounting
of Guards or coming upon Duty, they are to see that they have every thing in
order.

The Captains of Foot, Lieutenants and Ensigns are to wear their Gorgets
whenever they are upon Duty, or appear in Arms with their Companies.

It Is very necessary for all captains and Commanders of Companies to practice
their Musketeers to Exercise Pikes, and their Pikemen Muskets: As also to
practice their men to shoot at a Mark, which is extreme useful.

It Is too be observed that in Marching a Battalion in three Divisions, the
Distances between the Divisions be neither too great nor too little, The best
Rule for which is the judgment of the Officers to keep just so much Distance
between the Divisions as is necessary to Wheel a Division to make good the
Front as if you were to draw up on a sudden.

In marching by Subdivisions also the same method is best for the Distances
between every Division.

No Sentinel or Soldier under Arms is to bow or to pull off his Hat.

It is likewise to be observed, that when the Pikes or Muskets of a Body of men
are all Ordered, and that they be to Shoulder their Muskets and Advance their
Pikes, the Musketeers to be Commanded to Poise and Shoulder their Muskets
before the Pikes are to Advance.

When Officers are at any time to be Divided and Posted, It is to be done by
the Odd and even as the most easy war.

Upon Detachments or Parties all Officers of Horse are to command according to
the Dates of their Commissions, and all Officers of Foot according to the Ranks
of their Regi^^nts. and not according to their Commissions, but the Lieutenants
and Ensigns of the same Regiment upon such Detachments or Parties are to
command among themselves according to their Commissions and not the Rank of
their Companies

In Marching off any Parade or Place where men are drawn up, the Pikes are to
continue advanced till they have marched clear of the place of Arms, the like
is to be observed when a Body of men are to draw up, or that they march before
any Person that comes to view them.

No Soldiers are to march with any Coats on their arms or sticks in their
hands, or any thing to incumber them.

Of Councels of War, or Courts Martial.
I N an Army the Council of War is always to meet at at the Generals Quarters
or Tent, and none are called to it but the Lieutenant Generals, the Major
General, the Brigadiers, and the Colonels or Commanders of Bodies when the
matters concern their Regiments.

Private Councels of War or Courts Martial in a Garrison are either held at the
Governors House, at the main guard, or where the Governor orders. In a Camp,
at the Colonels Tent, who causes Notice to be given to the Captains to be
present.

When all are met, the Governor or Colonel, or he who is to sit as President,
takes his place at the head of the Table, the Captains sit about according to
their Seniority (that is to say) the first Captain on the right hand of him
that presides, the second on the left, and so of the rest. And the Town Major
or the aid major or Quarter Master of the Regiment, who in the absence of the
Judge-advocate discharges his Offices is to sit in his Place at the lower end
of the Table.

The Lieutenants, Sub-Lieutenants and En-Ensigns have right to enter into the
Room where the Council of War (or Marshal) is held, But they are to stand at
the Captains backs with their Hatts off, and have no Vote.

If the Council be called to Deliberate on some matter of consequence, the
President having opened it to the Court, Asks their Opinions,

The youngest Officer gives his Opinion first, and the rest in order till it
come to the President, who speaks last. The Opinions of every one being set
down in Writing, the Result is drawn conformable to the Plurality of Votes
which is Signed by the President only.

If the Council of War, or Court Martial be held to judge a Criminal, the
President and Captains having taken their places, and the Prisoner being
brought before them, and the informations read the President interrogates the
prisoner about the ^^cts whereof he is accused, and having heard his Defense,
and the proof made or alleged against him, he is ordered to withdraw, being
remitted to the Care of the Martial or Jailer. Then every one Judges according
to^ his Conscience and the Ordinances or Articles of War; the Sentence is
framed according to the Plurality of Votes, and the Criminal being brought in
again, the Sentence is pronounced to him in the Name of the Council of War, or
Court Martial.

When a Criminal is condemned to any Punishment, the Provost Martial causes the
Sentence to (...) put in execution, and if it be a public puinishment the
Regiment ought to be drawn together to see it, that thereby the Soldiers may be
deterred from offending. Before a Soldier be punished foy any infamous Crime,
he is to be publicly degraded from his Arms and his Coats stripped over his ears.

A Council of War or Court Martial is to consist of Seven at least with the
President, when so many Officers can be brought together: and if it so happen
that there be not Captains enough to make up that number, the inferior
Officers may be called in.

FINIS.

