A Little Handful of Cordial Comforts for a Fainting Soul, Scattered throughout
several Answers to certain Questions and Objections following.
The First Question.
O H Wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Wrath to come? for
my sins are many, and my iniquities are great; and if the Lord should deal with
me according to his Justice and my Deserts, my Portion must needs be in the
Lake of Fire with the Devil and his Angels. For the Scripture pronounces every
man Cursed that continues not in all things Written in the Book of the Law, to
do them, Gal.3.10. Show me therefore (I beseech you) show me what course to
take, to come out of this misery; show me the way how to get the Pardon of my
sins, and the favor of God, I care for nothing but this, neither is there any
thing in the World, that I do desire in comparison of this.

Answer.
This is that (indeed) which of all other things does most concern us: For upon
th^^ pardon of our Sins, and Peace with God, depends all Solid Con^^^ while we
are here, and the Eternal Salvation of our most precious Souls hereafter. And
therefore for our better, both Direction and Consolation in this behalf, let us
take notice of this that follows:

There is a way for men to come out of the misery of sin, and to obtain and
enjoy the Mercy and favor of Almighty God, and that is Faith in Christ: this
is the way, and there is none but this; neither is there any thing in the
World, that can help us to the Pardon of our Sins, to the Love of God, and the
Salvation of our Souls, but only Faith in the Lord Jesus.

That this is the way, is apparent enough by the Answer which was given by Paul
and Silas Act. 16.31. for when the Keeper of the Prison cried out with
trembling, Sirs what must I do to be saved? they made him this answer, belie^^
in the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved. The^ is in Christ sufficiency enough
for the obtaining of our Pardon, and the procuring of our Peace; and there is
in Faith Ability enough to make us partakers of Christ's sufficiency. Christ is
the only way whereby we come unto etern^ Life, and Faith is the only way
whereby w^ come to be partakers of Christ; by Faith w^ come unto him, and
through him unto God.

And that we may the better know, that the is in Christ sufficiency enough for
the Pardon of our Sins, and the salvation of our Souls, let us consider a
little, both who Christ is, and also what he has done for the working out of
our deliverance, and the procuring of our Peace.

The Lord Jesus Christ is the Eternal Son of God, who pitying that sinful and
miserable condition, whereinto we are all brought by the disobedience of our
first Parent, undertook to Mediate the matter betwixt God and us, and to
reconcile us again unto God. For the better effecting of which great work. He
came down from Heaven, and was Incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary,
and was made Man yea in all things like unto other men, save only in sin, that
so be might the better make us free from all sin. Being thus found in the
fashion as a Man, he set himself in our stead, and for us Men, and for our
Salvation, he became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. And by
his Obedience and Death he has perfectly alone by himself accomplished
whatever was requisite for our Salvation.

The wretchedness of our condition is briefly this: We all like Sheep have gone
astray, neither have we only omitted those Duties, which the Law requires, but
we have also committed those Evils, which the Law forbids; and as the want of
Righteousness does exclude us from the favor of God, and the Kingdom of
Heaven: so the guiltiness of sin does expose us to the wrath of God, and the
Damnation of Hell. But the Lord Jesus Christ has fulfilled all Righteousness.
For in his Life he performed as much obedience, as the Law in rigor could
exact; and by suffering Death upon the Cross, he underwent as much Punishment
as could be required of Sinners, in the severity of Justice: and so by his
Death and Obedience has he provided against our double Misery. For by his
sufferings upon the Cross, the Justice of God is satisfied, and his Wrath
appeased; and by his Obedience the Law is fulfilled, and we are accepted. And
as by his Death comes the pardon of sin, and deliverance from wrath, so by his
Obedience comes the imputation of Righteousness, and life Everlasting. All
which as they were done in our Nature, so they were done for us, and in our
behalf, he stood in the place of Sinners, that we might be numbered among the
Righteous; he took our sins upon him, that he might put his Obedience upon us;
the chastisement of our Peace was upon him, that with his stripes we may be
healed; he was made a Curse for us, that he might Redeem us from it; he was
made sin for us, that knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of
God in him: 2 Cor. 5.22.

And the better to assure us that by his Death upon the Cross, there was paid a
price sufficient enough for the procuring of our Pardon, He arose again from
the dead, which he could not have done, if the Justice of God had not been
satisfied to the very full in every particular. For as sin is the sting of
Death, and the only thing that makes Death terrible, so it is the strength of
Death, and it is that only that does give Death dominion over us: Sin is the
Lock, and Bar, and Bolt, that makes fast the Gates of Death; and as the Door
cannot be opened to let out a Prisoner, till the Bar be removed; so there is no
escaping from Death, until sin be taken out of the way. Christ therefore by
Rising from the Dead has mightily declared unto us, that he has paid the
utmost farthing of our Debts, and that by his Death he has fully satisfied the
Justice of God. So that now by virtue of his Sufferings, the greatest sins are
made pardonable, and there is a way set open for the worst of sinners, both to
Grace and Glory. I say even for the worst sinners. There is no man now that can
deny himself to be capable of Grace; there are too many, who from the greatness
of Gods Mercy, do without any cause prusume to sin; but there is no man, who
from the heinousness of his sins has any just cause to despair of Mercy: for
though our sins be many, yet the mercies of God be more; though they be great,
yet his Mercies are above them; he is rich in Mercy, yea, his Mercy is
Infinite, so that though he has spent much Mercy already upon our Forefathers,
yet he has Mercy enough in store for us also; with him there is plenty of
Forgiveness, and his Mercy endures for ever: And the Merits of Christ are of
the same Nature for he is Mighty to save, and he is the same for ever; and
though the Riches of these Merits of Christ, there is a way set open, even for
the worst sinners, to become partakers of the Riches of the Mercies of God. Now
if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, etc. I Joh. 2, 1, 2. And
though the time of his abode upon earth in the days of his Flesh were but
short, though his sufferings were but for a season; yet such was and is the
dignity of his Person (being the Eternal Son of God) that his Sufferings and
Obedience are infinitely Meritorious, and his Blood is able to cleanse us from
all Unrighteousness: so that we may well say with the Apostle, Who is be that
condemns? It is Christ that Dyed, or rather who is risen again, and now
makes Intercession for us, Romans 8. 33, 34. But let no Man turn this Doctrine
of Comfort to a liberty of sinning: against the greatest sins there is hopes an
Christ for penitent Believers. But because there is Mercy with God, shall we
therefore go on in sin? God forbid: There is Mercy with him, and therefore he
must be Feared. But if any Man shall presume to sin, because there is Mercy
with God, through Jesus Christ; in stead of Mercy, that man is like to meet
with nothing but Justice: for as merciful as God is, and as All-sufficient as
the Death of Christ is, there is no Mercy for such as go on still in their
wickedness.

And thus you see that Christ is mighty enough to save us from all our Sins,
and to reconcile us unto God: now that we may have benefit by this sufficiency
of Christ, we must lay hold upon it by a lively Faith. This is that which
Unites us unto Christ, and makes us one with him; this is that which gives us
Interest in him, and makes us partakers of his Merits; this makes the Death and
Obedience of Christ as verily our own, and as effectual for the Pardon of our
Sins, as the Salvation of our Souls, and if they had been performed by our very
selves. So that if we do-truly believe in the Lord Jesus, then is God well
pleased with us for his sake, and by Virtue of his Merits, being made ours by
Faith, our Sins are Pardoned, and our Souls and Bodies shall be Eternally
saved. And so much the Scripture does plainly testify in several places. As
Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
Whosoever believe ^han him should not Perish, but have Life Everlasting. And
again Act. 10. 43. Through his Name, whosoever believes in him, shall have
remission of Sins (be they never so many, never so heinous) And again, Act. 13.
38, 39. Be it known unto you, that through this Man is Preached unto you the
Forgiveness of Sins, and by him all that believe are Justified, from all those
things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. By the Law
of Moses, we could never have been acquitted either from the guiltiness of Sin,
or from the wrath of God: But we are delivered from both, by Faith in Christ;
for by it we obtain the forgiveness of our Sins and the Salvation of our Souls.

And thus it is manifest, That Christ is the way by which we are to obtain the
Pardon of Sin, and Peace with God; and that Faith is the way whereby we are
made Partakers of the Merits of Christ for our Justification and Salvation.
Proceed we now in a word, to show that nothing but Christ can reconcile us unto
God, and that nothing but Faith can make us partakers of Christ for our
reconciliation.

There is no way whereby to come unto God but only Christ: It is only in Christ
that God is well pleased; neither is there salvation in any other. For there is
none other Name under Heaven given among Men, whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.
12. Neither is there any other means on our part, whereby to receive Christ,
but only Faith, and yet unless we do receive him, we get no benefit by him; and
therefore unless we do believe in him, we shall perish in our sins. And to this
purpose speaks our Savior, Joh. 3. 36. He that believes on the Son has
everlasting Life; and he that believes not the Son, shall not see Life, but
the Wrath of God abides on him. See the sum of all this, in that place of St.
John, I Epist. 11. 12, and 13. verses. God has given to us Eternal Life, and
this Life is in his Son. He that has the Son, has Life; and he that has not
the Son, has not Life. These things have I written to you, that believe in the
Son of God, that ye may know that ye have Eternal Life, and that ye may believe
in the Name of the Son of God. By which place it is plain, that there is a way
to Life; that Christ is the way to it; that Life is so in him, that it is in no
other but him; that it is so in him, that by believing in him, we obtain Life;
and that it is so in him, that without believing in him, we get no benefit at
all by him. And thus you have the Truth of the former Answer enlarged and that
confirmed according to its several Branches; by which it is manifest, that
Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and nothing else but only Faith in him, can
help us to the pardon of sin, the love of God, and the salvation of our souls.

Hereupon it may be thus applied.

The Second Question.
I F I cannot obtain the pardon of my sins, and the favor of God, without
Faith in Christ, I doubt my condition is woeful, and that I am yet in my sins,
and liable into Wrath. For I fear I have not this Faith in Christ, and that I
do not as yet believe in him. Show me therefore (I pray you) how I may be
comforted against this fear, and how I may know whether I do believe in Christ,
yea or no.

Answer.
Doubtless if we do not believe in Christ, our condition is woeful: for there is
no salvation in any other; and without Faith in him, we can get no benefit by
him, but we are in our sins, and the obligation unto wrath is in full power and
force against us. For though the Ransom which Christ paid by his Death upon
the Cross, be a Ransom abundantly sufficient for the sins of the whole World;
yet the benefit of that Death of his is bestowed on none, but upon such
conditions as God himself pleases: which conditions for such as be of years,
are Faith and Repentance; which if we want, we shall (...) sure to perish in
our sins, not out of any de^^^ct in Christ, but only because we want those
conditions, whereby we came to have interest (...) him, and to be partakers of
his Merits. Now, (...) we may the better know whether we have his Faith in us,
yea or no (and so neither be ^eceived with vain hopes) nor yet discomforted
with false fears) consider this which follows, and see what answer you can make
to these ^^^veral demands.

Are you sensible of the misery wherein (...) are by reason of your sins? And
do you (...) that you need a Savior? Do you know (...) is the Savior of the
World? Do you (...) in some good measure who Christ is, and (...) he has done
for us, and what are the bene^^^ that are to be had by him? Do you know (...) a
necessity there is of having of him, and (...) a misery it is to be without
him, and what (...) must do, if we would have any benefit in (...). And do you
verily believe that Christ Jesus (...) none but he, is the Savior of the
World, (...) that he has both done and suffered, as the ^^^ptures Testify of
him? Do you verily (...) that there is no way to Heaven but Christ, (...) there
is no part to be had in him, but (...) ^ouncing all other Lords, and all other
Sav^^^ and by adhering wholly unto him for all (...) consolation and salvation?
And do you (...) desire from the Heart to be made parta^^^ Christ? And do your
sincerely endeavo^^ accept of him, and to embrace him? And (...) you be content
for his sake to forsake all (...) and to undergo any misery, rather then to
(...) with him? Can you be content to take him we say) For better or worse, and
not (...) for your Jesus, to save you from your sins, also for your Lord, to
command and dispose you at his pleasure? And is it your care to know his Will?
And is it your endeavor to yield him an Universal Obedience? And is it your
practice in Obedience unto him, to exercise your self to keep a Conscience void
of offense, both toward God and toward Men, and constantly, and Conscionably to
deny all ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live godly, and righteously, and
soberly in this present World? Do You thus accept of Christ, and submit unto
him? Nay, It is your hearty desire and unfamed endeavor so to do? Then you may
be sure that you have some degrees of true Faith in Jesus Christ, and therefore
that Christ is yours, that God is yours, that all is yours. For this is such a
qualification as has the promise, both of the Life that now is, and also of
that, that is to come.

By these questions we may examine our condition. For after this manner is
Faith wrought in us; such are the preparatives, such is the nature, and such
are the effects of a true, Faith, as are implied in these Questions; so that if
we can in some good measure make understanding and affectionate answer to them
all, then we may be sure that we have a true Faith, in Christ: But if either we
know him not, or desire not to accept of him, or care not to obey him, we have
then cause to think that we do not believe in him; and if we think otherwise,
we do but deceive our own souls.

Now if upon examination had, we find that we want Faith, we must be diligent
in using the means whereby to get it, which by reading and hearing of the Word
of God, and conferring about it. For Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word. If we find that we have this Faith, we must be careful to keep it,
and so increase it, by the Word, by the Sacraments, and by Prayer.

The Third Question.
(...) on this that has been spoken, another Question (...) may be raised to
this purpose. I do in some measure know who Christ is, and I do believe he is a
Savior All-sufficient, and that there is no other ^ay to Salvation, but him,
and that whosoever believes in him shall not perish: And I my self would (...)
believe in him: But how may I know that I (...) ^ight to believe in him, and
that the invitati^^ Faith do concern me? How may I know when(...) uld be
welcome, or not, if I should (...) so bold (...) ^ne unto him?

Answer.
(...) encouragement herein, and that we (...) more boldly unto the Throne of
(...) know, that Christ is a common (...) he Savior of the World; and (...) he
alsufficiency of his Merits, (...) ^^ne of those, whose nature he took, unto
whom his merits are not communicable; neither is there any one, who in that
respect may not truly be said to be savable. The promise is made to you, and to
your Children, and to all that be afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call, Act.2.39. Now if you desire to know, whether you be one of those,
whom he does call to believe in him, consider them whether or no, you be
sensible of your misery, and burdened with your sins; whether your desire be to
be eased of your sins, and to be partaker of Christ, and of those benefits and
comforts that be in him. For if we be thus quali^^^ we may be confident that we
are of the ^^^ber of those, whom he does seriously invite (...) come unto him,
and to depend upon him. And hereof you have (...) witness of your self, an Gods
own hand to show for it, to your gre^^ comfort. For these are his own words;
(...) unto me all ye that labor and be heavy lade (...) I will give you rest,
Mat.11.28. And ag^^ (...) any man Thrist, let him come unto me and (...)
John.7.37. Unto such thirsty Souls wa^^ (...) sent, he came to speak peace to
such (...) weary, and broken hearted, and (...) such as are bruised. So that
(...) what a misery it is to be in sin, (...) Savior, have thereupon an ea^^
(...) delivered from this misery, we (...) that he calls upon us to come (...)
our very names were specified in these invitations: being thus qualified, we
may come boldly, and upon our coming shall be sure to find rest; but without
this Badge we have no warrant at all to expect a welcome. They that do thus
hunger and thirst after Righteousness shall be filled; but they that be rich in
their own conceits, and are not sensible of any wants, these he sends empty
away.

The Fourth Question.
B Ut if I find that I want this sorrow, what course shall I take, to bring my
heart to be humbled for my sins?

Answer.
To this end let a Man examine himself by the Law of God. For by the Law is the
knowledge of sin. And let him duly think upon that fearful curse of God,
whereunto every the least sin does make us liable. Let him diligently consider,
how ugly and loathsome sin does make us in the sight of God, and what a fearful
thing it is to be deprived of the Love of God, and the joys of Heaven, and
what a misery it is to be exposed to the Wrath of God, and the Torments of
Hell. Let him seriously ponder what a misery it is to lose the Soul. Let him
thoroughly weight the Nature of Eternity, and the strictness of that Account
that is to come; and the severity of that Sentence, which in that last and
dreadful Day shall be pronounced upon all impenitent sinners, when they shall
be adjudged to that everlasting Fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. All these are of singular use to wound our souls, and to effect our
hearts with sorrow for our sins. It is the Law that makes way for the Gospel:
for thus John the Baptist by denouncing the Judgments of God upon wicked
courses, prepared the way for our blessed Savior. But especially let him
consider, how great things God has done for him. For as there is no greater
obligation to obedience, than the loving kindness of the Lord so there is no
thing that does more aggravate our sins, and so consequently our misery; and
therefore nothing that can tend more to the breaking of the heart, than the
consideration of the bounty and long-suffering of God to uswards. And this
plainly appears by that course which the Prophet Nathan, at the Lords
appointment took with David, 2 Samuel 12. for by setting before his eyes Gods
many and wonderful mercies vouchsafed, and his own extreme ingratitude and ill
requital of so great goodness, he was constrained to cry out with shame and
sorrow, I have sinned against the Lord.

And amongst all the mercies of God, there is none that does more deserve to
take up all our thoughts, than that departure of Christ, which he accomplished
at Jerusalem; neither is there any thing that does more tend, either to
preserve us from sin, or to humble us for our failings, than the death of our
Savior.

For, suppose the Lord Jesus should present himself unto us, when we are about
to commit any sin, or after we have done it, as he was hanging upon the Cross,
with his Sides Scourged, his Face Buffeted, his Hands and Feet Nailed, his Head
Crowned with Thorns, his very Heart pierced, his whole Body upon the Rack, and
Trickling down with Drops of Blood, speaking unto us after this or the like
manner. Behold, if ever sorrows were like unto my sorrows; and yet all this was
but the punishment of thy sins. It is thy sins that have brought me to all
these Torments, and can thou delight in that which was the cause of such
misery? All this have I done for thy good, and is this the requital of my Love?
I have born thy sins, that thou might be eased, mine hands were bound, that
thine might be freed; my Sides were Scourged, that thine might be spared; my
Cheeks were Buffeted, that thine might be Kissed; my Head was Crowned with
Thorns, that thine might be Crowned with Glory; and is this thy kindness to thy
Friend, thus to return me hatred for my good will? Have thou not put me to
pains enough already, but that thou must Rake in my Wounds, and make a sport of
my misery? or if thou will not pity me, yet pity thy self. For can that be
light to thee, which cost me so heavy? or shall thou escape the Cup, that art a
sinner, when my Beloved Father would not spare me that was but a Surety.

Suppose (I say) that the Lord Jesus should present himself and speak unto us,
after this or the like manner; would not such a sight make our Bowels to yern,
and such Words cut us to they very heart? Doubtless it were enough to make the
dryest eyes to wish for Tears of Blood, and the hardest heart of the most
obstinate Sinner, to become in the midst of his Body like melting Wax, thus to
hear and look upon him whom they have pierced: yea it is impossible for any man
to think on this, and to go on in sin, but such as could be content to Crucify
again the Lord of Glory.

And thus you see, what are the chiefest helps to Humiliation, and by what
means our Hearts may be brought to be deeply affected with sorrow for our sins.

Hereupon a timorous Heart will be ready to reply yet further after this manner:

The Fifth Question.
B Y this course, and by these and the like Meditations, I confess that I have
been brought in some Measure to be sorry for my Sins, and now I would fain be
eased of them; and it is my desire to believe in Christ, but I fear that I am
not enough Humbled; I fear I have not so great a measure of Sorrow, as may make
me capable of this Invitation; and my Heart is so hardened, that I cannot
grieve and mourn for my Sins so much as I should, a^^ would do; and therefore I
fear, that as yet I have no right to the Comforts of the Gospel:

Answer.
True it is, that Sorrow for Sin makes ready an Heart prepared for the Lord;
and as usually in the course of Nature, there is no Birth without some pain. So
in the work of Grace there is no regeneration, (that of Infants (...) Baptism
excepted) without some Sorrow. B^^ as there are Degrees of pain in the Nature
Birth: So in the Degrees of Spiritual Birth there are Degres of Sorrow. Some
Women have a quick dispatch, others have a more tedious Travel: and so it is in
the New Birth, all are not pained alike. Some there be that go mourning all the
day long, yea, day after day, whereas unto others, heaviness indures, but as it
were for a night, and joy comes in the morning. We must know therefore, and
that for our comfort that it is not the quantity but the quality of Sorrow,
that God looks after; neither matters it so much, how great our Sorrow be, as
how true it is.

If a Youth, upon due examination be found fit for the University, his Tutor
never demand how long he has been at School, how (...) he has been dealt
withal, how often he has been Whipped, before he could come to that perfection;
all that he looks after is, whether or no he be fit to be admitted: So it fares
with us; the Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ; and this it
does, partly by discovering unto us our sins, whereby we see that we need a
Savior: and partly by threatening of us with the Curse, whereby we are made
more careful to look our after this Savior, and more willing to accept of him,
and for our own ease to submit unto him, when once we have found him.

(...) when we can be content to accept of (...) ^rist upon any Terms, then are
we ready for (...), then are we fit to be admitted into him. (...) and when we
do seek unto Christ for this admission, he regards not so much, how long we are
at School under the Law, how often we were ^ashed by it, or how sorely we have
smarted under it; but all that he looks after is, whether ^e be fit to come
unto him. Consider therefore with your self, had you ever such a sight and
sorrow for your sins, as made you weary of ^em, and out of love with them, and
willing (...) be eased (...) them, and desirous of Interest in Christ, and
^^ady to accept of Christ upon any ^rms rather than to go without him? is it
your ^^ief that you cannot be more sorrowful, and (...) not you desire as much
to be kept from sin (...) the time to come, as to have all that pardoned that
is past? Surely, if you stand thus affected, then are you fitted and made ready
for Christ; and whether your sorrow were great or little, yet it is a token,
that it was a true and a godly sorrow, because it works repentance unto
Salvation, never to be repented of.

It may be yet further objected, thus:

The Sixth Question.
I Confess that I have been grieved for my sins, and I have been desirous to
believe in Christ: but I fear that my Sorrow is not good, nor my Faith sound,
because my Obedience is so faulty; for I am not so willing to forsake all my
sins, nor so careful to yield Christ Obedience, as I should be; or if I am
willing so to do, yet mine infirmities and my failings are such, and so many,
that I fear my Sorrow and my Faith, are not such as they ought to be.

Answer.
Certain it is, that sorrow for sin will nothing avail us, without amendment of
Life; the wicked must forsake his ways, if he expect pardon, Isa. 55. 7. And
it is he that confesses his sins, and forsakes them, that shall find Mercy,
Prove. 28. 13. If we willingly allow our selves in the practice of any thing
displeasing unto God, our condition is dangerous. If we say that we abide in
Christ, we must walk as he walked, or else we deceive our own Souls, I Joh 2 6.
If we say that we have fellowship with God, and yet walk in Darkness, we Lie,
and the Truth is not in us, I Joh. 1. 6. And if it be not our Study and
Exercise to yield Christ an Universal Obedience, our, Faith is but Presumption,
our Peace is but Security, our Hopes are but Shadows, and our Expectation will
perish.

But if we have an hearty desire, and a sincere endeavor in all things to live
Honestly, we may not from our failings and imperfections presently conclude
that we are not sanctified at all, that we have no Faith, no Interest in
Christ, no Love of God in us. For perfection is not to be attained unto, while
we be in the Body; but sincerity is that which may be had, and affords unto us
matter of Comfort; for the Lord loves them that follow after Righteousness,
Pro. 15. 9. And they whose sincere desire and endeavor it is to have respect
to all the Commandments, are accepted of him. If it be our unfeigned desire,
study and endeavor, in obedience unto Christ, to do whatsoever he commands;
if it be our care to cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and
spirit, and to perfect Holiness in the fear of God, and not wickedly to depart
from him in any thing: I say, if it be our unfeigned desire, study and
endeavor so to do, we may safely conclude, notwithstanding all our
imperfections, that our sorrow is good, and our Faith sound, and that our sins
are pardoned, and our service is accepted and our souls shall be saved. For in
Gods account and acceptance, that goes for a clean life, which is not stained
with wilful pollutions, and whose obedience is extended to the utmost of his
knowledge, and has withal a purpose to attend what God shall hereafter make
him know to be sinful; to that Man is allowed the opinion of gracious.

See further in this point in answer to Objection, 16.

The Seventh Question.
I F these things be so, I find then that my condition at the present is good;
and if I were sure to Dye in this Estate, I make no doubt but I should be
happy. But I fear that I shall not continue in this condition; for my Enemies
are many, and Mighty, and Crafty, and Watchful, and I my self are prone to sin,
and apt to fall from my own stedfastness; and I find by experience that many
who have begun in the spirit, have ended in the flesh, and their latter ends
have been worse than their beginnings. This makes me to fear that I shall not
continue faithful unto the Death, and yet without this continuance, I shall
never obtain the Crown of Life.

Answer.
All these things I confess are true; such are our Enemies, such is our
weakness; and the misery of those that do turn back from the Holy Commandment
given unto them, is such that that it had ^worsd^ better for them not to have
known the way of Truth, 2 Pet. 2. 21. For they shall lose those things that
they have done, and their Portion shall be with Unbelievers. So that a Man
cannot choose but have cause to fear. Nevertheless there is comfort in God
against this fear also; yea, this very fear of (...) away has in it matter of
Consolation, for it is a means to keep us from departing from God, Jer. 32. 40.
And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away
from them, to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me.

Many there be that having begun well, do yet at length grow weary of
well-doing, and so lose what they have done; and therefore let him that
thinks that he stands, take heed lest he fall: But yet let not our Hearts
be troubled let us not be dismayed with fear, for the perseverance of such as
are Justified and Sanctified in Deed and in Truth, is certain, and the
Foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows who are his, and he knows
how to deliver them out of Temptation. In further answer to this Objection, and
the better to comfort us against this fear, take special notice of these Texts
of Scriptures, I Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the Power of God by Faith unto
Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. Joh.10.27, 28, 29. My Sheep
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them
Eternal Life, and shey shall never perish, neither shall any Man pluck them out
of my hand. My Father which gave them me, is greater than all; and no Man is
able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. For the Eyes of the
Lord run to and fro throughout the whole Earth, to show himself strong in the
behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him.

The Eighth Question.
B Ut if the perseverance and so Salvation of such as are in Deed and in Truth
the Saints of God, be so sure and certain, what mean those frequent Caveats
which we meet with in the Scripture? What mean those frequent Exhortations to
perseverance?

Answer,
The perseverance of such is sure and certain, howbeit God brings it to pass by
means; it is wrought in them by God, and yet their own endeavors also are
required; and these Caveats and Exhortations are the means which God has
Sanctified for their Preservation from Apostasy

Caveats we have many, and many threatenings; Exhortations many, and many
promises; such as are, Take heed to your selves. Watch in all things. Be
steadfast and unmovable, continue faithful unto the death. and I will give thee
the Crown of Life. The latter end of back-sliders shall be worse then their
beginning, etc. By which, and other like passages, we are not to think either
that perseverance is in our own Power, or tha^ (...) ^^^ion of Gods peculiar
People is (...) ^^^gard of him; but they do imply how (...) we are to sin, in
regard of our selves; (...) they show that our own endeavors are re(...) for
the working (...) ^f (...) Salvation, as (...) are the means (...) of God, for
the ^^^enting of sin, (...) of our (...) and so for the (...) of us unto his
^^^^enly Kingdom.

And whereas (...) the Power of God; we (...), as if we our selves (...) and do
nothing. We (...) God, and yet we also (...) God that keeps us, (...) and
Pray. But we are (...) God for our greater encouragement. (...) endeavors be
sincere, (...), yet they will be effec^^^ (...) a mighty helper; and (...) to
whom we ought to (...) our endeavors (...) God that must have the (...) Power
that we (...) works in us both to will and (...), (...) his own good pleasure.

Be strong therefore in the Lord, and in the Power of his might; he that is
with us is mightier then they that be against us. And therefore we need not
fear; for neither the power, (...) the policy of Hell shall prevail against
^^^ple of God; and the Mouth of the (...) spoken it, Matt. 16. 18.

The Ninth Question.
I Make no doubt of the Power of God, I (...) ^e is able to keep that (...) I
have comm^^^^ unto him: But I doubt of his (...) fear that (...).

Answer.
Sure^y (...) is a needless (...); for his Love, (...) everlasting, his Gifts
and Calling, are with^^^ Repentance, and whom (...), to the (...) he loves
them. And therefore fear not, (...) Lord will not forsake his (...) for his own
(...), sake, because it has pleased (...) to make you his People, (...) 12.2^.
(...) if once he has loved (...) so well, as to (...) for himself; (...) he
loves himself (...) to forsake (...) And though ou^ unworth^^ ^^erve that God
should (...) yet his (...) is such that (...).

(...) therefore upon (...) Love, Meditate upon his Power, call to (...)
Promise, forget not (...) and (...) the keeping of your Soul unto him in (...).
Care you to do well, God will care for the rest: For he preserves the Souls of
his (...) delivers th^^^ ou^ of the Hand of the (...). Psalm.79.10.

The Tenth Question.
B Ut seeing that mine own endeavors are required for the working out of my
Salvation; and seeing that my assurance of Salvation cannot be sound, unless my
Care and Diligence, in the constant using of all good means tending thereunto,
be every way answerable: show me I pray you by what means I may be enabled to
continue patiently in well doing, that so at the last I may obtain Eternal Life.

Answer.
Hereunto many things are useful, the chiefest of which are these following:

1. Labor to be sincere, by considering that all our ways are before God. To
walk before God is the way to be perfect, and Sincerity is the way to
perseverance. For the Righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clean
Hands, shall grow stronger and stronger, Job. 17.9. but he whose heart is not
upright before God, will start aside in the time of Trial, See I John 2.19.

2. Labor to overcome the World, that so neither the cares and glory of it may
too deeply affect us, nor yet the crosses and troubles of it, too much affright
us. For each of these are great hindrances to the practice of Piety.
Persecution is that heat that does wither the Word, and by it some are made to
deny their Master; and the cares of the World are the Thorns that choke the
Word, and a means whereby it becomes unfruitful. For the love of Money is the
root of all evil, which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the
Faith, I Tim.6.10 Arm your self therefore against both these; and to this end
consider with your self, and think often upon that of our Savior, Mat. 16. 26.
What is a Man profited if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?
and upon that, Mat. 8.38. He that is ashamed of me, of him will the Son of Man
be ashamed, etc. and upon that 2.Tim. 2. 12. If we Suffer with him we shall
Reign with him: but if we deny him, he will also deny us. And Learn to discern
between those things that be seen, and the things that (...) not seen: For the
things that be seen, are (...) Temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18.

3. Watch in all things, for our Enemies are many, and security is dangerous,
and Sin is so deceitful, that it will quickly harden us: and this is certain, a
man never yields to his own corrupt disposition for the committing of any Evil,
but he is ordinarily more willing to the second Act, than to the first; and who
can tell how far he may go astray, that does but once give way to their own
corruption?

4. Labor to grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, by considering that our labor cannot be in vain in ^he Lord. This
endeavor to grow in Grace (...) a special means to keep us from being drawn
away with the error of the Wicked: but standing still, is the danger of turning
back, and luke-warmness is the way to grow Key-cold.

5. Despise not Prophesying: if you would not quench the Spirit; if we would
not be weary of well-doing, we must wait upon the word: For that is able to
build us up, and to give us an Inheritance among them that are Sanctified,
Act.20.32.

And lastly, We must Pray without ceasing, that he who has begun a good work
in us, would also finish it, and grant that our whole Spirit, Soul and Body may
be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus. This is the way to
continue in well-doing, and so running we shall obtain.

The Eleventh Question.
B Ut though my Soul may be cared for, yet my Body may be in want. I want
already many things that be necessary; or at least I fear that I shall want
such things as be needful for me; and this Fear makes my Life the more careful:

Answer.
Doubtless if our^ Souls be cared for, other things may the less trouble us;
howbeit against those things also there is matter of comfort in Jesus Christ.
He that regards the Soul, will not neglect the Body; and he knows what we have
need of: and if we be of his Family, he will be sure to provide for us. He is
able enough to help us, for the whole Earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof: and of his Will we have no cause to doubt, for he has promised, that
if we seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, all these things
shall be added, as it were over and above, and into the Bargain, Mat. 6.33. and
he has said, That he will withhold no good thing from them that fear him,
Psalm.34.9,10. Whereupon we may safely conclude, that if he keep any thing from
us, it will be good for us to be without it: so that we may well say with the
Prophet David, The Lord is my Shepherd, I cannot want, Psalm.23. 1. For he that
has given us Christ, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
Rom.8.32.

The Twelfth Question.
I Have been a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief; I have gone through
much misery already, and many are the Crosses and troubles that are upon me at
the present, and I fear that there be more and worse yet to come: so that
sometimes I begin to think that the Lord does not love me, and I am ready to
doubt what will become of me; and I fear that my patience will one day be
tried, and that I shall faint in the day of Evil. Show me therefore, I pray
you, how I may be comforted against this Fear, and how I may be enabled to Wade
through all with Christian Patience?

Answer.
True it is, that the crosses and troubles which Men shall mere withal in the
way to Heaven, are matters of offense, and unto some they are very powerful,
turning them back from the hope laid before them, to the embracing of this
present World. But if we would think upon things aright, in the midst of
Misery; we should have comforts enough to refresh our Souls. Neither is there
any trouble that can befall us, in the midst of which they have not matter of
strong consolation, now being justified by Faith, are at peace with God,
through Jesus Christ.

Now to the end that we may be the better comforted against all crosses, let us
make use of these few considerations following:

1. Consider that it is no new or strange thing to be exercised with
afflictions; neither are crosses and troubles of themselves an Argument of Gods
hatred, but rather a token of his love, and a witness of our Adoption, if we
bear them patiently, and make good use of them. There is not any affliction
Incident to the nature of Man, which some one or other, even of Gods own dear
Servants and Children, have not been exercised withal. Look upon David and
Jacob, and Joseph and Job, and Paul, and all that cloud of Witnesses made
mention of, Heb. 11. and we shall find that through many afflictions, they all
entered into the Kingdom of God. Nay, look upon the Captain of our Salvation,
and we shall find that even he himself was made perfect through sufferings,
Heb. 2.10. and this must needs be a special means to enable us to bear all with
the greater patience, when we shall know and consider, that though our
affliction be for number many, and for nature grievous, yet they are but the
measure of our Betters.

2. Consider that God has promised never to leave us nor forsake us, Heb. 13.
5. and his presence alone is support sufficient even in the worst of miseries.
How can Jacob be afraid to go down into Egypt, when God himself has said, he
will go with him? Genesis 46. 34. God has made the like promise unto us, and
therefore if he bid us go into troubles; if he command us to walk through the
Valley of the shadow of Death, yet we need fear no evil, as long as he is with
us; for if God be with us, who can be against us? Rom.8.31.

3. Consider, that unto such as do believe in Christ, the nature of afflictions
is wholly altered; for their sting is pulled out, and their bitterness is
allayed, they may favor of Anger, of Wrath they do not: Crosses they may be,
Curses they are not: they may b e Chastisements for our Correction, but they
are not Judgments for our Confusion. For Christ has suffered whatever Wrath
was due unto us by reason of our sins; and if we be once reconciled unto God by
Faith in Christ, there is more ma^^er of comfort in the assurance of his love,
than there can be of dejection in the greatest trouble.

4. Consider that God intends nothing but good unto us, in his sharpest
dealings with us: for it is all to humble us, and to prove us, and to do us
good at our latter end; all is for our profit, that we may be partakers of his
Holiness. For hereby he reforms what has been amiss in us in times past;
hereby our iniquity shall be purged, and this is the fruit, to take away our
sin, Isai.27.9.

Hereby he prevents sin in us for the time to come, as he did Paul, unto whom
there was sent the Messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest he should have been
exalted above measure, 2 Cor. 12.7.

Hereby he does wean us from the Love of the World and worldly Vanities. As
long as all goes well with us, we are ready to say with Peter, It is good to be
here: but when once we begin to be afflicted, then presently with the Prodigal,
our minds are homewards,

Hereby he deals with us as the Husbandman does by the Vine, he pares and
prunes us, to make us the more fruitful, Joh. 15.2.

Hereby he does exercise our Faith and Patience, and makes trial of our
sincerity, as he did by Job. And so in this he lays the ground of our greater
Glory: for greater afflictions require greater patience; and the greater our
patience is, the greater shall be our future happiness.

And the consideration of this must needs be a means to persuade us to
Patience: for if we can willingly endure smarting-water for the clearing of our
eyes; and bitter Pills, and sharp Lances for the Health of our Bodies: much
more ought we to bear with patience the smarting hand of the Almighty God for
the health of our Souls. There is no affliction indeed joyous for the present,
but grievous; but after it works the peaceable fruit of Righteousness to such
as are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.11.

Consider that if we do continue faithful unto death, we shall receive a Crown
of life. And if we do but have an eye to that recompense of reward, we shall
easily be drawn, as Moses was, to esteem the reproach of Christ greater than
the Treasures of Egypt; and to choose rather to suffer affliction with the
People of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Heb. 11.25,26.
For the happiness of that Kingdom which is to come, is such, that our blessed
Savior accounts it matter of comfort against all fear whatsoever, as it does
plainly appear by those words of his, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, for
it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Where the only
Argument that he makes use of for the encouraging of his little Flock, is the
hopes of the Kingdom. And again by that place, Mat. 5.11,12. Blessed are ye,
when Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you for my Names sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward in Heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.
Wherein our Savior does hearten his Disciples against Persecution, only upon
this ground, because their reward should be great in Heaven. And surely in St.
Paul's computation, the present affliction is not worthy the speaking of, in
regard of that glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18. neither is there
indeed any comparison at all between them; for the one is but a light and
momentary affliction, the other is a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. So that this goodness of God in the Land of the living, is
enough to keep us from fainting under the heaviest Burden; for though our
outward Man decay, yet while we have an eye to this joy set before us, our
inward Man will be renewed day by day. Fitly therefore is the hope of this
happiness, called the Anchor of the Soul, and the Helmet of Salvation; for by
this Anchor we are preserved in the deep waters, by this Helmet we are
protected in the times of danger; and by flying unto this hope, we are sure to
find refuge in the day of evil.

And thus we may be comforted against evils present. Now as for those that are
yet to come we may thus resolve, either they shall not come at all: for God
will stand between us and harm, and keep us quiet from fear of evil: without
his providence nothing can befall us, and therefore nothing shall befall to do us
hurt: for he is a God that delights in the prosperity of his Servants.

Or if they do come, yet the Lord will deliver us out of all, there shall be an
end. Enlargement will come, and he will deliver his People, even because he
has a favor unto them.

And in the mean time, he will support us in them, till deliverance do come:
and his Grace will be sufficient for us. For God is faithful, and will not
suffer us to be tempted above that we are able: but with the temptation also
make away to escape, that we may be able to hear it, I Cor.10.13.

And he will also give us benefit by them: for he makes all to work together
for good to those that love him, Romans 8.28. And thus we may be comforted
against our fears also. In a word, there is none can know the way to heaven,
better than he that dwells there. And therefore which way soever God leads us,
it is safe to follow him. The uneasiness of the way, makes us think that it is
the farthest way about; but the Lord knows it is the next way home. And
whatsoever they seem to us, yet all the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth,
unto such as keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies, Psalm. 25.10.

The Thirteenth Question.
M Y troubles are great, exceeding weighty and burdensome, and there are no
sorrows like unto my sorrows; and this is that, that does so break my heart,
and drink up my spirit.

Answer.
This is answered in a word. It is but a conceit of our own, to think our own
troubles the worst, when as indeed they are but common temptations, but say the
worst, grant that there be none like them; yet if we shall compare them either
with that which we have deserved, or with that which Christ himself for us has
Suffered; or with that weight of Glory that shall be revealed, we shall then
esteem them all as nothing. And as great as they are, it we would but look up
and consider duly from whence they come, even that alone is enough to make us
patient: for thus it was with David, He was dumb and opened not his mouth,
considering who did it, Psalm. 39.9.

The Fourteenth Question.
But my affliction is such, that I am kept from enjoying the Liberty of the
House of God, and from praising him in the Congregation.

Answer.
This must needs be troublesome to Minds well affected; howbeit if God himself
restrains us, we may then be sure that he requires not our presence. And in
such a case, if our desires be with the Congregation, even that desire will be
sufficient. Neither is the Lord so confined to the Congregation, but that he is
near to all, that call upon him faithfully wheresoever they be, when necessity,
and not neglect is the reason of their absence. And besides all this, if at any
time, by reason of Age or Sickness, we are not able to do those things which we
do desire, and did perform in the time of our health and strength, then shall a
willing Mind be well-pleasing unto God, and good desires shall be accepted.
Yea, furthermore, this we must know for our consolation; that a Patient
submiting to the good will of God, is a worshipping of him, as appears by that
Job 1. 20, 21. where Job is said to worship God, when he did with Patience and
contentedness submit unto him: This is indeed a glorifying of God, and herein
we acknowledge him to be our God, and in thus submiting we shall perform unto
God as good service as ever we did in all our Lives. For this is the passive
part of true Obedience, and the Trial of sincerity in other things. To serve
the Lord when all goes well with us, is much; and it is altogether as much, if
not more, to resolve to trust in him, though he should Kill us. And if we can
with Job hold fast our Righteousness, and in the hour of Temptation not fall
away, this is a true Note of pure Religion, and a manifest Argument of
Sincerity and Truth.

The Fifteenth Question.
A Nd yet after all this I must dye; and when a few years are come, I shall go
the way whence I shall not return: and the fear of Death does much amaze me.

Answer.
Verily there is no solid Reason why it should; for God has given us Victory
over Death it self; through our Lord Jesus Christ. The Death of Christ was the
Death of Death. Death fastening upon him, to whom it was not due, lost its
sting, and so became less able to hurt those that had deserved it. Christ has
pulled out the sting of Death, by dying for sin; so that now, like a Be, or
Snake without a sting, it may buzze about us and fright us, but it cannot hurt
us. All the hurt that Death can do to such as believe in the Lord Jesus, is to
free them out of Prison, to put an end to their days of sin, to carry them home
to their Fathers house to let them into their Masters joy, to pull down those
Mouldring Cottages wherein they dwell, and to build them up to immortality. For
if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, them also that sleep in Jesus,
shall God bring with him, and they shall be for ever with the Lord. And of this
Happiness the worst kind of death that can befall us, cannot deprive us. A Man
may dye in Poverty, he may dye with extremity of Torments, he may dye by common
Calamities, and yet he may dye in Faith; and so dying his End shall be Peace:
For blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, even so says the Spirit, etc.
Rev. 14. 13. So that if we did but thoroughly understand the nature of Death,
and what it is to the People of God, we should be so far of being afraid of it,
that with St. Paul, We should rather desire to be desolved, because then we
should be with Christ, which is the best of all.

To shut up this point, and so likewise the whole matter concerning
afflictions, this let me add to all the rest, that if we desire to get good by
these Meditations, and to be upheld with Comfort in the time of trouble, we
must continue instant in Prayer. This is that Receipt which the Holy Ghost
prescribes to all sorts of Persons, against all manner of grievances
whatsoever, James 5. 23. This is the Remedy that is always at hand, and never
out of season. Yea, this is that Messenger which being dispatched aright, was
never sent empty away. Believe it, If a Man were in a Case more desperate then
Death, in a place worse then Hell, yet if there he could pray heartily, he
should find comfort and strength, even beyond Hope: for our Prayers use to be
with the utmost of our Hopes, if not beyond them, and yet God does use to be
better to us than our Prayers.

The Sixteenth Question.
I See now that there is matter enough of Solid Comfort in the Word of God. But
the unevenness of my walking makes me to doubt, that I have no part nor portion
in those precious promises, which God has made unto his People.

Answer.
Promises I confess that are misapplied, can afford to the Soul no solid
Comfort. But from our Failings we may not presently conclude that they do not
at all belong to us: for God looks upon the heart; and where Ability is
wanting, the Will is accepted.

Are not our Failings your Grief? Are they not besides your Will? Are they not
contrary to the current of your Desires, and the main bent of your Resolutions
and Endeavors? It is not your Endeavor to do the Will of God, though it cost
you the parting with the sweetness of Sin, even your own Iniquity? And is it
^ot your Resolution, that you will not wicked^^ depart from God? If it be so,
then notwithstanding your Failings, you may say with David, I have kept thy
Word: For though this be not such a measure of keeping as the Law requires,
yet it is such a keeping as God accepts: for he accounts such as keep
themselves from wilful sins, upright and innocent through Christ their strength
and their Redeemer, as appears by that passage, Psalm. 19. ^^.

And this is a true Rule, whereby to proceed in the judging of our selves. If a
Man that believes in Christ, continues in an unknowen sin that cannot hinder
the uprightness of his heart, so the Ignorance be not wilful; but the least
touch of knowledge or wilfulness mars Sincerity. So that if our failings be not
wilful, though they be many, yet they cannot hinder our interest in the
promises of God.

And what can we now object more? Do we doubt the Truth of all these Promises?
Surely we need not; for God is not a Man that he should lie, neither the Son of
Man that he should repent: Has he spoken, and shall he not do it? Has he
said, and shall it not come to pass? Was he ever yet worse then his word? And
have not we had experience of his Love, as well upon our selves as others? Is
he not the true witness, and a God that is most zealous of his own glory? Why
then are we disquieted, and why are our hearts dejected within us? Still trust
in God, make straight steps to your Feet: Pray for Faith in the promises, and
sti^ up your selves to take hold of God, tarry the Lords Leisure, and fear not;
light is Sown for the Righteous, and gladness for such as be upright in heart;
it may lie buried in the ground out of sight for a season, it may be somewhat
long in coming up, and very unlikely to come to any perfection: Nevertheless,
in due season we shall reap if we faint not. And therefore cast not away your
confidence. For the worst is past, the good is begun, the best is at hand: Lift
up therefore the Hands that hang down, and strengthen the feeble Knees; and run
with Patience the Race set before us; and being partakers of such precious
promises, let us think upon them, believe in them, and live in them: and in so
doing, we shall rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Here is the sum of all. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Rom.8.1. There is no
condemnation, and there is our comfort: the ground hereof is Christ; the way
unto it, is by Faith to be in him; the evidence of it, is to walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit. In the matter of merit, Christ is all; in matter
of interest and application Faith is all, in matter of Evidence and
manifestation, new Obedience is all. Nothing can free us from condemnation, but
Christ; nothing can give us interest in Christ, but Faith; nothing can assure
us that we do truly believe in Christ, and shall be delivered from
condemnation, but a care to be obedient unto Christ in all things: wherefore
let us so believe, and so live: for as many as walk according to this Rule,
Peace shall be upon them, and upon the Israel of God.

Now the God of Hope, fill us with all joy and Peace in believing, that we may
abound in Hope through the Power of the Holy Ghost Amen and Amen.

In the multitude of the thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my Soul,
Psalm.94.19.

FINIS.

