A REFUTATION OF Three Opposers of Truth, By plain Evidence of the holy
Scripture, VIZ. I. Of Pardon Tillinghast, who pleads for Water Baptism, its
being a Gospel-Precept, and opposes Christ within, as a false Christ. To which
is added, something concerning the Supper, etc. II. Of B. Keech, in his Book
called, A Tutor for Children, where he disputes against the Sufficiency of the
Light within, in order to Salvation; and calls Christ in the heart, A false
Christ in the secret Chamber. III. Of Cotton Mather, who in his Appendix to his
Book, called, Memorable Providence, relating to Witchcrafts, etc. does so
weakly defend his Father Increase Mather from being justly chargeable with
abusing the honest People called Quakers, that he does the more lay open his
Fathers Nakedness; and beside the Abuses and Injuries that his Father had cast
upon that People, C. Mather, the Son, adds new Abuses of his own. And a few
Words of a Letter to John Cotton, called a Minister, at Plymouth in New England.


By GEORGE KEITH.

Zephaniah 3.4. Her Prophets are Light and Treacherous Persons, her Priests
have polluted the Sanctuary, they have done Violence to the Law.

Philadelphia, Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Anno 1690.

Water Baptism No Gospel-Precept, etc.
Pardon Tillinghast,
AFter I had read thy small Treatise in print, wherein t^ou undertakest to
prove Water Baptism to be a Gospel Precept, by plain Scripture; I was sorry on
thy account, to find thee with such confidence, to publish thy Ignorance and
Folly, as well as thy great bitterness of Spirit and Prejudice against the
Truth, and the Witnesses of it, so openly in the face of the World. Put when I
call to mind how that God in his infinite Wisdom permits men to rise up to
oppose the Trut^, that the Truth it self may be the more clearly discovered, by
the breakings forth of Gods Light still more and more; the more that the Truth
is opposed, I am truly comforted and encouraged. And for thy Reviling and
Reproachful words against me, I regard them not, further, than to pity thee,
and heartily to desire, that God may open thy Eyes, and give thee true
Repentance and Forgiveness; for I have that Charity, that what thou do in
this thy work of opposition, it is through thy ignorance and therefore upon thy
Repentance is pardonable. But as for me and my Brethren, it is a small thing
for us to be reproached and falsely accused by thee, seeing thou art so
ignorantly bold and ^ool^hardy to reproach the Lord Jesus Christ in his inward
appearance, and Light, in the hearts of men, calling him a false Christ, as if
these who preach Christ in the hearts of Gods Saints, were those of whom Christ
foretold, that should come in the latter days and preach a false Christ,
saying, he is in the secret Chamber, which thou understandest as if Christ had
meant, the secret Chamber of the heart, following herein thy Brother in
Iniquity and Darkness, Benjamin Keech, who in his Book called, The Child's
Instructor, has these express words in that Section concerning the Light
within) Therefore believe not him that says, behold he is here in the secret
Chamber, viz. the heart. The which expression thou seem to have borrowed
from the said Book: But if thou had any true knowledge in the Mystery of
Christ, thou would sooner have chosen, that thy right hand, that penned these
words, had been cut off, than to have used them But by this, and other the like
expressions in thy Treatise thou plainly discovers thy self to be a man
altogether ignorant of the true knowledge of Christ; yea, thou seem ignorant
of the very Letter of the Scripture, which in plain and express words does
mention Christ dwelling in the heart, and Christ within the hope of Glory, the
Mystery hid from Ages and Generations; And said Paul to the Corinthians, Know
ye not that Jesus Christ is in you, unless ^e be Reprobates? And said Christ in
his Prayer unto his Father, Thou in me and I in them: And when he told the
Pharisees, who looked that the Kingdom of God should come with Observations, as
to say, lo here, or lo there, he said, for behold the Kingdom of God is within
you, Luke 17.21. and surely, where the Kingdom of God is, there are God and
Christ* ^o that the plain ^etter of the Scripture is against thy most absurd
and Antichristian Doctrine, That the Christ in the hearts of men, yea, even of
the Saints, as thou would have it (for thou make no distinction) is a false
Christ; for the plain tendency of this thy Work of Darkness is to make People
believe, that Christ is not a Light within the Saints, because, as thou
alledgest, the Light within was not crucified for us, but Jesus Christ of
Nazareth. And in this absurd distinction and dividing of Christ, thou acts the
part of Socinus and his followers, who are called Socinians, that affirm most
absurdly, That Christ it only a mere man, and that he had no being nor
existance before Mary. But if thou say, thou believe that Christ is both God
and Man, and that he was from the beginning, to wit, that Word by whom all
things were made, then, why do thou deny that Christ, as he is that Word, is
in the Saints? for though Christ only suffered in the flesh, and as Man upon
the Tree of the Cross, yet he who suffered, was not mere Man, but God and Man,
and yet still one Christ. And thus also Christ within spiritually and inwardly
revealed in the Saints, is not another Christ from him that (...) in the flesh,
and was crucified for us, even Jesus of Nazareth. And had thou taken a little
pains to read my book and consider it impartially and fairly, thou should
have seen what a plain and single account I give of mine and my Friends Faith
concerning the Man Christ Jesus, as he came ^n the flesh, and dyed for our
sins; and rose again and ascended, etc. even Jesus of Nazareth; and that true
faith in Christ Jesus is not only a believing in him, as he is the Word, etc.
but as the same Word did take flesh and was God manifest in the flesh, etc. to
wit, Christ crucified and risen again, made of a Woman, made under the Law,
etc. and that the true faith of a Christian does not divide Christ, etc. as
false Christians do, who say, they believe in Christ without them, but do not
believe and receive Christ within them, as God the Father does inwardly reveal
him, or as R^nters and other high Notionists, who pretend to believe in Christ,
as the Word and Light in them, but slight and blaspheme against Christ that was
crucified without them, as is plainly to be seen in my late book, page 131,
132, 133, and page 103, 104, 108. and p. 229. and hereby it does plainly appear
how farely I guard against both extremes o^ ^alse Teachers, some preaching
Christ without, but denying him within, as thou Pardon Tillinghast, and most of
thy Brethren called Baptists, most Anti-christianly have done, and yet continue
to do Oh Pardon! Pardon! God Almighty give thee pardon, through unfeigned
Repentance, for this thy great sin) others, not these sober People called in
scorn Quakers, but Ranters, and high Notionists, who pretend to own Christ
within them, but deny him without, as come in the Flesh, etc. And though thou
call'st thy self in thy title page A Servant of Jesus Christ, yet thou have
plainly discovered, that thou yet art ignorant of him, and in this thy Work
thou have rather proved thy self a servant of Antichrist; for what greater
opposition can Antichrist make against Christ, than to oppose the presence and
in-being of Christ in his People, who is their Life? And if he who is their
Life be not in them, they cannot live, yea, if Christ live not in thee, thou
art dead in thy tre^passes and sins, and the old man is alive in thee, and his
servant thou art, and Christ is not like to live in thee, as he did in Paul*
and as he does in all true Christians, so long as thou judge, That the Christ
in the heart is a false Christ. Oh, Pardon Tillinghast! thou have made too
great haste in this thy undertaking, as in many other thy works, wherein
possibly thou may imagine thou art tilling and plowing in Gods field; but
remember, that the Scripture says, The plowing of the Wicked is sin; and when
thou make haste to till, without the true knowledge of God and Christ, thou
had better let alone and employ thy self in some other lawful occupation.
Have thou no other way to defend thy Idol of Water Baptism, but to smite
against the Lo^d Jesus Christ, in his inward appearance in his Saints? But
kno^, O vain and foolish man! that as that ^dol Dagon did ^all before Gods Ark,
so thy idol of Water Baptism shall ^all before the Lord Jesus Christ, inwardly
appearing in thousands and ten thousands of his Saints; and let none be
offended that I call thy Water Baptism an ^dol; for whatever man sets up in
opposition to the inward appearance of Christ in his People, they make i^ unto
themselves an Idol, and it will fall, and they together with it. But as for
John's Baptism with Water, or that baptism with water that others of the
Disciples of Christ used, I call it not an Idol, far be it from me, it had its
blessing and service in its day, and pointed, as a figure, to Christ's inward
and spiritual Baptism; and if there be an inward baptism of Christ, then is not
Christ the inward baptiser, and minister of this inward baptism? yea,
certainly; and yet thou denyest Christ within, calling him, A false Christ in
the secret Chamber of the heart.

And as for thy undertaking to prove thy Water Baptism to be a Gospel Precept
by plain Scripture, I question not, but through Gods assistance, I shall prove,
that thou ha^t grossly perverted and mis-applied the scriptures, not
understanding the scriptures nor the power of God, like unto the Sadduces of
old. Thou compa^est thy self to David with his sling, and his few stones
smiting a^ Goliath. But, alas, poor man! that sling and these stones, and that
River or brook, out of which he did ^ake these stones, according to the deep
Mystery, signified under that figure or allegory, thou understandst not, it is
a dark Riddle and Parable un^o thee, and thou thy self art more a kin to Goliath
than to David.

In the beginning of thy work, thou do not fairly state the Question; first,
that thou take no notice of my plain and express words in my book, page 184.
where I say expressly as follows, If any were raised up by the Lord as John
was, and could prove and instruct their being sent to baptize with Water, as he
was, these to whom they should be sent, ought gladly to receive it; but to do
it by bare imitation, or a mere pretended Call, which they cannot prove to be
either mediate or immediate, is great Presumption, yea, Superstition. This one
short section is enough to overthrow thy whole Work, and yet thou have made no
Reply to it, nor given the least notice of it in thy book; and all that thou
have said for Water Baptism does not in the least give any ground for thy
Water Baptism thou and thy brethren set up in your vain Imaginations, without
any call, either immediate or mediate from God; so that your work i^ your
Water Baptism is a Will Worship. Secondly, Thou do not fairly cite my words,
in thy stating the Question, saying, That I affirmed, that the Apostles
practiced it* viz. Water Baptism, Only by permission, etc. The word [ Only] is
thy addition* and is not in my book: but my words are these following, The
Apostles generally thought fit both to use and tolerate the use of
Water Baptism, that belonged to John, and diverse other things of the Law, which
was by permission for a time, and not by any Gospel standing Commission, etc.
Now the word [ Only] being added, does derogate from my words, as if I did
understand that the Apostles only baptized by a bare, dry or naked permission;
whereas I did understand, and so I do still, that it was not a mere or bare
permission, but they they thought fit both to use it, and tolerate the use of
it; and that which made them think and judge it fit to use it for some time,
was really the Spirit of God in them, that gave them, not only a spiritual and
cheerful freedom to use it for some time, but let them see a great service and
convenience in it for sometime, until men began to contend about it, and lay
more weight on it, and other things of the like nature, than they ought to have
done; for as in the change of an outward form of Government, or a new
admin^stration of worldly and civil Laws, the former Laws and the execution of
them, cannot in an instant be removed, but gradually otherwise great
inconveniences would follow; as when a house is to be supported with new
Pillars, the old Pillars must not be first removed, else the House would be in
danger of falling; but the new Pillars must first, in great part, be well
placed and fixed, and then the old are by degrees safely and wisely removed:
Even so John's Baptism and other things of like nature, were not presently and
suddenly to be removed, because many, both Jews and proselited Gentiles laid
great stress and weight on them; And therefore, I say, the Apostles, not by a
mere bare and naked permission, but in the wisdom and counsel of God used
Water Baptism for a time; and yet all this will not prove that it is a Gospel
Precept, or a standing Gospel Ordinance that was to continue in the Church to
the end of the World*

Nor art thou more successful in managing this Controversy about Water Baptism,
than in stating it; for almost throughout thou fight'st against thy own shadow,
and take much pains and usest many Arguments to prove many things no wise
denied by me; as first, That the outward Form and inward Power of Godliness may
not be s^perated: This we affirm as well as thou, and much better than thou;
for seeing thou denyest Christ within the heart to be the true Christ, how
can thou really own the inward power of Godliness? Can the^e be any inward
power of Godliness, without Christ living, dwelling and ruling in the heart?
Again, many of you Baptists affirm, That men may be called of God both to
preach and baptize, and yet have no true Piety or Holiness: Which a Baptist
Teacher affirmed to me in the hearing of diverse witnesses last (...), in the
shop of one of our friends at Newport in (...)-Island; and whether this be not
thy own persuasion, thou art concerned to clear thy self. But further, how many
Hypocrites and vain persons do ye baptize with Water, that no real signs do in
the least appear in them, that the inward power of godliness was joined with
their being baptized with Water: Now the thing that thou should have proved,
was, that your Water baptism, taken up by you, without any true command, or so
much as a true inward liberty by the spirit of God in your hearts, is a
Gospel-Precept. But this the Apostles witnessed, when Peter baptized, or caused
to be baptized, Corn^lius, and others with him, no doubt, he both saw and felt
his liberty, and good allowance, by the revelation of Gods holy spirit in his
heart, so to do; and therefore he might well command it at that time to be
done* and yet it does not follow that it is a Gospel-Precept. I say further,
the outward form of Godliness is entire without Water baptism, as at this day
administered, though when it was practiced by the command of God, it was a part
o^ the outvvard form. And whereas thou say, John's preaching and baptizing
related to Christ's Gospel disensp^tion, citing for this, Mark 1. cap. 1, 2, 3.
^. I Answer; All this may be granted in a true sense, yea, I do readily grant
it in the true sense, and so did all the Figures and Types of Moses Law, all
which obscurely and darkly pointed at Christ, and the pure Gospel dispensation,
and were, as it were, a symbolical way of preaching Christ and his Gospel; and
therefore it was a good and worthy observation that many ancient Christians
have made, That the G^spel and New Testament lay hid within the vail of the Law
and old Testament; All these Figures and Shadows of the Law, shadowing and
figuring Gospel Mysteries unto those whose Eyes are spiritually enlightened to
see and understand them. And whereas thou citest Mark's words in the beginning
of his book, saying, The beginning of the Gosp^l of Jesus Christ the Son of
God. If I grant thee that both John's preaching and baptism, in a true sense,
is a beginning of the Gospel, what gainest thou by it? does it therefore follow
that Water Baptism is a pure Gospel Precept, and to be observed to the end of
the world? I deny the consequence: And the vanity and falsehood of it I shall,
by Gods assistance, plainly demonstrate ^ut first, I shall lay down a few plain
Positions, which I hope scarce any professing themselves Christians, that are
in any degree intelligent, can deny. 1 st, The Gospel did begin to be preached
by the Lord to our first Parents immediately after the Fall, when he gave the
Promise, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the head of the Serpent: And
this was before any Law of Types or F^gures was given, and before ^ater
baptism. 2 dly, This Gospel Promise was in a solmn way renewed by the Lord to
Abraham, That in his Se^d all Nations of the Earth should be blessed, and this
was 430 years* as Paul notice^h, before the Law of Moses: And the same Paul
says, That the Gospel was preached to Abraham; which is the everlasting Gospel,
(...) one and the same in all Ages of the world, and therefore, to spoke
strictly, did not take its beginning neither at the beginning of the book of
Mark (that begins with a Voice crying in the Wilderness, Prepare the way of
the Lord, that as it related to John's Ministration in part, so it has a
further reach, as pointing to an inward Ministration) nor yet of Luke, who
goes further backward, to wit, to Zacharias his burning Incence in the Temple;
and Matthew goes yet farther backward, to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and John
furthest of all, to the Word that was in the beginning, which Word is Christ,
by whom all things were made, and are upheld. 3 dly, This one everlasting
Gospel has had it various and diverse breakings forth and administrations in
clearer discoveries and dispensations from age to age, until the fullness of
time, and before that fullness of time, until Christ had suffered for the sins
of the World, rose again, ascended and gave the holy Ghost to all true
believers, the Gospel dispensation remained among all the faithful in all Ages,
but as veiled, or as the Kirnel within the Shell of the Figures and Types of
the Law. 4 thly, The Law was never given alone by the Lord, nor was ever
intended by him, that any should have eternal Life by the bare observation of
the Figures and Shadows of the Law, but by faith in Christ, and true Gospel
Obedience to him; but it was as a Schoolmaster to lead unto Christ, as Paul
has declared. 5 tly, These several more clear discoveries and dispensations of
the Gospel, may be branched forth, or distinguished into several degrees, and
these several degrees may be reduced into three, each of which dispensations
had their peculiar and proper divine inward Illuminations and influences of
Grace and Truth, to wit, First, That discovery that God gave to men by Moses,
and the written Law and the Prophets, until John. Secondly, From John until
Christ dyed and rose again, and gave the holy Ghost* Thir^ly, That last and
most glorious discovery and revelation by the giving of the holy Ghost
generally to all true believers in a peculiar influence and operation, beyond
what ever formerly was given in a general way to believers. Again, these three
may be reduced into two, viz. Law and Gospel, called by Paul the Two Covenants,
which (until the last greatest and most excellent discovery of the Gospel) have
been administered, as with an excellent mixture* as when Water and Wine are
mixed together, though the liquors be only two in kind, yet they admit of many
various Mixtures, all which are serviceab^e, according to the desire, and
ability of the drinkers. And therefore whereas thou say, Nor is there any
third Dispensation, that is neither Law nor Gospel of John's, as is imagined.
In this, as in many other things, thou figh^st against thy own shadow; for
though in my late book I writ of three Dispensations, and prove them
sufficiently out of the Scriptures, yet I never imagined that there was any one
of these three Dispensations that was neither Law nor Gospel: ^ut I thus
distinguish them, The first is both legal and evangelical, but the Evangelical
does but obscurely and hiddenly appear, and therefore the first may be called
more Legal, and in that respect is called by Paul, and others, The Law, by a
synecdoche, the denomination being ^^ken from the larger part; and this
Dispensation continued until John, according to Christ's own Words, The Law and
the Prophets were unto John. The Second Dispensation of the same Gospel may
well enough be understood to begin at John, according to Acts 1.22. beginning
from the Baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up from us; see
also Acts 10.^7, ^8. and to continue until the plentiful pouring sorth of the
holy Ghost, both at and after the day of Pentecost; and this second
Dispensation comprehends all the time of Christ his being on Earth in the
f^esh, which, though a more clear and glorious Dispensation of the Gospel yet
vv^s in some degree veiled with the figures of the Law, for not only John's
Baptism, but the whole Law of Moses was in force until Christ suffered on
the Cross, and became a Sacrifice of a svveet smell unto God, and a
Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, and thereby put an end to all
these Sacrifices of Rams, Lambs and Bull^cks, etc. for Christ himself being
made of a Woman, was made under the Law, and fulfilled it, both in his being
circumcised and baptized; and he preached the La^ and Gospel, and sent (...)
whom he had cured of his Leprosy, to the Priest, according to the Law, and
told the Jews, That their paying Tithes, which wholly belonged to the Law, was
a thing to be done, but that withal, the greater things of the Law, as Mercy
and Judgment were not to be neglected: And Christ told that it is written in
the Law, They shall be all taught of God; which is a Gospel Promise: So that
the Gospel and Law were united and joined together in both these former
Dispensations; and the Gospel wa^ (...) the Law, as some precious Treasure hid
within some vail. The Third and last Dispensation began from the giving of the
holy Ghost at Pentecost most apparently, and was to increase until it should
come to its Meridian or Noontide Glory, as so it may be said, it did really so
come in the days of the Apostles, before their decease; And this third
Dispensation of the Gospel is that which ought to be called, The pure and
perfect Gospel Dispens^tion, purely and perfectly unvailed and uncovered,
declaring and revealing that great Mystery of Christ, and of eternal Salva^ion
by faith in him, both as he came and suffered outwardly in the flesh, and dyed
for us, and rose again, and ascended, and ^s now in Heaven, at the right hand
of Majesty, making intercession for us, and also as he does come inwardly to
live, dwell and rule in our hearts; for both his outward and inward coming are
a most choice and excellent Doctrine of the Gospel of our Salvation, but the
one without the other is lame and defective; for as it is most glad Tidings
(which the word Gospel or Evangel signifies) that Christ has dyed for us, and
purchased to us the forgiveness of all our sins, (through Faith in his Name) so
likewise, that the Father has given him to us in our hearts, to kill and
destroy the very life of sin in us, and perfectly to sanctify and renew us
into the Image of God; and no Vails, nor Figures, nor Types of things to come
belong to this third Dispensation of the Gospel, but the Truth of the Gospel is
held forth, purely and perfectly in its own native luster, beauty and glory,
without any figure or shadow of the Law, such as Circumcision and John's
Baptism was. These Positions thus being laid down and well under^^ood (the
substance of which are sufficiently laid down in my late book, though not so
largely, or in so many express words,) may serve sufficiently to answer to
every one of thy Objections against us, without a particular application to
every particular of thy Treatise.

And thus it plainly does appear, how it may be granted that John's Ministry
and Baptism was the ^eg^nning of that second Dispensation of the Gospel, that
as yet had its Vails and Figures in some degree remaining, and vailing that
more abundant glory that was to follow: But it does not follow, that John's
Baptism or Water baptism of any that did baptize, did really belong to the
third Dispensation of the Gospel, as any part thereof; and this third
Dispensation is (being the Gospel per^ected and consummated, as it comes to
its Meridian or Noontide Glory and Brightness) that which is most commonly and
frequently called the Gospel in the New Testament, being cleared and discharged
from all these Vails and Figures of the Law; even as when Christ arose, he laid
aside his grave Clothes, and did not after his Resurrection reassume his
Garments, which he did use as a clothing before he suffered, but left them to
remain with the Soldiers that put him to death; A figure of this very M^stery.

And thou art at great pains to prove, That John was sent to baptize with
Water, and Christ's Disciples baptized with Water, and so did the Apostles
after the giving of the holy Ghost; and a great many other things thou
bring, no wise contradicted by us the People called Quakers, and therefore
thou might have spared thy needless pains. But the great thing for thee to
prove, was, That John 's Baptism, or Water Baptism is any part or precept of
the Gospel Dispensation, and Administration, as it began to take place after
the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and the giving of the holy Ghost; This
thou have not done in the least, and therefore thou have done nothing to
purpose. And whereas thou pleadest, That Christ sent John to baptize and
preach; I answer; And so I say, as truly he sent Moses to give the Law and
Circumcision; for the Spirit of Christ was in Moses, and in Aaron, and in the
holy Priests under the Law, that circumcised and sacrificed; and Christ gave
both the Law and Gospel, and was the Mediator under both, and the Minister of
both; for without Christ, the Word, that was in the beginning, by whom all
things were made, neither Law nor the Prophets could have been. But the thing
thou should have proved, That Christ, as the Mediator of the New Covenant, in
the pure and perfect Dispensation of the Gospel, in the last administration of
it, ever commanded Water Baptism; or that Christ after he rose from the dead,
commanded Water Baptism, which thou do not do in the least. Thou seem to
lay great stress on these words, Acts 1^.48. That Peter commanded them to be
baptized who had received the holy Ghost, to wit, Cornelius and his company.
But this I have answered already, and I say further, this does not prove that
Water Baptism is a Gospel Precept, but only that that second Dispensation being
not yet wholy abolished, Peter savv a service in it, in the Wisdom of God,
revealed in him, and therefore he might well command it for that time, though no
Gospel Precept.

But whereas thou say, That Peter and the Apostles did command in Christ
Jesus, the Lords Name, Water Baptism, is a thing utterly false, the Scripture
says no such thing; but That Peter commanded them to be baptized in the Name
of the Lord; so that the Name of the Lord is relative to their being baptized,
and not to the command, and their being baptized in the Name of the Lord does
plainly signify, that their being baptized with Water was some outward sign,
that they became the Lords, and were true believers in him. Next, whereas thou
say, I affirm that Water Baptism was at that time an abolished Ceremony, is
false, I said no such thing; It was beginning to be abolishing and decaying,
and was decreasing, as John said in respect of his Baptism, I must decrease,
but Christ must increase: But that it was then totally abolished, I say not;
for it could not be safely abolished all at once, but by degrees, and after
some time, as I have above demonstrated. And now that I call this third and
last Dispensation, that began to take place after the Death and Resurrection of
Christ, the pure and perfect Dispensation of the Gospel, I understand it not,
as if the first and second Dispensations before and under Moses, or before and
under Christ, as he was present in the flesh, had any mixture or impurity of
sin or evil, nay, far be i^ from me; but I call it pure and perfect as having
none of these Figures and Types of the Law mixed with it, as formerly. And
though the Apostles, after the giving of the holy Ghost, did grow up into the
attainment of this most pure and perfect Gospel state and Dispensation; yet
many Christians who had a measure of sincere Faith in Christ, were short of
it, and for the cause of such who were vveak, and but as Babes in Christ they
savv it meet in the Wisdom of God to use it for some time. But after the days
of the Apostles and their Successors, about three or four hundred years
there-after, the true Gospel Spirit was generally* lost (a Remnant excepted of
hidden ones, who in some measure retained it) and the inward Power of Godliness
departed from, and then* Water Baptism, and many other things belonging to the
outward form, became as a dead thing and was more fit to be buried than to be
used. And none ought to presume to raise it up again, unless it could be said,
That the Power of God had raised it, or renewed it in the users or practisers
of it, and that they could sincerely say and prove, that God had sent them, or
given them Authority to use Water Baptism, and other the like things; but this
I do not find that any called Baptists so much as pretend unto, and if they did
pretend to it, their bare pretense, without some real and effectual prooff,
were not to be believed. And that Peter caused Water Baptism to be administered
to Cornelius, and other Gentiles, does not prove it to be a Gospel Precept; for
under the Law the Gentiles who became Proselites of the Covenant, so called,
were generally baptized into Water, as well as Circumcised, long before John's
time, as the Jews Books plainly declare, and as may be gathered from Scripture,
and as diverse Christian Writers relate from the Jews, and particularly Thomas
Godwin in his ^ook called Moses and Aaron, lib. 1. cap. 3. And seeing it was so
commonly practiced by the Jews, as well before John's time as then, and
thereafter, as both Jewish and Christian Writers affirm, and as the Epistle to
the Hebrews does plainly declare, Heb. 9.10. how that the Law had its diverse
Baptisms (so the Greek translated into English, Washings) and carnal
Ordinances, until the time of Reformation; it does more plainly evince, that
Water Baptism was a legal thing, though both it and Circumcision, with all the
other Types and Figures of the Law, pointed at Gospel Mysteries, and in so far
may be said to relate or belong to the Gospel in its more obscure
Administration; but that whole Dispensation both of Moses and the Prophets, is
in Scripture style, called, The Law, although Moses himself and all the Prophets
saw beyond the Figures of the Law, and were truly endowed, in great part, with
a Gospel spirit.

That, thou say, if Water Baptism had not been comprehended in Paul 's
Commission, then he had done evil in baptizing so many. I Answ. It does not
follow, any more than that he did evil in circumcising Timothy; for things may
be done upon occasions without a Command from God, and that not only by a bare
or simple permission, but in a sweet heavenly freedom of Gods holy Spirit
inwardly revealed, which is the only chief and principal Rule of every true
Christians freedom, as well as of their Obedience. How many good Christians
join in Marriage, having no command so to do, but knowing and enjoying an
inward Liberty by the Spirit of the Lord so to do, and therein receiving the
blessing of the Lord; and many other the like cases might be mentioned.

Thou give a very strange and exceeding strained Gloss upon Paul's words,
That he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, to wit, that Water
Baptism was not so bound to Paul, or any other sent to preach the Gospel, that
they with their own hands must needs perform that Work of Baptizing; and Paul
and the other Apostles had such and such for their Ministers, as John, Timothy
and others. But what then? what Paul commanded other Disciples to do, is all
one as if he had done it himself, as thou arguest in another case, but not to
thy purpose; and therefore it cannot be reasonably judged, that if Paul had
been sent to baptize, either by himself, or making use of others to assist him
in that work, he would have said, He was not sent to baptize; for that would
imply a plain Contradiction, to be sent, and not to be sent. But this thy
strein'd gloss on Paul's words is grounded upon a mere supposition of thine,
That Paul was sent to baptize with Water, which thou have not in the least
proved, nor art ever like to do; Matthew. 28. says nothing of Water.

Thy similitude betwixt Solomon's Temple and the Gospel Church, as thou do
apply it, is exceeding vain and foolish, and proceeds from great Ignorance,
as if the Stones that were the Foundation of Solomon's Temple, cut out of the
Mountains, and the Timber-work, did signify, that the Foundation of God's
Spiritual House should be Water Baptism. But this is plain contrary to
Scripture, that says, The Church is built on the Foundation of the Prophets
and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone; And thou that
sets up Water Baptism as the Foundation of the Gospel Church, preachest another
Foundation than Christ Jesus, and another Gospel. If Solomon's Temple had been
built on the Waters, thou might have had some slender pretext or color to
use such a Comparison; but what Resemblance Stone and Timber has to Water
Baptism, I do not understand. And if Water Baptism be the Foundation of the
Church, then the Church has had no Foundation for many Ages past; for Infant
Baptism, by sprinkling, ye Baptists do not acknowledge to be any true Baptism
at all, but a mere fiction or invention, and yet for many Ages there has been
no other Water Baptism used, but that of sprinkling Infants; for that party or
society of People called Bapti^^s or Anabaptists did but appear about Luther's
time, or since, and therefore if Water Baptism be the Foundation of Gods
Church, the Church has had no Foundation for many Ages, and therefore has
quite ceased to be; for she cannot be or subsist without a Foundation.

And as concerning the Allegorical and Spiritual signifycation of Solomon's
Temple, it is very well understood without your Water Baptism; for Solomon's
Temple, as it was a figure of Christ's Body, which was crucified and rose again,
and ascended into Glory, so also it was a figure of the Gospel Church under the
pure Gospel Dispensation, the Foundation whereof is Christ Jesus, as he came in
the likeness of sinful flesh, and took upon himself the form of a Servant, and
humbled himself unto* Death, even the Death of the Cross, made of a Woman, made
under the Law, the Seed of Abraham and David: I say, Christ thus come in the
flesh, and crucified for our sins, as the Mystery of him is inwardly revealed
by the holy Spirit in the hearts of all true believers, in respect of his thus
humbling himself, and taking hold of the seed of Abraham, may well be compared
to the Stone and Wood of Solomon's Temple, which were but mean, and not very
costly Materials, but the fullness of the Godhead, that dwelt in Christ Bodily,
and his being anointed with the holy Spirit without measure, being the only
begotton Son of God, full of Grace and Truth, of whose fullness all true
believers do plentifully receive, and Grace for Grace, and the many most rich
and excellent divine Virtues wherewith both Christ and his Church are most
richly endued, and adorned, are well signified by that great plenty of Gold and
Silver, and other precious Furniture, wherewith the Temple of Solomon was
beautified. But it is much thou did not make the Sea in Solomon's Temple to
signify Water Baptism; possibly some of thy Brethren may judge this a great
omission or neglect in thee; but had thou brought it, it could have made
nothing for thy Water Baptism; for that Sea in Solomon's Temple was not a
figure of outward Water (which it self was but a figure) but of these spiritual
Waters of the Sanctuary, mentioned by the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 47.1, 7, 8, 9.
and by John, c. 4. v 6 and Rev. 22.1.

But this most idle and ignorant gloss and comparison of thine, is like to that
other passage in thy book, where thou say, Repenting Believers, baptized with
Water (being a sign and token from God to them of the remission of sins) are
the only true Heirs of the Promise of the holy ghost, etc. Which assertion thou
do falsely ground on Peter's words to the Jews, Repent and be baptized, every
one of you (mind it (say thou) every one that expects Salvation) in the Name
of Jesus Christ* for the Remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of
the holy ghost. But whether Water Baptism is to be here understood, or not, thy
arguing, that it must be Water Baptism, is most weak and idle, as if to render
it only Spirit, is to charge the Spirit of God in Peter with gross
Impertinencies and Tautologies, as if he should say, Repent and be baptized
with the holy Spirit, and you shall receive the holy Spirit. To this I Answer;
This is no Impertinency nor Tautology in the least, but very proper, as it is
very proper to say, White Cloth being dip't into the Dyers Fat, that has a red
dye, receives the said red dye; even so, the Soul being dipped into that
spiritual Water of Gods holy Spirit, receives it, as the Cloth receives the
dye: But this to thee is a Mystery and Parable, and therefore it is not strange
thou talkest such gross impertinencies. And it is plain by these words of
thine, thou make Water Baptism equally necessary to Salvation with Faith and
Repentance, and therefore all are eternally and finally Lost, who have not been
baptized or plunged into Water. O Monster of uncharitableness! This most
Uncharitable Doctrine damneth all to the Pit of Hell, for many Ages, that never
received Water Baptism; this is like one of thy Brethren, who printed a (...)
with this Title, Dip or Damn. It is no wonder t^ and you Baptists generally so
bitter and peevish; for this your Uncharitable Doctrine of Condemning all to
Hell, who are not baptized into Water, begets this evil nature in you, even
as the narrow Doctrine of the Presbyterians as touching the Grace of God,
makes them of the like evil nature; for evil Principles and Persuasions have a
great influence upon men's Hearts and Lives. And now I find thee in this thy
work against us, joined with the Priests of New England, and particularly these
of Boston (though formerly some of thy Brethren suffered great persecution by the
Priests of New England) where it seems thou have got thy book printed, -- and
so like Herod and Pontius Pilate joining together against Christ, as he came in
the flesh, so ye join together against him, as he is come, and coming more
abundantly in Spirit; but this Stone, which ye builders of Babylon have
refused, will God exalt, and is exalting, to be the head of the Corner.

Thou art as idle and impertinent to allege, That by Water and Blood,
mentioned 1 John 5.6. This is he that came by Water and Blood, is to be meant
Water Baptism, and that called the Supper, in giving and receiving Bread and
Wine. But this being thy bare alledgance, without any shadow of proof, it is
altogether denied; and the Virtue of both the Water and Blood, together with
the Spirit, are inwardly and spiritually felt, which three agree in one, and
are inseparable; but so are not your Water Baptism and Bread and Wine, which ye
your selves confess are often separated from the Spirit, as the many vain persons
among you, and the many dry and barren Souls of your society, too palpably
demonstrate; for who more gaudy and vain in their Attire and Clothing, both
men and women, than many called Baptists? as I have seen and observed, in part,
to my great grief; Who greater Enemies to the Spirits inward Revelation, and to
Christ's inward presence and Appearance in Believers, than thou, and the
Baptists generally (perhaps some few excepted?) And therefore the Spirit, and
your Water Baptism, and breaking of Bread, agree not in one, and are not in
unity.

And whereas thou chargest it on me and my Friends, the People called in scorn
Quakers, as if we did presume or boast of our being arrived to a state above or
beyond the Apostles, after they had received the holy Ghost; for thou say,
Here we may note the pride that this Bo^ster is fill^d with, counting even the
Master Builders of God's House, but Children in comparison of them, etc. And
again, thou say The Generation of ^uakers, it seems, are got into an higher
degree of stature and fullness, thinking they are in an higher Dispensation,
than they had attained, etc. All this is a most injurious and gross Perversion
of my words, and of our Principle; I never said, writ or thought any such
thing. But take notice on what false foundation he grounds this his Perversion,
because I said in my last book, If they who are so zealous for Water Baptism,
were cordially zealous for the inward and spiritual Baptism, they might be the
more born with, as Men bear with Children, etc. and Charity might be allowed
them in that case, to be as Children or Babes in Christ. I entreat the Readers
to take notice, that I say nothing here of the Apostles, or any living in that
Age, but of these now living in our Age, who are generally too zealous for the
Water Baptism, but have little or no zeal, most of them, for the inward and
spiritual, plainly denying inward Divine Revelation, as the privilege given to
the Saints in our Age, and calling Christ in the hearts of the Saints, a false
Christ, as this Pardon Tillinghast has done, and as many others do. And though
the Apostles, after they received the holy Ghost, used Water Baptism, yet it
was not for themselves, who saw beyond it, and were attained to that One
Baptism, Not the putting away the faith of the Flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience, as Peter declared; but in the Apostles days, there were Babes in
Christ and many scarce arrived at the true state of spiritual babes, whom the
^postles saw meet to baptize into Water; but yet that Water baptism was not the
Milk wherewith they were fed, but rather as stilts or Crutches that these
babes or lame Persons used for some time And whereas thou further say, That
we called Quakers are born Monsters, not Babes to be fed with Milk, as the
Saints heretofore. Here thy scornful Spirit, full of bitterness and prejudice,
does plainly appear: How many thousand babes in Christ have been, before ever
baptism with Water was in being, and since it received its burial? and whoever
seek to raise it again, or restore it in their own self-will, and mere
imaginations, from what they falsely infer or draw from the Letter of the
Scripture, they but raise a dead thing, that is not the sincere Milk; for the
Milk of Babes, is the sincere Milk of the Word, and that is not Water Baptism
And whereas thou alledgest, That to pretend to the Power, and deny the Form of
Godliness, is as Hypocritical as the other is Formal: This we agree unto; but
it remains as yet to be proved, that Water baptism is any part of the Form of
Godliness, since the form and practice of it has generally ceased, since the
Apostles, for many Ages past, and but again is raised up by the mere will of
Man, without any divine Call or Authority, so far as ever I could yet learn;
for I never yet heard that any in this Age, or since the Apostasy began, did
pretend to an inward divine Call for Water Baptism. But whether when the Gospel
shall have it free course to be yet preached to all Nations, any shall be
raised up to baptize with Water, by a divine Authority, belongs not to the
present debate.

And thus I hope it will appear to the impartial Readers, that I have
sufficiently answered to thy Objections and pretended Reasons, from plain
Scripture, which thou have but grossly wrested and perverted.

In the close of thy book thou say, I strike as well at the Lords Supper ^s
at Water Baptism* alleging further, that I say, our common eating that we use,
is the Lords Supper, whether two or three, more or less; but both these are thy
false alledgings, and none of my words, nor justly can be gathered from my
words. And first, as to the Lords Supper, I say, where Christ is not inwardly
and spiritually seen, tasted and fed upon, by his inward Revelation in men's
hearts, there is not the Lords Supper, although they gather together with ever so
great a Solemnity, as outwardly, to eat outward Bread and drink outward Wine in
remembrance, as they pretend, of Christ. Secondly, There is neither Number of
Persons, nor any set Times appointed by Christ, in relation to the outward
eating and drinking, which ye call the Supper; and therefore as the Church of
England use it once Quarterly, and some Baptists Monthly or perhaps some
Weekly, why may not others, with as good reason, use it daily; and seeing the
Number of Persons is no essential part, as ye must confess, then why may not
two or three, as well as some hundreds, use it with equal Solemnity and
religious Devotion, viz. eating and drinking together, both with a holy fear
and cheerfulness, remembering the Lords Death* even until his last coming, as
well as until his more abundant inward spiritual Coming into their hearts.

And whereas I queried in my last book, Wherein we are behind you, or wherein
we fall short of you, or what excellency, worth or value has your Supper above
and beyond ours? To this thou have not answered one syllable, nor have thou
showed any one particular instance wherein your eating and drinking excels
ours, and therefore I return it again unto thee to be answered. And I thus
further query, Is tho difference about the bear Name, that ye call it The
Supper of the Lord, and we have no freedom to call the bare outward eating and
drinking, unless Christ be inwardly enjoyed, the Supper of the Lord, but where
Christ is inwardly enjoyed and fed upon, together with the outward eating and
drinking, as most frequently is witnessed, to God's praise, that we can freely
call the Lords Supper? Or, 2 dly, Is the difference, because ye have some
Priest, or Pastor, or gifted Brother, to consecrate the Bread, and make it more
holy than our Bread that we eat, even when we use Prayer and Thanksgiving
before eating, either vocal or only mental, and frequently both? Or, ^ dly, Is
it because we do not use that formality of repeating the words, Take, eat, this
is my Body, which we find no where commanded to be used in the Saints eatting?
Or, 4 thly, Is it because the eating and drinking that was among the Saints,
called by thee and others, the Supper, was never intended for satisfying
hunger, as thou hintest? And what if I should say the same, thou gainest
nothing; for it is not the simple eating and drinking that I call a holy
Remembrance of Christ's Death, but the holy and religious way and manner of
performing it; and yet thou can not prove, that the Saints, when they did eat
that commonly called the Supper, did not really eat and drink sufficiently to
refresh and ^o^rish the Natural Body, as well as together with that, the^r
Souls were refreshed and nourished with spiritual food; for it is most clear,
that in the Church of Corinth they did eat together to refresh the outward man,
and this the Apostle did not reprove, but their disorderly manner of eating, so
that some were hungery, and others were drunken, and some eat at home in
private, and others did not, but ^arried to eat together with their Brethren,
and were at times disappointed: This plainly proves they used to make a real
Meal of their eating together; but your manner of eating about the quantity of
a Nut in Bread, and a spoonful, one or two in Wine, we find no where in all the
New Testament; and that ye give the cup but once, and Christ gave it twice, as
I have showed in my late book, this ye can give no account of, and thou have
not taken the least notice of it, although it is material to you, who pretend
to observe every thing as Christ did. And why are ye not as zealous for washing
one another feet, and anointing the sick with Oil? I am sure more expressly
commanded by Christ, and James the Apostle, than your Water baptism? ye can
give no just account. It seems, thou art zealous for laying on of hands, which
thou reckons also as belonging to the foundation of the Gospel, falsely citing
and perverting these words in Heb. 6.1, 2. for though that place mention the
foundation of Faith and Repentance, and afterward the Doctrine of Baptisms,
and of laying on of hands, yet it says not, that either Water baptism or
laying on of hands is any part of the foundation; and the Doctrine of Baptisms
and the laying on of hands is one thing, the use of Water baptism is quite
another: The Doctrine of all the legal Rites, Figures and Types remains in
the Church at this day, but the practice of them is abolished, and so of Water
baptism.

Before the close of this my Answer, I shall further take notice of some other
of thy gross Impertinencies: First, Thou usest these idle words, by way of
reproach, So that upon hearing Peter 's Testimony, not of killing the Light
within, as the Quakers preach, etc. Here thou make it a matter of derision,
to say, Christ, who is the Light, and the Life, may be killed or crucified by
men's sins; whereby thou declarest thy great ignorance of the Letter of the
Scripture, that said of some, that they cr^cified the Son of God afresh; and
surely that was within them, and not without; and said James, Ye have killed
the just, and he has not resisted you; which cannot be understood, as if all
these to whom he had writ, had been guilty of outward Murder. But understand
how these called Quakers mean, that Christ is inwardly crucified or slain (...)
men's great sins, to wit, not in himself, for his Life is a^ Immortal Principle,
but unto them; so that by their (...) they wholly deprive themselves of the
enjoyment of it. 2 dly, Thou say, While Peter is speaking, not mentioning
ought of the Light within, (although we deny it not where God (...) have it
spoken o^.) Behold here another bitter and satirical Scoff against the Light
within; and what al^ho' Peter mention not the Light within in that place, Act^
10. in express words, let the place be considered* (...) it shall be found
plainly enough implied in that very d^scourse of Peter, see v. 42. said Peter,
that it is even (...) of Nazareth, who was ordained to be judge of (...) and
dead: And can this be without the Light within, (...) shall be as a thousand
Witnesses against the wicked in that great day of Judgment, when the books
shall be opened, not only the book of Conscience, but the Lords Light in the
Conseience, that did see and reprove them, and witness against them, when they
sinned. And whereas thou say, thou denyest not the Light within when God
would have it spoken of: I say, thou denyest it in so far as thou denyest
Christ in the heart, who is the true Light, and call him a false Christ; and
also that thou blamest the Quakers for pre^ending to inward Revelations, which
ye Baptists generally deny, therein agreeing with the dark Priests, and other
dark Professors* 3 dly, Thou do represent the Quakers as denying, that Christ
is come in the flesh, and carrying it in a subtle notion, that he is come in
their flesh. This is a most false and injurious Accusation; we most faithfully
believe and embrace it, as a most faithful saying, That Christ Jesus is come in
the flesh, to wit, in that very Body of Flesh which was conceived by the holy
Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, dyed, and rose again, etc. and yet,
according to Scripture, we also believe, That the Life of Jesus is made
manifest in mortal Flesh; and that the Bodies of the Saints are the Temples of
God, and of Christ and of the holy Spirit; and that the Saints are his Members,
and He their Head, and that they enjoy and possess a measure of the same holy
Spirit that dwelt and dwells in him in a^l fullness; and though some divine
Illumination and manifestation of the Spirit of God be given to all men in a
day or time, according to plain Scripture, yet we do not say, that all men have
the holy Spirit or are baptized with it, as thou do falsely represent us; for
many men are se^sual, not having the spirit, ^and the Spirit of God has left
many men, and does no more invite and call them to Repen^^nce* the day of their
Visitation being over* 4 thly, Thou d^st insinuate, as if we did not believe
any other Coming of Christ, than his inward coming in his Saints; which is
false, as also is that other gross alledgance of thine. That our opposition to
Water Bapt^sm is raised against the Person of Jesus Christ, and the remembrance
of his last Coming. This I altogether deny, as False, Wicked, and Injurious; we
do believe, and make it our care to remember that our Lord Jesus is in Heaven,
in his glorified ^ody* Soul and Spirit of true Man, that Seed of David and
Abraham, and that he shall come again, and jud^e both quick and dead, even the
Man Christ Jesus. And as for thy other many false Accusations, and hard bitter
and reproachful Speeches against us, and me in particular, I shall not waste
paper nor time to repeat them, but heartily wish thy Repentance, and the
opening of thy dark Understanding, to the acknowledging and confessing to the
Truth, if it be the good will of God that so it may come to pass, before thy
days be expired.

And now ye Water Baptists, who plead so earnestly for Water Baptism, though in
opposition to the living and glorious Appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ in
the hearts of his Saints, some of you calling Christ in the heart a false
Christ in the secret Chamber, the which Water Baptism of yours is neither
John's, nor the same that some of Christ's Disciples and Apostles administered
for some time, seeing ye can show no Line of Succession, either from John or
the Apostles, of your call to administer Water Baptism, that proves ye have no
shadow of any mediate Call, and to an immediate Call ye have no pretense; nor
can it be truly said, that the Letter of the Scripture barely and alone
considered, calls any to a Ministerial Office or Function; for the Scripture
says, No man takes an Office unto him but he that is called of God, as Aaron
was: And thus John was sent of God by the Spirit of God in his heart, and did
not draw his Call from the Letter of the Scripture, though he was of Aaron's
Posterity, and the Son of a Priest; And therefore your Water Baptism is a mere
Idol, like the golden Calf that the Children of Israel set up when Moses was
absent. But suppose your Water ^aptism were as good as John's (which it is not)
go and learn what that means, Mark 9.5. how when Moses and Elias (and ye know
that Christ said of John, that he was Elias, who came in the Spirit and Power
of Elias) did appear with Christ at his Transfiguration, Peter said, Let us
build three Tabernacles, one for Moses (that signifies the Law of Circumcision
and Sacrifices) another for Elias, (i. e. John with his Water Baptism) the
Scriptures says, he knew not what he said; and a Cloud came and took away
Moses and Elias, (i. e. John Baptist) out of their sight* and left only Christ
present with them: and well consider, whether this does not sign^fie, that
Believers in Christ, under the pure and perfect Gospel Dispensation, are not to
build Tabernacles neither for Moses nor John, i. e. neither for the Levitical
Law of Moses, nor the Water Baptism of John?

A brief Answer to the weak and impertinent Arguments of ^enj. Ke^ch, against
the Lig^t within, in his Book, called, The Child's Instructor, in that Section
of his Book concerning the Light within, wherein he undertaketh to prove, That
the Light in every man has not the least tendency or service to man's
Salvation, but only to condemn him. And also an Answer to his gross Calumnies
and false A^cusations, that in his ignorance he raises ^p against both the
Principles and Persons of the People called in scorn Quakers.
FIrst, he grants, That the Light in every man contains in it the Law or
substance of the first Covenant, written or implanted in the hearts of the
worst of men. Next, he does acknowledge, That it does show or teach every man
that there is a God, which did create all things, and that he is the Sovereign
Lord of the whole Creation; that he is to be worshipped; also, that it does
convince of sin but not of every sin: Also, That it does teach Righteousness
toward men, and to render due respect unto all, and to do unto all men as they
would be done unto; and from this he concludes, saying, Therefore take heed,
and walk according to this Light, for it is a Candle lighted and set up by the
Lord in thy Intellectuals.

Answ. This seems a fair acknowledgment and is more than many do acknowledge;
for if men are to take heed unto it, and walk according to it, (as he says
they ought) it is given of God for a Rule of Obedience unto men, and therefore
the Scripture is not the only Rule, as many affirm. But that he says, It does
convince of sin, but not of every sin, this he only affirms, and does not
prove in the least; and seeing it contains in it the substance of the Law of
the first Covenant, it follows most evidently, that being duly improved, and
the mind duly applied unto it, it convinces of all sin against the first
Covenant. Next, as to sins against the second Covenant* called the Gospel or
New Covenant, if the Gentiles (who have not heard the Gospel outwardly
preached) have nothing of the Law of the New Covenant revealed or made known
unto them, they cannot be said to sin against it; for w^ere no Law is, there is
no Transgression; if then these Gentiles, who never as yet heard the Gospel or
Christ outwardly preached, have only the Law of the first Covenant, they are
only sinners against that Covenant; and consequently, that Light in the
Gentiles does convince them of every sin that they are or can be guilty of in
the Gentile state. But seeing he has granted, That there are some sins that
they are guilty of, that the first Covenant in them does not convince them of,
it follows most necessarily, that there is some Law or Light of the new
Covenant in them: And thus it does plainly appear, that the snare or net which
this Benj. Keech has been making for the People called Quakers, he is
entangled himself therein. But we can most clearly prove from Scripture, that
the Light that is generally in men, the Heathens not excepted, has in it some
small degree of a discovery or revelation of the New Testament or New Covenant;
1 st, Because it reveals to men generally the goodness of God that leads to
Repentance, according to Romans 2.4. yea, the Riches of his goodness, and
forbearance, and long-suffering; and therefore it reveals in men universally,
that God is merciful and gracious, as well as just, and pa^doning sin and
transgression to every one that truly repents and turns from sin: And this
may be proved also from B. Keech's own confession; for he plainly confesses,
That the Light in every man teaches him, that God is the best, the highest,
and chiefest Being; therefore it does clearly follow, that the Light in men
teaches them, that God is a gracious God, and one that pardons Iniquity,
otherwise he could not be understood to be the best being; for seeing among
the Children of men many men have that goodness that inclines them to forgive
the greatest Trespasses, upon their Repentance and asking forgiveness;
therefore God himself is infinitely more gracious and ready to forgive. 2 dly,
The Gentiles or Heathens of the better sort, who have not heard Christ
outwardly preached unto them, have offered up Sacrifices unto the only true
God, as well as the Jews; and Aristotle, though a Heathen, did affirm, That i^
was proper to Mankind, universally, to Sacrifice unto God; and as the
Sacrifices of the People of Israel, as B. Keech confesses, was a spiritual and
shadowing Ministration* given in mercy unto men, to discover and hold forth
unto them the glorious and great Sacrifice and Atonement of the Lord Jesus
Christ, the same may be said of the Sacrifices of these Gentiles, who
sacrificed unto the only true God And if it be said, The Gentiles who did so
Sacrifice, as Job and others, did it, being taught by some outward means: I
answer, allowing it so to be; so did also the Jews and People of Israel; but as
among the Jews, so among the Gentiles, the Light of God in them did accord in
Harmony with the outward means of their Instruction. 3 dly, The Apostle Paul
does plainly declare, That the Gentiles, who did the things contained in the
Law, had their thoughts excusing them (or apologizing, as the Greek has it)
and therefore there is some Light or Illumination in them, other than that of
the first Covenant, that only condemns, as B. K. affirms. 4 thly,
Cornelius, before Christ was outwardly preached unto him, has this Testimony,
by the Spirit of God recorded in Scripture, That he was a devout man, and
feared God, and his Prayers and Alms were accepted of God, according to his
state; and that he was not singular, or the only man in the World that was
sincerely devout, and that knew not Christ as come in the flesh, Peter's words
plainly declare, how that in every Nation, he that fears God and works
Righteousness, is accepted of him. And if it be said, that Co^nelius was a
Proselite, or at least had some knowledge of the Jews Religion: I Answer; This
is only supposed, but not proved; but granting it were so, it is certain he had
not faith in Christ crucified and raised again, until Peter preached Christ
unto him; and therefore a man may be accepted of God in Christ, and for
Christ's sake, in some respect and degree, who at present has not faith in
Christ crucified and raised again; which most evidently overthrows all that
B. K. has built up in his vain and dark Imagination against the Light within,
and yet such are not without faith altogether; for they have faith in God, and
in his living Word in their hearts.

And whereas B. K. frames an objection in behalf of the Light within, viz. If
this be a Light flowing from God, and a Ministration of God, how can it fa^l in
any r^sp^ct, and be insufficient? He answers, First, The Law given to Israel
was a Ministration of God* and yet it could not give Life. But this is easily
answered; for God gave not the Law to Israel only for that end to condemn them,
and send all and every one of them to Hell, but to be a Schoolmaster to lead
unto Christ, and therefore together with the Law of the first Covenant, he gave
them the Levitical Law of Sacrifices, and many other Types, which had some real
Ministration in it of the New Covenant, though obscure, yet such as served for
that time. But according to B. K. the best of the Gentiles, who were most
diligent to frame their lives according to the Light in them* and have not
heard Christ preached unto them, as crucified, etc are all sent to Hell, and
the Light in them, though a Ministration given them of God, has no other end but
to condemn them, and make them guilty of Hell Fire, and that forever; which is
a most injurious Reflection upon both the Justice and Mercy of God. Secondly,
he says, Every Light and Ministration of God serves for the end, time and
purpose it was appointed and ordain^d: This saying is very true, but very badly
applied, as if that Light and Ministration of God in the Gentiles, were only
given to make them guilty of eternal Damnation, but having not the least
service, use or tendency to the least beginning of their Salvation; which is a
horrible Re^lection upon God, as representing him altogether Cruel and
Unmerciful, worse than most men, and therefore is a blasphemous Assertion.

In the next place he undertakes to prove, That the Light in every man is not
God, nor Christ, nor the Holy Spirit: First, he proves that the Light in men
is not God, Because though all Light does come from God, yet all Light is not
God. I An^w. And who says all Light is God? but because all Light is not God,
it does not therefore follow that G^d is not Light, no more than it does
follow, that because all Spirit is not God, therefore God is not a Spirit. But
seeing he confesses, This Light flows from God, it does necess^rily follow,
that God himself is present with and in this Light; for God cannot be locally
separated from any thing or being that proceeds from him, otherwise he were
not Omnipresent; and the Name Light does as properly belong ^o God* as the Name
Spirit; for as the Scriptu^e says, God is a Spirit, so it says, God is Light.
Nor is his Argument any more valid to prove, that Christ is not L^ght in men*
Because Christ signifies, Anointed, and only the Man Christ is Gods anointed:
I An^wer; Thus we see how B. K. acts the Socinian, like his Brother P. T. for
if Christ be only and wholly restricted to Christ's outward Person, as he came
in the flesh, then there was no Christ, nor Savior, nor Mediator before Mary;
but this is express contrary to Scripture in many places, which says, By Jesus
Christ all things were created; And Israel in the Wilderness drank of the Rock
that followed them, and that Rock was Christ: And most surely, all the faithful
in all Ages were partakers of Christ, and he lived in them as well as in Paul.
And that Christ was Anointed from the beginning, before all Time and Ages, is
expressly affirmed, Prove. 8.23. the true Translation out of the Hebrew Text
being, I was anointed from the beginning; The Hebrew word Nissak is rendered by
Buxtorf in his Hebrew Lexicon, To anoint; and surely David, Isaiah, and all the
faithful were partakers of the holy anointing, and they had it from Christ
God's anointed from the beginning. And Lastly, he is as foolish and idle in his
arguing, That the ho^y Spirit is not a Light in all men, because Christ said,
The World cannot receive him, Ioh. 14.16. and whoever have the Spirit of Christ
are Christ's, Romans 8.9. for to have and receive, in these places, signify Union
and Possession, and in that sense we say, Unbelievers and Ungodly men have not
the Spirit; but yet it does not follow, that the Spirit is not in them to
reprove and convince them, and also to call, invite and move them to
Repentance, otherwise men could not be said to resist the holy Spirit; and as a
rich Treasure may be laid in a man's House and yet that man have not the right
and possession of it, even so, the Spirit of God is in Unbelievers, to
convince, call and move them to repent and turn to God, and yet they have no
right nor interest therein, while remaining in their unbelieving state. But it
is to be further considered, that the holy Spirit, throughout the Scripture,
does signify, not the Spirit of God abstractly considered, but as influencing
men with a peculiar holy or sanctifying influence and operation: and these are
only such who (...) in Christ crucified and raised again, as is clear in the
case ^f Cornelius, and all other Believers in Christ crucified, ^c. whose Faith
is wrought in them by the mighty Po^^r of God; and therefore this peculiar
influence and operation of the holy Ghost, the Gentiles have not in their mere
Gentile state, but yet they have that which is preparatory thereunto, and
infallibly will bring them to partake of it, as they are diligent, rightly to
improve that first degree of divine Grace and Illumination already given unto
them.

Now let us hear his Arguments against the Sufficiency of the Light within, so
much as to begin the least good Work of God in the Gentiles. 1 st, he says, It
cannot discover unto thee that there is a Redeemer, who suffered Death without
the Gates of Jerusalem. 2dly, Though it convince of many sins, yet it cannot
cleanse thee from them. 3dly, It cannot make Satisfaction for the sins that are
past. 4thly, It cannot lead thee into Evangelical or Gospel Truths. 5thly, It
cannot teach thee the Righteousness of God, without the Law, being witnessed by
the Law and the Prophets, even the Righteousness of God by Faith of Jesus
Christ, unto all and upon all that do believe. 6thly, It leaves thee under the
sentence of Death and Misery, without affording any d^rections or help for thy
Recovery, (Note these words, whereby it plainly appears, he takes away from
it all sufficiency, so much as to begin any good work in men, as having the
least tendency to begin the work of Salvation, or prepare thereunto.) 7thly, It
cannot give thee (he says) eternal Peace and Salvation, as these Miserable men
(meaning the People called Quakers) do affirm. Thus he argues.

In Answer to these his Arguments, I say, it is really a degree of Blasphemy to
say, that there is no Light, or Principle, or Being in men, that can do these
things; for God and Christ can do all things, and both God and Christ are in
all men, not only as to that general presence in all the Creatures, but in a
special way of Revelation, as being the Offspring o^ God, as Paul declared to
the Athenians. But it is one thing what God and Christ can do, and far another
thing what they commonly and universally do. Now it is readily granted, that
God and Christ do not commonly reveal unto men the knowledge and ^aith of
Christ crucified, etc. without the Scriptures Testimony, or some outward
Teaching; but this does not prove that the Light in men has no preparatory
service, use or tendency, in order to receive the knowledge and faith of Christ
crucified, as we see it has, according to Scripture, as is clear in the case
of Cornelius, and in the Parable of the good ground, that signified the good
and honest heart, even before the Seed of the pure and perfect evangelical
Dispensation was ^own in it. And at this rate he might as well argue against
the Light in the best Saints or Christians, in these Ages of the World, as
being insufficient to give eternal Life and Salvation; for the ordinary and
usual way of God to beget in all true Believers the true knowledge and faith of
Christ crucified, is by some outward means of Preaching, Reading, or Hearing
the Scriptures read, and not without them, the inward Light and Grace of God
mightily co-opera^ing and working together with the outward means of the
Scriptures preached, read or heard. And whereas he directs his Book generally
to these called Christians, many of whom are of his own Profession, if his
Doctrine be to be received, none of his own Brethren, nor any Christians
whatsoever, have any saving Light or Grace in them; for he makes no
distinction betwixt Christians and Heathens, but says generally to all, That
they have no saving Light in them.

But for the better understanding of the whole matter, let it be considered,
that the Light in men has a two fold sense and signification; 1 st, It may and
does signify God who is Light* and Christ who also is Light as the holy
Scripture declares: 2 dly, It may and does signify some divine inward
Illumination and Revelation of God and Christ in men, which has also a
quickening and cleansing operation in it. Now admitting that the divine
Illumination and Revelation of God and Christ does not at first reveal or
discover these peculiar Mysteries of the pure Gospel Dispensation, as Christ
crucified, and Faith in him, yet it does suffice that I have proved* that it
can begin, and does really begin a good Work of God in them that are diligent
to obey it; and where this good Work of God is begun in any, they cannot
perish* although they dye in that state: for as no Unrighteous Soul can (while
such ^ go into Heaven, so none that are in any the least degree Righteous by
the Work of God in their hearts, (while such,) can go to Hell, or finally
perish. But to determine at what precise time, and how this work of God begun
in honest Gentiles, is perfected in them, and at what precise time the
knowledge and faith of Christ is wrought in them, is not a difficulty that is
singular to us the People, called in scorn Quakers, but does equally urge and
pinch our Adversaries; yea, I suppose generally the Baptists themselves; for
first, They acknowledge, That many Infants dying in infancy, belong to Gods
Election, and are saved: 2 dly, That not only Infants, but others come to Age,
may belong to God's Election, who are born Deaf and Dumb; and many will
acknowledge also, That God has his Elect among the Gentiles, who have not
heard Christ outwardly preached, and shall be saved, God working by his Spirit
when, where, and how he pleases, as the Presbyterian Confession of Faith owned
by Baptists, does expressly declare. Now it is plain, the Difficulty is equal to
them, with us, and is a great secret, known (perhaps) to ^ew of the Sons of
men, the precise time, way, manner and means of Gods saving them with eternal
Salvation, who have not had Christ outwardly preached unto them, neither by men
nor Scripture; and let it suffice to clear us, that we say, the knowledge and
faith of Christ crucif^^d, even Jesus of Nazareth, is universally necessary to
the full and final perfecting the work of men's eternal Salvation and Happiness,
and is ordinarily and commonly wrought in men, by outward preaching reading, or
hearing the Scriptures Testimony. But again, let it be considered, when we say,
That the inward Light and Grace of God is sufficient to Salvation, it is to be
understood, that its sufficiency reaches to the present time, work and purpose
for which it is given, even as B. K. has confessed; for not only the Gentiles
have not received at once all that div^ne Illumination, and Grace, and
Assistance of God, that suffices unto all time to come, but even none of the
Saints have received at once so much as is sufficient for all time ^o come;
otherwise* they might say, We are Lords, and will come no more to God, nor pray
any more to him; whereas all true Believers feel their continual need and want
of a new and fresh supply of Gods Grace and gracious Assistance, both to think,
to will and to do any thing good and acceptable unto God. And as true Believers
in Christ crucified, etc have that which is sufficient for the time present of
divine Grace and Illumination, suitable to their state and dispensation, so
have the Gentiles that measure of divine Grace and Illumination which is
sufficient for the time present, suitable to their state and dispensation,
which is readily granted to be a Dispensation or Administration really distinct
or diverse from that pure and perfect Gospel Dispensation, which true Believers
in Christ crucified and raised again, are under, yet both coming from one
fountain, and both tending to one end, and meeting together in one, yea,
embracing one another in due season. Moreover, that the Law state and
dispensation, before that the faith of Christ crucified and raised again, etc.
does come, is a good state to all such as are diligent Improvers of the same,
is most clear from Gal. 3.23. Before Faith came, we were kept under the Law
(and as Beza, a Protestant, does well translate it) we were preserved or kept
sub Legis presidio, i. e. under the safeguard of the Law, as in a City of
R^fuge even as the Manslayer under the Law, escaping to the City of Refuge,
did remain there safe from death, though as in a Prison or Confinement, ^ntil the
News did arrive unto him of the death of the High Priest: A real Type and
Figure of this great Mystery* And therefore it is readily granted, that no man,
until he attain to the true Faith and Knowledge of Christ crucified and raised
again, is perfectly justified, nor can his most exact Obedience to the Light in
him be an Atonement or Propitiation unto God for sins past or present, as
neither is the Saints greatest inward Righteousness or Holiness wrought in them
by the Spirit of God, an Atonement or Propitiation for their Sins, but Christ
alone, who dyed for us, the Just for the Unjust, etc. But as God is gracious to
true believers in Christ, who have not attained to a Perfection in Holiness,
but have the Work begun in them, for Christ's sake, and also when they are
perfected in Holiness, God does accept them in Christ, and for his sake, even
so does he extend his favor and mercy, in some measure, to the honest
Gentiles, for Christ's sake, and does not leave them without all hope of Mercy*
And as God has promised to reward the diligent Improvers of his Grace, with
giving them more Grace, who are true Believers in Christ crucified, so no doubt
the Promise is good to all Gentiles, who are faithful Improvers of that Light
that God has given them in their Gentile-state, to increase his Grace unto
them, and to give them that further degree of Faith and Knowledge of Christ
crucified, which they have not as yet attained unto; for the Promise is
universal, To every one that has shall be given. And therefore it is a most
foolish and rash undertaking in B. K. or any others to affirm, That these
Gentiles, who were diligent to frame their Lives according to the Light in
them, never at any time had, nor ever shall have the knowledge and faith of
Christ crucified and raised again, who have lived in remote parts of the World,
where the Gospel has not as yet been outwardly preached. Has not God many
ways to reveal himself to the Souls of men, and the depth of his Counsel, tha^
^asseth our search and understanding? Who knows what God does reveal to
honest Gentiles on their Deathbed, when by reason of Bodily weakness they
cannot declare unto others, what God does then reveal unto them, or even
possibly at the instant of Death, or after Death, as many Professors use to
say, as well Baptists as others, That the Souls of Believers, at or after
death, are made perfect in Holiness: But this is only an Argument ad hominem,
as it is called, i. e. such as can be raised from their own Principle, by way
of retorsion or counter-arguing; but let us leave secret things unto God, until
he reveal them, and keep close to the Scriptures Testimony, so far as it is
opened to us, that gives us sufficient cause and ground of Charity, to
conclude, that none of the Gentiles, who were diligent to improve that Light
that God gave them, are finally and utterly lost, and yet that the faith and
knowledge of Christ crucified and raised again, is altogether necessary, though
not to the beginning, yet to the full and final consumating and perfecting men's
eternal Salvation and Happiness, both which are well consistent, although B. K.
and his Brethren, through the ignorance and prejudice that is in them against
the Truth, do not see or understand it.

I shall now take notice of his gross Calumnies and false Accusations that he
raises up, in his ignorance, against both the Princ^ple and Persons of the
People called, in scorn, Quakers.

First, That he says, The tenor of our Doctrine sh^weth plainly, that Jesus
Christ our blessed Lord and d^ar Mediator dyed in vain. Answ. This is a most
false and unjust Charge, and no wise reaches to us, because, first, we say the
Light that is in the Gentiles, and in every man, is the real fruit and purchase
of Christ's Death, and also, that none can be eternally saved, as in respect of
the perfect Accomplishment of the Work of their Salvation, without some measure
of the Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified, though we cannot assign the
precise time and manner, how and when that knowledge and faith is given them,
as no more can they, when or how it is given to elect Infants, and other elect
Persons, suppose Deaf and Dumb from the Womb.

Secondly, he says, We set up an inherent legal Righteousness in man, as his
only Righteousness, whereby he shall be eternally saved. Answ. This is grossly
false.

Thirdly, That we deny the imputed Righteousness of Christ, wrought in his own
Person for us and the virtue of the Price of his most precious Blood. Answ.
This also is grossly false.

Fourthly, That it is a fancy to believe, that Christ has fullfilled the
Righteousness of the Law for us, any other ways than our Pattern. Answ. And
this likewise is most grossly false; for we faithfully believe, that Christ has
fulfilled the Law for us and the Righteousness thereof, not only as our pattern
but as being therein and thereby, both in what he did and suffered for us, an
Atonement and Propitiation unto God for our sins, and that his Obedience and
Sufferings has purchased unto us, as a most precious and great Price,
Justification, Remission S^nctification and Eternal Life; and that he gave
himself a Ransom unto God for us, and all men, which these called particular
Baptists, deny; yet this Price and Ransom, or fullfilling the Law for us, is
not so to be understood, as if thereby a liberty were procured unto us to sin
at pleasure, but as Christ has fullfilled the Law for us, he must also fulfill
it in us, according to Romans 8. in order to our perfect Sanctification and
Justification. And here it is to be noted, That these Accusations of his, in
the aforesaid particulars, are not gathered from any express words of the
People called Quakers, but are only the false and absurd Consequences he
gathers from our Principle, altogether grounded upon his Ignorance and
Mistakes, and especially his Prejudice against the Truth.

A Brief ANSWER to Cotton Mather his Appendix to a little Book of his, called,
Memorable Providence, relating to Witchcrafts, etc.
THe main design of Cotton Mather in this his Appendix is to vindicate and
defend his Father Increase Mather, as no wise guilty of these Charges which ^
laid against him toward the end of my late Book, called, The Presbyterian and
Independent Churches, in New England, and elsewhere, brought to the Test. Now
if Cotton Mather had made any true and just Vindication of his said Father, it
had been a commendable work in him, but he is so far from that, that his so
weak and ^mpertinent pretended Vindication does not in the least excuse him;
and he is so far from any just Vindication of his Father, that he does rather
more lay open his Fathers Nakedness in the si^ht of the world, and adds to
his Fathers grossly abusing the honest People called Quakers, new Abuses, and
lying abusive Speeches of his own, besides that, in the judgment of any
impartial and understanding Reader, he discovers himself to be a very shallow
man ^airy and full of froth, but showing nothing of Solidity in his whole
discourse.

As for his scornful and disdainful words and reflections on me, calling me*
One Keith, a Quaker, not deigning to design me by my full Name, and Our little
Author, This new Apostle, This wasp^shman, etc. I value them not, so as to be
any discouragement unto me to bear my Testimony for the blessed Truth of God,
against his and his Brethrens false Doctrine and Hypocrisy; and the words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, left upon record in Scripture, in a measure of the sense
of that holy Spirit that gave them forth, have been and are made comfortable
unto me, Mat. 5.11. Blessed are ye when men shall rev^le you, etc. I desire to
bless the Lord who has truly made me little in my own eyes, and has let me
see not only my littleness but nothingness, as of my self, and given me also to
know, that I am one of his little Ones, which to me is greater satisfaction
than to have the greatest worldly advantages; and that he seems to reflect upon
the littleness of my stature (as is apparent) shows in him little wit or
discretion; many excellent men were of little bodily stature, far exceeding
Cotton Mather or me either; and Goliath was a man of great bodily stature, who
defied the host of God, and yet fell before little David; and though I do readily
acknowledge my self little every way, yet by the Grace of God I doubt not but
to be made able to defend the Truth, against all that thou and all thy Brethren
can do to withstand it; for the Truth is the greatest and strongest of all, and
when he who is the Truth pleases to use an Instrument, let it be ever so
little or mean, it is well enabled to do the work it is raised up for: And though
in the close of his Appendix (that contains little else but silly ^rolling)
he says, G. K. has given sufficient ca^se why his own S^ct should be ashamed
of him, if shame were compatible to such a perfect People; Which last part is a
mee^ Scoff, yet he has not made it appear, and I hope in the Lord he never
shall be able to make it appear that my Friends have any cause ^o be ashamed of
me.

Before he comes to his Fa^hers Vindication, he thought fit to tell the world
of the strange liberty which the Devils gave to some possessed Children to come
to the Meetings ^f the Quakers, and to read their writings: And if all this be
true, what says it against the Quakers, in the least to discredit them, or
their Religion? We know many wicked People, whose Souls the Devils possess (and
that is worse than a mere Bodily Possession) may read both our Books and the
Scriptures also, yet as this is no discredit to the Scriptures, so no more to
our books; yea, the Devil could and did cite Scripture to Christ, and could use
the outward names of God and Jesus. And thou grantest that that Girl
possessed, as thou alledgest, Bodily with the Devil, did read the 59 Psalm; And
what may be concluded from this, according to Cotton Mathers pretended Logic,
that though the Devil would not suffer the Girl to read some Presbyterian Books,
but gave her liberty to read some of the Common Prayer, or other Episcopal
Books, and Quakers Books, and also the 59 Psalm, that all these are of the like
quality? Thou further say, The Girl so possessed, as thou alledgest, could
hear the Scripture read, and called to one to read of Mary Magdalen; and I see
not what difference the Devil does make, in good earnest, betwixt reading and
hearing the Scripture read. Again, That the Devil suffered some of them to come
to the Quakers Meetings: Supposing it were so, is this any more in prejudice of
the Quakers Meetings, than that Cotton Mather says, The same Girl, so
possessed, came to a study or Closet in his House, and entered therein, and
there read on the Bible, and good Books? And if he say, It was because the
Devil had left her, how soon she came there, Why may not the same be alleged
on behalf of the Quakers Meetings? Who sees not how shallow this man is, that
from so ridiculous an instance would represent the Quakers Meetings and Books
such as the Devil had a good liking to? But it seems the holiness of his Study
drove the Devils away, and made the Girl so quiet in his S^udy, as is implied
in his words, where he says, She add^d a Reason for it, which the Owner of the
Study thought more kind than true. It seems then that Cotton Mather thinks
himself in that respect obliged to the Devils kindness, more than to the truth
of the Reason, That they left the Girl how soon she entered into his Closet:
But why could not the Devil carry the Girl into his Closet, as well as the
Devil took Christ into the holy City, and set him on a Pinnacle of the Temple,
Mat. 4.5. and as it is in Job, When the Sons of God came together, Satan also
came among them? and if Satan can come where the Sons of God are met together,
why may he not quietly suffer some possessed by him, to come either to C.M's
Closet or the Quakers Meeting, without any just reflection on either of the
places? But if C.M. think the Devil more kind than true to him, he had need
beware of his Kindness, lest it turn to his damage in the end; for a kind Devil
is the most dangerous Devil.

In the beginning of the Vindication of his Father, he says, One would think
that if an Historian did but secure his Veracity from being impeached, most of
his other fauls were pardonable, etc. But to this I Answer; That Increase
Mather has not secured his veracity from being impeached* for it belongs to
Veracity, and to him who has it, not only to tell some true matters of fact,
but to tell them with a true intention, and for a true and upright end, and to
assign the true and right Names to the Persons that have done the things
alleged; as when a man is murdered, ^ho' the matter of Fact be true, yet if he
who relates it, does charge it upon a person or persons no wise guilty, his
Veracity may justly be impeached; and so the case is here, as to I. Mather,
suppose the matter of fact be true, yet it is us gross and false a charge and
imputation to cast these things acted and done by Tho. Case and his Crew upon
the Quakers, as to cast them upon any other People whatsoever, yea, as upon
them whom he may judge to be true Christians, or suppose Presbyterians and
Independents; for what though they call themselves* or that others ig^orantly
call them Quakers? does it therefore follow that they are owned by that People,
or are of their Society? no wise, no more than it does follow, that they are
Christians* because they call themselves also by that name: And suppose these
of T. Case's crew should call themselves Presbyterians and Independents, or
Members of the Congregational Churches of New England, does it therefore follow
that ye of New England should be charged with these things?

And whereas I said in my last book, That I. M. relates these stories on
purpose to abuse the honest and sober People called Quakers, without making any
distinction, thou Cotton Mather leavest out altogether the following words,
that were most material for the clearing of the Quakers, and proving I. M.
guilty of slandering and falsely accusing an innocent People, my following words
being these, nor giving the least information to the world, how that the Body
of the People called Quakers does not in the least own these ungodly and wicked
People, etc. But what does his Son C. M. answer to this that may satisfy the
impartial Reader? surely nothing, but answers with a Scoff, like to himself (it
seems he has largely accustomed himself to si^ in the Seat of the S^o^ner)
saying, But what Metal is this man's forehead made of? and then he proceeds to
allege, That his Father very carefully made a distinction, because once or
twice he calls them, the late singing and dancing Quakers: And again, that he
says. The Quakers are some of them possessed with evil Spirits. But I Answer;
Thou C. Mather rather bea^est in thy forehead the print of him that has a face
of Brass, than of an ingenuous man, in thy under^aking so to palliate and
excuse thy Fathers gross abuse and slander. Does not every one that knows
what a distinction is, know, that it consists at least of two Members or
parts, and not of one only member or part: Now I challenge Cotton Mather to
produce one word or syllable in all Increase Mathers discourse, where the other
Member or part of the distinction is named or expressed in the least: whereas if
he had indeed made any distinction, he would at least have informed the world,
That there is another s^rt of People called Quakers that does no wise own
Thomas Case or any of his Crew, nor their Spirit, nor Doctrine, nor Practices,
but abhor them and their way as much as any People can do, and do as widely
differ from them as white from black, or as one contrary from another; yea, it
is easy to show, that Tho. Case and his Crew are more near to many called
Presbyterians and Independents, than to the honest Quakers, both in Doctrine
and some Practices; f^r the honest People called Quakers own no ca^nal Singing,
and do not own dancing on any account, and yet to my certain knowledge, many
called Presbyterians do both own and practice carnal Singings, and Dancings,
and Pipings, and Fiddlings also at Feasts and Weddings; all which practices are
more like to the mad Crew of Tho Case, than to the sober and honest Quakers,
who own no singing but what is truly spiritual and holy; and it does not
appear, that when I. M. names the late singing and dancing Quakers, that he
intended any distinction, but that he gave such Names only as certain Epithets
to the Quakers, or to some of them; as when Cott. Mather calls us, absurd and
angry People, it does not appear that he intends a distinction, as if some of
us were not absurd nor angry, or as when his Brethren used to call us, The
Cursed Quakers, that they intended any distinction, as if some of us were
blessed; or if he had called us, The late upstart Heretical Quakers, as some
have called us, as if some of us were not late nor heretical, but Ancient and
Orthodox; nor is it any real or true distinction to say, Some of the Quakers,
as implying not all; for all and some are no specifical distinction, but only
numerical; whereas I said in my book, without any distinction, it is most clear
from my following words in that book, (purposely, as it seems, omitted by C.
M.) that I meant a specifical distinction; for what I. M. alleges on some of
the Quakers, as such, belongs to all of the same society, even as what
belongs to some men, as men, belongs to all men; and if these wild, and
mad, and abominable Practices do not belong to T. Case's Crew, as Quakers, then
why does he so charge them as Quakers? or why does he not inform the People of
New England, That T. Case's Crew are no Quakers, any more than real Christians,
although they falsely are so called, and are no wise owned by the Body or Society
of that People* this he has not done in the least; and no man that has not
some better Information what the Quakers are, than what I. M. has given of
them, can know any other, but that the Quakers generally are all singing and
dancing Quakers, or at least own these mad P^actices; for as I said before, I
say again, he makes no distinction betwixt them he calls Mad Quakers, and
others that are sober; and there are many hundreds in New England that reading
I.M's Book, will be ready enough to believe, the Quakers generally are such as
these of T. Cases Crew, seeing he mentions no other sort, and they have no
other intelligence what the Quakers are, having never seen any of them, nor
heard them, nor read their Books. But C. M. perceiving this pinch or strait,
how he could not make it appear, that his Father made any real distinction,
takes another course, and plainly tells us, His Father needed not make any
distinction at all; and rather than C. Mather will allow the least Charity to
the Quakers, he will fall at variance with his Father, and show himself of a
contrary mind, as one would think, to his supposed reverend Father, that
whereas he thinks, or would have it believed, his Father made a distinction
betwixt the late singing and dancing Quakers, yet the Son Cotton, thinking
himself more wise than his Father, makes no distinction at all, and will have
Cases Crew, and all other Quakers (which he as falsely as foolishly, calls,
Keith's Crew) to be substantially of the same drove, both Mad, though with some
variety of application in their Phrensies. This is barely alleged, but not in
the least proved, and therefore needs no further Answer. The honest People
called Quakers, through the Love and Grace of God, whereof they are made
partakers, without boasting or vain-glorying, may in general be compared to the
best of your Church Members in Sobriety and good Christian ^ehaviour: It has
been the lot of good men before us, to be called Mad, and worse. But thou have
given us no evidence or proof that we are so, and therefore it returns upon
thee as a Calumny and Slander

And whereas thou say, One Keith, a Quaker, had been compassing S^a and Land
to make Proselites, visits New England in his Progress wh^re meeting with small
Applause, and less Success, instead of Converts, ^icks up what Quarrels our
Country could afford him, and among the rest, this Book of Providence. Answ.
That I have traveled in many places both by Sea and Land, to turn People unto
the Lord, and from Darkness to Light, I am not ashamed to acknowledge; for so
did many of the Servants of God in former Generations, and not like Cotton
Mather, and his Brethren generally, who creep into one certain place or House,
and there continue to preach for hire, and rarely remove, but when the motive
of a greater Sallary does invite them: And as for men's applause, I regard it
not, whether great or small; I seek not honor of men, but the honor that
comes of God, that does satisfy me, and the good and Christian esteem that I
have in the hearts of many Brethren, as well as my honest Report among men,
that truly know me, which has not been wanting to me in New England as well as
in other places where I have traveled; and as for Success in my Ministry, and
being made instrumental to convert some, and build up others in the most holy
Faith, through the Grace of God, I need not bear witness to my self, but if
need were, many can bear witness to it, even in New England, so that my labor
in New England has not been in vain, and I hope yet to see more the fruit and
effect of it, through the blessing of God. Next, whereas thou say, At my
return to Pennsilvania, I bless the World with a little Volumn of Heresies and
Blasphemies against the Protestant Religion. Here thy scoffing airy Spirit
appears, as often elsewhere; how can the world be blessed with a Volumn of
Heresies and Blasphemies? But that my book contains either Heresy or
Blasphemy, thou have not yet showed, far less proved: Thou call my Book,
Some further improvements of Nonsense, than the Abilities of the Quakers had
heretofore helped them to; and after a few lines, thou say, I have been
craftily assaying to spoil your Vines: This seems not well to consist; if my
Book be nothing but Nonsense, how can it, or I by it, craftily assay to spoil
your Vines? Craft and Nonsense seldom go all along together. And that thou
say, thou supposest, I will not be long without the Castigations of a full,
though short Answer, etc. I fear not this menacing; if any such pretended
Castigation come forth (though thou call me a Fly) I doubt not, but if I live,
God will enable me to detect the vanity and impertinency thereof, or if removed
by Death, that he will raise up some of his Servants to do it. But that thou
say, The twelfth Article I charge on you, is directly contrary to what ye
assert, and maintain, and preach every day; and then add'st scoffingly, after
thy wonted manner, This was his Inspiration then! I Answer; Then why do thou
not produce this twefth Article, and demonstrate it so to be, as thou
affirmest? But I say, thy Affirmation is false in that very thing, the 12th
Article being this in express words, That the Scriptures ought to be believed
only for their own outward Evidence and Testimony; and not for the inward
Evidence and Testimony of the holy Spirit in men's hearts. That this is justly
charged on you, I need not much enlarge to prove it at present, only in short I
prove it thus: Seeing ye deny true divine Inspiration, and inward Revelation of
the holy Spirit in the hearts of the Saints, ye must needs deny the inward
Evidence and Testimony of the holy Spirit, for they are one; and that ye deny
the former, is plain, from the express words of your Confession, that says,
There is no new Revelation; and the former ways of Gods revealing his Mind,
are ceased. 2 dly John Owen, whom ye used to call your Reverend Brother, has
writ a large Book to prove the self-evidencing Power and Authority of the
Scriptures, and denies that it deriveth its evidence from the inward
Revelation or Inspiration of the holy Spirit in men's hearts; yea, thou thy self
scoffest at Inspiration in this very place, and elsewhere. and though in words
ye seem to own the inward Testimony of the Spirit, yet in Deed ye disown it,
while ye deny true divine Revelation, and Inspiration, properly so called. 3
dly, If ye did indeed believe the Scriptures for the inward Evidence and
Testimony of the holy Spirit, then ye would acknowledge it to be the principal
Rule of Faith, but this ye do not; for ye say in your Confession, The Word of
God contained in the Scriptures is the only Rule, etc. Whereas I said in my
Book, That when some of T. Cases Crew were whipped at Plymouth, some of the
honest People called Quakers openly declared before the People, that the
Quakers did not at all own them to be of their Society. To this thou make no
direct Reply, but say, I am to ask him, who of this honest People then it
was* that then declared them to be the dear Children of God? I Answer readily,
No, not one; and I challenge thee to instance any one owned by the Society of
that honest People, that so declared. But this question of thine is a mere
deceitful Evasion, containing in it some Insinuation, as if some did so
declare, which is utterly false.

Next, as to the story in old England, taken from H. More, concerning one
Robert Churchman, that was no Quaker, but only had some inclination to be a
Quaker, as H. More does allege, and he imagined that the Spirit of God spoke
in him, and at last it appeared it was not so, but that the man was under some
mistake, or suppose a real Possession of the Devil. To this I answered; What
can all this say to discredit the Quakers Religion and Principle? Have there
not been mad People, and whimsical both of the Presbyterian and Independent
Churches? To this thou answerest, not denying, but that a Possession of evil
Spirits may befall one of your Communion: What then? the Possession does not
move any to be of that Communion, we see the contra^y. But the stories recorded
by the Father (thou say) plainly enough demonstrate, that Diabolical
Possession was the thing which did dispose and incline men unto Quakerism: Also
thou say, their Quakerism was the proper effect of their Possession, and not
an unconcerned consequence. Answ. This is most wretchedly alleged, but no wise
proved; for none of these Instances prove in the least, that Diabolical
Possession did dispose and incline any man to be really of our fellowship or
Society, though it may well enough be granted, that the Devil may dispose and
incline men to think or imagin^ themselves to be true Christians; but it does
not therefore follow, that he does dispose or incline them to be really such:
And let Cotton Mather answer me this Question, Whether he thinks it not
possible that some Diabolical Possession may incline or dispose a man, to
pretend to be, in outward Profession, a Presbyterian or Independent? This he
cannot deny; for there is no outward Profession of Godliness but the Devil may
incline men unto, while in the mean time he have the Government of them, he
cares not what they profess, yea, he may incline them to the highest
Profession, so as even to confess to Christ, and to his true Servants, as is
most clear in the case of those Devils that did Bodily possess some, who did
confess to Christ, Mat. 8 29. and also to his true Servants, Acts 16.17. These
men are the Servants of the most high God, which show unto us the (...) of
Salvation. Now* what ^a^st thou, Cotton Mather, to this? does it not here
plainly appear, that the Devil in this possessed Damsel did acknowledge Paul
and Silas to be the Servants of the living God, and consequently, that the
Religion they professed was the true Religion? Does it therefore follow, that
Diabolical Possession in this Damsel did incline her to be of Paul's Religion?
Does not both thy Fathers weakness and thine also manifestly appear in this
Charge? for if either thou or thy Father had lived at that time, when the Devil
gave that Testimony to Christ, and to Paul, and to Silas, by your Argument, the
Christian Faith and Religion was not true. Thou and thy Father also are very
ignorant of the Devils devices, if ye know not, that he can transform himself
as an Angel of Light, and incline or dispose men to any outward form or
profession whatsoever, and also to confess to the Truth it self, but not to
live and walk in the Truth. But however, seeing by this instance of Rob.
Churchman brought by thy Father, thou grantest, That thy Fathers design was to
show, that Diabolical Possession was the thing that did incline men unto
Quakerism. By this thou quite over turnest what thou said formerly* That thy
Father made a distinction betwixt Quakers Mad, and Bodily possessed with the
Devil, and other Quakers; for now thou plainly confessest, That thy Father
brought these Sto^ies to prove that Diabolical Possession did dispose and
incline men unto Quakerism; And that our Religion (called in scorn, ^y thee,
Quakerism) was the effect of Diabolical Possession, without making any
distinction* It seems thou did not mind that true saying, [ A Liar should
have a good Memory] Is this thy Vindication of thy Father, as if he had made a
distinction betwixt Mad Quakers and Others, and presently again to say, They
are all one? It is rather Him like to uncover thy Father Nakedness, as I leave
to every impartial Reader to judge.

And whereas I said in my Book, That I. M. has showed his rashness and folly
in some other passages of his Life, if not Malice, that has occasioned him for
some time past to abscond, etc. In answer to this, thou art so far from
covering thy Fathers Nakedness, that thou layest it open in the face of the
world, telling a long story, How thy Father did declare in a Letter to a
certain Person, that several shroud things would make him suspect a Person he
names, the Author of a Letter, that was a most ^ill^nous Forgery, filled with
Treason and Madness, whereupon that Person sued him in an Action of Defamation*
Now does not Increase Mather's Folly and Rashness plainly appear, to charge a
man with a Crime he could no wise sufficiently prove, and fearing the event of
the Trial, being sued in an Action of Defamation, did abscond, and so privately
escaped to England? all which C. Mather cannot deny; only he tells the World,
That his Father intended a Voyage to England, to endeavor the service of his
afflicted Country: But whether it was so or not, does not clea^ him of great
Rashness and Folly, to charge a man with what he could not p^ove; and for his
Success of Affairs in England, whatever Cotton his Son boasts of it, it does
not yet appear. It had been more becoming Increase Mather, if he had been a
true Minister of Christ, not to meddle so much in worldly Affairs, as to have
left them he calls his Flock, now for some years, without returning to look
after them. And it had been better for New England that the men called their
Ministers, had not meddled so much with their outward Affairs and Concerns,
which has proved to their great damage in many respects. I can truly say, I
bear a good will to the People of all sorts in New England, and do heartily
desire their welfare in all respects, but am very sorry to see them so
misled by their blind Guides, to their great danger, both as to their Eternal
and Temporal state. O that the Lord may open their Eyes, so as no more to
follow these blind Leaders of the blind, which I hope in due time he will do to
many.

As to these scurrilous and most indecent Expressions and Words he uses
against some lately in outward Authority, I need say no more, but that he
shows thereby the meanness of his Spirit and ill breeding.

He quarrelleth against my Book, because some of the Copies were bound up in
Ozenburgs Linnin, which he calls Canvas* and thereupon makes a silly jest,
as if like one of the Witnesses* I would prophecy in Sackcloth. But that some
of my Books were bound up in Ozenburgs, was only, that the Printer could not
have Leather to bind them all up in, the condition of the Country at present,
(after so new and late settling) not affording largeness of Leather (nor is
this manner of binding up Books in Ozenburgs unusual in some more ancient
Plantations than this) And must this Cotton Mather turn this into a Jest? Has
he forgot how the first settlers in New England, not very long ago, were
reduced to a few grains of Indian Corn, many of them and had no other B^ead?
But now Iesuru^ like* many of them through plenty are waxed fat and kick.

He professes, as seemingly, to be against the Magistrates inflicting any
punishment upon any supposed Heretic. But how shall we believe him, for he
says in his Book of Witchcraft, he and others with him, could cheat the
Devils, when they spo^e one thing and meant another, page 38. And seeing this
is Cotton Mathers way with Devils, to speak one thing and mean another, why may
it not be supposed, that he thinks to take that way with men, or how can he
assure us to the contrary? But it is a most intolerable Abuse in Cotton Mather,
to say as he does, There is far more to be said for the Justification of our
ancient Severities on two or three Quakers here, than the World has yet been
acquainted with. Is this then the manner of your Justice, to hang men for
Crimes merely alleged, but not proved, no, not so much as charged in the face
of the World, till many years after they are put to Death! Is not this highest
Injust^ce, with a witness, (...) to hang men, and then to publish their
supposed Crimes, or rather only to accuse them, being innocent? Is not this
worse than that called Abbington Law, ^here it is said, Men were first hanged
and afterward tried? But what thou Cotton Mather do allege in this case, is
notoriously false, and has not the least shadow or show of probability; for
surely, those who put these men, called Quakers, to death at Boston, if they
had had any thing further to charge them with, than what they openly charged,
they would have done it; for they wanted no will to Charge them after the
highest manner* But I charge thee Cotton Mather, seeing thou art so impudent to
charge these worthy men, (after they have now above twenty eight years been put
to Death) of things that the World has not yet been acquainted with, to
produce these things against them, otherwise thou art to be accounted A most
Infamous Defamer and False Accuser of Gods faithful Servants, who are long
since deceased, and at rest in the Lord.

Thou praisest thy self, and others there called Ministers (I suppose at Boston
for their Voluntary Poverty and Transcendent Self-denial, that has scarce its
Parralel in the Christian World; saying further, If any Maintenance extorted
from ^uakers, has ever been paid unto them, thou art confident, it was without
their knowledge or consent. Answ. This is a very fair Testimony in show, but
coming from thy ba^e self, is not worthy of credit. I question much, and so may
thousands more, whether your, so called, Voluntary Poverty does near equal that
of the thousands of Beging Friars and Monks, pretending as much to Christianity
as ye do. And if ye have not so large Sallaries, as some of your Brethren in
other places have, it does not appear that it is your own choice that makes it
so, but that ye know not where to g^t more, or where to have a better
convenience; and the least any of you have, is far too much, beyond what ye
deserve for preaching false Doctrine, and mis-leading the People; for instead
of turning them to Gods Light and divine Revelation in their hearts, ye turn
them away from it, in that, acting more the part of the Ministers of Anti
christ and Satan; And though little, or perhaps nothing has been extorted from
these called Quakers at Boston, because very few have had Estates there to
extort any thing from, yet seeing thou do not condemn this practice in many
or most of thy Brethren, but justifiest it in all places in New England, where
great extorting of Goods has been used from the People called Quakers, not
only at Plymouth, but at Hampton, and many other places in New England, as well
as in Old England, Scotland, Ireland, and elsewhere, thou art equally guilty
with them. Nor does it excuse, thy saying That the Grants of Lands, there made
by the Court, have still been with an express Condition and Proviso, That the
allowed Ministry be therewith supported, to wit, at Plymouth, or some other
places; for supposing this were so, which yet in great part may be justly
questioned, (for some of the Quakers Relations and Parents had as good a Right
to their Lands in New England as any others, and that before any such Grant of
Cour^) it does not therefore follow, That they are obliged to uphold a false
Ministry, not sent of God; for no man is bound to a thing unlawful, says both
the Law of God and man. The Popish Clergy use to argue at the same rate, for
all the great Lands and Revenues that were given to them in Old England,
Scotland and Ireland; but this says nothing, that they do justly belong to
them, no more it does, that our Friends are bound to maintain these in
New England, whom they cannot own in Conscience to be true Ministers of Christ;
and all true Ministers of the Gospel ought only to live by the Gospel, and not
by the Law of any earthly Court: None of the Apostles, or Ministers of Christ
in the Apostles days, had any such way of Maintenance allowed them but as they
freely gave, so they did freely receive, without any extorting what was
necessary.

Thou say, The Barnstable story is a Romance, of the same piece with the
rest; but of this thou give no proof, but that thou hear so. But is a bare
Report or Hearsay sufficient to discredit a Passage that is known to so many
living Witnesses in that Town? the Persons are yet living that testified these
things, and if need were, their Testimony can be produced under their hands,
being of good Credit and Report, yea, not only these called Quakers, but some
of New England Church can witness to the substance of it.

Thou Mockest, after thy wonted manner (not minding how far he who sits in the
seat of the Scorner is from the state of the blessed man, Psalm. 1.1.) at my
saying* My hope is, in due time your Meeting Houses shall no more receive you
into them, where after thou have diminished from my words, most unfairly and
disinguously thou puts thy false and malicious Gloss upon them, as if I did
guess from either the private Conversation I had with your Persecutors, as thou
call them, or their Public Administration there, that your Churches were
quickly to be overturned. All which is notoriously false. It is manifest whom
thou call Persecutors, viz. some eminent in Authority at that time, whom I
did not know to have persecuted you, for ye had your liberty for your
Profession of Religion as much as could be desired, or as any others, unless ye
call that Persecution, that ye were restrained from persecuting others. And as
for worldly concerns and transactions betwixt these in Authority and you, I had
not the least meddling, neither in private nor public. But finding that the
Governor was favorable to our Friends in New England, in restraining some
Persecuting Priests and Justices to strein our Friends goods for Maintenance to
the Priests, I judged it my duty to visit him, being also thereunto
particularly recommended by a Person of good Quality and Report, of his former
Acquaintance; and I must needs say, that both He, and They were very civil who
were with him; but as to any Worldly or Civil Concern, either with him or any
other, or as to any intention or purpose that he or they had to hurt or damage
you in any of your Relig^^^s or Civil Concerns, I had no knowledge, nor have
from ^^y of them. But the ground of my saying what I have affirmed in my Book,
was simply and wholly, as I there in my Book have affirmed, That my (...) that
in due time many People both in Boston and New England shall have their Eyes
opened by the Spirit of the Lord, which ye blaspheme, to see yo^ to be these
false Teachers, who bring not the Doctrine of Christ; and the Houses ye preach
in, not being your Houses, bu^ the Houses of the People, they shall not any
more receive you into them, etc. Hereby it does most evidently appear, that I
had not the least ground in my most remote thoughts, that these in present
Authority, or any others, by any outward Force* would destroy your Churches, or
extrude you out of your Meeting Houses, but that in due time God would open the
Eyes of the People to see you to be that sort of false Teachers, who bring not
Christ's Doctrine, and that on that account the People would not receive you
into these Houses, being their Houses, and not yours. It is therefore most
evident, this gloss of thine upon my words, is a mere Forgery and Calumny, as
if I did either wish or predict, by some conjecture, That any in present
Authority at that time, were ever long purposed to destroy or overturn your
Churches or Meeting Houses. But it is no wonder thou putest such false
Interpretations on my words, when thou and thy Brethren dare so frequently put
false Interpretations on the Scriptures themselves. And I never had the least
ground to think or conjecture, that any at that time in Authority, had the
least intention to overturn any of your Churches, or in the least to straiten
you in the Profession of your Religion, and I believe they had none. And as to
my words that I said, In due time, my hope was, that God would open the Eyes of
many People, both in Boston and New England, thou also make a Mock of that
Expression [ In Due Time] saying, Ay, no doubt of it in due time; but I pray,
friend George, (say thou) when shall this due time be? I Answer thee, sooner
than thou do expect, or think of; but as to the precise time of what Year,
Month, or so, I leave it wholly to the Lords ordering, who has said, He will
Overturn, Overturn, Overturn, till He come to reign, whose right it is, and
that is the Lord Jesus Christ, spiritually and inwardly revealed to reign and
rule in men's hearts, whom ye oppose and blaspheme against, and all his Enemies
will fall before him in Due Time, according to Deuteronomy. 32.35. To me belongs
Vengeance and Recompense (says the Lord) their feet shall slide in DVE TIME,
for the Day of their Calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon
them make have. So thou may see, that the true words of Prophecy in Deuteronomy.
32.35. are so expressed, with a respect to the Due Time. As for us, and me in
particular, neither we nor I have any evil will or wish in our hearts toward
the Land or People of New England; but we, and I in particular can and do say,
I wish the Welfare and Happiness of it every way, and my Hope is great, and
my Faith sure and firm, That God has a chosen Seed and People in it, to whom
he will inwardly reveal himself in great Power and Glory, and gather them to
the living knowledge of himself, and into a living acquaintance with himself,
and his living Way and Truth, and this will make them indeed a blessed and
happy People; but as for all such who shall be found continuing to oppose and
resist the heavenly inward and spiritual Appearance and Revelation of God and
Christ in the hearts of People, and shall be found saying, as these Scoffers,
of whom Peter prophesied, who should come in the last days, and say, Where is
the Promise of his coming? and as this Cotton Mather, in the same scoffing
nature and spirit, has said, When is that due Time, that I have said shall
come, that God will open the Eyes of People, etc.? both thou, and all such, and
all Hypocrites, and all false ^^achers of all sorts, who do all that ye can to
uphold your Babylonish buildings, shall be greatly disappointed of all your
vain and false Hopes, and a dreadful Cup of Wrath and Judgment will be given to
all such who shall still continue to gainsay and oppose, yea, to blaspheme this
heavenly inward Appearance and Revelation of Christ in his People. And
therefore I do sincerely and ea^^^stly exhort and request, both thee C. Mather,
and Increase Mather thy Father, if this ever come to his hands, and all others
of you called Ministers and Teachers in New England, to Repent of all your hard
Speeches, Revilings, false Accusations and Calumnies that ye have raised
against the Truth and Witnesses of it, and bow and submit to that divine Light
of Christ in your hearts, that ye have so long and so much gainsaid, and
blasphemed against heretofore.

And as for thy Conclusion in thy Appendix, it is so dirty and u^clean, that it
is not worth mentioning, being an old Latin Rhyme made by some old doting
Priest or Clergyman, in the former time of Ignorance; and as it has no good
savor to any that understand a little Latin, so no more would it have if
translated into English. But we may well bear it, to be called or esteemed by
thee in thy ignorance and darkness of understanding, as Dung and Filth, when
the Apostles of the Lord, by men of thy dark Spirit, were made as the Filth of
the World, and the Offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13. (...).

There is another Passage in Cotton Mathers Appendix, which though I could
easily have passed by altogether, without any just Reflection on us, yet
because it shows how foolish and inconsiderate he is, to accuse others for
that, which these of his own Society have been sufficiently liable to, I shall
take some notice of it. He says, That the Quakers fall out among themselves,
is but a natural Consequence of their Tempers, and Errors, which cannot be
otherwise than incoherent; and sometimes their Credit forces them to explode in
one another, what they (wish they could, but) cannot excuse. Answ. That we have
denied Thomas Case and all his ungodly Crew and Followers, is not the least
proof that the Quakers fall out among themselves; for though they or others may
falsely call them Quakers, as being of our Religion and Society, yet it does not
follow, any more, than that many of the most Wicked, called Christians, are of
the true Christian Religion, or are Christians, because falsely so called. But
in this thou actest more like Celsus, and others in ancient times, who
upbraided the sincere Christians, yea, and the Christian Religion it self, with
all the vile and gross Heresies and wicked Practices of some Apostates, and
other vile and lewd Persons, who called themselves Christians, and were not. We
have better learned Christ and Christianity, than to judge any to be of our
Religion or Society, because of any outward Name whatsoever. But if thou had
any common discretion, thou would have spared these words, to upbraid the
People called Quakers, with falling out among themselves, and that their so
falling out, is but a natural consequence o^ their Tempers and Errors; for
through the great love and mercy of God, the honest and sincere People called
Quakers (the which Name of Quakers is but a Nickname, raised upon them by
Scoffers, like Cotton Mather, even as the Name Roundhead and Puritan were
Nicknames raised upon sober People fifty years ago, and upwards) have been
preserved, as to the main, in great Unity, both of Persuasion and Love, beyond
any People that have appeared, pretending to a Reformation, in these latter
Ages. But for any Presbyterian or Independent, who reckon themselves one in
matters of Religion, to upbraid any other People with falling out, when they
have had so great Contentions and Fallings out among themselves, not only with
one another, but with these called the Episcopal and Church of England, whom
they deny not to be their Protestant Brethren, and one with them, in the main,
does evidence, not only great Partiality, but Hypocrisy and Indiscretion. For
who have had greater Quarrels and Fallings out one with another, than them who
have professed one and the same Protestant Religion, not only to hard Speeches
one against another, but great Persecution one of another, and all this on the
pretense of Religion. And even in New England it self, Cotton Mather cannot be
ignorant what Quarrels, Disputes and Fallings out have been among these called
Ministers and Teachers in New England: There are diverse yet alive, who were
both eye and ear Witnesses to the hot Contentions and Fallings out among some
called Preachers and Ministers in New England of the Congregational way, and
particularly that great Opposition and Falling out that was betwixt old John
Cotton of New England (of whom this Cotton Mather is descended) and some of his
Brethren; the said old John Cotton being accused severely by his pretended
Brethren of the Ministry, for false Doctrine, though that Doctrine for which he
was accused, was not false, but true, and agreeable both to the Scriptures
Testimony, and to what the honest People, called Quakers, are raised up to
witness unto, as namely, That not only the Graces and Operations of God, of
Christ, and of the holy Spirit, are in all true Saints and Believers, but that
God, and Christ, and the holy Spirit, together with these Graces and
Operations, are really present and in-dwelling in the hearts of all true Saints
and Believers: And John Owen has asserted in some of his Books printed in Old
England, to wit, That the holy Ghost does really dwell in Believers, together
with his Graces and Virtues: The which Doctrine both of old John Cotton, and
John Owen, an Independent Preacher in Old England, has been judged by others
of their Brethren, not only Heresy, but Blasphemy, and is the main Article of
Blasphemy, that the Presbyterian and Independent Priests and Professors change
upon the People called Quakers. And thus it does appear, what little Wit,
Discretion or common Prudence this Cotton Mather has, to charge the Quakers
with falling out among themselves (which, in the case mentioned by him, is
altogether false) when they themselves, and his Brethren, have been so deeply
chargeable in that matter; besides that of late there have been very unhappy
Differences among these of your Church in New England, the which, how agreeable
to true Christian Religion, or Civil Authority, Truth, in due time, will
discover.

Nor is he any more pertinent, to say of a Woman, (that God moved, as she
declared, to come with her face made black, for a sign of some Judgment ready
to come upon many People of New England) That she dressed her self like a
Devil, and frighted some of her Sex almost out of their Lives, in one of their
biggest Assemblies; for the Judgment, she was moved to come as a sign, to warn
you of, did soon after come to pass, by a very sore and dreadful Visitation, of
that, called by some, The Black Po^k, that cut off many, both Young and Old
among you, as I noticed in my late Book. But if Cotton Mather were not full of
a scornful, light and airy Spirit, he would not make so light of a matter of so
great weight, so to sport and make merry with the^e whom God moved to warn of
his approaching Judgments, that come to pass accordingly, and thereby it was
made apparent, her Message was true. But why should the color of black be
judged by Cotton Mather so much to resemble the Devil? How many Negro's are
there in New England, whom People daily see and converse with, some of which
may come to your Assemblies, and none are affrighted thereby? But if the color
of Black so much resemble the Devil, as C. M. alleges, then what says he to
his Brethren, the men called Ministers in New England, who generally are Black
in Habit from the Crown of the head to the foot, like the Black-coats or
Chemarims of old? must they also by Cotton Mathers Authority be like unto the
Devil? So that in all his discourse C. M. shows himself a mere silly
Triffler, but no sollid Disputer, nor Defender, either of his Father or himself.

Another thing I think fit to acquaint the Reader with, That he heed, not think
strange to find Cotton Mather so falsifying and wresting my words, and abusing
the honest People called Quakers, when downright and in plain words he
falsifieth the holy Scripture, and alleges a downright falsehood upon Christ
himself, who is the Truth; for in his thing called a Sermon, upon 1 ^et. 5.8.
page 9. he says, We are told in Mat. 12.26. Sat^an is NOT divided against
himself. Now let the Reader view the place, and he shall find no such words,
nor indeed any where in all the Scripture; for the words are, Mat. 12.26. And
if Satan cast out Sat^an, he is divided against himself, how shall then his
Kingdom stand? And here every one that has a right, though ordinary,
understanding of things, and who see even but a very little, may see that
Christ does not so much as imply That Satan is not divided against Satan, but
only argues the case with them against themselves, by an Argument that is
commonly called Argumentum ad hominem, as does plainly appear by the following
Verse, v. 27. And if I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your Children
cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges; for Christ had this
manifest advantage against them, that they could no more allege, that he did
cast out Devils by the Prince of Devils, than that it might be alleged, that
any of their Children did cast them out; for their Children did believe, they
did cast out Devils by the Power of God, and Christ had far greater cause to
say the same, to wit, that he did cast out Devils by the Power of God: Nor does
the manner of Expression, If Satan cast out Satan, argue or imply in the
least, that Satan is not divided against himself, or that his Kingdom is not
divided; for the Particle [ if] is not always to be understood to imply a
negative, but frequently an affirmative, as in v. 28. said Christ, But If I
cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, etc. the sense is not Negative. And
hereby it does plainly appear, that Cotton Mather is a Falsifier and Wrester of
Christ's words, who would bring Christ's Authority to prove, That Satan is is
not divided against Satan, which is utterly false; for Satan is divided
manifestly often times against Satan, and his Kingdom is divided also, and
therefore it cannot stand, but must needs tall, and great will be the Fall
thereof; for there is no true nor real Unity betwixt the Devils, nor can there
be, because they are not in unity with God, nor Truth, which is the alone
foundation and ground of all true Unity; and though Devils may seem to agree, and
the parts of his Kingdom to be in Union, yet that is no real unity, and
therefore they often fall at variance, as their wicked Actions and Works in
wicked men, plainly demonstrate, that are most commonly divided and disco^dant.

And as for thy Book of Wi^chcraft (though I believe there is such a thing,
that is too frequent, as real Witchcraft, and too many that are real Witches)
yet I find little, or indeed nothing in all thy book that does effectually
prove, that any of these Children were really bewitched; the most it proves,
is, that some Whimsies and Fancies, together with some fits of Madness or
Melancholy Distractions, did seize upon them, or suppose a Diabolical
Possession; all this does not prove they were bewitched, nor do I find any
effectual proof, that it was a Bodily Possession of the Devil. But whether it
was so or not, I am little concerned (to enquire) further, than to take notice,
that C. Mather will needs have it to be so, not only to bespatter and abuse the
People called Quakers, because a whimsical Boy became well when his going to
the Quakers Meeting was but mention^^ (which might be used, rather for, than
against them, but really (...) no force either for or against) but to make
simple and too credu^^^s People believe, That some of his Brethrens, or his
own, Prayers did conjure the Devil, and cast him out: And all this to prove the
great worth and excellency of the Presbyterian or Independent Religion. But I
have both read and heard as great, or rather greater instances of evil Spirits
and Devils being cast out of some by Popish Priests, which does no more prove
either the truth or worth of Pope or Papacy, than this pretended or supposed
Ejection, and casting out, or perhaps the going out of the Devil, without any
force, but on his crafty design to make Cotton Mather imagine it to be so, and
others of the like ^^^ly credulity, does prove, the truth or worth of your
Religion; for C. Mather should remember his own words in that thing called his
Sermon on Witchcraft, p. 36. Sometimes (says he) the Devil will use a
digression, he will seem to give over his intent in one thing, but make sure of
his intent in another: such a Stratagem he ^seth, as what Joshua took A^
withal, he retires, and so he conquors. I say then, what does Cotton Mather
know, or how can he prove to the contrary, but that the Devil used this
Stratagem in retiring or going (...), without being conjured by the force of
his and his Brethrens Prayers? And though the great worth and power of true
Prayer, I most willingly acknowledge, which is only performed by the
Inspiration and Revelation of the holy Spirit, yet seeing Cotton Mather and his
Brethren generally mock at any, at this day laying claim to divine Inspiration
and Revelation, I cannot own their Prayers to be true, they are liker to Charms
and Spells of superstitions Persons, all such Prayers that are performed
without divine Inspiration and true internal divine Revelation.

Nor does it content or satisfy Cotton Mather to accuse and speak evil of the
honest People called Quakers, and to belie CHRIST himself, and the Scripture,
as I have above sufficiently proved, but he also falls foul upon his own
Native Country, and the People in it, saying expressly of the Country of
New England, A COUNTRY FULL OF LYES^ page 28. in his discourse of Witchcraft:
How may the People of New England relish this? a People generally all over (few
excepted) your Church Members, and yet by Cotton Mathers Authority, full of
Lies. Also, he does plainly accuse not a few of them for using and practicing
manifold Sorceries and Charms. Had the People called Quakers, so accused them
of New England, it would have been judged great impiety. But what says the
People of New England now to Cotton Mather, who does so accuse them? let them
see to it, and if they be not guilty of his Charge, whether is he not severely
to be reprehended? And what say his Brethren, the men called Ministers in
Boston, who have so highly praised his Book, have they no Garment to cast over
their Naked Brother?

Here follow a few words of a Letter to John Cotton, called, a Minister, at
Plymouth in New England.
John Cotton;
HAving seeen a few Lines from thy hand, attested by thee, and other two
Witnesses, wherein thou and they declare, That in the Town of Plymouth in
New England, last Summer, save one, ye heard me affirm, That the Scriptures are
the Word of God. My Answer to thee and them, is, That ye have not dealt fairly,
nor as becoming true Witnesses, in this case; for every Witness should declare
all the Truth, and conceal nothing of the Truth which they heard* Now this ye
have not done, but diminished from my words, as your Consciences may bear
witness, if your Memory be not bad; for I very well remember my words at that
time, which were these, That I did acknowledge the true Sense of the Scripture
to be the Word of God, and that in the same I was not singular in my
Persuasion, from the People called Quakers; for Samuel Fisher in his Book
called, Rusticus ad Academicos, that has been in print upwards of twenty five
Years, has affirmed the same, to wit, That the true Sense of the Scripture is
the Word of God. And at that time I further said, That not every one who had
the Letter of the Scripture, had the Word of God, to speak properly, because
they had not the true sense of Scripture, which none have, but such to whom it
is given by the Spirit of God. I also did further affirm, That the Letter or
words of Scripture may be called the Word in a figurative sense, as the Map or
Card of England is called England, and that the Greek word is used in Scripture
in diverse acceptations. All this, and more to the same purpose I spoke to thee
at that time.

G. K.


The substance of this I have more largely asserted in my late Book, printed,
called, The Presbyterian and Independent visible Churches, etc. cap. 1.

THE END

