A LETTER from the most Ingenious Mr. LODOWICK
Roode-Island, Febr. 1. 1691, 2. Honored and Esteemed Mr. Mather,
HAving seen your Book, called, Quakerism Displayed, wherein you have been
pleased to mention my Name and my Challenge to the Quakers (...) this Isla^^ I
am thereby emboldned, to trouble (...) time with some Lines; sending You (...)
Books penned by G. Keith, with a (...) Written by Him about Three years (...)
His Way to the City of God, from (...) will see, what Christ he owned (...) p.
62 to 65. You will see (...) understood by the Seed, Ligh^, and Grace (...) and
in p. 50 51 18. what His Faith in Christ then was. But G. Keit^) perhaps by
means of His Controversies with Mr. Hicks, (perceiving the many Absurdities
which follow from this New Fabric* (e. g. that the Heaven^y Body or Divine
Intermediate Substance, if there was really such an one would be discerpible
into particles, which particles should be carried hither and thither by men, as
they step from place to place, and that there would have been so many Messia's
or Christ's within, consisting of a Spirit and Body, as there have been Saints
from the beginning; and that the portion of that Body in the Son of Mary,
increased in quantity, and that that Heavenly Substance, consisting of a Body
and Spirit, should be most properly the Father of Christ the Second Adam, if a
portion of him, supplied the Male-Seed in the Conception of Christ in Mary
etc.) built some years after, another Fabric, as You will find by His, The way
cast up, from p. 89. to 168. which he further defends in his Third Book. By the
Manuscript You may further understand the Dotages of this Notional Man, which
some obscure Passages in his late Books have reference unto. When I read Your
Book, I did wish, that You might have had the perusal of these Books of his,
ere You wrote Yours. For though You have notably discovered the Errors of the
Generality of the Quakers (whom I call Foxians) yet there is also a little
party dispersed to and fro, among the com^^^ (...) who, though they observe G.
Foxes (...) pass with the rest under the (...) are nevertheless no true
F^xians, (...) sake) be called (...) but they are so few, that I believe, (...)
all gathered together, they might meet (...) and make no considerable
appearance (...) are most of them, the more learned sort (...) people called
Quakers: the chief writers of these, are G. Keith, To. Barclay, (both
Scotchmen,) and because Mr. Faldo and Mr. Hicks knew not the distinction that
is to be made between the Foxians and Semi-foxians and their several Opinions,
G. Keith and W. Pen were in some things too hard for them, (for notwithstanding
what W. Pen had written before that time, as a Foxian touching the Three
Persons, Christ's Satisfaction, Remission of sins etc. He subtly without
confessing any change, acted the Semi-foxian in his controversies with Mr.
Faldo and Mr. Hicks.) The common Foxians conceive that that which condemns
every man within him, is a measure of the Essence of God, which they call
Christ, the Light, the Word, and the Eternal Spirit etc. And they conceive that
this Christ is also the Father, (because Christ ^ called Everlasting Father,)
and the Holy Ghost, (because he is a Spirit as God,) and they fancy, that (...)
this Inward Condemner does condemn for some evi^ (which they call, a
Manif^sting, R^vealing and showing them what is evi^,) so it does show them not
only Errors in Practice but also Errors in Judgment, and that, if they be
faithful to it (which they call believ^ing in it) it will reveal unto them more
in time, and that there is no more required of any man, then G^d or Christ has
thus shown him within him etc. And herein consist their daily Divine
Illuminations, Inspirations, Revelations of knowledge* but their Experimental
knowledge of Christ's Birt^, Death, R^surrection* etc. ^onsists in this, that
when a man is (...) then they say, the Immortal Babe is born, Christ the Seed
and Lamb which was slain, comes to be Raised, and he ascends the Throne, and
comes to Judgment in Clouds of Heaven within, and Judges such a man for his
sins [whereby they only describe the various condition of man's Conscience.]
And hence they deny wholly, that ever Christ as Man shall come down from Heaven
to Raise and Judge the Dead. And they say, that that which is a man's
Trou^b^er, R^p^^ver and Condemner within him, will be also his Comforter,
Approver, Justifier and Saviou^, if he believes in it, and it will redeem and
save him from all sin, and from W^ath for sin, (esteeming the checks of the
Conscience to be God's Wrath) Herein they place their Salvation and R^demp^^^^
from sin, viz. some wi^ful sinning, and their sin^ess Perfection consist in
their abstinence from gross wilful sinning and the peace of Conscience ensuing
thereupon, they call the peace (...), and Justification in the sight of God.
And their Inherent Righteousness, they call the Righteousness of Christ, which
he has wrought within them, and they do never speak of the Merit of the
sufferings, Death and Resurrection^ of Jesus at Jerusalem, but they call his
Righteousness a Rightousness of another at a distance, which can do us no good;
and they say, it is an inward blood that must cleanse our Souls inwardly. And
here also may be understood, what their Baptism of Repentance with Fire and
with the Spirit of Judgment, is, VIZ. When a man is inwardly Judged for his
sin, so as to repent of it. And unto this PROTON PSEUDOS or fundamental Error,
VIZ. That the Inward Condemner is Christ, the Light, and if obeyed, will become
a man's Justifier and Savior, they have suited all their other Doctrines
concerning Christ, saying, that the true Christ was never seen with Mortal
Eyes, heard with Carnal Ears, and that the Visible Body Born of Mary, was but a
Garment of the true Christ tabernacling in it; which body, some of them say he
has laid down, othe^s cannot tell what is become of it, and they say, to mind
Christ in that bodily appearance and manifestation (as they call it,) is to
know Christ after the Flesh, and they call their Christ within Christ in the
Spirit, they say that Christ Born of Mary was Christ in the Flesh. And beacuse
they, read of Eating Christ^s Flesh, and of Drinking his Blood* they have
feigned also an Omnipresent and Invisible B^d^ of Spiritual Flesh and Blood,
which they say the Saints in all Ages partook of within them; and when they
feel an inward Affectedness or sensible Refreshment of their B^wels (which they
call the (...),) then they say, they eat of Christ's Flesh, or o^ the Bread of
Life, and they drink of his Blood which is Life, and by which they are
cleansed. And here in consists their Lords Supper: and he that fully
un^derstands what they mean by their Light and by their Life, may understand
their whole Divinity. The Semi-foxians finding this Doctrine to be too Gross,
and that God is Indivisible and Immortal, and cannot be Crucified Slain and
Raised from Death, will not say, that the Inward Condemner is a measure of the
uncreate Eternal Spirit, but they say, it is a create or rather Emanated Being,
Emanated from God in the beginning before all things, VIZ. A measure of the
Es^ence of the Heavenly Man, which they generally call the Light and Spirit of
Jesus Christ, and the purchase of his Death R. Barclay says in his Apology p.
87. that it is a M^asure of the Heaven^y Body of Christ, and that every
unrighteouss Action is Reproved by it. But G. Kieth on his Way cast up, will
have it to be the Neshamah of the Heavenly Man extended into us. (And
consequently their pretended inward Motions immediate Inspirations,
Illuminations, and Revelations are not Immediately from God, but medi^t^ly
either through the Body or Soul of a feigned Man: and by this is also their
inward Justification, Sanctification and ^egeneration) This is their Divine
Ess^ntial Principle, which they so often speak of, and sometimes call the Seed,
Grace and Word of God, and R. B. says, that it is the Manifestation of the
Spirit spoken of 1. Cor. 12.7. the seed of the Kingdom, Math. 13.18, 19. the
Ligh^ that makes all things manif^st, Ephesians. 5.13. the word of God To. 10.18.
the Talent Math. 25 15. the little Leav^^, the Gospel preached in every
Creature, Col. 1 23.. and he is ^ffended with them that call it a Natural
Conscience. He says, that if this Seed ^e reci^ved into the Heart to bring
forth it^ Effects, Christ comes to be formed of it, which the Scripture calls
the New Man, Christ within, the hope of Glory. In this Birth or Form^tion of
Christ within us, and working his works in us, and pouring his Blood into our
Souls, he places our formal Justification, which he expl^^^s to be all one with
Sanctification, viz. A ma^ing ^ight^ou^ inwardly* and though he grant^ that
Remission of sins was only purch^sed by virtue of Christ's Sacrifice without us,
(...) he (...), that they may come to partake of it, that are ignorant of the
History of Christ, for he asserts that by the operation of this Light and Seed,
some have been and may yet be saved, to whom the Gospel is not outwardly
Preached, nor the History of Christ outwardly known, because they have with all
other men, a day of Visitation, in which God offers to work this Salvation, by
the Measure of a saving, sufficient supernatural Right, given to every man,
which all are to believe in, as he would infer from Joh. 12 36. G. Keith writes
in (...) Way to the City of God, to the same purpose. And you may see by G.
Keith Books, how they have framed their Doctrine Concerning Christ, according
to this their Hypothesis, borrowing several of their Noti^n out of the Writings
of some Rabbis among the Eastern Jews, Translated into Latin, by a Learned
Noble Man in Germany [whose Children I Tutored some years agoe] but i^ the
Rabbies-Aensoph ^e according to the Semi-foxians, the Father, Word and Holy
Ghost, (as they say) and the Aensoph's having clothed himself ^ith the M^nhood
called Adam Cadmon, be, the Word's being made Flesh, then according to them,
not only the Word, but also the Father and Holy Ghost were ma^^ Flesh. This and
many other Absurdities follow from G. Keiths ass^rtion, that the Word was made
Flesh in the beginning, and that this Flesh is the Rabbis Adam Cadmon. And
these Cabbalis^i^al Semi-foxians s^em to expect that their heavenly Adam Cadmon
in the Body, assumed of Mary, shall come from Heaven to Judgment, and (...)
then there shall be ^ Resurrection out of the Graves; and G. K. does ^lso
^^lieve, that at his coming there will be the 1000 Years-Reign, which is more
then I ever heard any on^ called a Quaker affirm. And because G. Keith, as he
tol^ (...) last Summer, favors the Twelve Revolutions or Transmigrations of
our Souls, whereof R. ^ischack, a whimsical ^ew in the Eastern Countries, (who
pretended to Revelations,) has written most largely, (which notion he perhaps
learned of some of the Turks in some of those parts, who greatly favor the
Pythagorean Metempsychosis) therefore he is of late very ^ickle concerning the
R^surrection-body; for he told (...) last Summer, that this our Flesh which
goes into the grave shall not rise again, but there is an Invisible Bone
dispersed through the Body, called by the Cabbalists Luz, which is the Seed Sown,
unto which God shall give a Spiritual Body: and he said, that he asked some of
the Jews i^ these parts, what (...) signified, and they [because they
understood nothing of (...) Cabb^la, and perhaps knowing that the word, Luz in
^he Portugal and Spanish Tongue signifies Light] told ^im it m^an^ Light and
so G. K^ith is hugely pleased with ^^e fancy of it, and thinks it su^eth
bravely with their Light (...) Seed. And when I told him, that the Cabbalists
said, (...) this Invisible Bone is only a Small Bone in the back, he ^^swered,
that Wise men would not tell all at once. I sup^^se also that he beli^ves, that
honest Pagans, at some of their ^evolutions receive the knowledge of Jesus of
Nazareth, (...) and according to his late absurd Notion) are then perfectly
^^stified and Saved [as if Justification ^dmitted of Magis and (...),] I asked
him last Summer, how any such Gentile (...) be actually justified and saved
from wrath, before he be ^^rdoned, and how he could be pardoned of the least
imper^^ction of the very best of his moral virtues, without Faith in ^^sus of
Nazareth, and he gave me no direct Answer. Certain^^ G. Keith has no reason to
quote not only Protestants but (...) the Fathers, because he holds not the same
Christ, Grace (...) Justifying Faith with them. You will likewise find, (...),
that G. Keith bel^^veth not only the Preexistence of Two ^^grees of the Soul of
Christ, but also the preexistence of our ^ouls, of which he makes of late more
degrees then one, thus ^^ntradicti^g what he formerly writ concerning our
Nephesh (...) hi^ Way ^ast up And indeed the GALGAL or Revoluti^^ of Sou^^
presupposes their Preexistence. These Cabalis^^^al Semi-Q^akers labor as much
as is possible, to use the ^^pressions (...) G. For and his followers, whence
many of the ^^mmon Foxian* do not so much as suspect that they differ (...)
them; and in their Writing, they use deceitfully and (...) the Words W^ and Us,
without any specifical ^^^tinction, as though they did write the Sense and
^udgment (...) the whole People called Quakers, when they do not; and ^^en they
answer the Books writ by Anti-Quakers, they ^^ll either put another Meaning, or
some favorable Con^^nction on the gross Tenants of Fox and his Followers,
^^thout ingenuously bearing witness against those Errors, (...) if they be ^oo
gross, they will either ^o^k some Evasion, or under their Opposites gross Liars
and A^^users of the (...) People called Quakers, because themselves do not
maintain these things, though they know in their Consciences* that their Pagan
Brethren (as George Keith lately called them) hold those gross Tenants, upon
whom they were also most truly and justly charged by their Opponents* And
therefore as I suppose George Keith is writing an Answer to your Book, so I
believe, he will use many Evasions, and take advantage where he can: and he
will either put some other Meaning upon George Foxes words which you have
quoted (and which he dares not well deny) for his Brethrens sake, who esteem
George Fox the greates^ Oracle and Prophet that ever was among them; or
per^haps he will say, that you have quoted no page, an^ therefore he will wave
them. I was glad to see the Antidote which you and your Honored Colleagues i^
Boston, have set forth against George Keith, and I can sin^cerely say, that God
made it very profitable and servic^^able to me* in many respects: and it is to
be admire^ what Baseness and Malice George Keith did not scruple (...) use
against you, and how unreasonably he perverted the Assembly's Words and
Meaning. Having exceeded my i^^tended Brevity, I shall conclude, desiring God
to ble^^ your Labor and Service in the Go^pel of his Dear Son* And Rest with
my Respects to you,

Sir, Your Servant in the Faith of Christ, Christianus Lodowic^


