Several ACTS AND LAWS Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of
Their Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND.

Convened and Held at Boston, the Eighth Day of June. 1692.

Anno Regni Gulielmi, et Mariae. Regis et Reginae Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae, Quarto

BOSTON, Printed by Benjamin Harris, Printer to His Excellency, the Governor
and Council. 1692.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay. An Act, For Continuing the Local Laws, to
Stand in Force, till November the 10th. 1692.
BE it Ordered and Enacted, By the Governor, Council and Representatives
Convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Ordered and Enacted* By the
Authority of the Same, That all the Local Maws Respectively Ordered and Made by
the Late Governor, and Company of the Massachusetts Bay, and the Late
Government of New Plymouth, being not Repugnant to the Laws of England, nor
Inconsistent with the Present Constitution and Settlement by Their Majesty's
Royal Charter, Do Remain and Continue in Full Force in the Respective Places,
for which they were Made and Used, until the Tenth Day of November Next; Except
in Cases where other Provision is or shall be made by this Court or Assembly.

And all Persons are Required to conform themselves accordingly: And the
several Justices are hereby Empowered to the Execution of said Laws as the
Magistrates formerly were.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay. An Act, For Enforcing the Collecting and
Paying in the Arrears of Public Assessments, etc.
WHereas by the Late Governments within the Colonies of the Massachusetts and
New-Plymouth, now by Their Majesty's ROYAL CHARTER United and Incorporated,
Several Public Taxes and Assessments have respectively been granted for the
Security and Defense of Their Majesty's Subjects and Interests, and the
Defraying of the Public Charges arising by the War, with Their Majesty's
Enemies, French and Indians, since the First Day of October, ONE THOUSAND SIX
HNNDRED EIGHTY NINE. And have been (...)

Province of the Massachusetts Bay. An Act, For Collecting the Arrears, of Town
and County Rates.
WHereas several Taxes or Assessments necessary for the Support of the
Ministry, and other Public Charges, arising in the several Counties, and
Towns, within this Province, have been laid upon the Inhabitants, and Orderly
committed to the Constables or Collectors by the Select-Men, or Assessors, in
the several Towns, since the first day of May, in the Year, One Thousand Six
Hundred Eighty and Nine, and in many places remains uncollected, and unpaid; in
whole, or in part.

Be it therefore Ordered and Enacted, By His Excellency the Governor, Council,
and Representatives, in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, it
is Enacted, That all such Constables and Collectors, be Authorized, and
Required, and are hereby Authorized and Required to Collect all such Rates, or
Assessments so committed to him, or them, that remain yet Uncollected, and to
pay the same unto the County Treasurer in each County Respectively, or Select
Men being in each Town Respectively where they were made, and to be Improved to
the use or uses, for the which they were granted, and to finish their Accounts
with them, at or Before the Tenth Day of December next ensuing, on Penalty of
Forty shillings Per Month, for every Month's default after the said Tenth Day
of December, to be Recovered by the County Treasurer, or Select Men
Respectively of any such Defective Constables or Collectors at any Court of
Pleas in the same County. And where any Constables or Collectors are Dead, or
Removed, and the Assessments committed to them, remain Uncollected, or any part
thereof; the Select Men are Empowered and Required, to depute meet persons to
Collect the same, and the persons so deputed are required to Collect what so
remains, and to pay the same accordingly.

And it is further ORDERED, that in any County, Town or Towns, where such Tax
or Taxes, have been agreed on since the said first Day of May, and not Assessed
upon the Inhabitants, the Select Men of the several Towns, are hereby Required
forthwith to make such Rates or Assessments, and commit them with Warrant to
their Constables on the like Penalty of forty shillings Money for every Month's
defect, and to cause them to be collected, accounted for, and paid as aforesaid.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay. An Act, For the Granting to Their Majesty's
an Assessment upon Polls and Estates
WE Their Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Representatives of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England: Convened in General
Assembly, being sensible of the Necessity of Raising Moneys for the Defense of
Their Majesty's Subjects, and Interests, and Prosecution of the War against
their French and Indian Enemies, and for the Defraying of other the Public
Charges of the Province. Do Unanimously and Cheerfully grant unto Their Most
Excellent Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors, to the End and Intents
aforesaid, a Rate or Tax to be Assessed upon the Freeholders, Inhabitants, and
other Their Majesty's Subjects, Resident within the said Province, in manner as
is here after Expressed; to be paid in Money, or to the Satisfaction of the
Treasurer

And Pray that it may be Enacted, And be it accordingly Enacted By the
Governor, Council and Representatives, Convened in General Assembly. And it is
Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same. That the Treasurer do
forthwith send forth his Warrants to the Select-Men of each Town within this
Province, requiring the said Select-Men, to Cause the Inhabitants of such Town
to meet together some time in the Month of July next, who being so Assembled,
are Required to Choose one of their Freeholders to be a Commissioner for said
Town, which Commissioner, together with the Select-Men within the Month of
August following, shall make a true List of all the Male Persons in the said
Town, from sixteen Years Old and Upwards; and a true Estimation of the Just
Yearly Value and Income, so near as they can by all lawful means, which they
may use, of all Estates Real and Personal, being, or reputed to be the Estate
of all and every the Persons in the same Town, or under their Custody or
Management. All which Persons and Estates, are by the said Commissioner and
Select-Men to be Taxed and Assessed as follows, viz. Every Person aforesaid
at Ten Shillings by the Poll (except the Members of the Council, Settled
Ministers, and Grammar Schoolmasters, and others Devoted to the Ministry, and
Students of the College) and all Houses, Lands, Stock, Goods and Merchandises
and Estates whatever, Real and Personal at a quarter part of one years Value or
Income thereof. All persons who through Age or Infirmity, are unable to manage
their Affairs, are to be free of the Poll-Tax, at the discretion of the
Select-Men.

And it is further Enacted, That the Commissioner of each Town, upon the First
Wednesday of September next, shall carry the Lists of said Town, unto the Shire
Town, within the same County, where the Commissioners of the several Towns
shall meet togethr to Peruse, Examine, Correct and Perfect the said Lists;
which Lists so Examined, Perfected and Signed by the major part of the said
Commissioners so met, shall by one of the said Commi^sioners, whom the rest
shall appoint thereto, be forthwith Transmitted unto the Treasurer, who upon
the Receipt thereof, shall Issue forth his Warrants to the Constables of the
Respective Towns, to Collect the Sum Total of each List upon the Inhabitants of
such Towns, according to their respective proportion: And in case any person or
persons shall neglect, or refuse to make payment of the Sum or Sums so Assessed
upon them; then to Levy the same by Distress and Sale of Goods of such person
or persons so neglecting or refusing; returning the Overplus, if any be. And
the Constables are to pay in unto the Treasurer the one half of the said Tax,
at or before the Twenty Fifth of December next, and the other Half at or before
the First Day of May following, and make up their Accounts with the said
Treasurer by the first of June next, on pain of Forfeiting Ten Pounds in Money
unto Their Majesty's, for the Support of the Government. As also to pay all
Arrears of Said Assessments, The Said TEN POUND Forfeiture: And Arrears to be
Sued for, and Recovered by the Treasurer, in the Inferior Court of Pleas, in
the County where such Constable lives, by Bill, Plaint, Action or Information.

Provided also, that where Persons, who are not Settled Inhabitants, and their
Estates being Rated, yet are removed and gone before the same can be Collected,
it shall be abated to the Constable that was to Collect the same. Certificate
thereof being given by the Select-Men.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act for the
granting to Their Majesty's an Assessment upon Polls and Estates, shall
continue in Force only for this present Levy, and no longer. Any thing to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Province of the MASSACHUSETS-BAY. An Act, For Impost, Excise, and Tonnage of
Shipping.
WE Their Majesty's most Loyal, and Dutiful Subjects, the Representatives, of
this their Majesty's Province, Convened in General Assembly, being duly
sensible of the great Charges and Expenses, which have already arisen, and must
necessarily be Daily Growing and Increasing, in Defending and Securing, of
Their Majesty's Subjects and Interests, and in the Prosecuting of the War,
against their French and Indian Enemies: have Cheerfully and Unanimously Given
and Granted, and do hereby Give and Grant unto their most Excellent Majesty's,
Their Heirs and Successors, to the End and Intent aforesaid; and for the
Defraying of other the necessary and Contingent Charges, in and about the
support of the Government of this their Majesty's Province, the several Duties
Impost and Excise on the Wines, Liquors and Goods hereafter mentioned. And
humbly beseech their Majesty's to accept the same.

And that it may be Enacted, and be it Enacted, By the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled. And it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained By the Authority of the same, That from and after the twenty ninth Day
of this Instant June, In the Year of our Lord, One Thousand six Hundred Ninety
and Two, there shall be paid by the Importer, for all Wines or Liquors, and
Goods hereafter specified that shall be Imported into this Province, the Rates
hereafter mentioned.

That is to say, for every Pipe of common Fyall Wine the Sum of one Pound,
Every Pipe of Passada Wine, One Pound Fifteen Shillings, every Pipe of Madera
Wine One Pound Ten Shillings, Every Pipe of Canary, Mallago and Sherry Wines,
two pounds. Every Pipe of Port Wine, one pound five shillings, and so
Proportionably for greater or lesser quantities, and for every Gallon of Rum or
other Spirits Imported as aforesaid, Sixpence. All which Imposts as aforesaid,
shall be paid in Current Money of this Province, the one half at or before the
Landing thereof, the other half to be allowed three Month's for payment,
provided there be Bond and Security given to the Commissioners appointed by
this Act, or such as they shall appoint, for the payment thereof at time as
aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Merchant or
other Person Importing any Wines or other Liquors into this Province, shall be
allowed Twelve per Cent for Leakage: Provided said Wines have not been filled
up Aboard. And that every Hogshead of Wine or other Liquors that shall nor have
full seven Inches left therein, and every Butt or Pipe of Wine or other Liquors
that has not nine Inches left therein shall be accounted for Outs, and the
Merchant or Importer to pay no Impost or Duty for the same.

And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That
if all or any Wines or Liquors as aforesaid be Landed, and afterward be
Exported out of the Province within Nine Months after Importation thereof,
there shall be Repayed or Discounted by said Commissioners, or their Order,
unto the Importers, or their Assigns, two third parts of what they Paid or
Secured to be Paid, for so much as they Export; he or they making Oath, That it
is the same Wines or Liquors, for which the whole Duty had been duly paid or
secured io be paid And that its Exported within the time limited as aforesaid
by this Act.

And it is also Enacted by the Authoaity aforesaid, That for all Goods, Wares
and Merchandises that shall be Imported to any part of this Province, after the
twenty ninth day of this Instant June (Salt, Cotton-Wool, Provisions, and every
other thing of the growth and product of New England only Excepted) there shall
be paid by the Importer, the several Imposts and Duties following, That is to
say, For every Hundred Pound Sterling in English Merchandises, at the prime
cost in England (the Invoices thereof to be produced and shown) the sum of Ten
Shillings.

For every Hogshead of Sugar, one shilling. For every Hogshead of Molasses
sixpence. For every Hogshead of Tobacco, sixpence. For every Ton of
Logg-wood, one shilling.
And for all other Commodities, Goods, Wares, and Merchandises (except as
before excepted) One Penny for every Twenty Shillings value here. All Entries
where the Impost or Duty to be paid, does not exceed Four Shillings, to be made
without Charge to the Importer. And not more than six pence to be paid for any
other single Entry to what value soever.

And the better to prevent Fraud, It is further Enacted. By the Authority
aforesaid, That all Merchants, Factors, or other Person or Persons, Importers,
being Owners of, or having any of the Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares, and
Merchandises Consigned to them, that by this Act are liable to pay Impost or
Duty. Such Person or Persons shall by themselves, or, Order, cause the same to
be Entered with said Commissioners or such as they shall appoint; and pay their
Duty, or secure the same to be paid, as by this ACT is provided, before such
Wines, Liquors, Goods, or Merchandise be Landed or Put into any Boat or Vessel,
in order to be Landed, on the Forfeiture of such Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares,
and Merchandise, so Landed, or Put into any Boat or Vessel in order to be
Landed: One third part to Their Majesty's, one third part to the Governor, one
third part to the Informer, that shall Sue for the same, by bill, Plaint or
Information, in any Court of Record within this Province: Any thing in this
Act, or any other to the contrary not withstanding.

And all manner of Persons are hereby required, to be aiding, and assisting the
said Commissioners, their Agents, the Informer, Discoverer or Seizor of such
Wine, Liquors or Goods so Landed or Unloaden contrary to the true Intent and
Meaning of this Act.

And it is further Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for such as are
Empowered or Improved by the Commissioners, or for the Informer or Discoverer,
by Warrant from the Lieutenant Governor, or any two Justices of the Peace,
within this Province (to that purpose first obtained) with one Constable or
more, to search according to Law, all manner of Houses, Cellars, and
Warehouses, for such Wines, and Liquors, as they, or any of them shall be
informed were carried there to be concealed, in prejudice to the true meaning
of this Act, and with Intent to defraud Their Majesty's, of Their said Duties.
And such Wines and Liquors so found, shall be forfeited and condemned in manner
and form before mentioned. Always provided that such Search be made in the day
time, and within the space of one month after the Offense supposed to be
committed.

Provided also that if the Information, whereupon any House shall come to be
Searched, shall prove to be false, that then and in such case, the Party
injured shall recover his full Damages and Costs against the Informer, by
Action of Trespass to be therefore brought against such Informer.

And it is further Enacted and Ordained By the Authority aforesaid, That there
shall be given and granted, and paid unto Their Majesty's, Their Heirs and
Successors for the Uses aforesaid. An Excise upon all Wines Brandy Rhum, and
other Distilled Liquors, Perry, Beer, Ale, Cider, and Metheg^^^ that shall be
Sold Retail in any Town or Place within this Province, (...) that shall Retail
the same, in manner and form as (...) Expressed and Declared: That is to say,
For every Gallon of common Fyal-wine, the Sum of Sixpence. Every Gallon of
Passado, Malago, Canary, and Sherry, the sum of Twelve-pence. Every Gallon of
Madera, the sum of Eight-pence. Every Gallon of Rhum, and all other sorts of
Distilled Spirits, the sum of One shilling. Every barril of Perry, beer, Ale,
and Cider, the sum of One shilling and sixpence. And every gallon of
Metheglin, the sum of Four-pence.


All Current Money of this Province, and after that Rate, for any greater or
lesser quantities.

And for the due and orderly Collecting and Receiving of the Excise aforesaid.

It is hereby further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Retailers of Wine, Brandy, Rhum, and other Distilled Liquors, Perry, Beer, Ale,
Cider and Metheglin within this Province, having any of the said Liquors in
their Respective Houses, or elsewhere belonging unto them, at the time of the
Publishing of this Act, shall make due Entry, and pay the Duties and Excise
aforesaid, for the same as is herein beforementioned. And upon their further
Receipt or Purchase of all, or any of the Liquors beforementioned, shall
within twenty four Hours after the Receipt or Purchase thereof, make Entry with
the said Commissioners, or such Person or Persons that shall be appointed to
Receive and Collect the same, and pay the Duties and Excise aforesaid, under
the penalty of Forfeiture of all such Liquors as shall be found in any
Retailers House, not being duly Entered, and the Excise paid as aforesaid, and
every Retailer who shall make his own Cider, and Metheglin, Brew his own Beer,
or Ale, or Distill strong Liquors, shall from time to time, and at all times,
when he or they shall make, brew, or distill the same, make Entry with said
Commissioners, or such other Person or Persons, as for that purpose shall be
appointed, of all such Cider, Metheglin, Ale, Beer, or Distilled Liquors, by
them made, brewed or distilled, and pay the Excise as aforesaid, under the like
penalty and forfeiture of all such Liquors as shall be found in any Retailers
House not Entered, and the Excise thereof not paid in manner before Expressed,
and to that end, it shall and may be lawful to and for such Officer or Officers
as by the Commissioners shall be Appointed and Empowered, when, and so often, as
he or they shall think sit, in the day time, to Enter into any Retailers House,
Cellar, or Ware house to Search for such Wines or Liquors, etc. as are not
duly Entered, nor the Excise paid for the same, and such Wines or Liquors, etc.
so found, to Seiz and Secure in order to the Trial, and Conviction thereof, and
to Gage any Cask or Casks for that end and purpose. Provided always, That it
shall and may be lawful to and for the Commissioners to agree with any Retailer
for his Excise, for one whole year, in one entire Sum to be paid quarterly, as
they in their discretion shall think fit to agree for, without making any Entry
as before said.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
persons, on any pretense or color whatsoever for the future, shall or may take
in, receive Harbor, entertain keep or conceal, in his or their Dwelling
Houses, Cellars or Warehouses, any quantity or Parcel of Wines or other
Liquors, belonging to any Licensed Person or persons, Retailer or Retailers,
under the penalty of-Forfeiture of Twenty Pounds for every such quantity or
Parcel of Wines or other Liquors so taken or received, harbored, entertained,
kept and concealed as aforesaid.

All which Penalties and Forfeitures one half to Their Majesty's, Their Heirs
and Successors, for the Support of the Government, the other Moiety to the
Informer that shall Sue for the same) shall be recovered by Bill, Plaint or
Information, in any Court of Record within this Province, wherein no Essoyn,
Protection, Wager of Law, Non vult ulterius Prosequi or Injunction shall be
allowed. Any thing in this Act or any other to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And all manner of Persons are hereby Required, to be aiding
and assisting to the Officer or Officers, as shall be appointed to Collect and
Receive the Excise aforesaid in the due Execution of their Respective Offices.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be
Commissioners nominated, appointed and Commissioned by the Governor and
Council, to Receive all Entries, and to Transact and Manage all and whatsoever
does relate unto this Act, and the due observance thereof; which Commissioners
shall Appoint and Employ such and so many Officers under them, as they shall
find needful for that purpose, the said Commissioners, and all other Officers
to be Employed under them, before their Entering upon the Execution of their
respective Offices, shall be sworn before the Governor, or Lieutenant
Governor, or one or more Members of the Council, or two Justices of the Peace,
to deal truly and faithfully in the Execution of the same; which aforesaid
Commissioners for their own Service and Labor in this Affair, and the payment
of all their Underofficers and Charges whatsoever shall be allowed, one just
sixth part of all such Moneys as shall be Collected and brought into the
Public Treasury, by Virtue of this Act, the said Commissioners to account with
the Treasurer for all their Collections.

And it is likewise further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid.
That every Ship or Vessel above Twelve Tons coming into any Port or Ports of
this Province, to Trade or Traffic, the major part of the Owners whereof are
not belonging to this Province, shall every Voyage they make, pay twelve pence
per Ton, or one pound of good and new Gunpowder for each Ton. Such Ship or
Vessel is (...) Burden, to be employed for the Supply of Their Majesty's
Castles and Forts within this Province, to be received by the Treasurer, or
such other, as in the several Ports or Places shall be appointed to receive the
same.

And it is hereby Enacted and Declared by the authority aforesaid, That this
present Act, Entitled, An Act, For Impost, Excise, and Tonage of Shipping,
shall remain and continue in force for the term and space of one whole year,
and no longer. Any thing herein before contained to the contrary thereof in any
wise not withstanding.

Province of the MASSACHVSETS-BAY. An Act, For the Erecting of a Naval-Office.
WHereas by Act of Parliament, made in the Fifteenth Year of King Charles the
Second, Entitled, An Act for the Encouragement of Trade, It is Provided, That
no Ship or Vessel, coming to any Land, Island, Plantation, Colony, or
Territory, or Place, to His Majesty or Heirs and Successors belonging in
America, shall Lade or Unlade any Goods or Commodities whatsoever, until the
Master or Commander of such Ship or Vessel, shall first have made known to the
Governor of such Land, Island, Plantation, Colony Territory or Place, or such
other Person or Officer, as shall be by him thereunto Authorized and Appointed,
the Arrival (...) the said Ship or Vessel, with her Name, and the Name and
Surname of her Master or Commmander, and have shown to him, that she is an
English-built Ship, or made good, by producing Certificate, that she is a Ship
or Vessel free, and Navigated with an English Master, and three fourth parts of
the Mariners English Men, under the pain of the Loss of Ship or Vessel and
Apparel. Now for the due and more effectual observation of said Act of
Parliament, and that all undue Trading contrary to the said Act may be
prevented in this Their Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay.

Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Assembly Convened

And it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the Authority of the same. That in
the several Ports and Places hereafter mentioned, there shall be a Naval-Office
Erected, wherein the Officers by the Governor to be appointed for the end
aforesaid, shall duly attend: That is to say, At Boston, for the Port of
Boston and Charstown; at Salem, for the Port of Salem and Marble-head; at
Ipswich at Newbury, at Kitte^^, at Plimonth, and at Bristol: At which Naval
Office, all Masters of Ships or Vessels arriving in this Province, shall make
their Entry with the Officer, according as the said Act of Parliament requires.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority* aforesaid, That all Masters of Ships
or Vessels Sailing out of this Province, shall before their Sailing out
thereof, Clear their said Ships or Vessel, (...) the said Naval-Office. And
that an Officer be appointed at Martha's Vineyard, and another at Nantucket, to
Enter and Clear all Vessels passing to and from thence, but not to be accounted
Ports, for the Unlivery or Lading of any of the Enumerated Commodities. And the
Fees in the said Office to be demanded and received, shall be these following,
and no other, viz. P. Sh. P For Entering and Clearing all Ships and Vessels
Trading to this place from Abroad (excepting, Connecticut, Rhode Island,
Narraganset, and New Hampshire) viz. Two Shillings Entering, and Two Shilling
Clearing. 00 4 00 Examining and Recording Certificates that Bonds are given
according to the Act of Navigation, Two Shillings. 00 2 00 A Bond given
according to the Act of Navigation, and for the Copying of the same, to be
Transmitted for England. Three Shillings. 00 3 00 A Certificate of the Lading.
Two Shillings. 00 2 00 For Entering and Clearing all Vessels Trading to and from
Connecticut, Rhode Island, Narraganset, and New Hampshire, Five Shillings per
Year, or Twelve-pence each Voyage, at the Masters Choice. 00 1 00 A Certificate
for Vessels Lading of Goods, carried in them from Port to Port, within the
Province. One Shilling 00 1 00 A Certificate for Goods of the Growth of Europe,
carried out of the Province, to other Plantations. Two Shillings. 00 2 00 For
every Oath Administered. Sixpence. 00 00 6

And the said Naval Officer is hereby Empowered to Administer the Oaths,
required by said Act of Parliament.

Province of the Massachusets-Bay. An Act, For Making the Former Bills of
Credit, to Pass Current, in Future Payments.
WHereas Their Majesty's Affairs within this Province, do require a speedy
advance for the Defense of the Province, and the Prosecution of the War,
against Their French and Indian Enemies, and there being no Stock at present in
the Treasury to supply the same, or to defray other the Necessary Charges for
Support of the Government.

Be it therefore Ordained and Enacted, By the Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly. And it is Enacted by the
Authority of the same, That all Bills of Public Credit issued forth, by Order
of the General Court of the late Colony of the Massachusetts Bay, shall pass
Current within this Province, in all Payments Equivalent to Money, for the sum
in each Bill respectively mentioned (excepting all Specialties and Contracts
made before Publication hereof;) and in all public payments, at Five Per Cent
advance. And for Encouragement to such Person or Persons, as are Possessors of
said Bills, to lend them for the Service of the Public. It is further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That they and every of them, who shall so do, be
secured by the Public Taxes and other Revenues, arising within this Province
already Granted, and shall be reimburst and paid in Money within the space of
Twelve Months, out of the said Taxes and Revenues, such sum and sums, as he
or they shall Respectively so lend, and deliver unto the Treasurer of this
Their Majesty's Province, in Bills as aforesaid, to be made to appear by
Receipt. Provided that such of said Bills, and no other, as shall be Indorsed
by Capt. Jeremiah Dummer, and Mr. Francis Buroughs, shall be accounted
Current, Excepting for payment of those Rates, that were Granted before the
Arrival of his Excellency the Governor. And the said Capt. Jeremiah Dummer and
Mr. Francis Buroughs, are hereby appointed to Receive in all Bills which any
person or persons shall lend as aforesaid, and deliver the same to the
Treasurer.

Provided also, that all persons, who shall lend their Bills, as aforesaid,
shall have Credit for all Sums, which they shall have to pay in all public
payments whatsoever, being Bona Fide, for their own account, to be allowed them
by discount, upon a Note from the Treasurer.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay An Act, For Transporting of part of the
Militia, of the Province, Or Obliging Them to March to the Relief of the
Neighboring Provinces, or Colonies.
FOrasmuch as in this time of War, there may be Occasion for the Raising of
Soldiers, and Transporting or Marching of them out of the Limits of this
Province, into the Neighboring Provinces and Colonies of New Hampshire, Rhode
Island, Connecticut* Narragansett* or New York for the prosecution of the
French or Indian Enemy, and the Defense of Their Majesty's Subjects, and
Interests. Be it Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Court, And it is Enacted By the Authority
of the same, That in the Vacancy of the General Assembly, it shall be in the
Liberty of His Excellency the present Governor, by and with the advice and
consent of the Council, to Raise and Transport, such part of the Militia of
this Province, as they shall find needful, or Oblige them to March into any of
the before-named Provinces or Colonies, for the ends aforesaid, at any Time or
Times, within the Space of Six months next, and at no time afterward, without
their Free and Voluntary consent, or the consent of the Great and General Court
or Assembly; any thing in this present Act, contained to the contrary thereof,
in any wise notwithstanding.

Province of the Massachusetts Bay. An Act, For the Holding of Courts of
Justice.
FOrasmuch as the orderly Regulation, and Well-Establishment of Courts of
Justice is of great Concernment. And the Public Occasions with reference to
the War, and otherwise being so Pressing at this Season, that this Court cannot
now conveniently Sit longer to Advise upon, and fully Settle the same. But to
the Intent that Justice be not Obstructed, or Delayed.

Be it Ordained and Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Assembly, and it is Ordained by the Authority of the same.
That on or before the last Tuesday of July next, there be a General Sessions of
the Peace, Held and Kept in each Respective County within this Province, by the
Justices of the same County, or three of them at the least, (the first Justice
of the Quoram then present to Preside) who are hereby Empowered to Hear and
Determine all Matters Relating to the Conservation of the Peace, and whatsoever
is by them Cognizable according to Law. And to Grant Licenses to such Persons
within the same County, being first approved of by the Select-Men of each Town,
where such Persons Dwell, whom they shall think fit, to be Employed as
Inholders, or Retailers of Wines, or strong Liquors. And that a Sessions of the
Peace be successively Held and Kept as aforesaid, within the several Counties
at the same times, and places, as the County Courts, or Inferior Co^^^ of
Common Pleas, are herein after appointed to be Kept.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid* That the County Courts,
or Inferior Courts of Common Pleas, be Held and Kept in each Respective County,
by the Justices of the same County, or three of them at the least, (the first
Justice of the Quorum then present to Preside) at the same times and Places
they have been formerly Kept according to Law, for the Hearing and Determining
of all Civil Actions arising or happening within the same, Triable at the
Common Law, according to former Usage. The Justices for Holding and Keeping of
the said Court within the County of Suffolk, to be particularly appointed and
Commissioned by the Governor, with the Advice and Consent of the Council. And
that all Writts, or Attachments shall Issue out of the Clerks Office of the
said several Courts. Signed by the Clerk of such Court, directed unto the
Sheriff of the County, his Undersheriff, or Deputy: The Jurors to Serve at
said Courts, to be Chosen according to former Custom, by and of the
Freeholders, and other Inhabitants, qualified as is directed in Their Majesty's
Royal Charter.

This Act to Continue until other provision be made by the GENERAL COURT or
ASSEMBLY.

FINIS.

