Old Men's TEARS For their own DECLENSIONS, Mixed with FEARS of their and
Posterities further falling off from New-England's PRIMITIVE CONSTITUTION.

Published by some of Bostons old PLANTERS And some other.

Psalm. 78. 3, 4. What we have heard and known, and our Fathers have told us..
We will not hide them from their (...): showing to the Generation to come (...)
^^ises of the Lord, and his strength, and (...) ^onderful works that he has
done. Boston, Printed by Benjamin Harris, and John Allen And are to be Sold at
the (...)

TO THE READER
WHereas this Scribled Script was Penned with design to have lein latent, and
to have been a Posthumus Memoire of a Father to his Children, of his Sentiments
about the Public Concerns; the signal Consequence of the Eastern Cloud, which
from an hand-breadth had overspread nigh all our Hemisphere, with other
circumstances, together with an accidental Discourse, the Writer had about 7
Months past, with two Eminent Ancients of this our Israel; who being under the
same Gravamen and Load of Spirit with himself, about the awful Effects and
Aspect of Divine Providence toward us, with their procuring Causes, they then
let fall such sympathetical Fears, as upon further digestion, made up this
mixture of Tears with Fears, as if there had been a Triumvirate Council: this
wrought a change of the (...) intention, so as that which was intended to have
been swallowed down in secret, and buried under mournful silence, then took
vent, and since upon the Approbation of the Honored Magistrates and Reverend
Elders, has exposed it self to public view and censure; though he cannot plead
himself to be one of the first Planters, yet to have been of such a standing,
as to have seen and observed various Vicisitudes, yea, of all these in the
sequel remarked; except of the first Foundation; what further must occurr is at
the disposal of the Sovereign God) but alas! who shall live when he does them?

If by any thing hereafter mentioned, we of the first and old Generation may be
rouzed out of our dro^^^e Lethargy, and be Provoked not to lose the things
which we have wrought, but may receive a full reward, and to hold fast that we
have, that no man may take away our Crown, according to the Exhortation of the
late Divine, John Norton, the Second Seraphick Doctor or Teacher of Boston
Church, who as his Ministry was accompanied with such redundant Efflux of
Divine Matter, as in a most graceful and comely manner appeared, in the want of
ready vent of the fullness of his Heavenly Treasure thorough the narrow Conduit
of his Earthen Vessel, and in whose ardent Prayers such was the Violence of his
Taking the Kingdom by force, that they were attended with Jacob's Let me go!
and with Moses's Let me alone! he also in that Lord's Day of this Ordinadation
was in the Holy Spirit, and received a more than ordinary Presence and Effusion
of it, according to his then wrestling and prevailing Petitions for it, who
applied himself to that Church, and to all the Churches gathered in that vast
Assembly, and to all Ranks and Degrees in them, Nominating Magistrates and
Ministers, Military Men, Merchants and Laborers, To hold fast not their leafy
or lawrel-fading Crown, but that which was Immarcessible and Incorruptible,
which he declared to be the Faith, the Order and Conversation of the Gospel,
and the Profession of the Truth with Liberty, Sincerity, and Purity; and as a
Motive thereunto pressed upon all there present, to Remember the Love they
manifested unto it, and testified by the high price they valued it at, above
Inheritances and Fathers Houses, in their great Undertaking, being such as past
memory of man, nor paralleled by any, except that of Abram, who at Gods Command
left his Country and Friends, and went he knew not whither.

And also that we old men more especially may be cautioned of a great evil
impending our Churches, of subverting the foundation by us laid, of Repentance,
from Dead works, and of Faith toward God, in the heart believed, by the mouth
confessed, and in the life professed, of being according to judgment of
Charity, Saints by calling, and none but such Admitted to full Fellowship with
us, which hopefully may prevent Christ's Spouse styled by himself a Garden
enclosed, a Spring shut up, and a Fountain Sealed, from turning into a Meadow
fenced in, and Receptacle of standing Waters, or streams of formal Nominal
Christians, Destitute of the Life and Power of Godliness.

That our Young Plants and Planters may be excited, to be the followers of
their Fathers as they were of the Lamb; and beware of taking in that whereby
the Dragon persecuted, and drove this Woman; to fly into this Wilderness, (the
place of God appointed for her to be fed in,) and also that they drink not of
the waters of the flood which the Serpent and Dragon cast out of their mouths
after the Woman, that they might cause her to be carried away of it. That these
and all other good Consequences needful to the Welfare of our Churches, may
from the Lord be furthered and obtained, That all of us according to the will
of God may serve him in Serving our Generations, and that tho we he left poor
and afflicted, yet that New England may be a people Trusting in the Name of the
Lord, is the Prayer of Him who is one Embarked in the common Cause and thy
Souls Friend,

J. S.

Old Men's TEARS For their own Declensions, etc.
AS it is not unknown to some few Survivors of the First Generation, so it
should be Recollected, Remembered, and not forgotten by their Succeeding
Posterity, both of those famous Patriots, and of them who either accompanied or
followed them, in their Voluntary Exile into this Wilderness: the great hazard
their Parents ran in this great and unparalled Design, and that upon
Proclamation made by the Great Jehovah, through the body of our Nation, and
Summons served upon them, by stirring up the hearts of Thousands (who never saw
the faces of each other) and unanimously inclining their Spirits, to so
difficult and dangerous a Design of removing themselves, little ones,
relations, and families, into these remote ends of the Earth; and this not for
any secular Advantages proposed to themselves leaving their dear Native
Country, Friends, Accommodations which they there plentifully possessed, of
which they totally denied them selves, but upon, the account of the Enjoyment
of Liberty in the things of God in his Instituted worship, and their further
discovery of his will, and freedom from the Yoke of Bondage imposed on them by
the then prevailing Hierarchy.

Upon debate with their own Souls, and seeking the Lord for a right way, the
great Pa^^oni, the Numberer of Days and Times, the Sovereign Disposer of the
Habitations of Adam's Sons, who had spyed out this particular place, and
dividing these Nations their inheritance, set them their bounds according to
the Number of these New England Planters, he carried them to in fluttering over
them as the Eagle bears her young ones on her Wings, yea he whose name is
Wonderful, so appeared as that of about three hundred Ships which brought over
above two thousand Passengers, Men, Women and Children, not above one of them
miscarried either by Shipwreck, Pirates, or any other Casualty; here the Lord
prepared for them a Rehoboth, sweeping away the Natives by War and Pestilence
before their Arrival and by the Smallpox after it; such restraint was then put
upon the rage of those left, whose hearts were then as full fraught with malice
and savage Cruelty, as since they have manifested; but God then said, Touch not
mine Anointed, and do these my Prophets no harm; and so great a Blessing from
the most High attended this Colony in the first forty years, wherein this Land
(as Israel of old) had rest, that Strangers who came from Europe into these
Parts, to see whether the Reports they heard in their own Country concerning
this place were true, have solemnly professed they saw more than they had
heard, and when they came home, should they report what they here found, they
should be esteemed egregious Liars. When these Heroes (whose Names will and
ought to be recorded to eternity) here arrived, those Zorobabels and Joshua's
according to the Vows of God upon them and their transmarine Resolutions; their
care was first to lay the foundations of Civil and Sacred Polity according to
the Divine Directory, each acting in their own Sphere, the Magistrates and
Deputies drew up a Body of Laws suited according to their best understanding of
their Royal Charter, the Elders and Messengers of Churches met in a Synod, (so
as Moses and Aaron being met in the Mount of God, might be seen kissing each
other) and drew up a good Confession according to Scripture light, both of
Faith and Order, which they were not ashamed of, and published it unto the
World, under the Title of the Platform of Church Discipline, drawn out of the
Word of God, so as the complete walking in the Faith of the Gospel, according
to the Order of the Gospel was writ in the Frontispiece of these New England
Churches, as the late Reverend Norton, in one of his last Sermons, judiciously
has declared. Then might we see the Civil Authority, as with a Stone Wall,
Fencing in the Lords. Vineyard; the Churches and Officers comforted in the
mutual Faith of each other, walking in Gospel-simplicity, without visible
Addition or Diminition from the Precept or Pattern in the Mount. But alas for
us! the Noble Vine is Degenerate into a strange Plant.

What is become of the Primitive Zeal, Piety, and Holy Heat found in the hearts
of our parents; their daily care of reading and instructing their families from
the Scriptures, their strict keeping of Sabbaths, their Charity, and bowels
each to other? their self denial, moderation, mortification; is not their Love
to God and his Ordinances, perverted in us to slighting and neglecting not only
of Instituted but of his Natural (...) turned into the form and semblance of
it, their Soul lively Thirstings and Pantings after God and his Ways,
Metamorphosed into Land and Trade breathings the Renewing of the Mind,
transformed into conformity with the present evil world, lusts of the flesh,
pride of life; our, Spot is not the spot of Gods Children; the old Puritan
Garb, and Gravity of Heart, and Habit lost and ridiculed into strange and
fantastic Fashions and Attire, Naked Backs, and bare Breasts, and Forehead if
not of the Whorish Woman, yet so like. unto it as would require a more than
ordinary Spirit of discerning to distinguish; the Virgins Dress and Matrons
Veil, showing their power on their head, because of the holy Angels, turned
into powdered Foretops and Topgallants Attire, not becoming the Christian, but
the Comaedian Assembly, not the Church, but Stage Play, where the Devil sits
Regent in his Dominion, as he once boasted out of the mouth of a Demoniack;
Churchmember, he there took possession of, and made this response to the
Church, supplicating her deliverance; so as now we may and must say,
New England is not to be found in New England, nor Boston in Boston; it is
become a lost Town, (as at first it was called;) we must now cry out, our
Leanness, our Leanness, our (...) and vain confidence in Church Priviledges
forgetting of God our Rock, and multitude of other horrid Abominations, which
our Prophets sent unto us from God, with voice lift up as a Trumpet, are daily
bearing witness against.

Where is the Mourning on the Mountain like Doves of the Valleys, every one for
his own Iniquity, where is the breaking down of the wall of our Adamantine
Hearts, that we might make a severe search into those dark Cells and Closets,
into the Chambers of our Imagery, after those Images of Jealousy yea
Abominable Beasts and creeping things are portrayed upon our walls, the
figments and Sediment of highest provocations are there extant, accompanied
with turning the back upon the Lords Temple, and worshipping toward the East,
such things as none but he that searches the Heart, and tries Reins can
discover and find out, yet there is a candle of the Lord, which is able to let
in the Light of those things of a man, which no man knows but himself, and
were we seriously Conscientious in attending upon Divine Appointment Sanctified
to that end, we know not what more would be discovered, upon frequent Communing
with our own Hearts, and our retired Soul Soli-Loquies, what matter of
conviction, confession and conversion, not barely from that which is obviously
observed, but known only to him who sounds the inwardest part of the Belly,
even the Hell and Tophet in these our deceitful and desperately wicked-hearts,
which would work, a Self-loathing, Soul-abhorring, and Soft-walking before God
and man all our days, then that which God has so long listened after, and
hearkened for that he might hear if any man would say, Lord what have I done!
every man would loudly-cry it out, saying, what I know not, Lord teach thou me!
search, examine, and try my heart, then our Uncircumcised Souls being humbled
for all our-contrary walking, and our not he arkning unto Gods Voice, accepting
the Punishment of our Iniquity end unfeignedly turn from it, and returning unto
the Lord from whom we have revolted, them will he remember his Covenant with
our Fathers, and heal our land, giving us the Valley of Achor for a door of
hope, then should those Privileges which in measure are restored, even our
Charter would be fully confirmed were we called a Faithful Gity and a Righteous
People, we might expect our Judges to be restored as at the first, and our
Counselors as at the beginning, our Officers to be made peace, and our Exacters
Righteousness.

We have cause to acknowledge (...) unspeakable cause of gratitude that our
Civil Courts of Judicature are yet kept up, and that we may see our aged and
honorable, and the continuance of our Worthy Governor a first Founder, and
some others of the Raisers of our Foundation, together with our Samuels and
Josiahs's raised up, this is cause of blessing the Name of the Lord, and of
prayer for their continuance. Yet may we not fear that there is cause to lament
for them; if Moses or Aaron do or speak unadvisedly, it is because of Isreal's
Provocations: If David be left to number the People, it is through Gods Anger
against them; and we must with all submissiveness be jealous, that there have
been uncomfortable Animosities, Convulsions, and censorious uncharitableness
toward some persons, to judge them unfit for any trust in Town or Country, who
could not wholly subscribe to the models and measures of others, yet such as
were as solicitously careful, to preserve the dear purchased Liberties and
Privileges of New England as themselves. Were there not 2 Worthies who
adventured to appear in England, to plead our Zions cause; upon their return,
rendered accomplices with, and joined to the Samaritans. It has pleased God to
preserve our highest honored One, to outlive and vindicate himself from that
high scandal, and what it cost his Learned (...); it is not unknown to some yet
extant (...) the Living, That the Authority of the General Court were not
wanting the last War; in drawing up, and publishing a Catalogue of the
provoking Evils then found amongst us, is to be with seriousness acknowledged;
and also that in this juncture of Affairs, the like care has been taken to
give solemn notice in each Congregation, that there might be an universal
Reformation.

As for our Reverend Elders far be it from us in any manner of way to rebuke,
yet with all due respect to their places and persons, we may as Fathers entreat
them, and do with all thankfulness to the God of the Spirits of all flesh
celebrate his holy Name, who out of this Nursery here planted, has of our Sons
raised up for Prophets, and of our young men raised up for Nazarites (...) may
not the Lord say, is it not so O New England, yea and that according to the
prediction of our Elijah's, and upon the Prayer of the late Man of God Mr.
Wilson, presented to God upon his sad parting with the Orthodox Eagle-eyed
Norton, his Fellow Laborer, who then with hands lifted up to Heaven
supplicated, (it being a lively Symbol of his Faiths confident readiness to lay
hold on, and receive what he them asked for,) viz. That a double measure, not
only of his spirit, but of diverse other New England Worthies then mentioned,
might be given to Elisha his Relict and Successors, which has evidently been
fulfilled upon diverse of them, and of his Children: So at, in respect of their,
piety and pregnancy, difficulty to be equalized in many parts of the Christian
World; yet some tears must be let fall for them, and many for our Churches;
though there is ineffable cause to celebrate the Sacro-Sapct Name of the Lord our
God, for keeping up our Golden Candlesticks, and their Lights burning in them:
but as when the foundation of the second Temple was laid, between the weeping
of the ancient men, who had seen the first Temple; and the rejoicing of the
young men, such was the Discord of their Concord, as the difference could
hardly be discerned: so now when as the Old Men call to mind the first building
and settlement here, how each Church completely fitted with Officers was then
beautiful as Tirza, and comely as Jerusalem; and the Churches with their Synods
and Consociations, were terrible as an Army with Banners, neither Churches nor
Officers intrenching upon, nor neglecting of each other, (though then Wooden
Chalices, and Mud-wall Meeting houses) the one not complaining for want of
Spirituals in their Administrations, nor the other of Temporals in their
Contributions, though then no comparison with what is now contributed, nor
above one half of the Officers now to be distributed unto, none of those
burning and shining Lights, was well content without his Colleague, not looking
at themselves sufficient alone to bear the formidable weight of a whole
Presbytery; and it is well hinted and notified by a Person of Note in the
Churches, that a Church needs but one Elder, is an opinion contrary to the
sense of the Church in all Ages? How is the Crown fallen from our heads? Woe unto
us because we have sinned.

How are our Churches receeded from their first Principles? how few of us do
know or acknowledge our Father or Mothers Name? but act as if Ashamed of that
which then was writ in their foreheads, if we be not, why do we not practically
hold it forth, we were not then content without Pestors and Teachers. Then
Christ's Spouse had two Breasts, which like two young Roes that were Twins fed
among the Lidies. It Is not unknown that some Churches, in laying their
foundation, did solemnly promise and covenant before God and one to another,
that they would be furnished with two Teaching and two Ruling Elders, but its
not attended to, it was not for want of Maintenance: no, Religion has brought
forth Riches, but the Daughter has devoured the Mother as was said and
observed of old.

Where are the Ruling Elders who as (...) Porters were wont to inspect our
Sanctuary Gates, and to take a turn upon the Walls, is not the remembrance of
such an Officer almost lost and extinct? though the Scripture and the platform of
our Church. Discipline expressly declare for them, and set our their particular
charge and work: It was an affecting Question put forth by one of about fifty
years old, born in the Communion of our Churches, concerning Ruling Elders;
what these men were, who were formerly so called, professing in time of their
Minority; there were such men to their remembrance, but since had forgotten
what they were, and therefore defined Resolution.

It is time for our Churches to remember from whence they are fallen, repent and
do their first works, least he that walks in the midst of the Golden
Condlesticks should withdraw; and the rather because it is said to be
questioned by some among us, whether such an Officer be Jure Divino, or any
Rule for them in Gods Word, which occasions a Reverend Elder to take up the
Argument against such; and bewails the neglect of them in the Churches, as a
sad Omen of their turning popular or prelatical; and if so, (...) to be
regulated either by Lord Brethren, o Lord Bishops. Is not this a great
Derogation from Christ's Authority to say, That Deacons may serve the Churches
turn, who may Officiate to do do these Elders work is it not a preference of
men's politics before Christ's Institutes; did not the practice of men's
prudentials prove the ruin of the Churches, and rise of Antichrist. That our
College by Gods blessing should afford materials for Teaching-Elders, and that
our Churches should grow so barren, as not to bring forth, nor educate men
qualified for the other, may seem to portend a threatening of Christ's Departure
from them, as to Conjugal Communion.

Let the Churches also consider what is became of the Public Exposition of the
Scriptures, which every Lords day we had, with two Sermons in some of our
Congregations, if not in most which for some Dedades of years was kept up, and
continued for two or three Succession of Officers, to the Unspeakable
Edification of the Flock, one taking it up where the other left, beginning at
Moses and the Prophets; they opened the whole Word of God, and declared the
whole Counsel of God, concerning the Mystery of Christ and his Kingdom, about
the regulating of his Churches, the practical discovery whereof was the Grand
Design of his Plantation; and some have not been backward to say (which God
forbid should be true) that the Clergy as they call them, is not willing that
the Laity or common people should be instructed in the Doctrine of the Keys,
and liberty by Christ left unto them, least if the Brotherhood should get them
into their hands, they should knock them about their Ears; whatever other
aberrations from the revealed will of God; or any irregular actions or Motions,
wherein any of the Churches have deviated, from the strieght line and Sacred
Cannon, of the rule, these ought to be mourned for, If we call to mind the
private fellowship in the days of old one had with another, when families, the
men apart, and their wives apart, where there was a pouring forth of Souls
Experiences each to other, face answered to face, and lively Characters of the
same Grace, line for line appearing, as in those who were made partakers of the
same sealing Spirit: then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another;
there is as great cause now as then, the Lambs might wade in the Sanctuary
Streams, where the Elephant might swim; personal Doubts and particular
Grievances might be proposed and resolved according to Scripture light, and
Grace received, without offense to any, or of being confined.

Our Teaching Elders then came amongst us, tho not appropriated to any
particular Meeting; and we sat at our Gamaliel's feet, who bearing with us
further instructed, and dismissed us with blessing end prayers, that all the
Lord's People might be Prophets, and that he would put his Spirit upon them.

Laying all together, and whatsoever might further be the burden of our Souls,
relating to our Personal, Domestic, Ecclesiastic, or Civil failure and
misdoings; concerning which we must all cry out, Lord who knows his Errors,
and in this day of Adversity, and awful rebuke both by Sea and Land, the Lord
refusing to go forth with our Armies; we have weighty cause to fall down before
him, confessing humbly all that is amiss; to try and search our ways, and turn
unto the Lord who has smitten us, and that with strange Diseases, not suited
formerly to the pure and serene air of our Climate, (whither Strangers were
wont to have recourse to recover their desired health) not only with the
Infections Small pox have we labored under, but with burning and spotted
Fevers, shaking Agues, dry Belly Achs, plague of the Guts, and diverse other
sore distempers; our Neighbor Plantation sins have been visited with their
Diseases.

As for the long enjoyed Peace and Tranquillity we have been blessed with, when
as our dear Nation was involved in a cruel War, and almost all Europe was
harrass'd; New England was as a Babe rockt in the Cradle to quiet it thereby,
as was the Speech of the Venerable Cotton, our NewEnglands great Apostle; who
as in his Life Light, and Learning, was the brightest and most shining Star in
our Firmament; so in his Sickness and Death he was wonderfully remarkable by a
a Satelles to the Pleiades, or an Attendant to the seven Stars, which continued
visible all that while, and until his buryal, which was six days after his
death, and then disappeared; how signally portentous this was to the state of
our Churches in New England, is notified by the Learned, John Norton, his
Successor; and now calls for a Higgajon, Selah. Our deep, solemn and awful
meditation upon, Heavens monitory Apparition, about thirty eight years since,
and it concerns us now sadly to consider of.

Lately we might meet with poor Children, in their employment distant many
miles from any Town, without fear or danger; now to safety or peace to him that
goes forth, not to him that comes in, the Arrow of our War has been once and
again drawn out of the Quiver of Gods displeasure, and has been shot at us to
the twice depopulating of the Eastern parts, but chiefly by this last war, the
vigilant Watchmen upon our walls are not warning to warn us of our danger, and
to direct and provoke to the use of means for our preservation and in order
thereunto, exhort us to be humbled for, and reform those Epidemical Sins which
have brought upon us these Epidemical Diseases, and to consider of our Fathers
ways, those Chariots and Horsemen of Israel alas, where are they! we remember
the Pequod wars, when as they hearkened unto, and obeyed Gods voice, (...) in
him, cried unto him, were delivered, and not confounded, they were heard, and
spedily subdued their Enemies either to a total Ruin, or a feigned subjection;
our heavenly Father how grievously, is he displeased by us, that he should once
and again deliver up his Disobedient, (...), and disengenious Children not into
the hands of his nasty (...) to be Scourged, but to be inhumanly Tormented and
Butchered by bloody Barbarians, and cursed Canibals; Yea our Father which is in
the Heavens, has he not himself fought against us, by the Stars in their
Courses, and his Anger Smoked against our prayers; raising Snow and Vapor, and
his cold (which no man can abide) with the stormy wind fulfilling his word, to
the Impeding, and disappointment of our Naval Military Design, and disinabling
our Fleet; God grant that his fierce Euroclydon and Eastwind do not break in
pieces the Ships of our Tarshith, and all this not so much, for the Enormities
and debaucheries found amongst us of the profane mixed multitude (which now
through Gods goodness are testified against), who came not over with us, but
crowded in amongst us, but for the Provocations of Gods Sons and Daughters, who
also have corrupted their ways, and are become Flesh so as we may fear not only
an inundation, but a deluge of calamitious desolations unless Sovereign Grace
interveene; we have provoked the Lord to wrath by leaving of our first love,
and practice of Faith and manners, so as we may fear the vengeance of the
Quarrel of his Covenant, and pray we, that the withdrawing of the presence of
his Glory may not make further progress, but that it may retrograde from the
Threshold to the Cherub and Mercy- Seat in this his Temple, That his
providential deserting of us in our land and Maritine forces, may not be
accompanied with the withdrawing of his Special presence, in his worship and
ordinances Woe, woe unto us if the lord Depart from us, he seems to have his
heart turned within him toward us, and his repentings kindled within him,
saying how shall I give thee up, how shall I deliver thee how shall I make thee
as Admah? etc. as if he remembered the kindness of our Fothers Espousals, when
they followed, and went after him into this wilderness, a land that was not
sown, and as if he feared the Enemy least they should say our hand is high, and
the Lord has not done this, lest the Prince of Darkness should boastingly say,
where is the Englishmans God whole Bible as they called it, they translated
into their Native Language, the Frenchmans Legends, and Stories are truer than
it, their Beads, Crucifixes, Masses and Precessions, better than the English
Fastings, Prayers, Psalms, and Preaching, lest Satan should glory over the
HEBREW CHILD JESUS, who from his Birth silenced all his Oracles, his mouth is
now stopped, and all his Prophecies are false and mute, lest Abaddon and
Apollyon with the^^ infernal IGNATIAN Jan^sar^es, the Locusts of the Bottomless
Pit, should triumph over Zions King giving the honor to IGNE NAIE Hell-born
LOYALA the Canadians tutilar Saint.

Let Us comfort our selves in the dawning day of the Consumption of that Son of
Perdition, and of all those mischievous Confectioners of the intoxicating Cup
wherewith the Kings and the Inhabitants of the Earth has been Inebriated, they
shall drink their last draught, when in every Nation and Language the Name of A
JESUIT shall manifestly be abhorred, and discovered to be as it is truly in
our English DEPART YE FROM JESUS. These Apostates from the Name first given to
Believers at Antioch, have arrogated to themselves to be of the Society of the
blessed Jesus our Savior; but indeed they have destroyed vast multitudes and
millions of Souls and Bodies, and have been the Incendaries of the Universe.
Our Savior will not own such renouncers of him, the Lords Christ, the Prophet,
Priest and King of his Church; and blasphemous Attributers of his due to their
three headed Gerberus, annexing it to the Triple Crown of their Papal PONTIFEX
MAXIMUS, and great High Priest.

Blessed be God who is not quite gone, though we have deserved this greatest of
all Judgments; and we have cause to fear and tremble, lest it should be so with
us, though he stands as a man astonished, that cannot help, as a strange
Wayfairing man, O Lord thou art in the midst of us; we are called by thy Name,
leave us not; let (...) bring all our actings and courses to the SCRIPTURE
TEST. It Is not our Fasting and Praying will do, without Redress and Reformation
of all our particular and universal Irregularities, according to Divine
Direction. Eury is not in God, who would set Brians against him in battle
array, he would go through and burn them together; but let us take hold of his
Strength, that we may make peace with him, and we shall make peace with (...).
Bewail we the hardness of our hear from his fear, and our Errors from his ways,
and though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel does not acknowledge us; yet O
that upon a well-grounded confidence we could say, Doubtless thou art our
Father.

To shut up with a few cordial Wishes, and as we hope unfeigned Petitions for
the Welfare of all Ranks and Ages.

1. That we the Old Men and falling Generation might Nightly water our Couches,
for our windfal rotten and immature fruit, for our being Sapless and hollow
Trees, instead of Palm Trees and Cedars, Fat and Flourishing in the house of
our God, bringing forth fruit to show that the Lord is Upright, our Rock, and
no Unrighteousness him, that we may demonstrate in our lives and Conversations,
the Vigilance, Gravity, Temperance, and Soundness in the Faitly, in Love, in
Patience becoming such as have known him who is from the beginning.

2. That the standing-Generation, our Sons may be as Plants in the House of our
God, our Daughters corner stones Polished after the Similitude of a Palace, for
Christ Jesus by his Spirit to Dwell in. That our young men may overcome the
Wicked One, the World and all that is therein, Lusts of the Flesh, Lusts of the
Eye, and Pride of Life which is not of the Father but of the World, that they
may be strong and steadfast in the Faith and order of the Gospel according to
the Word in-dwelling in them.

3. That the Rising Generation, our little Children and Babes may be Effectual
calling know the Father, that they may abide in him, without Seduction by the
Deceivers, and may overcome them, that it may not be said of us, as is recorded
of Israel of old, who after this or next Generation are gathered to their
Fathers; there should arise another Generation, who shall not know the God of
their Fathers, nor yet the great Works the Lord had done for them and forsake
him.

The Lord divert this dismal Judgment, but pray we that there may be a
pepetuation of the Name Jehovah, and his unpolluted worship according to his
holy word, in New England to all Generations.

Tho our Heads are not Fountains of Tears and our Eyes Rivers to mourn for our
own, and Relations wanderings and wickedness, yet that the Lord would please to
accept some few Drops from us, to be such as he will put into his Bottle, and
though we cannot look for any Indigitation; or Remarque in the Book of his
remembrance, knowing by your selves just ground of saying, Lord when did we
etc. yet we hope there is not an utter oblivion, of the least mite into his
Treasury, of our Sincere Sighs and Groans, and Soul Travel for the Welfare of
present, and future Generations, concerning which we have cause from our hearts
to beg and also now do, That the Lord would spare us, according to the
Multitude of his great Mercies, and although our Iniquities testify against
us, before him who is the Hope of Israel, yet we know that there is hope in
Israel concerning this thing; and shall conclude with Solomon's Prayer, Oh that
the Lord our God would be with us as he was with our Fathers, and that he would
not leave us nor forsake us. Amen.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF any ingenious Reader would fully be informed, about the Astrocism made by
the Great God in our visible Heavens; relating to the Great Cotton, and related
in the Impolite Lines preceding, let him consult the Life and Funeral Elegy;
Writ and Composed at his Buryal: by the late Famous Norton, his Successor. A
Taste whereof is here inserted.

That Comets, Great Men's Death do often fore-go;
This present Comet does too sadly snow
This Prophet Dead, yet must in Doctrine speak,
This Comet says, else must New England break
What ere it be; the Heavens avert it far,
That, Meteors should succeed our greatest Star.

