Blessed UNIONS. An UNION With the SON of God by FAITH. And, an UNION In the
CHURCH of God by LOVE, Importunately Pressed; in DISCOURSE which makes Diverse
Offers, for those Unions; Together with A COPY of those Articles, where-upon a
most Happy UNION, (...) been lately made between those two Eminent Parties in
England, which have now Changed the Names of PRESBYTERIANS, and
CONGREGATIONALS, for that of UNITED BRETHREN.

By COTTON MATHER.

How long did our Fathers Sow in Tears for the Harvest? God has Reserved the
Resting-Time for us their Children: and therefore let us (...) according to the
Joy in (...) Excellent Sermon, on, The (...) Page 19. BOSTON. Printed by B.
Green, and^ for Samuel Phillip, 1692.

To the Brethren (...) Church in the North Part of BOSTON.
IT was in a Weekly Course of Sermons o^ the Seventeenth Charter of John, that*
You were Entertained (...) Thoughts, as I do now again (but not without the
Concurrent Encouragement of more than One, or two, Reverend Persons in the
Neighborhood) more ^^^lickly and more Barall^ lay before You. And that I now
send the^e Thoughts abroad, is not with a Design of so much Boldness, as to
Address all the Neighbor Churches with my own Apprehensions about their
Interests; I leave That unto Greater and Wiser Persons, which all of them are
furnished wi^h; but it is more immediately to serve Y^^r Edification. I shall
shortly give up my Account of my Stewardship (...) more! and O that I may do i^
w^^h (...) Pea^^ and Joy, if I may say before my Gl^^^o^s Maste^^ That while I
was (...) the Expense of (...) my Talents, to (...) end, Eng^ging Y^u t^ accept
the D^ties and (...) of the New Covenant, I was also (...) to Establish you
(...) the Principles and (...) of such a (...) state as may maintain Your
U^io^, with (...) ^^arts of our Lords Visible Kingdom in (...) World; and may
Obtain for you the (...) Protection of God, in this Day of th^se Earth (...)
which will Shake all things, ^o (...) for those which Cannot be sh^k^^. This
(...) Endeavor, i^ the following Treatise, and (...) his Endeavor I woul'd ^p
(...) my (...) Your Sollicitous Pastor, and Servant*

To the Very Reverend MATTHEW MEAD, JOHN HOW, AND INCREASE MATHER; Of whose
Pious and Prudent Endeavour^, (among others) the God of Heaven has made a very
particular Use, (...) producing a most Blessed UNION among His People.
Much Honored,
IT was a Conjecture, which I had almost called a Prophecy, in the Sermon
Preached by One of You, o^ the THANKSGIVING Lately ^^^^ted by The United
Brethren, for the ^^nal Mercy and Presence of God, (...) has appeared in their
becoming, (...) Sticks Made One, You have done That in this Agreement that
promises great Advantage unto our Brethren abroad; it is like the Beams of the
Sun, which Diffuse Light and Heat unto Thousand at once. I may humbly presume
now to inform All of You, That there are I suppose Thousands of Saints no less
than Thousands of Miles distant from you, who are like to Rejoice in the Sacred
Light and Heat, with which this Blessed* Agreement of yours inspires them. When
that Noble and Equally well Timed and well Framed Work of Accommodation,
wherein You have so much Labored, was once Prosecuted unto that Effect, which
your eyes have seen, doubtless the A^^els in the C^lestial Regions, were making
their Joyful Acclamations thereupon; the Angels (...) say of whose Intimate
Acquaintance with what is done among the People of God, we do not want
Assurances; the News quickly Reached Heaven, and the Shores upon it were, Glory
to God in the Highest, because there is on Earth Peace, and Good Will among
men. But let me also suggest this further Joy unto, The Counselors of This
Peace, That the C hristians in the American Regions, who dwell in such an
Hoemisphoe^e that some think the Apostle means Us by, Things under the Earth,
do now send back the loud and long Ech^'s of your UNION. As he that heard a
Story of two very Faithful Friends, most passionately Exclaimed, U^inam Tertius
^ssem! so the Churches of New England are ambitious of a Room in all that
Friendship into which they who are Studious of, A Reformation according to the
Word of God, are by the Perfect Bond of Charity now ^emen^ing of themselves.
But that which raises this Desire of these Churches into a sort of Demand* is,
Their having now so long Professed and Practiced Those very Principles upon
which our Europ^an Brethren do now Uni^e, and Exhibited a standing Ins^ance of
that Union after which Your most Evangelical Souls have been Aspiring. Not only
have those of the Sc^^ch and the French Communions, been admitted unto a
Transient Communion in these Churches, when they have come with due
Testimonials for it; but also in our S ta^ed Communion, the Name of
PRESBYTERIAN and CONGREGATIONAL^ [Yea, and EPISCOPAL too when Piety is
otherwise visible] and (...) may add, the Name of, ANTIPE^OBAPTIST, likewise,
is of no Consideration; both, yea all together do, As one man carry on the
Affairs of our Lords Ecclesiastical Kingdom; and the S ubstantials of Religion
(perhaps Critically sometimes Named only become the Terms of Sacred Fellowship.
From the Constitution of a Little Zion, here, which has more than a little of
Heaven, in it, you have had that Invitation, Come up hither! and now that God
is causing you, To come out of your Graves, (a thing that is doing when, T he T
^o S ticks become One in the Hand of God) I do most ardently solicit for your
Prayers and Cares before the Lord, that we may not by any Effects of our
Degeneracies, be put into Ours, or be made indeed, T hings under the Earth.
While the Authority of England has (and may it ever have) Reason to acknowledge
the New-E nglanders among the most Loyal Subjects in the World; I hope You will
not forget that here is a Country in a manner who^y consisting of your most
Hearty Brethren; I know you cannot. It may be some Recommendation for us, That
your Names and your Books are precious even to the furthest Nooks of these
Colonies; We Read you, Prize you, Bless God for you; and with Yours, the
Venerable Names of ADAMS, ALSOP, ANNESLY BARKER, BATES, BAXTER, BURGESS, COLE,
COLLINGES, CRADOCK, DOLITTLE, GII^PIN, GRIFFITH, HAMMOND, HURST, ^^E, MAYO,
SLATER STEEL, SYLVESTER VEAL, VINCENT, WILLIAMS, WOODCO^K; WOOD, and others,
yet Surviving Men of God, besides many others now Asleep in the Lord, are among
us, all of them, As an O^n^ment poured f^r^h. When any of those Pillars in the
Temple of God, happen to fall by the Stroke of Death, even the Ground in
America shakes at the Fall: So did it Lately at the Translation of the most
Excellent FLAVEL, who, as we hear, Stole from you, that Week, that he had been
Moderator in a General Meeting of Ministers at Exeter, where Solemn Thanks were
directed unto You, as ^hre^ of those Worthies, who not by War but by Peace had
signalized your selves unto the English Israel. But it will more powerfully
plead with you for us, if we let you understand, which I now do, That
New England is in a large part but just the very same that you would have your
own particular Flocks to be, and that whoever attempts the Ruin of (...)
Churches, intends the very same for every one of yours. It was a severe
Persecution, that a while since drove the first Planters of this Territory into
the most Horrid and Squalid of all Des^r^s, which with a vast Expense of their
own Treasure, Sweat and Blood, is now become somewhat Habitable. It can scarce
enter into our^, or ind^ed into an, Honest or Humane Heart, that any (...) now
through the Sea, go to follow the poor Children of those First Planters here,
with a Persecution for their Nonconformity to such things as the Errand hither
was a peaceable Secession from. Nevertheless I do again see cause to be your
Petitioner, that you would not let this little Outcast, be cast out of your
most useful Thoughts at the Throne of Grace. Though No man care, for us, Yet (Y^e
blessed Sons of Peace!) You do; and One of you by a tedious Absence from your,
Interests among us, to attend an Agency, in the Courts of two KINGS now
Successively on our behalf; have given a Memorable Demonstration of it. May, My
God think upon all of you according to all that you have done for this People.

But while I thus (...) the (...) your Intercessions for my Country, you will
permit me to ask your Blessing on my self; inasmuch as you that are, The
Chariots of Isr^el, and the Horsemen thereof, are all of you Fathers unto me.
One of you is Naturally so, and I reckon it among the choicest of my
Advantages; the other Two of you, are Spiritually so; for if ever I have go
beyond, T he Almost Christian, or if ever I have Tried, The Good of Early
Obedience; if ever I was I^flam'd for T he Blessedness of the Righteousness, or
ever I Learn^d the Art of, Delighting in God; your Invaluable Writings have had
their Influences thereupon.

Wherefore, MY FATHERS, having here withal brought you, some of (...) Venison
['tis Plain, Mean, po^r New England Venison] I pray you, T h^^ your Souls may
Bless me;

Who am in all Duty Your Son and Servant, COTTON MATHER

Blessed UNIONS.
Recommended, from John XVII. 21. That they all may be ONE, as Thou, Father,
art in me, and I in Thee, That they also may be ONE in Us.
SERMON I.
IT was a very Just Remark and Applause once bestowed upon our Blessed Savior,
That He so sp^ke as never man sp^ke; and it is a Reflection to be no less Truly
made, That He prayed so as never man p^ay'd. Our Lord Jesus Christ, Ascending
into the Third Heaven, where He ever lives to make Intercession for us. Left
behind Him a standing Monument and Counterpane of that Heavenly Intercession by
which His Oblation for us becomes Effectual; and the Seventeenth Chapter of
John i^ the P^t in which this very Caelestial Manna is Reserved. Though, A^
Scripture is Profitable, and is like the Gold, Precious; and like the Sky,
Sublime: Nevertheless there are peculiar Excellencies in some Scriptures, and
this Chapter may be Compared unto a Pearl in that Gold, a Star in that Sky;
it is, A Chapter of Degrees; and very truly, A Superlative. The Evangelist John
was of Old Resemb^ed unto an Eagle; behold, What this High Soaring Eagle has
fetched from Heaven for our Entertainment here! It Is a prayer of our Lord Jesus
Christ; whereof I may affirm, as the Great Me^ancth^n before me did, Ne^
Dign^orem, nec Sanctiorem, nec Fructu^siorem, nec Magi^ Patheticam Vocem, in
C^^lo (...) Terra u^quam fuisse ^^d^^am; Never was there such a Voice heard in
the World before. The Words of a Dying Man, usually have in them something that
is more than Ordinary; the Words of a Dying S aint are to be Looked upon as yet
more extraordinary; but methinks the words of a Dying Jesus, must be of all the
most con^iderable. And such Words are those that are now before us! It is one
of our Calamities, That we know not what we should pray for as we ought. And
one would therefore be Inquisitive to know what it was that our Lord Jesus
chose to pray for when He was wrestling with His Father on our behalf.
Certainly That should be the very Desire and Request, which we should all
choose ^o lay before our God for our selves. When Almighty God makes us, as He
Now and Ever does, the Proffer which He made unto Solomon, Ask, What I shall
give thee! Surely, 'twould be our Interest for us to Ask, that He would give
us, the very same Things which, A Greater than Solomon, has Asked for (...) Our
Context here will give us Information thereabout. In the verse before, we see
For whom our Lord prayed; and in the Twenty First and the Twenty Fourth Verses,
we see, For what He prayed. He prayed not only for all the Disciples in that
Age, but also for all the Believer^ in every Future Age. He prayed, That they
might all of them have a Comfortable State First, in This, and Then in another,
and a better World. Now the Text in our Hands, does represent A Glorious Union,
as the best Thing which our Lord Jesus Christ, had in His Wishes, for his
People, upon Earth and this Glorious Union, is here described, first, by the
Fountain of it; next, by the Nature of it; and, thirdly, by the Pattern of it;
On which we shall by the Help of that Grace, which This very Prayer (whereupon
we are now Discoursing) has obtained for us, make our pertinent Observations.

OBSERVATION I. There is a Blessed UNION, which Believers are to have with
Christ, and by Him, with God.
Says our Lord, That they may be One in Us. To penetrate into this, Deep T hing
of God, we may be helped by two Praeliminaries.

Praeliminary I.
The whole Undivided Adorable T rinity is concerned in the Union which
Believers have with the Lord Jesus Christ. This UNION is the Grand Scriptural
Mystery; and (avoiding undue Images in our minds) it may be thus Illustrated.

You may suppose God the Father as a Sacred Root; suppose the Lord Jesus
Christ, as a T runk issuing from it; suppose the Holy Spirit, as a S ap running
through it; suppose our selves to be, [and O that we may be!] the Branches
thereunto belonging; and suppose our Good Works to be the Fruits in this way
prod^ced. Here is a little Image of this Blessed UNION! Our Union is with God
the Father; thus we read, in 1 John.4.16. He that dwells in Love, dwells in
God, and God in him. Our Union is with God the S pirit; so we read in Romans 8.
11. If the S pirit of Him that Raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you. And
our Union is with the Lord Jesus Christ; hence it is said in Ephesians. 3. 17. T hat
Christ may dwell i^ your Hearts. The Term of Dwelling is that whereby the
Scripture in those and more places, denotes this Union. In this Union we become
T emples for the whole T rinity; there is an ineffable Concurrence of all the
Three Persons in the Eternal Godhead, therein to take possession of us.
Briefly, (...) renders us Children to God the Father, Pupils to God the S
pirit, and Member^ of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Praeliminary 2.
It is more peculiarly the Lord Jesus Christ with whom all Believers* have
their Union. It is the Lord Jesus Christ, as GOD* MAN, who is, T he Head of the
Church; and in that capacity we have our Union with Him. Indeed, the Personal
Union of the Two Natures in our Lord, is that upon the account whereof He is an
Object admirably Fitted for an Union with us. Hereby it is, that He becomes our
Immanuel, or, God with us; and so poor, mean, vile Man, may become, One with
Him* Our Lord Jesus Christ is Man; and the Kindred which by His Incarnation He
comes to have unto us, does marvellously make way for our Union unto Him. It
may ^ow be said, as in Heb. 2. 11. Both He that Sanctifyeth, and they that are
Sanctified, are all of one. If therefore they become one, it will not be such a
Monstrous Union as Nebuchadnezzars Idol showed, where the Head was of one
Metal, and the Members of another. Our Lord Jesus Christ is God also; and the
Infinite Perfections of His Divinity, do Infinitely furnish Him to bestow those
Benefits for which His Union with us, is intended by God. We are told in Col.
2. 19. It pleased the Father, that in Him there should all Fullness dwell. That
Fullness is needful to obtain and maintain the ends of this Union; we have now
an Head that can supply all His Members, with whatever good they have occasion
for.

Wherefore, we have now an opportunity to Enquire,

W hat is that UNION which we are to have with our Lord Jesus Christ?

I. There might many Things be N^gatively spoken, to rectify our Apprehensions
about our Union with our Lord. But especially three such Things as these

First, We must not propound unto our selves an Union so Remote, as what shall
be Mental only. The Soul does in a manner Unite it self, with what i^ Looks, or
Thinks upon; Contemplation affords unto us a sort of Union with what is laid
before it. But our thoughts on the Lord Jesus Christ, are not the Things,
wherein does consist our Union with Him; though indeed the U nion is cherished by
those Holy Thoughts.

Nor may we, Secondly, propound unto our selves an Union so Confused; as what
shall arise to be Personal: The Familist has counted himself so united unto our
Lord, as to be, C hristed with Christ; but our Union will afford no room for
such Nonsensical and Blasphemous Gibberish. Our whole Persons are to have an
Union with the whole Person of our Lord Jesus Christ; and yet our Union will
not make our persons to become One Person with Him.

Let me add, Thirdly, That the Fundamental Haeresy of Quakerism receives no
Countenance from our Union with our Lord. There is a certain, Inward Excusing
or Condemning Principle, which men are Born withal: and the Quaker (if I can
understand him) holds This Principle to be, The Man Christ, Or as their Jargon
for it is, A measure of that Man. 'The Visible and the ^angible Flesh which
hung upon the Crose without the Gates of Jerusalem, the Quaker calls, The
Bodily Garment of that Man, Christ: and what is now become of that Flesh, he is
loathe to say; While he will fallaciously grant you the Man to be Ascended into
Glory. The Quaker does also Count his own Flesh to be such another Bodily
Garment unto the Man Christ, and his having of that Man thus in Him, is that by
which he Expounds, The Coming of Christ in the Flesh. You see what an Union
this Heretic pretends to have with our Lord Jesus Christ; He not only has, The
Man Christ, within himself; but he does in effect make himself to be, T hat
Man. We all of us have within us, a C onscience which is, The C andle of the
Lord, but an Enemy to fair Distinctions, will have, T he Candle, to be, The
Lord Himself. Methinks, these people help to fulfill the Prophecy, That before
the Coming of our Lord, Men shall say, L^here is C hrist, or there! and there
shall arise, False C hrists; and they shall say, Behold, He is in the Desert!
But what will they Reply to the Challenge which One Recovered out of Quakerism
has lately given them, wherein he tells them, If this your Foundation stand
sure, it would follow, That all honest Pagans, Jews, and Mahometans, are in C
hrist as well as you; and true Christians, Believers, Disciples Followers of
Christ (at least, as to the Mystery) and so your Brethren in C hrist. And
indeed! There is no Man ordinarily without a Principle which will Excuse him,
when he thinks he does well, and will C ondemn ^im when he thinks he does Ill;
but is the Man C hrist so United unto every man? Sure I am, the Apostle affirms
of some, what we may as well apply to most in the World; Ephesians.2. 12. Ye were
without C hrist.

Pardon me then, that I thus largely enter this particular Caution, against the
Strong Delusion of the Quaker^. This Age and Place, wherein the Light of the
Gospel has been more Eminently Sinned against, is most in danger to be visited
with that Spiritual Plague of Quakerism, which under the Notion of Light!
Light! will decoy the Souls of men into the most Horrible Pi^s of Darkness into
which any Fools Fire can seduce 'em.

II. But it may be now expected, that some things be more positively spoken,
about our Union with our Lord.

Wherefore you may take this General Idae^ of it.

It is our C oalition with the Lord Jesus Christ, or, the C onjunction of the
Lord Jesus Christ with us, as a Vital Principle unto us in the Enjoyment of God.

I do ingenuously and sorrowfully confess, That I cannot fully Explain that
great UNION which we have with our Lord Jesus Christ. For a full Delineation of
it, I must adjourn you till w^^ have [ And O our God, Give it unto us!] a
Joyful meeting in the Kingdom of our God. Our Lord has told us, in Jo^. 14.
20. At that Day, ye shall know, tha^ I am in my Father, and you in me, and I
(...) you. Neighbors, At that Day, when the Free Grace of God shall fetch away
the Spirits which now manage these Crazy Limbs, to the Gardens into which the
Lord Jesus has now withdrawn Himself; A^ that Day, when the Rich Grace of God
shall Raise these Bodies of our Humiliation out of our Graves, to make a vast
Army whereof the Lord Jesus is to be the Standard Bearer; (Allow me the Tears
which now fall at the Hopes of That Day!) Then, if you as (...) me, What it is
to be United unto the Lord Jesus Christ? Some Rare, some New, some Adaequate
Things may Then be said upon it. And yet in the mean Time, even, At this Day,
it may be a little Stammer'd at.

Suffer me then a little to descant upon two Scriptures, which being Together
Considered, may set this Union i^ (...) True Light before us. One is that in
(...) Cor. 6. 17. He that is Joined unto the Lord, is One S pirit. Another is
that in Gal. 2. 20. I Live, yet not I, but Christ Lives in me. In this Union,
we are so Joined unto the Lord, as that we are parts of a Mystical Body which
He has in the World; and He does by the Influences of His own Spirit, make us
all Resemble one another in our Living unto God. Breefly, there are two Things
which will Complete our Union with our Lord Jesus Christ; and I do solemnly
advise you, that while these Things are Declaring, Your Hearts do with all
manner of Compliance and Agony accompany them. So may you at this Moment come
into this Union, and this Day for that cause may be forever with you, Much to
be Remembered!

First, We are to Receive the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Almighty God has
Offered Him: and O that you would so Receive Him! It was wished in Ephesians. (...).
17. That Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith. In this Union, the Lord
Jesus Christ begins with us, by Infusing into us that Li^e, the first Act
whereof is our Faith in Him. By this Faith i^ is, that we are to Receive the
Lord Jesus Christ, wherein we become One with Him, and so, have Power to be
called the Children of God. A Matrimonial Contract, is that by which the Holy
Ghost Expresses unto us our Union with ou^ Lord; it has much of a Marriage
Union in it. Know then, that the Lord Jesus Christ Employes His Proxies, His
Agents, His Ministers, upon this most Surprising Errand; His Ministers are His
Angels, and with an Ardor like what is in Flaming Fire, they Woo u^ to an
Acceptance of the Lord Jesus Christ. These Ambassadors of the Lord come and
plead with us, That we would be Married (...) the Son of God, the Prince of
Heaven, and the Lord of Glory. They set before us the Necessity of this Match
that we cannot be, Happy if we abide thus un-married: They set before us the U
tility of this Match; that if Christ b^ ours, A^^ is O^rs: The^ set before u^
the (...) of the Person who Condescends to make this most Astonishing Motion to
us; that He is, Altogether Lovely; and cannot we Love Him? that He is, The
Desire of all (...) Nations; and shall not we Desire Him? They lay before us, the
Terms of the Match; that if we do but cordially consent, we shall certainly
Enjoy; and that if we are willing entirely to Live With, and For the Lord Jesus
Christ, and by Him to bring forth Fruit unto God, we shall be made partakers of
this Blessedness. Our Hearts must now be conquered; we must Heartily say, Amen,
and I will; Were it such a Day of Gods Power on our Souls, the Match were how
made immediately. In short, we must now Renounce all other L over, and hearken
to the Lord Jesus, when He says unto us, Thou shall be for me, and not for
another. We must Renounce the Flesh; and Resolve, To Humor that shall never be
my chief Interest any more. We must Renounce the World, and Resolve, To follow
that shall never be my (...) Business any more. We must Renounce the Devil, and
Resolve, He shall never more ^ead me C aptive at H^^ Will. And we must now
Embrace the Lord Jesus Christ, in all His Offices. Even a whole Christ, both
the Prince, who gives Repentance, and the Savior who gives Remission of Sins.
We must Embrace the Instruction of the Lord Jesus and profess, The Scripture
and Spirit of Christ shall be my Guide. His Eye Salve shall Illu^inate me. We
must Embrace the Atonement of the Lord Jesus and profess* The Righteousness of
Christ shall ^e that in which only I will appear before the Judgment Seat of
God: Hi^ Holy Life, His Bitter Death, His Continual Intercession, shall
purchase all of (...) Salvation. We must Embrace the Government of the Lord
Jesus, and profess The Kingdom of Christ shall be set up within me; my Heart
and Walk shall (...) by him directed; and by Him shall I be made a Conqueror
over the Enemies of my Soul. And yet when we attempt this Reception of our
Lord, we must b^ sensible of our utter Inability to perform any part of it; we
must C ry to Him, and Hope in Him, for the Assistance of our weak Endeavors.

But, Secondly. The Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ will then marvellously
maintain His Interest in our Souls: and I pray ask for that Spirit, of Him that
says, He will give it unto them that ask it. It is said in 1 Cor. 15. 45. The
Last Adam is a Quickening Spirit. The Quickening Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ,
will now take possession of us, and keep the Holy Fire always alive upon the
Altars of our Hearts. That Spirit will Inform us; He will cause us To know the
Things that are Spiritually Discerned; He will cause us To Behold Wondrous
Things out of Gods Law: He will give us right and clear Apprehensions of those
Things which Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, and Heart not Conceived.
That S pirit will In^line us; he will make us, Ready to every Good Work; he
will dispose us to those things that are, Holy, and Just, and Good: he will
cause us to like, Whatsoever things are True, whatsoever things are Honest,
whatsoever things are Just, whatsoever things are Pure, whatsoever things are
Lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report. That Spirit will Defend us; He
will Teach our Hands to War, and our Fingers to Fight, in the Batters of the
Lord; He will make us Fight the Good Fight, and keep the Faith, and Finish our
Course; He will make us Conquerours and more than Conquerors over all our
Interior Adversaries. In a word, That Spirit will give us the same Affections
and the ^ame Experiences that are in the other Sheep of our Lord Jesus Christ;
even such as we never saw, or knew, and such as are concealed at a thousand
Leagues Distance from us. Yea, That Spirit will make us fee^ something (...)
Heaven upon Earth; something of the same Loves, and the same Joys, that
replenish the Souls of the Saints Triumphant above; is now distilled in some
measure into the Saints Militant here below. And that Spirit will even Reserve
and Renew such a Portion of the Dust into which our Dissolution does incinerate
us, as that the Tabernacles wherein we now Lodge, at the Resurrection shall
become Temples unto Himself World without End. In fine, The Second Adam with
His Quickening spirit, will give us Releef against all the Death which is from
the First Adam with Original sin derived unto us. This is that Union with our
Lord Jesus Christ, which O that we were all come unto!

And now you will easily discover two singular Properties in this Union.

First, It is a Mysterions Union. There are Three most Wonderful Unions, which
we are in our Creed acquainted with. We are all of us as Owls placed before the
Sun, when we go to Comprehend them. Mysterious is the Union of Diverse Persons
in One Nature; such an Union there is in the Godhead; it is said in (...) Joh.
5. 7. The Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, these three are One. Mysterious
is the Union of Diverse Natures in One Person; such an Union there is in our
Savior; it is said in 1 Timothy 3. 16. Great is the Mystery of Godliness, God
manifest in the Flesh. And unto the most Mysterious Unions may be annumerated
that of two District Natures, and of two Distinct Persons, by One Spirit. Hence
the Apostle speaking of Adams Marriage ('it is not every Marriage that is so) as
(...) Type of this Union, makes that Not^ upon it, in Ephesians. 5: 32. This i^ a
great Mystery. And therefore, if you mind it, this Union was one of the last
Things in which our Lord Jesus Christ instructed His Disciples: when their
Capacities were most improved, and when He was to leave the highest and hardest
of all His Lessons with them, this UNION was then insisted on.

Secondly, It is a most Intimate Union. It brings a Mutual In-being with it. By
this Union, we are in Christ, as it is said in 2 Cor. 5. 15. If any man be in
Christ, there is a New Creature. And Christ is in us; as it is said in 2 Cor. 13
5. Jesus Christ is in you, except you be D^s^pproved. Let us a little Examine
some of the Similitudes by which this Union is represented in the Word of God,
and we shall see that it is most admirably Intimate. Our Union with our Lord,
is ^^ke that of the Foundation and the S uperstructure; thus it is said in Ephesians.
2.21. In whom all the Building f^^ly fra^^'d together, grows unto an Holy
Temple in the Lord. And yet this Comparison fails, because there is no
Communication of Life in this matter. Nearer then; our Union with our Lord, is
like that of a Root and the Branches; thus it is said in Joh. 15. 5. I am the
Vine, ye are the Branches; He that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much Fruit. And yet this Comparison also fails, because a Graff
is oftentimes more Excellent than the Stock. Nearer yet; our Union with our
Lord, is like that of a Head and the Members; thus it is said, in 1 Cor. 12. 17.
Ye are the Body of Christ, and Members in particular. And yet this Comparison
likewise fails, because ^here the parts are some of them closer to it, some of
them further from it. All these be Real Comparisons. Let us (...) upon a
Relative one: Our Union with our Lord is like that of a Wife to her Husband.
Hence, it is a Nuptial Song, which we have to Celebrate i^ in the Canticles.
Thus it is said in 2 Cor. 11. 2. I have Espoused you to one Husband, that I may
present you, as a ^hast Virgin to Christ. It is what we have in our Baptism a
Symbol of it is said in Act. 2. 38. Be Bap^ised ever one of you in the Name of.
Jesus Christ As a Wife comes to wear the Name of her Husband, when she is once
Married unto him; so is the Name of Jesus Christ put upon them that are United
unto Him. It Is UNTO Him that they are Baptized; and as in Circumcision of old,
Zippor^ (whom we misrepresent^ as calling Moses, A Bloody Husband, called her
Infant, (...) Espoused by Blood unto the Lord; ^o in Baptism* the Children of
Men are visibly Espoused unto the Lord Jesus Christ. And yet this Comparison
too, is not sufficient, because the nearest Conjugal Union may be Dissolved by
Death: Whereas our Union with our Lord, is Everlastingly Indissoluble. He says,
I will betrothe thee unto me for ever; and he says, We shall abide in him. It
is a Knot that never shall be broken; I say, Never! Never! The very Heavens may
perish; but thou, O Blessed UNION, shall endure; they may all of them wax old
like a Garment, But thy years never shall have an end.

APPLICATION.
And now, that so these Faithful Sayings may not be Lost upon us.

I. Let every person among you all, be overcome and persuaded this Day, To give
such an Entertainment unto the Lord Jesus, in your Hearts, as may produce your
Union with Him. I pray, make Room for a precious Jesus in your Souls; that so,
He may say concerning you, I am in Them? This is, The Thing, which will ^ettle
an Eternal Union between Him and You; without This, you remain without Christ,
and so without Hope for ever.

You must imagine me this Day to be one of the Disciples, that come to Demand a
(...) (as they did of old, in Mark 14. 14) for the Entertainment of the Blessed
Jesus. I pray, where is the Room? Let your Answer be, Lord, in this poor Heart
of mine; Come to dwell there by the Spirit of Faith for-ever! Reply thus; and O
do not shut him out of Doors. In is the sweet voice of our Lord Jesus, in Rev.
3. 20. Behold, (...) stand at the Door and Knock. And i^ deed, how many Knocks
has He be making at the Doors of your Souls (...) is said, Is not my Word an
Hammer Why, That Hammer has been Knocks at your Hearts for many a Day; (...)
the Golden Rod of your Enjoyment and the Iron Rod of your Affliction has also
been loudly Rapping there That you would give Admission to the Spiritual
Efficacies of the Lord Jesus your Souls; And will you still keep Hi^ out of
Doors? Why, Sinners, the How it his own, as Paul says of the Chur^^ for he has
both Made it, and Bou^ it; it is by the Right both of Creation and of
Redemption, HIS; and (...) you still Bar him out of his own? Gi^ me leave then
to make that Cry sour in and through this great Congregation Psalm. 24. 7. Lift up
your Heads, O Gates, and be ye lift up ye Everlasting Doors, and the King of
the Glory shall (...) in. So I say, and could I speak powerfully as the Last
Trumpet shall, would choose This to say among you and unto all the World. Give
way ye (...) Gates, in the hearts of miserable sinners; Fly open, ye Doors of
Never-^ying Souls, for the King of Glory demands an Entrance at you, that so he
(...) have an Union with us all. But what shall I say, that may further move
you thereunto?

Consider 1. How infinitely worthy of a Room in your Hearts, the Lord Jesus,
is! Look upon his Dignity, and ^ee whether it be fit for you to put ^eights
upon him! When the Angels behold him, (for it is him they beheld) (...) Isa. 6.
3. they cry out, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, yea, the whole ^^irth
is full of his Glory. And will any of you be does to have An heart filled with
the Glory of that holy Lord. When he first came to Heaven after (...) being
made Flesh. O had you seen what a Welcome all the Inhabitants of the Heavenly
Regions gave unto Him there! Doubtless, the whole City of God was presently
mo^'d at the Report of his Arrival, and they all ^ast themselves down before
him, with most Joyful Ado^ations owning, (...) Our Lord, our Lord, Thou have
made New Heaven for us by thy coming hither. Alas, those Hearts are nothing but
mere Hells, which do not give like Welcome to this Matchless Lord Again, Look
upon his Relation, an^ see whether it be congruo^s for him to be slighted with
you. He speak to us in that Language, Cant. 5, 2. Open to me my Sister, my
Love, my love. Is it according to the Rule of Civility or Behavior, for a
Sister to bid her Brother be gone, or Wife her Husband, or a Child hi^ Father?
Truly, far worse manners are used in the Contempt that you thr^^ upon the Lord
Jesus Christ. It was most abominably Insolent for the Pope to make his Emperor
wait three day in the Cold abroad, before he would give him Audience; but
methinks it is more abominable for us to serve our SAVIOR so. And that which
aggravates the miscarriage, is. The Earnestness, the Vehemence, the I^porunity
with which our Lord presses for a Room in our Hearts. We find Him saying, in
Prove. 1. 2. How long! and in Mat. 23. 37. How often! He has been Long and Often,
Entreating that we would once take Him in; and O how can you refuse him still!
We find that at our Importunity he opens his Doors to us; and it will be hard
indeed if at his Importunity we do not open ours to him. Importunity! did I
say? Lord, that ever thou should be so sollicitous for so mean a Room as
these Hearts of ours! But he would once have (...) (...) Stable, and will still
have an Unclean Heart, the Room, in which he will Magnify his Grace.

Consider, 2. What Vast, what Rich Advantages you will have by giving to the
Lord Jesus (...) Room in those Hearts of yours. To receive a Prophet, has been
sometimes represented and experienced, as a very gainful thing; but what is it
then, To receive a Jesus, think you? While the Lord Jesus is calling at your
Doors, He says as in Rev. 22. 12. B ehold, I come, and my reward is with me. I
may tell you, That you will be well R ewarded for giving Room to such a Guest as
he: he never comes Empty-handed into any Soul. What will be the R eward? It
will be a Feast; he will Feast you with such Dainties as an Ignorant and (...)
World is not concerned about; so says he, If any man hear my Voice, and open to
me, I will come in to Him, an^ Sup with him, and he with me. 'T^^ a most
Refreshing, Reviving, Satisfying Fello^ship, which the Lord Jesus will now give
you with himself: and he will replenish you with, Fullness (...) Joy. When the
Ark, which was but (...) Shadow of our Lord Jesus Christ was in the House of
Obed-Edo^, i^ (...) said, The Lord blessed him, and all the he had. How much
more if the Lord Jesus Christ, himself were i^ you Hearts, would it then be
said, The Lord has blessed that poor S^^^e in all (...) Interests! If Z^chous
once open (...) Doors to the Lord Jesus Christ, what follows? even that
Assurance in (...) 19. 9. Thus Day Salvation is on (...) this House. I say
then, open the Door (...) to the Son of God; and the (...) News will be,
Salvation is come to this poor Soul; This undone Soul, is now made partaker of
Grace, of Glory, of all that is Good. Whatever Wisdom, whatever Righteousness,
whatever Sanctification, and what Redemption soever, you have wanted all this
while it shall come along with that Jesus, whom you now give a Room unto. But,

Consider 3. If you do now keep the Lord Jesus out of your Hearts, W hat will
be the Consequence? Truly, There is Danger that he will never come into your
Hearts at all, if they be not now opened for him: Inasmuch as according to that
in 2 Cor. 6. 2. Behold, Now is the Acceptable Time, Behold, Now is the Day of
Salvation! And if you should Never be thus wrought upon, alas, what an horrible
issue does then abide those Desolate Souls of yours? We read in Col. 1. 27.
Christ in you the hope of GLORY. O There is no Hope of your ever coming to
GLORY, if you be not thus United unto the Lord Jesus Christ. If the Lord be not
now in you, how can you D y in Him at last? but woe to you if you do not so!
And, mark what say, every Denial that you give to the Lord Jesus, of a Lodging
in your hearts does but confirm the Devil in his possession of those forlorn,
doleful, woeful Hearts; and more incurably fix you in the State of them of whom
it is complained, How long shall vain Thought lodge within you? It Is probable
that the House in which I am now speaking, it full of Devils; and they Rage,
they Storm, they Tremble, at the Things which I am Delivering, le^t any of your
Souls be now prevailed with, to Entertain the Lord Jesus Christ. There is (...)
most Exact Notice taken whether any of you do still continue Obstinate (...)
Refusing, or, which is all one. Delaying, to, Receive Christ the Lord. If you
Do it is a thousand to one, but the Devil^ get some such dreadful Permission
from the Lord Jesus Christ, as this, Go, since they will not have me, do you enter
into them, as you did into the Swine of old. So the Devils which are called,
The Power [on Army] of the Air, will Enter into your Souls, as Insensibly as
you suck in, The poison of the Air, when Epidemical Contagions are about you;
and for your Destruction, as Efficaciously. The C onsequence of This, is now
like to be your Penal and Final Impenitency in your Unbelief. Thus, I am
afraid, And, O Lord, thou know I mourn when I think of this! That every
Knock which I am giving in the Name of the Lord Jesus at many of your Hearts
from Day to Day, does but Ripen some of you apace for the Fiery Vengeance which
must Overtake them, That obey not the Gospel of God. But O take a seasonable
Warning of the Thing which then will come upon you? It is foretold, in Luke 13.
25. When the Master has shut the Doors, and ye begin to Knock, saying, Lord,
Lord, open to us, He shall answer, I know you no: Why, This is what i^ will at
last come unto; you will one Day beg with Tears of Blood, Lord, Lord, open the
Doors of thy Heavens for me! But you must expect no Replies but such Thunders
as those, (...) Remember, you would not (...) open the Doors of your Hearts for
me; As I cried and you would not Hear, so you shall Cry, and I will (...) Hear;
Depart, I know you not.

Come then, Come to a better Temper. Think what Answer to make unto the Demands
of the Lord Jesus Christ. And, I pray, what Answer (...) it? He demands, Will thou consent the I take possession of thy Soul for my self. Let your Answer be,
Come in, thou blessed Lord, why stand thou without? Com^ in, and In^t^^nce
this Heart of mine, and work all thy W orks in me and for me. (...) Hearty in
this Answer; and the Lord Jesus Christ will presently so Unite you to Himself,
that you shall say, My Beloved is mine, and I am His for ever.

II. And now, if you are thus come unto an Union with the Lord Jesus Christ, I
pray, give an Entertainment also unto the Duty and Coms^^t which belongs unto
such Believers. To speak distinctly,

1. It is your Duty to beware of Sinning against God, with a Caution beyond
what is in other men. Your Sins have Aggravations in them above the sins of
others in the World; for, as it is said, in 1 Cor. 6. 15. Know ye not, that your
Bodies are the Members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and
make them the Members of an Harlot? God forbid: Even so, Know you not that you
are United unto the Lord Jesus Christ? And shall that very Head which is United
unto the Lord Jesus, become, A Shop of Wickedness? Or, shall that very Tongue,
which is United unto the Lord Jesus, become, A Firebrand of He^^? Or, shall
those Hands, and those Feet, which are United unto the Lord Jesus become, The
Weapons of Unrighteousness! I say, God forbid! The Repenting David reckoned it
an Aggravation of his Offenses, (as it is carried by some Great Interpreters)
That in the Hidden part, God had made him to know Wisdom; and if God have
Raised us to an hidden Union with His own Son, it makes our Offenses to have
some singular Exasperations in them. The, Provocations of Sons and of
Daughters, are more than Ordinary Provocations in the Resentments of our God;
His Holy Spirit, is more than Ordinar^^ Grieved at them; and He is in the World
usually most severe and most speedy in the Chastising of those Provocations;
however, as to what concern the future World, He will forgive the^^ Iniquities.
O then, whosoever shall by Sin Dishonor the Lord Jesus Christ, (...) Him not
have cause to say concerning You, as in Psalm. 55. 12,13. It was not (...)
Enemy; the (...) 'could have born it; but (...) was thou, a man, mine
Acquaintance [and one United unto my self!] A Wound from a Friend, how grievous
is it!

2. And that you may be the more fortified against all Temptations to sin Let
your Comfort be set before you. But what is it? In short, All of CHRIST is
yours: and you know who says, Christ is ALL! You may Cheerfully lay that Claim
in Cant. 2. 16. My Beloved is Mine. And if so, the Richest, the Fairest Person
imaginable and One before whom the ve^^ S^n in the Firmament is black, has
bestowed Himself upon you; and with Him, you have all sorts of sure Mercies for
a Portion, albeit you do your selves bring nothing but Wretchedness and
Raggedness unto Him. If this be not enough, I Will add, All of GOD is Yours; for
indeed, Christ is God. It may be said unto you, as in Isai. 54. 5. Thy Maker is
thy Husband; The Lord of Hosts is His Name. Are there no Afflicted Widows
here, to lay a very Particular Hold upon such a Word as that! The Immortal God
now tells you, My Power is yours to Rele^ve you; and My Wisdom is yours to
Direct you; and, My Goodness is yours, to Pity, Pardon, Succor you! O
Transcendent Consolations!

But Perhaps, While you live in This World, you will not be Comforted, unless you
may have something of This World among the rest of your Conveniences. Well
then, I am to advertise you, That all the Good of the Whole World is yours; for
Christ is, The Lord of all. What says the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 3. 21,22,23. All
Things are yours, and ye are Christ's? and what a full Inventory is there of
your Goods! If there be any thing, that God shall see Good for you [(...) O for
shame, leave to Him the ^^^ment of That!] you shall certain have it Conferred
upon you. Med^ta^ now on these things, and let Him the has this Union with
you, now have (...) Glory from you for ever.

III. But your Union with the Lord Jesus Christ may strike T error into t^^
Hearts of your Adversaries; and I pray let T hem give a due Entertainment un^^
this, T error of the Lord. There is certain People in the World, and
New England, as well as Old, is Considerable for having such a People in it; a
People which are Evidently acted by a Spirit of Respect unto the Rules of
Universal Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety a People in whom there is a
(...) which inclines them to Live (...) those who seek an Heavenly County It Is
that Spirit which hinders they from Conforming not only to the (...) which
their Neighbors are infected with, but also to whatever parts (...) means of
Worship for which they are no ^atisfy'd, that they have a sufficient ^^arrant
in the Word of God; 'twould be well if men would awaken themselves to see what
Shi^oleths the Devil does invent in every Age, for the Discovery of this
people; and then what Instruments he has for the Destroying of them. But let me
now make an Appeal to the Consciences of all those that are the Malicious
Enemies of such a people; D^ not you in your Consciences, think, That an Holy
People have an Union with an Holy Jesus? How dare you then to malign, molest,
and oppress, any whom you do in your Consciences judge to be, An Holy People?
Be it known unto them, That such a People have an H ead in Heaven, who feels
all the Blows and Wrongs that these give unto them here. Ins^ctan^ur Nor, and
in Nobis Deum, said Salv^an very truly of old. Ha^k to the Thunderclaps that
Rumble in Heaven upon every one of their unreasonable (...); they are those, in
Act. 9. 5. (...) Lord said; I (...) Jesus, (...) thou Persecution! and let them
(...) for hot Thund^^ -bolts to be thence discharged at last upon them, if that
they shall Impenitently go on to Pers^cute; perhaps while they are Eating (...)
the People of God, as they Eat Bread [the^ can Eat 'em without Salt!] they
Dissemble the Fear which their Consciences do secretly give them, T hat God
(...) in the Generation of those righteous ones albeit also their standing
without Fe^^ before them, is to them, An Evident T oken of Perdition; yet they
shall on^ Day Feel more than they now ca^ Fear. Fool hardy Creatures, Do the^
know where they strike? The Lord (...) Heaven says unto his people in zech. 2.
8. He who touches you, touches the Apple of his Eye. It seems, they had (...)
good go to tear out the very Eyes (...) the Omnipotent God who Beholds (...)
their Villainies; and that God will make them find that they are but pulling and
cutting out their own Eyes in all the^ do. There was a King of Scotland once
called, T ^e poor (...) King; But much more such an one the King of Heaven is;
and He has moreover most nearly United Himself unto that poor people whom He is
a King unto. Can you then Dream, That He will suffer the Injuries done unto a
people thus Interested in Himself, to pass Unrevenged? In the Dreadful Day of
God, the Fearful Doom of these Men of the Earth, from the Mouth of the Lord
Jesus Christ will be, You have done to Me, what you have done; Depart with your
Master, into Everlasting Fire. And in the mean time they are pulling down upon
themselves, that Great STONE, which always breaks the Bones of those unhappy
Miscreants that it falls upon. I say, Consider of this, lest you be Torn to
^ieces, and there be None to Deliver you.

SERMON II.
THere are now a few Thoughts more to be spent by way of Appendix to those
which have already been spread before you. Christians, I am to do my part, that
becoming One, with the Lord Jesus Christ, you may also, and therefore become,
One among your selves.

OBSERVATION 2. There is a Blessed UNION which Believers on the Lord Jesus
Christ, are Thr^ Him, to have with One Another.
In Chr^sostoms Days, 'twas, I think ^n (...) and ungodly Superstition among
many people, to make, The Seventeenth Chapter of John, a sort of Spell whereby
Evil Spirits were Exorcis'd among them. It will be but agreeable to the best
Religion, if One Verse in that Chapter may now prove a Strong Charm, [it is a
piece of Gods Spell!] to lay those Evil Spirits of Contention and Confusion
which have sometimes too much obtained among the People of God.

I am therefore now to mind you, That the same Spirit which Unites Believers
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, as Members to their Head, is also to United the
Members unto each other in the Lord. I am to Address you in the Words of the
Apostle, Phil. 2. 1,2. If there be any Fellowship of the Spirit, be
like-minded, having the same Love, being of one Accord, of one Mind. Let us
prove our Union with the Lord Jesus Christ, by our having of that Spirit which
He does Inspire all Believers with; and let us prove our having of that Spirit
by our Union with all Believers. Our Lord here says, That they all may be ONE.
The Greek Word is of the Neuter Gender; and Luther thinks that the Work, S
omoe, or Body, is the Substantive to be ^nderstood: And indeed we are to be in
our Union, as one Body of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is not enough that we have
an Invisible Union with all the Saints of God; but we must have a visible Union
too, or such an one as our Context mentions, That the World may Believe, at the
Contemplation and Invitation of it. If then it be the

Question;

Wherein should the People of God be all United?

The Answer is,

First, We are to be United in (...) Profession. And this must be a true
Profession too; or else our Union is but Faction, and no better than that of
Jew^ or Turks. What says the Apostle, (...) 1 Cor. 1. 10. I beseech you
Brethren, b^ the Name of our Lord Jesus C hrist, tha^ ye all speak the same
Thing, and that there be no Divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly
joined together, in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment. As fat as we can,
we should be of the same Opinion, and hold the same Doctrine o^ Christianity;
be sure we must concu^ in all the Fundamental Ones, or els^ we cut off our
selves from the, Communion of Saints; and as he that had the Plague in his
head, we are shut out from the Camp and Church of God. The Pagans counted,
Harmonia, to be a Deity; and an, Harmony of C onfessions among all Christians,
is a Divine sort of a Thing. Yet Speciosum quidem est Nomen pacts, and pulchra
Opinio Unitatis; fed quis ambigat ^am solam unicam Ecclesioe pacem esse quoe C
hristi est?

Secondly, We are to be United in our Affection. It Is possible that we cannot
come up, or go down to the Persuasions, of some Godly Brethren; Yet we are
still to Love them all, as Brethren. (...) should be with us as it was said in
Act. 4. 32. The Multitude of them that Believed, were of one Heart, and of one
Soul. We must make no S chism, in the Church of our Lord Jesus Christ: All the
Church Catholic, that is, all that* speak and live according to the Main
things in the Gospel of God, must have our Charity, although they be not in all
things of our mind. Every Saint must have our Hearts knit unto them, as
Jon^th^ns was to David; and we must not confine S aint ship to every thing in
our way* Moreover, Having with Gods leave joined our selves to that Particular
Church which we Judge most fully answering, The Pattern in (...) Mount, we must
with a most Holy and Humble Carriage Endeavor the Peace of it, as well as of
any other Societies with which it walks in a Total Communion; and at the same
time, if there be any other Particular Church with which in its Constitutions
or Observances we cannot me^tain an Entire Communion, yet ever there also we
should beware of Hasty Censuring, and while we Walk wherein (...) have
Attained, we must with all Charitable Friendliness and Patience leave unto God,
Those that are otherwise-minded, until God shall Reveal even This unto them. It
is a Rule as Good as Old Necessarjis Unita^, in Adiaphoris Libert^^ in U^risque
Chari^as.

Thirdly, We are to be United by our Sympathy. We should all have the same
(...) and the same Griefs, on the same Occasions for them. We should be able to
speak after the Apostle, in 2 Cor. 1^. 28, 29. That which comes upon me Daily,
is the Care of all the Churches; Who is weak? and I am not weak? Who is
Offended? and I burn no^? All our Envy should he laid aside. When any Saint is
in Prosperity, we should be g^^d of it; when any Saint is in Adversity, we
should be sad at it; and Enquiring after Newe^ like Pious N^hem^^^^, rather
than curious Athenians, we should count the News abroad, either Good or Bad,
as it fares with the Church of God. We should have most Compassionate
Resentments of whatever Condition, our God may bring any of His own into;
counting our selves (as Paul speaks) also In the Body; and this, even (as Paul
had) For such as have not seen us in the Flesh, and perhaps are never like to
see us.

But Fourthly, our Union with one another must carry a Resemblance to the Union
between the Father and the Son in the Eternal Godhead: This is the pattern for
our Union given here, As thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee. We must not
grossly conceive that this, At, notes Equality, but we are to account it a Note
of Similitude. There are other Scriptures enough to confuse that Arian^sm,
wherein we shall be Entangled, if we allow that gross conceit. There is an
Ineffable Union between the Father and the S on in God But what Union? It Is not
an Unity of Person. Our Lord says not, He is the Father, but He is IN the
Father; nor, the Father is He, but The Father is IN Him. In opposition to the
ancient S^^ bellianism, and the modern Quakerism we must assert more than One
Person in God. It is Affirmed, in Heb. 1. 3. That the Father is a Person, ^t is
Affirmed in 2 Cor. 2. 10. That the Son is a Person. Hence the Father is not the
Son and the S on is not the Father. And surely, He that affirms it must be a
Person too; since all Actions are of S upposites, or Persons: now that Affirme^
is the Holy Ghost* But it is an Unity of Essence, which is here to be Adored.
Thus it is affirm^d, in Joh 10 30 I and my Father are one: Mind the Neuter
Gender and vo^'l see it is not, One Person. It Is One E ssence which all the
Three Persons of the Godhead IS. It is not for us to fathom so profound an
Ab^^ss; but we may cry out, O Lumino^^^^in oe Tenebroe^ Our God, he dwells in
Light, for his Excellency, and yet in Darkness for his Incomprehensibleness.
What we know of this Mystery is by S criptural Revelation. From thence, if one
should attempt, [tho I should scarce approve the Attempt!] a Rational
Demonstration or Il^^stration of the Trinity, one would say, There being but
one God, who also is ^mmeasureably Perfect, we must not admit any Multiplicity
in Him, except what is for the Discovery of his Perfection; nor yet Reject any
Multiplicity, which does make for that Consummate Perfection; all consistent
still with the Unity of the Divine Substance. One would then say, That God
cannot be infinitely and Absolutely Perfect, without the Perception of Himself,
and an immense Joy and Love resulting therefrom, in finding Himself, T he
Alsufficient Good; and this Perception, and this Joy and Love must also be of
the most perfect Kind. One would now say, That Essential Perception, and
Essential Joy and Love is far more Excellent than that which is Modal, such as
Creatures have: whose Perceptions and Operations are with Images, which are not
the Soul it self. This is the Prerogative of the Deity; God has a S ubstantial
Representation of Himself within Himself* and a Substantial Satisfaction
thereupon. The Father is the Fountain of the Deity* The Son is the Express
Image of the Fathers-Person, or God Essentially Representing of God, or the
Eradiation of H^ Glorious Riches and Fullness; therefore also from all Eternity
containing in Him the ^dea of all that was to (...) made in Time; The Holy
Ghost is the wonderful Joy and Love, which God h^^ in Himself by the Grateful
Percepti^^ which the Father and Son Eternally ha^ of one another. I say, A
Working H^^ might reach after some such Conceptions; but I think one should
rather chi^^ a Daring Heart into a silent, and Quie^ Adoration, than go to
Exercise ones ^e^ in Things too high for the very Angels i^ the Highest. I
therefore hasten to say That our Union with one another mu^^ have some
Resemblance to this. But how far? Why, It must be a S piritual Union and not be
founded in Civil or Nat'ra matters only. Again, It must be an Orderly Union;
there must be the Distinction of all Persons preserved Entire. Once more, It
must be a Constant Union; w^ we must always be together never Straggling from
one another. Furthermore, It must be an Holy Union: ^ur Unity with men must be
no further than will stand with Purity. We must not Renounce Truth for Peace,
nor so have Peace with one another, as to have no S alt in our selves. Our
Union must not be a mere Compliance; nor should it quench our Z eal. It Is not
Herod's and Pilates Agreement in Evil, that is to be our Union: while we Follow
Peace with all men, we must no^ come to say or to do, any thing Inconsistent
with, Holiness without which no man shall see the Lord; nor Purchase our Peace
with man, by a War with God. Finally, The Intimacy of our Union is by this
Resemblance intimated unto us; Our Unity must give us a near Perception of one
another Cases; and our Unity must fill us with Joy in, and Love to one
another. We must after a sort find in one another our very selves, and call and
count each other another self. We must be concerned for one another, as if our
very self were bound up in one another.

But, There are two PROPOSAL^ which I am now to make you.

PROPOSAL. I.
Let us now pursue and maintain a Blessed UNION with one another i^ the Lord.
It Is an Invaluable Jewel, a^ UNION, which I am now fallen into the Commendation
of; but, Quis Vitu^ perat? I suppose there is not one of (...) all, but what
will readily subscribe to every C^ause of the Hundred and T hirty Third Psalm;
and I could wish that those melodious Notes of David's Harp might cause the Evil
Spirits of Division ^o depart from us. O that from this Da^, we might all agree
to lay aside, All Expressions of a Groundless o^ Boun^less Displeasure against
any of our Neighbors! and especially, that all Saints would concur ^o give
each other, T he Right Hand of Fellowship, in those more Important Things
wherein they are ind^ed U^^n^mous, and walk together wherein they are Agreed;
and that in the lesser things wherein their Apprehensions are yet various, they
may indulge one another, without all Unchristian Persecutions or Animosities,
and not Revile one another as vile S chismaticks, for every Modest S eparation.
God forbid, that opinionum Varietas, and opinantiam Unitas, must become
Inconsistent! As for S ^rife, no Ink of mine is Black enough to describe the
Prodigious Abominations, the Abominable Consequences of it, All that ever the
most Eloquent Ancients Thundered against S chism, you may apply to the Sin of S
trife in the Churches of God; for indeed S chism is but T hat? Let me ^dd,
Never did the Almighty God use more Omnipotent Arguments to command and caution
men against any sin, than he has to still all strife among his People; and
shall we Quarrel after all? The Son of God is a Lamb; for us to Quarrel, is to
be so unlike Him, that even the Pagan Emperor S everus, when he saw two
Christians Engaged in a Scuffle, gave Order they should never be called C
hristians any more. Our Jesus, like Joseph with his Brethren, has with an
Ungainsayable Importunity besought, That we fall not out. Th^^ Prince of Peace,
It was not only His Dying Prayer, but also his Dying Charge* Th^^ we Love one
another; and common Honesty requires us to fulfill, The (...) of the Dead. The
Spirit of God is Dove: to Quarrel is to show such an overflowing of Gall, as
does no less Dislike him, than it is Unlike Him; (...) it is to Di^rest him of
his Lockets. H^^ strives with us, that we would not b^come Vultures nor
Harpi^^, nor stri^^ with one another; this Work of the Flesh must needs be
distastful to th^^ Spirit. When we don't put away (...) Bitterness, and W rath,
and Anger, (...) do fearfully Grieve Him, and shame full put Him away. Cloven
and Fiery Tongue were things in which he once Exhibited himself; but C loven
and Fur^ou^ Hearts he is ever Banished from. Strife it is a Sin that stirs up
all other sort of Distempers and Corruptions in us the Lusts in our Souls, like
so man chilled, Snakes, do horribly Crawl, an^ Hiss, and Sting, when this Fire
(...) (...) Envigorated 'em: The Devil has Lodging where men do not Ring a
^urse (...) Bell. We are as Bottles; if we take and shake one another, a world
of dirty S tuff will be Raised from the Bottom in us. The Aggressor, and the
Defendent will be to each other, what S olomon speaks, A^ C oals to Burning C
oals. S trife, it is a Sin which hardens our Hearts against all the Means of
Grace and Good; we shall receive no Admonitions, but like Angry Jon^s,
misbehave our selves; and say, I do well in all. And thus all the Spectators
too do come to be prejudiced at the Ways of God; as the Jews are at this Day
so S candalized by our Dissensions, that they plead, T he Eleventh-Chapter of
Isaiah is not fulfilled, and ^o the Messiah cannot be come! Thus, there was a T
^^n in this Land, where an uncomfortable Rupture happened in the Church; and
there a young man was left unto an horrid Murder of himself; but he left behind
him a Writing directed unto his Father, wherein he approved himself: a Warner
to us all; some of his words were, Father, (...) Ruin was the Stubborness and
u^ faithfulness of my Younger Years Evil Coun^il, and Evil Company, and The
Differences in the Church, by reason whereof I grow* proud, and did-not carr^
it in my place as I ought, which is the wide way to Ruin. You see what sa^
work, the Contentions of Churches d^ make for the Rising Generations! O^
Consider of it! Strife, In fine, it is that which brings all manner of Wounds
upon us. Our Prayers, they cannot be without Doubting, when they are no^
without Wrath. Our ^astings, they cannot be such as the Lord has Chosen, while
we are Biting one another. Our S acraments do lose their Efficacies, if such a
strange Fire do accompany them. Who are those that must at-last perish without?
Why, T he Dogs, that are ever a snappish and a snarling sort of Creature? Who
are those that God will pour down Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and
Anguish upon? They are, The Contentious: to whom all that is True or Just, is
usually disagreeable* What S ociety will not quickly moulder away when once it
has Breaches in its Walls? All Ages have confirmed that standing Oracle of our
Lord, An House Divided cannot stand. O that such Thoughts as these might now
promote the Unity of the S pirit in the Bond of Peace, among the People of God!
But if the People of God, like little silly Birds, will still be pecking at one
another, they may fear that some Ravenous Kites may have a permission to make a
prey of all. Alas, must Blessed Ridley, and Hooper, be sent into a Prison^ to
Unite them. They say, None of the Marian Martyrs were tortured with such
Exquisite Fires as they? Shall we bicker about B lack and White, until God make
us meet in Red? When the Primitive Christians had the Feuds among them, for
which they were Exposed as Ridiculous and Contemptible upon the Heathen
Thea^^^, what commonly followed, but such Storms of Blood and Fire upon them
from their Adversaries, as drove them Nearer in their Unions one unto another.
God prevent the Repet^^ions of that Fate upon His People Now; though within the
Memory (...) man, I can tell you, they have in several parts of the World, had
a Repetition of (...) But, There are two or three most Humble Petitions, which
I am now read to Address you with. Only, do me the Justice, to Remember, That I
do no^ Pretend in any Wise to meddle with any Civil Affayrs among the People of
God; all manner of Loyal Submission and Obedience to the Higher Powers for the
Common Good, is what I wish all unto; In the mean time, they are not Civil, but
Sacred UNIONS, which I am now Prosecuting of; and the Concerns wherein I would
appear to persuade my Neighbors unto an Oneness of Mind; or at least where the
first cannot be had, an Oneness of Heart, are purely Ecclesiastical. Now,

First, Where we can Unite in the END, There let us do it; and not Contend
about the WAY leading thereunto. To see an Oneness in the Judgments of all Good
men, upon every Particular in Christianity, is as much ^o (...) despaired of,
as to see an Exact Likeness of all the Faces and Features in the World. But
where we are all set for what is, Holy, and Just and Good, we should shake
hands with one another, saying as in Genesis 13. (...). Let there be no S trife, I
pray thee, between Me, and Thee, for we are Brithren. It Is in Pursuance of this
Golden Rule, that I would further say,

Where we can Unite in Practices, let is do it; although Perhaps we cannot
Unite in the Principles whereupon we proceed in those Practices. The same
Conclusions may by diverse Intellects be formed out of diverse Premises. I say
then, let them not only Hold the Conclusions, but Gladly Hold together in them;
and never Vex one another about the Media which they Raise them on.
Particularly, In many matters of Church Order, there are two Considerations
which may be a Ba^m to heal many Contentions. One is, That the Foundation of
all Church-S ocieties, is laid in the Light and Law of Nature it self, A Church
is a Society of Humane Rac^ (...) and has its Particularities wherein (...)
Conforms to the Common Rules of all Societies. There needs no New Express
Command for what the Law and Light of Nature does require in all Societies
Combining for* the Worship o^ God. Another is this That the First Commandment
ha^s cut out much Business for Church-S ocieties, which it is possible the S
econd Commandment may not so plainly reach unto; yea, such a Society has many
things to do, which not the First, but the Second of the Tables in the Divine
Law, has Enjoined the doing of. I say then if Saints that see not all with the
same Eyes, can do the same things, though not on the same grounds, there is no
Thing to be a Ground for Quarrelling. Pardon me, if I touch upon two or three
Instances, which are, I think, the Only ones, wherein our Churches have their
(not Contentions, blessed be God, but) Varieties. I will meant on them, though I
should meet with the Parters Portion for it; or find (...) observation true,
Media via nequ^ Amicus par^^, (...) Ini^icos (...).

Our Churches do Ordinarily Expect from those whom they Admit unto Constant and
Complete Communion with them, some few savoury Expressions [ Written, if not,
Oral] of what Regenerating Influences the Ordinances, or the Providenoes of
God, have had upon their Souls. There are some, who demand This, as a Thing
required by the Word of God, When, A Confession with the Mouth, and, A
Profession of Repentance as well as Faith, and, A Giving a Reason of the Hope
that is in us, is required; And they look upon this as a Justifying
Circumstance, which a R^sonable C harity is to seek, before it pronounce upon
the C redibility of that C onfession and Profession, whereupon men lay Claim to
Privileges. Others cannot see through this; they rather decry it as, An Humane
Invention. Yet rather than C hurch-Work should be at any Stay, both sides may
Grant, That it is but a piece of Reasonable C ivility, for any that would be
accepted as Members of any Society whatsoever, to Address that S ociety for
that Acceptance; and that whoever does Address a Church of (...) Lord Jesus for
their Fellowship, should Endeavor to do it with such Languag^ and Matter as
may be like that of, On Returning of God. If there be any further Contest,
whether the Brethren, (...) Right are to have any Acquaintan^^ with, or
Interest in, the management (...) this matter, I am Confident, That (...) the
Pastors who are the Porters to the House of our God, will generally Examine
what Experiences their Communicants have attained unto, so the Pasto^^ will as
generally grant, it is not Unlawful ^or them to Communicate unto the Brethren
of the Church, the ^ast which they have had of the Graces in such a^ they now
propound unto them, to b^ ^eceiv'd as Brethren: Yea, That i^ is many ways
Comfortable and Profitable, if not altogether Necessary. Behold then, a Temper,
wherein we may, as hitherto we do, in this thing Unite I have been Concerned
with some Godly People of the S cotch Nation, who have at first shown much and
hot Antipathy against This Way of our Church, and yet ^^k'd Admittance to the
Table of the Lord. These have Consented unto me, That I should put what
Questions I pleased in my Trials of them; That I should herewithal take in
Writing what Minutes I pleased of their Answers to me; That being my self now S
atisfy'd Concerning the my I might If I pleased Offer that S atisfaction unto
any or all of the Churc^^ who looked for it, at our usual Opportunity. These
Concessions immediately opened Their way, in Ours, unto the Table of the Lord,
(...) any Difficulty unto either of (...). (...) it all this while be
Remembered; That I am not proving what must be done; I am only showing what may
be done, to prevent Fires, when they may be like to follow other-wise.

Again, Our Churches are some of them furnished, with Elders, whose whole
Office it is [God help 'em to Do it Well] To Watch ^ver the Conversation of the
Church Members with Authority. It is pleaded, That nothing is Plainer in
Scripture, Than Elders, who Rule well, and are Worthy of Double Honor, though
they do not Labor in Word and Doctrine whereas if there were any Teaching
Elders, who do not Labor in Word an Doctrine, they would be so far from being
Worthy of Double Honor, the they would not be Worthy of any Honor, at all. On
the other side, some cannot see any such thing as what w^ call a Ruling Elder
directed and appointed in the Word of God; ye^ some do still mention the Thing
wi^^ such Exhorbitant and Vilifying Term^ as are far from decent in any thing
which themselves own to be so Disputable. And what shall now (...) done in this
case? I would modestly offer thus much. Let it be first Recognized, That all
the other Church Officers are the Assistents of the Past^r^ who was himself (as
you find, even about what the Deacon has now to do) Entrusted with the Whole
Care of all, until the further pity and kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
joined other Officers unto him, for his Assistence in it. I suppose, None will
be so Absurd as to Deny This at least; That all the C hurch-Officers are to
take the Advice of their Pastor with them. Upon which, I su^ join, That a man
may be a Distinct Officer from his Pastor, and yet' not have a Distinct Office
from him; the Pastor may be the Ruling Elder, and yet he may have Elders to
assist him in Ruling and in the actual Discharge of some Things, which They are
Able and Proper to be serviceable unto him in. This Consideration being laid
in, I will persuade my self, every Pastor among us, will allow me, That there
is much Work to be done for God, in preparing what belongs to the Admission and
Exclusion of Church Members; in carefully inspecting the Way and Walk, of them
all, and the first Appearance of Evil with them; in preventing the very
Beginnings of Ill* Blood among them; and Instructing of all from House to
House, more privately, and Warning of all persons, unto the Things more
peculiarly incumbent on them; in Visiting all the Afflicted, and informing of
and consulting with the Ministers for the Wel^fare of the Whole Flock. And They
must allow me, That This Work is too heavy for any one man; and that more than
one man, yea, no less than all our C hurches do suffer beyond measure, because
no more of This Work is thoroughly performed. Moreover, they will acknowledge
to me, That it is an usual Thing with a Prudent and (...) Faithful Pastor,
Himself (...) single ou^ some of the more grave, solid, aged Brethren in his
Congregation, to Assist him in many parts of this work, o^ many occasions in a
year; nor will such a Pastor ordinarily do any important thing in his
Government, without having first heard the Counsel of such Brethren. In short,
There are few discreet Pastors, but what make many occasional Ruling Elders,
every year I say then, suppose, the Church by a Vote Recommend some such
Brethren (the fittest they have, and always more than one) unto the more S
tates Assistence of their Pastors, in the C hurch Rule wherein they may be
H^^ps unto him? [I do not propose, that they should be Biennial or Triennial
only* though I know very famous Churches throughout Europe have them so!] Yea;
and what if they should by Solemn Fasting and Prayer, be Commended unto the
Benediction of God, in what Service they have to do? What Objection can be made
against the Lawfulness? I think, None* can be made against the Usefulness of
such a thing? Truly, for my part, if the Fifth Chapter of the first Epistle to
Timothy would not bear me out, when Conscience both of my Duty and my Weakness
made me to desire such Assistences, I would see whether the First Chapter of
Deuteronomy would not. Only, let it all this while also be Remembered, That a
total want of Men, is the sad case of some Churches, which cannot be thus
provided for.

Once more; There has been a Controversy, What is the W atch which our Churches
owe to the Adult Children; that were in their Infancy Baptized among us? Or,
indeed, whether any at all? Some do conceive, That the Church Membership which
any have in their Infancy does not ^ease when they come to of Discretion, until
Censurable Evils are found upon them; and that therefore the Churches are so to
watch over them, as to use the Process prescribed in the Eighteenth Chapter of
Matthew upon them, when they fall into Scandals* Others cannot be of that
persuasion, but judge that the Church Membership of Infancy is not Personal and
Immediate, and that it so vanishes when they come to the Age of acting for
themselves, as to dismiss them from any proper Watch of the Churches about
them. How shall these two parties now come together? Perhaps hardly enough;
Nevertheless, Let it be Considered* Whether some cannot come to do that as a
point of pure Morality, which others choose to do as a point of Institution. If
one that feeds and sleeps in my Family do commit any gross Iniquity, I would
Admonish him for it, in the hearing of those that have heard of his Offense;
and if he don't Reform, I would openly fix upon him the Character of, One that
walks Disord^rly. This would I do, as a a piece of Righteous Charity, although
there were never a Text in Matthew, or although there were nothing after the
Fourth of Genesis, to warrant this proceeding. Why then may not Churches count
the Common Law of Reproving, to be Warrant enough, in thus dealing with such as
have been Baptized in their Bosoms, although the Statute Law of Discipline
should be silent in it? Another things that may be Considered is, Whether both
sides might not agree in Reviving the Ancient Ordinance of CONFIRMATION; I
mean, For the Elders of the Churches to send for, their Children as they come
to Men's and Women's Estate, and Examine them strictly about their Conversion to
God, and their Inclinations to Renew and Observe their Baptismal Covenant. Upon
this Examination, They that are found Fit for it, may be Regularly Confirmed in
Church Priviledges. They that are not so, may with suitable Instructions and
Awakenings, be Detained, for a while from some special Ordinances. Both sides
can do This, and if this were well done, it would go far toward the Removing
of many Differences.

I am not unsensible of the further Noises that have been in the Rearing o^ our
Temple, about the Sub jects which B aptism is to be Extended unto. Not only
those that Restrain it unto the Limits of the Lords Supper do vary from the
most of their Neighbors; but, even those which Enlarge it unto the Children of
some that are not in Full Communion, do it not exactly in the same Notion; some
do Baptize them, as being only in a Catholic Church State, and others as being
also in a Particular. And yet they mostly, Accord in this, That the
Administrator of Baptism is generally to be an Officer some way concerned with
a Particular Church, and the Baptized should be under the Laws of our Lord
Jesus as they are Administered in such a Church. I wish matters could be brought
unto a Good Issue here; all that at present I can Contribute unto it, is to do
what E^i^u Resolved, I also will show mine Opinion. It Is this;

That our Lord Jesus Christ has in the World a Catholic Church of Elect^alled
ones, which becomes in Various Degrees Visible unto us; and according to the
Degrees of its Visibility becomes Capable of a Visible Communion with i^^
Glorious Head.

That when men Profess the Faith of the Gospel, or their consent unto the
Covenant of Grace, and overthrow not that Profession by a Scandalous
Conversation, they are to be ^ook'd upon, as belonging to the Visible Catholic
Church of our Lord; they are to be treated as Christians; to call them or count
them Heathen is to do them a Grievous Injury.

That when such Professors Regularly Combine into a Society for the Evangelical
Worship and Service of our Lord Jesus Christ* and furnish themselves with
Officers of His Appointment, they then become a part of the Catholic Church,
so Visible, as to be a Body Politic Entrusted with all the Special Ordinances
of the New Testament.

That a Particular Church, thus in their Officers betrusted with the
Institutions of our Lord Jesus Christ, is to be concerned for Applying some of
those Institutions, unto Sub jects that have no^ yet arrived so far in Visible
Christian^^ as to be the Constituent Parts of tha^ Holy Society.

That Baptism is One Ordinance to be Administered, unto them that are in the
Visible Catholic Church, while the said Christians have not yet Joined
themselves to a Particular C hurch, but are only in a state of Initiation and
Preparation for it. In the Scripture, we do not read (at least, I have not yet
found) of any that were Baptized after their Joining to full Communion in a
Particular Church; but many that were so Before. Wherefore, if any Person of a
blameless Conversation, come to us, Professing his Belief of the Christian
Religion, and Seriously Enter into Covenant with God in Christ, Submitting
therewithal to the Ecclesiastical Government of our Lord Jesus, and Engaging to
labor Continually for those more Positive Evidences of Regeneration, which may
Embolden him shortly to seek an Admission unto the Table of the Lord; surely
such a person may say as the Eunuch did, What ^^'s hinder me (and Mine) to be
Baptized? Persons may* be Disciples, while they are not yet Risen to the more
Experienced state of Brethren; and there may be Subjects in the Kingdom, which
have not yet all the Privileges that the Members of the Corporations lay
claim^ unto: now Baptism should belong sure, to all the Disciples and S ubjects
of our Lord. From a Nursery thus Watered with Baptism, our Churches may be
supplied, from time to time, and multitudes of well-disposed People who by
^oubts and Fears are for a while discouraged from the Lords Table, may thus be
kept under Engagements to be the Lords.

I beseech you to Forgive this my freedom with you^; I cannot but b^ concerned,
because I find, as Op^^tus once, Inter Licet V^strum, et Non Li^et Nostrum,
nutant Ani^oe Populorum: but if Union may be thereby furthered, there will be
no such Forgiveness to be asked for.

We shall be more brief in what re^ains. (...) Wherefore,

Secondly, Where we can Unite, n^^ther in the WAY nor in the END Yet let us not
C ontend so as to break the Law of Brotherly Kindness among the Children of
God. Our Behavior toward the most Wicked and Blood Persecutors, is to be full
of a Christ-like Sweetness, Meekness, and Long-suffering But much more, if any,
of whom it may be hoped that they have, The Root of the Matter, in them should
ever differ from us; Yea, and so far differ too as that our C ommu^ion with
them in S peci^^ Ordinances, comes to be broken up still there is a World of
Mutual Forbearance; which we must accommodate one another with. Still that of
the Apostle is to take place, Romans 12. 10. Be Kindly Aff^ction'd one to another
i^ Love. We must first, Forbear to Impos^ one upon another. It is impossible
for any but, God who form^ the Spirit of man within him, to form the
understandings of men, into a Belief of every C hristian Doctrine^. If we shall
Violently and Forceably C ompell all about us, to take in all our S chemes, we
shall be a^ Inhumane as that Giant, who cut or ^retch'd all his Lodgers, to the
Exact length of the Bed, he had provided for them. Austin was very Zealous in
Writing against the Errors of the Do^atists; and yet he said, he had rather ^e
Slain by them himself, than be an Occasion that any should Persecute them to
Death, for holding of those Errors. And much more, when we have confessed a
thing to be in it self, Indifferent, it is a most Uncharitable thing for us to
C ommand it as Necessary, and then assert that our C ommand has made it
Necessary. Could I speak to the most Swol^n C hurch Governor in the World, I
would Ask him, First, Whether Paul were not a C hurch Governor, of as Great
Authority as any of them all, or all of them together? Next, Whether in Paul's
Days there was not a Grievous Dissension about the use of several Things that
were merely Adi^pho^^^s? Then, Whether an Uninspir'd C ommand of Paul would
have so taken away the Indifferency of those things, as to make them no longer
matters of Disputation, but matters of Observation among (...) Believers? And
then, whether if (...) were so, Paul would not have been the most Uncharitable
of Men, (...) have left those things, as he still d^^ he sti^l does,
Undetermined? Or, certainly, others must be so, when they do Determine such
things as those.

But as we should Forbear all Impositions of one upon another, so should we
Forbear all Prejudices of one against another. Though Calvin could not come to
the Lords Table with Luther, yet says he, I will ever call him an Eminent
Servant of God, yea, though he should call me a Devil. I do not see, That
Christians not joining with others in all the same Rites and Modes of Worship,
must be understood as, Declaring all others to be not in a S tate of Salvation.
Those Angry Men, which fall into a Rage at all Dissenters, as if they did
indeed so Declare, do indeed therein Declare only that as their own Opinion of
those Dissenters. Nor will any man that sufficiently ponders, That in Romans 14
6. where God is Glorified by two opposite parties, think there ^s any Divinity
in that Assertion of those Angry Men. I must join my self, where the Ordinances
are so Administered as that my Conscience tells ^ne, Gods Word and my Good is
therein ^ost attended unto. But a man may Locally separate from very many
pointing Defects and Failures in C hurch-^^dministrations, while he does not
Hear^ly separate from his Obligations to Love and Serve those whom he does not
now meet withal. Briefly, every Difference in Religion, does not make a
Different Religion. And if we think our own Understandings to be a Standard for
all the Rest of Mankind, we do certainly, Think of our selves above what we
ought. But what must our Deportment then toward C onscientious Dissenters be?
I say, All made up of C harity. We are still to be Theirs, U^^^d Aras; and be
ashamed if our Conduct unto them, should not be able to stand before the
Thirteenth Chapter In the first Epistle to the Corinthians. We should make the
fairest constructions of all Actions, and Lovingly take every thin^ by the Best
Handle. We should, (...) we knock with Hard Reasons, yet str^k^ them with Soft
Answers; and let the^ find us of the Tribe, which, Give^ Goodly Words. A S
amaritan sort o^ crabbedness, churlishness, frowardness toward all that are
not in every thing just Jumping with us, and, -- No^ Monstrare vias ^adem nisi
sacra Colenti^^^ It Is not the Spirit of the Gospel. I^ short, we should
conclude as the famous African Synod, upon the Sub ject of Baptism did, Neminem
Judicamus (...) Diversum in hac Re Senserit. We must beware how we Monopolize
all Godliness to our own Little Party; in the same Decalogue, the same
Lawgiver that says, Thou shall not W orship a Graven Image, also says, Thou
shall not bear False W itness against thy Neighbor. Wherever we can see,
Al^quid Christ any thing of Christ, let it be dear to us. A Moses may pay for
an undue Heat against his Erring Brethren and the case may be so, that an
Erroneus C yprian may deserve better th^n an Orthodox Stephen, in the
Charitable Resentments of Godly Men. If nothing will satisfy us, but the
Extirpation of all that are not of our party, God has told us what will follow,
Ye shall be Consumed one of another. I may argue as L^ct^ntius did of old; your
Opposites are either Wise or Fools: If they be Wise, you should Follow them; if
they be Fools, you should Pity them; there is no place for any Malicious
Pro^^^ (...) Let me, in a word say, as the Apostle once, Why do thou set at
^^ought thy Brother? Let us follow after ^he things that make for Peace: and
let me beg, That the Fourteenth Chapter to the Romans may not become Apochrypha.

Thirdly, Let Mortality Affect us, and Humility Adorn us, and both together
will soon Unite us. Be Affected with Mortality. They say, Dust thrown on
Fighting Bees, will presently make 'em give over the Fight. If we are prone to
Sting one another, Let us cast a little of our Grave-Dust upon us, by our
Devout, Gracious, Antedating Meditations. If we would not be Wranglers, Let us
not forget that we are Mortals. Especially, when it comes to stabbing of one
another with Pens, Let us Remember our S and runs faster than our Ink, and we
are as Brittle as the Glasses which we now use instead of Ink-horns. How near
are we to that State, Ubi Luthero cum Z^inglio optime j^m Convenit? A Luther
and a Zuinglius will be less eager one against another, if they think, How soon
they are to meet! But, be also Adorned with Humility. It is that upon which I
may Employ the Panegyric of Te^tullus, O thou most Noble Virtue, By thee we
Enjoy great Quietness. We know, Lowliness, and Long-suffering do go together.
We have long since been told, (and it has been Descanted on by the Quill of one
among us, who by his Treatise called, A Little Peacemaker, has been Earning a
Name among, The Children of God.) Only by P ride comes Contention; it is That
which is the Grand. Barretor and Boute^e^ of the Universe. It Is said, The proud
man i^ as he that Transgresses by Wine; that is, he is very Quarrelsome. What
needs be said more? Only, What the Wise man said, Cast o^^^ the Scorner, and
Contention shall go out. If every S heaf* must always how to Yours and Mine,
when shall we be quiet? Were we all so Humble as we should be, it would hinder
our making that Insolent S yllogism, A Person who i^ never Liable to Mistake,
is one whom no man can sincerely or christianly Differ from. But I am a Person
who am Liable to no Mistakes; therefore whoever Differs from me, is an
Intolerable Creature. And if such a Syllogism were never shaped in our
conceits, the World would not be so full of Tempest as it is (...)

In fine, That I may Repeat nothing, which I have said for the pressing of
Union among the Children of my People, in four several Discourses formerly
Published, -- I now take the Leave, only to Add, a few Ejaculations on the
behalf of my Beloved Neighbors.

First, May none of our Churches be called, Esek, and S^^na, because of any S
trife among us At present, I hope, our Lord looks upon this part of America,
saying, My Dove is One! and (...) pray, that it may ever be so. The Oldest of
the Churches in this Colony, is at Salem; God Grant they may All of them,
always dwell in, Peace, Concord is the Name on one of our Towns; may it be a
Frame in all the Rest. And may the Rebuke that was given to the Litigious
Corinthians, never come to be ours, Whereas there are among you Divisions, are
ye not Carnal? May we, as far as we can, Anticipate the Days of the
New-Jerusalem; which are quickly, The Things to be Looked for, by Banishing all
War from the midst of us. May we keep a Perpetual Sabbath, which may resemble
the, Rest Remaining for the People of God, by Kindling no Fires within our
Gates. We are S heep; no room I beseech you, for the Rage of Dogs and Wolves in
our Hearts.

Secondly, May our Pastors all of them forego all Strife but that of Love and
Good Works, and, K^ss each other in the Mount of God! We are advised, Envy is
Rottenness in the Bones; and it may be, we know the Name of that Old
Interpreter, who by Bones there understands, Men of Ch^ef Place among the
People of God. It was a madness in the Priests of B^al, to cut and slash
themselves; it will be as mad for us to serve one another so. Our very Name
Reminds us, that we are Under-Rowers to our Lord Jesus Christ; if we don't all
of us, pull the same way, What will become of our Little Boat? The Scriptures
speaks about, The Mouth of all the Prophets, as if they all had but One Mouth.
If we cannot have but One Mouth, yet let us have but One Heart; and let not the
Lion ever find any one of the ^our oxen alone by himself, What ^ame of the
Ominous Paroxysms, between Chrysosiom and Epiphanius? What a Woeful Discord was
that of Peter and Meletius in the Gaol? Or that of those two Great Persons who
being sent into the Mines made a Wall between their Works, and would not meet
until the Stake tied them together?

To have done, Let all manner of S trife, be avoided by all manner of men, all
manner of Ways. Take that Counsel, that Command, in Romans 12. 18. If it be
Possible, as much as Lies in You. Live Peaceably with all men. You have been
warned, That if you be not as Little Children, you shall not Enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; and, That the Extinction of all Malice is the thing wherein
you are to be as Little Children. If there are any Personal Piques among you,
Let 'em all immediately Evaporate. Two Pagans from Contending once, come to
Compounding, and one ingeniously owned unto the other that had given him cause
to own it; You are the more Worthy man; for I began the Stife, and you began
the Peace. Behold, Christians, a way for you to get the Better of your
Adversaries; the Almighty God Himself, by first Beseeching us to be Reconciled
unto. Himself, has Led you the Way.

Thus, Live in Peace, and the God^ of Love and Peace will be with You!

PROPOSAL. II.
But let us at the same Tim^, Give our Thanks to our God, for the Blessed
UNION, which He has lately been disposing a Considerable, part of His People
abroad unto. It is to be Remarked how often the Evangelist Luke, records the,
ONE ACCORD, which the Primitive Believers were famous for; that, ONE ACCORD,
seems to be Celebrated as one of the most Memorable things that could be
mentioned. We have heard, That our Brethren beyond the Seas, are hopefully
curing the Gang ^^es of which* heretofore they have Complained, and coming to
ONE ACCORD, in those Things which formerly have been, Apples of S trife, among
them. We have heard, That the Body of our Brethren is no more like the Monster
once born in Scotland, (as we read) which was born with two Heads, that were
still arguing, opposing, and in Eager Disputes assaulting one another. The
Tidings have been, As Cold Waters to our Thirsty Souls; and I bespeak your
Praises on that behalf, to the God (...) Makes Peace in His High Places. It is
not for ^xe to Prognosticate upon this Transaction; though I know tha^ when
Abraham had propov'd overtures of Peace unto his Kinsman, God immediately
showed him the Land of Promise, and said, All this Land, unto the^ ^ill I give
it! But I Will q^ote you a few words of the Reverend MEADS, In* the Sermon
Preached upon Occasion of it* Says he,

Brethren, Lift up your Heads; and look for Great Things to Result from this
Work of making, The two Sticks One. I am well persuaded That God has a Great
Design in this Thing; and that it will have a further Extent, than you can
foresee. How far it may reach to hasten the Removal of all Made Things, who can
tell? This is plain in Scripture, That Z ions Building, and Babylons Ruin, the
Lambs Marrying, and the Whores Burning, do go together. The Church Militant and
Malignant are like a pair of Bal^ances, or the Buckets of a Well; as one goes
up, the other goes down.

But whatever the Effect of this Dispensation of God be without, I am
persuaded, it will be great within; and therefore Look for some glorious
Appearance of Christ in your C hurches, as the Blessed Fruit of it, Thus he.

But, while I thus Raise the Notes of your Praises to God for this
Dispe^^^tion, Let me also obtain your Pray^^ be mingled therewithal; Your
Pr^^^^ That this UNION and the Interest of Gods Word, and Holiness and Religion
(...) it, may, Run and be Glorified; for Satan will doubtless endeavor to
undermine it.

A certain King of England holding a Treaty of Peace with a French King, in an
old Chapel that lay between their Two Armies, both came to a good Agreement;
but as they were coming out of the Chapel, a S nake ^uddenly crept out of the
old Wall, which they seeing Drew their Swords, and their Servants at the Door
Drew likewise. Upon this the whole Armies no less furiously tha^ ignorantly,
advanced upon one another, and Commenced a Battle, wherein (...) most horrid
Slaughter was made, before the Mistake was Rectified. Alas, It often thus comes
to pass; when the Servants of God, have been just finishing a Reconciliation,
the Old Serpent will interpose and interrupt it all. But let us pray for the
Arrival of the Day, when (...) Old S erpent shall be Bound; and this the more
hopefully, in^smuch as yo^ now ^ee a further Symptom of its Approaches; When
the, Two S ticks are made one, it soon follows, David my Servant shall be King
over them.

But while I thus Excite your Prayers, I shall gratify your Expectations with a
Copy of what, I know you very much Desire to see.

HEADS of AGREEMENT Assented to by the United Ministers, formerly called,
PRESBYTERIAN and CONGREGATIONAL.
I. Of CHURCHES and CHURCH MEMBERS.
WE Acknowledge our Lord Jesus Christ to have One Catholic Church, or Kingdom,
comprehending all that are United to Him, whether in Heaven or Earth. And do
conceive the whole multitude of Visible Believers, and their Infant Seed
(commonly called the Catholic Visible Church) to belong to Christ's Spiritual
Kingdom in this World. But for the notion of a Catholic Visible Church here,
as it signifies its having been collected into any formed Society, under a
Visible human Head on Earth, whether one Person singly, or many collectively,
We with the rest of Protestants, Unanimously disclaim it.

2. We agree, That particular Societies of Visible Saints, who under Christ
their Head, are statedly joined together for ordinary Communion with one
another, in all the Ordinances of Christ, are particular Churches, and are to
be owned by each other, as Instituted Churches of Christ, tho differing in
apprehensions and practice in some lesser things.

3. That none shall be admitted as Members, in order to Communion in all the
special Ordinances of the Gospel but such persons as are knowing and sound in
the fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion, without Scandal in their
Lives; and to a Judgment regulated by the Word of God, are persons of visible
Godliness and Honesty; credibly professing cordial* subjection to Jesus Christ.

4. A comperen* Number of such visible Saints (as before described) de become
the capable Subjects of stated Communion in all the special Ordinances of C
hrist, upon their mutual declared consent and agreement to walk together
therein according to Gospel Rule. In which declaration, different degrees of
Expliciteness, shall no way hinder such Churches from owning each other, as
Instituted Churches.

5. Tho Parochial Bounds be not of Divine Right, yet for common Edification,
the Members of a particular Church ought (as much as conveniently may be) to
live near one another.

6. That each particular C hurch has Right to choose their own Officers; and
being furnished with such as a^^ duly qualified and ordained according to the
Gospel Rule, has Authority from Christ for exercising Government, and of
enjoying all the Ordinances of Worship within it self.

7. In the Administration of Church Power, it belongs to the Pastors and other
Elders of every particular Church (if such there be) to Rule and Govern: and to
the Brotherhood to C onsent according to the Rule of the Gospel.

8. That all Professors as before described, are bound in duty, as they have
opportunity, to join themselves as fixed Members of some particular Church
their thus joining, being part of their professed subjection to the Gospel of C
hrist, and an instituted means of their Establishment and Edification; whereby
they are under the Pastoral Care, and in case of scandalous or offensive
walking, may be Authoritatively Admonished or Censured for their recovery, and
for vindication of the Truth, and the Church professing it.

9. That a visible Professor thus joined to a particular Church, ought to
continue steadfastly with the said Church; and not forsake the Ministry and
Ordinances there dispersed, without an orderly seeking a recommendation unto
another Church. Which ought to be given, when the case of the person apparently
requires it.

II. Of the Ministry.
1. WE agree, That the Ministerial Office is instituted by Jesus Christ, ^or
the Gathering, Guiding Edifying Governing of his Church; and to continue to the
end of the world.

2. They who are called to this Office, ought to be endued with competent
Learning, and Ministerial Gifts, as also with the Grace of God, ^ound in
Judgment, not Novices in the Faith and Knowledge of the Gospel; without
scandal, of holy Conversation, and such as devote themselves to the Work and
Service thereof.

3. That Ordinarily none shall be Ordained to the work of this Ministry, but
such as are called and chosen thereunto by a particular Church.

4. That in so great and weighty a matter, as the calling and choosing a Pastor,
w^ judge it ordinarily requisite, That every such Church consult and advise with
the Pastors of Neighboring Congregations.

5. That after such Advice, the Person consulted about, being chosen by the
Brotherhood of that particular Church over which he is* to be set, and he
accepting, ^e duly ordained, and set apart to his Office over them; wherein t^s
ordinarily requisite. That the Pastors of Neighboring Congregations concur
with the Preaching* Elder, or Elders, if such there be.

6. That whereas such Ord^^a^i^^ is only intended for such as never before had
been ordained to the Ministerial Office; If any judge* that in thee (...) also
of the removal of one formerly, ordained; to a new Station or Pastoral Charge,
there ought to be alik^ solemn recommending him and his Labor to the Grace and
Blessing of God; no different Sentiments or Practice herein, shall be any
occasion of Contention or Breach of C ommunion among us.

7. It is expedient, that they who enter on the work of Preaching the Gospel,
be no^ only qualified for Communion of Saints; but also that, except in cases
extraordinary, they give proof of their Gifts and fitness for the said work,
unto the Pastors o^ Churches of known abilities to discern and judge of their
qualifications; That they may be sent forth with Solemn Approbation and Prayer;
which we judge needful, that no doubt may remain concerning their being Called
to the work; and for preventing (as much as in us lies) Ignorant and rash
Intruders.

III. Of Censures.
1. AS it cannot be avoided, but that in the Purest C hurches on Earth, there
will sometimes Offenses and S candals arise by reason of Hypocrisy and
prevailing corruption; so Christ has made it the D^ty of every Church, to
reform it self by S piritual Remedies, appointed by him to be applied in all
such cases; viz. Admonition and Excommunication.

2. Admonition, being the rebuking of an Offending Member in order to
conviction, is in case of private offenses to be performed according to the
Rule in Mat. 18. v. 15, 16, 17. and in case of public offenses, openly
before-the Church, as the Honor of the Gospel, and nature of the Scandal shall
require: And if either of the Admonitions take place for the recovery of the
fallen Person, all further proceedings in a way of censure, are thereon to
cease, and satisfaction to be declared accordingly.

3. When all due means are used, according to the Order of the Gospel, for the
restoring an offending and scandalous* Brother; and he notwithstanding remains
Impenitent, the Censure of Excommunication is to be proceeded unto; Wherein the
Pastor and other Elders (if there be such) are to lead, and go before the
Church; and the Brotherhood to give their consent* in a way of obedience unto
Christ, and unto the Elders, as over them in the Lord.

4. It may sometimes come to pass, that a Churchmember, not otherwise
Scandalous, may sinfully withdraw; and divide himself from the C ommunion of
the Church to which he belongs: In which case, when all due means for the
reducing him, prove ineffectual, he having hereby ^ut himself off from that
Churches Communion; the Church may justly esteem and declare it self discharged
of any further inspection over him.

IV. Of Communion of Churches.
1. WE Agree, that Particular Churches ought not to walk so distinct and
separate from each other, as not to have care and tenderness toward one
another. But their Pastors ought to have frequent meetings together, that by
mutual Advice, Support Encouragement, and Brotherly intercourse, they may
strengthen the hearts and hands of each other in the ways of the Lord.

2. That none of our Particular Churches shall be subordinate to one another;
each being endued with equality of Power from Jesus Christ. And that none of
the said particular Churches, their Officer, or Officers, shall exercise any
Power, or have any Superiority over any other Church, or their Officers.

3. That Known Members of particular Churches, constituted as aforesaid, ^ay
have occasional Communion with one another in the Ordinances of the Gospel,
viz. the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, S inging Psalms, dispensed according to the
mind of Christ: Unless that Church with which they desire Communion, has any
just exception against them.

4. That we ought not to admit any one to be a Member of our respective
Congregations, that has joined himself to another, without endeavors of
mutual Satisfaction of the Congregations concerned.

5. That one C hurch ought not to blame the Proceedings of another, until it
has heard what that C hurch charged, its Elders, or Messengers, can say in
vindication of themselves from any charge of irregular or injurious Proceedings.

6. That we are most willing and ready to give an account of our C hurch
Proceedings to each other, when desired; for preventing or removing any
offenses that may arise among us. Likewise we shall be ready to give the right
hand of fellowship, and walk together according to the Gospel Rules of C
ommunion of C hurches.

V. Of Deacons and Ruling Elders.
WE agree, The Office of a Deacon is of Divine Appointment, and that it belongs
to their Office to receive lay out, and distribute the C hurches Sto^^ to its
proper uses, by the direction of the Pastor, and the Brethren if need be. And
whereas diverse are of opinion, That there is also the Office of Ruling Elders,
who labor not in word and doctrine; and others think otherwise; We agree, That
this difference make no breach among us.

VI. Of Occasional Meeting of Ministers. and^
1. WE agree, That in order to concord, and in any other weighty and difficult
cases, it is needful, and according to the mind of C hrist, that the Ministers
of several Churches be consulted and advised with about such matters.

2. That such Meetings may consist o^ smaller or greater Numbers, as the matter
shall require.

3. That particular C hurches, their respective Elders, and Members, ought to
have a reverential regard to their judgment so given, and not dissent there
from, without apparent grounds from the word of God.

VII. Of our Demeanor toward the (...) Civil MAGISTRATE*
1. WE do reckon our selves obliged continually to pray for God's Protection,
Guidance, and Blessing upon the Rule's set over us.

2. That we ought to yield unto them not only subject o^ in the Lord, but
support, according to our station and abilities.

3. That if at any time it shall be their pleasure to call together any Number
of ^s, or require any account of our Affairs, and the ^^^te of our C
ongregations, we shall no^ readily express all dutiful regard to them hereon.

VIII. Of a Confession of Faith.
AS to what appertains to soundness of Judgment in matters of Faith, we esteem
it sufficient, That a Church acknowledge the Scriptures to be the word of God,
the perfect and only Rule of Faith and Practice; and own either the Doctrinal
part of those commonly called the Articles of the Church of England, or the C
onfession, or C atechisms, Shorter or Larger comp^led by the Assembly at (...)
or the C onfession, agreed on at the S^voy, to be agreeable to the said Rule.

IX. Of our Duty and Deportment toward them that are not in Communion with
(...).
1. WE judge it our duty to bear a C hristian Respect to all Christians,
according to their several Ranks and Stations, that are not of our Persuasion
or C ommunion.

2. As for such as may be ignorant of the Principles of the C hristian
Religion, or of vicious conversation, we shall in our respective Places, as
they give opportunity, endeavor to explain to them the Doctrine of Life and
Salvation, and to our uttermost persuade them to be reconciled to God.

3. That such who appear to have the Essential Requisites to C hurch-C
ommunion, we shall willingly receive them in the Lord, not troubling them with
Disputes about lesser ma^^ers.

As we Assent to the forementioned HEADS of AGREEMENT; so we Unanimously
Resolve, as the Lord shall enable us, to Practice according to them.

FINIS.
ERRATA. In the Dedication, Page 4. (...) 13. for Named, read Examined. In
(...) ^ook, page.44.l. 11. r. In Necessari^s.


