A MIDNIGHT CRY An Essay For our AWAKENING out of that Sinful Sleep, To which
we are at THIS TIME too much disposed; And For our DISCOVERING of what peculiar
things there are in This Time, That are for our AWAKENING, a Discourse given on
a Day of PRAYER, kept by the NORTH-CHVRCH in BOSTON. 1692.

By COTTON MATHER.

Now Published for the use of that (...) together with a Copy of
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS and PROTESTATIONS made in pursuance of the Reformation, Whereto
we are to be Awakened.

Animis haec Scri^^ non Auribus

BOSTON, Printed by John Allen, Samuel Phillips, and are to be Sold (...) Shop,
at the West End of the (...) House. 1692.

To the CHURCH in the North-part of BOSTON.
WHen the old Pagan Historians tell us the Name (...) One, who, they sa^, fe^^
into a Sleep, that lasted above Seventy ^ears, and when the old Christian
Historians (...) the Names of Seven, who, they sa^, (...) Sleep, for near Two
Hundred Years t^ge^her; we count that we Read, A Fab^e* But ^f I tell you, That
the whole World has been ^enerally Asleep for some Thousands of Y^a^s; and that
particular Professors of R^lig^^n in ^his Age of the Wo^ld, are ordinari^y
Asleep ^ll their Days, I should therein but (...), A Truth, as horrible, as
notorious. As for Y^u, (...) Dear Change, the Office which I sustain t^^ards
you, is that of a WATCHMAN* and in (...) Discharge of (...) Off^ce, I (...) ^ut
(...) your hands, another perpetual INSTRV^ENT for your AWAKENING, l^st when
our (...) comes, He find you Sleeping! I have (...) Published it with so much
presumption as (...) propound therein the Direction of (...) Churches. But I
have (...) a Small Impression, that I may fulfill my p^omise of (...) every one
of you, a Copy of this ^our Moni^or; so that perhaps I may (...) of this Book,
as (...) Philosopher did of his, It Is Published, but (...) made Public. And
now, For-ever Magnified be that Grace of thine, O Lord (...) God, which has
thus Enabled me to give (...) Warnings of a Watchman! may it be (...) that they
do live, who have been war^^d: and that I also have Delivered my own (...).

A midnight Cry.
Made on a DAY of PRAYER; kept by the North-Church in BOSTON.
IT IS a passage occurring in the no less Believed than Famous Records of
Antiquity. That the Blessed Austin* while he was yet a Stranger to the
Blessedness of the New Creature, had that (...) from Heaven given unto him Take
up an^ Read! Take up and Read! And that wh^^ thereupon he Took up the Bible
(...) the place which by the direction of pro^^^dence he Read, was the Latter
end of (...) 13 t^ C^apter to the R^mans. That he (...)* Thi^ he Read* and it
proved the mean (...) his bringing home to God.

It Is not by any thing like Chance, but by a Reasonable, and I hope, a
Profitable Choice* that a Text from that very Paragraph (...) Script^re, i^ n^w
to be laid before us: (...) there be as good success attending of it! (...)
Advice from Heaven this Day unto us (...) Take up and read* and the particul^^
Sentence of the Inspired and Unerring Wri^tings, which I must Invite you to
Take (...) and Read; is that, in Romans XIII.11. AND THAT KNOWING THE TIME,
THAT IT IS HIGH TIME TO AWAKE OVT OF SLEEP.



IT is the Remark of the Apostle, concerning a Resurrection from the Sleep of
DEATH, in 1 Cor. 15.1^ (...) be not such a thing, then is our Pre^c^ing in
vain. The same Remark I may, and (...) do, make upon a Resurrection from the
(...) of SIN, Our Preaching is in vain, if such (...) do not come to pass.

(...) possible, yea, probable, That (...) of our Preaching may be the thing
(...) Almighty God, shall make use, to (...) us out of our Sleep; and then
(...) neither That nor All our Preaching, will (...) in vain: An Essay must now
be made (...) it.

There were two very Different Reports in (...) Third Heaven of old, about the
Condi^^on of men here in this lower World. One (...) that in Zech. 1.11.
Behold, the Whole (...) sits (...), and is at R^st; or, Sleeps. another was
that in Act. 9.11. Behold, he (...). It will be a sad thing if the Former
^^aracter must belong unto us, Behold, they (...) No, It Is the Latter Character
whereof we should be all Ambitious, Behold, they Pray! It Is this Day with us, a
Day for it. But indeed, the Characters are utterly Inconsistent with, and
mutually Destructive of, each other. What has been said of Sinning* may be said
of S^eeping, which are the same, (...) Praying will make us leave Sleeping,
(...) S^eeping will make us leave P^aying. And for that cau^^, (...) Day set
apart for Praying: a Text which bespeaks, and requires our (...)* does now
demand our Meditations. On a Sacred Fist we ought Naturally to (...) more
Sleepl^^s than on another Day; (...) on such a Day, we should not (...) at
(...).

The Great Apostle, having Instructed (...) in the graciou^ and glorious Way of
Justi^^ (...) Ri^^te^usness of the Lord (...) Christ, ^e pr^ceeds to show how
Justi^^^ Persons* not (...), but also will, beha^^ themselves That Faith which
does Just^^^ (...) the Righteousness of (...) Lord Jesus Christ free^y Tendered
unto (...) by God, for our Justification before Hi^ will not permit the
Believer to Live without Ab^unding in (...) w^rks of the Lord, or wit^^out
Bringing (...) much of that Fruit, where^^ the Heavenly Father man be
glorified. A Jus^^^fy'd Person, is always touched with a (...) prejudice
against the Sins, from which he (...) been Justified; he conceives that his
(...) delivered from the Condemning Power of the Law, does not R^lease him
from, but unspeakably and everlastingly Oblige him to, the Commanding Power of
it; his Gratitude unto the Lord that has Redeemed and Pardoned him, will cause
him for ever to be zealous of the Good Works for which he is Purified, and
avoid those Abominable (...) which are Hated by the Soul of God. Liberty from
Sin, and not Liberty for sin, is the only Liberty in the account of such a man.
For one to make a Trade of Doing Ill Things, under the Encouragement of what
Kind Things are done for us in the New Covenant, (...) altogether incompatible
unto a person, whose peace is made with God; I may bold^^ say, It Is not a spot
of Gods Children; but ^^at such as thus, Turn the Grace of God into ^antonness,
have upon them the Brand of ^ngodly Men. Our Apostle, in pursuance (...) this
Doctrine, does press an universal San^^ification, as the thing wherewith
Justificati^^ ever is accompanied. And our Text accordingly follows upon the
Inculcation of ^everal Things, whereof every Sanctified Be^iever must and shall
be studious, on the ^core of his being Justified. Universal Sanctity is here
urged under the General Meta^hor and Expression of, Waking out of Sleep. And
the Figure of waking is used, that so an Exh^^^^tion to the Lively Performance
of (...) things before called for, might be the (...) Livelily Insinuated. The
Apostle had said, Be Fervent, Serving the Lord. He (...) says, Be wakeful in
that Service; be not per^functory; be not Sluggish, be not (...) act like Men.
Awake, in what you have to do. There are two Circumstances in th^^ Exhortation,
which we may take notice of.

First, We have a Transition to it. And tha^. The clause is Elliptical. It Is as
much as to say, Moreover, or Furthermore; and it is as if it had been said, Be
sure to mind THAT. It is THAT, which you are to set a, Note We^^, upon.

Secondly, We have a^ Argument for (...) Knowing the Time, that it is High
Time. Something there is in the Time, that powerfully (...) us to our work.
There is a Cry in the (...) against those Vices, whereto we are (...)

So lies the Text*

It Is a Day, wherein we see the Flame War Enkindled almost through all the
part^ Eu^ope, and the mortal Spark^ of it flying ^^ver into America.

It Is a Day, wherein those Critical (...) are formed, which will in a few months
(...) such Irretrievable Issues, as may aforehand (...) us all to Tremble for
the Ark.

It Is a Day wherein the Romanists (...) sensible of the Advantage which their
(...) one have given to the Protestants, are thou^^^^ful of such Accommodations
as may leave (...) Lords poor Little Flocks, without the Defe^^ arising from,
Wolves pulling one another (...) their Throats*

It Is a Day, where^n Great Britain is agita^ed with such Earthquakes, as will
Terminate How, and When, O Lord, Thou know!

Finally, It Is a Day, wherein we see our Own Country weltring and wasting under
the Fiery Rebukes of Heaven; A Day, wherein we see our dear Neighbors
Butchered and Captived, by the most Barbarous Canibals, with whom, Every Act of
Civility is a sort of Miracle, almost aequal to that of the Lions Muzled in
Daniels Den; A Day, wherein we are panting and pining to Death, under the
Distempers of (...) manifold Vnsettlements. Day, did I call it! Yea, Although the
Sleeping Virgins may make (...) so much as a Dream of it, Yet I will con^ently
speak it, It is the quarter of the Night ^^erein the world is to have that
Midnight (...) sounded in it is heavy Ears, Behold, the Bride^^^n comes! All
these, and more such things, have ^ade this alarm unto me, What meanest thou,
(...) Sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God. And that (...) may do the part of a
Watchman, I must Con^ey to you the like Alarm. The Prophet ^peaking, perhaps
of Our Day; or at least of a Day, wherein the pretended Brethren of our Lords
Disciples, have been very busy at, Casting them out for his names sake; he
adds, in Isa. 66.6. A voice of Noise from the City, a voice from the Temple, a
voice of the Lord. There is (...) this Day such a voice from every corner ^oth
at home and abroad, reaching of us; the ^oice is, Awake; It Is high time to AWAKE
ou^ ^f Sleep.

That I may do what I can to render (...) Voice as penetrating to Your Souls,
as I wo^^^ have it be to Mine, there is this Truth whi^^ from the Text now in
my hands, I am to (...) before you.

It is the Interest of all Men, at all Times, (...) shake off all Sinful Sleep,
especially at (...) Times, as carry more peculiar Awakenings in them. There are
three Conclusions, Wherein th^s matter may be Dressed for your Entertainmen^.
When you have laid these things togethe^* You Will see What our Sinful Sleep is,
Yo^^ see How, and Why, and mo^^ peculi^^ When, we are to shake it off.

CONCLUSION I.
There is a Sinful Sleep, whereto (...) Souls of men are liable.

We may not Imagine that our Souls (...) fall into the Sleep of a Senseless
Condition, when we Die; no, the least suspicion of su^^ a thing would make me
cry out, and eve^^ good man would join with me in that Exclamation, God forbid!
The Opinion of the Psychopannychist, or, Soul-sleeper, is too vile ^ thing for
any man to swallow. If any Crea^ure that is called Man, will suppose, that when
he Dies, he has not a Never-lying Soul, to exist in (...) apprehensive of his
(...), Let him (...) only a little more (...), to make a (...). For my part, I
cannot Heard among such D^eame^s, nor could the Apostle Paul, when he said, I
(...) to be (...), and to be with Christ. When men Die, then indeed they S^^ep;
How? ^Tis in regard of their Bodies rather than their (...)* The very Devils
themselves* though the most unblushing Liars, yet have been sufficient and
credible Witnesses to this Truth. It Is well known, that the Devils make a
Compact with some Witches, to be the Masters of their Souls upon their
Departure hence; and such W^^ches have been among our selves Convicted by so
fair and full a process of Law, as would render the Denyers thereof worthy of
no Reasonabler Company than that in (...)* and greater P^odigie^ than any that
^re in Witc^craft it self. If any therefore will not Believe M^ses and the
Prophets, which tell us, that our (...) elsewhere Ar^, and (...)* when our
Bod^^s are Incinerated in their Graves, Let them know, That some have come unto
us from the ^am^ed for our Conviction of it. Nevertheless, That our Souls do
often fall into the Sleep of a Secure Condition, while we Live* is a thing
whereof we have, alas, too pernicious, too lamentable Evidences.

There is* first, something that I may call a Moral Sleep of the Soul. Which
is* when (...) not Active, but rather u^ele^s in us. When a man (...), either
his own, or an higher.) You may safely say of that man, He Is fast Asleep. It
was said in Ps. 94 8 Understand, ye B^uitish, among the people. A B^ui^ish
people are ^ Sleeping People. There are some (...) the common Rules of Rea^^n,
but (...) if all the powers of Reason were Asleep within them. It Is a Rule of
Reason, Where a^l ot^ers perish, there I should not venture; nor should I
Drink, where all that have tasted before me, do meet with Death in the Pot: It
is ^ Rule of Reason, When I follow any way, I should f^^esee the end it will
bring me to. It is a Ru^^ of Reason, I should not expose my self to the (...)
and Vengeance of an Enemy, with which there is no possibility of my making my
party good. That Reason which is given us for our conduct in a dangerous world,
has many such Rules whereby to steer. But, These, and many more such Rules of
R^ason how little are they regarded by the most of men? At least in the affayrs
of their Immortal Souls; whereof Reason says, Men should be most exactly
Rational? It Is because of a certain Sleep that has Locked up the Apprehensions
of Reason in them.

But there is then also, a more Spiritual Sleep, which comes upon many a Soul.
And That is when a principle of Grace, is no^ Active, Stirring, Operative and
Influential, in the Soul.

There is a P^e^iminary Distinction, which I am in the First place to make upon
it. We are to Distinguish, between the Dead Sleep of D^mning u^regeneracy: and
the Deep Sleep of Living Christianity. There is (...) Es^ential Difference
between the Sleep of the Foolish, and of the (...) Virgins. Of the (...) it may
be (...), as in Ep^. 2.1 He is Dead in Trespasses and Sins. Of the Saint, it
may be said, as in Mat^. ^.24. He is* Not Dead but Sleepe^^. The Believer is
not ^eft (...) a Total, and a (...): no, not at (...) worst estate; the Habits
of Grace are yet (...) within him, and some (...) thereof w^^ld (...) Trial be
soon (...) from ^im, (...) his worst Estate. In which (...) his profoundest
S^eeps and (...) may (...) say, as in Cant. 5.2. I S^eep (...). Had you come to
(...) of that Sleep which (...), Grant me to kn^w your (...) End, and What
(...) th^n from his very Soul have Answered, (...) have the thoughts of ^aving
any (...) the (...) God, for my End, and my Lord for ever? (...), had you come
to Peter, in the midst of that (...), wherein Satan so fatally took him (...)*
and asked him, Friend, upon a little delibe^^^ion, What regards have (...) for
the Savior (...) you have so perfideously denied? He would (...) a Real Heart
have answered, (...) He is the Son of the Living God, and I had rather be (...)
with (...) Horses, than (...) ^nterest in that life eternal, the (...) Him
Whereas, On the other sid^* we may use the Language of the (...). 1.4. The
(...)* No^ their Souls are to closed up with a (...) S^ee^ upon them, that
(...) Almighty Go^ should pu^^, not the^^ (...) their ver^ Hea^ts* out of their
sides, they would lie stil^ where the^ were. We are now ready to observe
particularly.

First, Men are (...)* when they Remit their (...) toward God He of old cou^^
say, (...) me up* whereas (...) many it (...). The^^ S^eep has eat^^ up (...).
The^ that are not Acted (...) a R^^pect unt^ Go^ continually, or that (...) the
mo^^ Affectionat^ Thoughts of Go^ and (...) ^^erein do fa^^ Asleep. As (...)
may have some Faith; (...)* Even that which is called (...) Work^ess one, (...)
a (...). He has but a dull, sma^l* Opinion* (...) of Invisible Things, and such
an one (...) makes ^word a due Impression upon the Heart and Life* but leaves
the like Pass^ons in the Heart* and the like Errors in the Life, as ar^ in
those that have no Faith at all. When a man S^eep^, it cannot be said of him,
as in 1 (...) 2.13. The Word of God works effectually in you Again; A Sleeping
Soul, may have some Hope; but what is it? Not that which is called in 1 Pet.
1.3. A Lively Hope. He don't feed and live upon the Expectations of Eternal
Glory in another world; he don't Look Upward, with fit Ravishments, upon the
bright Mansions in the Heavenly Fathers House; he don't Look forward, with fit
Ecstasies, upon ^he Glory which is hereafter to be Revealed. He is more taken
with Hope of Earth, and of Riches and Honors here, than with a prospect of,
Being for ever with the Lord. When a man Sleeps, he cannot say, as in Ps.
119.166 Lord, I have hoped for thy Salvation, and I have done thy Commandments.
Furthermore; A Sleeping Soul may have (...); but what is it? No other than that
which is called, in Mat. 24.12. A Love waxing C^ld. He is not Enflamed with
Ardours of Desire, to please God with utmost Exactness, to Serve Him with
Exquisite Contrivance, to Seek Him with unfainting Industry, or to be
remarkably Serviceable unto the True Interests of his Neighbors. His Love to
God, is not ^^ith all his Heart, or the Employment of (...) Understanding; with
all his Soul, or the Fervor of his Affection; with all his Might, be the
Extent of his Capacity; nor is it unto his Neighbor, in such measures of
Giving and Forgiving, as he would have to be used unto himself. A man that
Sleeps, cannot say, as in 2 Cor. 5.14* Love constrains me. Finally, A
Sleeping Soul is without such bitter, humbling, tearful Resentments of Sin, as
are in that, R^pentance which is not to be Repented of Si^ is not by such an
one Mourned for, nor Turned from, with such Detestation as belongs to the worst
^ Evils. When a man Sleeps, then for former Sins, he does not like David with a
Troubled Soul cry out, I have sinned greatly in what I have done, and now I
beseech thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy Servant, for I have done
very (...). And for future Sins he does not like Joseph, with an angry Soul cry
out, How shall I do this wickedness, and sin against God? This i^ the first and
the great Sleep of our Souls; and the second is like unto it. For,

Secondly, Men are Asleep when they o^mit their Guard over themselves. The^ who
do not most carefully Walk by Rule, do no other than (as once we are told,
Galen did) Walk in their Sleep. When a man i^ not Asleep, he says, as in Psalm.
39.1. I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not; and he does according to
what he says. A Sleeping Soul, intermits a due caution, about the man's whole
Carriage; it ponders not the (...) of ^is Feet; it Looks not wel^ to his
Goings; it Walks not Ci^cumspectly, Redeeming of the Time. Such a man keeps not
a Guard upon his Works; that they may not be any Doin^ against the Lord; but
that they be none (...) the Works which his Hand finds to do* or such Works as
he may gladly hear our Savior ^^ying, I know the Works. Much less, does (...)
keep a Guard upon his Words, that there may proceed no Rotten Communication,
and Evil Communication, from him; but, that his Lips may feed many, that his
Mouth may be a Well of Life, that his Tongue may be Health, and as the Choicest
Silver. Least of all does ^e keep a Guard upon his Thoughts; tha^ there may be
no vain Thoughts lodged in him; but that every Thought may be brought under
Obedience to the Divine Law, and that he may say, Lord, how precious are thy
Thoughts unto (...)? How great is the sum of them! We (...) in Lev. 26 23.
about, Walking at Per^dventures. Thus do they Walk, that Sleep. (...) and Wrong
are at mere Peradventures (...) them. If they tread Right, it is more (...)
Hap, than by Heed; and if they do not ^^ep wrong, it is because it Chances not.
One (...) was not Asleep, could say, in Psalm. 119.^9. I thought on my Ways.
Whereas, a ^leeping Soul can go on without very Thought^ul Reflections, Am I in
the Good Way? Is this the way to Rest or no? So, you see what (...) is to be
Asleep! Now

CONCLUSION II.
It is the Intrest of men to Shake off the Sinful Sleep, which their Souls may
be Arrested wit^*

Men may be of Issachars Opinion, in (...) 49.15. That R^st is Good. But if
th^^ do thus Opine* concerning a, Sinful Sleep had almost said, the Arms of
Issachar inde^^ belong unto them; yea their Folly is Grea^^^ than that of, The
Wild Asses Colt. A Sin^^^ Sleep, is indeed, a Deadly Sleep; it is a
stup^^^fying, and a venomous Bed of Night-Shad^^^ whereupon men ly when they
Sleep in Sin. About Lazarus of old, said the Disciple^ in Joh. 11 12. Lord, if
he Sleep, he shall (...) w^ll. But upon a Sleep of Sin, it may (...) said, If a
man Sleep, Woe! to him* If a (...) Sleep, he makes himself a prey to all his
^^ternal and Infernal Adversaries; he lays (...) self open to all manner of
Blows upon (...) his Interests. When the Kings Retinue (...) been too fast
Asleep, it was by David said (...) to them, in 1 Samuel 26 16. The thing is not
(...) that thou have done, Ye are worthy to dye* ^^^deed there is not only a
Desert of Death, (...) also an Approach, of Death, in ou^ (...) Sleeps. As they
render us Worthy to Die, they are Parts or S^^ps of the Death if (...) whereof
they m^ke us Worthy. Yea, (...) cannot be a more Dead^y Symptom upon ^^ny man,
than for him to Sleep in the (...) of Sin.

A Great Commander finding a (...) once Asleep, immediately Ran him thro^^^
saying, Dead I found thee, Dead I leave thee. When Sin has laid us Asleep, we
are as likely to be laid and left for Dead under the mortal Rebukes of Heaven,
as ever the sleepping Si^era was, upon the Floor of old. It has I think, been,
even among ourselves, very sadly proved an Error, though it has been a Vulgar
one, That the Thunder never kills any that are Asleep. This I am sure, None are
so much exposed unto the destroying Thunder of Gods Indignation, as the
Sleeping are. If it be a Child of Wrath, Whom Sleep has so much intoxicated,
as to make him fancy a more than Ordinary Reprieve and Respite, from the
Judgments of God, it is extremely probable that those Judgments are ^ust Ready
to break upon them. The Apo^^le speaking of our unbelieving world, says (...)
1. These. 5.3. When they shall say, peace, and safety, then sudden Destruction
comes upon them. None so Nigh to Desolation, as those that like the
Inhabitants of old Laish, are al^ogether, Quiet and Secure. It Is the Buried
(...) sleep, that are prepared for other Fune^^ls, in an Invasion of many
miseries* If it ^e a Child of God, who gives way to Sleep (...) the concerns of
Eternity, he may be sure (...) some dreadful Temptation or Affliction is (...)
the Door. Our Lord said unto his Dis^^^les, in Luc. 22.46. Why sleep ye? Rise
(...) Pray, lest ye enter into Temptation. None (...) to be sifted by the most
shaking Dispensations, as they that like the confident Peter say, I shall never
fall, and with that Imagination Sleep. Ask them that have been siezed with any
Extraordinary Sin or Grief, In what Frame were you, when this came upon you*
The Account which perhaps must be given of it is, Alas! I Prayed, I Lived, like
one fast Asleep.

I say then, That nothing is of more importance unto us, then for us to Shake
off our Sinful Sleep? Only we are now to enquire How is this to be done?

For Answer to that Enquiry.

First, our Sinful Sleep, is to be shaken off, by the Revival of a Sincere
Conversion.

We are to make sure of a Real and Thorough Conversion to God in Christ:
Whereto we are called, with such Expressions a^ those in Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou
that Sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light. We
are to Wake; that is we are to Live; and therein we are to Turn. We are to
Wake,; that is, we are to become sensible, What and Where we are, and VVhither
we are going; and to leave off that Ignorant and Vnw^ry disposition of Soul,
wherein our Original Sin has overpowr'd us. To be VVaked is to be Warned. It
was said in Math. 3.7* Who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come! We
are to take the VVar^^ings which the God of Truth has given (...) of a Wrath
to come, and a Wrath so Eternal, that after it is already Come, there will be
still more to Come, upon the Unregenerate; this it is to be Awake! We are to
Wake that is, we are with sollicitous and inquisitive Souls to Ask, What
shall I do to be saved! and we are to Do what the word of God shall make us
Know* of what we Ask. We are so to Wake us to Look; Look Upward, and see, a
God Angry* Look Downward, and see an Hell Gaping; Look Inward, and see our
Cursed Hearts; Look Backward, and see our Wicked Lives. And we are then so to
Wake, as to (...); Fly from the manifold entanglements of ungodliness; Fly to
the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Refuge that has been set before us Briefly, we
are to be Unquiet until our Peace with God, be made, by our closure with the
Lamb of God; and until The Friendship* settled between God and us, is
maintained by our Communion with the Lord Redeemer, who is ^o give unto us both
Repentance, and Remission of Sins.

Secondly, Our Sinful Sleep is to be shaken off, by the Watchfu^ness of a Godly
Conversation. Watching, is a most comprehensive as well as Necessary, property
of tha^ Good Conversation in Christ, which is no less (...) Part of, than the
Way to our Blessedness. We are to wak^, so as to watch; that is, to keep Awake;
and it notes a due care in us, about the affairs of our Souls; it is a mixed
thing, and it implies, both our Diligence: for says the Psalmist, Thou have
commanded us to keep thy Precepts Diligently: and our Discretion: for, says the
Apostle, Wa^k not as Fools, but as Wise. To speak particularly.

First, We are to Watch against Evil; Namely, for the Avoiding of it. It was
the Counsel of David, as it seems, to his Beloved Son, in Prove. 4.23. Keep thy
Heart with all Diligence. The Heart of every man is a kind of a Garrison,
whereof his Conscience is as it were the Sentinel. Now, we are to Watch, by a
continual caution of Conscience, that this Garrison be not siezed and entered by
any thing that may wrong (...) Souls. Particularly, We are to Watch against the
Flo^^* Lest the D^lilah, which lies in our Bosoms do betray us, into the
Hands, which will mak^ a prey of (...)* We are to Watch against the World; Lest
the Baits and Snares, wherewith it lays a Siege to our Senses, Entangle us in
what shall not be convenient for us. We are to Watch against the Devil, who
Tempted both Adams, and will sorely Tempt the Children of both. He is always
watching whom he may devour, and therefore we are to ^atch that him we may
Resist.

Secondly, We are to watch unto Good; namely, for the performing of it. It was
the Counsel of the Apostle, in 1 Pet. 4.7. Watch unto Prayer. Thus, there is no
part of our Obedience, which we must not Watch unto the yielding of.
Particularly, we are to watch Before Duty; that so we may take a due Time for
it, and have a fit Frame for it; and that in every Encounter, in every Company,
in every Business, we may leave nothing undone, of what should be done, for the
glory of God. We are to watch In Duty; that it be done with an agreeable
Atten^^on and Affection, and with Right Ends and Aims, and that no Leven cleave
unto our Sacrifice. We are to watch After Duty; that we may see what
Enlargements or Streightnings we have had; and what Earnings we have made. We
are to get into a Watchtower, to Learn what is coming; and when we have shot
our Arrows, we must like the Psalmist, Lock up, to see how they Speed.

Thirdly, We are to watch by a constant Expectation of, and Preparation for,
the Coming of our Lord It was said in Mat. 25.13. Watch therefore, for ye know
neither the Day nor the Hour, wherein the Son of Man comes. Behold, This is
watchfulness; it is for a man to get and keep in such a posture, that if the Son
of man were immediately to come, this man might cheerfully say, Welcome, Dear
Lord, I am ready for thy C^ming* We ought so to behave our selves as if our
Lord were immediately to break in upon the World^: and call us before His Great
and High Tribunal, to give an Account of what we have been doing in the Body.
It is said. in Phil. 4. 5. Let your mode (...) be known unto all men* The Lord
is at hand. This is watchfulness; it is to be so moderate, so mortified, so
temperate, in using or seeking the Things of this World; and so concerned about
the Things that are above, as believing that, The Lord is at hand. Suppose that
before to morrow Morning, the Lord Jesus Christ were to become visible unto
this lower World, and make the Sky to rattle with his rapid Peals of Thunder,
the Mountains to tremble before his Lightnings, and the Hills and Rocks to melt
at the presence of his Majesty* could we Rejoice before the Lord, because He
comes, He comes to Judge the World* THIS is the proper Description of a
Watchful Christain? We should always be expecting that Glorious Revolution,
wherein our Lord Jesus Christ, will both dispossess the Devils of our Air,
making of it a New Heaven, filled with the New Jerusalem of his Raised Saints;
and also by a terrible C^nflagration make a New Earth, whereon the Escaped
Nations are to walk in the Light of that Holy City. A little Praefiguration of
which wonderful state, there was in the Transfiguration wherein Moses and Elias
appeared with our Lord in that Glory, whereof the living Peter and James and
John were made the VVitnesses, and Partakers. In what condition would we desire
to be found, if we were sure that within ^ very little while our Lord should
thus come to take his Kingdom, and be Governor among the Nations? To be
always in that Conditition, is the Watchfulness, to be New Endeavored; and I
say, N^w, with an Emphasis, because the Time of the End, seems just going to
^ay its Arrest upon us: and we are doubtless very near the Last Hours of that
Wicked One, whom our Lord Shall Destroy with the Brightness of his Coming. We
ought continually to walk under the Impression of that Assurance in Romans 14 12.
Every one of us shall give Acc^unt of himself to God; and think with our
selves, Who knows how sun? A watchful man would be able to say with Jer^m of
old, Wherever I am, and whatever I do, methinks I hear the Sound of the Last
Trumpet in my Ears, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment. And we should always
be also Preparing for that Stupendous Revolution. We should be doing all we
can that we may have a comfortable Doom then passed upon us, in the Day of the
Lord that shall burn like an Oven; that we may then be, found in Christ, and
found in Peace; and that our Sentence then may be, Well-done Good and Faithful
Servant, Enter into the Joy of thy Lord Our Watchfulness lies in the Readiness
whereto we are advised in Luc. 12.40. Be ye Ready; for the Son of Man comes at
an Hour, when you think (...). Say we to our own Souls, as Dr. Usher often
would, unto some Ladies of his Acquaintance, Pray, Be Ready! Be Ready! Lest you
be foolish Virgins at the Coming of the Lord. We should be perpetually so
laying out our Talents that we may be well furnished with Bills for another
world, and have many a Glad thing to mention, when the Lord shall say with his
Loudest Thunderclaps, Give up an Account of thy Stewardship. When some urged
the Excellent Calvin to intermit his Expensive Studies, He replied, Would you
have my Master, when he comes, to find me Idle? A watchful man, would evermore
be doing something, the remembrance whereof may give him an ineffable
satisfaction, in the Day when God shall judge the World in Righteousness, by
that Man, whom He has Ordained. So are we to Shake off our Sinful Sleep, But,

CONCLUSION III.
There are some Times, that have (...) peculiar Awakenings in th^^, and by the
Knowledge of such Times we should be peculiarly Awakened.

We should be at All Times awake. But we should Especially be Awake in Times of
great Calamities Inflicted. If Thieves, or Fires be upon us, it is no time to be
Asleep. It was a bitter Complaint, in Isa. 64.7. W^ all do Fade, and yet there
is none that stirr^^^^ up himself, to take hold of thee. For people to be
smitten with Sore Afflictions, and yet for them never to Wake out of a
Prayerless* Careless, Worldly Plight; O it is an Horrid Symptom! It was the Black
Brand upon Ahaz of old; In the time of his Distress, he Trespassed yet more
against the Lord; This is THAT King. Thus twill be a thing of the worst
Consequence Imaginable if we incurr this Note; In the time of his distress, he
sleeps (...) still; he does not set himself to do the Things whereto the Lord
by Troubles and Crosses would awaken him; This is THAT S^eeper! Again, We
should Especially be Awake, in Times of great Accomplishments Approaching. If
any Signal Mercy or Judgment be at the Door, it is to be no sleeping Time. It is
written by the Prophet, in Dan. 12.2, 3. ^ Daniel, understood by Books, the
Number of the Years, whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the Prophet,
that he would Accomplish -- And I set my face to the Lord God (...) seek --
When some notable Chang^ is quickly to be looked for, we should be able so to
say, I understand that God is going to do some great Thing, and therefore I set
my self to wake. It is a most infaustous Thing, for men to be surprised in
courses or humors disagreeable to ^^ose Designs which the Lord God, is visiting
them upon, and we had need be well Awake (...) Aware lest we be so surprised.
Moreover we should Especially be Awake, in Times of Great Probations intended.
Most men have their Critical Times, wherein they (...) Made or Marred, perhaps
for both worlds, according to their behaving of themselves. If they do in this
Nick of Time, acquit themselves with a good Wisdom and Virtue, it is well; there
is a further store and shower, of Blessings to come upon them. But if in this
point of Time, they miss it, by any Egregious Departures from God, then,
Reuben, thou never shall excel! the man is lost and gone, and all the world
cannot fetch him any more. Now, God forbid that we should Sleep at such a
Time! Here is a Time to be taken by the F^relock; but our Sleeping in it, may
cause our Slipping of it for ever. Every Sand of this Time is more precious
than Dust of G^d. You know the Name of a King, of whom, when he was coming to
his Kingdom, God made a Trial, upon two considerable Things; One was, The
Ridding of the Amalekites out of the way; The Other was The forbearing to take
the Priesthood upon him* That poor Prince mi^carried in both of these; and
thereby he forfeited that conduct of Heav^^* which he had hitherto Enjoyed; it
was little use that God made of him after the wrong steps which he took in the
minutes of his Trial. It Is no strange thing for one Descended from Adam thus to
Ruin himself* it was Adams own Infelicity, and ours in him. Our Lord wept over
Jerusalem, in Luc 19 4^ saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in
this thy Da^, the things which belong unto thy Peace! It seems, That the Jews
had their (...) Day, wherein if they had well Entertained the Son of God, there
had been done for them, The Glorious Things, which are spoken of thee, O thou
City of God! But what followed upon their fatal Inadvertency? Alas, Now they
are hidden from thine Eyes. The Wise Man has Lamented it, Man knows not his
Time. And wherefore is it so? It Is because, Man Sleeps out his Time. I say
then, A man should harbor seasonable suspicions in himself, Is not the Great
God now Trying of me? Once more, The Time of Old Age, is one of those Times
wherein peculiarly men should be Awake. The Apostle says of Old Men, Let them
be sober; it may be rendered, Let them ^e watchful. Old Age, they say is very
^leepy; but, Fathers, whatever your Eyes may be, I pray, Let not your Minds be
so. Wake, for the Last Enemy is just going to draw upon you. To you that have
Hoary Heads found in the way of Righteousness, I may say what is in our Context
here, Now your Salvation is Near^^^, than when you first Believed. The God of
Heaven is very shortly sending for you to be brought unto himself in Heaven;
and the Wagons of Jesus will all so fast call upon you to be gone; O be not
now found Asleep. We say, None goes to Heaven on a Feather-bed; nor should we
be upon a Feather-bed of Carnality, Sensuality, Worldly-mindedness, or
Slothfulness, when we may think every Day, I may mount for Heaven this very
Day. To you, that are coming apace toward, (...) an Hundred Years Old, I may
invert (...) is in our Context; Your (...) is (...) yea, very near, if y^u do
not now Believe. You (...) not more Gray Hairs upon your Heads, (...) you have
Calls to ly no (...) in (...) perilous Unconcernedness about your (...)
Verily, you had need bestir your selves in (...) ma^ter of Returning to the
God, from (...) you have been Wandering Days without Number; Lest you quickly
find your selves to (...) sunk down so far, that the Lord shall say; (...)
great Gulf is now f^^ed, there is n^w for you* (...) passing over. In short,
when you see an (...) Man so Sleeping, as to brag how strong an^ hale he is,
and how like to live yet many (...) Day, it is a thousand to one, but within a
(...) Days his Coffin covers him. I pray, (...) them take this Warning, If you
Sleep hard, (...) may not be long before you Die.

Finally, It should be our Endeavor (...) Know the Times wherein we are
especiall^ (...) be Awakened, and Know what there is i^ the Times for our
Awakening There is (...) peculiar and important Subject for the Studie^ of Good
Men, the too usu^l Neglect whereo^ is, A Great Evi^ which I have seen under
(...) Sun; I mean to know, What Article (...) the Great Line of Time, we are
(...) upon. When the Apostle in our (...) here, would have the Romans to Know
(...) Time; is no^ improbable that he might (...) Respect unto the Time of that
Antichrist, which was to Rise among the Romans. Antichrist was conceived as
early as Twenty Five Years after the Ascension of our Lord, in the Affectations
of Primacy then begun; there was his Root; although he was not completed until
six hundred sixty six years after that, when Image-wo^ship was at last
effectually Established: Now says the Apostle, (...) already Time to be Awake
about these Affay^s. This I say; There is a most Exact Line of Time, which
partly the Histories, and partly the Prophecies, of the Scripture, have Run
from the Beginning of Times at the Creation, to the Fullness of Times in the
Restitution of all Things. In the Oracles of God we have most curiously, not
only Dese^^ved, but with Distinguishing and Memorable Figures variously
Emb^ssed, a Long LINE of Intersabbatical Time, Commencing at the Sabbath which
was in the first week of the World, and Expiring in the Sabbatism, when the
Creature shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption: into the Glorious
Liberty of the Children of God. It is possible for us now to discover near,
what Joint in that Line of Time, we are now arrived; and although we may run into
great Inconveniences by too Peremptory and Injudicious Computations upon this
Li^e of Time, yet I see not why modest, cautious, humble Disquisitions upon it,
should be treated with such Infamy, as they now are in a Sleepy World: or as if
the Letter which our Ascended Lord has from Heaven sent unto us, to Teach us
how we may measure the Last H^urs of Time, were not indeed, The Revelation. We
have a Precept with a Promise, from our Lord Jesus, for, Our (...) the Numbe^s
which concern the Duration of Antichrist; and for men to hiss at all sober
Attempts to Learn, how far we are got on toward the R^st which R^mains for the
P^^ple of G^d, in the Latter Days, it is an affront unto that Holy Spirit of
God, who has given us a Prophetical as well as an Historical Calender of our
Times. The Jews about the Time of our Saviors Incarnation, by studious
Calculations might have perceived, that such a progress had been made in the
four hundred and ninety yea^s foretold by Da^iel, as to make it evident that
they could not be far from the Time; and for their O^citan^^ about such
Reasonable Supputations, ou^ Lord most bitterly Rebuked them, in Matthew. 16 3 O
ye Hypocrites, can ye not Discern the Si^^s of the Times? and in Luc. 12.56. Ye
H^pocrites, how is it that ye do not Discern this Time? The usual Dirt, flung
upon such Contemplations, is, That All Good Men have hitherto (...) it in their
guesses about the Times. But there is a great Untruth and Slander in that
Report; for our God h^s most wonderfully owned even the Published Conjectures
of some (...) have sought His Blessing by Reading and ^haring of His
Apocalypse; and I need not (...) so far to prove it, as the Days wherein the
^arbarous Nations Rush^d in upon the (...) Empire, when it was a General Cry,
that (...) the Church of God, The (...) hand* I may tell you, that (...) it
self as well as Europe, has now lately had cause to Acknowledge. That God may
permit (...) to Hi^ Right in some considerable ^riestes about the Time of the
Day. Besides, we (...) deeper now every day th^^ other, getting (...) those
Times, whereof it is foretold, Many (...) Run toward (...), Knowledge shall be
(...). Wherefore, I beseech you, that well^Regulated Researches into This Time,
(...) more be Di^countenanced among the People of God; but Let us assay to get
Vnder^^anding in the Times, that so we may, (...) we ought to do, with
reference to the ^^ngdom of our David. Yea, whatever Times (...) come upon us,
we should be Inquis^tive to (...) our Times It is said in Eccl. 8.5. A Wise
Man's Heart d^scerneth both Time and Judgment. May we have so good a Judgment,
as to Discer^, when it is a Ti^e to do every Thing in the whole of both our
Callings: may we have such a Judgment as that ^e may Wel^-time all we have
(...) do, and make it Beautiful.

APPLICATION:
By way of Examination, and Excitation, and Exhortation, there are many things,
that might be now set before us. But instead of the Ordinary method wherein you
might have been treated, I shall use the Compendious One of now laying before
you, only Three ASSERTIONS.

Assertion I. There are sad Signs of a Sinful Sleep too generally to be found
upon us.

Indeed, Security will be the Epidemical Disease of our days; and the Older the
world is, perhaps it will be the Sleepier; or more like what it was, In the
days of No^h. They are the pathetical Exclamations of Your and My Father, in a
Latin Treatise well known among the Churches of God, Vbi ^ides H^^inam C^risti
N^men pro^i^enti^^^? Vbi Sancta, Adve^tus D^mini Expectati^? Vbi de^ique prisca
Christianorum Vigilantia, suspiri^, Lacrymae? Nonne propheti^ (...) est,
Morante Spensa ^i^tarunt D^^nes: H^^ M^^du^ alte Cons^pitum! I see the very
Character of our Time; The watchings, the Sighs, the Tears of the primitive
Christians are little imitated, Alas there is a Deep S^eep upon the World! Now,
it will be well, if there do not grow upon us ^^e causes of such Lamentations;
Or if the Lamentations would Rowse any of those, over whom we make them. We
have seen several Plantations in our Neighborhood, laid in Blood and Fire, by
those Invaders, to whom our Security is the Chief Thing that has made us
Obnoxious. But we may do well to enquire, whether we are not in that Security,
which may lay us as open to the Displeasure of God, as to the Vexation of man.
There are two Things besure which Conspire to invite us, unto that Sinful
Sleep, whereof and whereby we are Endangered. Within, we have our Corruption,
to bring Sleep upon us. When the Disciples were Sleeping, our Lord said upon
it, in Math. 26.41. The Flesh is Weak. The Flesh is all for Sleep; that
Sluggish kind of a thing, will be ever saying, Yet a little more Sleep, a
litlte more Slumber, a little more folding of the Hands; and this F^esh will
haunt us as long as we dwell in F^esh. Without, we have our Company to Rocque
us into Sleep. It was said in 2 Timothy 3.5. M^n shall have a form of Godliness,
Denying the power of it; from such Turn away. Why so? Truly, because men infect
one another with Formality. Sleeping is Ca^^hing. If one man Yawn it will put
the Next upon the doing the Lake. In a Room, where many Sleep, if any one there
does talk and stir, the rest are all offended at it; if any one Church, yea, or
if any one Man, will not Sleep^like other people, they will fume, and frett, and
fling, and say, What a needless disturbance are you making here? And so for
the sake of quietness, we must all Sleep as it seems, till Dooms Day. But let
it for such causes then be thought upon, Whether (...) are not Asleep? It was
long since Judged, that the witty person, who while others were begging of
monopolies, petitioned for a Patent, which might enable him, To Demand a small
Piece of money from every One who carried a VVatch about him, and yet cared not
how he spent his time, would have had a large Revenue, But it were well if they
that keep a VVatch over their Hearts and Ways, were one half so many, as those
that now wear a VVatch about them in their Clothes. I have these
Interrogatories for you.

First; If we are not Asleep, why are we so Senseless, before the Almighty God?
There is that Spiritual Plague mentioned, in Isa. 6.10. A Fat Heart, Heavy
Ears, and Shut-up Eyes; which is perhaps oftener quoted in the New Testament
than almost any one passage of the Old; bceause it is the Grand Plague under
the New Testament. But has not this New-Testament-Plague, most fearfully siezed
upon multitudes among us? The Voice of God, how few have the Sense to hear that
Thundering Voice? Upon the Promises of God we say not, These are Faithful
Sayings, and worthy of all Acceptance; O may I have the Godliness, which they
belong unto* Upon the Threatenings of God, we say not, These are the Faithful,
and the True Sayings, which will shortly come to pass: O may I be afraid of
these Judgments! Although we may say with the Psalmist, God has spoken once,
yea, twice unto us, yet the Lord may say to us, as by the Prophet, I spoke unto
thee, and thou would not hear. The Face of Christ, how few have the Sense to
see that Beauteous Face? We do not gaze upon the most Illustrious Excellencies
of our Lord-Redeemer, until we say, He (...), in whom there does all Fullness
dwell, and? Here is the One Thing Needful. Although He be the, Altogether Lovely,
yet we have not such a view of Him, as to make us Love Him; although He be the,
Pearl of Great Price, yet we have not such a view of Him, as to make (...)
Prize Him; we Desire Him not, although He be, The Desir^ of all Nations. The Load
of Sin, how few have the Sense to feel the weight of that Mountainous Load? How
few, Laboring and Heavy-Laden Souls, are to be found among the Sinners that
have all their Days been those, That Heap up Wrath against themselves* How few
do with Restless Terrors of Soul account themselves, Wretched and Poor, and
Miserable and Blind, and Naked: and not rather say, I have Need of Nothing?

Secondly, If we are not Asleep, why are we so Fearless, of what may be to come
upon us? It Is said of some, Said in Job. 21:9. Their Houses are safe from Fear.
But it may be Said of more, There is in their Hearts no Godly Fear. Alas, there
are multitudes of Leviat^ans for Sinning in the miost of us, and such as have
Made themselves without Fear. We have long had a dreadful Hurricane of the
Divine Judgments upon us; but men are like Jonah, fast Asleep, while the Great
God seems to be sinking of us, in the Roaring Billows of his Wrath. There is a
Flood of cal^mitous Acci^ents ready to Roll in upon us; but are we like Noah,
who, By Faith, being moved with Fear, prepared an Ark* There is a Combination
of Enemies for (...) Desolation; but are we like Jeheshaphat, who, Feared and
Proclaimed a Fast? The Word of God has loudly told the Unconverted People in
our Neighborhood, That an horrible Tempest of Eternal Vengeance is impending
over their miserable Souls. But how few are like those wary Egyptians, who of
old, Feared the Word of the Lord? and not rather like the impudent Sod^mites
that would go on to Sin, when they were just stepping into, The Vengeance of
Eternal Fire? Although the Almighty God have Sounded in our Ears, the Alarms of
His Everlasting Indignation, if we do not Return from our Evil Ways; yet
Sinners, like the fiery War-Horse, do mock at Fear, and Laugh a^ the shaking of
the Spear. How few among u^ can say with the Apostle, I know the Ter^^rs of the
Lord? How few with the Psalmist, O Lord, my Flesh Trembles for fear of thee?

Thirdly, If we are not Asleep, why are w^ so Mindless of what we have to do?
It Is said unto some in Psalm. 50.22. Consider this, you that Forget God. But how
many are there whom that Note is to be Branded upon, They Forget God, and never
Consider what He has called them to? With what a Brutal Stupidity, do men
Forget the Errand which they were sent into the World upon? which is, To
Glorify God. Our main Business in the World is, By Repenting, and Believing to
make sure of Everlasting Happiness, and in the continual exercise of Religion,
bear our Testimonies unto all the Truths and Ways of the God that made us. But
is not this Business, utterly laid aside by the most of men? Men Employ
themselves, as if they had nothing in the world to do, but build and fill a
little Nest made of Straw and Clay, wherein after they themselves have been
Merry for many years, their young ones may be comfortably Lodged after them.
Vain Man! And know thou not how soon the Cudgels of Death may batter down
that little Nest? I have one Question to send round unto every man in this
great Assembly; it is this, Pray, what have you been doing in the world, ever
since you came into it? How few among us, could Relate any other than a most
wretched Story, in a True Answer to that great Question? When our Lord was
going to Die, He could say, ^^ther, I have Finished the Work, which thou have
given me to do. But many of us, if we were to Die immediately, must with most
inexpressible Stings in our Souls, confess, O I have never yet struck so much
as one good Stroke at the Work which has been ordered for me. And hence also,
how little concerned are we to know and use, the wonderful Opportunities
wherewith we are furnished in our several Capacities, to be doing or getting of
Good? We have our Talents; that is, our Opportunities to Serve the Interests of
God, of the Church, of our own Souls: But we suffer our Talents to lie by most
shamefully unimproved; and there are very few that seriously and frequently ask
themselves, What is there that I may do for the further Service of my God, and
of my Generation?

Fourthly. We are Speechless, and should we be so, if we were not fast Asleep?
If (...) were falsely charged upon Job. in Chap 15.^^ T^ou restrainest Prayer
before God; it may be too Truly charged upon ourselves. O! there is too little
Prayer a going among us, for such, A Day of Trouble, and Rebuke, and Blasphemy,
and of no strength to bring forth, as is now come upon us. P^late most
insolently said unto our Lord, Speak thou not unto me? know thou not that
I have power to kill thee, or save thee. But our Lord may Righteously complain
of us, Their Life and their Death, is in my Hands, yet they will not speak unto
me. How many Closets are there that are not visited and perfumed with Secret
Prayers from Day to Day? Yea, it is Reported, that some Church Members have been
so fearfully Distempered, as to dispute whether Secret Prayer were incumbent on
them* An Indication of a most Horrid L^^^ness sent into the Soul! Are those
true (...) that can argue so? What? have they no Secret Sins then to be
bewayl'd, no Secret Wants to be relieved, no Secret Wounds to be opened, and no
S^cret Temptations to be cried against? And no such Command of our Lord as
that, Enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door, Pray to thy
Father which is in secret. How many Houses also are there, that have not
Private Prayers every Day performed in them? Although besides what the ^ery Light
of Nature dictates, That they who (...) and R^st, and it may be Sin, together;
^ould likewise every day Pray together; we have the Law of Scripture for every
Master of a Family, C^ntinue in Prayer, and watch (...) the same. Which is but
an Allusion to ^he Continual Sacrifice of Old, which was every Morning and
Evening brought unto the Lord. (...) is affirmed, that the very Indians, which
are now preying upon our East, have so much Christianity, learned from the
Papists among them, That they have Private Prayer ^n their Wigwams every Day. O
My God, I Mourn in my Complaint, That among our Baptized Neighbors, there
should be so many ^amilies that call not upon thy Name. If our God Pour out his
Fury, upon us, by the sword of the Heathen that know him not* it is because He
finds among us those pretended Christians, who are worse than the Heathen that
know him not. But may it not be deplored, that there is among us, A Great
s^lence in Heaven, too? Our Honorable Rulers, in an Order for a Fast, some
while since had these Expressions, That we may not by letting fall our Hands,
give Advantage to our Adversaries, the several Congregations in the C^lony, are
hereby Exhorted, That they keep the Wheel of Prayer, in a continual Motion, By
Repeated and Successive Agreements for Days of Prayer with Fasting, in their
several Vicinities till our God have spoken peace unto us, and we find
Salvation to be near us, with Glory dwelling in our Land. But how few of our
Churches do thoroughly, fervently, frequently Enough, attend the Counsel, which
has with so much Authority, been given them? Or if Days of Prayer are Indicted,
in how many circumstances do men manifest an Indisposit^^on thereunto? I am to
tell you, The whole Eng^ish Nation, may cry shame, upon thi^ Country if we let
one whole Month together pass us, without a Solemn Fast, some when or other in
our Neighborhood.

Fifthly. Were we not Asleep, should w^ please our selves, with our Fine, Gay,
Romantic Dreams, as we too often do? It is used as a Similitude, in Isa. 29.8.
An Hungry man Dreameth, and beh^ld He E^teth, but he awaketh and his (...).
Have ^e no such Dreams, in our (...)? It Is but a Dream, for us to imagine, That
the Temple of the Lord must needs also have the (...) ^f the Lord, alth^' there
be (...) Defiling thereof. It Is but a Dream for us to imagine, That there can
be nothing still defecti^^ in our Church-Constitution, to render us (...) as an
Army with Banners, and that after all our Seize, we must not still press
on. It Is but a Dream for us to imagine, That we may comfortably get through our
Difficulties, without Returning to the Lord, that has been smiting of us. We
Dream, if we imagine, That if the World bec^me our God, it shall not soon
become our Grief; or, that we shall not find Vanities and Vexations in all
Te^rene Dependencies. And yet have we not been swarming full of these Dreams?
Our God may say unto us, O How Long shall your vain Thoughts L^dge within you.

Sixthly, What Corporal Sleeping, under the means of Grace do many of us give
way unto? We read of Euticl^us, in Act. 20 9 As Paul was long Preaching he sank
down with Sleep, and was taken up Dead. We should have a Consuming Mortality
indeed, if God should smite every one that contentedly Sleeps (...) His
Worship, with a Stroke like that upon the Tired Euticl^us; But this I may say,
whenever we allow our selves to be Sleeping, when we should be Praying or
Hearing before the Lord, there is, A (...) to be taken up De^d. When Jac^b had
(...) in a place, where the Lord cho^e to give Special Di^coveries of himself,
it is said, He was afraid, and said, How d^ea^ful is this p^ace^ T^is is (...)
but the H^use of God, and this is the (...) of Heaven. Whereas we have among
us, those, that one would suppose to set themselves for Sleep, in this Dreadful
Place; yea, the uninterrupted Naps they take here seem to own, That S^eep is
(...) T^ing which they come hither f^r. It Is an affecting Apologue, sometimes
mentioned, That a (...) in an Humane Shape, coming into a Congregation, where
there was a man Asleep, the Devil went, and jog'd, and chi^^ the man, and said
unto him, Friend, I can tell you, that if these Offers of a Savior were made
among us in (...), there would be no Sleeping at them. Of this I am very
confident, The very Devils, of whom doubtless there are many present, when we
come, to present our selves before the Lord; I say, the very Devils themseves
do wonder to see so many Sleepers in our Congregations; although indeed, they are
the Devils that Ro^^^^ their Cradles for them. And now, Judge, I pray you? Can
all these things be said of those that are not Asleep? I add,

Assertion. II. There are Loud Calls unto us, to Shake off our Sinful Sleep.
The Powerful, [O that I might have said, Effectual^] Awakenings that have been
given us, do now as well aggrava^e that Sinfulness of our ^^eep, as Necess^tate
us to Shake it off. But (...) Awakenings? Briefly,

First, We have had the Awakenings of the (...). It was a vouchsafement unto
the (...) of old, in 2. Chron. 36.15. The Lord (...) of their Fathers, sent to
them by his (...), Rising up be^i^^es, and sending: What (...)? But that he
might Awaken them. It Is (...) h^'s been done for ourselves. The (...) throughout
New England have had the Messengers of Heaven in them; and as we read, about,
The Mouth of all the Prophet^, in this (...) the Ministers have all had but One
(...); All the cry every where has been, (...)! and, Reforma^i^^, or
Desolation! Refor^^^ion, or Desolation* ha^s been the Concur^^^^ Admonition of
them that have (...) the Word of God.

We have hereupon had the Awakenings of (...)* It is said in Mic. 9.6* (...)
Why, what says (...), sinners, Awake unto the (...) God. One affliction after
another has been (...) us; First (...) have (...), and (...) have torn us; in
every ^ne of our (...) and Pleasant Things we have been (...); Every Man
perhaps in the (...) Territory, has had a share in the (...) of these
exercises: And may say, I am (...), that have seen ^^^iction by the R^d. (...)
why does our God Affict us, but, that (...) may Awake us! But this is not all.

We have also had Awakenings of the Fire* It may be said of us* in Isa. 42.25.
The fury of Gods (...), has set him (...) ^ound about. O let it not be further
said. H^ knew it not, he laid it not to (...). How often has ^oor B^ston been
raised in the Night with such an outcry as that. (...) in your (...)? In other
places also* we have seen more than One Province said in A^h^s by the Fire of
Gods (...) And we have often seen our (...), wherein, The Lord calls to contend
be Fire. So have we been Scorched, that we might (...) Methinks, that the (...)
appl^'d (...) might bring us to ourselves

Yea. (...) have herewithal had, (...) wakenings of the (...) was said in Math*
(...) 10. The (...) is laid unto the Rent of the (...) Now what is the Language
of every (...) But th^^ much, Awake, O Tr^es, and (...)* There are especially
three (...) which the Pro^peri^^ of a People grows up (...). is the (...) of a
Land; (...) which it comes to flourish in the Enjoym^^^ of (...) and (...). A
Second is, (...) Religion of a Land Even a Pagan (...) could ascribe the
Successes of his R^mans, (...) their (...) fares as Gods A fares among us. A
Third is. The Religion of a Land. The Saints, are the Chariots (...) Horsem^n
of the Places where they Live. (...) Destroyers confess to Righteous Lots, We
(...) do nothing against the Place, as long as you are there. But on every of
these Accounts have there not been those that have been Rooting in our Exposed
Vineyard? In all, Awake, has been the Cry of every Stroke.

And now again, We have the Awakenings of the Philistines upon us. We read
concerning Sampson; in Judge. 15.30. She said, The Philistines be upon thee,
Sampson; and he awoke out of his Sleep. I cannot say, whether our Indians are
not the Posterity of the Ancient Philistines; they seem to be, if not
Canaanites, yet Scythians, by their Original. But there are many things wherein
they Resemble and Imitate the Philistines; and these Philistines have been
Laying our Country wast, (...) many Leagues together. Our God has (...)
fullfill'd unto us, that Word of His, (...) move them to Jealousy with those
which are not a People, I will provoke them to Anger with a Foolish Nation. O
that we might be Moved and Provoked unto a convenient Wakefulness, by what has
thus befallen us. At least, when we call to mind, how these American Rapparees
have taken our Brethren, and binding them to a Stake, with a Lingering Heat,
Burned and Roasted them to Death; the Exquisite Groans and Shrieks of those our
Dying Brethren should Awaken us.

But that you may see a further Accen^ upon even the sharpest of these
Awakenings, I am to tell you, That all sorts of persons have been concerned in
them. When a little Handful of men had in a sudden and awful manner Lost their
Lives, our Lord said unto all the People, in Luc. 13.3, 5, Except ye Repent, ye
shall all likewise Perish; and again* Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise
Perish. This I say, We have seen the Deadly Blows of Heaven, upon all Ranks of
Men among us; and the Word of the Lord Jesus to all Ranks therefore is, Awake,
Lest you also Perish! Bad Men, Let them awake; inasmuch as you have seen the
Lord as it were with Fish-hooks fetching out many hundreds of ungodly persons
to be Destroyed in the Flames of His Displeasure. Good Men, Let them Awake;
inasmuch as you have seen some that had the Fear of God within them, yet
without the Mark of God upon them, for their preservation in our Late
Overflowing Scourge: but perhaps, as they have Risen off their Knees, they have
had the Bullets of Death shot in at their Windows, by the Skulking Adversary.
Old Men, Let them Awake; inasmuch as you have seen Gray-hairs died Red in their
Owners Blood, and the Bodies of the Aged thrown even unto the Swine to mangle
them. Rich Men, Let them Awake; inasmuch as you have seen those which had large
and fair Estates, in one years time come to Beg their Bread. Poor Men, Let them
Awake; inasmuch as you have seen Poverty going on with closer pinches to gripe
such like an armed Man. Rulers, Let them awake; inasmuch as you have seen one
that was once a Magistrate, with his Family, most horribly Massacred by a crew
of Infidels, that a few Hours before had been most Hospitably Treated at his
House as Friends. Pastors, Let them awake; inasmuch as you have seen a most
Pious and Faithful Minister lately Assassinated by the Bruits of our East; in a
Captivity among whom his Virtuous Wife quickly after ended her Days; and one
of the Assassinates coming on the Lords Day, among the Captived Parishiones of
that Worthy Man, with the Clothes of their Dear DVMMER upon him. Women, Let
them Awake; inasmuch as you have seen the Tender Sex, driven into Slavery
before th^se Monsters, W^ose Tender Mercies, are Cruelty; Women of Good Fashion
being made always Hungry, and almost Naked, have been forced to call a filthy
Squa, by the Title of Mistress; Yea, Women that have loved their Infants with
most Relenting Bowels, yet have been put upon Begging of their Swarthy Masters,
with Tears in their Eyes, To Kil^ these Beloved Infants ^ut of hand. Children,
Let them Awake; inasmuch as you have seen many of those Little C^icke^s, by the
Eastern Vultures preyed upon; Children that should have had an Ingenuous
Education, have almost forgotten even their Mother Tongue, in their Vassalage
among our own Wild Barbarians; yea, Children that have but whined a little for
the Breast, have therefore by the Patroons that now Adopted them, had their
Brains dashed out against the Stones; even the Brats of Babylon, have so dealt
with our Little Ones. But above all, Young Folks, Let them Awake: inasmuch as
the Lord our God, seems to have a peculiar Controversy with the Rising
Generation of New England. Many of our young people do not first Secretly, and
then Publicly Enter into Covenant with God in Christ; the Dainties of the
New Covenant Exhibited, first in the Gospel, and then on the Table, of the
Lord, are not by many of our young people, most affectionately Embraced* And
what has followed? Why, The God of Heaven seems to say, I will take no pleasure
in your young men. Hence it is, that some of our Young Ones have been given up
to the most abominable Impieties of Uncleanness, Drunkenness, and a Lewd, Rude,
Extravagant sort of Behavior. There are the Children of Belial among them, and
Prodigies of Wickedness. Hence also, Hug^ Throngs of our Young ones have been
Pressed into the Wars at home, or Carried unto the Seas abroad, where they have
Died like Rotten Sheep; and it is upon them especially, that the Contagious
Mortalities among us, have made further Havoc; Death has fed upon them. I may
say, O that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, to weep for
the rueful Estate of my own Generation, among whom there are so few Instances
of Early Piety; in comparison of what Instances there are of, Early Sin, and
Early Death! But I rather turn my Lamentation into this Obtestation, O that you
were wise, that you understood ^^ese Awakenings, that you would consider what
will be your Latter End, if you Awake not out of your Impenitencies. At this
Rate, has the God of Thunder been Awakening of us. Now God forbid, That as it
was of old said, He would have Healed Babylon, and she would not be Healed, it
should be now said, We would have Awakened New England, and she would not be
Awakened!

I now have only this more to say.

Assertion III. There are Great Works to be done by us, that we may have our
Sinful Sleep evidently laid aside. As Deborah called upon her self, Awake,
Awake, and utter a Song! So would I call upon all my Friends, Awake, Awake, and
let that be done that should be done. Our Natural Sleeping is a most Necessary
Refreshment for us; at least, when it is not become irregular, by the Hebetude
of our Spirits, or by the undue pressure of any Viscous or Aqueous particles
thereupon; it is but the Recruit of our Animal Spirits, by a New Digestion to
Repair and Supply the Loss of those that have been Exhausted through our Enlarged
Pores, while our External Senses were in their Activity. But our Spiritual
Waking is infinitely more Necessary, both for our Temporal and Eternal
Welfare. Indeed, if any of us will really and thoroughly Awake our selves, we
shall grievously Anger those who think our Lord says to them, what He said unto
His Disciples of old, Sleep on! We must look to meet with foolish and absurd
Censures, from the Sleepers, whom like Noah, we Condemn, when we Awake. When
the Holy Vigilantius vigorously appeared against the Abuses creeping into the
Sleeping Church, in the Beginning of the Fifth Century, no less a man than
Jerome gave Opiates to that Sleeping Church, by undertaking the Patronage of
those Abuses, and bestowed the Name of Dormitantius, with other base Terms,
upon the almost only Vigilant Servant of God in the World. Give me leave (...)
speak it; As he that Slept has formerly murmu^red at him that Wak't, even so
it is Now! Some Cavil or other will certainly be Excogitated, whereby all
Essays toward Waking will be ridiculously blown upon; and if nothing else
(...) be invented, the Cavil will be* It Is a (...) Thing that you are upon.
Thus when the^^ was a Church among our selve^ that set apart a Day of Prayer
with Fasting that they might Cry to Heaven for Converting Influences of Grace
to be poured from Heaven, upon their Children, there were some [ Shall I tell
it?] Professors of Religion, so excessively Ridiculous, that they Exclaimed
against it, as, A New Practice. When our Lord Jesus Christ, uttered none but
the Old Law, with better G^^sses upon it, than they had been used unto, the
people cried out A New Doctrine. Even so, if we do no more than what is to be
found in the Old Way of Returning to God, praescribed in His Word, yet i^ there
be any one Indifferent and Expedient circumstance of Explicitness, dictated by
the very Light of Nature, for the better doing of it, ^ot used heretofore, they
that are Settled on ^^eir Lees, will cry out A New Practice. For Churches to
Renew their Covenant, has been with Ignorance Enough reproached as, A New
Practice; and so perhaps it will be for Church^^ by Acts of their own, to
Explain the Cove^^^^ which they have Renewed. It may be (...)* But I may tell
you, It Is a New Thing for ^^ople to Awake out of their degeneracies: through (...)
Time and the Times of the Antichristian Apostasy, it has been so; So it was
before; ^o it will be still. But, let us fortify ourselves against such little
objections, and about, Wa^^ing, say, If this be to be Vile, We will be yet more
(...); and having been Rowsed up from the ^ouchant posture of our Souls, let us
be Lions which do not for any Turn away. I bespeak you (...) the words of the
Apostle, 1. These. 5.6. ^et us not Sleep as do others, but let us watch.
Wherefore.

First. Let all unrenewed Sinners Awake ^^eedily out of that hurtful and woeful
Sleep that is upon them, and become New Creatures, before the Lord. Poor
Creatures, you are fast Asleep in a Doleful Prison, that is also on a Light
Fire over your Heads; and unless you quickly become New Creatures, You will be
horribly consumed there. The English Historians tell us of a man that Slept for
no less than fourteen Days without Intermssion. Yea, The Learned Cranzius
tells of a Scholar at Luboc, that Slept for no less than Seven Years together.
But what greater Prodigies are You, that have been Asleep for so many Days,
and Years! Even ever since you came into the world! O Take heed, lest you
shortly incur that very direful thing in Romans 11.8 God has given them the
Spirit of Slumber. Shall I then bestow a few Jogg^^ and Pull's, upon my
Sleeping Hearers! And those that like the Poetical Endymion, do wish for
nothing so much as that they may Sleep for ever? You Sleep, Sinners; but Where
is it* It is as in Prove. 23.34* Thou shall be* as he that lies down in the
midst of the Sea; or as he that lies upon the Top of a Ma^^. You are every Hour
Sleeping, in the peril of Tumbling down into the Horible Pit, were the Worm
never dies, and the Fire never shall be quenche^ One Touch of Grim Death upon
you, would push you into a Fiery Ocean, of Intolerable (...) Interminable
Miseries. You are Sleeping; bu^ I Will tell you, Who is not. It is said in 1 Pet
5.8. Be Vigilant, because your Adversay the Devil, as a Roaring Lion, walks
about, seeking wh^m he may devour. While You are Sleeping, the Devil is Busy;
even to throw his Nets over You; and You are Hagridden, by the most ugly things
Imaginable. You are Sleeping; but (...) tell you, What is not. It is said in 2.
Pet. 2.3. Their Damnation Slumbreth not. While you are Sleeping, your Damnation
is Hastening; You are to Day, nearer to Hell, by Twenty four Hours than you
were Yesterday. O how can you Sleep in such Horrid Circumstances? and while you
are only by the Rotten Thread of a Dying Life, hanging over the Mouth of that
heated Furnace, from whence the Smoke of the Torment, ascends for ever, and
ever? When the Emperor Augustus heard of one who could Sleep well, although he
had heavy Debts lying upon him, he sent to buy the Man's Pillow, saying, Surely
^here must be some very sleeping Virtue in a Pillow, which a Man so much in
Debt, could Sleep upon. As for you that can Sleep hard, though you have whole
Talents and Mountains of Sins lying upon you; I pray, what are your Pillows
made of? So many Debts to the Justice of the Great God upon you still
unanswered, and yet any Pillows to be found where you (...) Sleep on both Ears!
I say, What Narco^icks are they stuffed withal? Awake, ye miserable Souls; I
say again, Awake. But alas, They are Dead! However, even the Dead must be
Prophesied over. But what can our Calls do unto the Dead, without the
Efficacious and Omnipotent Grace of Him that i^ the God of our Life? Unto Him,
I therefore bow my Knee, That even the Dead may (...) Hear the Voice of the Son
of God and Live: (...) that He, who Raised Lazarus, when it wa^ said, He
Sleeps, would with a Living Wo^^ say to these poor Souls, Come forth and Li^^

Secondly, It Is not easy Sleeping on ou^ Knees; O therefore Let us be much upon
them. In Prayer we do, as we read our Lord Jesus did, Lift up our Eyes; now,
Lifted Eye^ will not be Sleeping ones. Let us be much (...) Prayer; and in every
kind of Prayer; Pray^^^ with all Prayer, by the Spirit, watching there^^^ to.
Pray in Secret, and in Private every (...) Pray in more Public, and le^s
Public (...) of Good Men, as often as you may: (...) with Extraordinary
Solemnity, when the (...) is Extraordinary. Let us not (...) Undertaking, or
endure any Tribul^^^^ without making a Prayer upon it. Let (...) make a Prayer
from, yea, and in, every S^^mon, wherewith our God is Admonishing (...) us. I
would more especially Recommend (...) Blessed Boltons Advice unto us all, That
(...) Morning we should recount, what particular (...) signs we have to manage
in the Day Ensuing, (...) in our Privacies make our particular p^ayers, (...)
Gods Blessing thereupon. This would keep yo^ from Designs, that would be either
Vnlawfu^ or Unprosperous. And unto this Advice, (...) would subjoyn another;
which is, That Ejaculatory Prayers may be continually proceeding from us.
Wherever we are, and whatever we do, Let us be Darting up our Petitions or
(...) Thanksgivings to Heaven, as the Matter ^ay Require* I say, Happy is the
man that has his Quiv^^ full of such Arrows! But in our Prayers, Le^ us very
much insist upon this Request, That we may be kept Awake. I think, David in one
Psalm, does no less than Ten Times make that Prayer, Lord, Quicken me! It Is a
Prayer that we have cause to make more than Ten Times every week, Lord, Waken
us. Let us Pray, as in Psalm. 13.3. O Lord, my God, lighten mine Eyes, lest I
Sleep the Sleep of (...). And whereas, we have a Keeper, who (...) neither
Slumber nor Sleep, Let us by (...) Prayer Commit our selves unto Him, that we
may be kept from S^umbring and Slee^ing in our Sins.

Thirdly, Let us think of our Night; and that will break us of our Sleep. We
are none of us very far from a Night, when we shall Sleep in the dust; We Shall
not Sleep in our Sin, if we are duly Sensible, how sure, and how near, ^his
Night is unto us. Our Savior said in, (...). 9.4. I must Work, for the Night
comes. (...) us be often thinking, The Night comes; and we shall be ever
saying, I must wake: ^ must wake. When we go out of our Houses, Let us think, I
shall shortly be carried out of Do^rs. When we come into our Houses, Let us
think, I shall shortly be carried unto my Long Home. When we sit at our Table^*
Let us think, I shall shortly be my self a m^rsel for the Worms. When we rest
in our Lod^^ings, Let us think* A cold Grave will shortly be my Bed. And when
we view the Chest^* where we put our Treasures, Let us think, A little black
Chest is that wherein I my self shortly may be Locked up. Such Monitory
Representations of Mortality, would correct the poison^ of those Potions,
whereby Satan would bring Sleep upon us. And in pursuance of this Rule, it
would be well, if every Night before we Sleep, we should settle Accounts
between our God and our selves, even as if ^^^fore to morrow morning we were to
^^^pear before Him. When we are going (...) Sleep at Night, having first asked
our (...)

What has been Gods providence toward my (...) in the foregoing Day?

We may then do well to ask our selves*

What has been my Behavior toward God, (...) the Day?

Particularly.

I. Have I lived this Day under a Deep (...) of Mortality and Eternity; and as
a (...) in the world?

II. Have I Devoutly read the Word of Go^ this Day, and Seriously sought the
Face (...) God both in my Retirement, and with my Fa^^^ly?

III. Have I had many Eja^ulati^^s this (...) both in a way of Petition, and in
a way ^f Thanksgiving unto God?

IV. Have I had most affectionate Meditations upon Heavenly Things this Day;
and have I made Earthly Things to occasion some of my profitable Reflections?

V. Have I been careful of my Discourse this Day, and spoken with a Tongue
Bridled by the Fear of the Lord?

VI. Have I been Diligent in my Calling this Day, and avoided all needless
Expense of my pre^ious and golden Minutes in Diversions?

VII. Have I this Day Endeavored all Usefulness unto those to whom I am
Related, or with (...) I have been Concerned?

VIII. Have I this Day Controlled and Conquered my Master Sin; and has my
Watchfulness issued in my victory over my own Iniqui^^?

IX. Am I in a F^t State and Frame to appear before the Judgment Seat of God,
if I should immediately be Summoned thereunto? And therefore, Do I still choose
the Great GOD as my Best Good, and my ^^st End; and the Lord Jesus Christ, as
my Prophet, my Priest, my King? And is it (...) Desire to be Employed as a
Witness for His Truths and Ways for ever?

All or most of these Questions, every ^ight carefully Considered, would keep a
^oul always Awake!

Fourthly. We shall not Wake in Vain, if we Apply ourselves to do what we can
for The City of our God. It is reported by the Builders of Jerusalem, in Neh.
4.9. We set (...) Watch day and night. Were we thoroughly Awake, we should fall
to Building the Lords Jerusalem, and be all hands at Church-Work wi^^ all our
might. Why do no more of you join to a Particular Church of the Lord Jesus? the
omi^sion of which, will fill your Death Be^^ with Terrible Thorns, when you
come to die? Let me tell you, t'wi'l not be safe Sleeping abroad, out of some
Well-constituted Church, in the Storms that are now coming upon the World. If
you will cast up the Numbers of such as the Plagues of, War and Smallpox, and
Feavour, have carried off in the last three (...) four Wasting Years among us,
you^ generally see perhaps that scarce one in (...) of our Communicants, have
perished in those dreadful Plagues; whereas a far greater ^^^portion of
Destruction has been made upon our other people. It seems, as if God had set a
special Mark of Protection upon (...) Churches, that the Destroying Angels
mig^^ not so much meddle with them. Only the^ Let us also set our selves to
Amend all that (...) Amiss, and Supply all that is Wanting, in (...) Churches.
In Allusion to the words of (...) Prophet, I would say, Awake, Awake, put (...)
thy Strength, O New-English Zion, and put (...) thy Beautiful Garments, O
American Jerusalem* Pray, Let us not permit our selves, to be without any of
those Officers, or any of those Disciplines, whereby we may be clothed with
Strength

I do particularly wish, that our Churches, first by not Well ^^ating, and then
by not Maintaining, the Office of RULING ELDERS, have not Sleepily lost the
Locks, wherein lay the Strength of their affayrs. This I may ^ver; That Our
Days are concerned in that word of the Lord Jesus, Rev. 16.15. Blessed is he
that watches, and keeps his Garments, lest he walk Naked, and they see his
shame. When any of the Watchers in the Temple were found Sleeping, by those
that walked the Grand Rounds, they had their loose Garment^ taken from them,
which could not without (...) and loss be again recovered. Churches by
Sleeping, may come to loose all that may defend them or adorn them; did not
Antichrist, ^^terly deprive the Churches of their privileges, through their
Sleepiness? and have not some Churches of Late (you know where?) by their
Sleepiness come to be well nigh Stripped, even of, A Liberty to choose their own
Pastors? ^riefly, I am verily persuaded, we are now Entered into those
Earthquakes, which are ^o attend and assist, The Resurrection of our (...)
Witnesses. And it may be feared those ^orrible Earthquakes will shake even Us
also, to pieces, if we do not become well settled in the Establishment of,
Th^se things that cannot be Shaken. I Will say this one ^^ing more; If Th^^ would
attain any thing upon us, there is one Scripture, which I wish, were Engraven
on the Door of every Meeting House in the Country; It Is (...) in Ezr. 3.3.
They Set the Altar upon his Bases, for Fear was upon them because of the People
of those Countries.

Fifthly, The Growth of Ta^as is no^^ of the smallest Evils, against which our
Sollic^tudes are to be kept Awake. We read in (...) parable, Mat* 13.25. While
men slept, the Enemy came, and Sowed Tares among the Wheat. Wherefore, let us
beware of Tares in our Principles. It Is the quality of Tares, and of (...) to
disorder the (...). Let not ^he Tare^ (...) Will Worship, of Arminianism (...)
of Serp^^^tine Quakerism, be nourished in our Churche^* but stick we close to
the main Principles of Protestantism, and of Puritanism, which we have declared
for. Let us also b^war^ of (...) in our Communions. We should use (...) in
admitting of others unto Holy Things* (...) Charity here* will become
Injusti^^, if it ca^^not Open Eyes: Charity must not be so (...) us to bring
visible Tares, into the Garden^ (...) God. If our Churches once become useless
(...) to that great end of them, which is, To rep^^^sent unto the world, Who
those are that (...) Lord Jesus will have to, Ascend into the (...) Lord, and
stand in his holy place for ever* (...) may seen write an (...), upon all our
Glor^* In (...), whatever is contrary to that Evangelical Church Order, which
our Lord (...) Instituted; Let us beware of it, as of our Ba^e. It Is observed by
the Venerable Baxter, in a Book wherewith he has lately Honored me, That
Thunders oftener fall upon th^se Buildings, which are called Churches, than upon
any ^ther whatsoever. Now the way for our Churches to be preserved from the
Thunderbolts, which our God will now be Scattering upon the World, is to have
as few Tares in them, as we can.

Sixthly, As the Apostle said, ^^ake unto Righteousness, thus would I say,
Awake unto Reformation. And O Let not our God after all our Awakenings,
Complain of us, as in Jer. 8.6. I h^^rkened and (...), but no m^n Repented him
of his Wickedness, ^^ying, What have I ^one? Let him not write over our Doors,
that in Jer. 44.10. They are not H^mbled (...) this Day. There was an
Observation made in ^ Book formerly Printed in this Country; and I find a
Devout Gentleman in England, has lately Addressed the whole Nation with a
Quotation of it, That in our Last War, the Sword was first drawn upon a Day
(...) Humiliation, and that much of the sad News in (...) progress of th^se
Wars, come at the close of th^se Days: ^he Lord thereby declarin^ from Heaven,
that He Expects from His Peop^^, something else (...) Fasting and Prayer; even
REFORMATI^N (...) But that upon Renewing of Covenant with (...), to Reform the
Evils among us, We had great ^^ccess against our Enemies. As for Us, we have
(...) many Days of Humiliation; but when shall we have a Day of REFORMATION?
One of This, were worth many of These. May we now Awake (...) it, KNOWING THE
TIME: I have not yet plainly and freely enough, given you my own Little
Opinion, WHEREABOUTS WE ARE IN TIME* and therefore I will now humbly do it. I
do conceive, That the Antichrist, having before passed his Time, and his Times,
did enter his Last Half Time at the REFORMATION in the Last Century, Commenced
at the Year 1517. When also the Antichrist was come to Halve it with our Lord,
not only by the Loss of many and mighty Kingdoms from (...) Pap^l Empire, but
also by the Remainders of Antichristianism yet cleaving to the REFORMATION it
self. Wherefore, about an Half Time, that is, about an Hundred and Fourscore
Years, from that REFORMATION, I do firmly expect, a NEW REFORMATION to be
began; a REFORMATION more Glorious, more Heavenly, more Unive^^sal far away
than what was in the former Century together with most formidable Desolations
to be (...) from Heaven, upon those that shall incurably retai^ an Antipathy to
this REFORMATION. Behol^ then, we are got into the very Dawn of the Day when
God will vouchsafe a mavelous Effusion of (...) own Spirit upon many Nations,
and REFORMATION, with all Piety, and Charity, shall gain the Ascendent, over
those Men and Things, that for many Ages have been the Oppressors of it. And I
(...) affirm, That all the Peace of New England lies in (...) being, A W^se
Virgin, that shall go forth to mee^ this Blessed Reformation.

Three Years are now passed, since our Merci^^^ God, by a wonderful Turn
rescued this People from the Hands of those, who declared us, A People (...)
only to be Rooted off the Face of the Earth, and wh^ might have been in
Forwardness enough to accom^plish, That Rooting Business. All this while, ou^
God comes, Looking for Fruit; and although He almost says, Cut them down! yet we
are entering, One (...), of Patience, wherein if we do nothing Remarkable about
Returning to God, what Apology ^^an we have in the Day of His pleading with us?

In the Prosecution of this REFORMATION, I ^^ve but ONE THING at this Time,
further to lay before you. It Is an Advice lately Agreed upon by ^he Watchful
PASTORS, of the Churches herea^outs; and it runs in such Terms as these.

Whereas, the most heavy and wasting Judgments of Heaven, upon our Distressed
Land, loudly call upon us, no longer to Delay the Taking of some hitherto
^^taken Steps, toward the Reformation of our Provoking Evils, and the Recovery
of Practical Religion in our Hearts and Lives;

Among other Expedients in order thereunto, we cannot but Recommend it as very
Advisable, That the several Churches having in an Instrument, proper for that
purpose, made a Catalogue of such Things, as can indisparably be found amiss
among them, do with all seriousness and solemnity, pas^ their VOTES, That they
count such Things to be very Offensive Evils, and that Renouncing all
Dependence on their own strength, to avoid such Evils, they humbly ask the Help
of the Divine Grace, to assist them in watching against the said Evils, ^oth in
themselves, and in one another. And that the Communicants do often Reflect upon
those their ACKNOWLEDGMENTS and PROTESTATIONS, as perpetual MONITORS unto them,
to prevent the Miscarriages, wherewith too many Professors are too easily
overtaken.

All our Churches have Received; and some of ^^em have Renewed, the Covenant of
Grace, wherein we have consented unto the Bonds of a Walk ^ith God. We are now
Advised unto a Transaction, wherein we may, by our own VOTES, do no more than
Explain, and Strengthen, the Bonds of the Lord which already lie upon us; it is
to Revive our Sense of those Gracious Bonds, and Prevent our Transgressions
thereof, by being either Ignorant or Forgetful of them. We that have gone the
farthest in Coven^nting with God, herein do not Go Back, so much as one step
that we have already taken, but only Look Back, to assure what steps we have
taken. And not only our Communicants, but even all that are under our
Church-watch, may by Degrees be brought unto such Distinct Confessions of the
Ties that are upon them. Such Humble Recognitions of our Duty, will not only be
Accepted by our God, as our Declaration for Him, whereupon He will Declare for
us; but also they are the New Covenant-way of obtaining Help for the doing of
our Duty. And if they be often Read over in a year, both publicly at our
Meetings, and privately when we are Humbling of our selves before the Lord,
what pure minds might we obtain, by the Remembrance of our Duty thus explicitly
Awakened? Unto your Consideration I leave it* being assured, that you are
sensible, SOMETHING MUST BE DONE.

Acknowledgments and Protestations VOTED As Explaining the Obligations laid
upon us by, our most Holy Covenant.
WE, that through the goodness of God, have been Combined, and are still
Continued, a CHURCH of His, HAVING heretofore Consented unto the COVENANT of
GRACE, according to the gracious Terms whereof, We have made Choice of the Lord
JEHOVAH, Father, Son, and Spirit, as our God, and of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as
the glorious Mediator, upon whose Fullness of Merit and Power we Rely, as well
to be strengthened for the Duties, as to be Invested with the Blessings of that
Well-Ordered Covenant; and have therefore according to His Will, Incorporated
our selves into that Evangelical* Church State, wherein our Desires after the
Su^e mercies of that Covenant, (...) to be expressed, mentained, and answered:
BEING herewithal sensible, That our Justification only by Faith in the
Righteousness of Him, who is* Savior and a Surety for us, does very strongly
oblige us, to close with all the Commandme^^ of God, as Holy and Just and Good,
and as those Rules in conformity to which alone, our Peace can be lengthened
out: AND BEING also Awakened, by the most heavy Judgments of Heaven, under
which this country has been Weltring and Wasting for many later years, to
suspect lest in the Hearts and Lives of US in particular, there may be found
some of those ACCVRSED THINGS, which have brought upon the Land, such a Long
Variety of Sore Calamity:

DO therefore acknowledge, That We, are under peculiar Bonds to Walk
Circumspectly, not only by Avoiding the grosser Miscarriages of Ungodliness,
but also by guarding against whatever Corruptions do sometimes more easily
obtain among the professing people of God* Behaving our selves, Not as Fools,
but as Wise* and Redeeming the Time, because the Days are Evil.

And in special manner, To Revive the sense of the Ties, which are laid upon
us, by the Covenant of God, that has not only been Accepted, but also Renewed,
among us.

I. We acknowledge, It would be a great Evil in us, if our Love to the World,
should make us Omit our Communion with God, and Abate of that Zeal and Watch,
which w^ should always keep alive in our Souls; o^ hinder us from the most
Affectionate Reading of his Word, and Seeking of his Face, every Day in our
Houses, or from the daily use o^ Meditation and Supplication in our Closets.

II. It would be a great Evil in us, if, while on the one side we Protest
against practicing any thing as Divine Worship for which we have not a Divine
Warrant, and against the usage of all Pagan and Papal Superstitions, on the
other side, we should not according to the best of our Capacity Attend and
Support the Institutions of God, in the midst of us; with Endeavors, that
there may be nothing wanting thereunto.

III. It would be a great Evil in us, if when ^e Draw near to God in his
Ordinances, We should allow ourselves to be Formal, Car^al* or Sleepy, in what
we do; Especially, if ^e should Ordinarily come to the Table of the Lord,
without serious Examinations and ^^^iliations preparatory thereunto; or if
(...) managing of Church Discipline, we ^ould Vent our own Passions and serve
our (...), instead of acting entirely for the lord*

IV. It would be a great Evil in us, if we ^ould Abuse the Good Creatures of
God (...) Sensualities in Eating, D^in^ing, and Recre^tion or by Extravagancies
in our Apparel: (...) if, whenever we use the Titles or the ^^iptures of our
God, it should not be with ^uch Reverence in our Souls.

V. It would be a great Evil in us, if we ^ould not keep a strict Guard, both
on our (...) Thoughts, as well as Words and Works on the Lords Day, and also on
all that are under (...) Influence, to Restrain them from the (...) of that
Sacred Rest.

VI. It would be a great Evil in us, If (...) should not make it our Careful
Study, to have our Families well Instructed, and well Governed, and in such a
Condition as if agreeable to the Fear of God.

VII. It would be a great Evil in us, if by the Prevalency of a Private Spirit,
we should be Backward unto any Public Servi^e wherein God shall call us, with
our Perso^^ or Estates to Serve our Generation* or if we should with Unjust
Neglect and (...) Ill Require such as have been Service^^^^ more especially,
such as in Government (...) the Ministers of God unto us for our Good.

VIII. It would be a great Evil in us, if (...) should put off a Patient,
Peaceable, For^giving Temper toward our Neighb^^^^^ or not with Meekness of
Wisdom (...) Smother all causes of Contention.

IX It would be a great Evil in us, (...) should spend our Days in Idleness,
and not (...) Diligent in such Employments, as may ^^dorn the Doctrine of God,
by Rendering us ^^^ful to those that are about us.

X. It would be a great Evil in us, if (...) should in any of our Carriage, or
so (...) in our D^scen^se, admit any thing that ^^^vour of a Lascivious or a
Licenticus (...) ^osition in our Souls.

XI. It would be a great Evil in us, if we should use any Dishonesty in our
Dealings, and either by Fraud or Force exact unreasonably upon those, with whom
we are concerned.

XII. It would be a great Evil in us, maliciously to make, or Injuriously to
spread, any False Reports, or too easily to Receive Slanders against the
Innocent, or to Countenance the Broachers of them

XIII. It would be a great Evil in us, if we should not Conscientiously Observe
and Fulfill, what Promises we have Lawfully given one unto another.

XIV. It would be a great Evil in us, to be ^iscontented, either at the
Prosperity which God would have others to Enjoy, or at the Adversity wherein
the Providence of God has (...) any time confined our selves.

XV. It would be a great Evil in us, if we would not be Ready, Charitably and
Liberally to Relieve the Necessities of the Poor, that ^all for our Bounties.

XVI. It would be a great Evil in us, if we should not with a most Brotherly
Affection, ^ither Give or Take Reproofs when there is a ^^use for them; or if
we should withhold any ^^ue Testimony against whatever may fall out among us,
Displeasing unto God*

Wherefore, by a Solemn VOTE, We Declare against all these Evils, as Abominable
^^ings; and, utterly Despairing of any Strength (...) selves to keep clear
thereof, we do most Humbly Ask the Alsufficient (...) in Christ, that neither
these, nor any such ^^^quities, may have Dominion over us; (...) that we may
Watch against them all* (...) in our selves and in One Another.

THe Church in the North part of Boston, having had Opportunity, by previous
Co^^^^^tations to Debate and Concur about this Ma^^ter, did on the 10 th day of
the 2 d Month Declare,

That they did Accept of the foregoing Instrument as Containing the Serious
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS and PROTESTATIONS of their Souls; Whe^^^on they would often
R^flect, for the (...) of what may be Amiss in their Hea^^ and Lives; as also
for the Directing of the Prayers, and the Strengthening of the (...) that they
would use in their more Watchfu^ Walk with God.

Accordingly they did without any (...), join with their PASTOR, in a
Sup^^^cation, wherein these things were distinct^^^ Spread before the Lord. And
the PASTOR undertook to make provision, that a Co^^^ thereof, might come into
the Hand of ever^ Communicant, for which cause there is no^^ made a small
Impression.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some other Books.
THE Call of the Gospel. Military Duties, An Artillery Serm^n, 3 Right Thoughts
in Sad Hours. 4 Early piety Exemp^ify'd. 5 Memorable Witc^crafts and
Possessions. 6 The Good Man's Resolution, with other Subjects. 7 Soldiers
Counseled and Comforted. 8 The Wonderful Works of God, Commemorated. 9 Work
upon the Ark. 10 Speedy Repentance Urged. 11 A Public Spirit. ^2 A Companion
for Communicants. 13 The Serviceable Man^ an Election Sermon. 14 Serious
Thoughts in Dying Times. 15 Addres^es to old men, young men, little children.
16 The life of the Ren^w^ed Joh. Elliot* 17 Expectanda, o^, things to be l^^k'd
for. 18 Little Flocks guarded against Quakers. 19 A Virtuous Woman 20 Blessed
Unions Recommended. 21 A Sacred Exorcism upon Sinful Disconte^t. 22 The cause
and cure of a Wounded Spirit. 23 Meditations on the Day of Judgment.
All by This AUTHOR.


