An APPEAL from the Twenty Eight JUDGES TO THE Spirit of Truth and true
Judgment In all Faithful Friends, called Quakers, that meet at this Yearly
Meeting at Burlington, the 7 Month, 1692.
WHereas twenty eight Persons, called Friends of the Ministry, have published a
Paper of false Judgment against George Keith, and the rest of his Friends and
Brethren, without any Hearing or Trial, We, in behalf of the rest, do make this
our Serious and Solemn Appeal to the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment in you
all, that by the help and guidance of the same, ye may enquire and search into
the matter, requesting and beseeching you to do Justice in these things, for
the Vindication of the Truth, the honor of Christ, the Peace of your
Consciences, and the Credit and Repute of our holy Profession, and making up
the Breach that is among us, if possible, and answering the expectation of our
faithful Brethren in England, and other places of the World, who will be
greatly concerned with us, that Justice and true Judgment may take place
impartially, and without respect of Persons.

And Friends, Think it not strange, that we Appeal to you universally, that by
the Spirit of Truth ye may give true Judgment in these matters concerning Us
and these Twenty Eight Persons, and others of the Ministry who are joined with
them therein; for though upon a pretense of their being Ministers, they claim a
Superiority over you the Lords Heritage and People, as if ye were not capable
nor qualified to judge them, but that they have Authority to judge you, and on
this pretended Authority (too like the Roman-Herarchy) (...) have sent their
Paper of Judgment against us to you, though they were no Yearly Meeting, nor any
true Representative of the Body of Friends in these three Provinces, but a
Party or Faction of prejudiced men against the Truth (and us the defamed
Witnesses of it) many of whom we can prove guilty of great Ignorance and Error
in Doctrine, as well as some of them are guilty of evil and scandalous
Practice, repugnant to our holy Profession; and some that have been too busy
to comply with their usurped Authority over you, have read the said Judgment in
diverse Monthly, Quarterly and other Meetings, without the consent of the said
Meetings, or so much as asking it: All which we Appeal to you, Whether it be
not a manifest Usurpation over you, and seeking to bring you into Bondage? And
when we have at several Meetings, requested the Friends of the said Meetings,
to enquire and examine the matter of Difference between these twenty eight men
and us, some of the said 28 have still refused to suffer the thing to come to
any further Examination or Judgment, pretending, None have Power to judge in
these Matters but Friends of the Ministry, whereof these 28 are the far
greatest part in these 3 Provinces, and most of the rest of the ^^eachers are
joined with them, to uphold and defend them in their Tyrannical Usurpation over
your Consciences, as if ye were only to see with their Eyes, and hear with
their Ears, and not with your own, and that ye were to take all things without
all due Examination and Trial, by an impl^^^ Faith, Papist- like, from them.
But if there remain that Nobility in you, and sense of your Christian-Liberty
and Freedom, where-withall Christ has made you Free, as we hope there does, ye
will not suffer your selves to be so imposed upon, nor to be thus Ass-rid by
them, as to take things by a ba^e implicit Faith from them, but every one of
you to see with your own spiritual Eyes, and hear with your Spiritual Ears of
Gods opening, and to bring these weighty things of Deference to the true
Touchstone, the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment in your selves, which ye
have, as well as they, and which many of you are better taught by and
acquainted with than they; even as ^^^erly it was, that many of the People say
beyond the Priests and Teachers, in the days of the Prophets, and of Christ in
the Flesh, and the Apostles; and also of late, many Thousands of the People
have seen beyond the Priest and Teachers, and have been made able by the Spirit
of Truth to judge them for their great Ignorance and Error. And that ye may
have the better Opportunity to examine these matters, and impartially and
thoroughly to search into them, and judge of them, we have procured to be
printed their three Papers of Judgment, viz. the first given forth by their
Monthly Meeting at Philadelphia, the 26 of 3d Month 1692. wherein they clear
Tho, Fitzwater, and condemn G. K. for saying, The Light is not sufficient
without something else, which something else, Thomas Lloyd, as the Mouth of the
said Monthly Meeting, acknowledged, They knew G. K. held to be the Man Christ
Jesus, and what he did and suffered for us on Earth, and what he now does for
us in Heaven: The ad Judgment is given forth by them called Friends of the
Ministry, concerning ^. Stockdale, signed by Sam. Jenings, as Clark of the said
Meeting, the 4 of 4 Month, 1692. The 3d signed by 28 of them of the Ministry,
against G K. and his Friends, etc. Which said Judgments we desire you to
compare with our Printed Answer, called, The Plea of the Innocent, etc and
another Paper called: An Expostulation with Thomas Lloyd, Samuel Jenings, etc.
and another by way of Epistle, in answer to their three false Judgments.

And we earnestly request and desire of you, to procure of these 28 men, that
we may have a public Hearing with these men before you all, at a place and
time mutually appointed by them and us, before the People be gone from the
Yearly Meeting; and that an orderly Method be agreed upon betwixt them and us,
to prevent all Confusion, and especially that none but one speak at once, and
that every one that speaks, who is concerned, may have full Liberty, without
Interruption, in order to which we are most willing that one or two Impartial
and Judicious men may be chosen by both them and us, to preside, and have full
Power to command and enjoin Silence to any of them or us, as they shall see
occassion; and whoever of them or us yields (...) to the said Command, shall
be held and declared unworthy and incapable of further speaking at the said
public Conference. And also, we demand that Justice or these 28 men, that they
will give us the said Public Hearing and Trial before you.

And let these particular things be discoursed of, and come to a public
Hearing and Trial at the said Meeting, and what other things they and we shall
agree to, viz.

1. Whether George Keith has been proved guilty by these 28 men (his Accusers)
of R^^iling, Ungodly Speeches and false Accusations? Or (...) he has given
Names to any of them (as alleges in their Paper) that they did not deserve,
and did not belong (...)? And whether it be not false that they say, This
Meeting having Tenderly and Orderly dealt with him?

2. Whether they who have signed that Paper against him, are not guilty of
giving him Names that did not belong to him, but may be justly accounted Names
of Reviling, Ungodly Speeches and false Accusations? And whether Samuel Jenings
particularly is not greatly to be blamed for calling G. K. Worse than Profane,
and Apostate, seeing we know not wherein G. K. is in any one particular gone
from Friends Doctrine or Practice, or what thing or things he is guilty of, so
as to be worthy of having his Ministry denied?

3. Whether it cannot be proved, that that Faction (which have sufficiently
shown their Opposition and Prejudice against G. K. and have signed to that
Paper against him) are guilty of Cloaking more Damnable Heresies and Errors,
than any Protestant Society in Christendom, while it can be proved against
them, that they have not only cloaked W. Stockdale for above 18 Months, in
saying, To preach Faith in Christ within, and in Christ without, is to preach
Two Christ's, and Tho Witzwater, in saying, The Light is sufficient without any
thing else, and That he owned (...) Christ Jesus as (...) in Heaven, but the
Grace of God within him, and saying in his Prayer, O God that (...) us, and
laid down thy Life in us etc. and saying, That he had not learned that I (...)
(...) on the Tree of the Cross, or some what that he took of the Virgin, etc.
but they have cloaked diverse other Persons in their vile and gross Errors, as
can be sufficiently proved, and particularly Sam. Jenings, in saying, To do our
own business, as men, we needed not a super natural Power; and Tho. Lloyd in
arguing some hours, That we might be Christians good enough without the Faith
of Christ as he died for our sins, and rose again without us; and Arthur Cook
and John Simcock in their charging G. K. for imposing Novelties upon them, when
he affirmed, Christ was in Heaven in the same Body for being, in which he
suffered; and J. Simcock denied that Christ rose in the same Body in which he
suffered; and Robert Young in saying. That he read not in all the Scriptures of
Christ without, and Christ within, and that Christ was separated from his Body
in the Cloud; and Rob. O^^n and William Southbe, in denying any general Day of
Judgment, and the Resurrection of the Dead but only what every one witnessed
within here? Whether these, with many more that can be proved, were not cause
enough for G. K. to say, More Damnable Heresies and Errors were cloaked among
the Quakers here, than in any Protestant Society in Christendom?

4. Seeing their Paper, signed by the 28 mentions a main matter of
Controversy betwixt G K. and them which (they say) they proffered to refer to
one of his own Books, or to the Yearly Meeting here, or to the Yearly Meeting
at London; Let them show what that main Matter of Controversy is, and wherein
his present Doctrine does contradict any of his former Books, which he says
they can never prove.

5. Whether (...) Act of the Monthly Meeting at Philadelphia the 26 of 3d
Month, 1692, is according to Christian Doctrine, That the Light is sufficient
without any thing else, thereby excluding the Man Christ Jesus without us, and
his Deaths Sufferings Resurrection, Ascension, Mediation and Intercession for
us in Heaven, from having any part or share in our Salvation, and thereby
making him only a (...), but no real Savior, (...) that side, lately (...) the
Difference betwixt them and (...) Christ (...) and another (...).

6. Whether it be necessary to our Salvation, to believe, That Christ dyed for
our sins without us; and rose again, and is gone into Heaven without (...) and
there does make Intercession for me? And whether it does not belong to sound
Christian Doctrine to believe, That Christ will come without us in his
glorified Body to judge the quick and the dead and that there shall be a
general Day of Judgment, and that there is a Resurrection of the Dead to be,
that the deceased Saints have not yet attained generally, but wait for it until
Christ's Coming? And whether there is not to be a Resurrection of the Body, that
is not the Resurrection or quickening of the Soul only, as some falsely imagine:
Let them clear themselves in these things, they having given us just cause to
suspect them Unbelievers therein.

7. Whether every true Christian is not taught and led to believe in the Power
and Spirit of Christ, and his Light and Life inwardly revealed, and by the help
of the said measure to believe in him who has the Fuliness, even the Man
Christ Jesus without us, glorified in Heaven? And whether by True Faith in the
Man Christ Jesus without us, as it is wrought by the measure of the Spirit and
Light of Christ in us, we receive not a daily supply and increase of none
Grace, Light and Life, and a further measure of the Spirit from the Man Christ
Jesus? And whether they who have not this Faith in the Man Christ Jesus without
them, are worthy to bear the honorable Name of Christian?

8. Whether it is not a great and necessary part of Christian Doctrine,
necessary to be preached, in order to bring People to an inward knowledge and
enjoynment of God and Christ, and the holy Spirit, to preach Faith in Christ
without us even the Man Christ Jesus, as he dred for our sins, and rose again,
and is (...) into Heaven, and there makes (...) as Faith in Christ in us as he
does inwardly enlighten us? [And whether it can be laid that the Man Christ
Jesus it in us, otherwise than by a figurative Speech, of giving the Name of
the whole to the measure or part, as when the Sun is said to be in such a
House, the fullness of the Sun's light is only in the Body of the Son, and but
a stream of Light comes from the Sun into the House?

9. Whether the said 28 Persons had not done much better to have passed
Judgment against (...) of their Brethren at Philadelphia (some of themselves
being guilty) for countenancing and allowing some called; (...), and owning
them in so doing to hire men to fight (and giving them a Commission so to do,
signed by 3 Justices of the Peace, one whereof being a Preacher among them) as
accordingly they did [and recovered a Sloop, and took some Privateers by Force
of Arms?]

10. Whether hiring men thus to fight, [and also to provide the Indians with
Powder and Lead to fight against other Indians be not a manifest Transgression
of our Principle against all use of the carnal Sword and other carnal Weapons?
And whether these called Quakers, in their so doing, have not greatly weakened
the Testimony of Friends in England, Barbados, etc. who have suffered much for
their refusing to contribute to uphold the Militia, or any Military force? And
whether is not their Practice here an evil President, if any change of
Government happen in this place, to being Sufferings on faithful Friends that
for Conscience sake refuse to contribute to the Militia? And how can they
justly refuse to do that under another's Government, which they have done, or
allowed to be done under their own. But in these and other things are stand up
Witnesses against them, with all faithful Friends every where.

11. Whether it be according to the Gospel, that Ministers should pass Sentence
of Death on Malefactors, as some pretended Ministers here have done, preaching
one day, Not to take an Eye for an Eye Mat. ^^. 3. and another day to
contradict it, by taking Life for (...)?

12. Whether there is any Example or President for it Scripture, or in all
Christendom, that Ministers should engross the Worldly Government, as they do
here? which has proved of a very evil Tendency.

Signed by us, in Behalf of many Friends, who are one with us herein. George
Keith, George Hutcheson, Thomas Budd, John Heart, Richard (...), Abraham (...)


POSTSCRIPT.
BY a Warrant signed by Sam. Richardson and Rob. Ewer, Justices, the Sheriff
and Constable entered the Shop of William Bradford, and took away all the above
written Papers, they could find, called, An Appeal, etc. and carried the said
W. Bradford before the said (...) and also sent for (...) M' Comb, who (as they
were informed) (...) of two of said (...) and they not giving an account where
they had them, were both committed to Prisons also, they sent Robert (...), and
the said Officer, to (...) the said W. Bradford's (...) but found none, yet
took away a parcel of Letters, being his ^^tensels, which were (...) about ten
Pound. Now the (...) Papers being seized, and a great (...) spread abroad of
Sedition, (...) and (...) Government, etc. we have, though with some
difficulty, procured the (...) Appeal to be Reprinted, (...) one that (...)
might have the Opportunity to read and judge of the matter contained in the
said Appeal, and also to signify, that we did not (...) do not intend any
thing against the present Government, or (...), but even them in Commission to
be Magistrates, and account it our Duty to obey them, either actively or
pushvely, but knowing that it is contrary to the Quakers, Principles to use the
carnal Sword, and finding by experience that it is impossible to uphold
Magistracy without it, therefore we (...) (...) it to be duly considered and
discoursed of among all Friends at this Yearly Meeting at Burlington.

A Copy of the Mittimus.
WHereas William Bradford Printer, and John M' Comb Tailor being brought before
us, upon Information of Publishing, Uttering and Spreading a Malicious and
Seditious Paper, entitled, (...) Appeal from the Twenty Eight Judges, to the
Spirit of Truth, etc. Te^^ing to the Disturbance of the Peace, and Subversion
of the present Government; and the said Persons being required to give Security
to answer it at the next Court, but they refusing so to do. These are therefore
by the King and Queen's Authority, and in our Prop^^i^tary (...) to require you
to take into you custody the Bodies of William Bradford and John M' Comb, and
them (...) keep till they shall be discharged by due Course of Law; whereof
(...) not, at your Peril, and for (...) so doing, this shall be your sufficient
Warrant.

Given under our Hands and Seals this 24th of August, 1^^2.
These to John White, Sheriff, of Philadelphia, or his Deputy.
Arthur Cook, Samuel Jenings, Samuel Richardson Humphery (...) Robert (...).


THE END.

