The Wonderful Works of God Commemorated.

PRAISES Bespoke for the God of Heaven, In a Thanksgiving SERMON; Delivered on
December. 19. 1689.

Containing Just REFLECTIONS upon the Excellent Things done by the Great God,
more Generally in CREATION and REDEMPTION, and in the GOVERNMENT of the World;
But more Particularly in the Remarkable Revolutions of Providence which are
every where the matter of present Observation: With a POSTSCRIPT giving an
Account of some very stupendous Accidents, which have lately happened in France.

By COTTON MATHER.

To which is Added a SERMON Preached unto the CONVENTION of the
Massachuset-Colony in NEW ENGLAND.

With a short Narrative of several Prodigies, which New England has of late
had the Alarms of Heaven in.

Printed at Boston by S. Green. and Sold by Joseph Browning at the corner of
the Prison Lane, and Benj. Harris at the London Coffee-House. 1690.

AT THE CONVENTION of the Governor and Council, and Representatives of the
Colony of the Massachusetts Bay.
I T having pleased the God of Heaven to mitigate His many frowns upon us in
the Summer past, with a mixture of some very signal Favors, and in the midst
of wrath so far to remember Mercy; That our Indian Enemies have had a check put
upon their Designs of Blood and Spoil; That others have not seen their Desires
accomplished upon us; And that we have such hopes of our God's adding yet more
perfection to our Deliverances: Inasmuch also, as the great God has of late
raised up such a Defenoe to the Protestant Religion and Interest abroad in the
World, especially in the happy Accession of Their Majesty's our Sovereigns,
KING William and QUEEN Mary to the Throne.

It is therefore Ordered, that Thursday the nineteenth instant, he kept as a
Day of THANKSGIVING throughout this Colony; And all Servile Labor Labor on
said Day is hereby inhibited: And the several Ministers and Assemblies are
Exhorted to Observe the same, by Celebrating the just Praises of the Almighty
God, Of whose tender Mercies it is that we are not Consumed.

Boston December. 3d. 1689. By Order of the Convention, Isaac Addington Secr.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Henry Ashurst, Baronet.
SIR,
IT IS an obscure Pen, among the Antipodes of that World in which you dwell,
which now waits upon you, to let you understand, That ^here^s an England in
America, as well as One in Europe, which the Name of ASHURST has been no less
Dear, than Known, unto. Upon that Expression in the Sacred Scripture, Cast the
Unprofitable Servant into (...) Darkness, there is an Interpreter who imagines
that the Regiones Exteroe of America are the Tenebroe Exteriores, which (...)
unprofitable are there Condemned un^^ Doubtless The Authors of those
Ecclesiastical Impositions and Severities, which drove our Predecessors into
this American Wilderness, esteemed those old Puritans to be a very Unprofitable
sort of Creatures; and we their Children, desire with much Humiliation to
Confess and Lament our own Unprofitableness; not without our wonder, that any
Party in our Nation, should propound unto themselves any profit, by
Endeavoring our further Misery. We nevertheless flatter our selves with
slopes, that as while we sat under the shadows of our Char^ers we at least made
the other parts of the English America to be profitable unto the Crown of our
King, so the Church of our God in the other Hemisphaere, will not Excommunicate
us from their Fellowship and Affection, when it is considered, that the Exercise
of the Protestant Religion in the purest and fullest Reformation, is That very
Thing which this considerable Plantation was first built upon. He that shall
Travel over New England, will find a large Country filled with Churches, which
I may without vanity call Golden Candlesticks, in this Outer Darkness, and
which are Illuminated with Able, Faithful and Laborious Ministers, among whom
the person who now Addresses you, is no more worthy to be Reckoned, than the
Seventh which appears no^ among the Pleiades, is to be counted One of the Seven
Stars. These Churches, in their Doctrine, do profess, and in their Worship, do
practice, most entirely the (...) ant Religion, as our Confession of Faith,
(...) (...) Platform of Church Discipline, has (...) (...); and though they
want the Liturgies and Holydays and Ceremonies, which were not Conceived before
the Man of Sin was Born, they do but approach thereby the nearer to that
Primitive Christianity, which will be our Glory, while we continue in it. It is
in these Churches that we have long seen the Goings of God our King, for the
Regeneration, and Edification of multitudes, who after an Arrival to a pitch of
Holiness equal to what any part of this Lower World affords, have gone to the
Spirits of Just Men made perfect; and though a Decay of Piety has accompanied
an Increase of People in the midst of us, yet even among Us of the Third
Generation, the God of our Fathers, has such a Number of Serious, Gracious,
Fruitful Christians, as encourages our Hopes, that He still has Reserves of
Mercy for us. It Is in these Churches (however Degenerate) that One may see
Discipline managed, H^resy subdued, Profaneness conquered, and Communion
maintained, with a very beautiful subserviency to the Great Ends of the Gospel.
And if after all the Printed Books, not only of our Cotton, Shepard, Hocker,
Bulkley, Mather, D^venport, Cobbet, Norton, Newman, Whiting, Mitchel, and the
rest now Asleep of the former Generation, but also of our Higginson, Fitch,
Morton, Wigglesworth, Allen, Moodey, Torrey, Willard, Batly, Stoddard, (not to
mention my own Fathers both, English and Latin Composures) through the Favor of
God, vet Alive among us, we must he indg'd unprofitable to the Church of God
abroad, yet the prodigious and Atloean Industry of the Reverend Eli^t and of
those whom that Venerable Saint yet Lives to see succeeding him in cares for
Evangelizing the poor Pagans here, must be owned profitable to those, whose
Cuter Darkness we are sent into.

But the ^^ght of these Churches, to a good Reputation with all them, that have
any value for the Protestant religion, is not more palpable, than the Wrong
which has been sometimes Ignorantly, and sometimes Maliciously done unto us, by
them that have baited us for the sake of the Bear-Skins, which themselves have
put upon us. Never was any thing more wicked than the Calumny, with Loads
whereof our Enemies compelled our Fathers in the Infancy of this Plantation, to
do as diverse of those, whom they call, The Fathers, did of old, even, ^o write
Apologies; nor can any thing be more Slanderous and Romantic, than the
Accusations that some Ill, Men have more Lately trad^^ed us withal; One may see
the very Spirit of Persecution revived in them! Nevertheless, after all the
Nanter of our Adversaries, as I would never desire an Easier Task, than to
prove, That their Majesty's have (...) in all their Dominions, more Loyal
Subjects, than the People of New England; so it is evident enough, That, where
any Real Miscarriage has procured One, our zeal for the Protestant Religion in
the power of it, has procured more than Ten of the Complaints that have been
made against us. And therefore, we not only challenge (...) Interest among the
Reformed Churches, in whose Comforts we cannot but Rejoice, as we have most
inquisitively and 'Affectionately mourned in their Sorrows; but we also expect
the Friendship of all those particular persons who are well affected unto the
stones of Zion, and take pity on the Dust thereof. As it is a thing too
observable to be denied, or concealed, That tho we are a very unworthy people,
yet the Haters of New England stil^ find themselves pushing hard against the
Great Stone, so I believe none of those Noble Persons who have been sincerely
concerned for our Welfare, will ever see cause to Repent of it; but Goodness
and Mercy shall follow them all their Days. Blessed (...) the God of our
Fathers, that albeit we are as an Outcast, yet it may not be said, No man has
cared for us! There were Three Knights among our first Parentees; it calls for
our Extremest Gratitude if there have been more of That, or Another Quality
willing to be our Patrons.

And Sir, whereas you have been pleased your self to let the World know, how
much you are desirous to see New England flourish, you will pardon it if One
born and bred in that Country, and a Son of the College there, take the
Liberty to acquaint you, That we are not insensible. That you are, my Fathers
Friend, is a thing that Lays me under Obligations; but your being New-Englands
Friend, is a thing which we would All Resent; and though the Dedication of
these two Little Sermons to your Name, does not, Take of the best Fruits of the
Land, as a Present for you, yet I humbly ask your Acceptance of them, as a part
of out Acknowledgments. Among the other Curiosities of New England, One is that
of a mighty Rock, on a perpendicular side whereof by a River, which at High
Tide covers part of it, there are very deeply Engraved, no man alive knows How
or When, about half a score Lines, near Ten Root L ong, and a foot and half
broad, filled with strange Characters; which would suggest as odd Thoughts
about them that were here before us, as there are odd Shapes in that Elaborate
Monument; whereof you shall see, the first Line Transcribed here.



Sir, I take leave to add, That the English people here will study to have the
kindnesses of their Benefactors, not less Durably, but more Intelligibly
Recorded with them, than what the Indian People have Engraved upon Rocks; And
therefore it is, That you shall now publicly find your person and Family
mentioned in our prayers to the God of Heaven, for your Enjoyment of all the
Prosperity engaged unto them that Love Jerusalem. The Voices that ascend from
the Thrones of the Lord Jesus here, are asking for you, Grace and Glory and
every good thing: and among them, there are my own Wishes, That the Son, and
the Church of God may find you their KNIGHT which is to say (in English) an
hearty Servant, and that in the day when (...) a Word will be esteemed above
ten thousand Worlds, you may hear a Well Done! from the mouth of your Glorious
Judge. It Is with these, that I subscribe my self,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant Cotton Mather.

PRAISES Bespoke for the GOD of Heaven, In a Thanksgiving SERMON.
It is Written in Isai. XII. 5. Sing unto the Lord, for He has done Excellent
Things; This is Known (...) all the Earth.
OUr Blessed Savior, being to Preach upon a Text, (...) out of that very Book
from whence we have now taken ours, began His Holy Sermon, with sayings (...)
Day is this Scripture fulfilled in your Ears. It is by an unhappy Encounter of
Gods Mercies and your Desires, that upon the Reading of the Text now before us,
I may in like manner, close the Book, and say, This day is this Text fulfilled
amongst us. Truly it is known abroad, that our God has done excellent things; and
for this cause we are with no less Grounded than Solemn THNKSGIVINGS
endeavoring to Sing unto the Lord. Behold a Word of the day in its day here
provided for you! May our further considering and understanding of the Text,
but promote our fuller Conformity thereunto, and more exactly imprint the
shapes of this Heavenly Mould, upon us.

As the Noble Prophet Is^iah, is in the Books of the New Testament quoted
perhaps no less than threescore times; thu the Days of the New Testament are
those which his Prophecies have their frequent and special References to.

Among other Employments of this An^elical, and Evangelical Pen, one was the
pre^a^ing of Sacred Songs, for the use of the (...), in the circumstances which
there (...) been predictions of; and so, besides the (...) which common
conjecture, have af^^^ unto this Prophet the composing of; (...) forty sixth
particularly, which in imitation, of the great Luther, we may at this day make
the Anodyne of our cares: we have two inspired Songs in this Chapter laid
before us^ in the first of the Songs, the Confessors of God endeavor
thmeselves to celebrate the Praises of that Eternal one; in the next they
endeavor to excite and engage others unto a consort with them in this glorious
Exercise. And here we have the Text which we are now to descant upon. [In that
Day ye shall say] But What day is That day? we must be beholden unto the
foregoing Chapter, for an Answer thereunto. We there find, that there will a
Day come, when the Lord will set His Hand again the second time, to recover the
remnant of his People: which will be when the Tribes of lost Israel are
converted unto the Faith of the Lord Jesus; when according to the Language of
the New Testament, All Israel shall be saved. There will a Day come, when the
Root of Jesse shall stand for an Ensign for the People: which will be at the
second coming of our Lord; when according to the phrase taken by our Savior
from this very place, the sign of the Son of man shall appear. There will a Day
come, when the Lord shall with the Breath of His Lips, slay the wicked; which
will be when Antichrist shall ^erish by the fiery approach of the Lord Jesus,
to take vengeance on His wickedest Enemy: when according to the phrase taken by
the Apostle also from this very place The Lord shall consume that wicked one
with the breath of his mouth, and shall destroy, him with the brightness of his
coming.

It Is that day which the Song now before us, is peculiarly calculated for. But
certainly, we that are only getting into the D^wnings of that day, are not
excluded from all meddling with it; no, it is written for our Admonition.

In the Words to be now Handled, we have two Things.

First, The Doings of God are here mentioned. It is said, He has done
Excellent Things: or as the Original imports, Great Things, and High Things: or
as it may likewise be rendered Magnificent, and Illustrious Things. The Hebrew
Word ((...)) is indeed a Substantive; and it intimates, that the Works of God
are even Excellency in the Abstract, and Majesty it self. And the Chaldee
Paraphrase here fitly puts upon them the term of (...) of Magnali^, noting in
them something eminent and powerful. Such things are done by Him, who is
Wonderful in Working!

Secondly, The Duties of men are then specified hereupon. Since excellent
Things are done by God, there are two things to be done by us.

First, We are to sing the Praises of God. It is here said, Sing unto the Lord.
And such is the expression in the Holy style, as to signify, not only an
exactness, but also an instrument used in the Song. We are with a Sacred Music
to magnify the God, who is worthy to be Praised.

Secondly, We are to spread the Praises of God. It is here said, This is known
in all the Earth; but the version which is by some chosen for it rather is, Let
this be known is all the Earth: We should not only our selves do it, but
likewise provoke and excite all the Earth to take notice of what Wonders have
been done by Him who is fearful in Praises.

Wherefore the Truth to be now entertained with us, is,

Chat it should be our study to SING and SPREAD the Praises due to the Eternal
God, for the EXCELLENT Things which are done by him in the World.

It is by the Propounding of two or three, Conclusions that this Doctrine, will
have its due Advantages.

PROPOSITION I.
There are multitudes of Praises due to the God the Heaven from us. To praise
God, is to Acknowledge the perfections that are in Him; it is to Acknowledge the
infinite Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice and Holiness, which are His
Attributes; and this we are to do, In all our ways. We have received our Being
for this End; and our Grand, our Chief Errand into the World, is, That our God
may have a Number of Rational Beholders to be sensible of His Excellencies.
When Mankind came first out of His Glorious Hand, He then said, as in Isa. 43.
21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise. In
our Lower Little World, no Creatures can be found capable of Conceiving and
Expressing those Acknowledgments of God, which are, The Glory due unto his
Name, besides MAN; who is therefore not unfitly called, The Highpriest of the
Creation. The devout psalmist once called upon all Creatures, with a Repeated
Invitation, Praise ye the Lord; but they all reply that Man is to do it for
them, and they all therefore conspire to offer the Notices of the Almighty God,
unto Man's affectionate Contemplation.

To praise God, is to Acknowledge in Him something Excellent, as it is said in
Psalm. 148. 13. Let them praise the name of the Lord, for His Name alone is
Excellent; thus, when we Acknowledge an Excellency in all those Manifestations
which God makes of Himself; then it is that we praise Him. Now the Praises
owing to the God of Heaven from us are obliged not only by what He Is, but also
by what He Does: indeed by what He Does it is that we come to Learn what He is.
We ought to Acknowledge an Excellency in the Nature of God; which is to Ascribe
Glory to Him. The Language of our praises is to be that in Psalm. 89. 6. Who can
be compared, who can be Likened, unto the Lord? God should be truly
Transcendent with us. We should apprehend, that as the Name of our God is, I
AM, so all other Beings are as mere NonEntities in comparison of Him;
subscribing to that is Isa 40. 17. All are before Him as Nothing. We should
apprehend the Being of God, so Independent, so Unchangeable, so Mysterious, as
no other Being is; and with Dazzled Souls fall into such praises as to say, I
cannot find out the Almighty to perfection. The perfections that are in the
^^mighty God should even Astonish our (...) standings; and fetch the Exc^^^^
(...) Moses from us, in Exo^. 15. 11. (...) (...) unto thee, O Lord, who is
like unto thee? One while our praises are like Hannabs, to say, There is none
Holy as the Lord! Another while our praises are like Ethans to say, Who is a
Strong God like unto thee? Sometimes our Praises, like Paul's, are to say, God
is only Wise; and sometimes again, God is True, but every man a Liar; and then
with David, we are to praise and say, O how great is thy Goodness! But the
Excellency which is in the Works of God; is that which renders the Glory of His
Essence, most apparent unto us; and the praises which we are to bring unto Him,
are in a great measure to spring from thence. We are told in Isa. 28. 29. The
lord of Hosts is Excellent in Working. Our praises of God, are in This to find
the Reasons of them, He has done Excellent Things.

First, We ought with many praises to observe the Excellent Things which God
has done for our selves. As the Psalmist called upon himself, in Psalm. 103. 1.
Bless the Lord, O my soul; and forget not all his Benefits; thus ought we to
Reflect upon the many Benefits and Kindnesses of the most High toward our
selves, with praises too many to be Numbered, too Hearty to be ended. We ought
to see something of God, in all our Circumstances, and upon all that happens to
us, we are to say, The Lord be magnified! But there are some Excellent Things
done for us, by our God; Things which no Friend, no Hand, none else could have
done for our Good; and These Things we should with suitable praises be
particularly grateful for. It is the manner of the Jews, to receive the
Comforts of their Lives, with a Baruk Adonai, or Blessed be the Lord. We that
are Christians may not suffer our selves to be exceeded by any people, in
Thankfulness unto God. It is related concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, in John
6. 11. that he would not Eat a Meals Meat, without a Thanksgiving over it. Much
more ought the more Excellent Things that are done for us, to be so
Acknowledged. When God had heard a Prayer, there was that praise returned for
it, in John 11. 41. Father, I thank thee for it. We ought seriously to think,
What Answers of our Prayers, what Reliefs of our Wants and Woes, the great God
has in an excellent manner favored us withal; and the Result of all should be,
Lord, I thank thee for these Excellent Things. A good Hezekiah himself may
smart by failing here. Those persons are worse than Pharisees, ^n whose mouths,
God be Thanked, is not a frequent but yet solemn Interjection.

Secondly, We ought with many praises to observe the Excellent Things which God
has done for Others as well as for our selves. Our praises must not be confined
unto those mercies of God, which we our selves have been the Subjects of. But
all His Dispensations abroad in the world, are to be the Occasion of our
Halleluj^bs to Him. A Soul that is Filled with all the Fullness of God, will be
Filled with praises to Him for all his Workmanship. We should be like him that
said, in Psalm 139. 14. I will praise thee, for mavelous are thy Works.
Whatever our God is Doing, we should upon the sight thereof be praising; and we
should Acknowledge Him, in all those Excellent Things, which we see done in any
part of the Universe. It was said in Psalm. 40. 5. Many, O Lord, my God, are the
Wonderful Works which thou have done. God has done many Wonderful Works, and
many Excellent Things, in which we our selves have not an Immediate, or at
least not a peculiar share; but we should all render praises unto Him on the
account thereof. It is mentioned as the privilege of a Righteous man, in Psalm.
112. 9. His Horn shall be exalted. What if one thing intended in it should be
This? That as the praises of God were sounded by His People, in Cornets of old,
so there were Exalted Horns, or Exalted Notes, which He would have their
praises to be Raised with. Thus we read in I Chron. 25. 5. of, Words to Life up
the Horn. To accommodate the Allusion; The Praises of God are to Sound High, in
our Devotions. When we praise God for being Excellently Good unto our selves,
we do well; but we are to Raise our praises unto an Higher pitch than so; they
are to Expatiate upon all those things, wherein our God has exhibited Himself
as Excellently Great, throughout the world Such Abstracted Praises are
agreeable to the Inclinations of every Godly man; he argues at that Rate, Great
is the Lord, and therefore Greatly to be praised.

PROPOSITION II.
We ought both to Sing, and to Spread, the praises which we owe unto the God of
Heaven. Behold, a double Office incumbent on us, with respect unto those
Acknowledgments which we are to pay unto our God; beside and beyond the first
Motions of them, in our own Souls. Indeed the Spring of all the Acknowledgments
which we make unto God, must be in our Hearts, and the gracious Opinions and
Resentmen's which are first formed there. We must first look to this, that God
be praised by the Thoughts in our minds, and, as the Psalmist speaks, by, All
that is within us Blessing his Holy Name. They never will praise God
sufficiently or acceptably, who cannot say, as in Luke 1, 46. My Soul does,
Magnify the Lord. As all worship of God, so particularly, all praising of God,
must be performed in Spirit; otherwise it will not be in Truth. But the praises
of God, being shaped in the Honorable Thoughts of our Souls, what are we then
to do?

First, We are to Sing the praises due to God for the Excellent Things that He
has done. And if we keep close to the Text, we shall see two things here
demanded of us.

First, There should be an Exactness used; in our praising of God. There should
be in our Praises, as on one side an Amputation of all that is improper, so on
the other side no Omission of any Article that calls for out meditations. The
charge given to us it That in Psalm. 103. 2. Forget not all His Benefits. We
should not Forget so much as One of the Excellent Things, which we can Remember
to be done by God. The skipping of One stroke in a Lesson, often spoils the
grace of the Music. So does the missing of One Thing, in a Commemoration of
what God has done. We should be careful with an often, yea with a daily
Examination, to inform our selves, about the Things for which God is to be
praised. It is hardly convenient for a man to sleep at Night, until he have
pondered, What New Excellent Things has been done by God this Day, that I
should particularly praise Him for? And we should be careful that our Sorrows
do not swallow up our praises. It Is often so, that as that worthy woman of old
could not eat of the Peace Offering, which was a Thank-Offering, because She
Wept; thus we cannot praise God, because He Smiles us. We cannot see Excellent
Things done by God, because we feel Terrible Things done to our selves. But
this is our Folly.

Where we have One Trouble, we have a Thousand mercies of our own to be
praising for. And if we were a million times more afflicted, than we are, yet
the Lord might challenge our Praises. It was a great Speech of the Renowned
G^rson, Quiequid de me ordinaverit Deus, said He, However God may dispose of me
for ever, whether to Eternal Weal or Woe; yet This I know, that He is worthy of
my praises, and He shall have them all. Indeed Praises are a Debt owing to Him,
even from those woeful Spirits that are broken in the place of Dragons, and
covered with the shadow of Death.

Secondly, There should also be an Instrument used in our Praising of God. But
of what kind? Far be it from us to plead for that which is properly
instrumental Music in the Church of the Lord Jesus. Indeed before the coming of
our Lord, there was in the Church a Divine appointment for such a thing; and
between the Neginoth and the Nehiloth, I find, if I miscount not, sixteen or
more kinds of Instruments for the maintaining of it. But upon the Abolition of
the Mosaic Pedagogy, we have uo order-for the continuance of this Temple
Worship, by introducing of it into our Synagogues. The Primitive Church had it
not, as even a Bellarmine tells you; the Ancients often and loudly declaim
against it, and Aquinas himself about four hundred years ago, notwithstanding
all his Popery and Bigottry, yet bestows none of the kindest Remarks upon it.
The Schoolmen themselves own, that Aliquid Figurabat, it was a Typical thing;
and we having in the Tidings of the Gospel that grace and joy which this was a
figure of, ought not to Judaize by upholding the shadow in the presence of the
Substance; nor ought we to bring into the House of God, a Troop of Officers
which the Lord Jesus never instituted. What Instruments are we then to praise
God withal? we are all furnished with two at least.

First, Our Lips are to be employed in the praises of God. The Psalmist called
his Tongue my glory. Our Tongues are then our glory, when we glorify God
therewith all. It Is a proper service for them; Hence the Apostle says,
Therewith we bless God. It is Desired for the Saints in Psalm. 149.6. let the
High Praises of God be in their mouths. And it is Resolved by one of them, in
Psalm. 145.21. My mouth shall speak the praises of the Lord. Hence the Apostle
urges it, in Heb. 13.15. let us offer the Sacrifice of praises to God
continually, that is the fruit of our lips. There were Offerings of many sorts,
which God was praised withal of old; but our Lips are to be instead of the
Calves and Lambs, and other Euchr^^^tical Offerings that then were customary.

With our Lips we are to rehearse and recite the Excellent Things that have
been done by God, especially when we are with bended Knees and lifted Eyes,
presenting our selves before him. With mentioning what God has done, we are to
do as he said, in Psalm. 145.2. Every Day will I bless thee my God.

But there is one Exercise of our Lips, which God is more peculiarly to be
praised with; and that is the Singing of Psalms. In those Commands of God which
require the praises of God, even in our Days, we have such clauses as those,
in Psalm. 95 1. O come, let us sing to the Lord, let us make a joyful noise to
the Rock of our Salvation. The New Testament sufficiently inculcates this way
of praising the most High; and if you will believe Tertullian, the Primitive
Christians hardly ever had a Feast without it. There are savoury Hymns, of an
Humane Composure, which no doubt we may praise God by singing of. But
Scriptural and inspired Hymns are those which we should principally thus put
Regards upon. The Psalms of David are those which God is to be Praised by a
Reverent, and Attentive Singing of. These were those, no doubt which our
Savio^^. Himself Sang, at the Passover, more than a score of Times, And the
very Angels whose Melodies the Shepherds overheard of old, seem to sing out of
the Eighty fifth Psalm. Hence when the Apostle says, in Ephesians. 5. 19. Speak to
your selves in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; he alludes to the
well-known Division of the Psalter. q. d. Go sing all the Psalms of David over.
Till we can mend them, never let us, leave them. He that shall sing those
Blessed Psalms, and ordinarily spend at least one Observation, and one
Ejaculation, upon every verse, as he goes along, will therein praise the great
God, at no common rate.

Secondly, Our L ives are likewise to be Employed in the Praises of God. We
have Hands as well as Tongues for it; and something there is that our Hand
finds to do. The best Thanksgiving is Thanks living.

We should sometimes put that Question to our selves, in Psalm. 116:12. What
shall ^render to the Lord for all His benefits? As a return to God for the
Excellent things that are done by Him, we are to order our lives in such a
manner as may be pleasing to him. Hence in Psalm. 50.23. He that offers praise,
and he that orders his conversation aright, are equiv^lent.

There is a general Return of Obedience, which we are to praise God by yielding
of. It is said in Phil. 1.11. the fruits of Righteousness are unto the glory
and praise of God. When God had carried Israel over Jordan, there were Stones
erected for His praise; but what was inscribed on them? was it any History of
what had been done by God? No, it was a Copy of the Law. Our keeping the Law is
our praising of him that gave it. We praise God when we fear and blush to do
any thing that he may be displeased at.

There is also a special Return of well-doing which we should now and then
praise God withal. As when David had seen many mighty things done by God, he
became inquisitive, in 2 Samuel 7.2. What shall I now do for the House of God? so
some signal act of Piety, or of Charity should be done by us, that God may not
be without his (...). We praise God when we are labour^^^^ to do some singular
thing, for the advancement of His Truths and Ways.

Secondly We are to Spread the Praises due to God for the excellent things that
He has done. Yea, our outmost is to be done that they may be known in all the
Earth.

A good man desires that he may not be Alone in the praising of God, he would
have all men to join with him in it. It is therefore said by such a man, Come,
I will declare what God has done for my Soul. We are to praise God as publicly
and as openly as we can; and to say like him in Psalm. 22.25. My praise shall be
of thee, in the great Congregation. And we are to do what we fairly can, that
the excellent things done by God, may not be concealed things, but that all men
may be acquainted with them: so are we advised in Psalm. 105.1,2. Give thanks to
the Lords, make known His Deeds among the people: sing unto Him, talk ye of all
His wondrous Works. We should render them as Notorious as they are Notable; and
publish them among all our Neighbors, as the happy partakers did the healing
Miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ. Hence it was the wish of the Psalmist, in
Psalm. 26.7. That I may publish with the voice of Thanks giving, and tell of all
thy wondrous works.

Yea, when God has done Excellent things, we are not only to speak of them, but
(If we can) to write of them too. Every good man should leave to his Children,
a Diary for a Legacy. Some written Memorials and Experiences of Excellens
things which a good, man in the time of his Pilgrimage has seen done by the
most High; these would be will worth bequeathing to them that should come after
him, that they may set their hope in Gods.

And the more considerable Appearances of God in every Generation, ought with a
fuller Publication to be transmitted unto Posterity, by the Pens of good
Historians. That we have no more Books of Remarkable Providence, is an
Omission that has wronged and robbed the Almighty God of more than a Million
(...). There should be compiled sufficient (...) ratives of the excellent
things, occurring in every Age and every place; like the Books of Jasher, and
Nathan, and Iddo, and other Seers; or like the Pillars among many Monuments of
Antiquity. What shall I say, more? when God has done a more conspicuously
excellent thing, He is to be Praised after that manner, in Psalm. 102. 18. This
shall be written for the Generation to come, and the people that shall be
Created shall praise the Lord.

But it remains, that these things be made useful to us.

APPLICATION.
And O that we might all stir up our selves this Day to sing and Spread the
praises due to the Eternal God for the excellent things which He has done.

It is an excellent thing indeed, that we may have a Day of Thanksgiving, while
the World is in so much Confusion and Combustion, and every where Men's hearts
are failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are doing
upon the Earth. Let us be at some pains, that this Day be not lost, or that it
may not evaporate in a few fensual satisfactions. The Excellent things done by
God, are now to be the Repast of our Souls.

Day's of Thanksgiving as they are among the most Heavenly, so they will be
among the most prosperous, of all our Devotions. There are Pious Men that will
now and then in secret places, keep their Days of Thanksgiving before the
Lord; laying our whole Days in praising of the Great God for what He is, and
what He does, and in pondering on What they shall do for God. And I Will assure
you, such persons ripen for Heaven a pace; yea they live in Heaven upon Earth.

But as for Days of Thanksgiving observed in the Assemblies of good men; all
men have seen the wonderful successes of them. New-Englands Prosperity has more
visibly followed upon its Thanksgivings than upon its Humiliations, as in times
both of War and of Sickness, has been more than once perceived. We have seen
the fulfillment of that Word in 2 Chronicles. 20.22. When they began to sing and to
praise, the Lord set ambushments against their Enemies. Praises, thousands of
high praises be to our God, that we may have a Day to celebrate His praises.
But that our praises may be awakened, and that no man may make a Jar in our
Harmony.

Consider how Reasonable these praises are for us all.

O consider with our selves, Who is God? it is He that Humbles Himself to
behold the things that are in Heaven. Consider, Who is, Man? a poor Worm, yea,
a cursed Viper. Now that this GOD should look upon this man^ Lord, What is man
that thou should be mindful of him? Yet the Eternal God has been doing of
Excellent things, which we not only behold, but also enjoy? There is not one of
us all, who has not excellent things to be this Day praising the Almighty for.
They whose case is never so bad, yet have cause to carry on this Day of
Thanksgiving with us, in that it is no worse. The most miserable person in all
this Congregation, may with an eye to his own condition, say like him in Psalm.
119.156. Many are thy mercies O Lord. If I could find out the most unhappy, and
the most complaining person among you all, even to that person would I say, God
has done Excellent things for thee, and some that never finned so much, yet
suffer more than you.

Consider Likewise, how Profitable these Praises will be to us all. Behold an
Expedient for the obtaining of all the Blessings that can be wished for. It was
said in Psalm. 67. 5, 6. Let the people praise thee; then our God shall bless us.

If the Earth send Vapors up to Heaven, Heaven will make Showers to descend on
the Earth. Let our praises be continually ascending from us, and they will soon
issue in those things that are called, The Showers of Blessing. When we have a
Jealousy of a Leaky Vessel, we try it by first putting of Water, before we
trust Better Liquors in it; if we that have little; more than Water to comfort
us, will yet not permit it to Leak without Praises from us, then God has more
Excellent Things to do for us. To be always Begging and Craving, as a Dog for
his Morsels, ad Spem futuri semper hians, without multiplied praises unto God;
this is a most vile Disingenuity. It Is no less than a Loss of, yea, no less
than a Curse on, all our Blessings, which we incurr by not praising the giver
of them. But the praising Soul may fill himself with such a Joyful Hope, as
that in Psalm. 71. 14. I will Hope continually, and will (...) thee more and
more. Those that are ^^llicitous least God should Loose any of His Praises, are
the persons, for whom God will be concerned that they don't Loose any of His
Blessings; these are they that shall experimentally understand the
Loving Kindness of the Lord. Man, would thou have any Excellent Things done
for thy self? Then bring thy praises for what Excellent Things have been done
in the world.

I suppose by this time, we have generally got our Halleujahs ready; but you
call for a Catalogue of those Excellent Things, which they are to be fixed on.
It Is a Feast that you are this Day to be treated at; and before you go out of
these Doors, a Feast you shall have. I shall set before you a short Account of
some E xcellent T hings, which I ^^tend as a Feast for your praises; and
believe me, though your praises had [and O that they may have!] no less than an
E ternity to be Feeding on those matters in, they never would be glutted, never
cloyed.

First, The E xcellent T hings done by God, in the Works of CREATION, call for
our Praises. It was once the outcry of the Psalmist, in a Rapture, Praise the
Lord from the Heavens, Praise the Lord from the Earth, praise the Lord all ye
His Armies. Truly, It Is our Business to praise Him, for the Heaven and for the
Earth, and for all those Armies which He has replenished the World withal. We
have a good pattern for us, in Psalm 104. 24, 33. says the Psalmist, O Lord, how
manifold are thy Works! in wisdom have thou made them all. Well, and what is
now incumbent upon us, that have the view thereof? It follows, I will sing
praise unto my God, while I have any Being. Methinks the Children of Men too
much imitate the Spider, when they Look after nothing but building a little
House for themselves, and concern themselves with nothing but the petty Affairs
thereof. We should remember that we are Citizens of the WORLD, and as far as we
can, we should visit every Corner of it, with our Praises to Him, of whom and
for whom is all! I make no question, but that we do in a blessed manner
Ante^a^e Heaven, by doing so. The Praises of God are Exhibited in every part of
the World, and we forfeit the ^^^viledge of Reasons, if we do not put as many
of them as we can, into our Acknowledgments. There are above six Thousand
Plants growing on that little Spot of the World, which we Tread upon; and yet a
Learned Man, has more than once, found One Vegetable enough to make a Subject
for a Treatise on it. What might then be said (...) the Hundred and fifty
Quadrupeds, the Hundred and fifty Volatils, the five and Twenty Reptiles,
besides the vast multitudes of Aquatils, added unto the rich variety of Gems
and Minerals, in our World? Our own Bodies are, to use the Phrase of the
Psalmist, So Fearfully and Wonderfully made, that one of the Ancient Heathen at
the sight thereof, could not forbear breaking forth into an Hymn unto the
praise of the great Creator; It Is impossible that any thing should be better
shaped! Indeed, All the Things that we have every Day before our eyes, have a
most charming prospect in them; and the very Deformities which the Flood has
brought upon this Terraqueous Globe, are made Beauties, by the Disposals of the
Lord that sat upon the Flood. There is not a F ly, but what may confute an
Atheist. And the Little things which our Naked Eyes cannot penettate into, have
in them a Greatness not to be seen without Astonishment. By the Assistence of
Microscopes have I seen Animals of which many Hundreds would not AEqual a Grain
of Sand. How Exquisite, How stupendous must the Structure of them be! The
Whales that are sometimes found more than an Hundred Foot in Length, methinks
those moving Islands, are not such Wonders, as these minute Fishes are.

But alas, All this Globe Is but as a P^^point, if compared with the mighty
Universe. Never did any man yet make a tolelerable Guese at its Dimensions: but
were we among the Stars, we should utterly lose the sight of our Earth,
although it be above twenty six thousand Italian Miles in the compass of it.
Look upon the Wandering Stars, and you shall see so many Worlds, that swallow up
all our Conjectures at the circumstances of them, and of their Satellites. Look
upon the Fixed Stars, and what shall we say about the Bigness of them?
Doubtless they many scores of times exceed the Bulk of this poor Lump of Clay,
about a few Foot whereof the Inhabitants are so Quarrelsome. Or, what shall we
say about the Number of them? For though they are but a few above a Thousand,
That we ever see, without a Telescope, yet that will tell us, that the Six,
which we commonly call, The Seven Stars, have above Sixty among them, and the
rest are like the Sand of the Sea, innumerable. But above all, the Sun, that
principal Engine, which the whole Visible Creation has such a manifest
Dependence on; This declares the Glory of God, at such a Rate, that the
Philosopher once thought himself Born on purpose, to Behold the Splendors of
it. This at last has glar'd out my Eyes, that at this Time, I can look no
further upon the Marvels of the Creation. But, my Brethren, Let us take our
Time to Travel over the World; (I hope, we shall one Day have Bodies more able
to do it, than our Spirits at present are!) and then let us give many Thousands
of Praises to Him, whose Omnipotent and Omniscient Hand has Created all. O
Sing unto the Lord, because He has done Excellent Things, in making and
managing the vast Fabric of the World.

Secondly, The Excellent Things done by God, in the works of REDEMPTION call
for our Praises. It was the Exordium of a Psalm, in Psalm. 107. 1, 2. O give
Thanks unto the Lord, for He is Good; Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so.
Behold, a Constellation of Excellent Things here which the very Angels at this
Day are with a million Praises adoring of. Could we steal a Look this Day into
the Third Heaven, we should see the multitude of the Heavenly Host there
clapping of their Golden Wings, and hear them reiterating that Heavenly Shout,
in Luke (...) 1 4. Glory to God in the Highest, because there is on Earth
Peace, and good will toward men! When the blessed Angles beheld the horrible
Pit which Man by Sin was fallen down into, doubtless they were even at their
Wits ends about a way for his Rceovery; doubtless with pity and much Despair,
they cried out, Alas, for miserable man; He is helpless and hopeless now for
ever! But they have now seen a Remedy provided for undone wretched man, and
therein they see, what they Stoop and Bend themselves to pry into; they see The
manifold Wisdom of God; and they have ever since, even for more than five
Thousand years, been Praising of the God, that has Remembered us in our Low
Estate, because his Mercy Endures for ever. That there should be a Man, who was
Born perhaps in September, not seventeen Hundred years ago, and who yet is the
Father of Eternity; a Man who lay in a Cradle, and who yet cannot be contained
by the Heaven of Heavens; a man, who is his own Mothers Father, in a word, a
man, in whom dwells the Fullness of the Godhead, and from whose Fullness, all we
receiv^ll behold an Excellent thing which the very Angels cover their faces at.
No man Living is able to comprehend the Trimmphant Praises that were among the
Angels of God, when our Savior was first Born into the world. When the Sun of
Rightecusness first shone in our Horizon, doubtless these Morning Stars were
presently making their Acclamations at it. The Tidings of it were quickly
carried through all the quarters of the Heavens, and the whole City of God was
moved at the Report. When it was told, The Redeemer of Lost Man is Born! it set
them all on Praising the most High God, and saying, Glory, Glory to the
Highest, in the Highest for ever! Well, they call us, Their Brethren, and from
the Lofty Battlements of the Third Heaven, they call unto us, that we would not
Leave them to Praise Alone. A famous Minister Lying at the point of Death,
after he had been for some Time senseless, fell to Singing in a manner very
extraordinary, and gave this Reason for it, I heard the Angels, and shall not I
join with them! Surely our Interest in Redemptions is not inferior to Theirs;
but then strike up, Ye Redeemed of the Lord; where, O where are the Praises due
to Him that has Delivered you from all the fiery plagues, which you have madly
exposed yourselves unto. What could we Children of wrath have imagined, but
that a just and a terrible God would have said concerning us, I will avenge me
on those Adversaries! But instead thereof, behold, He has ready for us, a
Jesus, who saves His People from their Sins; and that calls aloud unto us, O
Look unto me, and be saved. This is an Excellent Thing! It Is an Excellent Thing
which God has done, in so Loving the World as to give His only begotten Son,
that whosoever Believes, may not perish, but have Everlasting Life. It Is an
Excellent Thing which God has done, in ordering that He who thought it no
Robbery to be Equal with God, should take on him the Form of a Servant, for us
thereby to gain the Dignity of Children. It Is an Excellent Thing, That He who
knew no Sin, should be made Sin for us, and we be made the Righteousness of God
in Him; and that we who have lain in the Belly of Hell, should be Renewed by
the holy Spirit, and be made to sit together in Heavenly Places in Christ
Jesus. I am to tell you, That the Blackest of all the Devils are Saints, in
comparison of that Man, whom these Excellent Things do not Effectually bespeak
all possible praises from. But you that by Regeneration, are arrived unto a
more Plenary, Actual, sensible Interest in this Redemption, are to be more
abundant in your Praises. O strain the utmost of your Capacities, to show forth
the praises of Him, who has called you out of Darkness into his Mavelous L
ight; Come, SING unto the Lord, because He has done Excellent Things in the
Recovering of Lost Man to an Intimates, and Eternal Fellowship with Himself.

Thirdly, The Excellent things done by God in the Government of the World, call
upon us to praise His blessed Name for ever. The continual providence of God,
is disposing of all things in an Excellent subordination to His own praise; the
Wheels of providence are not carried on coeco impetu, but are full of eyes, and
if we praise Him not for Things that every day occur unto us, it is because we
are worse than blind; These two things are conjo^ned in Psalm. 103. 19, 20. The
Lords Kingdom rules over all, Bless ye the Lord. We may see our eternal King
after an excellent manner keeping all the World in a real Order,
notwithstanding all the seeming Distractions of it. We may see him fulfilling
of His promises and His Threatenings, and giving Recompenses among the children
of men. We may see him frustrating and confounding of His Enemies, and
preserving his Church, As a burning Bush not consumed.

We should pursue a distinct sight of these things, and Bless the Lord. When we
see, that His is the Kingdom^, we should add, And thine is the Glory too.

My arrival to this part of our Discourse, puts me into a capacity to give you
some Recapitulations of the Excellent things which this Day of THANKSGIVING is
more particularly designed for.

My Brethren, there are Excellent things which our God has of late been doing
in the English World. He that moves the four wheels of Providence through all
the four parts of the Earth, has given the English Nation lately to see those
Revolutions which the Histories of all Ages can hardly parallel. And now let us
this Day sing unto the Lord, for He has done excellent things.

I. The Late Revolutions in the Land of our Forefathers Graves, afford unto us
a sight of Excellent Things which ought to be had in Everlasting Remembrance.

And here,

The first and great and most comprehensive matter of our Praises is, The happy
accession of their Majesty's, King William, and Queen Mary, To the Throne of
the Three Kingdoms.

This was a Thing in all the parts of it so Circumstanced, a^ to make all men
say, This is the Lords Doing, and it is Mavelous in our Eyes! It made a
Second EIGHTY EIGHT out-shining that in the former Century. For,

Consider, the Season of it. It was when the Protestant Religion was Lying at
the Stake; and foreign Popish Writers did not stick to tell the World in Print,
That there was a Private League made between two of the most Potent. Monarchs
in Christend^me, (which one of their own Ambassadors also, did in a manner own)
for the Extirpation of Hoeresy; and that not only the subduing of Holland, but
also the Enslaving of England were steps to be taken in order there unto. It
was when the Indefatigable Drudges of the Papacy, who had more than Ten years
before declared, We have here a Mig^^^y Work upon our Hands, no less than the
Conversion of three Kingdoms, and by that perhaps the utter subduing a
Pesi^lent Heresy, which has domineered a long time over a great part of this
Northern World; whereof never such Hopes as now; had now got all the
Advantageous Posts of the Nation into their Hands, and had so modeled all their
Business that they counted themselves cut of the Reach of chance for ever; and
were even teady! like Human to cast Lots for a Lucky Day to throw all their
Vizards off. It was when the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom were overturned,
and the Frogs of the Romish Egypt were swarming in a main, to take possession
of the Glorious Holy Mountain between the Seas. When things were thought
hastening to that pass, that every vacancy in the public Employments would
have made several Proselytes unto Popery; when a great Creation would suddenly
have given the Papists a majority in the House of Lords, and New Charters with
Bold Returns might quickly have given them a Majority in the House of Commons
too; a Condition of Affairs that was formidable to all that penetrate into the
Tendencies of Popery.

THEN it was that the (then) Prince of ORANGE entered upon his Glorious
Enterprise of Rescuing the Church of God from the Bloody Altar, which it was
now bound upon; and the Protestant Princes Combining with him, offered up their
Vows to God, for the prosperity of this Important Undertaking, as counting that
in the miscarriage of it, All was Lost. There had been one or two Attempts made
before, but a wrong step taken in them, only brought a R^ine upon the unhappy
people Engaged therein. The Popish Party were then flashed with their
Successes, and forgot or slighted the Dying Words of one whom they Burnt (it is
said) for only Relieving a Destrested Sufferer; Though you are seemingly fixed,
and using your Violence against those whom you have got under you, yet unless
you can secure the Lord Jesus Christ, and all His Holy Angels, you shall never
do your Business; but Vengeance will be upon you, before you are aware.

Consider also the Manner of it. It was the Expectation which the Late Earl of
Arg^le Expired withal, That God would accomplish His work, Not by Might, nor by
Power, but by His own most Holy Spirit. And so it has been done! The Spirit of
God inclined the Dutch to give their Great PRINCE in the Assistence that could
be given. When the Navy, with such Wonderful Turns of the Wind, as argued a
particular Care of God about it, was come into its Harbor, the Spirit of God
strangely inclined persons of all Degrees to an Agreement with the Princes
Declaration: it was a Touch of God upon their Souls! Whence, though the Nation
were D^hauched on purpose to make Popery acceptable to them, yet many thousands
that were of no Religion at all, could not now fight for that Religion. The
same Spirit sent a Terror into the Great Oppressors of the Nation, so that
though there was a vast Army to oppose the Prince, the very sound, of his
Approach, put them to Rout, equal to one given by the clearest Victory; and as
they had endeavored by Shams to establish themselves, One piece of Paper,
which ('it is said) was a Sham, had no little Hand in the Defeat of those Daring
Criminals; nor was any blood shed (...) these Transactions, but of a Little and
a desperate Party that seemed weary of their Lives, or they might have kept
them. Hence ensued, by the unexempled and scarce accountable Desertion of the
Late King, such a Dissolution of the Government as never had been known; and
the Throne becoming Vacant, the Crown is una^^id^bly placed upon those
Illustrious Head, which, God grant L ong to Reign!

And then, Consider the Prospect of it. For what may be now hoped for, but a
Protestant KING, Just and Ruling in the Fear of God, as a morning without
Clouds unto the Protestant World! We now see upon the British Throne, A KING,
whose unparalled zeal for the Church of the Lord Jesus at the Lowest E bb,
has made Him the P henix of this Age; A KING in whom Courage and P rudence
make a Temper which is to be no where seen but in the Greatest Heroes; A KING
that scornfully rejected a Sovereignty over his own Country, when he might
have have had it, by betraying of it; A KING, that uses to say, That be can
cannot have so unworthy a Conception of God, or so base T houghts of Mankind,
as to believe that any one person should be designed b^ the Almighty King, to
trample and oppress a Society placed under him; A KING, that so abhors all
Persecution, that when he accepted the Crown of Scotland, he Explained a clause
in the Coronation Oath, with this Proviso, I will not be obliged to be a
Persecutor: A KING, that has twice had a Crown of Light, appearing in the
Heavens over his Principality to signalize him unto the World: With him we see
A QUEEN, whose Virtues had long since Enthroned her in the Hearts of the whole
English Nation: We do not now see a Rom^^ Dalilah for the Phil^stins to Plough
withal; no^^ls our S olomon under the Temptations which the greatest Monarchs
have sometimes fell before. What can be hoped for, but that the Chains with
which the Tyrannous and Treacherous Grand Segniour of France had Petter'd
Europe, will now be broken? and that the most monstrous Tygre in the world,
having the Forces of Three Kingdoms let loose upon him, while he is Attacked
with such a General Storm on every side as was never seen before, must quickly
either perish, or proclaim Liberty for that Religion which he has out done all
that ever Lived, for the Perscution of? It Is an unaccountable Coincidence with
this, That some hundreds of People in F rance are lately fallen into Predigious
Ecstasies, wherein being Dead asleep, they both speak of T hings and speak with
Tongues, which before they had nothing of; and they agree to tell us, The L ate
Revolutions in England were to begin the Deliverance of the Church of God.
These are some of the Excellent Things done by our God! Thus are all the
Affairs of Europe overturned.

But there is a further matter for our Praises which has followed hereupon; and
we that are a Country of Nanconsormists, may not pass it by unmentioned.

It is, The Repeal of those Laws, which the Protestant Dissenters were long
Harassed with.

It is well-known, That those whose Consciences did not allow them, to worship
God, in some Ways and Modes then by L aw E stablished, were not many years ago,
Persecuted with a violence, to be abho^red by all sober Men. It is well known
that Five and Twenty Hundred Faithful Ministers of the Gospel, were Silenced in
one Black Day, because they could not comply with some things, by themselves
justly counted, Sinful, but by the Imposers confessed Indifferent. And it is
affirmed, That by a modest Calculation, this Persecution procured the untimely
Death of Three Thousand Nonconformists, by Imprisonment in Noisome Goals, and
the Ruin of Threescore Thousand Families, within five and twenty years. As the
Dissenters are far from charging their Sufferings upon all that the Church of
England in its National Constitution acknowledges for her Sons; for we have
seen the most Learned and Worthy Members of that Church make their public
Pleas for the Nonconformists, and Boldly beg for Moderation to them; and
advance this Assertion, That for every man to worship God according to his
Conviction, is an E ssential Right of Humane Nature; and we have Learnt, That
the late persecutors were mostly a Knot of Ill men who professed, that they had
rather be P apists than P resbyterians, and that they would as soon be Turks as
P apists; and who surrendered themselves as mere Tools to a P opish P arty, that
thought to grow great upon the Ruins, of both the Parties whom they so set
together by the Ears: So, I hope, the Dissenters will now forgive and forget
the most inhumane Injuries that they have ever yet sustained. The Severity of
that P ersecution, which at last had broke up the Congregations of them that
had perfected their Testimony to the Kingly Office of the Lord Jesus, than
Celebrating a Thanksgiving for it, indeed caused the Dissenters to Accept of
Liberty, though upon some Terms which they approved not. You are not ignorant
that we then told you, There would quickly come an Earthquake that should carry
on that L iberty to more perfection; and behold it is now done in a P
arliamentary Way! Blessed be God, that Protestants are come to a better
understanding of their true Interest! May the Apples of Strise among them now
be removed! May all Good men concur in pursuance of that Reformation, which God
now calls His Church unto! and may the Reformers have Peace among themselves,
and (as one speaks) War with none but Hell and Rome. But for the Church of God,
in Scotland, as their Calamities exceeded what their Neighbors felt, which I
suppose, the Mar^yrology they promise us will demonstrate; so they have not
come behind them in Deliverances. O what has God wrought? my Brethren, It looks
as if God had begun the Resurrection of His Dead People. O Lord God, Thou have
begun to show they Servants they Greatness, and thy mighty Hand, for what God
is there in Heaven, or in E arth, that can do according to thy works? And if
so, it is time for us to Laft up our Heads, with at least some Examination,
whether we shall not shortly see the Vintage of the P apal Empire? Whether I
taly be not near a greater Earthquake, than that which made hideous Desolations
in above Thirty Cities, Towns, and Villages there, a little while ago? Whether
the Blast of the Second Woe Trumpet, be not just expiring, and the Turkish Power
be not within two or three years (at least) of that End, which will make him
incapable to Disturb Europe any more. Yea, Whether the Gospel of the Lord Jesus
will not quickly have Liberty with an Efficasy, not only in P opish Countries,
where it is Restrained: but also in P agan Countries, in One of which, we hear
of near two Hundred Thousand Heathen, Converted unto true Christianity, within
these few years?

In a word, Whether the Day is not at Hand, when the Kingdoms of the World,
shall be the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ!

Whether we shall not very quickly see those, glorious Things which are spoken
of thee, O thou City of God!

II. The late Revolutions among our selves, have also been attended with some
Excellent Things, where of we may say, The finger of God is here! Indeed
nothing in the World could more exactly imitate and resemble the late
circumstances of our Mother England than the Revolutions here, in all the steps
thereof, and this, though we understood not one another. This was from the
Excellent operations of that God who turns a Wheel in a wheel! And what shall
we now say? The Judgments of God have been upon us heretofore; but this poor
Land has cried unto the Lord, and the Lord has heard and saved. And the Enemies
of New England have still perished be fore the Rebukes of that God who is our
King, our Lord, our Lawgiver. It has been as dangerous to seek the Heart of this
poor Country, as ever it was to annoy the Piccardines, of old; and they that
have stretched out their long Arms to make us miserable, have brought upon
their own Heads the vengeance of the Temple. But we were grown a worldly,
Sensual, Factious People; and then our God fulfilled unto us that Word of His,
I will punish you yet seven times for your Iniquity.

Our Charters were taken from us, and our Land, Strangers devoured in our
presence. You have seen cause to Declare, That there were denied unto us the
Common Rights, which all Englishmen justly reckon themselves born unto; and
that all that was dear unto us, was entirely given up to the Arbitrary
disposals of four or five Men, that beyond all measure hated us, and made no
stick to tell us, We were. but Slaves.

You have seen cause to Declare, that we were now given to understand, Our
Lands were none of our own; and that a Storm of unjust Violence was every day
falling upon the more Honest, and sober part of the Country, while the wicked
walked on every side, and the vilest Men were exalted.

Our Churches also began to feel the kindness of those, who had Sworn by the
Living God, to ruin them; and all Debauchery was coming in among us like a
mighty Flood. All this while we were in a Sea of fire, miserably scorched and
scalded; and yet it was mingled with Ice; there were great cakes of Ice over
our Heads; there was no getting out. That one person, who new hazarded his All
to obtain us Relief, by (...) our Addresses for us, was made (...) of this.

Remember, O New England, ^^w often that cry then went up from thee (...) (...)
Lord, Return we b^s^^ch thee, O God of (...)! look down from Heaven and visit
(...) (...); And now, behold, He is Returned. Our Adversaries are what and
where they are; and we see so far Our Judges as (...) (...) first, and our
Counselors at the Beginning.

And there are several Excellent Things that have been done for for us by our
God, while He has been effecting of our Deliverance.

We have cause to Praise the God of Heaven, That in the Tumult of our Action,
there was not the loss of a Drop of Blood, nor such Plunder and Outrage as
would have been a Disgrace to our Profession.

We have cause to Praise Him, that our Sovereign has Declared, He took very
well what we had done for Him, and for our selves in the Revolution.

We have cause to Praise Him, that we have been so comfortably carried through
the Difficulties of a whole Summer, while we could not say That any Law was of
any Force with us. Every Week erected a new Ebenezer for us^.

We have cause to praise Him, for putting it into the Heart of a Person, well
known unto you all, to take a Voyage into England, just before the late
Overturnings there: on purpose to be in the way of those Opportunities, which
his Faith was that he should have, to serve the Churches of the Lord Jesus
here; by which means, (as our Friends there assure us) it is that we have been
preserved from being totally udome.

We have cause to praise Him, for giving a check to those Indian Bloodhounds,
which have been worrying of us in the East; who having destroyed several
Plantations, met with no full stop, till they assaulted the first Place where a
Gospel Ministry was maintained; but there they found such a Ba^ in their
Carrier, that we now hear no more of them.

And may I not say it? We have cause to Praise the Glorious God, for some
Excellent Things, which as yet we know not of. We gave I mperfect, but (with
many) probable Accounts, of a Deliverance from a French Force, that the
possession of this Territory, would have been a valuable Thing unto.

But this is indubitable. If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, may
New England now say, they had swallowed (...) up quick: Blessed be the Lord,
who has (...) given us as a prey to their Teeth.

New England, Be humbly Thankful to thy God, and exalt the God of thy Fathers.
God forbid there should be any Murmurers among us all. A year or two ago, we
would have been Thankful for a small moiety of what we now enjoy: But if our
Praises are not yet enough animated, I pray then, let us make a comparison of
our Condition.

Compare our Condition with that of them in Hungary. The Protestant Churches
there, have be^n made a Desolation, and it would break an heart of Stone to
Hear, what both Pa^tors and People have endured. Should you see one of the poor
Confessors come out of an hideous Dit^geon full of T^ads, and S^akes, and
Excrements; with their very Throats putrified, their Teeth fallen out, and
their Eyes gone into their Heads, and their Flash mangled in a thousand places,
you could not forbear preaching a Sermon on, Thankfulness to God Imagine your
selves under the continual Executions of the most witty Devils, and all that
shall but relieve you with a bit of Bread, torn to pieces by the hand of an
Hangman, and you will see what has befallen the most venerable Ministers of
that Kingdom, until the Protestant Religion has been almost extirpated there,
and this after the Oaths of their Monarch to support it.

Compare our Condition with that of them in Germany. The French King has there
made even the Popish Provinces themselves a Stage of Blood, and laid all in
Ashes for many Leagues together. He has given the Sun for his Device upon many
of his Coins; and by the Fiery Destructions which his Bombs have made, he has
given us cause to suspect whether he be not the Sun in the fourth Vial, that
has power to Scorch men with Fire. Imagine that you were put under the French
Contributions, and not only Robbed of all you have in the World, but also driven
like so many Cattle before their Slaughterers. Imagine your Towns laid all in
H^aps, and your Persons obnoxious to all manner of Rapine and Murders from the
worst of H^rpyes: this is what thousands are now feeling of.

Compare our Condition with that of them in ^^rance. Except in the matter of
our Sabbaths, what are we better than the People of God in that rueful
Country? But all the Bloody Butcheries and Cruelties committed in the By- past
Ages, are mere Triflles in comparison of what that People have of late endured,
and this after Faith given often enough unto the contrary. After they had gone
thorough intolerable vexations in all those things that they had any kindness
for, they have been at last given up into the claws of the merciless Dragoons:
and were all the Devils of Hell Incarnate, they could not invent more or wors^^
Tortures, than these Dragons inflict upon persons of all sorts, till they have
compelled them to abjure the Truth of God; and thus all the Flocks of the Lord
Jesus have been worried and Ruined there. Imagine a Swarm of Lewd Soldiers,
like Locusts quartered in your Houses, and there binding of you, that they
might abuse your nearest Relations before your eyes; imagine them Hanging of
you by the Hair of your Heads and then half Choking of you with Smoke, or half
Roasting of you with Fire; imagine them pricking of you with Knives and
Bod^^ns, and with ten thousand lingering Tortures, making you Desire, while you
may not enjoy, such a privilege as Death; until at last you have been worried
into an Abjuration, which makes the wounds on your Consciences no less than
those on your Bodies were before.

To have done, Compare our Condition; with that of our English Brethren, in
woeful Ireland, especially the more Southern Counties of it. Behold, their
Estates Confiscate; the value of Four Millions was long since the Account of
the Losses felt by only them who had Fled into. England. Behold their person^
Confind; having sharp Sk^ins ready for^ their Throats, with just Fears day and
night of a new Massacre. What would you think, if you were driven like Dogs
into the Goals of Galloway: if you were Enjoined to carry your own Fathers^
Heads upon Poles in the Head of a Regiment, or if you lay at the mercy of a
Wild Irish Rabble?

Behold these things, Behold them with Sympathy O New England; and be not
scanty in thy Praises to Him, that has known thee above all the Families of the
Earth.

Come, and Sing unto the Lord, for the Excellent Things which He has done. But
yet let us not put Him off with a Song. It Is a thing very pleasing to God, that
we have a Day of Thanksgiving to Praise Him in; and if this Day, he duly kept,
I doubt not but Good News will quickly put us upon the keeping of Another. He
that Inhabits the Praises of Israel will keep House among us, if by Leaving off
our Praises we turn Him not out of Doors. It was a Remarkable thing that befell
One of our Neighbors, a while ago, By a Ship wrack, he was cast upon a
desolate Island, where he was left many months Alone. After many a Day of P
rayer, for succor, he at last kept a Day of Praise, for the support which he
had so long Enjoyed; and within a few Hours upon this, there came a Vessel by
that saved him. New England has been, and yet is, in so many Troubles, that some
have questioned whether a Day of Thanksgiving would be Seasonable! O Yes! most
highly Seasonable! Keep it well, and it shall yet be said, Also in New England,
things went well.

But the principal Thing in our Thanksgiving, yet remains, and that is, a
Thanks-Doing Let us all Repent, and Reform, and set up on the Lively Doing of
the Good Thing which the Lord our God Requires. The Apostle speaks
pathetically, I beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of God. It is This, I
conclude withal; I beseech you Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that New
England may be as a Noble Person sometimes called us, The best people in the
world; and that no scandalous Things may be done here, to offend the God that
has done Excellent Things for us. I beseech you by the Mercies of God, that as
we profess the Protestant Religion with the most exalted Purity, so we may
practice it, in such an Exemplary manner, that, A New England man, may be a
Term of Honor in the world. I beseech you by the Mercies of God, that we may
all sincerely intend the same Ends, which brought our Predecessors here, even
to propagate the Spiritual Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. May all due pains
be taken, that not only the English may every where have the knowledge of God,
but that the Indians too, may share with us in it; for an Engagement whereunto
God has given us to see, as that a very visible Blast has attended the Estates
of them who have grown Rich by Trading of Drink with them, so a visible
Blessing has accompanied them who have Labored in Preaching of Truth to those
poor Pagans; and since at this day, the most powerful Nation of them, namely,
the Mohawks, ask for the Gospel, it cannot but be a piece of Policy as well as
Religion, in us to carry the Gospel unto them, while they cannot be reconciled
unto the Superstitions of our French Neighbors, that have been Tampering with
them. O that we might not forget the Errand of our Forefathers hither! We
shall then Flourish, in spite of all that wish ill unto us; Thus will Salvation
be nigh unto us, and Glory shall dwell in our Land. May our God sanctify all
His Dispensations to us; particularly those of the Summer past, as well the
Terrible as the Merciful. It Is a Metaphorical Earthquake which has lately been
among us, and there was a Literal one in some parts of the Country preceding
of it. May these Earthquakes produce better effects on us than those at Lima in
this our^ New-World America, did upon the people there a little while ago. We
are informed, That an horrible Earthquake, after some Warnings of it, shook
that Great and Lewd City; till with incredible Noise and Fury, it sunk a large
Part of it into the Earth, and the Sea came hideously Rolling in upon it. While
the miserable Spaniards were under ^Apprehensions of perishing in speedy
Ruins, they that had been Enemies one to another immediately made
Reconciliations; they professed a Deep Repentance of their former Vices; their
fine Ornaments and other Vanities, they buried under ground; and with
consternation cried out, Our Oppression, our Injustice, the Extravagancies of
our Cloathings and our Houses, have brought all this upon us! We have newly
been passing through a Figurative Earthquake, which is not set quite over with
us. God forbid, we should be Impoenitent after all; and, since I would E nd,
where I began, God forbid, that we should be Unthankful for our preservations.
New England is not used unto such Follies as Bonfires, nor do we think Ringing
of B else; but Singing of Psalms, to be a Thanksgiving Exercise. Come then,
Sing unto the Lord; Sing the Praises which He may lay claim unto. It was a no
less wonderful than undoubted Thing which happened in France a few months ago,
when, upon the Dissolution of the French Congregations, and a particular
Interdict upon the Singing of Psalms through the Kingdom, there were thousands of
persons, in hundreds of places, at scores of Times, that plainly heard the
Singing of Psalms after the manner of the French Assemblies with a most
Ravishing Melody, by Invisible Singers in the Air; a thing so notorious that
the very Psalms were often Distinctly as well as Audibly enough Sting, to let
the Hearers know what Psalms they were; such as the Fifth, the Forty Second,
the Hundred and Thirty Eighth particularly; and even the Parliament of Pau made
a Decrce that men should not go abroad to hear this unaccountable Singing under
a forfeiture of Two Thousand Crowns, upon which the Reflection of the
incomparable Jurieu is, This is a Reproach that the Providence of God makes
unto us: because you have not dared, nor been willing any more to Sing His
Praises and Songs of Thanksgiving. God has made mouths in the midst of the Air!
But behold an Happy Presage, that God will not suffer your Voices and your
Songs to Die, the Angels have fiezed on them.

Thus, give me Leave to say, That if we will not Sing unto the Lord, there are
others that will; and we that will not, never shall^ Yea, our Silence may
provoke the very Rocks and Stones to loud Shouts; in praising the Eternal God.

O come, and Sing unto the L ord; and though we do not certainly know what
Changes yet may come upon us; nor how far the Clouds may Return after the Rain;
len us nevertheless be found, Singing to the L ord.

They that Remember how many Princes and Interests were concerned for the
Protestant Religion threescore years ago, and how almost all of them afterward
Disappeared, cannot yet be without Apprehensions in the midst of their
Thanksgivings. But, though we may not Sing Requiems to our selves, yet we may
Sing P raises to our God: and whatever Fears may be upon us, I am now to Repeat
that Call; A wake, Awake, O Congregation, Awake, Awake, and utter a Song. It
was a memorable Accident which happened near one of the L ee-ward Islands some
years ago. A Ship with some pious people in it, was by a violent Storm driven
between two hideous Rocks; where she lay on one side so that every moment they
expected she would overset; In this Distress, in this Despair, they agree to Die
Singing, and there they sat Singing the Hundred and Forty sixth Psalm. But
behold, a Dutch Ship that had newly taken a Spanish Vessel, at that Instant
came by, and not only delivered them from the perils of their own Ship, which
immediately perished, but also bestowed an other Vessel on them. Methinks, this
poor Country has been, and yet i^, much in the condition in which That serious
people were: Well, but supose we should S ink after all the Excellent Things
which have been done for us, (and yet we cannot forbear saving, If the Lord were
pleased to kill us, would He have showed us all these things!) Let us however S
ink and S ing both at once, and keep S inging to Him that has done Excellent
Things, while we have any Breath; (and when we have None, we shall do it
Better!) such a Course it is, which gives the greatest Likelilihoods, that He
will with a perfection of Deliverance, Arise and Save us.

FINIS.
A Passage in Mr. Flavels Thanksgiving-Sermon, Preached Febr.14. 1688.
SHall we Ingratefully Overlook the Beginnings of Mercy, as small and
Inconsiderable Things? Shall we say, All this is Nothing, because we have not
yet All that we would have? God forbid. When I srael was in Egypt, then a
Little Straw would have been Esteemed as a great Mercy; but afterward Quails
and Manna were Despised. Brethren, Three or Four Years ago, you would have
Accounted it a Special Mercy, to have Enjoyed an Hour or Two together in
Prayer, or to have had a Little Spiritual Bread Handed to you, behind your
Enemies Backs; and is it nothing in your Eyes this Day, to behold the Worship
of God at Liberty? Yea, to see the Success of the Gospel, in bringing home of
many Souls to Christ? The Fears of Popery vanished? The Witnesses Risen; the
Tenth-part of the City fallen; and such a prospect of far greater and more
glorious Things before your Eyes? O let not the Consolations of the Almighty
seem small.

A Postscript.
Endeavoring the Satisfaction of them that are Inquisitive after the late
Stupendous Ecstasies and Prophesies in France.

THe Words of God are True, in the Notice which they have given us, That the
Works of God are Great; and certainly no Age did ever afford Instances of
Greater than those which are Now the matters of Discourse and Wonder throughout
the World.

Among the Mavelous Things which at this Day strike the minds of Men with a
just Astonishment, there are not many more considerable, than those of the late
Ecstasies in France. Concerning, which we have undoubted Information;

That about the beginning of the Year 1688: a young Shepardess in the Province
of Dauphine, fell into unaccountable Trances, wherein though the standers by,
pulled her, struck her, cut her and burnt her, yet it was impossible to awaken
her. In this condition, her custom was to utter many Divine things; and though
she could neither write nor read, nor could speak any Language but that of her
Country, which has nothing of pure French in it, yet she now Prayed and
Preached at a most prodigious rate, and Sang Psalms after the manner of the
French Protestant Congregations: and when Auditors that could thereby be
edified, were present, she expressed herself, not only in French of a Dialect
most Exact and Correct, but also having occasion to speak Latin, in the
Refutation of the Romish Superstitions, she did it with a distinctness that
filled all the Hearers with Admiration. And though when she came out of her
sleep, she remembered not what had befallen her; yet she had her wits thereby
made more Sparkling and Refined.

Those new French Apostles, the Dragoons, quickly did their utmost, for the
suppression of this Rare Thing; but behold the event! It was not long before
other persons fell into the like Trances, with Symptoms not unlike to those
which had attended her; and the Number increased unto several Hundreds of these
Prophets, if I may call them so? where^ of even the Kings own Guards afforded
One. And at length some that were Awake were carried forth unto Rapturous
Exercises with an Eloquence and Energy equal to that of those that were Asleep.

They are People of all Ages and Sexes; but the greatest part of them are Boys
and Girls, from six or seven to five and twenty years of age; and persons very
old; all of them the meaner sort of People: but of Families Exemplary for their
good living; the whole affair being indeed so prodigious, that the most
obstinate Saddu cees in the Kingdom confess it, A natural Distemper directed by
Providence to procure the Repentance of a sinful World.

The Ministry of these Extraordinary People, does chiefly consist of two things.

One part of it is, the Admonition of those unhappy persons that have provoked
God by many notorious Miscarriages, but especially by Apostasy under the late
Persecution. They deride the Follies of the Mass, with a surprising ingenuity;
and in a vast Assembly of perhaps two thousand People come together to hear
these Preachers, if there be any that have abjured the Protestant Religion,
they will call them before them, and address them in such powerful Terms, as
usually make not not only the whole Congregation shed floods of Tears, but the
Apostates themselves to become Penitents: and there comes not one away, who
does not positively declare, That he had rather be torn to pieces with wild
Horses than ever go to Mass again. No man is able to resist their Words! And
they make the Penitents now and then confess other particular sins, which they
convince them of, though the Transgressors had imagined these Faults impossible
to be discovered. A whole Council assembled could not manage any matter with
more Authority than They do the Conviction of those, who have gone to Mass,
that they may shun the Severities of the French Dragoons.

It may not be unprofitable to recite a few of the Sentences, which fell from
the mouths of these Extaticks.

Have a care (said one of them) that you come not hither out of Curiosity.
Better it w^ere for the Wicked that hot Coals of Fire should p^^ss through
their mouths, than that they should mo^k at the Word of God; they had better
swallow a Serpent with all its Poison.

If the Wicked (said one of them) had the same power over God, that they have
over you, they would do the same to Him that they do to you: but God will
pronounce the Sentence of Malediction on them, and will say, Go into Eternal
Fire.

Brethren, (said another of them) Pray hard; and then though we should meet an
Army of Enemies at the Door, God will place a million of Angels for your Guard.

Brethren, (said another of them) We have always apprehended more the Threats
of Men than those of God, else what happened to us, would not have happened.

One of them said, Your Riches have ruined you, and your Prayers must Relieve
you.

One of them said, I am afraid the first Persecution will make you return to
Mass again; but O suffer your selves rather to be first out in pieces. Alas!
Jesus Christ has poured out all his Blood for us, and we cannot endure the prick
of a pin for Him.

To the Apostates, they generally so conclude their Warnings; You have sinned
against the Father, you have sinned against the Son, take heed of sinning
against the Holy Ghost, for God will then pardon you no more.

And when the Children are told, They shall be Hanged, they are not at all
afraid, but answer, That is but a little harm for a greater good.

But the other part of their Ministry is, The P rediction of Things quickly
(...) come to pass. They do indeed foretell many Things of a more private
concern; they foretell a thousand Things that must happen to themselves and
their Friends: and the issue confirms the Prophecy. One of them being thrown
into a Dungeon, said,. The man who sent her thither should within eight Days
fetch her out, and it strangely was accomplished.

But the Things of a more public Concern, are chiefly those which they
foretell. The Gentlemen, who give us the History, tell us, that they judge it
not yet convenient to publish a large part of the Authentic and sufficient
Collections which they have made of these Prophecies. However, they have given
us a Taste. In general, The Subjects of this Enthusiasm all agree in
foretelling, A Speedy Deliverance to the Church of God: and they declare, The
Late Revolutions in England, to be the Beginning of that Deliverance.

Though all France was filled with a Rumor, That the Late K. James had Defeated
the^ (then) Prince of Orange, both by Land and Sea, these then said, The
Authors of these Report, commit a great sin, for the Prince of Orange has
Chased, and shall Chase the King out of England; and that is the Beginning of
the Deliverance of the Church.

They foretold a fresh Assault of Persecution in France, and it had a very
dreadful fulfillment; for after it Ensued a Terrible Storm of Outrage upon the
Relics of Protestantism in the Desolate Kingdom: in one Article of which,
there was a Massacre, of about four hundred people; but they foretold within
how many Days the Persecution should be over; and they give hopes of a
Protestant King, very quickly to be seen in France. They proclaim, The Devil is
going to be shut up in the midst of Hell! They say, The Accomplishment of the P
rophetical Months and Days is at Hand; but it must be accompanied with very
Terrible Wars and Plagues.

The whole is a Thing very unaccountable: and when I consider the Fate of the
famous German Prophets, which made such a Noife in the World: or, when I
consider, that while the Jews were under their Infatuations about their false
Messiah, Sabatai Soevi, some Hundreds of people fell into Ecstasies (as it is
Reported) wherein they Prophesied, the speedy Deliverance of the Jews by that
impostor, and Little Children that could not ^tammer a word, yet repeated and
pronounced the Name of this Deceiver, with Happy Omens of Him but consider on
the other side, That not to Regard the Works of the Lord, i^ a Destroying evil;
(...) (...) make any Reflections on it. I (...) (...) say, what ^^^thority; or
that Origin^^ is (...) assigned unto these Inspirations; (...) (...) I know
(...) Comfort and Counsil of the Church is without such things now sufficiently
provided for; and our Lord Jesus having foretold the State of the Church until
He come again, has so concluded His Predictions, If any man shall add unto
these things, God shall add P lagues unto Him. Nevertheless, This also I shall
take for granted, That the Great God intends hereby to Awaken us unto a
Consideration of what is before us; That is a proper use of Miracles; and when
we are once Awakened, there is provided for our Entertainment A more S ure Word
of P rophecy: which O that our God may help us to Give Heed unto Am^n^

The Way to Prosperity.

A SERMON Preached to the HONORABLE CONVENTION Of the GOVERNOR, Council, and
Representatives of the Massachuset-Colony in New England; on May 23. 1689.

By COTTON MATHER.

Jer. 23. 28. He that has My Word, Let him speak speak My Word faithfully.
BOSTON. Printed by R. Pierce. for Joseph Brunning, Obadiah Gill, and James
Wood, MDCXC.

A Prophesy in the Divine Herbert's Church-Militant.
REligion stands on Tip-toe in our Land, Ready to pass to the American Strand.
When height of Malice and prodigious Lusts, Impudent Sinning, Witchcrafts and
Distrusts, (The marks of future Bane) shall fill our cup Unto the Brim, and
make our measure up;

-- Then shall Religion to America flee; They have their Times of Gospel, even
as we.

-- Yet as the Church shall thither westward fly, So Sin shall Trace and Dog
her instantly.

The Preface,
THe Occasion which first produced the following Sermon, cannot be expressed in
better Terms, that those which were used by the Worthy Gentlemen that were the
Conservators of our peace, in their humble Address to Their Majesty's, bearing
Date, May 20th 1689. Wherein among other things they say,

-- Your three several Princely Declarations, Encouraging the English Nation,
to cast off the Yoke of a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Power, which at that time
they were held under, have occurred unto the View and Consideration of the
people in this Country, being themselves under alike (if not worse) evil and
unhappy Circumstances with their Brethren in England; First by being
unrighteously deprived of their Charter-Government, and Privileges, without
any Hearing or Trial, and under utter impossibilities of having Notice of any
Writ served upon them; and then followed with the Exercise of an illegal and
Arbitrary power over them, which had almost ruined a late flourishing Country,
and was become very grievous and intolerable; besides the growing miseries, and
daily fears of a total Subversion, by enemies at home, and Invasion by foreign
force; the people thereby excited, to imitate so noble and heroic an Exemple,
being strongly and unanimously spirited, to intend their own safeguard and
Defense, resolved to sieze upon and secure some of the principal persons
concerned, and most active in the ill management, of the illegal and arbitrary
Government, set over them by Commission. Accordingly upon the eighteenth day of
April, last past, arose as one man, siezed upon Sr. E. Andros the late
Governor, and other of the evil instruments, and have secured them for what
Justice, Order from your Majesty's shall direct. -- Thus that Address.

Upon the late Revolutions thus described, ensued various debates about the
further Steps that were needful to be taken for the service of Their Majesty's
and this afflicted Country; Which Debates quickly issued in the Return of our
Government, into the Hands of our Ancient Magistrates; who with the
Representatives or Deputies of the several Towns in the Colony, made another
Address unto Their Majesty's, bearing date, June 6. 1689. in which Address
there were these Words.

-- Finding an Absolute Necessity of Civil Government, the People generally
manifested their Desires and Importunity once and again That the Governor,
Deputy Governor and Assistants, chosen and sworn in May 1686. according to
Charter and Court as then formed, would assume the Government; --

-- the said Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistents, then Resident in the
Colony, did Consent to accept the present Care and Government of this people,
according to the Rules of the Charter, for the preservation of the Peace and
common safety, and the putting forth further Acts of Authority, upon
Emergencies: until by Direction from England, there should be an orderly
Settlement; which we hope will Restore us to the full Exercise thereof, as
formerly; notwithstanding we have, for some time, been most unrighteously, and
injuriously deprived of it.

That Royal Charter being the sole Inducement and Encouragement unto our
Fathers and predecessors, to come over into this Wilderness, and to plant the
same at their own Cost and Charge.

In Answer to this Address, His Majesty in a most gracious Letter, bearing Date
the 12th of August 1689. unto the Government here, uses these Expressions,

Whereas you give Us to understand, that you have taken upon you the present
care of the Government, until you should receive Our Order therein, We do
hereby Authori^^e and Empower you to Continue in Our Name, your Care in the
Administration thereof, and Preservation of the Peace, until We shall have
taken such Resolutions, and given such Directions for the more orderly
Settlement of the said Government, as shall most conduce to Our Service, and
the Security and Satisfaction of Our Subjects within that Our Colony.

It was in the time of our greatest Heats and Straits, and at a time appointed
for a General Assembly of this great Colony, that the ensu^ing Sermon was
expected from me. Through the Grace of God, the Sermon Then was not altogether
unacceptable to some who desired the Publication of it. But I gave not my full
Consent unto their Desire, until now, they had an Opportunity (with their
Renewed Im portunity) to join in with another Discourse which they have
obtained from me; and though the little Differences which were among us, when the
Sermon was preached, are now so well Composed, yet I flatter any self with an
opinion, that the things here insisted on, will not, should not be judged
Unseasonable.

I confess it is a very Bold thing, for one every way so mean as my self, to
Address the whole Country in such a manner as here I do; but, Si crimen erit,
crimen Amoris erit; and if the general Dispositions of the year will not excuse
a Breach of Order in me, I have but one thing more to offer by way of
Satisfaction for it. There was once a people in the world, with whom it was a
Custom, That when men would Conciliate the Favor of the Ruler, they were to
present his own Son before him, as a Sight which would speak more than any
Advocate. Instead thereof, that I may not want the Favor of my Country, how
blameable soever they may count my freedom with them, I shall only present
them with my own Father; whose cheerful Encounter with an hazardous Voyage unto
a strange Land, and with innumerable Difficulties and Temptations these, for no
other Cause, than that he might Speak FOR them, has at least merited oe Pardon
for Mce, with whom he has for near two years now left both his Church and
Family, if I have transgressed by taking a Liberty of Speaking To them at the
same time, the things which may promote our Enjoyment of the Divine Presence
with us. Now, may Salvation be nigh unto us, and Glory dwell in our Land!

Cotton Mather.

The Way to PROSPERITY.
It is the Word of the Eternal GOD in II. Chron. XV. 2. Hear ye me, Asa, and
all Judah, and Benjamin: the Lord is with you while you are with Him.
IT is a Remarkable Occasion which has brought these Words to be the Subject of
our present Meditations; but it was much more a Remarkable Occasion which these
Words were first uttered upon. We find them in the Sacred Book of Chronicles,
which Chronicles are not the Civil Records, in other-parts of the Bible referred
unto; but an Inspired History of things that concerned the Line of Christ and
the Church of God for five hundred more than Three Thousand years. It seems as
an Epitome of the Whole, (for so it is in Jerome's Language) to be written as late
as the Last of all the Books in the Old Testament; and the Hebrew Bibles give
it a place accordingly. The Greeks choose to entitle it, The Book of things
(else where) passed by; because, as Lyra notes, according to the Rule of our
Savior, It gathers Fragments that nothing may be lost; and if there were
nothing else but the Story which affords our Text unto us, to justify that
Appellation, it were enough: it is a Story passed by in the Book of Kings; but
worthy to be had in everlasting Remembrance.

The ready Pen of Ezra (for him we conjecture to be the Scribe of the Holy
Spirit here, notwithstanding those few Clauses which may be judged to be added
by another hand after his Decease, I say the Pen of Ezra) is here informing us,
That the people of God had newly been invaded by a vast Army of Cushites; but
we are yet at a loss who these Cushites were? Far more Scholars (...) the
World, than there were Soldiers (...) that Army have hitherto been content
with our Translation, which renders them Ethiopians here. But that learned
Frenchman Bochart, by whose happy industry, more than any man's, the Treasures
in the Bowels of the Scriptures have been dely'd into, has with irrefragable
Demonstration proved, That not Ethiopians but Arabians are the Cushites
mentioned in the Oracles of God. These Arabians, tho they have not been called
Saracens (as has been thought) from their word Sarak, that signifies, to Steal;
yet for their Euracious Inclinations, they well deserved such an Etymology;
they were a wild sort of men, that lived much upon the Rapin and Ruin of their
Neighbors; and particularly, a Million of them now designed Jerusalem for a
prey. The blessed God gave His people a notable victory over these Invaders,
and they were now returning from Gerar (a place between thirty and forty miles
off) unto Jerusalem. The Holy Spirit of God excited and inclined a Prophet
whose Name was Az^^iah, to entertain them with a faithful and solid Sermon
hereupon; and in my Text you have the Sum and Substance of it.

We may observe,

First, The Proeface of it; and that is very awful and earnest: Hear ye me Asa,
and all Judah, and Benjamin. As he was probably none of the greatest, so it is
like he was none of the oldest men; for it seems by the eighth verse, that his
Father was yet alive, and present at this time. Yet being to speak in the Name
of the great and eternal God, he expects, he demands the attention of the whole
Army to him.

Secondly, the Design of it; and that is, to decclare both the Rise and Use of
their late Prosperity. The Lord is with you, while you you are with Him; or as
the Vulgar Latin has it, Inasmuch as you have been with him. What follows, is
but an Explication, and Amplification of this. He saw they were taken up with
various Businesses and Contrivances; they had their Enemies under Hatches, and
their minds were full of Thoughts and Cares, What to do next? But he calls them
off to acknowledge the Presence of God, as the cause of their coming off so
well in their late Action, and above all things to obtain and secure the
presence of God, that they might come off as well, in in their future
Enterprises.

I am therefore to call for your Attention unto this Faithful Saying.

DOCT. That The GOD of Heaven will be with a people while they are with Him.

It Is by the ensuing Propositions, that the Explication of this Truth shall be
endeavored.

PROPOSITION. I.
It is the Interest, and should be the Desire, of Every people to have the God
of Heaven With them. But we are to enquire,

What is implied in that presence of GOD, which we are to be solicitous about?

For Answer to this; There is a Threefold Presence of God, mentioned in the
Scripture of Truth.

First, God is Naturally present with all Creatures. He is an Immense Being,
and no Creature can be without him. The Apostle thus argued in the Court at
Athens, in Act, 17.27. God is not far from every one of us. No, He is near us
all, He is with us all. And Paul could have had the Gentiles themselves
confessing it; for besides what their Seneca did own, One of their own Poets
had said, Jovis omnia plena. It is the Speech of our God, in Jer. 23. 24. Do
not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Yea, That He does. The Jews call
God by the Name of Makom, or of Place, because all things are in Him; this is
His Name in the Book of Esther, if I mistake it not. Whether we may count it
proper and physical to speak of an Imaginary, Infinite space, beyond the utmost
Selvige of the world, replenished with our God alone; yet we are sure that the
Heaven of Heavens gives no limits unto His Being; and the Ancients were not
mistaken when they said, Deus Ipse Sibi, et Mundus et Locus et Omnia. We cannot
so well say, That God is in the World, as we may say, The whole World is in
God; and we may say with the Psalmist, in Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I flee
from thy presence?

Secondly, God is Gloriously present with the Inhabitants of the Third Heaven.
The Heaven of Heavens has in it most intimate and mavelous manifestations of
God. It is the Place, of which we may say, as it is said of that State, in Rev.
21. 23. The glory of God does lighten it. There the blessed ones have God with
them, so that they Always behold His face; and they are satisfied with His
likeness for ever. When we come to Heaven, then as in I. These. 4. 17. We shall
ever be with the Lord. So the Lord will be with us for ever. Heaven is the
Throne of the Most High; He is there as a Prince in his Throne; the Great KING
is in a manner very ineffable residing there. To be there, is called in 2. Cor.
5. 4. A being present with the Lord. Hence unto the Heaven, and not unto a
Bible, are we directed to make our Corporal Applications in our Prayers, or our
Oaths before the Lord.

But Thirdly, God is Graciously present with His people, by being Favorable
unto them. And this Gracious presence of God is that which a people ought to be
concerned for. It lies in The Engagement of Divine Providence for the Welfare
of such a people. God is with us when God is for us.

To particularize,

First, God is with a people by Directing of them. When Israel was to pass
through the Wilderness, they had that encouragement, in Exodus 22. 15. The
presence of God going with them. What was that? Why, They had a cloudy fiery
Pillar miraculously Leading of them every step of the way; There was a
wonderful Pillar which was a Cloud by day, and a Fire by night; the Lower part
of which rested on the Tabernacle, while the Upper part was to be seen by the
whole Congregation: the Motions of this being managed by the Ministry of
Angels, now God was with them, and He led them forth by the right way. A people
are often brought into a Wilderness of Difficulties and Emergencies: but if God
be with them, He guides them to a good Issue of them all. The Presence of God
appears in His Directing and Inclining of a people to such Actions, as may be
for His Honor and their Safety, and such Methods, as may extricate them out of
all Distresses. When God is with a people, He shapes their Counsels for them,
and he disposes them to the Things that should be done. He supplies them with
Apprehensions beyond the Reach and Verge of their own Wisdom, and He ^ayes
before them Invitations, and Provocations, which as it were push them into the
way wherein they should go. When the Jews were upon a Re-Assumption of the
desirable things which the Babylonians had deprived 'em of' they took a Right
Way to dissappoint all that were desirous to interrupt them in it. We find in
Neh. 4. 13. That while those Exercises continued, they waited in a posture
agreeable thereunto; and when the danger was over, then they returned every one
to his work. How came this to pass? 'Twas because GOD was with them.

Secondly, God is with a People, by Protecting of them. 'Twas the promise of
God unto His people, in Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the Waters, I will
be with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee. On which
Text, blessed Bilney after his Condemnation so sweetly paraphrased, that his
Friends caused the whole Sentence to be fairly written on their Tables. A
people may be ready to be swallowed up, by a stormy, gaping Ocean of Troubles,
but if God be with them, they shall escape clear of all. The Presence of God is
a Defense, a Refuge to the people that are partakers of it. It was said unto
David in 2. Sam. 7. 9. I was with thee, and have cut off all thine enemies out
of thy sight. When God is with a people, He distracts and confounds their
enemies, and He troubles those who trouble them. A people who have God with
them, are too strong for all the Malice and Power of their enemies; no
Adversary no Desolation, shall make such a people miserable; they are the
Jacob, unto whom in Genesis 28. 15. Behold, I am with thee, and I will keep thee,
says the Lord.

Thirdly, God is with a people by His Assisting and Succeeding of them. When
Joshua had a vast Undertaking in hand, it was said unto him in Cap. 1. 9. Be of
good Courage, for the Lord thy God is with thee, whither soever thou go. q.
d. God will Assist thee, and succeed thee, in thy undertakings. The Presence of
God will carry a people comfortably through all that they take in hand. If they
have Canaanites to subdue; if they have Enjoyments to obtain or preserve, the
Presence of God will prosper them in doing all. It was said unto Solomon, in I.
Chron.22. 11. My son, the Lord be with thee, and prosper thou, and build the
house of the Lord thy God. Thus, if the Lord be with a people, they shall
prosper In all their Affairs; in every Expedition, they shall come off with
Satisfaction; and they shall not miscarry in any of their Applications. This is
the Presence of the Lord.

Proposition. II.
The Presence of God with a people in His Outward Providence, has a diverse
Foundation and Continuance from His Presence with His People, in the Covenant
of Grace. As it is well observed by the great Owen, in a Discourse unto the
Parliament, These two are to be carefully distinguished. We must not reflect on
the Stability of the New Covenant, for what Variety and Sovereignty we may see
in providential Dispensations, toward this and that people in the world. This
matter seems determined by David, in 2. Sam. 23. 5. Though my house be not so
with God, yet He has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things and sure. David had promises for the prosperity of his House; He had
also the sure mercies of the Covenant made over to him in the promises of God.
These promises had now a different Establishment; The Sure mercies of the
Covenant, were unto him more Absolute and Immutable; but the prosperity of his
House, we find under another Law, and subject unto a dreadful Alteration.

To bring these things into the case before us.

God has in the Covenant of Grace, promised, That He will be with His people.
This we read in Heb. 13. 5. He has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. The Alsufficient God, who is HE that answers our Necessities, Let them
be what they will; the Unchangeable God, who is a HE still, whatever He was to
the Saints of old; this God has said [and how much better is this Autos
E^reken than the best Ipse dixit in the world! He has said it, and this] with
multiplied Negatives, in the Original, heaped one upon another, I will not, I
will not leave thee, I will not, I will not, I will not forsake thee. Well, but
God is not with a people in His outward Providence just after the manner
therein observed.

This Twofold Presence of God;

First, It has a Diverse Foundation. When we look on the Covenant of Grace,
there the Sins of one are explated by the Sufferings of another; and so, God
comes to be with His people, for whom the Atonement is thus Procured. Thus it is
said in 2. Cor. 5. 25. Christ was made sin [or a Sin-offering] for us, that we
might become the Righteousness of God in Him. Now come to outward Providence,
and there you see other measures taken. Here God is with a people, according to
those Terms, in Ezekiel. 18.20. The Soul that sins IT shall dye; one shall not
bear the Iniquity of another.

Again, It has a Diverse Continuance. When we look on the Covenant of Grace,
there God has ^ound Himself to be with His people for ever; yea, to see that
they shall therefore for ever be with Him. He there sa^es as in Jer. 32. 40. I
will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put My fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from Me. Now come to outward Providence; and
there you see it is otherwise. God is with a people for a while; and upon their
misbehaviours and provocations, He changes the Tenor of His Dispensations to
them. It Is with them, as it was with that family, in I. Sam. 2.30. I said
indeed, that thy house should walk before me forever; But now the Lord sa^es,
that be far from me.

The sense of these things will prepare your Thoughts for one Conclusion more,
which is,

Proposition. III.
A People must be with God, or God will not be with them. And here also, to
prevent Mistakes, Let that one Text be always carried in our Minds; Neh. 9.
18. Being merciful, thou for sookest them not; there is Mercy in the Whole of
this matter. Let it be noted, That though this Condition seems to be im^^sed upon
us; yet it is Grace, pure Grace, rich Grace that helps us, when we are helped
unto the performance of it. When a people have so been with God, as that He has
been with them, they are to shout, Grace, Grace! concerning all. It is also to
be noted, that this Benefit dos not depend upon that Condition, as an Effect
upon the real and proper cause of it. When a people has been with God, this
does not merit, and so procure that God should be with them; but that is barely
the Antecedent unto which, this is the Conse^^^^.

Having praemsed this I must now affirm, God is with you, while you are with
Him. We need only reflect on the People of Israel, for an Instance of it. That
whole History, which almost fills the Bible, proclames nothing more than this;
it loudly declares, That while a people are with God, God will be with them;
but that He will be very Terrible in His providential Dispensations toward
such a people as do forsake Him.

But, What is it for a people to be With God? In short,

Our being With God, implies the Whole of our Obedience to Him. Our Duty to God
must be attended, that we may have the Presence of God. The Wh^oe of this Duty
is comprised in that Expression of our being with the Lord. Particularly the
Hebrew Particle [^im] in our Text, admits of three Significations; it
signifies, With, and For, and Like, [which last Signification I make the more
free withal, because a little Philology will acquaint us with many Exemples of
it: for instance, When David says in Psalm. 120, 5. I dwell in ( Gnim Hebr.)
the tents of Kedar; a very great Interpreter translates it so, I dwell As the
tents of Kedar. i. e. Like the inhabitants of the Stony Sunburned Arabia; whom
indeed I don't Remember David ever was among.] Accordingly, a people have Three
Things incumbent on them, if they would enjoy the Presence of God.

First, A People should be with God, by Communion [With] Him. This it is to be
With Him; There are Certain means of Communion between God and us; and these
we must be continually approaching to Him in. We are With God, while we are at
Prayer before Him; hence in our Context here, it immediately follows, If you
seek the Lord, He will be found of you, While we do seek Him, we are with Him.
The Psalmist was a man much in prayer, and therefore he could say as in Psalm.
73. 23. I am continually with thee. A people much in Prayer may say the same,
We are continually with the Lord. A People that will pray upon all occasions, a
people that will pray over all Businesses, a peothat will retire into the Mount
for pr^^er (and Easting too) at every turn; that people is with the Lord. And
the whole Worship of God must be, diligently, graciously, faithfully frequented
by a people that would be with Him. We are with God, when we are at His House.
A people should support and esteem, and use all the Ordinances of God among
them. The Church of God has His very special Presence in it; the Name of the
Church is that is Ezekiel. 48. 35. Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there. We should
all be there too, and there give those Encouragements which are due to the
Institutions of God; So shall we be with the Lord.

Secondly, A people should be with God by Activity [For] Him. To be For God is
to be with God. It was once the Summons given in Exodus 32. 26. Who is one the
Lords side? And all the Sons of Levi gathered themselves; they were with God in
doing so. It Is a Summons given to the world in every Generation, Who is on the
Lords side? They that obey the Summons are with the Lord. A people full of
Contrivances for the Interest of God, are with Him. A people should set
themselves to advance the Glory of God; they should own His Truths, and His
Ways; and endeavor to draw all about them into the Acknowledgement of the
same. A people should propound the Glory of God as their cheef End and the main
Scope of all that they do; and they should think much of no Cost, no Pains, nor
(tho, as a Martyr once expressed himself, tho every hair on their heads were a
life) should a Thousand Lives be dear unto them, in the promoting of it. Then
are they with the Lord; they are so, when God can say of them, as in Isa. 43.
10. Ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord, and my servant.

Thirdly, A people should be With God, by Behavior [Like] Him. To be Like God
is to be with God. They that are with Him, do not walk contrary to Him. God and
we should be One. A people should have the same Designs, the same Desires,
which the Written Edicts of Heaven declare to be in the blessed God; and not
only so, but the same Virtues too. Is God Holy? Thus a people should not bear
with them that are evil. Is God Righteous? Thus a people should abhor all
Injustice and Oppression. Is God Merciful? Thus a people should be disposed
unto all fair acts of Pity and Kindness. Then they will be with the Lord; and,
O that this people were so with Him!

This is the USE to be now made of what has been delivered.

Let us all now, Be with God, that God may Be with us. I suppose, whatever else
we differ in, we generally concur in that wish, I. King. 8. 27. The Lord our
God be with us, as He was with our Fathers, let Him not leave us nor forsake
us. O that we might all as much concur in an endeavourous Resolution, to be
with God, as our Fathers were with Him; not to leave Him, nor forsake him.
There is as much of New England in this great Congregation as can well be
reached by the voice of one Address; it is indeed, the best part of New England,
that is, at least Represented in this Assembly. As the great Council at
Jerusalem satt near the Temple, thus the whole Convention of the Massachusetts,
is here come into the House of God this day: Wherefore I take the boldness to
say, Hear ye me Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin. The Cheef Sinner and least
Preacher among all your Sons, now takes a Liberty to mind you, That God will be
with you while you are with Him. Now that we may be all of us inspired with a
Zeal for this great thing this Day,

Let us Consider, First,

How Desirable, How Necessary a Thing it is, that we should have God with us.
Truly, This is the Unum Necessarium of New England!

Nothing is more Desirable, for us, than the Presence of our God. The Jews
have a Fable of their Manna, That whatever any man had a mind to ^ast, he
presently found in the Manna a Savor and a Relish of it. It is very true of
this Blessed Presence; all manner of Blessings are enwrapped in it. There is a
multitude of Blessings which we are desireous of; but they are all contained in
this comprehensive thing: It will give every honest man, all that he wants.
This will extricate us out of all our Labyrinths; This will set all things to
rights among us; This will wonderfully carry on all the Salvations which have
been begun for us, by the God of our Salvations. If Christ, if God be aboard,
our little Vessel will not sink in the gaping, roaring, formidable Waves now
tossing of it. Well did the Apostle say, in Romans 8. 31. If God be for us, who
can be against us? Thus, If God be with us, we have All for us. One GOD will
weigh down more than ten Worlds. If we have the Presence of that God, Who made
and moves the Universe by a Word; if we have the Presence of that God, Who can
Command and Create our Deliverances, O most Happy We! We may then join in such
Triumphant Acclamations as that in Psalm. 118. 6. The Lord is on my side, I will
not fear; what can man do unto me? We may then defy, even the Gates of Hell it
self, for, Cur met ^at homine^^ homo in sinu Dei posit us? and though abroad at
this day, The earth is removing, and the Waters roar, and are troubled, and the
mountains are shaking, splitting, tumbling, with the swelling thereof; Though the
great and the terrible God be at this Day, coming out of His place, to make all
Europe a stage of blood and fire, and make the Nations everywhere drink deep of
the Cup that shall make them giddy with all manner of Confusion and
Astonishment; Yet WE shall be helped right early, for God is in the midst of us.

Add to this; Nothing is more Necessary for us, than the Presence of God. We
are undone, thrice, and four times Undone, if we have it not. Methinks I hear
the Almighty GOD with a voice more awful than that of the loudest Thunder,
saying over us, as in Hos. 9. 12. Woe to them when I depart from them. And Woe to
us indeed; we are in a most woeful estate, if it come to that! How can we endure
the mention of it, without our most importunate Deprecations, O our God, leave
us not! We can have a prospect of nothing but horrible Disorders, Agonies and
Vexations, if we lose the Presence of our Lord: We ly open to no less than a
fearful Dissipation, and more than all our late Oppressors would rejoice to see
brought upon us. We have lately been complaining of Burdens, that were grievous
to us; but I may warn you of our danger to feel one Burden more, which will
infinitely exceed them all; it is that in Jer. 23. 33. What Burden? I will even
forsake you, says the Lord. Behold a Burden that will sink us into a
bottomless Abiss of Calamities! The Presence of GOD, This is no less than the
very Soul of New England; We are dead and gone, if that withdraw. When Israel
was nimbly enough possessing themselves of the promised Land, which God had
given them such a CHARTER for, they perished in the Attempt; for in Deuteronomy, 1.
42. The Lord said, go not up, for I am not among you. Alas, if we don't in the
first place look to this, That God be among us, we cannot avoid all manner of
Dissappointments, Desolations.

Let us Consider, Secondly: What uncomfortable Symptoms we have had of God's
not being with us. It seems as if God had fulfilled that sad Word on this poor
Land, in Deuteronomy. 31. 17. I will forsake them, and many evils shall befall them, so
that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because God
is not among us? There is a vast number of Calamities, which have given us
lamentable cause to fear, That God has forsaken us. Why have we suffered such a
Blast, both on our Trade, and on our Corn, that the Husbandman complains, I
looked for much, and ^o, it came to little! and the Mariner complains, I went
out full, and came home empty! It Is Because our God is not among us. Why have we
had Fire after Fire, laying our Treasures in Ashes? What means the heat of this
Anger, that Boston, the most noble, and vital Bowel of the Territory, has with
a twice repeted Conflagration suffered such a Loss of that which in the Body
politic answers to Blood in the Body natural? It Is Because our God is not among
us. Why have we had War after War, made upon us by a Foolish Nation? Why have
the worst of the Heathen had renewed advantages to disturb our Peace? And why
have so many of our Brethren and Neighbors been made a prey to the most Savage
Murderers in the world? It is Because our God is not among us. Give me leave to
say, as in Judge. 6. 12. If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen
us? But we may find Humiliation enough to convince us of this deplorable thing,
from what we have endured upon the Loss of our Government. She of old said unto
our Lord Jesus, in J^h. 11. 21. Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had
not dyed. So, If the Lord had been here, it is possible we had not Died. If the
Lord had been with us, would he have made our Wall so feeble, that (as they
said of Jerusalem) the going up of a poor Fox upon it, should break it down? If
the Lord had been with us, had all the wild Creatures that passed by this
Vineyard, found such Opportunities to be plucking at it? No, Our God would have
kept us, as A vineyard of red Wine; and lest any should have hurt us, He, (the
Lord) would have kept it, night and day. If the Lord had been with us, had you
ever thought you had seen cause to Declare, as you have lately and justly done,
That a Company of ^bject strangers had made a mere Booty of us? Had Had we ever
felt the sore grievances of an illegal and arbitrary Government? No; The God of
Heaven was not with that oppressed people, to whom He said in Isa. 1. 7. Your
Country (...) desolate; your land, Strangers devour it.

What shall I say? It was an Appeal made in Joel, 1. 2. Hear this, ye old men,;
has this been in your days? Even so, I may say to the old men within the
hearing of it; My Fathers, You Remember how we were, when God was with us;
pray, was it so in your days, as it has been in ours? Were you visited with
Plague after Plague, in a long Series of heavy Judgments, as We your poor
Children are? Surely, They will tell us; God as not with us, as He was with
them.

In all these matters, our Case may at least have some Correspondence with that
in Luc. 23. 28. He made as though He would havegone; but they constrained Him,
saying, Abide with us!

Let us Consider Thirdly; If we are not With God, we shall be guilty of an
Apostasy, and that under very shameful, very direful Aggravations too.

We shall be Apostates, and O let us not be so, lest our God say, My soul can
have no pleasure in them. But if we are so, we shall be of all Apost^^^s the
most inexcusable Let us Consider, what Fathers we have had; they were with God:
I may say of 'em as in hos. 9. 8. They were with my God: and they are gone to
be so forever. What an unaccountable thing will it be for us, to have that
Character, which we have been so much cautioned against, There arose another
generation which knew not the Lord? What? Shall the Grandchildren of Moses turn
Idolaters? and shall the Children of Samuel become the Children of Belial?
Shall we forget the Hope of our Fathers, or forsake our Fathers Friend? The
very Graves of those blessed men, every Post, every Stone upon their Graves, is
a Witness against us, if we do. With dismal Accents, Methinks, their very
Ghosts, will groan unto us, Alas, Is our posterity come to this! Nay, Abraham
would be Ignorant of us, and Israel would not acknowledge us, if we should be
so degenerate as to lose the Presence of the Lord.

Let us also consider, what Warnings we have had. It may be said unto us, as in
Jer. 25. 4. The Lord has sent unto you all His Servants the prophets. This
Country has been blessed with a most faithful Ministry, by which, I suppose,
every Assembly in this Territory, has been called upon, to Be with God, and to
keep with Him. Especially the Sermons which our ELECTIONS have put the
Ambassadors of God upon Preaching and Printing of; these have been so many
loud Warnings unto us, That we leave Him not. In them we have been faithfully
warned, That our true Interest is Not to Lie unto God. We have been Warned,
That the latter end of our Misbehaviours will be Destruction from the Lord. We
have been Warned, That We must Repent and do our first Works, or have the
Candlestick of the Lord Jesus removed from us. In a word, We have been warned
from Heaven, That If we forsake our God, He will cast us off for ever. O
miserable We, if we do it after all.

These Considerations, will not have their due Force, unless they expire in a
Threefold Request, which I must now lay before you; and I may justly assert
concerning the Things contained therein, They are not Vain Things, they are Our
Life. Wherefore, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin; Hear ye these
things, all ye people of the Massachusetts!

First, Let us Return to the Lord. We must Come to Him, if we would Be with
Him. We have marvellously backsliden from our God, but He (...) after us,
Return ye backsliding Chil^^^, and I will heal your Backslidings. O that we may
all as one man Reply what is in Jer. 3. 22. Behold, we come unto thee, for thou
are the Lord our God! If we ask that Question, in Mal. 2. 7. Wherein shall we
return? Methinks, it were an harder Quaestion, Wherein should we not? But,
Behold, We have had a great voice out of the Temple in answer thereunto. We
have had the Elders and Messengers of our Churches, conven^d in a STNOD,
solemnly informing of us, Wherein we shall Return. God forbid the Advice of
that Synod, should only serve to Convict us and Condemn us, in the Day when He
shall take vengeance on us for our Conten^^ing of it. That were dreadful
indeed! But in Compliance with it, Let every man seriously now enquire of
himself, What have I done? Mark what I say, That man who does not suspect
himself, of having a share in the Sins which have driven away from us the
Presence of our God; That man, I may safely affirm it, is one of the principle
Troublers of this Israel; I do without any Scruple say it, Thou art the man.
Let us all then Examine our selves, and set upon the Reforming of our own
Hearts and Lives, and the Renewing of our Covenants with the Lord.

Indeed, both the Objects in which, and the Authors from whom we have endured
our Calamities, those are enough to indigitate what Sins they are that have
exposed us thereunto. Let me in two or three instances use of plain dealing
with you, agreeable to my station here this day.

What have been the Objects in which we have been afflicted? Our Fruits have
been blasted; and were they not abused in the excesses of Sensuality? Our Lands
have been threat'ned; and were not They the Idols, for the sake of which we
have offended GOD, and almost Renounced all that was Holy, and Just and Good?
The most happy and easy Government in the world, was changed with us, into what
has by the most impartial men been confessed to have become Intolerable; Why,
Did not men despise the Best of Governments, and procure other things to be set
over them, because they endeavored to make Loggs of what they before enjoyed?
To pass on, Were we not in the late unreasonable Extortions of the Law, invited
to consider, Whether our needless Multiplications of Litigious Contentious
Lawsuits formerly amongst us, were not as Scandal thus chastised? Were we not
in the late unsufferable Injuries, Abuses, and Exactions of them, that under
the pretense of the Excise carried on very outrageous Villainies, put upon
Considering, Whether the Multitude or Quality of Drinking-Houses, in the midst
of us, had not once been a Stumbling Block of our Iniquity!

Again, What have been the Authors from whom we have been afflicted? Our
Molestations have risen very much from Indian Hands. And Alas, have we not very
much Injured the Indians? I do not mean, by taking from them Their Land; For it
was Hardly possible they should be more fairly dealt withal than they have been
in that particular; but by Teaching of them, Our Vice. We that should have
learned them to Pray, have learned them to Sin. Endeavors for their Conversion
have by many people been blown upon; but there have been wicked English, who
have taught them to drink, yea, and to curse, and swear; things which they knew
not the meaning of, till they came to School unto such White Pagans as some
that wear the Christian- Livery among our selves. And have not we also Followed
the Indians? The Indians are Infamous, especially for Three Scandalous
Qualities: They are Lazy Drones, and love Idleness Exceedingly! They are also
most impudent Liars, and will invent Reports and Stories at a strange and
monstrous rate; and they are out of measure Indulgent unto their Children,
there is no Family-Government among them. But, O how much do our people
Indianize in every one of those Abominable things. We must repent of these our
miscarriages, or else our God will take up that Resolution concerning us, I
will even forsake them, says the Lord.

Secondly, Let not Sin be With us, and God will be so. It Is the purpose of our
God, in Josh. 7. 12. I will not be with you except ye destroy the Accursed
Thing, from among you, Let us then Destroy that Accursed thing.

Especially, Let us take heed of the Sins, which at this Time, we have a
peculiar Disposition to. It was complained in Hos. 7. 1. When I would have
healed Israel, the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered. It has bin thus, but God
will not be With us, if it still be thus among our selves. Our good God, the
Lord our Healer, is now Healing of us: O let us not now be impatient patients,
lest that our blessed Physician deal hardly and roughly with us. Impatiens
agrotus crudelem facit Medicum. Let us now no more discover Revengefulness
against them that have deserved Ill of us. Let the Law, and not the Sword
measure out their due unto them. No more discover an Unthankfulness unto them
that have deserved Well of us. Requite them not with Censure and Hatred for
their unwearied pains to preserve our Peace. No more discover a Contempt of the
Ministers, who set themselves faithfully to Declare the whole Counsil of God,
and to Lift up their voice like a Trumpet in showing us our sins. They are all
agreed (I hope) as one man to live and dye studying of your Welfare; but if
they are unjustly ill-treated with you, the great God, whose Messengers they
are, will take notice of it, and say, Ye have despised Me!

And O let us no more Discover such a Spirit of Lying as we have made our
selves worthy to be reproved for. We find mention of an Evil Spirit, that said
in I. King. 22. 22. I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth
of all the prophets. Doubtthe same Devil has been suing for a License to go
forth and be a Lying Spirit in the mouth of near all the people here: I would
to God, this Devil were in a Shorter Chain! I beseech you Let not this Land
have that Character, A Country full of Lies.

But of all our Errors, There is none of such dangerous and threatening
Consequence as the Contention which we are too prone to break forth into. We
are too much a Contentious, and that will soon render us a Wretched and a
Ruined people. A Divided and Quarrelsome People, do even say to the Almighty,
Depart from us; for He is the God of Peace. But O, What is our meaning then, to
make a full submission and entire resignation of our selves to the Tyranny of
our own Passions, as we have too much done, while we have been debating about
the Measures of another Submission and Resignation in our various Revolutions!
I have read of a people with whom it was a Law, That in a Fray, where Swords
were drawn, If a Child did but cry PEACE, they must End the Quarrel, or else he
dyed that struck the first blow after PEACE was named. He that Considers the
Feavourish Paroxysms which this Land is now raging in, through mere
Misunderstanding about the Means leading to the End wherein we are generally
agreed, and how ready we are to treat one another with fiery Animosities, had
need cry, Peace, Peace! with a very speedy importunity. For my own part, I
confess my self but a Child, and among the meanest, the smallest of your
Children too; but yet I am old enough to cry Peace! and in the Name of God I do
it. Peace! my dear Contrymen; Let there be Peace in all our Studies, Peace
in all our Actions, and Peace notwithstanding all our Differences. We cannot
avoid having our Different Sentiments; but Peace! I say; O let not our Dissents
put us upon Hatred and Outrage, and every evil work. It has not a little
surprised me to read in a Greek Author, who wrote Fifteen hundred years ago;
that in the times long praeceding his, there was a Tradition among them, that
Europe, and Asia, and Africa, were Islands, encompassed by the Ocean, without
and beyond which was another as big as They: in which other World, were mighty
and longliv'd people, inhabiting of great Cities; the two greatest whereof were
called, one of them, The Fighting City; the other of them, The Godly City.
Behold very Ancient Footsteps of the knowledge which the old World had of our
America, some Thousands of years ago. But I pray, which of them American
Cities, must New England become Incorporate into? Truly, if we are a Fighting,
or a Disagreeing People, we shall not be a Pious one. We have hitherto,
professed our selves, A Country of Puritans; I beseech you then let us have
the wisdom to be first (...) then peaceable. Every man should count himself
liable to follies, and mistakes, and (...) not a few. Are you so, or are you
not? If you are not, what do you here in this Lower World, where you can find
no more of your own Seize? If you are so, then be patient and peaceable
toward those who see not with your eyes! Let us all condescend one unto
another; and let no man be in a foaming Rage; if every she of do not how to
hi^. There is one ingenious way to unite this people, if it were so heeded as
it ought to be. I remember, an inquisitive person of old, that he might know
which was the Best Sect among all the Philosophers, he asked one and another,
and every one still preferred the Sect which he was of himself: But he then
asked them, successively, Which do you reckon the next best? and they all
agreed, that next to their own, Plato's was the Best: upon which, he chose
That, as indeed the Best of all. Thus, We all have our several Schemes of
things, and every man counts his own to be the Best; but I would say to every
man, Suppose your Scheme laid aside, What would you count the Next Best;
Doubtless we should be of One mind as to That: And if we could act by the
common measures of Christianity, we should soon be united in it. O that we
could receive the Word of the Lord Jesus, in 2. Cor. 13. 11. Brethren, live in
peace, and the the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

Thirdly. Let every man do his Part, and his Best in this Matter, That God may
be with us.

Behold, a work provided for all sorts of men.

Pardon me, that I first offer it unto You, that are or may be Our Superiors.
It was said in Hos. 11. 12. Judah rules with God. When Rulers are with God, O
happy Government! Unto YOU, much Honored, I would humbly address this
Petition. That Your first work may be to think on some considerable Expedient,
by which the Presence of God may be secured unto us. A little Consultation may
soon produce, what all New England may bless you for. Yea, it is very much in
your Power to do what may have a Tendency to perpetuate the Presence of God
unto the succeeding Generations. I cannot for bear uttering the Wish of the
great Chytr^us in this Honorable Audience, Utinam potentes rerum Domini
majorem Ecclesioe et Scholarum cur am susciperent! May a godly and a learned
Ministry be every where encouraged: and no Plantations allowed to live without
a good Minister in them. May the College be maintained, and that River the
wholesome streams whereof have made glad the City of God, and blessed us with a
privilege above the other Outgoings of our Nation, be kept Running, with
Issues beyond those from the Seminaries of Canada or Mexico; may Schools be
countenanced, and all good ways to nourish them and support them in every
Town, be put in Execution; you shall then probably leave the Presence of God,
as a blessed Legacy with such as may come after you. I know not whether we do,
or can at this Day, labor under an iller Symtom, than the too general Want of
Education in the Rising Generation; which, if not prevented, will gradually,
but speedily, dispose us, to that sort of Criolian Degeneracy, observed to
deprave the Children of the most noble and worthy Europeans, when transplanted
into the America. The Youth of this Country, are very sharp, and early ripe in
their Capacities, above most in the world; and were the Benefits of a Religious
and Ingenuous Education bestowed upon them, they would soon prove an Admirable
People; and as we know that England afforded the first Discoverers of America
in these latter Ages, whatever the Spaniards may pretend unto the Contrary; for
it may be proved that both Britains and Saxons, did inhabit here, at least
Three or Four hundred years before Columbus was born into the world, which the
Annals themselves of those times do plainly enough Declare; So our little
New England may soon produce them that shall be Commanders of the greatest
Glories that America can pretend unto. But if our Youth be permitted to run
wild in our Woods, we shall soon be Forsaken by that God, Whom our Fathers
followed hither, when it was a land not sown; and Christianity, which like the
Sun, has moved still Westward, unto these Goings down of the Sun, will Return
to the old World again, leaving here, not a New-Jerusalem, as Doctor Twiss
hoped, but a Gog and M^gog, as Master Mede feared; for the last of the Latter
days. Now may the God of Heaven, bless the Wisdom and Goodness of Your
Endeavors, for the continuance of His Presence, with those that may rise up in
your stead, when you shall be gone to be forever with the Lord. Allow me to
say, unto the Fathers of this Country, what was said unto the Judges of old,
Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good.

And as for Us, that are and shall be Inferiors, Let us also do what we can,
That our God may be still among us. We ought all of us humbly to lay before our
worthy Rulers that Encouragement in Ezr. 10 4. Arise, for this matter belongs
to thee, we also will be with thee, be of good courage and do it. Let there be
a public Spirit in us all, for the good of the whole; the Rarity and Mortality
where of among us, New England bewails among the greatest of its Calamities.
Especially, Let us Pray hard, That God would not leave the Land. It was a
Public Spirit which was in that Famous Prince of Orange, who was the first
Captain General of the United Provinces an hundred years ago; and the Ancestor
of that Illustrious Person, whose glorious D^^gh and Service, we have lately
with so much (...) Declared for; that when he was ha^^ly ^^^rchered by the
Pistol of a papist, His dying and only words were, O my God, take pity of my
soul, and of this poor people. When he had but one breath to draw in the world
His poor people had half of it! O Let this poor People have no less than Half
our Cares, half our Prayers. Let no man say, I am a sorry Creature, of what
account can my prayers be? For You that can do little else but pray, can yet be
the instruments of saving this poor people, by the Presence of the Lord. We
find in Amos. 7. 2. That a poor Herdsman and Huckster, kept the great God from
Leaving of the Land. A poor Husbandman, yea a poor Woman, by lively prayers,
may do incredibly much toward the Keeping of our God yet among us.

And if God be With us, then His Rod, and Staff, His mighty Crook, which
horribly breaks the bones of all that it falls upon, will crush and wound all
that shall go to make this Wilderness, A valley of the shadow of Death unto us;
and beat away all that may essay to do us any Harm. So shall we be Led and Fed
among the Sheep of our GOD; He will Restore us, and His Goodness and Mercy
shall follow us all our Days.

MANTISSA.
THus have the Words of God been Calling upon us, to beware of Loosing His
gracious P resence. Now the Presence of God, will either go or stay with His
Gospel; and the Principal Danger of New England lies in its giving an ill
Entertainment unto that glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus. Let us then see
wether the Works of God, have not also been calling upon us to take heed of
that Epidemical Evil; and let what has befallen some of our Neighbors, in our
days be produced as a Warning unto us to avoid any Contempt of that Gospel,
which others have smarted for the Slighting of.

I would fill the Remaining pages of this sheet with a Discourse fetched from a
Reserved Collection of MEMORABLE PROVIDENCE, not improper to be produced on
this Occasion.

MATTHEW. X. 14. 15. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your Words, It
shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than
for that City. To Despise and Reject the Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, is an
Evil, than which none is more evil; and yet nothing is more ordinary than this
extraordinarily sinful Sin; which Unbeleef may be accounted, as Tertullian of
old esteemed Idolatry, the Praecipuum crimen Humani generis, the grand Crime of
Mankind. Low thoughts about the Person, and the Office, and the Beauty of the
Lord Jesus; contemtuous Apprehensions of His Truths and His waves, and His
Ordinances; these are the Things which bring the most Signal fiery Wrath of God
upon the Children of unperswadeableness. The peculiar Controversy of God with
man, in the managing of which the most High God inflicts upon particular
persons, at once a Blasting on their Estates, and a Blindness on their Spirits
here, as the Prologue to the Hottest Vengeance of Eternal fire in the dismal
vaults of Hell below, is not so much on the score of all their other P rofanity
and Iniquity, as this one thing, They slight the Redeemer of their souls. And
this is that thing, by which whole Nations and Peoples bring swift Destruction
upon themselves; that thing for which all the Seals, all the Trumpets, all the
Vials in the Apocalypse, have brought in the direful plagues of the Almighty
upon the Pagan and the Papal, after the Ruin of the Jewish World. They have
maintained a vile Praejudice against the Saving and the Ruling Hands of a
Gracious Mediator. O that, besides the other innumerable Rebukes of Heaven upon
mankind for this Madness in their hearts, the following Instances of Divine
Displeasure may awaken us to Take heed of an evil heart of Unbelief.

Exemple I.
AMong all the Nations of wild Salvages by which the vast Territory of
New England was inhabited, scarce any was more potent or populous than that of
the Narragansetts. Unto those miserable Heathen was the Gospel, and a Gospel
without charges too, offered by some English preachers of it, but they
peremptorily with much affront and contempt refused the Glad tidings of
Salvation by Jesus Christ, praeferring their own devilish Rites and gods
before the New Thing tendered unto them. An holy man, then famous throughout
our Churches, hereupon let fall a speech to this purpose, I speak altogether
without the Spirit of God, if this nation be not speedily and remarkably
destroyed. And so it happened. This Nation, much against the advice of the more
aged men among them, engaged in the late bloody armed Conspiracy with the other
Indians in the Country to cut off the English: in prosecution of which, after
they had done many Acts of Hostility, the English Army took the just
provocation in the depth of Winter to assault the strong Fort and Swamp in
which was their General Rendezvous. The Number of our Forces was much inferior
unto theirs, but with a wonderful Valor, and memorable Success, on our part,
the Day was carried against the tawny Infidels. Their City was laid in Ashes,
two and twenty of their Cheef Captains were killed, with we know not how many
Hundreds or Thousands of the common Indians; after which, mortal Sickness and
horrid Famine pursued the Remainders of them; so that there are scarce any of
them that we know of, to be now seen upon the face of the Earth.

Exemple. II.
The Ringleader of the last War which the Indians afflicted the English in
this Land withal, was Philip the Prince of the Wompanoags. That gracious and
laborious Apostle of the Indians, the Reverend John Eliot, made a Tender of the
Gospel to this Monster, who after the Indian mode of joining signs with words,
pulling off a Button on the good man's Coat, told him, He did not value what he
said so much as that: and he moreover hindered his subjects from embracing the
Christian Religion through a fear which he expressed, That it might obstruct
something of their Civil absolute unlimited Obedience to him. After his
Invasion of the English with some unhappy Success, the Hand of God so sell upon
him, as that after many Calamities, one of his own Vassals upon a disgust at
him, for killing an Indian who had propounded an Expedient of Peace with the
English, ran away from him, informing our Forces where he was; and they came
upon him in the Thicket, just as he was telling his Counselors of his Dream
the night before, that the English had taken him, and while he endeavored an
Escape an Indian shot him through the heart, whereof he dyed immediately, nor
are any considerable part of his people now to seen any where out of their own
place.

Exem. III. Some time since there were Sundry well disposed persons in
Virginia, upon whose affectionate Letters, full of desires, that they might
enjoy the means of eternal Salvation, diverse worthy Ministers were sent from
hence unto them, Mr. Thomson, Mr. Knowles, and Mr. James; who after a passage
so tedious and dangerous as made them almost suspect their Call, at length
arrived there, where God gave them a blessed Success of their labors, with a
loving and a liberal Entertainment in the Country: Yet it was not long before
the Rulers of the Plantation drove them away by an Order, That all such as
would not Conform to certain things, which the consciences of these Gentlewere
known to scruple, should leave the Country by such a day. Before that black
day came, the Indians, who for some hundreds of Miles had entered into a
Consoederacy to cut off all strangers, made a dreadful massacre of the English,
and 300 at least were suddenly killed by the natives there: A grievous
Mortality by Sickness did also accompany the said Massacre, so that many
removed from thence, and many of the Rest glorified and magnified the Justice
of God, (...) (...) ^^ing the Quarrel of His Refused Gospel. (...)

An APPENDIX Touching Prodigies In NEW ENGLAND.
AS an Appendix to the Endeavors used in the foregoing Treatise, to
Commemorate the Wonderful Works of God, and at the same time to awaken this
Country unto such a Devotion and Repentance as the Works of God are calling
for: It ought to be seriously enquired, Whether we have not been by any
Prodigies Warned of the Evils near unto us? though it must be confessed, that our
Hearts were Predigiously obdurate and insensible, if we needed any, while we
have Moses and the Prophets. The written Word of God is that Firmament, spread
over the Spiritual, which answers the Expansum in the Natural World; and the
Threatenings with the Histories therein shining and Thundering, would give to a
sinful People as great a praemonition of impendin Plagues, as the most
Portentous Armies in th Air, or Comets in the Ether of the Universe. Yet even
Insolit Accidents of Nature, as well as Faithful Cautions of Scripture have
been emplov'd for our awakening in our late stupidity. Indeed there are some
from whom we might have expected a less unreasonable Skepticism, who deride all
Prodigies; but these Gentlemen, like Those who deny Original Sin, do in their
own Disputation confute themselves, by Giving, yea, by Being an Instance of the
very thing, which they oppose. Nay, Let no more than the Authorities and
Varieties recited by the Great Zuinger, in his Elaborate Theater, upon the Head
of Prodigies, be fairly considered, and I know not whether you will allow them
to be called Gentlemen, that shall be so Disingenuous as to make a Ridicule of
all in this kind, that has been hitherto Reported and Believed. I acknowledge,
That there ought to be much Accuracy in the Observation of Prodigies; and that
those things ought not always to be accounted Prodigies which are
Extraordinaries; and that it is a simple thing to believe every word; and since
I have seen the Nonconformists Reproched for their minding of Prodigies, by the
loose Pens of certain Writers, whom, weighing well their Accomplishments, by
their own Rule, we ought not to mind, I have been desirous that we may 'so far
take the Informations, though we value not the Judgments of their Malice, as to
be sufficiently critical in this important point; yet we may not by profanity
maintain our own Security. Although that the Eternal God, Hate Robbery for burnt
offering, and it is as Pangerous as it is an officious thing, To Ly for Him:
nevertheless those people, I am sure, were stigmatized for none of the wisest,
Who Regard not the Works of the Lord, nor the Operation of his Hands; and the
Communion between Us and the Angels, either good or bad, which are Invisibly
about us, is more frequent, and Upheld and Applied unto more purposes than
Mankind is Happy enough to be well Aware. I therefore pass on to say, That
New England also seems to have had its Prodiges. We have had inded One Omen,
which was rather a Prophesy than a Prodigy unto us. I Remember that Leontius,
the Aged and Famous Minister of Antio^b, pointing to his own White Head, said
unto his people, Brethren, when this Bank of Snow falls, I can tell you, that
you will have a dirty ^^me on it; intimating the Troubles and Quarrels that should
happen among them, after his Decease. Truly that sort of Snow fell so fast
among us, and the precious, praying, Excellent Old Disciples were so fast
interred, that we might well conceive as much of our Quiet, would go away with
them, as there went of our Glory. But I yet speak too figuratively, to answer
the Expectations of my Reader; Let him then know: That

Just before our late Vexations, we were terrified with an Earthquake in the
Southern Parts of the Country. And if so base a man as Polydore Virgil could
reckon an Earthquake in England long since, the Forerunner of a Bloody and
Cruel French War, We that knew what Neighbors we had, were not without ground
of Conjectures that were none of the most Comfortable or Encouraging.

In the Summer of the Year, 1688. just before the first eruption of our unhappy
War, we bad growing in Boston a Cabbage Root, out of which there sprouted three
very wonderful Branches, one of them exactly resembling a C^^tlace, another of
them, as exactly resembling a R^pi^^, and a third, ext^^amly like to the Club
used by the Indians in their Barbarous Executions. I was my self one among the
Multitudes that visited this Curiosity, with no little surprise at the odness
of it; and the Characters of it in my thoughts have grown m^re Serious and
Solemn, since the Consiquences of it have been so agreeable. I do not imagine
my self herein imposed upon, as Lycosthenes who wrote of P rodigies, was in the
Business of his Bearded Grapes; but it would be Crambe bis cocta for me to
offer the Reader what Exemples parallel hereunto are mentioned by the
exquisitely Learned, and Curious Authors of the Renowned German Ephemerides.

Moreover, it was credibly affirmed, that in the Winter of the Year 1688, there
fell a Red Snow, which lay like Blood on a spot of Ground, not many miles from
Boston; but the Dissolution of it by a Thaw, which with in a few hours melted
it, made it not capable of lying under the contemplation of so many Witnesses
as it might have been worthy of. The B loody S hour that went before the
suffering of the ancient B ritains from the Picts, (a sort of People that
painted themselves like our Indians) this Prodigy seemed a second Edition of.

And in the opinion of the most Critical Observers, throughout the Country,
they were prodigious or at least, Uncommon SIGHTS and SOUNDS, which on the
first of October, in the Year, 1689. We were entertained withal, and not unlike
those which Pl^ny mentions as presages to the Cimbric Wars of old. For on that
Day, in the Morning, while the S ky was too clear, to give us a suspicion of
any thing like Thunder approaching there suddenly Blazed a Flames in the
fashion of a S word; which Blaze after a continuance, far longer than that of
an ordinary Lightning, expired in a smoke that gave Terror unto the Beholders
of it. But hereunto succeeded immediately very terrible and Repeated Noises,
exactly like Volleys of small Shot, not without Reports like those of Great
Guns superadded thereunto. This was a Scaene which all the Colonies of this
large Country, and Thousands of People, at once were Spectators of, carrying
in it, something, beyond the known Law^ which ordinary Meteors are Conformed
unto. And herein was indeed One Circumstance, that gave Demonstration, of
something Rare and Great in this Occurrent; That persons which were Distant
from one another many scores of Miles above an Hundred, yet at the same Time,
both Saw and Heard the whole of what is now related; and though I know, the
Fancies of men applying themselves unto what is in the Clouds, are Fruitful
even to a Ridicule; strong imagination being able to find, even a Juno in them.
and all that can be any where imagined; the shapes of Clouds, like the Clinks
of Bells, humoring the Thoughts of any one; yet in This Accident, no small
Numbers of Gentlemen, who do not use to be imposed upon, but count no Trial
severe enough to Examine Things of this Nature with, were so surprised as with
one mouth to say, The Finger of God was here! But with H im are left the Events
of all. And in the mean time we are not ignorant, that

Nanq^am Fatili^^s Excanduit Ignibus AEthers

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge (...). l. Last, Read Saying.

Page (...) Line 5. Read Jews.

Page 37. Line I. dele Can.

Page 44. Line I. Read as at.

Page 44 Line last r. undone.

Page 45. Line 13. for gave, r. have.


