PROMISE-KEEPING A Great DUTY: As it was Delivered in a SERMON

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in BOSTON.

Prove. 25.14. Whosoever boasts himself of a false gift, is like Clouds and Wind
without Rain.

BOSTON, Printed by Benjamin Harris, and John Allen, at the
London-Coffee-House. 1691.

PROMISE-KEEPING A Great DUTY
2 Cor. 1.18. But as God is true, our word toward you, was not yea and nay.


THE principal occasion of Paul's Writing this Second Epistle to his
Corinthians, seems to have been, some Aspersion that the false Teachers who
came among them, had cast upon him: which they had taken advantage to do, by a
Misinterpretation of some Expressions that he had used in the former Epistle,
which they had perversely applied to the Scandalizing of his Person and
Ministry: One of these was from a promise which he made of Coming to visit
them, Chap. 16.5. which it seems, he had failed in performing, being hindered
from coming, partly by the unforeseen Troubles which he had met with in Asia,
which providentially impeded his intended Journey; partly in respect of the
unfit posture which this Church was in to receive him at that time. This they
alleged against him, as if he were a light and inconstant man; very rash in
promising, and very negligent in performing: which though some might think it a
very small matter to raise a scandal upon, and to have proceeded rather of
malice than any just occasion given: yet we see how solemn and industrious Paul
is to wipe it off, and clear himself in this matter.

There are two things which our Apostle endeavors to make good.

1. That when he made that promise to them, it was without levity, i. e. that
it was serious, real, according to his present intention, with a due
subordination to Gods Will and Providence, verse 17.2. That there was a just
and necessary hindrance which intervened, by which he was prevented from doing
what he had so purposed, and brought him under an obligation to take other
measures, so that he was not in the least blameworthy on this matter: Our Text
belongs to the former of these; and in it there are two things to be taken
notice of,

1. A strong Asseveration; as God is true: in the Greek it is an abrupt form of
Speech; God True: To omit other Interpretations, this kind of expression is
used in Scripture as an Ellyptical invocation of God, in adjuring him, and
carries in it the nature of an (...); it is q. d. as su^^e as God is true, or,
I appeal to the God of Truth; and thus that phrase, God lives, is diverse times
rendered, as God lives; and this shows that Paul accounted it no trifling matter
to be suspected in this thing: as having been well in^^^^cted not to use
additional asseverations and appeals unto God, as words of course in his
ordinary Communication, but only at such time as the case did require it.

2. The thing asserted by him, or that to which the asseveration is connected;
Our word toward you, was not yea and nay. Our word; there be some who apply
this to his Preaching, as if he intended that he had been steadfast in his
Doctrine, and had not been off and on, as to any Article of it: but there are
others who do more pertinently apply it to his word of promise, that is made
mention of in the verse next foregoing. Although, because his Calumniators were
ready enough to insinuate, that he who so little regarded his word of promise
made unto them, would be every whit as inconsiderate in his Preaching; he
therefore subjoyns a vindication of that too, verse 19. By yea and nay, he
intends off and on, fallacious, deceitful, speaking without any consideration
or intention at all, but merely in complement, and upon pretense; and he means
on the other hand, that he was real, honest, and sincere in it:

We may from hence observe this, DOCTRINE.
It is a great and momentous Duty, incumbent on the People of God, to be true
and faithful in their Promises.



Paul looked upon it as a great reflection and reproach cast upon him, that he
was otherwise represented by the false Teachers; and therefore reckons it his
Duty and Interest to clear up his Integrity in the matter, and because no other
knows the sincerity of the heart, he therefore does it by a solemn appeal to
God, who is the discerner of hearts.

In the clearing up of this Doctrine, there are two things which will cast for
our enquiry, viz.

1. Wherein the Truth of Promises does properly consist?

2. Of what concernment it is for the people of God to be very careful in this
matter? and it is to be observed that this Duty belongs to, and is to run
through the whole of a Christian's Conversation.

1. Wherein the Truth of Promises does properly Consist?

A. I may here premise a few words concerning The nature of a Promise; and of
Truth as it stands related to a promise.

1. A Promise is a Voluntary Obligation of one Person to another, wherein he
stands bound to do something for him. In all Promises there are two Parties to
be considered, One that makes it, and another to whom it is made. In making of
a Promise the man becomes bound; he gives his word for the thing: either he was
at liberty before, and now he becomes voluntarily Obliged, and so parts with
his freedom; or else it was a Debt or Duty which he before was under a Moral
tie unto, and by thus promising, he makes himself further engaged: hence there
is supposed a Consent of the will on his part, who makes it, by which the man
ties his own hands, and puts himself under the command of another; and it is to
do something for him; this differenceth it from a threatening, which is to do
against him; and hereupon there follows a performance to be requisite by virtue
of the promise: after which the man is in Conscience bound to endeavor; this
is clear by the light of nature.

2. Truth, as it refers to a promise, is firstly a Conformity between the mind
of the promiser, and the thing which is promised; which Truth farther discovers
it self by his practical pursuit of the thing, Truth of words in General, is
when men speak as the thing is: A promise is a word past by a man concerning
any matter, and it may then rightly be said to be true when it is according to
the thing: and this firstly relates to the mind of the speaker, then
secondarily to the action depending thereupon, for there is a necessary
Connection between these two, to make the word true: here then we may
particularly take an account of th^s Duty, and lay down some special Rules by
which it is to be attended, and that,

1. In the making.

2. In the performing of them.

1. In the making of a promise, let these things be observed.

1. That in all the promises we make, we owe a Subordination to the will of
God; and therefore we ought to have an eye or respect thereunto always in our
making of them: There was a Law in Israel that if an inferior person made a
vow (and a promise partakes in the nature of a vow) the Superior, who had a
power over that person, might vacate the vow, upon the hearing of it, if he
would; and we are all of us Gods Servants, and he has incomparably more power
over us then any second being can have over his fellow creature* every promise
is therefore presumed to be the disposal of Gods pleasure; and it is (...) for
us, in acknowldgement thereof, explici^^^ to say if God will; and there is a
double r^^spect to the will of God which is here to (...) had.

1. To his preceptive will; we ought always to be satisfied in the lawfulness
of the thing, before we Dare to bind ourselves; if we bring ourselves under the
Obligation of doing any sinful action, we forfeit our Truth, for in the very
act of doing such a thing we prove ourselves false unto God, and then what
Truth can there be in us? every sin is a ly, according to Scripture-account,
and then to promise to commit a sin, is to engage unto a Ly.

2. To his Providential Will, we have not our power in our hands, for the
performance of any thing that we promise; God both can, and also does
whatsoever he sees meet, put in an unforeseen, and unavoidable impediment,
which shall altogether disenable us from doing the thing which we intended; he
can give obstruction to the thing, and lay unconquerable difficulties yea
impossibilities in the way of performance; or he can cut us off from our
designs, and make all our thoughts to perish at once: we are then always to
acknowledge, and carry about with us the consideration of this in all that we
engage our selves about, or plight any promises for the doing, else we despise
Gods Providence, and may well expect to be frustrated; hence that caution,
Jam. 4.14 and such a limitation had this very promise to which Paul refers in
our Text, see verse 16.7. if the Lord permit.

2. There must be a true and sincere intention to do the thing, if God do not
prevent it. This is the proper conformity between the mind and the tongue; when
our words are the expressions of our hearts, and our promises are the true
manifestations of our real purposes: this is it which makes our yea to be yea;
when our words are a true glass in which we do show our hearts; when in the
very act of promising we carry that resolution in our minds, that nothing but
the uncontrolable will of God shall in any wise prevent us from doing the
thing, according to the true purpose and meaning of our words, opposite
hereunto are;

1. An inward resolution never to perform: men promise one thing, and resolve
upon the contrary at the same time; say they will do such a thing, and mean not
to do it: this is direct and positive lying; for herein the tongue contradicts
the mind; and as there is a ly materially contained in every contradiction, so
the guilt of it lies heavy upon that man who does it knowingly, thus Ananias is
charged for lying, Act. 5 begin. He said that it was but so much, when he knew
that it was a great deal more.

2. An irresolution in the mind of the man about it, this is the levity which
the Apostle makes mention of, Context, verse 1^. A promise made without due
deliberation beforehand; a cursory obligation that a man makes without so much
as thinking, or having any regard to what he says, when his word passes from
him: and when it is so, that which naturally follows upon it, is that he takes
no more thought about it afterward, nor in the least concerns himself to see
that it be discharged: this also is inconsistent with the Truth that is herein
concerned, which lays the man under bonds, whereas this frame of spirit leaves
the man insensible of any, and there can be little expectation that ever he
should fulfill according to his word.

3. It must be in that which is in the man's power to perform, in the ordinary
course of Gods Providence. It is not lawful for men to promise impossibilities,
whether in themselves so, or in their circumstances; nor ought they to be rash
in promising improbabilities, there are many things which a man has not in his
own hands, nor is it in his view, how he shall be able to obtain them; some
things a man is able to do for any thing that is in them, but he cannot do them
in such a time: now to promise in any of these considerations, is to
necessitate himself to ly; and it is profaneness added to falsehood: for him to
impute his disappointment of doing them, to the Providence of God, because in
very deed God's Providence, if he had any regard to that, did plainly forbid
him from making of any such engagements. There are al^o some things that are
very hazardous such as things ventured at Sea, and men had need to be very
cautious, and plain dealing in such promises, else they may impose upon others,
and that is so far against the Truth: For any to promise a payment by such a
day, when he neither has it in his hands, nor has a prospect of a way in
which he shall probably come by it, is a mere purpose to deceive, and may well
be branded for a Cheat: to say he hopes it, when he has no rational hope at
all, in the ordinary course of second causes, is but very little better, if any
thing at all: To promise more work to be done within the compass of such a
time, then it will allow him to do, with all the diligence that he is able to
use, is likewise of the same nature: But to promise that which he may do, and
is in the power of his hand, in case God shall please to continue his health
and limbs, or if he preserve his Estate unto him which he has in possession,
this must he acknowledge to be within a man's ordinary compass or ability: and
the Promiser ought always to have a respect to that.

2. In the performing of Promises. Here also there is Truth to be regarded as
well as in the other; and this is that which is called Faithfulness: which
fidelity is nothing else, but our carefully verifying, or giving being to the
word which we have past; the word which is given, is a pattern or pledge for
some deed which is to be done; the reason of a promise, is, because there is
some time to intervene in order to the doing of the thing, which is secured by
such a word, so far as it will go.

Here then these Rules are to be minded.

1. That if God by some unforeseen Providence, disable a person from doing
according to his Word, it is not to be imputed to him for a sin, if he do come
short of performing: it does not make the man guilty of an untruth, tho he
should fall behind in the thing: always provided that his intentions were
honest, and there were no fallaciousness in the management* and for men to
asperse him with knavery or cheating on this account, it is to throw dirt in
the face of Gods Providence; it is the duty of all men to accept of another
word, under such a proviso, and not to think that any can forestal him, Who
does his pleasure in the world, or to think any Christian so mad as to intend,
I will do so, whether God will or no; if it be labor, and God lays the man up
sick: if it be money, and God takes all from him, he is to be pitied and not
reproached: Paul for this Reason, counts it hard Measure for him to be Consumed
in this regard, when unfore-suspected Troubles in Asia had prevented his truly
intended Journey.

2. That sometimes the case of the Party unto whom the promise is made, makes it
a duty, at least to suspend the doing of the thing: A promise is always
supposed to intend the doing something for another, i. e. for his good, that
which is to do him harm is of the name of a threatening, and is often a
mischievous thing; If then it shall afterward prove (as sometimes it does so
fall out that it does so prove) to be apparent for his (...), especially if it
be very pernicious. The promiser is hereby brought under the Obligation of
another duty, which supposes the former: and this is a great Truth; Viz: that
two actions the one whereof is necessarily subversive of the other, cannot be a
man's duty at the same time, to the same person; for Gods Command never involves
us in contradictions: Paul intended to come to Christ, at such a time, hoping
that his Epistle would have prepared them to give him a good welcome; but it
falls out that if he now comes it would be to his Grief* and not to their
comfort, hence he Pleads this Ver. 2^. I promise a man to furnish him with such
a weapon, by such a day, but in the Interim; I am fully assured that he intends
to Murder himself with it; I am bound to withhold it: and in keeping the sixth
Command, I do not violate the N^m^: only we must not frame such things on
surmize, to Cover our own Infidelity.

3. That it is our Duty to make Conscience of performing Our Promises,
according to the true tenor and intent of them; there is a great care which is
incumbent on us in this respect; if once our word be past from us, we have now
parted with our liberty, and ought to account ourselves to be under a
Conscientious tie: A promise is a kind of a Vow; and we have the wise man's
advice, Eccl. 5 5^ better it is that thou should not Vow, then to Vow and
not Pay. We should not account our selves to be at our own dispose, but to know
that our Truth lies at the stake, which ought to be very dear to us, and
carefully Preserved by us; we ought not therefore to forget it; but to bear it
in our minds, and to be in Travail till we have brought it to pass. And we must
be sure that there be no fallacy in it, no Deceit, or Evasion, our word should
be according to our intention, and then our Performance must keep pace with our
word; else the very end and use of words is perverted, which is the imparting
of our minds one to another.

4. There must be no seeking of excuses, or shifting of the thing by evasions:
men sometimes promise, and then repent of it, they did not so well consider, and
afterward upon reflection, they begin to think, there is some inconvenience in
the thing, they have Disadvantaged themselves by it; and now they sat
themselves to study some cunning Evasion, so to put off the Performances; here
the contrary is given as one of the Characters of an honest and good man. Psalm.
15 4 He swears to his own hurt, and Changes not. Not as if he does
Designedly study harm to himself, but if it prove so through want of foresight,
that he will not for that reason revoke his word: it is not our own Personal
Damage that should make us shift off a promise, if our word be once given; we
must rather suffer in our Personal interest, then Violate our Engagement,

5. We ought therefore to do nothing afterward that will impede our
performances, and necessitates us to fail in our promise. If God sees meet to
put in an obstruction, we are to adore his providence and submit quietly to his
Supremacy; but if we do it our selves, it will bring us under blame; if it be
heedlesly, we are faulty by it, but if it be designedly, this will be imputed
to our fallacious mind; and render us al together inexcusable; he that engages
to do one thing, and then sets about that which will certainly put him by from
being able to attain it, practically sets himself against the truth, and
voluntarily necessitaets himself to tell a ly.

2. Of what concernment it is for the people of God to be careful in this
matter.

A. Promises are made either to God or man, the former of these are by a mere
peculiar appropriation called vows; and do not belong to our present discourse:
the latter are properly second-Table-Duties, and are a part of that love which
we owe unto men: but yet the second great comprehensive command is like unto
the first, inasmuch as it is stamped with the same authority, and has the same
ultimate end, leading unto the glorifying of God as well as the other: and
there are sundry weighty considerations which will represent this to us as a
momentous Duty; especially,

1 The honor of God is herein deeply concerned. Truth is one of the Divine
Perfections, it is a virtue wherein we should strive to be perfect as God is:
and there are some who Put such an interpretation upon our text: as God is
True; so would I be True too, I would be like him* It is for children
studiously to imitate their parents in that which is good and commendable; and
in so doing they come to be a credit to them, and honor themselves too; it
greatly pleases a Father to see this in his child: now God has so much
testified to his approbation of Men of Truth, in the scripture, and so awfuly
threatened the lying tongue, to show how much he esteems himself to be honored
by the one, and dishonored by the other: yea, how many have bin the signal
Testimonies of Gods providence against Promise breakers; this was the ruin of
Zedekiah and Jerusalem 2 chronicles. 36.13. and see how the prophet comments upon
it, Ezekiel 17 15. all the world expect that they who profess the fear of God,
should be under the aw of him, so as not to dare to falsify their word: and
therefore the name of God suffers exceedingly by it, if such do fall behind in
their performances, and therefore;

2. The credit of Religion has a deep interest herein. Gods people have to do
with a great many men that have but little knowledge of the true Religion, and
who care not to concern themselves to be acquainted with the Mysteries of it:
but all men understand something about moral honesty, which, without doubt,
appertains to the practicks of Christianity, and every one that calls himself
Christian, makes a profession of, and would be thought to be singularly
concerned about: and it is certain, the men we are speaking of, do measure all
Religion by it, it is the Standard by which they try it; and they account men
just so much Religious as they are morally honest: this fidelity therefore
gives a luster to a Christian's Profession, and gains unto Religion it self a
commendation from them; they will say such a man is sure a good man, he makes
conscience of his word: whereas a bare neglect of this, will expose the whole
of a man's profession to contempt; it will make those to think and say, such men
use Religion to no other purpose than to be a cloak for their knavery; and
might it stop here, it were not so much, but how ready will they be to infer
from hence, that Christianity it self is nothing else but a license given men
to indulge themselves in immoralities? I am sure Paul met with this reflection
more than once, though he gave no occasion for it; much more is it to be
expected where there is.

3. The Christians Conscience is herein laid to Pawn. Suppose the man was
Entirely at his own liberty before, and under no necessity of making such a
promise, yet if once he does make it; he is now Tied unto it by his own act;
and what is the Security that is given unto him to whom the Promise is made,
but that now the man's Conscience is become a Pledge: if therefore he perform
the thing which he has undertaken, he now saves his Conscience, takes up his
Pawn, but if he breaks that, he forfeits this; and what has that man left him,
that is of any worth at all, who has Forfeited and lost his Conscience? if
once it comes to Pass that a man has no regard to that, he has not only lost
his Religion, but his Morality too: and he who despises his Conscience,
Despises God, who is the Lord of Conscience and unto whom it is accountable
for all that is done by the man.

4 The man's Personal Credit is here also interested. Every man has a Concern
lying upon him, to get and keep a good Name; and that being a thing of great
worth, his Concernedness ought to be so much the more about it, Eccl. 7.1. and
the Christian has more reason than any man to be Careful in this matter,
because his own name cannot be lost, without some reflection upon the name of
God. It is true, Christians, who live among them that are Enemies to Christ,
are warned to expect to suffer from the world, in Name Estate, Liberty, and
every way, nor can they Escape it by all their Holy and Righteous Conversation,
but may rather expect to meet wi^h the more of it; yet have we the Rule given
us for Caution, that though we cannot avoid suffering, yet we take heed, What
we suffer for, 1. Pet. 4.16. But the world will throw this dirt upon him; it
has ever been their Endeavor to Asperse good men with immoralities; but it is
our care to see that these Aspersions be not true; but Notorious lies. Let a
man Brag never so much of a Profession, tell the world never so many stories of
his Conversion* yet if he be not a Morally honest man, he is nothing at all:
what says the Apostle to this? Jam. 1, 26. and 1. Joh. 4.20* Nay such an one,
not only Forfeits his Reputation for a Good man, with the ungodly, but with
those that are Godly, who are to judge of the Tree by it is Fruits: he that
makes it a customary and little matter to falsify his word, deservedly incurs
this discredit; if it may be truly said of him, that he regards not his
Promise, there is no trust to be put in that man nor is he to be believed in
any thing.

5. The Welfare of Humane Society is very much Concerned in this matter. Man
is made a sociable Creature, and the Comfort of Mankind is maintained by mutual
Intercourse and Communion: Man is a Dependent Creature, and not only have all
men their absolute Dependence upon God; but one man has a great deal of
Dependence upon another, without which the Affairs of this life cannot be
carried on for the support of our Livelihood, there are many things man wants,
and there are many Vocations are needful for the supply of them, one man cannot
Carry on all by himself; and hence it comes to pass, that there is mutual
Traffic between men and Transactions among them in the Management of it: nor
can all things be carried so, as that there should be no more but Present
commutation, but men must trust one another; and therefore Covenants and
Promises must pass beween them for the future doing this or that, which may
Answer the ends of each: and that which makes these promises to pass for
current between man and man, is truth in the promiser; it is the Opinion of
that which gives him Credit with the other party; but for which Opinion he
would refuse to take his word or credit him on the value of it: if therefore
there be a failure upon this account, mankind is disappointed; and if it should
grow to be a common thing, the Ligament of Humane society is dissolved and
Communities must be disbanded: if Truth fail all is put to a rout: if once a
man cannot be believed, what should any others have any more to do with him? by
this means secrets come to be revealed to men's great detriment; expectations
are hereby frustrated, businesses of greatest moment disappointed and humane
traffic woefully entangled; hence arise quarrellings, tedious lawsuits, yea
Contention and every evil work: whereas on the other hand were men but True and
faithful, how happily might they live together? what helps and Comforts might
they be mutually one to another? it is indeed the Ligature of all societies and
if it be broken they will fall in pieces: and when all those things are put
together, It will tell us what reason the Apostle had to be so Careful in
defending his credit in this Respect.

USE I.
This Doctrine then may serve to reprove the too great neglect of this Duty,
among those that make a profession of Piety. How it is upon this account, is
best known to every man's Conscience; But I am sure there is a great deal of
complaint made, and so little reproach cast upon the ways and people of God in
this matter; and too many, who have made the highest profession of
Christianity, and entered into solemn explicit Covenants with God, are ill
represented upon this account: Promise-breaking (...) an aspersion that is cast
into many a (...) dish: and if the thing be true, let all such know, that they
are guilty of a great and scandalous sin, and beware that you do not think
slightly of it, and go about to evade it, and suppress the conviction of it in
your own consciences, by any trivial excuses: and if there be any of such
persons, whose hearts do condemn them before God for this sin, let it help to
bring them to deep Humiliation, and soaking Repentance: think how much
dishonor you have brought to Gods precious Name by this, how woefully you have
opened the mouths of ungodly men, and given them occasion to speak evil of you,
and your profession; how much you have wounded the Charity of them that fear
God, and laid your selves under their just suspicion of your sincerity; how
dangerously you have exposed your Profession to contempt; and made holy and
conscientious Christians to suffer for your sakes. But I shall turn my
Reprehension into Exhortation; and therefore,

USE II.
Let it serve to advise and excite all Christians to a careful and constant
practice of this Duty. Among the other parts of a gospel conversation, see that
you do not forget this, to be at all times true to your promises: what has
been already said in the clearing up the weight of this Duty, may be made use
of as as arguments to move us to hearken to this advice, I shall therefore only
add these two considerations.

1. It is your Duty to be examples in all Moral honesty, to all other men. The
people of God ought to endeavor to outdo all others whatsoever, in
righteousness, math. ^.^0. except your Righteousness exceeds etc. The Grace of
God where it is received teaches men effectualy to do these Duties, Tit 2.11
12. to live Righteously, etc. Christ's Disciples are said to be the lights of
the world, and for that reason they should labor so to shine, that they may
win others, Mat. 5.16. it is therefore a crying shame to them, that any such
who make no pretense to holiness and the fear of God, are yet to be commended
for these things far above them; that do by many degrees outdo them; that
there is a great deal more confidence may be put in them, and their word is
much safer to be trusted unto than any of theirs: to be able without slander,
to say of any one who tells all men that he is a Servant of Jesus Christ, that
he is not to be believed in any promise that he makes, what an horrid shame
must this be? let there then be no such occasion offered.

2. You will have a great deal of peace in thus doing, whereas otherwise you
will create for yourselves a great deal of trouble. Every man, next to God,
has most of all to do with his own Conscience, and it is his greatest wisdom
carefully to provide for the quiet of that: it is his best friend, if he do
maintain the peace of it, and it is his worst foe, if he will be so foolish as
to set it against him: and whatsoever Evasions men may use to baffle their
Consciences withal for the present, yet they keep a true Register, and will
have a time to call men to a severe Reckoning; then it will be an unspeakable
comfort, to be able to say of our selves, as Paul does, Acts 20.16. if we
maintain Truth in the inward parts, that will be matter of solid consolation,
in the darkest hours of Temptation: but it will be a terrible thing, when our
thoughts shall be made to reflect inward, then to have such accusations as
these are; I have been false to men, how can it be then that I should be true
to God? I have had little or no regard to my word; I made nothing of promising,
and as little of breaking promise: all that you can gain by your falsehood or
save by cunning tricks to put off your engagements, will never compensate this
mischief: all that you can suffer by being honest and true, though you should
lose considerably in your outward concerns will not make you (...), or hinder
your inward quiet: this will be a solid comfort to you at all times.

And for your help and Direction in this matter take these few Rules.

1^ Be Considerate and Cautious in making of Promises* men that are rash and
hasty in Promising, will be every whit as slow and regardless in performing: he
that really accounts his word* when once it is past, to be as Obliging on his
Conscience, in point of Truth, as if he had given his Oath unto it, will be
sure first to think of it Deliberately, and look it round, before he will bring
himself under such a bond: Consideration well becomes a prudent man at all
times; in all cases that are of any moment; a rash man, will never gain the
Reputation of a wise man: and here you are to Consider, whether you may do it
in regard to the Lawfulness of the thing: otherwise you will bring yourselves
into a Snare; for although sinful promises, when the thing promised is
forbidden us by the Precept, are not to be kept but broken; and to fulfill them,
is to add sin to sin, yet there is folly to be imputed to and repentance
required of such as so do: Her^a was a fool for making such a Promise as he
did, but he was worse then a Madman for standing to it because of his word.
Think also whether you may Promise it in point of ability to perform: do not
dare to engage any thing which you know you must of necessity never fulfill; a
Physical impossibility makes it a moral evil in us, to ob^i^e ourselves to the
Doing of any thing which otherwise were Lawful for us, were it in our power:
think also whether it will not Repent you of it afterward, and so become a
Temptation to you either to Fraud or Falsehood; that so being Clear in what you
do, you may be the more fixed in your Resolutions to stand to your word.

2. Having promised, now carefully avoid all Temptations to Dishonesty, beware
that you give not the least entertainment to any thoughts of fraudulent dealing
in the thing: do not meditate nice evasions, nor study to find any advantage
how to break or to be any whit worse then your word. A Christian ought to be
very clear, sincere, upright in promising, and he will herein make it appear
that he was so, when he pursues it in his practice, when he hates any thing
that looks like a deceit, and though he might yet will not make use of it:
There are a great many cunning tricks, that some men studiously make use of, to
impose upon their neighbors withal, accounting it a matter of credit, and
that which deserves commendation, that they can thus live by their wits: but it
very ill becomes a Christian thus to do: that is a duty with respect to all our
dealings with others, Romans 12.17. provide things honest in the sight of all
men; however witty men may count such a man to be, I am sure all honest men
will vote him wicked and that is a very ill Epithet to be put upon any one that
calls himself by the name of Christian.

3. Hence beware of making any Enquiry after the Promise is given. That is a
thing which is to be done before, but it comes too late, and out of order
afterward; it is good and a piece of Prudence for men before they proceed to
oblige themselves, to say What shall I do? shall I bind my self or no^? what
will be consequent upon it? but when our word is gone, then to say, What have I
done? many times Proves to be a great sin, and puts us upon sinful and
scandalous Courses to undo again, when it is too Late; when once we have
brought our selves under the obligation, our business now is to study* how we
may perform; whereas such enquiries as these mostly tend to put us upon
thinking how to evade and falsify our word, when we think we have been
over-seen, or are like to be losers by the bargain*

4 Beware of forgetting your promises. It will be no extenuation, but rather an
aggravation of you fault so to do: it will argue a great want of integrity:
that is one of the main ends of a promise, to put us in mind of what we have to
do: and if we do indeed purpose the thing, it will set us about it, and then
there will be no danger of the forgetting it.

5. Keep the Fear of God always before your eyes. Think it not enough that you
can escape the Laws of men, which is all that too many take any thought about,
and think all is well if they can keep clear of falling under their Lash.

But remember. God is a witness of all the promises that you make, and he will
be an avenger of all falsehood: be afraid of provoking him to anger at you, or
of exposing his Name to reproach among men* think the time is coming when you
must give an account of every idle word unto the great Judge; then all tricks
and trivial excuses will be insignificant: he will then bring the hidden things
of dishonesty to light: promise breakers then will have an awful account to
give in. Let us then pray that uprightness and integrity may preserve us; that
God will take from us the way of lying: this will be one way to help us to live
in credit among men to enjoy great peace in our own spirits, and appear with
comfort* before the great Judge at the Last Day.

FINIS.

