By His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in Chief of
Their Majesty's Province of New York, Province of Pennsilvania, Country of
New Castle, and the Territories and Tracts of Land depending thereon in
America, and Vice Admiral of the same, Their Majesty's Lieutenant and Commander
in Chief of the Militia, and of all the Forces by Sea and Land within Their
Majesty's Collony of Connecticut, and of all the Forts and places of Strength
within the same.
A PROCLAMATION
WHereas by Proclamation given forth at Hartford the 28 day of October last
past, I did think fit to signify unto all Their Majesty's good Subjects within
their Majesty's Colony of Connecticut, That their Most Excellent Majesty's,
William and Mary, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING and QUEEN, Defendors of the Faith, etc. were graciously pleased,
by their Royal Commission under the great Seal of England, to constitute and
appoint me Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor of New York, etc.
Their Lieutenant and Commander in Chief of the Militia the said Colony of
Connecticut, Not only for the assorting of Their Inherent Right and Royal
Prerogative, but also of their special Grace and tender Care they had for the
Security and Defense of Their good Subjects in the same; and that pursuant
thereunto, out of the true and tender Regard I had for the Peace of the said
Collony, and better satisfaction of all their Majesty's good Subjects therein,
as for the due Execution of the said Commission, I did with all convenient
speed hasten unto the said Town of Hartford, and did then apply my self unto
the General Assembly there sitting (the present Administrators of the
Government) and in the said Assembly caused my said Commission to be publicly
read, and left with them a Memorial (...) Writing of my Expectation of their
ready Submission to Their Majesty's Lawful Commission. And for the more speedy
and effectual Execution of the same (besides the allowance of a sufficient Time
for their Deliberation) I did likewise offer to commissionate all the late
Commission-Officers, and to be advised by them in appointing others, to supply
the vacancy of officers; and particularly caused a Commission to be tendered to
Coll. Robert Treat for the Command of all the Militia of the (...) Collony. I
did then also assure them, That I had neither Power nor Intention to invade any
of their Civil Rights, only requiring Obedience to their Majesty's Commission,
whereby the Power of the Militia may be acknowledged to be (as it is a Royal
Right, inherent to, and inseparable from the Crown. Whereby I did expect, as
well as require, That the said General Assembly would have render (...)
Obedience accordingly: But in leiu thereof they positively refused to yield
Obedience unto their Majesty's Royal Commission aforesaid. Whereupon, for the
further satisfaction of their Majesty's good Subjects in the said Collony, I
did by the said Proclamation further declare, That Their Majesty's Commission
was Absolute and Indispenible, and was a Command, not only to me to Execute,
but all their Majesty's Subjects in the said Collony to Obey; and that the same
did make Null and Void all former Military Commissions; and that it was not in
my Power to suspend or delay the Execution of it, nor the Default, or any other
Inconveniences that may happen thereby, be by any means justified. And did
then declare my Resolution, in obedience to Their Majesty's Royal Command,
forthwith to put the said Commission in Execution; and did, by the said
Proclamation, in Their Majesty's Name straightly forbid all Persons whatsoever,
to execute or obey any former Military Commissions, or to levy any Men and
Arms, otherwise than in pursuance of Their Majesty's said Commission to me
granted, and published in the General Assembly of the said Collony, as
aforesaid; and did require, That all Their Majesty's loving Subjects in the
said Collony, upon their Allegiance would yield their due Obedience to Their
Majesty's said Commission of Lieutenancy, and be aiding and assisting to me in
the Execution of the same accordingly, as they would answer the contrary at
their utmost Peril.

And forasmuch as in my Return through the said Collony, unto the Charge of my
Government of New York, I found that the said Proclamation had not been duly
published and made known unto the respective Towns and Inhabitants of the said
Collony, as their Majesty's Service, and the true Intent of their Majesty's
said Commission did of necessity require. And being likewise informed, That by
the specious Pretenses of Ill Designing Men, not well affected unto Their Most
Sacred Majesty's, and Their Royal Dignity and Crown of England, etc, many of
Their Majesty's loving Subjects within the said Collony are deluded, inveigled
and drawn away from their Duty and Allegiance, as aforesaid, whereby the Peace,
as well as Safety of the Collony is very much endangered. For prevention of
such Insinuations, as well as for the better Direction of their Majesty's good
Subjects, and that the Ill Consequencies that must attend such Disobedience,
may be avoided, I have thought fit further to Publish and Declare unto all
Their Majesty's loving Subjects, as aforesaid, That as it has been Their
Majesty's most Gracious Pleasure, out of Their tender Love and Care that they
have for the Preservation and Good of Their Subjects in the said Collony, in
this Time of Actual War, to invest me with the Powers and Authorities in the
said Royal Commission contained. That pursuant thereunto, I do again strictly
Charge, Require and Command all Their Majesty's loving Subjects, residing, or
any other Person or Persons that take upon them the Administration of the Laws,
or Conservation of the Peace within Their Majesty's said Collony of
Connecticut, That fortwith upon the Publication and Receipt hereof, they do
yield and render an entire Obedience unto Their Majesty's most Gracious
Commission, as aforesaid, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as they will
answer the Contempt of the contrary hereof at their Perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Arms, at Fort William Henry the Eight Day of
November, 1693. And in the Fifth Year of Their Majesty's Reign.

Ben. Fletcher.

God Save King William and Queen Mary.
Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to Their Majesty's, King William
and Queen Mary at the Sign of the Bible in the City of New York, 1693.


