Truth Advanced IN THE CORRECTION OF MANY Gross and hurtful Errors, Wherein is
occasionally opened and explained many great and peculiar Mysteries and
Doctrines of the Christian Religion.

By George Keith.

Whereunto is added, A Chronological Treatise of the several Ages of the WORLD:
Showing the Intervals, Time and Effects of the Seven Churches, Seven Seals,
Seven Trumpets, and seven Vials, called, The seven (...) Plagues, and the
various dreadful Effects that are like to ensue at the pouring forth of each of
them, which is near at hand. Together with an Account of the Time of the
Churches going into the Wilderness, her Return, full Restoration, and (...)
spreading of the glorious Gospel into all Nations of the Earth. As also, the
time of the Personal Antichrist his Reign and last Persecution; With the Time
of the Prophesying, Killing and Rising again of the two Witnesses. And Lastly
Concerning the Thousand Years Reign of the Saints with Christ yet to come, and
time of beginning (...), only by way of Essay and Hypothesis.


Printed in the Year 1694.

The CONTENTS.
COncerning the great Worth and Benefit of true divine Knowledge, and the holy
Scriptures, page 1. Concerning the great Mystery of Election and
Predestination, after a peculiar way, p. 9. Of the great Mystery and Foundation
of the Christian Faith, viz. the Father, Son and holy Ghost, that holy Three.
p. 15. Concerning the Garden of Eden, and the Trees thereof; Of the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil; Of the Serpent that tempted Eve; Of the Tree of
Life, and the River that watered the Garden, and the four Heads thereof,
briefly opened and explained, after a Mystical way and manner. Of Adam^s state
before the Fall, in the Fast, and Restoration Of Adam's Nakedness, what it was,
and the Coat of Skin that God clothed him with after the Fall. That Bodily
Sickness and Death was the consequent and effect of Adam's Sin. p. 16. That
Adam's Posterity do generally derive a Defilement of Sin and Corruption of
Nature ever since the Fall, p 32. Concerning Universal Grace and the Light
within, etc. how sufficient to the Salvation of all Men, not without* but with,
by and through the Man Christ Jesus, his Death, Resurrection, A^cention,
Mediation, etc. p. 38. Concerning the true manner and way of preaching Christ,
and how, and in what extent he is the Object of our Faith, Hope, Love, Devotion
and Obedience; together with God the Father, and the holy Spirit. And how
Christ is both God and Man, by a most glorious and admirable Union of his
Godhead and Manhood, belonging to none else, neither Angels nor Men, yet so as
his Godhead i^ not his Manhood, p. 45. Concerning Justification and
Sanctification, and the peculiar Influences and M^nistration of the Spirit of
Sanctification, proper only to true Believers in Christ crucified, p. 52. That
Worship* Prayer* Thanksgiving and Honor is to be given to the Man Christ
Jesus, the Son of ^^raham, David and Mary, etc. p. 57. Concerning Christ's being
now in Heaven* in the true and entire Nature of Man, both of Soul and Body, p.
63. Concerning Imputed Righteousnes^, p. 67. That none receive the holy Ghost
but true Believers in Christ crucified, p. 7^. Concerning Perfection, and how
gradually attainable, p. 72. Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, general
Day if Judgment, and Christ's last Coming and Appearance without us to judge he
Quick and the Dead, p. 89. Concerning the New Heavens and New Earth, what they
are, and time of the Conflagration of this World, p. 122. Concerning the state
of the Church before she entered into the Wild^rness, her state in the
Wilderness, and the Manner and Time of her full Restoration, p. 133 The
Mystical Week* or a twofold Analogical Paraphrase or Exposition on the 7 Days
of the Creation, p. 163. Some Positions* and Queries concerning Water Baptism
and the outward Supper, p. 173.
A Preface to the Friendly Reader.
Friendly Reader,
BEfore thy Perusal of the following Treatise, to prevent Mistakes, and to
further thy profiting by reading the same, there are some particulars, which I
desire to lay before thee, and earnestly recommend to thy serious
Consideration, 1st, That the many Errors in Doctrine which I have in this
Treatise undertaken (by Gods help) to correct, and discover their contrariety
to the holy Scriptures, I neither have charged, nor do charge them upon any
present People any where called Ch^istians, in any place of the World,
excepting only these called Ranters, w^o, (because o^ their Impious and
Blasphemous Doctrines and Principles) deserve not to be called or esteemed Men,
far less to be classed among the lowest sort of these called Christians. And to
shun all occasion of giving O^fence to any who have the least Tenderness and
Sincerity toward God* Truth and Rig^teousness, I have named none by Name,
belonging to any Society o^ People; It Is true, I mention some Old Heresies, and
the Names of such as did abet them, as Palagius and Eutyches, whose Errors some
particular Persons in our present Age, to my certain Knowledge, do too much
embrace, through the great Ignorance, and want of a right Understanding; and
though the first abettors of such Errors be dead and gone, yet it is needful
that the Errors at least be witnessed against, and that Ignorant and Unwary
Souls be cautioned against t^em; for it is the stratagem and subtilty of Satan,
among other his subtle and mysterious Workings, to revive Old Heresies and
Errors, formerly condemned by the Spirit of Truth in faithful Witnesses of
Christ, as well as to invent New ones. And as I charge not the Errors hereafter
Corrected, to any whole Society of People in Christendom, so nor wo^ld I be in
the least understood to charge any one of these upon that w^ole Society o^
People, who have been eminently and mani^estly raised up by the mighty Power
and Spirit of God, to bear their faithful Testimony, (according to what they
have livingly witnessed) unto God, and Christ, and the holy Spirit, their
inward Teachings, and to that blessed divine and heavenly Appearance of God and
Christ in their Hearts, to the Truth of which many are raised to bear a blessed
and faithful Testimony, and many more will in due time be raised, but as Paul
said long ago, That all are not Israel which are called Israel; nor were all
true Christians in Paul's time, who called them^elve^ Christians, or were ^o
called by others; for there were in the very days of the Apostles who had the
Name and Form of Christian Pro^ession, b^t were (...) in the Nature and Li^e
(...); and gross and hurt^ul Erro^s b^gan to take place among these called
Ch^istians, who generally in that Day (...) ended to the inward Teachings of
the Spirit, as in the Church of ^o^inth, some did greatly err concerning the
Resurrection of the Dead, and among the G^latians, some did greatly Err
concerning the way and manner of Justification; and too many of the Jews, that
professed to believe in Christ Jesus, in the days of the Apostles, urged the
Necessity of Circumcision, and the Observation of Jewish Days, and other Jewish
Rites, Types and Shadows, all which ended in Christ. So in this our Age, and
more especially even o^ late Years (since the Lord raised up many faithful
Servants and Witnesses to his bl^ss^d Truth, and bl^ssed inward heavenly and
divine Appearance, by the Light and Life of his Son Christ Jesus, and of his
holy Spirit in their Hearts, and whose Testimony God has greatly blessed, and
yet will more abundantly bless, to the ^urning many Thousands from D^rkness to
Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, many of which ^aith^ul Witnesses and
Brethren are fallen a sleep, and rest with Christ, and diverse of whom, even who
were the first, do yet remain to this day.) I say, beside these faithful
Witn^sses and Brethren o^ the Lords raising, there have been others, who have
appeared, ^^to the great grief of the faithful) who have in words and show, as
much as any other, pretended to the inward Teachings of the Spirit, and to
Christ's Light and Life within, and have got the words and form of Truth in
their Mouths, Lips and Pens, in diverse things, but altogether out of the Life
and Spirit of Truth; and though such have the words of the Power of God o^t in
their Mouths, yet Satan's Power too much rules in their hearts; and though
they talk of the Light of Christ, as he lights every Man that comes into the
World, and pretend to direct and turn Men to it, yet walk in Darkness
themselves; and these have been and are a great occasion of Grief to the
faithful and true Witnesses of the Light and Life o^ Christ.

But as some at this day do greatly profess the Spirit's Teachings, and the
Light and Life of Christ inwardly revealed, that are not in the least measure
gathered into the Life and Possession of what they pro^ess, and pretend to
preach and teach, against which faithful Witnesses of Truth have been
constrained to declare, and warn the simple concerning them; so there have been
others, and are at present, who have had some measure of Convincement, by the
Light and Spirit of Truth in them, (...) have felt in measure the Power and
Operation of (...) to begin a good Work (...), and have known in measure the
pure Judgments of the Lord against sin, and the Spirit of Judgment and Burning
ki^dled in them, to destroy the sins and lusts that had place and rule in them;
but such not abiding the Work of Judgment long enough, and not staying long
eno^gh in Christ's School, and under Christ's Teachings in their hearts, until
(...) had duly learned the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and the
Doctrine of Christ, do remain Ignorant in many needful things of Doctrine, and
so have spoken and given forth unsound words of Doctrine, contrary to the
Truth, to the stumbling of many against the Truth, and the faithful Witnesses
of it; and which is still worse, some of these are VVillfull, Heady and
Headstrong in their Self-will, and will scarce bear to be admonished, or
better instructed and helped by their Brethren who are of a better and more
sound Understanding, pretending, They are taught o^ God, and need not Man to
teach them; and such seem with great Zeal to preach the Light within, and
Christ and the Spirit within, and have great pretenses to high Enjoyments of
the Spirit, and great inward divine Revelations, when their gross Ignorance in
many necessary and principal things of Christian Doctrine declared plainly in
the holy Scriptures) do sufficiently demonstrate they have but little
Experience of the Spirit of Christ, either of his Teachings or Workings; ^or
the Spirit of Christ is a Spirit of Light, Wisdom, Knowle^ge and Understanding,
and also, a Spirit of Holiness, Humility and Love; and therefor whoever have
much Experience of it, and are fitted and qualifi^d d^ely to be Teachers of
others, they witness it to be their Teacher, so as to give them a true and
so^nd Knowledge, at least in the most Necessary Things, and first Principles of
Ch^i^tian Doctrine, and also greatly to incline them to Humility, Love and
Tenderness and to be ready to hearken to the good Advice and Counsel of the
Spirit of God in faithful Brethren, who are o^ greater Experience in the Truth.

But the Ignorance and Defects of some, either really belonging to a Society of
People, or pretending to belong unto them, are not to be cast or charged upon
the whole Society, unless after due Notice, they cloak, cover and connive at
them. It were indeed greatly to be wished, that (among all that pretend to the
Teachings of the Light and Spirit of Christ within) as there were none to be
^ound of a blame wort^y Conversation, so there were none that were Ignorant o^
the first and most necessary Principles, at least, of the Christian Doctrine.

But lest any should think that I have undertaken the Correction of these
Errors in vain, and without a^y just occasion o^ ground given unto me, I do
solemnly declare, That i^ I had not ^ound great and just occasion given me, by
the Ignorance, Blindness and Darknes^ (...) many, in all these things
here^f^er-mentioned, some in some things, (...) in others t^o^gh per^aps not
any one in all, but yet in many of them) I (...) not (...) in this Undertaking;
for to my great A^^onishin^^, as (...) as Grief, I have fo^nd, ^^to my ce^tain
Knowledge) too ma^y in (...) places in the Wo^ld, where my Lot has been to
travel in the Service o^ Truth, greatly igno^ant, bli^d, dark and unbelieving
in all these Things ^ereafter mentioned and and corrected, and yet pretending
much to the inward ^eachi^g^ of the Spirit and Light of Christ, as if they were
taught these (...) Er^o^s by the same, which is a great Reproach and Dishonor
to (...) of (...). And I can and do further say, That the Love o^ the Tru^^,
and Z^al or it, as well as the Compassion that God has begot in me, to many
Ignorant and Erring Souls, who are deceived with these Errors, to my (...)
knowledge, which I have had by my frequent Conversation wit^ them, has drawn
and moved me to this Undertaking, wherein, I ^ope, to Gods Praise, I can say, I
have ^ound the Lord assis^^ng me, as to the ma^n, and whereof I ^ope the
Judicious and Intelligent Readers, who can savor the Truth, will gi^e an
Acknowledgement.

2dly, If in any things here delivered by me, and which I have in Love and good
Will declared, for the Detection of Error, and Discovery and Vindicat^on of
Truth, any that read this Treatise, dissent from (...) in some or many things,
I earnestly beseech and entreat them, not to be hasty to reject them, but with
their Minds retired to that Spirit of Truth, that teaches all Truth, and a
diligent searching the holy Scriptures, brought by me, and other Scriptures
that are of the same Tendency, they would impartially Examine and Try all
things; for though the Spirit of Christ be the great Teacher of his People, yet
he is pleased to make Use of the holy Scriptures, which have proceeded from
him, as Orgains or Instruments in his hand, whereby to open the Understandings
of People; for it is said of Christ, That he opened the Understandings of the
Disciples, to understand the Scriptures, and the things concerning himself
written therein. And though I am well ^ss^red, that as to all the main and
principal Things here delivered and ass^^ted by me, I have a sound Persuasion
and Faith given me of the Lord, and have given forth nothing contrary to my
Persuasion, yet I will not be so presumptuous or abounding in my own Judgment
or Persuasion, but to acknowledge, it is possible, that in some things of
lesser Matter, and out reaching the main or principal Doctrines of the
Christian Faith, but that are Circumstantial, I may receive better Information,
and if any can give it to me, or shall offer to give it to me, in a Christian
Spirit, I shall, I hope, tenderly, and as becomes a Christian, in a Christian
Spirit, receive it, and acknowledge their Love in the same, for although I
believe that all the Teachings of the Spirit of Christ are Infallible, and that
in many Things, yea, in all Things of greatest weight, I have received that
Infallible Teaching of the Spirit of Christ, and have the Mind of Christ, that
is Infallible, as to the main, to wit, the Foundation, Christ Jesus, and Things
of Faith, that are Fundamental; yet in other things, both I and others far
better than I, may receive some Correction and better Information; for I know
no M^n upon Earth, even the best, that is absolutely and in all respects
Infallible. And whatever I have here or any where else delivered, in any Books
or Treatises o^ mine, that have been published to the World, as I do with all
Humility submit t^em to be tried by the Spirit of Truth within, so to the Holy
Scriptures of Truth without, as the Only and Supreme outward Rule, Test and
Touchstone of all Doctrines belonging to Matters of Religion; so that whatever
Doctrine is held by any Man whomsoever, let his Pretenses be ever so great or
high to the Teaching and Inspiration of the Spirit within him, it is to be
tried by the Rule and Touchstone of the holy Scriptures, and if it be true,
will be found agreeable thereunto; but if it be disagreeable to the holy
Scriptures, it is not of God; for the inward Testimony of the holy Spirit and
outward Testimony of the holy Scriptures do always agree, and that in most
perfect Unity, as proceeding from One Author, the Spirit of God, the Fountain
of all Truth.

3dly, If in any things I may have seemed to have erred, in any Matters here
delivered, and that by so doing, any Error of mine, or Errors su^posed (...)
such (for I hope I have not erred in any thing here delivered* and I am sure I
hold no Error wilfully; nor have I ass^rted any thing but after having used
great Wariness and Deliberation, and both giving diligent Attention, (so far a^
my small measure of Ability does reach) to the divine Gift in my Heart, and
also to a serious and judicious searching in the holy Scriptures, (with earnest
Prayer unto God) and that not only in our Mothers Tongue, but for most part
comparing the Translation with both the Hebrew in the Old Testament, and the
Greek in the New, where, in any part I did suspect a defect in the Translation)
do give any seeming Occasion of Offense to any, I earnestly entreat all
Readers, that have any such Offense, at any thing that may seem amiss or
contrary to the sound and who^^om Doctrine of the holy Scripture, that they
charge it wholly upon me, and wholly impate it to my Weakness alone; but that
they may do bot^ me and themselves that Justice, That they change it not upon
any Society of People whatsoever in any price of the World* for what I have
here delivered, I do not deliver as Personating or representing any Society of
People whatsoever; Alt^ough I we^^ know, and am well ass^red, That I have many
Hundreds, (...), I believe Thousands, that are of one Faith with me in all
these things that are (...) any considerable Moment, yet I am so tender of
them, that I wo^ld have none of my Defaults, whether real or supposed, charged
upon a^y but my self.

To conclude; I hope the Readers will take it in good part that they find (...)
Over-co^^ident, so is to lay all and every thing here ass^rted by me, both or
Mat^er and Manner, upon the Spirit of Truth, w^ic^ too many too (...) do; but I
rather l^ave all to the impartial (...), and what they find to be from the
Spirit of Truth, Let the God of Truth alone have the Honor of it, through
Jesus Christ.

G. K.

The Printer's Advertisement.
Friendly Reader;
THe Author's absence from the Press has occasioned some Errors, which thou art
desired to amend, as thou finds them occur. Those that have come to my
Observation, upon a second Perusal, I have here noted; the rest (as aforesaid)
pray excuse and mend. Some Difficulties also happened in the Copy of the
Chronology, which (though it passed the Press with great care) must be
submitted to the Authors scrutiny.

ERRATA.
PAge 16. line 23. read Pu^uma. p. 35. l 22. r. sown in. p. 42. l. 3^. r. and*
p. 57. l. 31. r. are to be. p. 65. l. 37. for ascended r. descended, p. 69. l
26 for circumcised r. uncircumcised. p. 99. l. 11. r. Transfiguration. p. 117.
l. 32. r. Acts 3.20.

Truth advanced above Error: Or, A Correction of many very dangerous and
hurtful Errors, entertained by some, as Articles of Sound Doctrine, which yet
are false Doctrine, and contradict the holy Scriptures, relating to many of the
first Principles, and chief and most necessary things of the Christian Faith
and Religion.
ERROR I.

THat People should not be earnest to seek after or search into further
Discoveries of divine Knowledge, because ( as some allege) they know enough
already, if they be faithful to what they know; And to seek or search after
Knowledge of divine Mysteries, has an evil Tendency to make People airy, proud
and fantastical.

CORRECTION.

Things should be rightly distinguished; there is a right and wrong seeking and
searching after Knowledge: The right seeking proceeds from a real drawing and
inclination of the Spirit of God, moving Souls to seek after a further increase
of divine Knowledge; and the true manner of seeking after the same, is by
frequent Prayer, silent Waiting, Meditation, Reading in the holy Scriptures,
and other good Books, and Conference with Pious Men, endued with good
Knowledge, and by using all other helps and means, both inward and outward, by
and with the aid, assistance, and help of Gods Spirit, as it is inwardly
revealed and felt. And seeing we are commanded to grow both in Grace and
Knowledge, we are to seek after a further increase of Knowledge, as well as of
Grace; and as no man is so Holy, but that he may and ought to be more Holy, so
is none so Knowing in the things of God, but he may still know much more; for
there is no end of the Treasures of divine Knowledge and Wisdom. And though
such who are unfaithful should rather be faithful to what they know, than
(remaining unfaithful) to seek after more Knowledge, and that the way to attain
to further Knowledge, is to be faithful in what is already made known; yet
there are many who pretend to know enough, are really very Ignorant of many
necessary things, and their Ignorance is a hinderance to their faithfulness;
whereas if they had more real and sollid Knowledge, it would greatly help them
to be more faithful unto God; for true divine Knowledge, received in the Spirit
of Truth, and held in the some, does greatly tend to promote and increase real
Holiness in men; for the more we truly know God, the more we love him; and the
more we love him, we are the more Obedient unto him, and conform to the Image
of his Son. And though it is said to be a (...) held by many in the Church of
Rome, That Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, yet this is renounced by all
true Protestants; and it is good Protestant Doctrine, That the Scriptures are
to be read and searched by all, with the help of the unerring Spirit of Truth,
that did dictate them, that every one may be able to give an account of the
Hope that is in him. And God is a God of Knowledge, and his Spirit is called in
Scripture, The Spirit of Knowledge and Understanding, and therefore the more we
know truly of God and Christ and divine Things, (if we be faithful to what we
know) the more we are like unto God, True Divine Knowledge being a part of his
Image. And the proper tendency of all true divine living Knowledge of God and
divine Things is to make men truly Humble, sollid and weighty; but Ignorance,
and dead and dry Knowledge, empty of Life, and without the true Love of God and
our Neighbor, which is Knowledge or Science, falsely so called, does puff up
into Pride, and that is only that Knowledge which Paul said does puff up. The
holy Scripture does greatly condemn Ignorance, and abounds with the praise of
true divine Knowledge; and the true divine Wisdom inviteth men, To search and
seek after her as for hidden Treasure. And wherefore are so many great and
precious divine Mysteries wrapped up in the Savings of the holy Scriptures, but
that men should search after them? for as it is the Glory of God to hide a
thing, it is the Glory of a King ( viz. who has overcome his Lusts and rules
over his own Spirit) to find it out, as the Scripture declares* And it is one
great part of the Spirits Work to open the holy Scriptures, and the deep things
that are testified of in them: And Christ said, There is nothing hid that shall
not be revealed; and God has promised, That Knowledge shall greatly increase,
even to fill the Earth, as the Waters fill and cover the Sea; And the Prophets
are commended in Scripture by Peter, That they searched diligently concerning
the Coming of Christ, and his Sufferings, and the Time thereof, and the Glory
that should follow. And therefore the right manner of seeking and searching
after an Increase of true divine Knowledge, so as to understand many places of
Scripture, both relating to Doctrines and Prophecies, to wit, by the help of
Gods Spirit, accompanying all our endeavors, is both necessary and
commendable; for whatever many think of their Seize in divine Knowledge,
it is most certain, there is very much does remain to be attained, beyond what
the most knowing has as yet reached unto. And though men may be good Christians
who are not endued with great Knowledge of divine Things, yet the first
Principles of Christian Doctrine are altogether necessary to be known to every
true Christian, and if any be in danger to be exalted by the abundance of
Revelations, as was Paul's case, that is not to be imputed unto divine
Revelation, but unto humane Weakness, for men may also be in danger to be
lifted up with their Services and Sufferings, and other good Gifts of God;
which proceeds from humane Weakness.

Error 2. That we stand by Faith, and not by Knowledge; and therefore Knowledge
of divine Mysteries is not necessary, nor much desirable.

Correction. The Scripture says, We stand by Faith, but it no where says,
that we stand by Faith only, excluding Knowledge; and it is altogether
unscriptural, as well as unreasonable to set Faith (...) Knowledge in
Opposition; for true Faith is not a blind assent to (...) Truth, but has
Knowledge accompanying it, and does either (...) suppose or include it. And
when the Scripture says, We stand by Faith, it can have no further
unde^standing than this, That Faith is an instrument and mean of our standing,
for God and Christ is the principal Cause and Author of our standing, and Faith
the Instrument; and as Faith is one Instrument and Mean of our standing,
Knowledge is another Instrument and mean of the same. And therefore Paul does
join Faith and Knowledge together, as mutual helps and m^ans of our standing
and stability in the (...) (sai^ he we all come to the Unity of the Faith, and
knowledge o^ the Son of God, unto a perfect man, etc. that we be no more as
Children, ^ossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.13, 14. And
experience does abundantly prove it, That true divine sollid Knowledge (as well
as Faith) is a great mean and Instrument of men's being preserved in the Truth;
for who are most ready and liable to be, carried away and tossed with every
wind of Doctrine, but Ignorant and Unstable Souls, whom Satan and his
Instruments deceive, for want of true divine Knowledge; whereas men of sollid
Knowledge and Understanding, and of a good Judgment in divine Things, are
generally preserved sound and firm in the Way of Truth. And certainly Ignorance
is the Mother of all Error of Understanding; and as all Error is hurtful, so
many Errors are exceeding hurtful to Mankind, when received. And since all
Mankind is ruled and led into all their Actions by Persuasions, good or bad, it
does greatly concern all men to have sound and true Persuasions of things; for
false Persuasions lead men to bad Actions, and the best ^ay for men to be free
of false Persuasions, is to have a good measure of sound Knowledge; for as
false and evil Persuasions (the Daughters of Ignorance) mis-lead men, and cause
them to go astray in their Actions, so good Persuasions (the Daughters of true
Knowledge) lead men in the right way, wherein they should walk, and have a very
great Influence upon the Actions of men, to make them good, and render them
worthy and acceptable to God.

Error 3. That since God does immediately reveal and teach People what is
necessary to be known, as he taught the Prophets and Apostles, therefore there
is little use of the Scriptures to such, and men need not much read or meditate
on what they read in the Scriptures, for attaining divine Knowledge; it will
come abundantly unto them without Reading, or outward Hearing, or Meditation,
by divine Inspiration in silent Waiting upon God. And such who Preach need not
read the Scriptures, to be so much as an Instrument to help them to preach; for
Immediate Revelation, and Immediate Teaching, to such who are come to it,
makes the Use of all Books, and all outward Helps needless and superfluous.

Correction. It is a very wrong and false sense and understanding of Immediate
Divine Revelation and Immediate Teaching of Gods Spirit, as if it did exclude
or make void, in any measure, the use of the holy Scriptures, or any other
outward means and helps of true Knowledge that God has appointed; for the word
[ Immediate] is not exclusive of means but inclusive, so that the Spirit's
inward Revelation and Illumination, Operation and Influence, must be joined
with all means and Instruments used by us, otherwise they are altogether
ineffectual and unprofitable. And though frequently God does give to his dear
Children a sensible and experimental Knowledge of himself, in the enjoyment of
his Love, Life and Power, and divine Goodness in their hearts, so as to feel,
to savor and taste of the same, that exceeds all Words and outward
Testimonies, and Means whatsoever, and is often communicated when their is no
present use made of outward Means, of any sort, but in a deep and profound
inward Silence, Quiet and Stillness of Soul; yet it is not always so, but as
the Lord pleases he does convey to the Souls of his Children the sensible and
experimental Knowledge of Himself, and most precious Tastings and Feelings of
his divine Love, Life and Power, and divine Presence, sometimes in the Use of
outward Hearing* Reading, Meditation, Prayer, and sometimes in pure silent
Waiting and inward Stillness.

But for the further opening and clearing the matter, let the following Things
be well and duly considered,

1 st. There is a twofold Branch of true divine Knowledge, one Doctrinal and
Discursive, the other Sensible and Intuitive; These two are both most necessary
to all Christians, and they contribute mutually the one to the other, and the
Doctrinal Knowledge does prepare the Soul to receive the Sensible, and is as
the Husband-mans Laboring with his Instruments of Husbandry to raise Bread and
other Provisions for him to eat.

2 dly. Although the Knowledge of God, as a Creator, in great part, together
with the Knowledge of many Duties and Sins, common to us with the Gentiles,
(who have not the Scriptures) may be had by us, only and altogether by inward
divine Revelation, without the Scriptures (as the Experience of the Gentile
Philosophers does sufficiently witness) accompanied with their using the Books
of Creation and Providence, who by the same did also attain to the Knowledge of
many good and precious Truths, as of the Immortality of the Soul, and that
there were Future Rewards for good men after Death, and future Punishments for
bad men, yet the Knowledge of God in Christ, as he is come in the Flesh, and
dyed for our sins and rose again for our Justification, and his Ascension into
Heaven, and Intercession for us in Heaven, and of his Return to judge the quick
and the dead at the great Day, and of the Resurrection of the Body, both of
Just and Unjust, with all other Doctrines peculiar to the Christian Faith and
Religion, as such, is not made known to us, in Gods ordinary way of working, by
the Inward Teaching, Revelation, and Inspiration of the Spirit, without the use
of the holy Scriptures, but in and through the same, as Instruments in the hand
and management of the Spirit, inwardly inspiring, revealing, teaching and
working, which yet may well be allowed to be (in a true sense) Immediate, not
excluding, but including the use of the holy Scriptures, and all other Means
and Helps of true Knowledge, as when a Master teaches his Scho^lars both by
word of Mouth, or vive Voce, and also makes use of Books, and has his Ushers,
himself being also present, and teaching, together with them. And even the
Prophets and Apostles in many things were helped and furthered in divine
Knowledge by one another, and especially the latter by the former. But it is to
be granted, that both the Prophets and Apostles were taught many things of
Doctrine without all outward Teaching and Means whatsoever; but for us to
presume to such a thing, as to ^e taught the Doctrines of the Christian Faith
and Religion, only by the Spirit of God, excluding the use and service of the
holy Scriptures, is certainly to tempt God, and provoke him; and therefore men
should be sober and wise in what they say or think in that matter. Nor is it at
all safe for any in our Day to equal themselves to the Prophets and Apostles of
God, who were made Instruments to commit to Writing the holy Scriptures, for
they were extraordinarily chosen, fitted and endued to so great a Work, and had
extraordinary Revelations, and were greater and more eminent Members in the
Body of Christ than any of us are or can be. And if any think they can preach
well enough without Reading or Meditating in the holy Scriptures: when they
speak in Tongues and Languages, that they never learned, and have other
extraordinary Gifts, that the Prophets and Apostles had, it is time enough to
believe them, but not till then; for we find by experience, that the Words
that men use in Preaching (how much soever they are endued and assisted by the
Spirit) they have learned them and received them, more or less, by outward
Hearing or Reading (unless it may be said, that some perhaps coin some few
words that are new and unusual) and every sentence of Scripture that they
mention in Preaching, they have received it either by outward Hearing or
Reading, though often men may forget when or how they did so receive them, and may
not remember that some sayings of Scripture are really contained in the same,
which has occasioned some ignorantly to affirm, They had these Sayings and
Sentences without all Hearing or Reading of Scripture; which is their great
mistake. God has given the holy Scriptures to be a great Blessing and Help, as
to all Christians in general, so to all Preachers, that out of the same, as out
of a most rich Storehouse, they may be furnished with whatever is profitable
unto them, to preach to People for Doctrine, That the Man of God may be
perfect, and thoroughly furnished unto every good Work; and it pleases God to
accompany the Scripture Words in the Mouths of faithful Preachers, and make
them as Instruments and Conduits of his Spirit, and Life, and divine Power, and
Presence; and certainly he is the best and most able Minister of the Gospel who
is both Mighty in the Spirit and also in the holy Scriptures, and has the
Spirit of God and a spiritual Gift and Ability given him in the Spirit, in a
Doctrinal way to open and expound them unto People, as well as to use them in
Exhortation, Reproof, Correction, etc. and therefore Paul did confess, That
what was formerly writ was writ for his Learning, and his Brethren, and he
desired Timothy, That together with his giving Attendance to the Gift of Gods
holy Spirit in him, he would give himself also to Reading; and that surely was
in the holy Scriptures, so much as then was extant. And Paul further declares
in the Epistle to the Romans, That the Preaching of the Gospel, according to
the Revelation of the Mystery that was hid from the beginning of the World,
(viz. in great part) according to the Commandment of the great God, was now to
be made known to all Nations, for the Obedience of the Faith, by the Scriptures
of the Prophets. And John declared, That what he had writ, was, that men might
believe, and believing may have Li^e, thro^gh his Name. It is a woeful and
hurtful Mistake to run so into Extremes, as many do, some wholly resting in the
Letter of the Scripture, and neglecting, yea, blaspheming against the inward
Teaching of the Spirit of God, Others, on a pretense of trusting to the Spirit,
rejecting or slighting too much the holy Scriptures, and laying aside either
altogether, or too much, the due Use of them. But the only safe way, is, to
walk in the midst of both these dangerous Extremes, which is in the Leadings of
the Lord, to j^yn both together, and to use the Scriptures in Reading,
Meditation, Preaching, Praying, Thanksgiving, as the Spirit of the Lord is
felt to move, and accompany the due Use of them.

But although every true Minister of Christ is to read, or to hear some read to
him, and to meditate or study in the holy Scriptures, by the aid and help of
the holy Spirit inwardly enlightening and inspiring him, yet he ought not to
prepare a Form of Words beforehand wherewith to Preach or Pray, nor to speak
in his own Will or Time what has been formerly opened unto him, but as a good
and faithful Steward in the House of God, and as a good Scribe instructed well
in the things of Gods Kingdom, being well stored with Knowledge of divine
Truth, and other Ministerial Induements and Qualifications, he is to wait upon
God in pure Silence of heart, to be guided by his Spirit, and feel the Motion
and Opening of his Life, What, and When, and How much to speak; and the only
best Preparation for a Minister of Christ to Preach, is to be as a ready
Instrument in the hand and management of the Spirit, that Christ and the holy
Spirit may speak in him to the Hearers, and may make use of his Heart,
Understanding, Knowledge, Judgment, Memory, Mouth, Tongue and Lips, as his
Organs and Instruments, and not otherwise; for only such Preaching does avail,
as having a Ministration both of Life in it to quicken, and of Light to
enlighten the Hearts and Understandings of the Hearers: And here, as the
Minister waits in pure Silence, the Spirit of God presents to him the
Matter or Subject of his Preaching, and seasonably and livingly brings to his
Remembrance what he has formerly read or heard, or had opened to him by the
Spirit, and often also furnishes him with many new, precious, living and
refreshing Openings, that are both New to himself and the Hearers. And thus the
good Scribe, instructed in the Kingdom of God, brings forth out of the good
Treasure of his Heart, good Things, both New and Old.

And though Doctrinal Truths of the Gospel are not revealed to men, in Gods
ordinary way, without the Scriptures, concurring at least with the Spirit, as
an Instrument and Organ, yet other things relating to the Souls inward state,
and counselling them in the weighty Affairs of Humane Life, as in Marriage,
Traveling from place to place, Calling to our outward Vocation in the World,
etc. and many the like Cases are made known to the Souls of such, by inward
divine Revelation, who live and walk in great Tenderness, Sincerity, Humility
and Nearness unto God; but as for such who live too Carnally and Dissolutely,
it is great Presumption to expect such Revelations, and too many deceive
themselves with Imaginations, and are deceived with Diabolical Suggestions,
which they embrace as divine Revelations, for want of a due inward Purification
of Soul, that clouds them so, that they have not a right discerning in such
Cases, to distinguish betwixt Imagination and Diabolical Delusion on the one
hand, and real divine Inspiration and Revelation on the other.

And whereas it has been affirmed by some, That they have known Doctrinal
Truths of the Gospel so by divine inward Revelation, that they cannot allow the
Scriptures so much as to have been the Instrument of the Spirit to give them
that Knowledge, and should have known these things if they had never heard men,
nor read on a Book. It is certainly too great Presumption, and greater Sobriety
and Moderation in that case were more becoming and safe for them; for the plain
tendency of that false Persuasion is to lift up into spiritual Pride and vain
Glory, and to slight and neglect those means and helps that God has graciously
provided for them.

Error 4. That as God has not absolutely Reprobated any Souls of Men, or
decreed them before the World began to eternal or perpetual Destruction, so nor
has he Chosen any Souls of Men before the Foundation o^ the World to Holiness
and Perseverence therein, and through Holiness and Perseverence in the same, to
Everlasting Life; but has left all Souls of Men to an indifferent Choice,
either by an Indifference of Will to choose Holiness, and Life Eternal, or Sin
and Unholiness, and Eternal Destruction. And according to this Persuasion, as
there is no Reprobation of any Souls, so nor is there any Election of any
Souls, either to Holiness or Life Eternal, but all the Election of Souls is
merely Conditional, as to say there is such a state chosen of God, etc.

Correction. Although I am well persuaded there is no absolute Reprobation of
any Souls of the Children of Adam, or decree of Eternal Destruction past upon
them that is absolute, but only such as is Conditional and Relative unto their
final State in Sin and Unbelief, yet I am well and fully persuaded, there is an
Election of Souls and Seeds, that is certain, to wit, That God has chosen all
such Souls of Mankind who shall be saved from the beginning of the World, to
the End of it, both to Faith and Holiness, as the means, and to Eternal Life
(...) Happiness as the End to be obtained by the said Means, and that in all
Souls that are to be saved; although both Holiness and Eternal Life is to be
their free Choice, yet that Choice is not a bare indifferent or contingent and
accidental Choice, but God has most certainly and absolutely purposed to work
that free Choice in them, both to Holiness as the Means, and to Eternal Life
and Happiness, as the End to be (in due time) obtained by the said Means. And
this is the plain Doctrine of the Apostle Paul, as is to me very plain and
clear, and is made exceeding Comfortable unto me, by a measure of the same
Spirit that dwelt in him, and did distate these gracious Words through him,
Romans 8. For whom he did Foreknow, them he did Predestinate to be Conform to
the Image of his Son; and whom he did Predestinate, them he Called, and whom he
Called, them he Justified, and whom he Justified, them he Glorified. These
Words are called by some, A Golden Chain, consisting of certain very sure and
firm Links, none of them depending on the uncertain Motion of the mere
indifferent Will of Man, but on the free Love and Grace of God, given to Gods
Elect in Christ Jesus before the World began. And agreeable to this is that of
the same Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 1.4. He has Chosen us in Christ Jesus before the
Foundation of the World, to be Holy and without Blame before him in Love. On
which place Augustine well observed above Twelve Hundred Years ago, That it is
not said, God has chosen us for our foreseen Faith and Holiness, but in has
chosen us To be Holy. So that our Faith and Holiness is who^ly the Effect of
Gods Election, and not at all the Cause or Condition of it. Which does most
excellently agree with Christ's Doctrine, to his Disciples, saying, Ye have not
Chosen me, but I have Chosen you, and appointed you to bring forth Fruit, and
that your Fruit should remain. Where both Holiness and Perseverance are the
Effects of Christ's Choice, by his plain Doctrine. Many other Scriptures might
be cited to confirm this, but let this suffice.

And thus though we read, That God has Chosen some to be Holy, before the
World began, yet we no where read that God has appointed any to be Unholy;
for men's Holiness is the Effect of Gods Love and Purpose; but men's Unholiness
and Sin, and continuance therein, is only by Gods Permission, whereof they
only, and not God, are the Cause; and therefore true Religion obliges us to
ascribe all our Good unto God, but all men's Evil to themselves. And as for that
Conditional Election, as it is not a Scripture Phrase, so it does not agree
with Scripture, but is contradictory unto it; for if such a Conditional
Election were, it would be general or universal, and comprehend all Mankind;
for why are one part more than another, seeing Eternal Life and Salvation are
held forth Conditionally to all? but the Scripture no where holds forth a
general Election, but only of some; and therefore Christ taught, that though
Many are called, yet few are Chosen. Now this cannot be a Conditional Election;
for it would not be good sense to say, few or some are conditionally Elected.
But whether God's Election be only Gods Decree, or somewhat super-added by way
of Effect to the same, as importing a selection or setting a part certain
Souls, as contained in Adam, to Everlasting Life and Happiness, in Christ their
proper Head and Root, I shall not at present meddle to determine.

This so precious and comfortable Doctrine of Election ought not to be laid
aside, as a thing either too hard to be understood or believed, or
unprofitable, as some are ready to suggest. But on the contrary, it is a
Doctrine worthy of all Acceptance, and such as gives great occasion to all
Gods Children exceedingly to love, praise and admire him for his peculiar Love
and Fav^our, and peculiar Fatherly Care and Providence toward them; and this
Use Paul makes of it, writing to the Thessalonions, saying, But we are bound
to give Thanks always unto God for you, Brethren, because God has from the
beginning Chosen you, etc. And if it be not opened to any, they are to pray to
God, that he may open it to them by his Spirit, that so they may have the
comfort and benefit of it. And if Election were only Conditional, why did Paul
exhort Believers, To give all diligence to make their Calling and Election
sure; for how can that which is only Conditional be made sure to some, more
than others? Now he presses them To make it sure, to wit, that they might have
the assured Knowledge of it, not that it was not sure unto God; for as Paul
has declared, The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, etc. and
this Foundation is Gods Everlasting Love in his Son Christ Jesus, who has
loved and chosen them in him, as his Members before the World began; and though
they lapsed and fell from him their Head, yet he is sent of the Father to
recover and save them all and every one of them, so that not one of his Elect
shall be utterly or finally lost, but all found, and recovered, and restored
before the end of the World, so that not one Grain ( Amos 9.9.) of his true
Israel shall be lost; for they were given to him, and their Names are written
in the Book of Life before the World began.

Error 5. That the Elect Seed is only Christ, and the Reprobate Seed is only
the Serpent, or the Devil; and when any come into Christ by Faith, they come
into the Election, and may be said to be Elected, but not before; but when they
depart from him, or are not come to him, they may be said to be Reprobates.

Correction. That Christ is Gods Elect, is most certain, according to
Scripture; but as Christ is the Elect (...), so he has an Elect Body, and
Elect Members, that were giv^^ to him before the Foundation of this World; And
as he is that Elect Stone, living and precious, chosen of God for a sure
Foundation, so there are many Elect Stones, that are to be built upon him, many
whereof already are gathered and built on him, and many are yet scattered and
ungathered, which are all in due time to be gathered unto him, and to be built
upon him before the end of the World; for not one Grain of the Elect Body and
Members of Christ shall be lost, see Amos 9.9. compared with verse. 12. and many
Thousands belong to Gods Election and are his Chosen and Elect, who yet are in
a state of Unbelief, and not yet converted nor saved from sin, as is clear from
Paul'^ Doctrine, who has affirmed, Romans 11. That many of the Unbelieving Jews,
who as touching the Gospel were Enemies, etc. yet as touching the Election were
beloved for the Fathers sake, and were in due time to find Mercy; And Paul
said, He endured all things for the sake of the Elect, that they might be
saved; which plainly proves, That they are Gods Elect before they are saved,
even when they are in a state of Unbelief and Impenitency. And it is absurd,
and contrary to Scripture to say, A Man may pass from Election to Reprobation,
as if Gods Election, and free electing Love and Grace, were a variable thing,
and could change; for as the Scripture declares, The Gifts and Calling of God
are without Repentance; and this is said with a respect to Gods Election, both
of Jews and Gentiles, many of which were at that time remaining in Unbelief and
Impenitency. Nor is the state of Unbelief and Impenitency, simply as such, a
state of Reprobation, so as all Unbelievers are Reprobated, in a strict sense*
for how can men be said to be reprobated and rejected of God, while God is
calling and inviting them by Motions and Allurements of his Love and Li^e in
their Hearts, To come unto him? It Is then only Men become Reprobates, when
their Day of Visitation is expired, and God does cease to strive any more with
them; and therefore a state of final Unbelief and Impenitency only, is (in a
strict sense) a state of Reprobation, and none are Cast-aways or Reprobates but
such as are le^t of God to final Unbelief and Impenitency.

And though it is a true Opening that some have had, That Election and
Reprobation are of Seeds, to wit, that there is an Elect Seed and a Reprobate
Seed. Yet the Elect Seed is not only Christ, but all Souls belonging to him,
that shall be saved from the beginning of the World to the end of it; and the
Devil or Serpent is not only reprobate, but his whole Seed, and all such who at
the end of the World shall with him be cast into the Lake of Fire, which is
the second Death; and these are called in Scripture Bastards, Tares, Dross;
Goats, Dogs, Swine, and Vessels of Wrath fitted (or perfected) unto
Destruction; as Gods Elect People are called in Scripture, Vessels of Mercy,
and chosen Vessels, prepared or fore-appointed unto Glory, and Wheat, ^old,
Sheep, Children of the Kingdom, and Sons and Daughters, even in their dispersed
and scattered state and Condition.

And whereas some think that it will follow, That if some only be Elected, that
others must needs be Reprobated, from Eternity unto Eternity. In that they are
greatly mistaken; for Election signifies only a Selection or Preference of
some before others, and not an absolute Rejection of any, so as that God did
hate any of his Creatures with an absolute Hatred, which is impossible; for God
the Creator loves all his Creatures, as they are his Workmanship, but his Love
is more or less ex^ended and manifested unto them, or hid from them, according
to their several states and capacities; and that the Love of God is more
ex^ended and manifested to such who shall be saved from the beginning of the
World to the end of it, than to such who shall not be saved, is a thing which
all of good Understanding must and ought to acknowledge, to God Eternal Praise,
who has made one to differ from another. And that such who shall not be saved
(...) any time in this World, are called in Scripture Bastards, Tares, Dross,
Goats, Dogs, Seed of the Serpent, Children of the Wicked One, etc. does plainly
import, that as they were not given to Christ, as his Members, from the
beginning, so they are of another Stock and Root than that Adam or Man whom God
created in the beginning Male and Female, in his own Image, and after his
Similitude, and were not contained in him, nor are his Branches, Parts or
Members, (...) are of Adam Belial and the Seed of the Serpent, that was fallen
from the state of his Creation, before Man fell; for the Serpent his Tempting
of the Woman does plainly show, he was fallen from his state wherein God
created him; and this is employed in these words, that he is said to be subtle
or Naked (so the Hebrew) before any Beast of the Field; and by the VVomans
yiedling to his Tentation there came to be that unhappy Mixture betwixt these
two Seeds, viz. the Seed of Man and the Seed of the Serpent; and in order to
effect the perfect Separation of the one from the other, viz. the Wheat from
the Tares, the Gold from the Dross, and the true Seed from the spurious and
bastard, Christ, the Seed of the Woman was promised, and who according to Gods
Promise is come, and will perfectly effect that Separation of the one from the
other before the end of the World, and in many has already effected it, so
that some are wholly the right Seed, having nothing of the bad cleaving to
them; and some are wholly bad, having nothing of the good remaining in them,
being mere Tares, Dross, Dreg and Excrement. The which Doctrine of Election, as
it is high and mysterious, so it is worthy to be enquired into, by the help of
Gods Spirit that searches all things, even the deep things of God; for being
truly understood, as it does give us unspeakable matter to praise God for his
great Love, so it clears to us the Justice of God, and his other glorious
Attributes of his divine Wisdom and Power, to the stopping the Mouths of
Atheists, Blasphemers, and perverse Infidels, and to the affording unto all
Gods dear Children most abundant cause of divine Consolation, as it is inwardly
opened by the holy Spirit, and that Eye is opened in them to read their Names
written in the Book of Life (of the Lamb slain) from the Foundation of the
World. And whence is it, but from God's Election and Predestination that the
Church of God has continued in all Ages of the World, and shall continue to
the end of it, notwithstanding all the Malice and Subtilty of Satan and his
Instruments; for if God had left all men to their mere indifferent Choice to be
Good or Bad, Holy or Unholy, it might have happened that none had been good or
holy, and so the Church had ceased in the World.

Error 6. That in the Godhead, the Father, the Son and the holy Spirit, are but
only distinct Names or Operations toward the Creatures, according to which it
may be said, the Father is the Son, and the Son the Father, and the Father or
Son is the holy Spirit, and the Father was born of a Virgin, and was crucified
for us, and rose again; and also that the holy Ghost or Spirit was born of a
Virgin, was crucified, dyed and rose again.

Correction. All which is exceeding false and corrupt Doctrine, and contrary to
Scripture; for though the Scripture says, The Father, the Son or Word, and the
holy Spirit are one, yet it never says, the Father is the Son, or the Son is
the Father, or that the Word is the holy Spirit, but still holds forth a
clear distinction in manner of being and relation, or Relative Properties
betwixt them; for the Son does not beget the Father, but is begotten of the
Father from Everlasting, and the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and from
the Son from Everlasting; for many things are said to be one, when the one
cannot be predicated or affirmed of the other; as the Soul and Body is one Man,
and yet the Soul is not the Body; and Christ the Son, and the Father are one,
by a most marvelous and high Union, surpassing all created Understanding, yet
the Son is not the Father, but the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the
Father. And the Scripture does not say, the Father was made Flesh, and dwelt
among us, or the holy Ghost was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, but The Word
was made Flesh, etc. And though the Father, and Christ Jesus the Son, as he is
God, be one Being or Essence and Substance with the Father, and of one Nature,
yet as Christ is Man, he has also the true Nature of Man, and his Nature as he
is Man is not the Nature of his Godhead; and Christ as he came in the Flesh,
the promised Seed of the Woman had two Natures, the one of his Godhead, the
other of his Manhood, truly distinct, so that the one Nature is not the other,
nor transmuted or changed into the other (which was the gross Error of the
Eutychians) but most gloriously and inseperably united together forever: And
Christ now in Heaven has his twofold Nature, the one of his Godhead, the other
of his Manhood, so that his Godhead is clothed with our Nature in Heaven, both
of Soul and Body, most exceedingly glorified and exalted above all Angels;
which is the ground of the Hope and great Consolation of all true Christians,
as the Mystery of it is inwardly opened and revealed by the Spirit of Christ in
their hearts, That he is in Heaven ever living to make Intercession for us, and
that he will change us and make us like to him, and receive us to be with him
forever in Heaven, and that we shall enjoy him, and converse with him, as such,
as our Head, Lord and King forever; For though he shall deliver up the Kingdom to
his Father, yet not so as to abdicate or alienate it from himself, but to
retain it, together with his Father in a more excellent manner than has been
witnessed, or is to be witnessed on Earth.

And whereas Christ is called in Scripture, The Everlasting Father, or Father
of Ages, that is to be understood, That he is our Father, but not to confound
that true Relation betwixt him and his Father. And when Christ is called in
Scripture, The Lord that Spirit, and The second Adam, the quickening Spirit,
This does not give the least ground to confound that distinct Relation betwixt
the Word, and the Spirit that proceeds both from the Father and the Word; for
the word [ Spirit] some^ime has a general Signification, according to which
the Father, the Word and the Spirit are One holy pure Eternal Spirit, but
frequently it has a peculiar signification, especially when it is named in
Scripture To Pneuma to Agion, i. e. That Holy Spirit, which is said both to
proceed and to be sent from the Father and the Son. And though it is good and
commendable not to admit the words of man's Wisdom, to apply them to this
Mystery, yet the Mystery it sel^ ought to be with great Religion and Reverence
acknowledged, according to sound words of Scripture; and the right Knowledge
and Faith of it is exceeding ^^^essary to every Christian, and the Faith of it
is a necessary (...) of the Christian Faith, and of great service, both in it
self considered, and as it conduces to help us to u^derstand other great parts
and Doctrines of the Christian Faith, and it self is a Fundamental Doctrine of
the Christian Faith.

Error 7. That the Garden or Paradise where God placed Man when he made him,
was some part of t^is visible Earth that we walk upon, where Adam was to ^ave
wrought with Plough and Hoe, and have raised Grass and (...), and ^ed Cattle to
kill, and eat their flesh: And that the Trees of the Garden were such as did
grow on this visible Earth, called the dry Land; and the Serpent was some
Snake, like the Snakes we see in the Woods.

Correction; All this proceeds from great Ignorance, and want of a spiritual
Opening and Understanding of the holy Scriptures; for Adam by his Fall was
drove out from the Garden to Till the Ground, from whence he was taken; and
therefore it could be no part of the visible Earth; for what pleasant part is
there on all this Globe of the Earth, which men have not access unto, both good
and bad? Also, Paul tells us, that when he was in Paradise he was caught up
into it, whether in the Body or out of the Body he could not tell; and Christ,
the Eternal Wisdom, is called, the Tree of Life, in Scripture, both in the Book
of the Proverbs, and in the Revelation of John; And to him that overcomes, it
is promised, that he shall eat of it. And as man by his sin was drove out from
the Garden, so many by their returning from Sin, to Go^, by true Faith and
Repentance, and having overcome their Sins and Lusts, do in measure witness a
Return into the Garden of God, and eat of the Tree of Life that is in the midst
of the Garden, which Tree is the Life in Christ, the Word. And it may well be
granted, that as Adam's Soul was placed in a Garden, proper and suitable unto
it, so his Body had its Garden of Pleasure, of a suitable Nature (which some
refer to the Work of the First Day, being a Region and place of pure Light,
whose Inhabitants were the Angels of Light, among which man was placed, being
made a little lower than they) even as Christ's Body has its place in Heaven,
and the Bodies of the Saints at the Resurrection of the Dead shall have their
proper places in Heaven, which shall be a most pleasant Garden unto them. But
the Garden where Adams Body was placed before the Fall, is hid from the Eyes of
men; which because of their weakness and frailty, cannot behold it, and it is
not to be revealed until the Resurrection of the Dead, so as to be seen with
Bodily Eyes; for if the frail and weak Eyes of men can scarce behold the Glory
of the visible Sun, how much less can they behold the Glory of the Garden of
God, which is that New Earth that John saw (not with his bodily Eyes, but with
the spiritual Eyes in the Spirit) And as the New Earth is the Paradise for
glorified Bodies, so the New Heavens is the Paradise for glorified Souls, and
the Glory, Life and Virtue of which is Christ, the Eternal Word, by which all
things were created, and in which they consist. And that they are called New
Heaven^ and New Earth (although they were before this visible Earth) has a
weighty Reason in it, not obvious to many, for because they never wax old, and
are not subject to any Corruption or decay, they are worthily called still New.

And that the Serpent was the Devil, is plain from John's Revelation, who
calls him, That Old Serpent the Devil. Moreover, that Adam was to have ^illed
the Ground either with Plow or Hoe to raise Grass or Corn, or feed Cattle in
Paradise, or to kill and eat their Flesh before the Fall, is all false, and
proceeds from great Ignorance and G^osness of Understanding. But some are
deceived with the wrong Translation of the words, that say, God put the Man
into the Garden to [dress] i^, and to keep it; but the word [ Dress] answers
not to the Hebrew, which signifies, To Work in it; for it cannot well be
understood, that it needed dressing, after the manner of our common Gardens.
And man's Food, both for his Soul and Body, was to have been Paradisical,
suitable to his glorious state wherein God made him.

Error 8. Others say, That as Christ was the Tree of Life, so the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil that was forbidden to Man, which was in the midst of
the Garden, was the false Wisdom and Serpent's Subtilty. Others say, Dry and
dead Knowledge, without Life, was it.

Correction. But such little consider, that this Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil, that was forbidden to Adam, did grow in the midst of the Garden, near to
the Tree of Life; and how could the fals^ Wisdom and Serpents subtilty, or dead
and dry Wisdom, have (...) midst of the Garden. Others have had some better
Opening of it, That this Tree was good in it self, but not good for Man to feed
upon. But to be sure the fallen Wisdom and Serpent's Subtilty was not good in
it self, nor is the dry and dead Wisdom or Knowledge, that is empty of Life,
good in it self: All that is only dross or shell. Now admit that Christ the
Word is that Garden, and the Life in the Word is that Tree of Life, What is
there in Christ that is good, but not for Food? Is it not the severe Justice
and Wrath of God, called also in Scripture, The Wrath of him that sits upon the
Throne, and of the Lamb; This is good, excellent and glorious, and yet it is
not goo^ that Man should taste of it, or feed upon it, for it is of a killing
Nature. But such was the love of God to Man, that he would not have Man to know
his Wrath and severe Justice, by any experience, sense, or feeling of it, as
the fallen Angels had already known: He would have Man to know him in his love,
wisdom, power, and all other divine Perfections and Virtues, signified by the
Trees of the Garden, but not that he should feel or taste of his Wrath and
severe Justice, and feed upon it; and this Man behoved to do, if he sinned
against God, by turning away his love from his Maker, to the inordinate love of
created things, that were below him; for this was Man's sin, his turning from
God to the Creature, and from Light to Darkness, the which how soon he did, he
could not but feel the Anger and severe Justice of God against him. So Man by
his being forbid to feed on the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, he was
forbid to sin against God, by turning from God to the Creature; for Judgment
and Wrath is the infallible consequent or concomitant of sin; and so by
forbidding the one, he did forbid the other, as God did plead with Israel of
Old, Turn ye, Turn ye, why will ye dye? for Sin brings Wrath and Death upon
men. And as it is common for Parents to say to Children, Beware of the Rod,
lest ye taste of it, which is equivolent with that, Do not Disobey. And thus
the Lord by Moses set before the Children of Israel Good and Evil, Life and
Death, saying, Choose Life that thou may live. Now the same that is Life to
the Obedient, is Death to the Sinner; The Word is one, but has a twofold
Property, One of Life, to refresh and comfort the Obedient, Another of Wrath
and Death, as a two-edged Sword to kill and afflict the Sinner; The one is the
Property of Goodness, Mercy and Love, the other, of Severity, Wrath and Anger,
which are one in the Word, but branching forth in a twofold Property, as to
men, according to the words in the Psalm, duly translated out of the Hebrew,
Psalm. 62.11, 12. God has spoke one, two I have heard, Mercy belongs unto
God, and also Power, to wit, the Power of his severe Justice and Wrath (for so
the Hebrew word does signify) for he will render to every man according to his
Works.

Now what that sin was that the Serpent tempted Man to commit, may be
understood by the like Tentation, wherewith he ass^ulted the Lord Jesus Christ,
(as Man) upon Earth, which was, The Glory and lustful Delight and Pleasure of
this inferior perishing World, above which God placed Man when he made him;
but the Serpent wrought so mysteriously, that he presented it to Man (first
assaulting the Woman or Female part) as if it were some higher and better thing
than what God had given him, and as if the perishing and mortal Delights of
this fading sublunary World were above the Pleasures of Paradise, and
consistent also therewith, and should give him more Wisdom, and also more
Delight and Pleasure. But in this he was a Liar and Murderer, as Christ called
him

And whereas after man's Fall, God said, Behold, Man is become like one of us,
knowing Good and Evil, it was true that God said, but not in the Devil's sense,
who deceived Man with a Lie and Equivocation; for after Man had sinned, he felt
the Property of Wrath and Anger awakened in him, which he knew not before, and
found himself to be an Angry Man, and in some sort he became like unto God,
Note. That Anger is in God effectively, not subjectively* and is not any
inherent Accident or continge^^ Quality in God; for no Accidents or contingent
Qualities can have place in God who is Most Perfect.
who is an Angry and Jealous God against Sinners, but Gods Anger is pu^e and
holy forever; Whereas the Wrath and Anger of fallen Man is impure and unholy.
And though Man by his Fall knows many things that he did not know before, yet
it had been better for Adam he had not received such a Knowledge; for he knew
himself Naked, Poor and Miserable, which was a Knowledge to his sorrow. But God
in his infinite Mercy did so order it, That where Sin did abound, Grace should
abound much more.

Error 9. That if Adam had not sinned, he should have dyed the ^odily Death, as
Men now dye, and been subject to Bodily Sicknesses, and other Bodily-Weaknesses
and Infirmities, etc.

Correction. All this also proceeds from great Ignorance and want of a
spiritual Opening and Understanding of the holy Scriptures, and does plainly
contradict the^; for it was not said to Man, when God made him, To Dust thou
sh^lt return, but after his Fall; and the Scriptures Testimony is frequ^nt,
That Death, and all the Vanity and Calamity of this Mortal Life, is the Effect
and Consequent of Sin; Therefore are our days on Earth called, few and evil,
and the Days of our Vanity, in Scripture; and the Scripture says, By Man came
Death, (viz. the first Adam) and by Man (viz. the second Adam, Christ Jesus)
comes the Resurrection of the Dead. And as the Resurrection is that of the
Body, as well as of the Soul, so the Death is the Death of the Body, as well as
of the Soul; for when Man sinned, his sin defiled both his Soul and Body, and
therefore the Wrath of God was kindled against both, and both were to partake
of the Punishment; for not only the Soul of Man suffered a great Degeneration
from its primitive Glory, but the Body also; So that Man being in Honor, and
not abiding, became like the Beasts that perish, as the Scripture declares.
And seeing Man's Body before the Fall was not subject to any sort or Sickness or
Death, it does argue that the Glory of it before the Fall was very great, and
endued with many excellent Gifts and Abilities of Beauty, Strength, Vigor,
Agility, and quickness of Perception, far beyond what we are able to
understand, being made Lord over all the visible Creation, and Works of Gods
hands, as the prime Masterpiece of his Workmanship, and crowned with Glory and
Honor, as the Scripture declares; and yet the glory of Man's Body before the
Fall was exceeding inferior to the glorified Body of Christ in Heaven, and to
the glorified Bodies of the Saints at the Resurrection of the Dead; for his
body was not spiritual, but Annimal; and being compared with Christ, as Man, he
was but as a Figure, or Type of him that was to come, as Paul declares, and
was an Earthy Man, of the Earth Earthly, whereas Christ is the Heavenly Man, of
the Heaven Heavenly, etc. 1 Cor. 15. And as we have born the Image of the
Earthy, so we shall bear the Image of the Heavenly. But even the Image of the
Earthy was very glorious before the Fall; for though God made him of the Dust of
the Ground, yet that Dust was not common Dust, but much more pure and refined
than that of which the Bodies of Men since the Fall were made of.

Nor should it be strange, that Adam's Body (if he had not sinned) should not
have dyed, but have been Immortal, though made of the Dust, when we believe that
the Bodies of the Saints at the Resurrection of the Dead, shall be raised up,
and made Immortal, and much more glorious than Adam's Body before the Fall. But
though Adam was not to have dyed a Bodily Death, if he had not sinned, yet it
is not to be doubted but his Body in due time should have been changed,
together with all his Posterity, from Earthly to Heavenly, and from Annimal to
Spiritual; for such is the goodness of God toward his Creatures, that they are
still to ascend to a higher Perfection, and that endlesly, beyond the Condition
of their first Creation.

Now if any will contend, That this Change which Adam was to undergo, was to be
a sort of Death; I will not contend with them about words, for I love not to
strive about words; but I say, it was not to be such a Death as Men now dye;
nor do I find any thing in Scripture to warrant why it should be called Death.

But before I close this Head, I shall answer some few Objections, viz.

1. When God said to Adam, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
dye, he dyed not the Bodily Death that Day, but lived many Years after; and
therefore that cannot be understood the Bodily Death.

Answ. 1. All the sad and lamentable Effects of Adam's Fall are not set down
particularly in these words that God spoke to Adam before the Fall, but only in
general it was told him what should befall him thereby; but after the Fall the
sad and lamentable Effects and Consequences that should happen both to Adam and
Eve are particularly declared, as, That she should conceive and bring forth
Children with sorrow, and be under the Rule of her Husband; and That the Ground
should be cursed for his sake, and (when he plowed or tilled) it should bring
forth Thistles and Thorns; That in Labor he should eat of it, and in the
sweat of his face should eat Bread, until he should return to the Earth from
whence he was taken.

2 dly. Though Bodily Death be not expressed in these words that God spoke to
Adam before the Fall; yet it is understood, as well as the Death of the Soul
unto Righteousness, and the enjoyment of God; for that very day wherein he
Transgressed, Sentence of Death passed on him, and immediately he became
subject to Death, and so was a dead Man by the Law of God, even as God said to
Abimelech, Because of Abraham 's Wife thou art a dead Man, because he was to
have dyed if he had done any Violence to her; and when a Criminal has Sentence
of Death past on him, he is a Dead Man in the Eye of the Law. And ever since
the Fall, the Condition of Man's Bodily Life is such, that he is continually
subject to the danger of Death; and so soon as Man is born, and begins to live
in the World, he begins to dye; so that, as some wise Men have observed, Man's
Life in this World is a Dying Life and a Living Death, according to the words,
Dying thou shall dye, see the Hebrew. Besides, so great a Death coming on the
Soul of Man by his Transgression, it could not but greatly affect and change
his Body; and even his Body, as well as his Soul ceased to be a living
Instrument to serve God, and was defiled by sin; and therefore behoved to
partake of a suitable Punishment for the same.

And lastly, As it is observed by some, neither Adam nor any of his Posterity
living a complete Thousand Years, which in Scripture signify sometimes a Day,
Psalm. 90. it may be said, he lived not a whole Day.

Object. 2. If Bodily Death be the Effect and Consequent of Sin, then the
Saints Death does prove them Sinners; for the Effect not being removed the
Cause does remain.

Answ. It does not follow that the Saints Death proves that they are still
Sinners, otherwise they should still be sinners, even when deceased; it only
proves that they have sinned, and that the Scripture plainly declares, even
That all have sinned, and that in Adam all dye, for that all have sinned. And
as for that Maxim or Rule, That the Effect remaining, the Cause must remain;
It holds not in all cases and respects, but admits of various Exceptions,
and especially in destructive Causes it does not hold, as when a man in his
Drink burns a House, it does not follow that his Drunkenness ceasing, and he
being become sober, that the House does not continue burnt or destroyed. And to
show the weakness of this Objection, that has weight with many, it is
generally acknowledged, That Adam needed no Garments or Clothing before the
Fall, and that our need of Clothing, both to preserve us from Cold, and cover
our Nakedness, is an Effect and Consequent of the Fall; and yet it will not
follow that therefore such who have attained to a Freedom from Sin (by the
Grace and Power of God) are to lay aside all use of Clothing, and go Naked,
although some Ungodly Persons have so practiced, taking their ground from the
like Reasoning.

Object. 3. Generation and Corruption, or to be born and dye, seem to infer one
another; and therefore if Adam was to have had any Posterity by Humane
Generation, if he had not sinned, nor they, it seems, they were to have dyed.

Answ. That Generation here in this World, within the Planetary Sphere or
System, where all things generated and brought forth, are under the Rule and
Government of the Sun, Moon and Stars, as is obvious to all men of ordinary
Understanding (in an ordinary way) does infer Death and Corruption, is granted.
But it is no wise probable that Adam's Body before the Fall was in the least
subject to the Rule and Government of the Sun, Moon and Stars; for being placed
in Paradise, and in a Paradisical state, both as to his Soul and Body, he was
not subject to these things, but was above them, as it is said, Psalm. 8. God
has set him [Over] the Work of his Hands; and that is not only the Earth, but
Moon and Stars, and the visible Heavens. And though, no doubt, Man had access
into this lower World, within the Planetary Sphere or System, and had great
Power in it, yet he was not subject to any thing or power belonging to it; nor
had his Life any dependence on any thing in it; nor (as some judge most
probable) needed he to go out of the Garden where God placed him) to seek his
Food; for the Earth or Soil of the Garden brought him forth Herbs and Food
suitable to his Paradisical State; and consequently, some expound the Herbs and
Trees, given to Man for Food, before the Fall, to be Paradisical* Genesis 1.29.
and the Earth Paradisical, distinct from this gross visible Earth, called, The
Dry Land; which Distinction Origin gathers from Haggai 2.6. and other places
of Scripture; and so it will be t^ the raised Saints, at the Resurrection of
the Dead, who shall live and dwell in that Garden where Adam at first was
placed, called, The New Earth, Rev. 20. And though they shall have the Command
and Rule of this visible Earth, under Christ, their Head, yet they shall need
nothing in it.

Error 10. That Adam and Eve were Naked before the Fall.

Correct. It is no where so affirmed in all the Scripture; for though they
needed not any such Clothing or Garments as Mankind commonly use since the
Fall, yet it is very absurd and unreasonable to imagine that God created them
Naked; for God who has clothed every Lilly and Herb of the Field with its
proper Clothing that has its glory, no doubt clothed the Body of Adam with a
glorious Clothing, proper to his state; and therefore although Christ said
concerning Solomon, That in all his Glory (viz. of outward Clothing) he was
not arrayed like one of the Lillies of the Field, (because the Clothing of the
Lillies was their own, but Solomon's borrowed) yet it is no where said, That
Adam in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of the Lillies of the Field. And
the Hebrew word translated [Naked] Genesis 2. is the same that is said of the
Serpent, which is Translated [Subtil] The Serpent was more subtle than any
Beast of the Field; and therefore it had been as well to have Translated the
words thus, And Adam and his Wife were both [subtil] and were not ashamed, or
to have translated the following words thus, And the Sepent was more [Naked]
the Hebrew word [ ^arum] being the same in both places. And Moses giving an
Account of Adam's Nakedness, and immediately subjoyning the Nakedness or
Subtilty of the Serpent, and how he deceived the Woman, etc. does proceed very
orderly, as first, telling, that Adam and Eve were Naked, and then immediately
proceeding to give the cause or occasion of it, viz. the Serpent being Naked,
having lost his clothing, wherewith he was adorned at his first Creation,
assaulted our first Parents, to have them made like him, to wit, Naked or
Subtle, as he was.

And that Adam and Eve were not ashamed of their Nakedness, does not imply
their Innocence, but rather their Impudency, and too great Boldness that they
had after the Fall, until God called them, and caused his Light to shine and
spring in their dark Hearts or Souls, and then they were both afraid and
ashamed.

And that it is said after the Fall, They hid themselves among the Trees of the
Garden, the Hebrew does bear it, In a [Tree] of the Garden; And seeing this
Garden was no part of this visible Earth, but that the Eternal Word, Christ
Jesus was this Garden, and the Life in the Word was the Tree of Life, and the
many divine Virtues of the Word the Trees of it: That one Tree, in which our
first Parents did seek to hid themselves, may well be understood to be the
divine Mercy or Clemency, even as it is common to men at this day, after they
have sinned, to fly to the divine Mercy for a hiding place; but the Mercy of
God hides no Impenitent Sinner; for men must first Repent of their sins, and
turn from them, before they can be hid in the Mercy of God; but at this Time
Adam and Eve had not repented of their Sin.

And it ought to be considered, how this whole Narration is a continued
Allegory, and mystical or enigmatical way and manner of Speech; for as Moses
put a Vail on his Face, so there was by the Wisdom of God a Vail drawn over his
Writings, which was most convenient for that Time and Age; but now, under the
clear Gospel Dispensation, the Vail is done away, and Moses Face is clearly
seen, by such who are well taught in the School of Christ.

Now according to the Tenor of the Allegory, the Beasts of the Field are the
Fallen Angels, which were without the Garden, as common Fields are without
Gardens; and the Serpent that deceived Eve was one of the worst of these fallen
Angels, to wit, the most Naked or Subtle of any of them.

And as the Garden or Paradise is the Eternal Word, Christ Jesus, so the River
that watered the Garden, is the Spirit of Life, that came out of Eden, where
the Garden was planted.

Now, here the great Mystery of the Three, to wit, the Father, the Son, and the
Spirit is secretly hinted at; for Eden signifies Pleasure, Delight and Joy,
and in that did God beget and plant his eternal Word, and out of the same does
the Spirit proceed, as a most precious and large River; and afterward, viz.
from Christ the Garden, it is divided into four Heads, holding forth a fourfold
Influence of that one Eternal Spirit to the four Quarters of the World, viz.
North, East, South and West. Allegorically signified by four Rivers, Pison,
Gihon, Hiddekel and Euphrates; Pison encompassing the whole Land of Havilah,
where there is Gold, and the Gold of that Land is good, etc. which according to
Scripture relates to the North, for out of the North comes Gold, as the Book
of Job declares, the H^brew word being rightly translated: Gihon encompassing
the whole Land of Ethiopia or Africa, which is known to be the South Quarter of
the World; Hiddekel is expressly mentioned to go toward the East of Assyria;
and therefore Euphrates remains to belong to the West Quarter of the World.
Which cannot be outward and material Rivers, all rising from one Original
River, for no such thing is to be found, as any material River dividing itself
into four Branches, toward the four Quarters of the Earth, and watering them;
but the whole Passage is an Allegory, and the four fold Influence of the Spirit
of God may well be understood to be four Rivers, as well as four Winds,
according to Ezekiel. 37.9. and the Waters of the Sanctuary running North, East,
South, West, Ezekiel. 17. throughout.

But whereas some imagine, That Mesopotamia was that Paradise or Garden wherein
Adam was placed, they are under a great Mistake, for Mesopotamia as is well
known to all Geographers) lies only betwixt two Rivers, (to wit, Tygris and
Euphrates,) and not four; but Paradise or the Garden where Adam was placed, had
but one River to water it, and neither two nor four; for the division of the
River of Paradise into four Heads, was not within the Garden, but without it,
as is most clear from Moses words, Genesis 2.10.

And it is but a weak Reason that some give, why Adam and Eve were Naked before
the Fall, Because their being Naked is mentioned before the Serpent his
Tempting the Woman to Transgress the Commandment of God; for the Order of the
History is very proper, first to tell of their Nakedness, and then immediate^y
proceed to tell of the cause and occasion of it, viz. The Serpent, who was also
Naked, tempting Eve, and she prevailing with Adam.

Nor are many less mistaken to imagine, That the Coats of Skin wherewith God
clothed them after the Fall, were of the Skins either of Trees or Beasts,
which is a groundless Conceit: But whereas the Man and his Wife, by sin had
contracted a twofold Nakedness, one of the Soul, another of the Body, or one
inward, the other outward, He provided a Clothing to both, clothing them
inwardly with the Righteousness of the Lamb of God slain from the Foundation of
the World, through their Faith in him, and this was a skin or covering to cover
their Nak^d Souls; and clothing them outwardly with the Skin and Flesh of this
frail, mortal and corruptible Body, in many things resembling the Skin of a
Beast, as Job said, Thou have poured me out as Milk; thou have curdled me as
Cheese, thou have fenced me with Bones and Sinnnes, and covered me with Flesh
and Skin, etc. And indeed many of the wise Gentiles did understand how this
frail, mortal and corruptible Body, that is such a clog and weight to the Soul,
has happened unto Man by the Fall; therefore they have called it the Prison of
the Soul, and compared it to a dark Cave and Dungeon; And as the Wisdom of
Solomon has it, The corruptible Body is heavy unto the Soul; and for this
cause Paul called our Bodies of Fle^h, The Flesh of Sin, Romans 8. saying, God
sent his Son in the likeness of the Flesh of Sin (as the Greek has it) so that
when we but think on our flesh, we have occasion given us to think and remember
of our sin and fall in Adam. Yet it is not to be questioned, but the true Body
of Man lies within the Shell, Oar or Mine of this gross, heavy and corruptible
Body, and that is it which shall be the Resurrection Body, at the Resurrection
of the Dead.

Now since the Body of Man had not this grosness and imperfection before the
Fall, it is manifest that the manner of Man's Generation or Propogation had been
after a far more excellent manner than now it is, if the Fall had not been.

Another great Mistake many are under, grounded on a mis-translation of the
Hebrew word, viz. That Eve was made of a Rib of Adam; but the Hebrew word is
better Translated Side than Rib, as it is so Translated, Exodus 26.26, 27. cap.
30.4. cap. 37* 5. and 2 Samuel 16.13. In all which places it cannot, in any
tolerable sense be translated Rib* but Side; The Woman therefore is one side
of the Man, as to say, one half of him (as when a round or square Body is split
or divided into two sides or halfs) and is not only Bone of his Bone, but Flesh
of his Flesh. And she was called Isha in the Hebrew Language, which is to say,
Taken from Man; for at first God made them Male and Female in one Flesh or
Body, and aftewards divided them. But whether this Division or Separation was
made before or after the Fall, is much questioned by many, They who think it
was after the Fall, bring this Reason for it, Because, Genesis 2.18. it is
declared, that God said, It is not good that the Man should be alone, I will
make man an Help meet for him. Now, how came Man to be alone, seeing at first
they were made together, Male and Female, in One, and God blessed them with the
Blessing of Fruitfulness, that they might multiply and replenish the Earth?
Also, seeing that God saw all that he had made, and it was very Good, as he
first made every thing; how then comes it, that it was not good for Man to be
as he then was, if Sin had not occasioned a great Change in him? For it is not
to be supposed that God is like to a Man, that makes a piece of Work, and when
he has made it, does not please him, as he at first made it, and therefore
puts it into another fashion. From all which they conclude, That the Woman
being separated from the Man, was a consequent of the Fall, and that therefore
it was not good that Man should be alone, to wit, that his Wife should remain
barren in him; for the Effect of then Fall was such, That they could not
multiply their Species in one body, as they might have done, if the Fall had
not been. And so, as ^o that Manner of Propogating their Species or Kind, they
became unfit and unfruitful, which is by way of Allegory expressed by some
Mystic Writers, That their b^ck^ were joined together, and their faces
averted, i. e. turned the one from the other; but when they were divided, their
faces were set one to the other, according to the words in Genesis 2.18. I will
make him an Help, as before him, i. e. face to face, so the Hebrew. And from
this it is thought that Plato borrowed his Account of Man's Formation, being
both Man and Woman in one Body, whom he called Androgynus, but because they
offended their Maker, he divided them into two, setting them face to face, the
one half being the Man, and the other half the Woman; and that therefore the
Man loves his Wife, as being the one half of himself.

And whereas some are ready to object, That this would seem to lessen the due
esteem of Marriage, and humane Propagation, in the due use thereof, if Marriage
was not appointed and ordained in Paradise.

To this they readily give Answer, That it does no more lessen the due esteem
of Marriage, to say, it was not ordained in Paradise, than to say, It shall be
no Ordinance in the Kingdom of Heaven, after the Resurrection of the Dead,
which Christ has plainly taught us, That the Children of this World Marry and
give in Marriage, but the Children of the Resurrection marry not, nor give in
Marriage, neither do they dye any more. From all which some gather, That
Marriage is an Ordinance of God, as a Remedy for Death; for if Marriage were
not, Mankind could not be preserved upon Earth, in the regular and due way as
God has appointed. And it is sufficient to preserve the due Honor and Esteem
of Marriage, that it is, without all doubt, the Ordinance of God to Men, during
this Mortal state. And since Paradise was no part of this visible Globe of the
Earth, it may well enough be allowed, That Adam's state in Paradise belonged
not to this World, that is full of Trouble, where all things under the Sun are
Vanity, as the Spirit of God has declared by Soloman. Nor should it seem
strange, that some of the Effects and Consequences of Adam's Fall should be
related by Moses, before the Cause of it; for this is very usual and common in
all Writers, yea, Moses uses the same Method a little after in the same Book
of Genesis, for in the tenth Chapter he tells of the several Tongues of the
Children of Noah; and yet in the beginning of the 11th Chapter following, he
tells, That the whole Earth was of one Language, and so proceeds to tell
what was the Cause or occasion of the dividing of the Languages.

Another Mistake that many fall into is, That the six days of the World's
Making, were Natural Days, such as our common Days from Sun setting to Sun
rising again. But as both Origin and Augustine, and many others have well
observed, it could not be natural Days, for there was no Firmament till the
second Day, nor dry Earth till the third day, nor Sun, Moon or Stars till the
fourth day; and therefore these Days were not common Natural Days, but are
mystically to be understood; for God called the Light Day, and the Darkness he
called Night, and therefore every one of these six Days is Light, and not the
precise time of twenty four Hours betwixt sun and sun.

And whereas it is said, Genesis 2. That God planted the Garden Eastward in Eden,
many Translators do translate the word, from the Beginning, from whence Ierom,
and others do conclude, That Paradise, or that Garden was no part of this
visible World or System; for the most glorious part of this visible System is
the Firmament, Sun, Moon and Stars; and the Firmament was made the second Day,
and the Sun, Moon and Stars the fourth day.

And they do as greatly Err who say, This visible World was made of Nothing;
for as no place of Scripture says so any where, but does contradict it, so it
is a most improper manner of Speech, seeing of Nothing nothing can be made; for
Nothing is no cause of any thing: Whatever is a Cause, must have some Being it
self.

And as concerning the Making of this World, Moses gives us the Account, How
that the Earth was without Form, and void, in the Hebrew it is Toha va Bohu,
and in the Septuagint it is Aoratos, i. e. Invisible, according to which it is
said, Heb. 11.3. Things that are seen, or Visible, were not made of Things
Apparent. So that this whole visible World did proceed or come from somewhat
Invisible. And we ought to distinguish, according to Scripture, betwixt things
Created, Formed and Made: Things made pre-supposeth Things Formed; and Things
Formed pre-supposeth Things Created, in the greatest Propriety of Speech
(although at Times the one is put for the other) And though Things Created have no
Cause but God Almighty, yet they are not properly said to be of Nothing; for Of
Him (to wit, God) not as a Material, but an Efficient Cause) and Through Him,
and To Him are all Things. But why the Earth that God Created (without (...)
Prae-existent Matter) came to be Without Form, and Void, deserves a serious
Consideration.

And whereas it is said in Scripture, That the Earth was Cursed for Man's sake;
some run so far into the Extreme of an Allegory, that by the Earth that was
cursed, and was to bring forth Thorns and Thistles for Man's sin, the outward
and visible Earth was by no means to be understood, not in any tolerable sense
or respect, alleging, That Thorns and Thistles being a part of the Creation,
are good Creatures after their kind, as other Herbs and Veget^bles; and
therefore by the Earth that was cursed they will have only to be understood
Man's own Earthly Nature. But this proceeds from great Ignorance; for at this
rate they might as well say, the Frogs and Lice, with other Plagues and
Judgments inflicted upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians, were only within them, and
not without them, for Frogs and Lice are a part of the Creation, as other
Annimals are* But first it may be questioned, Whether all Vegetables and
Annimals, that are now in being, were created or made upon the Earth, before
Adam's Fall, or only the more perfect sort of Vegetables and Animals? for it is
certain that Mules were not from the beginning, being generated of an unnatural
Mixture of a Horse and an Ass? But secondly, waving that part of the Question,
Whether Thorns and Thistles did grow on the Earth before Adam's Fall, it is
most certain that Barrenness and Unfruitful Seasons came as Judgments upon the
Earth for men's sins; for the Scripture declares, That God turns the fruitful
Land into a barren Wilderness for the sins of Men that dwell therein: and
Experience proves it, That the Land of Judea is not near so fruitful as
formerly it was; and it is the Nature of barren (...) and to bring forth Weeds,
Thistles and Thorns, and other unprofitable Vegetables, that are good for
little but to be burnt. And whereas God said to Adam, Thorns and Thistles
shall it bring forth unto the^; it holds forth, That even such a part of the
Earth, as Adam should labor to bring forth Corn for Bread, should together
with Corn bring forth plenty of Weeds, as Experience fully proves. And as the
Frogs and Lice that were sent to the Egyptians, were the Works of God, (but as
the Effects of his Wrath and Displeasure) so the like may be said of the
Thorns and Thistles that these parts of the Earth, (which Man was to have
Tilled) were to bring forth, as they are the Works of God, so they were the
Judgments of God, and the Effects of his Wrath; as the like may be said of
great Devastations by Floods, Thunder, Lightning, Earth quakes, etc. All which,
though they have no Moral Evil in them, yet are the Judgments of God inflicted on
men, because of sin; yea, what are ^ll Diseases but Judgments and Corrections
from the Hand of God, which though they have no moral Evil in them, yet have in
them an evil of Punishment, and so have Frogs, Lice, etc. all which are parts
of the Creation, as well as Thorns and Thistles. Therefore it is certainly a
great and hurtful Error for any to hold, That the outward and visible Earth was
not Cursed for Man's sake; the which Curse returned unto Man; for seeing Man's
Body is a part of the Earth, it did also partake of the same; hence come the
many Diseases upon the Body of Man, that partly take their Rise from the Fruits
of the ^arth, which Man eats and drinks. And these also, as well as his
Earthly Thoughts and Desires, and Lusts, (...) a part of these Thorns (...)
Thistles that the Earth brings forth unto him.

Error 11. That Adam and Eve 's Fall and Sin, with the Woeful Effe^ts and
Consequences of it, did only concern themselves, but that no Damage did come to
their Posterity thereby, nor any Defilement of Sin or Depravation and
Corruption of Man's Nature is derived from Adam unto them; but that Infants
universally come into the World (out of their Mothers Belly) pure and
undefiled, and in all respects the same as if there had been no Sin nor Fall.

Correct. This is certainly a great and hurtful Error, contradicting not only
the Scriptures Testimony in many place, but also manifest Experience; for we
find too generally, That the Nature of Children is corrupted from the very
Womb, and that great abundance of brutish (...) and Inclinations have too much
place in them before they arrive at the Years of Discretion, so as to have the
due Exercise of sound Understanding, to judge betwixt Good and Evil, or of a
free Choice of Will, either to embrace the Good or refuse the Evil; as also
that great Aversion (...) Unaptness that we find in Children generally, even
when Parent^ take great Pains upon them, to give them a Godly and Religious
Education, to embrace the way of Virtue, and of a Godly Life; and on the
contrary, a great Readiness in them to follow evil Ways and Courses. All which
do manifestly demonstrate, from sad Experience, the Defilement and Corruption
of the Nature of Man in Children, and that they need to be renewed, washed and
sanctified, and spiritually born again, before they can enter into the Kingdom
of God; for if Children were sanctified from the Womb, and that all Infants
were Saints, while Infants, surely more of it would appear in them, than does,
and the favor of the divine Life (which is in all that are sanctified) would
be more savoured in them, by all who have a spiritual Discerning and Savor in
themselves; but the contrary is so far true, that in most of Children, before
they pass the Years of Infancy, many Godly P^rents find and observe, yea, and
feel that in their Children, which is cause of sorrow and grief unto them, and
of great Humiliation, to see and find so much of the brutish Nature prevail in
them, as most frequently does; so that the very fir^^ Inclinations that appear
in many Children, not past the Years of Infancy, are to lie, to steal, to fight
and speak unsavory words, which they are more ready to learn than what is good.

Next, As to the Scriptures Testimony, it is plain, That in Adam all dye, and
that by that One Offense, Judgment is come upon all unto Condemnation. And
David does plainly acknowledge, That he was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did
his Mother conceive him, Psalm. 51.5. And therefore our Flesh that we receive
from our Parents, is called by Paul, Romans 8. The Flesh of Sin; for he said, God
sent his Son in likeness of the Flesh of Sin (so the Greek) and that under the
Law the foreskin of the Flesh in Infants was to be cut off by Circumcision,
and an Offering was to be made for them; and the Mother does sufficiently prove
the Defilement of Nature in them, and that a Principle or Seed of Sin and Evil
is lodged in them; which even Plato a Heathen Philosopher did acknowledge,
saying, There was an ingrafted or innate Evil in men, (...). Nor is it a
sufficient Argument against the Doctrine, because it is difficult to many to
satisfy their Reason how this Defilement or Corruption is conveyed from Adam,
and other intermediate Parents, to the Children; for there are many other
things that are true, and necessary to be believed and acknowledged by all, and
yet all, or perhaps most cannot satisfy their Reason about them.

But for the better clearing of this weighty matter, let the following
particulars be well considered.

1 st. The Soul of Man receives not its being by Humane Generation or
Conception in the Womb, but is created of God; for Men, according to the Soul
or Spirit, are the Off-sp^ing of God, and God (...) their Father.

2 dly. According to our Original State and Condition, God made Man Upright, i.
e. the whole Mankind contained in Adam, and which is commonly called [ Adam] in
Scripture, but They ^ound out many Inventions, Eccles. 7 29.

3 dly. As we dyed in Adam, so we sinned in Adam; for Death being the effect of
Sin, we could not have dyed in him, if we had not sinned in him; and if we
sinned in Adam, we were contained in Adam. But as for that subtle and
unintelligible Distinction, That our Souls were contained in Adam, not formally
and actually* but virtually, or not having a formal or actual, but a virtual
Existence, it is more safe to let it alone, and hold to the words of Scripture,
especially seeing they who talk of that Distin^^ion, of a Virtual and Formal,
or Actual Existence, can hardly make it intelligible to any, far less to vulgar
Capacities, who are not acquainted with Philosophical and School Distinctions.
It may help us to understand, how as Levi paid Tithes in Abraham, being then in
his Loins, so we sinned in Adam: As also, that Exampl^ in Scripture, of the
Root and Branches; for Adam being the common Root and Head of Mankind, the Root
being defiled, the Branches that remained in him could not but part^ke of the
Defilement and Seed of Evil, being sown in Man at hi^ Fall; it is not uneasy
to understand how it has been conveyed downwards to his Posteri^y, the which
is called in Scripture, The Seed of the Serpent whose Head the Seed of the
Woman, Christ Jesus, was promised of God to bruise; and therefore Men generally
have that Seed of the Serpent in them: And how have they received it, but by
the Fall in Adam? For many evil Inclinations and Lusts begin to appear in
Mankind before they are aware or have a due Understanding and Disce^ning to
judge betwixt Good and Evil.

It is but a weak Objection that some make, saying, How could so many Thousand
Souls, as do belong to Adam's Posterity, be contained in him? For such do not
consider nor understand, that Souls being Spirits, and not Bodies, do not crowd
and jostle for room, as Bodies do. And it is as easy to understand how all the
Souls of Adam's Posterity could be contained in him, as the two Nations of
Jacob and Esau were contained in the Womb of Rebecca, or how the Souls of
Jacob's Sons, and Sons Sons, that came out of his Loins, were contained in him,
according to Genesis 46.26. for if they came out of his Loins, they were formerly
in him; as also, how a Legion of unclean Spirits were in one man, which Christ
did cast out, and seven unclean Spirits or Devils out of Mary Magdalen.

Nor has that other common Objection* that many think so strong as if it were
unanswerable, any great weight, That they see not how the So^l^ of Adam ^s
Posterity, that were contained in him, could or did consent (...) him, or had
any Knowledge thereof, seeing they retain not any Remembrance thereof. For as
we do not remembr that we sinned in Adam, by acting with Knowledge or Consent,
so nor do we remember that we were in in him at that time, any more than Levi
remembered after he was born, that he was in the Loins of Abraham, or paid
Tithes in Abraham to Melchisedeck; which yet the Scripture plainly affirms.
And how many sins do men forget, which they have committed in their own Bodies
and Persons? It is therefore no wonder that they have forgot what they were, or
what they did in Adam. It is sufficient to evince our sin and dying in Adam,
that we have felt strong Inclinations and Lustings to Evil in our Souls,
p^eventing the due Exercise of our Understanding and Will, that could not have
come into us unless by our knowledge and consent, although we cannot remember the
time and place, and other circumstances, when evil began to get entrance into
us. For who can tell the particular tim^ when the Seed of Evil was sown them,
since they came out of the Mothers Womb* Has not every one rather found it in
them, preventing all Knowledge or Remembrance of its entrance, and that The
Imagination of Man's Heart is Evil from his Childhood, or Infancy, as the H^brew
word does hear it, (...) and as Aria^ Montainus does Translate it, Genesis 8.21.
compare with Prove. 22.15.
a pueritia sua. But it is a most absurd and unreasonable Principle asserted by
some, That the Souls of all Adams Posterity are guilty of Adam 's Sin, and
defiled therewith by a ba^e Imp^tation, without any real Existence, Knowledge
or Consent on their part.

4 ly, The Effect of Adam's Sin did not extend so far to Adam, as finally and
irrevocably to cast him out from all capacity of being restored; for after Adam
sinned, the sentence of ^eath was past on him, and he was drove out of the
Garden to the Earth, but he was not cast into Hell Fi^e, w^^ch is the second
Death. And therefore seeing the Effect of Adam's sin did not extend to Adam
himself t^ a final and irrevocable Loss, nor to Hell Fire, and Punishment that
Devils and Wicked Men are to undergo at the Day of Judgment; neither does it so
extend to Infants, or any part of Mankind, simply for Adam's sin, so as that
any shall be finally condemned for the same. And consequently none dying in a
state of Infancy do perish, or shall be lost simply for that first sin; for as
Christ has plainly taught, The Condemnation of the World, is not simply that
men sinned in or with Adam, but that Light is come into the World, after that
Death and Darkness is come upon them, and men love Darkness rather than Light.

5 ly. But what is Gods Way and Dispensation toward all such who dye in a
state of Infancy, as many Thousands so dye, seeing they are not fit nor
qualified for entering the Kingdom of God, without being renewed and born again,
and seeing to be renewed and born again, or to be sanctified and cleansed from
all Sin and Defilement, and to be made Holy and Righteous, and replenished with
all divine Virtues and Fruits of the Spirit, requires our joint concurrance,
as Faith and Obedience, to work together with God, and Christ, and the holy
Spirit. And that Children, while in a state of Infancy, that know not the Right
Hand from the Left, seem not capable to act or work in order to their
Sanctification, Is a Difficulty that does generally pinch and straiten all to
answer it, Let it therefore suffice at present, to say, God has ways to deal
both with Young and Old, and to dispose of them, according to his great Mercy,
Goodness and Long-suffering, far beyond what the wisest of men are able to
conceive or comprehend* And seeing the Love, Mercy, and Long-suffering of God
is extended unto all, and God has so manifested his Love, that He has given
his dear Son Christ Jesus to taste Death for every Man, and that such who dye
in Infancy are a very great and considerable part of Mankind, it is most equal
and convenient for us to judge Charitable of all dying in a state of Infancy,
or who have had but little time to live in the World, and have been as the
Grass that is mown and cut down before it be near ripe, even as when in the
Bud, and who are taken away in the Morning, as it were, of their Day, that the
Most infinitely good, gracious, merciful, wise and just God, deals so with
all such, as to supply the present Defect and want of Time, and other weighty
Circumstances denied unto them, that others have plentifully had, after some
sufficient manner, that shall abundantly clear the Universal Love, Goodness,
and Long-suffering of God, together with his Wisdom, Justice, Faithfulness and
Power, and all other His Divine Perfections, Attributes and Excellencies; for
All the Ways of God are most Equal, and Ways of Truth, and his Tender Mercies
are over all his Works.

6 ly. It is manifest, both from Scripture and Experience, That the Seed and
Principle of sin and defilement, conveyed both from Adam, and other
intermediate Parents, has had greater place in some than in others of Mankind.
Hence it is that the Posterity of Cain was more defiled than that of Seth; and
the Posterity of Ishmael and Esau, more than that of Jacob; and the Moabites,
Ammonites and Cananites, with the adjoining Nations, were more defiled in their
Seed and Posterity than the Israelites; therefore God did forbid the holy Seed
of Israel to mix with them in Marriage; and an Edomite was not to enter into
the Congregation of Israel (viz. by Marriage) until the fourth Generation; nor
a Moabite until the tenth. And though there was great Defilement in the Line of
Israel, yet because it was not generally so defiled as that of the other
Nations, it was called Holy; and the Children of Unbelievers are called Unclean
by Paul, but the Children of Believers (where both or one of the Parents
believe) are called Holy, because that the holy Seed that is in them is not so
veiled and loaded generally with sin, as it is in the Children and Posterity of
Unbelievers; and our Experience proves, That some Children are born into the
World with excellent Inclinations to Wisdom and Virtue, that soon appear in
them, far beyond others. But this, and many other things relating to this Head,
are to be left to the Lords further Opening, which he will do in his good time;
for he will cause his Light to shine more and more unto the perfect Day.

And as the denying* That Adam's Posterity partake of any Seed or Principle of
Sin and Corruption, by Adam's Fall; together with the woeful Effects thereof, is
a great Error, so it is very hurtful, and of very evil consequence to entertain
it; for it makes People think less evil of themselves than they should* and so
tends to make them proud: And as it is not good not to see the Root of a
Disease, so nor is it good, but hurtful, not to see nor understand the root and
beginning of our Misery; but the true sight and knowledge of our fall and loss
in Adam, and of that Seed and Principle of Sin and Lust, called, The Old Man,
in Scripture, conveyed to us by the Fall, does really tend to humble us, and
excite us the more earnestly to contend against sin, knowing, that the longer
it has had place in us, and the more deeply it is engrained in our Nature, it
is requisite we strive with the more force, and use the greater Diligence to
overcome it. Besides, it h^th this other evil Tendency, that if it be believed
That Children are born clean and pure, and partake of no hurt or damage by Adam
'^ Fall, as the Pelagians of Old, and some of late believe, it makes Parents,
who do so believe, slack and remiss to use due Nurture and Discipline toward
their Children, and so fall short in givi^g them due Education; for if there be
no wild and brutish Nature in Children, there need no Pains to be taken upon
them to subdue it in them; all which is of bad Consequence. Nevertheless, it is
to be acknowledged, that some Children have very good, and virtuous, yea, and
pious Inclinations from their Childhood, through the great Mercy of God, yet
accompanied with some Imperfections, that sufficiently declare, that generally,
more or less, Adam's Posterity have suffered great Damage by the Fall. And that
John the Baptist and Jeremiah, or any others, as Moses, etc. were sanctified
from the Womb, being rare and extraordinary Cases, does plainly evince the
general Corruption that has seized on Adam's Posterity. Nor is it to be
allowed (...) any one born of a Woman, has been born clean and free of all
Stain and pollution of sin, in all respects, but only our Lord Jesus Christ,
who was born of a Virgin, and made like to us in all things, but without all
sin.

Error 12. That the only means of Men's Salvation is the Light of Christ, the
living Word in them, only as it convinces of common Sins, and instructs men
universally of common Duties in a way of common and general Illumination that
is common to all Mankind, whether called Jews, Heathens or Christians. And that
the said common Illumination and Law writ in the hearts of men universally, is
the only Gospel, and the All and Whole of it, and the New Covenant and Power of
God unto Salvation in the full extent of it, without all respect to Faith in
Christ come in the Flesh, etc.

Correct. Although it is worthily granted, That Christ is the Light of the
Wo^^d, and does lighten every Man that comes into the World with a divine and
supernatural Light, that is of tendency unto Salvation; and that Christ the
Light of the World, who lights every Man, is a sufficient Savior; yet his
inward Coming and Appearance in men's Hearts is not to be set in Opposition to
his Outward Coming in the Flesh, as he dyed for our sins and rose again for our
Justification, and (...) exalted at the Right Hand of God to be a Prince and a
Savior, and who ever lives to make Intercession for us, and is our Advocate
with the Father. And though Christ the Light be one, yet he has diverse ways
and manners of divine Illumination, whereby he enlightneth the Hearts and Souls
of men. Hence God is called in Scripture, The Father of Lights: And as the
High Priest under the Law did bear on his Breast Vrim, i. e. Lights, and
Thummim, i e. Perfections, who was a Type of Christ, our heavenly High Priest,
made higher than the Heavens, so Christ Typified thereby has the Vrim and
Thummim, i. e. Lights and Perfections; which he distributeth variously to the
Children of Men, according to their several States, Conditions and Capacities;
and therefore though the Light be one fundamentally and radically, yet it
brancheth forth into diverse Properties, and Operations, and Manners of
Workings; and as it is received, followed and obeyed, it has its diverse
Perfections, answerable thereunto. And therefore all faithful Christians are
otherwise enlightened than either Jews (viz. who are not Christians) or Turk, or
Heathens, be they ever so faithful or upright in the state they are in, for all
true Christians have such a divine Illumination from Christ, as does illuminate
their Hearts and Understandings, to understand and believe That great Mystery
of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh, or Christ come in the Flesh, of the
Seed of David, the Seed of Abraham, as he dyed for our sins and rose again for
our Justification, and is gone into Heaven, and there does appear in the
Presence of God for us. And who are thus enlightened and quickened to know
Christ, and believe in him as he dyed for them and rose again, they have a good
understanding of the Love of God, and of Christ; and the Mystery of Christ's
Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, etc. is inwardly opened and
revealed unto them.

And so, Christ thus revealed, known and believed in, both as in respect of his
inward and outward Coming, is the Foundation of their Faith, Hope, Love and
Obedience, and all Christian Virtues; and the Love of God and Christ, as it is
so known and believed, to wit, as God gave him to dye for us, etc. and as he
most freely and willingly offered himself, is a most excellent Motive or moving
Cause and Inducement to love God and Christ, and also of our whole Obedience.
And to whom soever this Knowledge and Faith of Christ does come, (which comes
not by bear Hearsay or R^port, but by the Working of the mighty Power, which
raised Jesus our Lord from the Dead) there does accompany greater Grace and
Power, to in^line to Love and Obedience, all True Christians, than what any of
the most upright of either Jews or Gentiles, who have not the Faith of Christ
crucified and raised again, are Partakers of. Hence we read in Scripture of the
Manifold Grace and Wisdom of God, and the Diversity of Operations,
Administrations and Dispensations of divine Gifts, but One God, One Lord, and
One Spirit: And though that common Illumination of God and Christ, that is
universal to Men, be really Divine and Supernatural, and so good and excellent
in its kind, and has a preparatory Tendency to eternal Salvation, yet it does
not save with eternal Salvation any who remain only under it, and proceed no
further, so as to witness that more special and peculiar Grace and
Illumination, proper to true Christians; for no Illumination is able to save
fully and perfectly with Eternal Salvation but that which gives the Knowledge
and Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, and does open and reveal the
Glory of Gods Love, Wisdom, Power and Justice, in giving his Son to dye for us,
and raising him from Death, to be a Prince and a Savior unto us.

And though it may and ought to be well granted, That the Gospel is preached in
every Creature under Heaven in some measure or degree, and ^lso, That the
Gospel Seed and Principle* even the Word of Faith, is nigh to every one, and in
every one; yet it is not so fully revealed in every man, as does at once
sufficiently reveal the whole Mind, Council and Will of God concerning men's
Eternal Salvation and Happiness; for Christ has been the Mystery hid from Ages
and Generations, viz. in great part from the generality of Mankind, who have
had that common divine Illumination, and yet have not duly and sufficiently
known him: And whoever did know him, as such, in any Age or Generation, as many
did, even from the beginning of the World, they had that Knowledge and Faith of
him by special Grace and Favor, and by special Revelation. And as for that
common Illumination that is general and universal unto all Mankind, it is more
Legal than Evangelical, and does more belong to the Law and first Covenant,
than to the second; and therefore is not the Only Gospel, nor the all and whole
of it, but at best some low and small Manifestation of the Gospel, that yet is
of excellent Service to all who are faithful under it, so that they cannot
perish; and it is tha^ which Paul calls the Law, that is a Schoolmaster,
that leads unto Christ: and as John outwardly was a Forerunner of Christ as
he came outwardly in the Flesh, to prepare the Way before him, so this General
and Common Illumination of Christ, to all who faithfully Obey it, is a
Forerunner to prepare the Way for that more special Illumination and
Revelation of Christ given to all true Christians, that does open unto them
that great Mystery of Christ come in the Flesh, His Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, Intercession, and as God has appointed him to be the Judge of the
Quick and the Dead, even the Man Christ Jesus, and constrains the Hearts of
all True Christians the more abundantly, and with a more excellent and pure
Degree of Love and Obedience to love and serve God and Christ, than what any of
the most Upright Gentiles, in their mere Gentile-state did attain unto. And
therefore though Corneliu^ was in a good state, as to God, before Peter was
sent to preach to him the Faith of Christ crucified, yet he was not to rest in
that state, but to be perfected by the Faith and Knowledge of Christ crucified,
by which he received the Holy Ghost, and the Assurance and assured Knowledge of
the Remission of his Sins by Christ, and of Eternal Salvation by him; therefore
the Angel told him, That Peter should preach words to him, by which he and all
his House should be saved, see A^^s 11.14. And as the Light of Christ within is
not to be set in Opposition to Christ without, as he came in the Flesh, so as
to make void either the great End and Use of his Coming, or the living Faith
and Knowledge of it, so nor is it to be set in Opposition to any of these
sub-ordinate outward Helps and Means of Gods appointment, for the furthering
and promoting the Work of our Salvation and Perfection, as Preaching, and
Reading in the Holy Scriptures, Conference, Vocal Prayer, etc. and all external
and corporal Exercises of Religion, as performed with the Heart and Soul, from
the inward Principle of the Divine Life, Spirit and Power inwardly revealed.

And as the Law of God is writ in the Hearts of men universally, it is not the
Law of the New Covenant; for the Hearts of most men, yea, of all unsanctified
and unrenewed men, are stoney Hearts, and not Hearts of Flesh; and therefore
the Law, as such, and as writ on these st^n^y Hearts, is the Law of the first
Covenant. And even the Law within the Gentiles, who have not the Faith of
Christ crucified, is distinguished by Paul, from Faith, and the Law thereof*
And this is that Law, which (according to Paul) stops every Month, and
makes all the World guilty before God, until the Faith of Christ be revealed.
And who are under the Law, and obey it, according to what their Ability does
reach, They are held there as in a Custody, or place of Safety, as the
Manslayer in the City of Refuge, in the time of the Law, till the Faith come
to be revealed.

And whereas Paul says, That the Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation, he
does not mean, that it is the Power of God simply and abstractly considered,
without all Doctrine and Doctrinal Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified, (as
some very falsely imagine,) but as that Power does discover it self in the
Evangelical Doctrine and Doctrinal Knowledge and Faith of Christ, as he came in
the Flesh, was born of the Virgin, dyed, rose, ascended, according as the four
Evangelists have declared of him, and the Prophets prophesied of him, as he was
so to come; therefore when the Angel preached Christ's Birth to the Shepherds,
Luke 2.10. he said, Behold! I bring you good Tidings of great Joy, which shall
be to all People (even as the Word Evangel, Englished, does signify Gospel)
for unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord. And that this is the true sense of Paul's words, is clear, that he
says, The Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that
believes. And he who rightly believes, he does believe that Christ is come in
the Flesh, of the Seed of David, the Seed of Abraham, the promised Seed of the
Woman, who was to bruise the Serpents Head. And thus Faith, although it usually
comes by Hearing and Preaching Christ crucified, yet it is not wrought in any
by the bare Hearing or Preaching, but by the mighty Power of God that raised
Jesus from the Dead, and conformeth every one to Jesus who has it. And as the
Law had its Doctrines, Precepts and Ordinances peculiar to it, so the Gospel
has its Doctrines, Precepts and Ordinances peculiar to it, add therefore is no
Dumb or Mut^ Gospel, as some have called it. And of these Doctrines, That of
Christ who dyed for our Sin^, and rose again, and is ascended, with all the
bl^ssed Effects, Benefits and Fruits of the same, and all spiritual inward
divine Blessings and Graces, wherewith God blesses us in him, and that our
Faith should be in him, and in God as he has thus given us his Son, and our
Love and Ob^dience to God and Christ, as flowing from such Faith, are of great
and special Note.

Error 13. That there are no distinct inward Dispensations and Ministrations of
Light, Grace and Spirit, but One only given to all men, whereby all who are
faithful and obedient under it, are eternally saved, though they have no
Knowledge nor Faith of Christ, as he came in the Flesh, and dyed for our Sins,
and rose again, and is gone into Heaven, and who makes Intercession for us.

Correct. The falsehood of this Error is sufficiently discovered and reproved,
by what is already said in answer to the twelfth particular, and therefore I
shall not need to enlarge upon it here, only take notice of these few
Particulars following. 1 st. That the Law and Gospel, or first and second
Covenant, not only in respect of Outward, but even in respect of Inwards, are
really distinct Dispensations, according to 1 Cor. 9.17. Epehs. 1.10.3.2. Col.
1.25. Gal. 3.21, 22, 23. Romans 10.5, 6, 7, etc. 2 dly. That some had a measure
of sincerity and Uprightness under the Law or Legal Dispensation, both of Jews
and Gentiles, who had not the Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Death and
Resurrection, and all such were in a state of safety for that present time, so
that had they dyed in that state (su^posing that they had not the Knowledge and
Faith of Christ crucified and raised again) they could not have perished, even
as the Manslayer was safe in the City of Refuge, until the Tidings of the
Death of the High Priest come unto him, and then, but not till then, he was at
liberty to return to his ancient Inheritence and Dwelling place; A Figure of
this great Mystery. And this state of Safety under the Law or first Covenant,
where men had or now have Faith in God as Creator, and blessing them with the
common Mercies and Blessings of Creation and Providenc^, and Love and Obedience
to him, as such, without all Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified and raised
again, etc. may be called the common and general Salvation that all men have
been, and are called unto, according to that common Illumination; but that
which all true Christians are called unto, is that more special Salvation,
proper and peculiar to Believers in Christ crucified, etc. The which
Distinction ^s made by Paul, who says, That God is the Savior of all Men, but
esp^cially of them who believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. The first more common and general
Salvation does (...) a good Work in them, who are faithful under the same
(though having diverse Weaknesses and Imperfections, ( for the Law or first
Covenant makes none perfect) and may be said to be the beginning, by way of
preparation, and the second more special and peculiar Salvation does Perfect
it, and is the Perfection thereof, even as Gold is the Perfection of Silver,
and all other Inferior Metals, and the Corn that is ripened is the Perfection
of Corn that is in the green Blade or Ear.

But if any object, This is to suppose a middle state betwixt these that are
Wicked, and faithful Christians.

I answe^ What is said by way of Supposition or Hypothesis, does not infer any
positive Conclusion; but to suppose a middle state of some (betwixt these who
are perfected in Wickedness, and these who are Perfected in the Faith of
Christ) who have not the Faith and Knowledge of Christ crucified revealed unto
them, is far more charitable and rational, and more agreeable to the Nature and
Attributes of Gods great Mercy and Love, than to conclude, (as too many most
rashly and uncharitably do) That all such Gentiles, however so diligent they
have been or are to live up to that common Illumination, are finally and
irrevocably lost and damned; or on the other hand, to conclude, that any are
saved and perfected with Eternal Salvation and Happiness, without all Knowledge
and Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, which the Scripture does lay so
great stress and weight upon; The which middle state is for some time only,
until the Faith of Christ be revealed unto these Souls, when, where and how God
shall be pleased to reveal it, and by what means and helps, unknown to us, for
we know but a part of his Ways. Nor does this in the least favor the Popish
Doctrine of Purgatory, nor yet that called by some Limbus Patrum. But waving
altogether the aforesaid Hypothesis, I do positively affirm, according to
Scripture, That Eternal Life and Salvation is only to be had through the Faith
and Knowledge of Christ crucified and raised again, and love and obedience to
him, as such, as the Mystery of him is inwardly revealed and savingly applied
to men's Souls by the Light, Life and Spirit of Christ in them. And although
that God gives this Knowledge and Faith of Christ ordinarily and commonly by
means of outward Preaching and Hearing, or Reading in the holy Scriptures, yet
I nothing doubt of it, but that God has inwardly revealed it to diverse,
without the outward means and helps of either Preaching or Reading in the holy
Scriptures, yea, before any part of Scripture was; for who taught it to
Abraham, Job, and many others, yea, and our first Parents after the Fall, but
God and Christ by the holy Spirit in their hearts?

Error 14. That the faithful Heathen, who has not had Christ as he suffered
for us in the Flesh, dyed and rose again, etc. outwardly or inwardly preached
or revealed to him, by means or without means, is as good and perfect a
Christian as he who has the greatest Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified,
though received by divine Revelation.

Error 15. That the Preaching of Christ as he came in the Flesh, dyed, ros^ and
ascended, is no necessary part of the Christian Doctrine, nor any Gospel
Doctrine, and is in no wise needful to be preached in these latter Ages, being
only proper to the Age and Days of the Apostles. The only needful Knowledge of
Christ now, is to know him only as the Word, Light and Life in us, but all
other Knowledge of him, as he came in the Flesh without us, and of what he did
and suffered, and of his outward Resurrection and Ascension, and Mediation for
us in Heaven without us, is but to know Christ after the Flesh, which Paul
rejected as a thing unprofitable: The only needful thing is to know him born in
us, crucified in us, raised and ascended in us, and mediating and interceeding
for us in us; and that all M^ditation of Christ's Passion, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, etc. and of what the four Evangelists declared of him, is of little
value or profit to such who are spiritual, whatever profit it may be thought to
have to beginners. And to my certain Knowledge, some have compared the Doctrine
of Christ as he came in the Flesh without us, To the Horn-Book that is to be
left behind.

Correct. The Falsehood of these two abovementioned Particulars does also
easily appear, from what is above declared. And if the faithful Heathen, who
has no Knowledge nor Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, be as good a
Christian, etc. or indeed be any True Christian at all, then Cornelius was as
good a Christian before Peter preached Christ crucified to him, as after; and
then it was in vain that Peter was sent to preach Christ crucified to him, and
it was in vain that the Angel told Cornelius, That Peter should speak words to
him whereby he and his House should be saved: He might have replied to the
Angel, He was saved already, and well enough under that present Dispensation he
was then in. All which is most false and absurd, and contrary to the Doctrine
of the holy Scriptures to assert.

And whereas some have asserted, That Pythagoras, Socrates and Plato and other
Gentile Philosophers, who had some measure of Uprightness, and were in some
measure faithful to what was inwardly revealed unto them, were Christians, as
Justin Martyr, and some other ancient Writers have asserted. As I will not
positively contradict it, so I do affirm, That if they were real Christians,
and were worthy of that honorable Name, they had some Faith and Knowledge of
Christ, the Messiah and Savior of the World, as he was to come in the Flesh,
which it was possible for them to have, by means of their Converse with some of
the Jewish Nation, among whom the Doctrine of the Messiah was generally
current, as he was then to come in the Flesh; and such who had that Doctrine
outwardly preached unto them, or conveyed by the Testimony of the holy
Prophets, who prophesied of him, and whose Books they might have read, and
might also have had some measure of special divine Illumination and Revelation,
helping such as were sincere among them, both to understand and savingly to
apply by Faith, Christ unto them. But to say, That the Doctrine of Christ, as
he came in the Flesh, dyed and rose again, etc. is no necessary part of the
Christian or Gospel Doctrine, and that it was only proper to the Age and Days
of the Apostles, Is to preach another Gospel than Christ and the Apostles
preached; and if an Angel from Heaven preach another Gospel than that which
they preached, he is not to be heard, but is accursed. For both Christ and the
Apostles preached Christ as he came in the Flesh, as well as come in the
Spirit; and said Christ concerning the Woman that anointed him with the
precious Nard or (...), ( Mat. 26.12, 13.) Wherever this Gospel shall be
preached, this (...) shall be told what this Woman has done unto me, for she
has done it unto my Burial; and therefore to preach Christ as he was
crucified, dyed, was buried, and rose again, and^* is a part of the Doctrine of
the Gospel of Christ, and I am sure is no small part of it; and the Gospel of
Christ is but One, and is the Everlasting Gospel that has been preached in all
Ages of the World in some degree, though not in the same degree of Clearness
and Demonstration in the former Ages and Generations before Christ came in the
Flesh, as since. And how frequently does Paul in his Epistles mention the Death
of Christ, and his Resurrection, and Faith in him who dyed and rose again, in
order to Justification and Salvation, and as a principal motive or moving Cause
of our Love and Obedience unto God and to Christ, to live to him who dyed for
us; see these following places, Romans 6.5, 8. and cap. 8.34. and 14.9. 1 Cor.
15, 1, 2, 3. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. 1 These. 4.14. and 5.10. And said Christ to the
Jews, If ye believe not that I am he, (to wit, the promised Messiah) ye shall
dye in your sins, etc. But to them who believed on him, he promised, That
Rivers of living Water should spring out of their Belly, meaning the holy
Spirit that he would give to them that should believe in him. And this Faith
was a Belief in him, not simply as the Word, but as the Word made Flesh, and as
he was then come in the Flesh; but this Faith, though commonly wrought by
outward preaching and hearing, is no bare external Historical Faith, but an
inward spiritual divine living Faith of him, and in him, full of divine
Mystery, Virtue and Sweetness, filling the Soul with pure Love to him, and Joy
and Rejoicing in him, and powerfully conforming the Soul to him; and such a
Knowledge of Christ, though it has a respect to him as he came in the Flesh
without us, dyed and rose again, and is ascended, etc. is not to know Christ
after the Flesh, but is a Knowledge of Christ after the Spirit, and is most
sweet, savoury and refreshing, and profitable to the believing Soul. And none
know, nor can know Christ within them duly and sufficiently, as they ought to
know him to be the Word, Light and Life, (as all true Christians know him,) but
who kn^w him both ways, viz. as he came in the Flesh, was crucified, dyed and
rose again, and as he is come in the Spirit, to reveal, open and apply the
Mystery of him, as crucified and raised again, etc. to eternal Salvation. And
therefore it is a great and dangerous Error, and tends to overthrow a great
Article of the Christian Faith, to say, It is enough to know and believe in
Christ in them, though they have no Knowledge or Faith of Christ without them.
And when Paul said, He knew Christ no more after the Flesh, it is clear, he
meant the carnal Knowledge of him, such as men may have of him, and as he had
before he was converted, by a mere carnal and natural Understanding by what men
can comprehend in the natural Understanding* by what they (...) or read of him.
And thus many have but a carnal Knowledge of Christ within, and of God and the
Spirit, and divine things, ^olding them in a ^^er Nation, which is not the true
Knowledge of him. But the true Knowledge and Faith of Christ, as he dyed and
rose again, and is glorified in our Nature in Heaven, as our Elder Brother, as
the Mystery of him is inwardly opened and revealed by Christ's Light and Spirit
in us, and not otherwise, is of great necessity, and of excellent Use and
Advantage to the most spiritual and advanced, as well as to Beginners, as is
clear from Paul's Example and Doctrine, who preached Christ crucified, though a
stumbling Block to the Jews, and Foolishness to the Greeks, yet to such as
believe and are saved, the Wisdom of God and the Power of God; and he counted
all things but Loss and Dung in comparison of his Knowledge of Christ, so as to
know him and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, and the being made conformable
to his Death, and to know the Power of his Resurrection: All which has a
respect to the Knowledge of him as he dyed and rose again without us, as the
Mystery of him is inwardly revealed, opened and applied to the Soul by the
Spirit. And though the bare natural Meditation of Christ's Passion, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, etc. as performed only by the mere natural Power of
the Understanding, as assisted by bare Hearing or Reading, is unprofitable; yet
the spiritual Meditation thereof, as performed by the help of Christ's Light,
Life and Spirit inwardly revealed, is both very necessary, profitable and
comfortable, and has a very great and exceeding force and influence upon us to
bring forth in us a Conformity to Christ in us, as also the Christian Virtues
of love, Patience, Humility, Resignation, etc. and is of great Service to the
most Advanced.

Error 16. That Christ without us, and all that he did and suffered was but a
Figure, Type, Vail and Shadow of what he does and suffers in us.

Error 17. That there never was nor is any other Necessity and Use of Christ's
outward Coming, and Obedience and Sufferings, etc. but to be our Example, to
imitate him in the like Obedience, Patience, etc.

Correct. Although it is readily to be granted, That in many things which
Christ both did and suffered without us, there is a manifest Analogy and
Similitude betwixt what he did and suffered without (...), and what he does and
suffers within us, yet it is hard to demonstrate an Analogy in all things,
and if it could, it does not prove that Christ either in all or any things that
he did or suffered, was a Figure, Type, or Vail of what he does or suffers in
the Saints, far less only a Type, Figure or Vail; for what he did and suffered
in his own Body and Person was of the greatest weight, and all that we do or
can enjoy of Christ in us, and of what he does or works in us, is but the
effect, fruit and benefit of what he has done and suffered for us without us.
And Christ, as he was offered up on the Cross for our sins, and humbled himself
to Death for us, was that great Propitiation and Sacrifice of Atonement for
our sins, that made Peace for us, and quenched the Wrath of God, and made
Reconciliation unto God for us, and was figured and typi^^ed by the many
Offerings and Sacrifices, and other Rites and Symboles under the Law, which had
no Virtue of themselves to take away sin, but as the Faith of Believers reached
through them to Christ, the Substance, and that one Offering that was to come
in the end of the World, by which One Offering, he has forever perfected them
that are sanctified, as the Scripture declares. And though Christ's Flesh is
called in Scripture, The Vail, as where it is said, Heb. 10.20. That Christ
has consecrated for us a new and living Way, through the Vail, that is to say,
his Flesh, yet it is not such a Vail as the Vails of the Law, but of more
excellent and abiding Use and Service; for by the Vail of his Flesh, wherein he
humbled himself, and was Obedient to the Death of the Cross, as by a most
lovely and costly Skreen, the hot Anger and Wrath of divine Justice was turned
away from us, and diverted: And as our Faith is exercised on him, as he thus
suffered for us, dyed and rose again (and is ascended into Heaven in that very
Body wherein he suffered, being the same it was for Substance, but having put
off all the Infirmities of Flesh, which he took on him for our sake, and being
wonderfully changed in manner and fashion, and is a glorious spiritual Body)
the face of God shines graciously on us, for his sake who dyed for us, and is
risen again, and does ever live to make Intercession for us, as he is clothed
with our Nature glorified in Heaven. And it is one of the great Mysteries of
the Gospel and Christian Faith, which the Spirit and Light of Christ must
inwardly open and reveal unto the Souls of Believers, and does, How the
Sufferings and Death of the Son of God in our Nature, should be of such Virtue
and Efficacy to reconcile us unto God, and quench and pacify the kindled Anger
and Wrath of divine Justice against us.

And for the better understanding of this great Mystery, as the Light and
Spirit of Christ does open it in our hearts, it is to be considered in the few
Particulars following, which only are here glanced or (...) at, although the
large handling of so great and worthy Subject would require a large Volumn, and
needs a more than ordinary divine Ability of Knowledge and Utterance duly to
express it, insomuch that Paul desired the help of the Saints Prayers, that he
might be enabled to make manifest the Mystery of Christ, as he ought to speak
it, and that Utterance or Speech might be given him to that end; for indeed all
Tongues of Men and Angels fall short to declare it.

1 st. That which God did so greatly regard in what Christ did and suffered for
us, was his Obedience unto the Will of his Father, which did so highly please
God, that for his sake, as a most excellent and mighty Intercessor, Gods Wrath
was quenched toward us, and offended Justice was pacified. For whereas in
diverse foregoing Ages of the World, the great Obedience of some excellent and
Holy Men, such as Noah, Moses, Aaron, Phineas, Samuel, Daniel, Job, etc. did
procure the Favor of God to such Nations; Families and Persons for whom they
interceeded, in order to a Temporal Redemption or Deliverance from divine
Wrath, the most great and excellent Obedience of the death Son of God, as he
obeyed in humbling himself, not only to take the Form of a Servant, but to the
Death of the Cross, did procure the Favor of God to all Mankind, for Eternal
Redemption to all who should believe in him, from the beginning of the World to
the end of it; hence he is said in Scripture to have obtained Eternal
Redemption for us, whose Obedience was so much the more excellent, that whereas
all others, who did perform the highest and most holy Acts of Obedience unto
God, in order to interceed for their Brethren, however so holy, were but Men
only; He was not only Man, but both God and Man; and therefore the Blood of
Christ in Scripture, is called, The Blood of God, Act. 20.28. for he who
suffered unto Blood, and was crucified, was not a mere Man, but God in our
Nature, although he did not suffer as God, but as Man.

2 dly, Not only the great Love of God, in giving his Son to dye for us, but
his great Justice, Wisdom and Power, and other his divine Attributes, are
gloriously revealed and discovered in the same, and that which appears to
carnal Man to be Folly, Weakness and Injustice, as that the Just should suffer
for the Unjust, and by his Death overcome him who has the Power of Death, that
is the Devil, is discovered to be divine Wisdom, Power and Justice. And whereas
by Man's sin the divine Mercy and Justice did, as it were, plead one against the
other concerning Man, the one to spare him, the other to punish him, the Wisdom
of God found out a way, by the Death of Gods dear Son, to answer the demand of
both, which David by the Spirit of Prophecy did foresee, when he said in Psalm.
85.10. Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed
each other. And what the divine Wisdom did find out, the divine Power did
execute and bring to pass, even the giving up of the Son, to Death, for us, the
Original whereof was the Love of the Father, that through this most lovely
Channel and Conduit, even Christ crucified, was to vent and extend it self, and
flow forth with all plenty of divine Gifts and Blessings, to Mankind.

3 dly. And as by the Sufferings of Christ he did show forth his most excellent
Obedience, so by the same he became perfected, which is to say, most perfectly
fitted and qualified to be a Savior unto us, and a merciful High Priest with
God, being touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, made like to us in all
things, sin excepted, so as not only by his Death and Sufferings to sweeten and
make comfortable our Death unto us, but to lay a Foundation of our Hope of a
blessed Resurrection, by his Resurrection from the Dead.

4 thly, And the divine Justice appears gloriously in this, That Christ, the
Son, suffering in our Nature, makes it, that his Sufferings are imputed as
ours, he being our Surety, and Head, and Root, even as what we suffer for him,
he reputeth it as his own Sufferings, as when he said, I was Hungery, and ye
gave me not to eat, in Prison, and ye visited me not; for he who sanctifies,
and they who are sanctified, being of one, as that of Head and Members, Root
and Branches, it is just and equal that the Obedience of one, should be imputed
unto all his Brethren, who should believe in him and obey him, for the
Remission of sins past, to declare his Justice, and that God might be just, and
the Justifier of them who believe in Jesus; as in the natural Body, what the
Head or any principal Member of the Body does, good or bad, is imputed as done
by the whole Body, and who are bound together jointly and severally, are liable
one for another; hence he is called our Surety or Bonds-man, in Scripture. And
thus because the Children of Israel were as one Body, they were punished for
the sins of some particular Members, until the divine Justice was answered.

5 thly, The Mystery of this was figured under the Law. That no fire was to be
kindled, but all to be quenched on the Day of Atonement, and on the Sabbath
Days: for as the Day of Atonement was in the end of the Year, so Christ
suffered in the end of the World, and quenched the fire of divine Wrath against
all Sinners; And near the beginning of the Jewish Sabbath, he dyed on the
Cross, and rested in the Grave, until the morning of the first Day, in which
Sabbath or Rest of our Lord in the Grave, he quenched the divine Wrath and
Severity against Sinners, and made Intercession for them, whereby the Benefit
and Virtue of his Death did and does extend to all Souls and Ages, to save all
who should believe in him.

6 thly, The Faith of all true Believers in Christ from the beginning of the
World, was not only in him as inwardly and spiritually present in their hearts,
the Word, Light and Life, but as the Seed of the Woman, according to the first
Gospel Promise, who should bruise the Serpents Head, and afterward, as the
Seed of Abraham, in whom all Nations of the Earth should be blessed, held forth
to their Faith in Promises, and Types and Figures of Sacrifices, and Shadows of
the Law. And they had the Faith and Knowledge of him, That he was to be both
God and Man, as not only Isaiah prophesied of him, but also Eve; for when Cain
was born, she called him Cain, saying, I have got the Man the Lord, (...),
(which is one of the greatest Names of God) so the true Translation; Not that
she did imagine, that Cain was he, as Luther and some others have conceived,
but without all ground; but the Reason why she called her first born Cain, was
to be a signification and Memoral of her Faith to succeeding Ages, in the Seed
that was promised he^, which she had received by Faith; even as Joseph called
one of his Sons Mannasse, and another Ephraim, with respect to other things and
Persons; and Rachel called her eldest Son Joseph, that signifies Addi^g, not
because of Joseph himself, but because of Benjamin, whom she foresaw, by the
Spirit of Prophecy, should be afterward given her, saying, God shall add to me
another Son; and therefore that is only the true Faith of Christ which lays
hold of him and respects him not simply as Man, nor simply as God, or the
Word by which all things were made, but as he is the Man the Lord, or the Word
made Flesh, or God manifest in Flesh, etc. And whereas many acknowledge no
other Necessity or Service of Christ's outward Coming, but to be our Example, to
Imitate him in the like Obedience, Patience, etc. They are under a very great
and dangerous Mistake; for as he is our most perfect Example, and pattern of
Obedience, and Arch-Type of all Perfection, so he is our Head and Lord, in whom
our Faith is continually to be exercised* that so by our Faith in him, as such,
we may be perfectly joined to him, and receive Ability from him to be made
conformable to his Example, in all holy Virtues and Fruits of the Spirit; and
therefore he is our Example after another manner than all others of the Saints,
who are our Fellow Members, but Christ is our Head, Lord and King over all.

Error 18. That the true saving, justifying and purifying Faith is only in
Christ within us, as he is the Word, Light and Life, and quickening Spirit,
teaching us to deny Injustice, Intemperance, and ^ her Worldly Lusts, and to
live soberly, justly and godly toward God as (...), but it is no Branch, Part
nor Property of saving Faith to believ^ (...) the Man Christ as he dyed for our
Sins, and rose again without us, etc.

Error 19. That Gospel Love, and all Gospel Virtues and Obedience, and Fruits
of the Spirit, are sufficiently and plentifully attained unto only by the
Light, Word and Grace of God within men, though that inward Word, Light and
Grace reveal nothing to them in more or less of Christ's Outward Coming, etc.

Correct. The Falsehood of these two abovementioned Particulars is sufficiently
discovered by what is already said on the foregoing Heads. Yet for the further
clearing the matter, let the few Particulars following be well considered.

1 st. That as the Law and Gospel, as to the inward, are distinct
Administrations and Dispensations, so they have their distinct Effects, there
is Legal Faith, Love, Obedience, and Legal Virtues, which are true and good in
their kind, and a Legal Per^ection, which yet is far short of the Gospel
Perfection; for there are diverse sorts and degr^e^ of Perfection, according to
the Hebrew words, Vrim, i. e. Lights, and Thummim, i. e. Perfections; and there
is an Evangelical or Gospel Faith, (...) Obedience, and Gospel Virtues, and a
Gospel Perfection, all which (...) a more excellent kind, far excelling the
other, as Gold excels Silver, Brass, Iron, etc. And to this does that Gospel
Promise relate, For Iron I will bring Silver, and for Brass, Gold, Isa. 60.17.

2 dly, The highest attainment under the Law, or Legal State, or first
Covenant, makes men but Servants in the House of God, or if Sons, yet but Sons
of the first Covenant; but the lowest true attainment under the Gospel state,
makes men Sons; and though every Son is a Servant of God, yet every Servant is
not a Son. This distinction of Servants and Sons, is used both by Christ and
Paul in the New Testament, and in the Old Testament was figured by Ishmael, the
Son of the Bondwoman, and Isaac, the Son of Sarah, the Freewoman, which
things are an Allegory, as Paul has declared, for Hagar and Sarah are the two
Covenants, and their Children are the two several Births, answering to these
several Mothers and Wombs: And as Ishmael and Isaac had one Father, but
differing Mothers, so the Children of the two Covenants, viz. Law and Gospel,
have one Father, to wit, God, but differing Mothers, viz. differing inward
Dispensations and Ministrations, as well as differing in Outward.

3 dly, The Legal Faith is a faith in God as Creator, giving Life, Health, and
many Blessings and Comforts both inward and outward, and from this Legal Faith
does flow a Legal Love, Obedience and other Legal Virtues, and all proceeding
from that general and universal Illumination that is common to all Mankind,
that teaches men generally the substance of the ten Precepts delivered by God
to the People from Mount Sinai, and writ by him in two Tables of Stone. And as
there is a Legal Faith in God, and love to him as Creator and Lord, so there is
a Legal Worship and Prayer, whereby men may call upon God as he is their
Creator and Maker, and giving them Being, Life, Breath, and all the Comforts of
Life common to Mankind, together with many good enduements of Knowledge and
Understanding, and general Virtues; but all this without any Knowledge and
Faith of Christ as he dyed for us and rose again, etc. But the Evangelical or
Gospel Faith is a Faith in God, not only as our Creator, giving us these common
Mercies and Blessings, but as he is a most gracious God and Father to us in our
Lord Jesus Christ, giving us the Revelation and Knowledge of his Son as he dyed
for us, and rose again, and is gone into Heaven, and now remains in Heaven
clothed with our glorified Nature, making Intercession for us; and as the
Evangelical or Gospel Faith is a Faith in God as he is our Father, and the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, so it is a Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
not simply as he is the Word or God, but as the Word made Flesh, and God
manifest in Flesh, as he dyed for our sins and rose again, with all the
Blessings and Benefits of him, as such. And this Gospel Faith, as it is more
excellent than the Legal Faith, so it has a more excellent Love that does
accompany it, flowing from greater and higher Motives and Inducements or moving
Causes, and a more excellent Hope, Obedience, and all other Evangelical
Virtues, and a more excellent Worship, and Prayer, and Thanksgiving, the which
more excellent Motives or moving Causes, are, That God has given his Son to
dye for us, and That the Son has freely offered himself to Death for us, the
which as it is revealed and applied to us by the Spirit of Christ in our
hearts, is a most excellent and high Motive and Inducement, far above all
other, mighty to draw and incline us to the Love of God and Christ, and to a
most cordial Obedience unto God and to Christ. And to such who are under this
Gospel Dispensation, the substance of the Ten Precepts is a binding Law unto
them, and they are obliged to fulfill the Righteousness of it, and that from
more powerful Motives, as is already said, than what the legal Dispensation
(simply as such) does afford unto them; and the Gospel Dispensation does afford
unto them not only more Light and Knowledge, but more Grace and Strength,
whereby to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law; and not only so, but to obey
diverse New Precepts that the Law (delivered universally to Mankind, or to the
People of Israel at Mount Sina) did not require; for the Law of the first
Covenant did permit men to require an Eye for an Eye, Tooth for Tooth, and to
resist Wrongs and Injuries, and seek a Recompense or Revenge, but this the
Gospel Law forbids; also, it did permit men to have more Wives than one
together, but Christ's Gospel Law forbids such a thing, as also Swearing,
which the Law did allow of. And the Gospel Obedience differs greatly from the
Legal Obedience, in manner of Performance, as flowing from greater Love and
Grace, as much as the Obedience of a Servant that loves his Master as well as
a Servant does or can do, differs from the Obedience of a Son that loves and
serves his Father, because he is his Father; but the Servant loves him
because he is ^is Master, and serves him for Wages, and fears to disobey
him, lest he beat him, or detain his Wages, or cast him out of his Service; but
the Son knows that he shall be his Father's Heir, and his Inheritance, as a
Son, is wholly in his Eye; Even thus the Sons of God love and serve God, that
they may forever inherit him to be their Portion and Inheritence; for they have
no other Inheritence but God and Christ, and that holy Spirit that proceeds
from both, and is one with both.

4 thly. The Children of the Law or first Covenant, signified by Ishmael,
become the Children of the New Covenant, signified by Isaac the Son of Sarah,
through Faith in Christ Jesus, to wit, whole and undivided, for the Lord Jesus
Christ is but One, not two Christ's, but One, and this One Christ is both God
and Man, the Word made Flesh, or God manifest in Flesh, the great Mystery of
Godliness; and therefore true Christians cannot divide Christ either in their
Faith in him, or Love to him, but both believe in him, and love him, and obey
him, as he is both God and Man, or The Man the Lord, as the true Mother of the
Child that was brought to Solomon, would not have the Child divided, but would
either have the whole Child, or none; so the true Christian will not divide
Christ, but receives him, believes in him, loves and obeys him wholly and
undivided, as he is both God and Man, and as he it now exalted in heavenly
Glory, as our Elder Brother and Sisters Son (for so both the Septuagint and
Greek Fathers, so called, do translate that word, Cant. 1.13. a bundle of
Myrrh is my Sister's Son unto me) clothed with our glorified Nature in Heaven.
And as the true Christian divides not Christ, but receives and acknowledges
him, wholly and undividedly, so nor does he divide his Offices, but takes him
as King, Priest and Prophet, Husband, Physician, Bishop and Shepherd, etc. But
all false Christians they take him not for their King and Lord, and are not
subject to his Law and Government, and therefore they have not a true Interest
in him, as their Priest and Savior. And that by Faith in Christ Jesus these
who are Servants become Sons, so that the Posterity and Children of Hagar the
Bondwoman, by Faith in Christ become the Children of Sarah the Freewoman, i.
e. the New Covenant, Jerusalem from above, the Mother of us all, (...) clear
from Gal. 3.26. for ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus.
And that the Law had a preparatory Service unto this end, is clear from the
foregoing words, verse. 24, 25. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith; but after that Faith
is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. And this was figured by the
words of Sarah, when she said to her Husband Abram, Genesis 16.2. I pray thee go
in to my Handmaid, it may be (or as the Hebrew does bear it, it shall come to
pass) that I shall obtain Children by her; which she spoke by the Spirit of
Prophecy, for the Children of Hagar, i. e. of the Law or first Covenant, become
the Children of Sarah, i. e. of the New Covenant, by Faith in Christ, after
that the Faith is revealed unto them. But too many stick in the Law, and think
they are well enough there remaining, but this is an abuse of the Law, for the
proper use of the Law is to prepare unto Christ; for all who are duly sensible
of the Requirings and Righteousness of the Law, have a feeling and experience
in themselves, that they cannot fulfill the Righteousness of it in all parts
and respects, and therefore they are driven from the Law to Christ, to receive
the knowledge of the Remission of their sins committed against the Law, and
also to be enabled (through a greater degree of Grace under the Gospel) through
Faith in Christ, not only to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law, but to
attain to a more excellent Righteousness, grounded upon greater Motives and
Principles, than what the Law does or can afford. And such who stick in the Law
or Legal state, and refuse to come unto Christ, are such who seek to establish
their own Righteousness by the Law, and are the whole that need not the
Physician, and as they abide there, they are in danger to turn Persecutors, as
the Jews and Pharisees did persecute the Lord Jesus Christ, and such as did
believe in him, and as in the figure Ishmael persecuted Isaac.

Error 20. That no Worship, Honor, Prayer nor Thanksgiving is to be given to
Christ the Son of Abraham, David, Mary, more ^^an to Saints or Angels, nor to
Christ the Son of Man, but only to Christ the Son of God, and who is God.

Corect. This is a great Error, and does most manifestly contradict the holy
Scriptures, and is a great dishonor to our blessed Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ, and is of great hurt to all called Christians, who shall receive such a
Persuasion, and does reflect and charge upon all true Christians (who do
Worship and Pray unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and give Thanks unto him, and unto
God the Father through him) a Crime no less than that of Idolatry; for no
Saints nor Angels are to worshipped, prayed unto nor called upon, nor to be
adored with any divine Adoration; and if no divine Worship, Prayer nor
Thank^-giving is to be given to Jesus Christ, the Son of Abraham, David, etc.
then it is real Idolatry to Worship him, or Pray unto him; but if divine
Worship, Prayer and Thanksgiving is to be given to him, according to the
Scriptures Testimony, and the Saints Practi^e recorded in Scripture, then all
such who deny it are highly injurious both to Christ and the Saints, and hold
an Opinion that is very hurtful, which I wish all that are guilty well to
consider, and to receive better Instruction and Information; for, to say, That
Jesus the Son of Abraham, of David and of Mary, is not to be worshipped, or
called upon, is to hold that there are two Christ's, or to deny that Jesus
Christ the Son of Abraham, David and Mary, is both God and Man, and ye^ o^^
Lord Jesus Christ; both which are false, and contrary to the holy Scripture,
which testify expressly, That there is [One] Lord Jesus Christ, and this one
Lord Jesus Christ is both God and Man, or the Word made Flesh, and God manifest
in Flesh; And as he is the Son of Abraham, and of David, and of Mary, as he was
Man, and the Seed of the Woman that should bruise the Serpents Head (as God
promised) so the same Lord Jesus Christ, and not another, is the Son of God, as
Peter confessed in that Noble Confession to the Lord Jesus Christ, when he
asked him, Whom say Men that I the Son of Man am, and whom say thou that I
am? Peter answered, Thou are the Son of the living God. So, whom Christ called
the Son of Man, Peter confessed to be the Son of God; and Elizabeth called
Mary, the Mother of her Lord, saying, Whence is this, that the Mother of my
Lord comes unto me? And how was Christ (whose Mother Mary was) her Lord, and
whom also Mary calls, her God and Savior, but that he was both God and Man,
and yet One Christ and Lord over all, having all Power given him in Heaven and
Earth, was being in the form of God, thought it no Robbery to be equal with God
(Phil. 2.6. compare with Zech. 1^.7.) humbled himself, and took on him the form
of a Servent, and was Obedien^ unto Death, even the Death of the Cross;
therefore has God highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name,
to be a Prince and a Savior, that at the Name of JESUS every K^^e may how, and
Tongue con^ess to the Glory of the Father; and every one that honors the
Son, honors the Father also. Again, seeing that Christ Jesus the Son of Man,
the Son of Abraham, David, etc. is to be believed in as our Savior and
Mediator (for even the Child Jesus was called JESUS, because he was to save his
People from their sins) then surely he is to be called upon; for the Object of
our Faith and Prayer is but one, according to Romans 10, How shall they call on
him in whom they have not believed? so it may well be said, How shall they
believe in him ^^ whom they do not call. B^^ that the Man Christ Jesus is to be
belived in, is clear from Christ's own Doctrine, and the Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles; Ye believe in God, (said Christ) believe also in me; And
if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins; and the Scriptures
abound with Testimonies, That the Lord Jesus Christ (who is both God and Man)
is to be believed in, and called upon, being our Savior, Mediator and
High Priest, who is able to help us, made higher than the Heavens; and because
he suffered in our Nature, and was tempted and proved, and made like to us in
all things, but without sin, therefore he is our merciful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, and is Steward over the House of God, as a Son, and is not
untouched with the feeling of our Infirmities, therefore we are encouraged to
come boldly to the Throne of Grace through him; and Christ commanded the
Disciples to ask in his Name, and the Apostles called (...) the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and so did the Saints recorded (...) ^^ripture, and Miracles
were wrought by calling on the Name of (...) of Nazareth, which has a respect
to his being Man, for he was conceived at Nazareth, in the Womb of the Virgin
Mary, who dwelt at Nazareth, and there he remained with her for a certain time;
And the Wise Men that came from the East, worshipped Jesus when he was a Child,
as the Scripture plainly declares, and offered up to him Gold, Myrrh and
Frankincense. And the Disciples worshipped him when he was among them, after
his his Resurrection, and also before his Passion and Suffering of Death. Mat.
14.33. it is said, Then they that were in the Ship came and worshipped him,
saying, Of a truth, thou art the Son of God. And after his Resurrection, Mat.
28.9. it is said, The Disciples came and held him by the feet, and Worshipped
him. And Luke 24.51, 52. And it came to pass while he blessed them, he was
parted from them, and carried up into Heaven, and they Worshipped him, and
returned to Jerusalem with great Joy: And who will say that this was a bare or
mere humane Worship, and not a real divine Worship? for the Man Christ Jesus
not being a mere Man, but God as well as Man, therefore divine Worship and
Adoration belongs to him; and which according to Rev. 5.9. The four Beasts or
living Creatures, and the twenty four Elders give unto Christ, who was slain
for the sins of the World, saying, (when having fallen down before the Lamb
(and that Lamb is the Lord Jesus Christ both God and Man) Thou art worthy to
take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof, for thou ^ast slain, and have
redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and (...),
and Nations, and have made us unto our God Kings and (...)* etc. Thus they sung
unto him. And to deny that this (...) Lamb or redeeming by his Blood, has a
respect to his suffering Death, (as he was Man) in the Flesh, is most absurd,
and a plain (...) version of holy Scripture; for however it may be said, That
the ^amb was slain from the Foundation of the World, yet that was not enough to
expiate and make an Atonement for the Sins of men, but it ^^hoved that Christ
should come and suffer Death, and be slain in the ^lesh, of which suffering of
Christ that was to come in the end of the World or Ages, when the Fullness of
Christ came, the Prophets have generally prophesied. And that the same Lord
Jesus Christ that was slain (and that was the Man Christ, for Christ as God
could not dye, nor be slain) is to be worshipped with divine Worship, is clear
from Rev. 5.12. where (...) the Beasts and the Elders, but the Angels, whose
Number was (...) ^^ousand times ten Thousand, and thousands of Thousands
worshipped (...), saying, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power,
and (...), and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing; yea,
and all Creatures worshipped him, etc verse. 13. And certain blind Men
worshipped him before he suffered Death, and prayed to him by the Name Son of
David, whose Petition he graciously answered, and did not reprove them, as if
they had been guilty of Idolatry, Mat. 20. for thus they pra^ed, Have Mercy on
us, O Lord! thou Son of David. And v. 34. it is said, Jesus had Compassion on
them, and touched their Eyes, and immediately their Eyes received sight, and
they followed him. And Mark 10.46. ^ blind man, called Bartimeus prayed to
Christ Jesus by the Name of Son of David, saying, Jesus, thou Son of David!
have Mercy on me. To whom Jesus answered, saying, Go thy way, thy Faith has
made thee whole. And if any say, his Prayer did proceed from Ignorance or
blindness of mind, it is a very great Mistake, for Christ commended his Faith,
and answered his Prayer, which proves, that what he did proceeded not from
Ignorance or blindness of mind, but they were rather blind who discouraged him;
whereas he had an excellent spiritual sight of him, and faith in him. Also, the
Ca^ni^^sh Woman prayed unto him by the same Name, in behalf of her Daughter,
saying, Have Mercy on me, O Lord! thou Son of David; whole Faith he greatly
commended, and answered her desire. And the Children and multitude worshipped
Jesus, and prayed, and sang unto him, by the Name Son of David, saying,
Hosanna, Son of David; which is a dire^^ Prayer, for the Hebrew word Hosannah
signifies, save I beseech, and is taken out of the 118 Psalm ^ ^5 And it was
prophesied concerning Christ, Psalm. 72. who in the Title of that Psalm is
called Solomon, of whom Solomon, born of Bethsheba was the figure and Tipe,
verse. 11. Yea, all Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve
him, for he shall deliver the Needy when he cries, etc. and v. 15. And he
shall li^e, and to him shall be given of the Gold of Sheba, Prayer also shall
be made to him continually (so the Hebrew) and daily shall he be praised. And
v. 10. The Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles shall b^ing ^resents, the Kings
of Sheba, and Seba shall offer Gifts: And part of this was fulfilled when the
Wise Men came from the East and offered Gold and other Presents unto him.

Now if any say, All this is but a humane Worship, and not divine, it is a
great Error, for Christ Jesus is a heavenly and divine King, and his Kingdom is
not humane and earthly, but divine and heavenly; and therefore a divine Worship
and Honor is due unto him, and is given by all true Christians unto him, and
unto God through him, our alone Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ
Jesus; for when we pray to God through Christ, the Mediator, it is directed to
Christ, and through Christ to God; and when we pray, the Spirit of Christ in
our Hearts does present to our Understanding, Thoughts and Remembrance most
frequently the Lord Jesus Christ, how he is both God and Man, and our near
relation to him, being such, even our Brother, being the Son of David, and the
Son of Man as well as the Son of God, both which are most sweet and comfortable
Names to us, as the Spirit of Christ does inwardly open the Mystery and Virtue
of them to us; and this gives us the greater heavenly and holy Boldness to
pray unto God, according to Heb. 10.21, 22. Having an high Priest over the
House of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith.
And who is this high Priest but the Lord Jesus Christ, who is both God and Man?
and therefore in our Meditations and Prayers we should not divide Christ so
much as in our Thoughts, so as to confine or limit our thoughts wholly and
simply either to his Godhead or Manhood, but consider him both ways, being both
God and Man; and this also is the True Christian Faith, to believe in him who
is both God and Man, and who is both within us, and also without us in Heaven,
in the true Nature of Man. And though at times the Soul may have an inward Sense
of the Life of Christ, and in that sense may pray unto Christ, without any
(...) Prayer, or particular Consideration of the Nature of the Man Christ, yet
even then, the Prayer ascends unto him, and through him unto God, for the Man
Christ Jesus being our Mediator, he is the Way and the Door through which our
Prayers and Petitions ascend unto God, whether we have any particular and
distinct Thoughts and Remembrance of him being such or not; but when we have
our Meditation and Thoughts exercised upon him, and that by the help of the
Spirit of Christ in us, that Spirit does present to us most frequently Christ
being both GOD and MAN, and gives us great spiritual Consolation and
Refreshing, to know, and understand, and remember that Christ (through whom we
draw near to God) is our elder Brother, even the Son of David; therefore it is
a very comfortable Name, that has much sweetness and virtue in it, Son of
David, and Son of Man, as the Spirit of Christ does open and apply the Mystery
of it to us; and because we pray to the Man Christ, and that our Prayer ascends
to God through Christ, therefore the M^n Christ Jesus hears our Prayers, and
is spiritually present with us and in us, by a measure of his Spirit which we
receive, who is the heavenly Man and second Adam, the quickening Spirit. And
Christ after his Ascension calls himself the Root and Offspring of David,
which is equivalent to that, Son of David, therefore Son of David is a suitable
Name to him, now th^^ he is glorified in the highest Heavens; and we may well
call him by that Name, which he calls himself by, now when he is glorified
and exalted above all Heavens, Angels, Thro^^s, Dominions, Principalities and
Powers in heavenly Places. And Paul writing to Timothy, said, Remember that
Jesus Christ, of the Seed of David, was raised from the Dead, according to my
Gospel; and therefore to remember Christ, his being the Son of David, and of
the Seed of David* now ascended into Heaven, and who there remains to make
Intercession for us, as the Spirit of Christ in us helps us so to remember
him, is of great service to us a^ all times, to strengthen and increase our
Faith in God, and Christ, and our Love to him, and especially when we pray, and
does (...) in us the most fervent Prayer. And as to name the Name of God (...)
with the mouth in Prayer, (as the Spirit of Christ in (...) us so to do) is
both necessary and convenie^^, so to n^^e the N^^e of Jesus Christ outwardly
with the (...) (by the help of the same Spirit in Prayer) is also necessary and
conv^nie^^; for it is a (...), full of divine Virtue, Savor and Sw^etness, a^
i^ it sounded in the Ears, and received into the (...) of all (...) of the
Spirit of Jesus.

Error 21. That Christ when he came in the Flesh, was only the Godhead in a
Body of Flesh which he appeared in, having no Soul nor Spirit of a Man in him;
and that the Body which he took up, he laid it aside, and did not t^ke it up
with him into Heaven; and that nothing of Christ ascended up to Heaven but what
at that time came down from Heaven.

Error 22. That Christ is now in Heaven only as God, and only and alone in the
Nature of God, but has nothing of the Nature of Man in Heaven, neither of Soul
nor Body.

Correct. Both these are very hurtful Errors, and contradict the holy
Scriptures most plainly; for the Scripture speaks plainly and expressly of the
Soul and Spirit of Christ, as well as of his Body; and as concerning his Spirit
it is said (when Christ dyed on the Cross) Mat. 27.50. he yielded up the
Spirit; and that this Spirit was not the mere natural Breath of the Body, but
an Immortal Spirit, is clear from Luke 23.46. Father, into thy hands I (...) my
Spirit, even at Stephen dying, said unto Jesus, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit,
Acts 7.59. And concerning the Spirit of Jesus, as he was M^n, it is said, John
1^.23. He groaned in the Spirit, and was (...). And cap. 12.27. Now is my Soul
troubled, etc. And cap. 23.27. Whom Jesus had thou said, he was troubled in
Spirit, etc. And as concerning the SOUL of Christ, as Man, more particularly,
see (...) 26.37. Then says he unto them, my Soul is exceeding sorrowful, even
(...). And concerning the Soul of Christ as he was Man, and as he was to suffer
Death in the Nature of Man, the Prophecy of Isaiah is very plain, cap. 53.1^.
When thou shall make his Soul an Offering for sin. And v. 11. He shall see the
travail of his Soul; And v. 12. Because he (...) his Soul unto Death, etc. And
David also prophes^^d of his Soul, Psalm. 16.10. For thou will not leave my Soul
in Hell, nor suffer thine Holy O^^ to for Corruption. The which words of the
Psalm, as (...), are to be understood of the Soul of Christ, (...) 2.27. And
that the Soul and Spirit of Christ in these places before-(...), are to be
understood of the Soul as Spirit of Christ, as (...), and as partaking of all
that was essential to Man's Nature, is clear, (...), 1 st. If Christ had only
(...) the Body of a Man, without the (...), he had (...) true Man, for the Body
without the Soul, is not the Man. 2 dly. If Christ only had the Body of Man,
and not the Soul, when his Sufferings had been only mere Bodily sufferings, and
(...) the suffering of the Body (...), (...) little Bodily pain; but the
greatest suffering^ of Christ were these of his Soul and Spirit, as he was Man,
for as he was God he could not suffer, to speak properly, the Godhead being
unchangeable, is altogether impassible; for if the Godhead could admit of any
Passion, or suffering of Grief or Sorrow, that would infer some Change in the
same, which is impassible.

3 dly. The Scripture frequently mentions Christ's Obedience, and how he came
down from Heaven, not to do his own Will, but the Will of him that sent him.
Now this Obedience of Christ unto the Will of God, must be the Act of his Soul*
and not of a mere Body; for what Obedience can a mere Body perform unto God,
without the Soul or Spirit? and therefore this Obedience must be of his Soul
and Spirit, as Man; for all Obedience implies a subjection to one that is
superior; for the Godhead cannot be said to command or obey himself, but the
Man Christ Jesus received a Commandment of the Father, and did most perfectly
obey the Father's Command; and therefore he had the true Soul and Spirit of Man
in him, as well as any other Man has. And though the Soul of Christ, as Man,
was and is incomparably more excellent than all Souls of Men, yet he has in
his Soul all that is essential to the Soul of Man, being made like to us in all
things, but without sin.

4 thly. As Obedience implies a subjection of an Inferior to a superior, or
of the lesser to the greater, so does Prayer, and therefore when Christ prayed
unto the Father, that Soul or Spirit in Christ which prayed, was the Soul and
Spirit in Christ, as Man, in respect of which Christ said, My Father is greater
than I, to wit, as Man; for the Godhead cannot pray to the Godhead, to speak
properly.

5 thly. The true Consideration of Christ's being our Mediator, does plainly
hold forth, that Christ has a Soul as well as a Body, as Man; and because he
was Head and Mediator to his Church, betwixt God and Men, from the beginning of
the World, therefore he had the Soul and Spirit of a Man from the beginning;
and when he took flesh in the Virgins Womb, his soul and spirit, as Man (that
was united with the Eternal Word from the beginning) did descend and Tabernacle
in that prepared Body of Flesh, to the end that he might perform these Offices
of his Mediatorship, that could not be performed without his Coming in the
Flesh, as namely, To dye for the sins of the World, etc. for some of his
Mediatory Offices he both could and did perform by his soul and spirit, before
he came in the Flesh, but to dye for the sins of men, so as to be a Sacrifice
of Atonement unto God for them, required his taking on him a Body of Flesh;
and therefore when he said, He came down from Heaven not to do his own will,
that cannot be meant simply the Godhead of Christ, who has no Will superior
unto him to obey or fulfill; but the soul of Christ (though united to the Godhead
by a most excellent and admirable Union) has a superior Will and Power above
it, which is that of the Godhead, in which he does always obey and fulfill the
Will of God; and therefore the soul, of Christ being in most excellent and
admirable Union with the eternal Word or Godhead, descended from Heaven to take
Flesh in the Virgins Womb.

And as concerning Christ's Body of Flesh which he did take up or assume, though
it dyed, and was buried, yet it rose again; for even his Flesh saw no
Corruption, as Peter plainly declares and proves out of Psalm. 16.10. And as
Christ prophesied of his Body, Destroy (or rather as it should be translated
from the Greek) Dissolve this Temple, and I will raise it up again the third
day: And in the same Body wherein he suffered Death on the Cross, and which was
buried, he rose again, and showed himself to his Disciples, and the Print of
the Nails and Spear, and after forty days in the same Body did ascend into
Heaven, in the sight of the Disciples; for having once dyed, he dies no more,
and therefore did not lay down his Body again; I say, the Body of Christ is the
same now in Heaven, as it was on Earth, both before and after he suffered, as
in respect of substance, or the true Essence, Being and Nature of a Body,
though it is wonderfully changed in Manner and Condition, having put off all
these Infirmities, that it did assume for our sake, and is a most glorious
heavenly spiritual Body, according to which the Bodies of the saints shall be
made conform at the Resurrection of the Dead. And seeing Christ's Body, that he
had of the Virgin, which ascended into Heaven (together with his soul) did not
come down from Heaven, (although his soul did descend from Heaven) therefore it
is a great Error to say, That nothing of Christ, or belonging to Christ did
ascend to Heaven, but that which came from Heaven; the Scripture says no such
thing any where; but thus it says, He who ascended is the same that descended,
to wit, the same Christ, who was before the Body was, did both descend and
ascend, but his Body did not descend with him, when he ascended; for it was
formed in the Virgins Womb, and conceived by the miraculous Operation of the
holy Ghost, and that Body had in it really of the Virgins Flesh and Nature, as
also, it had in it somewhat more excellent. And it is easy to understand how
the same Christ that did descend, did again ascend, and yet took up the Body as
a Garment, which he brought not with him at his descending, as to understand
how a man going from this place to London, returns ag^in the same Man, but
brings with him a Clothing or Garment that he did not take with him.

And whereas some say, They grant that Christ a has spiritual Body in Heaven,
but will not acknowledge that it is the same substance, essence or being of
that Body which was crucified, but say, It was that which was glorified with
the Father before the World was; and they being further asked, What that was?
they say, It was his Godhead; for they deny that Christ has any thing of Man's
Nature in Heaven, and they are offended with such who say, Christ has a
twofold Nature in Him, viz. one being the Nature of God, the other being the
Nature of Man; and thus like the Eutychians and Monothelit^s of Old, they
confound the twofold Nature of Christ, making his Nature, as God, to be his
Nature as Man, as if the Godhead of Christ were his Manhood, or as if his
Manhood could be changed (...) Godhead; and such fall into the gross Error of
those who say (...) Godhead it self is a Body in the form and stature of a Man,
and changed it self from being a spiritual Body to be a carnal Body, therein to
suffer Death, and after it rose again was changed from carnal to spiritual.
Now, as this is a most vile and Antichristian Error, greatly to be abhorred
and detested by all Christians, so it is another most Vile and Antichristian
Error to say, The Body of Christ was changed into the Nature of the Godhead, as
some say, or That Christ has but one Nature in Heaven, which is only that of
his Godhead, as others say; for the Nature of the Godhead is wholly and in all
respects unchangeable, being without all shadow of Change, as James declares,
and many places of Scripture confirm, and is most agreeable to the Dictates of
that good Understanding which God has given to Men, as Men. And again, to say,
That Christ has but one Nature in Heaven, is wholly to make void his being our
Mediator; for he is our Mediator not simply as God, nor simply as Man, but as
he is both God and Man; and his Godhead Nature is not his Manhood Nature,
although most excellently and admirably united together, and that forever, above
all Thoughts and Understanding of Men and Angels.

And whereas some argue, That Christ is not in Heaven in (...) Nature, because
the Scripture says, By Nature we are Children of Wrath. Such in this, as in
other things, bewray and discover their great Ignorance and Darkness of
Understanding; for it is by the corrupted and vitiated Nature of Man that we
have been Children of Wrath; but Sin or Corruption by sin is no essential part
or property of Man's Nature, but merely adventitious, and it is the work of God
and Christ to heal, wash and sanctify the corrupted and defiled Nature of Men;
and then (when washed and sanctified) they are no more by Nature Children of
Wrath, but Children of God, and in high Favor with him. But Christ did never
take or assume any thing or part of the corrupted and vitiated Nature of Man;
for though the Natures of other men were generally corrupted and defiled with
sin, both in Soul and Body, yet his Nature, even as Man, never had any
Defilemen^ in the least. And although his Nature as Man was never defiled, and
our Nature which we generally have has been defiled, this does not prove that
Christ did not partake of Man's Nature; for as one part of a Garment may remain
pure and clean, when the other parts of it are defiled, so that part of our
Nature which Christ assumed, remained pure, and was never defiled, although what
other men have has been defiled, yet so as to be capable of being cleansed and
made pure again, like unto the pure Nature of the Man Christ Jesus. It is
certainly a great shame that any pretending to Christianity should be so grossly
ignorant; and it is yet a greater shame and scandal that any pretending to be
taught by the Spirit of Christ, that is a Spirit of all divine Wisdom,
Knowledge and Understanding, should be so dark, blind and ignorant as some are;
and if they had but the right and good use of their Reason, as Men, they could
never fall into such gross and pernicious Errors, which not only the holy
Scripture, but the very sound Reason of a Man does abundantly confute.

Error 23. That the alone Righteousness of Christ, whereby men are justified,
is that inward Work of Righteousness wrought in us, in obedience to that
universal Illumination, common to Jews, Turks, Pagans and Christians; and that
the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, apprehended or received by Faith, is
but a fancy or invention of Men.

Correct. This is a great Error, and very hurtful, the plain tendency whereof
is to lead men to rest in the Righteousness of the first Covenant, as all that
Righteousness is, which is wrought in men only in Obedience to that universal
Illumination common to all men, as is above demonstrated; for even the inward
Righteousness and Holiness wrought in men, who are true Christians, is of a
more excellent kind and degree, than that which any of the most upright
Gentiles could attain unto by Obedience to that common Illumination in them,
who have not the Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, etc. for the
Christian Faith, Righteousness and Holiness, and the whole Christian Obedience
proceeds from a more excellent measure and kind of divine Illumination and
Grace, that is peculiar and special to Christians, though both the one and the
other do all proceed from one God, and one Lord Jesus Christ, and one Spirit of
God, yet diversity of Operations, Administrations and Gifts. And although the
Righteousness, Holiness and Obedience of true Christians be the more excellent
above that of the best Gentiles, yet it is not the Foundation or Ground of
their Justification, but (at best) Conditions and Instruments requisite
thereunto; But Christ Jesus, as he was a Sacrifice and Offering for us without
us, and became obedient unto Death, and fulfilled the Law and Will of God for
us, as he is inwardly revealed, and the Mystery of his Death and Obedience is
opened to us and applied by the Spirit of Christ, is the Foundation of our
Justification before God, not only for the Remission of sins past, but also to
render us, and our whole Gospel Obedience acceptable unto God, in our most
perfect and advanced state in Holiness; for it is still through and in Christ
that we are accepted of God, who is our Propitiation and Atonement, who is
made unto us of God Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. For
the best works of Righteousness or Holiness that we can perform unto God, even
by the help of his Grace and Spirit, is not the Foundation or Ground either of
our Justification or Faith; for that were to set up another Foundation than
Christ Jesus; whereas there is no other Foundation but Christ alone; but to the
end that he may be our Foundation, and his Righteousness may be imputed to us,
and all our sins freely forgiven us for his sake, we must have Faith in him,
and have the true Work of Repentance, and Conversion from Sin to Righteousness
wrought in us, and in time to come we must walk in Obedience unto him. And
therefore in order to obtain Justification and Remission of all sin, Faith is
not only required, but Repentance, and Conversion from Sin to Righteousness,
and Holiness, and true Gospel! Obedience, and good Works proceeding from a
living Faith, the which Faith has for its Object and Foundation, Christ, both
without us, as he became a Sacrifice and Atonement for our sins, and also as
he lives, and dwells, and rules in us.

And that our best Obedience, even when performed by the help of the Spirit of
Christ in us, is not our alone Righteousness, whereby we are wholly and
perfectly justified in the sight of God, is most clear and evident from the
holy Scripture; for that Obedience only can perfectly and wholly justify us,
that has been even performed by us unto God since the first Moment of our
Life, wherein we were capable to do either good or evil, but no such Obedience
can be found to have been performed by any Man, except the Lord Jesus Christ*
for all have sinned and fallen short of the Glory of God, as the Scripture
declares. And seeing we all owe a continual Obedience unto God, by which only
men can be justified, and that none have given it from first to last, and that
the Obedience which we perform unto God, after Conversion, can be no
Satisfaction nor Recompense for our many sins past, therefore what is wanting
in our Obedience, as to time past (or any time afterward, when we sin through
frailty, upon our hearty and sincere Repentance, and Faith, and new Obedience)
must be supplied unto us by the most perfect Obedience and Righteousness of
Christ imputed unto us.

And as concerning Imputed Righteousness, it is a Scripture phrase, and should
be owned in its place, as well as that inward Work of Righteousness wrought in
us by the Spirit of Christ; for it is written, Romans 4.10* That Faith was
reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness. And v. 11. it is said, He received the
sign of Circumcision a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, which he had being
yet circumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that believe, that
Righteousness might be [imputed] to them also, etc. And Romans 3.24. it is said,
Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his
Blood, to declare his Righteousness, for the Remission of sins past, through
the forbearance of God, to declare at this time his Righteousness, that he
might be just, and the Iustifier of him which believes in Jesus. And thus the
blessed Man is described, whose Iniquities are forgiven, but he must also be
such who does sincerely Repent, and in whose heart in no guilt, Romans 4.7. Psalm.
32.2. And certain it is, that no Obedience that we do or can perform unto God,
can by way of merit or strict Justice procure the Pardon of our sins past, for
that is given us freely for Christ's sake; and Christ whole and undivided, both
as he fulfilled the Law for us without us, and as he does fulfill the
Righteousnes^ of the Law in us, for the time to come, is our Clothing and
Garment whereby we appear before God to receive our perfect Justification and
Absolution, and so have Peace and Acceptance with God. And thus Christ and his
Righteousness, both imputed unto us, and which he works in us, is that doubt
Garment, of a scarlet or doubt Dye, wherewith all the Children of that
Virtuous Woman, Jerusalem from above, the Mother of us, are clothed, so that
she is not afraid of the Snow or her Ho^shold, for all her Ho^shold is clothed
with Scarlet (or as may be translated, and is on the Margent) with double
Clothing) Prove. 31.21. And therefore it is not safe for any to rely and rest
upon any Obedience they can perform unto God, as the Foundation of their
Justification, but only upon Jesus Christ, and the Mercy, and Grace, and Favor
of God, apprehended by Faith in him. So nor is it safe for any to think, That
Christ's imputed Righteousness of what he did and suffered for them will be a
Covering to them while they are not inwardly Righteous, and witness not Christ
to live, dwell and rule in them; for Christ is Righteousness to none but such
to whom, and in and over whom he is King and Lord, according to that saying,
This is the Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness.

Error 24. That men may have that holy Ghost that was given to Believers in
Christ crucified, etc. and may be perfected in Holiness, without all Knowledge
and Faith of Christ crucified.

Correct. This is a dangerous and hurtful Error, but is for most part
sufficiently refuted from what is above said, on diverse Heads above mentioned.
I shall therefore only add for a further Consideration and Refutation, what
briefly follows.

1 st. It is not said that Cornelius had the holy Ghost in his Gentile state,
although he had a great measure of Gentile sincerity and righteousness. Nor is
it any where to be found that any received that holy Ghost, which Christ
promised particularly to Believers in him, but such only who believed in him,
even Christ crucified and raised again, etc. whose Faith was wrought in them by
the Power of that holy Ghost or holy Spirit, and that same mighty Power which
raised Jesus out Lord from the Dead, and that in the ordinary way and manner of
outward preaching and hearing, by men spiritually and divinely qualified for
the Work of the Ministry, although God has wrought it in some, and can do it
in whom he pleases, without all Ministry in the outward.

2 dly. The holy Ghost, or Spirit, is in himself forever Holy, and has his
various Operations and Gifts in Men, in some one way and in some another, but
most especially he is called in Scripture, That holy Ghost, or Spirit, as he
does influence the Souls and Hearts of Believers in Christ with a holy and
divine Influence, sanctifying them and making them Holy, and conformable unto
Christ their Head, Husband and Lord, in a peculiar and special way and manner
given only to Believers in Christ crucified and raised again, and to none
others who have not that Faith; for that Holiness that is a Conformity unto
Christ the second Adam, and is the proper and peculiar Effect of the New or
second Covenant, is far more excellent than any Righteousness or Obedience that
is but the effect of the first Covenant or Ministration, and is but a
conformity to the first Adam his Righteousness, and makes not Sons but
Servants, or if Sons, but Sons of Hagar, or the first Covenant; and under this
first Covenant Ministration, the Spirit is called in them The Spirit of Fear
and Bondage, which keeps all Souls under it in a servile Fear, that is good
in its place, where also is Love, and other Virtues, suitable to the Servants
state; but the Filial Fear and Love, and other Gospel Virtues, suitable to the
Child of the New Covenant, are the far more excellent; and here the Spirit is
called, The Spirit of Adoption or Sonship, that helps us to cry Abba Father.
And as the Spirit of God is called in Scripture, The Spirit of Faith, The
Spirit of Knowledge, of Wisdom, of Fear, etc. because it works these Virtues
in us, so it is called, The Holy Spirit or Spirit of Holiness, because it
works a peculiar degree and kind of Holiness in all true Believers in Christ
crucified, etc. above what the most upright Gentiles do witness or experience
in their mere Gentile state.

And that any can be made Holy, according to the best and most strict sense of
the word, far less perfected in Holiness, without the Knowledge and Faith of
Christ crucified, is a great Error, and very hurtful, though maintained by
Pelagians of old, and some of late, and many other high Notionists, and is
expressly contrary to the holy Scripture, which says, The Law made nothing
Perfect, and that Law was not only the Law without, but even the Law within,
both in Jews and Gentiles* until the Faith of Christ, the one Offering come to
be revealed, by which (...) Offering he has forever perfected all that are
(...): And the Spirit of Holiness, which does perfectly both sanctify and
justify, is not received by the Works of the Law, but by the h^aring of Faith
preached, Gal. 3.2. Therefore we find in Scripture so great things ascribed to
Faith in Christ Jesus, not only for our Justification and obtaining Peace with
God, but for our perfect Cleansing, and Purification, and Sanctification and
giving us the Victory; therefore it is said in John, This is our Victory
whereby we overcome the World, even ^ur Faith; and that Faith is not simply a
Faith or believing in Christ as he is God, or the Light in us, but as by that
Light of Christ in us, given (...) Christians, we believe in him as he dyed for
us, and rose again, and is now exalted in the highest Heavens, to be a Prince
and a Savior unto us, from whom, even the heavenly Man Christ Jesus, we
receive most excellent peculiar divine Influences of Light, Life and Grace,
whereby he draws us to him, as by so many Cords, and fitteth us for him, and
joyneth us to him, as Members of his Body, which is his Church; and therefore
also we pray unto him, because (though his Body which rose is not present with
us, but is ascended, yet) his Spirit does extend, reach and flow forth unto us,
according to which he is really spiritually present with us, and hears our
Prayers, and presents them to God for us, and gives us gracious Returns. And
we are as really and sensibly united to him, as the Members are to the Head in
the natural Body of Man, or as the Branches are to the Vine Tree that bears
them, according to Christ's own Doctrine. And thus by Faith in him we eat his
Flesh and drink his Blood, as he is the heavenly Man and heavenly Vine-Tree,
and that Tree of Life that grows in the midst of the Garden of God, that has
united it self with that Seed of Abraham and David, and exalted the same
therewith.

Error 25. That all true Believers in Christ are perfected in Holiness at once,
so as to be perfectly cleansed and freed from all Sin, even when in the state
of Children, or at least within some very small time after they have believed.

Err. 26. That none ought to preach Christ to others, but who are perfectly
free from all Sin in Thought, Word and Deed, even from the least inward
Defilement of Sin, as suppose the least sinful Thought or Motion.

Correct. Both these are great and hurtful Errors. And as concerning
Perfection, and a perfect freedom from all Sin, in Thought, Word and Deed, and
a perfect Victory over it. It is a true Doctrine to preach it, as a thing
attainable, or possible to be attained in this Life by the Grace of God,
through Faith in Christ Jesus; and also to press and earnestly exhort all to
attain to such a Perfection, is commendable; and to hold forth unto People the
great danger and hurt of being slack and remiss in pursuing after the same. And
also, it is fit to be preached. That none should delay and be remiss, but that
all should be exceeding diligent to have that great Work of their Salvation
wrought out and perfected, while the Soul does remain in the mortal Body; and
that none entertain any such presumptuous Thought or Imagination, That if they
be not perfectly cleansed and made free from all sin here in the mortal Body,
they shall have some time or place after Death, where and when they shall be
cleansed; for it is altogether vain and foolish to entertain any such Thought
or Imagination; For Now is the accepted Time, Now is the Day of Salvation; and
the Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared unto us, teaching us to
deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live righteously, soberly and goaly
in this present World. And therefore it is extreme Folly and Madness for any to
put off their perfecting the work of their Salvation to any time or place after
Death; or indeed for any to delay or put off that work to old Age, or the
Deathbed, for no man knows how long he shall live in the World, or that he
shall have a Bed to dye upon, or a time of sickness before Death, or if he
happen to have these things, yet seeing Faith and Repentance (in every degree
of them) are the Gifts of God, and Men cannot practice them in their own Time
and Will, but in Gods Time, and as he is pleased to give them the present Grace
and Ability; therefore no Delay nor Remisness in so great and necessary a work
is to be allowed or excused. But on the other hand to say or imagine, That the
perfect freedom from all sin, and victory over it, is attained at the first
instant of men's believing, and that universally, even when their Faith is
sincere, and that they are come to feel the good Work of God begun in them, is
contrary both to the Scriptures Testimony in many places, and the experience of
Thousands who know by the Evidence and Testimony of Gods holy Spirit in their
hearts and souls, that it is given them truly to believe in God and Christ, and
they feel most infallibly, that God has begun his (...) Work of Sanctification
in them, and yet also, they feel and (...) know, that they are not perfectly
made free from all sin, and have not got the perfect Victory over it, but feel
a daily Warfare in them betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit; and in that Faith
they live and fight against the Flesh and the Lusts thereof, that through their
Leader and Captain of Salvation, they shall in due time overcome, and witness a
perfect Freedom from all Sin, of Thoughts, Words and Deeds, and that in the
mortal Body, if they be diligent and watchful; and the more diligent that any
are, they shall the sooner obtain such a state. But to limit a time, as either
at the first instant of true believing, or to any certain number of Days,
Months or Years, after the first instant of believing, proceeds from great
Ignorance and Darkn^ss of Understanding, and shows little Experience in any
who do so affirm; for according to the Testimony of the holy Scripture, and the
more general Experience of sincere Believers, there is a time of Warfare within
the Soul of him or her that has sincerely believed, betwixt Flesh and Spirit,
or Sin and Righteousness, and that which is not of God, and that which is of
him, as is clear from Romans 7. v. 9. to the end, where the Apostle Paul does
very plainly describe the state and condition of a man that is not altogether
an Unbeliever, or without, but of one, who, at least, has in some measure been
livingly and effectually touched by the Power of God, and has had some good
Work begun in him, as does appear from v. 13. That sin was made to appear to be
sin unto him, and did become exceeding sinful; and that was wrought in him by
that which was good. And v. 15. What I would, that do I not, but what I hate,
that I do: Now this cannot be said of any man that is altogether and wholly
unconverted and dead in his sins; for he that is wholly unconverted and
alienated from God, hates not sin, and has not a Will to do that which is
good. And v. 18. For to will is present with me, but to perform that which is
good, I find not. And v. 22. For I delight in the Law of God, after the inward
Man. And v. 25. So then with the mind I serve the Law of God. All which places
show some beginning of a real Change and work of Con^er^ion wrought in him; but
yet in this state he was not perfectly set free from all Sin, is also most
plain from diverse places in that Chapter, as v. 14. But I am carnal, sold under
sin. And v. 15. For that which I do, I allow not. And v. 18. For I know that in
me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing. And v. 23. But I see another
Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into
Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in my Members. And v. 24. O wretched Man
that I am! who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death! And though many
Professors, who believe not the Possibility of the state of a perfect Freedom
from Sin in the mortal Life, bring this place of Scripture to prove That there
is no perfect freedom from sin in this Life, and plead earnestly, that this
very state, here described, was Paul's present state, which ought not to be
granted unto them; for Paul did witness a better state, which he described a
little after, cap. 8. v. 2. For the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus,
has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death; Yet this ought in all reason
to be granted, That Paul does there describe the state or condition of one that
has attained some beginning of Faith and Sanctification, and is engaged in a
holy Warfare against all his Lusts and Sins, that war against his Soul; and
though it was not his present state, yet it was the state of some others, yea,
of many who had begun in the Spirit, but yet were not attained to a Perfection
in the Spirit, and so were partly Holy and partly Unholy, partly renewed and
partly unrenewed, partly carnal and partly spiritual, partly flesh and partly
spirit, partly gold and partly dross; and it is likely enough Paul for some
time after his Conversion might have witnessed the like inward Warfare and
struggling against Sin, until he did perfectly overcome it. And like to this
place in Romans 7. is that other place, Gal. 5.17. For the Flesh lusts against
the Spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to
the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would: And surely these
Galatians, to whom Paul did write these Lines, were not altogether Unbelievers,
but were in some measure partakers of the true Faith, and had in measure the
Spirit of Christ, and were the Churches of Christ, though there was diverse
things faulty in them, yet he calls them Churches and Brethren. And the same
Apostle Paul writing to the Collosians, he calls them Saints and faithful
Brethren in Christ, cap. 1. v. 2. and faith of them, cap. 2. v. 11, 12. That
they were circumcised with the Circumcision made without hands, in the putting
off the Body of the sins of the flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ; buried
with him in Baptism, wherein also they were risen with him, through the Faith
of the Operation of God, who raised him from the dead, etc. And yet that they
were not wholly mortified and cleansed from all sin, so as to have the Nature
and Root of it wholly slain and mortified, is evident from his earnest
Exhortation unto them, Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your Members which are upon
Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, evil Concupiscience, and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry; which is not so to be understood, as if at
that time they did commit these sins particularly mentioned, but because the
Seed and Root or Nature of these things was not wholly removed and destroyed in
them, therefore such an Exhortation was seasonable unto them; for as the Seed
and Root of a Plant, is one thing, and the Leaves, Blossom and Fruit, is
another, and the Seed and Root may be in a Ground, where it bears neither
Leaf, Blossom nor Fruit, being hindered and suppressed by something contrary to
its growth, so sin may be and is, in many, in the Seed and Root and inward
Nature of it, and may be felt to stir and move, in some measure, to the Souls
grief and burden, and yet not be suffered to bring forth its Acts either of
sinful Thoughts, Words or Deeds; and yet, where the Root and Nature of Sin does
remain in any, so long as it does there remain, they cannot be said to have
attained the perfect Freedom from sin, although by the Grace of God, many, to
Gods Praise, have attained to that degree in Sanctification and Mortification,
that sin does not reign in their mortal Bodies, but Christ does much more reign
and rule in them, even when they are but Young, and as Children, and of no
great growth and experience in the Truth; and where Christ begins to reign
and rule in his People, he does it gradually, and by degrees his Rule and
Government increases in his People, and by degrees he overcomes his and their
Souls Enemies; and when, at times, any thing of offense comes to pass, he
executes his Righteous Judgments against it, and his spiritual Sword is drawn
to slay the transgressing Nature, and his spiritual Fire is kindled to burn it
up.

And of this gradual Procedure and Progress of the Work of Christ in his
People, there are many places of Scripture that witness to it, and many
Similitudes, and Figures, and Allegories in Scripture, that hold it forth; as
the Wars that Moses and Joshua, and the People of Israel had with the People of
the Land, on both sides of Jordan, and their many Kings and Lords that they had
to conquer and overcome, in all, no less Number than Forty two, whereof Moses,
with the People, overcame on the other side of Jordan, namely, Syhon, King of
Heshbon, and Og, King of Bashon, (now Heshbon is an Hebrew word, and signifies
Thoughts, and Bashan signifies the Teeth, and is a manifest Allegory) and
after these two great Kings were overcome by Moses, on the other side of
Jordan, Joshua had no less than thirty one more, and five or six Lords of the
Philistians, all which he overcame in his time, yet not without a great and
long War with them, as is expressly said, Ios. 11.18. Joshua made War a long
time with all those Kings; and even unto David's time, the King of the
Iebusites, who possessed Jerusalem, was not overcome, but they still possessed
it, until David overcame them; and having overcome Ierusalem's Inhabitants,
being the last, who were Iebusites, (the Iebusites signify, Tredders under
feet) there God commanded the Temple to be built, for a place of Worship unto
him; but the Children of Israel were not without the Worship of God before that
time, although that place was not conquered until David did it, and yet not
David, but Solomon built the Temple; and the Rich Materials of Gold and Silver,
that built the Temple, were the Spoils that were taken from the Inhabitants of
the Land, and partly from the Egyptians; all which were Figures and Types of
great Mysteries; and it is generally understood and acknowledged, that these
outward Wars that the Children of Israel had against these Nations under Moses
and Joshua, were Types and Figures of the inward and spiritual Wars that the
Souls of Men have, under their Leader and Captain, the Lord Jesus Christ,
against the Lusts that war against the Soul.

And whereas some belonging to these Nations were spared, as the Gibeonites,
and that even all the Canaanites were not quite drove out, but some of them
were suffered to remain among the Israelites, has not the signification, which
some ignorantly conceive, viz. That some sins and lusts, that are evil and
sinful, do and must remain in the best of Saints for term of Life, but has
indeed another signification, as namely, the Annimal Affections and Annimal
Thoughts and Desires, that are not in themselves (simply considered) evil and
sinful, as neither Annimal and Bodily Senses and Functions of the mortal Body,
though in the Unbelieving State they are defiled, yet to Believers in Christ
Jesus, they are cleansed and sanctified, and made serviceable to the Lord, and
to his Truth, and Seed and People, as the Gibeonites were made seaviceable to
the People of Israel, and some others besides, that were spared, yea, the
Cattle of some of these Nations, and their Goods were to be saved, and not
wholly destroyed; whereas all the Cattle and Goods of some others, were wholly
to be destroyed, and nothing to be reserved; all which are plain Figures of
spiritual Mysteries, and have a spiritual Signification, which I shall not here
enlarge upon.

Again, the Lord Jesus Christ in his spiritual appearance in his People is
promised To be as a Refiners Fire, and as Fullers Soap, and that he shall sit
as a Refiner, and Purifier of Silver, and he shall purify the Sons of Levi,
and purge them as Gold and Silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an
Offering in Righteousness. Now it is well known that the Fullers Soap takes
some time to cleanse a Garment, or Cloth that is defiled; and a Mass or Lump of
Silver and of Gold, that has a great mixture of Dross in it, requires a time
to have it perfectly and wholly refined and separated from the Dross; and with
allusion to the Refiner of Silver and Gold, it is promised, That Christ shall
sit as a Refiner, implying his Patience and Continuance in that work till it be
perfectly done, therefore pure Gold is said to be seven times tried, and Silver
the like, Psalm. 12. And Christ compared the Kingdom of God to a little Leaven
that a Woman did take and hide in three Measures of Meal till all be leavened;
and the whole mass or lump of Meal is not instantly leavened, but requires some
considerable time. And also, Christ said to his Disciples, If ye had Faith as a
Grain of Mustard Seed, ye should say to this Mountain, Be removed, and cast
into the Sea, and it should be done; which Mountain, what else is it but sin,
that has had place in men's hearts as a great Mountain, and Faith removes it,
yet not commonly at once, but gradually, as the little Stone destroys the
Image by degrees, and then becomes a great Mountain, and fills the Earth.
And Faith is compared to a Grain of Mustard Seed, because the Mustard Seed,
though little in quantity, yet is great in Virtue, and is Medicinal. And as the
Souls gradual freedom from sin, through Faith in the Power of the Lord Jesus
Christ, is compared to a Warfare in Scripture, so it is compared to diverse
other things, that require some considerable time, as to a Husbandry, a
Building, and also, to a Iournying or Traveling from one remote place to
another. And it is generally acknowledged, that the sojourning of the Children
of Israel out of Egypt, throu^h the red Sea and the Wilderness, was a figure of
the spiritual Travail of the Soul from Sin to Holiness, and through the
Unbelief of the People made their Journying much longer, than it would
otherwise have been; yet if they had been duly faithful, it required some
considerable time. And Christ in the Parable concerning the Return of the
Prodigal to his Fathers House, holds it forth as a considerable long Journey
from a far Country; and it is said, Luke 15.20. When he was yet a great way
off, his Father saw him, and had Compassion, and ran and fel^ on his Neek, and
kissed him; Which plainly shows, that perfect Freedom from Sin is not at the
first instant attained, but requires some time; for who can say but a good
Work was begun in this Prodigal Son before he got to his Fathers House, yea, as
soon as he began to travel toward it.

But, lastly, The Work of God in the hearts of his People, is not only compared
to a formation or generation of the Birth in the Mothers Belly, which requires
some considerable time before it be perfectly formed, but also to Gods Work of
Creation, wherein six days he made Heavens and Earth; and waving altogether
that part of the Question, What days these were, whether common and natural
days? it is clear from the Epistle to the Hebrews, that our Perfection in
Christ is understood to be that Sabbath or Rest into which Believers do enter,
and whereof they have not a full Possession until they have labored and
wrought with God through a Week of six days, in order to attain to that blessed
Sabbath, therefore he thus exhorts, Heb. 4.11. Let us labor therefore to enter
into that Rest, although he, and others to whom he writes, were at that time
true Believers in Christ; and indeed, there is a plain and manifest Analogy
betwixt each days work in the outward Creation, and every days work of the New
Creation of God in our Souls, as we are Workers together with him, which here I
shall not insist upon to describe, but refer to a particular Head at the end of
this Treatise. Now as in the seventh day it is said, God ended (or perfected)
his Works which he had made, so in the seventh spiritual Day of Christ's
Appearance in us, he does perfect his Work, but not till then: And are not many
come to the first days Work, and no further? others are come to the second,
others to the third, and so onwards to the sixth. And that the Work of Salvation
from Sin, is gradual, and is not completed how soon it is begun, is clear from
the words of the Apostle Paul, encourageing some to whom he writ, That God who
had begun his good Work in them will perform it, until the Day of Christ,
Phil. 1.6 And said the same Apostle, writing to the Romans, cap. 13.11. Now is
our Salvation nearer than when we believed; which shewe^h, that there are
degrees of Salvation, even from Sin.

But for the further understanding of the Doctrine of Perfection, and the Souls
Travail in the way toward it, take these following short Considerations:

1 st. According to the diverse sense of the word [ Pe^f^ct] it may be said, in
one sense, that every part of God's Work in us is Perfect, from first to last,
that is to say, it has nothing of Defilement or Blame-worthyness in it, and
therefore whatever Imperfection is in any, it is theirs, and not Gods.

2 dly, As a little Gold well purified and refined, is perfect Gold, although
another part that did belong to that mass, is imperfect, and has a great
mixture of Dross, so the Faith, Love and Hope, and all other Virtues, that are
of Gods begetting and working in his People, are Perfect, in that sense, that
is to say, they have no Sin nor Defilement belonging to them, although there
may be Sin and Defilement in a Man that has, in measure, these Virtues; for
that Poor Man that said unto Christ, Lord, I believe, help my Unbelief, had
both true Faith and Unbelief in him at one time, although Virtue and Vice
cannot be together in one man, in any intense or strong degree; and where true
Faith, Love, Hope, and other Virtues have place in any Man, the Sins and Vices,
even in respect of the Roots and Natures of them, are drove into a Corner, and
are not suffered to reign.

3 dly, There are many sorts of Sins, the which if acted outwardly with the
Body, or if loved and entertained in the Soul, do certainly kill the Souls
Life, as to God; and whoever does commit them cannot be said to remain
sanctified, or to retain any degree of true Sanctification, such as
Drunkenness, Theft, Murder, Adultery, and all such gross things. But there are
other sins, and sinful weaknesses and blemishes, that though they do not kill
the Souls Life, as unto God, yet wound it, and weaken it, and the least sin
that is burdens and hurts the tender Plant of Righteousness wherever it is
planted in any, and wherever it is suffered to act so much as in a thought or
word, it clouds and vails the Soul in measure, and defiles it; for the least
sin is a defiling and hurtful Nature.

4 thly, Where the Root and Nature of Sin is not wholly destroyed nor killed,
it may be so far driven into a Corner, and captivated, and imprisoned, and
chained, that it is not suffered to act; and thus it is possible that such who
are but Young in the Faith, and have but some real and true beginning of
Sanctification, may be well preserved from acting of Sin, either in thought,
word or deed, by the ability of Gods Grace in them; and also, they may be well
enabled to perform many pure Acts of Worship and Obedience to God, without any
mixture of actual Sin, so that when they pray, their Prayer may be pure, as Job
said, my Prayer is pure, and the Meditations of their Hearts, and Words of
their Mouths, and Works of their Hands, by the help of Christ's Grace and
Spirit, may be pure, and without all mixture of Sin, in the Act, although the
Root and Nature of Sin and the fleshly Birth be not altogether destroyed in
them.

5 thly, But as such a thing is possible, and does often come to pass so to be,
yet at times, through humane frailty, and slackening the Watch, the sin that
was drove into a Corner and made Prisoner and Captive, may get some strength,
and some things of sinful Weaknesses, Blemishes and Imperfections may take
place, and too frequently do in many, where the Work of Sanctification does in
good measure remain, as giving way to a vain Thought for a minute, or some
small time, or speaking perhaps some idle or unadvised word, even as happened
in the case of Moses, yet that did not bring Moses altogether to a los^ of his
inward Condition. Also, there are Sins of Omission, and loss of time in some
parts, and Sins of Ignorance which many are chargeable with, and hinder their
growth in Holiness, and yet does not wholly destroy the work of Sanctification,
nor kill the life of Grace in them.

6 thly, Although no sins are to be indulged in any, as being little or (...),
because every sin, even the least, has a great evil in it, that is displeasing
to God, and offensive to his Spirit, yet comparing some si^s with others, there
are greater and lesser Sins; and lesser Sins th^^ do not kill, but hurt and
defile the Soul in some measure, if speedily repented of and turned from, and
forgiveness and washing from it is sincerely prayed for, in Faith, through
Christ, they are readily and easily forgiven for Christ's sake, and the
Defilement washed away quickly and readily, as if it had never been.

7 thly. There is a degree of Holiness and Nearness unto God, (...) Holiness,
that without all question many have attained unto which has great Purity and
Soundness, and sound Health of the S^ul in it, but such will be more careful
and desirous to preach and declare their Perfection by their perfect Works, and
perfect and holy Walking, than by talking of it; for it was more the manner of
the Saints to demonstrate their Perfection by good Works, than by many Words.
But he who says He is Perfect, and perfectly freed and healed of all sinful
Infirmities, and yet it is manifestly apparent to many, who hear him, that he
has diverse very palpable Imperfections, does certainly greatly dishonor God,
and give great occasion of Offense to the (...). Therefore if any think
themselves Perfect, and perfectly freed from all sin of Thought, Word and Deed,
and that they have no sin, and have lived so long without all manner of Sin,
either of Omiss^^^ or Commission* (as suppose a Day, Week, Month, or Year,) as
I will (...) deny that such a state is possible, so I would have every one well
a^^ured that it is so, and have the certain Evidence and Testimony of it, not
barely from their own Thoughts and Apprehensions, that may deceive them, but
from the clear and Infall^ble Evidence and Testimony of Gods Spirit: Nor is it
enough for any man to say, I k^ow not^i^g by my self; for though Paul did say
so, yet he said ^l^o, thereby ^e was not justified. And he who is as near to
God as John was, and other far advanced Christians, though they may say, If our
hearts condemn us not, we have Co^fi^ence before God, yet it is not proper for
every one to say so; for, alas! the hearts of many are hardened, and men's
hearts too frequently deceive them until a very great change be wrought in
them. And indeed too many are deceived with too great and high Conceits of
their Seize, which is to their great hurt in many respects, even as it is
to the great hurt of him that is dangerously sick, and yet thinks himself
whole, and so goes not to the Physician, as Christ said, The whole need not the
Physicians, but the si^k. Hence some are so lifted up with a Conceit of their
so great Seize (although their sins and imperfections be very manifest)
that they are set down in a fleshly ease, and carnal liberty, and can talk at
Random, and mis-spend much precious Time, and yet feel little Burden, or have
little sorrow or compunction for their sins, imagining many things not to be
sins, that are sins, which is too easy, but not a safe way to Perfection; and
when such pray* they rarely pray as Christ taught his Disciples, saying,
Forgive us (...) Sins, imagining that they have no sins to be forgiven them,
when as yet they have many, but are not duly sensible of them; such measuring
and comparing themselves with themselves, are not wise, as Paul has declared
in a like case. But if they did duly and diligently bring all their Thoughts,
Words and Deeds to the Light, and measure all they think, desire, speak or do,
or do not, but omit, with the pure Law and Commandment of God, that is
exceeding broad, as David has declared, who saw to the great Perfection of it,
beyond many, such would not be so confident and bold to think more of
themselves than is convenient.

And for a help to a man, whereby he may be helped to know his state before
God, it is safe for him frequently to examine himself, as in Gods Presence, his
Mind being retired, as much as possible, out of (...) worldly and selfish
Thoughts, and turned to the Light of the Lord (...) his heart, with these, and
the like, close and near, but plain (...), viz. First, In relation to his
Neighbor:

Move I no^ c^se this Day, Week, Month or Year past, said or done any thing to
the hurt of my Neighbor? Have I said or done nothing to lessen his Repute and
Estemation among Men? Have I entertained no hard or uncharitable Thoughts of
him? Have I said, or thought, or done every thing toward him, as I would have
him say, think or do toward me? Have I omitted nothing of my Duty toward him?
Have I (as becomes a good Christian) seasonably warned and admonished him of
what I saw amiss in him? Have I ministered to the Necessities and Wants of all
my Neighbors, both inwardly and outwardly, according to my ability, etc?

Next, as to a Man's Self;

Have I no vain* glorying and high Thoughts of my Self, and Seize? And
not exalted above my measure in any respect or degree, because of Knowledge or
Gifts above others, or Services, or Sufferings above others? Have I not at any
time for this Day, Week, Month or Year, or Years past, prefered and esteemed
my self above others, who may be and are really better than I? And do I not too
much please my self in many things wherein I ought to deny my self, and take up
the Cross, as even in eating, drinking, clothing, sleeping, and other Bodily
things? Might not some of these things I use be spared, and the Money, or worth
of them given to help the Poor, that may be in great necessity?

And, 3 dly. As to God, Do I love God as much as I ought to do? Do I delight
(...) God as much as I ought, and believe and confide in him, and in his Son
Jesus Christ, and depend on him as much as I ought? Is my whole strength, time
and ability, both of Soul and Body, spent in his service? Do I pray as much as
I ought, and am I as thankful unto God as I ought to be* for all his Mercies,
both temporal and spiritual? Have I as due and frequent remembrance of them, as
I ought to have, and especially of the great Love of God in giving his Son
freely to dye for me? Do I love and remember the Lord Jesus Christ more than
all things of this World* and th^re incomparably? Have I lost no hour nor
minute of my time? Have I omitted nothing of my (...) to God, in any respect,
for so long time pass, since I did reckon my self attained to Perfection? Does
my Mind never wander, and is never exercised in any unprofitable thing? Do I
always keep my Watch, and use a diligent Circumspection over all my ways, to
the least of my Thoughts, Words and Actions? Do I read the Scriptures as much
as I ought to do? Do I as reverently hear what God speaks to me in any of his
Servants, as becomes me to do?

With these, and the like close and near Questions, if many would impartially
examine themselves, no doubt they would find great cause of Humiliation before
the Lord, and to beg the pardon, as of many Sins, both of Omission and
Commission, so for their great sin of Pride, and thinking of themselves above
what they are.

But as I have nothing against the Doctrine of Perfection, as a thing possible
to be attained in this Mortal Life, by the Grace of Christ, so I greatly
dislike that any should imagine they are come to it, who are very short of it;
and I do judge it is a very great Error, and exceeding hurtful to hold it for
Doctrine, That every one that has the least measure of true Christianity, or
Faith, or Sanctification, is perfectly sanctified, washed and cleansed; The
plain tendency of which is to drive some to Presumption, and others to
Desparation; for some are naturally more inclined to presume than others, and
to think too much of th^mselves; and these who believe this Doctrine, will
conclude, (if they feel the least degree of Sanctification) they are Perfect;
for according to this most false and absurd Doctrine, there is no middle State
or Condition betwixt perfectly Holy and perfectly Unholy, perfectly Carnal and
perfectly Spiritual, every one is perfect Gold or perfect Dross; for there is
no mixture of Gold and Dross in one Vessel, according to this false Doctrine.
Others again, who are more naturally fearful, and jealous, receiving this
absurd Doctrine, because they feel somewhat of Sin and Unholiness remaining in
them; will conclude, they have nothing of Holiness in them at all, nothing of
Faith, nothing of Hope, nothing of Virtue, they are wholly without, they have
wholly lost their Condition; and because they feel some Malady or Distemper in
them, therefore they have nothing of Health or Soundness; and because the feet
are unclean, and need washing, therefore neither hand nor head, nor any part in
them has any Purity in the least. But this is far contrary to Christ's
Doctrine, which says, He who is clean needs not safe to wash his feet.

But some who hold this absurd Doctrine, have some seeming Reasons and
Arguments for what they say, as 1 st. If God and Christ save not all men
perfectly at once, and does not perfectly restore them, or in as short time as
Adam lost himself, and fell from his state, then Sin and the Devil is stronger
than God and Christ.

I Answer; It does not follow; for at this rate, not only all Believers must be
perfectly saved, and washed, and healed at once, but all men must be perfectly
saved also, and that at one touch; for God and Christ are present, and at work
in all men, in order to save them. But the Vanity and Folly of this Argument
may easily appear by the like Reasonings: A Man burns his House in one hour,
and the King takes Compassion on the Man, and builds up his House again, but
not in one Hour, but in some Days, Weeks or Months, Therefore the Man is
greater and stronger than the King. A Child wounds himself mortally with a
Knife in one instant, but the skillfull Physi^ian does not cure him till after
some days, and therefore the Child is stronger than the Man. But to answer more
directly, I say, it is one thing what God can do, and another thing what God
wills to do: That God can perfectly heal and cleanse the Soul from all sin in
a Moment or instant, none will deny, but it is not his Will so to do, and he
sees not ^it in his infinite Wisdom to do it, but rather to effect the cure by
little and little, that the Soul that has sinned with too great ease and
delight, may find it self cured through pain and smarting, and with great
difficulty, that sin may be the more distasted, and the Soul may be the more
careful not to sin against the Lord for time to come, that it may have to say,
as one said, when tempted to commit a great sin, I will not buy Repentance at
so dear a Rate. If God did cure and heal men's Souls by absolute Power and Will,
that were in all respects irresistible, and did the Cure without all pain and
difficulty to the Soul, it might easily relapse into sin again; but the great
sorrow, pain and difficulty that the Soul feels in its being healed, even by
the hand of the Lord, makes it the more wary for time to come, according to
the Proverb, Burnt Children dread the Fire.

Again, some argue thus, Christ's curing the Bodily Diseases of all that be
cured, and raising the dead, did it at onc^, by one word or touch, and never at
twice, except in that one case of a certain blind man, whose Eyes he opened at
first to see men as Trees, and next to see perfestly; and Christ is a perfect
Savior, and works not by halves, and therefore he cures and heals all
Souls perfectly at once, or at least at twice.

Answ. This Argument destroys it self, for it confesses that Christ did not
cure that blind Man at once; and if^ that do not argue, that Christ is not a
perfect Physician, tha^ he did not cure once, no more does it argue that he is
not a perfect Physician, though he cure no^ the Souls of men generally neither
at two or three words or touches, altogether fully and perfectly. And we have
other Examples and Instances of Christ's gradual curing men, and that not
perfectly all at once, as in his opening the Eyes of another blind man, John
9.6. it is said, (...) spa^e on the ground, and made Clay of the Spittle, and
he anointed the Eyes of the blind Man with the clay, and said unto him, Go,
wash (...) the Pool of Siloam, which is by interpretation [ sent] he went his
wa^ therefore and washed, and came seeing. Where Note these gradual steps, 1
st. Christ spat on the ground, 2 ly. he made clay of the Spittle, 3 ly. he
anointed the Eyes of the blind Man with the Clay, 4 ly. he bid go to the Pool
of Siloam, and wash. All which have a spiritual signification. And also in his
raising the Widows dead Son; for it is said, L^ke 7. That ^^ touched the Beer,
and it had this effect, that they that did bear him stood still; yet that touch
did not raise him up, but when Christ said unto him, Young Man, I say unto thee
arise; and here he spoke not only one word unto him, but diverse, and it had
this effect, that he that was dead, sat up, and began to speak; and then last
of all it is said, He delivered him to his Mother. And also, his curing the
man's Son possessed with a Deaf and Dumb Spirit, after the Spirit was commanded
to come out of him, he cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him, and he
was as one dead, but Jesus took him by the hand, and lift him up. Again, when
Christ raised Lazarus from the dead, observe these steps, 1 st. he commanded
them to take away the Stone, 2 dly. he prayed to his Father, and gave Thanks,
lifting up his Eyes, 3 dly. He cried with a loud Voice, Lazarus, Come forth;
But when he came forth, he was bound hand and foot with Grave Clothes, and his
face was bound about with a Napkin, therefore Jesus said, Loose him, and let
him go; all which has a spiritual signification, and is acknowledged by many
to signify the gradual working of Christ, in raising the dead Souls of Men;
and when raised, yet for some time they are bound, as it were, with Grave
Clothes, till they be loosed. And the the Par^ble of the Samaritan* (...) his
healing the poor wounded Man, not all at once, has the like ^^^nification;
for, first, it is said, he came where he was, and when he saw him, he had
Compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his Wounds, pouring in Oil and
Wine; and yet for all this he was no^ perfectly cured, nor able to go,
therefore it is said further, he set him on his own Beast, and brought him to
an Inn, and took care of him, and left two Pence with the Host to take care of
him; all which various steps and circumstances have the like signification. And
what other signification can that have, of the Prophet, bidding Naaman wash
seven times in Jordan, in order to be cleansed of his Leprosy, (as accordingly
he did) but to point at the gradual cleansing of the Soul, as it is not only
once or twice, but seven times washed in the spiritual Jordan, or River of
Judgment, the Number Seven being a perfect Number, answering to the seventh Day
and seventh Year, which was Sabbatical But I answer further, Although Christ's
curing outward Diseases was a Figure and Sign of his curing men's Souls, as to
the Substance, yet not as to all the Circumstances thereof; for, 1 st, Many
were cured of their Bodily Diseases, and some raised from the dead to Life,
without any thing on their part, in way of concurrance, but were merely
passive, as those who were raised from the dead, and healed of Madness, having
unclean Spirits cast out of him. 2 dly, Christ cured them commonly by his
Bodily Touch, and Voice of Words uttered with his Bodily Mouth, and by his
Bodily Presence with them for most part, his divine Power working invisibly
therewith, and he who cured them, they saw him, and heard him with Bodily
Organs; but it is not so now with all whose Souls he cures; for many Thousands
have been cured by his great Power, who have neither outwardly seen nor heard
him, but only believed in him. 3 dly, These whom he Bodily cured remained still
mortal Men, and subject to following Diseases, and Bodily Death it self; but
the Souls of many are so cured and healed by Christ, that they never dye any
more, but remain forever sensible of that Immortal Life and Power that first
quickened them. And though Christ's curing and healing the Souls of his People
be gradual, and not all done at once, yet it is done effectually and perfectly
in his own time, as the Souls of the Patients are faithful and careful to
observe his Commands. And though the Lord was a perfect Physician to David, and
did perfectly heal him, and restore him to health of Soul, after his great sin
and fall, in the case of Vriah, yet he did not work that cure in him al^ at
once, but after some considerable time, as David's words in diverse of his Psalms
plainly demonstrate, where he declares how sensible he was of the disease of
his Soul, and went under great heavyness and smarting, in the sense of his
sins, and that for a considerable time, and did go through much inward
Affliction and Trouble before he was perfectly cured and restored, (see for
this Psalm. 6.^8. throughout, and Psalm. 13, and 25, and 29. v. 9, 10. and Psalm.
32. v. 34. and Psalm. 51.) for indeed the Lords way and method of curing men's
Souls, is first to wound and make them sick and full of pain, as David
witnessed, and then gradually to heal; whereas when Christ cured men's Bodies,
he did not pain them.

And whereas they further argue, That as a Child is a perfect Child, and does
perfectly obey the Fathers Command, though he be not a Man, and cannot do (...)
Man does, yet if he do whatsoever his Father commands him, he sins not, as
if the Father say to one Child that is but weak, bring me ten Pounds, if he
bring the ten Pounds, though he has not strength to bring an hundred Pounds,
as another that is stronger than he has, yet he does perfectly obey his
Fathers Will, and sins not.

Answ. All Comparisons and Similitudes hold not in all respects, nor does this
similitude prove what is intended; for though a Child may perfectly obey his
Fathers Command in one or more things, yet it does not follow that he does so
in all things; in some things he may fall short, and have a Will to do more
than he does well perform, yea, when the Child is bringing the ten Pounds to
his Father, through rashness, and too great haste, he may fall, and hurt
himself in his face, or dirty his clothes; and its rare but Children in many
things do amiss, for they are often foolish, and of little Understanding, and yet
have greater Confidence often than Men of Years and Experience. And concerning
whom did James say, In many things we offend all? was it not concerning them
who were as Children, at least, and whom he calls Brethren? And said, John,
Little Children, these things I have writ unto you, that ye sin not, and if any
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, etc. where he takes it for granted,
that these who are in the state of Children may sin, and yet every sin does not
altogether make them cease to be Children, or cause the Father to dis-inherit
them. And even as in Natural Children, there are frequently diverse things
faulty and blameworthy, which a tender Father passes by, and easily
pardons, when the Child retains true Love to him; so in such who are but as
Children in the Truth, there are too often diverse things faulty, and
blameworthy, yet because they retain true Love to God in measure, he does not
reject them, but own them in their Childish state.

And as concerning these words in John [He who is born of God sins not,
etc.] It is to be considered, that to be thoroughly and entirely born of God, is
an high state, and does not belong to all who may be called (in a Scripture
sense) Children, as in the Child's state; for to be thoroughly born of God, is to
be wholly renewed and sanctified, so as to have nothing of the Flesh or
unrenewed Nature remaining in them; but this is an high state, and is not the
attainment, of every due in whom that good work of Sanctification is begun. And
it may be (...), the Birth of God, or what is begotten of God in man, sins
not; and Man (so far as he is spiritually renewed and born again* sins not,
the Heaven-born (...) sins not; but yet in many there remains an unrenewed
part, that may and does often sin, until it be changed and renewed.

And as concerning that other Doctrine, That none are to preach Christ to
others, but who are perfectly free from all Sin in Thought, Word and Deed: It
were indeed greatly to be wished that there were many such Preachers, and all
Preachers should have some real Experience of a good Work of God begun in them,
and be in some measure truly sanctified, and free of all scandal in Life and
Conversation. But to say, that none but such as are wholly perfected, and free
from the least sin or blemish, has no warrant from Scripture, as if the least
sinful defect or blemish did altogether unminister them, or make them fall from
their Ministry; for though Judas fell from his Ministry by Transgression,
because it was of a heinous sort, yet so did not all the Disciples, who had
some Weaknesses, diverse of them, as is recorded; for if the least sinful
weakness does take from a man his Ministry, then Moses's Trespass at the Waters
of Strife did take his Ministry from him, and the Contention betwixt Paul and
Barnabas did take away the Ministry from one of them at least; for one, if not
both, were faulty; and that for which Peter was reproved by Paul, did take away
his Ministry; al^ which are false; and therefore so is that Doctrine from which
such a false Conclusion does proceed* I need say no more to this Head, because
it is so connected with the former that it does depend on it; and therefore the
first falling, the latter does fall with it.

Error 27. That there is no coming again of Christ to judge the Quick and the
Dead, but that only which is already witnessed within us; but that there shall
not be any Coming or Appearing of Christ in his glorified Nature and Body of
Man without us, in my Age or Time to come.

Er. 28. That there is no general Judgment Day to come at the end of the World,
but every one (...) has all the Reward or Punishment, that he is (...) expect
(...).

Er. 29. That there is (...) of the Body after Death, either of (...) or
Unjust; for (...) Resurrection, (...) why are come to Christ, are come to the
Resurrection, and there is no other to be expected; and that all holy Men and
Women immediately after Death have got all the Reward and Resurrection that was
or is to be expected, and they wait for nothing more than what they then
received.

Er. 30. That they who are perfectly sanctified, are already fully come to the
New Heavens and the New Earth, and all that is written in the Prophecies of the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament concerning the New Heavens and the New
Earth, is already witnessed and fullfilled to such as are perfectly sanctified.

Correct. All these are great and hurtful Errors, and very unbecoming such who
not only pretend to be Christians of the more common sort, but who (...) to a
degree of Knowledge and Understanding in the Scriptures beyond many others, as
some do to my certain Knowledge. Now these Errors are so linked together one
with another, that they stand and fall together, therefore I need say the less
to the Refutation or Correction of every one of them. And as concerning the
first of these four Errors here mentioned, it depends upon another great Error
above refuted and corrected, to wit, That Christ is now in Heaven, only God,
without any Clothing or Garment of man's glorified Nature, of Soul and Body;
and that the spiritual Body he has now in Heaven is only and alone his
Godhead, as he was from all Eternity, which is Infinite, Almighty, and every
where present: Which is well nigh as gross an Assertion as any does or can
hold; for it is no where said in Scripture, That the Godhead is a spiritual
Body, but it is said, That God is a Spirit. And as concerning Christ's Body that
h^ had of the Virgin, and was crucified, dyed and buried, it is not every where
present; for after Christ rose from the Dead, the Angel told the Women, That he
was not in the Grave, but was risen; and Peter has declared concerning Christ,
That the Heavens must receive him until the Time of the Restitution of all
things; and then God shall send him from Heaven; Which must needs be understood
of his Body, and Bodily Presence, at the Son of Man. And said Christ
(concerning his Bodily Presence and Appearance) to his Disciples, The Poor ye
have always with you, but me ye have not always. And when they were sorry
that he was going away, he comforted them by telling them, not only that he
would come again in Spirit, but also That he would come again, after he had
gone to prepare a place for them in Heaven, and receive them unto his self,
that where he was, there they might be also; Which has a respect to his coming
at the end of the World, at the Resurrection of the Dead. And when Christ was
taken up Bodily into Heaven, while the Disciples looked steadfastly toward
Heaven, as he went up, it is said, Acts 1.10, 11. Behold, two Men stood by them
in white Apparel, (whether these were Angels, or some of the Saints that arose
after Christ's Resurrection, I shall not meddle here to determine) which also
said, Ye Men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing (...) Heaven? This same Jesus
which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye
have seen him go into Heaven; and surely that was without them. And though it
is well done to contradict the carnal conceit of such who carn^lly imagine,
that Christ is in Heaven with a carnal Body, and did so ascend, and will again
so descend, like our carnal body, and shall have a carnal Sword (as some grossly
imagine) to destroy his Enemies; yet it is not good, but very hurtful to run
into such an extreme, as because Christ has not a gross material and carnal
Body, such as we have, and will not descend with a gross material carnal Body,
therefore he will descend wi^h no Body at all without us, and have no outward
Coming at the Resurrection of the Dead; and so would confine and limit all
coming of Christ only to his inward Coming and in his Saints; and as if the
Saints in the World to come were to have no other Knowledge of Christ, nor
acquaintance with him, but only within them. But seeing Christ is in Heaven in
the entire glorified Nature of Man, both in Soul and Body, and in that Nature
is Head and King of the Saints, it does add (not a little) to the Comfort and
Happiness of the Saints, that they shall not only know, see and enjoy him
inwardly with the Eyes of their Souls, but that they shall also know, see and
enjoy him without them, seeing him Bodily with the Eyes of their Resurrection
Bodies, which shall be made able to behold him. And though the Wicked shall be
raised also in vile and dishonorable Bodiee, and shall be made to see him, yet
it shall be in another manner then the Saints shall see him, for it shall be to
their great Trror and Torment; therefore it is said, He shall appear in flaming
Fire (when he shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels) taking
Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.7, 8. for as Christ's inward Appearance is after one
manner to his Saints, even most lovely gentle and aimable, but after another
manner to the Wicked, even dreadful and terrible, and is compared to devouring
Fire in Scripture, so it will be in that Day, in the outward, insomuch that the
Wicked will then cry, Hills and Mountains, fall on us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits on the Throne, Rev. 6.16. compare with Luke 23.30.

And whereas some say, They can own no other Body of Christ but that which he
gives his Saints to feed upon, to wit, his Flesh, which is Meat indeed, and
his Blood which is Drink indeed; and this is not confined to any one place, but
is every where where the Saints are, who feed upon it in all places, whether
when (...) together, or in private places, and Dungeons, where they may be
Prisoners.

I Answer; The Body of Christ is one, even as Christ is one; but that Christ is
one, does not hinder that he has a two fold Nature, to wit, the one of his
Godhead, the other of his Manhood, forever united together in most excellent
and admirable Unity; yet the Godhead of Christ is not his Manhood. Again, as
concerning the Manhood of Christ, we ought, according to Scripture, to
distinguish betwixt his Body, and Flesh, and Blood, as he is, and was the
heavenly Man in all Ages of the World, and was before the World was, and who
fed the Saints in all Ages, as well before Christ came in the Flesh as since,
with his heavenly Flesh and Blood, that is spiritually or mystically so called,
as it is also called Bread, Wine, Milk, Honey, Marrow and Fatness, and which is
proper and belonging to him, as he is the Heavenly Man, or Lord from Heaven,
before he took Flesh in the Virgins Womb. I say, we ought to distinguish
betwixt his Flesh and Nature which he gives us to partake of and feed upon,
and that Flesh and Nature of ours which he did partake of, that is of a far
inferior kind, in it self considered, yet is now wonderfully exalted and
glorified in Heaven with himself.

And as concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, as he is and was the heavenly Man, in
his heavenly Flesh and Blood before this World was, and is the Food of the
Saints, he neither can nor ought to be understood as limited or confined to
any particular place, visible or invisible, but is every where present, giving
Being, Life and Virtue to all Creatures, according to their various Capacities.
But when we speak of the Body of Christ, as it was born of the Virgin, and
appeared among the Disciples, was crucified, dead and buried, and rose and
ascended into Heaven, and is now in Heaven, we ought to consider, that, as when
it was upon Earth, though the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in it, yet it was
not every where present, but was sometimes in one place and sometimes in
another; so now that it is in Heaven, it is not every where present, but does
there remain, and will, until the time appointed; and though the Fullness of
the Godhead dwells in it, yet that is not so to be understood, as if the
Godhead were confined to that Body, and were no where else but where that Body
is; but it has this sense, That such a Fullness of Gods Presence, and of the
divine Grace, Life, Power and Virtue, Light, Wisdom and Knowledge does dwell in
him, as in no other whomsoever, neither Angels nor Saints; and out of that
fullness which dwelt, and still dwells Bodily in him, all Saints and Angels
receive proportionably, and Grace for Grace, as John has declared. And it may
and ought to be acknowledged, That the Man Christ Jesus, the Son of David, and
the Seed of Abraham, who is now glorified in Heaven, in that Nature and Seed
which he did take, does send forth into all his Saints, divine Communications
and Influences of Light, Life and Grace, and divine Power and Virtue, to
quicken, refresh and comfort them, as also to teach and instruct them still
more and more in the Mysteries of his heavenly Kingdom; and by these divine
Communications and Participations of Light, Life and Grace, etc. they are
united unto him, and he unto them, as the Members are unto the Head, and their
Prayers and Breathings ascend unto him, which he presents unto the Father;
and as they feel and are sensible of his divine Power and Virtue* as really as
if he were Bodily present, so he feels and is sensible of all their
Sufferings, Afflictions, Wants, Necessities, Trials, T^ntations and Exercises
of all sorts, whereby they are greatly encouraged to pray unto him, and to come
unto God by him, who is their merciful High Priest and Advocate with the
Father. And it is the Man Christ Jesus who has received the holy Spirit above
measure, and all spiritual Gifts, Virtues and Blessings, that sends down the
same to his Saints on Earth. And it is by his Grace, Virtue, Light, Life and
Power, that all who become Saints, are converted and renewed, so as of Unholy
to become Saints and Holy; for it was the Man Christ Jesus that said, And I,
when I (...) up, will draw all Men after me; and of him it was prophesied in
the Psalms, That when he should ascend on High, he should receive Gifts for
Men, even for the Rebellious; and such as he received he gave them, to turn
them from being Rebellions, to be his Servants and Subjects. And seeing it is
acknowledged by many from good Experience, and the Scriptures Testimony, That
Holy Men have fellowship together in the Spirit, as Fellow Members of one Body,
and influence one another, and convey to one another spiritual and divine
Communications of Life, Grace and Virtue, from Christ their Head, and that at
any distance, as outwardly, in order to quicken, refresh, comfort and
strengthen one another; it must needs be acknowledged, That the Saints on Earth
have Fellowship with the Man Christ in Heaven, in the Spirit much more, and
receive divine Communications and Influences from him of divine Grace, (...),
Virtue, Light and Love, as so many Rays and Beams from him, who is the Sun of
Righteousness, and has that place and Office in his Church, as the outward Sun
has in the Firmament to the Earth, and the Stars of Heaven; and who does also
in a general way enlighten every man that comes into the World; and as he was
the Light of the World, and did in some measure lighten all men in all Ages,
even before he came in the flesh, so now, after he is come in the flesh, and
was dead, and is risen again, he does more enlighten Mankind than formerly,
where ever his Name is faithfully preached, as Paul preached concerning him,
That he should be the first that should (...) from the Dead, and give Light to
the Gentiles, to wit, more abundantly after his Resurrection than before, to
all who should hear his Name faithfully preached, and believe and obey. And for
these, and the like Considerations, it may and ought to be acknowledged, that
all true Believers, though they eat not of Christ's Body that was broken for
them on the Tree of the Cross, with the outward Mouth, yet by Faith they
spiritually and mystically feed upon him, and eat his Flesh and drink his
Blood, even that Body of his that was cruc^fied on the Gross, and his Blood
that was then shed, when the Soldier pierced his side with the Spear,
according to which Augustine, above twelve hundred Years ago, said, Grede et
Manducasti, i. e. Believe and thou have eat; for Christ as he suffered for us
in the Flesh, apprehended by us with a living Faith, is as a Feast unto us; and
this was signified by eating the Paschal Lamb, and Flesh of the Sacrifices
under the Law, and by the Parable of eating the fatted Calf, under the Gospel.

But now as concerning Christ's Coming and Appearance, that is yet to be, even
without us, in his glorified Body, in the time appointed, when he shall come to
judge both the Quick and the Dead, I shall cite some further Testimonies of
holy Scripture, which will sufficiently prove the thing to such who are not
blinded with Prejudice against such a precious Truth, Mat. 26.64. I say unto
you [he was speaking to the Council and high Priest of the Jews, who took
Council to put him to Death] Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on
the Right Hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven: Which words have a
plain Reference to his coming to judge both the Quick and the Dead in that
great Day of Judgment, at the end of the World (compare this with Mark 14.62.
Now that the real sense of Christ's words is, that they should see him, not only
inwardly to condemn them by his Light in their Consciences, but also outwardly
in that very Bodily Nature wherein they denied him to be the true Christ* is
most clear to all who are not wilfully prejudiced against the Truth of it; for
the Jews did generally believe that there was to be a Day of Judgment, and that
the Light or Spirit of God in their hearts would inwardly Judge all Men in that
Day, and therefore that was not it which they reckoned Blasphemy in Christ, to
affirm; But that he whom they sought to put to Death, the Son of Man, born of
Mary, and whose Body they saw standing before them, should in the same Body and
Nature come in the Clouds of Heaven to judge them for their Impiety, This they
judged great Blasphemy. Again, we have the Manner and Circumstances of his
outward Appearance in that gre^^ Day, very plainly described, Mat. 25. from v.
31. to the end, where its said, When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory,
and all the holy Angels with him, thou shall he sit upon the Throne of his
Glory, and before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them
one from another as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats, [for until
that time, good and bad will remain together in this World, not only in one
Nation, but in one House or Family] Then shall the King say unto them on his
Right Hand, etc. Now that this cannot be wholly a thing or action to be done in
every man's Conscience, (as some imagine) although the Book of Conscience will
then be fully opened, with the other Books, and Christ's Light in the Conscience
will manifestly witness against the Wicked, and for the Righteous; but ^s all
Nations are to appear before Christ, as he is the Son of Man, in their
Resurrection Bodies, ^he Just in glorious Bodies, and the Unjust in vile and
dishonorable Bodies, so Christ is also to appear in his Resurrection Body,
even the same wherein he was crucified, but wonderfully changed in Manner and
Condition, yet the same for Substance; but to say, all this is wholly in action
to be done within every (...), ^^ if all Nations (...) to be gathered within
(...) man, and the Sheep were to be set on the Right Hand within every man, and
the Goats on the left hand within every man, is such a gross Perversion and
Abuse of holy Scripture, that to mention it, is sufficient to refute it; for at
this rate every man has all Nations, good and bad* within him, and both Heaven
and Hell at once; than which there can be no greater Confusion, nor greater
abuse and Perversion of holy Scripture. And to this glorious Time of Christ's
Bodily Appearance, as the Son of Man, that place, Mat. 19.28. has a plain
Reference, Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the
Regeneration when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye also
shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel; where some
Greek Copies placing the Comma before these words, in the Regeneration, make
that clause ( In the Regeneration) to refer to the time of Christ's Coming, and
the Resurrection of the Dead, which is a sort of Regeneration, even as the new
Body of Corn, that rises out of the seed that is sown, is a true Regeneration;
and with this compare these parallel places, Mark 10.29, 30. and Luke 18.29,
30. Where note, that the Hundreds of folds, or Manifolds, relate to Christ's
Coming, which then shall be paid them, or rather freely given them, together
with what they lost, some in the same things, as Fathers, Brethren and Kindred,
and some in the equivolent. And whereas it is said* Mark ^0.30* ( with
Persecutions) it is a false Translation, for then shall be no Persecution, but
the Greek word, (...), signifies, as well, Things that follow, as to say, cum
Consequentibus, or cum Pert^nentibus, i. e. with the Consequents or Pertinents.
And whereas it is said* Now in this Time, it should rather be translated, Now
in That Time, to wit, at Christ's Bodily Appearance, when they shall be openly
rewarded in the sight of their Enemies, who did openly persecute and spoil
them. And surely such an open way that shall have an outward Demonstration to
men's sight, as well as inward to their (...), both of Christ's being rewarded
of his Father, after all his great Sufferings, and also of the Saints, their
being rewarded with him, after all their Sufferings, is that which does most
excellently (...) both with the Goodness and Wisdom of God, and also with his
Justice; for in this world the Justice of God (although they are exceeding
blind who see not the secret Tracts of it), does not so evidently appear to
all; as then it shall do, (...) concerning this Coming and Appearance of
Christ, in (...) said over without (...) his glorified Body, and the Hope*
Expectation and Faith that the Saints had of the same, to their great Comfort,
and what use they made of it, to their Progress, in perfecting Holiness in the
fear of the Lord, consider the following places of Scripture, Mat. 24.30. 1
Pet. 5.4. cap. 1.7. 1 Ioh. 2.28. and 3.2, 3. 1 Timothy 6.14. 2 Timothy 1.10. and 4.1,
8. Tit. 2.13. Mat. 24.3.27, 30, 37, 39. Mark 13.26. 1 Cor. 15.23. 1 These. 2.19.
and 3.13. and 4.15. 2 These. 2.1. Rev. 1.7. And there are many Testimonies of
the Old Testament that confirm the same Truth, of which see these following,
Dan. 7.9, 10, 13, 14. Zech. 14.5. Psalm. 96.13. Isa. 13.9. and of this outward
Coming of the Lord Jesus in the end of the World, Enoch, the seventh from Adam,
prophesied, as Jude relates, cap. 14. And that Jude does take particular
notice, that Enoch was the seventh from Adam (as the Book of Genesis declares)
does plainly point at the seventh Age of the World in which this should come to
pass; and as the Jewish Sabbath began on the Evening of the sixth Day, before
the sixth Day was wholly expired some considerable time, so there is cause to
believe, That that great Sabbath shall begin some considerable time before the
six thousand Years of the World be expired ( but more of this in the
Chronology.)

And whereas it is said, Christ shall come in the Clouds of Heaven; by these
Clouds partly may be understood, these great Multitudes of Angels and Saints,
in the midst of whom he shall come, even as a King in the midst of his Army or
Attendants. And that it is said, Zech. 14.4. His feet shall stand in that day
upon the Mount of Olives (near to which was the Valley of Iehosephat, where, it
is said, The Lord will sit to judge all the Heathen round about, Joel 3.2, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15,) etc. it may well enough be translated, Above the Mountain of
Olives; for the Hebrew word (Gnal) signifies above, as well as upon; for
neither the outward Mount of Olives, nor the Valley of Iehosephat can contain
any great part of the Nations that are there to be gathered; but the place
where the Lord will appear to judge all Nations, will be some where in the Air,
above that place, where Christ ascended; for Paul tells, That the Saints
shall have their Bodies changed in a Moment or Twinkling of an Eye, and shall
be caught up to meet the Lord in the Air; for both Christ's Resurrection Body,
and the Resurrection Bodies of the Saints, at their appearance shall have no
heavyness nor weight to incline them to the Glob of the Earth, as Christ's Body
now in Heaven has none. But seeing Christ's glorified Body is not every where
at once, nor shall the glorified Bodies of the Saints at the Resurrection be
every where at once, it is most equal and rational, according to Scripture, to
believe, that they shall appear in some certain place above the Glob of the
Earth, over or above the Mount of Olives, where Christ ascended, after he rose
from the Dead. And though the Resurrection Body of a Saint cannot be in all
places at once, yet without doubt they can move from one place to another at
any distance, upwards or downwards, South, North, East or West, in the
twinkling of an Eye, or according to the swiftness of a Thought, which is
easy to understand to such who know, that some of the movable Stars and
Luminaries move some hundreds of Miles in less than one Minute of Time, some of
which are greater Bodies than the Glob of the Earth.

But against Christ's outward Appearance in his glorified Body, some object John
14.19* Yet a little while and the World sees me no more.

To which I Answer; These words are so far from being any proof against Christ's
outward Appearance in his glorified Body at the time appointed, that it is a
good Proof for it; for he does not say, after I go away the World sees me no
more, but yet a little while, etc. and within that little while he promised,
that his Disciples should see him, to wit, spiritually and inwardly present
with them, the which little while contains the space of time betwixt his
Bodily Ascension into Heaven, and his Return; the which* though in it self
considered, is a large time, yet compared with the Ages in the World to come,
may well be called a little Time, A Thousand Years with the Lord being as one
Day. And whereas the English Translation has it, The World sees me no more,
the words ( no more) cannot exclude all time to come, but only some limited
time; for the Greek word (...), is most properly translated not as yet, and
does relate to some limited time, as is plain from Mark 14.25. I will drink no
more (or, not as yet) of the Fruit of the Vine, until that day that I drink it
new in the Kingdom of God.

Again, some object, That if Christ has such a spiritual Body that shall
outwardly appear, it will be so glorious that Men with their outward Eyes
cannot behold it; for if men cannot steadfastly behold the Sun with their
outward Eyes, because of its Glory, how much less the Body of the Man Christ
that shall be incomparably more bright and glorious?

To this I Answer; This Objection has no weight against the Saints seeing
Christ's Body, who shall have attained their Resurrection Bodies, that shall be
like unto his; for as John has declared, We know, that when he shall appear,
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. And therefore
though the Eye of the poor weak Mortal Body cannot see him as he is, yet that
hinders not but the Eyes of the Resurrection Body can so see him.

And as concerning these of the Saints who shall be living in mortal Bodies at
Christ's Appearance in his glorified Body, he can show himself well enough unto
them, in such a manner and after such a form as they are able to bear, though
they cannot see him altogether as he is, or as the Saints raised in Immortal
Bodies can do, even as when the Disciples, Peter, James and John saw him at his
Translation on Mount Tabor; for even before his ascension into Heaven, the Lord
Jesus appeared unto the Disciples after a diverse form. And for the Wicked,
though they cannot see him as the Saints, yet they may be made to see him after
a sort, to cause great Terror and Astonishment unto them; so that if they
cannot see him as the Saints shall, yet they may see some Sign of him, as
Christ himself said, Mat. 24.30. And then shall appear the Sign of the Son of
Man in Heaven, and then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn, and they shall
see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with Power and great Glory:
Now whether this be referred to an inward or outward sight of Christ, the
difficulty is the same, for certainly Wicked men can neither see Christ nor God
inwardly with the Eyes of their Souls, as the Saints do; they can only see him
in Wrath, to cause in them great dread and horror; and so they may see Christ,
even outwardly.

And as to the nex^ gross Error, held by some, to my certain knowledge, That
there is no general Judgment Day to come at the end of the World, but every one
immediately after Death has all his Reward or Punishment that he is to expect
forever; Which is so connected with the former Error, sufficiently above
refuted, that they fall together, and therefore less needs to be said for its
particular Refutation; for it is most clear from the Testimony of holy
Scripture (see Mat. 10.15.11.22.12.36. 2 Pet. 2.9.^.7. 1 Ioh. 4.17.) That there
is to be a great Day of Judgment in the end of the World, that is called in
Scripture, The last Day, the great Day, and That Day, by way of distinction
from all other Days; for even the fallen Angels have not as yet received their
final Sentence, and full and absolute Punishment, but are reserved in Chains of
Darkness unto the Judgment of the great Day, Jude 6. compare with 2 Pet. 2.4.
and Mat. 7.22. Many will say to me in that Day, Lord! Lord! have we not
prophesied in thy Name? And 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. where note the words of the
10th verse, particularly mentioning That Day, when he shall come to be
glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe (because
our Testimony among you was believed) in That Day. And Acts 17.31. Because he
has appointed a Day, in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by
that Man whom he has ordained, having offered Faith unto all Men, in that he
has raised him from the Dead; and according to this the words of Christ may be
well understood, Ioh. 5.22. For the Father judges no Man, but has committed
all Judgment to the Son, and v. 27* and has given him Authority to execute
Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man; and to this he adjoyneth the
Resurrection of the Dead, saying, v. 28, 29. Marvel not at this, for the Hour
is coming, in the which all that are in their Graves shall hear his Voice, and
shall come forth, they that have done good unto the Resurrection of Life, and
they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation: So that it
plainly appears by Christ's words, that God shall no other way appear without
men, to judge them, but in the Man Christ Jesus, who is both God and Man; nor
shall there be any other visible Appearance or Similitude of God to be seen by
Men, without them, but the glorified Manhood of the Lord Jesus Christ, who,
even as Man is the most excellent Similitude and Image of him, that ever was or
shall be, incomparably excelling all glorified Saints and Angels, who next unto
Christ are the Similitude of God; and therefore it is a gross Conception, and
full of Idolatry, to imagine, as some do, That God the Father, as an Old Man in
some visible form and shape, distinct from the Man Christ, shall sit to judge
the World; and that Christ the Son shall sit at his Right Hand in another
visible shape and form; for God, being purely a Spirit, infinite and
incomprehensible, can neither be seen nor known with the Eyes of Men's Minds, or
of their Bodies, as he is in himself, but as he is pleased to appear to Men in
his Son Christ Jesus, who is the express Image and Similitude, both as he does
inwardly appear by his Light in men's Minds, to their inward and spiritual Eyes,
or as he has appeared outwardly to the Bodily sight of Men, when he walked
among them in his Body of Flesh, before he suffered Death on the Cross, and as
after he appeared to his Disciples, when he rose from the Dead; and as he
appeared to Paul, even outwardly, after his Ascension; for as concerning the
Appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ without him in his glorified Body, Paul's
words are to be understood, Acts 22.6.9.11. and cap. 26.13, 14. and with a
respect to this Vision of Christ that Paul had without him, he said, 1 Cor.
15.8. And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time,
etc. And therefore the Right Hand of God at which Christ is said to sit, does
not signify any visible or corporal thing, but the great Power of God, with
which the Man Christ is most excellently endued, and fitted to be Judge of
Quick and Dead, and Lord and King over all Creatures, visible and invisible.
And when God appeared at any time to any of the Fathers or Prophets, in the
form of Man, before Christ came in the Flesh, there is good ground to believe,
that it was still in the Man Christ; for although the Body of Christ which he
^^d of the Virgin, was not then formed, yet he was then, and all along, the
Heavenly Man, from the beginning, in which heavenly and divine Nature, the
similitude of God, and in that respect could appear in the Form of Man, even as
Angels, who have no Bodies of F^esh, have appeared in the Form of Men, and as
Moses and Elias appeared at Christ's Transfiguration in the Form of Men,
although they had not attained the Resurrection Body; for even the Souls and
Spirits of Men have at times appeared in the Form of Men, after the death of
the gross Body. Nor will this seem strange to such who do rightly understand
how the inward Man dwells in the outward Man of every one of us, and the
inward Man has his proper Form, as well as the outward; for it is the form of
the inward Man that gives Form to the Outward, even as the Seal gives the
Impression to the Wax or Clay that seals it. And therefore the Saints now
deceased, that are with Christ in Paradise, have their proper and peculiar
Forms very beautiful, which are as an inward Garment unto them, and does
suffice unto them, until they be clothed upon with their Resurrection Bodies;
therefore it is said, That to the Souls that remained under the Altar, who were
slain for the Word of God, White Robes were given unto every one of them, Rev.
6.11. But when their Resurrection Bodies shall be given unto them, then their
inner white Garments shall be clothed upon, as with an outer Garment, even as
when a Man that is clothed with a fine Linnin Shirt or Wastcoat, puts on
another fine Garment above it, to which the words of Paul are to be referred, 2
Cor. 5.1* 2, 3, 4* Where note these words, Not for that would be uncloathed,
but clothed upon, the Greek word, (...) plainly import a double Clothing, as
to say, one above another. But I shall not enlarge at present, nor further
^anch forth into these Mysteries, although I may safely say, more of these things
have been in part opened unto me, than I think fit to declare, or can declare
in words.

And as touching the great Judgment that is to come to pass in the End of the
World, both in relation to Men and Angels, there wants not Testimonies in the
holy Scriptures of the Old Testament, as well as of the New, to confirm it, as
Psalm. 69.13. He shall judge the World in Righteousness, so the Hebrew. And to
this place of the Psalmist Paul did seem to refer, when he said, Acts 17.31.
God would judge the world in Righteousness: See again, Psalm. 98.9. Dan.
7.10.10.22. Eccles. 11.14. compare with Rev. 11.18. Joel ^.12. And without all
doubt Abraham had a respect to this great Judgment, when he did plead with the
Lord, saying, Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? Genesis 18.25. And
the Destruction of Sodom by Fire, with the other Cities, both Peter and Jude
affirm to be Types or Examples of the Destruction of the Wicked by Fire, at the
great Day of Judgment, Jude 7. 2 Pet. 2.6. of which more particularly he
writes 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13. But the Day of the Lord will come as a Thief
in the Night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, and
the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat; the Earth also, and the Works that
are therein shall be burnt up, etc. And though it is readily granted, That
immediately after Death, every Soul has its particular Judgment in part, as is
clear by the Parable of the rich Man and of poor Lazarus; for Souls dye not
with the Body, but remain in a sensible state of joy or anguish, according to
the manner they have lived in the Body; and the manner and degree of Judgment
to Souls immediately after Death, is not one, but various, yet the particular
Judgment that the Souls of Men rec^ive immediately after Death, does not hinder
that great Judgment that remains to be in general at the end of the world; the
which last and greatest Judgment, is called in Scripture, (...), the Eternal or
Agely Judgment, or of Ages, Heb. 6.2. And it is manifest from Scripture
Testimonies who these are that shall undergo the dreadful sentence of the last
Judgment, even these Vessels of Wrath, perfected (viz. in Wickedness) for
Destruction, who unto their former sins, that have been great and many, shall
have added that of blaspheming against the holy Ghost, and therefore are
neither to be forgiven in this World (or Age) nor in that to come; and these
are called in Scripture, Goats, Dogs, Serpents, Children of Beliel, Drofs and
Reprobate Silver, Tares, Chaff, etc. concerning whom Christ will say in that
day, Depart from me, ye (...) never knew you, viz. so as to be mine, as Members
of that Body whereof he is the Head, neither were they given to him from the
beginning, but are of another Body, Root and Seed, even that of the Serpent,
therefore are they called, The Children of the Wicked One.

Next, As concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, some who seem to own it in
words, yet deny it in truth, when they say and think, as some do, (to my
certain knowledge) That there is no Resurrection of the Body after Death,
either of the Just or Unjust, for Christ is the Resurrection, and they who are
come to Christ, are come to the Resurrection, and there is no other to be
expected. Which is a great and hurtful Error, and is a plain Denial of the
Resurrection of the Dead, the right Belief of which Paul does so much value,
that because some among the Corinthians had not the Faith of it, he charge
them, That they had not the Knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 15.34. and he does so link
or join together the Faith of the Resurrection of the Dead in general, with the
Faith of Christ's Resurrection, that to deny the one, is to deny the other; and
to deny Christ's Resurrection, is to deny both Faith and Preaching, and render
them void, and to make the Apostles of the Lord false Witnesses, and the Gospel
or Glad-Tidings of the Remission of our sins, through faith in Christ raised
from the Dead, a Fiction or Untruth; all which are most absurd. And as in that
Chapter the Apostle Paul uses many excellent Arguments and Reasons to prove
the Resurrection of the Dead, so particularly he does closely argue, That to
(...) Resurrection of the Dead, is not only to make void all Sufferings (...)
the Lords sake, but to introduce all manner of Brutalism and Ep^^rism of
Gluttony and Drunkenness, and other carnal Lusts and Pleasures, verse. 32. What
advantageth it not if the Dead rise not? let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
dye. And if any think to avoid this Consequence, by saying, It is enough to
believe the Immortality of the Soul, or That the Souls of Men survive after the
Death of the Body, to be rewarded or punished, according to the Deeds done in
the Body. This is to think themselves wiser than Paul, or rather than Christ in
Paul, who did dictate these words in him. But according to Paul's Doctrine, the
Faith of the Resurrection of the Dead i^ so joined with the Faith of Christ's
Resurrection, that they stand or fall together; and if Christ be not raised
from the dead, then the Faith of all the Saints is vain, and they have all dyed
in their Sins, and therefore their Souls can have no enjoyment of God, nor ^e
in any m^^sure happy. All which being most absurd and false, therefore that
Doctrine is false which denies the Resurrection of the dead. And it is
wonderful Ignorance in some, who affirm, That in all this Chapter, 1 Cor. 1^.
Paul does only understand the inward quickening or raising of the Soul from the
Death of Sin, to live unto God and to Righteousness; and by Christ's
Resurrection, the rising of his Seed or Life in us; as if Paul meant by these
words, v. 14. ( And if Christ be not risen, etc.) If Christ be not risen in us,
then is our Preaching vain; but they will not grant, that by Christ's
Resurrection, to be meant, the Resurrection of his Body out of the Sepulcher,
where Joseph of Arimathea buried him, and then by the same Method, the^ must
deny that Christ dyed outwardly on the outward Cross for our sins, or that he
was outwardly buried; and this will lead them to deny any outward Birth of
Christ in the Flesh, which is to deny and make void some of the chief Articles
and Principles of the Christian Faith, and consequently the whole. But it is
most plain to all men of common Understanding, that whereas Paul speaks of
Christ, that he dyed for our sins, and that he was buried, he does understand
how he dyed outwardly, and was outwardly buried, verse. ^, 4. and therefore his
rising again the third day, is his outward rising. It is a most lamentable and
wretched extreme which some run into, that because the Scripture mentions
Christ in us, and our being inwardly raised with Christ, to deny that which is
so plainly held forth in Scripture, that Christ is both outwardly raised from
the Dead, in the Body, and that his Resurrection from the Dead in that Body, as
we are enabled by the Spirit of Christ in us to believe it, is ground of our
lively Hope, That he will in due time raise us from the Dead. I have heard it
charged on Familists and high Notionists, That they so turn the whole Scripture
into an Allegory, as that they deny any thing to be true, as outwardly, that is
recorded in the Letter of the Scripture; the which, whether truly or falsely
charged on them, I will not meddle here to determine, but to my great
astonishment I have found too many professing themselves knowing in the
Scriptures, run into very dangerous Extremes, in great part laying aside the
most blessed and precious Doctrine of Christ, his outward Coming in the Flesh,
his Obedience therein, his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven, and
his Intercession for us in Heaven, and Faith in Christ as such, viz. as he
outwardly* dyed and rose again, and is gone into Heaven, making very little or
no account of his Death and Sufferings without us, or the Faith of it, further
than as an Example, but pressing with great seeming zeal, That we must know
Christ born in us, and crucified and raised (...), etc. and whoever believe in
Christ within them, though they have no Knowledge nor Faith of Christ without
them, they are well enough, and good Christians. But this is to confound
Paganism and the Christian Faith, which ought to be distinguished; for many
Pagans have believed that they have a divine Light in them, that teaches
common Duties of Temperance and Justice, and yet the Mystery of Christ
crucified was foolishness unto them, whereof many Witnesses of Pagan or Gentile
P^ilosophers, so called, can be produced, who in words did own a divine
Illumination within them, and yet were great Adversaries to the Christian
Faith, both as concerning Christ's Resurrection, and the Resurrection of the
Dead in gener^l, and writ against the Christians, as both Plotinus and
Porphyrius, and many others.

And whereas some say, We must witness Christ not only born or formed in us,
but crucified in us. I say, to witness christ born or formed in us is a blessed
and necessary experience, but after he is born or formed in us, which is to
say, after his blessed Life is revealed in us, it is no good nor desirable
experience to witness him crucified in us, and so to affirm does more savor of
Ranterism than Christian Doctrine or Sobriety; indeed in the time of men's
Unbelief and Alienation from God, it may be said in a Scripture sense, Christ
is crucified in them; but after they have truly believed, and witnessed a
measure of true Conversion, by the Power of Christ in them, his Life being
raised or revealed in them, they must take great heed, and be very tender that
they do not crucify him again, which will be to their own destruction: The
tender precious Life and Seed of God does indeed suffer many things in men
after it is revealed; for every sin occasioneth a suffering to it, even in the
least degree, but we ought not to put it to suffering, but rather be humbled
and afflicted before the Lord that we have so merly caused it to suffer in us,
by any of our sins of any sort; and though Satan and his Instruments seek to
persecute and crucify that tender L^fe of Christ in us, yet if we be faithful
unto God, they shall not be able to do it; for never does the Life of Christ
more prevail and reign in the hearts of the faithful, than when they are
outwardly persecuted for Christ's sake, who does account their Sufferings to be
his, even as his is accounted theirs.

But whereas some say, They are come to all the Resurrection they expect,
because they are come to Christ, who said, He was the Resurrection and ^he
Life. It seems, that in Paul's time, some from a wrong understanding of
Christ's words, his being the Resurrection, etc. did seek to wrest and corrupt
the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead, such as Hymeneus and Phisetus,
who said, The Resurrection was past already, and did overthrow the Faith of
some, whose words did eat as a Canker, as he declared, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. the
which Hymeneus (together with Alexander) Paul delivered to Satan, for his
great Error touching the Resurrection, for I find no other particularly
mentioned, 1 Timothy 1.20. compared with 2. Tim. 2.17, 18. By which it appears
from Scripture, that it is of great moment to be found in the Faith of the
Resurrection of the Dead, and it is a great hurt not to believe it; and
therefore People should not make so light a matter of that, and other parts of
Christian Doctrine, as some do, thinking, if they have the Life it is enough;
but the Life of Christ and his Doctrine go along together; and therefore he who
has not the Doctrine of Christ, and abides not in the same, has not God, and
consequently has not the Life of Christ, 2 John 9. for unsound Doctrine makes
an unsound Mind, and an unsound Mind is as a leeking Vessel or a broken
Cistern, that when the Water of Life is poured into it, holds no Water; and
therefore any thing or part of unsound Doctrine causes some decay or
withdrawing of the Life; and a great Error in Doctrine, that respects some of
the principal Matters of the Christian Faith, is like a great hole in the
Vessel, that makes it exceeding leeky. But the true sense of Christ's words,
That he is the Resurrection, can be no other than this, that he is the Author
of it; so that by his Power the Soul is now quickened and raised from the Death
of Sin, to the Life of Righteousness; and afterward, the hour comes when the
Body shall also be raised; even as Christ is called our Hope, because he is the
Author and Foundation of it. Now against some who deny the Resurrection of the
Body after Death, I have brought (among other places) that noted place, Phil.
3.21. ( Who shall change our vile (or low) Body) to prove the Resurrection; To
which they have answered, That is done already, they witness their vile Body
already changed, and made conform to the glorious Body of Christ. But such
contradict the Scripture, and speak reproachfully, but ignorantly, against the
Lord Jesus Christ; for Paul uses these words by way of Prophecy, as a thing
not then fullfilled, but to be fullfilled at the Resurrection of the Dead,
Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our vile (or low) Body, that it may be fashioned
like unto his glorious Body, etc. He does not say, that the Body was already
changed, and made like to the Body of Christ, but by way of Prophecy relates
it as a thing to come; for the washing and cleansing of the Body from sin is
not that change, but it is necessary to prepare unto it; for even after the
Bodies of the Saints are washed and cleansed from sin, they remain low, and
weak, and mortal, and corruptible, subject to hunger, thirst, cold, diseases
and death, and therefore are not made like to his glorious Body, until the
Resurrection of the Dead.

Now that the Saints are not immediately raised up after Death (so as to attain
to the Resurrection of the Body) or after the Spirit goes out of the Body
(although the Souls and Spirits of all righteous and faithful Men and Women,
who dye in the Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ, do immediately go unto God and
Christ in Heaven, and enter into a very great and large enjoyment of the
heavenly blessedness, after the Bodily decease) is clear from many express
Testimonies of holy Scripture; for the deceased Saints, (though their Souls and
Spirits are alive with the Lord in Heaven, and do not sleep, but are awake, and
pra^^^ God continually, yet they) are said to be asleep, as in respect of their
Bodies, which are rather fallen asleep, than dead, and are said to sleep in
Christ, to wit, under his divine care and protection, until he awaken them; for
which I shall cite these following Scriptures, 1 Kings 2.10. So David slept
with his Fathers, and was buried in the City of David. Deuteronomy. 31.16. Behold,
thou shall sleep with thy Fathers, said the Lord unto Moses: 1 Cor. 15.20. Now
is Christ become the first Fruits of them that sleep, viz. because he arose
from the dead the third day. 1 These. 4.14. For if we believe that Jesus dyed,
and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with
him; for this we say unto you by the Word of the Lord, that we (that is, such
of our Brethren who shall be found living in the mortal Body at Christ's coming)
which are alive and remain unto the Coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which are asleep; for the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a Shout,
with the Voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and the Dead in
Christ shall rise first. All which places, and many more that could be
mentioned, plainly show, that though Saints, a^ with respect to their Souls,
are raised up, and ascended, and are with God and Christ in Heaven, yet as to
their Bodies they are a^leep, and have not attained to the Resurrection of the
Body; for if they had attained to the Bodily Resurrection, Paul would not have
writ of them by way of Prophecy, in the future, or time to come, saying, The
dead in Christ [shall] rise first, to wit, at the Voice of the Archangel and
Trump of God. Now that this Trump or Trumpet is, both Paul and John declare,
and the time about which it is to sound, 1 Cor. 15.52. In a Moment, in the
Twinkling of an Eye, at the last Trump, and the Dead shall be raised
Incorruptible, and we shall be changed, compare with Rev. 11.15, 18. And the
seventh Angel sounded, (which seventh is the last Trumpet) and v. 18. Thy Wrath
is come, and the Time of the Dead, that they should be judged, and that thou
should give Reward unto thy Servants the Prophets, and to thy Saints, and to
them that fear thy Name, both great and small. And because Paul, 1 Cor. 15.
lays down Christ's Resurrection from the dead as the ground why true
Believers, which are his Members, shall attain to the Resurrection of the^^
Body, it manifestly appears that they are to attain unto it at the end of the
World, or at the last Trumpet, as is abovementioned (yet it may well be
allowed that some did attain to the Resurrection of the Body immediately after
Christ's Resurrection, according to Mat. 27.52, 53. And the Graves were opened,
and many Bodies of Saints, which slept, arose, and came out of the Graves,
after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many)
and therefore the deceased Saints have not generally attained to the
Resurrection of the Dead, as touching the Resurrection of the Body, but do wait
for it until the sound of the last Trumpet. Nor did any of the Saints attain to
the Resurrection of the Body before Christ's Body rose from the Dead, because he
is expressly called, The first begotten from the Dead, and the first Fruits that
goes before the Harvest; and therefore none did attain to the Bodily
Resurrection before him, neither Enoch nor Elias, for though they were taken
up, yet it is not said, they had attained to the Resurrection of the Dead; it
only implies some peculiar Privilege, that they did not taste of Death, as
other men; and the like may be said of Moses, whose Body was more pure and
excellent than that of other men, and therefore Michael the Angel did contend
with the Devil about the Body of Moses, and would not let him touch it, as
being more excellent, therefore it is said, God buried him in the Valley of
Moab, over against Beth-peor, the which words contain a great Mystery in them.
Moreover, it is very plain from Scripture, that the deceased Saints, who lived
from the beginning of the World, although their Souls and Spirits did ascend
unto God and Christ in Heaven, yet waited for the Resurrection of the Body, and
that more abundant Glory that should follow thereupon; for it is said, Heb.
11.13. These all dyed in Faith, not having received the Promises, but ha^^ng
seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, etc. And v.
39, 40. All these having obtained a good Report through Faith, received not the
Promise, God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us
should not be made Perfect. Now what this Promise is, is clear from verse. 35.
And others were tortured, not accepting Deliverance, that they might obtain the
better Resurrection, which is the Resurrection of the Just, that is better than
the Resurrection of the Unjust. Now if some say, the Promise they waited for
was Christ's coming in the Flesh: I answer; As it was in part, so it was not
only that, but all that Felicity and Happiness that should come unto them by
the Coming of Christ in the Flesh, and his Death and Resurrection, to wit, the
perfect Victory over Death, which is not fully obtained until the Mortal put on
Immortality, and the Corruptible put on Incorruption, as it is written, 1 Cor.
15.54. So when this Corruptible shall have put on Incorruption, and this Mortal
shall have put on Immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in Victory, O Death, where is thy Sting! O
Grave, where is thy Victory, etc! And the very first Promise that God gave to
Mankind after the Fall, did relate to this Victory over Death, That the Seed of
the Woman, (which is Christ Jesus) should bruise the Head of the Serpent; for
though the Head of the Serpent was inwardly bruised, as in respect of the
inward Redemption, Salvation and Deliverance of the Souls of all the faithful
in all Ages of the World, both before and after Christ came in the Flesh, yet
until they attain to the Resurrection of the Body, the Head of the Serpent is
not in all respects bruised, because the last Enemy that is to be destroyed is
Death, who is not fully destroyed until the Bodies of the Saints be raised from
Death; for by Adam's Fall, Death both of Soul and Body came upon him and his
Posterity, and by Christ's Death and Resurrection, to all who sincerely believe
in him, and obey him, that twofold Death is removed, the Death of the Soul
through Faith in him, and that inward quickening, and being raised with him who
is the Resurrection and the Life, now in the Mortal state, but the Death of the
Body at the Resurrection of the Dead; see this twofold Resurrection, the one of
the Soul, the other of the Body, expressly mentioned John 4.25, 28.

Now those who say, The faithful immediately after Death receive the
Resurrection of the Body, and all that fullness of Glory and Happiness that
they are (...) expect forever, as they overthrow a principal Article of the
Christian Faith, touehing the Resurrection of the Dead, so they overthrow that
other great and principal Article of Faith touching that great Day of Judgment
(by overthrowing I m^^n only contradicting, for Error cannot overthrow Truth)
that is to be in the end of the World, called in Scripture, The Last Day, The
Great Day, and That Day, by way of distinction from all other days, and which
is frequently mentioned in Scripture; for if all men, both good and bad,
receive their Resurrection Bodies immediately after Death, and all that they
are to expect forever, there is no occasion for a Day of Judgment in the end of
the World, for that is prevented by what comes to pass immediately after
Death, according to this absurd Opinion. And as concerning that great Day of
Judgment to come, Christ does plainly declare, Mat. 24.30, 31, and 36. But of
that Day and Hour knows no man, no not the Angels in Heaven, but my Father
only. And Mark 13.32. But of that Day and Hour knows no Man, no, not the
Angels which are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father; which is to be
understood of Christ, the Son, as Man to whom then it was not known; the which
Day and Hour cannot be the time immediately after men's Decease (for when men
dye, the day of their Death is commonly known) for though after Death there is
a Judgment that follows to every one, according to Heb. 9.27. yet that is not
the great and last Judgment, nor universal, but particular. And of this last
day Christ said, John 6.40. And this is the Will of him that sent me, that
every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting Life,
and I will raise him up at the last day: Note, He does not say, I will raise
him up in the Body immediately after Death, but in the last Day, to wit, in the
end of the World; and with respect to this Martha made a good Confession of her
Faith, touching the Resurrection of the dead, saying. I know that he shall rise
again in the Resurrection, at the last day; the which Christ does not in the
least contradict, but opened a further Mystery unto her, to wit, That he was the
Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me (said Christ) though he were
dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never
dye. And because he was the Resurrection, to wit, the Author of it, therefore
he could and would raise Lazarus, her Brother, from the dead at that time;
which yet was not the Resurrection in the last day; for he was but raised at
that time a mortal man, to dye again. And whereas Christ said, That he who
believes in him, shall never dye, contains a great and most comfortable
Mystery, to wit, that neither the Souls nor Bodies of true believers strictly
dye; their Souls sleep not, but are awake, and their Bodies, though they sleep,
dye not, and their sleep is not the sleep of Death, strictly taken; and
therefore Christ proved against the Sadduces the Resurrection of the dead, from
the words of God to Moses, I am the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and God is
not the God of the dead, but of the living; and therefore nothing of these holy
men were strictly dead, neither their Souls nor their Bodies; for even their
Bodies did but sleep, as when the Body of a Man sleeps, that is not dead; for
the Bodies only of such dye, in the worst sense of the word Death, who dye in
final Unbelief and Impenitency, On whom Death feeds, and whose Iniquities are
upon their Bones, and whose Bodies are called the Carkases of them that have
transgressed against the Lord, whose Worm dies not, and their Fire goes not
out; Psalm. 49.14. Ezekiel. 32.27. Isa. 66.24. But as concerning the dead Bodies of
the Saints and true Believers in Christ Jesus, it is prophesied, Isa 26.19. Thy
dead, my dead Body shall arise (so the Hebrew has it) awake and sing, ye that
dwell in the Dust, for thy Dew is as the dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall cast
out the Dead. By which words it is plain, that Christ owneth the dead Bodies of
his Saints to be his dead Body, as Members of him, their Head; And to this does
Paul's Testimony most evidently agree, and seems to point at it, 1 Cor. 6.13,
14, 15. Meats for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but God shall destroy
both it and them; now the Body is not for Fornication, but for the Lord, and
the Lord for the Body, and God has both raised up the Lord, and will also
raise up us by his own Power; Know ye not that your Bodies are the Members of
Christ, etc? Where note these particulars, 1 st. That Paul distinguishes
betwixt the Belly and the Body, saying, God will destroy the Belly, but he does
not say he will destroy the Body; for seeing after the Resurrection of the dead
men shall need none of the Meats of this corruptible World, nor shall they need
a Belly to put them in, as Guts and Draught, or any gross parts, as men now
have. 2 dly. That he says, The Body is for the Lord, and the Lord for the
Body; Now how is that to be understood but thus, That the Body is the Lords,
and he has bought it, together with the Soul, to be his Temple and Habitation;
and as while in the mortal state he dwelt in it, so he will again after Death
raise it up, and dwell in it forever. 3 dly. That Paul proves that the Lord
will raise up the Body of every true Saint and Believer, because God has
raised up Jesus in Body, and therefore he will raise up all you that believe in
Jesus. 4 thly. And that because their Bodies are the Members of Christ, and it
is most absurd to think, that any of Christ's Members should Perish. 5 thly,
That he enforces it as a strong Argument and Motive to persuade men,
professing Faith in Christ, not to defile their Bodies with Fornication,
because they are the Members of Christ, and the Members of Christ are not to be
made the Members of an Harlot: Where it is also to be well noticed, That he
does not speak here only of the Soul, but of the Body, and therefore both Soul
and Body belong to Christ, and they are his purchase, and therefore he will
inherit them forever, for indeed, though the Soul be the most principal part of
a Man, yet it is not the whole Man, the Body is also a part of the Man, and
Christ does save, wash and sanctify Spirit, Soul and Body of Man, according to
1 These. 5.23. And the very God of Peace sanctify you w^o^y, and that your
whole Spirit, Soul and Body be preserved blameless unto the Coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And as here, so elsewhere, the Scripture distinguishes betwixt
the Spirit and Soul in Man, but how they are distinguished, I shall not digress
at present to demonstrate; let it suffice to say, that frequently also the
Spirit is included within the term or word Soul, as also Mind, so that the
Mind, Spirit and Soul are commonly called Soul in Scripture, and especially
where Christ mentions the essential parts of Man, to be Soul and Body,
saying, Fear him that can cast both Soul and Body into Hell Fire; which does
plainly hold forth, that not only the Souls, but the Bodies also of wicked Men
shall suffe^ the punishment of Hell Fire; and therefore both the Souls and
^odies o^ the Righteous shall be glorified and rewarded with Everlasting
Happiness; for it best suits with the Justice and Bounty of God, that as the
Saints have serve God with the whole Man, both Soul and Body, so they should be
rewarded in the whole Man, both Soul and Body; and the Wicked that have sinned
with the whole Man, without Repentan^^ should be punished in the whole Man,
both of Soul and Body; and to pu^ it out of all doubt, the Scripture has
plainly determined it. And tha^ Job had a steadfast and firm belief of the
Resurrection of his Body afte^ Death, is clear from his words, Job 19.26. And
though after they have destroyed this Skin, yet in my Flesh, or out of my
Flesh, I shall see God, so the Hebrew, to wit, Christ, (who is God) in the
Nature and Body of Man, this was his Faith that he should see the Man Christ in
his glorified body at the Resurrection of the dead. Where Note, That he
distinguishes betwixt Flesh and Skin; so that though the Skin, i. e. the gross
material and drossy part be consumed in the Grave, yet there is a noble pure
part, that is the true Body of Man, that is not consumed, but remains, and
that shall be raised up again, not gross material flesh, but even the
Resurrection Body may in a Scripture sense be called flesh, in a more excellent
sense than that vulgarly unstood, as Pa^l said (treating of the Resurrection)
All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one flesh of Men, another flesh
of Beasts, etc. which contains in it a great Mystery, even as touching the
Resurrection; for by the Fall of Adam men have got a perishing corruptible
drossy and dark Body, like to that of Beasts, though still more excellent; so
that sin has greatly defaced the glory of man both in Soul and Body, and made
him like to the beasts that perish; but within this brutal skin of the gross
Body that rotteth in the Grave, there is lodged the true Body of Man, that
corrupts not; and the gross skin or whole part is no essential part of the
true Body, more than Dross is a part of the Silver or Gold that lies hid or
obscured within it, or the Husk is a part of the Kirnel of Corn that lies
within it, or the skin that dimeth the sight of the Eye, is any part of the
Eye; but at the Resurrection of the dead, nothing of the drossy part, that is
brutal, shall arise, but only that which is proper to Man, as Man, to wit, such
as Adam had before the Fall. So, the Flesh that is gross, mortal and
corruptible, is not that Flesh that shall be raised up immortal and
incorruptible; for the word Flesh is taken sometimes in Scripture, as well as
Body, in a very high sense, where it is said, Unless ye eat my Flesh, etc. and
All Flesh shall set the Salvation of God; and I will give them Hearts of Flesh.

^^ving thus at large proved, that the Saints do not immediately after Death
receive the Resurrection of the Body, but that they generally wait for it, to
receive it at Christ's Coming, when he shall appear in his glorified Body; It
does most necessarily follow, That the Resurrection of the Dead, as it is
commonly understood in Scripture, is a real joining and re-uni^ing together the
Souls and Bodies of the Saints, by the Power of Christ, at the Time of the
Resurrection, after they have been so long separated asunder; for why is the
Resurrection of the Dead delayed for so many Hundreds of Years, since the
Fathers fell asleep, if the Souls of Men are not to receive their Bodies, and
put them on again, which they put off when they dyed: If they have nothing to
put on, there is no Resurrection to be expected; but if they have something
that they wait to put on, what is that, but the same Body for substance which
they did put off, excepting the drossy and husky part, which is no proper part
of Man's Body, and therefore does not rise with the Body, but is dissolved into
Earth and Ashes, and after that springs up into Grass, and other Vegetables,
as other common Earth does; for if the Body they are to put on at the
Resurrection is altogether to be another Body in substance and essence, or
first Principle, this would not be a Transmutation of the Body, or
Transformation, but a Commutation or Exchange of one thing for another, as when
a Man changes Copper for Gold, and lays down a great lump of Copper, and
takes up a little piece of Gold; but such Change as is a real Transmutation or
Transformation, is, when the Substance or first Principle or Essence remains
the same, it is changed in Form and Mode, or in Manner and Quality, as when
Sand and Ashes is turned into clear Glass, and a heap of Wood by burning is
turned, for most part into Air and Sulpher, the Ashes, which are the drossy
part, that remains, being but a small part of the Wood; or, as suppose such a
thing possible, when Lead or Quicksilver is transmuted into Gold: And that the
Change of the Body at the Resurrection is not a Commutation of one thing for
another, differing in Substance or Essence, but a Transmutation or
Transformation, as aforesaid, is clear from the Greek, word, Phil. 3.21. (...),
that properly signifies, shall Transform; and therefore the Change of the Body
at the Resurrection is a Transmutation or Transformation, the drossy part being
separated, even as when the Soul or Mind of Man is renewed, cleansed and
sanctified, the Soul remains the same in substance or being, but is mightily
changed in Condition, Manner and Qualities, and a great deal of dross and filth
of unclean Spirits is separated from it; and therefore when the Apostle Paul
comes to give an account of the Manner of the Resurrection Body, he proposes
the Question thus, How are the dead raised, and (...), i. e. with what Quality
of Body do they come? (not quo Corpore, sed quals corpore) and so he proceeds
to answer, Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it dye, 1
Cor. 15.36. Now he says, thou fool, as charging such to be foolish who did not
learn the manner of the Resurrection Body from the Seed that the Husbandman
sows in the ground, after that he has opened it; for every Husbandman that
sows Seed in the ground expects that his Seed will rise, otherwise he would
not sow it; for he that sows, sows in hope: Now all that is sown does not
rise, for the husk and skin or drossy part rises not, but lies in the Earth,
as may be seen in many Grains, but the Kirnel or true Body of the Seed rises,
after Putrefaction, the which Putrefaction is to the end that the impure and
drossy part may be separated from the pure and noble part, that so it may rise
and increase. And therefore according to the similitude of a grain of Corn,
given us by the Wisdom of God in Scripture, the true Body of Man that shall
arise at the Resurrection of the Dead, lies hid (invisible to our gross and
carnal Eyes, within that visible gross appearance of Flesh and Blood, even as
the Kirnel of a Grain of Corn lies within the Husk, or as the precious Gold
lies within the course and gross Mineral or Mine, until the pure and precious
Metal be separated from the Dross. And because this Separation betwixt the
pure and noble part, and that drossy part in Man's Body, is not immediately
effected, therefore some Time is requisite after Death to effect that
Separation in the Grave, the measure of which Time I will not determine; and
when that Separation is made, the Body remains and is lodged by the divine
Providence, that gives to every thing its proper place, as in a certain
invisible Grave or Sepulcher, that was mysteriously figured by the burial
place, called Machpelah, that signifies a double or twofold Cave or Sepulcher,
which Abraham purchased from Ephron the Hittite for four hundred pieces of
Silver, Genesis 23. the which as it was literally true, so is an Allegory, as
diverse Mystic Writers observe, and points at the Mystery of the Resurrection
Body out of the mystical and invisible Machpelah or Sepulcher in Hebron, in the
Land of Israel, figuratively and mystically understood; for Ephron signifies
the Dust-eater, and by 400 pieces of Silver, i. e. by so many Virtues
(signified by Silver) this most excellent Burial-place is purchased from
Ephron; but he who has not these Virtues cannot have the Privilege to be
buried in this most excellent place (which was in Hebron, that in Hebrew
signifies bordering or joining, therefore it is said to be in the end of
Ephron's field) and who cannot be buried there for lack of these Virtues, an
Untimely Birth is better than he, as the holy Scriptures declares, Eccles.
6.3. for it is no such Misery nor Unhappiness not to have an outward and
visible Sepulcher, which many of the dear Children of God have not had; but
surely they have this other more excellent burial in the mystical Land of
Israel, where all the dead Bodies of the Saints shall he raised up, and stand
with the Lamb upon Mount Zion, to wit, not the litteral Zion, but the mystical.

But whereas some Object, How can these 490 pieces of Silver (signifying so
many Virtues) be paid to Ephron, the Dust-eater, if Ephron be the Devil, to
whom it was said, Dust shall thou eat? I Answ. Things spoke by way of Allegory
and Parable, are not strictly to be understood in every Circumstance; but the
design and intent of the Parable is principally to be minded, as in the Parable
of Christ concerning the Seed sown in the Highway, which Seed Christ expounded
to be the Word, and the Fouls that picked it up to be the Devil, and yet it
cannot be said, that the Word of God is the Devils Food; but the design and
intent of this Parable is to show, that the Bodies of all Saints, who have
these Virtues, signified by 400 Pieces of Silver (the Number 400 being produced
of 4. answering to the four elemental Principles or Qualities of the Body) and
the Number 10. answering to the Ten Commandments of the Law, and that again
multiplied by other Ten, because every one of the Ten Commandments may well be
understood to be branched forth into other Ten) are not under the Power nor in
the Possession of Ephron, but are the Lords, and that therefore they shall be
raised up by him to Life Everlasting.

Now some of the Jews carnally understood, That the Bodies of the faithful, who
are (...), shall all rise in the outward Land of Israel, and therefore (...)
earnest to have their Bones carried thither to be buried; but they are confuted
by the more intelligent of their own Writers, called Mysticks, who by the Land
of Israel, where all the Saints shall be raised up, do not understand the
outward Land of Israel, but another Mystical Land of Israel, whereof that
outward Land was but a figure, even that called in Scripture, The Land of the
Living, which is that New Earth wherein the Righteous shall dwell, that is no
Part of this visible Glob, but yet near to it. And that Joseph gave charge
concerning (...) Bones to be carried to the Land of Israel, as outwardly, was
but a figure and type, holding forth his Faith concerning the Resurrection of
the Dead. Hence it does appear, that the Graves that shall be opened at the
Resurrection of the dead, are not any visible places on this Glob of the Earth,
but certain invisible places to our carnal Eyes, where they are lodged by the
All-wise disposing Providence, until the time of the Resurrection. And thus
commonly men have two Graves, the first given them by men, until the Separation
be made betwixt the Kirnel and the Drossy part, by Putrefaction (as suppose
after a Year, or more or less) the second given them by God, who probably may
use the Ministry of Angels therein (see Jude 9.) even as it is said, That
Lazarus, after he dyed, was carried into Abraham's Bosom, viz. his Soul, and so,
why not also his Body into Abraham's Sepulcher, mystically understood? And
these Graves, Job seems to understand, where he says, The Graves are ready
for me, cap. 17.1. But here I desire the Reader diligently to mind, that what
is said of the Drossy part belonging to men's Bodies, called by Paul,
Corruption, 1 Cor. 15.50. is no wise to be understood of the Body of Christ,
which had no such part in it, but was altogether most pure, and saw no
Corruption; and therefore when the Sepulcher was looked into, nothing was there
to be found, but the Grave Clothes.

And whereas Paul says, Thou sowest not that Body that shall be, and God
gives a Body as pleases him, yet it is to be observed, that he says, God
gives to every Seed his own Body; for it is granted, the Body is not the same
in Condition and Quality, or manner of Being, but wonderfully changed, as to
that; yet the same for substance, the drossy part being excluded. And it is not
to be denied, but as the Seed of Corn that rises, gets many additional
parts to it of a new Body, whereby it is multiplied into many Grans, so the
Resurrection Body has also that which is added unto it of that excellent
Earth, out of which it arises, which is not this visible Earth that we tred
upon, but far more excellent, the Dust whereof is Gold, and the Stones of it
Saphires, Job 28.6. compared with Rev. 21.21. And as the Body of Man at first
was made of such excellent Dust, in Hebrew called Apher or Opher, so it shall
be made up again of the same.

And lastly, As concerning the Re-uniting or joining again together the Souls
and Bodies of the faithful at the Resurrection, that place in Acts 3.^^.
seems to point unto, where it is said, When the Times (...), i. e. of
Re-animating, or Re-animation shall come, viz. that the Soul shall again
animate the Body; for as (...), signifies the Soul its leaving the Body, Acts
5.5. by the same reason (...), signifies, the Soul its returning to animate
the Body at the Resurrection of the dead; therefore the Time of Re-animation is
said to come from the face or Person of the Lord; the Greek word (...), there
used, signifies either Face or Person.

But against the Doctrine of the Resurrection, as here delivered and opened by
plain evidence of holy Scripture, and in Scripture words and terms, to which it
is only safe in this, and in all other things, to keep close, some will be
ready to Object, First, That the Body is a thing altogether void of Life and
Sense, and does not live at all, but only the Soul it is that lives in the
Body, and therefore the Body is no part of the Man, nor does it deserve any
Reward or Punishment, because it is a mere dead thing, and without all sense,
or perception, even when the Soul is in it.

To this I Answer; That the Body is a dead thing, and without sense, when the
Soul is in it, is a false Assertion, and contrary both to Scripture and our own
Experience; for said Christ, Fear not him or them that can kill the Body, etc.
and if the Body can be killed, it had Life before it was killed. And though
that Doctrine, That the Body is without all sense, or perception, or life, even
when the Soul is in it, be taken up by some called Philosophers, yet it is
extremely irrational, and contradicted by others of more sollid Judgment in the
Knowledge of Natural Things. But on the contrary, seeing the Body has its
proper Life and Perception, after its kind as the Soul has, and is, as it were
married to the Soul, while the Soul lives in it it is most suitable t^ the
divine Goodness and Justice to Reward the Body, together with the Soul, and
join them together in a happy Bond of Union, that shall never any more be
loosed; and that a Man's Body is related to his Soul, as the Wife to the
Husband, is plain from Paul's Doctrine, who said, Let a man so love his Wife,
as his own Flesh. And though at the Resurrection there shall be no Marrying nor
giving in Marriage, nor carnal begetting of Children, yet a more excellent
Union shall be witnessed, than that of Marriage, by those at the Resurrection,
who shall be found worthy of it, Ephesians. 5.31, 32. compared with Genesis 2.24.

2 dly, Some will object, That according to the Judgment of those called
Philosophers and Enquirers into Natural Mysteries, the Body of Man when he
lives, is often changed and renewed in all its parts, and that within a Year,
(as some think) and less, as others think; and if so, every man that has lived
to Man's age, has had many Bodies; and which of these shall be his Resurrection
Body?

But to this it is easily Answered, That allowing there is a great Change or
renewing of the gross material and visible parts of Man's Body, yet the Radical
Body, or Radix and principal Substance of the Body remains the same, and is
of a durable and lasting Nature; and though it may be increased in Man while he
lives, yet it is not diminished, nor the parts of it separated asunder. And
though Man-eaters may eat the gross part of Man's Body, yet that more subtle and
invisible part they cannot; nor can that which belongs to one be given to
another; hence by way of Allegory and Metaphor, it is called Bone in Scripture,
Isa. 66.14.

3d Object. That there seems not any thing in the Body of Man that is such a
Noble Essence, and is capable of so great a Change, as the Glory of the
Resurrection Body does amount unto; for what else is the Body of Man beside the
four Elements of Fire, Air, Water and Earth, or as the Chemists say, Sulphur,
Mercury and Salt, which is also in the Bodies of all Vegetables, and Annimals,
yea, and Minerals and Metals also?

To this I Answ. That not only the Body of Man, but also in all the Inferior
Creatures, there is a noble Essence that is corporeal or Bodily, far more
excellent than that which is sensible or perceptible to our gross Senses; but
there is this difference betwixt that noble part in the Bodies of Men, viz.
good Men, and that which is in all the Bodies of Inferior Creatures, as
Vegetables, Annimals, Metals, that it lies in these inferior Bodies still
mingled or mixed with the more gross parts, in more or less; and therefore
nothing in the Body either of Annimal, Vegetable or Metal, attaineth to its
Resurrection, or Clarification and Perfection, but in Man, and that only in a
good Man; and therefore the i^ferieur Creatures, by a sort of innate appetite
and desire, incline to be joined unto Man, as their Head, and to be his food,
that so they may attain to their Perfection and Restoration in him, which they
cannot attain unto otherwise. And as there is a Noble Essence in the Bodies of
good Men, that lies hid within the shell of the gross Body, so no doubt there
is another Ignoble Essence in the Bodies of Wicked Men, that also lies hid
within the shell of the gross Body, that is exceeding dark and filthy, and of a
hellish Quality, that shall be their Resurrection Body unto Damnation.
Moreover, Paul treating of the manner of the Resurrection, says, That is not
first which is spiritual, but that which is Annimal (see the Greek) As it
seems to have a relation to man's first Condition before the Fall, so to his
Condition at the Resurrection of the Dead, when that which is Annimal shall be
made Spiritual; and when we have born the Image of the Earthly, to wit, of
Adam, as he was before the Fall, afterward we shall bear the Image of the
heavenly, to wit, of Christ, the second Adam, that never fell.

If any think these Answers too Philosophical, and reaching too far into the
Wisdom or Knowledge of Natural Things, let them consider* that the Objections
raised (which are common in the Mouths of Unlearned Men) gave the rise to
them; and indeed none are more ready to set up themselves to be Judges in the
greatest Mysteries of Natural Things, than such who are most ignorant in them;
and while they openly cry out against the Knowledge of Natural Mysteries, yet
they will presume to determine concerning them.

And to conclude this weighty Matter, Although there is no great Knowledge in
Natural Things required in men to be good Christians, and that men may be good
Ministers of Christ, who have not much Knowledge in the Mysteries of Nature,
and especially who have but little that comes to them by humane or natural
Learning; yet seeing Nature it self, and all Natural Things are of God (for all
is of God that can be named, sin only excepted and have him to be their Author,
and that the invisible things of God, even his eternal Power, and Wisdom, and
Goodness, and Justice, etc. are clearly to be seen in the things that are
Natural; it is a worthy and commendable thing in all Christians, and especially
in these who are Teachers of others, to have some good degree in the Knowledge
of things both Spiritual and Natural; for as there is a great Analogy and
Harmony, yea, and Unity betwixt them, after some sort, so the Knowledge of the
one has a great Analogy and Harmony, yea, and Unity with the Knowledge of the
other, and a great degree of spiritual Knowledge does greatly conduce to the
obtaining a good degree of the Knowledge of Natural Things; and the Knowledge
of Natural Things, duly and soberly improved, and being sanctified, is
subservient to the Knowledge of Spiritual Things, as the Handmaid to the
Mistress. And there is a divine and spiritual Knowledge of Nat^ral Things and
Mysteries, that Men have been taught by the Spirit of God, who is the Author of
Nature, and God of Nature as of Grace, as is evident from Moses, Job, David,
Solomon, and the Prophets and Apostles; for though diverse of the Prophets, and
most of the Apostles had little of that called humane Learning or Education,
yet that divine Spirit that was plentifully given unto them, did not only
impart unto them great Knowledge of spiritual Mysteries, but even of Natural
also, as is manif^st to all such who do impartially read, and well consider the
holy Scriptures, and have that Gift of Discretion and Understanding given them
of God to see what excellent Things of Truth, even in Naturals, as well as in
Spirituals, are there wrapped up, though the main design of the holy Scriptures is
to teach men the things that concern their spiritual State and Happiness in the
World to come; what it treats of Natural things being occasional, and in
subordination unto the other.

And here Note, That whereas it is commonly supposed, that the inward quickening
and raising men's Souls from the Death of Sin to the Life of Righteousness, is
that first Resurrection, mentioned Rev. 20.4, 5. but let the place cited be
well considered, and it will be found, that not the quickening of the Soul or
inward Man unto God, but the living again of the Saints at the Resurrection of
the Dead, in their Resurrection Bodies, is that first Resurrection. And that it
is said, Blessed and Holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection; this
is most true, for every one of the faithful has already, even at present, a
part or right in that first Resurrection, but they get not the actual
Possessi^n of it until the Resurrection of the Dead, even as many Men have a
Right in an Estate of Land, who yet have not the actual Possession of it. And
it is called the first Resurrection, because the Resurrection of the Just shall
be first in Order before the Resurrection of the U^just, the one preceding the
other a Thousand Years, as John has plainly declared, They lived and reigned
with Christ a Thousand Years, but the rest of the Dead lived not again until
the Thousand Years were finished, this is that first Resurrection, (so the
Greek) Rev. 20.4, 5. Therefore if any will say, The rising or renewing of the
Soul by Conversion, is [a] first Resurrection, I will not contend, but it is
not That first Resurrection, mentioned Rev. 20. where only, and no where else
in all the Scripture that manner of Speech or Phrase is to be found. And that
the Resurrection of the Just does preceed or go before the Resurrection of the
Unjust, is clear from diverse other places of Scripture in the New Testament, as
1 These. 4.16. The dead in Christ shall rise first; See, here is the first
Resurrection. And 1 Cor. 15.22. So in Christ all shall be made alive, but every
man in his own Order, Christ the first Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's
at his Coming; then comes the End, viz. after the Thousand Years are expired,
when the Wicked shall be raised up to Judgment, and when he shall deliver up
the Kingdom, viz. not only his present inward and spiritual Kingdom in the
Saints, but also his Kingdom of the Thousand Years over all that dwell upon the
Earth, in order to reign Eternally with the Father in the Heavens, where all
the Saints shall be with him forever; for though his Kingdom here upon Earth be
a Thousand Years, wherein Satan shall be bound, and there shall be none to
hurt nor destroy all that time, yet it shall be forever in Heaven; for he shall
reign forever and ever, and of the Increase of his Government there shall be No
End, as the holy Scriptures declare.

And as to the last of these four particulars abovementioned, viz. That they
who are perfectly sanctified already, are fully come to the New Heavens and the
New Earth, etc. Which is a very gross Mistake, and Contradictory to the holy
Scriptures; for however that the great inward Change and Work of Conversion,
may by way of Analogy be be called, the New Heavens and the New Earth; yet it
is most evident from Scripture, that the Apostles, after they witnessed that
inward Change and Work of Conversion, as much as any ever could or can pretend
unto, or rather more, yet declared their Faith and Expectation of That New
Heavens and New Earth, as a thing not then come, but to come, as Peter said, 2
Pet. 3.13. Nevertheless, we, according to his Promise, look for New Heavens and
a New Earth, wherein awelieth Righteo^sness. Note, He does not say, we already
are come to it, but we look for it; and this is that World to come, Heb. 6.5.
and New Heavens and New Earth, mentioned Rev. 21.1. the which, when come and
witnessed, shall be such, that there shall be No more Death, nor Sorrow, nor
Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain, for the former things shall be
passed away, verse. 2, 3, 4. for th^s is the state of the Saints after they are
^aised up in Immortal Bodies to live and reign with Christ: And though the
Saints thus raised in Immortal Bodies, shall appear to Men living in Mortal
Bodies on Earth, yet they shall need nothing of this Earth that we walk upon;
for the New Heavens and the New Earth shall afford them all things.

And whereas it is the Opinion of some, That the New Heavens and the New Earth,
that are promised to the Saint^, who shall attain to the Rerection of the Dead,
are no other than the visib^^ Heavens that we see with our gross carnal Eyes,
and the visible gross Earth that we walk upon; and that this visible Fabric of
the visible Heavens and Earth, by Conflagration or being set on fire, shall be
melted or changed into a Transparent and Christaline Form or Appearance. Or, as
others suppose, The visible Heavens and Earth shall only be changed into better
Qualities, so (...) the Heavens shall give more kindly and favorable
Influences to nourish and preserve the Life of Men and Beasts, by the Blessing
of God, and the Earth shall be made much more Fruitful. But none of these
Opinions sufficiently reach the Truth; for as concerning the Conflagration or
setting on fire the visible Fabric of Heaven and Earth, as there is good
ground from Scripture to believe that such a thing is to come to pass, yet it
is not agreeable, but contrary to Scripture to believe it will come to pass
before the Thousand Years; for though before the Thousand Years begin there will
be great and dreadful Judgments of God poured forth upon the World of the
Ungodly, by Earthquakes, Tempests, Inundations, Famine, Sword, and Fire from
Heaven on particular places, and Plagues of many sorts, as the Scriptures
declare, and Christ has expre^ly foretold, yet the Universal Conflagration of
the visible Heavens and Earth is not to be until the Thousand Years be
expired, when Satan shall be let loose again, and Gog and Magog shall gather
themselves together (out of the four Quarters of the Earth, the Number of whom
is as the Sand of the Sea) to Battle against the Saints (to wit, not the raised
Saints who shall have put off the Mortal Clothing, and put on the Immo^tal,
but such as shall be found living in mortal Bodie^) and even shall fire come
down from Heaven and destroy them, and that fi^^ (...) cause that general
Con^lagration, mentioned in Peter, 2 Pet. 3.^^, 1^. and in diverse other places
of Scripture and that shall be the ^ime when the Wicked shall be raised up, and
have the Judgment or Sentence of Damnation passed upon them; and then shall
Death and Hell be cast into the Lake of Fire, and and whosoever was not found
written in the Book of Life, Rev. 20.15.

But whether that Universal con^lagration shall change the whole Fabric of
this visible Heaven and Earth into a Transparent or Christa^line Form, or Solar
Substance, so as to be like another Sun for Light and Brightness, as some
think, I see no ground of Probability for it, from the Scriptures; let it
therefore su^fice us to believe, that as nothing of the Substance of Heaven or
Earth, that God has created, shall ever be annihilated or turned into Nothing,
(but only shall be changed, and by that change be meliorated; for the whole
Creation groaneth and is in pain to be delivered from the Vanity it was
subje^ted unto, and will be delivered, as the Scripture declares) so the
manner of that change shall be such, as the divine Goodness and Wisdom shall
see most convenient for his own Glory, and the good of his Creatures.

And though there is good ground from Scripture to believe, that all the time
of the Thou^^nd Years the visible Heavens and Earth shall, remain visible, as
they are, and there shall be a Continuation of the Course of the Movable Stars,
and Day and Night, at least as things were after they were made and set in
order, and that by the singular b^essing of God the Heavens shall give more
kindly and favorable Influences to the Earth, and to all mortal Creatures,
whether Men, Beasts or Vegetables that shall live on it; yet this so great
change shall not make that the visible Fabric of Heaven and Earth shall be
that New Heavens and that New Earth, that the Scripture, by way of Prophecy
does declare shall come; for, 1 st. Only Righteousness shall dwell in that New
Heavens and New Earth, and only Rig^teous and Holy M^n, as Peter has declared,
2 Pet. 3.13. for that New-Earth is that Land or Earth that God has promised in
the 5th Commandment, To give to them that shall obey him, which is called by
Paul, The first Commandment wit^ Promi^^; and that is the Earth or Land that is
promised to the faithful, Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall
thou dwell in the Land, (Heb. Earth) And v. 22. for such as be blessed of him,
shall inherit the Earth. And v. 34. Wait on the Lord, and keep his Way, and he
shall exalt thee to inherit the Earth. And this New Earth is called, Prove.
8.20. The highest part (Heb. Head) of the Dusts of the World; and Isa. 58. And
the High Places of the Earth. All which cannot be understood of any vi^ible
high places of the Earth; for the Earth, together with the Sea, is a ^ou^d
Glob, and one place of the Earth is so little above another, as to say the
visible Mountains, that they scarce deserve to be ca^^ed the hi^^ or highest
part of the Earth, being but like the Moles on the f^ce ^r skin of Man's Body;
for few Mountains on Earth reach above the perpendicular height of a Mile or
two, and to be sure none in the Land of Judea did reach near so far; and
beside, what is there of great worth or excellency on any visible Mountains on
Earth, more than on the Plains, to answer the substance of these excellent
Promises? And therefore by the Earth and high places thereof, (in these places
of Scripture) cannot be understood any part or parts of this visible Earth, but
another Earth that is far more excellent, that is invisible to our gross and
carnal Eyes, because of the Purity and Glory of it. And that it is called,
Prove. 8. The Head of the Dusts of the World, does plainly point at the
excellency of it; for as Man is called in Scripture, The little World, and the
Whole Creature, so the World may be called, and is so called by some, A great
Man; now though the lower parts of this great Man ( i. e. the World) are
visible to our carnal Eyes, yet the Head or chief Part of it is invisible to
us, and will be until we attain to our Resurrection Bodies, but with Eyes
suitable to our Resurrection Bodies, we shall both see it, and find our selves
in it, and be real Inhabitants of it. And though in Scripture the word Land or
Earth, figuratively at times may be applicable to Christ the living Word, as he
feeds and nourishes the Souls of the faithful, even as the common Earth
feeds our Bodies; yet it ought also to be granted, that it ha^h a reference
to a certain Place or Region above the Globe of this visible Earth, whither the
Body of Christ is ascended, and whither the Bodies of the raised Saints at the
Resurrection of the Dead shall ascend.

But 2 dly, That New Heavens and New Earth that is to come shall remain, and
never cease, nor come to wax Old, as is clear from Isa. 66.22. but this visible
Earth and Heavens shall not always remain, according to their present
Condition; for it is prophesied concerning them, That the H^avens, even the
Heavens shall wax Old as a Garment* and as a Vesture thou shall fold them up;
and therefore the visible Heavens and the visible Earth that waxes Old, and
shall be changed as a a Garment, cannot be that New Heavens and New Earth that
ever shall remain New, and never wax Old; for since it is altogether without
and above the Sphere of Genereation and Corruption, that is the cause of decay
and corruption of things, therefore it does always remain new and fresh; and
into this New Heavens and New Earth nothing that is unclean or defiled can ever
enter in any wise. But in the time of the Thousand Years there shall be many
that shall live on this visible Earth, that shall not be Saints, but Sinners,
and have defilements of Sin, and of them shall proceed that great Multitude,
which at the end of the Thousand Years shall make up the great Army of Gog and
Magog, whom Satan shall deceive, after he is again let loose. And that after
the Coming of the New Heavens and the New Earth, there shall yet be found
Sinners remaining, though not in that New Heavens and New Earth, yet here upon
this visible Globe of the Earth whereon we walk, is clear from Isa. 65.20.
There shall be no more thence an Infant of Days, nor an Old Man that has not
filled his days; for the Child shall dye an hundred Years Old, but the Sinner
being an hundred Years old shall be accursed: And that this accursing of the
Sinner is after the coming of the New Heavens and the New Earth, is clear from
verse. 17. For behold, I create New Heavens and a New Earth, etc. And whereas it
is said, by way of Prophecy, v. 20. There shall be no more thence an Infant of
Days, nor an Old Man that has not filled his days; for the Child shall dye
an hundred Years Old; It is plain and manifest enough from this Prophecy, That
after the coming or Revelation of the New Heavens and New Earth, there shall be
a great Change known upon this visible Globe of the Earth whereon we live; for
even upon the same, the Age of Men shall be exceedingly prolonged beyond what
it is now, even as it was in that time before the Flood, when Men commonly
lived diverse hundreds of Years, some above Nine Hundred Years, some above Eight
Hundred, and some above Seven Hundred, and Methuselah lived Nine Hundred Sixty
and Nine Years, wanting only thirty one Years to complete a Thousand, but that
none lived a thousand, contains a Mystery in it; and yet it cannot be showed
that all Mankind generally lived to so great an Age, for it is probable that
some even then dyed an hundred Years old, but when they dyed at the Age of one
hundred Years, they were reckoned but as Children, so that the Age of an
hundred Years then was but equivolent to the Age of fourteen or fifteen years
now; and therefore it is very probable, that in the Time of the Thousand Years
the Age of all living in Mortal Bodies, both Saints and Sinners shall be
greatly prolonged; and if any happen to dye an hundred years Old, they shall be
reputed as Children; but if any remain Wicked, even to a great Age, as many, no
doubt, will do, whether to a hundred or diverse hundreds, they shall be accursed.

And whereas it is said (after the coming or revelation of the New Heavens and
New Earth) verse. 2^, 22. They shall build Houses, and inhabit them, and they
shall plant Vineyards, and eat the Fruit of them; they shall not build, and
another inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat; for as the days of a
Tree, are the days of my People, and mine Elect shall long enjoy the Work of
their Hands. If any will affirm, That it is to be understood of the Saints that
shall have attained their Resurrection Bodies in the Time of the Thousand
Years, It must have altogether a Mystical and Allegorical Sense; for the raised
Saints, whose Resurrection Bodies shall be Immortal, and very excellent and
glorious, shall need no Earthly Houses nor Vineyards, literally understood;
for the New Heavens and New Earth shall furnish them all things; and the raised
Saints shall need neither Candle nor Light of the Sun (even to their Bodily
Eyes, as Adam before his Fall needed no Light of the Candle, nor of the Sun)
for the Lord God gives them Light, Rev. 22.5. But the litteral sense may well
enough be allowed, in respect of the Mortal Saints then living in Mortal
Bodies, who may both build Houses and plant Vineyards, as men now do upon this
visible Earth, to whom a long Life may be given in the mortal Body, until they
be perfected and perfectly fitted and made ready for that Change mentioned 1
Cor. 15.51. when the Saints living in mortal Bodies, in the time of the
Thousand Years, how soon they are perfectly fitted for that Change, shall be
changed without sleeping or dying, as the words of Paul do plainly testify,
Behold (said he) I show you a Mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall all
be changed in a Moment, in the Twinkling of an Eye at the last Trump, etc. And
whereas it is promised, As are the days of a Tree, so are the days of my
People, I do well remember, that Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Triphone
the Jew, says, That they should be read, as he had found them in an ^^^ient
Copy, [A ^are the days of the Tree of Life, so are the days of my People] which
do relate to Adam's Paradisical state before the fall; for if Adam had not
sinned, he had never dyed the Bodily Death, and therefore his days should have
^een as the days of the Tree of Life, so as to have lived forever, if he had
only fed upon the Tree of Life, and other Trees of the Garden, and not upon
that which was forbidden to him*

But some may be ready to say, To what purpose shall Christ with his glorious
Body, and the Saints with their Resurrection Bodies, appear to men living in
Mortal Bodies here upon thi^ visible Earth, in the time of the Thousand Years,
seeing they shall need nothing of what is here below? shall not such an
Appearance rather diminish than add to the Glory of the State they are in?

To which I Answer; God has appointed it in his divine Wisdom so to be, for a
great and glorious End and Purpose, and therefore the Wisdom of Men ought to be
silent, lest it contradict the Wisdom of God; and the End and Purpose of God is
manifest therein, viz. Because Christ and his Saints have been great Sufferers
upon Earth, and therefore God has thought it meet to Crown them with Dominion
and Glory over all Mankind upon Earth* even that very Earth on which they have
suffered so many things, that so publicly and openly in the face and sight of
all Mankind it may be known, that God has Exalted his Son, and next to him,
the Saints with him, who are his Members, over all Principalities and Powers on
Earth, that to the Name of Jesus every Knee may bow, and Tongue confess,
whether in Heaven, or Earth, or beneath the Earth; for all must be put under
him. And it is mo^^ agreeable to the divine Wisdom and Justice, that Christ and
his Saints, who have suffered the unjust Judgment of Ungodly and Unjust Men,
should be exalted to judge them, most justly, as it is foretold in diverse
places of the holy Scripture, and which Enoch, the seventh from Adam did
prophecy of, Jude 14. saying, Behold, the Lord comes with (or in) ten Thousand
of his Saints (for he shall be both in them by his Spirit, and with them by his
Bodily Presence) to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince ^ll that are
Ungodly, etc. And though some apply this to our present Time, yet they are in a
great Mistake; for its most clear that I^de cites this Prophecy of Enoch, with
respect to the Judgment of the great Day, mentioned by him, verse. 6. which is
yet to come, both to wicked Angels and Men. And concerning the Judgment
wherewith the Saints, under Christ their Head, shall judge the World and
fallen Angels, Paul does expressly write, 1 Cor. 6.2. Do ye not know that the
Saints shall judge the World? and if the World shall be judged by you, are ye
unworthy to judge the smallest matters? Know ye not, that we shall judge
Angels? And Rev. 20.4. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment
was given unto them. Mat. 19.28. Ye shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel. Luke 22.30. Dan. 7.9. I beheld till the Thrones were
set (Heb.) and the Ancient of Days did sit. V. 10. The Judgment was set, and
the Books were opened, verse. 13, 14. and v. 27. And the Kingdom and Dominion,
and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given to the
People of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom,
and all Dominions shall serve and obey him. And to this, that place in Heb.
2.5. does refer, For unto the Angels has he not put in Subjection the World to
come, whereof we speak; plainly intimating, that whereas the Administration of
the present World, and of the Nations in it (excepting the Church of God, which
has been in all Ages under the peculiar care, rule and protection of God and
Christ, in a most peculiar and solemn manner) has been under Angels, as Gods
Vicegerents or Ministers, under and together with his immediate Administration
(for his making use of Instruments does not hinder, but demonstrate his
immediate Operation in all thing) the World to come shall not be under the
Administration of those Angels, but under Christ, the Son of Man, and his
Saints in a special and peculiar way; see Wisd 5.1, 2, 3 4, 5, etc. and cap.
3.6, 7, 8, 9. Deuteronomy. 3.28.

And whereas the Scripture speaks of Thrones that shall be given to the
Saints to sit upon, it is not to be understood, that these Thrones shall be
material Thrones, of material Wood, Silver or Gold, but even as Christ's Throne
is his divine Power, so the same divine Power of Christ, variously putting
forth, and demonstrating it self in manifold Operations and Workings, shall be
these Thrones, and also Angels are called Thrones, in Scripture, who may be
said to carry the Saints, as it is said, Luke 16.22. That Lazarus was carried
by the Angels into Abraham 's Bosom; for it is no diminishing of the Dignity of
the Angels so to do, more than for a Man to carry a Child in his Arms; for even
the Lord is said to carry and bear his People, as an Eagle does bear her Young
Ones.

And whereas it is queried or objected, Shall not such an Appearance of the
Saints, together with Christ in their Resurrection Bodies, so as to have the
Administration of the World, and of all Nations of Men living in it in mortal
Bodies, rather diminish from, than add to the Glory of the state they are in?

I Answ. By no means; even as it does nothing diminish from the Glory of God,
but does the more demonstrate his Glory, that he is the great King and Ruler of
the whole World, whose Kingdom rules over (Heb. in) all, Psalm. 103.19. for the
Saints appearing with Christ, their Head, in their Resurrection Bodies, that
shall be more glorious than the Sun, shall ^ot have any thing diminished from
their heavenly Happiness and Glory, but increased; for they shall always live
in that New Heavens and New Earth, where with the Eyes of their Souls and Minds
they shall see God and Christ, their chiefest Happiness, and with the Eyes of
their Resurrection Bodies they shall see the glorious Body of Christ that was
raised from the Dead, and is gone into Heaven, which shall be a great joy unto
them, as it was unto the Disciples to see him after he rose from the dead, but
then their joy shall be greater; for at that time they saw him but with the
mortal Eyes of their mortal Bodies, and that but for a little time, but then
they shall see him with the immortal Eyes of their immortal Bodies, being made
like unto him, and that so as to be with him forever. And therefore whereas it
is said, Rev. 21.2. That John saw the New-Jerusalem coming down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband; The which New-Ierusalem,
are all the Saints of God appearing in their Resurrection Bodies, to mortal Men
living on this Glob of the Earth, both Saints and Sinners; but this Descent of
the Saints is not to be understood such, as if by the same they should leave
Heaven; for they will still be both in Heaven, and appear to men on Earth at
once, even as Christ, when he came down from Heaven, to take flesh in the
Virgins Womb, yet still was in Heaven, as he plainly testified; and the Saints
living in Mortal Bodies, are (as to their Souls or inward Man) still in Heaven,
as Paul said, Our Conversation is in Heaven and he has set us down in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus; how much more then shall the Saints raised up in
Immortal Bodies, still enjoy the fullness of heavenly Glory and Felicity. And
as the appearing of Christ and his Saints to Men on Earth, after the manner
aforesaid, shall cause a great awe, fear and reverence on all Sinners and
unconverted People, who shall remain on the Earth, so that all of them shall be
subject, though not for love, yet for fear; so the same will cause exceeding
great Joy and Gladness, as well as holy Awe, Fear and Reverence to all the
Saints and Faithful that shall then be living in mortal Bodies, who have not
attained that Change, so as to have put on Immortality; for though all the
Saints living in mortal Bodies shall be changed, yet not all at once, but when
they are fully fitted and prepared for the same, and when God shall count them
worthy of it; for during the Time of the Thousand Years there is ground to
believe, that many of all the Nations of the whole World, that shall be living
in mortal Bodies, shall be daily converted and brought into the Faith of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and that partly by the Ministry of the Saints living in
mortal Bodies, and partly by the Ministry of the raised Saints, that are raised
up in immortal Bodies; for it is written in Scripture, with a respect to that
very Time of the Thousand Years, Rev. 21.24. And the Nations of them which are
saved, (or, to be saved, shall walk in the Light of it, and the Kings of the
Earth do (or shall) bring their Glory and Honor unto it; and the Gates of it
shall not at all be shut by day; compare with this Rev. 22.2. And the Leaves of
the Tree were for the healing of the Nations; and Isa. 60.3, 5, 11, 20. cap.
66.23, 24. Z^ch. 14.8, 9. Ezekiel. 47.7, 8, 9, 10. But that many shall still
remain unconverted, does appear from verse. 11. But the Miery places thereof
shall not be healed; they shall be given to Salt. For what does the standing
open of the Gates signify, but that men shall have an opportunity given them,
by Faith and Repentance, and the washing of Regeneration, to enter into that
holy City? And seeing there shall be great Multitudes of unconverted People
that shall live in the World within the Thousand Years, it agrees with great
Reason, as well as Scripture, that they shall have an opportunity to be
converted, and by Regeneration to be made Members of the holy City; for Christ
has dyed for all Men that ever have lived, or shall live in the World, and
therefore all men shall have a Day of Visitation, wherein they may be saved,
and whoever are not saved, the default is their own; for the Grace of God is
wanting to none within the Day of their Visitation.

But if any shall object, That as the Manna was not to be gathered on the
Sabbath day, but on the Sabbath day the Manna that was formerly gathered was
eat of; and that this does seem to signify, that in the Time of the Thousand
Years, that great Sabbath, no spiritual Manna, i. e. no spiritual Food (...)
gathered by Men to feed their Souls; and therefore no possibility of (...) my
who have not been formerly converted.

(...) does well enough prove, that there is no possibility of Conversion to
any who have formerly lived in the World, and neglected their Time of Grace and
Salvation, which they once had; I say, it is vain for any such to expect to
live again and have another time of Grace and Salvation; but it does not in the
least prove, that such who have not at any time formerly lived in the World,
shall not have a Time of Grace and Salvation when they come to live in the
World, otherwise Christ's Death had been in vain for them; for seeing Christ
has dyed for all, and by his Death has purchased Grace for all, that either
has already appeared, or shall appear unto all, whereby all may be saved, and
many shall; therefore the Grace of God making Salvation possible to all, shall
be extended to all that shall at any time be born into the World in the
Generations to come, so long as the Generation of Mankind shall remain, which
is Glad-Tidings to all; but such who by untimely Death, and other things that
have happened, as being Deaf or Dumb, or Mad, etc. have been prevented from
having the outward means of Salvation offered unto them, as to others, and have
not had the capacity of understanding inwardly, as others, (...) are to be left
unto the Mercy of God, which is over all his Works, whose Ways are above our
Ways, and whose Thoughts are above our Thoug^^s, as far as the Heavens are
above the Earth, who does well know to supply what is wanting to any part of
Mankind, in such ways and methods, and by such means as Men cannot comprehend;
therefore we may (...) enough conclude with P^^l, Romans 11*32, 33. For God has
concluded them all in Unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon all; O (...) of
the Riches, has of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

And here, if any enquire, What are these New Heavens and that New Earth, which
God has promised to give his Saints to inherit?

I Answer; The Paradise or Garden of God, that God planted from the beginning,
in the midst whereof is the Tree of Life and the River of Life, where God
placed Man in the beginning when he made him, and out of which Man was drove or
cast when he sinned; and (...) the heavens were a Paradise to his Soul, so the
Earth of that Garden or Paradise, was a Paradise unto his Body; and if he had
not sinned, he had lived in great felicity, and been happy both in Soul and
Body; for God made Man to be Immortal, and made him to be an Image of his own
Eternity; nevertheless through Envy of the Devil, Death came into the World,
for God made not Death, as it is said, Wisd. 1.13 and 2.23, 24. And when Man
sinned, his Sin did not destroy Paradise, but only hi^ it from him, and at the
Resurrection of the Deads it shall be again opened or revealed, to them who
shall be found worthy of it, but to none else (even as the Saints now living
(...) the Mortal Body, as to the Soul or inward Man have access into Paradise,
although as to the Body or outward Man, during the mortal state, they cannot
enter) according to 2 Esdras 8.52. For unto you is Paradise opened, the Tree of
Life is planted, the Time to come is prepared, Plentiousness is made ready, a
City is builded, and Rest is allowed, yea, perfect Goodness and Wisdom; the
root of Evil is sealed up from you, Weakness and the Moth is hid from you, and
Corruption is (...) into Hell (or, the Grave) to be forgotten; Sorrows are
passed, and in the end is showed the Treasure of Immortality. And concerning
the Saints who shall be raised up to a state of Immortality, who shall stand
with the Lamb on Mount Zion (to (...) not the litteral or typical Zion, but
that which was typified by the same) see Rev. 7.4.9. and cap. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. compared with 2 Esdras 2.44, 45. And he answered, and said unto me, These be
they that have put off the Mortal Clothing, and put on the Immortal, etc. And
that these New Heavens and New Earth are called New, does not prove that they
were not from the beginning, but because they never wax old or decay, therefore
they are still New, (...) they are said to be created, as to Men, to whom the
new revelation and discovery of them shall be as a new Creation. And whereas it
is said, Isa. 65.17. For behold I am creating (so the Hebrew) New Heavens and a
New Earth, does contain a great Mystery in it, implying that God is still at
work in these New Heaven and New Earth, in order to a continual progress in
Perfection, without all end; and therefore that New Heavens and New Earth, are
called rather Mind in (...), than Murdus (...), i. e. The World tha^ ^^meth,
rather than that to (...), according to the deep sense of these words in Genesis
2.10. A River going forth of Eden (so the Hebrew) and Rev. 1.8. the Lord is
said to be, Who is, and who was, and who comes (so the Greek) for God is a
continual Operator and Worker, to carry on his Works to an endless Perfection;
therefore said Christ, My Father works hitherto, and I work. And though at
the end of the seven Thousand Years of this World, the manner of the
Administration of Christ's Kingdom will be changed, and in that respect he will
give it up, yet that is only in order to a new manner of Administration, that
shall be more excellent, after the time of this World is at an End.

Error 31. That the Church is already not only fully and perfectly restored to
all that Purity and Perfection in Knowledge, Faith, Holiness, Purity of
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, that she had in the first Constitution of the
Gospel Church, immediately after the giving o^ the holy Ghost after Christ's
Ascension; and that there are now as able Ministers of the New Testament, as
any then were, equal to the Prophets and Apostles, or rather excelling them in
spiritual Gifts, even when they were in their most advanced state; but that the
Church, as to her present Constitution, has attained to all that Glory and
Perfection in spiritual Gifts, of Knowledge, Virtue, Holiness and Purity of
Worship, etc. that God ha^h promised to give unto her, after her return out of
her Wilderness state* and that all the Promises of God concerning the Church
her Glory, Perfection and Restoration are fullfilled, so that nothing more is
wanting, but the increase of the Number of her Members, and that the Nations
may be gathered unto her.

Correct. Diverse things of this kind, to my certain knowledge, have been
asserted by some pretending to the Teachings of the Spirit, to the great
offense and stumbling of many. In Answer to which, let the particulars
following be well considered. 1 st. God has certainly begun a blessed Work of
Reformation in the Earth, and caused much more Light to shine forth in these
latter days, than in former Ages, under the Darkness of Popish Superstition,
Idolatry and Tyranny. 2 dly, In the darkest Times that have been ever since the
Apostles, God has had a Church and People, who have been living Witnesses to
his Name and Truth in the Earth, in the most Fundamental and Necessary
Doctrines of the Christian Faith, and whose Conversation and Practice has been
accordingly. 3 dly, The Work of Reformation which God has begun in the Earth,
and will carry on until he perfect it, has had its several steps and degrees,
and yet is to have, until it be perfected; so that it is not to be denied, but
that some things very considerable have been done by the Lord, in and through
Instruments of his raising up, for some hundreds of Years backwards, especially
since the Time of John Wickcliff; and they who have any favor of Life, cannot
but favor the precious Life that did spring and appear in the Marytrs, both in
England, Scotland and elsewhere, above one hundred years ago. 4 ly. That there
are many at this present day, who are come to a very blessed state and
condition in the Knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, and in Faith,
Holiness and Purity of Worship in Spirit and in Truth, whose state and
condition in the Truth may be judged equal to many Believers in the very days
of the Apostles; and that diverse may have, yea, and have a Ministry or
Ministerial Gift given them of God, equal in purity of Doctrine, and as
powerful and lively, and blessed with as great success to the Conversion of
Souls, as some had in the days of the Apostles; but to equal any Men now alive,
or who have lived since the days of the Apostles, to the Apostles of the Lord
(I mean the twelve, and Paul the thirteenth, all which were peculiarly and
extraordinarily fitted of the Lord to an extraordinary Work) proceeds not
from true Knowledge, but great weakness, and shortness of Understanding; for
God has set in the Church (1 Cor. 12.28.) 1st. Apostles, 2dly, Prophets, 3dly,
Evangelists, and Pastors, and Teachers; and though all were endued and inspired
with the Spirit of God, and spiritual Gifts thereof, ye^ the difference is very
great, in respect of measure, and other weighty Considerations; for the
Prophets and Apostles of the Lord are the principal Members of the Universal
Church, which is the Body of Christ; and therefore all others that come after,
are far it f^r our in Dignity unto them; and because of that excellent Dignity
of the Apostles, it was that Christ said, They should sit upon twelve Thrones,
etc. and the Wall of that great City, the holy Jerusalem, is said to have
Twelve Foundations, and in them the Names of the Twelve Apostles of the Lamb,
Rev. 21.14. and accordingly the Church is said to be built on the Foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone,
who is both their Foundation and ours. But it is yet greater presumption of
Ignorance in any, to imagine any men living since the days of the Apostles, to
have exceeded them, who are in the first Rank and Order of the Lords Worthies.
It is true, the Name Apostle, in the large signification of it, may be
applicable to any sent of God; but it is as true, that most commonly it is,
according to Scripture phrase, restricted to these twelve, and Paul the
thirteenth, the which very Number does contain a Mystery in it, answering to
the twelve Tribes of Israel, beside the Tribe of Levi. But there are some, who
though they will not be so bold to equal themselves to the twelve Apostles, or
to Paul the thirteenth, yet they reckon they are warranted by Christ's words, to
judge, they are greater than any of the Prophets; for of all the Prophets,
^here were none greater than John, and yet the least in the Kingdom is greater
than he, as Christ taught, Mat. 11.11. Luke 7.28. But surely whatever be the
sense of Christ's words, that cannot be it, as if the least true Believer in
Christ, after Christ's Death, Resurrection and Ascension, were greater, as to
their inward state before God, than John was (who was filled with the holy
Ghost even from his Mothers Womb, Luke 1.15.) or any of the Prophets, as to
their inward state, as if Moses, Samuel, David, and all the Prophets had not
been as true and real Believers in Christ, as any since, or were not so holy,
so good and virtuous as these who believe in Christ since. But well were it for
many that they were as good as John and many others were, who had Faith in
Christ as well as any now, by which Faith these Elders obtained a good Report,
and dyed in Faith, and by Faith their he^rts were purified; and through the
Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ they were saved, and were in a state of
Salvation, as well as we; and the Prophets had the Spirit of Christ in them,
and the holy Ghost, as well as any since; and seeing they prophesied of Christ,
as he was to come in the Flesh, and foretold the time and manner of his Coming
and Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, Ascension and Glory that should follow,
they did certainly believe in him; for said David, I believe, therefore I have
spoken; and said Paul, We having received the same Spirit of Faith, we believe,
therefore we speak; and the Faith is one, of the Prophets and Apostles, and of
all true Believers in Christ, and they are all built upon that one Foundation,
Christ Jesus the Rock of Ages, and Foundation of Generations; and since it is
the heavenly and divine Oil or Unction that makes Men Christians, surely the
Prophets had the same; for said David, Thou anointest my Head with Oil, my Cup
runs ever, Psalm. 23.5. yea, what inward and spiritual Experiences have any
Believers in Christ now, but the Prophets had the same, and greater? Aaron is
called, The Saint of the Lord, in Scripture; Moses is greatly commended, not
only for his Meekness, but for his Faith, and other great Virtues, of whom it
is written, That he esteemed the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than all the
Treasures of Egypt; And if all or many of them had some Weaknesses, they
overcame them at last, and they had Victory through Faith, as Believers now
have. And seeing the Apostle Paul describes the Kingdom of God to be
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. who can say with
Understanding, that Moses, Samuel, David, and the Prophets, and John that came
after, were not in that Kingdom as well as any now; for they had the same
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost, as any now have; and therefore,
if by the Kingdom, we understand Christ's Kingdom of Grace in the hearts of true
believers, surely John and all the holy Prophets, and other holy Men and Women
were in it, as well before Christ came in the Flesh, as since; and what Christ
said concerning John, That the l^ast in the Kingdom was greater than he, if we
understand the Kingdom of Grace in the hearts of true Believers, as we well
may, it is to be understood of John, not with respect to his inward state
before God, but with respect to his Water Baptism, and manner of Minist^ation,
which was figurative and typical in great part; for John's going before Christ
in the outward, was a type and figure of an inward Ministration of the Law and
Prophets, or Prophecies going before the more clear Ministration of the Gospel
inwardly* and the Prophets generally who prophesied of Christ, and of the
Gospel state under Christ, delivered their Prophecies under many Figures and
Symboles, and Symbolical Expressions, which were hard to be understood; but
after ^hrists Coming and Suffering in the Flesh, his Death, Resurrection and
Ascension, he gave the holy Spirit more plentifully in general to all
Believers, that made Gospel Truths more plain and clear to men's Unde^standing;
and therefore all Ministers of the Gospel since Christ came, etc. who are
indeed fitted by the Spirit of Christ to be hi^ Ministers, use greater
plainness of Speech than the Prophets or John used; for God had so appointed
it, that the Prophets should not give forth their Prophecies in such clearness
as was to come after: But all this does not in the least infer, that the
Prophets were not true Believers in Christ* as well as any now, and had not by
true Faith an entrance into Gods Kingdom, as well as any now; for it is absurd
to suppose with the Papists, That when they dyed, they went into a certain
Limbu^ or Prison, where they were detained, and had not entrance into Gods
Kingdom until Christ rose from the dead; and it is as absurd for any to
imagine, That Believers generally since Christ came in the Flesh, after Death
have a greater or higher place, or are greater in the Kingdom of Glory that is
to come, than the Prophets have; for it is most clear from Scripture, that
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets are in the Kingdom of God, Luke
13.28, 29. And none can enter into the Kingdom of God hereafter, who have not
known some beginning of entrance into it here in this World.

5 thly, That there are already many whom God has prepared and is preparing to
be a first Fruits of the Church, as she comes out of the Wilderness; and that
the full Time of her Wilderness state is very near expiring, and many have
their Eyes greatly opened to see a great Glory, and their hearts are greatly
affected with it; and many are come to an excellent state and growth in the
Truth, and may be truly said to be Children of the New Covenant, and to be
under the New Covenant Dispensation; and they look not for another Dispensation
in substance, than what they have attained unto, only for a further Increase in
degree, while in the mortal state the best and most advanced have cause to wait
for. But that any visible Society of People, assembling together in visible
Gatherings, are come either to that full and perfect Restoration, as was in the
best Times of the Church in the Apostles days, or has attained, as yet, to all
that Glory and Perfection in spiritual Gifts of Knowledge, Virtue, Holiness and
Purity of Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, that God has promised to give unto
the Church, after her Return out of the Wilderness state; And that all the
Peomises of God concerning the Church, her Glory, Perfection and Restoration
are fullfilled, does not yet appear to me, nor many more, though we have great
cause to bless God for what he has already done, and for these good things
that we have been made to see, taste and handle of the Word of Life. But if any
think, that there is any Society of People at this day to be found in outward
and visible Assemblies and Meetings, such as was in the Apostles days, and such
as God has promised yet shall be, after the Church her return out of her
Wilderness state, that has already all that Perfection of Purity in Doctrine,
Faith, Knowledge, Holiness, Worship, and all that degree of Qualifications,
either of Church Members or Ministers, as the Promises of God recorded in
Scripture hold forth, they ought duly and weightily to consider the Nature and
Extent of these Promises, and whether any present Society or Constitution of a
Church does amount unto the same As, first, it is promised concerning the
Church in the latter Days, That her People shall be all Righteous, being the
Branch of his planting* and the Work of his Hands, that he (to wit, God) may be
glorified, Isa. 60.21. And Zech. 14.20. it is promised, In that Day there shall
be upon the Bells of the Horses, Holiness unto the Lord; and the Pots in the
Lords House shall be like the Bowls before the Altar; yea, every Pot in
Jerusalem and in Judea, shall be Holiness unto the Lord of Hosts, etc. And in
that Day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the House of the Lord of
Hosts. Now that this is a Gospel Promise, to be fulfilled to the Church in
Gospel Days, is generally acknowledged, though the words be figuratively
spoken, and Gospel Mysteries expressed by Figures and Types of the Law. But
what visible Society of People is there to be found this day upon Earth, of
which all and every one that professes to the Members of that Society, has
these Qualifications? What Society is there of People, which has all her
Members Righteous and Holy, so that there is no Hypocrite among them, and none
of a wrong Spirit, signified by the Canaanite? But if any say, these
Qualifications are not to be understood of any outward and visible Gathering
and Society of People, but of the Members of the Universal Church, that is
invisible, all which are Holy. I Answer, That according to this they have been
all Holy in all Ages of the World; for all true Believers and Members of
Christ, in all Ages have been Holy; but certainly these and the like Promises
relate to a People that shall openly and visibly appear in the sight of the
Nations, and be as a City set upon a Hill that cannot be hid; and according to
these Prophecies, John said of Christ, That he would purely purge his Floor, to
wit, the Wheat from the Chaff, and gather his Wheat into his Garner. And
concerning the measuring of the Gospel Church, it is prophesied, Ier. 31.38,
39. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that the City shall be built to the
Lord from the Tower of Hananeel, unto the Gate of the Corner* [The Hebrew word
Hananeel signifies, the Grace of God, intimating, that the City is to be built
from that, and all the Furniture for its building is to come out of the Tower
of the Grace of God] and the measuring Line shall yet go forth over against it,
upon the Hill Gareb, and shall compass about to Goath: All which has a
spiritual and mystical Signification, relating to the Gospel Church, Gareb in
Hebrew signifies a scabby Disease, and Goath signifies the lowing of Cattle,
as intimating, That the measuring Line of Gods Grace shall (...) and to cure
all, however diseased with the scabby Disease of Sin, that shall sincerely
believe the Gospel, and it shall compass to take in all that have the least
sincere Breathings after God, and express their Desire after him, as Cattle
that low after their Food, or Keeper, or them of their own Kind. Moreover, what
signifies the so exact and accurate measuring that Temple in Ezekiel, by the
Man whom the Prophet saw with a Line of Flax in his Hand, and a measuring Reed
of six Cubits long, by the Cubit and an Hand breadth to measure the Wa^l, the
Gates, the Porch, the Chambers and Courts of it, both the outer and inner
Courts, but that the Gospel Church that shall be raised up, after the great
Night of Apostasy, shall exactly answer to the measuring Line and Reed, both in
respect of Purity of Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, and due Qualifications
of Church Members and Ministers? And, conform to this, John said, Rev. 11.1.
There was given him a Reed, like unto a Rod, and the Angel stood, saying, Rise
and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that Worship therein;
but the Court which is without the Temple, leave out, and measure it not, for
it is given unto the Gentiles, etc. intimating, that many should have the Name
and Profession of Christians, but not be Christians in Nature, but Gentiles or
Heathens, and such should not be numbered with the true Worshippers; The which
measuring of the Temple comes to pass before the seventh Trumpet sounds, and
therefore it is not long to that Time, for the sixth Trumpet has begun its
interval a great while ago. And lastly, John gives us the measure of the holy
City, that is to appear in the time of the Thousand Years, the which as it does
principa^ly relate to the Saints raised up in Immortal Bodies, so it may
secondarily be understood to relate to the Church of God that shall then
consist of Saints living in Mortal Bodies, who have not attained to the state
of Immortality, but wait to be fitted for it, whose state shall be very
excellent in all respects, as much as can consist with a state or condition of
Mortality. But even before the Thousand Years begin, there is good ground from
Scripture to expect, a very excellent state and condition of a Church upon
Earth, for some time, to answer, by way of Symbol or Allegory, to the Church of
Philadelphia, Rev. 3. v. 7. to 13. the which Church, as nothing in her is
reproved, so she has the greatest Promise, that does extend unto the M^llenial
Happiness, to be obtained by her; and the Gentile or Heathen Christians, having
the Name, but not the Nature and Life of true Christians, seem to be
symbolically designed by the Church of Laodicea, that shall be contemporary
therewith, for some time. But what visible Company or Society of People has
yet appeared in these latter Ages, or does at present appear, which has these
Qualifications, all whose Members are Holy and Righteous, and among whom there
are no Canaanites, i. e. no Hypocrites, or none of a wrong Spirit, so as all
and every professed Member of the Society has the measure of Knowledge, Faith,
Holiness, Purity of Worship, that does answer to the measuring Line? Do not
even these who reckon themselves farthest advanced in Purity of Reformation,
complain of the great Mixture that is among them? nor can it be expected but
that a great Mixture will continue, until God shall raise up a Spirit of holy
Zeal, and also of pure Discerning in many Brethren, which, as by the measuring
Reed and Line, all the professing Members may be measured; and whoever have not
the requisite Qualifications, after an impartial Examination, may be
impartially, and without respect of Persons, declared to be none of their
Members.

And as concerning the due Qualifications of Church Members, that are to make
up such a Gospel Church, as was either in the Apostles days, before there began
a dec^^^ing from the Gospel Purity, or is yet to be in the Earth, after the
Church is fully restored, there are some things absolutely requisite, both
in^ernal and external, to wit, both Life and Profession, or Power and Form of
sound Doctrines and Practices; for as the best form of Words and Practices,
does not suffice without Life and Power, but is like the Sheeps Clothing under
the Wolfs Nature, so a great regard ought to be had to the purity of the Form
and Profession, because although somewhat of the Life and Power may be felt to
stir and move in many, who have not the Purity of the Form and Profession of
Truth in words and Practices, yet the want or defect of the Purity of the Form
and Profession, is a great hurt and hinderance to the Life, and does greatly
tend to choke and quench the tender buddings of it; and whatever Society of
People has not the pure Form and Profession of Truth, both in respect of
Principles and Doctrines, as well as Practices of the Christian Religion,
cannot be said to be the pure Church of Christ.

And as concerning the Definition of a true Church, I like that very well given
by R. B. in his Book, called, A Twofold Apology for the Church, viz. That it
is a People gathered together by the Power of God into (...) Belie^^ of certain
Principles and Doctrines, (of the Christian Religion) and also certain
Practices and Performances, by which they are separated and (...) from others,
and have a certain Relation among themselves, and who have or do Declare
themselves Members of such a Society (Sanctification and Holiness being the
great and chief end which moves them to gather together) who own, believe and
profess the same Doctrines and Principles, and go under the same Distinction
and Denomination, etc. In which Definition these three things are well to be
considered, 1 st. That the Members of the Church are gathered together into the
Belief of certain Principles and Practices of the Christian Religion. 2 dly,
That they are gathered into that Belief by the Power of God. 3 dly, That they
declare themselves* all and every one of the Members, to have that belief, by
owning and professing the same. All which is according to Scripture, which
requires not only Men's believing with the Heart, but their Confessing with the
Mouth, and Profession of what they believe, which cannot be done without some
Declaration; the which is very needful, as in diverse other respects, so to
prevent any joining themselves to be Members of that Church or Society, who may
be Unbelievers in some of the most principal Doctrines believed by them. And if
any say, Men may profess to believe such Doctrines with their Mouths, and yet
not believe them in t^^ir Hearts. As this is to be granted, yet seeing it is
(...) that pretend to the inward Teachings of the Spirit and (...) thereof,
That all faithful Members have in some measure a Spirit of Discerning, whereby
they may savor and taste, and by the same may know who do sincerely believe
what they declare and profess with their Mouths, to believe, and who do not,
but are Hypocrites* and even such who pretend most to a Spirit of Discerning,
must acknowledge, Men are best discerned and known what they believe when they
are heard to declare or profess their Faith; for the Ear tries words as the
Mouth tastes Meat; and as the Bell is best known by its sound, whether it be
good Mettle, or not, so that confession of words which comes from true Faith
in the Heart, has a favor of Life in it, to the spiritual Discerners; but
when nothing is declared in words of what a man believes, it is much more
difficult to know what that Man believes. But again, as a man's Faith and
Sanctification does constitute him a Member of Christ, and of his Church, in
the sight of God, so the Declaration and Profession of it is altogether
requisite to constitute him a professed and visible Member of a Christian
visible Society of People, called, a Church, according to which it was
generally practiced in the ancient Church, that such who believed and embraced
the Christian Faith, did make some solemn Declaration and Confession of it to
some of their Brethren, that in the Mouth of certain Witnesses every word may
be established; and concerning which Paul did write to Timothy, That he had
professed a good Profession of the Faith, to which he was called, before many
Witnesses, 1 Timothy 6.12. the Greek word signifies most properly a verbal
Confession; but where this is wanting to be performed in a solemn and weighty
manner, Multitudes of Ignorant Persons, altogether ignorant of the first
Principles of Christian Doctrine, and Unbelievers concerning them, will crowd
in among others, and not only presume to be Church Members, but also to be
Elders and Teachers in the Church, to the great scandal and offense of many, as
has come to pass in too many, to my certain knowledge. And as in the primitive
Church, not only the Church Members were tried, but the Church Officers also,
even the very Deacons, and it was required in Teachers, That they might be apt
or able to Teach, as well as orderly in Conversation, 1 Timothy 3.10. for seeing
the Church in Scripture is compared to a House built of Stones, polished and
squared, after the similitude of a Palace, in the Wall of which no Stone is to
be laid, but the measuring Line and Reed is to be applied unto it; even so
ought all the Members of the Church to be duly measured, and tried, and proved
with the Line and Rod of Truth. And though this is the work of God principally,
yet it is the Work of the Saints and true Believers, working together
instrumentally with God, and therefore the Church of Pergamos is reproved
because she had them that did hold the Doctrine of Balaam, and of the
Nicolaitans; and the Church of Ephesus is commended, That she could not bear
them which are evil, and had tried them which say, they are Apostles, and are
not. Beside, what did it signify, that in the Temple of Jerusalem there were
Porters, and Keepers of the Doors of the Temple, but that in the Gospel Church
there should be such who should be as Porters or Door-keepers, strictly to note
and observe that none come into the Church, but such who come in duly
qualified, and at the right door, which is Christ; and whoever come in by him,
they not only believe him and his Doctrine, in the most principal and necessary
things, but also profess the same? But the Profession and Declaration of Church
Members, to what they believe, must not be, but of the most necessary and
principal things or heads of Christian Doctrine, delivered in plain Scripture
words, or such as are equivolent, plain and easy to be understood; and in some
things of less Moment, an allowance is to be given, and Charity to be exercised
toward them that (...), where they agree in the main and most necessary
things; and because many may be sincere Believers in Christ, who have not a
gift of Utterance, whereby to express their Faith, therefore it may suffice to
such to answer to some plain Questions concerning the Christian Faith, that
require no other Answer, b^t to say Yea or Amen to each Question.

But, 2 dly, A very great degree and measure of both Knowledge and Holiness,
and spiritual Gifts of all sorts, is promised to the Gospel Church, as she is
to be raised up in the latter days, Zech. 12.8. In that day shall the Lord
defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among them at that
day, shall be as David; and the House of David, as of God, as of the Angel of
the Lord before them, (for so the Hebrew does well bear) whereby is intimated,
that true Believers in that Day shall arrive at a very great degree, both of
Knowledge and Holiness; for David was certainly a man of great Knowledge, and
also a very Holy Man; for though he greatly transgressed in the matter of
Vriah, yet he greatly repented of it, and became a very Holy Man afterward;
and his Book of the Psalms does sufficiently demonstrate, to all that have a
spiritual Understanding, that David was both very knowing and very Holy. And as
concerning the great abundance of Knowledge that God is to give to Men in the
latter days, the Testimony of the holy Scripture is very clear and fu^l, H^b.
2.14. For the Earth shall be filled with the Knowledge of the Glory of the
Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. Numb. 14.21. But as tru^y as I live, all the
Earth shall be filled with the Glory of the Lord. The which two Places of
Scripture seem to refer one to another, as holding forth not only great plenty
of divine Knowledge, but also of great Holiness; for the Lord is said to be
glorious in Holiness, so that his Holiness is his Glory; and therefore when the
Earth shall be filled with the Glory of the Lord, it shall be filled with
Holiness; and the nature and property of true divine Knowledge is such, that it
has Holiness to accompany it, as an inseparable Companion; for the more truly
we know God, the more we love and obey him, and knowing or beholding his Glory,
we are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. And concerning the Increase of divine Knowledge upon
Earth, both Daniel and Christ have foretold, Dan. 12.4. But thou, O Daniel!
shut up the Words and seal the Book to the Time of the End, many shall run to
and fro (or, shall search) the Hebrew word may be and is both ways translated)
and Knowledge shall Increase. And said Christ, Mat. 10.26. There is nothing
(...) shall not be revealed, and hid (...) shall not be known. From all which
and many more places of Scripture that may be cited, it does plainly appear,
that a very great increase of divine Knowledge, accompanied with great
Holiness, shall be given to true Believers* even here in this World; so that
not one of all the deep Sayings and Prophecies contained in the holy
Scriptures, but shall be plainly opened to the Saints; and good Reason does
prove that it must be so, for the holy Scriptures were writ for our learning
here in this World, and therefore some time before the end they shall be all
opened to the Children of God, otherwise they attain not their end. And it must
be acknowledged, that many Scripture Prophecies and Sayings have not to this
day been fully opened to the People of God, nay, not in the Apostles days in a
general manner, and perhaps some things were hid even from the Prophets and
Apostles, which they prophesied of, that are afterward to be revealed; for
said Daniel, I heard, but I understood not; but from this it will not follow,
that any at this day have an equal degree of Knowledge with the Prophets and
Apostles of the Lord; for though Paul said, We know in ^art, yet who can justly
say at this day, that he knows more than Paul? none should be so arrogant,
but such who are, show their great Ignorance and Folly, and will bear their own
burden for it. But they who think they are come to the Light and full extent of
all that Knowledge that the Promises of God recorded in Scripture hold forth,
if they will impartially examine themselves, they will find, they are in a
great Mistake; for how many Sayings of holy Scripture, both Doctrinal and
Prophetical are yet hid from most, even of the best men known to us upon Earth,
or rather indeed from all? Who is there that can justly say, all the Sayings of
the holy Scripture, both Doctrinal and Prophetical, are opened to him? Indeed,
to my great Astonishment I have heard the like affirmed by some, but ^et at the
same time I did find and detect them ignorant of some of the first Principles
of the Doctrine of Christ. Many make too great and high Pretenses to divine
Revelation, and Knowledge, and the Spirits inward Teachings* but when they are
searched and examined, they are found very Ignorant; therefore John did
seasonably exhort, Believe (...) every Spirit* but try the Spirits; for indeed
it is not every Spirit that says in Man, (...) is the Spirit of God, that
really is such; for it is the greatest Imposture and Cheat that is or can be,
when a false and wrong Spirit in Man, pretends it self to be, and ca^eth it
self The Spirit of God; but the tru^ Spirit of God tries both it self and all
other Spirits, as a Right Line shows both it self to be right, and all
crooked and unstreight Lines to be what they are. And though to Gods praise it
is to be acknowledged, that many at this day have a good measure, both of
sincere Knowledge and Holiness, yet it cannot be denied, but that very many
even of such who have a measure of sincerity toward God, remain very weak and
short in divine Knowledge, and are very dark in their Understanding, as
touching many divine Mysteries, and lie under great Mistakes in many things;
but that which is worst of all, some refuse Information, supposing they know
what they do not know, and all the help we can give unto such men, is to pray
to God for them, for other help many will not receive; and these think
Knowledge comes to them without a^l outward helps, even of the Scripture it
self, so that they rarely read in it, bu^ rather lay it aside for most part;
hence it is that some pretending to preach by the Spirit, and neglect readin^,
speak often very un^^u^d Doctrine, and bring forth such No (...) and
Imp^rtinencies, that one of a very small capacity which neareth, can and does
trul^ judge, That ^e speaks not from the Spirit of God, but from his lack
Imaginations. To prevent which abuse, it were very necessary that none were
countenanced or allowed, or indeed permitted, without open witnessing against
them, to speak in an open Assembly of People, but such that fa^thful Brethren,
who are able in Knowledge and Discussing, have some real knowledge of; for the
neglect of this has d^ne much hurt already, to the occasioning many to
reproach the blessed Spirit of Truth, and to despise the Mini^try of some, to
whom God has given a heavenly Ministerial Gift. As there was a School of the
Prophets among the Prophets, before Christ came in the Flesh, so th^re seems
that there was such a School even among the Christians, whose Preachers were
called Prophets, of which Paul said, 1 Cor. 14.29. Let the Prophets speak, two
or three, and let the other judge; or at leastwise there should be Christian
Schools, where a^l tha^ want to be informed in the first Principles of the
Doctrine o^ Christ, may be informed by Men who have a spiritual Ability given
them of God so to do. And thus, if all were well instru^t^d in the first
Principles of the Christian Doctrine at least, before they go to preach to
others, they would ^ot bewray such g^oss Ignorance when they preach, as too
many do; and surely, if the Church were thoroughly reformed, and restored to
that degree of Purity and good Order, as God has promised, and will certainly
fulfill, such Disorder would not appear.

And 3 dly, There are particular Promises in Scripture concerning Ministers,
Rulers and Pastors, whom God will give to his Church and People in Gospel Days,
that shall be nobly and largely endued, both with holiness of Life and purity
of Doctrine, and who shall be accompanied with great success in their Ministry,
to turn many of many Nations unto God, and to the Faith of Christ, and to
Righteousness, and the true Worship of God, which is in Spirit and in Truth; as
Isa. 66.18. It shall come, that I will gather all Nations and Tongues, and they
shall come and see my Glory; and I will set a Sign among them, and I will send
those that escape of them into the Nations, to Tarshish, Pull and Lud, that
draw the Bow; to Tubal and Java^, to the Isles afar off, that have not heard my
Fame, neither have seen my Glory; and they shall declare my Glory among the
Gentiles; and they shall bring all your Brethren for an Offering unto the Lord
out of all Nations, upon Horses, and in Chariots, and in Litters, and upon
M^les, and upon swi^t Beasts (This is figuratively to be understood) to my holy
Mountain Jerusalem, says the Lord; and I will also take of them for Priests,
and for Levites, says the Lord; to wit, not such P^iests and Levites as were
according to the Law, but such as shall answer to the Gospel; and we find that
Gospel Ministers are called in Scripture Levites, and Sons of Levi, whom God
has promised, That he will purify and purge them as Gold and Silver, that
they may offer unto the Lord an Offering in Righteousness; then shall the
Offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of
Old, and as in former Years. And Ier. 3.15. And I will give you Pastors,
according to mine heart, which shall ^eed you with Knowledge and Understanding.
And it ought to be acknowledged to Gods Praise, wi^h great Thankfulness, that
these Promises are begun in part to be fulfilled, so that diverse such are
raised up in diverse places, whom God has made and is still making blessed
^^^^ruments in his hand, to gather People unto God and Christ; but yet, (...)
are too many who r^n, and are not duly fitted for so great a Work, and pretend
to have the inward and immediate Call of the Spirit of God, and to preach and
pray by the Spirits motion, and yet are but little acquainted with it, and some
nothing at all, but have ^ mere Notion of such a thing, as the ignorance of
their Understanding, and rawness and vnleavedness, yea, unholiness of their
Lives, do too apparently demonstrate. It is one thing to say and dispute, That
all Preaching, and Praying, and Praising God, and serving and worshipping him
is to be in Spirit and in Truth, but far another thing indeed to preach in the
Spirit, to pray and sing and give Thanks in the Spirit, and to do these things
purely, and without all mixture: And alas! how often do too many pretend to offer
the right Fire on Gods Altar, and profess in words a great holy Zeal, but upon
due search it is found to be but strange Fire, and Sparks of man's kindling, too
often the heat and wrath of man's Spirit does pass for a divine fervor; all which
shows, that the Church is not as yet arrived to that perfect Restoration in
Purity and good Order as is to be expected. But it is well that there is a
blessed Number, yea, of Thousands that are travailing toward it; and there are
some true Watchmen that God has set up, and yet will set upon the Walls, that
make mention of the Lord, and keep not Silence, and give him no rest till he
establish, and tell he make Jerusalem a Praise of the whole Earth, according to
Isa. 62.7. Nor ought the faithful Servants of the Lord be discouraged to labor
in the Work of the Lord, in the diligent improvement of their Talent, that
things are not in the general arrived to that purity among both Preachers and
Professors, as is to be desired, and will be fullfilled. The diverse Societies
and Gatherings of these called Christians at this day, are like diverse Fields
of Corn, of which some have a great many more Weeds than others, but all have
some; and these called Laborers in these Fields are more or less skillfull to
plant, to water, and to weed, and some also more slack, and others more
diligent; What then is to be done in such a case? should not these who belong
to the best and cleanest Field remain where they are, and not go back to any
other less pure; nor yet divide and separate from their Brethren, but rather
endeavor, partly by every ones more and more purifying himself, and persuading
others, with a Spirit of Love and Meekness, to labor and press after more
Purity, till all the old Leaven be purged out, and all the Weeds be taken away,
and nothing left remaining but clean Grain? And none ought to make a Separation
from his Christian Brethren, whom he sees to be the purest Society on Earth
known to him, though perhaps he sees that they are not altogether pure in all
respects, until he find that they are wilful, and settling down where they
are, and refusing to travel onwards to greater degrees of Purity; nor even then
is he to be hasty* but to wait to know the Lord to direct and guide him in what
he does. But certain it is, that the Lord is calling for greater Purity, and
that from these of the highest Profession in Christendom; and he is begun to
lift all Professions, in order to separate the Wheat from the Ch^ff; for th^re
is Wheat in all the Professions in Christendom (to wit, a Seed that sincerely
breathes after the Lord, yea, even these that are in the darkest Forms and
Professions, and not onl^ in Christendom, and among these called Christians,
but also among Jews, Turks and Pagans, of all sorts; for Christ has dyed for
all men, and a Seed is to be gathered unto him out of all Nations, that may
answer to the travail of his Soul, who has dyed for them.

And among other Instances, to prove that the Christian Religion and Church is
not yet fully restored in the Earth, to that degree of Purity and Perfection
that God has promised, and will certainly perform, there is this one, viz.
That when the Christian Doctrine, Religion and Church is fully and perfectly
restored, she will really be the Joy of all Nations, and the Nations will ^lock
unto her. And no sooner is the Church come out of the Wilderness, but the Angel
flies through the midst of Heaven, having the Everlasting Gospel to preach to
all that dwell upon the Earth, which God will bless with wonderful success; for
after that John saw the Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the
Everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, and to every
Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People, saying with a loud Voice, Fear God
and give Glory to him, for the hour of her Judgment is come, and Worship him
that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of Waters,
immediately there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fal^en,
that great City, etc. Rev. 14.7, 8. for indeed before Babylon fall, Zion must
^e raised up in measure; and as Dagon, the Idol of the Philistians fell before
the Presence of the Lord in the Ark, so will Babylon fall before the Presence
of the Lord in his Church, which comes out of the Wilderness, Fair as the
Moon, Clear as the Sun, and Terrible as an Army with Banners. It was wont to be
objected against these called Reformed Churches and Ministers, that have
pretended to be the Reformed Church, That the ill Success and Barrenness of
their Ministry did prove they were not the true Church purely reformed, nor
their Ministry that pure Ministry that God promised he would raise up in the
Eacth, after the Apostasy* for indeed although many (...) not converted, who have
the opportunity of hearing the best Ministers, as many heard both Christ and
the Apostles, and were ^ot converted yet many were converted; and it were
strange to think* that God sends any to preach the Gospel, which is the Power
of God unto Salvation, but he blesses them with some considerable Success; for
Jeremiah gives it as a Mark of false Prophets, that they turned not the People
from the evil of their ways, which they should have done, if they had hearkened
to Gods Voice, and stood in his Counsel. But many Peachers are more ready to
blame the People, and lay the default upon their Hearers, that they are not
converted, than upon themselves; but surely it does greatly concern all who
pretend to be Preachers and Ministers of Christ, whether the blame does not in
great part lie upon themselves, yea or nay; as whether their Ministry be not
barren, and the words they speak dead and dry? also, whether their Walking and
Conversation, not being such as becomes the Ministers of Christ, be not a
great Offense and stumbling Block to many? for it cannot be denied, but even at
this day there is a great deal of Preaching and Praying used in Assemblies, by
diverse, and yet very few converted, though diverse convinced, and few grow much
either in the Knowledge or Virtue of the Truth, under the frequent Ministry of
diverse, who pretend highly to the Spirits Teachings; and though the Ministry of
many has had great and blessed Success in our day, to turn many to
Righteousness, which is a proof their Ministry is of God, yet the best Ministry
that now is in being, so far as we know, has reached little further than to
two or three Nations, and but to a few in them, in comparison of others, who
remain in darkness; but as the Purity, and more pure and perfect Restoration of
the Church does advance, the Word and Doctrine of the Gospel will advance, and
have its free Course, until it be preached to all the Nations of the Earth,
which, will be fullfilled before the end of the World, as Christ has plainly
foretold.

And as God has promised to his Church and People great Knowledge (and that he
will teach them himself, from the least of them to the greatest, as well as
give them able Ministers) and Holiness (see Isa. 62.12.) so he has promised to
give them great Peace, both among themselves, and also as to others, as Isa.
^0.17, 18. I will also make thy Officers Peace, and thine Exactors
Righteo^sness; Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, Wasting nor
Destruction within thy Bo^ders, but thou shall call thy Walls Salvation, and
thy Gates Praise. And Isa. 11.6. The Wol^ also shall dwell with the Lamb, etc.
And v. 9. They shall not hurt nor dest^oy in all my holy Mountain. And
therefore when the Church of God, I mean, the Saints living in mortal bodies,
shall come to its greatest Perfe^tion and Glory, Persecution shall wholly cease
and come to an end. But after that the Church is come to a far greater
Perfection and Growth than ^he is yet arrived unto, and that many of many
Nations are converted unto her, and many Jews (or Israel after the Flesh) are
become Israelites (...), that is to say, true Believers in Christ Jesus, a
great Persecution is to arise, even the greatest that has been, but that it
shall be short, as does clearly appear to me from many places of the holy
Scripture; but before this great Persecution, the Church shall have a breathing
time of great Peace, and shall greatly flourish and spread, and bring forth
^ruit in many or most Nations of the Earth for some considerable time, as I
reckon, of about seventy Years, which answers to the half hours Silence, at
the opening of the seventh Seal, and therefore it is called half an hour,
because it shall be followed with a great Persecution, at the rising up of the
seventh Head of the Beast, and little Horn, that is yet to come; and as
formerly Antichrist has wrought in a Mystery of Iniquity, for many hundreds
of Years past, pretending for Christ, and yet against him, so in this last and
great Persecution, Antichrist, or a false Christ shall openly appear, denying
openly the true Christ of God, who is already come, and call himself the Christ
that was promised to come, and shall deceive many, and persecute many unto
death, and all that will not own him to be the Christ, he will endeavor to
kill, both true Christians and false; and this is the time that the two
Witnesses shall be killed under this outward Antichrist, after they have
finished their Testimony, and who shall rise again after three days and an
half: And the time of this Persecution is particularly expressed to be One
Thousand two Hundred and Sixty Days, the which must needs be natural and
ordinary Days, containing three Years and an half literally understood, and
not 1260 Years, because this great and last Persecution under this outward
Antichrist, is within the time of the sixth Trumpet, as is clear by comparing
Rev. 9.13. and cap. 11.15. for betwixt the beginning of the sixth Trumpet, and
the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, which introduces the Milleniel Happiness
and Reign of the Saints, the Vision of the loosing of the four Angels, which
were bound at the River Euphrates, and the great Army of Horsemen, the Number
of which is Two Hundred Thousand Thousand, that should slay the third part of
Men (which is in great part yet to be fulfilled) the Vision of the little Book,
the seven Thunders, the measuring the Temple* and the treading under foot the
holy City ( i. e. the Church of God) forty two Months, the Prophesying of the
Witnesses, their killing and rising, do all fall in. And as the time of the
Churches great Peace and flourishing estate, before this last great Persecution
under Antichrist, does answer unto and synochrine with the casting out of the
Dragon, and the Saints Victory over him, and the great joy in Heaven on that
account, so the Time of the last Persecution under Antichrist, does answer
unto the new Persecution, that the Dragon ( i* e* the Devil in that outward
Antichrist) shall raise against the Woman ( i. e. the Church) who again is to
flee into the Wilderness, after her former return out of it, and has the two
Wings of an Eagle given her to fly with; and he who will ready and well
consider what is written, Rev. 12. as God shall be pleased to illuminate his
Understanding, shall easily understand, that the Woman goes again into the
Wilderness, after her first Return out of it; and whereas her first abode in
the Wilderness, under the inward and spiritual Antichrist, was to be 1260 Days,
signifying prophetically 1260 Years (which time is near to be expired (the
truth of which Experience does sufficiently prove to any but a little skilled
in Church History, that the inward and spiritual Antichrist in the false
Church, especially in the Papacy, has prevailed above 1200 years already past)
her last abode is to be 1260 Days literally and vulgarly understood; nor is it
unusual in Scripture that both Days and Years be sometimes taken literally and
vulgarly understood, and sometimes figuratively and mystically. And concerning
this great and last Persecution, Daniel does prophecy, Dan. 7. v. 7. to the
end, and cap. 11. v. 27. to the end; And cap. 12.1. it is said, At that time
shall stand up Michael, the great Prince, which stands for the Children of
thy People, and there shall be a Time of Trouble, such as there never was since
there was a Nation [Note well these words, for they plainly hold forth this
last and most great Persecution, such as never was before in, and none will be
after it, for immediately after follows the raising up of the Saints, as
appears from verse. 2. And that it is said, Many of them that sleep in the
Dust of the Earth, shall awake, is so said, because some did rise from the dead
immediately after Christ's Resurrection. Also, it is probable, that some of the
Saints shall be raised up as a first Fruits, before the rest that are to be
raised, to wit, these 144000. mentioned Rev. 7. and cap. 14. who are expressly
called, The first Fruits unto God and the Lam^, and whose Description is such,
that they seem not to be Men living in a mortal state; for they are
di^^^^guished from the four living Creatures and twenty four Elders,
representing the Militant Church on Earth, That they did sing a New Song be^o^e
them, which none of them could learn, but only these 14*000. And it is said,
That they were not d^filed with Women, as intimating, that they are not now
born of Women, after the ordinary manner of Generation, but raised from the
dead in Immortal Bodies; for all born of Women (Christ only excepted) have
received some Defilement by their Bi^th. And let any diligently compare Dan
7.24, 25. with Rev. 12.14. and cap. 17.10, 11, 12, 13, etc. and he shall see
that both Daniel and John relate to the same thing and to the same t^me. And
the Ten Horns or Kings hating the Whore and burning her Flesh with Fire, is yet
for most part to be fullfilled, which Whore is the false Church, especially the
Papacy, that the ten Kings in Europe, together with the Turks, will greatl^
afflict, and because of their Idolatry and Superstition, and other great Sins,
God will bring this great Judgment upon them, and under these great Judgments,
many will still remain Impenitent, for which see Rev. 9.19, 20. compared with
Rev. 17.16, etc.

And concerning this outward and visible Antichrist, that is yet to come, who
shall call himself the Christ and Messiah, and shall deceive many false
Christians, as well as others* and many of the Ie^ish Nation especially, Christ
has plainly foretold, Io^n 5.43. saying, I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye
re^ive me not i^ another shall come in ^is own Name, him ye will receive. And
Mat. 24.24. he did foretell of false Christ's that should come, and false
Prophets, etc. and particularly v. 6. Wherefore if they shall say unto you,
Behold, he is in the Desert, go not ^orth, etc. And that this Time of great
Pe^secution shall be but short, because of the Elect, Christ has also
foretold, Mat. 24.22. For the Elects sake those days shall be shortened; which
agrees with Rev. 17.10. And when he comes (viz. the seventh King) he must
continue a short space. And of these seven Ki^gs, five were fallen and past in
John's Time, as the Angel told John, and one was then remaining, to wit, the
Roman Monarchy, the which does yet continue in the ^oes and lower parts of it;
but the seventh King is altogether yet to come, and is not to arise until the
Time of the half Hours Silence, or Peace of the Church be expired, the which
seventh Head shall begin this great Persecution, that shall be the greatest and
last, and shall be followed with the greatest Glory that ever was known on
Earth, when Christ, together with his Saints shall appear to Men in the Clouds
of Heaven; and though some petty false Christ's have formerly arisen, and
deceived some Jews, yet they were nothing considerable to this last false
Christ, that shall arise and work false Miracles, and lying Wonders.

And as concerning the five Kings that were fallen and gone before John's Time,
it is strange that so few, if any, have plainly found or told who they were,
seeing the Scriptures plainly hold them forth; for 1 st. there was the Egyptian
Monarchy, 2 dly. The Assyrian, 3 dly. The Chaldean or Babylonian, 4 thly. that
of the Medes and Persians, 5 thly. The Grecian, all which did greatly persecute
the Church; and the sixth that was come in John's Time was the Roman, that has
also persecuted the Church most terribly; and last of all comes the seventh,
who shall call himself the Christ, and shall either really be or pretend to be
a Jew, otherwise how could he deceive so many of the Jewish Nation, who do
expect that the Messiah shall be a Jew. And that such an outward and visible
Antichrist is to come, these called Fathers, both Greek and Latin, did
generally declare, and particularly Theodoretus at large, in his Commentary on
Daniel, cap. 11. which they might learn partly from the Scriptures, especially
Daniel and John's Revelation, and Paul's second Epistle to the Thessalonians,
cap. 2. And these seven persecuting Kings or Monarchies are by an Allegory
described, Genesis 36. v. 31. to 40. of which the Zohar and Mystical Writings of
the Jews take special notice, and as they are called eight in Genesis, so in
the Revelations; for its like the two last will be contemporary, or so near
that they are reckoned but as one, as the two Kings of the Medes and Persians
are reckoned one, and the Roman East and West Monarchies, that are as the two
Legs of the great Image, are reckoned but one. And these seven Kings are called
the Kings of Edom, by way of Allegory, and possibly after some secret manner
have had their rise from Edom, which is Esau, as the true Church of believing
Jews and Gentiles is called Israel; and the Persecutors of the Church in the
time of the Babylonish Captivity, are called in Scripture The Children of Edom,
Psalm. 137.7. Remember, O Lord! the Children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem.
And that it is said, Genesis 36.31. And these are the Kings that reigned in the
Land of Edom, before there reigned any King over the Children of Israel, it
has this Allegorical sense, That after the fall and expiration of the seven
Persecuting Monarchies or Kingdoms, six of which are near expired, God will set
up the Kingdom of his dear Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, so as to have a most
excellent Majesty, Splendour and Greatness, not only by his inward and spiritual
Presence and Appearance in his Saints and Church on Earth living in mortal
Bodies, but which shall ^e outwardly conspicuous to men universally in the
visible Effects of it* for even all that part of Mankind that shall not be
converted to be Saints, shall be under the Government of Christ and his Saints,
so far, that though they shall not have true Love to Christ and his Saints in
their unconverted state, yet a fear and awe shall take hold of them, that they
shall be subject to the Saints, even to these that shall live in mortal Bodies,
and shall serve and obey them as Servants or Slaves obey their Masters, to
which that place of Scripture does seem to relate, Isa 61.5. And strangers
shall stand and feed your Flocks, and the Sons of the Alien shall be your
Plow-men and Vine-Dressers; verse. 6. But ye shall be named the Priests of the
Lord, Men shall call you the Ministers of our God; ye shall eat the Riches of
the Gentiles, and in their Glory shall you boast your selves; and compare with
this Isa. 23.15. And it shall come to pass in ^ha^ day, that Tire shall be
forgotten 70 Years, according to the days of one King, viz. even as the Church
of God suffered Spoil, Devastation and Cap^ivity 70 Years under the King of
Babylon, (...) 400 (...) 60 (...) 6 (...) 200 666

so shall the false ^hu^ch (allegorically signified by Tyrus or Tsur, whose
Numerical Letters in Hebrew contain 666 (as on the Ma^gen) the Number of the
Beast (as Leterno^ does in Greek) suffer 70 Years Captivity, Devastation and
Spoil, not by true Ch^istians, but others; and in that ^ime of 70 Years, the
true Christians shall ^ave great Peace, and the true Church greatly flourish
and spread into many Nations, and Truth shall greatly prevail, and many shall
rejoice of all sorts to hear the sound of it, and most especially Heathens and
Gentiles, who have been defiled with the Idolatry, Superstition and Hypocrisy
of false Christians. And during this time of 70 Years, the se^en Vials are like
to be pured forth (a^owing to ^^ch Vial about the Time of ten Years) upon the
false Church and Apostate Ch^istians, which is like to begin about the Year
from Christ's Resurrection (according to the best Chronological Account I can
make) 1666. and is from the time of his Birth about the Year 1700. to wit, the
beginning of the said 70 Years, when the seven Vials or last Plagues are like
to begin to be poured out upon Babylon or Tyrus, i. e. the false Church, and
especially the Papacy, wherein God has a People that he will call out of her,
and who will answer the Call of God; the which Chronological true Account
differs from the vulgar Account in some Years, which the Reader is to observe,
for the Time hastenth wherein these things will begin to be fullfilled, as
seems exceeding probable; but as to the precise Number of Years, nothing is
positively to be concluded by me in this case, Time will discover the matter.

By all that has been said, it does plainly appear, that the full and perfect
Restoration of the Church to all that Glory and Blessedness, and plenty of
divine and spiritual Induements that God has promised, and is left upon Record
in holy Scriptue, is left to the time of the Thousand Years, which according to
great Probability is to begin about the length of the Age of a Man after the
Year 1700 is expired; but I undertake not to affirm this from the Spirit of
Prophecy; for some have too rashly undertaken to prophecy things, that have not
come to pass in the time they prefixed, and so have proved themselves f^lse
Prophets, the which rashness I resolve not to be guilty of, therefore what I
say in the case, is only in way of Probability, grounded upon some seemingly
strong Rational Persuasions, infered from the best Chronological Account I
could make, and if Time discover the truth of it, there may be found in it
somewhat more than a probable Conjecture, but I affirm it not positively, for
I had rather dye than give occasion to any to bra^^ me with the Name of a false
Prophet. And within this time of the Thousand Years, which I positively believe
and affirm, as a most certain thing that is to come to pass, the Church of God
upon Earth, (which is the Saints that shall be living in mortal Bodies, born of
Women, and begot as we are by humane Generation) shall not only be restored to
all that G^ory and Blessedness that ever she had in the purest time in the
Apostles days, after Christ's Ascension and giving the holy Ghost, but she
shall be enl^rged, and enriched with many excellent Induements, and Gifts, and
Blessings of God, both inwardly and outwardly, far beyond what the generality
of true Christians witnessed in the Apostles days; and yet even then I do not
allow that any should say, there shall be any of the Saints, living in mortal
Bodies within the Thousand Years, that shall exceed the Apostles of the Lord,
or equal them in all spiritual Gifts, it is enough that they be near, though
inferior unto them. And that which shall greatly increase the Dignity and
Felicity of the Church of the Saints living in mortal Bodies within the
Thousand Years, is, that they shall converse frequently with the Lord Jesus
Christ and the raised Saints, who have put off the mortal Clothing, and put on
the immortal, and have familiar Conversation with them, as the Apostles had
with Christ after his Resurrection, and may learn and be taught of them many
great Mysteries belonging to the Kingdom of God, secretly couched and wrapped up
in Enigmaes and Symboles of the holy Scriptures, that formerly they did not
understand, even as it is written, That Christ after his Resurrection conversed
with the Disciples, and expounded unto them out of Moses, and the Psalms, and
the Prophets, the Things concerning himself, and opened their Understandings to
understand the Scriptures; for there is no Inconsistency in it, but a very good
agreement to be inwardly taught by the Spirit of Christ, and to be outwardly
taught by Christ by word of Mouth; for no doubt, the Disciples of Christ were
both inwardly and outwardly taught by Christ many things, both before and after
his Resurrection. But the Glory of the Church of God, i. e. of the Saints
living in mortal Bodies upon Earth, who shall be born of Women, and begot of
Men in the way of lawful Marriage, and who shall eat and drink the Fruits of
the Earth, with all becoming Moderation, and holy Reverence, and Thanksgiving,
is such, that no words or declaration is sufficient to express it, only some
hints are given of it, so far as the Scriptures hold forth, according to the
small measure of that divine Illumination I have received. And though the chief
Government over all the Earth and Mankind, that shall live therein within the
Thousand Years, shall belong to Christ and the raised Saints (who shall
frequently outwardly appear to Men, both good and bad, or disappear, as they
shall see meet, and as Christ used to do after his Resurrection; for he
appeared or disappeared, as he pleased) yet in a secondary and subordinate way
and manner, the Saints living in mortal Bodies shall also reign with Christ and
the raised Saints, over all Nations of the Earth, and they shall have the full
dispose and command of all the Riches and Treasures of the Earth, which they
shall use with all holy and godly Moderation and Discretion, to the Glory of
God and the mutual Comfort of one another; for then shall that be fullfilled
which is written in Isa. 23.18. concerning the Riches of Tire, after the return
of her Captivity, and her Merchandise and her Hire shall be Holiness to the
Lord; it shall not be treasured nor laid up, for her Merchandise shall be for
them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for durable
Clothing; but the raised Saints, that have put off the mortal Clothing shall
neither need nor use any of these things, neither shall they Marry and give in
Marriage, but be as the Angels of God, as Christ has taught, when he proved
the Resurrection of the Dead against the Sadduces, and I wish such as hold the
gross Error of Sadducism at this day, would well consider Christ's Doctrine in
this particular.

And though the Church of Christ, before the Thousand Years begin, will not
arrive to her most perfect State of Glory and Happiness, yet there is cause to
believe, that within that preparatory Time of 70 Years, abovementioned,
(answering to the time of Daniels Numbers, the one of 1290. exceeding that of
John's Number in the Revelations by 30. and the other of 1335. containing 40
years more, making in all 70. and then last of all the Persecution under the
outward Antichrist, of about 3 years and a half* which brings to that
blessed Time 1335. as it is said, Dan. 12.12. Blessed is he that waits and
comes to the Thousand three hundred and five and thirty days; for then the
seventh Trumpet sounds, and the Thousand Years begin) the Glory of the true
Church shall be exceeding great, and nothing short, as to the general, of what
it was in the Apostles days, in respect of Virtue, Holiness, Peace, Love,
Knowledge, and all spiritual Induements, yea, and Gifts of Tongues, and
Miracles; for since Nations of strange Languages shall be converted, there i^
g^ound to believe, that the Gift of Tongues shall be given to the Church, as
well as other miraculous and extraordinary Gifts. Nor should this seem strange
unto any, that I affirm the Gift of Miracles will be given unto such, whom God
shall think worthy, when the Church comes more perfectly to be restored; for
if Antichrist shall be permitted to work false Miracles and lying Wonders, to
deceive many, as the Scripture declares, it is not to be questioned but God
will raise up his faithful Servants and Witnesses to work true Miracles and
true Signs and Wonders, to convince Unbelievers. And the Scripture does
expressly declare, that the two Witnesses that shall prophecy in Sackcloth, in
the time of that great outward Antichrist that is to come, shall work
Miracles, Rev. 11.5, 6. for if any man will hurt them, Fire proceeds out of
their Mouths and devoureth their Enemies; these have Power to sh^t Heaven,
that it rain not in the days of their Prophecy (as formerly Elias had such
Power) and have Power over Waters to turn them to Blood (as Moses did formerly)
and to smite the Earth with all Plagues, as often as they will. And though some
streign this wholly to a Mystical and Allegorical sense, and allege, That this
is already fullfilled under the inward and spiritual Antichrist in the Papacy;
yet it is certainly to have a litteral fullfilling; for the Prophesying of the
Witnesses belongs only to a time betwixt the sixth and seventh Trumpet, and
goes immediately before the seventh Trumpet, and therefore is not ^ thing yet
fullfilled; and the days of their Prophecy must needs be 1260. common Days, and
not Years, as some imagine; for 1260 years contain very near the space of Time
belonging to five Trumpets, allowing to each Trumpet 260 years, which the
Historical Events, according to Church History, compared with the Effects of
the Trumpets, so far as they are past, do make very probable; and according to
this Account, the sixth Trumpet began to sound about the year from Christ's
Birth 1514. about which time Luther was raised up to witness against the
Idolatry, Superstition and Hypocrisy in the Papacy; and since which time the
Turks have greatly prevailed against the Apostate Christians, and have been
made a great Scourge against them* and unless they repent, are like to be made
yet a far greater; for by that great Army mentioned, Rev. 9.16. that was to be
raised, as the Effects of the sixth Trumpet, without all question is to be
understood the Turks, which had been preparing for an Hour, and a Day, and a
Month, and a Year, (i. e. 390 Years, and some odds backwards, viz. about the
Year 1123. when the Turks began to be so strong, that they formed themselves
into an Empire, and had an Emperor over them. And who can doubt that there will
be great plen^y of Miracles daily seen in the Church, when she comes to her
Perfection in the Thousand Years, when the dead Bodies of the Saints shall be
raised from the Dead, and appear to the Living, after they have so long
remained dead. And the Saints living in mortal Bodies, when they are fitted for
it, shall be changed from a state of Mortality to a state of Immortality, so as
to ascend to Heaven in the sight of mortal Men, than which there are scarce any
greater Miracles, of which, Elias being carried up, was a Type and Symbol.

And to the Glory of the Church, as it shall consist of Saints living in Mortal
Bodies, until they be changed, it shall be no small addition, that there shall
be a very great Knowledge of things both divine and Natural, that shall be
generally given to the faithful, and Mysteries both of Divine and Natural
Things shall be wonderfully revealed, and the Books both of the Scripture and
of the Creation will be opened, and a Perfection there will be of all Arts and
Sciences, which at present are in great part very defective; and it is worthy
of Observation, that the Knowledge of Divine and Natural Things does increase
together gradually, as these latter Ages do sufficiently discover, and the Time
to come will yet more fully demonstrate; for God Almighty is the God both of
Grace and Nature, and the Knowledge of all Nature and Natural Things, that is
true and real, is of God, as well as the Knowledge of all Spiritual and Divine
Things, so that it may be warrantably concluded, That Children in that time
will be more wise and understanding in Things both Divine and Natural, than the
wisest of Men are at present; and there will come after us, that shall far
exceed us in Knowledge, and other great and excellent Induements and Gifts;
Therefore let none esteem of their present Seize above what is
convenient, nor imagine that they are come to the highest pitch of Wisdom or
Virtue; nor let any set themselves in opposition to further Discoveries of
Divine Knowledge in things both Divine and Natural, lest they be found Fighters
against God, and imagine a vain thing; for as no Man can stop the flowing of
the Sea or the rising of the Sun, so can none stop the increase of the Light of
the Day of God, that is yet to increase, and that with an exceeding Increase,
beyond what can be conceived, but let all be humble, and sob^r in Mind, and
keep faithful to God in the measure of divine Li^ht already received, still
Praying and waiting for a further increase, and standing open and ready to
receive the Increase of it, as it shall come both Immediately and Instrumently,
for i^ ^ill come both ways; and whoever rejects the Light that God causes to
shine to any, through any Instrument of his fitting and sending, they reject
God himself in so doing. Therefore let all fear, and be sober, and humble, and
try every thing with the true Touchstone, and Stone of Trial, the true Lig^t
of Christ in every particular, for so Christ is called, Isa. 28 16. Behold, I
lay in Zion, for a Foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone, or a Stone of Trial,
Lapidem probationis, as the Hebrew does ^ear, and as I^nius and Tremelius does
translate it; and he who believes, let him not make haste; Let none be hasty
to embrace or reject any thing or things that Men may bring forth as Openings
or Discoveries of divine Truth, beyond what is at present commonly made known;
for Satan is not wanting to transform himself as if he were an Angel of Light,
and will be apt to intrude his Diabolical Suggestions and devilish Doctrines,
as if they were divine Revelations; and on the other hand, to call that which
is really of God, a Diabolical Illusion: And therefore it does highly concern
all to be watchful in the Light and Spirit of Christ, and very cautious and
wary, either what they receive or reject. And though the Light and Spirit of
Christ (...) that which Principally does guide and preserve the Understandings
of the faithful from being deceived by Satan's Transformings, yet the holy
Scriptures are Instruments, Means and Organs in the hand of the Spirit of
Christ, which he is pleased to make use of to preserve the Faithful from ^eing
ensnared, and therefore they are diligently to be read and searched i^^o, and
meditated upon, by the help of the Spirit of Christ, with earnest and fervent
Prayer unto God, to give the true Understanding of them. And if any, on a
pretense of the Spirits inward and immediate Teachings, will reject the help of
the holy Scriptures in reading and meditating upon them, as aforesaid, or other
Helps that God gives them, they provoke God to give them up to Satan's
Delusions, to believe them, as sad Experience has sufficiently proved; so that
none have been more woefully deceived, than some who have made great Pretenses
to the Spirit's immediate Teachings, which yet says nothing against the truth
of the Spirits immediate Teachings, which are a blessed enjoyment to every one
that has them; but too many abuse the Doctrine of the Spirits immediate
Teachings, to vent and expose their vain dark Imaginations, and Satan's
Delusions, from which God preserve all that in any measure of sincerity love
the Lord Jesus Christ.

And to Conclude the whole matter concerning the Restoration of the Church, and
her arriving at that perfect State, which the Promises of God hold forth she is
to arrive unto before the end of the World, it is to be considered, That the
due and right Administration of Gospel Discipline, used in the Power and
Authority of God, as God shall be pleased to reveal it in fitted and prepared
Instruments, will greatly conduce thereunto, as it was in the best and purest
state that the Church had, in the Apostles days, where Discipline was
administered and good Order observed, in the real Power and Authority of God,
which put a great Impression of a holy Fear and Reverence upon all Believers in
that Day; for the Power and Authority of God, with which the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ, and Elders, were clothed, was so manifest, that it was
discerned, seen and felt inwardly by all that had any measure of a spiritual
discerning, and where any were blinded by Satan, and were stubborn, wilful
and Rebellions, the Judgments of God were manifested against them, invisible
Effects, as in the case of Annanias and Saphriah, who were struck with Bodily
Death for their Sin of Dissimulation; and so it was in the Church of Israel,
when Corah, Dia^a and Abiram rebelled against Moses the Servant of God, that
they dyed not the common Death of men, but the Earth swallowed them up alive;
and when Miriam spoke against Moses, she was struck with a Leprosy, which was
not healed until Moses prayed for her unto the Lord, Number. 12. And the Sentence
of Excommunication that was then in the Church, and which not only the
Apostles, but others had Power to pass against such as deserved it, was a thing
that was done by a divine Power and Authority, that had some manifest Effects
upon the Persons, against whom it was inflicted, that made it so very dreadful;
and therefore it is said, (after that which came to pass in the matter of
Annanias and Sapphira) Great fear came upon all the Church, and upon as many as
heard these things, Acts 5.11. And verse. 13. it is said, And of the rest durst
no man join himself to them, but the People magnified them. And therefore it
may warrantably be expected, that when due Gospel Discipline shall be duly
exercised in the Power and Authority of God, in the Church, the Judgments of
God will be manifest both inwardly and outwardly, in such manner as will make
the Hypocrites afraid to present themselves as Members of the Church of Christ;
and this will be as a Fan in the hand of the Lord Jesus Christ, to sweep his
floor, and to separate the Wheat from the Chaff: And truly the time draws
near that the hour of Gods Judgments will come yet more manifestly, and then
great will be the Woe that shall be due to such as make a great and large
Profession of the Truth, and yet are not in it; for of a certain, a fanning,
searching, sifting and winnowing Time is very near at hand, and the Spirit of
Christ is grieved with the liberty and looseness that too many take, who even
profess the Teachings and Leadings of the Spirit, and Judgment is like to begin
at such; and most assuredly God is calling for a further degree of Purity and
Reformation, than any have yet attained unto, and will in due time effect it,
and that not only by his own immediate Power, but by raising up Instruments to
work with him; for great things God has done, and yet will do, by Instruments
of his fitting and preparing, in the Earth. Therefore it is high time for us to
be waiting for the Coming of the Lord to be revealed in greater Power and
Authority, to cleanse his House and Garden, that none may refuse to join with
him, when he calls, or oppose or slight any Instruments of his raising for
such a work, however mean and despisable they may seem to be in the Eyes of
Men. And surely it is matter of grief to find some sitting down at ease where
they are, and thinking all is well enough already; and when they are told, yea,
when they see it, and do acknowledge it, that there is a great mixture, and
many Weeds and Tares mingled with the Wheat, that choke and hurt it, do say, as
I have heard some say, Let the Wheat and Tares grow together till the Harvest,
which is the end of the World; not rightly understanding Christ's words, nor
duly applying them, for the Field where Christ commanded that both the Wheat
and the Tares should be suffered to grow, is not the Church of Christ, which is
as a Garden, but the World, as Christ does expressly declare in his opening the
Parable* Mat. 13.38. The Field is the World, the good Seed are the Children of
the Kingdom, but the Tares are the Children of the Wicked One; and such have
done well who have made use of this place of Scripture against persecuting Men
for Conscience sake, and against putting Heretics to Death, for many are
called Heretics falsely; but suppose there be that are Heretics, and do teach
Heretical and false Doctrine, who are the Tares, yet they are to be let alone
to live in the World, according to Christ's Doctrine, but yet neither they nor
their Doctrine is to be allowed in the Church, but they are to be disowned and
denied, and due Church Censure and Discipline is to b^ exercised against them,
who go to preach or teach any Doctrine contrary to the Doctrine of our Lord
Jesus Christ; therefore that Parable of Christ says nothing against Church
Censure and Discipline duly administered against false Teachers, if they be
really found to be such, or any that walk disorderly, being professed Membe^s
of the Church; but every small Mistake or Error in Judgment is not just cause
to exclude a Man from the Fellowship of the Church, but if it be in any thing
Fundamental, or of great Consequence, to the manifest hurt of Peoples Souls, if
they persist in their Error, they are to be disowned, according to John 2.10.
for both the Church of Pergamus and Thyatira are reproved for bea^ing them that
taught false Doctrine; and the Church of Ephesus is commended, That she could
not bear them that are Evil; and such are both false Teachers and bad Livers.
And seeing the Church of Christ is compared to a Garden, in several places of
Scripture, Song. 4.12, 16. and 5.1. Isa. 58.11.6..11. great care is to be taken
by all such to whom God has committed the over^ight thereof, and labor
therein, to preserve it as free as possible of all Weeds and hurtful Herbs; for
as Weeds and hurtful Herbs when suffered to prevail and abound in a natural
Garden, do exceeding much (...) to the tender Herbs in it, and also spoil the
Beauty of it, that the Owner of it has not pleasure to walk therein, even so,
evil Men, to wit, Hypocrites, and all false Christians do great hurt to be
suffered to mix and mingle with the true Church, in any matters that concern
them as a Church; therefore Believers and Unbelievers should not be yoked
together in any matter of Church Concerns, but a Separation ought to be betwixt
them, as betwixt Light and Darkness, God and Belial, Christ and Antichrist, as
it is written, 2 Cor. 6. v. 14 to 18. And whereas these words, v. 14. Be ye not
unequally yoked together with Unbelievers, are commonly applied to Marriage, so
that a Believer ought not to marry an Unbeliever, to which I readily assent,
but that is not the principal design or thing intended in these words; for Paul
is not there treating of the case of Marriage, but of Church Fellowship. Again,
1 Cor. 5.6, 7 Know ye not that a little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump? Purge
out therefore the old Leaven, that ye may be a new Lump, etc. And v. 11. If any
Man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, etc. with such an
one, no, not to eat.

The Mystical Week, or a twofold Analogical Paraphrase on the six Days of the
Creation.
THe manner of the Operation of Christ's inward Illumination in the Hearts and
Souls of Men, has its various steps and degrees, answerable to the seven Days
of the Creation; As, first, To convince, and demonstrate to the Soul and Mind
of Man, That God is, and that he is a bountiful Rewarder of all that serve him,
and a severe Punisher of such as serve him not; that he is a most good,
gracious, merciful, just and holy, wise and powerful, Immortal and Eternal, the
Judge of all the Earth, searching the hearts of all Men, and beholding all Men's
Thoughts, Words and Actions. 2 dly, To reveal and discover unto Man the
Righteous Law of God, as given him for a Law of Obedience, in relation to God,
Himself, and his Neighbor, the substance whereof is summarly contained in the
ten Commandments; the which Law, as it threatens Death to the Disobedient, so
it promises Life to the Obedient. 3 dly, Where this Law or Light is believed
in and joined with, by the heart of Man, it begets some measure of
Conformity in the Soul and Heart to the same, and has some influence upon both
Soul and Body, to do and perform some parts of Obedience that God requires, so
as to become a Servant in the House of God; but where this Law is Transgressed,
it works Wrath, and convinces the Soul of sin, and loadeth or burdeneth, and
afflicts the Soul both with the sense of Sin, and of the Anger and Judgment
of God because of sin, and so makes the Soul poor and needy, and wanting the
Physician of Value to heal and cure it. And thus far the Soul may be advanced
in a mere legal state and condition of a Servant, and have a knowledge and
faith of God, and love toward God, as a Servant has to his Master, and be in
great fear to disobey the righteous Law of God, and be under great Trouble and
sense of the Judgment and Displeasure of God, because of sin; and when he does
well, he may find some Peace, Joy, Comfort and Acceptance with God; but because
in this legal State his Obedience is not perfect, so nor is his Peace; for the
Law (simply as such) whether outwardly or inwardly administered, makes nothing
Perfect; and this is the state of the best and most devout and religious
Gentiles, who have not the Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, although
they do by Nature the things contained in the Law (to wit, Nature partly washed
by the living Word of God put into them) yet their Conscience bears witness,
That they have often sinned, and their Thoughts the mean while accusing or else
excusing one another; and therefore they can have no perfect Peace with God,
nor Justification before him, nor sure knowledge of the Remission of Sin, while
in this mere legal, servile and gentile state* 4 thly, To open the Souls Eye to
see Christ, its Physician, even whole Christ, without dividing him, and h^w it
needs Christ to save and redeem it, both as he came outwardly in the Flesh to
dye for it, and rise again for its Justification, and as he comes inwardly to
apply to it, and work in it, the blessed Effects and Fruits of his Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, Mediation and Intercession in Heaven for us 5 tly, To
enable the Soul effectually to be^ieve in Christ, and to apply Christ to it,
whole and undivided, both in his outward and inward Coming, and to work in it,
not only some beginnings of true Faith in Christ crucified, and raised again,
but also of true Repentance, causing the Soul to look on him (by the Eye of
Faith) whom it had pierced, and mourn bitterly because of the same; also, of
Humility, Meekness, Temperance, Patience, Love, Hope, Joy, and holy (...), with
all other Evangelical Virtues and Fruits of the holy Spirit, the which more
excellent and peculiar Degree of divine Illumination, is an additional measure,
superadded to the former, and in Gods ordinary way of working with men, does
only accompany the outward Preaching of the Gospel, or the Testimony of the
holy Scriptures, although all the various measures and degrees of divine
Illumination and Revelation, of all sorts, come from one Original and (...), to
wit, God and Christ, and that one Spirit proceeding from (...). 6 thly, To
increase in the Soul and whole Man, and to carry (...) to perfection all those
beginnings of all Evangelical Virtues, Graces and Fruits of the Spirit
abovementioned. And here is daily witnessed more and more a gradual putting
off and crucifying the old Man, with his Deeds, by the Power of Christ's Cross,
Death and Sufferings, as the Mystery thereof is opened and revealed in the
Light, to the Soul, and a putting on the new Man, even the Image of the dear
Son of God, which is created in Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness,
after the Image of him that created him, and the Plant of Gods planting, is not
only felt to be grown up, from the least of all Seeds, into the greatest of
Herbs, and to become a great Tree, but also to be the Man-Child, filling the
heart with Joy, the which is a measure of the Life of Christ inwardly revealed,
and raised in the Soul, making it Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone, by
the Soul's spiritually feeding upon Christ, eating his Flesh and drinking his
Blo^d, spiritually, unto its perfect growth, and stature of a perfect Man in
Christ. 7 thly, The perfecting the Soul in all these Evangelical Virtues,
Graces and Fruits of the holy Spirit, and in all Holiness, and new and living
Obedience unto God and Christ, and to cause it to witness God and Christ, its
Sabbath and rest, whereinto it has a begun entrance in this mortal Life, and
whereof it shall have a full Enjoyment in the Life and World to come. And thus
the fourth and fifth steps reach to the beginning of the Christian Faith, Hope
and Love, and other Evangelical Virtues; the sixth to the progress of them, and
the seventh to their Perfection, and so the Soul advances through its six days
of spiritual Labor, until it attain to its perfect Sabbath and Rest in Christ,
and God, which is Everlasting Life.

And by the due Consideration of these seven gradual steps of the Operation of
God and Christ, by his divine Illumination in the hearts of Men, the Analogy
and Harmony betwixt the seven days in the outward Creation, and the seven days
in the inward Creation, is plainly discerned; The three first Days answering to
the Work of God and Christ, and the Spirit in Men's hearts, under the Law or
legal Dispensation belonging to the Servants state; and so far may the devout
and religious Gentile come, without the Faith of Christ crucified and raised
again, as is plain in the case of Cornelius, and many others. The other four
Days answering to the Work of God, Christ and the Spirit in men's hearts under
the Gospel and (...) Covenant, and truly Christian Dispensation, where the
Gospel finishe^h and perfecteth what the Law began, the Lord Jesus Christ being
the Author of every good thing that is wrought in Men, whether under the Law or
Gospel. So that on the first Day, God saying, Let there be Light, and causing
the Light to shine, and dividing it from the Darkness, answers to Gods inward
enlightening the dark Soul and Mind of Man with some true measure of Knowledge,
both to know God and his Light shining in it, though in the Darkness; and also
to know and discern the Light from the Darkness. The Firmament being made on
the second Day, dividing the Waters above from the Waters below, answering to
the Law placed by God in the heart, that is firm, and also large, as the
outward Firmament is; and here the Inferior Waters signify, the more low and
inferior Influences of the Spirit, that are only given unto Men, until they be
fitted and prepared by the Gospel Dispensation, to receive the Influences of
the Spirit (...) are of a more high kind and degree, as far excelling them as
Win^* Oil, Milk and Honey do excel common Water.

The gathering together of the Waters on the 3 d Day, and dividing them from
the dry Land, and making it fruitful to bring forth Grass, Herbs and Trees
bearing Fruit, answering to the Influences of the divine Spirit, given to Men
to make them bring forth Legal Works of Righteousness, comparable to Grass,
Herbs and Trees.

The Sun, Moon and Stars on the 4 th Day set in the Firmament of Heaven, answer
to Christ the Sun of Righteousness arising in the Soul with healing in his
Wings, that is given to perfect the Righteousness of the Law, and to exceed or
excel it; the Moon and Stars answering to many excellent divine Illuminations,
Virtues and Graces, all proceeding from Christ the Fountain, raised and placed
in the Soul, and as the Sun, Moon and Stars enlighten, beautify and adorn the
outward Firmament, so does Christ and his heavenly Virtues, Graces and Gifts
give great Light to the many dark Sayings and Mysteries contaned in the Law,
and does beautify, adorn and perfect it.

The 5 th Days Work in the outward Creation, answering to the lower Influences
of the divine Spirit being made fruitful, by a certain Dew or Influence from
the superior, to bring forth a more excellent degree of manifold (...), as far
exceeding these of the Law as Fowls and Fishes exceed Grass, Herbs, Trees and
Vegetables of all sorts.

The 6 th Days Work answering to (...) ^^duction of a higher Degree of those
Virtues, by the Influence (...) Spirit of Promise, even as the Life in Beasts
exceed that in (...).

And lastly, The making Man (...) Image of God, so as to beat the Likeness and
Similitude of the ^^^venly Adam, whereof the first Adam in all his glory was a
figure, as Paul declares; and the 7 th Day Sabbath, answers to Gods
perfecting his Work in Man by Christ Jesus, so as to cause him to enjoy a sweet
and most joyful Rest in him, and in God through him, to be his Everlasting Life
and Happiness.

And as every Day had its Evening and Morning, save only the seventh, this
signifies, that until the Work (...) Christ be perfected in Man, there will
remain a Mixture in him (...) and Darkness, Knowledge and Ignorance, Good and
Evil, yet (...) Light does prevail over the Darkness, Knowledge over (...)
Evil, until the Perfection be witnessed on the (...) is very good; the setting
the Evening before the Morning, in the Work of the si^ Days, does answer to
that which remains of Darkness in every Man, being necessary to be removed
gradually, before the Light be discerned to shine forth in clearness.

That it is said on the second Day, And God saw that it was good, does answer
to the weakness and unprofitableness of the Law, either perfectly to justify
or sanctify being weak through the Flesh, as Paul declares.

The right Knowledge and Consideration of the Doctrine above mentioned, does
sufficiently demonstrate who the true Christian is, and how distinguished from
the devoute and religious Gentile or H^athen; for the very Word or Name
Christian, is derived from Christ, that signifies, the Anointed; and therefore
none are truly and properly Christians, but who are anointed with some measure
of that heavenly Anointing of the holy Spirit that comes from Christ, which
none receive but through the Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, as the
Scripture has declared, That by Faith we receive the Promise of the Spirit
(viz. that holy Spirit of Promise, called, The Spirit of Adoption in Scripture)
Gal. 3.14. And cap. 3.2. Paul declares, That the Galatians received the Spirit
not by the Works of the Law, but by the hearing of Faith, whereof a manifest
Example we find in Cornelius, who received the Spirit by Peter's Preaching
Christ crucified to him and his Household. But devout and religious Gentiles or
Heathens, who have not the Faith of Christ crucified, they have not that
Influence of the holy Spirit that true Believers in Christ crucified and raised
again have, but an Influence of a far inferior sort and degree; for though the
Spirit of God is One in being, yet it is said in Scripture to be seven fold,
and also two fold, to wit, the Spirit of Bondage, to such who are but Servants
in the House of God, and the Spirit of Adoption to such who are Sons, through
Faith in Christ Jesus; and this two fold kind of divine Influence is that which
by way of Analogy does answer to the Waters below and above the Firmament,
these below the Firmament answering to the divine Influences given to them who
are under the Law, and these Waters above the Firmament answer to the divine
Influences of the Spirit given to true Christians and Believers in Christ
crucified, under the Gospel; for God has so honored his Son, and glorified
him, that because he humbled himself to the Death of the Cross, for the sins of
Men, therefore he has ordained it, that this more excellent Influence and
Grace of the holy Ghost should accompany the Doctrine and Preaching of Christ
crucified and raised again, and the Faith of him, as such. Hence it is that the
Gospel of Christ is called, The Gospel of our Salvation, and the Power of God
unto Salvation, and Christ crucified, The Wisdom and Power of God. And it is
very evident from the Writings of the New Testament, That these only were
called Christians, who were Believers in the crucified Jesus, and that he rose
again, etc. and became Followers of his Virtues and holy Life, and by so doing
hoped to receive Eternal Life, and the Resurrection of the Dead by him. It is
therefore highly Injurious to the Christian Faith and Religion, and
Dishonorable to the worthy Name of Christ crucified and raised from the Dead,
Jesus of (...), the Son of David and of Abraham, in whom all Nations of the
Earth are blessed; and of very dangerous consequen^e to Men's Souls to say, That
all honest, devout and religious Gentiles or Heathens are true Christians, and
have a right to Eternal Life and Salvation, without all Faith of Christ as he
dyed for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, and made Peace by the
Blood of his Cross; for if Men may be Christians, and attain Eternal Life and
Happiness without all Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, which are the
plain Terms and Conditions of the Gospel, ( Romans 10.9, 10.) then in vain is the
Gospel or Faith of Christ crucified preached to all the World, an^ in vain did
Christ command it to be so preached, because (according to this absurd
Principle) Men may be saved without it, only by believing and obeying that
common Illumination given to all men, that reveals nothing of the Mystery of
Christ crucified. And if every good Gentile or Heathen is a true Christian, and
may by the mere improvement ^f that common divine Illumination perfectly
overcome all sin, and love and obey God perfectly, without all knowledge and
faith of Christ crucified, then the Distinction betwixt H^athen and Christian
is but only in (...), and nothing in Nature, and then the tru^ Christian may be
called the Heathen, as well as the Heathen may be called the Christian; and
then here is another way to be saved than the Name of Jesus o^ Nazareth; and if
where the Faith of Christ crucified is preached, it is necessary to be believed
to Salvation, but not to others, and diverse Commands necessary to be obeyed,
which the Christian Faith enjoyneth to such who hear it, the Heathens are in a
better state than true Christians; for God leads them in an easier way, and
far more near to Salvation than Christians, the one as it were making a gre^ter
Compass, and so a longer way than the other. But as no devout religious Gentile
can perish, if he continue faithful in his Dispensation, so he cannot be saved
eternally without the Faith of Christ crucified; but this Faith all m^n have
offered unto them, as the Scripture declares, although the way and manner of
it is not so very easy to demonstrate.

A second Exposition of the Mystical Week, as it has a relation to the seven
Ages of the World, each Age containing 1000 Years.
AS the seven Days of the Creation have a great Analogy to the seven steps and
degrees of the New Birth, and Work of Regeneration within Men, so to the seven
Ages of the World, as will appear by the following Instances.

1 st. As on the first Day God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light,
and God divided the Light from the Darkness, and the Evening and the Morning
was the first Day; so in the first Thousand Years of the World, after Man had
fallen into great Darkness, God caused his Light to shi^e out of Darkness,
generally in some sma^l measure, to enlighten all Mankind, whereby they had
some knowledge of God, and whereby they could discern and distinguish Light
from Darkness, Good from Evil.

2 dly, As on the second Day God created the Firmament, and ^^^reby divided the
Waters above from the Waters below; so in the ^^cond (...) Years of the World,
God gave a Law or Covenant unto (...) to his Posterity, containing in it both
Covenants and Ministrations, Law and Gospel, and such o^ ^is Posterity as
sought no further than the Law and Righteousness thereof, they had the
inferior Influences of the Spirit, answering to the Waters below; but such as
sought further than the Law and Righ^e^^sness the^^of, even to the
Righteousness of Faith, which is by (...) Christ, the^ had the superior or
higher Influences of the Spirit, answering to the Waters above. And as the
Hebrew word Rakiah, translated (...), signifies, an Expanse or expanded t^ing,
like a S^^et of ^ape^ o^ Pa^^hment, that has two faces or sides, the one
looking upward, the other downward, so it may be said of the Law or Light that
God ^ave to Mankind in this second Age of the World* viz. to Noah and his
Posterity, one face or appearance of it points at the Righteousness of the
Law, and to this belongs the lower Ministration of the Spirit, answering to
the lower Waters; the other face or appearance pointing at Christ, and the
Righteousness of Faith through him, and to this belongs the higher
Ministration of the Spirit, answering to the higher Waters. And this inward Law
or Light duly and justly divides the Waters from the Waters, (as the outward
Pirmament does) so as to dispense the higher Influences of the Spirit only to
true Believers in Christ, but the lower Influences to such as sought no further
than to the Righteousness of the Law. But during these Ages of the World, there
were but few, in comparison of the generality of Mankind, that had the true
Faith of Christ; yet in the darkest Age some had it, and in all Ages God has
had his Church, and will have to the end of the World, against which the Gates
o^ Hell shall not prevail. Compare then the Law or Light within men in the 2d
^ge o^ the Wo^ld, to a Book or Roll written without and within, that without,
the Law, that within, the Gospel.

3 dly, As on the Third Day God gat^e^ed the Waters below, and made the dry
Land appear, and then made the Earth bring ^orth Grass, H^rbs and Trees, etc.
So in the third Age or Thousand Years of the World, he divided the Nations,
called Gentiles (which in Scripture are compared to Water) from the twelve
Tribes of Israel, called the Church, and which was only the visible Church that
God then had upon Earth, and made this Church fruitful to bring forth Virtues
of a lower kind and degree, even as Vegetables have a lower degree of Life than
Annimals, while in the mean time the generality of the Nations or Gentiles
remained barren, until the fifth Day, that they were made fruitful in the 5th
Age or Millennium, to bring forth. [But Note, that what is here said of either
the Church or Gentiles, is to be understood of the generality, and not of all
universally; for it must be acknowledged to Gods praise that as there were
excellent Men, and true Believers in Christ, and many great Prophets in the
Church of God in this third Age of the World, so there were some excellent Men
among the Gentiles, who were not included in the visible Church, but had true
Faith in Christ, as Job, etc.

4 thly, As on the 4th Day God (...) up the Sun in the visible Firmament of
Heaven, and the Moon and Stars to give Light unto the World, so in the 4th
Thousand years God sent his dear Son in the Flesh, even the Lord Jesus Christ,
to be that Son of Righteousness, to enlighten the World with more abundance of
divine Light and Virtue, than at any time formerly; and as the outward Sun is
set in the outward Firmament to enlighten and beautify it, so Christ the Sun
of Righteousness is set and given to perfect the Righteousness of the Law, as
he said, I come not to destroy the Law and Prophets, but to fulfill them. And
in this Analogy, the Moon answers to the Church, and the Stars to the Teachers
and Pastors; for as the Moon and Stars borrow their Light from the Sun, so both
the Church and Pastors borrow their Light from Christ, and give and impart
Light to the dark World.

5 thly, As on the fifth Day God made the Waters fruitful to bring forth Fishes
and Fowls, so in the 5th Thousand Years, which began immediately after Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension, God made the Gentiles (who were converted to the
Faith of Christ) fruitful, to bring forth Christian Virtues, answerable to that
degree of Life in Fishes and Fowls; for by the Preaching of the Gospel,
immediately after Christ's Resurr^ction and Ascension, the holy Ghost was given
to the Gentiles, through Faith, and more of the Gentiles believed, than Jews;
and therefore it is only said, The Waters were made fruitful on the 5 th Day,
because (in comparison) few of the Jews believed in Christ in that Age, or yet
do at this Day.

6 thly, As on the 6th Day God made the Earth fruitful to bring forth Beasts
after their kind, and Creeping things after their kind, and Man after his
Image, so in the 6th Thousand Years, now current, God is making the Earth to
bring forth ex^ellent Men, endued with Virtues, answering to a high degree of
Life in Beasts, far above Vegetables, or the Annimal sort of Fishes and Fowls;
and before this sixth Age be ended, God will restore Man, and so create him a
New, so that he shall be nothing short of what Adam was before the Fall, but
shall far exceed him in Gifts both of Mind and Body; for within this Age, viz.
in the latter part of it, the Resurrection of the Saints shall be attained, as
probably about the year of the Worlds Age 5740.

7 thly, As on the 7th Day God finished (...) perfected his Works, and that
Perfection is the Sabbath, so in the 7th Age or Thousand Years, God wi^^ finish
and perfect his Church, and that will be the great Sabbath of the World, which
Perfection includes the Resurrection from the dead, (...) a full Deliverance,
Redemption and Freedom from all the Effects and Consequences of Sin, as Bodily
Sickness, Death, etc.

And here Note, 1 st. That as the Jewish Sabbath began on the Evening of the
sixth Day, about the nineth hour of the Jewish Day, which was about 3 hours
before Sun set, so this great Sabbath of the World will begin in the evening of
the sixth Age or Millennium, and probably about the Year of the World 5740* 2
dly, That each Day had its Evening and Morning* except the 7th, to signify,
That until the great Sabbath come there will be some Mixtures remain of Light
and Darkness, as Paul said, Now we see things darkly, as through a Gl^ss, and
we know in part, and prophecy in part, etc. but when that which is perfect is
come, that in part shall be done away. 3 dly, That we do not find that God saw
the 2d Days work to be good, but it is said of all the rest, God saw that it
was good, and twice of the 3d days Work; and of the 7th Day, God saw that it
was very good, which may mystically signify unto us, the great Degeneration of
Mankind in the 2d Age, that had very few good Men in it, for generally they
were great Sinners ( Noah excepted) for which cause God brought the Blood upon
them; but in the 3d Age there were many good Men and excellent Prophets, as
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, Moses, etc. But because the greatest Perfection
sha^^ be witnessed in the 7th Age, therefore it is said of the 7th Day, God saw
his Works that they were very Good.

Some Positions and Queries concerning Water Baptism and the Outward Supper;
Tending to Love, Peace and Unity among all the sincere Professors of the Lord
Jesus Christ, who hold the Head, and build on the true Foundation, and yet
differ in some lesser Matters.
1 Position.

WAter Baptism and the outward Supper are not of absolute (...) to Salvation,
so as none could be saved, but who have been ^utwardl^ Baptized, and have eat
the outward Supper.

2 Pos. Water Baptism and the outward Supper are not of the nature of the
Everlasting Gospel, nor Essential parts of it, because the Everlasting Gospel
was from the Beginning, and was preached and believed in all ^^es of the World
from Adam, but Water Baptism and the outward Sup^er were not practiced in all
Ages from Adam.

3 Pos. They were instituted to be Signs and Figur^ of Christ, and spiritual
things and blessings, and particularly Water Baptism, as administered to
Believers in Christ, was instituted to be a Sign and Figure of Christ's Blood
and Spirit, that wash all that truly believe in Christ, from their Sins; and
Bread and Wine in the outward Supper were instituted to be Signs and Figures of
Christ's Body that was broken for us for the Remission of sin, together with the
spiritual Blessings, Graces and Gifts, that we receive by him, to nourish us
unto Eternal Life.

4 Pos. These outward Figures and Signs had not (nor have) any Virtue or
Efficacy to Men's spiritual Profit, but as the Spirit of God was o^ is pleased
to work with them and by them.

5 Pos. Both Water Baptism and the outward supper were practiced in ^he
Apostles days, and continued to be practiced in the Church in after Ages.

6 Pos. Water Baptism, as administered by John the Baptist, differed much from
the Water Baptism that was afterward administered to (...) in christ Jesus, and
especially in three particulars, 1 st. Ioh^'s Ba^^ism (...) Badge of their
Repentance, who were baptized by him, and therefore it is called in Scripture,
The Baptism of Repentance; but that other Baptism was a Badge of their
Christian Faith and Profession, whereby was signified, That true Believers in
Christ were dead and buried with him, and risen again with him, and that they
had put on Christ; for it does not appear that all whom John baptized had Faith
in Christ, as he was to suffer Death for the Sins of the World; for the
Apostles, who were baptized with John's Baptism, as Peter, James and John, etc.
had not that Faith either ^hen, or for some time after. 2 ly* John's Baptism
was restricted only to Israel, but that other that followed was extended both
to Jews and Gentiles, that professed Faith in Jesus Christ. 3 dly, Though some
spiritual Virtue and Blessing was given of God to them who received sincerely
John's Baptism, yet none received the holy Ghost by or with John's Baptism* but
some did receive the holy Ghost by or with that other Water Baptism, that was a
Badge of their Christian Faith and Profession, (...) is clear from Acts 19.2, 3

7 Pos. That it never was simplyeth* want of th^se outward Signs that was a sin
unto any, as where they could not be had in the^^ (...) Administration, but the
(...) contempt and neglect of them, where or when duly administered.

8 Pos. All outward Figures that signified Christ to come in the Flesh, and his
Death and Sufferings to come, as he was to be o^fered (...), Sacrifice and
Offering unto God for the sins of Men, are (...) not to be continued, since the
Coming of Christ, such as Ci^cumcision and Sacrifices of Beasts, and all other
Types and Fi^ure^ (...) (yea, and John's Water Baptism) that signified Christ's
Death and Sufferings, as things to come.

9 Pos. But such Signs and Figures as do not signify Christ to come in the
Flesh, and his Death and Sufferings, and sheding of his blood for the Remission
of Sins, as things to come, but are Memorials and Significations that he has
already come, and has dyed and is risen again, together with the spiritual
Gifts and Blessings received by faith in him, which were observed and used in
the Apostles days, after Christ's Resurrection and Ascension, and that signify
real Virtues and Graces really enjoyed and possessed by the faithful now under
the clear Dispensation of the Gospel, as it began to take place after Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension, and giving the holy Ghost, may be and are of
service to be continued in the Church, as 1 st, The religions Observation of
the first Day of the Week, (commonly called by Christians, The Lords Day) is
practiced by the greatest part of Christians in most Professions in
Chr^stendom, as a Memorial and Signification that our Lord Jesus Christ rose
from the Dead on the first Day of the Week; and that day is worthily (...) by
all sincere Christians, for a Day of Thanksgiving, to praise (...) who gave
his (...) to dye for us, who as he dyed for our sins, so he (...) for our
Jus^^^cation. 2 dly, Men's prophesying and praying with the head uncovered, is a
sign and figure now used generally by all sincere Christians, to signify, that
under the clear Dispensation of the Gospel, Christ on: Head is clearly
revealed, and that we all with open f^ce, or the Vail taken off, do behold the
Glory of the Lord, etc. and to distinguish our manner of Worship from that of
the Jews, who used and still use to pray with their Heads covered or veiled. 3
dly, Kneeling and standing in Prayer^ with Hands lifted up, are signs and
figures generally used by all sincere Christians, to signify their inward
Reverence, Humility and Devotion toward God; and the lifting up of their Hands
in Prayer, signifies, the lifting up of their Hearts with earnest Desires unto
God; and the figure or sign was commonly practiced by the faithful in all Ages
^^th under the Law and Gospel. 4 ly, The religious Observation of (...) the
Hand, as a sign of spiritual Union and Fellowship, which (though practiced in
bare Formality by (...)) yet being sincerely practiced, has been known to be
attended w^^h a precious sense of Life, and precious Unity in the Life, felt
with one another.

10 Pos. Though no Figures are essential to the Gospel, or of the Nature of it,
yet some figures and signs may be, and are of service to be used by true
Christians now under the Gospel, as being useful adjuncts and Concomitants or
Consequences (even as under the Law, the Shadows and Figures went before the
Substance, which Shadows and Figures were many; but now under the Gospel they
follow, and they are few, as when the Su^ is low, the Sh^dows are great and
long, but when the the Sun is ^igh, the Shadows are small and short, but there
sti^^ is some Shadow, until the Sun comes to its Vertical ^oint) even as (...)
are no essential parts of a M^ns Body; for the Body is a true entire perfect
^ody without them, yet they are useful to the Body to preserve it clean and
warm, and free from (...), and as a second Wall of a double wa^led Cit^, is no
part of the City, yet may be of service to the ^ity to render it more safe and
secure from the Enemy.

Having l^id down the^fo^e going (...) Positions, I shall in the next place
propose ten Queries to all moderate sincere Christians.

Query 1. Whether the Practice of Water Baptism and the outward Supper, may not
be allowed to all such who (...) declare, they find the inward Life (...) Power
of Christ (...), and feel the inward mo^^on (...) Gods (...) practice them, and
also, that they (...), that they receive by the practice (...) conte^ding
whether there ^e any (...) and ex^res^ com^and of Christ r^corded in Scripture
to (...) them (...) most called Ch^istians judging there is) seeing it is
granted on all (...) that the practice of them did continue in the Church in
the Apostles day* and in after Ages, yea, as long as true Preaching and Prayer
did continue?

The Reasons that seem to some to make this Query more weighty, and of more
force, are these following, 1 st. (...) use some things are continued to be
practiced generally i^ Chris^^^ni^m, ^h^t h^ve (...) exp^ess outward Command
recorded in Scripture to (...) the Practice of the faithful in the Apostles
days, (...) of the Week, and ^etting it apart for Religion (...) though many or
most who religiously observ^ (...) have no express Command in Scripture, but
(...) Church in the Apostles days to warrant (...) ^^gether with the inward
spiritual Advant^g^ (...) it, and the Lord blessing it unto them with (...), is
judged by them sufficient, though they have no (...) Scripture for so d^ing.
And as many judge (...) or appointing Elders in ever^ City wh^re the (...) was
planted, and also the weekly Co^^ections for the (...) Deacons to gather and
distribute them, have no (...) in Scripture, but the Scripture testifies that
they were practiced* and seem to be of Apostolic o^ Ec^le^^^^tick ^nstitution:
An^ (...) judge and say, that the distinction betwixt ^ishops and Presbyters
came (...) even in the Apostles days, as also betwixt Preach^^g Elders and
(...) Elders, or them that had not a public Gift of Preaching, and yet had no
other Sanction or Authority, but the appointment and P^a^tice of the Church in
the Apostles days, who saw a great service therein. 2 ly, Because it must needs
be granted, that Water Baptism ((...) as it ^elonged to John's Ministration,
which was only to the (...) to (...), as preparing the way to Christ, but) as
it became a general ^adge of the Christian Profession (as some understand from
Heb. 10.22. compared with 23.) And the breaking of Bread, commonly called the
Supper, were of more we^ght and fo^ce in the Apostles days than Circumcision,
and the other Rites, (...) and Figures of Moses Law, otherwise they would have
agreed to (...) them, as they did Circumcision. And though Paul said to the
^alatian^* As many of you as are circumcised, Christ profits you nothing, yet
he no where said, As many of you as are baptized, or break Bread in remembrance
of the Lords Death, Christ profits you nothing, therefore (...) appears they
had some greater esteem for them than for Circumcision. 3 dly, Because it is
judged by many, that some sincere Christians in all Ages since Christ's
Resurrection, have practiced these things sincerely and conscientio^sly, and
have found the Lord to accept them (...) their so doing, and to have blessed
the use of them to them; and these Practices have found such a general
R^ception in Christendom, that i^ is not probable that Christendom will be
persuaded to leave off the Pr^^^ice of them; and to persuade them so to do,
seems to lay a stumbling Block generally in their way. And therefore whether
it (...) ^^tter to allow the Practice of them to such who may or do
conscienti^^sly and sincerely practice them, from inward Convi^tion and Motion
of the Spirit of God, and only to reprove and witness against the bare
Formality of them, as well as of other things, and not imposing the Practice of
them upon any, who are not persuaded by any inward conviction of the Spirit of
God so to do. 4 t^ly, Because it is judged by many, that as God by his gracious
Providence has continued in Christendom the Letter of the holy Scriptures, so
likewise the Practice of Water Baptism and the Supper (though not according to
the primitive Institution in all respects, which yet does not make them void,
as the keeping of that great Passover in the time of H^zekiah, when many kept
it not, as it was written, 2 Chro. 30.18) that have been sincerely and
conscientiously perform^d by some faithful Witnesses in all Ages since Christ's
Resurrection, as a concurring Testimon^, together with the Letter of the
Scriptures, to the Doctrine and Faith of Christ crucified and raised again, and
the inestimable spiritual ben^fits and blessings the faithful have by him, and
by giving his Body to be broken, and his Blood to be shed for them, for the
Remission of sins, and which have been a great means and Instrument (by the
singular Province of God) to continue the Doctrine and Faith of Christ
crucified, in the World. And if any say, It might have been continued without
them; it may be answered, And so it might have been continued w^^hout the
Letter of the ^c^ipture. But the Qu^stion is not what might ^e by divine (...)
what has been, and is, or may (...) Working* for as the Letter of the (...)
outward (...) has set (...), and (...) him in words, so these (...) in dece^t
and (...), both which (...) and working of (...) Spirit, have been made (...)
Impression on the ^inds (...) Hearts of the (...) known by the (...) of the
faithful in all Ages, that (...) and signs, a^pro^^d of God, have been made
Instrument^l to (...) their (...) and Love, and other s^i^itual Vi^tu^s. 5
t^ly, Because, acco^^ing (...) some Persons observations, the (...) of (...)
outward (...) ^aving aside the Practice of them has (...) this evil Effect or
event upon many, that together with the d^^use and laying aside of these (...)
of Christ's Death and Sufferi^gs, the Doctrine and Faith of (...) for us, etc.
(...) regarded by many, as necessary (...) Salvation.

Query 2. Whether the Arguments commonly brought against (...) and the Supper,
as, That they are not the Things (...), but (...) Signs and Figures of them,
They are not the Kingdom o^ God, ^^ey are not the Body and Substance, do prove
that they are not to be used now under the Gospel, seeing diverse visible Signs
and Figures are genera^ly used by Christians of all or most Professions in
Christendom, which are no more the Body and Substance, than these other, as
Men's Praying with the Head uncovered, Kneeling and standing in Prayer,
Rel^gio^^ (...) of the First Day of the Week, Religious giving the Hand, yea,
The Letter of the Scripture, and Words of Scripture, are not the Substance and
Body, or Kingdom of God* and yet are of great Use and Service to the faithful,
even the most spiritual; for the best of word^ in Preaching and Prayer, are but
Signs, and not the things themselves; and a^ some have truly said, Words are
but Accidents of Prayer; so th^se S^g^s of Water Baptism and Bread and Wine in
the Supper, though they are not of the Nature of the Gospel, nor essential
thereunto, yet, May they not be allowed to be usef^l Adjuncts or Accidents, as
Garments to the Body, etc?

Qu 3 Whither Paul's saying, He was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach the
Gospel, does prove that none others were s^nt? for might not Paul, who labored
more abundantly than all the other Apostles, have some what singular and
extraordinary in his Ca^l and Commission, by (...) Privilege, which was to
Preach, and not to Baptize, that b^in^ (...) the (...) other (than his) who
either went along with (...) or so (...) him, so that whom he did baptize, he
did either by a divine (...) particular Co^^^ssion; for if Paul had baptized
(...) who were converted by his Ministry, (...) might have greatly hindered his
Preaching?

Q^. 4. Whether Paul's (...), He thanked God that he did Baptize (...) ^orin^h,
does prove (...) Water Baptism was of no more e^^eem or value ^h^n (...),
seei^^ a faithful Preacher might say concerni^g a People to whom ^he Gospel had
been preached (put they had ^ot w^lk^d wor^hy of the Gospel, nor brought for^h
the fruits of it) (...) God he was not (...) to preach to them, but to another
People that (...) wort^y, and broug^t forth the Fruits of it; Does this prove
that the Prea^^^^g of the Gosp^^ was to be laid aside?

Q^. 5. W^e^her it may not be said, there is One Baptism, a^ that th^^e is
(...) though the Map or Figure of it is also (...), even (...) but one
spiritual Baptism with the holy Ghost, the the (...) ^aptism with Water, is
also called Baptism?

Q. 6. Whether it (...) outward things, viz. Baptism and the Supper, were
practis^d in the Apostles days for the sake of the we^k, the^e is not the same
occasion to practice them now? And they that say, They need not Brea^ and Wine
to put them in Remembrance of Christ's Death, by the some A^gument may they not
say, They need not the Letter of the Scripture, nor outward Preaching? And
whether they that say, Water Baptism and the outward Supper are carnal and
visible Things, and there are not now to be used under the Gospel, may not by
the same Argument call the Letter of the Scri^ture c^rnal, and therefore not
now to be us^d? And may they no^ b^ the same Argument reject all outward Form
of Religion and Church Discipline, as some do, abusing and perverting these
w^rd^ of Script^^^, W^ ^ook (...) on t^ing^ that are seen, etc. w^e^eas the
sen^e of that Scri^ture is plain, that true Believers rest not in the (...)
t^ings, but b^ vi^^ble things are helped to look beyond them* to that which is
(...) ^ternal; for even ^he visible Works of God, of (...) the (...) Heave^s
and Earth Sun, Moon and Stars, the Seas and ^ountains of Wate^s, Day and Ni^ht,
Sum^e^ and Winter, give great occasion to every Pious Sou^ to Praise God, and
(...) in their place to excite the fait^^ul (by the divine Assistance) to
Praise him?

Qu. 7. Whether (...) into the (...) of the Lord Jesus ^oth always (...) into
the (...) and with the holy Ghost, seeing (...) not received the ^oly G^ost,
(...) Greek) the Name of the Lord Jesus? and wheth^^ (...) with Water?

Qu. 8. (...) men ba^tize with the holy Ghost, or give the (...) Christ Jesus,
seeing it is no where to be (...) in all the (...) ever any man or men g^ve the
holy Ghost, but only (...) Man Christ (...), it being declar^d in Scripture to
be singular and peculiar to him, Mat. 3.11. John 1.33, 34. Though it is to be
granted, that God and Christ gave the holy Ghost, (and did baptize with the
holy Ghost^ by the Ministry of faithful Men, as sometimes in Preaching, and
sometimes in Prayer, and laying on of Hands?

Qu. 9. What is it to eat the Flesh of Christ and drink his Blood, but by a
sincere and living ^aith, wrought (...) the mighty Power of God that raised
Christ from the Dead, to (...) that Christ gave his Body of Flesh to (...)
b^oker for us, and his Blood to be shed for us on the Tree of the Cross, for
Remission of sin, and that by this Faith we partake of his Life, and feed upon
it, which is our imm^diate and most proper Nourishment?

Qu. 10 Can (...) eat the Flesh of Christ and drink his Blood, who have not the
Fait^ of him, as he gave his Body of Fle^^ to be broken, and his Blood to be
shed for us? And was not the eating the Flesh of the Paschal Lamb a figu^^, to
signify, how all true Believers, by Faith, ^at the Flesh of Christ, a^ he was
slain for u^ on the Tree of the Cross* And did not the sprinkling the Blood of
the Paschal Lamb on the Posts and Lintels of the Door, signify, how all true
Believers, by Faith, apply ^he Merit, Worth and Efficacy of Christ's Blood,
Death and Sufferings unto them for Remission of Sin, that so the Wrath of God,
signifi^d by the Destroying Angel, might not consume them?

FINIS.
A Chronological Account of Several AGES of the WORLD FROM Adam TO Christ.

And from thence continued to the End of the WORLD: Showing, by Scripture
ACCOUNT I. The Time of the Churches going into the Wilderness, her Continuance
there, and Time of Return and (...). II. The Intervals of Time belonging to the
seven Seals, seven Trumpets, and seven Vials, called, The Seven last Plagues,
and the various dreadful Effects that are like to ensue at the pouring forth of
each of the Vials, which is near at hand. III. Concerning the Personal
Antichrist yet to come, and the Time and Manner of his Appearance, and
continuance of his Reign. IV. The Time of the Prophesying, Killing and Rising
again of the Two Witnesses, Rev. 9. V. The Time of the Appearance of the Virgin
Company, of 144000 Rev. 14. VI. The Time of the Angels flying through the midst
of Heaven, having the Everlasting Gospel to Preach. VII. And Lastly, Concerning
the Thousand Years Reign of the Saints with Christ, yet to come, and the Time
of beginning thereof, by way of Essay and Hypothesis.


Printed in the Year 1694.

1 Chronicles (...) And (...) which were Men that had (...) what Israel ought to do;
the H^^ds of (...) their Brethren were at their Commandment.

Luke 12.56. (...) the face of the Skey, and of the Earth, (...) not discern
this Time*

Mat. 10.3. (...) Signs of the Times?

2 Pet. 3. T^^re shall ^ome in the last d^ys Scoffers, walking after their own
Lusts, (...) ^aying, Where is the Promise of his Coming? for since the Fathers
(...) things continue (...) they were from the beginning of the Creation. (...)
and (...) Earth which are now, by the same Word are (...) against the Day of
Judgment, and Perditi^^ (...) beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that
(...) the Lord as a Thousand Years, and a Thousand Years as one Day* The Lord
is not (...) concerning his Promise, (as some count slackness) (...) suffering
to us w^rd, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance: But the Day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the Night, in the
which the Heavens shall pass away with a great (...), and the Elements shall
melt with fervent Heat, the Earth also, and the Works that are ^^erein shall be
burnt up. Ne^ertheless, we according (...) ^romise, (...) ^or New Heavens and a
New Earth, where ^ dwelle^^ Righteousness.

A Scripture Chronology of the several (...) World, and the Prophetical Numbers
of Daniel (...).
GRreat being the Expectation (...) of Jews and Christians, that within a (...)
some (...) will come to pass in the World and (...) ^he holy Scriptures with a
Godly Search and Enquiry concerning (...) Prophecies and Prophetical Visions
concerning the Times of the ^ullfilling thereof, and particularly concernin^
(...) of the Church of Christ, and down fa^^ of Babylon: and h^^ing had some
Twy-light Discoveries of these things, I find ^reedom to communicate them,
though not daring to call every thing here proposed a divine Opening, because
as yet I see into these things, but as a man sees in the Twy-light; and yet I
have great cause to thank God for ^he sight I have received of these and many
o^^er things, and (...) my desire to wait upon the Lord for further clearness
(...) other things not so perfectly yet discovered unto me. (...) ^^ings I have
^eached to the Truth and true ^ence of those (...) that not only the increasing
Light of the Day of God, that is further dawning and springing, but the plain
fullfilling of the Prophecies, as to the Times at hand demonstrate the same
Truth, the Glory belongs to God alone, who is the Revealer of Secrets; but if
in some things, through humane Weakness I have fallen short of the Truth and
true sense of these Prophecies and Prophetical Numbers, (...) that be only
charged on me, as my Mistake; for even the true Servants of God, while they see
but as in the Twy-light, and as he saw whose (...) at first Christ had opened
but in part, to see men walking as Trees, may be under some mistakes, while at
the same time they may have real divine Discoveries and Openings of other
things.

As to the Chronology, because the Scripture gives us the best and most clear
account of the beginning of the World, and of the Number of the succeeding Ag^^
and Periods in Years, from Adam unto the Captivity, and from thence (by way of
Prophecy) until the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and from thence unto the
end of the World, I shall give the best Account I can from Scripture it self,
of the Number of Years from Adam unto the Death and Resurrection of Christ, in
their several Periods.

And here I (...) to understand, That the Chronology does greatly differ,
according as Men fo^low the Grecian Account, that is grounded upon the
Septuagint, or the Hebrew.

The Grecian Church did follow the Septuagint, and so did some of the Latin
Church, as (...), who makes it above 5000 years and wanting but about 5000,^^00
Years from Adam unto the Coming of Christ. But the (...) Bible being but a
Transl^^ion, is not of so unquestioned Authority as the Hebrew, especially as
to the Chronology, or where it differs from the Hebrew in other things.

The Latin Church did (...) the Account of the Hebrew, and so do most
Christians at th^^ day, as being the most probable, yet they greatly differ as
to the just and precise Number of Years, but agreeing almost in the General,
That the Number of Years from Adam unto the Death and Resurrection of Christ*
is near about 4000. few making it more, but m^st of them making it somewhat
less.

I shall divid^ (...) whole ^^me of the World from Adam unto the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, into six Periods, and in every Pe^iod I shall follow
the (...), according to the Hebrew, so far as has been (...) it; and where any
Period is not so clear as might be desired, I shall not be altogether positive,
but leave the Reader to make the best choice he can, without imposing on him.

The First Priod is from Adam unto the Flood of Noah, and by the H^brew Account
is 1656. Years, according to Genesis, cap. 5.

From Adam to Seth 130 Years. From Seth to Enos 105. From Enos to Cainan 90.
From Cainan to Mahalaleel 70. From Mahalaleel to Iared 65. From Iared to Enoch
162. From Enoch to Methusaleh 65. From Methusaleh to Lamech 185. From Lamech to
Noah 182. From Noah to the Flood 600. In all 1656 Years. And the Flood
continued about one year, until the ^ime that Noah came out of the Ark, makes
in all 1657 Years.

The Second Period contains the Number of Years from the Flood unto Abrah^m's
birth, and (as seems most probable unto me) contains 382. Years, thus Genesis
11.

Sem begot Arphaxad after the Flood 2 Year^. From Arphaxad to Sala 35. From
Sala to Heber 30. From Heber to Peleg 34. From Peleg to Reu 30. From Reu to
Sarug 32. From Sarug to Nahor 30. From Nahor to Terah 29. From Terah to Abraham
130. In all 352.

And here I ask libert^ to propose this Question, Whether a Generation be not
wanting betwixt Arphaxad and Sa^^, to wit, that of Cainan, seeing not only the
Septuagint, but Luke in the Geneology of Christ, cap. 3. mentions Cainan,
betwixt Arphaxad and Sala, following therein the Septuagint? If then we allow
(...) Cainan 35 years, and from Cainan to Sala 29 years, (the same as from
Nahor to T^rah) the full sum shall be 381 Years.

If any shall (...) me, Why I (...) 2^ Years to be allowed for Cainan, and
neither more nor less? I Answ. (...) for diverse good Reasons I judge the full
Period of Years from Adam unto Christ's Death and Resurrection is 4000 Years,
wanting only some small matter or fraction; but the said Number cannot be made
(...) unless by allowing to Cainan the said 29 years, that so the 2d Period may
contain 382 years. No^ need it ^^umble or offend any, to suppose the Hebrew
Account to want this one Generation of Cainan, having been los^ at (...) time
or another in the transcribing out of the Hebrew (...) by another part of the
Scripture, as in Luke, cap. ^.

Some may be ready to Object, Why I allege, (...) Terah to Abraham are 130
Years, seeing it is said, Genesis 11.26. and Terah lived 70 Years, and begot
Abraham, Nahor and Haran. To which I Answ. That though Abraham be (...)
mentioned, it does not appear that he was the first born* and that Abraham was
born when Terah was 130 years, is clear from Genesis 12. for when Abraham was 75
years of Age, he departed out of Haran after his Fathers Death, who dyed at the
Age of 205 years (compar^ ^en. 12.4. and cap. 11.32. with Acts 7.4.) If then
from ^05. (the whole Age of Terah) we deduct 7^ years of Abraham's Age when
Terah dyed, the remainder is 130 years, as aforesaid, the just time of Terah's
Age at Abraham's Birth.

The Third Period contains the Number of Years from Abraham's Birth, until
the going forth of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, which are 505 years;
for when Abraham received the Promise, as he went out of Haran, he was of Age
75. And from the giving of that Promise, to the time of the giving of the Law,
as Paul in Gal. 3.17. does expressly affirm, are 4^0 Years. The whole is 505.

The Fourth Period contains the Number of Years from the going forth of the
Children of Israel out of Egypt (in which very Year the Law was given) until
the Foundation of the Temple, the which is expressly affirmed to be 480 Years, 1
King. 6.1. (...) which Period contains the several times of the People of
Israel their abode in the Wilderness 40 Years, and the times of Joshua and the
Judges, until Saul; and from Saul until David, and from David until the the
fourth Year of Solomon's Reign, when (...) Temple began to be built.

The Fifth Period contains 418 Years, thus, viz. From the Foundation of the
Temple, to the (...), after the Foundation of the Temple, Solomon reigned 36
(...), 1 King. 11. cap. 14. Rehoboam reigned 17 years* (...) reigned 3. Asa
reigned 41. cap. 22. Iehosaphat reigned 24* 2 King. 8. Iehoram reigned 8.
Achazia reigned 1. cap. 11. Athaliah reigned 6. cap. 12. Ioas reigned 40. cap.
14. Amazias reigned 29. cap. 15. Azarias reigned 52. Ioatham reigned 16. cap.
16. Achaz reigned 16. cap. 18. Ezekias reigned 29. cap. 21. Manasse reigned 55.
(...) 2. cap. 42. Josias reigned 31. cap. 23. Ioachas reigned 3 (...) r^^gned
11. year. cap. 24. Iehojachim reigned 3 months. (...) 418 Years.

And here Note; that the (...) of the 70 years is to be reckoned from that
under Iejojachim, and not from that under Zedekiah, when the City was smitten,
both because of Jeremiah his Epistle, cap. 29.10. and also because in Ezekiel
cap. 40.1. the 14th year after the City was smitten, is expressly called the
25th year of the Captivity.

Note also, That the aforesaid Period of 418 years is proved to be true out of
the 4th Chapter of Ezekiel; for these 390 days wherein the Prophet was to bear
the Sins of the People, signify 390 Years, from the time that Jeroboam set up
the Golden Calves, until the Destruction of Jerusalem, 10. years after the
Captivity under Iehojachim.

The Sixth Period contains the time from the beginning of the Captivity,
until the Death and Resurrection of Christ, which is 560 years, for the
Captivity continued 70 years. To which adding 70 week^ of years ( viz. 490.)
prophesied by Daniel, wanting only some fraction because the Messiahs was to be
cut off about the middle of the last week that is some time before it expired
(the Hebrew word, Dan. 9. signifies, any part within the Week, as suppose the
last Year of the Week) makes in all 560 Years.

An account of the 49. Years from the end of the Captivity, unto our Savior's
Death* taken out of H. Broughton 's Exposition of Daniel, printed at London
1596* And first, of the Persian Kings Times, from Darius to Alexander King of
Greece,

Darius Hystaspi^, that reigned together with Cyrus, 24 years. Xerxes War 6
years. Artaxerxes reigned ^ years. Ochus reigned 8. Artaxerxes reigned 42.
Ochus reigned 3. Darius reigned 5. In all 130^

2dly, Of the Grecian Kings Times (...) Alexand^^, out of Clem. Alexandrinus.

Alexander reigned 6 year, (...) reigned 40. Ptolemy Philadelphus reigned 37.
Ptolemy (...) reigned 25. Ptolemy Plylopator reigned 17. Ptol. Epiphan^s
rei^ne^ ^4. (About this time Judah removes the Government under the (...).)
Ptolemy Philometor reigned 35 years. Physcon reigned 29. (...) reigned 36.
Auletes reigned 29. Cleopatra reigned 22. The (...) our Lords Death 60 years.

According to which Account, the Number of Years from the end of the Captivity
to Christ's Death (...) Years* 490 To which add the Time of the Capti^^^^ 70 The
Number of Years in the sixth Period, is, 560 All the six Periods (...)
1. From Adam to the flood. 16^^ 2. From the flood to the Birth of Abraham. 381
3. From the Birth of Abraham to their going out of (...). 505 4 From thence to
the foundation of the Temple. 480 5. From thence to the Captivity. ^18 6. From
the Captivity to Christ's Passion and Resurrection. 560 In all 4000 Years.

The particular Periods from Christ's Resurrection to the end of the World,
containing, according to Scripture, 3000 Years, as follows, viz. 1. From
Christ's Resurrection to the Church her going into the Wilderness, 4^^ 2. The
Number of Years she remains in the Wilderness. 1060 3. Babylons Captivity
and Desolation, represented under the figure of Tyrus, see Isa. 23.15. 70 4.
The Personal Antichrist his Reign* ^ and half 5. The Reign of the Saints with
Christ. 1000 6. The little Season, that Satan shall be loose^, 2^0 In all 3000.
To which, add the time from Adam to Christ's Death. 4000. Its Produce is the
World Age or Continuance, 7000.

By the foregoing Account and Table, the whole Age of the World seems to
consist of 7000 Years, whereof 4000 expired betwixt the beginning of the World
and the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, as I shall more plainly make
appear by what follows in this Treatise.

1. The Captivity of the two Tribes and a half seem to fall in the Year of the
World 3440. for un^^ the same adding the 70 Years Captivity, and the 70 Weeks
of Danie^ that is 490, the whole sum is 4000.

2. That great Number mentioned in Daniel, cap. 8.14. of 2300 days, after the
Expiration of which the Sanctuary was to be cleansed, and a most glorious Time
immediately to follow, seems to contain 2300 Years, a day in the (...) style
of Scripture sometimes signifying a Year, and to begin ^n the Year of the World
3440. together with the Captivity, and to end at the Year of the World 5740,
the which is the Year from Christ's Resurrection 1740. and from his birth 1774.

3. Danie^ (...). seems to have the same Period or Time of end (...) other
Number of 2300. according to which the Order of the Numbers stand thus, From
the beginning of the Captivity to Christ's Resurrection. 560 From Christ's
Resurrection to the beginning of Daniel's Number 1334. 406 From thence the
whole Interval of 1334 2300

4. John's Number of 1260 Days, seem to signify so many Years, and to have the
same beginning both with Daniel's Number, cap. 12. of 1290 Days, i. e. Years,
and of 1335, to wit, about the Year from Christ's Resurrection 406. And thus the
Scripture seems to give us both the time when the Woman, i. e. the Church
shall flee into the Wilderness, and how long she shall continue, (which is all
the time of the Beasts Reign, Rev. 13.) and when she shall fully come out, and
the Time of the Beasts Reign, and warring with the Saints fully expire; for
allowing that these three Numbers have one beginning, but several Endings, it
seems to point unto us, how as the Antichristian Darkness came on upon the
World gradually, so it shall gradually expire, and so the Numbers shall stand
thus; So that John's Number of 1260 Days, i. e. Years, as it begins at the
year from Christ, Resurrection 406* so it shall expire about the year 1666. the
which is from Christ's Birth, according to common Account* 1700. 406 1260 1666
5. And Daniels Number of 1290 days, i. e. years* as holding forth a second step
of the Churches Recovery, (...) of Babylon and the Beasts Overthrow, beginning
at 406, ends (...) ^ear 1696. 406 1290 1696 6. And his last Number of 1335
((...) ^334 complete) beginning also at 406, ends at the Year from (...)
Resurrect^on 1740. which is from his Birth 1774, when the Church (...) be
restored to Apostolic Purity and Glory, and to abundant Peace, and Babylon,
and the Beast and false Prophet shall be wholly destroyed. 406 1334 1740

And if we take the Number 1333 1/^ (...) be the whole Time of the Beast, his
gradual beginning and decay, until his final Destruction, the Numbers will
stand thus, The first step or degree of the Beasts Reign at the Year 333 1333
^^^6 The second step or degree of the Beasts (...) ^^^3 ^^33 1696 The third
step or degree of the Beasts Re^gn at the Year 406 1333 Brings to the Time of
the Personal Anti christ. 1740 To which if we add the reign of the Saints with
Christ, 1000 And litt^e Season wherein Satan shall be loosed again. 260 And
time from Adam to Christ. 4000 Makes in all 7000 Years, The Worlds Age. 7000

Now, that the whole Age of the World consists of 7000 Years, is proved, first
generally, secondly, particularly.

First, Generally, Because the seven Days of the Week, and the seven Years,
whereof the last Day and Year were Sabbathical, bear a manifest Analogy to the
seven Ages or Days of the World, according to Psalm. 90.^* and 2 Pet. 3.8. for
as the 7th Day of the Week was a Sabbath, so was the 7th Year a Sabbathical
Year, in which Year there was to be neither Sowing nor Reaping, nor laying up
the Fruits of the Earth, and in which Year the Bond-Servant might be set free
from his Master; all which were Types and Figures of that glorious Sabbath that
is to come in the last Age of the World, that shall be a Time of Rest, Ease,
Refreshment and Liberty, as to the Saints in particular, so to the Creation in
general, the which shall consist of 1000 Years at least; and as the Jewish
Sabbath began in the Evening of the sixth day, before it was expired, so shall
this glorious Sabbath of the World begin in the Evening or latter part of (...)
Thousand Years, as about the Year of the World 5740. by (...) and most probable
Account I can make* to which adding 1000 (...) and the little Season ((...) the
the 1000 years are expired) (...) ^6^. the Interval of a Trump^t, wherein (...)
is to be loosed, etc. ^^^keth up 7000 years. To which also the Tradition of the
House of Elias (as is to be found in the (...) and C^bb^la of the Jew.) does
agree, That the Ages of the World are so divided, that 2000 Years were (...)
the Law, 2000 under the Law, and 2000 ^nde^ the M^ssiah, and the^ the (...)*
which as it proves the Coming of the Messiah in the Flesh, in the close or
ending of the fou^th (...), and setting up his Kingdom in his Church in the
beg^nn^ng ^f the (...), so it does (...) refute the (...) ^ontrary to the
Tradition of their (...), as well as (...), do not believe that the (...) is
come. Concerning which glorious Age and Sabb^^h of ^he Wo^l^, (...) Christian
Writers have made (...) both Poets and ^hilosoph^rs^, and (...) in particular
mentions the 1000 Years; and Enoch, who prophesied of Christ's last Coming,
(...) ^.14. being the 7th Generation from A^an, his Translation signifies the
Translation of the Saints from Earth to Heaven in the 7 th Millennium of the
Worlds Age: Also, the clean Beasts and Fowls that were brought into the Ark by
seven, whereof Noah was to offer a Sacrifice, has the like Signification; for
the Number Seven generally throughout the Scripture is a Mystical Number, and
points at this or some other great Mystery wrapped up therein; and as Enoch was
the 7th from Adam, so Moses was the 7th from Abraham, whose whole Age was 120
Years, that is also a Mystical Number. And with respect to this glorious
Sabbath the 92d Psalm was penned, and used the Jewish Church, as the Jews
confess.

2 dly, Particularly, for the Scriptures of the Old Testament give ^s a
particular Account of the years from Adam to the Captivity, when (...) two
Tribes and a half were led Captive out of the Land of Judah* (...), and from the
Captivity to Christ Passion, Death and Resurrection, consisting of 4000 Years.
And the Scriptures of the New Testament, by Prophecy, give us such particular
Account of Years, that the total Sum must needs make up 3000 years; for the
time of the Beasts Reign, and the Churches Removal into the Wilderness is 1260
prophetical Days, i. e. Years, (...) add the 1000 Years Reign of the Saints
with Christ, and (...) that past betwixt Christ's Ascension and the Church her
(...) into the Wilderness, that did consist of some Hundreds of (...) lastly,
the little Season wherein Satan shall be loosed, after (...) Years are
expired, all which being added together, shall (...) Years, from Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension to the end of the World, as does more particularly
and distinctly appear in the particular Chronology before described in this
Treatise.

That the Messiah, to wit, our Lord Jesus Christ was to come in the Flesh, and
suffer Death in the Flesh for our Sins, and rise again, etc. some time within
the 4 th Millennium, and about (...) ending of it, does appear also both
generally (...) ^articularly from the Collection of the particular (...), from
certain Types, Figur^^ and Analogies foun^ (...) 1 st, From the Analogy betwixt
the 4th Day of the Creation, wherein God set up the Sun to (...) in the
Fi^mament, and the 4 th Millennium, wherein God sent his Son, the Son of
Righ^eousness, to give Light unto the Wo^^d, and raised him from the Dead, and
(...) him to sit down at his right Hand in the Heavens, to enlighten the World
with more plenty of divine Light and Knowledge, than on the former Ages of the
World, though in all Ages of the World he was in some degree the Light of the
World, yet not so plentifully enlightening it, in the foregoing Ages, before
he came in the Flesh, as since.

2 dly, From the Analogy betwixt the time of Isaac's Birth, the Type and Figure
of Christ, compared with Abra^ams Age, when Isaac was born, and the Time of
Christ's Birth, compared with the Worlds Age at that precise time; for as Isaac
was born in Abraham's old Age, when he was in the hundred Year of his Age, so
Christ was born in the Worlds old Age, and by the Analogy of Numbers, and Rule
of Proportion, As Abraham's whole Age, 175 years, is to the Worlds whole Age,
7000. so Abraham's Age when Isaac was born, viz. 100 years current, to 4000 the
current Age of the World when Christ rose from the dead, which was as a Birth
day unto him, according to the Doctrine of the New Testament, that applies
that Prophecy in David to Christ^ Resurrection, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee, Psalm. 2.7. compared with Heb. 1.5. Acts 13.33. Heb. 5.5. for
by that Arithmetical Rule, called, The Rule of Three, as 175 to 7000. so is 100
to 4000.

3 dly, The Circumcision of the (...) Trees in the fourth year after their
planting, according to (...) did Typically and Analogically hold forth, that
Christ in the (...) Millennium, by the Sacrifice of himself on the Tree of the
Cross (...) purge away the Uncircumcision of our sins, according to (...). When
he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the Right Hand of Majesty on
high.

4 thly, By the Analogy of the Times in the Year, when the High Priest did make
the Typical Atonement for the sins of the People, and the time of the World
when Christ our High Priest, did make the true Atonement; for by the best
Computation I can make, the time when the High Priest made the Typical
Atonement in the most holy Place, being the (...) Month, does precisely
answer to the 2084/7th day (...) the Intercalary Month, according to the (...)
reckoning, which happened every third year, which said ^0 year contained 13
Lunar Month, and by the Rule of Proportion, As 365 to 7000. so 2084/7 to 4000.

5 thly, Christ's Parable concerning the Fig Tree, that was 3 years barren, and
when in the 4th year the Gardener interceeded with the Owner of it, to spare it
one Year, promising to dung it, signifies, how Christ in the 4th Millennium
did make Intercession for all Mankind (signified by the barren Fig Tree) that
was gener^lly barren of good Fruits, until that God gave the Grace of the holy
Ghost by Jesus Christ, b^ which many be^ame fruitf^l.

6 thly, Paul said, Christ was come in the Fullness of Time, to which the
Number of 4000 years does best answer, the whole Age of the world being 7000
Years; for the Number 3 is the exact Arithmetical mean or medium betwixt 1 and
4, and betwixt 4 and 7. for as 4 exceeds 1 by 3, so 7 exceeds 4 by 3. And this
will more clearly appear, if we divide the whole Age of the World into 7 equal
parts, by way of Analogy to the Age of a Man, which is said in Psalm. 90. to be
seventy Years, as being not (...) exceeded since the Life of Man has been so
much (...) what it has been in the former Ages. If then we divide the (...)
Age of Man, viz. 70 Years, into 7 equal parts, each part containing 10 Years,
allowing the first 10 Years to his Infancy or Childhood, the second 10 Years to
his Youth, the third 10 years to his Manhood, which was our Savior's Age when
he was baptized, and began his Ministry; the fourth 10 years to his Maturity,
or fullness of Age, when he begins to (...) vigor, it is manifest that 4000
years is the only Number that (...) properly called, The Fullness of Time; for
the first 1000 (...) as it were, the World's Infancy or Childhood, the second
^000 (...) the Worlds Youth-hood, the 3d 1000 years the Worlds Manho^^ (...)
fourth 1000 years the World's Maturity or ripe Age, (...) to old Age; and as a
Father deals with his Child, so (...) with Mankind; In the Child's Infancy he
gives him Instruction only in plain and easy things, such as his Infancy or
Childhood is capable of, and when he transgresses, he does not severely punish
him; and in his Youth-hood he does further instru^t him, and when he does
Transgress, he punishes him somewhat more smartly than in his Infancy; and in
his Manhood he does yet further instruct him, and when he (...) punishes him
yet more than at any Time formerly, (...) manner; but when he is come to his
full Time (...), as in his 40th year, then he does instruct him in the (...)
things, and if he transgress, he does punish him most severely; yet all is but
a Fatherly Chastizement. And this Allegory Paul does several times point at in
his Epistles, and particularly Gal. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. and with a respect to
this, Paul said, The Times of Ignorance God wincked at, but Now (to wit, after
Mankind is come to its mature Age, as it was then) he commands all men every
where to Repent; and not only so, but the Mystery of Faith did then begin to be
preached to all Nations. And here observe the gradual dealings and proceedings
of God toward Men: In the first Thousand Years of the World, Men generally had
no other Law but that implanted in their Nature, commonly called, The Law of
Nature (some particular Persons excepted, who were highly favored of God) In
the second Thousand God superadded to what was formerly given, certain Laws
that he gave to Noah and his Posterity. In the third Thousand he gave yet a
greater super-addition, to wit, the Law of Moses, with many excellent Types and
Figues, pointing at Gospel Mysteries, and especially that great Mystery of
Christ crucified and Faith in him; and he gave some excellent Prophets after
Moses, as Sa^^ell and David. In the ^o^rth Thousand, he sent many Wise Men and
Prophets, and last of all he sent his Son, to give the greatest Light of
Instruction to the World, by which they that received and believed were
blessed, but who rejected, and believed not, were accursed. But that God
punished the Old World with a Deluge of Waters, and Sodom and Gomorrah with
Fire from Heaven in the World's Youth-hood, and before it came to its Maturity,
or full (...) does no ways contradict Paul's Doctrine, in saying, The Times of
(...) God wincked at, because the Sins for which the old World, and (...) and
Gomorrah, were punished, were not ordinary Sins common to (...), but highly
extraordinary, and being against the very Nature (...) kind, so could not be
called Sins o^ Ignorance, therefore (...) so severely punished; and yet, as is
manfest from Christ's Doctrine, The sins of Sodom and Gomorrah were not so
great as the sins of them shall be and are, who do not believe and obey the
Gospel, and consequently the punishment of Unbelievers shall be greater than
that of the Old World, and of Sodom and Gomorah; for theirs was but a temporal
(...), but the Punishment of Unbelievers, is, To be cast into the Lake of Fire*
where the Worm dies not, and the Fire goes not (...) cannot be proved that
the Souls of them that were (...) were burnt with Fire in Sodom, did all
perish, so (...) Fire, which is the second Death.

The sojourning of the People of Israel 40 years, before they come into the
Land that God promised to give unto their Fathers, and unto (...), does bear a
manifest Analogy with the time of the Church her being in the Wilderness; and
as after the expiration of 40 years the People came into the Promised Land over
Iorda^, not under the conduct of Moses, but of (...) so the Church, after the
expiration of the full (...) of her being in the Wilderness, shall come into
the clear Gospel Dispensation, (called frequently in Scripture, The Kingdom of
God) under Christ, of whom Joshua was a Type. And though the time, as de^^ribed
by John in the Revelat^^^, of the Church her abode in the Wilderness, is but
1260 days, as pointing at the first step of her egress, or coming out, yet as
des^ribed ^y Daniel, with respect to the last step (...) full egress, is 1335.
And to me it is evident that he has a respect to that great (...) Number 1333.
which is of 4000 years, which (...) but a (...) fraction from 1335. considering
the beginning of the last y^ar, (...) shall put an (...) to all the Troubles
and Persecutions of the Church, (...) the Thousand Years begin. If then we
divide 1333 by 40. the (...) sh^^l yield 33 * which is another great Mystical
Number, containing the Years of our Saviors Life upon Earth, betwixt his Birth
and Cruc^fixion, which is a sort of Mystical Year* wherein that glorious Sun of
Righteousness did run his Course from the beginning to the end, and ^o such
Mystical Years make up ^333 common years, the time of the Churches (...) ^bode
in her Wilderness Condition, and 50 such Mystical years ((...) mystical Jubilee)
make up 1666. with a fraction. And (...) the expiration of the said Number of
years from Christ's (...) viz. 1666. which is from his ^irth 1700. the true
Church of (...) expect a great Jubilee Year, and time of great Rest, Joy and
(...) all manner of Persecution, and the Jubilee Trumpet shall (...) to wit, the
jo^ful Sound of the Gospel, which shall be h^ard through (...), and continue
without Interruption, until the last Persecution shall begin, under the
Personal Anti-ch^ist, which will be very smart, but short, viz. three years and
a half litteral^y understood.

Note, That as the Church did gradually (...) into the Wilderness, viz. from
the year ^333. after Christ's (...) 406. so she will gradua^^y (...) and come
out (...) year after (...) Resurrection 1666. to the (...) 333 and 1666 the^e
are years 1333, answering to (...) 406 and 1666. there ^re 1260. answeri^g to
John's Revelations; which does reconcile the seeming Diff^rence betwixt Daniel
and John.

The division of Moses Age (which was 120 years) into three equal parts, each
part containing ^0 common years, does to me plainly ^oint at a great Mystery,
viz. the Dispensation of God toward his Church, from Noah's Flood to the
beginning of the Thousand Years, consisting of 4000 years, which 4000 years
d^vided into 3 equal parts, each part shall contain 1333 years, and such equal
Div^sions shall give us great Light and Instruction into the true Chronology of
the Worlds Age, and several Periods of it*

When Moses was 40 years of Age, having killed the Egyptian, he fled to
Midian, and ^welt with Iethro, and kept his Flocks* and married his Daughter;
and except that, little more is said of him until he was other 40, to wit, ^0
years old, at which time he was sent to Pharaoh to bring the Ch^ild^^n ^f
Israel out of Egypt. But the manner of Moses Preservation from being drowned
in the Waters, by his b^ing put by his Moth^^ into a little Ark to swim on the
Waters, does bear a manife^^ Analog^ with Noah's swiming on the Waters in the
Ark* and therefore the first 40 years of Moses life respects the state of the
Church from the Flood of Noah until David, after he smote the King of the
Iebusites, and had peaceable Possession of the Kindom; which Period of Time,
from the Flood until King David, about the tenth Year of his Reign, shall be
found to consist of 1333 years, by the best Chronological Account* The second
40 years of Moses life respects the sta^e of the Church from David's ^^me, when
he became King over all Israel, to the time that the Church (...) called out of
Egyptian Darkness, both of degenerat^ Iudais^ (...) Heathe^ism, by the Ministry
of Christ and his Apostles, and (...) faithful Successors, until the year
after Christ's Resurrection (...) 333. after which time she began to make her
first step into the Wilderness, even as the Children of Israel, after their
great Deliverance by Moses at the 80th year of his Age, did go into the
Wilderness for the space of 40 years, so the Church, after this great
Deliverance by Christ and his Apostles, etc. goes into the Wilderness for the
space of 40 mystical Years, which are 1333 common (...) reach to the year 1666.
The third 40 years of (...) the state of the Church during her abode in the
(...) and the first step of her egress, each Period cons^^ting of 1333 years,
making in all 4000 years from Noah's Flood, to the time that the Church makes
her first step out of the Wilderness, to which if we add the 70 years of the
Churches great Peace, and B^bylons Captivity and Desolation, under the pouring
out of the seven Vials, and 3 years and a half for the Personal Antichrist his
Reign, the whole shall be 5740 from Adam to the beginning of the 1000 Years,
wanting only a small part of ten years, the occasion of which defect may
possibly be, that being a small Number it is not regarded, when the Analogies
of Numbers are roundly considered, or rather possibly, as is probable, the full
Number of Years from Adam to the Flood is r^ally 16^6. although by our common
reckoning we make up but 1656. because possibly the odd Days, Weeks o^ Months
that are not mentioned over and above the Years in the Geneologies from Adam to
Noah, might make up the odd ten years; for Noah being the tenth Generation from
Adam, if in every Generation we allow the years of each to be perfect years,
and not current years, and that each had so many odd days, weeks or months,
over the perfect years, withal allowing one year to the Flood it self, before
the Earth was perfectly dried and made fit for Habitation, it may easily be
conceived, without any streign* that the Number of years from Adam to the
Flood, including the time of the Floo^ it self, might be 1666. But then, to
make the Chronology of the World to agree in all its parts, and be in Harmony
with the whole, and exactly to correspond with the general Analogies, we may
suppose it as possible, that in the (...) Geneologies the years may be reckoned
not perfect and (...), but current, each Geneology wanting some odd days* (...)
months, to make the years perfect years; and thus it may (...), that the ten
years added to the Period from Adam to the (...) them 1666. may be taken away
from the Periods follow^^^ (...) the whole shall remain, as given in the
particular (...) seeing it cannot be rationally supposed that the years of
(...), when they began to have Children born unto them, were precisely perfect
years, but rather either current, or some odd days, weeks or months over and
above, we may therefore give some grains of allowance for such a small Number
of years as ten, that may be either added to or subtracted from certain
Periods, that the general and particular (...) the better agree; by the
General, I mean that which (...) Analogies, and Mystical Numbers, as is above
described (...) by such Analo^ies of Numbers, that Christ behoved to (...)
Death, and rise again, in the close or ending of the fourth Millennium, and not
in the fifth or sixth, as some have imagined, following the Septuagint
Translation, which through some mistake, widely differs from the Hebrew.

Now ^hether the Years from Adam to the Floood be reckoned, as commonly, 1657.
or 1666. it makes no Error in the general Sum, seeing if we add ten years to
the first Period, we substract it from the following Periods. Beside, for a
further evidence that it is very probable the said ten years may be lost in the
odd Days, Weeks or Months not set down in Genesis 5. observe, that the best
Chronologers say, that Dionysius Exigunus, the Roman Abbot, who began the
Chr^stian Epoch, by the ommission of some odd Days, Weeks and Months, in the
Reigns of the Emperors, from Christ's Birth to his time, which was 600 years,
lost diverse years, some say 2, others say 3, Bishop Usher says 4, and another
Author says 5, which makes our vulgar Account fall short of the the true
Account by some years; The like Example we have in our English History,
concerning the Reigns of some of the Kings and Queens of England; for from K.
Henry the 8th to King Charles the 1st, inclusive, it (...) 137 perfect years,
but the odd Months and Days make it three years more, in all 1^0. within the
short space of 140 years; how easy then is it to allow ten years to be lost in
1666? Now if for the probabl^ (...) given, we may allow betwixt Anam and the
Flood (...) of 1666 years, (by the addition of ten years over the (...)) it
will not only well suit to the Analogy of Moses (...) with the years from the
Flood to the Churches coming (...) Wi^derness, but it will wonderfully suit
with the time (...) Resurrection, to the time of the Churches Restoration,
(...) same Number of 1666 years; for as the World was, as it (...) and restored
again by Noah, after 1666 years from Adam, so the World shall be again restored
and renewed by Christ, 1666 year^ after his Resurrection. And as the Flood of
Waters came upon the Ungodly and destroyed them at the year 1666 from Adam, so
it may be expected that though not a Flood of matereal* Waters, yet a Flood of
Judgments will be poured forth upon the (...) ^^penitent at the year 16^6 from
Christ's Resurrection (...) was preserved fate in the Ark, during the time of
the (...) at 1666 from Adam, so the Saints and true Believer^ shall be
preserved ^a^e in Christ, from the deluge of those f^^^ful Judgments that are
to come upon the World of the Ungodly, and shall begin about that very year
1666 from Christ's Resurrection, to be poured forth.

And thus in another Method, differing from the former in some particular
Periods, yet agreeing in the sum Total, I shall in this Table describe the
several Periods of the Worlds Age.

1. From Adam (...) the flood of Noah, 1666 2. From the flood of Noah, to the
tenth year of David's Reign* 1333 3. From thence to the Churches being brought
out of Egyptian darkness, 1333 4. From thence, the time of her Wilderness
state* to her Restoration. 1333 5. From thence the 70 years of Babylons
Desolation, and Churches quiet, 70 6. The time of the Personal Ant^-christ his
Reign, 3 year and half, 3 7. The Reign of the Saints with Christ, 1000 8. The
little season wherein Satan is to be loosed, 260 In all 7000

The equality of these Intervals of Time in the 2d, 3d and 4th Periods (...)
observable, and i^ a strong rational Confirmation, that these (...) are very
Mystical, and have a deep Mystical Signification, beyond what is yet vulgarly
known. And it seems very probable, that the 120 years, mentioned Genesis 6.3.
God saying, Man's days shall be 120 years, wherein his Spirit should strive in
Man, do respect the said 4000 years from the flood (...) Return out of the
Wilderness; for during all that time (...) world was re-peopled, after the
Flood, the Spirit of God has (...) in Man to restore him, but has little
prevailed in the (...) nevertheless, at the Churches Restoration, the Spirit of
God (...) prevail in Men for their Restoration. But whereas (...) that these
120 years, mentioned Genesis 6.3. do only relate to (...) Number of years wherein
the long-suffering of God was to wait upon men, that they might Repent, this
has no g^^^nd from scriptute; as if the Patience and Long-suffering of God
were confined within that short space of Time; for Gods long suff^^ing did
extend to them for some hundreds of years before the deluge came. But if they
refer it to the time when Noah was 5^0 years old, mentioned Genesis 5.32. until
the flood came, that space contains only 100 years; for Noah entr^^ (...)
when he was 600 years old. Others with as little (...) these 120 years of the
common Age of Man's Life (...) generally after the flood, for a long time, lived
much longer, and I find not the Age of any Man but Moses to be 120 years.

And whereas it has been said above in this Treatise, That by the most
probable Computation, the Thousand Years shall begin about the Year of the
World 5740 which is from Christ's Resurrection 1740. Besides the other Reasons
given, and Analogies of Mystical Numbers, this seems mystically to be
contained in the Number of the Years of the clean Beasts, that God commanded
Abraham to offer up for a Sacrifice, when God made the Promise to him, That his
Seed should inhabit all that Land from the River of Egypt, ( viz. Nylus) to
the great River Euphrates; which has not been hitherto accomplished, but the
accomplishment of it is to be referred to the beginning of the Thousand Years.
Now the killing and dividing the Beasts signifies, That Abraham's Posterity
should under go great Sufferings before the Promise should be accomplished, and
that they should be separated asunder and scattered, and yet come together
again, signified by the laying each piece one against another; but that he
divided not the Birds, signifies, That in the Persecution they were to suffer
in Egypt under Pharaoh, they should not be separated asunder; and therefore the
Birds refer to the time that God gave this Vision to Abraham, Genesis 15. until
they came out of Egypt; the years of the Beasts, to wit, the Heifer 3 years
old, the she Goat 3 years old, and the Ram 3 years old, refer to the time from
their coming out of Egypt, until the beginning of the Thousand Years, counting
each year to be a Mystical Year, containing as many years as one common year
contains days; but then it must be Lunar Years, that (...) to the suffering
state, each Lunar year containing 355 days, and by this Calculation ^ years
shall contain 3195, being the time from the People of Israel their going out of
Egypt, unto the beginning of the ^000 Years; and by the particula^
Chronological Account in the (...) S^^et, just so many years are b^twixt the
People of Isreal's going ou^ of Egypt, and the beginning of the 1000 years, as
in the following Table.

From the People of Isreal's going out of Egyp^ to the foundation of the Temple.
480 From the ^oundat^on of the Temple to the Captivity. 417 From the Captivity
to Christ's Resurrection, 559 From Christ's (...) to the Thousand Years* 1739 In
all 3^^5

If then (...) to the former particular (...) the (...) from ^he beginning of
the World, to the time that the People of (...) of Egypt, into one sum, it
shall make 2545 years, to (...) the Years of the former sum, ( viz. 3^95) the
whole (...) from Adam to the Mil^e^ni^m is ^740 Years.

That the Number of Years from Adam to the going forth of the People of Israel
out of Egypt, is 2545, is apparent by the following Table, From Adam to the
flood, 1657 From the flood to the Birth of Abram, 3^3 Abraham^s Age when the
Promise was given, 75 From thence to their coming out of Egypt, 430 In all 2545

Note also, That the 40 Natural hours betwixt Christ's Death and his
Resurrection bears Analogy with 40 Mystical Hours betwixt his Resurrection
and the Year 1666, which is expected to begin the Churches full Return out of
the Wilderness, allowing the Scripture Analogy of a Day consisting of 24 hours,
compared to 1000 Years; for by that Analogy, If 24 Hours give 1000* 40 H. give
1666 and two 3 ds.

Also, the 6 hours Christ did ^ang upon the Cross, with his Arms stretched
forth, do signify* that for (...) Hours ( viz. 2000 years, each hour being 333
years and one 3d) Christ's Sufferings and Death should be preached un^o the
World, in order to men's Salvation, and Christ crucified, and as it were hanging
on the Cross, and bearing all m^ns sins in his Body on the Tree by the
preaching of the Gospel, should be evidently set forth (...), maki^g (...)
Invitation to all, with his hands stretched (...) accept of the Me^cy and Grace
that comes by him, as ^e did so (...) again And then the outward Sabbath, its
immediately (...) those (...) that Ch^i^^ h^^g on the Cross, does s^g^ifie,
(...) World'^ Sabbath (which is the ^000 Years) shall imm^diate^^ (...) those
(...) My^^ical Hours of 2000 years from Christ's Resur^^ction.

Having thus given a Scriptural Chronology of the Age of the World, and s^veral
(...) thereof, with an explanation of some (...) Numbers and (...), which in
time may be further opened, (...) in the next place proceed to explain the
Intervals of the ^ Churches of As^a, to w^om (...) writ in ^is Book of the
(...) which seem plainly to signify 7 several states of the C^^rch in general
from Christ's Resurrection to 2000 years, each Church containing the Interval of
333 years and one 3d, except that Philadelphia and Loadicea seem to fall within
one and the same Interval, Philadelphia representing the true Church, and
Loadicea a seeming or pretendedly reformed Church, embracing the Form of Truth,
but greatly falling short of the Li^e and Power of it. [ Note, That this Number
333 years and a 3d, is a Mystical and Prophetical Number, being one 3d of 1000,
which 1000 years is called, A Watch of the Night, Psalm. 90.4. and therefore 333
and a 3d is one Mystical Hour of that VVatch.]

The First is the Church of Ephesus, her Interval extends from Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension, to the year 333. She is blamed (...) nothing but
for her Decay and Remisness in her first Love, for which she is severely
threatened; and to which the Name Ephesus does well answer, which signifies
either desirable and lovely, as she was at her beginning, or remissive and
decaying, as she was in the latter part of (...) Interval; however she retained
the purity of Doctrine, and earne^^ly withstood the Heresies that began to
arise in that Interval.

The Second is the Church of Smyrna, from 333 after Christ's Resurrection, to
the year 666, who is described by her Poverty, and Tribulation, and Sufferings,
and she is plainly distinguish^^ from the false Church or Whore of Babylon,
that began (...) called, The Synagogue of Satan. And the Name of the (...) her,
to wit, Smyrna, that signifies Myrrh, does (...) to her; for as Myrrh being
bruised, gives a fragrant (...) bitter to the taste, yet very Medicinal, so
was the state of the (...) during this Interval.

The Third is the Church of (...) from the year 666, to 1000. who is commended
for holding (...) yet reproved for suffering them that held the Doctrine of
(...) Nicolaitans, and these were the false Church, that in this Interval (...)
both te^ch and practice Idolatries, as Church History plainly proves (...) the
Name Pergamus does answer to her, for as Pergamus was the chief City in Asia,
and famous for lofty Towers and stately Buildings, so in this Interval the
Church became rich in worldly Riches* and had many great and fair Edifices and
(...) the Monuments whereof remain in many places to this day (...) that
sincere Preachers were few, therefore God (...) did overcome, he would give
them to eat o^ the (...) Manna, (...) gave to the Children of Israel in the
Wilderness outward Manna to eat, when Bread produced by men's Labors was
wanting.

The Fourth is the Church of Thyatira, which is commended for her Works,
Charity, Service, Faith, Patience, and the last to be more than the first,
answering to her Name, that signifies, The Sacrifice of Labor, (as some
render the Etymology of it) but is reproved for her suffering Iezabel, i. e.
many false Teachers, to teach and practice gross Idolatry, as accordingly came
to pass within this Interval, viz. from 1000 to 1333.

The Fifth is the Church of Sardis, whose Interval reaches from the year after
Christ's Resurrection 1333. to the year 1666. which is the Interval now current,
and is a plain description of the Protestant Churches, that began from the days
of John Wick^liff, who flourished about the beginning of this Interval, after
whom followed John Hus and Ierom of Prague, and about one hundred years after
Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, and many other Protestant Teachers, who opposed many
(...) of the false Church, yet were short in diverse things. And though (...) ha^h
a (...) Names in her that are worthy, who have not defiled their (...)* yet the
generality of her Professors are greatly blamed for their Insincerity, having a
Name to live, and yet being dead: And her Name does answer to her, for (...) is
the Name of a Stone of a fleshly color, intimating the Condition of this
Church to be more carnal than spiritual.

The Sixth Church (...) signifies, The love of the Brotherhood, that is yet to
(...) from the year after Christ's Resurrection 1666. which is from (...) 1700.
and extends to the year 2000. and therefore (...) the Thousand Years Reign of
the Saints with Christ (...) This Church does well answer to her Name, for in
her shall be (...) Unity among Brethren, a thing that has not (...) ^^therto
among Professors of Christianity in genera^ (...) began. This Church is grea^ly
commended, (...), and great Promises are given to her, as particularly* That
(...) before (...) an open Door, that no man can sh^t; which signifies (...)
success her Ministers shall have in the preaching of the Gospel, to the real
Conversion of many (...), and Hypocrisy* (...) Christianity; also, it is
promised to her, That the false (...) again the Synagogue of Satan) shall bow
to her, and (...) she is loved of God, and prefered. And this Philadelphia
(...) reach to the glorious Time of the 1000 Years, as is plainly employed (...)
the Promise annexed to the (...) in this Church, which is, That God shall write
upon him that (...), the Name of God, and the Name of the City of God, etc.

The Seventh Church is that of Loadicea, that signifies vulgar Righteousness:
This Church shall be much more in Professi^^ than Possession, having a great
conceit of her Seize, as if she were rich with spiritual Riches, and had
great K^owledge, and light of spiritual things, yet she is poor and blind, etc.
and is lukewarm, and without true Zeal* She is commended in nothing, and
therefore short of all the other. But it is not to be understood that she
succeeds in a distinct Interval after the Philadelphia Church, but she shall
be contempo^^ry with her, professing the same Faith* Doctrine and Christian
Religion with her, but out of the Possession of that Life, Power and Virtue
which the other has; yet she is bi^ (...) and a Promise give^ her on condition
of Repentance, and therefore it is not only (...) but probable, that many shall
he truly converted that did belong to her, and so become real and true Members
of the (...) Church.

The seven Seals seem also to signify certain Intervals of Time from Christ's
Resurrection to 2000 years, and as it seems unto me the six Seals reach from
Christ's Resurrection unto (...) years, divided into six equal parts, and the
seventh Seal, (...) with the sixth. According to which the (...) six Seals are
as follows, viz.

The first Seal reaches from Christ's Resurrection to the year 333. at the
opening of which Seal John (...) a Voice say, Come and see, and he saw a White
Horse, and (...) on him had a Bow, and he went forth conqu^ring and to (...)
Rider is Jesus Christ, and the White Horse, his Ministers, and (...) hand, the
Power of his heavenly Doctrine, which mightily (...) for 3^3 years.

At the opening of the second Seal there (...) a Red Horse, and a great Sword
was given to him, which signifies Soldiers and Captains of Armies, raising
great Wars in the World, to the great effusion of Blood, which happened all
over the Roman Empire, as is clear from History, (...) the year 333 to 666.

At the (...) 3d Seal, (...), a Black Horse appeared, and he that sa^ on him
(...) ^^llances in his hand; Is not griev^us Famine sig^^fied (...) and that
both natural and spiritual? both which came to pass in this Interval, viz. from
666 to 1000.

At the opening of the 4th Seal, behold, a pale Horse, and whose Riders Name
was Death, and H^ll followed him, and Power (...) given to him over the fourth
part o^ the Eart^, to kill with the Sword, with H^nger, and with Death, and
with Beasts of the Earth? Does not this signify a Complex of all the former
evils which happened in the two preceding Intervals, together with an increase
or addition of more; for does not killing with the Sword signify Wars, Hunger,
Famine, and Death, which was the Riders Name, and the Beasts of the Earth foul
unclean earthly Spirits, miserably deceiving People in this Interval with great
Heresies and damnable Doctrines, drowning Souls to Perdition, from the year
1000 to 1333.

In the Interval of the 6th Seal, viz. from 1333 to 1666. John saw under the
Altar the Souls of them which were slain for the Word of God, which signified
great Persecution and killing the true Servants of God, which came to pass in
this Interval. And why did ^hey so earnestly desire, That God would avenge
their Blood on them who at that time were to dwell upon the Earth? was it
because the Justice of God is glorified in taking Vengeance on the Wicked, even
as his Mercy is glorified in showing favor unto the Godly? but was it not also
because they did know that the time (...) God (...) avenge their Blood on them
who were to dwell on the (...) also be joined with the time when they should
rece^ve (...) hundred folds, which Christ promised them at (...), or (...)
again in the 1000 Years?

In the Interval of the 6th (...) viz. from 1666 from Christ's Resurrection, to
2000. does not (...), the Sun's becoming Black, and the Moon as Blood* the
(...) falling unto the Earth, the H^avens departing (...) and Islands being
moved out of their places, a^l (...) and the down fall of all corrupt, unjust
and (...) of a^l ^o^ts every where in the World, and a quite and total (...)
the way and manner of them, that so the Kingdoms of the World may be the
(...), which sh^^l ce^tainl^ be fu^^fi^^ed wit^in this Interval; for (...) that
be fu^^fi^^ed on such Rulers and Magistrates, who (...) God, and have not
sought his Glory, which is (...). Thou shall br^ak t^em (...) a Rod of Iron,
(...) shall (...) like a (...) now therefore, O ye Kings, (...) Judges (...),
and Isa. 23 9. See the Effects of the (...) the sixth Seal, Rev. 6.12 to 17.
And as this shall be a most fearful and calamito^s Time to a^l the Ungodly of
all sorts, both great and small, so it will be a Time of great Joy and Praising
God to all the faithful.

The seventh Seal seems to contain 70 years great Peace to the true Church,
which being interrupted with a Persecution of 3 years and a half, is called
half an hour, after which Persecution, great Peace and Happiness to the very
last, at the sounding of the 7th Trumpet does follow.

The first Trumpet by Computation begins at the year 180. from Christ's
Resurrection (that space of 180 years being a^lowed for the Angels offering up
the much Incense, with the Prayers of the Saints* it being a time of great
fervent Zeal and Devotion, and the Angels preparing to sound) and ^eacheth to
the year 440. And at the first Angels sounding there followed Hail, and Fire
mingled with Blood, the Hail signifying many gross Errors and Heresies that did
afflict the Church within that Interval, as the Heresy of Arius, Manicheus,
Pelagius, Nestorius, Entyches, and many others that arose within that Interval,
The Fire and Blood signifying, the great Persecutions, even to Fire and Blood
that did accompany; for (...) that did bear the outward Name of Christians did
(...) death, about their differing Opinions, which (...) and impose the one
upon the other; and (...) this (...) part of the Trees was burnt up, and all
green Grass was (...) a great Affliction upon both so^ts, of high and low, but
most generally upon the low ^ors, designed by green Grass.

The 2 d Trumpet by (...) from 440 after Christ's Res^^^ection, to the year 700.
(...) a great Mountain b^^ning with Fire was cast into (...) part of the Sea
became Blood, etc* This (...) is (...) both Rome and the Roman Empire; for
within this Interval Rome that had exalted her self as a great Mountain in
Pride, over all other Churches, was destroyed by Fire (in great part) several
times, and the Roman Empire miserably sp^iled (...) afte^ by the Invasion of
the Goths, Hans, Vandals, and other (...) Nations; and because the Roman Empire
is reckoned by Compu^^ (...) to be the third part of the habitable World then
known, therefore (...) Calamity is said to have fallen upon the third part of
the Sea, by the Sea meaning the Nations and People thereunto belonging.

The 3 d Trumpet by Computation reaches from 700 to 960, within which Interval
a great Star fell from Heaven upon the third part of the Rivers and Waters, by
which they were made bitter, so that many men dyed of the Waters, the Name o^
that Star being called Wormwood; by which St^r seems to be understood some
great degeneration of the Teachers and ^lergy of the Church of Rome, and some
great corruption of Doctrine, compared to Waters that made them bitter, so that
many dyed of them; and though before this time the Apostasy had entered, and a
(...) made from the true Life and Spirit of Christianity, and (...)
Superstition^ and Errors had crept in, and the Bishops of Rome ha^ exalt^^
themse^ves over all other Bishops, yet until this Interval b^gun the Church of
Rome did hold an external Profession of the Essentials of Christian Doct^^ne;
but after this Interval began, very great Errors were received and held, and
earnestly pressed, which (...) many Souls, even within the Church of Rome her
self, as Adora^ion of Images, Praying to Saints, and other gross Superstitions.

The 4 th Trumpet by computation reaches from 960. to 1220. within which
Interval the third part of the Sun, Moon and Stars was smitten; whereby is
plainly intimated, the greet obscuration of the worldy Government of the
Emp^^ors, Kings (...) Princes, called Christian, by the greatness of the Popes
of Rome* (...) ^ithin this (...) not before, exalted himself over them (...)
and (...), as the History of the Pope (...) sufficiently (...), that did not a
little obscure and darken (...) and the third (...) mentioned in all these four
Trempets, either to signify, That these Calamities should afflict the Roman^
(...) justly reckoned the third part of the (then) known (...) also the great
decay of Truth and true Doctrine, (...) part of the whole.

The other followi^^ (...) they bring greater Woes, so the Effects of some of
(...) universal.

The 5 th Trumpet reaches from (...) to 1480. within which time the Bottomless
Pit was opened, and a Smoke arose, and out of the Smoke came Locusts, which did
torment Men, but not kill them, nor could they hurt them that had the Seal of
God in their Foreheads: Some by these Locusts understand the Turks, but it
cannot be the Turks that are (...) by these Locusts, because these Locusts have
no Power to (...) torment and sting them, whereas the Turks have killed many
Thousands of men, therefore by the Locusts are most fitly understood, Popish
Schoolmen, and many Orders of Popish Monks and Friars, that sting and torment
men's Consciences with their stingy Doctrines and Heresies, that did arise and
greatly swarm and abound within this Interval; and their Power was to continue
fi^e M^neth^, (...) by an alleg^^^cal Allusion to the usual time of the ab^de
of the Locusts in these Countries, intimating that these mystical Locusts
should abide the 5t twelfth part of 1260 year, i. e. 520 years, viz. the whole
space of two Trumpets, viz. from 1220 to 1740. though within the In^erval of the
6th Trumpet before it be expired, they shall greatly decay and vani^h away.

The 6 th Trumpet by computation, reaches from the year after Christ's
Resurrection 1480 to 1740. which is the present current Interval; and the
Number of Horsemen being Two hundred T^ousand Thousand, m^^t certainly be
understood the Turks great Army of Soldiers, which beg^n about the beginning
of this Interval to invade the most Western parts of the World, west from
Euphrates, and who have al^ead^ destroyed many Thousands prof^ssing
Christianity; and they are said to have ^^en formerly bound by the great River
E^phrates, but are (...) loosed, designed by four Angels, in respect of four
Angelical Presidents, that were over them (as all Nations (...) their (...)
over them) which were preparing for an hour, day, (...) years, i. e. for about
the space of 391 years, backwards from (...) the Turkish History does confirm,
that ever since that time the (...) greatly increased in strength and
greatness. And that it is said, ^he third part of men was to be killed by (...)
by Fire, Smoke and Brimstone, signifies the Guns, which soon after they were
invented, were made use of by the Turks against the Christians, and by which
they have killed (...) thousands; and the third part of Men, signifies, as is
said, the Roman Empire, esteemed by computation the third part of the World, as
then known* and i^ plainly seems to be employed, that this great stroke that
shall (...) upon the professed Christians by the Turks, shall fa^l upon the
Popish Countries and People thereunto belonging, for their great Idolatries and
worshipping Devils, and Idols of Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and
VVood, and other (...) sins, which sincere Protestants are not guilty of; and
therefore it (...), if all sincere Protestants in their several Profes^^^^s be
(...) God in Prayer, they man obtain it of God, that th^^ shall (...), which I
heartily pray and desire of God, that so it (...) his Will, and that as God
would have spared Sodom, and the other Cities for the sake of a few righteous
Persons being there, if they had been found, so that it would please God to
spare the Protestant Countries and People (and unite their hearts in true
Christian Love togeth^^ if there be found among them such righteous Persons,
whose Prayers shall prevail with God in behalf of their Brethren.

The 7 th Trumpet, by computation, begi^^eth at the year after Christ's
Resurrection 1740. and reaches to 2000. in the beginning of which the glorious
Time of the Thousand Years commenceth, and the first Resurrection proper only
to the Saints, but which brings great wrath upon all that remain Ungodly and
Impenitent; and after the 1000 Years are expired, the rest of the dead shall
live again, to wit, the Sinners and Unrighteous, to receive the Sentence of
Damnation, Go ye Cursed, etc. which is the Resurrection of the Unjust, etc. And
here Note, That the Visions of the little Book, which John was commanded to
^at, etc. and the measuring of the Temple and Altar, and them that worship
therein, and the Prophesying, killing and rising of the Witnesses, seeing they
are set down betwixt the 6th Trumpet its beginning to sound, and the beginning
of the 7th Trumpet its sounding, his proves that all these three Visions belong
to the Interval of the sixth Trumpet: and as the 7 Thunde^ ^ay belong to the
time since the sixth Trumpet began, carrying (...) ^eformation to a greater
degree of Perfection, from the days of Luther, who appeared about the beginning
of the 6th Trumpet, viz. 1480 from Christ's Resurrection, which is from his
(...). And in the year 1517. Luther made a great appearance in op^^^ition to
the Popes Indulgences; so the time of the measuring of the ^^mple, Altar and
Worshippers, as also, the Prophesying, Killing and (...)* is yet to come some
time within the sixth (...) the Witnesses belonging to the time under (...) his
Perse^ution; but the measuring the Temple (...) abo^^ the year 1666 from
Christ's Resurrection, which (...) 1700.

Such who have any measure of a divine Opening of these Prophetical Vi^ions,
and are but a little skilled in (...) History and the History of the World in
general, may easily perceive how the events of things, so far as the Prophecies
are as (...) fullfilled, answer to these Intervals. Now Ld. Nieper of
Marcheston^ in his (...) Revelations allows the equal Interval of 250 (...)
allow 260 to each, which as it better answer (...), so is a more Mystical
Number, containing (...) answering to the ordinary time the Child lyet^ in the
Mothers Womb; (...) 2^ 8/9 Days multiplied by 9 Months, produces 260, which
being (...) to 1000, makes 1260 the time of the spiritual or mystical reign of
the spiritual or mystical Antichrist in Years, and the time of the Personal
Antichrist in Days.

Next, I shall make an Essay to show the Intervals of the seven Vial^ of Wrath
that are to be poured out upon Babylon, the Beast and false Prophet, which
shall contain 70 years, and will begin about the year 1666 from Christ's
Resurrection, and will end about the year 1736. but counting from his Birth
will begin about 1700, and end at 1770. The Order and Time of the said Vials,
are as follows, viz.

The first Vial was poured forth upon the Earth, to wit, the Inferior sort of
the false Church, who are like to suffer some great Reproach and Discontent
within this Interval, viz. from the year 1700. to 1710.

The 2 d Angel poured his Vial on the Sea, signifying some great stroke to fall
upon the false Teachers, especially these called the high Clergy, from 1710 to
the year 1720.

The 3 d Vial is poured forth upon (...), signi^^ing the like stroke upon the
Inferior and Vulgar, (...), to 1730.

The 4^^ is po^^ed upon the Sun* (...) Eclipse and Dark^^^^ upon the false
Church (...) ^plendor, from 1^^0 to 17^^.

(...) 5 t^ Via^ is poured upon the Seat of the (...) possibly may (...) from
^^40 to 1750.

(...) is p^ured upon the great River (...); which seems to signi^^e a ^^roke
upon the (...) ^he Country about (...) from 17^0 to 17^0.) the Kings o^ the
Earth (...) A^magid^on.

The 7 th (...) poured (...) the Destruction of (...).

I know some are (...) the Vials ar^ already begun to be ^^red forth, and (...)
four Vials are already expired, but I am not of that (...) rather that the
first shall begin about the year 1700. And within (...) Interval of 70 years,
viz between the (...) from (...) 1770* Babylon the great is like to have her
(...) which is to be effected gradually for (...) God is to call and bring out
of ^er (...) B^bylon is the fal^e Church composed (...) Christians o^ a^l
sorts, (...) especially Persecutors of their (...) for Conscience sake.

Now the Beast that ^ose out o^ the Sea with 7 Heads and 10 Horns, is that
^reat Earthly Power that (...) pe^secuted the Church, The first Head being the
Eg^p^ian Mona^chy, the 2 d the Ass^^rian, the 3 d the Babylonian, the 4 t^ the
Medes and Persian^, the 5 th the Grecian Monarchy, all which were fallen in
John's time, and the sixth, (...) the Roman was th^n standing, and yet stands
in part d^vided into the ten Horns or ten Toes, i. e. ten Provinces or
inferior Monarchies; and that there ha^h been such a Division of the Roman
Monarc^y, History does plainly make appear.

The sixth Heads time being not expired, (which is as yet current) the 7th Head
is yet to appear, and will ^e the most cruel and persecuting of all, but his
time must be short, and seems to be limited to 3 year and a half literally
understood, viz* betwixt 1770 and 1774. and this is the time when Antichrist,
formerly hid under a Profession of C^ristianity, shall be revealed to be an
open (...) both to Name and thing of i^. Now that there is to appear such an
outward and Personal Antichrist, immediately before Christ's coming to
Judgment, not only Christ, and John in the Revelations, and the ^rophet Daniel,
have foretold, but it was the Persuasion generally of these called Ancient
Fathers, both Greek and Latin, and particularly Theodoretus, a Greek, on these
words, And the Judgment shall sit, Dan. 7.26. writes thus concerning the
Personal Antichrist, He ( to wit, Antichrist) shall imitate the Humanity ( or
Manhood) of God, and our Savior; and as the Lord appearing by Man's Nature was
the Author of our Salvation, so also the Devil having taken to him a fit
Instrument of his Wickedness, by the same will show his Power, deceiving idle
men with (...), Prog^di^s, and a false show of Miracles. And Paul teaching,
(...)* w^y God the Creator of all things s^ffereth these things to be, says,
(...) cause, b^ca^se they received not the love o^ the Truth, that they (...)
be ^aved, therefore God shall send them the working o^ Error, that (...)
believe a Lie, that they all may be j^dged, that have ^ot believed (...), b^t
consented to Ini^uity. The same also the Lord said to (...), John 5 I have come
in my Fathers Name, and ye (...) not received me, another shall come in ^is own
Name, and him ye will (...). And a little after he says, It remains
therefore, that we understand the fourth Beast to be the Kingdom of the Romans,
about the end of which ten Kings shall rise at the same time, and last of all
(...) appear the Workman and Master of all Wickedness, doing (...) ^^ffering
these things, which we are taught, after whose Destruction shall appear the
Coming of our God and Savior, and Judgment shall be given concerning all Men,
etc.

The time of the Prophesying and Killing of the two Witnesses (falling within
this Interval of the 6th Trumpet, do seem really to have a litteral
fullfilling, and to belong to the time of the greatest Persecution, under the
seventh Head of the Beast, which continues but for 3 years and a half; and
about the closing of these three years, when they shall have finished their
Testimony, the ^east is to kill them, and their dead Bodies shall lie 3 days
and an half in the City, spiritually called So^om and Egypt, after which they
shall rise again; and (...) as it were immediately follows the first
Resurrection, and the beginning of the 1000 Years, viz. about the year from
Christ's R^su^rection 1740. and from (...) ^irth 1774. (...) from the beginning
of the World 57^0. to which (...) the 10^^ (...), and the little space wherein
Satan is to be loosed, (...). 260 years, makes in all 7000. And though ^t the
end of the 1000 years, as is said, Satan shall be loosed for 260 years, yet
that shall not hinder the (...) glory of that time to continue unto the end of
the World, which seems to be at 7000 years, when all the Saints that were
raised up in the first Resurrection in glorious bodies, like unto the body of
A^^m before the fall, shall be further changed and made like unto the glorious
Body of Christ, and so ascend to Heaven with Christ, and there to remain with
him forever. But who these two (...) at shall be slain and ^aised again) shall
(...) saying they (...) Elias, others, Moses and El^as) I ^eave to a further
opening. (...) it is a Question among many, (...) Christ shall (...) in his
glorified Body about the beginning of the 1000 Years, (...) with the Saints on
Earth, to their great and unspeakable Joy, (...) time? As I doubt nothing of
it, (...) I seek not to impose my (...) any; but the manner of it is not in any
carnal way, as some (...) who do ca^na^^ imagine, that Christ and his Saints
shall sit on (...) Thro^es, eat and drink of the ^^uits of the Earth, and enjoy
other (...), which carnal thoughts are to be rejected.

The (...) Company of 14^000 (who are the first fr^its of the first
^^^^rrection) seem to fal^ some time after the year ^700. when the (...) on
Mount Zion with them (compare Rev. 14. with 2 Esdras 2.^8. to (...))
immediately after which ^he A^gel ^lyeth through (...), having the Everlasting
Gospel to preach, which in purity of Doctrine and Power of a holy Life, shall
have a ^ree course throughout all N^tions of the World of Europe, Asia, A^^ica
and America, for the gathering of Gods Elect every where, which shall have
great Success in the midst of great outward Troubles; which Times are near at
hand.

To Conclude, I earnestly desire the Reader to take Notice, That what is here
alleged, is not all positively asserted by me in this Chronological Treatise,
but rather as an Essay, by way of Hypothesis and Query, in order to stir up the
Gift of God in others, who may come to see further into these Mysteries than I
^o at present; and what Truth does evidently appear in any things herein
delivered, let it be acknowledged to the Spirit of Truth, and let the God of
Truth only be praised (...) it; but what Mistake, Error or Defect of
Understanding, or want (...) due Consideration shall ^e found herei^, let it be
(...) imputed to (...) Weakness, but not to my Willfullness.

FINIS.

