EARTHQUAKES EXPLAINED AND Practically Improved: OCCASIONED By the late
EARTHQUAKE on Sept. 8. 1692. in LONDON, many other parts in England, and beyond
Sea.

By THOMAS DOOLITTLE M. A. The Author also of the Treatise on the Lord's Supper.

Jamaica's Miseries show London's Mercies. Both Compared.

Reprinted at Boston, by Benjamin, Harris, and are to be Sold at his Shop
over against the Old-Meeting-House* 1693.

Imprimatur,

Increase Mather
Boston, New England, August 25. 1693.
An Humble WARNING From the Presaging EARTHQUAKE Sept. 8. 1692.
PLague, Fire and Earthquakes are amongst the most terrible Judgments, whereby
the great and holy God does manifest his sore displeasure against a sinful
People, and his indignation and hatred of their heinous and crying Sins. These
three have befallen London. The first in the GREAT DYING Year, 1665. the second
in the GREAT BURNING Year 1666. and the last in the GREAT TREMBLING present
Year 1692. and the Month of September is remarkable in all these. The Plague
(as I remember) being then at the highest, the great Fire began on September. 2.
and the Earthquake was on the Eighth of the same Month; on which day of the
Month Josephus de bell. Jud. lib. 7. cap. 18. writes thus; Jerusalem was taken
the second year of Vespasian's reign on the eighth day of September, and having
been already five times before surprised, it was finally again destroyed. This
was London's trembling, but (through the great Power Patience and Mercy of God)
not its falling day.

I call Earthquakes presaging for these Reasons; what weight (...) ^s in them I
leave to others to judge.

1. Because Christ did assert them to be such: Luke ^^ 5. to 12. as some spoke
of the Temple, how it (...) ^dorned with goodly stones, and gifts he said, As
(...) things, which ye behold, the days will come in, which there shall not he
left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down; they asked, Master,
When shall these things be? and what sign will there be when these things shall
come to pass. Then Christ gave (amongst others) Earthquakes as foregoing Signs
of such future Ruins.

2. Because God has made use of Earthquakes (in former times) as forerunners
of great Calamities to come. So according to Christ's prediction, this Sign
went before the destruction of the Temple. Josephus de bell Jud. Lib. 7. c. 12.
Amongst the foregoing Signs of the destruction of Jerusalem, mentions an
Earthquake: Upon the Feast Day of Pentecost, at night the Priests going into
the inner Temple to offer their wonted Sacrifice, at first they f^lt the place
to move and tremble, and afterward they heard a voice, which said, Let us
depart hence.

3. Because Christ says (as of other Judgments mentioned, so) of Earthquakes,
They are the beginning of Sorrows. If the beginning, must not others follow?
when an Earthquake is the beginning (let not Scorners deride) who knows what
shall be the middle and the ending of those Calamities, that might take their
beginning from an Earthquake, Matthew. 24.7, 8.

4 Because I Judge (if I err, let my mistaking thoughts be excused) that this
late Earthquake was from the immediate hand of God. And yet if it were not, God
can use the alleged Natural Causes of Earthquakes, to give warning and to
fore-run other following Miseries. But my reason is this, because it did extend
it self so far, to so many places in England, and beyond the Sea (according to
the Account I have heard) not only on the same day, but at the same time of the
day as in (...), at London, Sheerness, Sandwich, Deal, Maidstone, Portsmouth,
and many other places beyond Sea, at Paris, Mar^^, ^^^sailles, and in Normandy,
at Brussels, Cologne, and in most places of Holland and F^anders* Now if it did
arise from Natural Causes, there must be exceeding great quantities of such
Vapors in the Caves and hollow Places of the Earth, which striving all along
so far to get out, it seems very strange they did no where with great fury
break out, to the opening of the Earth, and overthrow of some places, where the
Earth was weakest. If the quantity was less, taking its beginning in some
certain place, and proceeding forward, seeking to get out, but could not, it
would have required more time to travail under ground to such distant Towns and
Cities, as in England, and so many places beyond Sea, and so could not have
been at all, at the same time.

And if it were from the immediate hand of God was it not for some great end
that God should do so great a work, which he does more rarely do? Is not the
meaning of it, a warning to all that have been shaken by it, to forsake sin,
and turn to God by repentance and reformation, or else look for some other
stroke? while we go on in a course of great provoking sins, when God has
shaken his Rod over us, might we not fear it will some time fall upon us? But
whether it were natural or Supernatural, should not all places that trembled by
it, without Reformation, fear and tremble at the Judgments that may follow it?
when God begins to punish, and Men not so much as begin to repent and turn,
does not he threaten he will go on to punish seven times more, and seven to
that? and many times seven more to that? when a People still walk contrary to
him? Lev. 26.15. to 40.

Some would fain deny the matter of Fact, but that there are so many Witnesses
to testify against them. Some that own it, make light of it, and do not at all
think it portends any more Calamity to (...), even as the blinded Jews slighted
all the Indications of more approaching Miseries, as Josephus writes concerning
them; saying, These miserable people were easily persuaded to believe Impostors
who did belly God, yet would they not believe, nor give any ear or regard unto
certain Tokens and Signs (of which an Earthquake was one) of the ruin of their
City: but as it were blinded, neither having Eyes nor Souls, they counterfeited
themselves, not to see what God foreshewed them.

Though I dare not undertake to tell what particular Judgments (which are at
God's ordering) this Earthquake does presage, without Reformation; yet may I
not ask this sober Question, If this late Earthquake have not good effect upon
our Hearts and Lives, may we not fear lest those Judgments may follow, which we
read in Scripture God has sent upon a People for those very sins which do
reign amongst us? as for profaning his Sabbaths, for excessive Pride in
Apparel, for profane Swearing, fullness of Bread, Drunkenness, Whoredoms,
Robberies, Murders, Contempt of Religion, Hatred of Godliness, Divisions, and
hating one another, neglect of Religious Education of Children, banishing the
Worship of God from our Families, Blaspheming and Cursing, instead of Calling
upon God, Lukewarmness, and a general decay of the Power of Godliness, Leaving
of our first Love, loss of the Spirit of Prayer, yea (a^ sinful Age) deriding
of it, Apostacies, and Worldliness, Selfishness, and abuse of God's holy
Ordinances, prostituting them to Carnal Designs and Interests; and many more.
That Scripture (amongst many, Isai. 3) may serve for a Glass to see our sins,
and what Judgments we may fear, if they be continued in; which are sins that
bring Kingdoms and Cities to ruin. Verse 8. For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah
is fallen, because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord, to
provoke the Eyes of his Glory.

O that Magistrates ( Nehemiah like) would not any longer suffer the Sabbath to
be openly profaned, or things exposed to Sale in Londons (late trembling)
Streets, or Parts adjacent, nor in the Land. Where is Nehemiah's Courage? Neh.
13.15. In those days saw I in Judah, some treading Wine-presses on the Sabbath,
and bringing in Sheaves, and lading Asses: as also Wine, Grapes, Figs, [and now
in our Street-trade, Apples, Pears, Plumbs, etc.] on the Sabbath Day: and I
testified against them in the day wherein they sold Victuals. Verse 17. Then I
contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing is this
that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day? Did not your Fathers thus, and did not
our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this City? yet ye bring more
wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath. Verse 21. The^^ I testified against
them, and said unto them, if ye do so again, I will lay hands on you. From that
time forth came they no more on the Sabbath day. O that after such shakings of
the City, such things might be done no more on the Sabbath day.

O that no more Oaths on other days might be heard in our Streets, and no more
reesings by Drunkenness there, least the Earth reel under us again. O that
there might be praying to, and praising of God in all Houses that did shake,
and yet do stand. That all Men, of all Ranks, Callings, Qualities, Rich and
Poor, Magistrates and Subjects, Ministers and People, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, might search the^^ hearts and ways, see what is amiss,
and mend it, what is good, and continue and grow therein, that God may be no
more provoked, dishonored, incensed against us, but glorified, pleased, feared
by us, that his Anger might be turned away from us, that instead of Judgments
and Wrath, his Blessings and Mercies might be poured upon us. Amen.

EARTHQUAKES EXPLAINED and IMPROVED.
ACTS XVI.26. And suddenly there was a great Earthquake, so that the
Foundations of the Prison were shaken: and immediately all the Doors were
opened, and every ones B^nds were loosed.


WOnderful, many wonderful things are done by the Lord of Heaven and Earth, by
reason whereof his People may in triumph, and the Wicked in terror say, Who is
like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the gods (or mighty ones) who is like thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, working wonders? sometimes in the
Heavens over our heads; sometimes on and within the Earth under our feet: In
both the works of God have been so amazing, that night fill the Inhabitants of
Heaven above, and of the Earth beneath, with admiration of his Divine
Perfections.

First; God's works have been astonishing in the Heavens over our Heads, which
because they are too high, and above our present Theme and Subject, I shall but
briefly mention three of them, and those concerning the Sun, the great
inlightner of this Earth whereof we are to speak

1. The standing stil^ of the Sun. It is the Doctrine of Aquinas, That Motion
does as much belong to the Nature of Heaven, as Immobility and Rest to the
Nature of the Earth. The Earth is a settled, fixed Body, and therefore it is an
act of mighty power in God to shake it, and to make it move: but the Sun is as
a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, rejoicing as a strong man to run a
race, according to the ordinary Law of Creation and Government in continual
motion, and therefore a mighty work of God alone to cause its motion to cease
and stand still. The making of the Sun to stop, which naturally cannot but
move, and causing the Earth to shake and move, which naturally cannot but stand
still, is an effect of equal power. The command of God does change the Earths
station into motion, and the Suns motion into standing still. Josh 10 12. Then
spoke Joshua to the Lord in the day when the Lord delivered up the Amorites
before the Children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun stand
thou still upon Gibson, and thou Moon in the valley of Ajelon. Verse 13. And
the Sun stood still, and the Moon stayed until the People had avenged
themselves upon their Enemies. So the Sun stood still in the midst of Heaven,
and hasted not to go down about a whole day. Verse 14. And there was no day
like that, before it or after, that the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man,
for the Lord fought for Israel. Where is observable, (1.) That Joshua spoke
first to the Lord, and then to the Sun; for it was not Joshua's voice, but
God's power that put a check to the motion of the Sun. (2.) God hearkened to
the voice of Joshua, praying that the Sun might stop its motion (3.) Then the
Sun hearkened to the voice of Joshua, so that by God'^ commanding voice, in
answer to Joshua's praying voice, the Sun stood still: If all the men on Earth
with one concurrent voice, should say to it, Sun stand thou still, it would
still go forwards in its (...): so that its cessation from motion demon^^rated
the mighty amazing work of God.

2. The (...) motion of the Sun, or its going backward, is no less a wonderful
work of God in the Heavens than its standing still. The motion of the Sun is
naturally progressive, or going forward, and if it should make more haste by
many degrees in its diurnal Motion, it must be by power Divine, and not Humane;
yet in the apprehension of men, it is a greater thing, that it should go
backward, and would c^use more their observation of its motion, and amiration
of God's power, Isai. 38.7. This shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord, that
the Lord will do this that he has spoken. Verse 8. Behold I will bring again
the shadow of the degrees which is gone down in the Sun-dial of Ahaz ten
degrees backward. So the Sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone
down. Hezekiah prayed, God promised, gives him a sign for his assurance of the
performance, and the sign (though miraculous) was effected, and the mercy asked,
was bestowed: God caused the Sun to go backwards to confirm the faith of his
People in his Promise that his work for their deliverance should go forwards.

3. That at and from high noonday till three in the afternoon, the Sun should
give no light, but darkness should be at the usual time of its inlightening the
Earth, was the hand and power of God. Ordinary Eclipses are not miraculous, yet
there was (...) that was not according to the course of Nature. When the Lord
of G^ory, the Sun of Rig^t^^usness was crucified, the Sun hid i^s face, and
(...) Heavens put themselves into mourning at his (...) Matthew. 27 45. Now from
the sixth hour there was da^kn^ss ^ver all the Land until the ninth hour. This
was ^n extraordinary and miraculous work of God, upon the Reasons usually
alleged (1) Because it was the full of the Moon, which caused a gr^^^
Philosopher to cry out, Either the God of Nature suffers, or the Frame of
Nature dissolves. (2.) Because (^s some affirm) it was universa, over all the
(...). Or (3.) according to others, because it was only over the Land of Judea,
all other parts of the World having the benefit, and enjoying the light of the
Sun at that time, which some judge to be the more strange: that as when Israel
had light in G^sh^n, the Egyptians were under the Plague of Darkne^^ so at the
crucifying of Christ, Israel which dwelt in Judea should be under darkness,
when the World besides enjoyed light. Thus it is manifest that God does great
things in Heaven above; the Sun moves or stands still, goes backwards or
forwards, shines not, to give light at noon day, and for some hours together
unto the Earth at all, or else makes light in one part, when it does not in
another; and all this at the pleasure of the great God. But our present Task is
to observe one extraordinary work of God, on and in the Earth.

Secondly; There is the amazing, mighty work of God on and within the Earth,
which in the Text that suits the occasion, is God's shaking of, and making it
to tremble before him, and under men that dwell upon it

This moving of the Earth is far different from that constant motion that some
Philosophers ascribe unto it, for amongst the several Systems of the World
which Astronomers have invented, three are more famous, the one by Ptolomy, the
other by Copernicus, and the third by Tycho B^ache. Copernicus following the
Pythagoreans, assert the motion of the E^rth, and the Sun to be in the Center
of the World, without motion, that the Earth has two moti^ns, one Diurna,
which is performed about its own Axis, in the space of 24 hours, and from this
motion do arise our days and nights: the other Annua, whereby it is carried
about the Sun, from the West toward the East, according to the Succession and
Signs of the Zodiac. Where then is the Miracle of the Suns standing still in
Joshua's days, if it stand still in all Ages* Where is the Wonder of the Earths
moving, if it whirl about every 24 hours with so swift a motion? Why cannot all
people discern this constant motion of the Earth, that do perceive its shaking
for a few minutes, and are so much affrighted at it? Are the Pillars of the
Earth turned into Wheels? Some have denied all motion, some affirm too much*
(...) as when all motion was denied, a Philosopher to prove it, rose up and
walked; so when the constant daily, and yearly motion of the earth is asserted,
we may know by our Senses that it stands still, but these great men of Reason
(so they are) will give you this presently for an Axiom, Sensibus non est
Fidendum, you must not believe, nor trust your Senses which yet for the sake of
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, I should not readily receive; but knowing
that my Senses cannot err about their proper object, when it is presented at a
due distance, through a right medium, and the Organ of Sense rightly disposed,
a Papist shall not persuade me that the Bread after Consecration is not Bread,
and that the Wine is not Wine, nor a Copernican that the Earth does naturally
move, when in the one by my Seses I discern it to be Bread and Wine, and not
real Flesh and Blood carnally and corporally taken, and in the other that the
Earth stands fast and still, so much confidence I will put in my Senses: a
drunken man that by excess has disturbed his head might conceit the Earth
turns round, and the room where he is does move, when the motion and turning is
in his Brains, and when he heth slept (...) sober will perceive, what he
thought before did move, does then stand still. But it being not proper, nor
profitable to this Assembly to debate Philosophical Controversies, I shall
dism^ss them, and retain you with what may be more ad^antageous for your Souls,
in treating of this amazing work of God which you so lately did discern, and
then were so much astonished at, and affected with, Viz God's shaking of the
Earth under your Feet, and the Houses over your Heads; that you did think the
one did Reel under you, and the other would (...) upon you. History is full,
and your own Experience can give an instance of Gods terrible shaking of the
Earth. Some you have hea^d of, and ONE you have Seen and Felt. Ea^thquakes!
Some you have read, and have been told you, by which Multitudes have been
destroyed. Earthquakes? One you have seen, and yet are preserved Earthquakes?
In some Gods wrath has been poured out, and in some his Grace and Mercy has
been shown forth: Some ending in Destruction, and some in the Conversion of
Sinners. Oh! that this you have seen with your own eyes might have the like
Issue and Effect on you, as that you hear of from this Text had upon the
Jaylour, stir you up with Fear and Trembling, to go to your Ministers, as he
did to the Apostles, saying, asking, Sirs what must I do to be Saved? That by
the word of God following this mighty work of God, you may be awakened to
repent and believe on the Lord Jesus, you and your House, as the Jaylour did,
and all his House.

In the Text you may observe these parts:

1. The motion or shaking of the Earth. That which according to the course of
Nature stands still, the extraordinary workings of Providence causes it to
quake. The Earth has neither life, nor sense, nor motion in it, yet God can
make it tremble. As the Sun that moves, stands still at God's command; so the
Earth, that stands still, shall move at his voice and pleasure: and yet men
that have life, and sense, and reason, disobey God's commands, and will not
hearken to his voice, and do not tremble at the thoughts of his Sovereign Power
and Infinite Majesty. When sinners upon Earth do not, the Earth under them may
quake and tremble: and if while the Earth trembles under them, they then
tremble upon it, yet when the Earth stands still again, they run as fast to sin
again, as they did before: when the Earth cease its trembling, they do not
cease their sinful motions. The great Pillar that supports the Earth, whereby
it stands so fast, is the power of God, for he has hanged it upon nothing,
Job. 26.7. Yet sinners supported by the Earth, without fear and trembling, do
abuse the mercy and the patience of God, though if he should remove that
suppor^^n^ Pillar, the Earth would sink under them: but though he keeps it up,
yet sometimes he makes it shake, The^e was an Earthquake.

2. The greatness of this motion, or shaking of the (...): There was a great
Earthquake. Its greatness is set forth by the greatness of its Effects and
Consequents here named: As,

1. The shaking of the foundations of the Prison. The strongest Prisons, the
most impregnable Places, Houses built with brick and stone, being founded on
Earth; when the one does quake, the foundations of the other must needs be
shaken: In exceeding strong winds and tempestuous storms, the (...) Houses may
shake, and rock to and fro, w^ile the f^undations stand firm and are not moved;
but when the Earth it self, on which they stand, does quake, their foundations
are also shaken, and though your Houses then stood, yet they stood trembling,
foundations, floors and roofs together.

2. The immediate opening of the doors. Prison-doors, especially upon a strict
charge given to the Jaylour for the securing of his Prisoners, are fast locked,
securely barred and chained; but God did cause such an Earthquake, that no
Locks could hold them fast, no Bars nor Chains could keep them shut; for at the
arising of th^s Earthquake, immediately all the Prison-doors were opened.

3. The loosing of the Prisoners bands Pau^ and Silas were fast bound, shut up
in a Prison within the Prison, and their feet made fast in the Stocks, so that
they could not stand in the Prison, nor the ground still under them, but the
Earthquake came, and was their Jail-delivery. These be the great Effects of
this great Earthquake.

3. In the words are expressed the sudednness of this Earthquake. An Earthquake
is sometimes quickly caused, and quickly ceased at the pleasure and the will of
God. God spoke, and the Earth stood fast, Psalm. 33.9. God speaks, and he makes
it quake and tremble.

Though it is one Doctrine chiefly intended to suit the occasion, yet I will
briefly mention more, which will not be altogether alien from our design.

Doct. I.
God many times works wonders for the deliverance of his suffering Saints in
order to the propogating of the Gospel. Paul and Silas were imprisoned because
they did preach, God by an Earthquake sets open the Prison doors that they may
go forth and preach. They by preaching did make the Devil's Kingdom shake; they
for preaching were fast bound in Prison; the Earth where they did lie so bound,
falls a quaking under them, as being weary of the burden of imprisoned
Preachers, and does not rest, and could not stand still under them, till they
were enlarged and set at liberty.

God can do wonders for the deliverance of his suffering Servants, of this his
Almighty Power is a proof. God can deliver his Sufferers after such a manner,
as none other can, their Enemies being Eyewitnesses and Confessors of it. Dan.
3.28. Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego, who has sent his Angel and delivered his Servants that
trusted in him, and changed the King's word, and yielded th^^ bodies, that they
might not serve, nor worship any God, except their own God. Verse 29 Therefore
I make a decree, that every People, Nation and Language, which speaks any thing
amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, shall be cut in
pieces, and their H^uses shall be made a dunghill, because there is no other God
that can deliver after this sort. Darius put the question to Daniel in the Den;
Dan. 6.20. When he came to the Den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto
Daniel, and the King spoke and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the Living
God, is thy God whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee from the
Li^ns? Verse 22. My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the Lions mouths,
that they have not hurt me. Then follows Darius his Deeree, Verse 26. I make a
Decree, that in every Dominion of my Kingdom, men tremble, and fear before the
God of Daniel: his reason why; for he is the Living God, and steadfast for ever,
and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his Dominion shall be
even to the end. Verse 27. He delivers and rescueth, and he works signs and
wonders in Heaven and in Earth, who has de^ivered Daniel from the power of the
Lions. Behold God can, for he has wonderfully delivered his Servants Three in
a Fiery Furnace, that the fire did not consume nor since them. One in the Lions
Den, that they did not devour nor hurt him. Paul and Silas out of Prison, that
they should be no longer confined there. He can make the Fire not burn
combustible matter. He can withold Lions from what they might else have made
their prey. And he can cause the foundations of a Prison by an Earthquake to be
so shaken, that the doors might open, and his Servants may come forth. He can,
he has, and when he pleases, he still will, he has delivered, he does
deliver, and we may trust to him according to the Promises that he has made
that he will still deliver us, 2 Cor. 1.10.

Doct. II. God needs not length of time to do the most great and wonderful
works. Suddenly there was an Earthquake. God can make it move in an instant.
When its said God in six days made this World, it is not to be understood that
he did need so many days to make it in. It was his pleasure to take that time
to finish, beautify and complete it. When God did create the Earth, and
brought it out of nothing, it was suddenly done. He did but speak, Let it be,
and it suddenly started out of Nothing into Being. Creation is an instantaneous
action: he that did so suddenly and so easily make it, can as suddenly and as
easily make it quake and tremble. How suddenly did God make the Earth to quake
where London stood, and after his shaking of it, through his great mercy yet
does stand!

When men thought of no such thing, not the Student in his Study, nor the
Trader in his Shop, nor the Workman at his Work, nor the Drunkard at his Cups,
when none of these had any apprehension of it. Suddenly, The Student thought
his Desk, on which he was writing, to be removing from him, and when he drew it
toward him, it went back again, several times: the Trader suddenly sees a
motion in his Wares, and the Workman the moving of his Tools without hands, and
the Drunkard thought indeed the Earth did stagger more than he: many suddenly
felt their Chairs to move under them, and could not presently discern the
reason, but thought some living Creature had been under their Seats, and did
disturb them. Suddenly, many, most that I have spoken with, discerned a
dizziness in their Heads, and in the instant thought the motion was there, not
imagining any thing of the shaking of the Earth: Suddenly they feared the
falling of their Houses; but at first particular persons thought there was some
defect and fault in their own particular dwellings, till they did perceive the
motion was general, and heard others say of their Houses as they found in their
own: and all this was suddenly done. In a minute, in a moment God can cause an
unexpected Earthquake. Men must have time to do the smallest, but God needs
none to do the greatest work.

Doct. III. Though an Earthquake suddenly come, and quickly go, and nothing is
destroyed thereby, yet it is and might be truly called a great Earthquake. It
is expressly said in this Text this Earthquake suddenly came, we do not read it
lasted long nor that the Prisonhouse, or Persons in it, were destroyed or hurt
thereby, yet we read it was a great Earthquake. When many Houses are swallowed
up, and many Men, Women and Chi^dren (as this present year in Jamaica) are
destroyed, and go down alive into the Bowels of the Earth by opening of its
mouth to eat them up as one morsel, then men will call it a great Earthquake.

But such a one as was so lately in London, etc. when not one House was
destroyed, nor one Person consumed, seems to be so small (especially now it is
over and all safe) as is not worth their observation, for People now are as
little concerned already, as if it had not been, or they had quite forgotten
that it was. But let such slighters of this late work of God, and regardless of
this Judgment, and calling of it a little thing, tell me

1. Was not this a great Earthquake that made so many Houses as be in such a
great City as this to move, and shake, and tremble, though they stood? Is it not
a great thing to make one of London streets, and the Houses therein so to
quake? much more two or ten, much more all and every one?

2. Was it not a great Earthquake that did reach so far, and extended it self
so many miles at the same instant of the same day to so many places in England
as we have heard.

3. Yet more, was it not a great Earthquake when it did enlarge it self, and
reached at the same time to so many Cities and Towns beyond the Sea? Did God
stretch out his Arm so far, and do you look upon i^ as a little thing, not
worthy your observation, remembering, or spiritual improvement of it.

4. If it were so small in your Eyes, what made so many to be in so great a
consternation? why did so many run out of their Houses, and such as were
sitting at their Tables hasten from their Dinners with their Napkins in their
hands, to get into the Streets? why did so many run from their Shops? what was
the reason, of the sudden, common cry, by so many, one by one, My House is
falling, and my House is falling, and my Children above will he destroyed and
yet I dare not go up to fetch them down.

5. How little do you know, if this late Earthquake had been a little more, and
had lasted a little longer, a few minutes more, how near you and your Houses
would have been to a subversion and total overthrow? or how near the trembling
Earth might have been to opening, and swallowed up both you and your
Habitations? For all that you know by this Earthquake you were upon the brink
of ruin, a little more might have brought you down; and yet will you slight
this work of God, as if it were a small, a very little thing?

6. As small a thing as you look upon it to be, could any man, or men, could
all the mighty men upon the Earth have caused such a shaking and trembling of
the Earth, and all upon it. Could all the mighty Captains, Lord Generals, Kings
and Emperors, with all their Armies, have had such an Influence upon the
Earth? if they can batter down strong Walls, and Cities, and Castles with their
Instruments of War, yet can any of them, or all of them, cause such a shaking
of the Earth as that so lately was? do you ascribe great things to Men, and
call them so, that are far inferior to this, and yet let this pass by with so
little observation, as if it were a work so small?

7. If men could shake the Earth and your Houses as God did, could they so
securely have preserved them from falling, and you from hurt, as God did? Was
the shaking of your Houses, so much, and the preserving of them so shaken, so
great a mercy, in it self, and yet so little in your eyes? and last no longer
with a due impression in your memories?

8. While you look upon this Earthquake to be so small a thing, can you look
upon your preservation to be so great a mercy as indeed it is? whilst you
lessen the work of God, the more you lessen the mercy of God? did God shake you
and your Houses, and not overturn you and them, and was not this great mercy?
Oh! take heed you do not diminish this work of God's power in your own
apprehensions, and consequently your danger then, and God's mercy now in your
safety. Lord! Let London so tr^mble at thy Judgment with which thou have so
lately visited it, and account it great, that their Repentance, Reformation may
be great. And though it suddenly came, and quickly ceased, and did no hurt, let
not London account that work a small work, but thy mercy great mercy,
vouchsafed in so great a Judgment, least in thy wrath yet greater, thou cause
the foundations of it to shake and tremble more, and do that execution that
should make all confess and say (that deny this) that suddenly there was a
great Earthquake.

Doct. IV. Though some Earthquakes have their natural causes, yet some do arise
from the immediate hand and power of God without such causes. Paul and Silas
were imprisoned; in Prison they prayed, and sang Praises, in testimony that God
heard their Prayers, he immediately causes this Earthquake under the Prison.
Judicious Expositors assert this Earthquake to be miraculous.

In treating on this I shall take this course:

I. Distinguish between Earthquakes figurative and metaphorical, and such as
are proper and real: because both are spoken of in Scripture, this will be
requisite to remove the ambiguity of the word, that one might not be taken for
the other.

II. Distinguish real Earthquakes into natural and supernatural. In respect of
the Earth it self, whose nature is to rest and stand still, such shakings and
motions may be termed contra natural, but in respect of the second Causes in
Nature, which sometimes produce such tremblings and quakings in the Earth are
called natural, in contradistinction from those which are caused (...) God's
immediate hand, without such causes, and are therefore supernatural.

III. I shall give a short account what natural Philosophers assert to be the
Causes of such Earthquakes.

IV. Point at the several sorts or kinds of such Earthquakes, and give the
names which Philosophers and Divines from them, do call them by.

V. Enumerate several antecedent Signs of Natural Earthquakes, as by
observation Men have taken notice of to go before such ensuing Earthquakes, and
so leave it to others to judge what to think of this lat^ Earthquake in London,
in other parts of England, and in foreign parts beyond the Sea, and all at the
same time, whether they will call it a Natural, or Su^pernatural Earthquake.

VI. Set down some Effects and Consequents of Earthquakes, whether produced by
such Natural Causes, or by the immediate Hand and Power of God.

VII. Lay down some Conclusions by way of further Explication of this mighty
work of the great God, in causing the Earth thus to shake; or show its Adjuncts.

VIII. Show what use we should make of such tremendous works of God, whereby
many might have been buried under ground; when this amazing work of God is
already by many buried in Oblivion, and by few improved according to the
greatness of the danger Men were in, or the greatness of the mercy in escaping
that danger.

Quest. I. What are metaphorical Earthquakes?

Earthquakes and movings of the Earth are often taken meataphorically for great
Commotions, alterations made in States, Kingdoms and Church, and for sore and
heavy Punishments inflicted by God upon wicked and disobedient People. Isaiah
29.6. Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts with Thunder and with
Earthquake, and with great Noise, with Storm and Tempest, and the Flame of
devouring Fire. A figurative description of God's Anger against Jerusalem; as
much as to say, Heaven and Earth shall concur to their ruin; yet some
Expositors say, this Earthquake may be understood according to the letter. Isa.
24.18. The foundations of the earth do shake. earth do shake. Verse 19. The
earth ^s utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved, the earth is moved
exceedingly. Verse 20. The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and
shall be removed like a cottage and the transgression thereof shall be heavy
upon it, and it (...) ^all and not rise again. By the earth here so often
mentioned, understand the Inhabitants of the Earth, and properly those
Countries wherein the (...) and their Confederates lived in those times: by the
shaking, m^ving, removing, breaking down, and ^^ssolvi^g the Earth, understand
the Punishments that should befall that People from an angry and provoked God.
So another expounds it, he does not mean the natural Earth, on which Men tread,
but the People that tread upon the Earth; or that Com^onwealth wherein People
are united and governed; th^se shall be shaken, broken down, and reel to and
(...), and be removed like a Cottage; as if he had said, You thought your State
and Kingdom was (...) like a strong Castle, but I will take it down, as a Man
takes down a little Cottage: the strongest Kingdoms and Bulwarks of the Earth
are but as (...) Cottages, when God takes them in hand Rev. 11.9. And the
T^mpl^ of God was opened in Heaven, and there was seen in his Temple the Ark of
his Testament, and there were Lightnings, and Voices, and Thundrings, and an
Earthquake, and great Hail. Some say, by the opening of the Temple in Heaven,
is most conveniently understood the glorification of the Church it self in
Heaven, and by the Ark of his Covenant, the glorious beholding of Christ our
Mediator in it, whereof the Ark was a Type; and by Thundrings, Lightnings and
Earthquake, the tokens of his Wrath against Unbelievers. Some say, the Visi^n
of the opened Temple in Heaven signifies the freedom given to the Gospel
against Persecutors and Corrupters, and the pure preaching and profession of
it, and God's owning his Covenant and Church by his eminent blessing, and the
Lightnings and Earthquake signify the great Manifestation of Christ's Power
for his Church, in the commotions and changes in the World, and his judgments
on their Enemies. Rev. 16.8. And there were voices, and thundrings and
Lightnings, and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were
upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great. Some understand this
literally, and that it is past, others that it is yet to come before
Antichrist's fall, and say others, before the Day of Judgment; some say, hereby
were represented the great Commotions which went to those great changes and
subversion of the Heathen Powers. By these and such like Texts of Scripture it
appears there are metaphorical Earthquakes to be distinguished from litteral.

Quest. II. Which are Earthquakes supernatural?

Real and proper Earthquakes are either such as are caused by God's immediate
Hand and Power, or such as have their Causes in Nature; though these also are
appointed, and ordered and ruled by the powerful Providence of God, and do not
come (as some call it) by chance. Though the finger of God be in those Natural
Causes, yet such as have been without them must be wholly and only from God.
And I shall gather these out of the Scripture, that we might learn to fear and
tremble before this great God that needs no winds and vapors, nor any kind of
Creature to make the Earth to shake and tremble. And they are these.

1. The shaking of the earth at God's giving of the Law to Moses, and the
Children of Israel. Exodus 19. 18. And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke,
because the Lord descended on it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the
smoke of a furnace, and the whole Mount quaked greatly. That this quaking of
the Mount was literal, and not figurative, Rivet argues, because it is joined
with the smoke, and Thunders and Lightnings properly to be understood, and
says, That the causes of the moving of the Earth, and of the Mountain as it
were leaping at the presence of God, are not to be searched for in Nature, nor
should we dispute concerning Phisical Reasons of this Commotion, for when all
things done here are miraculous, the glory of God is obscured, if where he acts
immediately and in an extraordinary manner, and that altogether Divine, we
enquire after second Causes, which in such events are none. Psa. 68.7. O God!
when thou wentest forth before thy people; when thou did march through the
wilderness Selah. Verse 8. The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the
presence of God; even Sinai it self was moved at the presence of God, the God
of Israel.

2. Such a Supernatural Commotion of the Earth is also recorded Psalm. 114. per
tot. When Israel went out of Egypt, etc. The Sea saw it and fled; Jordan was
driven back. The Mountains skipped like Rams, and the little Hills like Lambs.
The Sea was divided. Jordan driven back, the Mountains and Hills moved. All
literally understood. This asserted. Then the Question is propounded, What
ailed thee, O thou Sea, that thou fle^^est; what ailed thee, O Jordan, that
thou wast driven back? What ailed them? did not God by his mighty power,
without natural causes that could not have such influx upon the Sea and Jordan
to divide them, produce those Miracles in the Sea and Jordan? When again it is
asked, (...) by ye, ye Mountains that ye skipped like (...), and what ailed ye,
ye little Hills, that ye skipped like Lambs; must not the same answer be
returned, as to the former. The same immediate power of God that caused the
division of the Waters, caused also the motion of the Hills and Mountains.

3. A most tremendous miraculous moving of the Earth, caused by the Lord
himself, is largely described, Numb. 16 23. to 35. Verse 30. If the Lord make a
new thing, and the earth open her mouth and swallow them up, with all that
appertain to them, and they go down quick into the pit, then shall ye
understand that these men have provoked the Lord. Verse 31. And it came to pass
as he had made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground clave
asunder, that was under them. Verse 32. And the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that appertained unto
Korah, and all their goods. Verse 33 They, and all that appertained to them,
went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them, and they perished
from among the Congregation. Josephus relating Moses his Prayer at large,
records, that whilst he spoke those words, and intermixed them with tears, the
Earth instantly trembled, and shaking began to move (after such a manner, as
when by the violence of the wind a great billow of the Sea floateth and
waltereth) hereat were all the People amazed: but after that, a horrible and
shattering noise was made about their Tents, the Earth opened and swallowed up
both them, and all that which they esteemed dear, which was after a manner so
exterminate, as nothing remained of theirs to be beheld whereupon in a moment
the Earth closed again, and the vast gaping was fast shut, so as there appeared
not any sign of that which had happened. Thus perished they all, leaving behind
them an example of Gods Power and Judgments. And this accident was the more
miserable, in that there were none, no not of their Kinsfolks, or Allies, that
had compassion of them; so that all the People whatsoever, forgetting those
things that were past, did allow God's justice with jo^ful Acclamations,
esteeming them unworthy to be bemoaned, but to be held a^ the Plague and the
Perverters of the People. After this he relates how Two hundred and fifty were
con^u^'d by fire, when suddenly so great a fire shone, as neither the like was
kindled by man's hand, nor usually breaks from the bowel^ of the burning
Earth, neither was ever qui^kned in the Woods, split and born down in the
Summer time by a Southern brize, but such a one was seemed to be kindled in
Heaven most brig^^ome and flaming, by the force and power whereof those Two
hundred and fifty (together with Core) were so consumed, that there scarce
appeared any relics of their Cark^sses Only Aaron remained untouched, to the
end it might appear that this fire came from Heaven. Surely this might serve
for strong conviction, that as God sent down fire by his own immediate power,
that was not of any Creatures kindling, to the consuming of one Company; so he
did as immediately shake and op^n the Earth without second Phisical Causes for
the swallowing up of the other. Let Atheists either contradict this History and
Matter of Fact, or believe the Existence of a Deity. And all Men fear and
tremble to provoke such a just and terrible God.

4* That there are Earthquakes sometimes caused by the immediate hand of God,
without those natural causes asserted by Philosophers, will be clearly
evidenced by the miraculous Victory over the Host of the Philistines obtained
by two Men, Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, related 1 Samuel 14 where to
demonstrate the immediate workings of God might be considered.

1 The great Number of the Host of the Philistines.

2. The Situation of their Camp or Garrison.

Josephus describing it says, that the Philistines had pitched their Tents on
an high Pointed Rock, which extended it self in length with three Angles, as it
were a Wall, and Fortification against the Incursion of their Enemies. The
place was Fortified by Nature, so that no Man might ascend or assail them, but
with disadvantage. And Sacred Scripture Records that Jonathan, climbed up upon
his hands and his feet, and his Armor Bearer after him.

3 That there were but these two Men that invaded their Camp who at first slew
twenty of them within (as it were) about half an Acre of Land, which filled
their whole Army with Terror and Amazedness, who (as Josephus writes) casting
away their Weapons fled Amain: some other being ignorant, which were either
their Friends or Foes, invaded one another as their Enemies: for imagining with
themselves that only two Hebrews durst never ascend and enter their Camp, they
addressed themselves to their mutual Murder, and Slaughter; so that some of
them were slain, others fled to escape the Sword, and fell Headlong down the
Rocks

4. In this exploit of Jonathan, God did Miraculously work, in causing the
Tremb^ings that fell out that Day, expressed, 1 Samuel* 14 15 And there was
trembling in the Host, in the Field, and among all the people: the Garrison and
the spoielers they also trembled, and the Earth quaked, so it was a very great
trembling. Who made all the Philistines Host to tremble, the Garrison and the
Spoilers to tremble, only Jonathan and his Armor Bearer? Was it not God? And
was it not the same power of God, made the other Tremble? To put all out of
Doubt, the last words declare the true cause of all; and it was a trembling of
God. The reason why the Translators rendered it a very great trembling, is,
because the word [God] is added oftentimes to set forth the greatness of
things; as great Mountains, great Cedars, great Fire, in Hebrew are said to be
Mountains of God, Cedars of God, a Fire of God. But this is but the Secundary
and Consequent signification of it; the Name of God added to any thing
primarily and properly denotes that God is the efficient Cause of that to which
it is added. It was a Trembling of God: that is a Trembling sent and caused by
God: the Trembling of the Philistines, and the Trembling of the Earth, was from
God: So the Heathens were wont to attribute that fear and trembling, of which
no cause did appear nor could be alleged, to some of their Gods, as to Pan,
whence came the Expression of a Panick fear This trembling then of the
Phi^istines, and this trembling and quaking of the Earth, was from the
immediate Hand and Mighty Power of God.

5. From the immediate hand of God was that terrible Earthquake that was in the
days of Vzziah: Amos 1.1. The words of Amoz. -- Which he saw concerning Israel,
in the days of Uzziah King of Judah- two years before the Earthquake: This is
mentioned, Zach. 14. -- The Earthquake in the days of Uzziah King of Judah.
Concerning this amazing Providence, I will t^ke in these particulars.

1 That Vzziah greatly provoked God by going into the Temple to burn Incense
upon the Altar of Incense.

2. Azariah the Priest, and Fourscore P^iests of the Lord (valiant men) went in
after him, and withstood him, saying, It appertains not (...) Uzziah to burn
Incense to the Lord, but to the P^iests the Sons of Aaron, that are Consecrated
to Burn Incense.

3. Vzziah's wrath against the Priests was greatly incensed

4. While he showed his anger against the Priests, the Lord by his own
immediate Hand smote him with a Leprosy, which appeared in his Forehead.

5. Upon this, all the Priests thrust him out from thence, yea he himself
hasted also to go out, because the Lord had smitten him, 2 Chronicles: 26.16. to 22.

6. At the same time, and for the same sin was this Earthquake in the days of
Vzziah. And why may not the Earthquake be attributed to the immediate hand of
God, as well as his being smitten with Leprosy. That this was at the same time,
and for the same sin, and so from the same hand of God, Josephus in his History
does make plain: who writes thus; Uzziah upon a certain solemn F^^st-day,
whe^ein all the People were assembled together, he attired himself in the High
Priests Vestm^nts, and ent^ed into the Temple to offer Sacrifice unto God upon
the Golden Altar, which notwithstanding the H^gh Priest Azariah (accompanied
with foursc^re Priests) (...) him the same, telling him that it was not lawful
for him to ^acrifice, in that it was only allowed in those that were of the
Posterity of the High Priest Aaron. Whilst after this manner Azariah
expostulated with him, commanding him to go out of the Temple, and not to
contradict the Ordinances of God; the King waxed wr^t^, and threatened to take
his Life from him, except he kept himself quiet Whereupon there fell a great
trembling and Earthquake, and the Temple cl^ft on twain, and a great Light of
the Sun entered thereunto, and refl^cted on the King's face in such a manner,
that all his Body was instantly covered with a Lepr^sie, and before the City
(in a place called Eroge) the half of a Mountain (that stood to the Eastward)
brake and fell, and rolled and removed for the space of four Stadia ( or
Furlongs toward the Oriental Mountain, where it rested: so that the public
ways were shut up, and choked, and the King's Gardens of Pleasure were wholly
ruinated and disfigured. When the Priests beheld the King's face covered with a
Leprosy, they told him what inconvenience had happened to him, and enjoined
him to depart out of the Town, according to the custom of Men that were
polluted. Whereupon, he (wholly confused at so grievous an aocident, and having
no more audacity to speak) obeyed the Commandment that was given him, enduring
a pitiful and Lamentable punishment, for being elate and proud, more than
became humanity; and for that he committed such impiety against God. Finally,
he died through grief and discontent and was only buried in his Garden. This
Earthquake came, and this Leprosy was inflicted on him for that sin; the
Leprosy is expressly said in Scripture to be from the Lord; why not also then
the Earthquake?

By the way, let this be observed by many, that in our days, without the way
appointed by God in his Word, in the pride of their hearts and self-(...),
thrust themselves into Sacred Functions, which is not lawful but for those that
are competently qualified and duly called thereunto, lest for such doings by so
many, God make the Earth to quake under us, as he did for one Vzziah's
intrusion in former time.

6 Amongst the many Miracles at the Death of Christ, an Earthquake must be
acknowledged to be one: all of which were Testimonies, not only of his
Innocence, but also Demonstrations of his Deity. The whole Creation groaned and
travailed in pain, when the God of Nature, (he that was God as well as Man)
though not as God, died a sha^eful, cursed and painful Death; Mir^^^^s wrought in
Heaven above, in Earth beneath; all Creatures sympathizing with a suffering
Christ, except M^n, for whom alone he suffered The Sun was darkened, the Vail
of the Temple was rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, and the Earth did
quake, and the Rocks rent, and the Graves were opened, and many Bodies of the
Saints which slept, arose, and appeared to many, Matthew. 27.45, 51, 52, 53.
Writers do affirm, that by this Ea^thquake not only Golgotha, but the whole
City, and the Regions near were terribly shaken; and some, that in Bithinia,
and in Thracia certain Towns were overthrown; but how far this Earthquake was
extended is uncertain.

7. Amongst these also must be ranked the Earthquake at the Resurrection of
Christ, Mat. 28.2. And behold there was a great Earthquake.

8. Of the sam^ Nature was that, when the Apostles were prayi^^, the place
where they were, was shaken, God giv^^g them by this Miracle a Testimony that
their prayers were heard: Acts 4.3^ And when they had prayed, the place was
shaken where they were assembled together. The Greek word properly signifies to
be moved up and down, like the Waves of the Sea, and is the same with that in
the present Text, where it is said, by the Earthquake the foundations of the
Prison were shaken, which also I reckon to be of the number of those that are
caused miraculously and immediately by God, without those Causes that others
are produced by.

What may be inferred and learned from this?

1. May we not learn the certain Existence of the Deity? Does it not follow
there is, and must be a God? if we may argue from an Effect to a Cause, when
there is an Effect that cannot be ascribed to any Creature, must there not be a
Being that is, and is no Creature? when things are done, that are not done by
finite power, must there not be an infinite power by which they are done, when
there is no medium betwixt that which is finite and that which is infinite?
when any thing is effected, of which no natural Cause can be named, must there
not be a supernatural? Aaron at God's command stretched out his hand with his
Rod, and smote the Dust of the Earth, and it became Lice in Man and in Beast;
all the Dust of the Land became Lice throughout all the Land of Egypt; and when
the Magicians did so with their Enchantments to bring forth Lice, and could
not, did not these Magicians themselves say unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of
God? Exodus 8.17, 18, 19. When there h^ve been such shakings of the Earth that
no man can say, and prove what he says, that they were done by second Causes,
may not, should not every Man say, in these was the finger of God? If you
cannot gather there is a God by what he does by Creatures, cannot you conclude
there is a God, when things are done, and not by Creatures?

2. May we not learn that this God never wants means to effect whatsoever he
pleases? What he does not do by second Causes he can do without them. Jonathan
(when one of these Earthquak^s happened) said, It is all one with G^d to save
by few or by many, 1 Samuel 14 6 So it is all one with God to save by few or
none; and to do what he will with means, or without them When he does not shake
the Earth by Causes got into its Bowels, he can and has shaken it without. And
indeed, if he brought it out of nothing without any instrumental Cause (for in
Creation there can be none) why may he not, when it is created, shake it till
it tremble without any instrumental Cause? cannot he that does the greater, do
the less?

3 Has God made the Earth to tremble without any Natural Causes, Have not
ungodly Men cause to tremble even then, when there is no visible sign, to
reason from any Natural Causes to fear Punishment and Ruin? Is not their own
sin as Meritorious of God 's Wrath and Sore Displeasure, with the thoughts of
God 's infinite Hatred of it, and His Almighty Power to Punish it, a Sufficient
Reason Why they should Fear, and Quake, and Tremble? What though they live in
such places and parts of the World that are not so subject to Earthquakes as
some other places are? Will they say.

First, we live upon that part of the Earth, that is only Stony and Hard, and
not Soft and Tender, and therefore no fear the Earth should Quake and Tremble
under us?

Se^o^dly, will they say, we dwell upon that part of the E^^th that has not
those Caverns, in which those Vapors that cause Earthquakes are generated,
therefore we are in no danger? In the Body of Man winds and Vapors are sooner
and more stirred in the Bowels and Hollow Parts thereof, than in the Hands, and
Bones, and more Close, and Solid Members: In Subterraneous Caverns, rather then
in Close and Rocky places, is the Matter of an Earthquake; but such is not that
part of the World where we Inhabit.

Thirdly, Will they say we live in Inland Towns, and not near the Sea, which
are most Obnoxious to such Earthquakes, because such places are more easily
filled with Vapors, therefore we need not fear?

Fourthly will they say let them live in fear of Earthquakes where the Earth
they live upon is both Soft and full of Caverns, and near the Sea, as most
liable thereunto Let them quake when the earth does not, because it is so
subject in such places to such trembling fits; but our Habitation is on Hard
and Rocky Solid places, without such Concavities, and in the midst of the Land
remote from Sea, and therefore secure enough. Did you speak true before you
were aware, when you said, you were s^cure? Yes; and let me add, your Heart
seems to be more Stony, and Rocky and Hard than the place you boast you live
upon* as if Gods Arm were so short, he could not reach you, as if your Mountain
stood so strong it could not be moved nor shaken. Do not you know, have you not
heard, that God has shaken the Earth by his own immediate hand, without those
Natural Causes, and Rocks, and Mountains too. Fear to sin, cease to provoke the
Eyes of his Glory, for he can reach you with his own hand, and shake your
strongest Tower by his own might, without other Causes.

Quest. III. What are the several sorts, or kinds of Earthquakes?

There is difference amongst Philosophers in this point, some making 2 sorts or
kinds of Earthquakes, as Possidonius, and Aristotle; some 3 as Seneea and
Zan^hy. Some 7 which last they thus distinguish and nominate.

1. An Earthquake of one sort is an Inclining Earthquake, when the Earth is
caused to incline one way, like a S^ip upon the Sea, or a Boat on the River,
when laden more on one side than the other, leans that way only, where the
greater weight and burden is laid. In this kind of Earthquake a Room seems to
be lifted up on one side, and sink down or depressed on the other.

2 An Earthquake lifting the Earth upright: and by and by letting it down
again, after the manner of boiling Water, or waxing not.

3 Earthquakes causing Chasmes, Chinks, Openings of the Earth, making Breaches
in it, and tearing one part from another.

4 Earthquakes, which by force break their way, and the Vapors and Winds do
get out of the Bowels of the Earth, which sometimes take with them Rocks, or
Mud, or open a flowing Fountain where there was none before.

5 Earthquakes which by one motion, enforcing or thrusting, overthrow, overturn
whatsoever they come upon, or rush against.

6 Earthquakes which make the Earth, and things upon it to incline sometimes
one way, and then another back again, without falling any way, like the Rocking
of a Cradle, by Reciprocal Motion or turning.

7 Earthquakes that come with a great noise, Roaring, and Bellowing, much like
to the Lowing of Kine, and sometimes like the Vehement and fierce crying of
Women.

Others Reduce these to two.

1. There is a Tremblg Earthquake, when the Earth Qivers like a Man in a Fit of
an Ague. This kind of Earthquake is when the Vapor in the Earth is not much.

2 There is an Earthquake which moves the Earth upwards, and then again
downwards. This by Aristotle's followers is called Pulsus, like the beating of a
man's Pulse.

Quest. 4* What are the usual Antecedent Signs of an approaching Earthquake
given by Natural Philosophers, which by Observation and Experience they commend
unto us.

If these signs of Natural Earthquakes be sure and constant, let it be
considered, and let us reflect whether any such were taken notice of by any,
before the late Earthquake in London, and in other places; if not, either these
Philosophers are under a mistake, or we must judge, that this late shaking of
this City was from the more Immediate Hand of God; if there were, yet the
presence and working of second and natural causes, ought not to take us off
from the minding and observing of the first, for as much as all the second are
at the Command, Ordering, and Disposal of the first, and are all under the
Government of the Providence of God, and the Voice and Call of the first and
second Causes is, that we should Repent and turn from those sins that have
provoked him to such sore Displeasure, to so great Wrath and Anger, as to make
the Earth to shake and tremble under us.

1. One foregoing sign of an Earthquake, they teach, is, a certain troubling
of Waters in the deepest Wells, and in Fountains, having then a Tincture of a
Sulphurous taste, and an infected and stinking ^^vour: Because from the
subterraneous commotions the Waters in the Wells must needs be troubled
Therefore (...) repor^ed of P^^recides the Phi^^soph^r, that b^ Wa^er drawn out
of a Well, he (...) foretold the Lacedaem^nians the Ruin of the City by an
Earthquake

2. When the Se^ does suddenly swell, not being caused so to do by Winds and
Waves, when the Air is still and calm, and no blasts of Winds, yet on a
sudden the Sea swells, and the Ships thereon do shake: The reason is, because
then the Earth in the bottom of the Sea is moved.

3. When Birds sit trembling on the ground, forsaking Trees, because they
perceive a certain trembling, shaking the Trees and the Roots thereof*

4. When there are great and terrible sounds in the Earth, and roarings and
noises in the Caverns of the Earth.

5. Dimness of the Sun for some days going before the Earthquake.

6. Long and thin strakes of Clouds, sometimes sooner in the day, but chiefly
after the setting of the Sun, the VVeather in other respects being very clear.

But of all that I have discoursed with, about the late Earthquak^, I have not
met with one, nor heard of any one that has, that spoke any thing of any of
these Signs, before it happened, nor that by recollecting of themselves, do say
since that they remember any such fore-^^ing sign, that gave to them the least
in^imation o^ it; and the general surprise of all by it, generally
acknowledging that the moment before they had not a thought o^ such a shaking
to be so near. I leave to all to judge, and to their own thoughts, whether this
Earthquake did arise from Cau^es in Nature, or from the immediate Power and
VVorking of God, the Lord of Nature. And if we see the Immediate Mighty Finger
of God in it, to study and pray to know his Mind and Will by it, or be moved
by the moved Earth to confirm more unto his Will revealed in his Word.

Quest. V. What are the Effects and Consequents of Earthquakes, which make them
exceeding dreadful where they come?

Reason may dictate to us what terrible Effects, what dismal work Earthquakes,
when they have a full Commission from God to execute his Wrath, do make. Our
Ears have heard the Miseries of multitudes of Persons, the overthrow and ruin
of Towns, and Cities, and Countries: But those that have seen them would speak
of them more sensibly, and set them forth more fully. It might make our flesh
to tremble to hear of the woeful devastation^ that the trembling, shaking, and
opening of the Earth has caused in many Ages, in many places; but such as did
see, and feel, and suffer by them, have contended with the Earth, whether it or
they should tremble most. Oh the Cries and Shrickings! Oh, the doleful
Lamentations! Oh, what bitter Complaints have been poured out, and wishes in
vain have been uttered in the time and places of devouring and desolating
Earthquakes; When we shall hear some of those effects (though not written of
according to the fullness of the Terror wherewith they are done) let us
sympa^hize with the poor miserable People (yet left) in Jamaica, and pray that
their Judgment might not come over to London, nor Travel further to other
places.

First, Earthquakes cause great Consternation in the minds of men, and fill
their hearts with fear. When God makes the Earth to shake under them, he makes
their hearts to tremble within them. When the Earth shakes and moves they
cannot stand upon it without fear. One Earthquake causes many thousand
Heart-quakes Did not many thousand People in London in its late Earthquake
(though through God's great Mercy so short) feel great tremblings within
themselves when they felt the Earth to shake under them, and saw their Houses
move this way and that way over them, and could not tell whether they would
stand or fall; nay, when so many thought and said, their Houses would not stand
but fall? Were you not then under great Consternation, when you thought those
Houses you had slept in, you must not only so quickly die in, but be buried in
them too: That the Houses you had built or rented to shelter you from Storms
and Tempests, should bring that Destruction upon you, which many Storms and
Tempests had not done? Have not you of late years heard terrible and roaring
Thunderings, God Thundering with a Voice which none can imitate? Have you not
seen great Flashings of Fire and Lightnings, which made the Night like Day,
that you said you could see to take up a small thing from off the ground, and
were not you then glad you had an House over your head? But when this late
Earthquake was, were not you afraid because you had an House over your head,
when you thought it would fall upon your head and whole Body? And when this
Earthquake was, did you not make as much haste to get out of it, as in Storms
and Tempests you ever did to get into it? Is this already forgotten? What! so
soon! It is hard to express the fears that many then were filled with, and it
is sad to see how little God is feared since by many that then did fear so
much. Beside your own late Experience, Sacred Scripture, as well as Historical
Writers, do Record the fears of Men in times of Earthquakes, 1 Samuel 14 15 There
was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all the people: the garrison
and the spoi^ers, they also trembled, and the earth quaked: so it waes a very
great tremb^ing. Behold! a quaking Earth, and therefore a trembling People.
Behold! Valiant Men of War, that are not afraid of Swords and Bullets, but with
undaunted Courage assault their Enemies, and when many lie dead on both sides,
fight on with boldness, that fear not so much the shaking of Spears and Pikes,
as the shaking of the Earth; the Host trembled, the Garrison trembled, and the
Spoilers themselves did also tremble. Spoilers tremble! What! those that had
spoiled so many upon the Earth, they tremble lest they should be spoiled by the
quaking Earth. The Host, the People, the Garrison, the Spoilers, and Earth did
tremble, surely it was a very great trembling, Mat. 27.54. When the Centurion,
and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the Earthquake, they feared
greatly Captains, Men of great Spirits, at the quaking of the Earth are filled
with great fear. Mat. 28.2. Behold, there was a great Earthquake. 4 For fear of
him (the Angel whose Ministry God used to cause that Earthquake) the Keepers
did shake, and became as dead men: An Earthquake is so terrible, causing such
frights and fears, that makes Men (as the saying is) look like Death. Acts
16.26. And suddenly there was a great Earthquake. 29. He (the Jailer) called
for a light, and sprung in, and came trembling. The Gaol trembled, and the
Jaylour tr^mbled. When the Keeper ^aw he could not keep the Prison-doors shut,
but when he had shut, and locked, and made them fast, the quaking of the Earth
did open, he could not keep himself from trembling. An Earthquake will make
even a Jaylour to tremble.

But why such fear and trembling in Men, when such shaking and trembling in the
Earth?

1. In some, it may arise from the apprehensions of the terrible Wrath of an
Angry God. There have bin some Earthquakes, that were Tokens of God's Grace and
Favor; as the Earthquake shaking the Foundations of the Prison, in favor to
Paul and Silas, testifying that God had heard their Prayers made in Prison, and
that by it he would deliver them, as he did. And that in Acts 4 31. the
Apostles prayed, and at their Prayers the place was shaken; the shaking of the
place made them stand the faster in their Faith in God, and trusting to him.
But usually Earthquakes are indications of God's Wrath and sore Displeasure.
When Men run on in sin against God, to show his Indignation against it and
them, he sometimes will not suffer the Earth to stand still quiet under them.
Psalm. 18.7. The Earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the Hills
moved and were shaken, because he was wroth. When Men apprehend that God is
provoked, and they may apprehend it, when God in such a terrible manner does
show it, knowing they are no more a Match for God, than a Worm is to an Angel,
or a Child to a Giant; it may put them into such amazing Frights and Fears,
saying, God is angry, what shall we do? The Omnipresent God, is angry, whither
shall we go? The Just and Holy God is angry, with what can we appease him? He
does show his Anger, and we do see it, and how shall we escape? God is wroth,
and the Earth trembles before him: God is wroth, and is come down in sore
displeasure, and the Earth quaketh at his presence; our Heads are giddy, but
not with Wine; we reel but not with strong Drink. O stay your selves, and
wonder; cry ye out, and cry, they are drunken, but not with wine, they stagger,
but not with strong drink, Isa. 29 9.

2 Conciousness of their own Guilt: When the Earth did quake, it did not only
wake the Jaylour out of his Natural Sleep, but also out of his Spiritual
Slumber; Conscience was a^arm'd, as he was affrighted; his Eyes were opened to
see a Terrible God above him. Conscience was Awakened to see his Sins within
him, and that had been committed by him, an Angry God above, an Accusing
Conscience within, and the Quaking Earth under him, filled him with Fear, and
Trembling. When Men do Prosper upon Earth, they can Swill, and Swear, and Sin
in all their ways, and Conscience holds its peace, is quiet and still, does not
Reprove, Accuse, Judge, or Condemn them; but when Judgments come, an Hardened
Pharaoh will cry out, I have sinned; a Wicked Saul will confess and say, I have
sinned: And when an Earthquake comes, is not he an Hardened Seared Wretch, whose
Conscience (though bad yet) is quiet within him, when the Earth is not quiet
under him? And whose Conscience is not moved, and troubled for his Sin, when
the Earth is moved, as being restless under the Burden of such Sinners? But if
Conscience then does stir, when the Earth does tremble, the sinner trembles
(for the time) considering God's Anger, remembering his sin that did provoke him
to it.

3 If neither apprehensions of Gods wrath against them, nor sense of sin
committed against him, does fill them with fears at the quaking of the Earth,
yet Apprehension of Death at that time might make them tremble. Death is the
King of Terrors, Job 18.14. Shall not that which is the most Terrible, when it
is approaching in so Terrible a manner, make the stoutest heart to quake? If
they have no thoughts of Hell and Damnation, yet Death by the trembling of the
Earth presents it self unto their thoughts: and though they would not think of
it yet they must; though they would divert their minds from it, yet they cannot
send these thoughts away till another season: though many go to Hell without
fear of Hell, and seldom think of it till they feel it, yet when Death seems to
be coming to them by an Earthquake, it almost kills them with the terror of
it, being ready to die with fea^ of such a Death

There are these Circumstances in this Case that fill men with these amazing
fears upon the account of Death.

1. The sudden surprizal. An Earthquake comes suddenly in a minute; many times
without notice and warning, as this in London lately did; and it seems to bring
Death with it, and often does; now an Evil that suddenly comes, does the more
amaze, when in a minutes time, there is not space for men to recollect their
thoughts, and fortify themselves with actings of Reason, or Grace (which Alas
are not so ready) against advancing Death. In sickness men have time to prepare
and make ready for it, and to allay the fears thereof; but in a moment to be in
danger of Death, the fears are more raging and Predominant, and less help
against them. Fear without a Remedy must be great Fear.

2 The suddeness of Death, the apprehended nearness of it. The danger did not
only seize them suddenly. What! die so soon! what, within a minute or two? will
Death stay no longer? can it not a minute more be delayed? what! so soon step
into Eternity? so suddenly, must I hasten into another everlasting World? I
never did so suddenly remove from one House to another, and must I now so
suddenly remove from one World to another? from a temporal into an eternal
World? and yet not to leave this, nor to go into that? It is hard to imagine
the power and strength of fear that must invade and fill them in such distress*

3. The unavoidableness of Death apprehended in an over throwing Earthquake
augments their fears, or torments them with despair of Life. If a man be sick,
the means he uses keeps up his hope of Life, and the more he hopes he shall
live, the less are his fears of Death. But in a desolating Earthquake, what
hopes can Men have? whither can they in a moment go to escape the ruin? what
present Friend can help them, when they and their Friends are in the same equal
danger? when one must not die without the other? If they stay within doors they
apprehend they may be killed with the f^l of their Houses: if they run out,
they know not but they may be destroyed with the downfall of their Neighbors.
Will they hasten into the Fields? what! in a minute? alas! they have not time
allowed for such an escape, or if they had, there the Earth in an Earthquake
might swallow them up. No where safe, every where in great fear.

4 Apprehensions of sudden, unavoidable Death, and this when they are in health
and strong, aggravates their case, and augments their fears. What! am I well,
and yet must die? strong in health, and yet now must die? has Death forgot its
old way of sending Harbingers before it, before it came it self? did it use to
send its Sergeants to arrest, before it cast Men into the Prison of the Grave,
and must I be haled away without Summons? Some have been weaned from the love
of Life, and made weary of it by long and languishing Sickness, by wracking and
tormenting Pains, and must I in my Youth, or in middle Age, under no pain, with
my strength firm, yield to Death? All this does fill with greater fear.

5 This unusual way of d^ing makes it the more terrible. Others, in other
cases, first die, and then are buried, first expire, and then are carried to
their Graves; but in an Earthquake must I be buried alive? first buried and
then die? others are carried from their house, when dead, unto the grave, and
must mine own house be my grave, and that while I do live? Behold! the Earth
quakes under me, my House trembles over me. Oh! what if my trembling House
should fall, and I in it? what if the Earth should sink under me? what if this
quaking Earth should open its mouth, and eat me up alive? what if it should
cleave asunder (as in its shaking it has sometimes done? and swallow me up as
it has done thousands of others? when others die another way, does this loving
Mother lay their dead Bodies in her Bosom, must I die this way, and go down
alive into her bowels? did I live in my Mothers womb before I was born, and
must I live (awhile) in this common Mothers bowels, after I am therein buried?
This being not the common death of all Men, makes it more terrible to those
that apprehend in an Earthquake they must not die as others do. All laid
together, shows that Earthquakes cause great consternation of mind, perplexing,
fretting fears, which is the first effect thereof.

Secondly, Another effect of Earthquakes is speedy and precipitant flying, if
possibly Men might hasten the danger thereof. Though they leave their Goods
bebind them in their Houses, they will attempt to fly to save themselves. Numb.
16.32. The earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and their houses, and
all the men that appertained to Korah, and all their Goods. Verse 34. And all
Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them: for they said, lest
the Earth swallow us up also. Zach. 14.5. And ye shall flee to the valley of
the Mountains -- yea, ye shall flee like as ye fled from before the Earthquake
in the days of Uzziah King of Judah. These were particular Earthquakes, and
some by flight escaped from them; but when it shall be more general, or fall
out in the place where you dwell, and some miles about you, when it comes in a
minute, whither will you fl^e? or to what place will you hasten, or in so
little time how will you get thither? however, Men shall endeavor to fle, though
it should be in vain, when the Earth so moves, they cannot, they will not stand
still to be devoured and swallowed up, if by flight they might escape, which
they will try, though they be overtaken with it. Overtaken! alas! in such a
Judgment, you may sooner run into it, than run from it; you may think to leave
the danger behind you, and still it is before you; you running away from it,
may run to meet it. But the danger is so dreadful, the Death so formidable, the
Misery so great by Earthquakes, that Men will flee from them if they can, that
they might not perish in them. But better repent, reform, and turn from sin to
God to prevent them, than to continue in the sin that do procure them; for when
they come, you will find it hard to flee from them.

Thirdly; Another Effect is the cleaving asunder of the Earth, and devouring
and swallowing up many Persons in a short time. In other Judgments People die
one after another, in this by multitudes. When Death by sickness puts a period
to Life, each one has his own Grave; in this opening the Earth by Earthquakes,
one great Grave is made for many, Numb. 16 31. I 2, 33.

Fourthly; Another Effect is the subversion of Houses, Towns, and Cities, with
the destruction of their Inhabitants together. History abounds with many sad
and grievous Examples hereof. When Trojan was at Antioch, there happened a most
terrible Earthquake that destroyed many Cities and People, which extended it
self very far. Great and terrible Lightnings were before it, then great and
unusual storms of Winds, then arising a great and sudden Noise, the Sea
wrought, the Waves swelled, the Earth was shaken, Buildings trembled, some did
burst asunder, and others first lifted up, fell down. A great and horrible
Noise was heard, Walls by contrary motions driven sometimes this way, sometimes
that were broken and fell, the Sea with boisterous storms did mount and toss to
and fro; the Earth where no Buildings were, was greatly moved: such a thick
dust was raised, and so great a darkness upon all, that they could not see one
another, nor speak, nor hear one the other, and by reason of the violence of
the Wind, and greatness of the dust, could scarcely breathe Trees plucked up by
the roots were cast down upon the ground, many, very many were (...) with the
overthrow of Houses and Walls, many falling upon one another died, if any hurt
by wood or stone, went away thus torn and wounded Bodies, they were more
miserable than the rest, forasmuch as they could not live long, nor yet quickly
die: of multitudes of Men scarce any escaped without some hurt. One might be
seen to flee with his Shoulder broke, another with his Arms lost; many laid
dead with their Heads separated from their Bodies* some with their bruised
Breasts vomited Blood. Still the Earth continued to shake both by Night and
Day: in this great Calamity they could find no remedy, nor way of escape: those
that were hurt with the fall of Houses died in many places, and though by the
benefit of Vaults and roofed Places some were preserved, yet, the Earthquake
continuing, they perished by hunger and famine, before any succor could be
brought to them. When the Earthquake ceased, some went-upon the Ruins, where
they heard a Woman's voice, and the crying of an Infan^; the Ruins had covered
both the Mother and the Child; it was wonderful how the Mother should have Milk
to nourish her Child; but Mother and Child were taken safe out But whilst the
dead Bodies and fallen Houses were more diligently searched, another Infant was
found sucking the Breast of its dead Mother: But Life was a grief to all that
had escaped Death, when ^hey beheld the lamentable fall of the City, and so
many People destroyed.

Fifthly; The change of the Channel of the Sea. In the time of Valens the
Emperor there happened another tertible Earthquake, whereby an hundred Cities
were destroyed in Crete: then also the Sea leaving its place, so overflowed
certain grounds, which before were plowed, became navigable; and in other
places where Men sailed, the Sailers in their Navigation were found upon dry
Land where before the Sea was.

Sixthly; Another Effect of Earthquakes has the Convulsion of Mountains, their
sinking down, their clashing and transportatio^ or removal to a great distance
from the places where before they stood. Instances of these History do afford
many, but I will only mention one, because more remarkable, how God does
miraculously sometimes preserve praying People, and may move Persons, whose
Hous^s after shaking by an Earthquake stand, to pray therein. In the Year 1584.
one Mountain by an Earthquake violently removed, destroyed a Town consisting of
ninety Families, and threw down all excepting half of one House, where the
Master of the Family, with his Wife and Children, kneeling upon their Knees,
were praying and calling upon God.

Seventhly; Infectious Diseases, Plague and Pestilence are sometimes the
Effects of Earthquakes: For the matter of Earthquakes is Pestilential, because
subterraneous, or under Ground, wanting wind and motion to purify it; this
therefore when it does exhale and breath out, or break forth does infect the
Air, and Men by taking in that infected Air, are infected by it In Scripture
Earthquakes and Pestilence are set down together, as sore and heavy Judgments;
God grant that London, England, and all p^aces that have been shaken by this
late Earthquake* might so fear and tremble before this Great, Almighty God, as
to Repent and turn from sin to God, (...) this his Call so lately, powerfully,
and mercifully given, that after the Earthquake the Plague and Pestilence might
not fol^ow.

Q^est: VI. What are the Adjuncts of Earthquakes, which may further inform us
concerning this Mighty Work of God?

What I shall add concerning this, may be laid down in those following
Conclusions.

First Concl Sometimes there may be an Earthquake in some particular place, and
not in others near unto it. The Earthquake which shaked the Foundations of the
Prison where Paul and Silas lay, did not extend it self to other places. God
that can cause the Rain to fa^l upon one City, and not upon another, can make
one City (...) when he does not another.

2 Conc^. T^^ duration and continuance also of an Eart^quake is uncertain.
Sometimes it may last but a Minute or two, more or le^s; sometimes it may
continue Weeks, Months, Years, as some Wri^ers do affirm So some tremblings of
the Earth continued after the great damage by the Earthquake in Jamaica in June
last past If the Vapors shut up in the Earth, be ^or^ gross, they do more
slowly evaporate or get out, and more difficulty find their passage. If they be
more cold, they are also more slow. If they be in greater quantity, the
Earthquake may be of a longer continuance, for much is not so soon evaporated,
as a little. The Nature of the place also wherein an Earthquake is, may cause
the longer or shorter duration of it; for if the surface of the Earth, in whose
Caverns the matter of the Earthquake is contained and shut up, be more solid,
close and lesser holes, chinks and pores be in it, the Earthquake lasts the
longer, by reason of the more slow and difficult evaporation of the matter that
causes it.

3 Concl. An Earthquake may in a few Minutes destroy and overturn multitudes of
Houses, and sweep away thousands of People. Thus the Intelligence from Jamaica
runs: On the 7th of June, 1692 about 12 at Noon happened here [Port Royal] a
most terrible Earthquake: It was most violent on the Harbor side, where the
Houses all sunk down in a Minutes time, from the depth of three to five Fathom
Water; in the Streets next the Wharf, the Earth opened it self wide and deep,
and instantly gushed out an Inundation of Water, so that many of the (...) were
drowned.

Some People being ignorant of the Nature of an Earthquake, and what
Destruction it may make in a few Minutes, set little by the Mercy of being
preserved at such a time, and soon wear off the sense both of the Judgment and
the Mercy, because it lasted so short a space. But though London was some days
in being consumed by Fire, when many Houses were preserved, yet by an
Earthquake in a few Minutes it might have been all destroyed: The preventing
whereof was the wonderful M^^cy and Providence of God, never to be forgotten.

4 Concl Sometimes an Earthquake may be once in some parts of the Earth, and
not return again, sometimes it may repeat its c^urse, and often put the same
places into many trembling fits. When the shaking is over once, the bitterness
of God's Wrath, and our Ruin might not be past; if the shaking of London
should be rei^e^ated, the latter might be more grievous than the former. All
these second Causes are ordered and overruled by the Providence of God: All
the Natural Causes of Earthquakes are subject to God's power, and are at his
Beck, command and call; therefore though London be safe afer its late shaking,
yet let it not be secure, for the same Hand and Power of God that did shake it
once, can again, and throw it down.

Use I. Earthquakes, when armed with the wrath of God, and come with his
Commission to destroy, are one of the sorest Judgments whereby he Executes his
Vengeance, and manifests his hot Indignation against sin and sinners upon
Earth. Our Lord Jesus ranks these with the most dreadful and terrible Judgments
and Punishments that befall the World. Luke 21 10. Then said he unto them,
Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against Kindom 11 And great
Earthquakes shall be in diverse places, and Famines and Pestilences, wndfearful
Sights, and great signs shall there be from Heaven. Is War dreadful ask those
people whose Country is made the Seat of War. Is Famine a sore and heavy Evil?
What think you, when at such times, Mothers have boiled their own Children and
eat them, 2 Kings 6 26. As the King of Israel, was passing by upon the Wall,
there cried a woman unto him, saying, Help, my Lord, O King. 28. And the King
(...) unto her, what aileth thee? And she answered, this Woman said unto me,
give thy son, that we may eat him to day, and we will eat my son to morrow, 29
So we Boiled my son and did eat him. Is the Plague a wrathful Visi^ation of
God? Those that are yet alive, that were in London in 1665. May remember the
Terror of it. Is an Earthquake behind these for dread and horror? Or does it
not in some r^spects go beyond them? In War strong Castles, Fortified places,
and firm Walls, may keep out a Besieging Enemy, which they cannot batter and
overthrow in many Months, and these overturned by an Earthquake in a few
Minutes Does the Sea rage, and is tempestuous? Mariners have their ships, and
Men on Land have their Banks and Ports to secure them: but an Earthquake tears
up their Ports, breaks down their Banks, and makes way for an overwhelming
Innundaton, and drowneth many. Does a consuming Fire burn and turn many Houses
into ashes, yet the Inhabitants by flight might save themselves. But in an
Earthquake, whither will you run to escape the danger? The fire on your house
will not follow you into the street or fields, but there the Earthquake might
meet you. Does the Plague go through a City? does it go from House to House,
does it climb up in the Windows? Yet you have you^ Antidotes against it, and
some escape, being not inf^cted, and some infected, do recover: when i^ is most
severe upon the people, it leaves their dw^l^ings behind them when they fall
into their graves, their Houses stand upon their old foundation

But Earthquakes makes no diff^rence betwixt the Rich and the Poor, but
swallows up all, and their Money too, and this in a few Minutes, and is not so
long in destroying as the Famine is, nor gives that time for preparation for
another World, but in a moment many go down into one common Grave.

Use II. Woe then to wicked M^n, when God comes and shakes his Rod over them,
whereby he makes the Earth to shake under them, how sorrowful is your case? how
dreadful is your condition? what comfort have you to support you in such
^errour? what refuge have you to fly unto, when God shall enter into such a
Judgment with you, and contend with you by shaking the Earth under you, if he
proceed thereby to make the Houses fall upon you, or the Earth to open under
you, which way will you look for help, or hope, or comfort? above you? behold!
there is an angry God, a provoked Lord, a righteous Judge. Round about? behold!
your tottering Ho^^es, your moving Walls, threatening your Death by their fall.
Will you look downwards? behold! the Earth trembles, its Pillars shake, as
being weary any longer to bear the burden of ungodly Men that walk upon it; and
you fearing when it will cleave asunder and swallow you up. At such a time, had
you an interest in God as your reconciled Father, in Christ as your Lord and
Savior, in the holy Spirit as your Regenerator and Sanctifier, what sedateness
of Mind, what composure of Spirit, what stable hopes might you have of Heaven,
when the Earth cannot stand still for trembling? what comfort against your
fears, what joy against your sorrows, what remedy against your misery (against
which there seems to be no remedy) might you have from your special relation to
God as reconciled to you, when he so terribly shows his anger unto others.

Use III. Such special and peculiar Earthquakes which God has caused for
special and peculiar ends, improve to the obtaining of those ends. All the
Earthquakes in general do manifest the Glory of the power of God, and God in
them does speak to Men on Earth. They have a voice, and we should have an
hearing ear; let us not be deaf to the Instructions that God is giving of us;
nor dull to take out the Lessons he is teaching us. Particularly some more
observable upon more rem^rkable occasions, such as these.

1. The Earthquake there was at the Death of Christ. The Jews hearts were stony
and hard, and did not fear nor tremble to shed the innocent and most precious
Blood of the Son of God, but when it fell upon the ground, the Earth did shake
and tremble to receive it. Abel's Blood did cry to Heaven from the ground, and
Cain was cursed and the Earth was cursed to him for that bloody fact. Genesis
4.10. And he said what have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries
unto me from the ground. Verse 11. And now art thou cursed from the Earth which
has opened her mouth to receive thy brothers blood at thine hand. Verse 12.
When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee her A
Fugitive and a Vagabond shall thou be in the Earth. Was not the Blood of Christ
of greater worth and value than Abel's, or of all Men, being the Blood of him
that was God as well as Man, pure and spotless; was not therefore the shedding
of it by Men, a more heinous sin and barbarous fact; and yet the shedders of it
stupid, and not afraid to take away his li^e? what does the Earth under their
feet, but shake and tremble at what they did not? and what improvement did some
then present make thereof? and what conclusions did they draw from it? Mat. 27
51. Behold, the Vail of the Temple was rent in twain, from the top to the
bottom, and the Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent. Verse 54 And when the
Centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the Earthquake and
those things that were done, they feared greatly. And what did they say? what
did they gather and infer from thence? what Conclusion laid they down as sure
and certain? they said, Truly this was the Son of God. Though you did not see
it, as they did, yet you read it recorded by them that did see it, and do not
you believe this matter of fact, and the record of it to be true? and will not
you say, surely that Christ, at whose Death the very Earth did quake, and other
great Miracles done, was the Son of God, and love him, desire him, trust him,
receive him, and consent to have him for your Lord and Savior accordingly? was
the shaking of the Earth, and the rending of the Rocks, a testimony against the
Impenitent, Unbelieving, and Rocky-hearted Jews, that neither before, for all
the Miracles done by him in his Life, nor after they saw what was done at his
Death, did own him for the Son of God, nor receive him for their Savior and
Lord, but did still reject him, and do you hear of the same things that they
saw, and yet be guilty of the same Unbelief, Impenitency, and Rejecting of
Christ as they were? shall it not have the same effect upon you, as it had upon
the Centurion, and those that were with him? The Earth at h^s Death did quake;
do you fear and tremble, lest you be found a Rejecter of him.

2. The Earthquake at the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, ought to be improved by
us to establish us in the Articles of our Faith of Christ's Resurrection, and
our own, and to rejoice at the thoughts of both. And the more the Earth did
tremble, the more steadfast let our Faith be. Mat. 28.2. And behold there was a
great Earthquake. Verse 5. Ye seek Jesus. Ver. 6. He is not here, for he is
risen. Verse 8. They departed quickly, with fear and great joy, and did run to
bring his Disciples word. The Earth did quake, and they did believe; the Earth
did quake, and they did joy that Christ was risen. As the Earth did quake to
drink up his Blood, so it did quake to detain his Body beyond the appointed
time, and by its motion did congratulate the Victory Christ had obtained over
Death in its own Dominions. Improve this also to believe the power of Christ to
raise our Bodies also, for if he give the word, if he utter his voice, Come
forth ye dead, Awake, Arise, he will make the Earth to quake and tremble, to
deliver up its dead. Rev. 20.11. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that
sat upon it, from whose Presence the Earth and Heaven fled away, and there was
found no place for them. Verse 12 And I saw the dead, small and great, stand
before God, and the Books were opened, and another Book was opened, which is
the Book of Life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were
written in the Books, according to their Works. The Earth did quake when Christ
did die, and when he arose; and so it shall when he shall come to raise the
dead, and judge the World.

3. The Earthquake at the Prayers of the Apostles (when the Gospel was opposed,
and the Preachers of it Persecuted) that God would grant unto his Servants that
with all boldness they may speak his Word, and for confirmation of their Faith,
and satisfaction that their Prayers were heard, his Church and Kingdom should
be propogated and preserved, the place was shaken where they were, Act.
4.24.31. He that can shake the Earth, can establish his Church; he that can
make Mountains quake, can and has built his Church upon such a Rock, that no
Power shall prevail against it.

Use IV. Improve this mighty terrible Work of God in causing this late
Earthquake by making more have to turn from sin to God by a speedy and sincere
Conversion. Were you not afraid of Death, when your Houses did shake, and you
feared, would fall upon you? Were you prepared to die? Were you fitted for
Judgment and Eter^ity? What if you had been destroyed then, where had your
Souls been now? Have any of you been more serious and earnest in enquiring
after the way of Salvation? Have you so much as with a concerned mind asked any
Minister, what you must do that you may be saved? How! have you not? What, will
you be more stupid than the Earth under your feet? Did it tremble, and not you?
Or did you then, and are become secure again? Will you be more careless and
hardened than the Jaylour? He! did not he, being moved by the motion of the
quaking ground, make have, and run to the Apostles, and (...) his knees begged,
Sirs, what must I do to be Saved? If you know, tell me, I see the greatness and
the power of your God, if he will have mercy on sinners, tell me and what I
must do, that he might have mercy on me, and save me, tell me; if his Wrath be
so great, how may I escape it? I do not yet know, fain I would, but I do not; O
Sirs, tell me what must I do to be saved? Has this that you have felt and seen
put you on to any greater diligence for your Souls Salvation, than you had
before? Careless before, and so still? Impenitent before, and so still? No
minding of Conversion before, and none yet? Indeed! shall this amazing
Providence of God, whereby you were in so much danger of Death and Hell, pass
away, and leave you as carnal, careless, and negligent as you were before?
What! after the Earth in its trembling might have opened its mouth and
swallowed you up alive into its bowels, and from thence have gone to Eternal
Torments? from Pit to Pit? From a deep Pit made by the Earthquake in the lower
parts thereof, into a bottomless Pit, prepared by a just God to take Vengeance
on Impenitent and Unconverted sinners to all Eternity? Turn sinner turn, or
this God, that can and has by Earthquakes overturned Towns, Cities, Mountains,
will turn thee into Hell; and now it thou will not fear to continue in a sta^e
of sin, there thou shall feel his Wrath and Vengeance for thy sin.

Use V. Let all and ever^ one of us get and evidence our Title to a Kingdom
that cannot be shaken. You see there is no place in this World that is so
stable, but it may be shaken, even those Houses that you do not call moveable
Goods, how moveable God can make them. When you build on Earth, you mind that
your Foundation be ^ood and firm, and not sandy, or unsound; and if you built
your House upon an earthly Rock, though when the Wind blows, and Rain descends
and beat against it, yet it stands; but if an Earthquake come, with a
commission from God to overturn, or sink it your best foundation cannot secure
it. But there is a City above that has [unshaken] Foundations, whose Maker and
Builder is God. Secure an House there, not made with hands for that will be
Eternal. There are Mansions above which are perpetual. There are no ^^orms nor
tempests; there are no terrible Thunderings and Lightnings, there are no
Rendings nor Shakings; all sedate and calm, all at quiet and rest, all secure
and safe. No death, or darkness, no fears or tremblings, no threatening or
amazing motions tending to interrupt the Joys and Holy Pleasures, the
Triumphant Songs of the Citizens of that City, of the Glorious Subjects of that
abiding Kingdom. Your House on Earth might be destroyed by War, by Fire, by an
Earthquake; but there are Mansions above not subject to be destroyed or spoiled
by these or any other way: Set less by these on Earth, that have, and may be
shaken, and more by that Kingdom, that never has, nor shall, nor can be
shaken. Heb. 12.27. This word, once more signifies the removing of those
things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which
cannot be shaken, may remain. 28 Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom, which cannot
be moved, let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence
and Godly Fear.

Use VI. God never wants ways and means to punish the Disobedience and
Rebellion of sinners against him. He can make the Heavens above to punish them
by withholding Rain from them, or by pouring out immoderate Showers upon them:
He can punish them by the Earth beneath. And if there be nothing visible to
plague and destroy them, yet he has his Armies and his mighty Host under
Ground, and in the Barth, which he can Muster at his word of command, all stand
ready to fight against them, which can slay them heaps upon heaps and bury them
first, and after kill them.

Use VII. Admire the sparing Mercy of God to London more than to many Places
and Cities in the World Indeed, by this late Earthquake many Towns and Cities
besides London have been shaken, and are spared which does not make Londons
deliverance to be less! for God in sparing others, might have brought London
down. But compare your Mercies (for there are many in its preservation) with
the Desolation brought upon many Cities in former Ages, and upon Port Royal in
Jamaica, by Earthquakes, and acknowledge Gods Mercy and his power in his late
visitation of it, his power in shaking it, his mercy in preserving of it
Consider this Providence seriously, suffer it not to pass without due
observation, and think whether you may put a greater accent upon his Power or
his mercy in this Dispensation; upon his power in making it to tremble, or on
his Mercy, that he did not make it sink or tumble down. Did God by an
Earthquake shake London, and yet does London stand? God did shake it, behold
his Power. It does stand, behold his mercy. Nay, do not you see his powerful
mercy, and his merciful power? His powerful Mercy in shaking it, as a warning
to you, and his merciful Power in keeping it from falling when it was so
shaken. O write upon your walls, however Engraven it on your Hearts, and
Memories; My House was shaken with an Earthquake and yet it stands.

London sorely threatened, and yet it is spared. It is by the distinguishing
Providence of God, that you have been visited in the same way as others have,
and yet are not overthrown, nor swallowed up in the same manner as others are.
That you may be the more sensible of, and so more thankful for God's great
Mercy in sparing you in the day of his Power. But do not Men still conti^ue in
their disobedience and provoking sins, and does not God continue to manifest
his hatred and detestation of them? For all this is his anger turned away? is
not his Hand stretched out still? have not we heard of the sad destruction of
Jamaica by a most terrible Earthquake there this year? Should not we sympathize
with them, and by God's dealing with them tremble at the remembrance of our own
sins, the procuring cause of all Calamities, especially since God so lately
has shaken this City, though it stands? (...) argument the greatest sufferers
are the greatest sinners. Luke 13.1. There were some present at that season
that told him of the Galileans whose Blood Pilate had mingled with their
sacrifices. Verse 2. And Jesus answering, said unto them, suppose ye that these
Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered these
things? How does Christ answer his own Question? Verse 3. I tell you nay: but
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Verse 4 Or those eighteen on
whom the Tower of Silo fell, and slew them, think ye that they were sinners
above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem. Verse. 5. I tell you nay: but except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. It is confessed by some that write from
Jamaica that they were a very wicked People; great Swearers, Drunkards,
Unclean, etc. and are there not many such in England, yea, in and about London
Is it not known? is it not seen? can it be denied? and are there not such
Circumstances that may make the very same sins to be more (...)


