Solemn ADVICE TO Young MEN, Not to Walk in the Ways of their HEART, and in
the Sight of their EYES; but to Remember THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.

By INCREASE MATHER, Praesident of Harvard College in Cambridge, and Preacher
of the Gospel at BOSTON, in New England,

Psalm. 71. 17. -- Thou have taught (...) from my Youth, and hitherto have (...)
declared thy wondrous Works.

Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

Boston in New England Printed by (...) Sold by (...) the Brick Shop near the
(...) Meeting House. 1695

TO THE YOUNG Generation, in New England.
WHEN I was (as you are) a Young Man, it pleased God to put into my heart an
earnest desire to seek the Welfare of that Generation, who are now past their
Youth. From thence it was that I Published the last Sermons of my Brother
ELEAZER MATHER (who rested from his Labors above Five and Twenty Years since)
which were then designed for the benefit of the Young Generation* From thence
also it was, that I did both (...) and Print thatCall to the Rising Generation;
Several Editions whereof have been dispersed and disposed of; I hope not
altogether without some fruit. GOD having lengthned (...) days to see many of
the third Generation standing thick upon the Stage, As my (...) Sons let me
warn you.

It has been Observed, that when (...) about to remove His Servants, He (...)
by (...) secret Providence incline their hearts to spea^^ something which may
concern those that sha^ live after they are gone: So it has (...) to several
near Relations of mine: So my Brother, but now mentioned: So my Father (whose
Memory is blessed) a little before his death Preached many Sermons on David's
dying charge to his Son Solomon. I have more reason (...) shall express, to
believe that my Opportunities of Serving any (and in special You the Young
Generation) in New England, are very near unto their end. And I have therefore
been the more willing to put this into your hands, that (...) I might thereby
speak, when I shall be seen (...) more amongst you. In the mean time, I can
never cease desiring, and (so far as I am Capable (...) Endeavoring your
SALVATION* I (...) you Remember that it lies with you, whether the LORD shall
Continue to be the GOD of new England. The most of your are Children defended
from Godly Parents: For sake not your Fathers God and Friend; and you shall
never be forsaken by Him.

Solemn Advice to Young Men.
Ecclesiastes 11. 9. Rejoice O Young man in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer
thee in the days of thy Youth, and walk in the Ways of thy Heart, and in the
sight of thine Eyes; but know thou, that for all these things, God will bring
thee into Judgment.
IN these words we have (1.) An Ironical Concession. Do thou (faith Solomon)
who art a young man live as Merry as heart can with: Indulge thy self in the
most Vicious Courses and see what will come of it, or on thee for (...). He had
just before intimated that lise in this world is but short, and then a long
Eternity follows. If a man live many years and rejoice in them all, yet let
him remember the days of darkness for they shall be (...). The longest (...)
upon Earth, is here but a very short (...) compared with the days which his
Body must be in the dark Grave, and if he continues walking in the way of his
Heart and in the sight of his Eyes) his Soul in a darker Hell. The use which an
Atheist on an Epicure would make of this Doctrine concerning the brevity of
man's life, is, Then let us live a short life and a merry, let us eat and drink
for to morrow we shall die. Do so (says Solomon) do so Young man, and see what
you will bring your self unto at last. He does not speak in earnest, but in an
holy disdain. His words are like those of the Prophet unto Ahab, whose heart
was set upon going to fight against the Syrians hoping to come off a Conqueror,
Go and prosper (says he) for the Lord shall deliver thy enemies into thy
hands; when as he intended the contrary. Thus does Solomon by way of Irony and
Derision permit young men to do that which the^^ most willingly and commonly
practice. Therefore (2.) The Latter part of the words read, contain a sad and
serious Admonition unto Young men. Know young man that for all these things, h.
e. for all the Sins, Vanities, and Extravaganes of thy youth, God will bring
thee into Judgment. Thou shall one (...) brought before the Tribunal of the
(...) God, there to have thy Trial; and (...) in thy sinful Courses, a dismal
day will it be unto thee: Thou shall be Condemned and Punished for all that
thou have done in Compliance with the ways of thy heart, and the sight of thy
eyes. So then the Doctrine now before us, is, That Young Men who Continue to
Walk in the Ways of their Heart, and in the Sight of their Eyes, will have a
sad account to give to God, at the day of Judgment.

The Particulars contained in this Doctrine may be set before us in several
Propositions.

Propos. I. Men ought not to walk in the ways of their Heart, and in the sight
of their Eyes. There is in the Scripture an express Prohibition to the
contrary; which is ((...) Learned Interpreter has well and (...) Observed) a
clear demonstration that Solomon does not speak in earnest (...) Ironically,
when he bids young men walk in the ways of their heart and in the sight of
their eyes. Otherwise Solomon would contradict Moses, who says; seek ye not
after your own Heart, and your own Eyes, after which you use to (...)? Numb.
15. 39. Nor are these expressions ever used in the Scripture in a good sense.
The way of the heart and sight, of the eyes of men, is always evil. But the
Truth of the Proposition before us is further evident.

1. In that Original sin has depraved the whole man. It is a woeful Leprosy
whereby every member of the body, and all the powers of the soul are tainted
and disordered. The heart is put for the most excellent faculties wherewith the
Souls of men are adorned. Sometimes for the mind or understanding. Now sin has
defiled and depraved that power of the rational Soul. The mind and Conscience
(which is the practical understanding, or the Soul reflecting upon it self and
judging of a man's own ways) these are defiled, Tit. 1. 15. Therefore men are
apt to Judge (...) to be Truth, and evil to be good, the light in them is
darkness, and how great is that darkness? So that if they walk after the blind
dictates of their own dark and deluded understanding, they may miserably
perish. Sometimes the heart is put for the will and affections, which are also
corrupted and perverted by Adams fall and original sin. Hence men do naturally
choose and delight in those things which the Lord abhors. Zech. 8. 17. Let none
of you imagine evil in your hearts against your neighbors, and love no false
Oath, for all these things I hate, says the Lord. So then the things which God
hates, the vile and carnal hearts of men love and embrace. And as the chief
powers of the Soul, so the most excellent members of the Body are vitiated by
sin. The eye is the most excellent member of the body, but it is now a very
sinful member. The Scripture does therefore speak of Eyes full of Adultery,
and that cannot cease from sin. 2 Pet. 2. 14.

2. The natural Inclinations of the hearts of men are corrupt and evil
inclinations. The hearts of men are naturally averse from and indisposed unto
that which is good. They have neither wit nor will for a good matter. Jer. 4
22. They are sottish Children, they have none understanding, they are wise to
do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. That which the Prophet there
speaks, concerning the Jews, is no less true of all men considered as what they
are by nature. Heart does answer Heart, as in the water, Face does answer Face.
The Jews spoke what was in their hearts, when they said unto the Prophet, as
for the word which thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, We will not
hearken to thee. Jer. 44. 16. Let a good motion be presented, and the carnal
heart can find an hundred Excuses, Evasions, and Objections against it; but let
an evil motion present it self, and the heart is ready to close with it
immediately. Sinners are not only uninclinedto that which is good, but woefully
inclined unto that which is evil. Eccles. 8. 11. Because sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil. The heart of a sinner is wickedly bent. It Is set
for evil, nay fully set to do evil. The truth is (and a sad truth it is) there
is no evil so bad, no sin so abominable, but there is a natural propensity in
the Unregenerate heart to close with it. Well does the Scripture say, that the
heart of man (and what worse could be said of the heart of a Devil) is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked. Jer. 17. 9. It Is not only
false, but deceitful above all things; not only a subject of sin, but wicked
and desperately so. There is not an Unregenerate man in the world, but if the
Holy God should wholly remove from him the restraints of His Grace and
Providence, and give him up to the natural inclinations of his own heart; there
is no wickedness so great, no sin so bloody, but he would soon become guilty of
it. Therefore the Apostle speaking concerning what men are by nature; he says,
their feet are swift to shed blood, Romans 3. 15. Every man has by nature the
heart of a Murderer in him. Is he not subject to rash and undue anger? That Is a
degree of Murder, and would end there, did not special or common Grace prevent
it. From this consideration it was that an holy man when he heard of any
prodigious wickedness done by the vilest sons of Belial (suppose Blasphemy,
Sorcery, Adultery, Murder) would strike upon his breast and say, In this Heart
of mine is that which would have caused me to have been guilty of the same
evil, if the Grace of God had no^ made a difference. Yea, such is the
depravation of men's nature, as that their hearts are set upon an evil the
rather and the more because God has forbidden it. The Heathen could observe
that there is such a perverse Temper and Inclination in men. They could say,
Nitimur in vetitum semper, men are always desiring forbidden fruit. Truly since
the sin of Adam, it has ever been so. The holy Apostle was very sensible of
this; we hear him bewailing it sadly. Romans 7. 8. Sin taking Occasion by the
Commandment, wrought in me all manner of Cons^piscence. So it was with him
before his Conversion, because the Commandment said, ye shall not do such a
thing, he was the more set upon doing it. There is many an Unregenerate man
that would not do such and such things, did not God in His Word say, ye shall
not do them. I remember Austin in his Confession, mourns over the Corruption of
his nature in this respect. He says, that when he was an ungodly Youth, he did
sometimes Steal Apples out of his Neighbors Orchard, when he might take as
many as he desired of the very same sort of Apples in his fathers Orchard, but
where he might have them without sin he cared not for them, only in a place
where he could not come by them without transgressing the eighth Commandment;
his eyes and heart were set upon the forbidden fruit. The truth is, that no
inclinations besides what have sin attending them are natural to the carnal
hearts of men. If there be good Inclinations, they are Supenatural. For I know
that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing. Romans 7. 18. Since it
is thus, men ought not to walk after the inclinations of their own hearts.

3. The thoughts and Imaginations of the heart of a sinner are vain and vile.
Job 11. 12. Vain man would be wise, though man is born like a wild Asses Colt.
Men bring hearts into the world with them that are full of Vanity. They are
born foolish Creatures. Therefore has the wise man said, that Foolishness is
bound in the heart of a Child, Prove. 22. 15. A Child carries a bundle up and
down with him wherever he goes, and this bundle in his heart. But a bundle of
what? Truly, a bundle of folly. Children can no sooner exercise their thoughts
about any matter, but there are a world of foolish Imaginations naturally
springing up in the^^ (...). And as they grow up from child hood unto youth,
and from youth unto manhood, their Imaginations are vain still, yea, as vain
as Vanity it self; the Lord knows that it is so. Psalm. 94. 11. The Lord
knows the thoughts of man that they are Vanity. The thoughts of young men in
a peculiar manner are very vain. Genesis 8. 21. The Imaginations of man's heart is
evil from his youth. It cannot be expressed what an Infinite number of vain
thoughts and imaginations are in the hear^ of poor Unconverted youth: his heart
i^ like a Mint which is always framing and coining vain Imaginations.
Atheistica^ thoughts are the foolishest that can be Imagined. Yet his vain
heart is full of them. He Imagines that God does not observe him so as to
bring him into Judgment, that those he sins he shall escape Punishment. Deu^
29. 19. It shall come to pass if when he hears the words of this Curse, that
he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
Imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; the Lord will not
spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his Iealousy shall smoke against
that man. Thus are sinners apt vainly to Imagine that they shall have peace
though they walk in the ways of (...) hearts, notwithstanding God has said
(...) He will make His anger to smoke against them. Not only Vain but Vile
thoughts are natural to the sinful hearts of men. Unclean thoughts, Revengful
thoughts. Bloody and Blasphemous thoughts; if there were no Devil to Tempt them
or to cast such thoughts into their minds, their hearts would naturally of
themselves produce them. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, Murders,
Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False Witness, Blasphemies. Math. 15. 19.

4. The Byes of men are oftentimes an Occasion, and an inlet to very much sin.
David was very Sensible of this, and it had been well for him if he had always
remembered it. The knowledge and sense of this truth in his heart, made him pray
as in Psalm. 119. 37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding Vanity. The eyes are
the windows through which many sins creep into the heart. No sooner does a
sinful eye behold any thing which is vain, but the corrupt heart is stirred up
to lust after it. Holy Job made a covenant with his eyes, and he would not
suffer his heart to walk after his eyes. Job 31. 1, 7. But the heart of an
Unregenerate unholy man does walk after his eyes. He is led by sense and not by
right reason, or by Religion. Where sin bears rule (as (...) in the hearts of
all that are in their (...) estate) sense bears rule too, and does Captivate
the Will, Affections, Understanding and all, so as that which way soever the
eye goes the heart walks after it. Though sin is Originally in the heart, it is
there before it is in the eye; nevertheless, the eye allures the heart, and
occasions the stirrings of that Corruption which is there as the fountain of
sin. There are very pernicious evils which get into the heart by the eye: when
once the eye le^s them in, the heart is like tinder to sparks of fire presently
inflamed, The eye does occasion the heart to become guilty of Uncleanness in
the sight of God. Joseph's Mistress Cast her eyes upon him, and then her ungodly
heart was inflamed with wicked desires. Genesis 39. 7. When Achan saw a goodly
Babylonish Garment, and two hundred shekels of Silver, and a wedge of Gold,
then he Coveted them, Josh. 7. 21. Coveteous desires after Silver or Gold or
Goods, or any thing which is another man's, are accasioned by the sight of the
eyes. Hence Coveteousness is called The Lust of the Eye. 1 John 2. 16. because
the sight of the eyes blows up Covetous desires. Wherefore (...) (and in
particular young men) ought (...) careful not to walk after the sight of (...)
This notwithstanding, The Second Proposition before us, is,

Propos. II That Young Men whose natures are not changed by the Regenerating
Grace of God, Walk in the ways of their Heart and in the sight of their Eyes.
It is true that amongst Unconverted young men there is a great difference: All
are not alike as to Viciousness. There are young men that have been kept from
Scandalous sins all their days, who are nevertheless in their natural estate,
strangers to a work of Regeneration. Such a young man do we read of in the
Gospel, who came to Christ desiring to know what good thing he should do that
he might have Eternal Life: when the Lord said to him, keep the Commandments,
thou shall do no Murthen thou shall not Commit Adultery, thou shall not Steal,
thou shall not bear false Witness, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, the young
man said unto him, all these things have I kept from my youth up, Math. 19. 20.
And yet that Young man had not saving Grace in his soul: he wanted that one
thing necessary unto Salvation: he loved the world more then he loved Christ:
he had not Faith, and therefore could not overcome the World: he would rather
part with Christ; and loose eternal life, than part with his estate when the
Lord called for it. And such a Young man was Paul whilst he was yet in his
natural estate: No man could accuse him with any Scandalous sin; nor could he
accuse himself: he had lived honestly according to the Religion in the which he
had been Educated: he could say to the Council, I have lived in all good
Conscience before God until this day, Acts 23. 1. And he tells the Philippians
that touching the Righteousness which is in the Law he was blameless: This
notwithstanding, had he dyed in that estate he must have perished Eternally.
But although an Unconverted Person may be free from Scandalous Immoralities in
the sight of men, yet he does indulge himself in some lust or other, some way
of his own heart; some sin or other does not only at Times prevail over him
(as it may be with a true believer) but has a standing power and dominion over
him. And there are evils which Youth is in a peculiar manner subject unto.
Hence is that caution, 2 Timothy 2. 22. Flee youthful Lusts. h. e. those Lusts
which Young men more than others are generally addicted unto. We see this also
in that expression of the Psalmist, Wherewith shall a Young man cleanse his
way. Psalm. 119. 9. Intimating that the ways of Young men are commonly Unclean,
Unholy ways, ways of their own heart, very impure in the sight of God who will
bring them into Judgment. The Confessions and Supplications made by holy men
long after their Conversion do likewise manifest this. Job bitterly Complains
of the (...) of his Youth. Chap. 13. v. 26. And David prays, that the Lord
would not remember the sins of his Youth, nor his transgressions. Psalm. 25. 7.

The Enquiry here may be, What are those Ways of their own Heart which
Unregenerate Young Men use to Walk in?

Ans. 1. The way of Pride is the way of a man's own heart. Man is naturally ever
since Adam sinned a proud Creature. The Devil who is made up of Pride, infused
that poison into Adams heart. When once the Serpent of hell had bitten him, his
heart was swollen with Pride: and Adam did propagate that poison to his
children: he was in the day that God Created him in the likeness of God; but
when once he had sinned he did not beget a son in the likeness of God, but in
his own likeness and after his Image, that is to say, he begat a Son with a
proud heart like his Father. Genesis 5. 3. Nor is there any Unregenerate man, but
he is under the dominion of that sin of Pride. It may be other sins may have
dominion over him. Men are serving diverse lusts: but whatever lust besides
there may be, Pride reigns in the Unregenerate Soul. Hence such persons are in
the Scripture called the Proud, Mal. 4. ^. There is no sin more natural then
that of Pride: We see it in children who discover that Corruption to be in them
before they can speak. And this is the sin which uses to reign in Young men:
if they are descended of better parents then others, they are proud of their
birth and parantage: if they have good natural parts, wit and memory; or
acquired parts above others, they are on these accounts lifted up with pride.
The Apostle faith that knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8. 1. Where there is not
Grace to keep the heart humble it does so. And vain Young men do often times
conceit their knowledge to be much greater then it is, not being sensible of
that Abyss of Ignorance which ^s in their dark minds. It is from Pride that
Young men do not show that respect to their Superiors, or unto Aged ones,
which God Commands them to do. The child will behave himself Proudly against
the Ancient, Isa 3. 5. Such especially whose parts and abilities are through
age decayed: Proud Youth dispi^eth them. And hence it is that Young men regard
not the Counsils and Instructions which are administered to them Jer. 22. 21. I
spoke unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou said, I will not hear, this has
been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyest not my voice. Young men are
usually impatient of Advice and Reproof; let the Reprover have never so much
Authority with him, they regard it not. (...) gravely reprove and admonish his
Sons, he told them that he had been informed of their evil do^ngs, and why do
you such things? But it is noted concerning those haughty young men, that they
hearkened not to the voice of their father, 1 Samuel 2. 25. It is from Pride that
young men are not willing to be under Government: Children will not be ruled by
their Parents, nor Servants by their Masters; and the reason is because they
are ruled by the Pride of their own hearts. An inordinate affectation of
liberty, is the sin which reigns in Youth commonly. What Is said concerning the
Young Prodigal is a description of the spirit which uses to prevail in
Unconverted Young men. He was not willing to continue in his Fathers Family,
nor to be under his Fathers inspection and government, but would be gone into
far Countries. Luke 15. 12, 13. Do we not see it just so in many Young men
amongst our selves? Nothing will serve them, but to be going far from their
fathers house, that so they may without control walk in the way of their heart,
and after the sight of their eyes. An humble and dutiful respect to their
Parents would make them think themselves happy in being near them Again, the
Scripture speaks of the Pride of Life, 1 John 2. 18 Vanity in Apparel is one
particular intended by that expression: for the (...) of life discovers it self
very much in the outward garb which persons appear in. We see daily that young
people are very much addicted unto such Vanities. They are ready to follow
every Proud Fashion as soon as it comes into the Land, and it may be regard
neither God nor man that shall testify against them. Because of the bravery of
their tinkling Ornaments, the Chains, and Bracelets, and changeable suits of
Apparel, the daughters of Zion are haughty. Isa. 3. 16. etc. They that walk in
Pride, walk in the way of their own hearts, and in the sight of their eyes.
This Young People too generally do.

2. Unruly Unmortified Passions, are the ways of a man's own heart. As for those
Graces of Meekness, and Patience, and a forbearing forgiving spirit, they do
not grow in natures garden: They are Supernatural fruits produced and planted
in the heart by the holy Spirit of God: but for men to be Passionate and
Revengful is natural: We see it in little Children who if any one cross them,
will presently strike again and revenge themselves. The carnal Unregenerate
hearts of men esteem those holy Commandments which require the Mortification of
Passions to be severe and unreasonable. Julian the Apostate would scoff and
deride the Christian Religion because of those holy precepts which our Savior
Christ has taughts His Disciples, in Math. 5. 39, 40. Resist ye not evil, but
whosoever shall smite you on the right cheek, (...) to him the other also. etc.
The Philosophers amongst the Gentiles have taught that in great injuries men
ought to revenge themselves, which is directly contrary to the express word of
God. Prove. 24. 29. Say not I will do to him as he has done to me, I will render
to him according to his work. Nothing is more natural for men then to say so,
and to do so. I Will be even with him (says the Unregenerate heart) I Will give
him as good as he brings. They think it a disgrace for them to put up an
afront, or to pass by an injury without revenge or satisfaction,
notwithstanding the Lord charge them to forgive those that have done them
wrong as ever they desire pardoning mercy at the hands of God. And thus it is
with Young men until the Grace of God has made a mighty change in them: they
are ruled not by the word of God, but by their own passions; when once they are
provoked because they have not Grace in their hearts, they cannot command their
own spirits. Hence it is usual with Young men in their anger to speak rashly
and wickedly. There are Young men so devoid of all fear of God and the Judgment
to come, as that in their mad wrath and rage, they will Curse and Swear, and
wish Damnation to themselves and others. Ungodly Young men are apt to proceed
from wrathful words to revengful blows: in their passion they will make bloody
work of it. There were a number of Young men (above Twenty of them) that every
one thrust his Sword in his fellows side until they fell down together. 2 Samuel
2. 16. Sometimes their sinful anger does degenerate into hatred and revenge: So
it was with Cain and Absalom, wicked Young men both of them. And Simeon and
Levi were Young men that in their passion and revenge did a bloody fact,
concerning whom their Father on his death bed said, in their anger they slew a
man, Cursed be their anger for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel.
Gen 49. 6, 7.

3. When men indulge themselves in sensual pleasures, they walk in the way of
their own hearts. The Scripture fortels (and we see it verified) that in the
latter days of the world, some will be Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of
God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. This is that which men do naturally: they study more how to
gratify their senses than how to please a holy God. Hence the Apostle
describing the natural estate of the Ephesians, and so of all other men, says,
they did walk after the course of this world, fulfilling the desires of the
flesh. And this is that which Young men are in a peculiar manner addicted unto,
and their souls endangered by. Walk in the ways of thy heart, h. e. Take thy
fill of those sensual pleasures which thy heart is set upon: this is that which
Young men would have not considering that when Death and Judgment comes, those
will prove bitter pleasures to them. We see that Young men for the most part
are Servants, yea Slaves to some sensual lust or other: Drink and vain Company
is dearer to them than the Salvation of their own Souls: And many times there
is some unclean lust or other which they live in; Elibu observed concerning the
Youth in former ages, that their life was amongst the Unclean. There are many
sad instances which stand upon Record in the Book of God concerning this. Onan
a Young man but abominably unclean in the sight of God, for which his
wickedness the Lord flew him and sent him to hell in his youth. The sons of Eli
were guilty of vile uncleanness to the great dishonor of God and of their
Father also; of them it is said, that the sin of the young men was very great
before the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 17. Amnon a Young man was (though the son of a very
holy father) a monster of uncleanness; he set his eyes on his own Sister, and
then did wickedly after the sight of his eyes, by which means he made himself
one of the fools in Israel, and come to an unhappy and untimely death at last.
Solomon says that one evening he looked out of his window, and discerned
amongst the youths, a young man void of understanding -- Prove. 7. 7. And
whither was that Young man a going? To a wicked house there to debauch himself,
not considering that it would cost him the life of his Soul. And there are few
Young men in a state of Unregeneracy, but there is some unclean lust or other
which they do indulge themselves in: If not in the grosser acts of wickedness,
yet in Chambering and Wontonness, which will as certainly keep their Souls out
of the Kingdom of God as any other sins whatsoever. Gal. 5. 19.

4. Persons that live in Idleness, walk in the ways of their own hearts. The
flesh had rather live an easy than a labourious life. Much study is a weariness
of the flesh. Eccl. 12. 12. And so is other hard labor irksome to the flesh.
But to live at hearts ease and idle, is that which corrupt nature desires: And
this is oftentimes the sin which Youth is guilty o^; and when they are so, they
seldom prove famous and eminent in their Generation. They receive an
irrecoverable hurt and wound by the mispence of Precious Time in their Youth,
which makes them forever incapable of doing great things for God and for His
People. Do we not see many spend their Youthful days in little else but sports
and pastimes. It was said by Ahner, Let the Young men arise and play. 2 Samuel 2.
14. That's it which Young men would be at; they are for their play and sports.
As for lawful Recreations which moderately and seasonably used are good and in
some cases a duty; they too often spend more time therein, then God allows
of. And too many of them indulge themselves in sinful sports and pastimes; and
when once they have tasted o^ that forbidden fruit, they are enchanted and
intoxicated with it so as that they can know no bounds therein. Austin relates
concerning Alipius who was his Companion and Comrade when they were both Young
men, that he was by some Vain (...) to go to behold a Sword play, and he says,
that (though he was before a very hopeful Young man) when once he had been
made a Spectator in that bloody sport, he was with very much ado recovered out
of that snare. Thus when Young men indulge themselves in any Scandalous Games,
such as those of Cards and Dice (which the more sober Heathen have Condemned)
they know no measure therein. The wrath of God gives them up to such (...)
until they have sinned away the day of Grace, and when once their Souls are
dropped into Hell, they would give a thousand worlds (if they had them) for
those precious hours which they have lost in such Vanities, never to be
recovered again.

Propos. III Young Men [as well as others] shall be brought into JUDGMENT. This
is a Truth necessary for Young men to know and believe* Know O Young man that
God will bring thee into Judgment: And if God will bring thee into i^, it is a
vain thing for the to hope that thou shall escape the Judgment. But when will
this be?

Ans. Know. 1. That Young men (as well as others) are subject unto Death Job
(...) They die in Youth. The truth is, that most of those that are born into the
world die before they come to old age; where there is one that lives to old age,
there are many that die before gray (...) are upon them. Indeed Young men are
commonly unwilling to die, and so to come into Judgment: he Terrors of Death are
amazing to them. I remember a Young man on his death bed, who perceiving that
his Soul was (...) into the other World, Cried out, I am amazed! I am amazed!
Nevertheless, when God sends Death, the Youngest and. Strongest cannot stand
before it. One dies in his full strength, when his breasts are full of Milk
and his bones moistened with Marrow. That Messenger Death will take no bribes.
You read in the Gospel of one that said to his Soul, Soul take thine ease, eat,
drink, just as if he had no more then the Soul of a Swine in him: That was a
man that walked in the ways of his own heart; but there is a terrible thunder
clap a coming, God said unto him, thou fool, this night thy Soul shall be
required of thee, Luke 12. 19, 20. Death comes like a Bailiff, and lays and
arrest on the Young man, and away his Soul is carried before God the Judge of
all. In (...) case especially, Death often seazeth (...) Young men: one is, in
case their Parents have sinned and provoked God: What a fearful end did Ahab,
and Jezabels children come unto when all their heads were cut off, and laid in
bloody heaps for every body to (...) on; a dismal and an horrid Spectacle, and
this as a punishment of their Parents wickedness; with allusion unto this, it
was said of Jezabel, I will kill her Children with death, Rev. 2. 23. Again, If
Children do themselves prove very wicked, many times they die in Youth:
Therefore it is said by Ecclesiastes, be not overmuch wicked, neither be you
foolish, for why should thou die before thy time, Eccles. 7 17. Many years
since there was a sad Occasion for me to insist on that Scripture, and to show
that excess in wickedness brings untimely death: We have with our eyes seen
woeful examples of it. Especially if the Children of Godly Parents exceed in
wickedness, they make have into Hell. This we see in several of David's
Children, and in the Sons of Eli: Inasmuch as they had been brought up in such
Families, but sinned heinously against the Religious Education God had favored
them with, while they were Young men they became ripe for Everlasting
destruction. And most of all it is so as to such as live under the Gospel: God
uses to make quick work with such sinners. That Scripture relates to Gospel
times, Mal. 3. 5. Where the Lord says, He will Come near to Judgment, and that
He will be a swift witness against the Adulterers, and against the false
Swearers etc. If Young men that have the Gospel shall be Profane Swearers, and
Unclean debauched wretches, the Lord will be a swift witness against them, He
will not suffer them to be long out of Hell. How rare is it to see a profane
Young man that has enjoyed the means of Grace powerfully dispensed to live unto
old age? No; but God brings them to death, and when they are brought to death
they are brought unto Judgment also. For Judgment follows at the heels of
death. Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed unto men once to die, and after this the
Judgment. At the hour of death there is a particular Judgment passed on the
Soul: The Soul of a sinner is no sooner out of his body, but the next moment he
knows most certainly where he must be, and what will become of him throughout
eternal ages. Young men (as well as others) that shall die in their sins will
then be judged and condemned to perpetual Imprisonment: To lie in a Dungeon
amongst hellish Serpents, where is blackness of darkness for ever. Then will
the days of darkness which are many come upon them. It is said concerning the
sinners of the old World (amongst whom there were many Young men) that their
Spirits, their Souls are in Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19. Miserable Souls! they have
been in Prison now near upon Four Thousand Years: and Prisoners they must be
another thousand years until they shall be brought unto their Trial before all
the World at the last day; and after that to a worse Prison, there to abide for
ever and ever. Before the dead body of a man or woman, that dies in a state of
sin is put into the Prison of the Grave, their Souls are in a worse Grave, in
an Eternal Prison, in an everlasting Hell of Misery.

2. Young men (as well as others) shall be brought into Judgment at the Great
day. This is that which is chiefly intended in the Text before us. It is a
truth which has been known and believed in all ages, that there will a day
come, when He that made the World, will bring all the men that ever have been,
are, or ever shall be, before His Tribunal. The Jews have a tradition amongst
them, that this was the Controversy between Cain and Abel: It is said that Can
talked with Abel. Genesis 4. 8. The Scripture mentions not what the discourse was
that passed between them, only in the Hebrew there is an Extraordinary pause,
intimating that they had more talk than is there expressed. The Jews have it
traditionally amongst them, that the thing which Cain said, was, that there is
no other World but this, that there it no Immortal Soul, and that men shall not
after this World is come to its end, be brought before God to Judgment, but
that Abel contradicted him, saying, there is an Immortal Soul in every man, and
there will be a great day of Judgment, when every man must give an account to
God, of all that he has done in this life. Whether the Jews say true or no
concerning such discourse between Cain and Abel, the thing it self is most
certainly true: A day of Judgment will come, and the beginning of it is now
very near; not one man in all the World shall escape the Trial of that
dreadful day. 2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done whether it be good or bad. And in particular Young men who
have walked in the ways of their own hearts, must hold up their guilty hands
before the Bar of Divine Justice in that day. Rev. 20. 12. I saw the dead
Small and Great stand before God, and the Dead were Judged according to their
works* So then the Small as well as the Great, Young ones as well as Elder
ones, must stand before God, they must and shall appear before JESUS CHRIST the
Son of God, who is God and not Man (...) and be Judged either to (...)
Everlasting death, according as their way (...) ^orkes shall in that day (...)
And in the mean while (...) Young men who walk in (...) hearts arrest them with
sad Convictions at Times, that there is such a day approaching: When they have
Committed a great Sin, suppose Uncleanness or Lying, or the like, Sins against
the light of nature, there is that in their breasts which faith to each one of
them, God will bring them into Judgment for that Sin. Where is there a Young
man, that can say he never at all found it so? We proceed then to a fourth
Proposition, which is,

Propos. IV. The Day of Judgment will be a Sad Day to those Young Men that
shall Live and Die in their Sins. It will be to every man either the most
Joyful or the most Doleful day. To the Righteous it will be the most happy
day that ever was, but unto them that have walked in the way of their hearts,
and in the sight of their eyes, a bitter and a miserable day. A day of wrath: A
day of Perdition. That it will be a sad day unto all (be they Young or Old)
that shall be found in their sins and out of Christ, appears from several
things.

1. In that they have not improved their Talents committed unto them as they
might and ought to have done. There is no man but some Talent or other is
committed to him, which he ought to make a good use of. He who is the Lord of
us all, has given to Every man his Work, Mar. 13. 34. One man has this Work,
and another man has that Work, in the doing of which he must improve his
Talent. Young men are favored with several peculiar Talents: Time is a
precious Talent: Health, and Strength, and those Vigorous Affections which are
commonly in Young men, are great Talents which they must be accountable for. A
day of Reckoning will come. It is said in the Parable concerning the Talents,
After a Long Time the Lord of those Servants comes, and reckons with them.
Math. 25. 19. It is now a long time since our Lord ascended into Heaven, but He
will come quickly to Judge the Earth, and then will reckon with His Servants:
He will know of them how they have lived, and what they done in the World. A
Servant that has been set to work, but spends his time in Idleness all the
day, will have a miserable account to give unto his Master when night comes. A
Servant that has been trusted with Money or Goods to improve for his Masters
use, if he shall Embezel or mispend them can expect nothing but severity. Thus
when God shall say to a Young man at the day of Judgment, I gave thee space to
repent in, I suffered thee to live on the Earth, Twenty years Thirty years; I
put many advantages into thy hands, to be working out thy Salvation but instead
of attending to my Counsils, thou did walk in the ways of thy own heart and
what account can thou give for this now? What will thy Judgment! What thy
Sentence be then? God in His Word has told all unprofitable Servants, what
their Doom shall be. Math 25. 30. Cast ye the Unprofitable Servant into utter
Darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Though a Young man, if
he has been an unprofitable Servant, he must be cast into utter darkness, and
the sad remembrance of lost opportunities never to be recovered again will
cause Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth.

2. When God shall bring them into Judgment, all the Secret Sins of men will be
revealed before the whole World. Foolish sinful Creatures are apt to think
themselves safe, if they can but hide their sins from the knowledge of men, not
considering that the Eye of God is upon them in all their ways Children and
Young men that live in secret sins, their chief care is that the Magistrates
(...) their Parents or Masters may know (...) of what they do; but at the day
of Judgment all will come out; and the whol^ World will hear of what they have
done. Eccles. 12. 14. God will bring every Work into Judgment, with every
Secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil. As the Secret good
deeds of pious Young men that follow the Lord in secret will then be openly
revealed and rewarded, the same is to be said of the secret transgressions and
abominations which ungodly Youths will be found guilty of at that day.
Therefore the day of Judgment must needs be a day of horror and confusion to
them. Where is there an ungodly Young man, but if all his secret sins (yea, the
sins of his heart and all) should be revealed before the World, he would be
ready to say as Thamar when solicited by a wicked Young man to commit folly
with him, Whither shall I cause my shame to go, 2 Samuel 13. 13. The day of
Judgment will be to them that die in their sins a day of the greatest shame that
ever was or that can be: then will God fulfill that threatening against sinners,
Jer. 23. 40. I will bring an Everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual
shame which shall not be forgotten. Now they seek to cover their sins by
denials, fictions, and false-hoods, but it will be in vain for them to think to
do so then. Witnesses to their conviction will appear against them in that day.
The Judge Himself will be a witness against them: He will then say, My eyes saw
what you did, and My ears heard every Word that was spoken by you. Jer. 29. 23.
They have committed villainy in Israel, they have committed Adultery -- even I
know and am a witness says the Lord. And Angels will come in as witnesses
against them. The devils who now Tempt them to do wickedly will then be their
accusers: Yea, and holy Angels whose eyes have been upon them, and whose
Testimony will be received, shall be witnesses against them. And so will
Conscience which is more than a thousand witnesses. For the remembrance of
their sins remains in their Consciences for ever. Jer. 17. ^. The sin of Judah
is written with a pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamon: Where is it
written? It is graven upon the Table of their heart. It has made such
Impressions upon Conscience as cannot be gotten out. A sin which a Young man
commits now, he will remember it after he is dead, and at the day of Judgment,
and throughout the days of Eternity. We see that men of an hundred years old
will remember what they did fourscore years ago more perfectly than what they
did but four weeks since; a clear demonstration that the Immortal Souls of men
will never forget what was done by them whilst in their bodies, though never so
long ago since. Therefore in the Parable concerning the Rich man and Lazarus,
it was said to him, Remember that in thy life time thou receivedst thy good
things, Luke 16. 25. Sinners in the World to come have a perfect remembrance of
all that they did whilst in this World: When therefore they shall be told of
their secret sins, they will remember them all, and a dreadful remembrance it
will be.

3. A sentence which will be exceeding terrible, and the execution thereof
certain and unavoidable, will in the day of Judgment be pronounced on such as
shall die in their sins. They will then suffer a sentence of banishment, never
to see the face of God any more, never to come within the Glorious Palace of
the great King, which is a sad sentence indeed, Considering that in Gods favor
there is life, and His loving kindness is better than life it self. Woe unto
them (says God) when I depart from them, Hos. 9. 12. This woe will come upon
every sinner at the day of Judgment. Sinners must then Go away from the
Glorious and Gracious presence of God for ever: He will say to them depart. And
the place which they shall be banished into will be the most dismal that can be
imagined: Into a place where they must never see the light of the Sun; even
into Outer darkness, where there is nothing but a perpetual night. Psalm. 49.
19. They shall never see light. And in that place they must die. It was said
unto Shebna, that with a mighty Captivity he should be carried into Babylon,
and there thou shall die, Isa. 22. 18. So at the day of Judgment, the Chaldeans
of Hell will carry sinners with them into an Everlasting Captivity, and there
they must die. They shall then suffer not only a sentence of banishment but of
death too, and that the most dreadful that can be thought of: They shall be
sentenced to be burnt to death; to be cast into a Lake of fire and brimstone.
The Scripture expresses the Punishment of sinners in the World to come by such
Metaphors because it will be more intolerable than those things really and
literally done would be; as one in horror of Conscience looking on the fire,
said, To burn in that fire is nothing to what I feel. And as certainly as the
sentence shall be pronounced, execution will follow. For it is a Judgment never
to be reversed, a sentence never to be repealed. In this life sinners may by
Repentance toward God, and Faith in Jesus Christ obtain a Pardon, so as that
the sentence of Condemnation which they are under shall not be executed upon
them, but at the day of Judgment it is otherwise: For the day of Grace is then
at an end; there will not be one offer of Grace more then: Christ the Judge
that now offers to obtain a Pardon from God His Father for those that will
humble themselves and repent of their iniquity, will than be inexorable. No
Cries, no Tears, no Prayers, no Entreaties will prevail with Him for mercy. Let
sinners hear what He says and tremble: for His words are these, Because I have
called and ye refused, I have stretched ^ut my hand, and (...) man regarded,
but ye have set at naught all my Counsil, and would none of my reproof, I will
Laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear
comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a Whirel wind, when
distress and anguish comes upon you, Then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer, they shall then seek me early, but they shall not find me, for that
they hated knowledge, and would not choose the fear of the Lord, they would
none of my Counsil, they despised all my reproof, therefore they shall eat of
the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices Prove. 1. 24.
etc. How should sinners escape in that day? They will fall into the hands (...)
holy Angels, who are powerful and will be faithful Executioners of the just
and holy wrath of God. Math. 13. 41. 42. Yea, they shall fall into the
Omnipotent hands of the Eternal God. None can deliver out of his Angry and
Almighty hands: when the eternal God shall strike thee with those very hands
with which He made Heaven and Earth, it is impossible for thee to escape
destruction.

4. The misery of Sinners at the day of Judgment will be Eternal. It is called
Eternal Judgment, Heb. 6. 2. because men are then adjudged to an eternal estate
either of happiness or of misery. Whoever shall be found in their sins at that
day must die not only by a Tormenting but an Everlasting Death. To be long in
dying is a dismal thing. The pangs and Agonies of the Second Death will never
be over. Rev. 14 11. The smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever;
and they have no rest day nor night. The pleasures of sin will then prove dear
bought pleasures indeed. It was a sad word which a man that had lived an
ungodly life uttered on a death bed, I (said he) have enjoyed the pleasures of
sin for a few years, and now I must be in torment for it, more than a thousand
Million of Ages. Sin has a short pleasure attending it, but a long, an
everlasting pain. It were well if Young men who walk in the ways of their own
heart would think of this. A man that is in great pain and misery, suppose by
some Tormenting disease, as by the Stone, Gout, Cancer or the like, is
comforted with thinking this will not last always; but when misery is endless
as well as easeless, when there is Eternity added to extremity of dolours, most
woeful is the condition of such forlorn Creatures. Yet all this will Young men
that continue to walk in the ways of their own heart, bring themselves unto at
the day of Judgment. Hell fire is a fire that never can be quenched: The breath
of the Lord which is like a stream of Brimstone kindles that fire, and makes
it to burn for ever.

We Proceed to make some Improvement of the Doctrine which has been thus far
insisted on. The first USE may be of INFORMATION in two or three Particulars.

INFOR. I. Hence we may assuredly Conclude that God will certainly Bless those
Young men that do not walk in the way of their own hearts. Isaac said
concerning his Son Jacob, I have Blessed him, yea, and he shall be blessed.
Thus may we say of Young men whose hearts are changed and mortified to sin,
self, and the World, God has Blessed them, yea, and they shall be Blessed.
Indeed such a Young man is a rare sight. The Philosopher of old laid it down
for a Maxim, that Wisdom was incompatible to Youth, That a Young man could not
be a Wise man, because Wisdom requires experience and experience requires time
and age. This notwithstanding, the Grace of God may and it will make a Young
man Wise. The Scripture speaks of a wise Child. Eccl. 4. 13. And of a Child
that is an hundred years old, Isai. 65. 20. And of Young men that have the
Spirit of God poured on them Joel 2. 28. The Young man that has saving Grace
in his Soul will attend diligently to the Word of God; and whoever does so will
be blessed with that Wisdom, which will make him Eternally happy. David was a
Young man when he wrote the 119 Psalm. But hear how he speaks in Verse 98, 99.
Thou through thy Commandments, has made me wiser then mine Enemies; for they
are ever with me, I have more Understanding then all my Teachers, for thy
Testimonies are my Meditation: I understand more then the Ancients, because ^,
keep thy Precepts. Here now was a blessed Young man. The God of Heaven takes a
singular delight in Young persons who truly ^ear and serve Him. If men see
young trees in their Orchards full of fruit they are pleased with it; so the
Lord when He sees Young Plants in His Church abounding in Works of Piety and
Righteousness: When He beholds Young men a part, and Young Women a part Fasting
and Praying, and mourning together because of the sins of the Times and Places
where they live; Oh how exceeding dear are such Young gracious Souls unto God
and unto the Lord Jesus Christ. JOHN was the Youngest of all the Apostles,
scarce Twenty years old (as Ecclesiastical Writers report when he began his
Public Ministry, and he was the Disciple whom Jesus loved in a peculiar
manner. They that honor God in their Youth, He is wont to honor them many
times He makes them blessed Instruments of much good in their Generations
which is the greatest happiness that men on earth are capable of. How many
instance are there in the Scripture concerning this that so Young men might be
encouraged to seek and serve the Lord. Joseph a Godly Young man, and what a
blessing was he no^ only to his Fathers Family, but to a who^^ nation besides?
Joshua was a pious Young man, and the Lord magnified him in the sight of all
Israel. Samuel, David, Solom^ Obediah, Josiah, Timothy, were all of (...) Godly
in their Youth, and what blessed instruments were they in their several
Generations, to promote the glory of God, and the good of His People? What a
Crown of Glory shall such Young men receive at the day of Judgment? I write
unto you Young men, because ye have overcome the Wicked one. 1 John 2. 13.
Ordinarily it is so, that Young men are singled out to be Soldiers: As for
those Young men that have approved themselves faithful Soldiers of Jesus
Christ in fighting against, and Overcoming the flesh, the World, and the Devil,
the Lord Jesus will reward them in that day. Christ will then say to them, I
know all your Works, I know that when others did serve their lusts, and promote
the Devils interest, you did serve God, and promote His Interest in the World.
Here is a Crown for you: Now all Angels and men shall see how I have loved you.

INFOR. II. Hence such Young men as continue to walk in the ways of their
Heart, and in the sight of their Eyes, are very foolish Creatures. The
Scripture calls them Fools, and therefore they are so. Prove. 17. 21. He that
begets a fool does it to his sorrow; and the father of fool has no joy. A
profane Young man is that fool, whose father has sorrow and no joy in him; one
such son is enough to damp the joy which he may have in his other Children, who
are not such Wicked Fools as that son is. Such Youngsters are Simple ones
indeed. Hear what the Wisest of men faith Prove. 7. 7. I beheld amongst the
simple ones, I discerned amongst the Youths, a Young man void of understanding.
Consider a little if it be not so. Fools are easily deceived, and so are Young
men that have not Grace in their hearts; sin deceives them; the Devil
deceives them; vain Companions deceive them. They are easily drawn into the
snares of Temptation: like silly birds they hasten to the snare not knowing
that it is for their life. Persons are known to be either Wise or Foolish by
the choice which they make. One that does prefer pebbles to Pearls, Trifles
to the richest Treasure, is judged to be a fool. Thus it is with Young men
that walk in the vvayes of their own heart, especially if they do so under the
light of the Gospel, like fools as they are they refuse a good offer; with the
Young man in the Gospel, they refuse the Treasures which are in Heaven: And
(...) do they choose instead thereof? but the Vanities of this present World,
nay, sin which is the vilest thing that can be chosen. They that exchange
change things of the greatest value, for those that are worth nothing are
accounted fools. What folly was that of profane Esau to sell his birth right to
gratify his carnal appetite. Thus do profane Young men do: They have Immortal
Souls which are more worth than all the World, these do they exchange for
sensual and brutish Lusts. To part with pleasures for-ever-more, to enjoy those
that are but for a season, is infinite folly. He that runs into the fire is
either a fool or a mad man: What Fools then are they, that will cast their own
bodies and Souls into the fire that never shall be quenched? If it should be
said unto a man, you shall enjoy all the pleasures which your heart can desire
for a year together, on condition that after that you shall be in most
inexpressible Torment for an hundred years; no one but a Fool or a mad man
would accept of the proposal. Are not they then, the greatest Fools who to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a few Years will go into everlasting punishment.
I remember one of the Ancients speaks of a Chaste Woman who being solicited by
a profane vile Wretch to sin against God, desired him for her sake, to hold his
hand in the fire but one quarter of an hour: That (said he) is an unreasonable
desire, but ask any thing of me that is reasonable and He do it for your sake:
To whom she replied, Is it unreasonable for you to hold your finger in the fire
one quarter of an hour for my sake, and do you think that it is reasonable for
me for your sake to consent unto that, for which my Body and Soul must burn for
ever in the fire that cannot be quenched. Therefore Young men that continue to
walk in the ways of their own hearts, and so bring themselves to this at last,
are Foolish Creatures.

INFOR. III. What a sad account will they have to give unto God at the day of
Judgment, who have out lived their Youth, and yet shall die in their Sins. If a
Young man that has not lived Thirty years dying in his sins must be Eternally
miserable, what must they be that have lived Forty, it may be Fifty years or
more, and shall at last go out of the World in an Unconverted estate? It is
said that the sinner of an hundred years old shall be Cursed, Isa. 85. 2. O how
Cursed! O how Damned will the sinner of an hundred years old be! The Scripture
speaks of those that are Old in Adulteries, Ezekiel. 23. 43. An old Wanton, an old
Drunkard must needs fall under an heavy sentence in the day when God shall
bring them into judgment. The longer men continue in sin, the heavier will
their Judgment be at last. There are mountains of Guilt on their sinful Souls,
and therefore mountains of Wrath will break upon them in the great and terrible
day of the Lord. What have such sinners been doing all their lives long? They
have been treasuring up Wrath against the day of Wrath; such a treasure as will
never be spent throughout the days of Eternity. What an Infinite number of sins
have they to answer for? And that not only as to Commissions of evil, but as to
Omissions of duty? It will be said to many a sinner at the day of Judgment,
thou did live without Prayer in thy Family: and thou (...) without Prayer in
Secret: thou did live so many thousand days without any Prayer to God, and
now will God pour out His fury upon thee. For many years together thou did
despise the Offers of Grace in the Gospel. No thought will cut and kill the
heart of a sinner at the Judgment day like that. I remember I knew a man that
was Executed for an horrid Crime; and he did to me in private Confess his Guilt
in other Capital offenses which the World knew nothing of, acknowledging that
God was righteous in bringing him to such a death; that poor Wretch when he
came to die, declared unto all the Spectators that nothing troubled him so much,
as that of his having disregarded the many Sermons which he heard Preached in
the Name of the Lord: These were his sentiments when his Immortal Soul was
going to appear before God the Judge of all. So will it be with sinners at the
last day. Suppose a man had heard but one Sermon in all his life in which he
was called upon to repent and believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, but shall
neglect so great Salvation; this will make his account dreadful in that day.
But what then will become of those that have heard a thousand Sermons, and yet
live and d^ in their sins? The remembrance of every neglect of Christ will be a
terrible thing a^ the day of Judgment.

USE. II. Let Young men be Exhorted and Preswaded to Turn from the Ways of
their own Hearts, and to walk in the Ways of God.

Some Considerations and Councils Let me set before you.
Consider. I. The way which the generality of Young men walk in is a Woeful
way. It will be found so at the Judgment day. It is the way of their own heart
which is the broad way that leads to destruction (...) that it might not be
(...) of the Young men who have been born in New England. Many of them are
profane Are there no profane Swearers to be found amongst Young men? It is a
sad thing that there are any such. I knew the time when in New England Young
men knew not what it is to Swear. A man might live Twenty years (some have done
so, I my self did so when in my Youth) and never hear a profane Oath in
New England. Is it so now? And are there not Young men who are lovers of Strong
Drink? I wish I could say, that we had not Given the Nazarites wine to drink.
Are there not Young men who are Sabbeth breakers, notwithstanding they have
been put in mind of a Young man Executed for Murder, who when dying Cried out,
Let Young men take Warning by me, and let them know that (...) breaking will
prove a dangerous and a costly sin unto them. Are there not Young men who are
disobedient to their Parents, or to their Masters whom God has set over them,
and that are like the Children of the Devil, given to Lying? Are there not
Young men whose life is amongst the Unclean? Are there not Young men that will
Steal and (...) that will rob their Parents or Masters and say it is no
Transgression. Nay, Young men born in New England, that have turned bloody
Pirates, that to get Silver and Gold have embrewed their hands in blood. God
will bring them into Judgment, and than they will wish that they had never been
born, and most of all that they had never been born in New England. There are
others that are not profane, but like the Young man in the Gospel, they have
Externally kept the Commandments in their Youth, who nevertheless, are
strangers unto Faith in Christ, and strangers to the new birth. Is it not so
with the Youth throughout this Land generally? There are some and blessed be
God that are so many Young men in New England that the Grace of God is manifest
in them. Nevertheless, do we not see that the Young Generation as to the
greatest part of them, is a poor Unconverted, Perishing Generation? On that
account it is not to be wondered at, that God from Heaven has Testified His
displeasure against the present Generation. He has poured it out upon the
Children abroad, and on the Assembly of Young men together. Jer 6. 11. It is a
sad Word which is spoken in Isa. 9. 17. The Lord shall have no joy in their
Young men. And again, Amos 4. 10. Your Young men have (...) with the Sword. How
many Young men in New England have in these late years been numbered for the
Sword? Many has a French Sword or an Indian Sword slain* but more have been
slain by the Sword of the Lord in respect of mortal diseases, which He has
visited them with. We may say after the Prophet, Death is come up into our
windows, to out of the Children from without, and the Young men from the
Streets, Jer. 9. 21. And have not many Young Persons gone into Captivity. We
may say with the Lamenting Church, My Virgins and my Young men are gone into
Captivity, Lam. 1. 18. Now then the Lord calls from Heaven unto Young ones that
yet remain, saying, Oh! do not you continue to walk in the ways of your heart,
left Captivity, left Death come upon you also: Do you think that the Young
Persons whom God has thus dealt with, were greater sinners than any in
New England? I tell you nay, but repent left you like-wise Perish.

Consider. II. There are some Young men who if they die in their Sins, the day
of Judgment will in a peculiar manner be a dreadful day unto them. To
instance, it will be so unto such Young men as have been more wicked than
ordinary; who have above others indulged themselves in walking after the lusts
of their own hearts. It was said of Babylon, how much she has lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. The more pleasure any have
had in sin, the greater will their Torment be in the Judgment day. All ungodly
ones will be punished in that day, but not all (...). The Lord has reserved
the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished, but chiefly them that walk
after the flesh in the lust of Uncleanness 2 Pet. 2. 10. A Young man that has
committed but one act of Uncleanness, or that has been Drunk but one time in
all his life, must perish for ever without Repentance, much more one that has
been so an hundred times over. Again, they that have been favored with means
of Grace above others, and yet shall neglect the great Salvation, will have the
sadder account to give unto God at the day of Judgment. The Son of God has
declared it, Math. 11. 23, 24. Thou (...) which art Exalted unto Heaven; shall
be brought down to Hell, it shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom in
the day of Judgment than for thee. There are some Young men who as they have
singular advantages to gain knowledge, so they do know more than others: Now if
such miss of Heaven, their knowledge will be as an aggravation of their sin, so
of their punishment at the last day. He that knows his Lords will, but does
it not shall be beaten with many Stripes; unto whom much is given, of him shall
be much required. Luk 12. 48. Again, a Young man that has had Godly Relations,
and yet shall continue in his sins, will on that account come under the sadder
Condemnation when God shall bring him into Judgment. When those of the same
Family with him have set before him good Examples: It may be he has seen his
own Brother or Sister turning from sin unto God; and yet continues to walk in
the way of his heart and the sight of his eyes: This will render him
inexcusable in the day of Judgment. Esau will be Damned the deeper in Hell
because he had such a Brother as Jacob; whose Piety he saw but did not imitate.
But especially such as have been born of Godly Parents, if they continue to
walk in the way of their own hearts, will have a sad account to give at the day
of Judgment. Inasmuch as they have broken the everlasting Covenant, the Waters
of Baptism will be turned into fire at that day: The Tears and Prayers of their
pious Parents will be as oil to the flames of Hell. There Examples and all
their Instructions and Admonitions will rise up in Judgment against the
Children of their own bowels. How dreadful will it be when a Godly Father and
Mother shall join with the Lord Jesus Christ in passing a Sentence of Death on
the Children whom themselves have begotten. As his said Zach. (...). 3. His
father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, thou shall not live.
So will they say, when they hear the Son of God saying it before them. It is
reported of the Emperor Mauritius, that when he saw his Children slain before
his eyes, he used that Expression, Thou art Righteous O Lord because thou have
Judged thus. So will it be at the day of Judgment. As the Elders said when the
great Whore was Judged, Amen; Hallelujah, Rev. 19. 4. So when a Godly Father
shall hear the Son of God pass the Sentence of Eternal Condemnation on the
Child which was exceeding dear to him, he will say, Amen! Amen! Thou Righteous
Judge; I Praise thy Glorious Justice: I have nothing to say, why this Child of
mind should not be sent into Everlasting burnings. Thou know that I Prayed
for him; Thou know I Instructed him; Thou know I Endeavored to set an
holy Example before him, but he would go on in the way of his heart and in the
sight of his eyes: Therefore do I Justify and Join with Thee in the Righteous
Sentence which is passed upon him. You that are the Children of Godly Praying
Parents, think sadly of this.

Consider. III. They that turn from the ^ayes of their own heart unto God in
Christ, shall not come into a Judgment of Condemnation. Indeed, all must be
brought into Judgment, but as for them that repent and believe it will be a
Judgment of Absolution, and not of Condemnation. He that believes has
Everlasting life, and shall not come into Condemnation, but is passed from
Death unto Life. Joh. 5. 24. If Young men repent and turn from all their
transgressions, and betake themselves unto Jesus Christ for Salvation, all
their sins will be pardoned. I write unto you little Children, because your
sins are forgiven you for his Names sake. 1 John 2. 12. The sins of Childhood
and Youth are many, and sometimes very great. How many Wicked Words have they
spoken? What Sabbath breaking? What disobedience to Parents have Children and
Young men been guilty of? How many Lies have they told, for which they must be
Damned in Hell fire without Repentance. But if they truly repent and turn from
all their sins unto God in Christ, none of them shall ever be mentioned against
them, though never so many, though never so great. Ezekiel. 33. 16.

Some Counsils let me leave with you.
1. Do nothing which you are unwilling that ever the World should know that you
have done that thing. For it is certain that at the day of Judgment all will be
known: Even Every Work whether it be good, or whether it be evil. All the
passages of your lives wherever you have been, will be called over. They are
all Written down in a Book. Rev. 20. 12. The Jews have an apprehension that the
Angels write down all the Works of men, and will produce them at the day of
Judgment* To be sure, God Writes them down, and Conscience will remember them,
and the World will hear of them. This is a Good Rule for every man to remember;
It (...) would not have it known that such a thing has been done by me, then
never let me do it If Young men would remember this, it would keep them from
commi^ting many a sin. Remember therefore the Words of the Lord Jesus Christ,
who has said. There is nothing Covered that shall not be Revealed, neither hid
that shall not be known Luke 12. 2.

2. Beware of those sins in a special manner which do often times prove the
Ruin of Young Men. To Instance, Breaches of the Seventh Commandment are evils
which Young men are often found guilty of, and by indulging themselves therein
they provoke God in a way of Judicial dispensation to give them up unto that
and unto other lusts of their own heart also. The Lord in his forest Wrath
says, He that is filthy, let him be filthy still. Again, those sins of
Drinking and Company keeping prove fatal to the Souls of many Young Persons. A
Father once hearing that a Son of his was become a Drunkard, gave him up for
lost and gone. I shall never forget with what anguish a Young man that dyed in
this place above Twenty years ago, on his dead bed laid the ruin of his Soul to
his vain drinking Companions. Beware of that sin of Idleness, or mispence of
precious Time: there are many Young men who have much to answer for in this
respect. They have not been deligent in their Callings. They have enticed one
another to go ^o the Alehouse, or to the Coffee-house or ^o the Tavern; when
they have no call to be there; and there do they spend a World of precious time
in Drinking, or in unprofitable Discourse, or it may be in Gaming; for which
they will have a fearful account to give to God at the hour of Death, and at
the Judgment to come. An old dying man once said to some Young Persons, O
Children prize your Time, I would give a thousand Wor^^^ that I bad not lost
the Time of my Youth.

3. Let the Counsils of Godly Parents be of great Weight with you. Hear the
Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother. Prove. 1. 8.
To disobey and disregard the Admonitions of a Father is one of the blackest
marks of Reprobation that can be. Witness the Sons of Eli, of whom it is said,
They hearkened not to the Voice of there Father, because the Lord would slay
them, 1 Samuel ^. 25. If thou art such a Child as will (...) hearken to the voice
of thy Father, those may fear that the Lord has determined thy destruction.
The very Heathen have Reverence for the Counsils (especially the dying
Counsils) of their Parents. And (...) thou who art born of Christian Parents
(...) Religion in thee than they? Oh (...) to become guilty of the Fifth
Commandment, lest they light be put out in obscur^ darkness Signal Blessings
are wont to attend dutiful, and signal Curses follow disobedient Children.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother which is the first Commandment with Promise,
that it may be well with thee, and thou may be long on the earth. Did you
ever know any die on the Gallows, but they pro^essed that their ruin began with
disobedience to their Parents: And no doubt (as one speaks) Hell rings with the
same Complaints.

(...) 4. Remember DEATH, and the Day of ^ JUDGMENT. Think seriously and often
(...) of your dying. You have heard, and daily experience of it before your
eyes, may con^vince you that Young Persons may die as well as others. Serious
thoughts about it, would put you upon Prayer and Preparations for it. A man
whose constant practice was to Pray Six times every day; gave-this reason for
his doing so, I Remember I must (...) I have else where spoken of a gracious
Praying Child, whom the thoughts of Death caused to be much in Prayer: and when
some said to him, you are a Child and may live many years, what should you
think of Death for; he replied, I was in the Burying place, and there I saw a
Grave that was shorter than I am. You Young ones may die, and therefore you are
concerning to Repent and Pray, and make sure of an Interest in Christ. And
think sadly with thy self, If I should die this night, what would become of my
SOUL? In what place would my Immortal Soul be lodged for ever? And remember The
Great Day of JUDGMENT. Live now as you will wish you had lived, when That Day
comes. Think with thy self, If Jesus Christ the Son of God should now rend the
Heavens and come down to Judge the Earth; What would He say to me? What
Sentence would He pronounce upon me? Would He say to me, Come thou Blessed, or
would He not say, Go thou Cursed? Remember these things now, so may you hope to
find Mercy in that Day.

The hateful Evil OF SIN, Discoursed of in A SERMON, Showing that SIN
Unrepented of will be bitterness in the Latter END.
Psalm. XXXVI. II. He Flattereth himself in his own Eyes, until his Iniquity
be found to be Hateful.
THE Title of the Psalm shows that it was Written by David the Servant of the
Lord. There are but two Psalms in which he is so Styled, and both of them were
Written after his being Anointed King. He ^ad taken up an holy Resolution to
Serve God in whatever Capacity he did sustain whether Private or Public. No
man nor Creature is capable of an higher Advancement than to be accepted as
Gods Servant* To be styled David the Servant of the Lord, is a greater honor,
than to be styled David the King of Israel.

As for the Time when this portion of Scripture was Penned, that is not
particularly expressed. A Judicious Expositor has Conjectured that David wrote
it when Abiather came to him, and acquainted him with what Saul had done in
Murdering A^imeleck, and all the Priests at Nob. Hence a wicked man is
described and charecterised from the Example of Saul, in the first (...) of
this Psalm: The Transgression of the Wicked says within my heart, there is no
fear of God before his Eyes: He seems to intimate that once he had too great a
Charity for Saul, supposing that he might sin out of Infirmity, Melancholy, or
Passion, rather than out of Malice; but now he was convinced in his Heart and
Conscience, that Saul was a very wicked man: That he was wholly destitute of
the (...) fear of God; his Murdering the Priests of the Lord was an evidence of
it. Such actions were done by him as were inconsistent with the fear of God.

As for the Words at present to be insisted on, there have been various
Translations, and so various Interpretations of them, which (as not being much
to Edification) I shall not trouble you with. But as they are before us, two
things are affirmed concerning the Wicked man. (1.) That he Flattereth himself
in his iniquity: He is secure notwithstanding the sin he has been guilty of: He
pleases himself with vain Imaginations concerning his present and future
happiness. (2.) The Psalmist affirms that sin will at last appear in other
colors before the wicked man than at present it does. It will be found to be
hateful. Now iniquity is sweet, but the time shall come when it will be
bitter: Though at present it appears in false colors, as if sin were a
desirable thing, it will in the end of all appear to be a most detestable
thing. The DOCTRINE therefore from the words, is, That although Sinners may
Flatter and please themselves with vain Imaginations to the Contrary, it is
certain that Sin will at last appear to be a most Odious thing.

The particulars contained in this Doctrine may be expressed in three
PROPOSITIONS, all which are employed in it.

Proposition. I.
Persons who indulge themselves in sin, are not apprehensive of the Evil and
Danger which is therein. They flatter themselves. They please themselves with
vain Imaginations. Otherwise they would be afraid to sin, and much more to go
on in their trespasses. There are several vain Imaginations which sinners
flatter themselves with.

1. They please themselves with thinking that sin (...) no sin. That when they
sin fearfully they have not sinned at all. How common is it for men, if they
intend well in what they do, to think all is well. Like Saul who excused his
transgressing a positive Command of God, with saying, he did it for Sacrifice.
Sin and Satan do wonderfully blind the eyes of sinners. Hence they sometimes
take damning Errors to be rare (...) as the deluded Christians in Thyatira did,
Rev. 2. 24. The depths of Satan as they Speak. They said that the things which
they did believe were deep rare Mysteri^^ so did they speak concerning those
Errors which at last they found to be no better than Satanical delusions. When
men have shut their eyes against the clear light, their light does become
darkness, and how great is that darkness? A spirit of strong delusion is sent
upon them, so that they believe a Ly. 2. These. 2. 11. And because men err in
their Judgments, they are guilty of such practices as will prove the ruin of
their Souls, and yet flatter themselves that their is no sin nor evil in what
they do. Idolatry is a Soul-ruining iniquity, yet the Jews of old who lived in
that sin, would not believe they were guilty of any such crime. The Prophets by
all their Sermons could not convince them of it. Jer. 2. 35. Thou say,
because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me, behold, I will
plead with thee because thou say I have not sinned. Men may be under the
power of Sin and Satan so far as not only to believe that a damning sin is no
sin at all, but that it is a duty. To persecute the faithful Ambassadors of
Christ to death is a crime of an high nature: Yet did the Lord say to his
Apostles, The time comes that whosoever kills you will think he does God
Good Service. Joh. 16. 2. Thus it was with Paul before his Convertion. He
verily thought with himself that he ought to do many things contrary to the
Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Acts 28. 9. This indeed was not Saul's case when he
killed the Priest at Nob. He sinned Maliciously against his Conscience, at the
very time when he commanded bloody Doeg to Murder them; he called them the
Priests of the Lord: Some have therefore thought that he did at that time
Commit the sin against the Holy Ghost, because his knowledge and his malice was
very great. But many of those that kill and burn them whom they call Heretics,
do it more out of Ignorance than Malice, thinking they do well in it.

2. Another Imagination which sinners please themselves with, is, That is what
they do is a sin, yet that it is no great or dangerous sin. They say of the
iniquity which they indulge themselves in, as Lot said of Zoar, Is it not a
little one. Genesis 19. 20. Thus Ephraim Loved to oppress, and yet he said, they
shall find in me no iniquity that were sin, Hos. 12. 7, 8. The Hebrew word
there translated Sin, is many times used to denote a great Sin: Epharim pleased
himself that they should find in him no iniquity that was of an hanious or
criminal nature, notwithstanding his being guilty of great oppression, he
esteemed that to be no sin, that is to say no great sin. There are great
Oppressiors in the World, who justify themselves in their Oppression They that
are guilty of biting and oppressing usury commonly do so. Sinners remember not
what Christ has said, Math. ^. 19. Whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments and shall teach men so, he shall be called least in the kingdom of
heaven; he shall be of no account there, he shall never come there, if he does
allow himself in the wilful breach of the least Commandment. Men are apt to
please themselves that none on the earth are without sin; the best have their
failings: and that their iniquities are only sins of Infirmity, such as Gods
Children whilst in the World are Subject unto; and that therefore they shall
have a pardon in course for them: they cannot think that the merciful God will
be so severe as to punish them Eternally for such small matters; not believing
that the least sin is in its own nature deadly and damning. And it is possible
for men to be so blinded as to think that great sins are little ones. The
Gentiles thought that Fornication and Drunkenness were no great sins: and
therefore they had no Laws to punish such iniquities But the Lord in his Word
declares that they which do such things shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God,
Gal. 5. 21.

Hence 3. Sinners are apt to flatter themselves, That though they do iniquity
they shall escape Punishment. Notwithstanding the awful threatenings of God in
His word, the Sinner thinks he shall do as well as others. When he hears the
words of the Curse, He blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have
peace though I walk in the Imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to
thirst. Deuteronomy. 29. 20. There are many such sinners, who after they have made
themselves a thirst with strong drink, will make themselves drunk again, and
yet say they shall have Peace. They promise themselves Impunity in sinning
against the Holy God. Hence the Psalmist speaks, as in Psalm. 10. 13.
Wherefore does the wicked Contemn God? he has said in his heart thou shall not
require it. Every Sinner so far forth as he is a sinner, is an Atheist: he
faith in his heart that there is no such God as the Lord is. Either he is such
an Athest as to Imagine that God does not take notice of the sins of men, Psalm.
94. 7. They say the Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard
it. A vile wretch when he is about to commit a sin, suppose The^t or
Uncleanness o^ the like odious wickedness, if he believed that any man, nay,
that a Child of Seven years old saw him, he would not do that wicked thing:
Does he then believe that God seeeth him? No, he is an Athei^^. Or, he says
in his heart, that the Lord is not so Holy a God as his Word declare, Him to
be. That He is not so much offended with sin as His Ministers say He is. They
imagine a God made up all of mercy, without any justice or Holiness. They Judge
of God by themselves; because they do not hate sin, they think the Lord hates
it not. They flatter themselves that because God bears with them for a time,
that He will never call them to an account, Psalm. 50. 21. These things have
thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughest that I was altogether such an one
as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them in Order before thee. Or,
they flatter themselves that because of some external show of Religion, or some
good works done by them, all their sins will be forgiven. They vainly suppose
that by some Righteousness of their own they shall make amends for all their
transgressions. They think the Lord will be pacified with Rivers of oil, and
that the fruit of their bodies will Compensate for the sin of their Souls. The
Jews would Steal, Commit Adultery, and Swear falsely, and yet trust in Lying
words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Jer. 74. They
would go to the Temple and there offer Sacrifice and then say, we are
delivered; we are purged from our past transgressions; and now having cleared
the old Score, we may safely venture to sin again, and by going to the Temple
we shall be delivered, and never punished for these abominations (...) not men
in these days Flatter themselves, after the like manner? If they go to the
Temple, if they go to Church, if they offer Sacrifice, if they say their
Prayers there, they promise themselves impunity though they live in sin. Thus
are they who indulge themselves in the ways of sin secure and not aware of the
Infinite danger their Souls are in.

Proposition. II.
Sin is a most Odious thing. Iniquity i^ hateful: Men ought to hate every Sin.
They have Infinite reason so to do. For,

1. Sin is Contrary to the Holy, Nature and perfect Will of God. They that have
any Love to God, cannot but hate sin. Psalm. 97. 10. Ye that Love the Lord hate
evil. There is no sin whatsoever, but it is an evil committed against God: and
is indeed a greater wrong to God than any one else. A man by sin may wrong
himself and his neighbor very much, but he is most injurious (...) the (...)
God. David had grievously (...) against Uriab and Bathsheba, and against his
own Body and Soul; yet he said to God, against thee, thee only have I (...),
Psalm 51. 4. Sin is High Treason against the Eternal Majesty. God is Holiness it
self, Amos 4. 2. The Lord God (...) Sworn by his Holiness: He never Swears by
any thing less then Himself. But sin is Unholiness, sinners are called the
Un^^^y: So then sin is contrary to the nature of God. He cannot sin: It is
impossible that he should, Heb. 6. 18. He can no more sin, then He can cease to
be God: Nor can He be the Approver or the Author of sin, Hab. 1. 13. Thou art
of purer eyes then to behold evil, and (...) on iniquity. He cannot look on
(...) with approbation or without (...). Hence James speaks as in the (...)
Chapter and thirteen Verse of his Epistle, Let no man say when he is tempted I
am tempted of God. for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any
man. Neither is there any sin, but it is contrary to the (...) will of God.
Every sin is a Transgression of his Law. 1 John 3. 4. There is not the least
sinful Word or Thought but the Divine Law Condemns it. A sinner and a
transgressor of the Law are the same. A sinner does practically declare that
the Law ^f God is no good Law: He trampleth it under foot, he casts it behind
his back. Sin is therefore an hateful and a horrible thing. Jer. 5. 30. An
horrible thing has been Committed in the land Did men know what an evil sin
is, the thoughts of it, would strike them with horror and dread.

2. Sin makes those that love and live in it to become Odious. Therefore it
must needs be the hatefullest evil that can be thought of. It has caused some
of the most Excellent Creatures that ever were made, to become hateful and
abhorred. This is true concerning the Angels that sinned: They were once among
the Sons of God, the morning Stars shouting for joy. Job 38. 7. The morning
Star is a lovely Creature Sin has turned Angels of light into Devils of
darkness; morning Stars into the Darkness of Hell. It may be said of Hell, as
the Scripture speaks of Rome, Rev. 18. 2. It is become the habitation of
Devils, the hold of every fowl Spirit, and a Cage of every Unclean and hateful
bird. The Devils who are compared unto fowls in the Air, are hateful birds.
sin has made them to be the most hateful Creatures in the World; and next
unto sin we ought to hate the Devil, and to have no communion with him. But how
Odious an evil is sin then! It makes men also to become the objects of hatred,
Tit. 3. 3. We were sometimes hateful, that is worthy to be hated of God and
man. Hence sinners are said to be filthy, Psalm. 14. 3. They are altogether
become filthy. And to be loathsome, Prove. 13. 5. A wicked man is loathsome and
comes to shame. And to be abominable, Tit 1. 15. Being abominable and
disobedient and to every good work Reprobate. Sin makes men Odious in the eyes
of God, Psalm. 5. 5. Thou hate all workers of iniquity. The Lord abominates
them, Deuteronomy. 25. 16. All that do Unrighteously are an abomination to the Lord
thy God. Yea, sinners do by wickedness make themselves Odious unto good men,
Prove. 29. 27. An unjust man is an abomination to the just. An holy man does not
delight in the Conversation of ungodly ones: They speak such words, and do such
works as are grievous and abominable to his (...) It is said concerning Lot,
That he was (...) with the filthy Conversation of the wicked that righteous man
dwelling (...) them, seeing and hea^ing vexed his righteous Soul from day to
day with their unlawful deeds, 2. Pet. 2. 7, 8. Ungodly wretches out of whose
mouths proceed corrupt Communications, that delight in filthy obscene
discourse, that will revile the Saints of God, Scoff at Religion, Curse and
Swear, and Profane the blessed Name of God, a good man hates to be in their
Company. Psalm. 139. 20, 21. Thine enemies take thy Name in Vain: do not I hate
them O Lord that hate thee, and am not I grieved with those that rise up
against thee; I hate them with perfect hatred, I count them mine Enemies? If
sin does make those that live in it thus hateful to God and good men, it must
needs be a most Odious thing.

3. Sin makes men Miserable. And it is therefore an hateful thing. Men hate to
be miserable, but then let them hate sin the procuring cause of all their
Miseries. Jer. 2. 17, 19. Have thou not procured this unto thy self -- Thine
own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy back slidings shall reprove thee,
know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and bitter that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God
of hosts. All Temporal Judgments are the bitter fruit of sin. There are Public
Calamities, which cause Lamentation generally throughout a wholeLand which
suffers under the weight of them; such as Wars, Famines, Pestilential and
wasting diseases which leave great desolations behind them. These are procured
by sin, Mic. 1. 8. For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins
of the house of Israel. There are Judgments which fall upon particular
Families; sometimes a great Family is brought to ruin: Thus it was with the
house of Jeroboam, Ahab and others whom we read of in Scripture; and it was sin
that provoked the Lord to destroy them all. As for the man that shall do very
wickedly, the Lord says, I will set my face against that man, and against his
Family and will cut him off, Lev. 20. 5. Nay, which is awful to consider, if a
Godly man shall through the power of Temptation become guilty of a Scandalous
sin, it may be God to testify his holy displeasure at the sin of that good man
will destroy all his Family: What came on Gideons numerous Family after he was
dead and his Soul in Heaven? because of their Fathers sin, threescore and ten
persons of them were Murdered in one day. Gideon made an Ephod, and that
became a ruining snare to his house. We have another sad instance for this in
Eli: A good old man, but very sinfully indulgent to his Children: The Lord said
concerning him, Behold I will do a thing in Israel, at which both the Ears of
every one that hears it shall tingle: In that day I will perform against Eli
all things which I have spoken concerning his house, 1 Samuel 3. 12. This was
fullfilled in the days of Saul, unto whose bloody Malice David (as I told you
but now) seems to allude in the Text and Context before us. (...) being
Commissioned by Saul, Fell upon the Priests, and slew in that day fourscore and
five persons that did wear a linen Ephod: And Nob the City of the Priests smote
he with the Edge of the Sword, both men and women, children and suckling, 1 Samuel 22. 18, 19. Thus did God perform against Eli the thing which He had spoken
concerning his Family: And doubtless when this was first done, it made the Ears
of them that heard of it to tingle. Again, there are personal Judgments, which
sin is wont to bring with it. Men are exposed unto sufferings in Bodies, Names,
Estates, none of which would ever have been, if they had not sinned. Isa 42.
24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers, did not the Lord, He
against whom we have sinned. Though Afflictions are sent for other causes, and
not for sin only, as we see in that instance of the man that was born blind,
Job. 9 3. Nevertheless, it is certain, that Sin is the Parent of all Sorrow: If
men had never sinned, they would never have known Sorrow: Nor did ever any man
in the World suffer any thing, but either his own on other men's sins were the
procuring cause of it. Temporal death is also the bitter fruit o^ sin. Romans 5.
12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Sin has opened the door to let
in death upon all the World Men hate Death, but they have more reason to hate
Sin. There are moreover Spiritual Judgments, which Sin is the woeful cause of;
Judgments that light immediately on the Souls of men, and which are indeed the
most fearful; though sinners themselves are for the present the least sensible
of them: A blind mind is a dreadful Judgment. Joh. 9. 39. Jesus said, for
Judgment am I come into this world, that they which see might be made blind.
Natural blindness is a sore Calamity, but Spiritual blindness is incomparably a
greater evil. As sight is a great mercy, but spiritual eye sight a far greater
blessing. One of the Martyrs said to a pious blind Youth, that was cast into
Prison for the Gospel sake, Alas! poor child, God has taken from thee thy
bodily eye sight, Himself knows best why He has done it. But He has given
thee a far better sight, He has given thee an eye of Faith to behold the Lord
Jesus Christ. So Spiritual blindness is a thousand times worse than that which
is of the body only. Yet this misery has sin brought upon us: Every man in
his natural estate, has a Soul within him as dark as Hell, 2 Pet. 1. 9. He is
blind and cannot see a (...). Adams sin has brought that misery of Spiritual
blindness upon all his Children: And they do by actual sins of their own
provoke God to smite them with yet greater blindness: Their foolish heart is
darkened, and God has given them over to a reprobate mind. Hardness of heart is
a Spiritual Judgment: No greater Judgment can befall a poor Creature out of
Hell, than to be given up to sin without remorse for it. The more men sin, the
more are they hardened and emboldned in sin, until they have filled up the
measure of their iniquity. This is a dismal effect of sin, and of the forest
wrath of God for it. Well therefore might the Apostle give that Solemn Caution,
Take heed, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfullness of sin. Heb.
3. 12, 13. Especially, if men sin against the clear light of their own
Consciences, they provoke the Lord to smite them with Judi^ial blindness of
mind and hardness of heart. There was a man who fighting a Duel killed his
Adversary, for which Murder he was in great (...) of Conscience; after that he
killed another man, then was his trouble less; after that he did in the same
way Murder a third man, until he had killed seven or eight, and then he had no
remorse at all for his bloody c^imes. I could (...) you of another who having
made himself drunk, was in grievous h^rror of Conscience for his sin, but when
in dispite of these Convictions he did commit the same sin again, he was never
after that (...) or what he had done, but lived and dyed a Drunken sott. Here
now was the (...) wrath of God, punishing a sinner with everlasting hardness of
heart. And thus Sin unrepented of brings the sinner to Eternal ruin. Have not
men cause to hate that which will not only hurt them, but ruin them, and that
for ever? This Sin without Repentance and Faith in Jesus Christ will certainly
do. Nay, one sin will do it. (...) therefore God has said, Repent and Turn
your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin,
Ezekiel. 18. 30 One sin not turned from will prove the Eternal ruin of a man's
Soul: Will not then his iniquity be found to be hateful?

4 Sin has brought a Curse on the whole Earth, and upon all the Creatures which
are in it. It was said to Adam presently after he had sinned, Cursed be the
ground for thy sake, Genesis 3. 17. Every Creature which men have to do with, has
a Curse attending it because of sin, so as that they are liable to destruction
thereby. The Earth, the Water, the Air, or any Creature therein may cause a
man's death. This Curse has sin brought: Yea, and all the living Creatures in
this Visible World are become miserable by reason of the sins of men, which
misery they sigh under and long to be delivered from. We know that the whole
Creation groaneth and travelleth in pain, because it is made subject to vanity,
and to the bondage of Corruption. The sin of man has procured all this. Romans
8. 21, 22. By these things we see that sin is almost hateful evil.

Proposition. III
Sin will at last appear to be hateful unto Sinners themselves. Though now
they see not the evil that is in sin, they shall see it one day; sooner or
later they will have enough of sin: They will rue the day that ever they were
guilty of such and such sins. This will most certainly come to pass. Either,

1. By their being brought unto true Repentance for their sins. For then sin
becomes exceeding bitter to the Soul. The Jews took pleasure in Crucifying
Christ; but when Peter's Sermon had pricked them to the heart, they mourned for
him as one mourns for an only Son, and were in bitterness for him as one in
bitterness for his first born. Zach. 12. 10. When a man repents truly, his
sorrow for sin is much greater, then was the pleasure he had in Committing of
it. David found it so, this we see in his penitential Psalms, where we hear him
saying, Neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin: for mine
iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me,
Psalm. 38. 3, 4. And in another place, he speaks of his roaring all the day
long: And again, he complains of his broken bones: He could not have been in
more bitter anguish if all his bones had been broken, then he was in, after his
grievous fall in that matter of Uriah and Bathsheba. And when Solomon was
brought to a true sight of his sin, how bitter was it to him: Do but hear what
he says Eccles. 7. 26. I find more bitter then death the woman whose heart is
snares and nets, and he^ hands are bands, whosoever pleases God shall escape from
her, but the sinner shall be taken by her And did not sin become hateful to
the incestuous Corinthian, when he was in danger of being swallowed up with
sorrow, 2 Cor. 2. 7. There is nothing got by sin but sorrow and shame.
Therefore did the Apostle say, What fruit had you of those things wereof you
are now ashamed, Romans 6. 21. A true penitent never thinks of his former sins
and follies, but with sorrow and shame. It makes his Soul within him to bleed
and to blush before the Lord. Or if not so.

Then,

2. Sin will be made hateful by reason of the Punishment which will follow it.
Sin will prove a mischeivous thing at last. As the Lepers said, 2 King. 7. 9.
We do not well, if we tarry till the morning light some mischief will come upon
us. It is in vain to hope otherwise. It is a vain thing for impenitent sinners
to think that they shall always go unpunished. Sin will follow the sinner like
a blood hound, and will find him out at last. Therefore Moses said to the
Rubenites, Numb. 32. 23. Be sure your sin will find you out: And it will not be
long first. Punishment treads on the heels of sin. Genesis (...) Sin lies at
the door: It watches at the (...) to seize on the sinner. Many times (...)
this Life, sin is made to appear an hateful thing by bitter Plagues and
Punishments which are the natural and woeful fruit of it. Lam. 5. 16. Woe unto
us that we have sinned. When Jerusalem fell into the me^ciless hands of bitter
enemies, the (...) tells them, that they might thank themselves and their own
iniquities, for all those heart piercing sorrows, Jer 4. 18. Thy way and thy
doings have procured these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness. because it
is bitter, because it reaches to thy heart. This it is to be wicked: This
comes on Impenitency in a course of sin. Such Punishments does the Lord
sometimes cause to be inflicted on Sinners, and that in this life, as wound and
pierce their very hearts within them. I remember what God said to (...). 9. 14.
I will at this time (...) all my (...) upon thy heart. Many (...) came upon him
one after another, (...) heart felt them not, till (...) came upon him, that
(...) to his very heart. There are some whose Sins go before hand to Judgment
they are found out in this World; and when they are brought to open shame an
disgrace their iniquity is found to be hateful Some sins are in a most
peculiar manner shameful and disgraceful amongst men: That sin of Theft and
Dishonesty in dealing is so, Jer. 2. 26. The Thief is ashamed when he is found.
But above all, that vile sin of Uncleanness brings Everlasting disgrace on the
person that shall be known to have be (...) guilty of it. When Tame^^ was
Sollici^ed to commit such folly by that wicked Amnon, she said to him, Do not
thou thi^ folly: And I whither shall I cause my shame to go? and as for thee
thou shall be as one of the fools in Israel: q. d. Thou art a Person of
quality, and in great reputation, but such a base action as this, will render
thee Odious and Contemptible to all the World. 2 Samuel 13* 12, 13. Sometimes Sin
is Punished with loath some and shameful diseases: Thus were the Philistines
put unto a Perpetual shame: Then does sin appear to be hateful. The wise man
therefore gives wholesome advice, Prove. 5. 10, 11. Let not strangers be filled
with thy wealth, and then mourn at l^st when thy flesh and thy body are
consumed. Yet further, Sin carries guilt and horror along with it: Conscience
does smart and ^ore because of it; and that's a misery intolerable, Prove. 18.
14. The Spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: One that is a man of Spirit
and Courage will bear up under great Infirmities; but a wounded Spirit who can
bear? Do we not see that the Anguish of a wounded Conscience is intolerable? Do
we not see it in Cain? who cried, My Punishment is greater than I can bear. Do
we not see it in Judas? who in the horror of his heart ran to an halter to let
out his wretched Soul. It is true, that sinners for the most part, whilst they
have health and strength make light of sin, but many times on a death bed sin
appears to them with an hateful visage. Conscience that was asleep before,
awakes and rotes then. Have you not (if you have not, I have) known some that
have gone ro^ing down to Hell? Who have thought they have seen Hell gaping for
them, and Devils ready to seize on their Souls. When pale Death has sat on
their ^ips, how have they trembled? However, if there be no bands in their
Death, but they go smoothly into the Grave, as it is (...) a dying sinner to
have a stupefied Conscience, it is certain that after Death, sin will appear to
be sin. When the sinner beholds his (...) by the flames of Hell, it will appear
to him in 'its proper colors: Then and there will sin look like it self. What
did Dives think of sin? What did he think of Swearing, and Lying, and other
abuses of his tongue, when in Hell being Tormented, he cried out, O my Tongue*
my Tongue! What did he think of Drunkenness, when he cried and said, Father
Abraham send Lazar^s, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool
my tongue, for I am tormented in this (...) Luke 16. 24. (...) Miserable Dives!
Is it come to that now? Do you cry for a drop of water? How many thousand drops
and cupfulls of strong drink, did you swallow down more than you had need of?
And are you now crying for a drop? Without doubt though you flattered your self
in your life time when you fared deliciously every day, yet now you find
iniquity to be hateful. And so it will be found to be at the Judgment day.
Then sinners in a moment are brought into all evil in the midst of the
Congregation and the great Assembly which shall then appear, before whom all
their Secret Sins will be revealed. Prove. 5. 14. Then Millions of sins will be
remembered which now are forgotten: They will be all set in Order. They will
appear like a formidable Army in battle array against the sinner: And let him
then say, whether Sin be not an Odious thing. Psalm. 50. 23.

We proceed to the APPLICATION of this Doctrine.

First by way of INFORMATION.

Infor. I. Hence Sinners are foolish Flatterers. And who do they flatter?
Sometimes in distress they will Flatter God: they will promise Him fair: If the
Lord will deliver them, they say they will never sin against him as they have
done, but will turn over a new Leaf, and become new Creatures: They have said
well, and Oh that there were such an heart in them. But they are like the
Hypocrites, spoken of in the Psalms, who when the Lord slew them, then they
sought him, nevertheless, they did flatter him with their mouths, and they
lied unto him with their tongues, for their heart was not right with him,
neither were they (...) in (...) Covenant, Psalm. 78. 36. But they also like
foolish Creatures Flatter and deceive themselves: What folly is it to do so?
Sure they had better know the worst of themselves before it be too late to help
it. They flatter themselves that they have Faith, when they have no true Faith;
they believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and they say they trust in
him for Salvation, and yet they continue committing iniquity still: This is no
true Faith. What does it pr^fit my brethren, though a man say be has Faith,
and has not works, can his faith save him? Jam. 2. 14. There are many such who
say they have faith, and they think as they say, but they deceive their own
Souls, and their Religion is vain. They flatter themselves that they shall go
to Heaven as soon as the greatest Precisian in the World, though they live
ungodly lives: They will Swear, and Lie, and be Drunk sometimes, yet they
please themselves with vain hopes of Salvation because they have something of a
form of Godliness. Will you believe the Word of God? Hear then what He says,
in 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolators, nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Coveteous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God. It is then folly for men to promise themselves a
Kingdom, if they live in any of these sins. Is it not folly for men to flatter
themselves that they shall get to Heaven at last, though they never take one
step in the holy way which leads thither? There are sinners that are
convinced of their misery; they know they must either repent or perish; but
they foolishly neglect the present day of Grace, and flatter themselves that
they will repent hereafter; in the mean time Death overtakes them, and then
Repentance is too late. They please themselves with vain thoughts of Repenting
when they come to lie upon a sickbed and a death bed, but then they find that
they cannot repent, and that deathbed Repentance seldom proves true.

Inf. II. If Sin be an hateful Evil, what woeful Creatures are they that take
pleasure therein? A good man may sin, but he does not love to do so. A man may
be surprised into the doing of that which his Soul abhors. David was several
times guilty of breaking the nin^h Commandment, yet he could say truly, as in
Psalm. 119. 163. I hate and abhor lying, but thy Law do I Love. Sheep may fall
into the mire, but they do not love to be there. They are Swine that delight to
be wallowing in filth: Such are they who take delight in the ways of sin. Their
spot is not the spot of Gods Children. Their state is damnable, 2 These. 2. 12.
That they all might be damned who believed not the Truth, but ^ad pleasure in
Unrighteousness. Yet some there are who do not only take pleasure in sinning
themselves, but in causing others to sin and dishonor God. This argues men to
be wicked in a very high degree: When knowing the Judgment of God, that they
who commit such sins are worthy of Eternal Death, not only do the same, but
have pleasure in them that do them. This is to be as like the Devils as it is
possible for men to be. There are those in the World that take pleasure in
making others Drunk, especially if they can cause a Church member, o^ one that
has made any pretenses to Religion to drink to any excess, then they have
something to rejoice in. And there are some that take pleasure in causing
others to Swear and to profane the holy* Name of God* Are such men? Nay, they
are Devils incarnate; their Souls within them, are Devils clothed with flesh.

Inf. III. If Sin ^e such an Odious thing as has been proved, then that which
is Contrary unto Sin, namely Grace and Holiness is a most lovely thing. From
thence it is that the righteous is more excellent than is Neighbor. Who are
the most excellent ones on the earth? Are they rich men? or great men? or
learned men? If they be adorned with Grace in their Souls, then are they
excellent indeed: but if not, God in His Word calls them Vile Persons, Psalm.
15. 4. That Antioc^us whose admirers gave him the name of Ephiphanes, as if he
had been an illustrious and excellent person, the Angel calls him a Vile
Person, because he was a very wicked man, and a base dissembler, Dan. 11* 21.
But the Saints are the excellent in the Earth, and it is their Sanctity. which
makes them to be so. Psalm. 16. 3. Silver and Gold, and Rubies are lovely things
in the carnal eyes of men: but Grace in the heart is a far more lovely and
desirable thing than all these. This is that Wisdom of which Solomon speaks,
and concerning which he says, Happy (...) the man that finds it* For the
Merchandise* of it, is better then the Merchandise of Silver, and the gain
thereof then fine Gold, she is (...) precious then Rubies, and all the things
thou (...) desire, are not to be compared unto her, Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15. Grace
is an Ornament of great price in the sight of God: It makes those to be amiable
in whom it is. One true believer that has grace in his Soul is more precious
in Gods account, than Millions of other men. Isa. 43. 3, 4. I gave Egypt for
thy ransom, and Ethiopia and Seb^ for thee, since thou wast precious in my
sight. When a (...) is converted into a (...) there is a man become an Angel;
and that man shall one day be made equal with the Angels. Holiness makes men on
Earth like the Angels in Heaven. Wherein do the Angels of Heaven excel the
Devils of Hell? It is especially in respect of their Holiness. The blessed
Angels delight in all that is Holy, and Just, and Good; but the Devils do the
contrary, they delight in all manner of sin and wickedness. Holiness makes
Saints and Angels to resemble the ever blessed God For the Divine Image does
consists chiefly ^n Holiness Ephesians. 4. 24. The new man which after God it Created
in Righteousness and true Holiness. Who are the men that have most of God in
them? It is they that are most Holy. Therefore it is that The Man Christ Jesus,
has more of God in Him than any Man or Creature, because He is fuller of Grace
then can be said of any other man or Angel. It pleased the Father that all
fullness should dwell in him: Of his fullness we all receive, and grace for
grace. God gives not the Spirit of Holiness by measure unto him, as He does to
all others. More of Gods Glory is to be seen shining in that Man, then in all
the World besides. He is the Image of the Invisible God, Col. 1. 19. In respect
of His Eternal Person, He is the Essential Image of God, the brightness of the
Fathers Glory, and the express Image of His Person. And as Man He is the
Manifestative Image of God; there is more of God to be seen in That Holy Thing,
the Humane Nature of Jesus Christ the Son of God, than in all Angels and men.
It is said of God that He is Glorious in Holiness. Exodus 15. 11. His Holiness
is His chief Glory. Yea, it is His Life. The Apostle says of the ungodly
Gentiles, that they were (...) from the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. because they
were Strangers and Enemies to Holiness. The blessed God can no more cease to be
Holy, than He can cease to be at all. So then Holiness is (...) Lovely thing.
Moral Virtue which is but a lifeless Picture and Shadow of Holiness is a Lovely
thing: If that does render the person in whom it is found, to be amiable real
Holiness, does so much more. What soever things are pure, they are Lovely.

Let the Last USE be for EXHORTATION.
(...) Sin will one day* appear to be hateful, Oh Let us hate it no^. Abhor
that which is evil.

A few Considerations let me spread before you, and Conclude.

CONSIDER. I
Who they are that Hate and cannot but have Sin. The blessed God hates Sin with
an Infinite and an Eternal hatred, Psalm. 5. 4^ Thou art not a God that has
pleasure in Wickedness. And from thence it is, that He does punish every sin.
There never was, (...) ever shall be a sin Committed in the Word that shall go
unpunished. As for (...) that die in their sins, they shall be punished with
Everlasting (...) from the Presence of the Lord, (...) from the Glory of His
Power. The Righteous Lord will make all Angels and men see that Sin is hateful
to Him, in the day when Thousands of Million of (...) shall be sent away into
Everlasting Punishment And as for the Elect of God, all their (...) have been
punished in Christ their surety: Since He was pleased to Substitute Himself in
their room, and to undertake to Answer for their Crimes, God spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for (...) Romans 8. 3^. This was the highest
demonstation of Gods hatred of sin that possibly could be. When He spared not
the Angels that sinned, but cast down Millions of them from Heaven into Hell
for ever, and this for one sin. When He drowned all the men in the World at
once excepting one small Family: When He rained fire and brimstome upon Sodom
and Gomorra, casting them alive into Eternal Fire and Vengeance, He let the
World see that Sin is abominable to the eyes of His Glory: But His not sparing
His own Son was the most astonishing evidence of His Holy Indignation and
abhorrence of sin that can be. For Jesus Christ the Son of God had no sin of
His own, nor was it possible that He should sin, only the Reflection, the
Imputation of sin was upon Him, He became a surety for sinners, and then God
spared him not, but his Body and his Soul too, was made an Offering for sin:
The sorrows of Hell took hold on Him. Shall sin be thus hateful to the Blessed
God, and shall we love it? And how does the Lord Jesus Christ hate sin? It was
said of him, Thou love Righteousness and hate wickedness, Psalm. 45. 7.
Never man did hate sin as He did and does: He declares it from Heaven. He said
to the Church in Pergamus, Thou have them that hold the Doctrine of the
Nicolaitans, which thing I hate, Rev. 2. 15. And in the days of his flesh,
although he did converse with great sinners in order to their Conversion and
Salvation, and did show such Patience and Meekness as the like never was:
Nevertheless, his Zeal against sin did amaze the beholders of it. Joh 5. 17.
They then that do not hate sin, have not the Spirit of Christ in them, nor are
they his true disciples. And the Angels of Heaven hate (...). The Scripture
call them Holy Angels, because they never sinned, but are much Offended when
they see men sinning against the Lord: Those S^raphims burn with an holy Zeal
for God and against the sins of men: They are active in Executing the wrath of
God upon sinners. Angels destroyed the Sodomites: Angels destroyed the first
born throughout the Land of Egypt: Angels destroyed the Assyrians: Angels will
lay hold on wicked men at the day of Judgment, and cast them into the ever
burning Lake. And every truly Godly man is an hater of sin. The description and
character of a wicked man is this, He sets himself in a way that is not
good, be abhoreth not evil, Psalm 36. 4. But a good man had rather suffer than
sin, yea rather die any death than sin against his Conscience: that's his Spirit
when he is himself and out of Temptation. What horrible and to menting deaths
have some holy men chosen to undure, rather than to commit a seemingly little
sin against the light of their Consciences? It is said of the Hebrew Martyrs,
that they were tortured not accepting deliverance, Heb. 11. 35. Doubtless the
Apostle in those words has respect to the Story of the Ma^^abees An^i^^hus
told those (...) if they would but eat a mouthfull of that flesh w^i^h the Law
of God had (...), he would not only save their lives, but give them rewards;
now they would rather be tormented to death than b^ guilty of such a sin. A man
that has Grace and the true fear of God be his Soul, hates sin more than
death; nay more than Hell. It was the saying of one of the Ancients, That he
had rather be thrown alive into the Flames of Hell, than do that which he knew
was sinful, and evil in the sight of God. Shall God? Shall Christ? Shall Holy
Angels? Shall all good men hate sin, and will thou love it?

CONSIDER. II.
The Sins of men have Exposed the Son of God to all these bitter Sorrows and
Death which He suffered. They were the procuring cause of it. I do not say,
that we were the Crucifiers of Christ as the Jews were, or that the guilt of
His death does lie upon us as it does on them: But this I say, that our sins
were the Cursed weapons which wounded Christ to death. How then can we look on
sin with a pleasant Countenance? It is reported that when some of Cesars
friends showed the People his bloody robes, saying, Here is the blood of your
Emperor, they were filled with rage against the men that ^ad Murdered him. Our
sins have been the Murderers of the Prince of Life: we may see them dyed with
the blood of Christ: And shall not the thought of that fill us with an holy
rage against sin? The works of Our hands drove the Nails into His; our feet
being so swift to sin, have caused His feet to be Nailed to the Cross. If thou
art one that shall be saved, every one of thy sins has had a stab at Christ:
not one of thy sins but the Soul of the Son of God has had a stab for it. He
felt that for thy sins which made Him to swear Blood. If you should see the
knife that had Murdered your dearest friend, would you not be filled with
indignation at the sight of it? Sin is the Sword that has Pierced the heart of
the best friend that ever thou had in the World. He was wounded for our
transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities, Isa. 53. 5. Oh^^ then abhor
to have any more to do with sin. When some did with the hazard of their lives
fetch water for David to drink, he willing to let the World see that he valued
the lives of his Subjects more than the satisfaction of his own sensual
appetite, refused to drink thereof, and said, Far be it from me, O Lord, that
I should do this! Is not this the blood of the men that went in Jeapardy of
their lives, 2 Samuel 23. 17. And shall the waters of sin be sweet unto you, when
they have cost the Son of God His Life to save you from them? Will you so
undervalue His blood? Shall He die to redeem you from all iniquity, and shall
any iniquity be sweet unto you? Then never call your selves Christians, for
though you may be so in name, I am sure you are not so in Heart and in Truth.
Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart from iniquity.

CONSIDER. III.
That Sin will not always be sweet, at last it will be bitter. If the
pleasures of sin would last for ever, the folly of sinners would not be so
great as now it is. You must die shortly, and then the pleasure of sin will be
turned into unutterable and Eternal Torments. I remember I have some where read
concerning a Company of profane Persons that as they were drinking and making
Merry, one of them had this Expression, We live a brave Life if we could but
get some body to go to Hell for us when we die: True; if you can do so, be as
mad and as merry as you please: But since you must die and then into the fire
that never shall be quenched; if madness were not in your hearts, you would
hate sin more then ever you loved it. But (...) will sin be at last? As sure as
the Lord Lives and as thou have an Immortal Soul within thee, it will be bitter
at the last. Sin is a root that bears gall and wormwood, D^ut. 29. 18. As
Abner said to Joab about the devouring Sword, 2 Samuel 2. 26. So I say to thee
concerning sin that devourer of Immortal Souls, know thou not that it will
be bitterness in the latter end? What will that sin of Drunkenness be at last:
The wise man tells you when he says, Look not thou on the wine when it is red
when it gives 'it's color in the cup, when it moves it self aright at the
last it biteth like a Serpent and stings like an Adder, Prove. 23.31, 32. There
are some Serpents which when a man is first bitten with them, the poison
causes such a tickling as that he cannot forbear laughter, but when it is come
into his blood and bowels, the torment is intolerable: Such a poison is sin, At
the (...) will bite like a Serpent. What will the Cursed (...) bottle that has
destroyed so many Bodies and Souls in New England, be at last? That strong
drink which has made thee Drunk will at last prove the poison of Dragons, and
the Cruel (...) of Aspes, which kills without mercy and without remedy, Deuteronomy.
32. 33. What will unrighteous gain? What will Riches gotten by Pyracy and
Murder be at last? You Young men, that have a mind to turn Pirates in hopes of
getting Gold, hear what God speaks to you from His word, Job 20. 15, 16. He
has swollowed down Riches, and he shall vomit them up again: God shall cast
them out of his belly, he shall suck the poison of Asps, the Vipers tongue
shall slay him, his meat in his bowels is the gall of Asps within him. Such
wicked gain will at last prove a bi^ter and a deadly poison. And what will thy
Secret. Adulteries and Uncleanness be at last? What will you get by them? Prove.
6. 32, 33 Whose Commits Adultery with a woman lacks understanding; he that
does it destroys his own Soul, a wound and dishonor shall be get, and his
reproach shall not be wiped away. This will be all thy gain at last. A wound to
thy Conscience; an Everlasting reproach in the great Congregation when thy
Secret sins shall be laid open before all the World, and ruin to thy own Soul.

Wherefore set your selves* against sin. Hate it to the death; other enemies
you may be reconciled unto, but never to sin. God charged His People concerning
the Ammonites, saying, thou shall not seek their peace, nor their prosperity
all thy days for ever. And concerning Amalek, that they should have War with
him for ever. Sin is that Ammon, Sin is the Amalek with whom thou must have war
for ever. Sin is a bloody Serpent: thou must either kill that Serpent, or it
will kill thy Soul. And if you would become haters of sin, you must become
believers on Christ: There is not a man in all the world that is an hater of
all sin, besides the true Believer on Christ; when Christ becomes Precious, sin
becomes Odious: Sin may be restrained, but it will never be mortified in the
man that has not Faith. As for the world, and the things which are in the
world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of lice
(which men naturally love more than they love God o^ Christ) it is by Faith
that we come to ha^^ hearts set against them, and are made V^^torious over
them. And by this may a (...) know that he has true Faith in Jesus Christ if
keeping the Commandments of God be his great delight, or (...) be the chief
object of his ba^^ed: Of a truth it is worth more (...) all this world to be
able to say (...) David, with whose words I conclude, Psalm 189 128. ^esteem all
thy Precepts concerning (...) things ^o be right, and I hate every falls way.

THE END
To fill up the Vacant PAGES, A Serious and most Important Question, shall be
briefly Answered. Viz.
HOW a man may know that he is gone beyond an Hypocrite? Or, That there is true
Saving Grace wrought in his Soul?

Ans. I. An Universal respect to the Commandments of God argues sincerity.
Deuteronomy. 5. 29. O that there were such a heart in them that they would fear me,
and keep all my Commandments always. A constant regard to all the
Commandments is a sign that the heart is touched with the true fear of God. Let
such a man hope for Salvation and he shall never be ashamed by finding himself
disappointed of his expectation, Psalm 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when
I have respect unto all thy Commandments. David's in^^grity of heart is noted by
his being a man that would fulfill all Gods will, Act. 13. 22. This is an
evidence of Regeneration and of a true Faith. No man in the (...) does
Conscientiously observe every Commandment, but only the true (...) on Christ.
Joh. 15. 14. You are my friends if you do whatsoever I command you. An
Hypocrite does (...) and choose among^ the Commandments of God; some of them he
will obey, but others of them, he would be dispensed with, though he lives
transgressing of them. Jebu went far, and made a glorious profession, but See 2
King. 10. 31. So (...) Mark* 6. 19, 20. The sincere child of God is like
Cornelius, resolved to bear, that is to obey, all things that are commanded of
God. Act. 10, 33. And like Zachary and Elizabeth of whom it is said, as in Luke
1. 6.

II. When Sin is become a man's greatest burden, that argues a real Saving
change of Soul. Such an one has a New heart given to him. There is spirit as
well as flesh, Grace as well as Sin in that man's Soul. Gal. 5. 17. It is from
Grace in the heart that sin is become the most hated loathsome evil. It was a
good answer which an holy man gave to one that proposed that Question, How may
a man know that a sin is mortified? If (said he) it is become unsavory and
loathsome like a dead and rotten car^ass, that's a sign of its mortification.
Though sin has a being still in that man's Soul, it does not raig^ there unto
death. Suppose a living man should have a dead body chained to him that he
could not possibly get rid of, this must needs be matter of constant sorrow to
him, and he would desire nothing more than to get clear of that dead body: This
is the very case of the true believer on Christ, which makes him cry out Oh!
wretched man that I am, Romans 7. 24. That sin is become the greatest burden to
the renewed Soul, is evident, inasmuch as one of the chief reasons why he is
willing to die, is that (...) may never sin more. There are esepicia^^y two
Considerations which make the believer willing to leave this world, one is,
that so he may see Jesus Christ, and be with him for ever; the other is that so
he may be eternally freed from sin. For he that is dead is freed from sin, Romans
6. 7. Nothing is sweeter then life, yet life is not so dear to the sincere
Christian as sin is grievous and hateful to him. Hence it comes to pass that
if at any time. Temptations and Iniquities prevail over him, the sorrows of his
Soul are enlarged: he then says as Rebe^kah did, I am weary of my life because
of the Children of Heth. And because sin is become the most abhorred evil to
him, there are sins which Unregenerate men are seldom troubled for, that the
sincere Christian cannot allow himself in, namely Sinful thoughts. I dare not
say that whoever is afraid to commit a sin in his thoughts is certainly gone
beyond a Hypocrite; If I should so speak, I should ^ow Pillows under the Elbows
of many an Hypocrite. Such as have been no Christians a^ all, Moral heathen,
would conscientiously check themselves for, and refrain from some evil
thoughts; but if there be a wonderful change in a man's thoughts, that he dare
not allow himself in any sinful thought, and that vain unprofitable thoughts
which will crow'd themselves into his mind, full sore against his will (...)
become a burden to him, this is a sign of a true Conversion. Ps. 119. 113. and
137. 23. Isai. 55. 7. Jer. 4 14.

III. An earnest desire after much Holiness, is an infalliable sign of true
Saving Grace, wrought in the Soul. The Holy Spirit (...) Sealed that man unto
the day of Redemption whose Soul within him does desire holiness more than any
thing in this world. Enquire of thy Soul; if the Lord should put it to thy
choice, whether thou would be the richest of the holiest person on the
earth, which of these would thy heart choose? would thy heart say, Let me be an
holy rather than a great man on the earth. If I may but have much Grace, and
bring much Glory to God and to Jesus Christ, Let who will take the great things
of the world. Then thou art born of God: the marks of the Lord Jesus are on thy
Soul; thou do follow holiness, and thou shall see God. Heb. 12. 14.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere are several Treatises prepared for the Press, Viz.

A Discourse concerning the Glorious state of the Church on earth under the new
Jerusalem (...) concerning the (...) Conversion of the jews; answering (...) of
the Reverend and Learned Mr^ Boxter, Dr. L^ghtfoot, and others.

(...) Treatise concerning the Nature, Power, and (...) of the Holy Angels, and
the (...) which the Elect of God (...) Ministry: And of the Sin of the Evil
Angels, with a (...) concerning Angelical Appa^itions.

There is also now preparing for the Press. A Discourse concerning Judi^ial
Hardness, of Heart: By Increase Mather Praesident of (...) College, in
Cambridge.

There is (...) prepared (...) the Press, A Book (...) A Good Master Well
Served, Or, A Discourse on the Properties and Practices of a Good Servant, in
every sort of Servitude; with the Methods to be taken by the Heads of a Family,
to obtain such a Servant. By (...).

ERRATA. Page 6. line 26 read (...) p. 63. l. 2. ^. (...)


