The fourth Assembly, second Sessions: Beginning the 4th Day of October, and
ending the ^3d of the same, Anno Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae,
Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Sexto.
An Act for the raising and paying one Hundred Men, to be raised for the
Re-inforcing the Fronteers of this Province, in the City and County of Albany.
THe Representatives, convened in General Assembly, taking into their
Consideration that part of his Excellency's Speech relating to the Re-inforcing
the Fronteers of this Province, in the City and County of Albany, for this
ensuing Winter Season, do pray, that his Excellency, the Captain General, do
forth with raise the Number of one Hundred Men, in such Quota's and Proportions
in each respective City and County, as is hereafter specified and expressed,
which shall be well provided with Arms, and be at Albany, on ^he first day of
November next ensuing the Publication hereof, and there to continue and remain,
for the Re-inforcement of the Fronteers aforesaid; and to be joined to the
Forces at Albany, raised by the last Act of Assembly, for the space and term of
four Calendar Months, and one half, to commence on the said first day of
November, next ensuing the Publication hereof, and to terminate and expire on
the fifteenth day of March, then next following. Which Quota's and Proportions
of Men are as follows, viz. For the City and County of New York, Twenty five
effective Men. For the County of Westchester, Ten effective Men. For Richmond
County, Five effective Men. For Kings County, Fifteen effective Men. For Queens
County, Nineteen effective Men. For Suffolk County, Twenty effective Men. For
Vlster and Duchess County, Six effective Men.


And to the end that the said Men may be effectually raised, according to the
Quota's and Proportions aforesaid, Be it Enacted by the Governor and Council,
and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That if any Person or Persons, who in Pursuance of such Warrant or
Warrants, to be by his said Excellency the Captain General, issued out to the
chief Military Officer or Officers of each respective City and County or
Counties, as aforesaid, shall be warned to be in Arms, in order to the raising
one hundred Men aforesaid, shall neglect, delay or refuse to be in Arms, or
otherwise absent himself, or themselves, from such Duty as aforesaid, shall
forfeit for each default, the sum of five Pounds, current Money of this
Province, to be levied by Distress by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any
Justice of the Peace within this Province, directed to the Constable to levy
the same on the Goods and Chattles of every Person or Persons so offending, as
aforesaid, upon a Certificate of such Default made, from the Captain or chief
Officer of such Company, in or to which said Officer shall be listed or belong
under his hand and seal, the said goods and Chattles so taken by Distress,
shall be exposed to sale, and the over plus thereof, if any be, shall be
returned to the Person so offending, the sum forfeited and (...) of Distress
and sale being first deducted; which said sum of five Pounds, shall be i^^^oyed
or the encouragement of and raising the Quota's of Men aforesaid. And in case
such Person or Persons so offending, as aforesaid, shall not have Goods and
Chattles to be found to pay and satisfy the sum of five Pounds aforesaid, such
Person or Persons, upon such Certificate, and by such Warrant as aforesaid,
shall be committed to the common Goal of the same City and County or Counties,
there to remain without Bail or main prize for the space and term of five
Calendar Months, or until he or they shall satisfy the sum of five Pounds
aforesaid.

And for the paying and maintaining the said one hundred Men, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a Levy of five Hundred Pounds current
Money aforesaid, shall be laid, assessed, raised and levied upon all and every
the Inhabitants, Residents and Freeholders of and in this Province for the
paying and maintaining the said one hundred Men for the space and term of four
Calendar Months and one half, as aforesaid, and for no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever. To be laid, assessed, raised levied and paid to their
Majesty's Collector and Receiver General, for the time being, at their
Majesty's Custom-House in the City of New York, on the first Day of February,
next ensuing the Publication hereof, according to the Rates and Proportions
following, that is to say,

For the City and County of New York, One Hundred Ninety Seven Pounds ten
Shillings. For the County of Westchester Twenty five Pounds. For the County of
Richmond, Fifteen Pounds For Kings County, Sixty five Pounds six Shillings. For
Queens County, Seventy two Pounds ten Shillings. For the County of Suffolk,
Seventy seven Pounds 13 Shillings. For Vlster and Duchess County, Forty four
Pounds seven Shillings. And for Orange County, Two Pound fourteen Shillings.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
assessing, raising and paying the sum of Five Hundred Pounds aforesaid, the
Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York, the Justices of the Peace, the
Assessors and Collectors, for the time being, of all and every the respective
Cities, Counties, Towns, Manors or Liberties within this Province, are hereby
required, empowered and authorized to summons, assess collect and pay the
several sums of Money herein before mentioned, according to the Proportions
before expressed, in such ways and means, and according to such manner, rule
and direction, and under such Pains and Penalties as is contained, enjoined,
prescribed and directed in an Act of General Assembly, passed in the last
Sessions of Assembly, and entitled, An Act for the raising and paying one
hundred and seventy Men for the securing the Fronteers of this Province in the
City and County of Albany; and all and every Article, Rule, Clause, Pains and
Penalties mentioned in the aforesaid Act, for and concerning summoning,
Assessing, collecting and paying, shall be, abide and remain in full force and
effect to all intents and purposes, in as full and ample manner, for the due
Execution of this Act, until the abovesaid sum of five Hundred pounds be
duly, fully and completely assessed, collected and paid, as bove-said
directed, as fully and in like manner as if the same were particularly and at
large recited and set down in the Body of this Act, any thing contained therein
to the Contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding. And the Mayor and Aldermen
of the City of New York, and all the Justices, Assessors and Collectors of the
respective Cities and Counties within this Province, and all others concerned
herein, are to take Notice hereof accordingly.

An Act to enable Isaac Lanser to erect or set up an Engine or Mill for (...)
Rape and Linseed Oil.

An ACT confirming and continuing an Act of General Assembly made in the fourth
Year of their Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act for the satisfying the Debts
of the Government, one Year longer then the time mentioned for its last
continuance, to be employed for the Rebuilding of their Majesty's Chapel in
the Fort, the mounting of 16 great Guns, and defraying the Debts of the
Government.
WHereas it is found necessary that their Majesty's Chapel in the Fort within
the City of New York, should with all convenient speed be rebuilt, and the
great Guns lately sent by their Majesty's, for the Defense of this their
Majesty's Province, should be forthwith mounted, the Representatives convened
in General Assembly, humbly pray that it may be enacted, that four hundred and
fifty Pounds may be raised toward the rebuilding of their Majesty's said
Chapel, and one hundred and fifty Pounds may be likewise raised for the
Mounting of the said sixteen great Gunns. And whereas, there is an Act of
General Assemmbly, be in the fo^^th year of their Majesty's Reign, entitled,
An Act for the satisfying and paying the Debts of the Government, which does
expire by its own limitation upon the fourtenth day of November next, and from
thence continued by another Act of General Assembly, for the space and term of
one Year longer than the said fourteenth day of November next, which shall
expire and terminate on the 14 day of November then next following, which shall
be in the Year of our Lord 1696.

And whereas for the end aforesaid it is thought convenient that the said Act,
entitled An Act for the satisfying and paying the Debts of the Government,
should be confirmed and continued in force one year longer than the term now
last mentioned, Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and
Representatives convend in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by the
Authority of the same, That the additional Rates and duties, made payable upon
Merchandises and Liquors imported into this Province, by virtue of the said
Act, shall be levied, collected and paid unto their Majesty's Collector and
Receiver General for the time being, at their Majesty's Custom-House in thee
City of Now-York, for the term and space of one whole year next and after the
expiration of the Term next above expressed and mentioned, to commence and be
computed from the said 14th day of November, which shall be in the year of our
Lord 1695. and to terminate and end upon the 14th day of November then next
following, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1696. according to such Rules
and Directions, and under such Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures as is contained
and enjoined by the said Act. And the aforesaid Act and every Article, Rule,
Clause and Direction therein mentioned, shall be, abide, continue and remain in
full force, virtue and effect to all intents and purposes whatsoever, for the
payment of the said six hundred Pounds, during the said Term of one whole Year,
and no longer, as fully, and in like ample manner as if the same were
particularly and at large recited and set down in the Body of this Act, any
thing contained therein to the contrary thereof in any ways notwithstanding.
Always provided, That if the said Additional Rates and Duties, during the said
Term of one whole Year amount to more than the sum of six hundred Pounds
aforesaid, then the residue or surplusage of the said Sum, shall be applied to
the satisfying and paying the Debts of the Government, according to the
Directions contained in the said Act, and to no other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Gentlemen,
Merchants, Traders, or any other Person or Persons shall advance the Whole sum
of Six Hundred Pounds aforesaid, or any part thereof, upon the Credit of this
Act, he or they so advancing such Sum or Sums of Money, shall be allowed for so
much of the same as they shall so advance, not exceeding the sum of six hundred
Pounds aforesaid, the sum of Ten per Cent. annual Interest.

The End of the Second Sessions of the fourth Assembly.

