EARLY RELIGION, Urged in a SERMON, The Duties Wherein, And the Reasons
Wherefore, YOUNG PEOPLE, Should Become Religious.

Whereto are Added, The EXTRACTS of several Papers, Written by several Persons,
who here Dying in their Youth, left behind them those Admonitions for the Young
Survivers; with Brief Memoirs relating to the Exemplary Lives of some such,
that have gone from hence to their Everlasting REST.

By Cotton Mather.

Wherewith shall a Young man cleanse his way? By taking heed, according to Thy
Word.

Boston, Printed, by B. ^ for Michael (...) under the West End of the
Townhouse (...)

EARLY RELIGION URGED.
On a Day of PRAYER, kept by the Congregation at ^eading, for the Success of
the Gospel, on the Hearts of the Young in that Congregation. Anno 1693.
IT was the Gracious and Savoury Speech uttered by One of the Greatest
Personages in England, and perhaps in all Europe, unto a Grave Minister; I have
(said he) passed thro^ many ^laces of Honor and Trust, both in Church and
State, more than any of my Order in England, for Seventy Years before. But were
I assured, that by my Preaching I had Converted but one Soul unto God, I should
therein take more Comfort, than in all the Honors and Offices that have ever
been bestowed upon me. Yea, 'Twas the Speech of a much Greater than he, He that
Wins Souls is wise. And indeed, a true Minister of the Gospel, can have no
Joy equal unto that of seeing the Conversion of his people unto God! But if the
Conversion of any among our people, more than others, would give Joy unto us,
it is our Young People whose Turn to God, we should behold with most of
Satisfaction. To win one of those, is both Argument and Apology sufficient, for
the most vigorous Essays of our Ministry. For my own part, I observe the
Generation, whereto I do my self belong, advancing very far into the Affairs of
the World; But I also observe, the dreadful Plagues of Heaven making a most
Lamentable Havoc of this my poor Generation. Upon this Observation, what
better thing is there to be done for this Generation, then perswasively to
Recommend unto them, that Religion, the want whereof does not only Unfit them
for the Action expected from them, but also Expose them to the Judgments of a
Righteous and a Terrible GOD? Wherefore, although I have many a time already
made the most public Addresses, that I could, unto the Young People of my
Country, I am willing now at an Age thus far Extending, to conclude my own
Youth, with one Affectionate Endeavor more, That they may know the Things of
their Peace i^ this their Day. And among other things that give Countenance
unto such an Undertaking, Let me particularly mention the Example of Jonathans
Expedition, wherein we have one Young Man calling upon another, to do Service
for God and their Generation. When I Read the Change of our Lord Jesus Christ*
unto His Peter, and in him unto every Pastor, I find that the, Feeding of
Lambs, is to be the First part, and at Least one Third part, of our Pastoral
Care And standing this Day in an Assembly so much consisting of those Lambs, we
would a little Exemplify that Care, by setting before them that Word of God,
which may be the more Adapted Food ^f their Souls. Young People, We that are
this Day Fasting our selves with our Prayer to God, for your Conversion, would
be Feeding of you, with the Word of God, in order to that Conversion.

Give now your particular Attention to that Portion of Scripture, in,

PSALM CXIX.9. Wherewith shall a YOUNG MAN cleanse his way? By taking heed,
according to Thy Word.

THERE are those Words now lai^ before you, whereof I am to mind you, that like
the rest of the Sacred LOOK, wherein you have these words, they are, Non tam
Legenda, quam Vivenda, not only to be Read, but also, and much more, to be
Lived, by all who desire the Lives, of their Never Dying Spirits.

The Psalm wherein you find these words, was in a Vision Represented unto the
Great Austin, as, The Tree of Life, in the midst of Paradise* and I have now
gathered a Delicate Fruit from this Glorious Tree, to partake whereof, I would
this Day most affectionately Invite my own Generation; Eat, Friends, and Live;
Eat, that your Souls may Live!

We have here one of the greatest Paragraphs in the BIBLE, Written to Celebrate
the greatness of all the rest. The Word of GOD mentioned in every Verse but
Four or Five, ^n this Longest, but Sweetest of the Psalms, is here justly
magnified, for its manifold Excellency, and Efficacy. And in this verse the
Sanctifying Virtue of that Word, even upon the Young, which are the most
unsanctify'd part of Mankind, is particularly Specified.

The Psalmist had been showing that the Word of God points out the way to
Happi^ess; and it is here intimated, What way that ^s, it is the Way of
Holiness! and the Young Man is here called into that Blessed way.

The Psalm i^ Composed in a singular manner Alphabetically; Wherein the
Memories, and perhaps the Writing-books, of the Children among the Ancient
People of God, seem consulted: and a Text from such a Psalm then ^ay be very
prope^^^ addressed unto a Young Auditory; as it this Day.

I Remember that the Wise man does in a certain place report unto us, How his
Royal Father did use to Catechize him in his Youth; and his being so Catechized
was that which more than a little contributed unto his becoming so wise a man,
even while a young one. It is likely that we have here found one of those
Admirable Echo's which then passed between those Illustrious Personages: I
pray, Let all of that age attend unto it.

Our Text is a Demonstration of the Assertion, That the Word of God shows the
way to our Happiness. It Is Demonstrated by this; That this Word Enjoins and
Effects our Holiness. And this is here proved, with an Argument a Fortiori;
That which will be serviceable unto the Designs of Holiness in a Young man,
will be so for any man; for No man is ordinarily more Unholy or more unlikely
to be Holy, than the Young man: But the Word of God will do this; if such a
wild, such a mad, such an unclean thing as a Young man, will Give Heed unto it,
his cleansed Heart and Life will have the Marks of a Glorious Holiness
thereupon.

In the Text we have two things.

First, We have a Question. That is, Wherewith shall a Young Man cleanse his
way? It is herein supposed, That the Ways of Young People have much, yea, most
of Sinfulness defiling of them. It is also supposed, That Young People should
be sensible of their Defilement. It is further supposed, That the Defilement of
Young People is Curable. But it is thereupon Enquired, What shall be done for
the Redressing of our Disorders* and which demands for yet more of your
Observation, it was probably a Young man that here made this Enquiry

Secondly, We have an Answer to the Question. That is, By Taking heed thereto
according to thy Word. In this Answer, we see, First, a Medicine to be
applied. That is, The Word of God; whereby is meant, the Revelation which God
has given of His Mind and Will unto us. We see, Next, the Manner of applying
it. That is, By taking heed; which imports a serious Labor of Soul to Conform
unto whatever our God has therein required of us.

I confess, That I want a further Commentary upon this Text; but that is a
Practical one; and I must come to YOU, my Young People, for it. It is to YOU,
that I come this Day; and it is with this All concerning Doctrine that I come.

It is the High Interest, and it should be the Great Study of YOUNG People, to
TAKE HEED, that Their WAY may be Cleansed, according to Gods WORD.

There are two Propositions which I must Entreat my Young Folks, to Consider in
the Fear of God. Believe it, Sirs;

PROPOSITION I.
There is a woeful Uncleanness with which the Way of All People, and especially
of young People, too often is contaminated. Our way is the course of our
Actions; the course of our Thoughts, our Words, our Deeds. That this Way in
young People, should be unclean, is not so great a matter of Wonder, as it is
of Sorrow; for the Heart of young People is Unclean. The youngest of us all,
have cause to say, as in Psalm. 51.2, 5. Oh cleanse me from my sin, for I was
shapen in Iniquity. But we may rather ask, what is that Uncleanness, which
usually cleaves to our way? Now, to that I Reply shortly, SIN is that
Uncleanness! The most vile Thing in the World, is not so odious unto Us, as all
SIN is unto our God, who is Of Purer Eyes than to behold that Evil. Those
Oracles of God, which never miscalled any thing, do still represent, every
Transgression of His Law, as the vilest Filthiness. It Is possible, Young
People, that when you do some Sinful Thing, they seem Comely or Pleasant things
unto you; But I pray, Remember, They are all the most Filthy Things imaginable.
Rash Youths, you touch what is infinitely worse then the foulest Pitch, when
you meddle with them. Now there is a double Uncleanness whereto our Ways are
liable; there is the Sin of Uncleanness, and there is the Uncleanness of Sin.

First; Sometimes Uncleanness is taken in a stricter Sense, for the SIN OF
UNCLEANNESS; and there are few Young People so strict in their Ways, as to be
altogether free from that Uncleanness. The Luxuriant Intemperances, which
Violate the Seventh Commandment in the Decalogue, are distinguished by the Name
of UNCLEANNESS, because of a singular Loathsomness in those Enormities. But it
is a rare thing for Young People duly to Loath all those Impieties: Oh! how
rare a thing is it for Young People, truly to say after the Blessed Ezekiel, Ah
Lord* My Soul ha^ not been p^lluted from my Youth up. It Is a common thing, for
Young People to Debauch themselves in the Vomits, and Quagmiras, of the
Uncleannest Wantonness. We read of Some, in Job 36.14. They Die in Youth, and
their Life is among the Unclean; and indeed how Many are there that hasten upon
themselves an Early Death, by wallowing in such Uncleanness until they Die! The
King of Israel saw once a wretched person Ensnared in the Ruins of
Uncleanness; but whom did he see? We are told in Prove. 7.7. I discerned among
the Youths, a Young Man void of Understanding. Young People, have in them the
most of Tinder for the Temptations of the Unclean Spirit; and oftentimes that
Spirit is hideously and hellishly inflaming of them. Hence it is, that if Young
People are kept from Further Pollutions, yet they frequently plunge themselves
into most horrible Self-pollutions; it is by them, that these woeful Children of
Onan do Sacrifice the blood of their Souls unto Baal-peor, unto Priapus, unto
the Devil. Famous is the Story of the Young Nicaetas, who, being solicited
unto the Violations of his Chastity, with Circumstances, which he feared he
should not otherwis^ withstand, he bit off a piece of his own Tongue, and Spit
it in the Face of the Ha^^lot; and by the pain of that VVound, increased the
Indignation which he thus Expressed on that occasion. But how seldom does the
Resolution of Young People, against all Uncleanness, prove so obstinate? how
seldom do they Look upon every Glance of Uncleanness, with Resentments like
those of Joseph, How shall I do thts Wickedness, and Sin against God! But,

Secondly, Sometimes Uncleanness is taken in a larger sense, for the
UNCLEANNESS OF SIN; and in that sense also the ways of Young people are liable
to very much Uncleanness. There is an Uncleanness in all Iniquity; Original Sin
is a deadly Leprosy, and all the out-breakings of it are but so many Putrefying
Sores. Now Young people, may upon this very account with peculiar Lamentations,
lay their Hands upon their Lips, and cry out, Unclean! Unclean! It Were an
impertinency to quote Authority for it, That all men are sinners; but besides
the Authority of Ambrose, that Vicina Lapsibus est Ad^l^scentia, we may bring
an unhappy Experience for it, That Young people are most emi^^ntly, and most
viol^ntly sinners. And there are some Sins whereto the Young more than others
are disposed. Such are the sins, whereof it was Cautioned, in 2 Timothy 2.22. Flee
^^uthful Lusts: The Sins whereof it was requested in Psalm. 25.7. Remember not
the sins of my youth: The sins whereof it was complained, in Job 13.26. Thou
make me possess the Iniquities of my youth. There are some special Puddles of
Hell, wherein Ungodly young people are, as in their Element. The Sin of
Inconsiderateness, or, putting far away the evil day; the Sin of Sensuality,
or, Walking in the sight of the Eyes; the sin of Evil-Fellowship, or sitting
with vain persons; the sin of Mispence ^f time, or Forgetting the Latter End;
and, the (...) Pride, or, the want of a sober mind; (...) as these are the
sins, which young people are generally too prone unto; yea, when shall you find
any of them, that can say, I have cleansed my heart from such Iniquities!

But there is a way for it. For, I am now to tell you,

PROPOSITION II.
The WORD of GOD is of Glorious Use, to cleanse the way of all people, and even
of Young people, from its Con^^minations. It Is mavelous! What is the Word of
God for? It Is answered, in Prove. 1.4. it is To give to the young man, knowledge
and discretion; So, 'twill Give to the Young man Cleanness and Purity. But
there are Three Things, after which we are to be Inquisitive.

I. What WORD of God, should Young people reg^rd, for the Cleansing of their
way?

For Answ^^; Let young people (...) nothing less tha^ the WHOLE WORD of GOD.
There is no Word of God, whereof you may not say, Good is that word (...) the
Lord! You are told, in 2 Timothy 3.16.17. All Scripture is profitable, for
^^struction in Righteousness; that the man of God man be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works. Truly so, The whole Word God, is profitable to
make Young people Righteous; that the young man may be thoroughly purified, in
all good ways. But more particularly, There is the Word Written, and you are to
regard that Word. It is said in, 2 Peter 1.9. We have a more sure word of
Prophecy, whereto ye do well, that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines
in a dark place. You, Young people, are Young Sailors, through a Dark,
Tempestuous, Dangerous World: You had need make the Written Word of GOD, the
Pole Star, by which alone you may shape your Course; and therefore you had
need, at least every Four and Twenty Hours, to take Observation by that Word.
Again, there is the W^rd Preached, and you are also to regard that Word. It is
said, in Jer. 3.15. I will give you Pastors according to mine Heart, which
shall feed you with knowledge and with understanding. You that are Young
People, are the Young Lambs of our Flocks; Where the Preached Word of GOD is to
be Enjoyed in those Assemblies are the Folds of Him (...) is the Great and the
Good Shepherd of your Souls; you should t^^^efore every Week, be there Folding
in the Green Pastures, and by the Still W^^^rs, where you may hear the Voice of
your Eternal ^hepherd. But then,

II. What is that CLEANSING of the Way, which Young People may obtain from this
Word of God?

For Answer; Young People, It Is the MENDING of your Way, that is to be the
Cleansing of your Way. The Purification of your Way, is to be by the
Reformation of what is amiss in your way. The Cleansing of your way, has those
two things belonging thereunto; in 2 Cor. 7.1. First, Let us cleanse our selves
from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; and Secondly, Let us perfect Holiness
in the Fear of God. The Way of Young People is Cleansed, Firstly, When they
Repent what is Ill. It is prescribed, in Prove. 28.13 He that Confesses and
Forsakes shall find Mercy. When you do with a bitter Sorrow of Soul,
Acknowledge and Abandon all that is amiss in your Ways, you then have that
Mercy of Cleansed Ways. But the Way of Young People is further Cleansed, when
they Practice what is Good. It is Expressed, in Act. 24.16. I Exercise my self
to have always a Conscience void of Offense toward God and toward Man. We
have Cleansed Ways, when we are Conscientious in all our Ways; and when we
have nothing Offensive, nothing Provoking, nothing Injurious in them. In short,
Young People are to Forsake that Way, which the Preacher calls, The way of
their own Heart; and they are to Follow that way which the Prophet calls, The
good way, Leading unto Rest. It is by doing so, that our way, is cleansed
before the Lord. But now,

III. Which way does the Word of God Operate for this cleansing?

For Answer; Many ways. But, Thus especially.

First, The Word of God, is the GLASS, which gives Young People, to see the
Uncleanness of their Ways. It is said, in James 1.23. The Hearer of the Word,
is like to a man, beholding his Natural Face in a Glass. Young People do often
visit the Glass; but, Look here, is a most Impartial and most Heavenly Glass
for you; This Book is that Glass. If you will fairly set your selves before the
Commandments in this Book; and Examine your selves upon every one of th^se
Commandments, How far have I Omitted, what is in this Law required? Or, How far
have I Committed what is in this Law forbidden? You Will then see the manifold
Uncleanness of your Ways, in order to the Removal of that Uncleanness.

Again, The Word of God is the RULE, which tells Young People, how to get off
the Uncleanness of their Ways. This is the Rule of proceeding, in that
Business, in Isai. 1.16. Wash ye, Make you clean, put away the Evil of your
Doings* Young People have a Rule here, to show them what is Clean, and what is
Unclean; and a Rule, how to Gain the former, how to Shun the latter. If you
will Consult this Directory, and the L^mits, and the Touchstones, of
Christianity, therein directed; you will see the Remedies of Uncleanness, as well
as the Opposites of Uncleanness, and get your Ways Conformed accordingly.

Furthermore, The Word of God, is the SPUR, which moves Young People, to seek a
Cure for the Unclearness of their Ways. What Incentives unto Holiness, have we
in the Word of our God? Lord, Thy Word is very Pure, and we would Love it,
because it quickens us to be so! The Apostle says, in 2 Cor. 7.1. Dearly
Beloved, Having these Promises, Let us Cleanse our selves. Thus, Let me say,
Beloved Youths, In this Word, it is Promised, That if you will be Pure in Heart,
you shall See Good; it is Promised, That if you will be Undefiled in way, you
shall be Blessed; it is Prom^sed, That if you will have Clean Hands and a Pure
Heart, you shall Receive the Blessing from the Lord, and Righteousness from the
God of your Salvation. But more than so; In this Word it is also Threatened,
That if you Obey Unrighteousness, there is a Terrible Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish, to be rendered unto Every Soul of you. Well then, How
shall we do any other than Cleanse our Ways, upon the awful Intimations of
such a Word!

Moreover, The Word of God is the VEHICLE of that Spirit, who Washes Young
People from the Uncleanness of their Ways. How or whence is it, that we are
any of us Cleansed from our Sinfulness? It is answered, in 1 Cor. 6.11. Ye are
Washed by the Spirit of our God. Now the Spirit of God applies Himself to the
Souls of Young People, in and by this Word of His; a Word given by the
Inspiration of that Spirit. The Regenerating, the Sanctifying Spirit of God,
Breathes in His Word; the Word of this Gospel, is the Dispensation, and the
Ministration of the Spirit. Young People, you are in the way of the Spirit,
when you are sitting under the Word of God: and that is the way for you, to
obtain the Cleansing of your Way.

Finally, The Word of God Exhibits unto Young People, the MEANS whereby they
may be Cleansed from the Uncleanness of their Ways. What is the only
Abstersive, whereby our Sinful Uncleanness may be taken away? We are answered
in 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Jesus Christ, cleanses us from all Sin. Now that
Invaluable and Efficacious Blood, which is the Blood of God, is tendered unto
Young People in the Word of God. This is the Golden Vessel, wherein there is
brought unto you that Liquor of Everlasting Life. The Blood of our Savior, is
that Blood whereby we are Sanctified: Well, but when you have the Word of God
Laid before you, you have a most Mavelous, and Gracious profer of this
Inestimable Blood. The voice of this Word unto you is, Young People, Behold the
Blood of a precious Redemer provided for you; Here, you may Enjoy the Benefits
of that Glorious Blood; it is a Soul-cleansing Blood, an Heart softning Blood,
a Mind-Healing Blood; Consent that it should be to you such a Blood, and you
shall Enjoy the Benefits of that Blood. The Word of God will Cleanse your
Ways, when it procures your Consent unto the Cleansing Virtue of our Lords
BLOOD upon your Souls. But of these things we may now pass unto some,

APPLICATION.
I confess, that the Hebrew word Nagnar signifying A Young Man, comes from a
word that signifies, to cast off; and some give this Reason for it, because
Young men are too ready to cast off, all the wholesome instructions that can be
given them. Young People, I pray GOD forbid, that you should this Day come
under that unhappy Character! Do not cast off the instructions which are now to
be tendered you; O do it not, lest you provoke the Great GOD thereby to Cast off
your souls, and cast off your Prayers, and make doleful Cast-a-ways of you,
throughout Eternal Ages. GOD will deal with your souls, and prayers, just as
you deal with His Words; Wherefore, in the Language of Jotham, I Address you;
Young people, Hearken to me, that GOD may hearken to you another Day!

And now first, there is to be laid before you;

One Praeliminary Lesson.
And that is this; It Is possible for YOUNG People, to be GOOD People. Even a
Young man may cleanse his way, if he will will take heed, according to the Word
of GOD; and there are some Young men, who do take heed accordingly. Indeed, Our
whole Hundred and Nineteenth Psalm here, is the Language of a New Creature; and
yet it is commonly conceived that a Young person was the Writer of it; even
that very David, who elsewhere could say, as in Psalm. 71.5. Thou art my Hope, O
Lord God, Thou art my trust from my Youth. It Is to be confessed, and as much to
be bewailed, that many, yea, that most, Young people, are strangers to real
Godliness. The Greeks use the same Name for, A child, and A fool; truly, it is
not only a rare thing to see a child, that is not morally a fo^l; but the
sinful folly of the young usually stick^ by them, and cleaves to them, till
they are Old in sin. As there was one possessed by a Devil, concerning whom in
Mark 9.21 Jesus asked his father, how long is it ago, since this came unto him?
and he said, of a child. So, there are multitudes of Young people possessed
with a Vice; about whom, if it may be asked, How long is it ago since they were
under the power of this? it must be answered, Of a child! Oh! how many Children
are there, Led captive by Satan at his will! Nevertheless, there are some young
people, that come under a more laudable Character; we may speak of them, Those
better things which accompany Salvation. There is an execrable proverb A young
Saint, and an old Devil; but Erasmus well says, That the Devil invented that
Proverb, I am sure the Proverb, is none of Solomon's, who says, in Pro. 22.6.
Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not
depart from it. There have been Young Hypocrites, that have made Old Devils;
there have been young Sinners, that have made Old Devils; but Young Saints will
make Old Angels; and, blessed be God, there are such Young Saints in the World.
There are young Jo^^phs, who, though they want not for courage, yet they durst
not sin against God. There are Young Moses's, who prefer Affliction with the
People of God, before the Momentany pleasures of sin. There are Young Samuels,
who wait upon God in his House for his Word, while their Childhood is yet
scarce expired. There are Young Solomon's, who Choose Wisdom in the Fear of God,
before all the Riches, the Honors, the Delights of this Life. There are Young
Abijahs, who even in their Infancy have many Good Frames toward the Lord God
of Israel. There are Young Obadiah's, who not only Fear the Lord greatly, but
also do it, From their Youth. There are Young Josiah's, who while they are yet
young, do seek after GOD. There are Young Jeremiah's, who are Sanctified unto
the Service of God, and Replenished with the Spirit of God, even in their
Tender Years. There are Young Daniels, who will by no means be persuaded unto
any thing, whereby they may be polluted. There are Young Baptists, full of the
Holy Ghost, even while they are yet in their School-Boyes Clothes. There are
Young John's, who overflow with the Love of God, and are Beloved Disciples And
there are Young Timothies, who by the Knowl^^ge of the Scriptures, are Betimes
Made wise unto Salvation. Young People, To bespeak, and procure your becoming
such Young People, is my Errand unto You th^^ Day. And now, having thus taken
it for granted, That you may become such, that which Remains is, a fervent,

EXHORTATION,
Recommending of RELIGION unto the Rising Generation. Religion, (if you derive
it, a Re-^l^gendo) is but a Choosing over again. When it is said, in Eccl.
12.1. Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, in the Original there is
that Emphasis, Do it in the Days of thy Choice. Truly Sirs, The Days of your
Youth, are the Days of your Choice; and in these Days you make that Choice,
whereon depends your Everlasting Blessedness or Misery. During all the doleful
Days of your Unregeneracy hitherto, you had made a Bad Choice: You have not
Chosen, like Young Moses, the Condition of the People of God: You have not
Chosen, like Young Mary, the Good part that cannot be taken away: You have
Chosen like them that have Loved Death, by your Choosing to Wrong your own
Souls, in Sinning against the Lord Jesus Christ. But, Oh! that you would by
Religion immediately mend your Choice; and make such a Choice, as you may
Joyfully stand by, throughout Eternal Ages! Choose God for your Portion, Choose
Christ for your Savior, Chose Heaven for your Inheritance; and therefore
Choose Religion for the whole Conduct of your Li^es. There ate some have made,
not Reason, but Religion* the Essential Difference between a Man and Beast.
This I am sure of, There is all the Reason in the world, that as soon as ever
you are come to the use of Reason, you should Employ it in the Exercises of
Religion; and until you come to This, You are even, worse then the Beasts that
Perish.

Now the Religion, to be recommended unto the choice of our young people, is,
you see, under a Threefold Notion to be set before them; a Good WAY, a Good
WORD, and a Goo^ HEED: wherefore, Come, ye Children, heark^n unto me, and I
will teach you the Fear of the Lord.

I. A GOOD WAY, is the first thing, that our Young People, must have
Recommended unto them. See to it, Young People, that your Way be Rectified, and
by being Rectified, be Purified, according to the Orders of your God. Young
men, you Stand, as the Poets report of young Hercules, after a sort, In Bivio,
having the prospect of Two Ways before you; there is a Virtuous Way on the
Right Hand, and a Vicious Way on the Left Hand; whereto you are solicited. O
take the Better of these VVayes; whereof indeed there is but One Good; and
Know, that your Standing at the Right Hand or the Left Hand of the Lord Jesus
Christ, in the Dreadful Day of His Appearing depends on your taking of this
Way. But, What Way? O let it not be said of you, The Way of peace they have
not known, and, They have Set themselves in a Way that is not good. But let
your Way be, The Narrow Way, that Leads unto Life. Let not your way be that
which is called in Ephesians. 2.2, 3. A Walk, according to the course of this World,
^^cording to the Prince of the Power of the Air, and in the Lusts of the Flesh.
O may the good God keep you out of the way, to which the World, the Devil, and
the Flesh invite you* Let not your way be, The way which wicked men have
trodden: but, instead of that, let your way be that which is called in Prove.
2.20. The way of Good men. O that this might once be the way of Young men.

There is the Way of Repenting; let that be yours; and be you continually
crying to GOD for power against your sins, as well as for the pardon of them
all.

There is the Way of Believing; let that be yours; and be you continually
Looking unto the Lord Jesus Christ, for the supply of your Souls with all Grace
from his All-sufficient Fullness.

The way of the New Covenant, and of Resigning yourselves up unto the Most
High, to be, for Him, and not for another, according unto that Covenant* let
this be your way: that so when you come to the End of your way, you may
joyfuully hear the GOD of Heaven saying, as in, Ezekiel. 16.60. I will remember my
Covenant with thee, in the days of thy youth. This is the Good old way to
Everlasting Rest: Young man, take this old way; never balk any part or step of
this way; take, and keep, and hold, and never be guil^y of such great folly, as
to leave, this way of understanding. But then,

II. A GOOD WORD, is the ne^r thing that our Young People must have Recommended
unto them. See to it, Young People, that you Study the Word of God; and, Search
the Scriptures, like busy Miners, pursuing the inestimable Treasures in them.
Let none of us despise or neglect our Larger Bible, when David that had but a
little Moiety of the Bible, cried out, O it is more desirable than much fine
Gold, and sweeter than the Honey comb. Give a due entertainment unto this
invaluable Word of God. But how? I say, Entertain the Word of God Awfully. So
did they in 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. Ye received it, not as the Word of men, but as it is
in truth, the Word of God, Realize the voice of the Omnipotent God, in every
line of this Word. Suppose that the Great God should with Rapid Peals of
Thunder in the Sky over your Heads, articulately say, Young man, I have given
thee thy Life, now give me thy Heart, and seek thou my face, that thy Soul may
Live* Would it nothing affect you? Why you may truly suppose, That the terrible
Voice of God, as distinctly thus calls upon you in the Thunder Claps of his
Word. Suppose it, and say, Lord, my heart stands in Aw of this Word! Again,
Entertain the Word of God Frequently. This was enjoined, in Deuteronomy 6.7. Thou
shall talk thereof, when thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. This Word falls
like the Manna about you every day; and you should every day gather a Portion
of this Manna. Ordinarily count the Day lost, or that you have had* but a Dark
and a Black day of it, wherein you have not had something of this Word laid
before you; let this Word be the Young man's, as it is the Good man's, assiduous
Meditation! Once more, Enter^ain the Word of GOD Profitably. Let the Word be
mixed with such things in you, as may conduce to your profiting by this Word:
and especially, let unceasing Prayer, accompany it. What said the Psalmist? in
Psalm. 27.8. When thou said, seek ye my Face, my heart answered, thy Face,
Lord, I will seek. Even so, when God speaks to us, let us then seek to him. I
have known a very Young person, who in hearing a Sermon sometimes, has not
permitted one Text, or one Head, in all the Sermon pass him, without a
pertinent Ejaculation thereupon. Thus, When we hear a Sin rebuked in the Word
of God, follow it wi^h a Prayer, Lord, save me from that sin. When we hear a
Grace proposed in the Word of God, follow it with a prayer, Lord, fill me with
that Grace. When any thing is Promised in that Word, Pray, and Wish, Lord, let
this be my Heritage, and the rejoicing of my heart. And when any thing
Threatened, then Wish, Lord, let not those Judgments come upon me. There was one
of but Fight years old, that could say all the New Testament by Heart: but it
may be that thy Leaky Heart, like a Sieve, does let slip the Word of God, which
is poured thereinto; nevertheless, if the Word passing through thy Heart, excite
such Prayers and Wishes, in it, a mavelous Purificati^n of S^ul, will be
thereby Attained. And then,

III. A GOOD HEED is therefore, Lastly, to be Urged upon the Young People
before the Lord this Day. You are to Take Heed; and you shall be told, Of What?

First, Young People, TAKE HEED, Lest by Forgetting of your SOULS you Starve
them, you Slay them, you Ruin them. The Youngest of you all, have a Precious,
and an Immortal Soul within you; a Soul, by its Fall from God, plunged into
such an Universal Wretchedness, as would amaze you, if one part of it, were not
your being Star's Dead in it; a Soul, that cannot be Saved from that
Wretchedness, by a Less Ransom than the Blood and Life of God Himself; a Soul,
which is to Stand like a Rock in the Sea of an Eternity, either Comfortable, or
Miserable, according to your Youthful Preparations for that Eternity. But, oh!
what have you hitherto done, for the Welfare of this Never-Dying Soul? I say,
Take Heed, Lest you fall into that most woeful Disaster, in Math. 16.26. What
is a man profited, if he Gain the whole World, and L^^se^ his own Soul? I
hope, You Study to get into some honest Way of Living; You Labor to get
Aforehand in the World; You Desire to be Settled in a Family, with all the
Conveniences of a Credible Family about you; and you, Do well. But, O Take
Heed, that all this while, you don't Neglect your Invaluable SOULS, and that
Great Salvation, which is altogether necessary for your Souls. It Is reported,
That when Herod Butchered a Son of his own, among the Children which he
Murdered at Bethlehem, the Roman Emperor said upon it, It were better to be
Herod's Swine, than Herod's Son. Truly so, It may be said of many a Young Man,
That Young man will do more for his Carcass, yea, he will do more for his
Horse, or for his Dog, than he will do for his own Soul. But, in the Name of
God; Is this to Act Reasonably? Take Heed, I say, Take Heed, Lest that SOUL of
yours, have cause to complain, A Goodly Price am I Valued at of them! You set
such a Price upon a Body, which the Worms are a few Days hence to Feed upon,
that you have spent many a weary Year, for the Feeding, the Clothing, the
Pleasing of it. But in the mean time, will you Begrutch a Serious Hour, to be
now and then Laid out in Working out the Salvation of a SOUL, that shall
Endure, till the very Heavens be no more? A Goodly Price, Young People, A
Goodly Price, for such a Soul! Oh! Methinks I over-hear that poor SOUL, making
this Loud Cry, in its Owners Ears; Have Pity on me, Wretch, Have pity on me!
Art thou careful of every thing else, but of ME? O Do something to Rescue me
out of the Terrible Damnation whereinto thy Wickedness has H^^l^d me; Do
something that I may not be Left without God, without Christ, without Hope, as I
have been hitherto I again say, Take Heed, Lest a Slighted SOUL, become an
Eternal Castaway!

Secondly, TAKE HEED, Lest your Company prove your Confusion. ^rigidus (O
Juvenes fugite hinc) Latet Anguis in Herba. Oh! That our Young People, who are
generally by Nature Sociable, would be sensible of the Concernment that Lies
upon them, to be wonderfully careful concerning their Society! I am to tell
you, That your Society, will be perhaps the first Mark of your Conversion unto
God. You will no sooner begin to be in Earnest about your Everlasting
Interests, but it will be seen, by your Abandoning that Wild, Mad, Frolicksome
Company, which has it may be heretofore Enchanted you. But I am also to tell
you, That your Society is like to be the worst ^ane of your Conversion. What is
it that ^inders you from that Sober, Serious, Thinking Disposition of Spirit,
which might probably bring matters to that pass with you, He Thinks and he
Turns! It is the Entanglement of Evil Company, that keeps the most of you, in
the Snares of Death. I say then, Take Heed, Young Man, Take Heed, Lest you go
to Hell with and for your Company; such Company, as I assure you, will but
Inflame that HELL, till it be Seventimes Hotter, than it Would have been
without such woeful Company! Hear, that Loud Call of Heaven Depart from the
Tents of these wicked ones, Lest you perish in all their sins. How often have
you been Warned, That your Society is for your Eternity! Say then; Would you be
willing, throughout the Days of Eternity to be Lodged among these Lewd Youths,
Who never had one Savoury Word in their mouths, Who Scoff at all that has any
Savor of Devotion, Who do all they can to decoy one another into the Courses
of Gaming, Drinking, and Abominable Filthiness? Doubtless, 'Twill be your most
Lively Cry to God in a Dying Hour; Lord, Gather not my Soul with such Sinners!
And, I believe, if some of those wicked Companions, might come into your
Chambers, when you are Lying on your Deathbeds, the sight of them would smite
your Souls with more Horror, than if all the Ugly Toads of Egypt were Crawling
then about you. How often have I heard the Doleful Groans of Young People, when
the Dimness of the Anguish of Death has been upon them, and when their
quivering Souls have set upon the^^ Pale and Cold Lips, ready to be Gone for
ever, alas, they knew not, Whither! then Crying out, O my vain Company, it has
undone me! my Sitting with vain persons, has been the Damnation of my Soul!
But, Young Man, Why do you not withdraw your self presently then from such
Loathsome Sinners? We find, that when our Lord was going to be Crucified, in
Mark 14. 51, 52. There followed Him a certain Young Man, and the Young Men Laid
hold on him; and he Fled from them Naked. Young People, If you are Following
the Lord Jesus Christ, in the practices of Christianity, there are other Young
Ones, that will go to Lay hold on you, and oblige you to Accompany them in
offering all manner of Indignities unto the Lord Jesus Christ; Yea, those
Impieties, which do Crucify the Son of God afresh: But, Fly from them; Fly,
whatever it cost you. Instead of Them, why should you not Associate your
selves, with such Young People, as have their Pious meetings, every Week, to
seek the Face, and Sing the Praise, and Repeat the word, of God, and (...) one
another? Blessed be God, that we have so many such meetings among us! It Is an
Extreme Sleepiness in our Churches abroad in the Country, that they no more
Consult their own Hopeful Growth, by encouraging their Young People, to such
Preparations for further Communion among the People of God. Such Praying
meetings of Young People, I am sure, will tu^n to better Account, than those
Husking meetings, whereat so many of our young People in the Country do debauch
themselves; better I say, than those whereat the Young People, instead of
answering the demands of God for Green Ears of Corn to be brought him in our
Ear^y Piety, do make the pulling of Ripe Ears of Corn, an occasion of all the
Lewdnesses in the World. But oh! Let none of our Young Folks, ever disregard
that Oracle of Wisdom, He that walks with the Wise shall be wise, but a
Companion of Fools shall be destroyed.

Thirdly, TAKE HEED, Lest your Delaying prove your Damnation. There is nothing
more frequently or more dreadfully Threatens the Destruction of Young People,
than their Delay of their Duty. They will not positively say, We will not
hearken to the Word of God, but they say, We will hereafter Hearken: Like
unhappy (...) in Act. 24.25. they (...) of, A more convenient Season. ^ut
When? I beseech you, Vain Youths, when will that More Convenient Season, come?
O do not say like them of old, in Hag. 1.2. The TIME is not yet Come. Take
Heed, Lest by a by a Dre^m of, Hereafter, you utterly Lose the opportunity of
making your Peace with God, and throw your selves beyond the reach of Mercy.
Let This awaken you, That if you are not now in your Youth brought home unto
God, it is probable that you never will be so at all: for the most of Them that
are brought Home unto God, are so before their Youth is altogether out. But let
me more particularly Admonish you, That you will Forfeit your Whole
Opportunity, of Getting into the Lord Jesus Christ, if you Neglect the taking
of your Present Opportunity after plain Warnings that have advised you to take
it; if after you have been most fai^ly and fully Forewarned of the Danger in
Delays, you will still Delay to Turn unto God, upon a presumption of your
having Time and Strength to Turn at your own Dispose, it is to be Looked for,
that the Righteous God will in His Wrath Swear against you, That you shall
never Know the Things of your Peace; that you shall never be Purged from your
Filthiness; that you shall never Enter into His Rest You have been told, Youth
is Vanity; and its passing so soon, so fast away* is one thing that makes it
Vanity. But, O Take Heed, Lest by Sweeling away your Youth in the Vanities of
this World* you so offend the Spirit of Grace, that He Leave you in a Graceless
Condition all your Days. If you Grieve that Spirit, you do but throw your
selves into Interminable Griefs; If you Vex that Spirit, you do but procure*
Everlasting Ve^at^ons for your selves; If you Quench that Spirit, you will but
throw your selves into the Fire, that never shall be Quenched. All this you do,
by* Delaying to do what is inc^mbent on you, in order to the Good Settlement of
your Eternal Concerns. Wherefore, Take Heed of this Folly; and be able to say,
Lord, I made Have, and I did not Delay to keep thy Commandments!

THIS is that RELIGION, which we have Recommended unto the Rising Generation;
and now we must bring this matter to some issue, before we part. Say, my Young
People, will you now Comply, or will you still Delay?

If you would now COMPLY, and with Conquered Souls Reply, The Lord shall be my
Father, and the Guide of my Youth; my Savior, and the Love, the Hope, the Joy
of my Soul! Then we would leave Preaching to you; we would fall to Praising of
God for you. Yea, there is a very Charming thing that I am now to utter; I am
now demanding the Consent of your Souls, unto the Blessed Proposals of
RELIGION; and the Angels of God, with the God of Angels, are this Afternoon
observing whether you give an Hearty Consent unto those Proposals. If you do
it, the Glad Report of the Change now wrought upon you, will immediately be
Spread through the Heavenly Regions, and the Caelestial CITY of GOD, will be
All Joyfully Moved at the Report. All HEAVEN will quickly Ring with it, That
such a Young Person is received into the Favo^r of the Eternal King, and into
an Union with the Lord of Glory! And all the Three Persons of the Undivided and
Adorable TRINITY, With the Myriads of Bright Spirits, that are about his
Throne, will Rejoice over the Poor Youth, which was Lost, but is Found, which
was Dead, but is Alive. Hard-Hearted Youth, how can thou Resist a Charm so
very powerful! Do not envy unto Heaven, the Satisfaction of seeing the Youngest
Creature here made an Happy Creature! Do not hinder the Lord of Heaven from
laying of thee, in that Bosom, where there once lay the Youngest of his
Disciples! If when Jesus beheld a Civil, Moral, Well Disposed Young Man, He
loved him, what will He do, think you, when he beholds, a Truly Religious Young
man? O be persuaded now to make Joy in Heaven this Afternooon, lest God
Almighty Smite thee with Never-ending Sorrow in Hell another Day, for thy being
such a Child of Unperswadeableness!

But it is to be feared, that there are Obstinate Souls, who will still DELAY,
to Cleanse their ways, by taking heed, according to the Word of God: and as for
these, there are some further pains to be taken for the Reclaiming of them.

As for You that are OLD PEOPLE, God forbid, that you should procastinate in
Religion, whoever others do so procrastinate. You that are most unquestionably
very near to your Everlasting Estate, had need get quickly beyond Peradventures
about that Estate; and make sure, that your Future [and yet so Nigh, that it is
hardly to be called Future!] Estate, may be, That which remains for the People
of God. I say, Father, make have; and though with One Foot in the Grave, yet Run,
to and in, the Way of Gods Commandments. Art thou, A Sinner half an hundred
Years Old! Oh, Tarry not One hour longer so much under the Formidable Curse of
God, but give thy self up to God in Christ. This hour with hearty Lamentations
over all the former Errors of thy Life. It has been sometim^s enquired, Quis
Miserrimus! Or, who is the miserablest man in the World! And it has been
Answered, Senex Egenus, or, A Needy Old Man. But I Will tell you who is a far more
miserable man; A Godless Old man, a Christl^ss Old man, an Old man unacquainted
with the comforts of true Religion. I^ there be One such Old man within Hea^ing
here, I would say This to him; Friend, It is not yet altogether Too Late for
you to embrace the Tenders of the New Testament. Although that Old Age has
Ploughed its Furrows in your Faces, it is not yet al^ogether Too Late for you
to be Ploughing up the Fallow ground of your Hearts, by true Repentance.

But yet I must say This also; That it will quickly be Too Late. Wherefore,
make Have, Old man, make Have, in thy Cleansing of thy ways. We read, in Luc.
4.40. when the Sun was S^tting, all they that had any sick with diverse
Diseases, brought them unto Jesus Christ; and He Laid His Hands on every one of
them, and Healed them. Truly, Though thou a^t just come To thy Sunset, yet thou
may be welcome unto the Lord Jesus Christ, with all thy Spiritual m^ladies;
Repair to him, as the Prophet, the Priest, the King, of thy Soul; and that Sun
of Righteousness will yet arise unto thee, with Healing in His wings. But if
thou stay till it be Past thy Sunset, there will then be no Remedy nor
Escaping for thee; thou will then unavoidably Perish in Outer Darkness for
evermore.

But with you, that are YOUNG PEOPLE, it is, that I am this Day concerned; I
may not allow my Self to wear the Character of the Idol-shepherd, in zech. 1.11
16. He shall not seek the young one: but I pray, let a young man say as one of
the Ancients, in many Sermons would, Ad vos mihi sermo O Juvenes! or, It Is to
you, Young Foles, that my Sermon is now directed. As we read, Of a Young man, a
Prophet, who in 2 King. 9.5. said, I have an Errand unto thee: And Jehu said,
Unto which of all us? And he said, unto thee O Captain. So i^ it be asked, unto
whom I have an Errand from the Great God this Day, I must say, It Is to thee, O
Young man! And my Business with you is, to Convince you, That you ought
Immediately to set upon the practice of that Religion, wherein You shall
Cleanse your VVayes, by Taking Heed according to the Word of God. Wherefore,
Come, ^oung men, Let us Reason together; Hear my Demands, in the Name of the
God that made you.

Quest. I. Are not Gods COMMANDMENTS, Gods Promises, Gods Threatenings,
particularly directed unto YOU, Young People, to Engage YOU in Gods Religion?
We read in 2 John 4. of, Children walking in Truth, as we have Received a
Commandment from the Father. God our Father has given a Commandment unto Us,
Young Folks, to approve our selves ^is Children, by Walk^ng in Truth, or, as
His Truth directs. It Is the Commandment of God, Cast away from you all your
Transgressions; but is it any where said, Let none but Old People Cease
Transgressing? It Is the Commandment of God, Let the Wicked forsake his way,
Returning to the Lord; but was it ever said, Let none but Old People Return
from Wickedness? Never did you yet find any such Clause in all the Edicts of
Heaven; but the Thing intended by the God of Heaven is, Let all people do so!
So then, you Young People, are to do it. It is the Commandment of God, That All
men should Repent; and it is His Commandment, That We should all Believe on the
Name of His Son Jesus Christ. And what? Have you not so much Grammar in you, as
to know, that the Imperative Mood has no Future Tense? It is not for the Time
Future, but the Time Present, that you are thus Commanded.

Briefly, There is a Debt of Obedience, which You, Young Folks, Owe to the
Almighty God. Well, suppose No Day had been Expressed in the Bill for this
Debt. Why, Then Present Payment is to be Demanded. And now, as an Off^cer, of
the Great God, this Day I make this Demand. Souls, You Owe to the Glorious God,
all the Glory that by Loving Him, Seeking Him, Serving Him, and Giving your
whole Selves unto Him, you can render Him. Don't put me to prove the Debt; You
dare not but Own it all. I say then, Pay it out of hand, Pay it without any
more ado; Let your God Now, presently have those Good Things which he Requires
of you. But now I do again Think of it, There is a Day Expressed, for your
Obedience unto God; and I am to tell you, my Young Folks, that it is, THIS VERY
DAY. As David said Long ago, To Day, O that you would hear the Voice of God!
And Paul said again Long after him, To Day, O that you would hear the Voice of
God! Thus, In Every Age, The same Thing still is to be said; and it is to be
said also To every Age; What is to be done in Obedience unto the Voice of God,
must be done, TO DAY. And therefore you have so many a, NOW, in the
Commandments of God. His Voice is, in Jer. 25.23. Turn ye ^OW every one from
his Evil Way. Hs Voice is in Josh. 24.14. NOW Fear the Lord, and and Serve Him
in Sincerity It Is His Voice, in 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold, NOW it the Accepted Time;
Behold, NOW is the Day of Salvation. Agreeably whereunto, is the Speech of the
Jewish Rabbis, Gnabar Zeman, Gnabar Corb^n; the offering is past, if the
season be past, Well, But who is to Regard this NOW? Are they none but Old
People, that should NOW be concerned about the Welfare of their Souls? Nay, Let
Young People Hear; It Is Expressed, in Eccl. 12.1. Remember NOW thy Cre^t^r in
the Days of thy Youth. And agree^ble hereunto, are those Calls in Psalm. 148.
12, 13 Both Young men and Maidens, Old men and Children; Let them Praise the
Name of the Lord. Plainly then, There is not so much as one Reasoning ^abe
among you to be Excused from the Work of Praising the Lord; How? But by a
Well-Ordered Conversation. Though our God Loves not that any should be Babes in
Religion, yet He Loves well to have Religion in Babes. In fine, The King of
Heaven will have Young men, to stand before Him, and I am to do the part of a
Press Master, for that Great King this Day. Young People, You are to List your
selves under the Banners of the Lord Jesus Christ; and being so Listed, you are
to Fight the Good Fight, by a perpetual Religion, Opposing all the Enemies of
His Kin^dom. THIS is the Service, whereto I do (...) Press you this Day in the
Name of the Eternal MAJESTY. Shall I show you the Glorious Pay, that you are to
Receive, if you Obey? It Is Contained in the Promises of God. Read that Promise,
in Prove. 8.17. They that Seek Me Early shall find Me; and say, what think you
about Finding the Lord Jesus Christ, That Pearl of Great Price. It Is here
promised under the Hand and Seal of Heaven, That if Young people will come to
Walk uprightly, they shall have Grace and Glory, and no Good Thing shall be
Withheld from them. Young people, What are you for? Are you for Pl^asures?
Become Virtuous, and you have a Promise of Pleasures at Gods Right Hand for
ever more. Are you for Profits? Become Ver^uous, and you have a Promise of
Durable Riches with Righte^usness. Are you for Honors? Espouse virtue, and you
have a Promise of a Crown, a Throne, an Eternal Kingdom. Well, but on the other
side, I am also to set before you the Death, which is to be inflicted on you,
if you Refuse. It Is Described in the Threatenings of God. Read that Threatening
in Isa. 9.17. The Lord shall have no Joy in their Young men, for every one is
an Evil Doer; and then Think, What will come upon you, if you continue in your
Evil Doings. It Is Threatened, That if Young people, as well as others, (...) Sin
against God, their Souls are to Die for their Sins: Oh! but, The Death of a
Soul, What a Formidable Thing is That! It is the Threatening of Heaven, That the
Wicked shall be Turned into Hell, and all the Nations that Forget God. But
what? Are there no Wicked Ones, but such as have Gray Hairs upon them, that
fall within the reach of this Commination? Yea, There are Small Chips as well
as Great Logs, Burning in the Fire of Hell. It is the Threatening of Heaven,
That the Wrath of God shall be Revealed from Heaven, against all Ungodliness,
and Unrighteousness of men. But What? Shall only Aged men, if they be Ungodly
and Unrighteous, fall under the Wrath of God? Nay, the Least of you all, do Ly
open to, not the Least of that Wrath. Oh! Lay the Threatening of the Almighty,
before your Eyes; and, I pray, Don't count the Darts of God, but Stubble, don't
Laugh at the Shaking of His dreadful Spear. What shall I say more? David when
there was a Great Work to be done for God, by his Young Son, thought it no
Excuse for him to say, My Son is Young and Tender. Thus, Be any of you never so
Young and Tender, yet I am to tell you, that you have a Great Work, for God,
for Christ, for your own Souls, and for the Temple, incumbent on you; Oh! Be
up, and be Doing, My Son, and the Lord be with thee. Don't slight the Commands
of that God, at whose Voice, the Pillars of Heaven Tremble and who can with hot
Thunder Bolts Reveng^ thy Disobedience!

Quest. II. Can you not see that NECESSITY in Religion, which may fully and
fairly take off every* Objection against it? There are I know not what,
Objections, which Young People often have, against the Fear of God. But how
easily answered! Sometimes it is objected, If we be Religious we shall be
derided. But, by whom, I pray? Derided by none but a Crew of silly Fool, whose
Praise, I hope, does not Co^ntervail with you, the Praise of God! By none but
Wretches Acted so much by the Devil, that it is an Honor to be Reproached
among them; I am sure, that the Apostles of Our Lo^d, once Reckoned so. As for
all such as a^e not in Madness, gone to the farthest Elevation; they do all
Esteem you the Better, for those things, for which these Bats de^i^e you. As
the King of Israel upon the Atchivements of Young David, asked, Whose Son i^
this Youth? So will every true Israelite, with great respect, be saying of you,
What a Worthy Youth is this? And is it not better to have it said, There goes a
Godly, Honest, Useful Young Man, than to have it said, There goes a Young
Bully, as full of the Devil as ever he can hold? Ay, and I say this further;
Let those People Scoff: but, Let him Laugh, that Wins. They Now ^idicule you,
for your Conscientiousness; they Mock at your Sabbaths, your Meetings, your
Cautions. Well, Wretches, Mock on! But see you not, Their Day a Coming? I
assure you, The Day is just at Hand, when these Mockers will be Trembling under
the Last Arrest of Death upon them; and, Then! When they see GOD Frowning on
them, Hell Gaping for them, and a Legion of Devils just going to Drag them away
into their Eternal Prison; How Then! Why, Then, will these Woeful Creatures
Gnash their Dying Teeth, with Changing Wishes, O^ that I had Lived like those
Young People, which I once Fl^uted at! O^ that I had been one among those Young
People, which I spent my scoffs upon! O^ if I might now go back from the Pit, I
would make those Young Men see that I Honor them, and that I Despise, all that
are not like to those. This as to That.

Again, It Is Objected sometimes. It Is very Difficult for to be Religious --
It Is True; But will not the Wages abundantly make amends for all the
Difficulty? You Run, but it is for a Prize; You Fight, but it is for a Crown;
You are to Work hard; yea, but it is your Salvation, which you are all this
while working out. Besides, we say, To the w^lling all things are Easy. Make a
Trial! And Let Me Undergo all your Indignation, if upon the Trial, you don't
find your Devotions more facil and more pleasant Things, than those Drudgeries
of the Devil, whereby you are daily Damning of your own Souls. Young People,
It Is a most lamentable Paradox; That many of you are at more pains to procure
for your Souls a Lodging among the Dragons, of the Pit below, than you are to
make sure of your Everlasting Weal; Yea, That half the pains which many of you
take in the Debauching and the Destroying of your Souls, better placed, were
enough to ^ay Hold on Eternal Life. It is said of some, They Weary themselves
to commit Iniquity. Even so, Deal Honestly, Young Man, and say; Have you not
been more Weary in many of your VVandrings from God, than ever God required
you to be in the severest Mortifications of Holy Living? Let our Young people
then say no more of That!

But in Fine; Let the Objection against Religion be what it will, there is This
one thing to extinguish it; and that is, that this is* as Our Lord Speaks in
Luc. 10 42. The One thing Needful. As Paul said about the Preaching of
Religion, So let me say, about the practice of it, Necessity is laid upon you,
and woe unto you, if you do it not. We say, De Necessaris non est deliberandum;
when a thing must be done, there is no room for Deliberation whether it shall
be done. Come then, my Young people; I must allow you no Longer Time to
Deliberate upon this Point, whether you shall entertain the Fear of God, or no;
for you must, I again say, you must; and I am ashamed that you should put me
upon using the least Argument about it. Hear the Dilemma; '^is that, in, Ezekiel:
18.30.31. Turn, and so Iniquity shall not be your Ruin; make you a New Heart,
and a New Spirit; for why will you Die. Is this then, a matter of Disputation
with you, whether you should Court your own Death and Ruin! Fearful
Infatuation! Suppose a Law suit Commenced against thine Estate, wherein the
Plantiff will certainly be too hard for thee; Would thou not, Agree quickly
with thine Adversary! Young man, Thy Title to Heaven Li^s obnoxious; there must
be something done Quickly for the settling of it. Suppose a Dangerous Wound
made upon thy thy Body, would thou let it alone, till an Irretriveable
Gangrene should overspread it! Why, thy Soul, That has bloody Wounds, and
Brvises, and Ulcers upon it; it is Nonsense to Dispute, Shall I seek a Cure of
these wounds? it must be done immediately, suppose thy House were on Fire over
thy Head, would thou securely drowle and say, When I have taken the other Nap,
I Will see to the putting of it out! Why, thy Soul is in a plight, which has the
Fires, of the Divine Displeasure Enkindled thereupon it is Phrenzy to Dispute
whether they should be stopped or no; care must be taken immediately to prevent
the proceeding of those ^i^eful ^lames. Methinks, The very Instinct of Nature
puts more sense into the very Brute Creatures, than there is in our Young
People who dare continue in a state of Nature There are of them that will Shoot
into their Burrows upon the First Sight of the Dog. Young man, the Bandogs of
Hell are sensibly pu^suing of thee; and will thou not immediately then ^ly into
the Rock that is Higher than thee? There are of them, that will upon the first
Approach, or even the Shadow of the Kite, get under the Wings of their Dam.
Young man, the Harpies of Hell are ^luttering about thee; and will thou not
Immediately now Fly to the Redeemer that would fain gather thee, as an Hen does
her Chickens under her Wings? Briefly, Whatever the Devil has to Object against
Religion, you may stop the Mouth of that Foul ^iend, with telling what is
Written. Say, It Is Written, in Heb. 12.14. Follow Holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord. Say, It Is written, in Joh. 3.3. Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. And this is Written for Young People,
as well as Old! In a word; A Young man once had betaken himself, to the
Severities of a Christian Life; and Receiving Letters from his Father, with
some other pretended Friends, which he understood, were to Dissuade him from
his Christian Course, he never broke the Seal^, ^ut he threw the Letters into
the Fire, protesting, I will never so much as give the Hearing, unto any thing
that can be said against the Christianity wherein I am Engaged. I say, inasmuch
as you must be Religi^us, you should not so much as give the Hearing unto any
Objection against your being so. If the Old Serpent go to Charm you, be you
like the Deaf-Adder, to all his Charms.

Quest. III. You have put off Religion a LONG WHILE ALREADY; and, I pray, is
not That Long Enough? Let me call upon our Young People, as the Angel did upon
Young Austin; Take up and Read! Take up and Read! And now, Like Him, upon that
Cal^, Read what is in Romans 13.11. Now it is High Time to Awake out of Sleep.
You are fast Asleep, Young People, till you come to be Religious: But O Awake,
and see how high the Sun is Risen. They are no Inconsiderable Things that you
have to do; There are a vast multitude of Sins, whereof there is a Pardon to be
obtained; You have mighty Corruptions to be Subdued; You have mighty
Temptations to be Conquered; You have many Relations to be Fulfilled; and many
Services to be Performed: and your Evidences for Heaven are all still to be
Treasured up. And what? Asleep still! Begin to be Religious, when you will, you
may say, Nimis sero Te Amavi, O^, Lord, I blush that I have made it so Late,
before I begin to Love thee. I am sure, as to many of you, That if you should
(And Oh! that you would!) this Afternoon Turn to God, yet you will have cause
to Admi^e the Credit, and Comfort of some others, whereof you may Confess your
selves with Paul, As Born out of Due Time. To Stand Barren among the People of
God, for Three Years together, is by much too much; but it is Likely that some
of you have stood so, for more than Three-times Three. Let me Enquire of you; I
pray, How Old are you? It may be, Twelve, or Fifteen, or Twenty Years Old. And
what? A Slave of the Devil all this while! Sure, It Is Time for you now to say,
as in 1 Pet. 4.3. The Time past of our Life may Suffice us, to have wrought the
will of the Gentiles; And much more, To have wrought the will of the Devils!
All the World has Cried out upon the Insolence of that Pope, who made the Roman
Emperor wait Three Days upon him Abroad, before he would give him any
Audience. Young man, The Spirit of Almighty God has been waiting for an
Admission into thy Heart for this many a Day; He has been Calling, Open to Me*
and this, till His Head has been wet with the ^ew; but thou have kept the Door
of thy Sinful, Doleful Heart hitherto shut upon Him. And what? Is it not yet
Long Enough? Young man Will thou not be made Clean? When shall it once be?

Quest. IV. There are OTHER SORRY TRIFLING THINGS; Do you while off Those
Things, as you do Religion? What if your Betters, bid you be sure to meet them,
at such a time and place? You do not make Them stay for you. But the Glorious
Lord Jesus Christ has Ordered you to meet Him in His Ordinances; He has an
Hundred Times in a Year, for this many a year, been here Looking for you; And
still you make Him Stay! What if your Neighbors request a Courtesy from you?
You then say not unto them, Go away, and come to morrow! But your own Souls are
begging of you, that you would afford some Relief unto them; And yet you Regard
them not! It has been said, The Kings Business requires Have: But Religion,
that is the Business of that, Blessed and only Potentate, who is the King of
Kings; and Lord of Lords: And I pray, Why no more Have about That Business?
Nay, Young People, I have a worse Complaint still to make of you; You have not
put so much Disrespect upon the Devil himself, as you have done upon the
Eternal God! We read of the Tempted Young man, in Prove. 7.22. He goes
straightway. Truly, when the Devil has been Beckening unto thee, Young man, to
follow him in those Youthful Villainies, which were the undoing of thy Soul,
Straightway thou have followed this Devil, Straightway thou have Thrown away
thy own Soul. There, the Young People, Sponte sua properant; Labor est inhibere
volantes. But the God of Glory has been urging of thee, unto that Religion,
which would infallibly bring thee unto Eternal Glory; and He must after all
say, I would have Purged thee, and thou would not be Purged. Mourn, O my
Soul, mourn when thou see what a Wonderful and an Horrible Thing is done by
the Young People in our Land!

Quest. V. Suppose the God of Heaven, should Put YOU off, as you put off the
Religion of that God; I beseech you, How would you like it? You are not only
Impatient, if a Servant of your own stay long upon an Errand; With how much
discontent say you upon it, How Long this Lazy Creature Loiters! Whereas the
Infi^i^e God sent you into this World, upon that Errand of, Bearing some
Testimonies for His Truths and Ways; and you have been Loite^ing, even for
some whole Prentice ships of Years! Methinks, I Over-hear the Resentments of my
God upon it; I (...) this Person upon an Errand for my Service, more than Ten
Years ago; and the Vain Youth has never done yet so much as one stroke of that
Errand! Say, Young man; Is this Conveni^nt? But we'll Turn our Discourse
another way. I say then; What if the Great God Himself, should not presently
Accommodate You, when you Cry unto Him for His Mercies? In what (...)
Importunate Have are you; Like that in Psalm. 70.1. Make Have, O God, to deliver
me; Make Have to help me, O Lord! Or, Like that in Dan. 9.19. O Lord, Hear, O
Lord, Forgive, O Lord, Hearken and Do, and Defer not! Or, Like that in Psalm.
143.7. Hear me speedily, O Lord, my Spirit fails! Well, and what if the
Blessed One should now give no Answer but this, Be Patient, Sinner; Be Patient;
It may be Twenty or Thirty Years hence, I Will consider, whether any thing should
be done for thee? How Discomposed would you be upon such a Denial? With what
Raging Souls would you Expostulate, as in Psalm. 13.1. How Long will thou forget
me? O Lord, for ever? How Long will thou Hide thy Face from me? Yea, It Is well
if you don't become so Froward, as to say with him, Why should I wait for the
Lord any Longer? Unreasonable Youth; Why then must the Most High, be
continually Calling in thine Ears, Make Have, Young man, make Have to S^rve me;
Defer it not, but speedily do it; and your Answer be, that you will do it, you
scarce know, When, your selves? What if you should hereby provoke Him to say, I
will not wait for that Young Sinner any Longer? I cannot but own, Lord! Thou
would be Just in thy Speaking, and Clear in thy Judging so!

Question VI. You delay to set about Religion; But HOW LONG do you design to
Delay? I pray, What is it, that you stay for? Alas, my Young Folks will not
present themselves unto the Lord, until they become as Blind and as Lame, as
those Jebusite Idols, which were Hated by the Soul of the David. But Let me
debate this Point a little with you. You will be Religious, when Old Age comes
to tread Hard upon you. Will you so? That is, you will do no Good things till
you come to your Evil Days! You will never Look unto the Lord Jesus Christ,
until your Eyes cannot see without Glasses! You will never Hear the Voice of
God, until your Ears become as Deaf as a Beetle! You will never Walk in the
Path of Life, until your Feet cannot carry you without a Staff! And is this all
the Offering that you will have to bring unto an Infinitely Glorious God? Let me
Plead with you, as the Prophet with his People did; Sacrilegious Youth, Offer
such a thing now unto thy Governor; Will he be pleased with thee, or accept
thy Person? says the Lord of Hosts. Well, But you will be Religious, when
Sickness has laid you on a Bed, whence you may suspect that you may not come
off Alive. And Why Then? That is, When Legions of Devils Commissioned by a
Neglected and Offended God are about you, throwing the Chains of Eternal
Darkness, over you, you will then think of escaping from them* You will then first
fall to Serving of God, which cannot be done without Fervor of Spirit, when
all the Spirits you have left you will not be enough to Grapple with the pains
of your Bodies! Then, when like Israel in Bondage, you will be able to hearken
unto nothing for Anguish of Spirit, you will, it seems, never Hearken until
Then! Yea, Art thou not fearfully Distracted, Silly Y^uth, to do nothing for
thy Soul, until, the Time, when, for ought thou now know, thou shall be so
Distracted, as that, not one Coherent Thought can come into thy mind! But I Will
suppose, that God may Allow you such a long Space to Repent as you allot upon.
I am nevertheless to tell you, That a Late Repentance, is very seldom a True
Repentance. We have a Daily Demonstration of this, in those Multitudes of
Wretches, who while they lie, as they think, a Dying, do bitterly bewail all
their Divellism, and yet recovering, they play the Devil, as much as ever they
did before! We have the Report of such a Repentance, in those Terms, Psalm.
78.34.36. When He slew them, then they sought Him; and they returned and
Enquired Early after God. Nevertheless they did Flatter Him with their Mouth,
and they Lied unto him, with their Tongues; for their heart was not right with
him! As I have known many Condemned Malefactors, under the Expectation of their
Execution, have such Mavelous expressions of Repentance, that one could not
have imagined mere Hyp^crisy in the bottom of all. And yet I must freely say
it, Of those pretended Penitents, that have been Reprieved and Pardoned, I
cannot Remember Two, but what have afterward Proved Prodigies of Wickedness.
Thus Deceitful uses to be that Repentance, which counts it Early enough to be
Seeking of God, when men find the Almighty God slaying of them! Yea, But I have
another Check for your Young People's Dilatory Phrenzy; and that is this. How
do you know, Young People, but that an Early and a Sudden Death, may overtake
you! We Read of some, in Job 36.14. They die in Youth. Pray, mind, the next time
you step into the Burying- Place, whether you can see no Graves there, that are
shorter than yourselves? We Read of some, in Job. 21.13. In a mom^^t they go
down to the Grave. Pray, How many go out of the World, not having Liberty to
say, Lord, have Mercy on me! at their going?

I say then, Are you sure, that you shall ever see either Old Age, or Sickness!
If not, Be not so Mad, as to Venture your Everlasting Interests, upon such
desperate Peradventures. Young Man, What if thy Life should be out, before this
Year be out? Why, as the Prophet of Old said unto One, thus it is probable, that
there are some now in this Congregation, Whereof it may without an
extraordinary Prophecy be said, This Year thou shall dye. And What? will not
the suspicion of such a Thing make thee this Year, Give All diligence to make
thy Vocation and Election sure? Yea, 'twas a necessary Advice of a Rabbi to a
Scholar, You must be sure to Repent, at Least one Day before you Die. And I am
to tell You, that your Death will be very lamentably Ci^cumstanced, if at It
you cannot say, It Is at least a Day since I made my Peace with God. But I am to
tell you one thing more; Namely; That you cannot Be sure of this most Necessary
thing, except you do it this very Day. For, Boast not of to Morrow; thou
know not what a Day may bring forth!

Besides all this; Peradventure you should come to a Pensive Old Age, or to a
Ling^ing Sickness; Yet it is bur a Peradventure, that the Grace of Repentance
may then be given You. The Apostle speaking of Sinners that Oppose the Calls of
God, has this unhappy Discouragement upon his heart about them, in 2 Timothy 2.25.
If Peradventure, God will give them Repentance.

It Is beyond Peradventure, that if you don't hear the Voice of God now to To
Day, your Hearts will grow Harder and Harder every Day, [See Hebrews 3.7. and
8.]

It Is beyond Peradventure, that the Longer you continue in your Sins, the
deeper and the faster will those Weeds of Hell be Rooted in your Souls: The
Longer the Devil has possession of your hearts, the Strong Armed One, will have
so much the Stronger hold of you* The more Inveterate your Distempers are, the
more like to be Incurable: Every Day that you go on in your Infidelity, you lay
a New Stone, upon that Hideous Wall of Separation between God and You.

For this, there is no Peradventure; But it is a mere Peradventure, that after
you have slighted the Grace of God, which now profers to bring you unto
Repentance, you should at last have this Grace as it were, Forced upon you; Or,
that the Sovereign God, who Works in us to will and to do, whatever Good we
either Will or Do, should savingly Work upon you, after you have been many
years, presumptiously throwing off all Fear and Trembling, about your own
Salvation! Consider, Young Men; and Play not the Madmen any more.

Quest. VII. You Procrastinate in Religion; but what is the LANGUAGE of that
Procrastination? Many of my Young People say, That they will not yet Cleanse
their Ways; But what is the English of this? For the Interpretation of Deeds
is much easier and surer, than that of Words. The plain English of it then is;
That you will still remain an Enemy of God, and a Child of the Devil! This, O
Inconsiderate Youth! Even This, is the Foaming Language of thy Delays to be
Religious. You say, That you will still Go on, to Rob God of a Servant, Christ
of a Subject, the Holy Spirit of a Temple, and all Mankind of an Honest
Neighbor. For your Procrastinations in the Business of Religion, your Plea is,
Non vacat, or, I have no Leisure for it; but the Truth is, Non placet, or, I
take no Pleasure in it. It is noted, That the Building of the City of God, went
on apace; because as in Neh. 4.6. The People had a Mind unto the work. But it
is no Uncharitable Censure upon You, Young People, who have never done any
thing yet for the Growth or the Peace of that City, That you have no mind unto
the Work. You say, To Morrow, You Will Consider your Ways; but your meaning is,
To Morrow come never; God Almighty takes it so. Indeed, you say, That God will
never be Glorious, That Christ will never be Precious, That Sin will never be
Dangerous, That Satan will never be Bloody, That Hell will never be a Place of
Torment, and, That Heaven will never be the Pleasant Land. For Mark it; If
these Objects are not so just Now, they will Never be so; They Will Never be any
other than what they are Just Now. And you say, They are not thus J^st Now; for
else, you would by Religion acknowledge their being Thus. Behold, Young man,
Behold the Blasphemies, in the Bowels of thy prolonged Unbelief! Yea, Though, I
hope, thy very Soul within thee is moved with a Just Horror, at those Greater
Devils Incarnate, who Dare the Almighty to Damn them, which is an Impudence
beyond what the other Spiritual Devils have ever yet arrived unto; Yet I here
Indict Thee, for using of that very Language, in thy Sinful Procrastinations to
Leave off thy Sins. What says the Psalmist, in Psalm. 68.21. God shall Wound the
Head of his Enemies, and the Hairy Scalp of such an one as goes on still in
his Trespasses? Wherefore, when Thou Go on still in thy Trespasses, thou
do in Effect say, Let God Almighty Wound me if He please; I value not His
Wounds! But, Hold, Young man; Oh! Talk not so exceeding Lewdly, neither Let
such Arrogance come out of thy mouth.

Quest. VIII. What if you should unhappily DIE before you are Acquainted with
Religion; What will then become of you, throughout Eternal Ages? We read, That
the Threat of a Fiery Furnace, once made all the Country, except three or four
Young men, to Renounce the God of Heaven. But I do this Day require all of our
Young Folks, to Adore, to Obey, to Glorify that Great GOD, by the Denunciation
of a more Terrible Fiery Furnace unto the Disobedient. It was long ago said, in
Mat. 3.7. Who has Warned you to Flee from the Wrath to come? Let our Young
People now take notice, That they have the fair Warnings of such a Wrath, and
Who it is that has given them such Warnings. Young People, you must Expect
that the Wrath of God, will multiply Desolations upon you, in this World, if
you Despise His Religion. It is from Him that I do this Day declare this Thing
among you; if you Apostatize from the God of your Fathers, He that was your
Fathers Friend, will become your Unappeasable Enemy, and with Ireful, Direful,
VVasting Plagues, He will take Vengeance on you, for your Apostasy. If you
persist in putting slights upon Him that would be the Lord-Redeemer of your
Souls, the Angels of Death, will get leave to smite you with the Arrows of
Death, till there be Left but a little Remnant of you. My Brethren, It
astonishes me, that I see you no more astonished with the Fearful Judgments,
wherewith a Righteous and an Angry God, is daily Consuming Our Generation; and,
The Fury of the Lord is poured on the Assembly of our Young men together! But
as the Prophet said once unto a Great man, I know that God has determined to
destroy thee, because thou have not hearkened unto my Counsel; So, if you still
give a Deaf Ear unto the Counsels of Religion, I know, that God has Determined
still to Employ the Beesome of Destruction upon my woeful Generation; and, I
know, that some of you, must Ly open to the Sweeping Strokes of that Flaming,
Deadly Beesome. O my God, Thou know the Griefs, the Fears, the Tears,
wherewith I Deliver this thy Message.

But this is not all the Message; I am to tell you, That if you thus Dye in
your Estrangement from Religion, there is a more Dreadful Wrath still to come
upon you in another World; and such a Wrath to Come, that after it is already
Come, there will be still more to Come, and more to Come, throughout
Everlasting Ages. Your Tortures, by the Fire of Gods Displeasure, Flashing like
Hot and Fierce Lightning into your Souls, and by the Worm of your own
Conscience, like a Snake perpetually Stinging of you with Reflections upon your
Old Miscarriages; These Tortures will not only be Intolerable, but
Interminable. When you then feel yourselves passing into those Tortures, with
what an Horrible Consternation, will you Roar out your Vain Shrieks for a
Rescue, o^ at Least, a Respite, from the Place of Torment! Oh! When you indeed
find your selves Drawing Nigh to that Hideous Place, Then, as Job Speaks, (...)
would Fain Flee out of the Hands of God! and, Then, with what inexpressible
Fevers in you Souls, will you beg, Like the Foolish Virgins, Lord, Lord! Open
the Door of thy Kingdom unto me, and Let me not go down into the Horrible Pit!
Or, Lord, Lord! spare me* that I may have a little more space to look after my
soul, before I go hence, and be no more! But [as it has been truly said, Justum
est ut a Deo Contemnatur Mor^en^, qui Deum Omnipotentem Contempsit vivens:] the
Blessed God will Then in the Day of His Vengeance, be as Regardless of your
Cries, as you have been of His Calls Now, in this Day of His Patience. Young
man, Read the Last Verses in the First Chapter of the Proverbs, and be
Awakened! Know it, That your Perdition will then be unavoidable; and God will
Accomplish upon you, that Word of His, i^ Jer. 11.14. I will not Hear them in
the Time that they Cry unto me. And what an Horrid Welcome, Young People, what
a Welcome do you think, you shall then have of those Cruel Devils, to gratify
whom, you have scorned the Religion of God? We have lately Seen, befalling a
great many Young People in this Land, one of the most Prodigious Things, that
ever happened in the World! The Devils have actually Seized those Young People,
and cruelly Scalded them, so that We, the Standers-by, could see Blisters, and
Smell Brimstone, when yet our Eyes could not perceive the Instruments of those
Cruelties. The Devils have, with Ghastly Specter appeared unto these Young
People, and Wounded them with a Thousand Preternatural Vexations; but still so
Captivated their Senses, that ordinarily they might not mind any thing that was
Devout. These Devils have kept some of these poor Creatures in a Starving Fast,
for Nine, yea, for Fifteen Days together. And the most Killing Mischiefs thus
inflicted have been presently Cured, that so there might be a Daily Renovation
and Repetition of those Mischiefs. This Lively Picture of Hell have we Young
People, seen upon several of our own Generation; when 'twas perfectly
Impossible, there should be any Humane Legerdemains in the Drawing of it. But
as it was once urged, Surely if one went unto them from the Dead, they will
Repent; Even so, By the permission of God, the Devils coming from the Damned,
have in the Possessions of many Young People, displayed an Image of HELL before
our Eyes. And, I remember, One of the Possessed, Lying in such Anguishes as
would have broke an Heart of Stone to have seen them, once got ^o much Liberty
from the Infernal Fetters that were upon her, as to Cry out, Oh! All you that
Stand by, Behold, what an Hard Master the Devil is! One would think, that the
Rest of our Young People, should now Repent of all their Misdemeanors! But,
Wicked Youths; if you will not yet Leave your Hard Masters, you have a little
seen after what a T^^culent, and what a Tremendous Fashion, They will handle
you, when you shall at last fall into the Hands of those Hellish Fiends; you
have seen, a Little, How it will be, when those Freckled Adders, are Crawling
and Coyling about you for evermore. O That by the Fear of this thing, I might
Pull you out of that Fire, that never shall be Quenched! Finally,

Quest. IX. Do! Die Strangers to Religion; and how will you hold up your Heads
in the Day of GODS PLEADING with you? It was the Premonition once given to the
Young man, in Eccl. 11.9. O Young man, Know thou, that God will bring thee into
Judgment. Well but then, O Young man, Know thou, What Witnesses will appear
against thee, in that Judgment, if thou do not now by Religion prepare for
(...) ^^dgment! Of two things, you may be certa^n: One is, That God has
Appointed a Day, wherein He will Judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man
(...) He has Ordained: The other is, That This Day of the Lord, it is Near, it
is Near, and it hastens greatly. But now, Consider, O Young People, What
Witnesses your Irreligion, will in that notable Day, be Condemned with. As
Moses could say to the perishing Israelites, in Deuteronomy. 1.43. I spoke unto you,
and ye would not Hear, but Rebelled against the Commandment of the Lord: Even
so, There will at Last be a Triumph of Justice over you, when there shall come
in an Army of Witnesses against you; saying, We Spoke to this Young man, but in
spite of all our Speaking, he would Rebel against the God, that Made him. It Is
possible, Your Parents may then after this manner testify against you: Lord,
when this person, was under our Instruction, we often charged him to Serve thee
with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind; We told him, that if he Sought thee,
thou would be found of him, and if he forsook thee, thou woudest Cast him
off for ever. We Dedicated him to thee, and would fain have Educated him for
thee. We did in our poor measure set the Example of a Godly, Zealous, Watchful
Walk before him; we Prayed for him, we Wept over him, we were in Agonies of
Soul that we might see thy Image formed in him. He slighted all; and therefore
we have nothing now to say, why thou should not make him a Vessel of thy
Wrath World without End. Young man, With how many Scorpions will this Language
of thy Disappointed Parents Lash thee, in the Day of God! Add hereto; It Is
possible, Your Masters may then in like manner testify. Lord, When this Person
dwelt with us, we often set before him the Danger of all his Evil Courses; we
forewarned him of the Snares wherein Lay his Eternal Hazards; He had the Daily
Devotions of our Families to Forward him in thy Fear: We put Good Books into
his hands; we Encouraged him to wait upon thee in the Meetings of thy People;
and we allowed him Time every Day for his Communion with thy Majesty. Nothing
would work upon him; and therefore we cannot but Leave him to the Proceedings
of thy Everlasting Righteousness. Young man, Is this the Report which thou
would have thy Masters bring in, unto the Judge of the World* concerning
thee?

But in Fine, Your PASTORS: They that now Long for your Salvation; They, that
are continually Studying, Praying, Fasting, Weeping and Watching, for your
Salvation; even These too, must become Accusers, when they meet you e're long
before the Tribunal of the Dreadful God. Syrs, we should not count even our
Hearts-Blood, a thing too considerable, to be Spent, if the Spending of that
would certainly obtain the Conversion, though but of any one Young Soul among
you. And if (...) might see our Young Doves Flocking apace unto the Windows of
Our Lord Jesus Christ, we should count ourselves Richly Recompensed, for all
the Travels of our Weary Souls. We know what the Apostle says about his
Beloved Thessalonians, in 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. What is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of
Rejoicing! Are not even ye, in the Presence of Our Lord Jesus Christ at his
Coming? It seems, that in the other World, A Paul shall see and know those that
have by His Ministry been brought Home unto God, and he shall Rejoice to behold
them gathered like a Crown about him. Truly, I think, I cannot in any one thing
Rejoice more, than I do in a Thought which now entertains me; There is a Vast
Crowd of Young People Assembled here this Day; but there are many now in this
Crowd, that shall be our Immarcescible Crown, in the Day of the General
Assembly. Yea, We shall enjoy a Glad Eternity, with some of You, O our Young
People; Whom we shall FIND, and SEE, and KNOW again, in the Kingdom of GOD, and
hear saying, Blessed be GOD, That ever I saw the Face of such a Minister! Oh
Sir, my God helped me to follow the Counsels that you gave me in His Name, and
from His Word; and now, it is as you told me! You have brought me to this
Glorious Heaven with you. Yea but if you remain Incorrigible in your
Indispositions to Cleanse your Ways, by taking Heed according to the Word of
God, it is a sad Meeting which you are like to have with us in the Day of the
Lord. We have had Our Death hastened, by the Afflicction which we have endured
in Our own Souls, and by the Displeasure which the Jealous God has at Yours,
for your Incorigibleness. But Methinks, what passed between Reuben and his
Brethren, when they stood before Joseph, carries a little Resemblance, of the
Intercourse which You are to have with Us, before the Judgment Seat of Jesus;
in Genesis 42.21.22. They said one unto another, We are verily Guilty concerning
our Brother; in that we saw the Anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and
we would not hear: therefore this Distress is come upon us. And Reuben answered
them, saying, Spoke I not unto you, Saying, O do not Sin -- and ye would not
Hear. Even so, When the Anguish of the Sccond Death is taking hold on you, You
will then say, We are verily Guilty concerning Our Minister; We saw the Anguish
of Soul, the Sweats, the Tears, wherewith he besought us to be Reconciled unto
God; but we Slighted all; and therefore Our Souls are now thrown into an
Eternal Anguish. But, are you willing that We should then declare before the
Lord of the whole World, Lord, we spoke unto these poor sinners; We told them
of the sins that Ruined them; We told them of the Jesus that would save them
from their sins; We told them, How and Why they should make their Peace with
God; but no means would Prevail upon them! The Blood of Your Souls, will Then
be Laid, where it Now truly Lies; As for us, We shall be Clear of that Blood!

But Oh! With what Resolution, shall your Tired Preacher, after this Long
importunity, now Dismiss you?

When the Prophet spoke the Word of God, unto an Altar of Stones, it Rent
before that Word; O let not your Hearts now be so much Harder than Stones, that
the Word of the Most High, shall find, or make no entrance thereinto. As the
Roman Ambassador, demanding an Answer to his Message from a Person that was
willing to have considered first a little further on the Message, made with the
Point of his Sword a Circle about him, saying, Intra Hunc! -- Sir, You shall not
stir from hence, till I have your Answer; Truly, I have by an Importunity now
grown into the Third Hour, let you see, how Loath I am to let you Stir, till I
have your Answer to the Demands of Religion, which have (...) made you in the
Name of God. But, O my Young People, what Answer will you give? Do not say,
It Is too soon for you to Cleanse your Ways: Except it were Too soon for you to
be Saved from all the Horrible Plagues which your wandering from God have
brought upon you; Except it were Too Soon for you to enjoy the Wisdom and
Righteousness and Sanctification and Redemption, which the Lord Jesus Christ
has to bestow upon you: Or, Except it were Too soon, for you to Die, and it were
never known that persons younger than you are, have Died in their Sins: never
say of Religion, It Is Too soon for That! He that now tells you, It Is Too soon,
will shortly tell you, It Is Too Late. And if it should once come to be Really
Too Late, what will you then say of your selves? The Wise man has called, The
Sinner, by that Name of, A Fool, more than Fifty Times over. But thou will then
keep Chiding and Branding thy self as, A Fool, for more than Fifty Millions of
Ages. They that gathered Manna, were to do it in the Morning, or not at all.
And why should it be Too soon, for you in the Morning of your Youth, to be
Looking afte^ an ^nterest in the Lord Jesus Christ, The Bread of Heaven? In the
Catalogue of those that came to make David a King, we read, There was one
Zadok, a Young man; mighty of Valor. And why (...) it be, Too Soon, for you
that are in your Flourishing Age, to appear in and for the Kingdom of our
David? It is reported of Hezekiah, That in the First Year, and in the first
month of his Reign, he opened the Doors of the House of the Lord. And why
should it be Too Soon, for you in the First Year, and in the First Month, of
your Reason, to open the Doors of your Hearts unto the Lord? When the Lord
Jesus was but Eight Days old, He parted with some of His Blood for us. And can
it then be, Too Soon, even for you that are Eight Years old, now to part with
your Sin for Him? O say not so; but by the Circumcision of your own Hearts, Put
off the Old man, while you your selves are yet far from Old. Like a Servant of
Abraham, I am this Day Wooing of your Young Souls, That you would become United
and Married, unto the Son of my Glorious Master, the Prince of Life, the Lord
of Glory; and here I am sure, Blessed is that Wooing, that is not Long a Doing.
Say, Can it be, Too Soon, for you to be Matched unto the King of Heaven? If you
will Go with me, I would carry you, as far as I can, into the New Covenant of
Grace; unto all the Proposals of which Covenant I once again ask the Consent of
your Souls. Well, Will you Go? O It Is far from Too Soon, for you to say, I will
Go. With Conquered Souls then say it; and so take the Blessings which we are to
Leave upon you. It was said, in Psalm. 119.147. I prevented the Dawning of the
Morning, and I Cried: I hoped in thy Word. Why, If you will now in the Dawning
of this your Morning, devote your selves unto God, by true Religion, you may
then Hope for all those Blessings which the Word of God has Entailed upon such
Religion. May these Blessings in a singular manner and measure now be Poured
down, with the Spirit of my God, upon my Generation; and may there be many
Young Ones among us, whereof the Lord may say, These are pleasant Children, I
will surely have Mercy on them!

Appendix
INasmuch as Example has a singular Force to Teach and Move the Beholder of it,
We shall by way of Appendix unto our Meditations upon Early Religion, annex the
Extracts of several Papers, which diverse Pious Young Persons, who have Died
among us, have Left Written for the Instruction, the Awakening, and the
Encouragement of the Young Survivers. There have in this Country Expired sundry
Young Persons, who under the Fore-bodings of their own premature Mortality,
have drawn up their Affectionate and Experimental Resentments of Early
Religion, which they have Left behind them (...) their Young, Friends, to
improve as the best Legacies of the^^ Friendship. I hope it will not be either
Unacceptable or Unprofitable, for me to Communicate a few passages which I have
seen in some of those Memorials: And unto those it may not be amiss to add a
few Memoirs relating to the Exemplary Lives of some Young People, who have Gone
from us, to the Rest of God. But, If One Come unto my Generation from the Dead,
surely they will then Repent!

(I)
There Dyed among us, in the year 1688. a Young man, upon whose Gravestone
there were those words deservedly Inscribed, The Ashes of an Hard Student, a
Good Scholar, and a Great Christian. I shall for some Reasons forbear to
mention so much as the Name of this Exemplary Young man; much less give any
part of the Character which he had for those things that made him Exemplary.
But I shall truly Copy out for the Young Reader, a Few [never yet exposed] of
those many papers, which this Young man left behind him, when he left the
world. And These I offer, single* I out from the rest, because they are
particularly accomodated unto some Designs of Religion, which I was Desirous to
have particularly Recommended.

T^^e, First, his Explicit Consent unto the proposals of the New Covenant; That
I find written by him in these terms.

I do Renounce all the Vanities and wretched Idols and Evil Courses of the
World.

I do Choose, and will ever Have, the Great God, for my Best Good, my Last End,
my Only Lord. He shall be the Only One, in the Glorifying and Enjoying of whom
sha^^ be my Welfare; and in the Serving of whom shall be my Work.

I will ever be Rendering unto the Lord Jesus Christ, my proper Acknowledgments,
as unto my Priest, my Prophet, and my King; and the Physician of my Soul.

I will ever be Studying what is my Duty in these Things; and wherein I find my
self (...) fall short, I will ever count it my Grief, and Shame; and betake my
self to the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant.

Now, Humbly Imploring the Grace of the Mediator to be sufficient for me, I do
as a further Solemnity, hereunto Subscribe my Name, with both Heart and Hand.

Take Next, a Reflection written by this Young man, about the Power of Sin.

Dr Owen of Spiritual-mindedness, has this passage: It is required, that our
Affection is be so Set on Spiritual Things, as to be a c^ntinual Spring of
Spiritual Thoughts and Meditations. I cannot yet find it so with my self; An
^^gument that I never had my Affections yet Spiritually Renewed. O Wretched
Creature that I am!

But why should I be Discouraged as to the State of my Soul; feeling the Power
of Sin never so great? Let Corruption have never so great Rooting in my Temper,
Let my Continuance therein have been never so long; yet if I Come unto Christ,
I cannot doubt His Power to Relieve me. These Three Scriptures do sufficiently
clear That; 1 John 1.8. The Blood of Jesus Christ, Cleanses from all Sin; And
Mic. 7.14. He will Subdue our Iniquities; And, Heb. 7.25. He is able to Save
unto the uttermost. As to His Willingness, it is sufficiently cleared, in Mat.
11.28. Come to Me, all ye that Labor and are heavy Laden: And, Joh. 6.7. Him
that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Shall I then Tarry and Perish
in my Natural Estate? Shall I be so much wanting to my self, as to perish,
while I have a Physician, that is both Able and Ready to help me? Is not his
Death deserved, who may have a Physician to Cure him, and will yet Refuse him?

Let me set my self, now in Earnest, to Get an Interest in Jesus Christ; and
therefore with Earnest Prayer, Let me Come to God, as a poor sinful, helpless,
miserable Creature* to beg for this Interest.

Take, Thirdly, One of his Meditations About, Prizing the Public Ministry of
the Word was this,

Shall I not Prize the Word of God, not only as the Private Meditation, but
also the Public Dispensation of the Word? There are Motives to This, not
Inconsiderable.

Is not the Word, especially the Public Ministration thereof, that which does
Instruct me, in the Knowledge of God, and Christ, whom to know is Life Eternal?
Does it not show me what I am to Believe concerning God, and what Duty God
requires of Me? Does not attendance hereon, Issue in Spiritual Life, and
Quickening?

Again, Is not the Word of God, the means of Transforming me into His Image? Is
it not the means, whereby I may hope to have my whole Soul cleansed from the
Leprosy of Sin? Is not the Hiding of the word in my heart, the great means to
keep me from Sinning against God? Is not here Direction given me, how to apply
the Word, for the Nourishment of my Soul?

Once more, Is it not by the Word of God, that I must have all the Assurance,
that I must expect, to have in this World?

Furthermore, If I be Deprived of the Public Ministration of the Word, must
not my Soul needs be in a Condition Languishing and Unprosp^^ing?

Yet Further, Is not the Word, the great Instrument of Regeneration? Must I not
therein seek the Food of my Soul? Shall I not bring a Curse on my Soul by
neglecting it?

Finally, Is it not an Ordinance of Gods Institution?

And now, shall not this make me willing to choose rather to suffer the greatest
Afflictiions, than not to attend on the Preaching of the Word?

In the Fourth Place, I will Transcribe the Motives Written by him, to
determine his Choice for the Sevice of God.

I do [ he Writes] much admire, how Persons, that know that they are Enemies to
Religion, and that if they should be called out of the World within a little
while, they should be excluded from the Fruition of Eternal Happiness in
Heaven, can have any quietness in their Hearts, while they are yet unresolved,
To live unto God! But when look upon my self, and see how Unconcerned I am in
my Actings about these matters, which do call for the greatest Seriousness, it
makes me the less to Wonder at it, yet it excites in me a very great Shame,
that the Matters being of so great Concernment, I should so Trif^le about them.
And who would imrgine, That a person, who believes, there is an Eternal
Felicity offered unto him, for him, for him to set his Heart upon instead of a
Temporal One, which a man is not sure to hold for an Hour; should so little
value the Former, as to stand Questioning Whether he should set his Affections
on Things above? Or, Whether he should make the Things of this World the
utmost of his hopes and his Desires? For my part, I cannot but greatly wonder
to see my own Sluggishness in this particular! When I Consider, Whether of the
Two, I should choose, if they were offered me, An Eternity in the Pleasures,
Profits and Honors of this World, or, to speak specially to my self, That I
might always continue in the Condition I am now in: Or, on the other side, An
Eternity in the, Enjoyment of God in Christ, after my Living here a few years,
at the utmost, Fourscore Years, and it may be not a Fourth part of so many
years: And when I see how Loath I am to Choose this Latter, although I cannot
expect, now the Affairs of the World are so Ordered as they are, to continue
here on Earth for ever. But it is the most Reasonable Thing in the World, that
I should make such a Choice, as is now Offered unto me; and there is nothing in
This world, for which there may be brought a Reason, but either the same Reason
or some one of as much weight, may be given to stir up unto this choice.

In the Fifth place you shall have his Advice to a Friend, for his Releif
against Blasphemous Thoughts. 'Twas written in these brief Terms.

I address this Answer to your Request. Take Notice, No Temptation befalls you,
but what is common to men: And it is usual with God, when He is Converting of a
sinner, to leave him unto This Temptation. Know also, That Christ Himself was
Assaulted with, such Thoughts. If they drive you to Despair, plead, That you
allow them not. They are but your Crosses, as long as you hate them; however
there may also be much of your Corruption in them. I advise you, to observe the
scope of Satan in this Temptation; which is to Rob God of the Glory of His
Grace. Wherefore Do not Conceal it; neither do you Reason with the Devil about
it. When these thoughts arise, though you are to be Humbled, and pray for pardon;
yet you are not to be Dejected. But labor to Cross them with good thoughts,
just contrary to them. Make Conscience of the Duties which God requires in
order to your Victory; patiently submit unto the Correcting Hand of God; but be
Thankful it is no worse; and be willing to stay Gods Time for Deliverance.
During the Hour and Power of Darkness, avoid Solitariness; and avoid Idleness;
and Holily though not Haughtily, Deride the Devil; so you shall do do well.

In the Sixth place I will tender you one of his Self-Employments, which he
Entitled,

Meditations, Tending to the Exercise Of Repentance and Faith, And Preparation
for Death.
Am I not exposed unto the Curse of the Law of God; and that both because of
the State of sin that I am in, and by reason of the Course of Actual sins,
whereof I have been guilty?

Is not the Wrath of God, most Intolerable and most Dreadful? Is it not a
Fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God? Can my Heart endure, or
my Hands be strong; in the Day, that God will deal with me?

Can I endure Material Fire? And if I cannot endure to Ly in That, what shall I
do to lie under the Wrath of the Almighty for ever, and ever? My Soul Trembles
within me at this; the thoughts hereof do exceedingly terrify my Soul.

Is it indeed so, O my Soul? And shall I continue in the Condition that I am in?
Shall I continue in a State of Condemnation?

Shall I not then make as much Have to the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Men
pursued by the Avenger of Blood, did to the City of Refuge?

Shall not this make me, instead of Delighting in Sin, to Grieve for it, and
Heartily to Turn from it, unto God?

Shall I allow of any One sin, seeing that the Least sin allowed, will prove my
Eternal Damnation? Far be it! Either I must be the Death of sin, or sin will be
my Death, to Eternity.

Am I every Moment in Danger of Eternal Damnation? Does my Life hang in
uncertainties? May I not be called out of the World in a Moment? Yea, before I
lie down to Night?

Surely then, It is highly Incumbent on me, to Fly unto the Lord Jesus Christ,
as the Deliverer from the Wrath to come: and give my self unto him, to Save me
freely by His Grace: and resign my self wholly unto Him, to be His Servant for
Evermore?

The Seventh and Last Entertainments, that you shall have of this Young Man's,
are his Rules of Behavior.

1 Keep an Exact Diary, of Your Actions and of Memorable Passages.

2 If in the conduct of your Affairs you have been Deceived by others, or
committed any Error your self, 'twill be Discretion, to Note it.

3 Tu teipsum Oblectes, et Vulgi Verba Loquacis, Sperne; Been hic de te dicet,
et ille Male.

4 The best El^xir is,

Never to do that By Another hand, which you can do by your own.
Never to do that To Morrow, which you can do To Day.
Not to Neglect the Least Things.
5. Gods Eye is always upon you, therefore let Yours be always upon Him.

6. Let your Prayers be as frequent as your Wants, and your Thanksgivings as
your Blessings.

7. In the Morning think, What you have to do? And ask Gods Blessing: In the
Evevening think, What you have done? And ask God Pardon.

8. The whole Universe, is your Library; Conversation, Living Studies, and
Observations, your best Tutors.

9. Let nothing discourage you; Worth is ever at home, and carries its own
welcome with it. A Gallant Spirit will make you Cozen-Germain to a Caesar.

10 He has no serious Belief of God, or the Life to Come, who Dare be Wicked.

11 He that dares sometimes be Wicked, for his Advantage, will always be so if
his Int^rest call for it.

12. Make your Peace with God, at the end of Every Day, so at the last, you
will have but One Day to Repent of.

13. Hear no Ill of a Friend, nor Speak any of an Enemy: believe not all you
hear, and speak not all you believe.

14 Give not your advice, or opinion, before you are asked.

15. Find not fault with other Men; for you are not bound to Weed their Gardens.

16 Commend not a Person to his Face, but to others; nor dispraise any man
behind his back, but to his Face; And use not over great Encomiums of any
Person.

17. Keep an Humble, and Serene Deportment.

18 Let your Behavior, be like your Garment, neither Straight, nor Loose.

19 Deride not any Person for his Infirmities.

20 Never impart that to a Friend, which may Empower him to be your Enemy.

21 Carry an Eye of Wariness on yourself, and an Eye of Observation on others.

22 Parca Lingua, Aperta Frons, et Clausum Pectus, are the best Ingredients of
Wisdom.

23 Be not too Affirmative in any Assertion.

24 Never Magnify your self; the weakest Wings, are the highest Flyers.

25 Speak not Ill of any; Disoblige None.

26 Let not any Passion be above you.

27 Be like the Caspian-Sea; never Ebb, never Flow.

28 If you have an Injury done you, you do your Adversary too much Honor to
take notice of it; and think too meanly of your self to Revenge it.

29 It is a Noble way of Revenge to Forget, and Scorn it.

30 Be not like a Sun-Dyal in a Grave, of no Use.

31 A Friend, like a Glass, will discover to you, your own Infirmities.

32 To Doubt nothing, and Understand nothing, are alike Verifiable.

33 Don't quote Authors, nor Talk in Scho^^stic Phrases, nor Vent Metaphysical
Notions in (...) Company of Gentlemen.

34 It is a sign of a Good Judgment, to be able to ask, a Discreet, and
Pertinent Question.

These were his Rules. But from him, we will pass to another.

(II.)
IT is not a Year ago, that there Died, a Serious, Virtuous, Hopeful Young man,
among us; whose Name was, NATHANAEL SHOVE. He was the Son of a Worthy Minister,
whom, the Town of Taunton, Long Enjoyed, as their Watchful Pastor. But being
Arrested by a Languishing and Consuming Sickness, he did with his Dying Hand,
Write about Threescore Texts of Scripture, which God had made more singularly
useful unto him; whereto he added this Account of his Experiences.

February 3. 1691, 2.
Having for a Long Time, been Lame, and much Afflicted in Body and Spirit, I am
by Meditation brought to Look back, and see Gods former and present Dealings
with me; and my own Behavior under them; which, if I know my own Heart, I set
down for my own Warning, and the promotion of Repentance in me; and, An Example
to OTHERS, who may view it after me, that they by me, may warn themselves not
to fall from their First Love.

Happy are the Children of the Servants of God; who meet with a Blessing from
every Good Man they meet! For my Fathers Sake, I have had many a Blessing; and
many Instructions and Directions, from men of Great Worth. But that which most
especially took place with me, was the Counsel of Mr. -- Who asking my Age, I
told him, It was Twelve Years; and he thereupon said, The Example of Josiah,
would intimate, that it was High Time, and that God Expected it at Least Four
Years ago, that I should set my self to Pray unto Him, and Engage my self, by
the Vows of my Soul to Seek and Serve Him. He brought many Examples to quicken
me, and Scriptures to Encourage me, and Laid the matter before me in a solemn
manner. I now began to consider with my self what a miserable Wretch I was, who
had never Prayed but Three or Four Times in my Life: and now I did not know how
to go about it. But being also every Sabbath Day at Night, after Repetition,
pressed unto the same Duty by my Cousin Avery, with whom I dwelt: for it was
his Custom, at those times, to warn all his Family, with Renewed Arguments,
unto their Duties, pleading that if we hearkened not, his Warning would be a
Witness against us,; and he told us, that if we knew not how to Pray, we should
Go to God, and He would help us; all this wrought upon me, so that I resolved
to beg the Help of God: which doing, I quickly found my self able, not only to
Express my Desires unto Him, but to Maintain such a pleasant Communion with
Him, that nothing could prevent my Morning and Evening Prayers; and in time, my
Delight in it was such, that I Excited Others unto the Like; and I persuaded
one other to Join with me, and taste the sweetness of it; and seeing, he was so
easily drawn from his Play to that Duty, I was yet the more Encouraged to
continue, and plead with God, His Promise of answering, Two or Three, that
Gathered together in his Name. But in Time, being missed by our Play-mates, we
were watched and discovered; and so being often interrupted, we found out
New-places; but at last, we could come together, but once a Day; and that in
the Evening. I found then, that God did many times assist me greatly, in my
secret Duties; and it was sweet unto me, to Go to God: for many times, in my
Evening-Prayers, I thought it hard to break off; I thought I could Pray all
night, Without Ceasing.

But after this, yielding to the Temptations of the Devil, I grew Dull, and
Listless, and could scarce shed a Tear in the Duty, or perform it, but as a
Task or Stint; and still growing more and more Slothful, at last God visited me
by Sickness, and brought me Low, and made me a little more careful for a Time:
but I returned unto my former Sins again, and my Prayers were very Rare and
Cold. God had withdrawn His Assisting and Exciting Spirit from me; and Satan
came, and found me, not as our Savior, in Joh. 14.30. without Matter for his
Temptations to fasten on; but rather as in Mat. 12.44. Empty, Swept, and
Garnished; though full of vain Thoughts; ready to Entertain him. My Goodness was
as the Morning Cloud and the Early Dew, soon passing away; and as in Job 17.11.
My Purposes were broken off, even the Thoughts of my Heart. I had had Good
Intents, and Designs, made Vows to Serve God; but then I was, as in Rev. 2.4.
Fallen from my First Love. I was sometimes indeed something Awakened by a
Sermon, and would just at such an Instant, Seek God; but for the most part, the
Word of God was with me, As the Seed Sown by the Highway-side.

At last, my Father; being visited with Sickness, and thinking himself, not
likely to live, he called his Family together, and told us; That he was not
like to continue long among us; and therefore he was willing to give us
Counsil, How to walk, when he should be gone from us. He Exhorted us, to Peace
with, and Love to one another; He told us, There were evil times a coming, from
which he should be taken away, though we should Live to see them: He therefore
advised us, to go unto God, and Plead our Covenant, citing that place in Act.
2.39. for the Promise is to you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar
off even as many as the Lord our God shall call; and that in Heb 3.12. Take
Heed, Lest there be in any of you an Evil Heart of Unbelief in Departing from
the Living God: and many other Scriptures, with much other Counsel; stirring us
up to the Duty of Prayer, and promising his Prayer for us, as long as he had
any Breath; which in part he performed by then praying with us. Three Weeks
after this; namely, on April 21. 1687. We were Called Early in the Morning, to
see our Dear Father going out of the World; who now again told us, That He was
going from the Evil Days that were a coming, and still warned us to be
careful, not to Forget the Ways of God. So he continued Speaking, doubtless
Praying for Us, Longer than we could understand; and so He Dyed.

This was very grievous to me: Now my chief Soul Friend in this World was gone:
I thought my only way was to Go to God, and Enquire the Cause of this
Affliction; for I feared lest it might be in a way of Judgment against me, for
my not hearkening to the Word from Him: and sad Conclusions I was ready to draw
concerning my self. I was now Young, (not much exceeding Eighteen Years) and my
Counselor, and Admonisher, and he who used to Breathe out his Soul before God,
with such fervor for me, was gone; which proved most unhappy indeed for me!
For my subtle Adversary the Devil, knowing my Corrupt Nature, suited it with
such Temptations, as were most Likely to take place. I not only Left off
Constancy in my Duties, but Readily Entertained Idle Discourse, yea, I was too
often an Abetter thereof; putting the Evil Day far away, and depending on a Too
Morrow, for to do my Soul work in; and giving my self too much up unto the
Pleasures of this World.

But in Time, calling to mind a Sermon, which was Preached by Mr. Brown, from
that place, Boast not of a To Morrow; I considered, it was Dangerous to Delay;
for Gods Pleasure was, I saw, to Remove Younger as well as Elder Ones. But I
feared that God had now indeed withdrawn Himself from me, and said concerning
me, as in Isa. 5.5. Why should you be stricken any more? Ye will Revolt more
and more. So I begged of God, either to Draw me by his Mercies, or Drive me by
Afflictions. I was also stirred up, by many Sermons of Mr. Danforths, to seek
unto God, in my Youth, and give Him the Flower of my Age. And I Joined my self
to some Young men, who met at my House, every Sabbath-Evening, to Pray one with
and for another. I many times made many Vows of Reformation and Obedience, but
still I forgot them, and neglected to Watch my Ways. At last, God by
Providence Diminished my Outward Estate, and Refused to Bless the World unto
me. And in February, 1690. I was visited by Lameness, and forced thereby to
break up House keeping; whence all I had, came to Decay. Now! saw I had done
wickedly; for which the Lord had ( I feared) turned His Face against me, even
for that I had not kept close to Him; as, The Face of the Lord is against them
that do Evil. But yet notwithstanding, it was almost a Twelve month, before I
had the Sense which I ought to have, of my Afflictions, and the Causes of them.
And now, God has helped me to Consider, what should be the Sins, for which He
did now Afflict me. I feared, Gods withdrawing of Himself, was not Probational,
as it was to Job: but Paenal, for my Spiritual Sloth, as with the Spouse, who
in Cant. 5.2. was called to Open unto her Love, which she denied; and then she
sought Him, but He was Gone; and when she called Him, He would not answer. This
I feared to be my Misery; because I had neglected to hearken to the Motions of
the Holy Spirit, contrary to Gods Command, in 1 These. 5.19. Quench not the
Spirit. I have also Committed some Sins, for which the Spirit checked me; and I
have hearkened unto Satanical Delusions, rather than the Spirits Motions. Thus
I hearkened unto my Enemy, and Left my Friend; and so Grieved the Spirit,
contrary to that Command, in Ephesians. 4.30. and this I did with Reiterated Acts,
until I did like them, in Isa. 63.14. They Rebelled and Vexed the Spirit. All
these things I knew, were contrary to what I had been instructed in: Therefore
sometimes I was startled with that place, in Heb. 10.26. If they Sin wilfully,
after they have Received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for Sin. But I Read that in Mr. Loves Works that satisfied me,; I was
not fallen into the Unpardonable Sin. I hoped, I could say with Paul, That I
hated what I did.

But yet my Comforts Ebbing and Flowing, these places came to my sight, 1 Pet.
3.12 Rev. 21.8. 2 Timothy 2:12. 1 Cor. 6.22. John 8.34. John 3.18. Some of which,
for a time Discouraged me, others Excited me to Duty: But I found in me, an
unaptness to it.

I was yet Afflicted. But Reading Mr. Vennings Works, I was advised, to view
and plead the Promises of God. Whereupon I Studied so to do; and comforted my
self with Heb. 12.8. If ye be without Chastening, then are ye Bastards and not
Sons; and with the 6th and 7th Verses of that Chapter; and many other places,
according to the Trouble I was under. But I was afraid Lest I should deceive my
self into Hell; wherefore I begged of God, that He would meet me in this
Furnace of Affliction; and Purge me from my Dross, and show me the Cause of his
Controversy, and help me to cast away all Sin, and guide me rightly to Apply
His Promises.

Soon after this, I was put in mind of my Duty, of Joining to the Church. I had
^een minded of it before; but now I was thoroughly convinced, that it was my
Duty. So, after I had made Search into, The Order of Churches, I sought unto
God, that He would make way for my being of One: which he did; and soon after
that, I came to Braintree, putting my self into the Doctors Hands.

After I had been Lame, something more than two Years, I was Confined unto my
Chamber, by a Consumption; and People began to speak unto me, of Death. It
seemed comfortable unto me, to hear of Death, for I had been for a long time
submissively desirous of it; because my heart was so ready to be drawn into
sin; and because of the great Danger, my soul was in thereby. But I began
again, to enquire of my self, Why it was, that I was not now afraid of death?
When it was a Terror to so many Good men. I continually examined my Heart, and
begged of God that I might not be Deceived.

After this, a good Old Father, being at Prayer for me, prayed that I might be
Raised, and made Serviceable unto God. I then thought, I had not done well to
desire Death; for sure, it was the Duty of One, who had had an Heart so sinful
above all other Hearts, earnestly to Desire Life, that they might be as
Extraordinary in the Service of God. I was then Willing to Live, and I
considered, that God could Keep me from the Power of all my Spiritual
Adversaries.

But my Distemper growing, there was little Hope of my Life. I then began to be
constant in seeking, whether my Courage was well grounded; and once studying on
this thing, I looked about, and saw a Bible at my Elbow. I opened it, and Lit
upon Romans 5 3, 4, 5. and I thought, I could say, I had Experienced it. After
this, many other Comfortable Evidences came to my mind; as, The Certainty that
there was a Change in me from what I had been; my Love to the Brethren, so that
if I had only heard of a man Eminently Good, I had immediately a Love to him,
though I never saw him. Another Evidence, and all that my weak Hand is now able
to Write, is, I am sure Sin is a Burden to me, and God has promised Rest unto
such, if they come unto Him.

It is uncertain, How Long I may Ly Languishing by this Illness: therefore I
was willing to Write something to Comfort me, by Looking on it. The Lord Write
the rest in my Heart!

Thus He.

(III.)
THe Wars that have Lately Distressed our Land, have been singularly
Destructive to our Young men; but among the Young men Lost in these Wars, there
were some, who were like Josiah. They Died in Peace, though they Died by the
Sword, inasmuch as they had made their Peace with God before they Died. Some of
These had strange Fore-bodings upon their Minds, that they should not Survive
the Expeditions which they were then upon; and according to those Fore-bodings,
though they Returned Alive, yet a mortal Sickness presently carried them off. But
before their Going out, they Wrote some Affectionate Addresses, unto the Young
People of their Acquaintance, of which Writings, there are some fallen into my
Hands. From only Two of these, I shall now Transcribe only a few Passages,
which I hope will be considered, not only by the Young People of those Towns,
whereto these belonged, but also, by the rest of our Generation.

The first of these hopeful Young men, belonged unto the Town of Weymouth; and
his Name was Nash. He Left behind him, in the Hands of his Young Friends, a
Large Paper, of Admonitions, wherein One might perceive what Impressions had
been made upon his Young Soul, by the Ministry of that Able, Faithful, Painful,
and Excellent Person, who is at this Time, the Burning and Shining Light, in
that Plantation. Out of that Paper, I have Transcribed the following passages.

In the first place, I do acknowledge my self to be unworthy, even to take the
Name of the Great and Blessed God, into my mouth; and much more to do any
Service for Him. Yet I know, it is my Duty to do what Good I can, in such an
Extraordinary Time as this is.

We have been going away from the Lord our God; which does plainly appear by
His Dispensations toward us. Would the Great and Blessed God, have sent His
Judgments down upon our Heads, thus one time after another, if we had not
provoked Him by our Sins in Departing from Him.? Hag. 1.5. Now therefore, thus
says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your Ways. But God has also been calling of
us to Turn, by the Voice of His Servants in the Ministry. Oh the many solemn
Warnings, we have had in Time past, by the Servants of Christ, especially upon
Election Days, whereby we have been called upon to Repent and Reform, and have
been told wherein we should Reform!

Now, notwithstanding all that God has has done in a way of Judgment, yea,
and is yet doing, we have cause to hope, that God is saying, to New England, as
to Ephraim of Old, How shall I give Thee up?

If now we compare Gods Works with his Word, we shall certainly find, that we
have Something to do, and that God is calling for some extraordinary thing from
us; and therefore we should every one as we are able, be putting forward, and
Laboring in this Great Work of REFORMATION.

Let us Look into the Word of God, and enquire there; and consider, Firstly
whether there be not a Breach of Covenant, between us, and Our God; and that by
a great neglect of Duty, in Parents toward their Children, in their not
laboring to Train them up for God.

Secondly, We may Consider, Whether we have not provoked our Lord Jesus Christ
exceedingly to Anger against us, by our Coveteousness and Worldliness, which is
Idolatry. We seem to be Laying out the greatest part, if not all our Time and
Strength, in and about the Things of this Life; and so we have been Exchanging
our God.

Thirdly, We may also Consider, Whether we have not provoked our Lord Jesus
Christ exceedingly to Anger against us, by our unworthy Carriages one toward
another; by giving one another just occasions of Offense. And for
Church Members, that have given themselves up unto the Lord Jesus Christ, to
Walk with Him; their Scandalous Lives cause a Reproach to be cast upon Christ,
His Church, and the Christian Religion. Also instead of Provoking one another
to Love and Good Works, we have been provoking one another to Evil, and to Sin;
and instead of Loving one another, as we are Commanded, there is Hating one
another, and Envyings, and Backbitings, all which are directly contrary to the
Command of Christ.

Fourthly, We may also Consider, Whether we have not provoked the Lord to
Anger, by the neglect of so great and profitable a Duty as, Secret Prayer. It
is a Duty, whereby we may freely and fully pour out our Complaints to God,
which we cannot so freely do before others; and it is a Duty, that Christ has
Commanded us to perform, in Math. 6.6. and Ephesians. 6.18. but it is to be feared,
that many, if not the most of Visible Church Members do neglect it, or at
Least, are not Constant in it. But I wonder, (says Mr. Increase Mather, in his
Sermon) how such Men and Women can think, that they belong to God, or that they
have a Real Interest in Heaven, who can find in their Hearts to Live without
Secret Prayer!

Yet Again, We may Consider farther, for our Humiliation, Whether or no, we may
not be some Hindrance to the Work of Conversion, by our Bad Examples; for many
do give Bad Examples upon several Accounts. If Children and Young Persons, do
see Parents and Masters, Sleep at the Meeting, they will think, they may do so
too; and we are all generally too apt to follow Bad Examples. And, though our
Forefathers had a Design to Labor the Conversion of the Heathen, yet how many
be there now, who Teach them to Sin, and so are an Hindrance to the Work of
Christ among them?

We may Consider, whether there has been any thorough Reformation, since there
was a Synod-Book put forth, wherein God did no doubt declare the very Evils,
whereby He was provoked.

Oh! That we may therefore Set to it, in Good Earnest, that we may Pour out our
Souls before God, in secret places, that He may be pleased to Pour out His
Spirit, and Converting Grace, upon New England, and upon His Churches here, and
upon the Rising Generation!

The other of those Young Men, belonged unto the Town of Dorchester; and his
Name was Wykes. A little before his Decease, he wrote a Paper full of
Affectionate and Broken Hearted Expressions, wherein he applied himself to the
Young Folks of his Acquaintance, with Urgent Entreaties that they would mind
such Lessons of Religion, as their Faithful Pastor had so often pressed upon
them. The most of what he writ, I shall Omit, as more proper to be Confined
unto the Manuscript; but I shall Transcribe some of the more pungent Passages,

Though I am now in the Dust, and am Numbered with the Dead; yet here is my mind,
while I were Alive; and that is, That you would take Warning by me, and prepare
for Death, while you have Time, while your Golden Season Lasts.

We read in Romans 13.11. Now it is High Time to Awake out of Sleep. Why should we
Ly still, when Hell flames are kindling upon us? Why should we stay in this our
Dungeon, when we may be in the clear Sunshine? and why will we Love Darkness
rather than Light? Surely, It Is because Our Deeds are Evil.

How Delightful it is, unto Sinners, to do the Devils Drudgery! They will break
whole Nights Sleep, but they will accomplish it; it is so delightful unto them,
that they are never weary of it; it is a Race that is Down Hill, I think I may
say, Down to Hell; they are in the way, and if they keep on, they will quickly
be there; it may be, before they are aware of it.

I can safely say it, it is the mind of my Heart; I could freely give all the
World* nay, Ten Thousand Worlds, had I them; could I Recall the Time that I have
misspent; those Rich Opportunities that I have neglected.

The Thoughts of Death, are enough to Rend an Heart of Stone. The Thoughts of
going out of the World, and beholding man's Face no more, are dismal indeed; to
think to go down to the Pit of Silence, and into the Grave of Rest! Yet, these
things are but a mere Shadow, to what shall be, when God shall say, Depart from
Me, Ye Cursed, into Everlasting Fire.

I have taken Pleasure in Merry Meetings, and Company Keeping; and now, I
would, give all the World, that I could undo these things. Now I begin to see
the miserable Estate that I am in; and I would give all the World that I could
do any good unto You, that I could any ways Awaken you. For my part, I will
Turn and Seek the Lord, and I would have you do the same. I will now return,
and will not Walk in those Ways any Longer. If you continue in Sin, you shall
Reap the Fruit of it, in the Pit of Hell, where Hot Fiery Coals will be your
Bed, where Dismal Firebrarnds shall be your Pillow, and Flames shall be your
Coveri^^.

A little while ago, I thought I heard a continual Voice, as it were, say,
Come, ye Blessed, Enter into my Kingdom, that I may Execute Vengeance on the
Ungodly. God is now about to do these things; if nothing else do show it, it
would be plain enough, by this Sign; To see all the World in such a Confusion
and Uproar. And you that dare put God off, till, To morrow, when you see These
Things, do you think that when you have disposed of all your pure Grain, God
will accept your Chaff?

I do believe, that you are more concerned, how to get an Estate in this World,
than how shall Glorify God. But I warn you all, that you spend the rest of your
Days to the Glory of God. It is so pressed on my mind, that I cannot help it --
I must say this to you, Turn from your sins; take warning by me, and improve
your time here as if it were but a Moment that you should Live.

(IV.)
Sect. 1. LIttle more than Thirteen years Old, was JOHN CLAP of Situate, when
He Died; but it might very Truly be said of him, That while he was yet Young,
he began to seek after the God of his Father. From his very Infancy he
discovered a Singular Delight in the Holy Scripture, whereby he was made Wise
unto Salvation; and he also made him self yet further Amiable, by his Obedience
to his Parents, and his Courtesy to all his Neighbors. As he grew up, he
signalized his Concern for Eternity, not only by his diligent attendance upon
both Public and Private Catechizing, but also by the like attendance on the
Ministry of the Word, which he would Ponder and Apply, and confer about, with
much Discretion of Soul, and Pray for the Good effect thereof upon his own
Soul. Yea, 'twas even from his Childhood observable in him, that ever after he
began to speak Reasonably, he would both affectionately regard the
Family-Prayers, and likewise, both Morning and Evening, with a most unwearied
constancy recommend himself by his own Prayers unto the Mercies of God.

Sect. 2. Arriving higher in his Age, he was very Conscientious of his Duty,
both to God, and Man; and particularly careful of his Fathers Business, which
now became his own Calling. At Work with his Father in the Field* he would
frequently be propounding of Questions, by the Answers whereof he might be
promoted in the knowledge of God: and at the seasons which others usually
employ to vain purposes, he would be abounding in the exercises of Devotion.
But of all the Imitable things to be seen in him, he was exemplary for nothing
more, than his endeavors in Preparation for, and Sanctification of, the
Lord's Day. Yea, his Parents have affirmed, that for a Year or two before he
Died, They never heard an Unprofitable Word come out of his Mouth; but, he
would often bewayl the Idle, Tryfling, Vain Discourses of other People.

Sect. 3. About a a Year and a half before he Dyed, the Good Spirit of God,
Blessed him, with yet a more through Conviction of his Misery by reason of Sin
both Original, and Actual: whence though he had been such a Pattern of Innocence,
yet he would aggravate his own Sinfulness, with Lamentations truly
extraordinary. And for his Relief against the Terrors of God, wherewith he was
now Distracted, he was brought unto an utter Despair of his own Righteousnesses
and Abilities; but in this Condition, he came to Adore the Grace of God,
offering a JESUS who is Able to Save unto the Uttermost: In his Longings to
enjoy the Love of God, through Jesus, He was like the Heart panting after the
Waterbrooks!

Sect. 4. The Wounds of his Spirit, were accompanied with a Languishing and
Consuming of his Flesh; yet with Great Patience he endured the Hand of God, and
he followed the Lord with Prayers, with Cries, with Tears, for the
manifestation of the Divine Love unto him.

It was also Observed and Admired, that when he was abroad at the Public
Worship, in the time of his Weakness, he would stand the whole time of the Long
exercises, and be so affectionately attentive, that one might see every
Sentence uttered in those Exercises, make some impression upon him. The best
Christians in the place professed thems^^ves, made ashamed by the Fervency of
this Tongue Disciple! And in Days of Public Humiliations, or Thanksgivings,
kept with regard unto the general Circumstances of the Country, he would bear
his part, with such a sense of the Public Troubles or Mercies, as argued more
than a common measure of a Public Spirit in him.

Sect. 5. The Minister of the Place, visiting of him, after Sickness had
confined him, found him, in an extreme dejection of Soul; his very Body Shook,
through his Fear, lest the Day of Grace were over with him; yet justifying of
God, though he should be forever cast among the Damned. But yet his Fears were
accompanied with Hopes in the Alsufficient merits of the Blessed Jesus: in
which Hopes he still continued using all the Means of Grace, according to his
Capacity, and Lamenting after those whereof he was not Capable.

Sect. 6. A month before he Died, he kept his Bed; the First Fortnight whereof
he was very Comfortless, and yet very Patient; abounding all this while in
Gracious Admonitions unto other Young People, that they would be concerned for
their own Eternal Salvation. And you should not now have heard him complain,
that he wanted Health, and Ease, though he did so; but that he wanted Faith, and
Peace, and Christ; yet Expressing a profound Submission to the Will of God. But
in the Last Fortnight of his Life, this poor Child of God, had his weary Soul
more comfortably Satiated with the Promises of the New Covenant. God filled him
with a mavelous Assurance of His Love, and so Sealed him with His own Spirit,
that he Rejoiced with Joy Unspeakable and full of Glory. He would often be
saying, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on Earth, that I
desire beside thee: My Flesh and my Heart fails, but God is the Strength of
my Heart, and my Portion for ever. And, I know that my Redeemer Lives, and that
He shall Stand at the Latter Day upon the Earth. And, If I Live, I shall Live
unto the Lord; if I Die, I shall Die unto the Lord; and whether I Live or Die, I
am the Lords. And, When Christ, who is my Life, shall appear, then shall I also
appear with him in Glory. He would profess, that his Communion with the Lord
Jesus Christ, was Inexpressible; and the Spectators judged his Consolations, to
be as Great, as could be born, in a mortal Body. Being now asked, Whether the
Thoughts of Dying Troubled him not? He replied, No, Death is no Terror to me,
because Christ has taken away my Sin, which is the Sting of Death. But being
asked, Whether he was willing to Live? he answered, I am willing to submit unto
the Will of God; but if God have appointed me to Life, I desire I may Live to
His Glory. And being asked, Whether God had put out of Doubt, his Interest in a
Dying and Rising Jesus? He returned, Yes; and God has fully answered my
Desires; I am now going to a thousand times better World. He told his Mother, I
Love you as dearly as my own Life, yet I had rather Die, and be with Christ.

Sect. 7. He continued Six Days, with his Teeth so shut, as that they could
not be opened; and for the first Three Days and Nights, he took no Sustenance;
afterward, though this also but seldom, he Sucked in between his Teeth, nothing
but a little Cold Water: in which Time, they that Laid their Ears to his Lips,
could over-hear him continually Expressing his Comfort in God. But just before
his Death, his Teeth were opened; when he would often say, Oh! how precious is
the Blood of Christ, it is worth more than a Thousand Worlds! and often pray,
Come, Lord Jesus, Come quickly! and at Last, he gave up himself to God, in
those words, Lord Jesus Receive my Spirit. He desired his Mother to turn his
Face unto the Wall; whereupon she said, John, Do thou now Remember Hezekiah's
Turning his Face unto the Wall? he said, Yes, I do Remember it: and as she
Turned him in her Arms, he so quietly breathed his Soul into the Arms of his
Blessed Savior.

[Extracted out of the Account, Written and Printed, by Mr. Witherel, and Mr.
Baker, Ministers of Situate; and Prefaced by Mr. Urian Oaks, who takes that
Occasion to say, of this John Clap, He was a Young Old Man, full of Grace, though
not full of Days.]

(V.)
GOD was pleased by an Early Death, to take SARAH DERBY, out of this present
Evil World. Her Expectation of, and her Preparation for, her Death, even in the
Time of her greatest Health, was more than usual; and having by an Exemplary
Conversation Recommended Early Religion unto those that knew her, about the Age
of Nineteen, She left them to Follow her Faith, and Consider the End of her
Conversation.

But a few months before she Dyed, she gave to one of her Friends, this Account
of the Divine Dispensations toward her Better (...)*

My Soul desires to Believe and Profess that Holy Religion, which is Contained
in Mr. Cottons Catechism. The Spirit of God has been a Long Time Striving with
me; though my Father Died when I was a Child, yet God has been a Father to me.
He left me a Mother, who did abundantly put me upon Secret Prayer, and upon
Turni^^ from Sin, when I was about Six Years Old. But I thought my self Too
Young for such things; so I neglected my Duty to God.

At length, God made my Baptism to be my Terror. I had been Baptized; and
hearing Mr. -- Say, How Baptism obliged us to put on Christ, I was terrified to
think, how little I had answered my Baptismal Obligations.

It pleased God, in the Year 1688. To lay me under Sore Sickness. I was then
Awakened with a Sense of my Condition, and made many Promises, about walking
with God: Which I doubt I have not kept as I should have done.

At last, it has pleased God, by the Ministry of -- to bring me home unto
Himself.

(...) gone through much trouble of (...)* about my own State, and wondered,
that I have been out of Hell. But I have (...) to Bless God for ever, for what
he has done for me; and particularly for my Acquaintance, with a number of
Young Women, who have been very helpful to One Another in the Ways of God.

I have been much Awakened and Comforted by Mr. Increase Mathers Book
Entitled, A Call to the Rising Generation.

And I have been much Concerned that I might not resist the Strivings of the
Holy Spirit because it is said, in Genesis 6.3 My Spirit shall not always strive.

I humbly Bless God, for his Restraining Grace, which I have in some Good
measure, enjoyed all my Days. And I am not without hopes, that he has bestowed
something of his Renewing Grace upon me.

That Scripture has much comforted me, and directed me in the affairs of my
Soul; Jer. 31.18 19. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, thus; Thou
have chastised me, and I was chastised -- Turn thou me, and I shall be turned.

I have been brought to see Sin as a most Evil thing. God has enabled me, that
I desire to Mourn for it, and to Turn^ from it; and therewithal to see more of
its Loathsomeness, and the Loveliness of the Lord Jesus Christ.

I have been brought to see, my own Righteousness and Strength, as nothing
before the Lord; and I would go to the Lord Jesus for all; I must come to him,
very poor and miserable.

I have thought my self a Great Sinner, and one of the Greatest. I have finned
with Aggravations; and been terrified by that Scripture, in Romans 2:4.5.
Despisest thou the riches of his Grace? thou treasurest up to thy self Wrath
against the Day of Wrath.

But the three first Verses in the Fifty fifth Chapter of Isaias, have
supported me.

I have also had many sad Doubts and Fears whether I might venture upon all the
Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ, and whether I should walk answerably to my
Engagements But I have been convinced, that I must not live in any sin of
Omission, upon such excuses.

Wherefore I enter into Covenant with God, and I desire that the Lord Jesus
Christ would for ever take me, and keep me, near unto himself.

The last Lords Day of her being abroad, while she was yet in Perfect health,
she told one of her intimate Friends, that She had lately in some singular
Distress of her Mind, set up almost all night, crying to the Lord, that he
would please to apply unto her, by His own Holy Spirit, a Promise, which might
Relieve the Disconsolations of her Soul. At last she felt a most Powerful
Application of a Promise, which at once dispelled all her Fears and removed all
her Doubts, and caused her, to Lie down and sleep in peace with God. It was
that in Isa. 54.8 In a little Wrath, I hid my face from thee, for a Moment, but
with Everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, Says the Lord thy
Redeemer; and what follows. Whereupon She now signified, that the Peace of her
Soul, was confirmed; and that she should within a few Days Die in that Peace;
which accordingly came to Pass.

(VI)
Sect. I. Loath to Leave the Other Sex, without some Entertainment, which may
more particularly Engage Them, unto Early Religion, I shall add this Example.

Mr. Thomas Thornton the aged and faithful Pastor of Yarmouth, was blessed with
a Daughter named Priscilla, which at the Age of Eleven, left this world, having
first given demonstrations of an Exemplary Piety.

Sect. 2. She was one remarkably grave, devout, serious; very inquisitive about
the matters of Eternity; and in her particular Calling very diligent. She was
nevertheless troubled with sore Temptations and Exercises about the state of
her own Soul: the Anguish of her spirit, about Her body of Death, caused her to
pour out many tears and prayers; and she pressed, That some other pious
children of her acquaintance, might with her keep a Day of Humiliation
together, That (as she expressed it) they might get power against their sinful
Natures. But it pleased God at length to bless the words of her godly mother,
for the qui^ting of her mind. It was her singular Happiness, that she had such
godly parents; but it was her Opinion and Expression, We trust too much to the
Prayers of our Parents, whereas we should pray for our selves.

Sect. 3. At last, she fell mortally sick. In the beginning of her Sickness,
she was afraid of Dying; For, said she, I know of no promise to encourage me.
She could not but own that she had in some measure walked with God; yet she
complained, That she had not (...) God meeting her in her prayers, and making
her heart willing to be at his Dispose; and that the Pride of her heart, now
lay as a Load upon it. She owned, That she had many Thoughts of Jesus Christ,
and that it grieved her that she had sinned against Him who had done and died
for her.

Sect. 5. But many days were not past, before she could profess her self
Willing to Die, with some Assurance of her then going to eternal Blessedness.
Many Thanks and Loves did she now render to one of her Superiors, declaring,
'Twas because they had curbed her, and restrained her from sinful vanities. And
she said, Were I now to choose my Company, it should be among the People of
God; I see plainly that they are the only company. She was not without her
Conflicts in this time, wherein one of her Speeches was, Damnation, that is the
worst thing of all, but Christ is of all the best; I find it so; Christ is to
me, Wisdom, Righitousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. She told her Father,
She knew she was made up of all manner of Sin; but said she, I hope God has
humbled me and pa^doned me in the Merits of the Lord Jesus Christ. Unto her
affectionate Mother she said, Mother, why do you weep, when I am well in my
soul? Will you mourn, when I am so full of Joy? I pray rejoice with me.

Sect 5. When she was extremely spent, she said unto her Parent, O my Father, I
have been much troubled by Satan, but I find Christ is too hard for him, and
sin, and all. She now said, I know now that I shall die; and being asked,
Whether she were afraid of Death; with a sweet smile she replied, No not I,
Christ is better than Life! And so she continued in a most joyful ^^ame, till
she dyed: a little before which, it being the Lord's Day, she asked, What time
of the day 'twas, and when they told her, 'Twas Three of the Clock; she
replied, What? is the Sabbath almost done? well, my Eternal Sabbath is going to
begin, wherein I shall enjoy all Felicity, and sing Hallelujahs to al^
ETERNITY. And hereupon she quickly fell asleep in the Lord.

(VII.)
INasmuch as it is usual in several Towns of the Country, for the Pious Young
men, to Associate themselves in pious Meetings, for their mutual Assistence in
the Affairs of Religion; and inasmuch as it is of singular Consequence, not only
for Young men to be quickened by their Pastors unto such quickening Methods of
Devotion, but also to have such Meetings under an Exact Regulation: I shall
here annex a Copy of the Orders, Agreed, Used, and Signed by a Young men's
Meeting in our Neighborhood; that if God please, it may indeed prove a Copy,
so far as the promoters of such things do find convenient, for the Imitation of
many others.

Our Agreement.
WE that through the Grace of God, have been Awakened in our Y^uth to be
concerned about the Things of our Everlasting Peace, and that would Remember
our Creator therefore in the Days of our Youth, do now desire to give up our
selves unto God in Christ according to the Terms of His New Covenant;
professing with His Help, that according to the Duty and the Promise of that
Covenant, we are willing with full purpose of Heart to cleave unto Him.

And for our Assistance in the Designs of Early Religion, as well for the
prevention of the Snares, which Young People frequently find in Evil Company,
we Associate our selves, for the Observation of the Ensuing O^^ers.

I. It shall be our Endeavor, to Spend the Two Hours, from Seven to Nine, on
the Evening of every (...) in Praying together by Turns; One to Begin, and
another to Conclude, the Meeting; and between the Two Prayers, having a Sermon
Repeated; whereto the Singing of a Psalm shall be annexed.

II. If after the Stated Exercises of the Evening are over, there be any
Residue of Time, we will Confer upon some Question of Practical Christianity;
in order whereunto every one of us, in his Turn, is to be provided with a
Question, although the Answer to it shall be Left wholly Free unto every one, as
he shall see cause to say More or Less concerning it.

III. We resolve to be Charitably Watchful over one another; and therefore we
engage, that as we will not unkindly divulge one another Infirmities, but yet
lovingly Inform one another of what we shall know or hear to be a Fault, so we
will never manifest ourselves Offended at any of our Number that shall bestow a
Christian Reproof upon us for any of our Miscarriages.

IV. They that would be admitted into our Society, shall be First Proposed one
Evening; and then, if they be allowed, they shall the next Evening be Present;
when, if their Dispositions to be of us, do continue, One or Two of us
appointed by the Rest, shall go with them unto the Minister of the Place, whose
consent, and counsil about the persons to be admitted, being obtained, they
shall then set their Names with ours in our Catalogue.

V If any Person Enrolled among us do fall into any Scandalous Iniquity, we
will admonish him of his Evil; and suspend him from coming among (...) for a
Shorter, or a Longer Space, according to (...) Nature of his offense; nor shall
he be again ^eceived, without Credible Expressions and Evi^^nces of Repentance.

VI. Our List shall once in a Quarter, be called ^ver; when if it be observed
that any in it, have ^ong or often Absented themselves from us, we will ^end some
unto them, to enquire the Reason of their Absence; and if no Reason be given
but such as intimates an Apostasy from Good beginnings, they shall, without
speedy Reformation^ be Obliterated.

VII. Once in Three Months, we will have a Collection, out of which the
Necessary Charges of our Lights, Fires, and Entertainments, are to be defrayed,
(...) the Rest shall be scattered among the Poor of our Neighborhood,
according to Agreement.

VIII. Once in Two Months, we will devote our whole (...) unto Supplications,
for the Conversion and Salvation of the Rising Generation in our Land; and more
particularly, for the success of the Gospel, among the young in that
Congregation, whereto, we do ourselves belong.

IX Upon Special Occasions, cast before us by the Providence of God, we will
set apart our Whole Evenings, either for Humiliations, or for Thanksgivings;
and we will, when we can, have W^o^e Days for the like purposes, on the like
occasions.

Now, may the Grace of our God be sufficient for us!

FINIS.
(...)
1. THe Call of the Gospel. 2. Military Duties: An (...) Sermon. 3. Right
Thoughts in Sad Hours. 4. Early Piety Exemplified. 5. Memorable Witchcrafts and
Possessions. 6. Discourses, to Serve the Designs of Practical Godliness. 7.
Soldiers Counseled and Comforted. 8. The Wonderful Works of God Commemorated.
9. Work upon the Ark. 10. Speedy Repentance Urged. 11. A Public Spirit. 12. A
Companion for Communicants. 13. The Serviceable Man: An Election Sermon. 14.
Serious Thoughts in Dying Times. 15. Addresses to Old men, Young men, Little
Children 16 The Life of the Renowned John Eliot. 17 Expectanda; Or Things to be
Looked for. 18 Little Flocks guarded against Grievous Wolves 19. Ornaments for
the Daughters of Zion. 20 Blessed Unions Recommended. 21. A Sacred Exorcism
upon Sinful Discontent. 22. The Cause and Cure of a Wounded Spirit. 23
Meditations on the Day of Judgment. 24. A Midnight Cry. 25. Op^anda. Good Men
Described, and Good Things Propounded. 26. The Wonders of the Invisible World.
27. Awakenings for the Unregenerate. 28 Warnings from the Dead. 29. The Day,
and the Work of the Day. 30. Winter Meditations. 31. [Now in the Press,] The
Short History of New Eng^and.
All by this Author.


