Durable RICHES.

Two Brief DISCOURSES, Occasioned By the Impoverishing Blast of Heaven, which
the Undertakings of Men, both by SEA and LAND, have met withal.

The One, handling, The true Cause of LOOSING;

The other, giving, The true Way of THRIVING.

By Cotton Mather.

Mercatura est, pa^^ca amittere, ut majora Lucreris. T^rt. Ejusmodi Opes
Comparandae, quae navi fracta simul Enatare p^ssint. Boston, Printed by John
Allen, for ^^vasour Harris, and are to be Sold at his Shop over against the Old
Meeting House. 1695.

Preface.
IT has been Complained, not only tha^ Christian Charity, but also that Moral
Honesty, is too generally neglected by Men, in their Employing of those
Temporal Estates, wherewith God in his Providence has Betrusted them. And it
may be observed, That the too little Believed Providence of God most wisely and
justly Ordering all our Temporal Affairs, has been Chasti^ing this
Unfaithfulnes^ in our Stewardship, with such multiplied Losses, as often argu^
somewhat more than (...) mere Display of Divine Sovereignty* in th^i^
Infliction. Upon the occasion hereof, Two brief Sermons that have been Preached
on our Country-Lecture, are now offered unto the public: the presumption of
which offer, I do not go to excuse, as Authors fondly use to do, with the
Importunity of Friends, for (...) number of my Friends has ever, that I know
of, Importuned this Publication: but the Offer is made, briefly, Because I
think my Neighbors had need be Told of these things, whether they ask (...)
To^d of them or n^. May the Blessing of Heaven, accompany these poor Ess^ves*
To do good unto all.

COTTON MATHE^

THE True Cause of Loosing.
Hag 1 7, 9. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your Ways. Ye looked for
much, and ^o, it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did bow upon it.


IT was a true but a sad Report, which a Prophet once gave, concerning the
Times, when the Concerns of Religion were w^fully disregarded, in 2 Chronicles.
15.5, 6 In those Times, there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him
that came in; for God vexed them with a^l Adverversity. And m^thinks, to Repeat
those words would be at the same Time, exactly to Report the Characters of the
Black Times that are come upon our selves. There is indeed, a dreadful variety
of Adversity, every Year vexing of us; but among all our Vexations there is a
special Remark to be put upon those Losses which attend us in our Estates; and
those Losses are principally occasioned by the want of Peace to them that are
Going out, or Coming in. An Infallible Expedient for the Preventing, or the
Reparing of these Losses, would infallibly be welcome to us all; and I now
pretend, unto more than one such Expedient. The great Use of Guard Ships and
Convoyes: and the yet greater use of Ensurance-Offices, Established upon good
Foundations for this purpose, with Methods to stop Fires, or cure B^asts,
hitherto unpractised, I do somewhat know; but I am now to show unto you, A more
Excellent Way.

There were sore Losses that befell the People of God, who having obtained from
the King, a Good Charter, with a Good Governor, Empowring them to Settle a
Good Order both in Church and State, among themselves, too soon laid aside the
Holy Designs which they had begun upon. The Losses which thus Creepled the Body
of this People as well by Land, as by Sea, in the Infancy of their Plantation,
must needs be very Exercising. Their Condition is in these words Expressed unto
them, Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little; and when ye brought it
home, I did blow upon it. It seems they met with such Losses in their Ways of
Living, whether by Tillage, or by Traffic, that they could not Thrive in any
of their Undertakings. But the God of Heaven, very graciously sent one of His
Ministers, to debate with the people about their Losses, and Exhort them and
Invite them to Repent of the Sins, which had been the Moral Causes of those
Disasters.

Our Haggai was one of those Ministers; and, as it is noted by one of the
Ancients, because this Haggai was but a Young Man, Lest any should therefore
Despise his Y^uth, he came with a very Divine Authority; he demands Attention,
with a doubled, Thus says the Lord of Hosts; and, if the Message come from,
The Lord of H^sts, who dare do any other than Attend unto it? The Errand upon
which our Prophet here comes unto this People, is, briefly, to direct them unto
a way, how they might both find out the Cause, and obtain the End, of all the
C^lami^ous Losses, which had overtaken them. And that i^ my Errand unto Y^u
this Day; in the Discharge whereof the Text now Read will be very Serviceable.

The CASE before me is,

How should we Approve our selves under the Losses wherewith Almighty God
visits us, in our Estates; and how may we Improve those Losses unto Spiritual
and Eternal Gains.

In Answer to a Case, which I suppose, few or none, can count unseasonable,
there are these things to be offered.

I. The first Counsil proper for them that have met with Losses, is that which
we have, Repeated in our Context here. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider
your Ways. Consideration under our Losses, is as needful as ready a way, to
the Sanctification of those Losses. And there are especially two things to be
thereupon Considered.

First, When we have met with Losses, we are to Consider the Hand from whence
those Losses come upon us. Briefly, We are to Consider the Hand of God in all
our Losses. It was well Considered and Confessed, by the Holy Job, when be had
Lost a fair Estate, and there were Sabaeans and Chaldaeans as well as more
Natural Accidents, among the Authors of his Losses, in Job 1.21. It is the Lord
that has taken away. We shall be very Fretful under our Losses, if we are not
very Thoughtful under them. Yea, but our Thoughts will only increase our Frets,
if they should only be Employed upon Second Causes. This is the First Rule for
us under our Losses; Let us acknowledge a Wise, and a Just God as the First
Cause of all. It has been sometimes the Good Speech of a Good Man, I can take
any thing well at the Hand of God. As for our Losses, they will all Prove well
if we can Take them well; but now, behold how That is to be attained. Let us
consider, what we are told, in Deuteronomy. 8.18. Thou shall Remember the Lord thy
God, for it is he that gives thee power to get Wealth. And then, Let us
Consider, That when we Loose Wealth, we must Remember the Lord our God; for
it is he who denies us the power of keeping our Wealth. Perhaps our Losses may
rise from the Fraud or Force of our Enemies; but let us Cons^der, It was our
God that let Loose those Devourers upon us. It Is possible, Unhappy Casualties
have pro^cured us our Losses; but let us Consider, 'Twas by the Disposal of our
God, that such Inconveniences came to pass. It may be partly for this Reason,
that our Prophet here once and again mentions unto the People, The Lord of
Hosts, as concerned about their Losses; They were the Hosts of the Lord, that
were the more immediate and visible Efficients of their Losses; yea, but those
Efficients were but Instruments; and says the Prophet, It is the Lord of Hosts
himself that commanded this Armies to Fall upon your Estates. Whatever may be
our Losses, and from what Quarter soever they spring, I beseech you speak not a
word of any Bad Fortune, in the Business. It Is only for Pagans to ascribe their
Losses unto such a Blind Original. Consider every Loss as ordered, not by
Chance, but by God; even by that God who has Numbered all our Hairs; that, God,
without whom not a Sparrow falls; that God who does the Evil that is done in
the City. There was a pious VVidow once, that met with sore Losses in her
Concerns; but you shall now hear her Opinion about the true Original of all
those Losses; in Ruth 1.21. I went out fall, and the Lord has brought me home
again Empty; the Lord has Testified against me, and the Almighty has
Afflicted me. VVell-Thought on! It Is the Lord Almighty that Empties us, by all
the Losses that come upon us. Mark what I say; A man will never be a Looser by
any of his Losses, except he be Impatient under them. Now, the best Antidote
against Impatience is, to Consider, It Is the Will of God, that I should meet
with such Losses as I do.

Secondly, When we have met with Losses, we are to Consider the Ground for
which those Losses com^. The God of Heaven sent one VVasting Plague* after
another upon the poor Jews, till at last they Lost all they had in the World;
but then said He, in Ezekiel. 14.23. Ye shall know that I have not without a
Cause, done all that I have done in it, says the Lord. Our Losses are usually
the fruit and sign of Gods Quarrels. Ordinarily our God is managing of some
Controversy with us when He causes us to Loose those things that were
Comfortable to us. [VVe may allude unto Ezra 7.26.] It would be a Profitable
thing for us to Loose what is Comfortable, if we might be brought thereby to
Mourn for, and to Turn from our Sins, and to Humble our selves before God, with
a deep Repentance. It becomes us then under our Losses, to Consider, What is
the Cause of such Dispensations, and to Supplicate, as in Job. 10.2. Show me
wherefore thou contendest with me. In our Text, the Lord makes a, Why? upon the
Losses of the People. Truly, it becomes us also to use a, Why? upon our Losses.
Put the Question, Why am I thus? Why will not God permit me to Enjoy what he
has bestowed upon me? We are here informed, That our Ways are to be
considered, when our Losses come in upon us; it seems, that in the sinfulness
of our own Ways, we are to Look for the Reasons of our Losses. Particularly,
To begin with what lies before us;

First, Under our Losses we may do well to Consider, Whether it be not Because
of mine House that is wast, says the Lord of Hosts; and ye run every man unto
his own House. The Neglect of the Ordinances Administered in the House of God,
is here a^signed as the Rile of those Losses which befell the Jews of old. God
would not fill Their Houses, because they would not Replenish His. They would
not Build Gods House, and therefore God would not have Theirs to flourish. They
reckoned every thing too Much for the House of God, and so God said every thing
was too Good for theirs. There is then a twotold miscarriage, after which we
should by our Losses be made Inquisitive. We should Consider, whether we have
duly Attended the Ordinances in the House of God. It was Engaged, in Exodus
23.24. Thrice a year, shall all your M^n Children appear before the Lord God;
Th^n shall no men desire thy Land. (...) we Loose the Profits of our Land,
pray, ^et us then Enquire, Do we go up so much as once a Year, to the
Gospel-Festivals of our Lord Jesus Christ? The first Planters of this Country,
had a glorious Experiment of it; That as long as men were mostly Concerned
about a Room in the House of God, and about Preparing for, and Approaching to
the Ordinances of that House, they prospered wonderfully in their Undertakings;
but since that Church-Work has been so shamefully cast off by, A Generation of
sinful men Risen up in our Fathers stead; and since that instead of Desiring
this one thing, to dwell in the House of the Lord the chief Cry has been after
Worldly Accommodations; Men do but Loose on all hands, and miserably go down
the wind almost all the Country over. It has been said by our Lord, Seek first
the Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you. You then that
find All these things Taken from you, may do well to Consider, Have I duly
sought the Kingdom of God, by joining my self in a Sacred Fellowship, with the
People of that Kingdom? God makes us to Loose the Things that were to furnish
our Tables; why? Because the Dainties Exhibited upon His TABLE are despised
with us. Again, we should Consider, whether we have duly Supported the
Ordinances in the House of God. What notable Assurances did the Lord give, in
Mal 3.9, 10, 11. Ye are Cursed with a Curse, for ye have Robbed me. Bring ye
all the Tithes into the Store house, and pr^ve me now herewith, says the Lord
of Hosts, if I will not Open you the Windows of Heaven, and pour you o^t a
blessing, that there shall not be Room enough to Receive it; And I will Rebuke
the Devourer for your s^kes. Do many Devourers cause us to Loose our Stores: It
may make us Enquire, whether we have not pinched in what Concerns the Stores
that are necessary to keep the House of God from Sinking. It Is impossible that
the Ordinances belonging to the House of God should be carried on without
Charges; and every man to whom God has given any of His Talents, does owe
something proportionable, for the maintaining of these Charges. The Opened
Windows of Heaven use to let fall a pour of Blessings on those that are most
Open handed in such a Piety. Whereas, I can tell of a Count^ey in the world,
where the Unavoidale Charges of the Gosp^l, have been accounted the heaviest of
^urdens, by very many of the Inhabitants; and at length, God gave them to see,
that by his browns only upon One Expedition, He could in a few Weeks make them
Loose more than would have honorably Defrayed all the Ecclesiastical Expenses
in the Land for several Years together. There needs not much of Geography to
find such a Country; plainly, it is, My Own. It is among the Oracles of
Wisdom, There is that withholds more than is meet, and it tends to Poverty.
To withold from the Service of God, and of His Truths, and VVays, those
Quitrents which are Challenged by Him, who does give us All that we have; This
is to withold more than is meet. Let us then Consider, Is not my Sacrilege the
cause of my Poverty? We Loose what we have, when we go to Keep what we should
not. But,

Secondly, Under our Losses, we may do well to Consider, Whether we never made
Idols of those things, whereof we now undergo the Losses. When the Jews were
guilty of nefandous Idolatries, this was the Judgment of God upon them for
those Idolatries, in Ezekiel. 16 27. Behold, I have stretched out my Hand over
thee, and I have diminished thine Ordinary Food. As for us, it is chiefly one
sort of Idolatry which we are most prone unto; even that whereof the Apostle
speaks, Coveteousness, which is Idolatry. When our Hearts come to be
Inordinately set upon things here below, then it is that by one Loss after
another, those things are Diminished unto us. To Love any of these things
extremely, is the way to Loose that thing certainly and speedily. Let any
Guord, be overvalued, and it will not be long before that Guord shall be withered.
A miserable Indian at Mexico once very solemnly held up a piece of Gold,
saying, Behold, this is the Spaniards God! Even so it may be said about the
Cash, or Shop, or House, or Ship, or Field of many a man; There (...) the God
of that man. The man does more depend upon those things, for a Subsistence,
than upon the Almighty God Himself; The man will forget God, and all the Works
and Laws of Religion, rather than abate of his raging pursuit after these
things. This it is to make Idols of them* Well then, says the Blessed God, Since
this man will make Idols of these things, they shall be Idols indeed! Now an
Idol you know is Nothing at all. So, we Loose all, till all come to Nothing. It
was said in Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine Eyes upon that which is not? For
Riches certainly make themselves Wings. Riches are a Fine, Gay, Speckled Bird;
but it is a Bird in the Bush, not a Bird in the Hand; and it is our setting our
Eyes too much upon it, that causes its Flight from us, that is, our Loss of it.

Thirdly, Under our Losses we may do well to Consider, Whether our
Unthankfulness and Unfruitfulness under our Enjoyments, have not given much of
Reasonableness unto our Losses. All that we have, is but a Loan from the Great
God unto us. Now, if we be so Unthankful, that we will not particularly and
affectionately Recognize the Kindness of God unto us in such a Loan, it is not
very Reasonable that we should come to have a Loss instead of a Loan? Is it
famous Threatening of God, in Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. Because thou servest not the Lord
thy God, with Joyfulness, and Gladness of Heart, for the Abundance of all
things; therefore thou shall Serve thine Enemies in Hunger and in Thirst, and
in Nakedness, and in the want of all things. It seems, we come to the Want, and
the Loss of our Former Abundance; Why? Because we do not Serve God with a due
Thankfulness of Heart, in and for that Abundance. Let me put this unto the
Consciences of my Loosing Neighbors! When the Emperor Bajazet had in one Day
Lost no less than a mighty Empire and Glory, Tamerlane, who took him Captive,
seriously asked him, Sir, Did you ever yet give Thanks to Almighty God, for
putting so great a part of His World into your Hands; whereto the Turk
answered, No, in Truth I never thought of that. And the Tartar then replied,
Ungrateful Wretch! then wonder not, that thou have Lost it all! Truly so, Let
many of us, that have Lost much of the World, be asked seriously, Did you ever
give Express, Hearty, Frequent Thanks to God, for His bestowing these things
upon you? It Is to be doubted, that we should be found lamentably defective in
this Ingenuity; and so you see, the Cost of this Ingratitude. Moreover, All
that we have, is the Means of Cultivation Employed by the Great God upon us. We
are Trees in the Vineyard of God; our Delights are part of the Husbandry, or
the Means wherewith He Labors, to fetch some of His Praises out of us; and if
we are Unfruitful after all, it is but Reasonable that we should be deprived of
those Means. It was threat^^^^ in Hos. 2.8, 9. She did not know, th^^ I gave
her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her Silver and Gold; Therefore will
I Return, and I will take them away. Don't we know that as what we have, is the
Gift of God, so it must be all used for the Praise of God? Know we not, that
our Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and Silver, and Gold, is to be Laid out only so as
may be for the Glory of God? If we don't know this, we shall know that He will
Take it, and we must Loose it all. They that are Unprofitable Servants, do
quickly hear their Doom, Take the Talent from him, says the Lord! The
Unfaithful Stewards are quickly called upon, Surrender what is in your Hands!
Have we Lost considerably? Let us then think with our selves, How we have used
what we have Lost. It may be that what should have Nourished our Devotion, and
our Charity, has been made but a Fuel for our Lust. It may be that our Plenty
has been Abused unto Gluttony, Drunkenness, Pride, and the Superfluity of
Naughtiness. No wonder then, if the Jealous God, should say upon it, I Will trust
them no longer with my Goods! When David could say of Nabal, In vain have I
kept all that this Fellow has, he was presently for making him Loose all he
had; thus, if our God must say, In vain have I let that Fellow have so much of
the World, what is like to follow, but a quick Ejection out of all?

Fourthly, Under our Losses, we may do well to Consider, How we Got what we
have Lost. It is a most memorable passage, in Jer. 17.11. As a Patridge sits
on Eggs, and hatcheth them not, so he that gets Riches, and not by Right,
shall Leave them in the midst of his Days, and at his End shall be a Fool.
Many a man has been such a Fool, as to augment his Riches in some ways of
Dishonesty; he has either by Fraud or Force made himself a Master of Gold,
whereto he had no Right, by that Golden Rule, Do as thou would be done unto.
And what comes of it? The Eggs prove Addle. Or to speak more thoroughly; The
Stolen Eggs carry Burning Coals with them, and Consume the Nest with all that
belongs unto it. Well said the Psalmist, A Little that a Righteous man has, is
Better than the Riches of many Wicked. Why, a Righteous man misses many an
Advantage, that is taken by them, that Make haste to be Rich. But then, the
Little Money which he gets, has no Rust upon it; it will wear and last like any
Steel. Whereas, let a Wicked man, in the ways of Wickedness grow never so Rich,
and worth many Thousands, it is a Thousand to One, but one Loss upon the back of
another, will at last bring all to be, as the Riches of Pirates use to be.
Father Latymer spoke once of a ^^ugh that would come upon such as could swallow
Dishonest Gains. Why, Losses do Ensue upon such Gains, like so many Coughs, and
men Cough till they Vomit up all they have got. It is a Righteous Thing with
God, That One Loss after another should snatch away from us, those Riches,
whereat we have snatched more Greedily than Honestly. Any Remarkable Injustice,
used either by Us, or by our Fathers before us, in scraping together much of
this World, will but make one great Snow-ball of it all. One Loss will
probably haunt it after another, till it be melted all away: at least, vix
gaudet tertius haeres. Yea, There is many a Godly man, who through Ignorance,
or Carelessness, never made a possible Restitution of Things unlawfully
Obtained, if not by himself, yet by those that Left him what he has; and so a
long Series of Losses is Entailed upon him. Thus also, such as have once
Broken, by their own Extravagancies, rather than by the Unavoidable Frowns of
God upon them; and have after all, had more Fraudulence, than Fair-dealing, in
their Compositions with their Creditors, do ordinarily so plunge themselves
into further Losses, that (as we say) no Butter will ever stick (...) their
Bread afterward. Yea, If any Thing have been Gotten by any Trade, offensive
unto God; such a Trade, suppose, as that wherein by Strong Drink Sold unto our
Indians, the Salvages have been hastened unto Hell before their Time; it is well
if it been't Last, all in as little a while as it was G^t; and it may be, that
some Good men have made the Unwary and Unhappy Trial of it. I would only add
thus much, When we see a Corrosion upon what we have, Let us look whether
there be no Moth ^odged in it; and remember, that a Moth may be (if not in a
Garment yet) in an Estate, for Twenty, Thirty, Forty Years together.

God forbid, that every one, who meets with Losses in his Est^^e, should be
Remarkably Chargeable with all or any of these Iniquities. Nevertheless,
Loosers, Consider your Ways.

II. Whatever may be our Losses, Let us not be too much Discouraged by those
Losses, nor Loose our Spirits under them. Though your Daily Bread seem to be
Failing of you, do not now Eat the Bread of Sorrows, but Sleep as quietly and
as pleasantly as ever; for you may be still, The Beloved of God. O do not give
way to sinking Dejections, or Despondings, and Overwhelming Melancholy; do not
say, I now fear, I shall come to want before I Dye! Alas, That comes with a
Fear. But hear the Voice of the Gracious God unto you;, which is, Fear not, I
am with thee; and I will never Leave thee nor Forsake thee. It Is One
Consolation for you, That God is Able to Retrieve all your Losses. When
Amazaah once at one Clap, Lost unto the value of Thirty Seven Thousand Five
Hundred Pound Sterling, in ready Money, he was very much concerned about his
Loss. But it was then said unto him, in 2 Chronicles. 25.9. The Lord is Able to give
thee much more than this. I pray, who first Gave all that you have now Lost? It
was God; that God, whose is the Earth, and the Fullness thereof: And cannot that
Omnipotent God, again, Give thee much more than this? Although Job had Lost
All; yet after all it came to that, in Job 42.10. The Lord gave Job twice as
much as he had before. It may be Thus with you, though your Losses bring you to
be, As poor as Job: I am sure, your Contentation would be a good Bottom for
such an Expectation. It Is indeed often seen, that no persons are so unable to
bear Losses, as those that once had nothing at all to Loose. They that start up
from nothing to be Rich on the sudden, are usually most affrighted, and most
repining, when petite Losses create in them a suspicion of Loosing more. But it
would rather become them to argue so, The God that brought me to something out
of nothing, may make me of Nothing, to become Something again, if it pleases
Him. However, I have one more Consolation for you: It Is, That I hope God is not
among your Losses. When David had Lost at once, all that he had been getting
together for many years, it is said in 1 Samuel 30.6. He Encouraged Himself in the
Lord his God. A blessed Cordial, to keep us from Fainting under our Losses!
This is Lost, you say, and That is Lost: but in Gods Name, Is God Lost? H^^e
not you a God still to go unto, and live upon? There are some, who so read that
place in Job 22.25. The Almighty shall be thy Gold. Christians, You have still
Gold enough, so long as you have not Lost the Almighty God: Unless you will
say, that Gold was your God; and then I did amiss to call you Christians.
Indeed, when Micah had Lost something, he cried out, Ye have taken away my
Gods, and what have I more? Yea, but in the midst of all your Losses, dare you
utter or mutter such a word as that, Ye have taken away my Gods? Then truly
might you say, I have Lost all, I have no more. Whereas, you have a God, an
Alsufficient God, an Everlasting God, still to Friend: and so you may sing the
Song of the Prophet over all, Though the Fields shall yield no meat, and the
Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, yet I will Rejoice in the Lord, and will
Joy in the God of my Salvation. When that Excellent Person, Galeacius
Caracciolus, had Lost a brave Living, he said unto some that Visited him, That
man's Money may perish with him, who counts all the Riches in the World, worth
one Days Communion with God in Christ. Why, though you have Lost never so
much, yet sure, you have not Lost your Communion with God, or at least, your
Liberty for that Communion. So, your Losses are but like the spilling of a Cup
of Water, to him that has a Living and a Running Fountain at his Door. I say
then, Be cheerful; Al may be well yet; yea, All is well, for all this.

III. Let our Losses help to wean us from such things as those whereof we are
Bereaved in our Losses; and let us not over prize what we daily LOOSE. What is
the Language of all our Losses? but that in Psalm. 39.6. Men are disquieted in
vain; he heaps up Riches, and knows not who shall gather them. So then, Let us
no more be so vain, as to seek for our Happiness, in such Things a^ will not
stand by us when we have them. The first Sin of man, was our Addressing of
Creatures as our Chief Good; and the Commission of that Sin, Impregnated our
very Natures with a Disposition to make such Addresses. But our Losses do
Engrave that Motto upon the Fore heads of all Creatures, These are Lying
Vanities; and the Losses work well, when they take off our Hearts from those
Vanities? The Apostle writes, in 2 Cor. 4.18. We Look not at the Things, which
are seen; for the Things which are seen, are Temporal. Our Losses do proclaim,
that these things are no more than Temporal; and so they should not have so
much of our Looks, nor of our Loves, as heretofore. What are all our Losses,
but the Wormwood, wherewith our God would Embitter those Breasts of Creatures,
which we too much fancy to hang upon? It Is most suitably pressed upon us, in 1
Cor. 7.29, 30. The Time is short; It remains that they who purchase, be as
though they possessed not. Even so, Since our Losses tell us, that the Time of
any Creatures Continuance with us, is but very short, Let us not be too fond of
any Creature whatsoever. Let us not Lean upon these things for the supply of
our Necessities: inasmuch as our Losses have told us, They are but Broken
Reeds. Do not any more imagine, that these things will be sufficient Reliefs
against our manifold Sorrows; our Losses tell us, They are but Miserable
Comforters. Do not imagine, that these things will be Remedies for all the
Maladies whereto we are Exposed; Our Losses tell us, They are but Physicians of
no value. It is observable, That when Riches do without any Interruption flow
in upon us, we grow but the more Hungry and Craving alter them; Crescit Amor
Nummi. It Is well therefore that our God, Orders now and then a Loss for us:
it is to make us think, Certainly here is not my Rest! Woe to me, if God put me
off with a Portion in such wretched Perishables! Possibly, if we knew when we
had Enough of these things, our Heavenly Father would not send so many Losses,
to be as it were the Voiders of our Tables. There are some Considerable Dealers
in the World, who are such Mortified Men, that they Stint their Estates, at a
Moderate and Competent Elevation; they Resolve, that they will never be Richer
than just so far; all that they get over and above, they will generously give away
to Pious Uses; and as they Resolve, that they will never be Richer, so the
Smiles of God upon them seem to Resolve, that they shall never be Poorer all
their Days. Excellent is the Rule that I have seen sometimes given, Be more
Thoughtful how to use what you have, unto the Glory of God, than how to gain
more. Whereas, if we are like the Horsleech, always at, Give! Give! Our God
often Orders that we Loose accordingly. A Grasp after too much, is the Loss of
all. What shall I say? If our Losses did speak nothing more Diminutive about
the things of this World, than only thus much, That they are Momentary Things;
yet that were enough to Disgrace them for ever with us. We Read concerning a
Rich Fool, in Luke 12.19. Who said unto himself, Thou have Goods Laid up for
many years; but yet that very Night he Lost all. And a Fool indeed he was!
Truly, after our Losses, we shall be most Exemplary Fools, if we count any of
our Goods, Laid up for many years.

IV. Let our Losses provoke us to make sure of those things which are beyond
the reach of Losses; and let us get an Interest in such things as never can be
Lost. Could we hear the voice of all our Losses, we should find our selves
bespoken in such Emphatical Terms as those, in Luke 10.41, 42. Thou art Careful
and Troubled about many things, But One Thing is Needful; that Good Part, that
shall not be taken away. Have we Lost Many Things? It is not worth while to be
Careful and Troubled, about such Things any Longer. Let us now be more
sollicitous than ever, about The Good Part, which cannot be taken away. And
what is that Good Part? In short, It is a Part in the New Covenant. Let us Look
to it, that God be ours; For, He is from Everlasting to Everlasting. Let us
Look to it, that Christ be ours: For, He is Yesterday, to Day, and for ever the
same. Look to it, that we have Grace in our Souls; for we may say of Divine
Grace, as it is said of Divine Joy, Nothing shall be able to take it from you.
Let us make sure, that Heaven be ours. What said the Apostle, in Heb. 10.34.
Ye took Joyfully the Spoiling of your Goods, knowing within your selves, that
you have in Heaven, a Better and an Enduring Substance. Thus, we may, Take
Joyfully the Loss of our Goods, if we are sure of Heaven for our Portion: and
if we have true Grace in us, there will be that within our selves, from whence
we may Know that Heaven does belong unto us; we shall have an Inchoation of
Heaven there. A Reverend and Renowned Minister, among the Ancients, having
suddenly Lost all that he had in the World, presently Lifted up his Eyes to
Heaven, and said, Lord, Why should I be Concerned about the Loss of Silver and
Gold; Thou know my All was not here; my All is in Heaven, and blessed be
God, I have not Lost Heaven yet! Bravely Spoken! Let us have our Claim to
Heaven sure; and our Title to all the Promises good; Then whatever Loss comes,
we may still with Triumphant Souls rejoice, My All is yet safe, as long as my
God, my Christ, my Heaven is yet Left. It would seem strange, if I should say,
A man may grow Rich upon his Losses; but I do assert it, and I can Evince it. A
man that is Owner of infinitely more than all that this World can afford unto
him, is undoubtedly a Rich man. But a man may be so Awakened by his Losses,
that he shall thereby come to be more Acquainted with God, more Conformed to
Christ, more Established in Grace, more Experienced at his Christian Warfare,
and more Prepared for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, than ever he was
before. Now, here are Blessednesses infinitely beyond all that this World can
Enrich a man withal. Let us Learn more Godliness, and more Contentment, and we
are sure of, Great Gain* Mallem bonum conscientiam, quam plenum marsupium, said
he of old. It was the Advice of our Lord, in Matt. 6.19, 20. Lay not up for
your selves, Treasures upon Earth, where Moth and Rust does Corrupt, and where
Thieves break through and Steal. But Lay up for your selves Treasures in
Heaven. Let our Losses by Moth, and Rust, and Thief, make us more sedulous than
ever we were, in securing of that Heavenly Treasure, which never can be preyed
upon. Since we cannot be sure of these things, Let us come to this issue, I Will
give all Diligence to make my Calling and Election sure! It will be a sad
symptom upon us, if we should Serve our Maker, one jot the less, for any of our
Losses: it would help the Devil to a Truth, in that Accusation against us,
which he brought with a Lie against Job of old; The man is mercenary in his
Obedience; Do but put forth thine Hand, and Touch all that he has; and he will
have soon have done serving of thee. No, No; Let us be more prayerful, more
watchful, more Abounding in all the works of the Lord, because of our Losses;
and so we shall be vast Gainers by the Losses. We shall be Wise Merchants, if
by Loosing of all, we have a faster hold on, The Pearl of Great Price. Yea, And
who can tell, whether we shall not shelter our selves against all sorts of
Losses, by our giving to the Great Things of Eternity, the First and Chief
Regards? This I can tell; that the Lord said unto Solomon, in 1 Chronicles. 1.11.
Because thou have not asked Riches, Wealth, and Honor; but have asked Wisdom
and Knowledge; Wisdom and Knowledge is granted unto thee, and I will give thee
Riches, and Wealth and Honor too.

V. The very Occasions of our Losses, may administer unto us, those Reflections
which may Occasion our Gaining by our Losses. It was a Riddle once propounded,
in Judge. 14.14. Out of the Eater came forth Meat. Now that Riddle may be
expounded in the Occasions of those Losses, that sometimes do trouble us. Our
Losses are monstrous Eaters, they eat away huge morsels of what we have. But we
may fetch Meat for our Souls, out of those Eaters, by Devout Reflections
thereupon. As now; Have our Losses been by Burnings? Then we may Reflect, Lord,
Let not my Soul perish in Everlasting Burnings? Reflect; Lord, Let not thy
Anger burn against this poor Soul of mine! Again, Have our Losses been by
Shipwracks? Then we may Reflect, Lord, Let me never make Shipwreck of the
Faith, and of a Good Conscience! Reflect; Lord, keep my SOUL from the Lusts
which may drown it in Perdition! Once more, Have our Losses been by Robbers?
Then Reflect, Lord, who gave my Substance to the Spoiler, and the Robber, but
thou, the Lord, against whom I have sinned? O let me make my Peace with my
Offended God! Or, Have we been Cheated? Reflect then, Lord, Let me not be one
that shall deceive my own SOUL; neither let the Tempter deceive me! Moreover,
Have our Losses been by Carelessness, or Imprudence? Then Reflect, Lord, Let me
use more Earnest Heed, in the Things of my Everlasting Peace! Finally, Have our
Losses been, by Droughts, by Rains, by Unfruitful Seasons? Reflect upon it,
Lord, Let me bring forth Fruits meet for thee, by whom I am dressed; and let me
glorify thee, by bringing forth of much Fruit! Any one such Reflection having
its due Impression upon our minds, would Largely make amends for any of the
Losses that might occasion it.

VI. Let every Loss quicken our zealous and fervent cares to avoid the worst
Loss, that can befall us; and that is, The Loss of our own SOULS. The Dutch have
a saying well worthy of a Remembrance with us all; He that has Lost his Money,
has Lost nothing; He that has Lost his Credit, has Lost half; but he that
has Lost his SOUL, There Is a man that has Lost all. We all of us naturally
have a Lost SOUL, within us; a SOUL fallen into the Hands of Internal Enemies,
and Eternal Miseries. Unless this Undone Soul be recovered out of those Hands,
by the Saving Influences of the Lord Jesus Christ, it is Lost for ever, without
any Remedy or Escaping. A Dead Soul, That Is a Dead Loss indeed! And oh that the
awful words of the Son of God, were continually sounding in our Ears, from Mat.
16.26. What is a man profited, if he gain the whole World, and Loose his own
Soul? There is many an Ungodly Man, that meets with few or no Losses for many a
year to^gether; this is that, Prosperity of the Wicked, whereat the Saints have
sometimes been so Foolish as to be Envious. But in the mean time, what becomes
of the Precious and Immortal Souls, which they carry about them? Alas, There
is, A Leanness sent into their Souls; and their Souls are so Estranged from
God, so Enslaved unto the Devil, and so Entangled in the Snares of Hell, (...)
I do most Heartily Pray, Lord, Let me rather Loose till I beg my Bread, than
gain the whole world, with a Soul in such doteful Circumstances. It may be that
some of these may be so absurd, as to expect the Salvation of their Souls for
ever, because God makes them to meet with no more Losses here; A silly Story!
Thus the Heathen Historians write of one Polycrates, who strangely succeeded in
all his Affairs; in so much that once when he threw a costly Ring into the Sea,
that very Ring was brought him again, in the Belly of a Fish: but yet, that man
came to a most miserable End at the last. O be warned of it; Though a man
should never meet with any other Loss, yet if he do not make sure of a Saved
Soul, he will be a very dreadful sort of a Looser after all. That Lost Soul
will go down into the Pit, and then you have Lost all; God, and Hope, and Life,
and Happiness is Lost for evermore. But how much more ought they that instead
of Gaining the whole World, are Loosing of it every day, to be solicitous, that
they don't Loose WORLD and SOUL and ALL together! Be assured, if thy Soul
should be Lost at last, all thy Griefs for what thou have Lost in this World,
are but* The beginnings of Sorrows. It Is a Pain of Loss, that is the Hell of
Hell it self, and the Intolerable, and the Interminable Anguish of the Damned.
When the Terrible God is now stripping thee of thy Pleasant Things, it is but a
Terrible Emblem and Earnest of the black Night, wherein thou shall suffer the
Loss of all that is Desirable, and be left, Wretched and Miserable and Poor and
Blind and Naked, and not have so much as a Drop of Water to Cool thy Tongue;
but Ly, Hardly bestead, and Hungry, and Fretting, and Cursing of God, and
Looking upward. O think of these things; and see to it, that, A Lost Soul, be
not one Article in the Bill of thy Losses; but let thy Losses Excite thee to be
found among them, who Believe unto the Saving of the Soul.

Possidet ille nihil, Christum qui perdidit unum.
Perdidit ille nihil, Christum qui possidet unum.
Quiduam id est, quo si car^as, do^es; si
habeas, angeris; si amittas, Cruciaris?
Aurum et Argentum est.
Heidfield.
THE True Way of Thriving.
Ecclesiastes XI.1, 2. Cast thy Bread upon the Waters; for thou shall find it
after many Days

Give a Portion to Seven, and also to Eight; for thou know not, what Evil
shall be upon the Earth.


BEhold, a Duty of our Christian Conversation, which according to the Divine
Heraldry of the Scripture, has a very High Place in Christianity belonging to
it; a Duty than which there are not many, more Acceptable to God, more
Profitable to Us, more Honorable to our Profession, or more Neglected and
Omitted by multitudes, that will yet wear the Name which was begun (...)
Antioch. And it is Remarkable to se^ what a broad Contradiction is herein given
to the Dictates of that Common and Carnal Reason, which mankind is generally
misguided by The Ordinary Notion of the World is, If I have Bread, my own
Cupboard is the fittest place to keep it in. But the Holy Spirit of God will
teach us otherwise, Cast thy Bread upon the Waters. The Customary Dialect of
the World is, (...) keep what I have, because I know not what Evil I may Live
to see, I may Live to want it all. But we are otherwise Advised by the Holy
Spirit of God; Give a Portion, because thou know not what Evil may be upon
the Earth. It Is the God of Heaven, to whom we are beholden, for our Estates;
our Possessions and Enjoyments, by which we are furnished against the Natural
Inconveniences of Humane Life, are all bestowed upon us, by that God, whose
Providence disposes of all our Affayrs; and as we have it, in Deuteronomy. 8 17, 18.
Thou shall not say in thine Heart, my power has gotten me this Wealth; but thou
shall Remember, the Lord thy God; for it is He that gives thee power to get
Wealth. It Is neither Ski^l nor Chance, that brings our Estates into our Hands;
but it is God, of whom we are told, That He is the Maker both of the Rich and
of the Poor. Nothing in the World can then be more Agreeable, than for us to
Remember this God, in all our Wealth; and to Remember Him with it, is the best
Remembrance of Him in it. The (...) Covenant in which we are to make a
Surrender of our Spirits and our Bodies unto God, must by a parity of Reason
also Devote our Estates unto Him; and All that we Have, as well as All that we
Are, must come under a Dedication to the Lord. Most absurd was the Language of
Nabal the Churl; Shall I take my Bread, and my Water, and my Flesh, and give
it? Thine, O Senseless Man, How came Thou by it? It is God that gives us all
that we have* and by giving it unto us, He has not parted with His own Right in
it all. No, He still is the Lord Proprietor of all; and we own it in that
Covenant wherein we Choose Him for our Lord. It is therefore most highly
Reasonable, That we should be at the Direction of the Eternal God, as to what
we do with our Estates; esteeming our selves but Stewards of those Things,
whereof our Neighbors call us the Owners, and preparing our selves for the
Account which we must give of our Stewardship unto Him that is, The Lord of All
Now the Orders which our Lord has given us, about our Estates, are principally
Two. The First, is in 1 Timothy 5.8 If any provide not for his own, especially
those of his own House, he has Denied the Faith. Our Estates are in the first
place, to Feed and Cloth and Cherish our own Families; and we may even Lay up
for our Children a part thereof, if that may be done without the Defrauding of
such other Objects as God has required us, as long as we Live, to be helpful
unto. But then there is Another part of our Estates, that must be Consecrated
unto more Pious Uses; and about that we have the Command in the Text now before
us.

In the Context, you may read a Wise Monarch Reflecting upon the Vanities and
Miseries which the Dead Flies, (and perhaps the Maggots) of Great Men, do
oftentimes Plunge a Poor People into. It Is often seen, that a Poor People, by
the Influence of Unhappy Statesmen, are brought into inextricable Troubles and
Ruins; and our Text, is a Counsil given to such a People. The Counsel is, That
Men should be Liberal of their Estates, to Pious Uses; especially at such a
Time, as there is like to be* Evil on the Earth, or, when much Confusion is
like to happen in the Land. The Doctrine to which I Demand your Attention, is
only This,

DOCTRINE,

That men ought with a Gracious Liberality to Devote a good Proportion of their
Estates to Pious Uses.

My Text Contains almost all, That need be said for the Explication and the
Confirmation of this Charitable Truth, and I have Three Questions before me, to
Discourse upon: WHAT? and, HOW? and WHY?

The first Question before us, is,

What are those Pious Uses, that a Proportion of our Estates must be Devoted
unto? And under these Four Heads may they be Enumerated, Paying, Lending,
Giving, and Forgiving.

First, then, The Paying of our Duties, to the Public Charges of the Place in
which we Live, is one of those Pious Uses, which our Estates are to be put
unto. Something must be paid by us, for the Support of the Government, and of
the Ministry, which God has blessed us withal; the Public Servants of the
Place, must by our Estates be made Capable to Discharge what. Obligations we
have Laid upon them; and though these be Pious Uses, yet we may not place them
under the Head of Alms-Deeds* they are Debts which Honesty rather than Charity
binds us to the Payment of.

There are Civil Payments, which may be Enumerated under the Pious Uses* of our
Estates. Thus it is said in Romans 13.6. Right. Magi^trates are the Ministers of
God; Rend^r therefore to all their Due, Tri^^te unto whom Tribute is Due. The
Rulers of a Country, must keep up the Administration of Justice, and they ought
also to see that Schoolmasters and Soldiers, and other such Officers, do not
want their Salaries. The Cheerful Payments of the Taxes needful in order
hereunto, are some of the Pious Uses, in which our Estates must be Employed.
There are also Sacred Payments which may be Annumerated unto the Pious Uses of
our Estates. Thus it is said in Gal. 5.6, 7. Let him that is taught in the Word,
Communicate unto him that teaches, in all Good Things; Be not deceived, God is
not mocked. Laborious and Religious Ministers, that spend their Time in Cares
for the Souls of those whom God has made them Over seers unto, must be so
handsomely provided for, that they may become neither Discouraged nor
Contemptible in their Work; to pretend that we Love them and Prize them, and
Get Good by them; and yet think much of their Having All the Good Things that
we can help them to; the Apostle intimates, That this is a Mocking of the
Almighty God Himself; and they that Reproach them as Hirelings for Expecting of
it, are persons that have no more value for the Bible, than for the Alcoran;
and seem to have Read both alike. It was observable, That when God stated the
St^p^^ds of His Ministers, it was at such a rate as this: The Levites were not
a fortieth part of the People, yet had they about thre^ Times the Revenue of
any one among the Twelve Tribes of Israel But, it seems, to many, that in the
New Testament God has Left His Ministers wholly unprovided for! However we are
as Loath to speak as any body else can be to bear of such things. Only it now
Lies in my way to say, The Maintaining of Worthy Preachers, is another of the
Pious Uses appointed for our Estates.

But, Secondly, The Ready Lending of what may Assist those that want Means and
Helps for their Trades, is likewise one of the Pious Uses which our Estates are
to be placed in. It is mentioned as the Property of a Good Man, in Psalm. 37.26.
He is ever merciful and Lends; and in Psalm. 112.5. He shows Favor and
Lends. Indeed, A Lending to Idle Vagrants and (...), or those whom we may
suppose to borrow with the mind of the Wicked man, which the Scripture tells
us, is, Never to Pay again; this is not among the Pious Uses, but the
Indiscreet Abuses of our (...); our Lending should be to such, as are likely
thereby to come into a way of what they may call their own; and in that case we
have that Precept, in Deuteronomy 15.7, 8. Thou shall open thy Hand wide un^o thy poor
Brother; and shall surely Lend him s^fficient for his Need.

And Thirdly, The Giving of what may supply the Necessities, and Relieve the
Calamities of the Indigent, is among the Pious Uses of our Estates. It was the
Speech of the Apostle, in 1 John 3.17. Whos^ has this Worlds Goods, and see his
Brother has Need, and shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from him, how
dwells the Love of God in him? We must Give of our Goods to our Brethren,
when they have a manifest Need thereof.

There is a more Spiritual Beneficence, which our Giving is to be sometimes
unto. Contributions for the Propagation of the Gospel, are most Pious Uses; and
such are Subscriptions toward the Education of Poor, but Good Scholars in the
University, or elsewhere; and the same is to be said concerning the Dispersion
of Bibles, and Catechism^s, and other Devout and Use^ul Books to such as will
else be without them. Who knows, but with a Shilling a man may so Save a Soul
for ever? There is also a more Temporal Beneficence, which our Giving may
sometimes be Exercised in. It Is among Pious Uses, for us to bestow upon the
Distressed, That we may make their Circumstances more easy to them; To Comfort
the Sick, to Nourish Widows and Orphans, to Redeem Captives, and Prisoners, and
make mourning Hearts to Sing.

And unto this File belongs that Hospitality, in which Christians must be
Exemplary. It Is the Apostolical Injunction in Romans 12.13. Be given to
Hospitality; and in Heb. 13.2. Be not Forgetful to Entertain Strangers. We
should be as Ready to Treat a Traveller with what Conveniences we can afford
him, as if, Like Abraham and Lot, we should have unknown Angels to drop into
our Houses.

But, Fourthly, It Is among the Pious Uses of our Estates for us, to Forgive a
Debt, when the Hand of God has made the Borrower unable to Discharge it. This
is that which the Word of God recommends unto us, in Ezekiel. 18.7. and elsewhere,
under that Expression of Restoring the Pledge. To Restore the Pledge, is, To
Remit the Debt. I confess, it is a just Thing, that they who by Bad Courses,
render themselves Insolvent, should undergo whatever Lash the Law will help
their Creditors to inflict upon them; for they are a sort of Cheats and
Thieves, the punishment of whom is a thing very Sovereign and Wholesome for the
whole Body Politic which they belonged unto. But when the pure Frowns of God,
have brought a Debtor Low, it is a commendable thing to say like those
Creditors, in Neh. 5.12. We will Require Nothing of them. And you know where to
find a Terrible Parable delivered by our Lord Jesus, for the pressing of it.
Hence it is the Charge of our Lord, in Luke 6.35. Lend, Hoping for Nothing
again. To take that Simply, were to be Simple indeed; it would be to alter the
very Nature of Lending. But the meaning is, Lend, with a Disposition to call
for Nothing again, in case the Hand of God should Impoverish the Borrower. The
Greek word here signifies, to Despair; when we Lend, we should suppose that the
Debt may become Desperate; and be ready to Release Principal as well as
Interest, if Divine Providence make it so.

Here are Pious Uses for our Estates. Perhaps you may think I have propounded
Enough of them; Wherefore I hasten to the Second Question. Which is,

How are we we to Devote a Proportion of our Estates to such PIOUS USES.

My Text, shall give the whole Answer to this Enquiry.

First, We are to do it Readily. That is implied in the word, Cast. When any
Pious Uses call for our Estates, we must not have them as though they stuck in
our Fingers; No, we are to Cast them out of our Hands, as freely as we do that
which we Throw away.

(...) been, dat multum, qui dat cum munere vultum. This is the Thing Enjoined
in 2 Cor. 9.7. Let a man Give, not Grudgingly, or of Necessity, for God Loves a
Cheerful Giver. We must Resign our Estates, with a most Hearty and Lively Cast,
when we are called thereunto; the Pious Uses must not wrest and wring them, no,
but we our selves must Cast them out of our Hands. This is implied in Deuteronomy.
15.10, 11. Thou shall freely give, thy Heart shall not be grieved, when thou
give; thou shall open thy Hand wide. We are thus to Imitate the Bounty of our
Heavenly Father; and it avails not, as the Apostle says, To bestow all our
Goods to Feed the Poor, if we have not this Charity in our doing of it.

Secondly, We are to do it Helpfully. That which we are to Cast, is, Bread; it
must not be a Scrap, much less must it be a Stone. It is argued, in Mat. 7.9.
Wh^^ man, if his Son ask Bread, will he give him a Stone? Even so, We must
afford nothing less than Bread, unto those whom we are to do Good unto. Indeed,
Goats Hair and Ram Skins, and Looking-Glasses may go to Pious Uses; but it is
only when there are Uses for them. When it is said, in Mat. 6.11. Give us this
Day our Daily Bread; it is but a Translation of Prove. 30.8. Feed me with Food
convenient for me. Thus, we are to afford our Bread; that is, to afford what
may be Convenient for the Designs which our Estates are to be Subservient unto.

Thirdly, We are to do it Righteously. What is to be Cast, must be THE Bread:
it must be Thy own, and not Another man's. For the Almighty says, in Isa. 61.8.
I hate Robbery for Burnt Offering; nor will He allow of it, in any other
Offering. And hence is that word of our Savior, in Luke 11.41. Give Alms of
such Things as ye Have. Otherwise indeed all our Expenses this way, must have
an Ichabod Written on them; Where is their Glory? We must be Lawful
Proprietors of those things which we go to Serve Pious Uses with. And hence the
Jews call their Alms box, A Chest of Justice. We may not Filch and Steal for
this End; I have Read of Pious Frauds indeed, but no where, of Pious Robberies.
Hence also, They that are under Authority, as Children and Servants, may not
give away what belongs to their Parents and Masters, without their Approbation;
and whatever the Wife may do this way Without the Consent of her Husband, she
should beware of going directly Against i^, in such things as these. Hence
likewise, They that are joined in Partnership may not this Way diminish a
Common Stock, without the Concurrence of their Partners; and they that already
Owe more than they are Worth, have not so much to do this way as others have.
And Lastly, it is not for (...) to Raise an Estate by Unjust (...), and think to
make up All by giving Part unto the Poor; for it is a certain Rule, Bonus usus
non Justificat injuste Quaesita.

Fourthly, We are to do it Sincerely. Our Bread is to be Cast upon the
WATERS; and there are two Notes of Sincerity couched in that Clause. Our
Estates must be Cast upon the Water^; that is, without Hope of Return. By
Watery places here, some understand Watery Faces; that is, those whose Cheeks
are by Affliction filled with Tears; and indeed a special Regard is to be had
unto such in the Pious Uses of our Estates. But the meaning rather is this;
What is Cast upon the Waters, will either Sink away, or Swim away; it is a
Proverb for a thing that we never Look to see again, It is Projectum in Mare.
Thus, when we are bountiful with our Estates, it should be without any proposal
of Requital, from those whom we do Good unto; they should not be Cast upon
Tiding Waters, ^ut upon Current Waters; and we must not Imagine with our
selves, I shall (...) have as Good (...) Turn done to me, (...) the man, whom I
am now kind unto. (...) are to single out such Objects therefore, as our Lord
points at, in Luke 14.^^. Thou shall be Blessed, for they cannot ^^compence
thee. Again, Our Estates must be Cast upon the Waters* that is, without Aim at
Honor. That which is Cast upon the Waters, does not stay to be seen of men. If
we Do what good we do, to be Seen of men, as the Pharisees did of old, we Cast
it not upon the Waters, but we Nail it, or Paste it, upon Pillars. We must put
into Waters, not into Trumpets, the Pious Uses of our Estates. Indeed, our
being Seen of men therein, should not always hinder us from doing what is to be
Done. The Bounty whsch our God will not accept, is not that, Quae fit et
videtur, but that, Quae fit ut videatur. And it is a Caution, in Mat. 6.3. Let
not thy Right Hand know, what thy Left Hand does; that is, as much as may be,
Conceal thy Alms, not only from them that are most Related to thee at all; but
even from those that are most Assistent to thee in the Scattering of them.

Fifthly, We are to do it Frequently. We must give to Seven and also to Eight;
that is, to as many as we can; we may not Look upon Two or Three as ^now to
Receive what we have to Give. Hence it is assigned as one Quality of a Virtuous
man, in Psalm. 112.9. He has Dispersed, he has Given to the Poor. We should
therefore slip no Season, of doing what is to be done for Pious Uses. It Is the
Speech of the Apostle, in Gal. 6.10. As we have Opportunity, Let us Do Good;
but when have we an Opportunity?

Truly, We have an Opportunity, whenever we see an Indigency, that we are in a
Capacity to do something for. Whom soever we see Lying under any Wounds, we
must like the Compassionate Samaritan, Dispense our Oil and our Wine unto. Say
not, I have done Good unto Seven Miserable People already; No, think not that
Number perfect, but let there be Eight Instances of your Bounty, if you can
make so many. But there are some Seasons for this which have a more certain
Revolution with us; and though there should be Seven or Eight, yet we should
never count that we see too many, of them. As now, Does God make any Addition
to our Estates at any Time? Has any Adventure, or any Husbandry of ours been
smill'd upon? or has any Legacy been bequeathed unto us? Now is a Season for us
to Let Pious Uses have something of our Increase. Have we Got Wealth? Says
Moses now in Deuteronomy. 8.18. Now Remember the Lord thy God. Have we Gained a
Seventh, or an Eighth more than we had? Let Seven then, yea, let Eight be the
better for it. Again, Every Lords Day is a Season for this Bounty of ours. Thus
we find the Apostle saying, in 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Concerning the Contribution,
Upon the First Day of the Week, Let EVERY ONE OF YOU, Lay by him in store, as
God has prospered him. But then, I know a Place in the World, where many
Hundreds do very little consult their own Prosperity! Moreover, A Day of
Humiliation is another fit Season for it. Hence is that of the Prophet, in Isa.
58.6, 7. Is not this the Fast that I have Chosen? To Deal thy Bread unto the
Hungry? Their Feeding upon our Kindness, is one of the best Articles in our
Fasting before the Lord. When we Fast out of Piety, we must see that others do
not Fast out of Poverty. Once more, A Day of Thanksgiving is another fit Season
for it. On such a Day, it was Commanded, in Neh. 6.10. Go your way, Eat the
Fat, and Drink the Sweet, and Send Portions unto them, for whom Nothing is
prepared. When we are Praising of our God, we should then be Blessing of our
Neighbors; and we should Engage them to Rejoice with us in the Goodness of the
Lord; ^t is, A Day of Sending Portions one to another, and Gifts to the Poor.
Though these Occasions come oftener than Seven or Eight times in a year, yet let
our Portions be given on them all.

Sixthly, We are to do it Prudently. You may place a large Remark upon the
diverse C^^uses here. First, We must not Give All away. It Is a Part that we are
to part withal. Something must be kept for our selves; and as we say, Charity
must begin at Home. Again, We must not Give All to Some, and none to Others.
When we have been helpful to Seven, we must also see to it, that Eight, may
have a Room in our Helpfulness unto them. Furthermore; It Is not a Pittance, but
a Portion that we are to Give. It must be something that may be a Portion, or a
Ben^fit unto him, whom it is (...). This is that which the Psalmist would have
to be minded, in Psalm. 112.5. A Good man shows Favor, and Lends; ^e will
Guide his Affayrs with Discretion. And there is especially a double Discretion
with which the Pious Uses of our Estates are to be adjusted.

First, We are to Give Speedily; and avoid all Needless Delays in the Doing of
it. Sais the Wise man, in Prove. 3.27. Say not unto thy Neighbor, Go, and Come
Again, and To morrow I will give thee, When thou have it by thee. We know, Bis
dat qui c^o dat; but our Deferring Looks too like a Denying of our Bounty. It
is particularly, an Unwise Thing, for a man to put off what Good he may Do,
till he shall himself be Dead and Gone. One says well, That oftentimes they
that By their Last Will Bequeath something to the ^oor, do it Against their
Will; they that in their Lives did no Good, may then do it, because they cannot
any longer Keep what they Had. Wherea^, It would be a noble Discretion in us,
for us to be our own Administrat^^^; making our own Hands; our Executors, and
our own Eyes, our Overseers. It Is done To the Life, when it is done (...).

And then, Secondly, We are to Give Suitably. And this not only for the Measure
in which, but also for the Subject to which, we Give. One says very truly,
Turpissimum Genus perdendi est Inconsulta Donatio. And our Savior informs us,
about our Giving, in Luke 18.12. It must be, with a Distribution. We must give
in the first place to our Needy Kindred: and as for others, we must have
Respect first unto the Household of Faith, though we must also Do good unto All.
As for your Common Beggars, it is usually an Injury and a Dishonor unto the
Country, for them to be Countenanced; as for those that Indulge themselves in
Idleness, the Express Command of God unto us, is, That we should Let them
Starve; and as for those that when they Get, will melt and wast our Money in
Drunkenness, it is a Sin to supply those Monsters with what may be Fuel for such
a Beastly Vice. Let never any thing but a Naught, stand for them, in the Books
of Accounts.

It Is after this manner that we are to Do Good with our Estates. But this
brings us to the Third Question; Which is,

Why are we thus to Devote a Proportion of our Estates to PIOUS USES.

My Text will give you a double Reason for it.

The First Reason is, Thou shall find it after many days. There will a
Glorious, yea, an Eternal Recompense be made unto us, for all our Liberality.
Some think, that here is an Allusion to Ventures at Sea; Our Liberality sends
Ventures forth, upon the Waters, and there are very Great and Rich Returns made
thereof. But Let us a Little descant upon this Recompense.

The words may be Rendered, Thou shall find it in Multitude of Days. This is
indeed one Recompense of Liberality; there is a Multitude of Days, or a Long
Life, which the God of Heaven often favors a Liberal man withal. It was a
Speech once used unto a cruel Churl, in Dan. 4.27. Show mercy to the Poor, and
it may be a Lengthening out of thy Tranquillity. Behold, a Receipt, pro
prolonganda vita; Let us be Liberal, as our Father Abraham was; and that is the
way for us, Like Abraham to Live, till a Good Old Age, till we are Old men, and
full of years. It has been often observed, that very Liberal men, use to be
Long Lived men. It Is the full and firm word of our God, in Psalm. 41.1, 2.
Blessed is he that Considers the Poor; the Lord will preserve him, and keep him
alive. Thus we shall find our Bread after many Days; we shall have many Days;
this Bread will keep us Alive, till many Days have passed over us. But I
dismiss that Sense of the words; and only Lay down this Conclusion.

That Liberality is wonderfully Advantageous to them that use it, and this, for
a Long while afterward.

Our Lord assures us, in Mat. 10.42. Whosoever gives but a Cup of Water, shall
(...) no wise Loose his Reward; and yet that is the least piece of Liberality,
that can be thought of. We have the word of Him that cannot Ly, to assure us,
that we shall not be Loosers by our Liberality; that our Estates thus Laid out,
Non pereunt sed parturiunt; that though our Bread be Cast on, yet it shall not be
Lost in, the Waters. I will not here dispute about the Lawfulness of Usury;
but I will tell you of an Usury that I am sure is Lawful; and yet it is an
Usury so far exceeding that of Six in the Hundred, as that it is an Hundred for
Six, yea, it is far more than an Hundred for One. Let a man be Liberal upon
Pious Uses, and upon the word of a God, Let him know, that as in Mark 10.30. He
shall Receive an Hundred fold now in this Time; and in the World to come,
Eternal Life. He^^^, there are two Metaphors, with which our Good God
Condescends to give us this Assurance. One Metaphor is that of, Sowing. Thus
it is said, in 2 Cor. 9.6. He that Sows bountifully shall Reap bountifully.
Let a man be Liberal with what he has, and he shall be sure of a Good Crop; the
Bread Cast on the Waters, will prove but a Seed cast into an Earth more fertile
than that of which we read that Isaac, did Receive an hundred fold. Another
Metaphor is that of Lending. Thus it is said, in Prove. 19.17 He that has pity
on the Poor, Lends to the Lord; and then we may take for granted what
follows, That which he has given, will He pay him again. Let a man be Liberal,
and he shall have the Counterbond of the most High ^o save him harmless. As for
the Bread Cast into the Waters, our God under His own Hand acknowledges the
Receipt of it, and stoops to Charge himself a Debtor on the Score.

First then, There is a Recompense in This Life, which the Liberal man, is made
partaker of. And this every way; for, to be particular; Even his Inward man,
shall have the Comfort of his Liberality. Thus it is said in Prove. 11.25. The
Liberal Soul shall be made Fat. God will give a Thriving, Flourishing,
Comfortable Soul unto him; and fill him with the Peace, which passes
Understanding. His Liberality shall also pr^cure good Circumstances to his
Outward man. Not only will that word be fulfilled unto him, He that gives to
the Poor shall not Lack; but also, God will bless him with an Increase of his
Enjoyments. Thus it is said in Prove. 3.9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy
Substance; and so shall thy Barns be filled with plenty I could mind you of
poor little Tradesmen that have come to Live upon their Rents, by the secret
Blessing of God upon their Callings, when they have Conscientiously Laid aside
a certain part of their Income, for the Lord. And God will bless him with a
Success of his Businesses. Thus it is said in Deuteronomy. 15.10 Thou shall surely give
to the Poor, because that for this Thing, the Lord thy God will bless thee in
all thy Works. I have known a Ship-master, who upon going to Sea, would still
carry a considerable Purse of Money unto a Faithful Minister, to be by him Laid
out for God; and a strange Blessing did Accompany him! Yea, The Children of
such a man, do rejoice in the Fruits of his Liberality. Many Gripple Holdfasts
in the World, object against Liberality, That they must Lay up for their
Children. But say I, Lay out, and that is the way to Lay up. Let your Bread be
Cast on the Waters, and it will be safely Reposited in Gods Bags for your
Children after you: Do you give a Portion to Seven, and also to Eight, and then
though you have Seven or Eight Children, you have made sure of a Portion for
every one of them. Your Widows, will have Meal and Oil very like to he^s of
old. Be like Jonathan, and your poor Mephibosheths will have the Harvest of it.
You shall see, I speak nothing without Book, and therefore you shall have a
Scripture for this too; it is that in Psalm. 37.26. The man that is ever
merciful, and Lends, his Seed is Blessed after him. But

Secondly, There is also a Recompense in the Life to Come, which the Liberal
man is made partaker of. It Is testified unto us, in 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. That they
who be Ready to Distribute, Willing to Communicate, therein, Lay up in store
for themselves a Good Foundation against the Time to Come, and Lay hold on
Eternal Life. As for all the Riches that we keep with our selves, they have no
Foundation for them; any Little Storm will carry them away. But the Treasures
which a true Liberality shall put out of our Hands, have such a Foundation,
that we may thereupon Build our Hopes of Life Eternal; Not that any Good Works
of ours do Merit Life Eternal, but they are a Blessed Evidence and Argument of
our Claim unto it; so that a Liberal Man, when he comes to Die, may say, Lord,
Thou know that my Heart was never Set upon this World; and I take that for a
sign, that thou have another and a better World for me to be happy in for ever.
Our Lord says about the Liberal man, in Luke 16.9. When he fails, they w^ll
Receive him into Everlasting Habitations. All the Riches in the World will not
keep us from Failing and Breaking at the last. But then, the Saints whom we
have Succored, and the Angels whom we have Imitated here, will bid us Welcome
to an House Eternal in the Heavens. Our Lord also says unto the Liberal man, in
Luke 14.14. Thou shall be Recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just. It is
impossible to tell, what Satisfactions, the New Jerusalem will bring to such a
man, at the Resurrection of the Just. But indeed, after the Stupendous
Transactions of the GREAT DAY, throughout the Days of Eternity still all our
present Acts of Liberality, will be Lying by us, like so many Good Bills of
Exchange, which our merciful God, for the sake of Christ Jesus, will be for
ever Owning and Paying of. Then shall a Liberal Onesiphorus be sufficiently
Retaliated by the Lord. This, This will be after many Days indeed! yea, after
more than many millions of Ages, we shall make a greater Gain of the Poor, than
Joseph did of a Famine in the Days of old. How runs the Final Sen^ence of the
Righteous, but so? Come, ye Blessed, Inherit the Kingdom; ^nasmuch as you were
Liberal to my Afflicted Members in the former World. (Mark) He says not, For
you have bin Orthodox in your Opinions, or, You have been Eminent in your
Professions, or, You have been Abundant in your Devotions; No, But you have
been Liberal to the Miserable. But then,

The Second Reason is, Thou know not what Evil shall (...) upon the Earth.
It Is a Troublesome World, and that should persuade us to a Liberal Heart. We
may be called to Wade through a Sea of Troubles, but if our Bread be Cast into
the Waters, that will make them Easy to us. Would we be Delivered in Six
Troubles, as Eliphaz Expresses it, and in Seven would we have no Evil Touch us*
Then Let us give a Portion to Seven, and also to Eight.

But Let us a little penetrate into the Force of this persuasive.

First then, Since, Thou know not what Evil shall be upon the Earth, hence
thou know not how long thou shall Enjoy thine Estate, and it is Wisdom to
Husband it well, before it be Too Late. There may quickly come such Evil upon
us, that either our Estates may be taken from us, or we from our Estates. Let
us therefore be Liberal, in doing what Good we can, whilst as it is said in
Prove. 3.27. Thou have it by thee. Since the Times are like to be Dangerous,
it is best for us, to put as much of our Estates into those Hands, where no
Violence can spoil us of them; now such are the Hands of God, and of His
People; Manus pauperum est Christi Gazophylacium.

Secondly, Since, Thou know not what Evil shall be upon the Earth, it were
well for thee to do what may Compose and Settle thy Heart in the anxious
prospect of all that Evil. Now this will be done by being truly Liberal of
those Estates, which are the things that so much make us afraid of Evil Times.
Look into Psalm. 112.7, 9. where it is said, He shall not be Afraid of Evil
Tidings; Why not? It is added, He has dispersed, he has given to the Poor.
You see the Liberal man, has a Cordial against the Fears of Evil Days. For,
The Great God has promised, either to Preserve him from that Evil that shall be
upon the Earth; as in Psalm. 41.1. Blessed is he that Considers the Poor, the
Lord will deliver him in Time of Trouble: Or else, to Supp^rt him in that Evil;
as in Isa. 58.10. Draw out thy Soul to the Hungry, then shall thy Light Rise in
Obscurity. In short, since thou know not what Evil shall be upon the Earth,
hence thou know not but thou thy self must come into such a Condition as may
want the Liberality of other men; What is Their Case to day, may be Thine to
morrow. If thou would then fall among Liberal Persons, be Now such an one
thy self. It Is the promise, in Mat. 5.7. The Merciful shall obtain Mercy.

All this Practical Discourse has been Milk'd, and not Squeezed out of the Text
before us. Little can remain to be said in the

APPLICATION.

They that Fear God will find themselves moved by these things, to a most
Exemplary Liberality, in Devoting a fit proportion of their Estates to Pious
Uses. I do not now take upon me, to determine the Quota pars, or what
Proportion of our Estates ought thus to be improved. Only, I will tell you,
what our Father Jacob counted a due Propo^^^^^; we read in Genesis 28.20. He Vowed
a Vow unto God, saying, of All that thou shall give me, I will surely give the
Tenth unto thee. And if Abraham judged a Tenth due unto Melchisedeck, why
should we judge any less to be the Dues of his Antitype, our Blessed Savior? I
think a Tenth too Little for some men, at some Times; however, if they that are
never so Poor, would make a Trial for so much, I am confident, they would never
have any Temptation to Leave it off. Shall I tell you? I have known those, who
in their Childhood, while they were not yet Owners of near Ten Shillings, have
begun the Trial of it, and God has so Smiled upon them ever since, that they
never had any Temptation or Occasion to do otherwise. But that which is rather
to be pressed is, That we mind the Call and Voice of Providence in this matter;
and then let a Self-denying, and a Well-mortifyed Heart be our Director in it.
Let us not be unmindful, That the Honor of our Profession much depends upon
our Liberality for Pious Uses. It may shame us to see, that these who are under
the Influence of none but a False Religion, can have it said of them, in Isa.
46.6. They Lavish Gold out of the Bag. And what? Shall we be p^^^imonious, that
have Christianity to Raise our Inclinations unto all that is Ho^y, and Just and
Good! I was indeed very glad, when I read in Dr. Willet, That since the
Reformation, in one threescore years there was in only Three Cities of England,
no less than a million of Money openly and visibly Expended in Pious Uses,
besides what was done more secretly among them. So far has the Liberality of
Popery been Exceeded by the Protestants. But we that pretend to be the best
Metal'd, and most Refined Protestants, ought certainly to Exceed all others, in
the Sacrifices which God is well pleased with. To have done.

First, I have only this one Counsil to Subjoyn unto all the Premises; It Is
this,

Let us not imagine that the Pious Uses of our Estates, Deserve any Good at the
Hands of the Holy God; but Let us Depend upon the Lord Jesus Christ alone for
Our and Their Acceptance with Him. When some told the Dying Herbert of his many
Good Works, he replied, Yea, These are Good Works, if Sprinkled with the Blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ. When we have done our best, Let us be sensible of
that in Luke 17.10. We are Unprofitable Servants. One of the most Liberal men
that ever was in the World, would say, I have often Turned over my Accounts,
but I could never find the Great God Charged a Debtor there. So Let us think,
and place the whole Repose and Solace of our Souls, in the Merits of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

But is there not Secondly, sad cause of Reproof to too too many in the midst
of us?

Many there are, That squander away a vast deal of their Estates, in Profane,
Wicked, VVretched Uses; and in the pleasing of some Lust or other; but as to
Pious Uses they do Little or Nothing at all; No, they make an hideous grumbling
at all that should go that way, and feel as much Heart blood as Money, going
from them. Yea, I have heard this Assertion Demonstrated, That what is
needlessly Expended at the Taverns, in many Towns, would abundantly Defray all
the Public Charges of Church and School, and Commonwealth too, which the
Towns would be happier, if they were honester, in the payment of. Here, surely
are persons that Forget that Proverb, in Prove. 11.24. He that witholdeth more
than is meet, comes to Poverty And they Despise that Threatening, in Jam 2.13.
He shall have Judgment without Mercy, that showed no Mercy. How Unlike are
these to the VVidow, whose Two Mites, went into the Holy Treasury? Or to the
Martyrs, VViseheart and Rogers, who would forbear One Meal in Three, for the
Relieving of such as wanted Food? Or to that Noble and Worthy English General,
of whom it is noted, He never thought he had any thing, but what he Gave away.

But I break off. I pray God, that none of you, who are called, Christians,
being thus Ad^^re^^ed may imitate those Hearers of the Lord Jesus Christ; of
whom it is reported, in Luke 16.14. They who were Coveteous, heard all these
Things, and they Derided Him!

FINIS.
Haud di bie in Caelum substantia pervenit illa.
Quae Christo collata datur, sub paupere forma.
Quae Damnis Augmenta capit, quae Spargitur, ut sit;
Quae perit ut maneat, quae vitam mortua praestat.
Sedullus. Nunquam deficiunt Charites, cum dantur habentur^
Cumque absumuntur, multiplicantur Opes.
Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, and will speedily be Published, A new Book,
Entitled, Help for Distressed Parents. Or, Counsels and Comforts for Godly
Parents Afflicted with Ungodly Children: And Warnings unto Children, to beware
of all those Evil Courses, which would be Afflictive unto their Parents. By Mr.
Cotton Mather. Sold by Vavasour Harris, at the Sign of the Pi^^, over against
the Bl^w Anchor, in Boston. 1695.


