The Second SPIRA: Being a fearful Example of An Atheist, Who had Apostatized
from the Christian Religion, and died in Despair at Westminster, December. 8.
1692. With an Account of his Sickness, Convictions, Discourses with Friends,
and Ministers; and of his dreadful Expressions and Blasphemies when he left the
World. As also a Letter from an Atheist of his Acquaintance, with his Answer to
it.

Published for an Example to others, and recommeded to all Young Persons, to
settle them in their Religion.

By J. S. a Minister of the Church of England, a frequent Visitor of him during
his whole Sickness.

The Sixth Edition, with the Methodizer's Apology, wherein is now discovered to
the World the Substance of every Particular that he knows of in relation to
this Narrative.

Boston, Printed by B Green, for S. Phillips at the Exchange. 1693.

The Preface.
BBing often Importuned by several of my nearer Acquaintance, to Publish the
following Relation, as an account that might be very useful to the Public,
particularly against Profaneness and Atheism; and finding my Business at
present very urgent upon ^e, I have at last yielded to give the Papers and
Notes which I took ^uring the whole Visitation, to a Friend of mine, to put 'em
in some kind of Method and Order for the Press: And having examined the Piece,
how it is perfected, with the Original Notes and Papers which I drew my self, I
find the Substance and material Part very faithfully done.

It cannot be expected by the Reader that the Style and Words are ^erbatine the
same as delivered, especially the two Letters, which are in the following
Tract, but as far as I remember, and as my Notes will assist me, (in taking of
which I used all the Sincerity and Care I could) I dare affirm that there is
nothing material left out, nor is there any interpolations which are not
genuine, I mean such as do not add to the Sense, but only expatiate, in order
to give a plainer ^^tion and Idea of the Matter: (...) to what that Miserable
Gentleman delivered himself (who is the Subject of this Relation) both I and
the METHODIZER of my Notes have been superstitiously Critical to give them as
near the Truth, and very Expressions, as we could, believing the Reader would
not be displeased to have as Nice and Exact Account of that Part of the
Treatise as possibly could be met with. And though this unhappy Gentleman's
Name is omitted for weighty Reasons, mentioned in the following Pages: Yet if
any one doubts the Truth of any Particulars in the following Relation, if they
repair to Mr. Dunton at the Raven in the Poultry, they will receive full
Satisfaction.

There Is another thing which the Reader will not be sorry to find, which is;
That whereas in dreadful surprising Relations, the Bookseller, Aubour, or both
together, do usually ^og the Matter of Fact with long and tedious Observations,
impertinent Reflections and such like Stuff, only to make the Volume swell;
here he will find no needless or ^^^ing Digressions, but un^i^t Relation,
barely and purely delivered, so that the Reader all the while he reads, will be
upon his Subject, and not perplexed with an Expectation of it.

I Have no more to add but this, That I Am willing to hope and believe this
Treatise may be a means to sta^^tle some that are Atheistically Inclin^d; and
perhaps reclaim others, who (...) seeing this, may conclude it their (...)
^erest, Rather to be a thoughts (...) of such an History, than to be such an
History themselves. And as for other Young People, whose Converse in the World
has not yet given them the unhappy Acquaintance of our Modern Atheists or their
Principles; this may be a Spur to their Diligence, and a Warning to keep them
from the dreadful Sin of APOSTATISEING.

J. S.

The Methodizer's Apology.
I Am sensible enough that this Age has a deal of Curiousity and little Charity
in it, not but that every one, who by Imprudence, Accident, or otherwise, gives
any just Occasion for others to be Uncharitable, is obliged in Justice to
remove it, or be content to bear it.

I shall therefore, so far as I am concerned, give that Account to the world
which I have done to several Eminent Divines and Gentlemen, who have been with
me for satisfaction in this Affair, viz.

The Divine, whom I believe to be a Person of Integrity, and from whom I
received the Minutes, (which I have thus Methodiz'd) having mentioned 'em to
me, I became Importunate for their Publication, which he declined several
times, urging his Dependence upon the Family, and the ill Consequence it might
have, in respect of his Fortunes, perhaps of his Life. At last he consented,
upon my solemn Promise not to discover him, and upon assuring him, that only
the two first Letters of his Name should be Printed; all this time retaining
from me a knowledge of the Family. So soon as I had put the Original Papers in
that little Order the World now finds them, he desired he might have all back,
to compare the finished piece with the Original Notes* which he did, and wrote
the Preface, acquitting me of any Additions, Interpolations, etc. With this
Preface, amongst other things, he sent me a Letter (which afterward he told
(...) designed to send by it self, and therefore it was sealed up) The Letter
is as follows:

SIR,
I Had Yours with the Manuscript, and having compared it with the Memcirs I
took, I think you have done Me, and the Case of that miserable Man, a rigid
Justice.

As to the Preface you mention (...) Yours, if the following will be any
Service to you, you are free to it. Let only the two first Letters of my Name
be Printed at the latter end of the Preface. In the Title Page you may also
say, By. J. S. a Minister of the Church of England, a frequent Visitor during
the whole Sickness, or something like it. I Am going down into Essex, and as
soon as I return, I Will see your Bookseller, of whom I expect to receive half a
dozen Books.

December. 26. 1692. Your real Friend and Servant, J. S.


The Book being Printed, several Divines and others, who were very willing to
have a good Attestation, came (...) enquire of the Bookseller, and of me about
it, and (...) very desirous be World (...) satisfied in it, (...) the Relation
(...) to make such an unexpected (...) A^^^bour, (...) his return out of Essex,
with (...) Importunities of Publishing all he knew (...) the whole Matter, with
the Circumstances of Person and Place, pressing the Concern of Religion, my own
Reputation, and the Bookseller's, (who (...) hereby sufficiently acquitted from
any unfair dealing in the Case) to which (as near as I can remember, and as I
have ^old some in Town, whose Friendship I most value) he answered, That he was
^oldly received at his return, and loaded with the Epithers of Ungrateful
Promise breaker, etc, For he had promised them not to make the Concern public,
which indeed he has not in the most material Points) Besides, he tells me of
some private Threats that he has heard, in case he betrays the Family to the
Public ^gnomy of such a Relation; and he says he is sufficiently assured those
Divines and Doctors he saw with the sick Person have been dealt with
underhand, or else the Business must certainly have come to light before now.
I told him, that I believed his dependence on the Family, was not absolutely
necessary, since I doubted not (for I have heard it promised) but that he would
meet with a Patron, in case he should be expelled He answered to this, That if
all other Testimonies were taken off but this, he might reasonably fear, being
unjustly degraded, or Eternal Imprisonment, and such an Action of Scandal, that
would ruin (or at least inconvenience) several Patrons with him: I told him,
That several things looked suspiciously in it, as that it should come out by
none of all those that were present, besides him. To which he answered as
before, That he was confident they were all adjur'd silence, by Promises,
Threats, or some other Methods suitable to their Qualities. I told him, That
many suspect, that Mr. F. N. was the Person: He protested he was not. Here were
other things of this nature that past betwixt us, in all which I discovered him
mighty uneasy and apprehensive of further Mischief, continually ^newing his
Injunction and my Promise of not revealing any thing, of by any fortuitous or
unguarded Expression, I had discovered the Family.

As for my particular, I know well enough, that my own Integrity and Reputation
is the Hing upon which the Re^^tion chiefly moves, and I am very willing that
any Divine, Gentleman, or other Person whatever should have the Liberty of
Examining who and what I am, of all my acquaintance and if I appear hitherto
unspotted and free, and not stained with (...) little and dishonorable
Actions, I (...) shall have that common Charity (...) Affair which every one
would be unwilling to be denied, were he in my circumstances. The Bookseller
will give any one an account of my lodgings, where they may have means or
further satisfaction upon this last Head to that I think there is no necessity
of subscribing my Name to this Apology.

This is the fulest Account the World is to expect from what I at present know
in this Affair, and if I receive any further light into it hereafter, I shall
soon make it public, for my own credit, and the satisfaction of others.

THe Methodizer of this History being a Person of great Ingenuity, the Reader
has no reason to question the truth of this Printed Attestation he has here
given concerning it; and what commendation I shall give of it will be
serviceable no longer than till thou have perused it through; The wilt find
such Wine in it as needs no Bus^ This only I shall say, it well deserve thy
serious and frequent Perusal and I heartily wish those pious Gentlemen that
have Estates would be instrumental in dispersing of it through out the whole
Kingdom that so all ran^ of Men especially the Youth of the Nation, might reap
some advantage by this extraordinary (...) amazing Instance. This is (...)
Sentiment and hearty Desire of the (...) Friend in the Lord, (...), M. ^

February the 1st. 1692, 3.
A Gentlewoman came into Mr. Dunton's Shop, between three and our a Clock, and
said, she kn^w the Second Spira, and was acquainted with the Family to which he
belonged.

Witness my hand, Joseph Pools.

February the 1 st.s 1692, 3.
A Gentlewoman came into Mr. Dunton's Shop, in Company with another Person, and
said, She know the Second Spira, and was acquainted with the Family; and when
he importuned (...) her to (...) him who the Person (...) Person or Family, but
that the Truth (...) it would be acknowledged in a little time.

Witness my hand, Ananias Hodge^

These two Persons live in Cruched (...) Friars near the Pump.

LEtters which I have received from ^^ndon, written by no Considerable Persons,
have satisfied me that the ensuing Narrative is not (as some have supposed) a
mere Romance. That God has sometimes made Professed Atheists monuments of His
Wrath, the Examples of Dia^eras, Pherecides and others (though strangers to the
true Religion) have made it so manifest, as that men who had nothing more than
the ^ight of nature to inform them, could not but observe it, and be affected
with it. That any such should be found amongst men who have lived under the
Gospel, is prodigious.

In former times not above an Atheist or two was heard of in an Age. Inasmuch
as in this Age wherein we live, there are horrid Numbers of them forming
themselves into Societies, we may with dread expect that it is a terrible thing
which the LORD will do, to Vindicate His own Name and Glory. His making one to
become a Spectacle of Divine Indignation and Vengeance before the whole World,
(...) a Warning to an Atheistical Generation Nor ought such a Tremendous
providence to be kept in obscurity. From all which Considerations, could not
but Encourage the Book seller, who came to me for an Imprimatur, to go on with
hi^ design of Re-Printing what is he (...) with emitted.

Increase Mather
Boston N. E. August. 12 th. 1693.
The second SPIRA.
THat Examples prevail above Precepts can be no Surprise to any one that
considers the rarity of them, or that most of the Senses being at once employed
they should make so strong an Impression upon the Brain, and so upon the
Understanding, according to the manner of Humane Perception*

The present Instance, whose Relation. I have undertaken, having made so deep
an Impression upon my own Mind, I could not think, but that if all Men
participate of the same Nature as I do, but that they must be equally affected
with it, some Allowance being made for this, That what I my self saw and heard
actually, I communicate by way of Relation to others.

I am obliged, out of Tenderness and Reputation, to conceal the Name of the
Family of this Gentleman, who is the Subject of the following Discourse, and
could heartily wish that my concealing it would make so many as do know it, to
forget every thing but the Example it self, that being only useful, the rest
Ignominious: But I am afraid my Wishes will prove successless, there being four
more Divines, besides my self, who were very frequently there, at the beginning
of his Sickness, besides several Gentlemen and others, whose Acquaintance, or
Design of doing Good might lead them thither.

This unhappy Gentleman, who made so direful an Exit the eighth of this instant
December, had in his youth Time the Advantage of a Religions and Virtuous
Education; in which it was observable, That he made a more considerable
Progress than was usual for such Years, being very warm and active ^n all
Religious Exercises: Besides, he was a great proficient in Learning, being sent
up to the University from the School where he was educated, very perfect in his
Latin and Greek Tongues at sixteen Years of Age, where he continued five Years:
His Behavior and Deportment being such that all his Friends and Acquaintance
looked upon him as an uncommon Blessing, an Ornament to his Family. At the Age
of twenty one he came up to Town, and entered himself into the Inns of Court,
designing to study the Law; his Friends and he concluding it necessary, That
those that have Estates should have at least so much insight in the Law as to
know how to preserve them.

Oh that I could proceed with my Character, or at least abruptly break off, and
fay, Here he dyed, ignorant of the Town and it is Vices! But alas, the scene is
changed, and here we bring another Person upon the Stage, laughed and ridiculed
out of his Innocence and Virtue, by new Acquaintance, and for a long Time
together playing the Hypocrite, a^^^ming unto himself a degree of that
Profaneness and Impiety he was innocent of, appearing more vile and base than
he could suddenly bring himself to be, only to secure ^is Reputation with his
Companions, and avoid the uneasiness of being a Common Jest. But this was not
the only nor chief Method whereby he was brought to his Apostasy, for he had
too much Judgment, and too well grounded to be shocked and altered with a bar^
Laughter, or a ridiculous Grin. He would ofter say, Gentlemen, those that
pretend to Reason cannot be so bewitched with the Charms of Mirth as to think
Laughing a good Argument to confute whatever may b^ said; if Religion be so
unreasonable a thing as you would persuade me, by laughing at it, why don't ye give
me some fair Reasons against it Hereupon some of the oldest standing would
suggest, That Mahomet has more Votaries than Christ: That that Religion is not
without its Martyrs and Confessors; That the wild Indians dare bravely dye for
their Religion: That there is no Nation, be it never so ^a^barous, that gives us
not some fine Examples of Doing and Suffering; that therefore its not the
Excellency of any one Religion, but the Prejudices of all, that produces these
Effects: That it is the Habit and* Custom of Education that creates the
formidable Notions of Conscience, Heaven, Hell, Futurity and the Immortality of
the Soul, all which are but the politic Inventions of Priests and cunning
Magistrates, to enrich themselves and keep the Vulgar in Awe, who are naturally
Superstitious and Fearful; With a deal more to the same purpose. Such Harangues
as these did by little and little poison the Principles of this poor Gentleman,
and mould him into the same Heaven with themselves, not only into the same
Judgment, but liberty of all Prof^neness, Debauchery and Injustice, as far as
he could act without the Cognizance of the Law. It will not be amiss to add, That
this Gentleman was one of that CLUB which within these last seven Years met
together constantly To lay down such Rules and Methods (...) that they might be
critically wicked in every thing that they could, without the Laws taking hold
of them; and therefore the Laws it self was more particularly examined, What
Fallacies might be put upon it; Where and in what Cases it did not provide
against unheard of Villainies; What Subterfuges and Evasions there might (...)
in its Exposition; with many more (...) horrid Instances, which were all (...)
as very useful Discoveries for the new Candidates of improved Impiety.

But to proceed, This Gentleman Sense and Education had furnished him with too
much Prudence to lay open himself to every Body; he commonly kept a very fair
Correspondence with his Friends, and in all strange Places (...) very sober and
reserved, Prudence obliging him not to discover all he believed, to every Body.
Thus he lived several Years, being as secretly Wicked (...) all Temptations,
and the Advantages of a good Estate, would suffer him: But as the wicked do not
live out half their days by reason of their Intemperance and Debaucheries, so
this Gentleman hastened his dismal Period by the like Courses, falling
desperately (...) on the thirtieth of November last, continuing so till the
eighth of this instant December, as we said above.

As soon as he found himself precipitated by his ill Courses into such a
dangerous Sickness, he began to be extremely startled and amazed at the
Apprehensions of Death (for he believed (...) dye) and in spite of all he could
do, he could not forbear reflecting upon another Life; and notwithstanding all
his Fortifications to the contrary, he could not confute nor (...) himself of
the Expectation of a Future Retribution. Being thus distracted with his
Distemper and Fears, he threw himself upon the Bed, and discoursed with himself
after this manner. Oh! what is the meaning of the Tumultuous War in my Breast?
what Argument is there n^w to assist me against Matter of Fact? Do I assert,
that there (...) Hell at all, and yet I feel one in my Bosom? Am I certain,
that there is no Heaven when I am so sure that there is a Hell? That there is no
After retributions when I feel a present Judgment? Do I affirm m^ Soul to be as
Mortal as my Body, when this Languishes, and that is as Vigorous as ever? O
that one could restore to me my Ancient Guard of Piety and Innocence But it is
too late. Wretch that I am whither shall I fly from this Breast, (...) what
will become of me?

He had no sooner ended, but i^ comes one of his old Companions, to pa^^ him a
Visit, for he had heard that h^ was not well: How now Brother (says he) why
this Melancholy Look and Posture, you seem to be (...) concerned in your Mind
than Body? Pray tell me what is the Matter? The Matter? replied the other,
fixing a pair of ghastly Eyes upon him, It Is you, and the rest of my Companions
that have instilled those Principles into me, which now having most need of
them, leave me in the Agonies of Despare and Confusion. What Advice or Comfort
have you now to forti^ie me against my fearful Expectations of another Life?
Are you certain that my Soul is Material and Mortal? And that it will dissolve
with the Body? I Am so certain, replied the other, That I venture my Whole upon
it. Here I interrupted them by coming into the Room, and applying my self to
the Sick Person, I told him, That I was a Stranger to him, yet hearing of his
Distemper, I though it my Duty to pay him a Visit, and give him what Christian
Comfort and Advice I was capable of. I Thank you, replied the (...) Person, and
would desire you then to engage that Gentleman that sits there (meaning his
Friend and prove unto him that the Soul is not Matter, nor Mortal* That the
Soul is not Matter (said I) Descarte^ has proved in his Method, by showing that
the Soul is independent (...) Matter. That Matter it self cannot think, neither
in the Whole nor in Parts, is evident enough from M^^ Lock of HUMAN
UNDERSTANDING. But after all (...) perhaps can best prove it thus, Matter is by
every Philosopher granted to be in its own Nature indifferent to Motion or
Rest: That if it be i^ Rest, it will lie eternally so, unle^ something else
moves it; and that if any thing puts it in Motion, will eternally move, were it
not so the Opposition of other Matter which clogs and retards its Motion. (...)
those that would have the So^^ to (...) a pure fine Matter, say, that it fi^^
moves the Animal Spirits, they (...) Nerves, and these a Leg, an Arm, etc.
mechanically, as Matter moves Matter. Now those that make the Soul me first
Agent and Mover, make Matter to move itself, which is impossible, according to
the above cited Thesis, which will have Matter to rest eternally, unless it be
moved by something. But the Soul does move the Body independent of Matter, and
Matter cannot move unless it be first moved: Therefore the Soul is not Matter,
and consequently not perishable by Attrition, Transmutation, etc. But,
Gentlemen, added I, I hope there is no need of a Lecture of this Nature to
either of you; for you look like Creatures that have a share in Human Nature,
which has the Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul innate with it. The sick
Person made no other Anver (...) a dismal Groan, as if his heart had broke, and
his Friend also made have out of the Room, without doing us God b'w'e. I was
surprised at such an Effect, and desired the sick Party to know the Reason of
his Discontent, offering my Assistance to remove it, if possible, by Counsel,
Prayers, Advice, or any way that lay in my Power.

Alas, Sir, replied he, you have undeceived me, now its too late; I was afraid of
nothing so much as the Immortality of my Soul; now you have assured me of that
you have ascertained me of a Hell, of a fearful Expectation of Judgment, of a
Portion among those that have apostatized from their Religion, of the Lot of
Atheists, and Denyers of Christ: You have now sealed my Damnation, by giving me
an Earnest of it, I mean an awakened Conscience, that brings my Sins in to my
Remembrance, reckoning up the numerous Catalogue for which I must go and give
an an Account Oh Apostate Wretch, from how great Hopes am I fallen! Oh that I
had never known what Religion had been, then had I never denied my Savior, nor
been so black an Heir of Perdition. I was so surprised at such kind of
Expressions that I stood speechless for a considerable Time, for having
received the Character of a Person that had imbibed some Atheistical
Principles; I little expected such a desperate Change, but rather that I should
have an hard Task of it to make him consider seriously of a future Life: But so
soon as I could recollect my self, I said, Sir, I would desire you to take heed
how you violate the Mercy of God, and think so slightly of the Sufferings of
Christ, as if they were not sufficient for the Redemption of the greatest
Sin^rer. This may be a Delusion of the Devil, who would now hinder you from
Repentance and (...) in Christ. I hope, if I have convinced you of the
Immortality of the Soul, it is to a good End; for the way to cure a Distemper is
first to know it; if you had died ignorant of it, you had been miserably
undecived in another World, whereas knowing it now, you have an Opportunity and
some time left to prepare for your welfare. To which he replied,

As to the Mercy of God, in Christ, I once knew and tasted what they are, which
is now part of my Curse, in that I am more sensible of the loss of them. They
are, I will grant you, sufficient to those that have any share in them; but
what is that to me, who have denied Christ? Who have daily Crucified him afresh,
and put him to open shame? The Devil has nothing to do with the Torture I
undergo; it is no Delusion of his, but the just Judgment of God upon me; and
your Convictions are also part of my heavy Judgment, in that you have given me
a sensible Horror of my Sin, by proving my Soul immortal, whereas had I gone
straight to Hell in my old Damnable Opinions, I had endured but one Hell,
whereas I now feel two: I mean not only an inexpressible Torture which I carry
in my Breast, but an Expectation of I know not what a Change. Oh that I were in
Hell, that I might feel the worst! And yet I dread to Die, because that worst
will never have an end.

All that he spoke, was with an Air if such horror and eagerness as can scarce
be imagined; indeed it had such Effects upon me, that I knew not what to
answer: I tremble at the Judgment of, and I remember I ^isht within my self
that one or two of the loosest Atheist in the Age had been there, verily
believing is would have put a stop to their Impiety.

The Gentleman was got to Bed, refusing all Sustenance, and sweating through
Violence of his Torments, in the most prodigious manner that ever I saw or
heard of. As soon as he was got to Bed, I desired to pray ^y him before I took
my Leave, which with much Reluctance he consented to. In the midst of Prayer he
groaned extremely, tossing and turning himself as if had been under the deepest
Agonies of Death: When Prayer was over, I asked him how he did, and why he
groaned after such a rate in Prayer time? To which he answered, As the Damned
in Hell, which lift up their Eyes in Torments, and behold afar off the Saints
in Abraham's Bosom, have their Torments thereby doubly enhansed, first by
reflecting in their own Misery, and then taking a prospect of the Beatifick
Vision they have left even so, I, who know my self to be hardened, and sealed
unto Damnation hearing the Prayers of the Righteous, to which God Almighty's
Ears are always open; granting their Requests, this increases my Torments, to
think how I am excluded from such a privilege, and have no other Portion left
me, best Blaspheming, Weeping, and Wailing, and Grashing of Teeth, for ever.
Pray (...), said I, Consider, that (...) deal of difference betwixt (...) and
those that are in Hell; they are lost irrevocably for ever-more, without any
opportunity of a Reprieve, or hopes of Pardon; but you are yet alive, and have
Promises belonging to you in common with other Sinners; Christ died for
Sinners, and God has Sworn by himself, that he delights not in the Death of a
Sinner, but rather that he should turn from his Wickedness and Live; and that
at what time soever a Sinner returns from the Evil of his Ways he shall
receive Pardon. To which he (...) with his usual earnestness, I Will grant you as
much difference betwixt me and those that are in Hell, as betwixt a Common
Devil, and a Devil Incarnate. If those are irrevocably lost without opportunity
of Reprieve, or hopes of Pardon, and I am yet alive, what then? what is the
Consequences not that the Promise belong to me in common with other Sinners,
nor to any Sinners but such as Repent and Believe: If Christ died for Sinners,
it is for such as Repent and Believe; but though I, would, I can do neither, I
have outstood my Day of Grace, and am hardened, and turned Reprobate; If God
delights not in the Death of Sinners, it is of such Sinners as repent and return
unto him; but his Justice will vindicate it self upon such obstinate perverse
Sinners as I, who have denied his Power and Providence both in my Words and
Actions, and now he has met with me for it; and Oh it is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God. If God was not against me, I should not value
it, though all the Legions of Hell engaged me, though all the Power and Malice of
Men joined in one Complicated Body to study and exer^se the utmost Barbarities
that Flesh and Blood could inflict upon me; but when an Angry Irreconcilable
God looks upon his Creature in Wrath, and consigns him over to his Eternal
Vengeance and Fury, this is intolerable, inexpressibly, afflicting, and
grievous: Ah who can dwell with everlasting Burnings? Oh ye that have any hope,
and have not yet past your Day of Grace, Cry mightily to God, Day and Night;
think no labor too much which secures you from the Wrath of God: Oh who can
stand before him when he is Angry, what Stuble can resist such a Consuming
Fire? This, and more to the same purpose, he spoke with so deep a Concern, the
Tears trickling all the while down his Cheeks, that no Body in the Room could
refain Weeping, which he perceived said, And can ye Weep at the image and bare
relation of the effects of Gods Wrath, what then do you think I suffer, who
actually lie under the very weight of his Fury? Refrain your Tears for me, it is
in vain; Pity is no Debt to me, nothing is so proper for me as some Course to
complete my Misery, and free me from the Torments of my Expectation. Here he
paused a little, when looking toward the Fire, he said, Oh that (...) was to
lie and broil upon that Fire (...) Hundred Thousand Years to purchase the
Favor of God, and be Reconciled to him again. But it is a fruitless vain Wish,
Millions of Millions of Years will bring me no nearer the ends of my Tortures
than one Poor Hour: O Eternity, Eternity, who can discover the Abyss of
Eternity; who can properly Paraphrase upon the Words FOR EVER AND EVER!

I could not forbear reflecting on that passage of broiling upon the Fire
Hundred Thousand Years to purchase the Favor of God, and be again Reconciled
to him: how unproportionable was this Poor Man's Concern to that o^ the Common
Practice of the World a great ^art of which will allow no time in Days, Weeks,
Years, to see the Face and Favor of God? And amongst those that pretent to
Religion? How cooly and indifferently d^^ they spend that time they set apart
for Private or Public Devotion Were they sensible but for one Minute of what
this Wretched Person endured what a Spur would it be to their Devotion, and how
careful would they b^ to make their Calling and Election (...) how fearful,
left having a Promise made them of entering into Rest, any of them should fall
short through unbelief, and so be frustrated of their share and hopes of that
Glory which is to be revealed?

It began to grow late, so I took my leave of him for that Night, promising to
renew my Visit, (if it ^leased God) the next Day, when I found him still in the
same Condition, as to his Mi^^; but his Body was much weakened by his continual
Sweats, caused by the Agonies he lay under. I found Three or Four Divines with
him who had been at Prayer, which they told me, had the same uneasy effect
upon him, as when I Prayed with him the Night before. One of the Divines
desired him to consider the Example of St. Peter, who had denied his Master
with Oaths and Curses, and yet was received again into his Favor. To which he
replied; (officiously against himself, is he had done all the Day before) (...)
It Is true, St. Peter did deny his Master, as I have done, but what then? his
Master had Prayed for him, that his Faith should not fail, and being willing
that he should Repent, he looked him into a Repentance, and assisted him by his
Holy Spirit to perfect it; now if Christ would assist me to Repent, I should do
so too, but he has justly withdrawn his Intercessions from me: I (...) often
Crucified him a fresh, and put him to open shame so often grieved that Holy
Spirit, that God has taken it away from me, and in the room thereof has left me
the Spirit of Impenitence and Reprobation and given me a certain Earnest of a
fearful Inheritance in another Life.

He spoke little more that Day, for a deal of Company pressing in, it become
troublesome to him, and toward Night Orders were taken for the avoiding such
an Inconvenience. There were four more Divines in the Room besides, at six a
Christ; we all looked upon one another, not knowing what course to take, no
Text being offered in his favor, but what he readily turned another way;
whilst we were thus Musing, he Cried out in a vehement affecting Passion, How
long, Oh Lord! shall thy Wrath burn for ever against me, shall thy Eternal
Justice for ever exact upon a Poor despicable Worm? What is my Value or Worth
that thou should pour out full Vials of Wrath upon me? Oh that thou would
let go thy Hand, forever forget me, and let me fall into my first nothingness
again; as my Righteousness could have profited thee nothing, so my Impieties
have done thee no hurt, therefore Annihilate me, and let me Perish to nothing;
be not Angry with me that I thus Expostulate with thee; 'twill be but a little
time but thy Wrath will force the Dread fu^est Blasphemies from me, except thou
prevent them: Oh that thou would take away my Being, and my Misery; neither
of them can add to, or diminish from thy Happiness, therefore let them both
cease and let my Name be known no more or if I must still be, and be Immortal,
and thou will Punish me, because I have Despised thee, let it sufficed to be a
Privation of thy Self, and let me pass my Eternity in a Dream without ever
being awakned by the pangs of Torment, without ever being disturbed by the
Gnawing of the Worm that Dies not. But Oh what fruitless Desires are these, for
I am Expostulating with a God that has closed his Ears, and will not hear, with
a God that has for ever shut out my Prayers, and only protracts my Breath a
little longer to be an Example unto others! Oh ye Rocks and Mountains, that ye
would hide me from the presence o^ an Incensed God! But there is not flying from
his presence, what he has begun he will finish, he will extend his, Wrath
against me for ever and ever. Here some Body knocked at the Door, and it proved
to be a Penny Post Man with a Letter to this Gentleman; which being told him,
How (says he) a Letter for me? A little longer, and I expect another sort of a
Messenger, I am (added he) very quickly to give up my Accounts of every secret
Action that I have done, and I have a mind to make an Experiment of something
of the same Nature, to see how I can bear it; and looking about the Room he
espied me; pray Sir, said he, do me the favor as to open and read this Letter,
the Contents I know not, but I suspect it to come from some of my old
Acquaintance. (...) desired to be excused, alleging, that possibly there might
be something in it that might be improper ^o divulge. Nothing, nothing replied
he, can affect me row; I have no Honor, no Reputation, and what is yet worse,
no Heaven to lose by this or any other Act, therefore, pray Sir oblige me, or I
must trouble some Body else. Upon this I broke open the Letter, designing first
to take a Cursory View of it, and then to proceed, or desist, according as I
found the Contents, which upon perusal, I thought not impertinent to the
present Case, and therefore Read as follows,

Dearest SIR,
U Nderstanding you are fallen dangorously ill, and that it had a Melancholy
Effect upon you, I could not, ('considering our stricter Friendship) but
endeavor at least the removal of those Evils your Mind may lie under, which
perhaps is an Office no less grateful, than making your Body Sound and
Vigorous. Sickness and Death are the Common Lot of Mankind, and to Repine and
Grieve at the bearing of this Lot, is to Combat the Laws of Nature, and Fight
against Impossibilities; what Wise Man Repines at the (...) in Summer, or Cold
in Winter, or troubles himself, that the Sun ever (...) out of our Hemisphere
all the Night time? a common Evil that every Body tears, ceases to be an Evil,
because there is (...) one has a better Fortune to compare with it, and without
comparison, nothing can be said to be better or worse; thus also a Good made
common Falls into Indifferency from the same Reason. But perhaps your
Melancholy suggests unto you, that it is a dismal thing to Launch out into an
unknown Abyss, to be you know not where, nor what. I Answer, I dream sometimes
of frightful things, and the Idea's that I have of them, impress as afflicting
Resentments upon my Spirits, as if they were real, but when I awake all
vanishes. Thus, if we will examine Death, and its supposed Consequences, by the
Prejudices of a Melancholy and Distractful Brain, we may be Miserable,
proportionable to the height of our Folly; but if by our Reason we take a View
of these Formidable Monsters, they grow ^ame and familiar to us. I would demand
of him that asks me. What Estate I shall be in after Death, What Estate he was
in before Life? Pa^^ and Pleasure will leave their Impressions upon a Human
Spirit; it is as natural a Wax to receive the Impression of that Sea by which it
is Sealed. Therefore if I was either Happy or Miserable before I commenced
Humanity, I must still retain some Impression of it, but I now do neither
therefore shall do neither hereafter. I came cut of a State of Nothingness, and
shall return into the same again; as that Flame of an extinguished Candle
dissolved and loses it self in the Circumambient At even so the Toper of Life
vanishes into pure Ether, and is no more, when the Laws of the Union of Soul
and Body are violated and broken, Death it self is nothing; and after Death
there is nothing and why should I be afraid of nothing Take Courage, Man, and
either Die li^ your self, Master of your Fate and Happiness, so long as it is
to be kept; or Recover, and Live Worthy the Character of a Person that knows
how either to Live (...) Die So wishes,

Your real Friend and ServantA. B.


I had no sooner read this Letter through, but he surpised us all with
repeating dismal Groans, as if his Soul had been struggling under the last
Throws of Separation: we thought (...) not convenient to press for the Reason
of it, considering that Human Nature feels, or at least supposes in Ease by
complaining of the Evil ^t suffers, and it happened according to our
Expectations, for at length he broke out into these afflicting imprecations:
Cursed be the Day wherein I commenced such a fatal Friendship: Oh unhappy Time,
when first I imbibed these Atheistical Principles! When first I exchanged the
Christian Faith for the Creed of Spinoza and the Leviathan! When first I
relinquished all revealed Religion for the natural one, and the last for none
at all. When casting is Eyes upon me, he said, I am not able to write an Answer
to that Letter, though I earnestly desire there should be one, nor is it worth
my while to get an Emanuensis for that purpose, for I suppose I shall have no
occasion to write any more I Am also sensible that you might be better able to
answer such a Letter than I, and yet my present Circumstances are such (I being
not only a Party, but the dismal subjects a Matter my self) that what come from
me may make a deeper impression upon the Spirit of my Friend, than what comes
from strange Hand; therefore you will oblige me, if you will only lend me your
Hand and let me dictate, which I freely offering, he ordered a Chair to be set
on the other Side of the Bed, thinking it convenient to be as secret and free
from Noise and Diversion as possibly he could: And then he proceeded.

SIR,
B Eing not able to use my own, have borrowed another Hand to answer yours,
possibly I may subcribe myself. You say well, Its a grate^uller Office to
endeavor to remove the Evils of the Mind than of the Body What thou urge of
the common Lot of Mankind, ^s Death and Sickness: I could wish (...) were my
Case, but mine alas ^s a discovery that I pay dearly for, Viz. That Despare and
Hell is the common let of Atheists. Now your Arguments cannot reach my Case,
unless you first prove that Atheism is as inevitable as Death and Sickness, and
that therefore the effects of it are to be born patiently, unless a Man will
combat Necessity and (...) against the Laws of Fate. Your way of arguing in
such as I have used (...) myself formerly; and I cannot but winder now how I
could think it conclusive: Perhaps I never indeed thought of that, but was
pleased with it, because wished it to be true, and because I (...) it my
Interest that it should be so. (...) you please I Will just make a Reflection two
upon what you have writ, and ^en give you my Sentiments of the whole matter.
You say, That if we examine Death and its supposed Consequences by our Reason,
those formidable Monsters grow tame and familiar: If by our Reason you mean
either the peculiar Creed of Atheists, or the common Reason of Human Nature; I
am sure they Monsters will be less tame and familiar the more you think of
them, for since no Reason discovers what an unexperienced death is, or the
unknown change conesquent thereupon, how can we judge of things that we know
not? Reason (...) long as you please upon things that you are ignorant of, and
at last you wi^^ be as far from Truth and Satisfaction, if not farther, than
when you first began; like him that demanded a considerable Time to tell what
God was and when that was expired he demanded yet a greater; and being asked
why he did so, he replied, the more he thought the less he knew of him. It
might have been retorted on him, though the same History gives no account of it
Why then did he petition for means greater Ignorance and Confusion? Your
Argument is extreme weak about a pre-existent and future State; Viz. I retain
no impression of Happiness or Misery that I had in a pre-existent State,
therefore shall retain none in a future State. How that is a consequence in any
Rules of Logic I see not. Next, you would have me believe upon your bare Word,
That Death is nothing, and that after Death there is nothing. Pray how do you
know either, having not yet tried? there are a great many that say the
contrary. I have only concerned my self as to the rationality of your Letter,
that I might induce you to believe I am not Melancholy, distracted, or
prejudiced in my Reason, and I would desire you to believe it, That what I am
going to say may not have the less credit, because it comes from one under my
Circumstances; Its Truth, and whether you will believe me or no, ^ou will at
last find it to be so.


Here he groaned, and desired a little intermission, being not only weary with
repeating so much, but at present dejected and confused with the unhappy Truths
he was about to tell his Friend, and so he rested himself for about half an
Hour; when calling to me again, he desired we might proceed: Which we did as
follows.

If I could force you to believe me I would; all I can do is to deal with you
as a reasonable Creature, by opening my Breast to you, and then leaving you at
your liberty to Act as you please Whilst we are in Health and Business we may
seem to act contrary to our Intentiens, and plead for things we believe not;
but when we come to dye the Vizard i^ taken off, and the Man appears as he is,
open and plain. This is my Condition, therefore I can have neither Interest nor
any other Motive in imposing upon my Friends.

Religion (I mean the Christian) i^ no fictitions Imposture,; Heaven and Hell
are real, and the Immortality of the Soul is as certain as the existence o^ the
Body; for a Time we have officiously deluded and cheated one another of our
Religion and Happiness, and God, who will not always be despised by his
Creatures without taking notice of it, has chosen me out as an Example to you
all, and as a Warning to the lazy indifferent Christian: But who, alas, can
write their own Tragedy without Tears, or copy out the Seal of their Damnation,
without the extremity of Horror? That there is a God I know, because I
continually feel the effects of his Wrath: That there is a Hell, I am as
certain, have received the earnest of my Inheritance there, in my Breast, where
my Tortures are infinitely short of any Expression: That there is a natural
Conscience, which is not the effect of a prejudiced Education, I now feel with
Horror and Amazement, being continually upbraided by it with the Registry of my
Impieties, and a bringing of all my Sins fresh into my remembrance; why God has
marked me out for an example of his Wrath and Vengeance rather than you, or any
of our Acquaintance, I presume is, because I am the greatest Apostate, having
been more religiously educated than any of you, and therefore done greater
despite unto the Spirit of Grace, and been the greatest Scandal to Religion. Oh
what a presumptuous, egregious piece of Folly is it for Dust and Ashes to
contend with their Creator, to question his Justice, his Power, nay his very
Being, when at the same Time without this infinite wise God, every such vile
Wretch would immediately fall into its Cha^s again, being not able to exist one
moment without him? What a vile ingratitude is it scurrilously to reflect upon
the Christian Religion, when the Author of it dyed to reconcile such Reflectors
to himself? And if after all that he has done and suffered to make such Fools
happy, they will still deny him and despise the Benefits of his Redemption,
what can be expected but that this Intercessor become an angry Judge and
consign his Enemies over to the Reward of their Demerits? Don't mistake your
self, its not a light Matter to question and contend with the God of Nature, to
abuse Religion and deny the Author of it, and what is yet the worst of all, to
Apostatize and leave the way of Righteousness, as I have done; behold, God has
met with me for it, after a long Forbearance of several Years in inveterate
Impiety and Profaneness: Let me entreat you, by my Example, to leave off your
Sins by Repentance; who knows but God may yet receive you, and by me preach
such a Lecture as may stop you in your Course of Wickedness? I speak not this
out of any Love to Virtue or Hatred of Vice, for I am hardened and impenitently
reprobate, only herein I imitate Dives, who was unwilling his Brethren should
come into the same place of Torment with him: Make what use you please of this,
only remember that if it does not reclaim you, it will double your
Condemnation, and enhance your Guilt, possibly to be overtaken in this present
World as I am, with the just Judgment of God; if not, be sure you will be light
on hereafter: which is all, and I wish I could say enough.

FromYours, etc.


As soon as he subscribed his Name and the Letter was sealed, he desired a
Porter might be called and sent, for fear of a Miscarriage; which was done
accordingly. And the Night being far worn, we all took our Leaves and left him,
wishing him good Rest and a happier Condition the next Day: To which he
replied, Gentlemen, I thank you, but my Happiness is at an end, and as for my
Rest to Night, all the Ease I expect will be in wishing for the Day, as in the
Day time I wish for the Night thus spending the little remainder o^ my
miserable Moments in a fearful expectation of my Dissolution, and the dismal
Account I am to make upon it. But Gentlemen a good Night to you, and remember
my Example, to confirm (...) in that Religion I have disow^^^, that you may
stand more cautiously by my Fall; and secure the Happiness I have (...).

The next day came several of hi^ Friends out of the Country, having had an
account of his Sickness and Distractions. When they came into the Room, one of
them applied himself to him, telling him That he and several more of his
Relations were come on purpose to Town to see him, and were extreme sorry to
find him in such a weak Condition as he Appeared (for now he was almost nothing
but Skin and Bones, the Agonies that he lay under doing the Office of the
quickest Consumption) To which he Answered, I am obliged, out of common
Civility, to thank you all; but who are my Relations? Our Savior said That
such only as did the Will of his Heavenly Father were his Relations. I may also
properly say, That none but the Atheist, the Reprobate, and all such as do the
Work of the Devil are my Relations; this little Tie of Flesh and blood will be
dissolved in a Moment, but the Relation I have to the damned is permanent an^
lasting, the same Lot, the same Place of Torments, the same Exercises o^
Blasphemy, and the same Eternity of Horror will be common to (...) all; so that
similitude of Torments Place and Duration will join us i^ a very strict Union.
His Friends, who had only had some Report of a kind of Distraction, were
surprised t^ hear him deliver himself in such Terms, and degan to enquire of
so^^ of us what was the matter that he talked at such a rate; who replied We
could wish it were Frenzy (...) Distraction, but we were afraid of much sadder
Cause viz the Sense o^ Hell, and God's Wrath upon him which was so violent as
to drive him into Despair, and the utmost Agoni^ and Horror of Mind, begging,
if it might please God; the case might be altered before his Death, which the^
were sure could not be far off, if he proceeded as he had begun. He hearing
them whisper, and imagining the Cause of it, called them all unto him and said;
You may imagine me distracted or melancholy I wish I were either; but it is part
of my Judgment, that I am not; no, my Apprehension of Persons and Things is
rather more vigorous and quick than it was when I was perfect Health: And it is
my Curse, because I am thereby more sensible of my Unhappiness and the
Condition I am fallen into. Would you be informed why I am become a Skeleton in
three or four Days? Why, my Grief does continually extort some unhappy
Expressions from me: Know then that I have sinned against the Holy Ghost, and
done despite to the Spirit of Grace; that I have despised my Maker, and denied
my Redeemer; that in short I have Apostatized from the Christian Religion, and
joined my self to the Atheist and Profane, and continued this Course under
many Convictions, till my Iniquity was ripe for Vengeance, and the just
Judgment of God overtook me, when m^ Security was the greatest and the Checks
of my Conscience the lea^ Since I denied that Salvation the comes by Christ
Jesus, there is no other Mediator or Intercessor (...) Sinners; if there be,
who is (...) that can redeem my Soul from He or give a Ransom for my Life No,
no, the Scripture is certain true, and that says, That if we wilfully, after we
have received (...) Knowledge of the Truth, there (...) maineth no more
Sacrifice for S^ but a fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation,
which shall consume the Adversary. There remaeth no more Sacrifice for Sin,
tha^ the Wound that pierces my Sou^ Christ Jesus was the only expiator
Sacrifice for Sinners that God would accept of; and I not accepting (...) would
say) and I despising th^^ there now remains no other for (...) to accept of, no
other to make (...) Atonement and Satisfaction for (...) There Is no other Name
under Heaven given whereby we may be saved, but by the Name of Jesus; and it is
this Jesus that I have Reproached, Ridiculed, and Abused, in his Members here:
nor is this all, I have not been content to do this my self, but by my Example
have induced others to do the same. Methinks your Breasts are all open to me,
and in the midst of your Pity and Surprizals, you would bid me Hope, Believe,
and Return and Supplicate that Mercy I have abused; that Jesus came to save
Sinners, and to bring them to Repentance, with other things of this nature. I
know that these are your thoughts, and by mentioning them I have saved you the
Labor: Alas, how fain would I Hope and Believe! Can a Man, in Torments not
desire to be freed from them? No, assure your selves, I would upon any Terms,
but the Displeasure and Wrath of God, obstruct the Power of Hoping and
Believing; and though I would, I can do neither, nor do I know what some
Divines mear, that say He that desires to Hope, Repent, and Believe, in some
measures does it I experience the contrary; a fruitless Willing that comes not
to Act, is not more but a Conviction, which shall bring such Persons under
greater Damnation. Would you have me to Return and Supplicate that Mercy I have
Abused? Alas! how sad my Cafe, that have no other hope but what depend upon
Abused Mercy? But why said I hopes? When I have no hopes at all, my hopes an
frustrate, and my expectations an cut off, and what remainds behind why, I am
bid to Hope and Believe Oh what Satyr, what Mockery and Abuse is this upon me,
to find my in Misery, and bid me be Happy without affording me some power of
being so! Indeed should Jesus Christ say so much to me, it would be some
Comfort; but for you to do it, is the same thing, as to bid a Malefactor shake
off his Chains and Fetters, and assume his Liberty; or to call upon the Dead to
arise out of their Graves, and Challenge their Estates and Honors again. How
idle is it, to bid the Fire not to burn, when Fuel is administered; to command
the Seas to be Smooth and Calm in the midst of Storms, such is my Case, and
such are the Comforts of my Friends: But I Am spent, and can complain no more;
would to God the Case of my Complaints would also cease; the Cause of my
Complaints! This renews my Grief, and summons up the little strength I have
left to Complain again, like an extinguishing Flame that recollects at once all
its Alimentary Matter for one great Blaze before it expires. It Is just so with
me: But whether am I going? As he said this, he fainted away, and lay in a sort
of Swound for a considerable time, but by the help of some Spirits brought him
to himself again, and as soon ^s he opened his Eyes, he said, Oh cruel and
unkind Friends, to awake me from a Dream in which I had a Cestation from my
Tortures, but now they return again, and Prey upon my Soul like so many Furies.
This he spoke with so feeling and lively Concern, that not one of his Relations
could refrain from Tears none of them being able to speak to him for a
considerable time before You weep, says, he but your very Tears come too late;
was I like another Person that goes out of the World, it would be one of my
greatest Troubles to see you Weep, or least, it would add much to my pains; for
he must be unnatural and senseless that could not be moved and troubled at the
affliction of others, especially his Friends and Relations; but the Case is
otherwise with me, my Cup is full, and already runs over, the bitterness of my
Soul is as great as possible it can be in this World, and my Heart is full of
Horror and Anguish, and no Grief can add unto mine, being already so great that
it is incapable of receiving any more Perhaps, this may seem a Paradox to you at
first, but what think you of Time and Eternity? Can one add an Hour to
Eternity, which comprehends and swallows all Time? Can one add any thing to the
Wrath of God, which includes the Fury of Devils and Men, this being derivative
and dependent on that, and can any one add to my Grief and Tortures, who am
fullen into the hands of the living God? No, no, reserve your Tears for your
Sins, and cast them not away so fruitlesly upon one that is neither the better
nor worse for them

You may easily imagine what impressions such Sayings as these made upon the
(...) its of his Friends, who were almost overwhelmed with Grief and Amazement,
with Grief, at the lamentable State of their Kinsman, and with Amazement at the
dreadful Judgment of God upon him. But in the midst of their Sorrows they had
the Prudence to think of the Reputation of their Family, and to provide so as
much Secrecy as they possibly could in such a Case; for the Rumor of man in
Despare beginning to spread they conveyed him by Night to other Lodgings; but
he was grown so very weak, that notwithstanding the Care of those who conveyed
him in the Chair, it had like to have proved fatal to him; for he fainted away
several Times, but they got him in to his Chamber and to Bed as soon a^ they
could: After a little Rest he yet found so much strength as to express himself
thus: I am not concerned to enquire whither you have brought me, or your
reasons for so doing; it had been something i^ you had brought my Person hither
without my Horrors and accusing Conscience, or if you had changed my unhappy
State with my Lodgings; but my Torments are rather the greater than before, for
I see that (...) Hour is approaching and just at hand, when I shall bid you all
a sad Farewell. The Doctors that had been with him in the beginning of his
Sickness were again sent for, and they yet declared they could do nothing, so
long as the Listurbance of his Mind was the Cause of his Weakness, only they
ordered him some Cordial Julips, which they said might perhaps strengthen his
Nature, so that he might live two or three Days longer. My Business called me
away for a Day or two, and I came again upon Thursday Morning pretty early, the
Day of his Death. When I came into the Room I enquired of his Friends how he
had spent his Time? who had been with him, what Discourse or Expressions had
dropped from him? And they told me in general, he had little Company, and that
his Expressions were much shorter than before, being now unable to speak many
words together; yet that what he did speak, seemed to have more Horror and
Despair in it than formerly. Afterward I went to his Bedside, and saw perfect
death in his Face, mix with such Amazement and Anguish, that it was the saddest
Spectacle I ever saw in all my Life time. I asked him how he did? To which he
replied, Damned and lost for ever. I desired him not to entertain such a
Thought; the Decrees of God were secret, and God might punish him thus, in this
life, to make him fit for a better. They are not (said he) secret to me, but
discovered for my greater Torment; and my Punishment here is for an Example to
others, and for an Earnest to me of my own Damnation. Oh that there was no God,
or that this God could cease to be; for I am sure he will never have Mercy upon
me. Alas, said I, there is no contending with out Creator, therefore forbear
such words as may provoke him more. True (replied he) there is no contending; I
wish there were a possibility of getting above God, that would be a Heaven to
me. I entreated him not to entertain such a Blasphemy, for -- Here he
interrupted me, saying, Read we not in the Revelations, of those that
blasphemed God because of their pains? I am now of that number. Oh how do I
envy the happiness of Cain and Judas! But (replied I) you are yet alive, and do
not feel the Torments of those that are actually in Hell. To which he
answere'd, This is either true or false; if it be true, what are my
expectations, and how heavy will my Torments be: if I yet not feel the
uttermost? But I know that it is false, and that I now endure, more than the
Spirits of the damned in Hell; for I have the very same, Tortures upon my
Spirit, as they, have, besides the Torments I endure in my Body. I believe that
at the day of Judgment, the Torments of my Mind and Body will be both of 'em
more intense; but as I am now, no Spirit in Hell endures what I do: How gladly
would I change my condition for Hell! And how earnestly would I increat of my
angry Judge to send me thither, if I was not afraid that he would out of
vengeance deny me? Here he closed his Eyes a little, and began to talk idly and
besides himself, every now and then groaning and gnashing his Teeth; but when
he opened his Eyes and looket about, he grew sensible again, and felt for his
own Pulse, saying, How lazily my Minutes pass on! When will be the last Breath,
the last Pulse, that shall beat my Spirit out of this decayed Mansion into
those desired Regions of Death and Hell? Oh! I find it is just at hand; and what
shall I now say? I Am now afraid again to die. Ah the forlorn Hope, the
destitute State of an Atheist that has no God to go to, nothing to fly to for
Peace or Comfort! Here his Speech failed him again; and we all believing him to
be just a leaving the World went to Prayer, which threw him into an Agony, in
which, though he could not speak perfectly, he made what noise he could to hinder
himself from hearing, and turned away his Face that he might not see the
Action; which we perceiving, we recommeded him to the Mercy of God, and gave
over. His Speech returned not again for a considerable time, but he fixed his
Ghastly Eyes upon us, and by the Air of his Countenance showed, that we had not
a little disobliged him: And as soon as he could speak, he said, Tigers and
Monsters, are ye also become Devils to Torment me, and give me a Prospect of
Heaven, to make my Hell the more intolerable? Alas, Sir, replied I, what
Interest can we have in making you miserable? It Is our desire of your recovery
and reconciliation with God, that casts us down at the Throne of Grace; if we
must not seek assistance at the hand of God, where else should we seek it? If
God denies; who else can give it? If he will not have Mercy; whether must we go
for it? To which he replied, Ay that is the Wound, God is become my Enemy, and
there is none so strong as he to deliver m^ out of his Hand; he consigns me
over to his Eternal Wrath and Vengeance, and there is none that is able to
Redeem me. Was there another God as mighty as he who would Patronize my Cause,
or was I above or Independent of God, then I could Act and Dispose of my self
as I pleased, then would my Horror cease and the Expectation and Designs of my
Formidable Enemy be frustrate but this cannot be, for I -- Her^ his Voice
failed him again, and he began to struggle and gasp for a little Breath, which
having recovered, with a Groan so Dreadful and Loud, as i^ it had not been
Humane, he Cried out, Oh the insufferable Pangs of Hell and Damnation! and so
he Died Death settling the Visage of his Face in such a Form, as if the Body,
tho Dead, was sensible of the Extremity of Torments. How God disposed of his we
know not; Secret things belong to the Lord, to us Charity and Hope; ^et not so
much as to make this no Example to us, for such Instances are signalized on
purpose to Teach us Fear and Reverence, to Judge our selves, and use the utmost
Diligence and Care to make our Calling and Election sure.

FINIS.

