THE EARTHQUAKE
NAPLES; September, 21. 1694.
WE have now received a more particular Account of the EARTHQUAKE that lately
happened in this Kingdom. It was felt here on the 8 th Instant, between 17 and
18 hours, At Naples, the Sun, when in the AEquinox, rises at Twelve; and makes
Noon, at Eighteen hours: For the Italians begin their Reckoning from Sunset;
and divide the whole Night-and-Day, into Four and Twenty equal Hours in a
continued Account.
and lasted about half a minute, shaking all the Churches and Houses in this
City, throwing down none, nor killing any body. The Cathedral Church, with
those of St. Lorenzo, and several others; as also the Palaces of the Dukes of
Madaloni and Monte Leon, received the most damage; And part of the Hill without
the Gate of the Town, fell in; But it was much more terrible in the Country: In
the Districts of Lauro and Magnano, and at Lipari, and Mercogliano, several
Castles and Houses are thrown down, and some persons killed; At Nola, the
Bishops Palace, and a Monastry of Nuns; At Naia, Torento Avellino and Ariano,
most of the Houses; (...) at Ottaiano, the Cathedral Churches and Bishops
Palaces are quite ruined, And at Mercogliano, the Church, and at Capua several
Houses; At Aresa the Roof of the chief Church thrown down, with some other
Churches, and a Monastery; at Vico, all the Houses except 40; at Cara, the
Bishops Palace, and 3 Chapels, are laid in Ruins. In the Principality of
Citra; at Recigliano, all the Houses are down, and 220 persons killed, and
diverse wounded; At Belvano 70 killed, At St. Gregorio, Lavigano, Romignano,
Coliano, Sala, Valvano, diverse Houses destroyed, and the Marquis de Valvano
killed; At Vietri, St. Arstori, Diano, Atene, la Pella, Buon Abitacolo, and
Padula, few Houses are left standing; and at Luffo, none. In the Province of
Ultra, at St. Mauro, Valetta, Torella, la Torre, Zuncolo, St. Guglielmo, and
Suosso; there are no Houses left, and very few at St. Agente and Trivigo; At
Guardia Lombardia, all the Houses destroyed, and the Duchess Pignatelli
killed, and the Duke wounded; At Paterno the Church of St. Nicolas is thrown
down, and that of St. Michael very much damnified; At Grotta Minarda most of
the Houses, with 10 persons; and at Mirabella most of the Houses down, and 23
persons killed; At Gesualdo part of the Bishops Palace is down, and 5 or 6
persons killed; and several at St. Angelo; At Conza all the Houses and Churches
destroyed, and even the foundations of the Church of St. Giberto are not now to
be seen; At Menna the Church of St. G^etano, with the Archbishops Palace, are
quite ruined, and about 300 persons killed; At Calitri, the Castle, and all the
Houses, with 1200 persons, and among these several Persons of Quality
destroyed; At Pesco Pegano 1,200 persons; At St. Andrea 50; And at ^^cora 400
persons killed and all the Buildings of these 3 last (...) ruined, with several
Villages thereabouts. In the Province of Balisicata, at Muro, most of the
Houses; and about One Thousand Persons killed. The Town of Bella is reduced to
the same condition, and about 1300 persons destroyed; At Tricarico, Ruati, and
Barrile, the damage is also very great, and above 50 persons; at Rapolla 100
Houses; At Melfi the Castle, with most of the Monasteries and Houses; At Tito
the great Church, with many Houses, and 100 persons destroyed; The Hill near
that place opened at the same time, and a little (...) that run near it, was
thrown out of its (...). At Potenza, the Church, and most of the other
Buildings, with several of the Inhabitants; The Towns of Vignola, Matera,
Cas^^^, Mezzano; Laviello, Forenza, Salanora, (...) likewise suffered very
much: And upon the whole, the loss is so great, that it will require a long
time to repair it.

Boston, N. E. Reprinted by B. Green. February 21. 1694, 5.


