Anno Regni Gulielmi and Mariae, Regis and Regina, Angliae, Scottae, Franciae
and Hiberna, Sixto.
The 24th of March, Anno Dom. 1694/5.
An Act for the raising and paying one hundred and seventy Men for the securing
of the Fronteers of this Province, in the City and County of Albany.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly do think it necessary, for
the securing the Fronteers of this Province, in the City and County of Albany,
That his Excellency, the Captain General, do raise one hundred and seventy Men,
with their proper Officers, in such Quota's and Proportions in each respective
City and County, as is hereafter specified and expressed, which shall be well
provided with Arms, and be at Albany on the first day of May next, and (...) to
continue and remain for the security of the Fronteers of this Province for the
term and space of one whole Year, to commence on the said first day of May next
ensuing the Publication hereof, and to terminate and expire on the first day of
May then next following, which shall be in the Year of our Lord 1695. Which
Quota's and Proportions of Men is as follows, viz. For the City and County of
New York, forty three effective Men. For the County of Westchester, seventeen
effective Men. For the County of Richmond, eight effective Men. For Kings
County, twenty four effective Men. For Queens County, two and thirty effective
Men. For Suffolk County, thirty five effective Men. And for Ulster and Duchess
County eleven effective Men.

And to the end that the said Men may be effectually raised, according to the
Quota's and Proportions aforesaid, Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and
Representatives convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
That if any Person or Persons, who in pursuance of such Warrant or Warrants, to
be by his Excellency, the Captain General, issued out to the chief Military
Officer or Officers of each respective City and County or Counties, as
aforesaid shall be (...) to be in Arms, in order to the raising of the one
hundred and seventy men aforesaid, shall neglect, delay or refuse to appear in
Arms, or otherwise absent him or themselves from such Duty, shall forfeit for
each such Default the sum of five Pounds current Money of New York, to be
levied by Distress, by Warrant under the hand and seal of any Justice of the
Peace (directed to the Constable) within this Province, on the Goods and
Chattels of every such Person or Persons so offending, as aforesaid, upon a
Cirtificate of such Default made from the Captain or chief Officer of such
Company, in or to which the said Offender shall be listed or belong, under his
hand and Seal; the said Goods and Chattels so taken by Distress, shall be
exposed to sale, and the overplus thereof, if any be, shall be returned to the
Person so offending, the Sum forfeited and Charges of Distress and Sale being
first deducted, which said Sum of five Pounds shall be employed for the
encouragement and raising the Quota's of men by this Act in each respective
City and County or Counties to be raised, as aforesaid. And in case such Person
or Persons so offending, as aforesaid, shall not have Goods and Chattels to be
found to pay and satisfy the sum of five Pounds, aforesaid, such Person or
Persons, upon such Cirtificate, and by such Warrant as aforesaid, shall be
committed to the common Goal of the same City and County or Counties, there to
remain without Bail or Mainprize for the space or term of five Kalander
Months, or until he or they shall satisfy the Sum of five Pounds aforesaid.

And for the paying and maintaining the said one hundred and seventy Men, with
their proper Officers, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a
Levy of two Thousand six hundred and sixty Pounds, current Money of this
Province, be laid, assessed, raised and levied upon all and every the
Inhabitants, Residents and Freeholders of and in this Province, toward the
paying and maintaining the said one hundred and seventy Men, and their proper
Officers, for the space and term of one whole Year, as aforesaid, which
together with the sum of eight hundred Pounds, which is and remains a
Surplusage over and above what is required, or due by an Act lately made,
entitled, An Act for the raising six thousand Pounds, for the payment of three
hundred Volunteers, etc. makes in the whole the sum of three Thousand four
hundred and sixty Pounds, which is hereby allotted and appointed for the paying
and defraying the Incidental Charges of the said one hundred and seventy men,
with their proper Officers, and for no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever,
to be laid, assessed, raised, levied and paid to their Majesty's Collector and
Receiver General for the time being, at their Majesty's Custom-house in the
City of New York, in two equal Payments, that is to say, the Sum of thirteen
hundred and thirty Pounds, being the one moiety or equal half part of the said
Sum of two Thousand six hundred and sixty Pounds aforesaid, at or before the
29th day of September next ensuing the Publication hereof, and the Sum of
thirteen hundred and thirty Pounds, being the other Moiety or equal half part
of the said Sum of Pounds two thousand six hundred and sixty, at or before the
25th day of March then next following which shall be in the Year of our Lord
1695, according to the Quota's and Proportions hereafter following, that is to
say, For the City and County of New York, one thousand fifty one Pounds, being
their Quota and Proportion of the Sum of 2660 l. aforesaid. For the County of
Westchester, one hundred and thirty three Pounds, being their Quota and
Proportion of the 2660 l. aforesaid. For the County of Richmond eighty Pounds,
being their Quota and Proportion of the Pounds 2660 aforesaid. For Kings
County, three hundred forty and six Pounds, being their Quota and Proportion of
Pounds 2660 aforesaid. For Queens County, three hundred eighty seven Pounds,
being their Quota and Proportion of the Pounds 2660 aforesaid. For Suffolk
County, four hundred and thirteen Pounds, being their Quota and Proportion of
Pounds 2660. aforesaid. For Ulster and Duchess County, two hundred thirty and
six Pounds, being their Quota and Proportion of Pounds 2660. aforesaid. And for
Orange County, fourteen Pounds, being their Quota and Propertion of Pounds
2660. aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the soft half Year
pay, due to the said Fuzileers shall be duly and truly paid to them in the
City of Albany, at or before the last day of October next, without any delay or
stoppage of the same upon any presence whatsoever. And that the City and County
of Albany shall bear the whole Charges of maintaining the said one hundred and
seventy Fuzileers and such other Forces as shall be obtained, and his
Excellency thinks fit for the Defense aforesaid, with House-room, Fire and
Candles, and convenience for dressing of Victuals for them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
assessing, raising and paying the Sum of two thousand six hundred and sixty
Pounds aforesaid, the Mayor and Aldermen within the City of New York, and the
Justices of the Peace for the time being for the several and respective
Counties aforesaid, for the several Counties respectively for which they shall
be Justices of the Peace, do forthwith, upon the publication hereof, assemble
and meet together at the Court-Houses, for the several respective Cities or
Counties, or such other place or places as they shall agree upon amongst
themselves, and shall then order, that the Assessors and Collectors for the
several respective Cities, Towns, Manors and Liberties within their several
Jurisdictions, for the assessing, collecting and receiving of the public
Rates, for the defraying the public and necessary Charge of each respective
City and County aforesaid, be the Assessors and Collectors, for the assessing,
collecting and receiving the Sum or Sums of Money herein before mentioned,
according to their Quota's and Proportions before expressed, as to the said
Mayor, Alder-men and Justices of the Peace shall seem meet and reasonable.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayor,
Alder-men and Justices of the Peace for the respective Cities, Counties,
Manors and Jurisdictions, have and shall have power and Authority by virtue of
this Act, each of them by himself, to administer an Oath to the said Assessors,
Well, Truly, Equally, Impartially, and according to their best Understanding,
to Assess and Rate the Inhabitants, Residents and Freeholders of the respective
Places for the which they shall be chosen Assessors.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons who shall be chosen Assessors or Collectors, shall deny, neglect or
refuse to take the Oath, as aforesaid, or shall in any ways deny, neglect, or
unequally and partially assess, or refuse to make such Assesment, as by this
Act is required, or shall deny, neglect or refuse to collect any Sum or Sums of
Money in form before mentioned, assessed, that then and in such case, it shall
and may be lawful for any two of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the
County where such Offender shall happen to dwell or reside, and who by virtue
of this Act are required and empowered to do the same, by Warrant under their
hands and Seals, to commit such Assessor or Assessors, Collector or Collectors
so denying, refusing, neglecting, or unequally and partially assessing, to the
common Goal, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize till he or they shall
make Fine and Ransom to their Majesty's, for such Contempt, as above said

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, of what Degree or Quality soever he or they be of, within this
Province, who shall be assessed or rated any Sum or Sums of Money by virtue of
this act to be raised or levied, shall deny, refuse or delay to pay and
satisfy the same, that then it shall and may be lawful for any such Collector,
by virtue of a Warrant under the hand and Seal of any Justice of the Peace for
the City or County where such Offenders shall dwell or reside, who by virtue of
their Act are required and authorized to grant and issue forth such Warrants to
levy the same by Distress, and Sale of such person or persons Goods and
Chattels, returning the overplus of such Goods and Chattels to the Oowners the
Sum assessed, and charges of Distress and Sale being first deducted, if any
such Overplus shall happen to be.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Mayor,
Alderman or Justice of the Peace within this Province, who are hereby required,
empowered and authorized to take effectual care that this Act and every Article
and Clause therein be duly and truly executed, according to the true and
genuine sense and intent thereof, shall deny, refuse, neglect or delay to do,
perform, fulfill and execute all and every or any the Duties, Powers and
Authorities by this Act required and empowered by him or them to be done,
performed, fulfilled and executed, and shall thereof be lawfully convicted
before any of their Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province, he or they
shall suffer such pain by Fine and Imprisonment, as by the discretion of the
Justices of the Courts shall be adjudged.

And be it further Enacted, etc. That if any Action, Bill, Plaint or
Information shall be brought, moved, or presented at any time hereafter against
any person, or persons, for any matter, cause or thing done or acted in
pursuance or execution of this Act, such person or persons so sued or presented
in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue, not guilty, and
upon any Issue joined, may give this Act and the special matter in Evidence,
and if the plantiff or prosecutor shall be nonsuited, or forbear further
prosecution, or suffer discontinuance, or verdict to pass against him. the
Defendant or Defendors shall recover their trible Costs, for which they shall
have the like Remedy as in any case where costs by the Law are given to
Defendants. Provided always, that no Mayor, Aldermen or Justices of the Peace,
shall be troubled, sued, prosecuted or molested for any omission, offense or
neglect by virtue of this Act, but within the space of one year after such
omission, offense or neglect, and not at any time hereafter, any thing
contained herein to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That what person so ever
shall absent himself from the place of his abode, after the publication of this
Act, without leave first had from his respective Captain or chief Officer,
shall incur and be liable to the same fine and punishment, as if he had been
legally summoned.

An Act confirming and continuing an Act of General Assembly made in the fourth
Year of their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the satisfying and paying
the Debts of the Government, One Year longer than the Term therein mentioned.
WHereas it is found needful that there should be forthwith raised the Sum of
six hundred Pounds current Money of this Province, for the defraying the
Charges of his Excellency's Expedition to Albany, and the making of Presents to
the Indians. And whereas there is an Act of General Assembly made in the fourth
Year of their Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the satisfying and paying
the Debts of the Government, which does expire by its own Limitation upon the
14th Day of November next. And whereas it is thought convenient, for the
payment of the said Sum of Six Hundred Pounds, with Ten per Cenc. annual
Interest, that the said Act, Entitled, An Act for the satisfying and paying
the Debts of the Government, should be confirmed and continued in force one
Year longer than the Term therein mentioned, Be it therefore Enacted by the
Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it
is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same. That the Additional Rates and
Duties made payable upon Merchandise and Liquors imported into this Province,
by virtue of the said Act, shall be levied, collected and paid unto their
Majesty's receiver General for the time being, at their Majesty's Custom-house
at the City of New York, for the Term and space of one whole Year next, and
after the expiration of the Term limited in the said Act, to commence and be
computed from the 14th Day of November next, in this Instant Year of our Lord
1694 and to terminate and end upon the 14th Day of November then next
following, which shall be in the Year of our Lord 1695. according to such Rules
and Directions, and under such Pains and Forfeitures as is contained and
enjoined by the said Act. And the aforesaid Act, and every Article, Rule and
Clause therein mentioned, shall be, abide, continue and remain in full force,
virtue and effect to all intents and purposes, for the payment of the said six
hundred Pounds, with the Interest aforesaid, during the said Term of one whole
Year, and no longer, as fully and in like manner, as if the same were
particularly and at large recited and set down in the Body of this Act, any
thing contained therein to the contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.
Provided, That if the said Additional Rates and Duties, shall, during the said
Term of one whole Year, amount to more than the sum of six hundred Pounds
aforesaid, with the Interest aforesaid, then the residue or surplusage of the
said Sum shall be applied for the satisfying and paying the Debts of the
Government, according to the Directions contained in the said Act, and to no
other Use or Intent whatsoever.

An Act to enable the City and County of Albany to defray their Necessary
Charge.
Forasmuch as the Inhabitants of the City and County of Albany have been during
the time of the late Disorders, very much agrieved, wasted, destroyed and
impoverished by the Incursions of the French, their Majesty's declared Enemies,
and that it is absolutely necessary that some suitable and convenient way
should be found out for the Relief and more easy defraying of the necessary
Charges of that City and County, Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and
Council and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority of the same, That the Imposition or Rate of Two per
Cent. shall be raised and levied upon all Indian Goods that are brought up to
that City and County of Albany, and there sold or consumed And also, That the
Impost of Three Pence be raised and levied upon each Gallon of Rum that is sold
and consumed within that City and County. And for the due and orderly
collecting of the said respective Imposts and Rates, the Treasurer of the said
City for the time being, or any appointed by him, and the Mayer of the said
City, under the public Seal of the said City, are hereby empowered and
authorized to appoint, constitute and establish Collector or Receiver of the
Rates and Imposts aforesaid, who shall have Power to receive the same, and to
enter in a fair Book kept for that purpose, all such sum and sums of Money as
shall be so entered and received for the respective Duties aforesaid, the said
Collector or Receiver appointing certain convenient Times and Places for the
keeping of the Office, as shall be directed by the Court of Mayor and Aldermen
and Assistants of the said City. And all Persons that Trade and bring up to the
said City and County the aforementioned Indian Goods and Ram, are hereby
required to make a Report of the Quantity and Value of such Goods and Rum, they
so bring up and sell in the said City and County aforesaid, and pay the Duties
and Imposts hereby established, without being at any further Charge than the
said Duty. And in Default hereof it shall be lawful for the Mayor, Treasurer,
or any other Officer, hereby authorized, to issue out his or their Warrants,
under his or their Hand and Seal, for the seizing of all such Goods and Rum as
shall be Imbezeled, and not pay the Duties aforesaid, One third to the
Informer, one third to the said City and County of Albany and one third to his
Excellency the Governor or Commander in chief for the time being. Provided,
That all the sum and sums of Money that are hereby received, shall be only
appropriated and applied to the defraying of the necessary Charges of the City
and County aforesaid; and that the Treasurer, Collector or Receiver for the
time being, shall not pay any of the Money received as aforesaid, but by
Warrant from the Mayor of the said City, and approved by the Justices of the
Peace of the said County Provided, That this Act shall only remain in force for
the space of one Year, to commence from the 18th of May next ensuing, and no
longer, any thing contained herein to the contrary in any ways notwithstanding.

An Act against unlawful Bylaws, and Unreasonable Forfeitures.
IN all humble manner the Representatives of this their Majesty's Province of
New York, show, and complain unto your Excellency. and their Majesty's Council,
That the People of the City of New York under color and pretext of their
Charter or Custom, or both, have taken upon them to make and publish certain
Bylaws, Orders, Ordinations or Regulations, whereby they forbid the bringing
of any Flower or Bread, for Exportation, to New York, under the Penalty of
Forfeiture of the same, which said City being the principal Port of this
Province for the sending forth the Produce and Manufacturage thereof, and the
chief Market within the same, they thereby not only prohibit the importation
and selling such Flower and Bread at the same City, and obstruct and hinder all
Bolting of Flower and Baking of Bread for Exportation, which are lawful
Mysteries, Crafts and Trades, in all other parts of the Province, but also
arrogate to themselves the sole Bolting, Baking, Using, Making and Selling of
all such Flower and Bread, raised or to be produced within the Province, and
under color and pretense of the said Orders Bylaws, Ordinances and
Regulations; have taken, condemned and converted to their own Uses, diverse
Quantities of Flower belonging to several of their Majesty's good Subjects of
this Province. All which being contrary to Law, to the grievous Damage and
Impoverishing of many of their Majesty's good People, and the said Bylaws and
Orders unreasonable, and of evil, dangerous and pernicious Consequence to all
their Majesty's Subjects of this Province, They therefore most earnestly pray
that it may be Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by his Excellency, the Council
and the Representatives of this their Majesty's Province in General Assembly
met and assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the said pretended
Bylaws, Orders, Ordinances or Regulations of the People of New York aforesaid,
made in the Name of the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonality of the City of
New York, or in or by any other Name or Style whatsoever, and every clause or
thing in the same, or any other Rule, Order or Ordinance contained in any wife
concerning the Restraint of Bolting of Flower, Baking of Bread, or Importing of
Flower or Bread to New York aforesaid, or concerning or relating to the
Prohibition, Obstruction or Hinderance of the using, practicing or enjoying of
auy other lawful Trade, Mystery or Occupation, or against the Importing in or
to, or Exportation from the City of New York, or any other lawful Port in this
Province, any Wine, Corn, Flower, Bread, Flesh, Fish, Victuals, Wares,
Merchandises, and all other things vendible, and not by the common Law or
Statutes of the Realm prohibited; and all Process, Proceedings, Judgments and
Executions thereupon hereafter to be issued, ordered, entered, awarded,
published, or executed, shall be utterly void and holden for none; and they are
hereby declared void and null to all intents and purposes whatsoever, any
pretended By-Law, Order, Ordinance, Custom, Usage or Practice to the contrary
hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And further, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if at any time
after the making and publishing of this Act, any Officer, Minister, or other
Person or Persons whatsoever shall presume, by or under color of any such
pretended Bylaws, Orders, Ordinances or Regulations, to take, seize, condemn
or convert to his or their own use or uses, any Flower or other Goods or
Merchandises whatsoever, not by law prohibited at any time to be imported to,
or exported from the said City of New York, or any other lawful Port in this
Province, he, they and every of them shall forfeit to the Owner of such Flower,
Bread and other Goods or Merchandises tribble the Value of the Flower, Bread,
or other Goods or Merchandises so to be takes, seized, condemned or converted,
as aforesaid; and also, his tribble Costs to be recovered by Action of Debt, in
any of their Majesty's Courts within this Province, wherein no Essoyn,
Protection or Wager of Law, nor any more than one Imparlance shall be allowed.
Provided always, and it is the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, That no
Officer, Minister, or other Person or Persons shall at any time be impeached,
prosecuted, condemned, troubled or disquieted by virtue of this Act or upon any
Construction or Interpretation of the same, for any Fact, Matter or Thing
acted, done, perpretrated or committed it any time before the making and
publication hereof, but that such Officer Minister, or other person or Persons,
as to any such fact, matter or thing heretofore acted, done, perpetrated or
committed, shall be and remain in such plight, state and condition as if this
Act, an every Clause therein contained, had never been made, any thing before
herein expressed to the contrary hereof in any wife notwithstanding.

As Act for setting Pylotage for all Vessels that shall come within Sandy-Hook.
WHereas by the late Easterly Storm there was several Sand Banks thrown up at
the Mouth of the Harbor at Sandy Hook, whereby the Entry is rendered very
difficult and dangerous to all Vessels bound for this Port, and requires an
attendance of Men at the Hook to be in readiness to pilot them in to safety. Be
it Enacted and ordained by the Governor and Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by the
Authority of the same, That there shall be four Men appointed and
commissionated by his Excellency, the Governor, who shall constantly attend at
some convenient place, near the Hook, with a Boat, to give aid and assistance
to all Vessels bound for this Port, which they are obliged to pilot up as far
as the Narrows.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for every Ship or
three Mast Vessel, that shall come within the Hook, shall be paid Six
Shillings, current Money of this Province, for each and every foot Water said
Ship shall draw. And for every Berkentine or Ketch that shall come within the
Hook, shall be paid Five Shillings current Money of this Province, for each and
every foot Water said Berkentine or Ketch shall draw. And for every Sloop that
shall come within the Hook, shall be paid Two Shillings an six Pence per Foot,
for each and every foot Water said Sloop shall draw (except all such Sloops as
belong to this Province, and are Coasters upon the Main or North America, which
is to be understood to extend from Pemiquid to Virginia inclusive) which Rates
hereby established for the piloting inwards of each Ship or Vessel, shall be
paid by the Master at entering of each respective Ship or Vessel, to the
Collector or Receiver General at the Custom house for the use of the Pilots
aforesaid. Provided always, That the Pilots give their due Attendance at the
Hook, and use their endeavor to come off to all Vessels inward bound, in order
to the piloting them up as far as the Narrows. And whatever Vessel shall come
in, and not find the Pilots at the Hook, and ready as aforesaid, shall not be
obliged to pay the said Rates. And furthermore, the said Pilots shall for such
their Negligence or want of Duty, forfeit and pay unto the use of their
Majesty's the sum of five Pound. And that this Act shall continue but for one
year from the Publication hereof, and no longer.


