A Brief NARRATIVE OF The Success which the Gospel has had, among the INDIANS,
OF Martha's-Vineyard (and the Places Adjacent) in NEW ENGLAND.

With Some Remarkable Curiosities, concerning the Numbers, the Customs, and
the present Circumstance of the INDIANS on that Island.

Further Explaining and Confirming the Account given of those matters, by Mr.
Cotton Mather in the life of the Renowned Mr. John Eliot.

By MATTHEW MAYHEW.

Whereto is added, An Account concerning the Present State of CHRISTIANITY
among the Indians, in other Parts of New England: Expressed in the Letters of
several Worthy Persons, best Acquainted therewithal.

Boston in N. E Printed by Bartholomew Green, Sold by Michael Perry, under the
Exchange, 1694.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY Sir. William Phipps Knight. Captain General and Governor in
Chief of the Province of the Massachufett-Bay, in New England.
TO THE HONORABLE William Stoughton Esquire. Lieutenant Governor. TO Major
GENERAL, Wait Winthrop Esquire.
To the Reverend, Increase Mather, Praesident of Harvard College. AND To the
Reverend, Charles Morton, Pastor of the Church in Charlestown.
SHOULD I not make Honorable mention of Your Names, for Your continual Care
of, and Inspection into, the Great Work of Civilizing the Indians, and
Promoting the Work for their Conversion: and the hope of future encouraging the
Preaching of the Gospel, to such who as yet are (...) God of Israel; I should
be (...). I have in the (...) to the World a True Narra^^^^ (...), of the
Beginning. Progress (...) State of the Indians on Martha's (...) and (...)
Adjacent, and Places on the Mainland to them rela^ing, respecting their
Conversion. That I have not spoken of other parts of New England, may be justly
Excused; since I have Written little more than what is of my own knowledge: of
other places I must have presumed from report. Of the Calumnies cast on the
Indian Professors, I have in the discourse presented to Your view, (as in other
things) spoken briefly, which I hope will be some Satisfaction to You. I shall
only desire of You, that encouragement might be given to some English, or
Indian, Spirited for such Service (humbly conceiving an Indian most probably
like to effect the same) to visit the Indians, bordering on New England; who
might carry to them the glad Tidings of the Gospel; but since I may not doubt
Your Prudence, in this as in other Your weighty Affairs; I shall not add to
this, but Subscribe

Your EXCELLENCIES, And Your HONORS, Most Humble Servant, MATTHEW MATTHEW.
Martha's Vineyard, June 18, 1694
Of the Indians Inhabiting in New England, and Adjacent Provinces.
TO speak more of the Original of this People, than that they are descended
from the Loins of their great Grandfather Adam, however diverse worthy men,
have their diverse Sentiments; I shall not pretend; but that they are Originally
of one Language is most evident: Language.
nor is the admired knowledge of those Ancients so admirable, for their ready
speaking more than Twenty Languages which may rationally be supposed to have
been, but one Originally; though suffering some change, by ocasional accidents:
we know, the diverse pronouncing of the same words, without difference in
Dialect, may render the speaker hardly intelligible, to him that writes alike
with him; nor do I think the speech of these Americans so diverse, but that an
Indian who is (...) with his own, ^ay by (...) supposed of a (...) and (...)
Express himself in very few (...) to be well understood by Forty (...) Nations;
who by reason of Wars, the (...) of (...) and Commerce, and the advantage,
other Nations here ^ad by Literature; (...) severally suffered much alteration
of that Language, (...) first indifferently spoken by all, (...) yet is not
more, differing, than the present Language of the English, from their speech
not many hundred years since; which although it would not readily be
understood, by a present (...), if he should speak with his great Grandfather,
who than lived, yet has not ^o altered, but no long Converse, might render
them mutually intelligible. Of words not unlike in the Indian Tongue hardly
intelligible without customary discourse of Nation with Nation, I might
instance in above an hundred; such as Nuppaw, Duppaw, Ruppaw, the Sun, (...)
Abtooque etc. a Deer, (...) Wirrit, Good, and the like, Pum, Pum me, Pim, Oil
or Fat, these and the like, were doubtless the same words, little altered;
beside which, the alone difference in Pronouncing the same word, might seem a
great difference in the Speech or Language; for Example, Wirrit pronounced
short, sounds Writ, and might be not less readily understood, by differently
accenting the same word; to which I might add, words, as such, Expressing the
mind of the speaker, being (...) of other words, suitable for such Compo^tion,
yet as such might be called now, or distinct from a speech in former use* of
which words, near the one half of this Peoples Language is. I have been the
larger concerning their Language, that such English whose (...) may incline to
so good and great a work, may be encouraged, to go among those who (...) have
hardly heard the Name of the LORD, named among them.

Their Government was purely Monarchical^^ and as for such whose dominions
extended further than would well admit the Princes personal guidance, it was
committed into the hands of Lieutenants, (...)
who Governed with no less absoluteness, than the Prince himself:
notwithstanding in matters of difficulty, the Prince Consulted with his Nobles,
and such whom he esteemed for Wisdom; in which it was admirable to see the
Majestic deportment of the Prince, his Speech to his Council, with the most
deliberate discussion of any matter proposed for their advice; after which what
was by him resolved, without the least hesitation was applauded, and with at
lest a seeming Alacrity attended.

The Crown (if I may so term it) always descended to the Eldest Son (though
Subject to usurpation) not to the Female, unless in defect of a Male of the
Blood; the Blood Royal, (...)
being in such Veneration among this People, that if a Prince had issue by
diverse Wives, such Succeeded as Heir who was Royally descended, by the Mother,
although the Youngest, esteeming his issue by a Venture of less quallity than a
Princess, not otherwise than Sachims or Noblemen.

Their Nobles were either such who descended from the Blood Royal, or such on
whom the Prince bestowed part of his dominions with the Royalties, Nobles.
or such whose descent was from Ancestors, who had time out of mind been
Esteemed such.

Their Yeomen were such who having no stamp of Gentility, were yet esteemed as
having a natural right of living within their Princes dominion, (...)
and a Common use of the Land, and were distinguished by two Names or Titles,
the one signifying Subjection, the other, Tiller of the Land.

Although this People retained nothing of Record, nor use of Letters, Villians.
yet there lived among them many Families, who although the time of their
Forefathers first inhabiting among them, was beyond the Momory of man, yet were
known to (...) strangers or For^^igners, who were not Priv^ledged with Common
Right, but in (...) measure Subject to the Yeo^^anry, no^ were not dignified,
in attending the Prince, in Hunting or like Exercise; unless called by
particular favor.

The Princes, as they had not other Revenue, than the Presents of their
Subjects (which yet was counted, Due debt) Wrecks of the Sea, Reven^^;
with the Skin's of Beasts killed in their dominion, and many like things, as
First Fruits, etc. so they wanted none; For in case of War, both People and
Estate was wholly at their dispose; therefore none demanded nor Expected Pay.
If we respect their Court, it was doubtless maintained in great Magnificence,
in distinction from the Subject, which is the utmost can be obtained by the
greatest Monarch; their Families, and attendants being well Clothed, with
Skins of Moos, Bear, Deer, Beaver, and the like: The Provisions for their
Tables, as Flesh, Fish, Ro^^ts, Fruits, Berries, Corn, Beans, in great
abundance and variety, was always brought by their Neighboring Subjects; of
all which they were as void of Care, as the most Potent Princes in the Universe.

As the Prince was acknowledged, Absolute Lord on the Land, so he had no less
Sovereignty at Sea: for as all belonged to him, (...) on Sees.
which was stranded on the Shore of his Seacoast, so whatever Whales or other
Wreck of Value, floating on the Sea, taken up, on the Seas washing his Shores,
or brought and Landed, from any part of the Sea, was no less his own.

I shall conclude this brief account of the Indians in general with what long
since pasted between the late much Honored, Mr. Thomas Mayhew, and an Indian
Prince, who ruled a large part of the Maind land.

This Prince coming to Martha's Vineyard, with his usual attendants, being
about Eighty Persons, well Armed, came to Mr. Maybew's House, (...)
and being admitted, sat down; Mr. Mayhew entered the Room, but being acquainted
with their Customs, took no notice of the Prince's being there (it being with
them in point of Honor incumbent on the Inferior to Salute the Superior:) a
considerable time being past the Prince broke Silence, and (...), Sachem (a
word importing in their Language not more than, Noble, or Worshipful) Mr.
Mayhew, are you well? to which having a Friendly reply; and treating of several
things, and of the Island Martha's Vineyard, being Peopled with English; the
Prince desiring something wherein the English were concerned, Mr. Mayhew
promising to effect what he desired; immediately Subjoyned, that he must First
speak with the Inhabitants: the Prince demanded why he recalled his Promise;
for said he, What I Promise or Speak it always true, but you English
Governors, cannot be true, for you cannot make your words nor intentions true;
but mine are always true, for I make them true; greatly disdaining the Popular
Government of the English in this Country.

Having Promised an account of the Conversion of many Indians Inhabiting these
parts of America, it may well be Expected I should say something of their
Religion, while Heathen.

They generally acknowledged and worshipped Many gods; therefore greatly
esteemed and reverenced their Priests, Powaws or Wizards, Religion
who were esteemed as having immediate converse with the gods: to them
therefore they addressed themselves in all difficult cases: yet could not all
that desire that dignity (as they esteemed it) obtain Familiarity with the
Infernal Spirits; nor were all Pawaw's alike Successful in their addresses:
but they become such either by immediate Revelation, or in the use of certain
Rites and Ceremonies, Tradition had left as means conducing to that end:
insomuch that Parents often out of certain Zeal dedicated their Children to the
gods, and Educated them accordingly, observing certain Diet, debarring Sleep
etc. yet of the many thus designed, but few obtained their desire.

Supposing that where the Practice of Witchcraft has been highly esteemed,
there may be given the plainest demonstration, of Mortals having Familiarity
with Infernal Spirits; I am willing to let my Reader know that not many years
since, dyed here one of the Powaw's, who never pretended to Astrological
knowledge, yet could precisely inform such who desire his Assistance, from
whence Goods Stolen from them were taken, and whither carried; with many,
things of the like nature: nor was he ever known to endeavor the concealing,
his knowledge, to be immediately from a god Subservient to him, that the
English worshipped. This Powaw being by an English man, worthy of Credit (who
lately informed me of the same) desired to advise him, who had Stolen certain
Goods which he had lost, having formerly been an eye witness of his ability;
the Powaw after a little pausing, demanded why he requested that from him,
since himself served another God, that therefore he could not help him; but
added, If you can believe that my god will help you, I will try what I can do;
which diverted the man from further inqui^y. I must a little digress, and tell
my Reader that this Powaws wife was accounted a Godly Woman, and lived in the
practice and profession of the Christian Religion, not only by the approbation,
but encouragement of her Husband; She constantly Prayed in the Family, and
attended the Public Worship on the Lords Day's: he declared that he could not
blame her, for that she Served a God that was above his; but that as to
himself, his gods continued kindness, obliged him not to forsake his Service.

That the Powaw's by the Infernal Spirits often killed Persons, caused Lameness
and Impotency, as well as showed their Art in performing things, beyond Humane,
by Diabolick Skill, such who have conversed much among them have had no reason
to question.

Their Practice was, either by desiring the Spirit to them appearing to
perform, what mischief they intended; or to form a piece of Leather like an
Arrow head, tying an hair thereto: or using some Bone, as of Fish (that it
might be known Witchcraft, to the bewi^ched) over which they performed certain
Ceremonies; and dismissed them to Effect their desire. Such In^hanted things,
have most certainly, either entered the Bodies of the intended to be by them
wounded; or the Devil has formed the like, within their Flesh, without any
outward breach of the Skin; which we have good reason to believe; the Powaw's
acknowledging that practice; and such things having been taken out of the
Flesh, of the supposed to be bewitched. Or, by their Seizing something of the
Spirit (as the Devil made them think) of such they intended to Torment or kill,
while it wandered, in their Sleep: this they kept being in Form of a Fly,
closely imprisoned; and according as they dealt with this, so it Fared with the
Body it belonged to*

Of the Cures performed by them, on the Bewitched; I could give many instances;
I shall briefly bint at two.

The one, of an Indian on Martha's Vineyard; called afterward (...), who having
been some time greatly Tormented, and now wholly impotent; his Friends advise
him to the Powaw's, concluding him to be Bewitched; they being met, and dancing
round a great Fire, the Sick lying by; some of the Neighbors entered the
House, being persuaded that a great Powaw, now called to cure, had bewitched
the Sick* they threaten him that as he had Bewitched, unless he would Cure the
Sick man, they would burn him in that fire; after many Excuses, too long here
to relate, they took him up, resolving at least to a little Singe him; who no
sooner felt the heat of the fire near him, but the Sick immediately recovered;
This was a thing Publicly known to the English, as well as Indians, in the
Neighborhood: there can be no doubt of it.

The other I shall instance in, was a Relation from Capt. Thomas Dagget Esquire.
now deceased, and Richard Sarson Esquire. Justices of the Peace; who being on an
Island, where a Bewitched Woman lay in great Extremity and wholly impotent: the
Powaw's there having without Success endeavored the Cure; the related sent to
Martha's Vineyard, for more famoused Powaw's: the said Gentlemen, were admitted
to be present, on certain conditions; the Powaw's, go to dancing; who with the
Spectators, used certain Ceremonies usual in such cases; one of the Powaw's
Praying to his god, with such ardent desires and fervency, that Capt. Dagget
told me, had it been to the true God, it had been a Prayer Exceeding most that
he had heard: the issue was, they in a Deer Skin caught the Spirit (as they
said) which entered the Woman; this they said was the Spirit of an Englishman
drowned in the Adjacent Sound: yet it was then supposed, the Powaw was by,
which bewitched her: the issue was, she immediately recovered: the Powaw told
her, unless she removed to Martha's Vineyard, she would again be Sick, for
being an English Spirit be could not long confine it.

Of the Conversion of the Indians, inhabiting certain Islands near adjoining to
the Continent of New England; and the Propagation of the Gospel by some sent, to
the Maineland from thence.
THE Worshipful Thomas Mayhew in the year 1641. having obtained a grant of
Martha's Vineyard, Nantuket and Elizabeth Isles, to make a Settlement; his Son
Mr. Thomas Mayhew in the year 1642. Settled at Martha's Vineyard, with a few
other inhabitants, where his Reputation for Piety, his natural gifts, beside
the acquired by his Education (having attained no small knowledge in the Latin
and Greek Tongues, and being not wholly a Stranger to the Hebrew) soon
Occasioned his call to the Ministry among that handful. Not long after Viz. in
the year 1644. God who had Ordained him an Evangelist, for the Conversion of
these Gentiles, stirred him up with an Holy Zeal and Resolution, to Assay what
Success he might find in that work; he takes opportunity to insinuate, the Love
and good will ^e bor^ to that People, and soon finds Occasion to let them know
their D^plorable Condition, under Satan, who as he had kept them in Ignorance
of those Bodily and Earthly things, which might render their Lives in this
World more happy; so of those that related to their Future happiness in that to
come. And whereas he could not be in hopes of being heard in a more (...), he
Treats them in a more Private way; sometimes going to some particular Houses,
of Persons whom he esteemed most Rational and Well qualified, other while
discoursing with particular men. The first Indian embracing the motion of
forsaking their gods, and Praying to the true God, was called I a-co^mes;
Esteemed by the Indians as a contemptible Person among themselves; unto this
man, God who orders all things for His own Glory, gave so great a measure of
Faith and Confidence in His Power, that he is soon beyond the fear of
Concealing his Contempt of their gods: the Sachems and Powaw's being much
enraged, threaten his Life; the Powaw's or Wizzards told him (a thing Publicly
known) that he could not be ignorant, that they could kill such as displeased
them, Viz. by Witchcraft: he, answers for himself before the Sachimes, Witches,
and a great Assembly; acknowledges the god they Worshipped had great Power, but
Limited, and was Subservient to the God he now had chosen; therefore although
by their means many had suffered much, and some were killed, he despised their
power, as being himself a Servant of Hun, whose Power overruled all Powers, and
ordered all things: the Expecting multitude wait the event, which while they
Concluded, to be Sickness or Death; the good man remains wholly Sound to their
astonishment* Mr. Mayhew makes use of this advantage, is unces^ant in his
labor, and Promises, Now while they Stumbled in doubt of their own, to set
them in the Right Path; he spares not his Body by Night nor Day, lodges in
their Houses, propose, such things to their Consideration he thinks firstly
requisite, solves all their Scruples and Objections; and tells them, they might
plainly see, it was in good will, for* their good, from whom he Expected no
reward, that he sustained so much loss of time, and (...) wet and cold. It
pleased God to give such Success to these endeavors, that it was not long
before he obtained Public Audience among them, when generally, he (...) more
time after Sermon in reasoning with them, than in Sermon, whereby I must tell
my Reader, it came to pass, that their Religion was as well in Head as Heart.
This worthy Servant of the Lord continued his painful Labors among them
until the year, 1657. in which time, God was pleased to give such Success to
his faithful and unwearied Labor, that many hundred men and women, were added
to the Church; such who might truly be said to be Holy in Conversation, and
for knowledge such who needed not to be taught the first Principles of
Religion; beside the many hundred of looser Professors of which, that such
worthy Christians, whose godly Zeal, for Propagating the Gospel, to such who
sat in Darkness and saw no Light, provoked an holy Emulation, to compass Sea
and Land, by their liberal Contributions for Prosel^ting the Heathen, to the
Service and Worship of the Lord Jesus (who yet Survive) might rejoice, since
that, God gave a Blessing to, and caused a Plentiful harvest to Succeed their
Sowing in these Waters* and that the Successors and Children of those ever to
be Honored deceased Christians might rejoice, that their Predecessors
Religious intent, in giving freely of their Worldly Goods, to advance the Work
for Salvation of Souls, was so far from deminishing (...) Estates; that they
thereby (...) to their Childrens Children* I shall give a true Relation, of the
Progress, and present State, of the undertaking, and Gods blessing following
the endeavors of those he called, for Converting the Indians, on Martha's
Vineyard and Adjacent Isles; by letting the World know, who, and how qualified
these were who were Esteemed Christians.

When such a Number professed the Christian Religion, as gave Occasion to the
Indians in general to Esteem them a Sect differing from themselves, and by the
denomination of, Praying men, to Signalize that difference; and that their
Number was such as to Meet Publicly to Worship God: such who forsook their
Heathenish Worship and Idolatry, professing to become Christians: in the
Public Assembly declared, the grounds and reasons moving them to embrace the
one, and forsake the other way, with their Resolution to Pray, to Serve, and
endeavor to Over the true God in Jesus Christ; how this Resolution was wrought
in them; what Temptations had obstructed, what Reason, Scripture and Strength
from God had encouraged them, and enabled them to retain such Resolution* how,
they had often Prayed to God, and yet been overcome by discouragements, and
Temptations etc. Closing all with professing a Resolution, by Gods Assistance,
to Pray to, and Serve Him and Him only; begging the Prayers of the
Congregation to God in their behalf: which said, many of the Congregation took
them by the hand, in token of love, and good will. If after such Public
Profession, any was observed not to perform the usual Worshipping of God, in
Praying with their Families, desiring a Blessing on their Food, or the like
(who yet in their Public meeting constantly attended) they were Publicly
Examined of the same: Of which let me give a remarkable instance: One who after
his Admission (if I may so term it) into the Number and Society of the Praying
Indians, being present at a great Assembly, after the Exercise, was by him that
Preached, informed that it was reported, he had ceased to Pray, desired him, to
let (...) Congregation know, what grounds and motives occasioned such neglect;
the man answered, It was true, he had not lately used Publicly to Pray; yet
did sometimes Pray Privately; that he did not in his judgment disapprove the
Service of God, but acknowledged it to be good; but found himself weak; not
able to live up to Rules of that Religion: but when God should give him more
Strength, he hoped he should be again a Praying man.

Thus Mr. Mayhew continued his almost in expressible labor and vigilant care
for (...) good of the Indians, whom he justly esteemed, his Joy and Crown and
having seen so great a Blessing on his faithful endeavors in the making known
the Name of his Lord among th^se Gentiles, with indefatigable pains, expecting
no reward, but alone from Him, who said; Go teach all Nations, Le I am with
you: God moved the hearts of some Godly Christians in England to advance a
Considerable Sum for encouraging the Propagating, and Preaching the Gospel to
the Indians in New England: and seeing the Spirit given to Sundry of the
Indians, with the gift of Prophesying; according to the Pro^^se, given by Him
who Ascended and gave gifts unto men; an able Godly English man, named Peter
Foulger, who was employed in teaching the Youth in Reading, Writing, and the
Principles of Religion, by Catechizing; and being well Learned in the
Scripture, able to assist them in what might be needful* his Honored Father,
the Governor, well skilled in their Language, and highly honoring the work
for their Conversion; whereby, if in his absence, any difficult matter might
happen, they might find suitable Assistance: in the year 16^7. he intended a
Short Voyage for England; but alas, the Ship wherein he took Passage was never
heard of; Thus (...) to an Immature Death, Mr. Mayhew, who was so
Affectionately esteemed of by the Indians, that many years after, he was seldom
(...) without Tears.

Mr. Thomas Mayhew, after the loss of his son, as aforesaid: Seeing no such
(...) probably to be obtained, that might invite a Minister to embrace the work
among the Indians; and little hopes of finding any of the Spirit of his Son, or
Mr. ELIOT; to bear the burthe^^ attending, and in that day of necessity to be
undergone (...) without a prospect of more than could well be expected, for
encouraging to so in it self-troublesome ^mploy; and that his only Son, had
spent his Strength, and yet rejoiced in the midst of those many Aches, Pain's
and Distempers, contracted by his often lodging in their cold houses, and
enduring Wet and Cold, in faith of Gods accepting of, and prospering him in
that, whereunto he could see nothing could rationally move him; concludes that
it was, Of God, and not of man; he therefore resolves to Visit and encourage
them often; he goes once every Week to some of their Plantations; and with the
Assistance of Godly Indians who taught and instructed their Neighbors, on the
Lords Day's persuaded the Indians of the Gay head, who many years, were
obstinately resolved not to admit the Glad-Tidings of the Gospel among them
(being animated by the Sachims of the Continent) now to embrace it; so that now
the Indians on the Islands of Martha's Vineyard and Nantuket, might justly bear
the denomination of Christian: the number of Adult Persons on both Islands,
being about three thousand; of which I have taken the more particular care to
make an Exact Computation, that I might Vindicate Mr. Cotton Mather, from the
Imputation of overreckoning, when in the Life of Mr. Eliot, he reckons the
number supposed on Martba's Vineyard professing the Christian Religion to be
Sixteen hundred.

The Indians being thus brought over to the acknowledgment and profession of
the Christian Religion; and many of them desiring to join in such Communion,
whereby they might enjoy the presence of God in all His Ordinances; Mr. Mayhew
and Mr. John Cotton (now Pastor of the Church of New-Plymouth) who having been
sometime Preacher to the English, had attained, some knowledge in the Indian
Tongue, and Preached unto them two years; being well Satisfied with their
suitable qualifications, after mature Consideration and advice, concluded to
give their help and Assistance thereto; which was happily accomplished, to the
good Satisfaction of the English Church, and Godly Professors of the Island,
who by advantage of many years acquaintance with them, had great Experience of
their qualifications. An Indian Church Confederated, at Martha's Vineyard. Aug.
22. 1670.

Mr. Mayhew by Mr. Cotton's removing from the Island, was left alone as to any
English Assistance: but Mr. John Mayhew his grandson, being called to Preach to
a small People; by the urgent and ardent desires of the Indians; and being well
skilled in their Language, complied with them; and once every week Preached at
some of their Plantations. His diligence was now to be (...), especially after
Mr. Mayhew his (...) Death, in the year 1681. by reason (...) certain Heterodox
oppin^^^, likely to take (...) them; and being a man of great (...) parts, he
used to desire such who had (...) any of those Principles, to produce their
Reasons; as likewise any that desired to be resolved in any matter, to give him
ad^antage to resolve them in Public; that others might receive Satisfaction
and Instruction; whereby I believe and know, that they received more
Conviction, Instruction and Satisfaction, than in the ordinary way of
Preaching; which always notwithstanding preceeded that: insomuch that none, of
those Erroneous Oppimons spread to the disturbance, or unsettlement of the
Church, nor general^ity of professors among them: but having finished what God
in His all wise Providence, saw good to improve him in; he deceased in the year
1688. leaving the Indians (if I might now so term them) in an orderly way of
Religiously Congregating, in their several Assemblies on the Lords Day, and
hearing their several Teachers, who usually began with Prayer, Sang part of a
Psalm, then from some Portion of Scripture spoke for the Conversion and
Edification of his hearers: as also a Church which then or soon after consisted
of at least One hundred Communicants, being according to the most strict Order
of the Congregational Way: Which leads me to say something of the Discipline
used among them.

The Church then are a Selected Company of Professing Believers, in Covenant
according to the Congregational Practice, having Officers accordingly; and
keeping up the Exercise of a severe Discipline, by Public Admonition in case
of the disorderly walking of any member of their Society; and if after the
Reproof and Admonition of the Church, any proceed in their evil Courses, such
are proceeded with by Excommunication.

I would than willingly know of those Detructors who either Publicly or more
privately, have endeavored to Scan^lalize ^o great a work (...) what kind of
People they expect to see a Church consist of? or when it will come to pass
that some shall not be retained in Churches (who yet may be deemed an Holy
People) whose Conversation may be grievous to the Church, though the Church can
find no Expedient for their Excommunication? I know that many who are in no
measure qualified for Church Fellowship; think it no small disparagement to
themselves, that Indians should be accounted worthy of what themselves cannot
be admitted to: how it is in other places I know not, but here some, whose
religious pretenses have gained Credit abroad, and have not Scrupled to
Stigmatize the Indians with greatest opprobry, in particular cases of their
complaint, the Indians have been found wholly innocent, and themselves sordidly
Vilanous: but when shall it be that the Seed of the Serpent shall cease to hiss
at, and open their Mouths against the Seed of the Woman? which yet I could
demonstrate, has in several cases which have occurred here, against the
Indians, broken the Serpents head* in his Children, and if it were possible
filled them with Shame and Confusion: (...) however, the Sober Religious People
here, have done, and do, esteem them as Christians indeed; and although the
building be not all of Living Stones, yet as it is an House, is so far esteemed
an House of God: Insomuch that I have heard some Godly English, their
Neighbors, Members of Churches; profess they were troubled, that their
unacquaintedness in their Language was such, that they could not well (but
otherwise would gladly) partake with them, in the Ordinance of the Lords Supper.

I must acknowledge, that as the Number of the Indians are greatly decreased,
so especially of the Godly and Religious; it being a thing so obvious, that in
the year 1690. of the Indians of Martha's Vineyard alone; of the number of more
than one hundred Adult Persons that dyed, not less than three fourths, were of
the Sober Religious Professors; that it was by the English Inhabitants vulgarly
taken notice of: the which notwithstanding, in the year 1692. of the before
mentioned Church, were remaining more than one hundred; without mentioning
those many Confessors, before mentioned, whose Public Declarations of their
several Convictions, Temptations, and Resolutions to endeavor to Serve the
true God, would have drawn Tears from the eyes of any who had but in the
Serious retirements of Consideration acknowledged a Deity.

I must not conclude before I tell the Reader, that as in the Ap^stolick times,
the Church sent forth from among themselves, for the Conversion of the Nations,
so these Indians on Martha's Vineyard did; not only to the Island of Nantucket,
being about 1500. Adult Persons; but likewise to the Maine-land. Of those of
Nantuket I shall subjoyn a Letter, from the Worshipful John Gardner, who is
well acquainted with them, having diverse years Assisted them in their
Government, by instructing them in the Laws of England, and de^^ding difficult
cases among them.

Worshipful SIR
I have Received Yours of April the 8th. 94 with your desire to be informed of
the present State of our Indians, as to their Number, Worship and Government;
an Answer to your desires, take briefly: Their Decay is Great, Chiefly in
Number, there being now but about Five hundred Grown Persons: As to their
Worship, there is Three Societies or Churches: Two Congregational; One of the
Baptists, but their Number is small; but their is Live Constant Assemblies or
Meetings; Two amongst them that went by the Name of the Antepeatames or
Powatoms; and that I may now say, there is not known a POWAW amongst them: and
although it is true, there is a great (...) in Religion among the first
Societies, many of their best men, and I may (...) Good men are Dead: Yet
amongst the now Praying Indians, there is an Increase; God Raising us some, yea
even of Themselves, Preachers and Serious men too, some of them; which is cause
of Thankfulness: but that there is a decay with many (...) to be Lamented; the
cause I take to be their not preserving the Truth in the Love of it; their Love
to Drink: their being more mindful of Form than Substance; which puts me upon
endeavor to make them sensible, That it as neither Circumcision no^
Uncircumcision (...) any thing, but the Keeping the Commandments of God; Faith
that works by Love, the New Creature, and things of that Nature. As to their
Government, They are wholly under Their Majesty's, or the English Government;
the method is, they have Three distinct or Town-Courts, with Power to bear and
determine to Forty Shillings: the Magistrates they choose themselves yearly; and
when Chosen and Approved of, they have Commissions with liberty of Appeal to
the English, which they make much use of: Greater matters come to the English.
This in short is the Truth of their Present State.

I am Your Real Friend and Servant, John Gat
Nantu^et MAY, 17 th. 1694.

Here we must take notice of Gods giving Success to the Ministry of the
Indians; and acknowledge, that although there have been some decay, yet on that
Island, there is not only a Form, but in some measure the Power of Godliness.

So likewise on the Maine land; by the alone Ministry of the Martha's Vineyard
Indians, was the Civilizing and Conversion of the Indians on the Ma^ne land, at
a place called Succonet, and parts Adjacent: who as they were Converted by the
Ministry, sent from the Church of Martha's Vineyard, so the Officers were by
them (as likewise were those of Nantuket) Ordained by laying on the hands of
their Prosbytery; of these although I have been no eye witness; yet I have
received account, from even such who bare no great respect to Religion, that
they are as beyond Comparison, Exceeding the other Indians in moral Virtue; so
likewise from other Juci^^ous Persons, their Neighbors of whom I shall name,
Mr. William Vobes, a Person now representing the Freeholders o^ those parts, in
the Great and General Assembly, of the Province of the (...) Bay in New
England: nor have these People as yet dependence on, not Expeatation from any
other than their Mother, the (...)

Of the Indians Government when Christian.
I have already told my Reader, that the Government of this People was the best
of all Governments, Monarchy; and it has been judged not without reason, that a
main obstruction in the progress of the Gospel in the American Plantations,
was, if not yet is, the jealousy the Princes conceived of the Invasion of their
Government through the pretenses of Religion, and the Eclipsing their
Monarchical Dignity.

The ever Honored Thomas Mayhew there fore finding that the Princes on these
Islands, who although they maintained their obsolute Power and (...) as Kings;
were yet bound to do certain Homage to a P^tent Prince on the Continent: and
although they were no great People, yet had been wasted by Intestine Wars,
wherein the great Princes on the Continent (not unlike European Princes for
like Reasons of State) were not unassisting, whereby they were necessitated to
make these Princes the balance to decide their Controversies, and several
Jurisdictions, by presents annually sent, whereby obliging the Princes to give
their several Assistance as occasion required: and seeing his Son as aforesaid
in a zealous endeavor for their Conversion, he judged it meet that Moses and
Aaron join hands; he therefore prudently (...) them know, that by order from
his Master the King of England, he was to Govern the English which should
inhabit these Islands; that his Master was in Power far above any of the Indian
Monarchs; but that as he was powerful, so was he a great lover of Justice;
that therefore he would in no measure invade their Jurisdictions; but on the
contrary Assist them as need required; that Religion and Government were
distinct things. Thus in no long time they conceived no ill Opinion of the
Christian Religion.

When afterward the number of the Christian Indians were increased among them,
he persuaded them to admit of the Counsils of the Judicious Christians among
themselves, and in cases of more than ordinary consequence of a (...) for
Trial; when likewise he promised his Assistance and direction with the Prince;
when notwithstanding the Princes assent was to be obtained, though he were no
Christian. Thus within a few years there was a happy Government settled among
them, and Records kept of all Actions and Acts passed in their several Courts,
by such who having learned to Write fairly were appointed thereto. The Princes
with their Sachims (or Nobles) made Public acknowledgment of their Subjection
to the King of England, being notwithstanding mindful to be understood as
Subordinate Princes, to Govern according to the Laws of God and the King. Here
I shall take leave to insert two remarkables.

During the late unhappy War between the English and Indians in New England,
about Nineteen years since; an Evil Spirit porfessed too many of our English,
whereby they suffered themselves to be unreasonably exasperated against all
Indians; of such there were some on these (...), who could hardly be so
moderated (...) Mr. Mayhew, and others in Government with him, (...) to be
restrained from rising to (...) the di^^^ming of the Indians; for whose
satisfaction Capt. Richard Sarson Esquire. was ordered with a small party (the
Indians being on these Islands Twenty to one, having Arms) to Treat the Indians
on the West end of Martha's Vineyard, who were mostly to be doubted: he returns
with the in^uing answer* that the delivering their Arms would expose them to
the will of the Indians engaged in the present War, who were not less theirs
than the Enemies of the English; that they had never given occasion of the
distrust Intimated; if in any thing not hazarding their safety, they could give
any Satisfaction for proof of their Fidelity, they would willingly attend what
should reasonably be demanded of them; but they were unwilling to deliver their
Arms, unless the English would propose some mean for their safety and
livelihood: with this return they drew a Writing in their own Language, which I
have often read, and would have Verbatim inserted, but cannot at present find
it; the Substance was, that as they had Submitted to the Crown of England, so
they resolved to Assist the English on these Islands against their Enemies,
which they esteemed in the same respect equally their own, as Subjects to the
same King; which was Subcribed by the Persons of greatest note among them.

Having this answer the Government resolved, and accordingly (...) them (...),
furnishing them with (...), and (...) them so faithful this even some (...)
related, in observance (...) general instructions given them, so soon as they
landed from the Continent, were immediately brought before the Governor, to
attend his pleasure* insomuch that the English (although the W^^, with respect
to the (...) of (...), and their advantage by the (...) to the French (...) no
good aspect) took (...), but (...) the whole to the (...) (...) doubting to be
advertised by them of any danger from the Enemy. This was the effect of the
bringing the Gospel of Peace among them, Viz. a Peace-bringing Gospel.

The other observable I shall add to show as their Loyalty, so their observance
of the Laws of England.

In the time of the late Revolution, when many in hopes there was no King in
Israel, expected to have done what they saw good in their own eyes: Several of
our English threatening to fetch certain Sheep in possession of the Indians
inhabiting a small Island Adjacent to Martha's Vineyard; which Sheep they
asserted were Stolen from them, who met with repulse; the Sachim least there
should happen any misunderstanding of that matter, immediately makes his report
to me in these words, Viz. Several of your English have been on my Island, and
would have (...) taken Sheep from (...), and we are much threatened therewith; I
am doubtful if they persist in that Resolution, it may Occasion Bloodshed:
you know that while your Grandfather and my Father lived, there never happened
any difference in such things, not hope will be Occasion given by me. I desire
the (...) Amity may be continued, nor can the English say that we have not
manifested (...) Allegiance to the King by a continued Subjection. And although
it is true, we have desired your Order should come to us, rather than your
Officer, which has generally been observed; yet we are willing in Case the
English pretend any thing, ours have insured them in; let an Officer by writ
from Authority do has duty; then we shall know how in an orderly way, to be
relieved; yet shall the least Boy bringing your Order, as in your Grandfathers
time, Command any thing: and if you see cause on any complaint about our Sheep,
you may command all of them; hoping to find as (...) a decision by the Rules of
Justice: we hope we (...) not see (as is too much practiced in other places) an
English man, pretending an Indian to be in his debt to come to our Houses and
pay himself; or in other cases beat our People; but as (...) we may have equal
Justice, being the Kings Subjects; and Violence and Riot committed on our
People by the English may be esteemed of the (...) nature (...) quality as ours
against them; of which, with the Justl^^, we pray you would Consider, and (...)
speedy care.

I shall as to their Government only add; that in their several Plantations or
Town-ships, they Elect three or more to join with the Sachims (or Lords of the
place) who hold Courts, for (...) such Controversies as happen among them the
Sochim presiding in such Courts, or (...) case he decline that Office, another
is Elected in his place: if either party dislike the Judgment given, he Appeals
to a Superior Court, which consists of some of the most esteemed of each
place, being some of their Magistrates, where some Principal Sachims is Elected
to preside for one year: and from this Court an Appeal lies to the English
Court. In giving Judgment, they observe such rules and orders made and recorded
among themselves. and the English Law, the knowledge whereof they much aspire
unto. They have likewise some among them, whom the less able to declare, or
desend their own Cases, improve as (...); some of which are to admiration
Critical in their pleadings.

I shall close the whole when I have told the (...), that their Children are
generally ^aught to Read, and many to Write; in one of their Towns the last
Winter, Viz. 1693. Thirty Children were at School, Twenty more of the same
place, at the same time accidentally, being not supplied with Books, could not
attend it. Such who are too far distant from any School are often taught by
some of their Neighbors; in diverse places are lesser Schools.

CONCLUSION.
May, if not a double yet a single Portion of the Spirit of an ELIOT of New
England, the Mayhews of Martha's Vineyard, a Bourn of Sandwich, in the late
Colony of New-Plymouth, fall on some Persons, who may, induced with an Holy
Zeal for God, and the Conversion of Souls, according to their Example, Be
instant in Season and out of Season, in^ure all things, become all, unto those
miserable Creatures, that if possible they may Win some, not doing the Work of
the Lord neglegently, by (...) Preaching a (...) to such as desire to hour; but
by frequent visiting them, and from House to House, disputing with and
convincing them, show that it is God, and not themselves they Serve; believing
there is a great and Eternal Weight of Glory attending those whom their Lord
shall find So Doing: then may we hope to see a Blessing on this Land and Peace
on our borders; and the Indians bordering on us, shall obey not out of Fear,
but for Conscience sake. May the Indian Church send forth some from among
themselves, to the more Remote Indians, with as good Success as when to the
next bordering Indians. May the Royal Hearts of our Gracious KING and QUEEN,
still favor so great and Glorious an undertaking: to which may the LORD our
GOD, give His (...). AMEN.

Postscript.
HAving among many things, worthy of notice in the Precedent Discourse, omitted
some Remarkables, of the Indian Converse with Infernal Spirits; I thought meet
to briefly touch some things therein Remarkable: and to insert a (...) of the
Decease of a Prince, memorable for his forsaking his People, for the sake of
Christ, and his return with happy Success in Proselyting his Subjects, to the
Worship of God in Christ. This I find Written on the outside of a Book, in the
Library of Mr. John Mayhew deceased: which please to take as follows.

Mittark, Sachim (rather Prince) of the Gaythead, on Martha's Vineyard,
Deceased January. 1683.

This Princes Subjects being reso^ved to continue in their Heathenism,
notwithstanding his embracing the Gospel; grew so disaffected to him, that he
for a time, removed to the East and of Martha's Vineyard; whither after three
years (...) at the (...), he again returned, having persuaded his People into a
willingness, that such who would, might attend the glad Tidings he pretended to
bring; whereupon He himself opened to them the Mysteries of the Gospel,
dispen^ing the word to such as came to hear him; insomuch that at this day that
People are All Christians by Profession.

The day before his Death I being with him, inquired of him concerning his
hope; who after he had treated some time of the Mutability of an earthly Life;
Said, I have hope in God, that when my Soul departs out of this Body; God
will send His Messengers, who shall Conduct it to Himself, to be with Jesus
Christ; and then with great earnestness, pronounced these words; where that
Everlasting Glory is! As for my reasons; (said he) I my self have had many
wrongs of Enemies, of whom I have (...) Revenge nor retained evil in thought,
word, nor deed; and I also expect the same from God; but (said he) I proceed no
further, for (...) Merciful: then I asked him of his (...) to Die; he replied:
It is now (...) Nights since I was taken (...), and I have not yet asked of
God, to live longer in the World. In this World are some benefits to be
enjoyed; also many troubles to be endured; but with respect to the hope I have
in God, I (...) willing to die; here I am in pain, there I shall be freed from
all pain, and enjoy that Rest that never ends. Then pointing to his
Daughters, said, There be three of my Daughters (relating how they were
disposed of) and you my Daughters, if you loose your Father, Mourn not for me,
but Mourn for your selves, and for your Sins: Mourn not for me, for though you
are unwilling to spare (...), and I might be helpful to you if I should Live
(...) in this World, yet to die i^ ^etter for me.

Of (...) or Persons improving the Infernal Spirits to Effect their intended
Malicious harms: I can inform of a Converted Sachim; who in his Public
Protestation, said as follows. Viz. That he having often employed his god,
which appeared to him in form of a Snake, to Kill, Wound, and Lame such whom he
intended mischief to, he employed the said Snake to Fill, and that failing to
Wound or Lame (...) the first Convert on Martha's Vineyard; all which proved
ineffectual, (...) seriously considered, the said He (...) Af^ertion, that none
of the Powaw's could (...), since his God, whom he now Served was the Great
God, to whom their was subservient; he resolved to worship the true God, from
which time during Seven years, the said Snake gave him great disturbance, but
that he never after his Praying to God in Christ, ever employed that said Snake
in any thing, which about that time ceased to appear to him.

I can also inform, of an Indian Powaw, who although he was not accounted
Religious, yet said, he was a Christian, who being questioned by some English
of such matters reported of him, acknowdedged, that designing to Kill by
Witcherast a certain Indian who accidentally lodged in the house with him and
his Brother, while he went out to inchant an (...), his brother who before lay
from, now contrary to his knowledge lay next to the fire, it being their then
custom to ly bare-back't to the fire; be when he came in, nothing doubting but
that it was his Enemy, directed the enchanted hair to the back of his supposed
Enemy, which immediately entering his body, killed him; but in the morning it
proved to be his brother. The thing was well known; and this Powaw (...) with
great remorse and sorrow to acknowledge the same to such of our English who
inquired of him, concerning that matter.

A Further Account, concerning the present State of Christianity among the
INDIANS in other parts of New England.
Concerning the further progress of the Gospel among the Indians in America;
the Reader may take this following Account, which is Extracted out of several
Letters sent to the Reverend Increase (...), Praesilent of the College at
(...) in New England.

Mr. (...) Treat Pasto of the Church in Eastha^^, in a Letter (...) date August
23. 1693. Writes as (...)

Reverend and Worthy Sir.
I being Advertised that it would (...) be unseasonable or unservicable at this
Juncture, to give your self a true and impartial account, both of the number as
also of the present State of our Indians, and Acceptance and Entertainment of
the Gospel among them, and their professed Subjection thereunto: Wherefore Sir,
you may be assured as follows.

That there are Five Hundred and five Adult Persons of Indians, within the
Limits of our Township, unto whom these many years past, I have from time to
time imparted the Gospel of our LORD JESUS, in their own Language (and I truly
hope not without Success) and yet I continue in the same Service, earnestly
imploring, and not without hopes, expecting and waiting for a more plantiful
down pow^ing of the Spirit from on high among them: and I verily do not know
of nor can I learn that there is so much as one of these Five hundred Indians,
that does obstinately absent from, but do jointly (...) and attend on the
Preaching of the Word, and countenance the same, not only frequenting and
attending seasons of Worship of a divine Sanction, but also all other
occasional Opportunities, when the Gospel is dispensed to them; and when our
Congregations Solemnize Public Days of Prayer with Fasting or of Praises (I
usually giving them Advertisment thereof) they readily comply therewith, in
their respective Assemblies. They have four distinct Assemblies in four
Villages belonging to our Township, in which four Assembles, they have four
Teachers of their own choice, of the more Sober, well Affected and
Understanding Persons among them, who do duly Preach to them, when I am not
with them; these Indian Teachers repair to my house once a Week, to be further
instructed ( Pro modulo meo) in the concernments proper for their Service and
Station.

There are in the four abovesaid Villages, four (...) masters (of the best
accomplished for that Service) who teach their Youth to Read and Write their own
Language.

There are also Six Justices of the Peace (or Magistrates) in the four
abovesaid Villages, who regulate their Civil Affairs, and Pu^ith (...) and
Transgressors of the Civil Law; they have their stated Courts and other
Inferior Officers in a Subserviency to their Civil EUPOLITUESTHAI.

There are among them, many of a Serions, Sober, Civilized Conversation and
Deportment, who are making Essays toward a further Progressive step of
Obedience and Conformity to the Rules of the Gospel, Viz an Ecclesiastical
Combination, having a great desire to be Baptized.

They are very Serviceable by their Labor to the English Vi^inity, and have
all along since our Wars with their Nation, been very Friendly to the English,
and forward to serve them in that quarrel. Their Deportment and Converse, and
Garb, being more Manly and Laudable than any other Indians, that I have
observed in the Province.

But Sir, I would not be tedious, only Craving your Interest at the Throne of
Grace for us, that we may be Serviceable to the Name and Kingdom of our LORD
JESUS. So I Subscribe.

SIR, Yours willingly, Samuel ^reat.
Eastham, August, 23. 1693.

Mr. James Noyce Pastor of the Church in Stonington, in a Letter dated the
Fifteenth of March last, Writes thus.
Reverend Sir.
YO urs I Received, and Rejoice that God bath Stirred up any that does take
care and Contribute toward the advancing Christ's Kingdom amongst the Poor
Heathen; and do and did formerly believe, that where God sends Light, He
intends Love; and where God gives little, He expects less; and therefore the
Labors of the Reverend Mr. Eliot, Mr. Mayhew etc. have not leen lest, they
have net Run in vain, but that many are gone to Heaven of their deceased
bearers. And I should count it my Joy and Crown to win one Soul of them to
Christ. And (...) in hope that some one or two of the (...), that were my
Friends and lived (...) my Land, upon my endeavor have obtained (...) now
dead, who dyed Praying. Renou^^ed (...) the way of the Heathen Worship etc.
(...) Servants (...) the Faith with many (...) are Raptized, and give good
(...) to their Knowledge, Converse and (...) work upon them. I have (...) bound
fast to me to be instructed to Read and Write, and in the way of Life, which
hitherto gives great hopes, and no discouragement; he is about Thirteen Years
of Age. And once I had the advantage to Astonish many of the Heathen, and of
the chief of them, by Gods answering Prayers in the presence of many Heathen,
by raising a very Sick Indian Lad (English also present) after the Lad was
given over by Indians and English, and was Speechless; and several Powaw's had
Powawed, and given that Sentence, that the Lad would Die; but he is alive to
this day: The Story is too large to write, but I believe God did Glorify
Himself in the sight of the Heathen, according to Humble and Earnest Petitions,
made in the presence of about Thirty Heathen: all seemed to be much Confounded
and awakened. O^^ very W^tty and Wise Sachem there present told me, he would be
a Christian, but he was afraid his heart would not be right, without which
Profession would be in vain, and he was afraid Wine and Women would be his
Ruin, he should not for bear, but he owned and almost all present, when I
(...), Our God was the Great and true God, but they (...) Indians, and they did
(...) know Him. Of these things and (...) English (...) when their Powaw's had
long Cried for Rain and God answered by sending Rain the same day to the great
Astonishment of the Heathen.

Yours to Serve, James ^opce.
Stonington March, 15. 1693, 4.

Mr. Rowland Cotton, Minister at Sandwich, in a Letter of June 27. 1693.
Writes thus.
Reverend Sir,
I have Endeavored to take an Exact Account of those Indians, Adult Persons,
who do constantly attend upon the Dispensation of the Gospel, in the place that
at present I am concerned for. And we do find that in Mashipau, Sanctuit, and
Cotuit Villages bordering on each other, and all belonging to the same
Assembly; There are no less than Two hundred and Fourteen, besides several
Straglers, that have no settled Place; do repair thither. To carry on the work
of the Lords Day, there is appointed one Simon Papm^nit: and at other times I
shall diligently intend their good according to my Capacity.

Reverend Sir, I desire your Blessing on Your Servant, Rowland Cotton
Sandwich June, 27. 1693.

Mr. Thomas T^pper also has given an Account of One hundred and Eighty Indians,
unto whom he does dispense the word, concerning whom he has Charitable hopes
that they do (and that with Zeal and Sincerity) Embrace the Gospel. There are
moreover, in Plymouth Colony about Five Hundred Indians, amongst whom Mr. John
Cotton (Pastor of the Church in Plymouth, and Son to the Famous Cotton of
Boston) has and does Preach the Gospel. Likewise Mr. Peter Thatcher, Pastor of
the Church in Milton, is a Faithful Labourer amongst the Indians at Punkepaog.
So is Mr. Grindal Rawson, Pastor of the Church in Mendam, among the Indians in
those Parts; and Mr. Bondet, who is Minister to the French Congregation at
Oxford, in the Nipmug Country. The Indian Church at Natick (which was the first
Indian Church in America) is since Blessed ELIOTS Death, much diminished and
dwindled away. But Mr. Daniel Gookin, has bestowed his Pious Cares upon it.

Besides the Labors of the English in New England, Mr. Dellius (a worthy Dutch
Minister) at Albany has Learned the Language of the Indians in those parts; God
has Graciously Smilled on his Endeavors, so as that Considerable Numbers of
them are Converted to the Faith of Christ, and there is reason to hope that
what is done, is but the First Fruits of a Great Hervest to follow. Take the
Account which himself gives, in a Letter bearing date the 16 th of January
last. His words are these.

Reverend Sir.
I have this to add to my former, that a Jesuit called Milet, whom the Oneydes
took Prisoner about four years ago, and who is now in that Castle a great man
among them, uses all his Subtilty to frustrate my Labors, by making false
Impressions upon the Indians concerning our Religion; yet God Almighty is
Pleased to strenghen my Proselytes in that way, I teach them more and more;
sometimes there happens difference and disputes between my Proselytes and his
concerning the the Points of Religion, but ours allege they Confute the
others. This I must say for them, that they take a great deal of Pains and are
very Zealous to learn, and very Devote in there Practice; I am under favor of
opinion, that the Jesuit (...), with the Cases of Conscience added thereto,
writ by their own hands, which they learn the Indians, which is either in your
or your Reverend Son, Mr. Cotton Mathers Possession* may be Serviceable, to
convince our Proselytes and others French, that come here of there Pernicious
Principles, and wish the same might be sent me. I had put Six or Seven Psalms
in their Native Language upon our Notes, but were not perfected, now they are
finished and the Ten Commandments also. The new Infant Church among the Heathen
Increases, there being Seventeen last Communion day, the Thirty-first of
December last, who took the Sacrament with us, and four others Baptized the
same day. Thus God is sought of them that asked not for Him, and is found of
them that sought Him not. I think that God has a great People of them yet; the
Lord send a Blessing to those means that are used for the Enlargement of His
Kingdom among them; and Bless you, and all that Labor in His Vineyard, which
shall ever be the Prayers of him, who is,

Reverend SIR, Your most Faithful and Obedient Servant, in our Lord Jesus,
Godefridus Dellius.
Albany, January, 16. 1693, 4.

FINIS.

