TO THE Christian Reader
SOME have disputed, whether the In^vention of Printing and Guns, have done
more harm than good. I sha^ not determine. Only this I dare sa^^ that where
Guns has slain their thousands, the Press has slain its ten thousands. And
the (...) kind of slaughter is more deplorable because it reaches to men's
Souls. Of this m^^sery there will be no end, while Controversies tak^ up our
time, or Novelties take with our fancy* having now some leisure (whereof, as
eve^ a Heathen said, I must give an account) bethought my self, wherein I might
be mos^ servicable to my generation, and bring mos^ glory to my God and
Savior. Therefore knowing that the Press will reach those wh^ are otherwise
out of my reach, I resolved (...) some lesser piece first, to make an essay how
any thing of mine would pass in the world* And thinking it presumption (yea
something worse) to transcribe, and pick both method* matter, and words, out of
other authors, pretending a new treatise upon a beaten argument, which others
had better handled before* finding also by experience, that some (...) heedless
Writers have done the Church more ^^^ser^ice, by taking off the minds of men
from (...) ancient Authors, than real service by putting (...) truth only into
a finer mode; I did therefore c^^^clude, to except of that for my theme, which
all Divines (for ought I can find) have ^ with one consent left untoucht, as if
they ha^ bequeathed it to me to handle. So that (...) hope, all ingenious
Readers will be more candid to me, whatever imperfections their critical eyes
may here discover, considering that I could not plow with another man's He^^fer,
nor boast in another man's Line of thing made ready to my hand. And I hope,
(...) among the many women with child, it may light into the hands of some,
that are seirous humble, and teachable; whom I would entreat to peruse it
deliberately, ( if they please) a chapter in a day, seconding it with
Medi^tation and Prayer; and if they thus (...) through it in order, I question
not, but if (...) never hear of them, yet God shall soon hea^ their voice of
thanksgiving, for some benefi^ by it. We know that their dangers are ma^ny,
that their days are frequently shortened by travel, that their souls are
precious and therefore how precious should be to us an^ oppertunity, of
aquainting them with God with their duty to him, to their own souls and to the
children they go with. Surely our Relation to, or Aquaintance with some of
them, our Christian compassion that we owe to all of them, does oblige us, not
(...) to wi^h their happy deliverance, but, as ^^^casion is offered, to promote
their prepara^^^on for travel.

Sure I am, that all big-bellyed women (...) need to remember themselves, and
to consider (...) things that belong to their peace before they be (...) from
their eyes. For if women will make (...) other preparation for Lying in, than
(...) is common, if they only get Linen and (...) necessaryes for the child, a
nurse, a midwi^e, ent^^tainment for the women that are called to the Labor, a
(...) convenient chamber, etc.

Which things I confess every one accordin^ (...) their ability should be
mindful of, in tim^ her as I have showed in a distinct Chapter (...) this Book,
Women in this condition shou^^ be very careful of their bodies while they a^^
with child, and very careful of providing (...) Possible helps and conveniences
against the^^ Lying in. But all these may prove misera^ble comforters, they may
perchance need n^ other linen shortly but a Winding sheet, an^ have no other
chamber but a grave, (...) neighbors but worms; or if they be delivere^ while
yet they retain such unwillingness o^ mind to prepare for death, (as we say of
al^ other deliverances granted to the ungodly) they are delivered in anger not
in favor, with Gods curse not with his blessing, and are (in al^ ^ikelyhood)
reserved to the greater condem^nation when their Sin is Ripened. Whereas (...)
Would seek the Lord while he may be found, if they would mind diligently the
one thing necessary, if they would speedily fly to Christ for refuge, then they
are safe; for whether they live or die their souls cannot mis^arry. But (...)
these things I have spoken more at large in the Book it self.

Only I would beg leave in this second E^ition to interpose some short
admonition to ^^e Husbands and Friends of those to whom ^^is Book is directed.
And did not daily and ^^d experience promulge it, that too man^ Husbands need
some rememberance of their ^uty, I would not have been so importune as to say
any thing of it. (...) ^^erefore entreat their Christian (...) ^ellows, to
remember, that seeing they know not how momentous their pregnancy is, and how
much may depend on this fruit of the Womb which she is now burdened with; th^^
they would with all good conscience addre^^ themselves to know and fulfill their
relativ^ ^uties. This they all owe to their wives by common bonds of conjugal
fidelity; much more to faithful, godly, loving, deserving wives, by the
stronger bond of gratitude to God from whom they obtained so great a favor as
the enjoyment of her person, and this additional testimony of his blessing on
their matrimonial union, the child in (...) womb.

(...) becomes them therefore at all times bu^ now more, to put on, as the
elect of God (...) and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humb^^^ness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering, foabearin^ one another, forgiving one another;
as Christ fo^^gave, so aso do ye* col 3.12, 13. Now put o^ charity ( or love,)
now let the peace of Go^ rule in your hearts unto which you are cal^led, and be
ye thankful, now let all bitte^^ness, wrath, anger, clamor, and evil
spea^^ing, be put a way from you; and no^ dwell with her as a man of knowledge:
an^ this end, Let the word of Christ dwell in yo^ in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing her, an^ praising God with her in Psalms and Hymns, an^ Spiritual
Songs. These practices will caus^ her to submitt to you as it is fit in the
Lord and enable you to Love your wife, aad not t^ be bitter against her. v.
18, 19.

But especialy let your Supplications for he^ ^e made known to God, in this
time of need ^or though too few there are that pray at all of those few yet a
fewer number apprehen^ any need of Prayer for them, till the very hour of
travail, yet among those that ar^ acquainted with God it is known (and ^ wish it
were more known even among them) how much afflictions are sweetened blessings
multiplied, mercies sanctified, the ^oke made easy, and piety much promoted,
by this practice, of praying privately with their wives: For which Mr Rob.
Bolto^ (...) so famous, who prayed six times every day, ^wice in secret, twice
with his wife, and ^wice with his family. This will doubtless ^ye the band of
love with an indissoluble not, and cause them to live as heirs together ^f the
grace of life. And this I especially ^ommend to them at this time.

You should likewise implore the prayers of Ministers and other Christians for
them, of which we have in the City of London (and ^ther places where piety
flourishes) frequent and happy examples* and those that have ^eared much they
should not do well, have ^ound in this and other cases, that there are ^et some
in the world whose effectual fervent ^rayers do avail much, of which they have
^aused public acknowledgments to be made (...) the Congregations of Gods
people.

These things being duly performed, th^^ ^esser duties will follow of
themselves, as (...) tenderness of her health, protection, quiet, and^
tranquillity, a bearing with her infirmitie^ promoting her cheerfulness and
content i^ all fit and lawful ways and allowing her i^ such odd weaknesses as
accompany that con^dition. For women are always of strong passions and
affections, quickly sensible o^ kindness, or unkindness; but in this
conditi^on, especially of unkindnness, because of acc^^dental melancholy from
obstrustions, hyst^^rical vapors, many pains and illnesses, an^ sad
apprehensions of the burden they carr^ and the hazard they are in, under all
which ^is imposible to be in in so good a humou^ ^s at other times; for which
therefore a pro^portionable allowance must in prudence be given, as they
themselves desire or expect the ^ike favor to themselves in their own
sick^ness, wherein all men are liable to many absurdities, and troublesome
humors.

As for such wretches as pretending to be ^he head of the wife, yet take no
like care of her as the head of the meanest member ^ffected with any distemper,
that have no ^egard to these or other rela^ive duties, as every season calls
for them, but like Nabal are perpetually chu^lish, and bitter, and care not ^f
their wives perish; what shall I say or what can I say bad enough of them? They
^re Devils or Monsters and not Men, for no Man ever yet hated his own flesh; or
if they are ^en, yet the basest of men, worse than infi^els that provide not
for their own family, no ^ot the choicest and nearest part of his fa^ily, his
own wife. But I leave them either ^o the grace of God to convert them, or to
^he wrath of God to cut them off; Psalm. 18 ^5, 26. for with the merciful he
will show himself merciful and with the upright he will ^ew himself upright,
with the pure he will show himself pure, and with the froward he will ^ew
himself froward.

And now, Reader, to conclude. You must (...) expect the complements of some
writers, that I should extenuate the worth of this Book ^because it is mine) or
tell the Reader that it i^ ^nworthy of his view, needs his pardon; and wa^
^rrested from me by the importunities of no man nows who, that else I should
above all things ^ave shunned to appear in Print, etc No, Let such ^issemblers
study a truer Apology for their false Apology. When they have said never so
much ^o their own disparagement, who belives them? Neither can I understand,
how any honest man can Print a Book, and yet profess that (...) thinks none
will be the wiser or better for ^eading of it. Let me therefore only say this,
that I have in this piece, as Small as it is, taken pains, and well considered
of what I have written. The matter is generally Scrip^^ural, and there is that
truth of God in it, tha^ ^ommands your Christian regard. And God ^s my witness,
how often I implored Hi^ ^ssistance in composing it, and His blessing ^n it
when finished. That my Labor will b^ ^ccepted of the Saints is my greatest
hope, bu^ ^or Prai^^ or commendation from others, ^im not sollicitous. In a
word, I send i^ abroad with this confidence, that it will, b^ Gods Blessing, do
good to some. And I have this assurance, that there is nothing in it tha^ can
be hurtful to any, that will either rightly take it, or let it alone. Farewell
in the Lord*

Thy Souls Friend John Oliver.


