Ornaments for the Daughters of Zion.

OR The CHARACTER and HAPPINESS OF A Virtuous Woman: in A DISCOURSE Which
Directs The FEMALE-SEX how to Express, THE FEAR OF GOD, in every Age and State
of their LIFE; and Obtain both Temporal and Eternal Blessedness.

Written By COTTON MATHER

Tertullian's advice for the Ornaments of WOMEN.

Prodite Vos jam Ornamentis Extr^cte Apostolorum -- V^stite Vos S^rico Pietatis
Pyssi^o Sa^ctitatis, P^rp^ra Pudicitiae -- Deum habebitis Amatorem. In English.

Go ye forth now arrayed with such Ornaments as the Apostles have provided for
you; Cloth your selves with the Silk of Piety, the Satin of Sanctity, the
Purple of Modesty; So the Almighty God will be a Lover of you.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. G. and B. G. for Samuel Phillips at Boston. 1692.

The PREFACE.
IT IS very Surprising to see and read, what a [ Mundus, or] World, of Pretended
ORNAMENTS, the Bl^ssed Prophet Isaiah sets out. The Daughters of Z^on* which
lived in his Days, as Rigged withal. But among all those One and Twenty
Ornaments, I find none of those which the Inspired Apostle Peter do^s Recommend
unto the Women of all Ages, as, Things in the sight of God, of great price And
therefore as I did not Wonder at the Following menace of the Almighty, I will
take away the Bravery of their Ornaments; thus I also set my self to
accommodate my Neighbors, with such Ornaments, as make up what Mary Chose,
even, The good part which cannot be taken away. They that shall Criminate an
undertaking to write a little Book for Promoting the Fear of God in the Female
Sex, do* but show their Ignorance of what was done by Tertullian, by Jerome, by
Austin, in the Primitive Times* besides what has been done by several Renowned
Pens of a later date; and Perhaps, they forget, That one Book i^ the Sacred
Bible, was written for, An Elect Lady. As for the Manner of my own Writing,
it is Plain, Br^ef, Chaste; and not without an endeavor to imagine how such a
subject would have been handled by a Timothy. who was to address Women, and yet
be an Example of Purity. But as for the D^sign of my Writing, it is purely to
advance Virtue among those, Who cannot forget their Ornaments, and yet often
forget those things which are no l^ss Necessary than Ornamental. Now, may GOD
Prosper it.

Ornaments for the Daughters of Zion. OR The Character and Happiness of a
Virtuous Woman:
From the Words of the Wise Woman, in Prove. XXXI. 30. Favor is Dec^itful, and
Beauty is Vain; but A WOMAN THAT FEARS THE LORD, She it is, that shall be
Praised.


IT may well be reckoned the Brightest Honor of that Sex, which the Holy
Spirit of God has declared W^rthy of a Chaste and a Kind Honor from us* That
when the Fullness of Time was Come, God sent forth His Son, made of a Woman. As
a Woman had the Disgrace to Go First in that horrid and Woeful Transgression of
our first Parents, which has been the Parent of all our misery; so a Woman had
the Glory of bringing into the World that Second Adam, who is the Father, of
all our Happiness: a Woman had the Savior of Mankind in the Circumstances of
an Infant Miraculously Conceived within her; and of a Mary was Born that Holy
Thing, which is called, The Son of God. There is a Woman, whom we do now
without the mistakes, which made that Expression the Occasion of many Ancient
and no less Furious than Curious Controversies, call* The Mother of Him that is
God; inasmuch as that very Flesh which was Born of her, and which the Trembling
Heretics of this Age, do not now Tremble to Vilify and Nullify wi^h frequent
Blasphemies; I say, That V^sible Tangible Flesh is Personally United, unto the
Second Person in the Adorable Trinity. Though we do not like the Popish
Idolaters, for this Cause, imagine that Blessed Virgin to have been free from
Original Sin, when she was on Earth, nor now Implore her Mediation and
Intercession, in Heaven for us; and though I do not think, that the Holy Ghost
referred unto her peculiarly, as there are Expositors who think H^dos* when He
says, The Woman that fears the Lord, She it is that shall Praised; Yet we may
safely account the Female Sex herein more than a little Dignified. And how
should it Encourage all Women to seek a Saving Interest in that Redeemer, who
was Born of a Woman! how should all Women make their Hears a Lodging for that
Lord, who in a Woman received, The Body Prepared for Him!

THE Second, or a privilege not far from the Second Advancement of that Sex,
may be Esteemed, the Share which it has had in Writing those Oracles, which
make us Wise unto Salvation. As one Woman was the Mother of Him who is the
Essential word of God, so diverse Women h^ve been the Writers of His
Declarative word. Though the Apostle does abundantly intimate unto us, that
such Inspirations as Composed the Scriptures are not now to be expected, when
he gives the prohibition so much Transgressed by the most Absurd sect in our
Days, That the Woman may not speak in the Church; Yet our God has Employed
many Women to Write for the Church, and Inspired some of them for the Writing
of the Scriptures. We have not only seen Women doing service for the Tabernacle
by such Ingenious Writings as we find mentioned in the Catalogues of
Beverovicius,, Hottinger, and Voetius; or such as that most Accomplished Lady,
Anna Maria Schurman has in our Age addressed the World withal; for even the
Books Published by that Sex, were enough to make a Library far from
Contemptible; nor has even the New-English part of the American Strand, been
without A^thoresses that would Challenge a Room in such a Library: They to whom
the common use of Swords is neither Decent nor Lawful, have made a most
Laudable use of Pens; and they that might not without Sin, lead the Life which
old Stories ascribe to Amazons, have with much Praise done the part of Scholars
in the World; But we sometimes also find a Woman among the Ama^nenses or
Scribes, of that Spirit, who moved Holy men, to Write the most sure Word of
Prophecy. And how much does this Oblige all Women to study that precious Bible,
to the curious Work-manship whereof, the hand of a Woman has contributed? how
ready should women be to Read the pages, upon which they may see transcribed
the Heavenly discoveries made by the God of Heaven to an holy woman; rather
than to mispend their hours, and infect their hearts by the revolving of such
Romances, as commonly leave a sensible Taint upon the minds of their unwary
readers?

WE have not only the Song of Deborah, the Song of Hannah, the Song of Mary,
and the Prophecy of Huldah, in this matchless book of our God; but the
instructions of Bathshebah too, are entered in these bl^ss^d Registers. The
Thirty first Chapter of the Proverbs, contains a direction of Bathshebah to her
darling Solomon. Solomon that in the fourth chapter of this Book, records the
Counsils of his Father, now in the last chapter adds the Counsils of his Mother
thereunto. So careful will wise children be to remember the gracious counsils
of their godly Parents! We have Solomon here address^d by the name of Lemuel,
which name some interpreters judge to be a little and a loving imitation of his
true Name; (...) it is usual with our Mothers, from the names of Edward and
William and the like, to form some affectionate Appellations for us; but others
waving so small a consideration, do look upon Le^uel as one of the eight names
which the Jews do ascribe unto that man of Name, and they tell us, that as
Jedid^ah proclaimed his being Beloved of ^he Lord, (...) Lemuel signified his
B^longing to the Lord. Some f^mous persons in the world, have been signalized
by that Character of being Mother-taught; such an one was our Solomon, wh^ had
not only a Father, that left behind him* Transcendent Songs for Solomon, but
also a Mother* who taught him such things as the best should not be unwilling
to learn. How free, how ^ich is the Grace of God unto Repenting sinners!
B^thshebah after a very scandalous F^ll, becomes ^ very eminent S^int, yea, a
Prophet^ss of the Lo^d. Although a woman may have be^n Remarkable and Notorious
for sin, yet let her endeavor to make her peace with God: I^ may be made, and
she may enter into the Kingdom of ^eaven, before others that have not had
such wounds upon them.

IT IS evident, that the nine first verses of the Chapter, are spent in Reciting
the most Prudent and winning L^ssons of Bathshebah to her S^lomon. But it is
conceived that the rest of the chapter is only Solomon's Reciprocation in the
praises of Bathshebah. It is indeed a most lovely thing to see such
Correspondencies of Desert and Duty, as make Children to count their Mothers
worthy of their honor: Noble Romans have sometimes made Flo^id speeches a^ the
Funerals of their Mothers, and prof^ssed, That they had never in their Lives
been reconciled unto them, inasmuch as (they meant) they had never fallen out:
It is the Happiness of a Mother sometimes to have such Sons as Nazia^zen and
Austin were unto theirs, whose Names are by their means forever Celebrated:
although for the most part we see in men's Readiness to Slight their Mothers,
the Reason why the Mother is put first in that Charge of our God, Ye shall fear
every man his Mother, and his Father. It is the Opinion of others, That the
Conclusion of the Chapter, is also the Composure of Bathsheba; and that which
confirms them in this Opinion is, The Skill in Household Affairs here
manifested, which Carries a Little of a Female Aspect with it. However it be,
we have here the Description of, A Virtuous Woman, in twenty two Verses,
according the Number and Order of the Letters, in the Hebrew Alphabet; Every
letter in due sequence beginning a several Verse. It Is reported, that Children
among the Jews of old Learning to Write, had their Copies usually given them
from those Portions of the Scriptures, which were drawn up wi^h such an
Alphabet of the Hebrew Letters in them; whether that were so, or no I am sure
that Women among the Gentiles in our Days, Learning to Live, cannot easily
find better Copies to follow, than those which are in our Context here set
before them. It were to be wished, That the Sex which so often looks into the
Glass, would sometimes cast an eye upon this part of that Sacred Word, which is
Compared unto a Divine Glass; that they may see whether they have the Features,
or Habits of, The Virtuous Women, on them. And I pray, let no Woman count her
self s^ great a Lady as to put in her Exceptions, against tha^ ^troke in the
Cha^^cter of the Virtuous Woman here* She seeks Wool and Flax, and Works
willingly with her Hands; till (...) has procured the (...) of the English Law,
wherein, Spinst^r* is a Term given to Women of the greatest Quality. When a
Gentlewoman of Ex^raordinary Learni^g was presented before the first King of
Great Britain, his first Question to her, was, Madam, Can you Spin? And several
of the most Renowned Emperors, have not only Obliged their Daughters to Spin,
but also Wore such Garments as those Princely Hands had prepared for them. The
Cards at which many Gentlewomen Play wickedly with their Hands, are far more
D^^^si^g, than those C^rds which fi^^ the Wool for the Wheel: and the Distaff
is an Instrument of better Quality than the D^ce. The Famous Queen Katherine,
when (...) of high ^ank were s^nt unto her with a Message from King Henry
counted it no Disgrace to be found wi^h a Skein of Red Silk about her Neck, at
W^^k, wi^h a Maid of Honor by her side. She that has Bought a Field has no^
thereby Bought a Release from Domestic Busi^esses; the Hands which Carve at
the most Noble Tables, may be Laid unto the Spindle, without being
Dishonourably Blistered or D^^tied there.

IT IS a f^olish Custom which the Jews have in Reading Solomon's Book of
Ecclesiastes; that they Print the Last Verse but One, of it* over again in the
C^o^e of all, because they would have the Remembrance and Impressi^n of that
Verse to be St^onger upon the^, than that of the Terrible Verse which follows
it. But having laid before you the Descrip^i^n of, A Virtuous Woman, which
closes up Solomon's Book of Proverbs, I must upon anoth^r Account Print, and ask
the Daughters of our Common Mother to Read, the Last Verse but One, over again;
it is this.

FAVOR is Deceitful, and Beauty is Vain; but a Woman, that Fears the Lord,
She it is that shall be Praised. THE Words are, as one saves of them, A Roy^l
Ga^land set on the Head of a Virtuous Woman by the Hand of God. Some
Interpreters, do so Allegorize these Words, that they make this Virtuous Woman
to be the Church of God. Indeed, there are more Women, than Men, in the Church;
and the more Virtuous they pr^ve, the more W^r^hy will the Church be, to be
sig^e^ by, A Woman that Fears the Lord Some ^nterpreters again, do so Sublimate
the Words, that they understa^d Every (...), P^ous, Devout Soul by this
Virtuous Woman And it were well, if Women were genera^ly (...) V^rtuous, as
that they might w^rthily imp^rt un^o Ev^ry Godly S^ul, the Denomina^i^n of, A
Woman that Fears the Lord. Other Interpreters, do (...) Virtue i^ self to be
meant by the Virtuous Woman. Bu^, we should be sorry, if a Virtuous Woman prove
so rare a thing, as to afford a style for a Parable rather than an History. I
confess, Virtue it self, and the Names of all Particular Virtues, are
Grammatically of the Female Gender; and that the Things may Theologically
abound in that Gender, is what we may thence take Occasion to be wishing for.
But after all, It Is a Real, Proper, Gracious Woman, that has her Charact^r and
Blessedness in these words Exhibited unto us. --

THE first thing with which we are here treated is,

I. THE CHARACTER of a Vert^ous Wom^n.
AND this Character is both Negatively and Posi^ively offered. Negatively, It Is
not a Deceitful Favor, or, a Vain B^auty that sets her off; Women that have
none but those things ^o V^lue themselves upon, are driven ou^ from, The Temple
of H^nour, here: But, P^si^ively, It Is, the Fea^ of the Lord that is her
Commendation. It Is employed* not only Tha^ Favor and B^auty are poor Things
Compared wi^h the Fear of God, but also that they who have the Fear of God,
will not Value themselves upon their Favor and Beauty (...) Yea, that there is
a Favor and Beauty Opposi^e, Contrary, Destruct^ve to the Fear of God* We may
Reflect upon the Whole, in these Conclusions.

Conclusion. 1.
THE Virtuous Woman counts the best Female Favor to be Deceitful, the best
Female Beauty to be Vain.

BY Favor is meant, a Com^ly Presence, an Handsome Carriage, a Decent G^sture,
a Ready Wit agreeably expressing it self, with all other Graceful Motions, and
whatsoever procures Favor for a Woman among her Neighbors. The Virtuous Woman
is willing to have this Favor, so far as is consistent wi^h Virtue; She
Counts it a Favor of God for one to be graced with it; But still she looks
upon it as a Deceitfull-Thing. She is careful, that She do not hereby Deceive
her self into proud Imaginations, and into an Humor, Conceited of her self, or
Contempteous toward others. Careful She likewise is, lest hereby She Deceive
Unwary men, ^i^to those Amors which bewitching looks and Smiles do often
betray the Children of men, especially those that are but Children of men, into.

BY B^auty is meant, a good Proportion and Symmetry of the par^s, and a skin
well Varnished, or that which Chrysostom calls A Good mixture of Blood and
Phlegm Shining through a good Skin; With all that Harmonious Air of the
Countenance, which recommends it self, as a Beauty, to the Eye of the
Spectator. The Virtuous Woman, is not Unthankful for this Beauty when the God
of Nature has bestowed any of it on her; and yet She counts it no Virtue for
her to be very sensible of her being, Illustrated with such a Beauty. But still
she looks upon it as a V^in thing. She reckons it so Vain* that she ha'^ no
Assurance for the Continuance of it; but that it is, Temporis et M^rbi
Ludib^ium, as one of the Ancients has desc^nted on it; a thing neither Age
Proof nor Agu^-Proof. She sees that Vanity in it, which is upon the quickly
Withering R^ses and Lillies of the Field: such a Vanity as that Sick^beds or
Sun beams or a thousand Casualties may soon destroy that Idol of ^he Amorites.
And upon these Though^s, a V^rtuous Woman takes heed of becoming so D^ceitful
and Vain, as many Women are Tempted by their Favor and Beauty, to become.

Conclusion. 2.
THERE is a Favor so particularly Dec^itf^l* and a Beauty so Remarkably Vain,
as that a Virtuous Woman would be loath to be D^formed wi^h it.

THE Favor whereat a Virtuous Woman h^'s a Par^icular D^stast, is that which
Promiscuous Dancing is applauded for. The Exercise of Promiscous Dancing is
that which pretends to be a piece of Breeding which demands the Favor of
Womankind; but a Virtuous Woman esteems them Deceived who count it so; nor
will She affect such an Exercise. Jo^ recounts it as part of the Breeding which
the Ungodly bestow upon their Children, in Chap. 21.11. Their Children Dance.
Now the Virtuous Woman is not f^nd of b^ing that way Employed. We read the
^aughty Daughters of Zion described and threatened in Isai. 3.16. as, Walking
and Mi^cing as they go. Very Renowned Exp^sit^rs, Conceive that Scripture to
refer unto the hau^hty Carriages Learned in the Dancing School. The Apostle
Paul in Romans 13 13. Condemns, Rioting; and the Apostle Peter, in 1 Pet. 4.3.
Condemns, Rev^lling. Now the most Learned Critics in the Greek Tongue, Judge,
D^ncing to be the Thing intended in the word there used by those Apostles.
Moreover, The Reverend Assembly of Divines, in their Larger Cat chism, Very
justly mention Dancings among ^he Things forbidden in the S^venth Commandment
of our G^d. Nor does the L^vity of Dancing^ wherein Persons Le^p and Fling
about so like Bedlams, that the Wisest men have called it, A Regul^r Madness,
now agree well with the Gravity* which Holiness is to be accompanied withal.
Such things as these are Enough to make a Virtuous Woman to discard such
Dancings from among, The Things of Good Report; and leave them either to the
Pagans whose manner it was to Dance in the Worship of Bacchus, or to the
Monkeyes whom of old, they brought forth to Dance at the Festival of Diana.
Some of the more Sober Papists, have not stuck to say, The Dancer breaks the
Covenant of God, made it B^ptism; he Promis^d to Renounce the Devil, and his
pomps: but when he enters into a Dance, h^ goes in the Pompous Procession of
the Devil. They are not a few Silly Scrupulous prec^sians, by whom these
Dancings have been Stigmatized. In the Primitive Times, more than One or Two of
the Fathers, Thundered against them as, A Diabolical practice; and whole Synods
did prohibit the usage of them, even at Weddings as well as at other Seasons.
Nor have Reforming Synods of later days in France, Holl^nd* Poland, foreborn
to brandish the Sword of Church Discipline, and provide Censures, for any
Dancers* that might be found among their Communicants. Austin says, The
miserable Dancer knows not, that as many paces as he makes in Dancing* so many
S^ep^ he makes to H^ll: And the blessed old Waldenses testified, In a Dance one
breaks all the Ten Commandments of God* The most eminent Reformers above an
hundred years ago, concurred in witnessing against these Dances, as an
unlawful Recreation; and among the English Divines, yea among the English
Bishops, they have been decry'd by A cloud of Witnesses; they have branded our
Dancers as the Capering Goats that will not be found among the Sheep in the Day
of the Lord. Shall we say it? Even the Ancient Romans, although they were
Heathens, yet reputed skill in Dancing an Infamous thing. S^ipi^ called a
Dancer, Impudent; Sal^st called a Dancer, Dishonest; and they cited it as a
Note of ^nfamy. Tully could say, A Dancer is doubtl^ss eith^r Drunk or Mad; and
he argued against some, that they must needs be Vicious, inasmuch as they were
Dancers; nor did Seneca think it any other than a matter of bitter complaint,
That there were Dancing Schools tolerated in the City. These are
considerations enough to deterr a V^rtuous Woman from the Dances, which are now
become so acceptable to This Adulterous Generation. Pardon me ^his Freedom; I
had been worse than an Infidel, if I had not used it; for I remember Plutarch
himself enumerating the Qualifications of A Virtuous woman, gives this f^r one.
She must not be a Dancer. The Daughter of Herodias has been so Stigmat^ze^*
that a Virtuous woman will not be for Dancing after her.

THE Beauty whereof a Virtuous woman has a Remarkable Dislike, is that which
has Artificial Painting in it. The usage of Artificial Painting is pract^sed
by many women, who think thereby to be valued for a Beauty which they are not
Really the owners of: But a Virtuous woman will not be guilty of such a Vanity.
There is a wicked Bo^k that pleads for this ungodly practice; but that Good
Lady uttered the Language of a Virtuous Woman upon Reading such a Book, O Lord,
I thank thee, that thou gave me not Wit enough to Wr^te such a Book, unless
withal thou had* given me Grace Enough* not to Write it. Although it be not
Unlawful for a Person Transiently to P^eserve or to Restore her Native
Complexion, by Convenient Medicines, when She is in any special Danger of
Loosing it; Yet for a Person to Paint her self, that She may make some
Ostentation of a Complexion which God has not made her the Owner of, is a
thing that has heard ill among the most Godly Christians; nor will a Virtuous
Woman Easily be Reconciled unto it: Lest when the Saints Rise, as Tertullian
wished he might, at the Resurrection of the Righteous, To see whether the
Angels are then Carrying any Painted Ladies, in their Arms to meet the Lord
Jesus Christ, with Joy, there will be no such sight then to be met withal. The
wicked Harlots of old Painted their Eyes; as it is said in Ezekiel. 33.40. Thou
Paintest thy Eyes; Understand it of their Eyebrows and E^e Lids, which they
tinged with a Preparation of Antimony to Blacken them, and Beautify 'em. This
was accounted an Extraordinary Comeliness; and theref^re about the Harl^^ is
the Young man a^vised in Prove. 6.25. Let her not take thee with her Eyelids Of
such E^e* t^was that C^prian said, Th^se are (...) Eyes, with which our God is
to be Looked unto* And Jerome reckons 'em among Sc^ndalous Harlotries Now this
is One Argument which the Virtuous Woman has against the Painting of her face
in any part of it; It is the Guis^ of an Harlot. An Adulterate Complexion, is
but agreeable to an Adulterous Condition. A Painted Face is but a Painted sign
hung out for advice to S^rangers, that they shall find Entertainment there. It Is
often the Whores Forhead which admits Paint upon it. It Is well, if you don't
find a Snake, where you set a Painted Skin! Moreover, Our Face is a Seat which
has much of the Divine Image and Wisdom appearing in it; and it is a Vile
Affront unto God, for a Woman to Deface the Workmanship of the Almighty there;
by such an Inversion, as the Hebrew word for this Painting Signifies. Now, the
Paint which is laid upon it, not only Disfigures the Face for the present, but
also does Corrupt it and Corrode it, and Poison it, and hasten Wrinkles and
Ruins thereupon: it will Rent the Face, at the Scripture speaks of it; and I
am sure, it should R^nt the Heart, of them that use it. Besides, Our Lord
Rebuked it, as a base Hypocrisy for Persons to alter their Faces that they
might appear to be Fasting when they were so indeed; how much more basely
Hypocritical is it, for Persons to alter their Faces* that they might appear to
be Comely when indeed they are not so? There is no Sincerity in these
B^tterflies. It is a Cheat which there is no Enduring of. The more Moral
Heathen shew^d a Great Indigna^ion at it; and shall we think a Virtuous Woman
can allow of it? And al^s, what a World of P^ecious Time, is thus th^^wn away,
by poor Creatures, who are so taken up with Painting of the Sepulchers in which
their Souls ly^ Dead* as that they do Little or Nothing ^or the Beautif^ing of
those Black F^rlorn, Forsak'n S^uls* The sin commi^ted in Paintings we must
suppose committed in Patches too. When the Face is Patched the Heart is Rotten,
the Heart has m^re Black-Spots than the Face upon it. Some unhappy Ladies by
the Just Judgment of God, have brought forth Children with Natural Patches on:
so has God been offended at them. The Ancients tell us, That the Devil was the
Inventor of this H^llish Art; and it can be nothing but either Lust or Pride
(both Brats of the Devil!) that shall dispose any to the using of it. If they
that Please men, much more, I am sure, they that thus Cheat (...), cannot be,
The Servants of Christ; Tertullian well calls them, The Handmaids of the Devil;
nor when they Paint their Bodies, do they Glorify the Lord with their Bodies. A
Virtuous Woman would be loath to follow no better Patterns than Jezabel, or
Maximilla, both of which Woeful Creatures have this related of them, That they
Painted their Faces, For such would She leave these f^ul Pain^ings; and now the
old Picts are dead, She would not help to Revive that Pagan Generation, or make
her self a S^ster to the Squaws in the Thickets of America. Nor would She be in
the way of such Thunderbolts, as Dr. Hall in Imitation of the blessed Ancients
once darted against such Transgressors, Hear this, ye Plaister-faced Jezabels;
if you will not Leave your Dawbi^g and your High Washes, God will one Day wash
them off with Fire and Brimstone!

Conclusion. 3.
THE Fear of God is that which the Heart of a Virtuous Woman is under the Power
of. The Female Sex is naturally the Fearful Sex; but the Fear of God is that
which Exceeds (and sometimes Extinguishes) all other Fears, in the Virtuous
Woman. To state this mat^er aright, we are to know, That the Fear of God is an
Old Testament Expression, as the Love of God is a New Testament one, for all
true Religion whatsoever. It may then be said of a Virtuous Woman, That she is
a Religious Woman; She has Bound her self again to that God, whom She had by
the Sin and Fall of her First Mother departed from; She has a Love which does
not cast out the Fear that is no Fault, but confirm and settle her in that Fear
of God; That all kind of Piety and of Charity is prevailing in her Disposition;
That Sobriety and Righteousness and Godliness are Visible in her whole
Behavior; and, That She does J^st^ce, l^ves M^rcy, and walks Humbly with her
G^d. But that we may speak somewhat more par^icularly.

FIRST, A Virtuous Woman h^'s Awf^l^ as well as (...) Apprehensions, That there
is a God. When Jacob ^f old Perceived the Presence of God, it is said, in Genesis
13 17. He was Afraid. The Virtuous Woman in like manner Believes the Essence of
God; and that thought, God is, it raises a Sacred Fear of Him in her humble and
moved Soul. She sees the B^ing of a GOD proved from the Works of Creation: even
as he that made the Image of Mi^erva ingraved his own Name upon it so, that it
could not be taken out without breaking all to pieces. The whole World is a
Book, and all Creatures are the Letters in it, whereby She Spells out the
Existence of a GOD. Even the Dumb the Mute Creatures do loud^y speak this Truth
unto her. She Considers, That the World had a Beginning; inasmuch as it is Older
and Changing every Day: And that it could not have its Beginning from it self;
inasmuch as Nothing would then be the cause of Something. So, She sees, There
is a GOD; and She sees the Wisdom of a GOD, the Power of a GOD, the Goodness of
a GOD, throughout the Universe. She sees Likewise the B^ing of GOD Plain in the
Works of Providence; which Preserves all things in a most Excellent Order,
Subordinate and Subservient unto a Glorious End. She sees the World like a Vast
Army Composed of Quarrel-some, Contentious, Contrary things, and yet holding
well together; whereupon She Concludes, Th^re is a GOD who is the Wise General
over all. She Considers the Extraordinary Occorrences in the World; and when
She sees Prophecies that Exactly foretell what comes to pass many Ages after;
When She s^es Miracles, that give Check to the Common Course and Road of
Nature; When She sees Prayers Extraordinarily Answered Good men Ex^raordinarily
Rewarded, Ill men Extraordinarily Punished, She cries out, The Finger of a GOD
is here! She finds her self born with a Notion of a GOD, wherein She has not
been by any Tradition or P^licy of others Imposed upon; and She graciously
Cherishes that Notion. All Ancient Histories hardly mention above Twenty
Professed Atheists; and of those that were counted such, there never was one,
without frequent and V^hement Suspicions of a GOD. But all Tendencies t^
Atheism are m^st abominable to the Soul of a Virtuous Woman. She is not such a
Fool as t^ say with her Mouth* or to Think with her Heart, or to say in her
Heart, and Wish, There is no God. The Being of a GOD is at once the Fear, and
yet the Wish of her Godly Soul. If any Designing, Debauched Atheist, go to
insinuate unto her; That the No^ion of GOD, and HEAVEN, and HELL, and an
Immortal SOUL, is but a Trick of some Cunning D^vines, her Answer is with an
Indignation, Speedy and Angry like a Flash of Lightning, Satan, be gone!

NEXT; A Virtuous Woman has a most Rev^rent Respect and Regard, un^o all that
ha^ the Name of God upon it. They that have the Fear of God in them, are by Him
so styled, in Mal. 4 2. You that F^ar my Name The Name of God is all tha^,
whereby He makes Himself Known unto us; and a Virtuous Woman will not
Irreverently U^e any such Thing, Lest She should be h^ld not Guiltless before
the Lord. She will not utter the T^les of God in any Frothy and Foolish manner;
nor will she have a Lo^ Opinion of His At^ributes; nor will she wi^h ^ Carnal
Spirit come unto His Ordinances. Yea, so far she is from Affron^ing the Name of
God her self, that although she should be Dressed never so Fine, yet if she
Chance to hear the Name of God Blasphemed, she can Scarce forbear the Rending
^f her Clothes, as the Usage (...) the Jews was on such a Provocation* ^esure,
it causes the Re^ding of her Heart. Especially, the Word of God, is what ^he
Fears to Despise, or Control, or Disobey; it may b^ said of her, She Fears the
Commandment; it may be said by her, My Heart Stands in Fear of the Word. Of the
Precepts in that Word, it is he^ Fear, Oh Let me not break them! Of the
Promises there, it is her Fear, Oh Let me not fall Short of them* Of the Menaces
there* it is he^ Fear, Oh Let them never take hold of me! And at the same time,
the Virtuous Woman is very much Concerned, That the Name of God may be duly
Honored in the World. Sanctified be thy Name, is the first Petition of her
Soul unto her Lord. She would not for the m^st Nassy Wedges of Gold, ever do
any thing, that may bring Reproach to the dear Name of God, but she Studies,
Contrives, Labors to Advance that Blessed Name as far as ever she can; Oh (she
thinks) How may the Name of my Good God, b^ by my means Exalted in the World!

THIRDLY. A Virtuous Woman is Very Circumspect and Sollicitous to Avoid what
the God of Heaven may be Off^nded at. The Wis^ man takes notice of this, as one
Ingredient in the Fear of God, Prove. 16.6. By the Fear (...) the Lord men
Depart from Evil. And it is accordingly, the desire of the Virtuous Woman* to
Sh^n all that Evil which God may be displeased at. She ^lies from every Known
Sin, as from a direful Serpent, or from a deadly Poison; because that she sees
it Offensive unto that God, who is of Purer Eyes than to Beh^ld Evil, and
cannot Look upon Iniquity. What we (...) of Job* is Likewise to be said of her*
^he is a Perfect Woman, One that Fears God, and ^schewes Evil. She cannot hear
the Thought of Incurring the Anger of that God, who Overturns the Mountains in
His Anger; and she Trembles before that God, at whose Voice even the Pillars of
Heaven do Tremble. She had rather undergo any miseries, than incur the
^ntolerable and Interminable Torments which the Omnipotent God has to inflict
upon them that Provoke Him to J^lousy; and upon that Account she is Fearful of
Every thing that may be Provoking to her Holy Father. When she over-hears the
Lord saying, Oh I do not the Abominable things that my Soul hates, her Answer
is in Words like those that Joseph had unto his Brethren, Oh dare not, I cannot
Commit such Things, for I fear God! If Other Women will speak Vainly, Dress
Proudly, Live Lewdly, She can say as Nehemiah did of old, But so do not ^
because I have the Fear of God! The Exquisite Pen of a Dutch Lady has
Celebrated the Zeal of a Scotch Woman, who for her Zeal having her Leg tortured
in that cruel Horrid Engine called, The Boot, bravely said, My God, I Bless
thee, that thou have given me a Leg ^o be thus used for thee! Thus would this
Person rather have all her Bones Broken, than to sin so against God, that like
David she must ^ry out of, Broken Bones.

FOURTHLY, A Virtuous Woman Labors to Please and Serve the great God, with the
greatest of her cares. The Fear of God, i^ thus described by the Apostle, in
H^b. 12.2^. Let us Serve God Acceptably with Reverence an^ Godly Fear. And
nothing is more Acceptable to the Virtuous Woman, than that she may Acceptably
Serve her God. Let her be (...) never so High Rank, she thinks it no stoop for
her, to be a Servant of that Lord, who ha^ all the Angels in Heaven for His
Ministers* nor does her Opinion vary from that of thos^ Apostles who chose, to
be called, The Servants of Jesus Christ, when they might have been called, His
Kinsmen; or of those Emperors, who valued it as one of their Prerogatives, to
subscribe themselves, The V^ssels of the Lord Jesus Christ! Let her be of never
so Low Rank, She will not stoop to be a Servant of the W^rld, or of ^he Flesh,
or of ^he D^vel; nor can she brook that the Curse of so being, A Servant of
Servants, ever should come upon her. When she Con^^mplates that Lord, who is, A
Greater than Sol^mon. She cries out, Happy are thy Servants; Oh that I might be
one of them* And she would always be doing the will of God, in such a manner,
as may be pleasing to Him. We read of One, He had this Testimony, that He
pleased God. Now, That is the Testimonial to be given of the Virtuous Woman;
She aspires after the Imitation of the Lord Jesus, in, Doing always* the
things that pl^ase the Father. It is the Name of a Good man, The man that
Pleases God; and whatever Change the Name of this Woman may undergo, still she
keeps that Name, The Woman that pleases God. How so? Even because that she
does all ^he can in and for the Service of God; and she would not leave Room
for that Expostulation of the Lord, If I be a ^aster* where is my Fear? No, as
often as she says Our Father, so often does her Heart within her say, Our
Master is in Heaven! We read in the Bible, concerning, certain Women that
Ministered unto Jesus; and this Woman is ^mbitious to be of that Blessed Company.

FIFTHLY. A Virtuous Woman does attend the Worship of God, with an Unwearied
and Exempl^ry Diligence. The Proselytes, that of old were brought unto the
Worship of the True God, are thus disting^ished, in Psalm. 115.^1. Ye that Fear
the Lord And the Virtuous Woman acco^^^ngly expresses her Fear of God, by
worshi^ping of Him that is, Worthy to be Feared It may wi^h only the nec^ssary
Variation, be said of her, as it was of Cornelius Long ago, She is a Devout
Woman, and one that Fears God, and Prays to God, always. As the Almighty God
was called, The Fear of Isaac; because He was Worshipped by that Renowned man;
so may He be called, The Fear of the Virtuous Woman; because this Woman will
observe all the parts of that Worship, which is due unto the Lord. There is the
Natural Worship of God; whereto she is no less Piously Affected, than
Constantly Accustomed. She is a Woman full of Prayer, and Perhaps it may (...)
said concerning every Room of her House, ^he has Perfumed it with her Prayer.
Praye^ is what She will be Early as well as often at* and she is every Morning
Jealous, le^t like Origin, She give the D^vel an Advantage, by Omitting of it.
She m^^es not her Cl^set a place for mere Trifles and Pictures, but for Prayers
with Devoutest Meditations* She Retire^ into her Closet every Day, that she may
there have a Visi^ from the Eternal Bridegroom of her Soul; and whatever
Exercises may be at any time upon her mind, She does as Hannah did* She Pours
out her Soul unto the Lord, that she may be no more sad. Yea, she is not
unacquainted with solemn Humiliations* and solemn Thanksgivings, upon the Just
Occasions of them. She is a Woman whom Scriptures and Sermons are very dear
unto: and it is not every Trifle (as the want of a Garment, or a dread of the
We^ther) that she will make her Excuse for her Absence from the mea^s of Grace.
How fain would she be with Mary, always hearing the Sweet Admoni^ions of her
Lord, about, The One thing Ne^dful, and, The Good part which cannot be taken
away! The Sabbath she calls, Her D^light; no^ will she w^st the S^cred Hours of
i^, in the Naughty S^perfl^ities of Diet and Raym^nt; but be as often as well
she can, in the Congregation of* The People of God; and there, as her Voice
makes a sound tha^ shall be no Base, for the Music of the Public Psalms,
thus her Heart is an Altar from whence, during the whole Solemnity, there
ascend unto God, The Sacrifices which He Desires. There is Likewise, the
Ap^^inte^ Worship of God, whereto she counts (...) ^elf most Indispensably
Obliged. She can^^t bear to be (...) out from the Church of God, any more than
Miriam from the Camp of old; but whatever Longings ever may disturb her, She
never has any more Craving and Raging ones than this, Oh God, Tho^ art my God,
my Soul, Thirs^eth for thee, my Flesh Longs for thee, To see thy Power, and
thy Glory in the Sanctuary! Indeed* among the Turks the Wom^n do never go to
Church, but Christian Women would count it Hell upon Earth to be so debarred.
She is Desirous to Eat and to Drink where she may not speak; and having been
Baptized, She is not sa^isfy'd until she come to Eat among the Friends, to
Drink among the Beloved, of the Lord Jesus Christ. She will not make part of
that Unworthy Crowd, which thro^g out of Doors, when the Supper of the Lord is
going to be administ^ed, as if they were Frighted at it; or had cause to say,
The Table of the Lord is Polluted. She dares not indeed come without a W^dding
Garment, but she will not stay away like thos^, whose only Real Apology can be,
They ^re both to be at the Pains of putting the Garment on. Although She
sometimes counts her sel^ as a Dog, yet like that Syrophenician Woman, She will
ask for some, Crumbs from the Table of the Lord. Having had her Soul Purify^d
by Regeneration, She brings her Offerings to the Tabernacle. She presen^s unto
the Church (if it be asked for) a sensible Account, like another Lydia, of some
never to be forgotten Things, which God has done for her Soul; or* at least,
she makes the Church to Understand^ like Ruth of old, That she would come to
R^st under the Wings of the God of Israel. No^ would She let the ^uffetings of
the Devil, altogether discourage her, from Joining her self to some Holy
Society of Believers, where she may have her So^l Bound up in the B^ndle^ of
Life. She was a Noble Woman of Bohemia, that left her Friends, her House, her
Plate, and all, and because the Ga^es of the City were Guard^d, Crept through
the common Sewer, that she might Enjoy the Institutions of the Lord Jesus
Christ at another place where they might be had. Such is the Esteem which a
Virtuous Woman has for the Institutions of our Lord. She can say, Lord, I have
loved the place where thy. Honor dw^lls! and when she cannot Go yet She Is Creep
to, The Habitation of His House.

THIS is the Virtuous Woman! It was very cruelly spoken by those two very
Ancient Poets; the first of which ^sually [in his Comedies] represented Women,
as Very (...) bu^ the Latter, usually represented them, (...) Good; saying, The
first represented what ^hey Are; the latter, what they should be. I (...) I
have in this Discourse represented, not only, what all Women should be, but
also, what very many of them Are. And for their Encouragement, we will now pass
on unto,

II. The HAPPINESS of a Virtuous Woman.
AND this Happiness is here (...) that Word, She shall be Prais^d. Praise,
Reputation, Commendation, is that which a Woman is very Tender of; it is most
appositely then, that the Recompenses of a Virtuous woman, are set forth by the
Praise that should and shall be given her. Said the Apostle of old, If there be
any Virtue, and if there be any Praise, Think on these things. Truly where
there is Virtue, there will be Praise; and the Virtuous Woman will have her
Fear of God, recompensed with Praise from God, and be forever Glorious. We have
these Conclusions therefore now before us.

Conclusion 1.
THE Fear of God, will Recommend ^ Woman to the Praise and so to the Choice of
such men, as it may be desi^^able to have the Good Opinion of. For a Woman to
be Praised, i^ for her to be Married, in Scriptural Phraseology; thus it is
Lamented among the Judgments of God, in Psalm. 78 63. Their Maidens were not
Praised unto Marriage. Now the Fear of God, is the best way f^r a Woman to
dispose of her self to such a Marriage, as men usually Court non^, but such as
they hear much Prais^d, unto. When the Scripture speaks of the Marriage which
Antichrist forbids unto his Filthy and Wicked Clergy, it (...) it. The desire
of Women. It Is that which Women that have any Regard unto H^nour, will Desire,
wi^h Disdain to be otherwise Enj^y'd* like that Ingenious Woman, who having her
Chastity Sollici^ed, gave that Answer, You must first Give me, what you neither
have, nor can ^ave your self, and what yet you can give to me* that was, A
Chaste Husband. The Truth is to be Married unto a Vain, Wild, Ungodly man, is
that which no Discreet Woman will Desire* any more than to dwell with a Dragon.
The Excellent Basill^^ chose to be beheaded, rather than Marry a Pagan Husband.
But as for Prudent and Pious Men, it will be The^^ Desire to be Married unto
such a Woman as is Eminent f^r, The Fear of God. There was a Woman of whom it
could be said, in Ruth. ^.11. All the Town does know that thou art a Virtuous
Woman; and you know, that this Woman was not Long without a Good Husband, who
had first been taken with her Praise. We say, M^tches are made in Heaven; and
indeed, the Woman who by the Fear of God, has made sure of a Great Interest in
Heaven, is most like to meet with such a Match as may give her cause to Thank
Heaven all her Days. It Is possible, That Unsanctify'd men* may Marry only for
Portion or for Prettiness; how often do those Respects give us to see Matches
made in H^ll! and yet there are few men so Profane, as to look upon that Grace
as undesireable in a Wife, of which they themselves are destitute* But men that
have the ^ear of God in themselves, when they Choose the Companions of their
Lives, will ordinarily Choose to have such, as they shall hear Praised for, The
Fear of God; when they do otherwise, the God of Heaven often pays 'em (...)
verily for it. It is an old Rule, No^ solt^^ est Oculis decenda se^ Auribus
(...)
(i. e.) He that would Marry, and be wise,
Must choose by Ears, as well as Eyes.


WHEN a man of Understanding, does understand that a Woman is prais,d for, The
(...) of God, this is more than all other Favor and Beauty to him; and so She
comes to tha^ Room in his well-guided Affection, which will survive the Death
of all other Favor and (...) whatsoever; and which many Waters cannot Quench.
Instead of saying as many (...) There Is money, and w^'l hope the Fear of God
will come in Time, such a man will say, There Is the Fear of God,, and we will hope
that all These Things will be Added: and if he be an Isaa^* who prays much over
and before his Marriage he will pitch upon such a Wife as will (...) ^inder but
Assi^t, his Prayers afterward Moreover, the Women that has, The Fear (...)
Godpunc; need not Fear, but that she should b^ praised among multitudes of her
other Neighbors, whom yet she cannot be Married* unto If any do D^rid^ her,
they are none but th^^^ Absurd, Foolish, Giddy Creatures, that will one day
change their song, and with blood^ Tears will then wish, 'O That I ^ad Fear a
God Like such a^ one! All that have any sense o^ True-worth, or, whose Good
word is of any Wor^^ ^ill be sure to Admire her; it is a proper^^ (...) every
Citizen of Zio^, He (...) than Fear the Lord; but a vile person [Such an one as
does not Fear the Lord] is contemned i^ (...) ^yes.

Conclusion. 2.
THE Wisdom which is in, The Fear of God, makes Praise to be the One of the
Woman that is Adorned with it. A wise Woman is justly a Praised Woman, and a
Pris'd one, all over the world. The Wise Woman in the City of Abel, doubtless
was more than a little Praised in the United Acclamations of that City. It Is
said in Eccl. 8.1. A man's Wisdom makes hi^ Face to shine; and a Woman's Wisdom
does as much. No Favor, no Beauty is comparable to Wisdom; and though a person
were all over sparkling with peerless Pearls, yet this is a Favor and a Beauty
before which, No mention shall be made of Pearls; for the price of Wisdom is
above Rabies: Now, who or where is the Wise Woman? or what is true Wisdom* The
Claim has been long since laid, by many sorts of w^r^y plodders, and crafty
people, in the World; but the Apostle has put in that ^ar unto their claim,
That professing themselves to be Wise, they became Fools. If he Politician may
challenge the praise of Wisdom, d^^^tless those four MARY'S which in the Last
Age Swayed the Scepters of so many Kingdoms with the Profound^st Policy, were
Wise Women, and the Elizabeth which came after them, came (...) behind them.
Th^myris that could Lead an Army against the Persian, and Zenobia tha^ could
head an Army against the Roman, Emperor, were Wise Women. The Sabinian Women
which direc^^d the ^enate out of inexcricable Difficulties, were Wise ones. It
wa^ a Wise Woman of Yek^^ which could manage an Intregue at Court for the Lord
General of ^srael. If the Philosopher may Challenge the Praise of Wisdom,
doubtless those were Wise Women who were Tutoresses, if I may call them so, to
the old famous Professors of all Philosophy. The Daughter of Pythagoras who
made Comments on her Fathers Books, was a Wise Woman; and so was ^ippatia
formerly, who caught the Liberal Arts, and wrote some Treatises of Astrology;
and so Sarocchia more lately, who was Ordinarily Moderatrix in the Disputations
of the Learned men at Rome. The Three Corinnae, which Equaled, if not Excelled,
the most Celebrated Poets of their Times, were Wise: and such Ladies as
Olympias, or Trota, whose Physical skill, was the wonder of the Universe. The
Empress E^docia, who Composed Poetical Paraphrases on diverse parts of the
Bible, was a Wise Woman; so was Rosuida* who compiled the Lives of Holy men,
and Pamphilia who Penned no Despicable Histories; and the French Lady, who a
while si^ce, published Homilies on the Epistle to the Hebrews; and thus was the
Lady Jan Gray, who so admirably could Read the Word of G^d in its Originals.
There is Wisdom in these things; and the Women which have had it, are therefore
to be Praised. But, the Apostle said, yet I show unto you a more Excellent way;
so I say, There is a greater Wisdom than all of this It is the Assertion with
which the Wise Man B^gins the Book of Wisdom, in Prove. 1.7 The Fear of the Lord
is the Beginning of Knowl^dge. Or as the Words of his Blessed Father, whom he
much Imitated in his Expressions, were, The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning
of Wisdom. Or, as it may be read, The chief part of it. Here then, even in, The
Fear of God, is, the Prima Sapientia, the chief, prime, grand Wisdom of a
Reasonable Creature. It Is a true saying, Non qui multa, sed qui Fructuosa scit,
sapit; Wisdom lies not so much in the Knowledge of many Things, as in the
Knowledge of Useful Ones. N^w this is the Wisdom of a Woman that has* The Fear
of God; she ha^ the Science that will carry her safe through all the Storms, all
the Harms, all the Temptations of this world, unto the Haven of H^aven at the
Last; she has the Wisdom, to Consider her Latter End, and she is, Wise unto
Salvation. That adm^rable Woman, Olympia Falvia Morata had very great
Accomplishments; but that which most Accomplished her, was, her Embracing of
true Religion with all manner of Persecution for it; so that she could say, The
World is now become contemptible to me. 'Twas this alone which Enabled her,
when she lay a dying, at near thirty years of Age, ^o see Heaven open for, her
and say to her Excellent Husband, I am now full of Joy, and Sir, I know you now
no more! This then is the Praise that belongs unto such a Woman; It is noted
unto the Praise of Abigail, She was (...) Woman of a good Understanding, and
she was of ^ Beautiful Count^nance. As for the Woman, that has a Beautiful
C^untenance wi^h^^t a Good Understanding, (...) for her that is, Fair and
Foolish, you can find where she is compared unto, A Swine with a Jewel in her
Sa^^t. But if a Woman have the, Fear of God, you now see, that whether she have
a Beautiful Countenance, or no, yet she has a Good Understanding. And therefore
such a Woman shall be Praised among those Ladies whose Beautiful Aspect is
particularly mentioned in the Scripture; and whose Names make that Hexameter
verse, Sara^, Rebecca, Rachel, Abigail, Bathshu^, A^isha^, Esther.

Conclusion 3.
THE Benefits ob^a^ned by, The Fear of God, procure Praises for the Woman that
is Endued with it. Said the Psalmist, in Psalm. 31.19. O how great is thy
Goodness* which thou have laid up for them that Fear thee! Such a Profitable
thing ^s The Fear of God, must needs be a Praise worthy Thing. Let us a little
specify the Bl^ssi^gs, and so the Praises, which, The Fear of God, is attended
with. As for the Woman, that has the Fear of God; attend now unto the Praises
of such a Woman.

THIS is the Woman wh^m the Blessed Lord Jesus Christ becomes, A Sun of
Righteousness unto. It Is said in Mal. 4 2 Unto you that Fear my Name, shall the
Sun of Righteousness arise. We find among the Representations of the Church, A
Woman clothed wi^^ the Sun. Thus do you now see this Woman cloth^d! And as by
Vaion she is got into the Lord Jesus Christ, who like the Sun is the Center of
the World, and who like the Sun gives Life and warmth, and growth, unto her
Soul, so she is by him Clothed with all that Righteo^sness which D^livers from
Death. She not only has an Inherent Righteo^sness, from the Lord Jesus Christ;
or a principle disposing her to render both unto God and Man their D^es; but
she also has the Imputed Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, and being by
the Grace of God allowed an Interest in the perfect Obedience of her Lord, she
now stands as without Fault before the Throne of God. Well may she be a Praised
Woman, who shall be such a Righteous one. We say, The Wife shines with the
Husbands Rays. Behold here a Woman, whose Husband is, The S^n of Righteousness.

THIS is the Woman whom the Ang^ls of Heaven do most gladly Encamp about. We
have received Information from the Inv^si^le World, by Psalm. 34.7. That the
Ang^l of the Lord Encampeth about them that F^ar Him, and delivers them. A
Woman is usually by Law under C^v^rt; but it is an A^geli^al Covert which this
Woman has by the Law of Heaven placed over her. She s^metimes has an occasion
for a D^liverance; and the host Angel in Heaven, Perhaps the same Angel that
visited Mary of old, is upon the Wing ^o hasten it unto her. She has a
continual, though it may be an Insensible Conversation, with Ang^ls of better
Account, than the Sons of God which were Entangled with the Daughters of men,
in the Antediluvian World; these are her Guardians, her Protectors, and her
Monitors. When she was first Converted unto God, she made, Joy among the
Ang^ls, because of another Spirit come in to fill up the Room-left in Heaven by
the Apostate Legions: It gave a Triumph unto those M^rning Stars, to see one
that shall sh^r^ly come to move in Their O^b. And now she has, Praise among the
Angels; they shout and say, H^re is an H^ir of Salvation; and we have the
w^llcome and happy care of Looking after her.

THIS is the Woman, who takes a most Laudable course for her own Tempor^l
Prosperity. She is to be Praised, as a Woman that prolongs her own Life. It Is
said in Prove. 19.23. The Fear of the Lord, tends to Life. It keeps her from
^astning an Untimely Death, upon her self, either by R^sh Wishes to Die, Or by
the Overmuch Wickedness which by the sentence of Providence become Capital, or
by the Lusts which either Drown the Lamp, or Burn or Wear the Toreed of Life
away. She is to be Praised as a Woman that Consults her own Health. It Is said in
Prove. 3*7, 8. Fear the Lord, -- it shall be Health to thy N^v^l, and Marrow to
try (...) ^t keeps her from the Sins, which by being the Parents of Crudities
and Obstructions, are the Grand Paren^s ^f all Diseases; and being thus
forgiven her (...), it is likely she will not say, I am sick; or ^e forced like
the Woman in the Gospel, To spen^ all upon Physicians. She is to be Praised as
a Woman that Preserves her own R^put^t^on. It Is said in Prove. 22.4. By the Fear
of the Lord, is Honor. It makes her acknowledged for one that has the Image
of Christ and God upon her; which is THE ONE THING that renders, Honorable;
and while she makes it her Business like another Dorcas to Honor Her Master,
He fulfils that word unto her, Them that Honor me I will Honor; and leaves
her not cause for that Complaint, Reproach has broken my Heart. She is to be
Praised as a Woman that Eff^ctually lays in for her self a Competent and
Convenie^^ P^rtion of Wordly Comforts. It Is said in Psalm. 1^^*5. The Lord has
giv^n M^^t unto them that Fear Him. She will not be one of the, Idle Souls that
Suffer Hu^g^r; but according to Gods Promise, which is her Store house, her
House h^'s in it, all the supplies which are needful for her Glorifying of G^d;
and having as much Man^a as will carry her through the W^lderness, She does not
Crave after those Cumb^rsome Additions, which may hinder her pa^sing, Through
the Eye of the Needle: (...) Young Lions have not so good a Tab^e! ^he is to be
Praised as a Woman, that procures a Speci^l Guard of God upon her, in an Evil
Day. It Is said in Psalm. 33.18, 19. The Eye of the Lord is upon them that Fear
Him, -- to deliv^r their Soul from Death, and to keep them al^ve in Famine. Let
things go nev^r so ^ad, she can with Isaiah sing, The Forty Sixth Psalm, as
being one of the Alamoth, or H^d Persons, concerned in it; She has the Blood
of our Passover applied unto her, and so she is, Preserved in Christ Jesus,
when the Destroying Angels are the Executioners of the Divine Wrath a broad;
She has Rahabs Thread for her Defense in the midst of Wasting Plagues, and she
has a Mark upon her Forhead [which I am sure the Garish Attire there used in
our Days is not!] for her Preservation.

THIS is the Woman, who takes a most Laudabl^ way for her own Eternal
Prosperity too. She is to be Praised, as a Woman, that has made her Peace with
G^d. It is said in Psalm. 103.11, 12. Great is His M^rc^ toward them that Fear
Him* As far as the E^st is from the W^st so far has He removed our
Transgressions from us. He that was Born of a Woman has m^^e satisfaction for
all the Wrong^ (...) her Sins have done to the most Holy Lord; God for the sake
of Christ has Released her from whatever Punishment was ever due unto her, for
whatever Transgressio^ of His Law; and thus. B^ing Justify^d by Faith, she has
Peace with God. If any Affl^ct^ons come upon he^* they are not Vindictive, or
Destr^ctive, but Purely Medicin^l; She sees, they are, To do her Go^d in the
latter and; they are, To mak^ her partak^r of Gods Holin^ss* they are To Work
for her a (...) and Eternal (...) of Glory; She s^ys, Like the Martyr, God
(...) now Scowring of me* to set (...) high (...) in Heaven for ever. She is to
be Praised, a Woman that is heard in her Prayer to (...) It is said in Psalm.
145.19. He will fulfill the Desire of them that Fear Him. He also will hear
their Cry, and He will save them. She ^s one who his her Hear^s D^li^ht in God,
and so she has her Hearts Desire from God; Her Prayers are the Breathings
which the Spirit of God have Enkindled in her, and the Power, and Wisdom of
G^d, either in the Letter, or in the Better gives a Good Answer to them all;
the Almighty gives her a Ri^ht Will, which inclines her to ask of Him, Things
according to His Will; and then He says, as unto Her of old, Be it unto thee,
eve^ as thou Wilt. She is to be Praised, as a Woman that gets her Soul
Replenished with such Comforts as have a Fore^ast of He^ven in them. It is said
in Act. 9 31. They were Edified, Walking i^ the Fear of God, and is the Comfort
of the Holy Gh^st. The Holy Ghost Seals her with well-grounded and Eff^ctual
Persuasions of Gods ha^ing Loved her with an Everl^sting Love; Hence, whatever
Troubles do come upon her, She feels a Word set home upon her, which causes
her, like Hannah, To be* No more sad. She is to be P^aised, as a Woman whom the
Day of Judgment will b^ing Wonderful Glories and R^wards unto. It is said in
Rev. 11.18. The Time of the Dead, that they should be Judged, is Come* that
thou should give Reward unto them that Fear thy Name. Small and Great. She
shall be one of the Early Risers in tha^ Morning of the Great Day; When the
Change f^r which her Departed Soul has been waiting, is come, her
Lord-Redeemer, shall say to her, Awake and Sing, thou which dwell in the
Dust; and she shall then be marvell^usly Changed into the Likeness of the Lord
Jesus Christ Himself; She shall be made what Moses and Elias appeared in the
Mount of God; The Lord Jesus will then openly ^bsolve her and Applaud her; and
she shall sit with Him on a Throne, in the Regeneration; her Heart may now even
Spring like John in his Mothers Belly, when she foresees the Approches of the
Lord. She is to be Praised, as a Woman who is to be made Partaker of Life
Eternal. It is said, in P^ov. 14.27. The Fear of the Lord, is a Fountain of
Life, to D^part from the Snares of Death. Her Spirit shall be Entertained wi^h
a Transforming and Refreshing Vision of God in the Lord Jesus Christ, amidst
the C^lestial Regions of Light, with all the Sacred Inhabitants of those
Regions; Her Body, shall also be made I^corruptible, and m^re Immortal than
ever Eves in Eden was; i^ shall be made Powerful, Fulgent, Ni^ble, Subtle,
Spiritu^l, and after a sor^ Angelic^l. So shall she have a F^lness of Joy in
the Presence of God, and Pleasures at His Right Hand forev^r more. ^ere is the
Woman, that h^'s the, F^ar of God! This is the Praise that belongs unto her.

APPLICATION.
BUT shall it now be seen, that Women will more generally aspire after this
Charact^r and this Happin^ss? The petulant P^ns of some Froward and Morose Men,
have sometimes trea^ed the Female Sex with very great Indignities; Blades, I
guess, whose M^thers had Undu^if^l Children, or whose Wives have had but cruel
Masters. I am loath to show my Catalogue, nevertheless whole V^l^m^s have been
written, to disgrace that Sex, as if it were, as one of those Unnatural Authors
calls it, The mere Confusion of Mankind. Yea, ^tis no^ easy to recount how many
Licen^ious Writers, have handled that Theme, Femina nulla bona, No Woman is
Go^d! [or the men were bad that said so] But, behold, how you may Recover your
Impaired Reputation! the, Fear of God, will soon make it evident, that you are
among, The Excellent in the Earth. If any men are so wicked (and some Sects of
men h^ve been so) as to deny your being Rational^Creatures, the best mean to
confute them, will be by proving your selves R^ligious ones. I do ass^re you,
and I h^ve more than Luther to consent and concur with me, in this Assertion,
That the Actions of even the meanest Milkmaid or Cook maid, when done in the
Fear of God, are in the Account of God more Noble Things than the Victories of
a Caesar! Thus do I s^t before you, the way for you to be Enn^bled; and thus
Ennobled, many of you already are. When the Golden mouth^d Ancient had so far
forg^t himself as to call a Woman, An Unavoidable Punishment* a Necessary Ev^l,
a Desirable Calamity. With more such Iron Words, he sees cause to add, Sermo
est^de muliere mala; (...). My Speech is of a bad Woman; and not of a good; for
I have known many Ready to every Good Work. It Is an Observation of Solomon's
which has been somewhat Improved against You, in E^cl. 7:28. One man among a
Thousand have I found, but a Woman among all those have I not found.
Nevertheless, in your own Vindication, You may Reply, That Solomon speaks of
what is usual about the Courts of Princes; and perhaps about his own Court
Especially; A Good man in such a place is a Rare Thing; but a Good Woman there,
is a Black Swan indeed; Solomon himself Particularly had a Thousand Women to
Satiate his Exorbitant Lust; and possibly, he may intimate, That among all
Those he did not find One Woman truly Virtuous. O^, if this Reply be not
Satisf^ctory, You may Enquire. Whether Sol^mon speak not of such as are by
Repentance Recovered from the Snares of Whoredom when once they have been
therein Entangled. For a Man to be Reclaimed from the Sin of Uncleanness when
once he has been given thereun^o is R^re; but for a Woman to be Snatched out
of the Unclean D^v^ls H^nds, when once he has had any full Possession of her,
is more Extraordinary! However it (...), it is plain, that as there were Three
Mary's o^ one John, standing under the Cross of our Dying Lord, so still there
are far more Godly Women in the World, than there are Godly M^n; and our Church
Comm^ni^n^ give us a Little D^m^nstr^t^on of i^* I have seen it without going a
M^l^ from home, That in a Church of between Three or Four Hundred Communicants,
there are but few more tha^ One Hundred Men; all the Rest are Women, of whom
Charity will Think no Evil. Possibly, One Reason of it is, because there are
more Women in the World than men; but this is not all the Reason. It seems that
the Curse in the D^fficulties both of S^b^ection and of Child bearing* which
the Female Sex is doomed unto, has been turned into a Blessing, by the Free
Grace of our most Gracious God. God Sanctifies the Chains, the Pains, the
Deaths which they meet withal; and furthermore, makes the Tenderness of their
Disposi^ion, a further Occasion of Serious Devo^ion in them. Now, God forbid
that any of YOU, into whose Hands this Little Treatise may come, should
Contrad^ct that Charitable O^servation. And let me tell you, That m^st of You,
have more Time to Employ in the more Immediate Service of your Souls, than the
Other Sex is owner of. You are Ordina^ily more within the Horse, and so may
more mind the Work within the Heart, than W^e. Although I must Confess, it is
Often otherwise; Yet it is as Often so, that you have little more Worldly
Business, than to Spend [I should rather say, to Save] what others Get, and to
Dress and Feed [should I not also say, to Teach] the Little Birds, which you
are Dams unto. And those of you, that (...) Women of Quality are Excused from
very much of this Trouble to^. Oh! how much might you do f^r GOD if you d^^ly
Considered, The Price in your Hands to get Wisdom!

Well then,

COUNSEL. 1.
THE First Thing unto which I would persuade You, is, To Pray most I^stantly.
Constantly, Importunately that, The Fear of God, may be Planted in your Souls.
The, Fear of God, is indeed already begun in that Soul, which is insatiably
Desirous to be there wi^h Replenished; and Unutterable Groans after that Fear,
will augment the Power of that, which it already argues the Presence of. Said
Nehemiah, in Chap. 1.11^ O Lord, be Attentive to the Prayer of thy Servants,
who Desire to Fear thy Name. The Woman that most aff^ctionately lays this
Desire before God, O that I may Fear thy Name, is already among the Servants of
that God, and shall certainly have her Desire Accomplish^d. Pray Read* Believe,
Practice that Word of God, in Prove 2 3 6. If thou Cryest after Knowl^dge then
shall thou understand the Fear of the Lord. Crying is that which your Sex has
is p^r^icular E^si^ess unto; Behold, what your Cries, your Tears are best
Employed about. May it then be f^^d about you, B^hold she p^^yes! and may your
Prayer to the Lord put ^n suit that Promise of ^he Lord, in Jer. 32.40. I will
put my Fear in their hearts. O plead earnestly for the fulfillment of tha^ Great
and Precious Word of our God, and say, Lord, Be it unto thy Handmaid according
to thy Word.

COUNSEL 2.
HAVING ob^ained the, Fear of God, it should be your Ambition to be continually
Exercisi^^ of it. You are thus advised in Prove. 23.17. Be thou in the Fear of
the Lord, all the day long. Let your whole wal^ every Day, be a, Walk with God;
and let every Action in the Day, be so done in ^he, Fear of God, as that,
Holiness to the Lord, may be written thereupon. Be sure to Begin and Conclude
the Day with God; Rob Him not of His Dayl^ Sacrifice. In the Morning be able to
say, Oh God, when I awake I am still with thee; Take a Morni^gs-Draught of
Communion with G^d, first in your Closets, and then with your Houses, and of
Resolution to behave your selves as having, The Lord alw^yes before you. In the
Evening, Reco^l^ct the M^rcies which you have newly Received of God; and
Examine whether you have been so Ze^lous, Watchful Fruitful before God, as you
should have been? and whether you can* Ly down in Peace with Him? Throughout
all the Day, Interweave a, Conscience of D^ty, into all your motions, all your
Affayrs. Le^ every Meal, every Sleep, every Visit, and all your Dom^stick
B^si^esses, though (...) be but the Rocking of a Cradle, be done with an Eye to
This, This is the Thing wherein I may perform a S^rvice to God, and Expect a
Blessing from God (...) T^is is what my God wo^ld have me to be about.
Herewithal, Intermingle many Salleyes of Soul, toward Heaven every Day^; by
R^ising of some Se^ious, Graci^us, Divine Thoughts, from the meanest occurrents
that are before you* and by P^rtinent E^a^^l^^ions to God, both i^ a way of
Pe^ition and of Thanksgiving upon all Occasions. This it is to be, In the Fear of
the ^^rd, all the Day long, and Holy in every Turn*

COUNSEL. 3.
BUT at the same Time You should use a Good Caution against those that would
Seduce you from the, Fear of God. It is mentioned as the Singular Unhappiness
of Women, in 2 Timothy 3.6. Men having a Form of Godliness, but Denying the Power
thereof, -- These Creep [like Serpents, as they are] into Houses, and Lead
Captive Silly Women, Laden with Sins, Led away with diverse Lusts. T^s noted of
Sed^cers, that, like their Father the Devil, the Old, the First Seducer, they
have a Special Design upon the Weaker Sex, who are most Easi^y Gained
themselves, and then fit Instruments for the gaining of their Husbands, to such
Errors, as cause them to Loose their Souls at last. Simon M^gus Traded with his
Helena, and Montanus with his Maximilla, for the more Effectual Propagation of
their Haer^sies, as J^rom long since Observed; as as Epipha^ius tells us, Arius
promoted his Blasphemies by first Proselyting seven hundred Virgins thereunto.
That it is no New Thing for Women to become very Mischievous Adversaries unto
the Truth, and so unto the Fear, of God, is intimated from that Instance in the
Apostolical History, Act. 13 5^ The Jews stirred up the Devout and Ho^oura^le
Women, and Rais^d a Pers^cution against, the Ministers of God: Indeed a Poison
does ne^e^ insinuate so quickly, or operate so strongly, as when Women's Milk is
the Vehicle, which is given in. But may You be always upon your Guard, against
the Fa^se Teachers in these D^yes; and theref^re become so Well-principled in
your Catechisms, as that it may not be said of you. They are ^v^r Learning and
never able to come unto the K^owledge of the Truth. If you find your selves
unable to fathom some Controversi^s which you see agitated in the Church of
G^d, and if you must cry out. I have nothing to Draw with, and the Well is
Deep, the most likely way to be kept from going out of the Way, is This; Mind
what has the most Obvious Tendency to advance the, Fear of God, in your Hearts
and Lives; Mind what most M^gn^fi^s Christ, and Nullifies Man, and Recommends
Pract^cal Godliness; it is the, Doctrine according to Godliness, which is the
True Doctrine. Or if thou cannot Penetrate so far* Then mind how those men which
are most Eminent for the, Fear of God, are most generally inclined; Mind what
is most generally gra^eful, to the Sob^r, G^acious, Patient, Heavenly,
Mortified part of Mankind; and on the other side, what the most Loose, Proud,
Carnal, Railing, Profane, party choose to fall in withal; to Walk in the Way of
Good M^n: is most probably to Walk in the ^ood Way.

COUNSEL 4.
WHILE you thus maintain the, Fear of God, Let it very particularly discover it
self in your keeping the purpose of the Psalmist, I will take heed unto my Ways
that I Sin not with my Tongue; I will keep my Mouth with a Bridle. May it be as
much, a Causeless, as it is a Common, Report concerning you* That your Tongues
are frequently not so G^verned by the, Fear of God, as they ought to be. The
Faculty of Speech is of such a Noble and of such a S^gnal Figure in the
constitution of Mankind, that it is a thousand pitties, it should be Abus^d;
but Womankind is usually charged with a peculiar share in the Worlds Abuses of
it. It is indeed a piece of great Inj^stice, that every Woman should be so far
an Eve, as that her Depravation should be imputed unto all ^he Sex.
Nevertheless i^ highly concerns you to do your part, that in Fames T^umpet,
which is a Speaking One, you may be be^ter spoken of, as to the matter of your
speaking. The Attainment which therefore I Recommend unto you, is that in Prove.
10.20. The Tongue of the Just, is as Choice Silver. A Woman is ^ften valued
according to the Silver that She h^s to bring unto them that will call her
their M^stress, in order to their being Master of that. It Is a few, Pounds,
Shillings and Pence, that makes her weigh heaviest in the Scale of the vulgar
Estimation. ^ut a Woman of a Silver Tongue is the person of whom we may most
Reasonably say, She is not of Little Worth. As your Speech ought always to be
True, and there should be no less an Agreement between your H^arts and Words,
then between your Words and Things, ever speaking As you think, though it may be
not All you think; lest you put Brass or Tin instead of Silver: so your Speech
ought likewise to be Rare, like Silver, which is not so common as Copper or
Iron is. Be careful that you don't Speak too soon, because you cannot fetch
back and eat up, what is uttered; but Study to Answer. And be careful that you
don't Speak too much, because that when the Chest is always open, every one
counts there are no Treasures in it* and the Scripture tells us, it is the
Whore, that is Clamorous, and the Fool, that is F^ll of Words. Let there be a
comely Affability and Ingenuity at the same t^me, in all your Speech, that it
may be as Grateful as a Bag of Silver would be to the Receivers of it; and O
let there be no Dross in your whole Communication. The Dross of your own Wrath,
vented in Scolding, Fury, Vile Names; The Dross of your own Worth, vented in
Boasting, Bragging, Self-Ostentations; the Dross of all Filthiness, vented in
Ba^dy Talk about the Things which it is a shame to speak; let all this Dross be
purged out of all your Speech. But instead thereof Let your Speech, have so
much Use in it, that your Discourse may bring as much Emolument as read^ Silver
to the Hearers of it; that your Lips may Feed many, your Mouth may be ^ Well of
Life, and your Tongue may be Health; and that ordinarily your Companions may
not be a Q^^^ter of an Ho^r with you, before they may have cause to say of you,
Her Discourse has been M^at, Drink, and Physic to my Soul! O that when you are
Talking you would imagine what the Prophet says, The Lord h^arkened and heard*
and acknowledge what the Psalmist owns, There is not a Word in my Tongue, but
behold O Lord, thou know it altogether. I remember Tertullian relates* That
the Primitive Christians did use to season their F^asts with very savoury
Discourses; and he giv^s this Reason for it, Ita fabulantur, ut^ qui sciant
Dominum audire; They Talk as knowing that the Lord Hear^* Pray carry that in
your Minds, and that will preven^ the Impertinent G^ssiping which you have been
Reproached for, that will make you^ bring forth such things as you may with Joy
find Entered in, The Lords Book of Remembrance.

COUNSEL 5.
THERE is one peculiar Thing more, which you should see that your, Fear of God,
extend ^t self unto; and that is, your APPAREL, which you are often Accused
for Transgressi^g (...). Where the Fear of God Sanctifies the Heart, it will
doubtless Regulate the Habit. Pray let the, Fear of God, make you able to stand
before the, Word of God; where Women are commanded in 1 Pet. 3*2, 3, 4. to
have, A Coast Conversation coupled with Fear; whose Adorning ('it is added) Let
it not be the outward Adorning* but let it be the Hidden man of the Heart. For
after this manner in the old Time, the H^ly Women also who trusted in God,
Adorned themselves. And in 1 Timothy 2.9. That they Adorn themselves in modest
Apparel with shame facedness and Sobriety; not with Broidered Hair, or ^old, or
Pearls, or Costly Array; but (which ^ecometh Women professing Godliness) with
God W^rks. It Is true that more Indulgence may be given ^o Women and Children in
point of Apparr^l, than to Men; They were the Wives and the Little Sons and the
Daughters* which we find wearing most of Ornaments among the Ancient People of
God; And yet unto you also, has the God of Heaven given a Law, agreeably to
which you are to Attire your selves. You shall permit me to lay before you, a
few Max^^s, every One of which are so many just Consequences from the
Scriptures that have been given you.

I. For a Woman to Expose unto Common View th^se p^rts of her Body, which there
can be no Good End or Use for the Exposing of* is for her to Expose her self
unto the Vengeance of Heaven. There is indeed a Covering of the Skin, which is
but a Black Mark of one that never yet had a Covering for her Sin. The Black
Patches worn by too many Females, are indeed so many Bl^w ones; they are the
Tokens of a Plague in the Soul. They are not, the spots of Gods Children, but
the Dapples of a Leopard* that will never, Learn to do w^ll. They are for the
most part upon the Faces that never were washed, in the Blood of the Lamb
without Spot^; nor do they argue the Soul within to be one unto whom our Lord
may say, Thou art all fair, there is no Spot in thee. But there is a Nakedness
of the Skin which is also, and as much, to be accounted Criminal. The Face is
to be Naked because of what is to be Known by it; the Hands are to be Naked,
because of what is to be Done by them. But for the Nakedness of the Back and
B^^asts, No Reason can be given; unless it be that a Woman may by showi^g a
Fair-Skin Enkindle^ a Fo^l Fire in the Male Spectators; for which cause even
Popish Writers have no less Righteously th^n severely Lashed them; and for
Protestant Women to use them, is no less inexcusable than it is Abominable: nor
did a Golden Mouth of old stick to say, The Devil sat upon them!

II. For a Woman to put her self into a Fashion, that shall prejudice, either
her Health, or her Work, is to break all the other Eight Commandments as well
as the Sixth and the Eighth, which are thereby notoriously v^olated. They that
say, Pride feels no Cold, do often catch a Mortal Cold that they may please a
foolish Pride, and the Heat of Hell-flames is that which they thus hasten upon
themselves. They that profanely say, As good out of the World as out of the
Fashion, often follow such a Fashion, as either hurri^s them out of the World,
or unfits them for Living in it. Creatures yet, than which none would be more
loath to put on such a Pitch^d Coat of Martyrdom, as Nero clapped on the B^cks
of them that Worshipped out blessed Jesus, to burn them in it. But what Account
can they give at last? when Women go so, that they cannot Eat or Breathe, be
sure they cannot Work; and it is just with God that they who thus cannot Work*
should no^ be permitted long to Eat or Breathe.

III. For a Woman to Wear what is not evidently Consistent with Modesty,
Gravity, and Sobriety, is to Wear not an Ornament* but a Defilement; and She
puts off those Glorious Virtues, when she puts on the Visible Badges of what is
Contrary thereunto. The Command which requ^res any Grace* requires also the
Sign of that Grace; hence for a Woman with her Garish, Pompous, Flanting Modes,
to hang out the Sign, upon which every Rational Beholder thinks he has Liberty
to Read, There dw^lls a Proud* Light, Vain, Giddy, Trifling Soul, in that
Carcass! this is not according to God; who says, Whatsoev^r things are
Venerable, whatso^ver things are Lovely, whatsoever things are of Good R^port,
Think of these things. They that would approve themselves. The Daughters of
Abraham, are to be The Daug^ters of Sarah, too.

IV. As a Poor Woman may not aspire to go with a Bravery, which a Rich or a
Great Woman may be allowed in, so neither may a Rich or a Great Woman Extend
her Bravery, beyond the Allowance which God has given her. There is a
Soft-Cloathing which our Lord Jesus does not seem to deny ^^to such Persons of
Quality as are in Kings Houses. But you have doubtless heard, What came of the
Frog, which would not be content, Except she might look as big as the Cow. The
Ranks of People should be discerned by their Clothes; nor should we go in any
things but what may be called Suits. The Woman which will go as none but those
who are above her, do or can, shows her self to be as much out of her Wits as
out of her Place. And she that will not Cu^ber Coat according to her Cloth,
does but put a Fools Coat upon her; she that will have more on her Back, than
can readily come out of her Purse, deserves to be stripped as the Fine Jay was of
her borrowed Feathers. Nevertheless, Vainglory may insinuate it self into the
Rich and Great, as well as the Poor; and I am to Charge THEM, That they be not
High-minded.

V. A Woman, whose Raiment is too Costly to leave her capable of attending the
Duties of Justice and M^rcy, commits but a piece of shining Theevery, in that
cheating and cruel Finery. She that through Excesses in Attiring of her self, is
unfitted, for the payment of what she owes, either to her private Creditors, or
to the support of the Government and the Ministry, by which her Civil and
Sacred Welfare is Watched unto, is utterly unworthy, Either of Credit, or of
any Civil or Sacred Advantages. But there are Works of Charity as well as Works
of Rig^teousness, which a Woman is also under such obligation to, that all
Superstuities are to be Retrenched for the sake thereof. It seems but
Reasonable, That whenever we lay out any thing for purely Ornamental
Superfluities* we should lay out as much in Clothing and Feeding ^^e
Distressed Members of the Lord Jesus Christ; I doubt we shall make up very mean
Accounts about our Talents, if we do not so.

VI. For an old Woman to flant it in a Youthful Dress, is altogether as
prodigious a Disorder, as for the Flowers of May to appear among the Snows of
Decemb^r. A Summer Dress will not suit a Winter Age. The Aged show themselves
to be Twice Ch^ldren, indeed, if they go like Children, and no^, put away
Childish Things. For a Woman that knows her self near her Winding Sheet, still
to affect a Wedding Robe, is a Ligh^ness than which there can be nothing more
uncomely.

VII For a Pious Woman to Preserve no Distinction from a Deba^^^^ one, in her
Apparel, where it may be done, is to leave her self without a Distinction which
might preserve her when the Common and Wasting Judgments of God are Punishing
the strange Apparel in her Neighborhood. It was well advised by Tertullian to
the Matrons in his Days, Vt sit in^^r A^cillas Dei and Diab^li Discrimen, that
the Handmaids of God would go so as to distinguish themselves from the
Handmaids of the Devil; and believe it, the plagues which come upon the Haughty
Daughters of Z^on, will make no Difference between those that make none for
themselves. We read concerning The Attire of the Harlot; and the Woman that
will Wear like such an one, will probably Fare like her, in her Calamities. The
Curtes^ns in some Nations, of old, were known by Vail^s of a particular shape;
and it is pity but that Virtuous People should agree to avoid such Habits, as
Vicious persons have signalized themselves withal.

VIII. When a Woman finds her Superfluous Acco^trements, to Excite any Lust in
her self, She should no longer carry about her the Flint and Steel that strike
fire into the Tynder of her Corruptions: If Maryes locks have Entangled her
self or others, it becomes her to turn them into a Towel for the feet of the
Lord Jesus. To nourish and foment any Distemper in our mind^, is for us to
Wrong our own Souls, with a P^rensy greater than that of the Possessed
Creature, which kept Cutting and Wounding himself among the Monuments of the
Dead. For a Woman to indulge her self in a Gaiety, which as of on as ^is put
on, disposes her Soul to such a Vanity, as indispos^s her to Devotion, or
throws her into a Frame di^greeable to that of a Stranger and a Pilgrim in the
World; this truly does not, Adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior.

IX. The Woman that must be the High^st or the Soonest in every New Fashion,
will herein always keep the Old Fa^hion of a, Proud Fool It is required of us,
Let your Moderation (...) known unto all m^n; but for a Woman to betray such a
Levity, that nothing will please her but Changeable Taffata; and it shall be as
easy to make a Coat for the Moon, as to accommodate her fickle H^mour, with One
unto her mind; or f^r her to betray such an Ambition, that none shall come to
her Dimensions without an Observable Ex^rbitancy, -- this is quite Contrary to
a Christian Moderation. If when our Lord should say, She seeks me early, it is
on^y the Gallantry of the Age that can say, She is an ea^l^ seeke^ of me; if
when our Lord asks of her, What do thou more than others? all her Answer
must be, I Fl^nt it more, and I b^ave it m^re! it is but a m^serable Story that
is to be told of her.

X. If a Woman spend more Time in Dressing, than she does in Praying, or in
Working, out her own Salvation, her Dress is but the Snare of her Soul. An Holy
Person among the Ancients, b^holding of one that had been long standing at the
Glass, fell a Weeping, and gave this Reason for it, There Is one that has this
M^^^ing s^^nt f^r more T^m^ f^r her Body, than I have done for my Soul How many
Ladi^s would re^ite from their ^lasses with Weeping Eyes, upon their own
Account, if their Eyes were ever Turned Inward upon themselves, or upward unto
an Angry God, or Down-ward unto a G^^ing Hell, as they are Turned Awry to,
Behold V^ity! When a Woman must be set out with a^m^st as much Tackling, as
would serve the R^y^l Soveraig^, and m^st be so taken up wi^h D^cking a Body
which i^ very sh^rtly to f^ed the Worms, that her Soul which is ^o Live through
Eternal Ages, cannot be well Provided for, she Looses her own Soul, and yet
Gains Nothing of that, which if it were All Gained, would not make up the Loss.

XI. In times of terrible, and general Calamity, it is fit a Woman should
abridge her self of that Liberty in her Garb, which at other Times may be
allowed unto her. When the People are in Danger of Ruin, the Voice of God unto
them is, Put off your Ornaments. And as for a Woman to be Splendidly Arrayed
upon a Day of Humiliation, is an Affront not only to the Angels that see how we
look in our Sacred Congreg^tions, but also to the God of Angels, before whom we
should then appear in what is equiv^lent unto Sack cloth; so for her ordinari^y
to glitter with C^stly Array, at a Time when we are peculiarly to, Humble our
selves under the Mighty Hand of God, is to make her self like th^^ Midia^itish
Doxy, who had Zimri f^r her Gallant, in the face of the whole Co^gregati^n,
which were We^ping before the (...).

XII. The (...) R^b^s of any Woman are but v^le Rags if hey either do find her
D^stitute of or do not make her Conc^r^ed for, The Clothing of her Soul When
Athanasius behold a Woman g^^geously A^^iring of her self, he melted into
Tears, For (said he) all this preparation is for her D^str^cti^n. Tr^ly a Woman
is but Equipping her self against A Day of Slaughter, (...) Bo^ily Equipage be
all that she is furnish^^ with. If she do not, Put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
(...) sign^fies all her, Provisi^n for the Flesh? I sh^^be not. Arrayed in the
Fine (...) clean and White, which is the Righteousness of the Sai^ts, the Lamb
of God will disdain to take notice of her. If she have not on, The Wedding
Garment, the King of Heaven will not acknowledge her as a Guest of His. Let her
be, All Glorious within, and from the Needlework of the Holy Spirit, Let her
have an Under Garment of Grace, upon which an Upper Garment of Glory shall
shortly be induced, or else the Lord will see no Beauty in her. If she had no
more than a Peas^od out of which to (...) her a Gown and Hood, she would not be
so unhappy, as if her Soul go without the White Raiment, which the Lord Jesus
has Counseled her to Buy (that is, to Beg) of Him.

THESE are the Lessons, by the Remembrance and Observance of which, you may b^
kept from such Transgression in your Apparel as may say, There is no Fear of
God before your Eyes.

COUNSEL 6.
BUT, without your, Faith in Christ, your; Fear of God, is utterly to be
despaired of. No Good Fruit is to be expected from you, nor do I expect any
Good Fruit of all the perswasives unto the, Fear of God, now used with you,
unless by a Believing on, you come to an Union with, your Lord Redeemer, who
has told ^ou, Without me you can do nothing* Who^ver pretends to Write the
whole CALLING ^f a Virtuous Woman, and forgets to urge Faith in the Lord J^^sus
Christ as the Root and So^rce of all (...) Virtue, has finely left out the One
Thing N^^^^ful. There is nothing so Needful for Wo^^^ to be advertised of, as a
Mess^ge like (...) was carried from the Lord Jesus to that (...) of old, Arise,
the Master calls thee! The Last thing which therefore is now set before you,
is mentioned Last, because it is the First thing that you are to set upon the
practice of; It Is That of, B^l^eving on the Lord Jesus Christ; it is the
Answering of the Invi^ations which that Blessed Lord has given you, Look unto
me, that you may be Saved, and, Come unto me, that yo^ may have Rest We are
told in Heb. 11 6. Without Faith, it is impossible to please God; and we may
therefore say, Without Faith it is impossible to Fear God. It was when Faith in
the promised M^ssi^h was working in the Heart of our Father Abraham, that the
Lord said, Now I know that thou Fear me. Those two things are ^oined by the
Psalm^st, in Psalm. 115.11. Ye that Fear the Lord Trust in the Lord. Except we
come to a Tr^st in the Lord, for all our Blessedness to be graciously
Communicated unto us through the Mediator. We discover ourselves to be without
the Fear of the Lord; neither shall we ever Grow i^ Grace, if we have not a
sensible, affecting, fiducial Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. O that it may
no^ be ^ai^ of you, Woman, Great is thy Faith! and that where^^, Faith is not
of our selves, it is the Gifts of G^d, You may beg of God this Gift with a mo^^
becoming Importunity, Lord, I would believe; H^lp my Unbelief!

THAT You may not want a Description of that Faith, with which you should so
apply your selves to the Lord Jesus Christ, as that it may be said of you, Who
is this Lea^ing upon her (...)? Let me distinctly en^reat you, to pursue the
Experience of these two Seize.

FIRST, Get a Lively sense of your own Spiritual Death, Sinfulness and
Wretchedness. Behold your selves hunted and haunted by the Avengers of Sin, and
ready to be Destroyed if a R^fuge be not provided for you. When you hear the
Voice of God, as a Judge Enquiring after you, let it make you as much Afraid as
your first Mother in the first Garden was. Take a View of your own Condition,
as the Word of God has Represented it; and let no Creatures whatsoever then
Quiet the Agonies thence arising in your minds. Think on the terrible Wants and
Woes of your S^uls; th^nk on the Guilt, and F^l^h and Slavery wherein you are
pe^^shing every day; think on the Ever-burning Fire, and of the never dying
Worm* which you are every day in dang^r of going d^wn into; think till you cry
out, Oh Wret^hed Woman that I am! Who shall deliver me? Let not all the
Pleasures and Profits and Honors of this World al^ay the D^stresses which your
Souls are now cast into; call 'em all, Miserable Comforters! and, Lying
Va^ities! and, Ph^sitians of no value! If (...) now off^r to procure your
D^li^erance, treat that Idol with Contempt, and unspeakable D^sdain. As for any
Right^ousness of your own to answer the Demands of the Law, acknowledge, It Is
all Filthiness; as for any Strength of your own* ^o fulfill so much as the
Commands of the Gospel, acknowledge, I have no Sufficiency! pronounce your
s^ves LOST, and write yo^^ selves, Wretched and Poor and miserable and (...)
and Naked.

BEING thus Humbled, Or having Your Security in your Natural Estate so far
disturbed, that you feel you must Renounce all but CHRIST, all for CHRIST, then
cast your selves upon the Lo^d Jesus Christ for all manner of Good. Humbly,
Hopefully, Joyfully go to Him for all the S^re-Mercies of the New Covenant; for
all the Be^efi^s whereof it has pleased the Father there should in Him all
Fullness dwell; for all the Wisdom and Righteousness and Sanctification and
Redemption which He is to be made unto us. First, Accept the Lord Jesus Christ,
in His Word. When you hear the Tender of a Jesus made unto you, Reply upon it,
Lord, Let me have a Jesus upon any Terms! and like the Dying Martyr say. None
but Christ! None but Christ* P^nder Seriousl^, How the Lord Jesus Christ
Executes the Office of a Prophet and of a Priest and of a King; and when you
are asked, Whether you are willing to Enjoy the Instruction of that Prophet,
the Atonement of that Priest, and the Government of that King, let your sincere
Answer be, Lord, with all my Heart* And then, ^resent the Lord Jesus Christ, in
Your Prayer. When you make any Request unto the Almighty, let the Merit and
Virtue of the Lord Jesus Christ, be the Ground of your Hope to speed in all.
The Mediation of the Lord J^^u^, le^ That both Embolden your Applications to,
and Encourage your Expectations from, the God of Heaven. Particularly, when you
Pray for the Favor of God, let this be your Dep^ndence, The Lord Jesus Christ
has made Satisfaction for us by His Obedience, and now He Ever liv^s to make
Intercession for us. When you Pray for any Couns^l or Conduct, Rely upon this,
unto us a Savio^r is Given, whose Name is, Wonderful Counselor! When you Pray
for any Succor or Supply, Rely upon this, There is a Man upon the Throne* by
whom all the ^h^els i^ the World are managed! Oh let the ^iew of a Sweet Jesus
cause you to silence all your Despair of Mercy, and say, Why art thou cast
down, O my Soul, Hope in God, since He has Provided a Jesus for thee. THIS is
the, Faith of Gods El^ct. We re^d in 2* Tim. 3.6. Concerning, Silly Women,
Laden with Sins; Creatures indeed, which do not Feel their Lo^d. But it is the
Call of our Lord* in Ma^h. 11.28. Come to me, all ye that are Heavy Laden. May
you find your Souls Heavy Laden with a Mountainous Weight of Sins upon you; and
may you carry such Awakened Souls unto the Lord Jesus, as unto Him* wh^m God
has Exalted, that He may bestow both Repentance and R^mission of Sins upon His
Isra^l.

THAT so the Address now made you, may be as well Agreeable as Eff^ctual, give
me Leave to press it, under the Notion of a MARRIAGE whereof the Son of God now
makes you m^st Condescending Overtures. Never were you treated with such an
Important and Concerning Affair* as that which I now Challenge your Earnest
Heed unto; and therefore let the Words once used by a Woman, be now with a
little Alteration Mine, Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee; for I must prevail With thee to take m^ God* and my
Christ, as thine for ever. The M^^nisters of the Lord Jesus Christ are called
(...) Friends of the Bridegroom; Now let one (...) Th^^ inform you, That* the
Prince of Life* the Lord of Glory, the King of Heaven, makes unto you, even
unto sinful Worthless YOU, a Motion of a Marriage wi^h Himself. O do not slight
the Motion of such a Tra^scend^nt Match! but, that I may speak in the Apostles
Language, Let me Espouse you to one Husb^nd, that I may present you, as a Chaste
Virgin to CHRIST. We read in Rev. 19 6, 7. There is A Voice as it were of a
Great M^ltitude, and the Voice of Mi^hty Thunders, saying, Hall^lujah, let us
be glad and rejoice* for the Marriage of the Lamb is come* and his Wife has
made her self Ready! Could I speak wi^h a Voice like that of Mighty Thunders, I
would now call upon a Great Multitude, that they would make themselves ready
for a Marriage with the Lamb of God. O don't Refuse a Match with the LAMB, lest
you incur the Wrath of the Lamb; or, indeed, lest He become a Lion, and He Tear
you to pieces, while there is none to Deliver. Methinks, there should not need
many A^guments to persuade you unto such a Marriage as you now have the Tenders
of. If there do, then Consider the Necessity of this Marriage. The Apostle
speaking of a Woman, being not married unto another man* in a Time of Raging
Persecution, says in 1 Cor. 7.4^. She is happi^r if she so abide. But for a
Woman that is not Married unto the Lord Jesus Christ* Woe to her, if she so
abid! she (...) horribly Undone, and Interminably and In^^lerably Ruined, if
she so abide! If this be not though, then Consider* the Vtility of this
Marriage. When a Woman is Married unto a Neighbor, she is made Owner of what
he is, and of what he has; and a Beggar may be made an Empress when a mighty
Prince has taken her. But let a Woman be Married unto the Lord Jesus Christ,
and what follows? '^is no less than that in 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. All Things are
yours, and ye are Chr^sts. O what unsearchable R^ches, are you made presently
partak^rs of! If th^s avail no^, Consider, then the Exc^llency of ^he Person,
who Courts you to the Marr^age. It Is said of Him, in Cant. 5.16. H^ is
al^og^ther Lov^ly; and cannot you L^ve such an (...)? He is, The Desire of all
Nations; and w^ll not you Desire Him? He is* The Pea^^ of great price; and will
you set no Price upon Him? He is, The Christ of God; and O why should not you
say, Let Him be my Christ for-ever! And if none of all this will br^ak you^
H^ar^s, let it be Considered, That it is the Lord Jesus Christ Himself who has
made the First Off^rs ^f this Aston^^hing Match. We f^rlorn Creatures, by the
H^dges and in the D^tches of Hell, never durst have Dreamt of such an
Exaltati^n, if that Glorious Monarch H^ms^lf had not made the First Offers of
it* H^ was H^mself Mad^ of a Woman, on pur^ose that so He might b^ M^rried un^o
the Children of Men; and the Souls of Wom^n as well as of M^n, are capable of
this M^stical Marriage. This Illustrious Lord, who is infinitely High^r than
the Kings of the Earth, does now H^mself do so st^ange a thing, as to B^seech
you, That you w^^ld Accept of Him as the Husband of your So^ls; and that you
would be willing ^o have an I^^erest in that privilege, Thy Maker is thy
Husband, and the Redeemer; The Lord of H^sts is his Name; and thy, Redeemer. O
Heart of Adamant, which these Considera^ions do not Overcome and Mollify*

BUT it is p^ssible the Women to whom I write, may find their Hearts Complying
with the Proposals of the Blessed Savior, when they see those Proposals more
distinctly laid before them. It is therefore Desired, FIRST, That you would
Renounce all other L^v^rs besides the Lord Jesus Christ. It is the Demand of
our Lord Jesus, in Hos 3 3. Thou shall not Play the Harlot, and thou shall not
be for another man, so will I also be for thee. You have indeed given your
First L^ves, unto the Idols of your Souls; but O where are your Wonderments
that the S^n of God should not be Averse after all, to make You, His! Although
the Pri^st of old, might no^ M^^ry a Widow; yet our Magnificent High Pri^st.
JESUS, is willing to Marry a Soul that has been fearfully Vitiated and
Prostituted; Thou have Play^d the Harlot with many L^vers, yet Return again
unto me, says the Lord. But that which the Lord now Exp^cts of you, is, to
forsake and shake off, all the Old Oppressors of your Soul: forever. Unto the
Flesh now say, I will not have thy L^sts to be my Laws any more! Unto the World
n^w say, I will not seek my Ch^ef Good among thy Vexa^ious Vanities any more!
And unto the Div^l say, I will no more be among thy Slaves, whom thou Leadest
Captive at thy w^ll! Resolve, that if ever these Other Lords do after this
Obtain any thing from you, it shall be by the Violence of a Rape, which you
will never cease Crying to Heaven for Help against. And it is, THEN, Desired,
That you would Receive the Lord Jesus Christ, With and For all His Mercies.
Receive Him, with the Wish of your Souls, To be by Him Furnished and Provided
with all manner of Good, and by Him to b^ing forth Fruit unto Him. Receive Him
freely, fully, firmly, hoping to Live on Him, to Him, and with Him World
without End. Fall down like Mary in the Garden crying out, Rabboni; O* my Lord!
my Lord! With a Transported Affection say un^o Him, Lord, Be thou mine, make me
Thine, and let my Jesus be for ever the Beloved of my Soul! and upon your own
Souls lay that Change Continually, Hark^n, O Daughter; He is thy Lord, and
worship thou Him! But Rec^ive Him also very Thankfully* for, if when the
Serv^nts of Da^id came to Abiga^l, saying, David sent us unto th^e, to take
thee to him, ^o W^fe, it is reported in 1 Samuel 25 41. She bow^d her self on her
face to the Earth, and said, B^hold, Let thine Handmaid, be a S^rvant, to Wash
the Feet of the S^rvants of my Lord: Much more, when our Heavenly David, sends
to Marry your Souls unto Himself, it becomes you, must H^mbly to cast
you^^selves at His F^et, and adore His Goodness wi^h nev^r-ending Hall^lujahs.
It was uttered with some Ecstasy, by that Woman of Old, Whenc^ is this to me,
that the Mother of my Lord should come to me! But surely then, you have cause
to say wi^h as Rapturous Elevations and Acclamations of your (...), O whence is
this to me, that my Lord Himself. should not only come, but also give Himself,
to such a Wretch as I am! ^n the mean time, let not your want of a Dowry
discourage you from R^c^iving of that Rich Lord, who has infinitely more than,
The Earth and the Fullness thereof. Many a Poor Soul is Afraid of Receiving the
Lord Jesus Christ, because they have nothing to bring unto Him; they see
themselves vile, forlorn, loathsome, and think they, Will the Glorious Jesus
Look upon such a^ One! Yes, that He will; nor will he look upon any but such as
count and feel themselves to be such; and can Venture to throw themselves into
His Arms, notwithstanding their being so. You must come to the Lord Jesus, with
such Acknowledgments as these; Lord, If thou Marry me to thy (...) I have
horrible Debts upon me, which thou m^st a s^^er for. I have nothing but
Guiltiness, Wret^hedness, Ig^orance, and Slavery, to R^commend me unto thy
favors, THAT, and some Little (...) of That, is all that I have to bring unto
thy Majesty. With all THAT, I now cast my self upon thee, and according to thy
Glorious Grace, I must now be Thine for ever.

I PRAY, That this matter may be brought unto an Happy ^ssue before we (...).
Reader, As an Ambassador, for Christ, I do in the st^^d of Christ b^seech you,
That you would be M^rried un^o that Lord Redeemer. Will you give Your Co^se^t
unto the motion? Give b^t THAT, and the Much is made; and so, Blessed YOU, that
ev^r you were Born? Let your Hearts within you, now answer, I Will, and You
will make this, The Day of your Espousals, and, The Day of the Gladness of your
H^arts. Hear the sweet Voice of the Lord Jesus, from the Lof^y Battlements of
Heaven, this Day calling upon you. His Voice is, Art thou willing, that My
Righteousness, and Satisfaction and Interc^ssion, be that alone which may
Purchase for thee all thy Blessedness? Reply, Lord, I am Willing. His Voice is,
Art thou willing that my Teaching and my Eye ^alve, should Lead thee in the way
of Peace? Reply Lord, I am willing. His Vnice is, Art thou w^lling, that I
should set up my Kingdom in thee* and strengthen thee against all the Enemies
thereof? Reply, Lord, I am willing. Behold, The K^ot is now Tied; and i^ will not
be long before the Consummation of it, and your Cohabitation with the Lord. The
Lord Jesus will shortly fetch you away to the Mansi^ns in His Fathers Horse;
and so you shall Be for ^v^r wi^h the Lord. What shall I say more? Let me plead
with you like ^ S^rvant of my Lord: If you will deal kindly and Tr^ly with my
Master, T^ll me; Will you Go to the So^ of God for Life, or no? What is your
Ans^e^? Oh let it be like that which Re^eck^h made, in Genesis 24.52. I will go. I
have only this to tell you, That You Will spend Eternal Ages in Praising of God
for sending this little Book into your H^nds, if THIS may be the R^s^lt and
Effect of your (...). But O ^he Incredibl^ T^rments of the W^ath, which is
Reserved for, The Children of u^perswadeabl^ness!

I THEREFORE now ^^w my Knees unto the, O Father of Spirits, That a De^^l of
thy Po^^^ may come unto the Reader of th^se Lines, and that she may be made
willing in this Day of thy Power, to give her Self and her Love unto the
Eternal Son of thy Love; Amen; and let her that Reads also say, AMEN, and AMEN.

COUNSEL. 7.
AND yet there is this One thing more, which Women are to be advised unto;
Namely, To maintain, The Fear of God, in every C^ndi^ion of Life, into and
through which the, Will of God may carry them. There are particularly, F^ur
States, in One of which all Women are, and to most of which, perhaps, most
Women come. Let there be set before you, the po^^tr^it^re of, A Virtuous Woman,
in each ^f th^se Four States; and let it be your study to answer that
pourtraiture by, The Fear of God, in all. While I man^ge that D^^cour^e, I
shall take the Liberty to touch now and then upon the Sign^fication of such
NAMES as are most usual with the F^male S^x^; par^ly, because it is a Curi^sity
which you w^u^d willingly be Entertained with; but Che^^^y because I may make
some Lessons the more easily Remembered, yea, and the more thoroughly Attended,
by that Curiosity. A^ least, I hope, I shall not meet with such an Hard Fa^e,
as that German Divine, who telling his Audi^ory, tha^ Vrs^la signified, A
Little Bear, a Wom^n of that Name caused such an Up-roar among the Women
against him, as drove him out of the Town.

The Virtuous MAID.
IT IS the Wish of the Psalmist, in Psalm. 144.12. That our Daughters may be as
C^^^er Stones, Polished after the Similitude of a Palace. The Name of Per^el
[or Petronella] which Signifies, A Pretty Little Stone, has been sometimes put
upon a Daughter. And now behold. A Virtuous Daughter is here styled, A Polished
Corner Stone, by the Spirit of God; She is indeed a Margaret, that is to say, A
precious one. It seems* it is a thing that more than a little sets off the
Happiness of a People, When the Young Women among them, have Accomplishments
which render them, like the Tall, Fine, C^stly Pillars, that are usually at the
Gates of Pal^ces. The most Chr^stian Jew in his Transl^^ion of that Place,
makes the Wish ^o run, That our Daughters may be -- the B^il^ing of the Tem^le.
And indeed it is no small H^ppiness unto a People, when the Young Women among
them, do B^ild the Temple of God, and become Stones fit for a Room in that
Building. It has doubtless been a most Encouraging thing unto some one
Gather^d Church of the Lord Jesus. To see about Thir^y or Forty Gracious Young
^omen, in two or three Years time (as perhaps there have been seen) Addr^ssing
them for their Sacred Communion at the Table of the Lord* Now it is by, The Fear
of G^d, that a Maid may become one of these Happy Daughters. A Vert^^ous Maid,
will not count her self too Young (...) be Concerned about, The Fear of God,
but (...) Obeyes that Call, R^memb^r thy Creator in (...) Days of by Youth;
She believes that Word, Behold, Now is the Accepted Time, Behold, N^w is the
Day of Salvation! And let us now see what her Carriage is.

I Such is her D^votion, th^^ while she Prudently avoids the ^eading of
Romances, which do no less Naturally than Generally Inspire the minds of Young
People with Humors, that are as V^cious as they are Fo^lish; on the other
sid^, she Piously Reads the Bible Every D^y, and she thence fetches those
Humble and Holy, and serious Prayers which do obtain for her, all manner of
Grace to help in a Time of Need. The Name of Agatha, or, A Good One, is that
which for this cause Pertains unto her; and She is an A^^a, or an Hannah, which
is to say* A Gracious One.

II. Such is her Purity, that while she will not suffer the least B^haviour or
Expressi^^ to proceed from her, which may Savor of Obscaenity; so neither will
she Permit, much less Invite, the Dalli^nces of any Wan^on Creatures which may
design any thing besides what is H^nourable on her; ^or will she Endure ^o hear
any Talk that shall not sound Innocently, without bestowing the Rebuke of ^t
least that which for her sake we style, A ^aiden Blush* upon it. She is an
Ag^es, that (...) A Chaste One. The Name of a Catharine, ^^at is, a Puritan,
agrees well unto her; (...) she had rather have it, though with a ^^^^nful Nick
name, than go with out it.

III. Such is her Modesty, that she Chooses to be Seen rather than Heard
wherever she comes: and instead of that Confidence in Repartees and Railleries
which p^asses for Good^ Breeding with a Debauched Generation, or instead of
being like those who (as one says) More Bridle is their Chi^s, than their
Tongues, she Coun^s Tac^, which in English is, Hold your Peace, a Name
sometimes worn by some of her Sex, to be a Rule always to be heeded by her
self. But if she be Constrained* at all to speak, she still is, an ^^^alia, or,
a W^ll Spoken One; and though she will not be, As an Hind let loose, yet she
will ever, Give Goodly Words.

IV. Such is her Industry, that she betimes applies her self to Learn all the
Affairs of Housewifry, and besides a good skill at her Needl^, as well as in
the Kitchen, she acquaints her self with Arithmetic and Accomptantship,
[perhaps also Chirurgery^ and such other Arts relating to Business, as may
Enable her to do the Man whom she may hereafter have, Good and not Evil all the
Days of her Life. If she have any Time after this to Learn Music and Language
she will not Loose her Time, and yet she will no^ be proud ^f her Skill, though
the Name of Lora, that is* Learning, (which the Saxons had in use among them
for their Women) should justly belong unto her. She would with all good
Accomplishments be a Ruth; which is to say, A Filled One.

V. Such is her Discretion, that while it is too absurdly counted a Great Curse
to be an Old Maid, she makes her Single S^^te a Blessed One by Improving her
Liesure from the Encumbrances of a ^amily, in Caring for the Things of the
Lord, that she may be Holy both in Body and in Spirit: and when she sees what
Liberty she thereby has, To serve the Lord without ^^straction, she calls her
self a Beatrice, that is, A Blessed Woman. She does not Vow a perpetual
Virginity, lest her Vow should happen to Expose her; while there are Devils as
well as Angels, which do not Marry, nor are given in Marriage. But yet instead
of using any Hasty Method to get into the Married Row, and instead of taking a
Bad Husband merely to avoid the little Reproach of having None, she does by her
Gravity and Holiness, convince all the World, that her present circumstances
are of Choice rather than Force; and the Longer she is in them, the more she
does Consecrate her self unto the Lord.

VI. Such is her Obedience, that as 'twas none of her manner to seek a Match
for her self, by putting her self into a Flanting Dress, knowing that such a
Dress would make a Wiseman afraid of her, and it were better to have no
Husband, than to have such a B^zzard as could be caught by any Cassandra's [or
Women that set men on fire] in the Snares of an Extravagant Gaiety and Bravery;
so when a March does offer himself unto her, she wisely leaves it unto the
Reasonable Judgment of ^er Parents, or Guardians, whether he be indeed a Match
for her, or no; nor will she dispose of her self without their Consent,
Conduct, and Blessing in it. Indeed, she reckons this is a proper T^st, by
which a Real and a Worthy Lover may be tried; Let my Superi^^s, that have the
Disposal of me, know your Mind! so does she make her self an Abigail, or her
Fathers Joy: and not a Dinah, that is a Judgment unto him.

THIS is a Virtuous MAID! And those Virgins which were so Sacred among the
Ancient Romans, as to be made the Sanctuaries of the greatest Reverence, did
not more deserve all Resp^ct and Honor, than the Virgins which thus manifest,
The Fear of God. B^t we hope it will not be long before she becomes a WIFE;
which will render her a Mary, that is, an Exalted One; and let us now see, what
a Virtuous One.

The Virtuous WIFE.
WHEN Mr. William Wh^tely, was going to Publish a Book, which insisted much on
the Duties of a Wife, he Dedicated the Book to his Father-in-law; and in the
Epistle, after Solemn Thanks unto him for his bestowing on him, A most
Excellent and Virtuous Wife, he adds, I have been the better Able to show, what
a Good Wife should be, by fi^ding the full Duty of a Wife continually performed
unto me* in my own House; most easily therefore might I set out a Picture of
that (says ^e) which is hourly convers^nt before my Eyes. I cannot say that I
am any further, but I have ^ause to render unto Heaven my daily and hearty
Thanks, that I am thus far, advantaged for my Describing of A V^rtuous Wife;
and if I thus Publish this Mercy of God unto my self, the unworthiest of men,
le^ Me nor be Censured as if my Freedom were a Folly* not only because those
Eminent Persons ^^^aens and Paraeus have before me, in Print Celebrated each of
them the Worth of his Virtuous Wife, but also because the Wise Man reckons it
among the privileges of a Virtuous Wife, in Prove. 31.28 Her Husband also, he
Praises her.

IT was a great abuse which the Ancients who do^ed upon Virginity, put upon
those words of the Apostle, in Romans 8.8* Those that are in the Flesh cannot
please God; when they supposed all Married Persons to be Those intended. A
Virtuous Wife is one that pleases God, as much as if she were cloistered up in
the strictest and closest N^nnery; and there with yea, there- in she pleases a
Virtuous Husband also; she studies to render her self a true Ma^^l, or Amiable
person, in his Eyes; and a Right Evo^ias, or, One of a Good Savor to him. You
shall now hear her Qualities.

I. As for her Love to her Husband, I may say, It Is even strong as Death, many
Waters cannot quench it, neither can the Floods drown it. She can like, Sarah,
Rebeckah, Rachel, freely leave all the Friends in the World for his company;
and she looks upon that change of God unto His Ministers, Teach the Y^ung Wom^n
to Love their Husbands, as no less profi^able, than highly Reasonable. When she
Reads, That Prince Edward in his Wars against the Turks, b^ing stabbed with a
poisoned Knife, hi^ P^incess did suck the Poison out of his Woun^s, with her
own Royal Mouth, she finds in her own Heart a principle disposing her to show
her own Husband as great a Love. When she Reads of a Woman called Merpine, who
having her Husband Apoplex'd in all his Limbs, bore him on her Back a thousand
and three Hundred English Miles to a Bath, for his Recovery, she ^^ds her self
not altogether unwilling to have done the Like. When she Reads of those famous
Women, who after a ho^ Siege in the Castle of Winsberg, having obtained this
Liberty from their Enraged Enemies, That they might themselves go out, and also
take any one thing that they could carry with them, very bravely took up each
one her Husband, and so delivered them; she Applauds the Example and world
Follow it. And, when she Reads of that Generous Young Woman, Clara Cerv^nta,
who having for her Husband, on^ V^lda^^a, that proved full of most loathsome
Dis^ases, yet she rended him with all the care and cost imaginable, and Sold
her Jewels to maintain him; and at his Death, after ten long years of
Languishment, she Replied un^o her Friends who would rather have Congratulated
her Deliverance, That she would fre^ly l^s^ the b^st of her Enjoyments, to
purchase her D^ar Va^daura ag^^a! She resolves the Imita^ion of such a
Carriage, while she bestows an Admiration on it. He^ Affections were not at
first founded on the Estate or Beauty of her Husband; and therefore it These
happen to be Consumer, Those do outlive their Funeral. T^s Her Piety toward
the Commandment and Ordinance of God* that Inspires her Affections; and so ^hey
do not grow Cold like a Smith's red hot B^r of Iron, when taken out from the
Fire of a misplaced Lust* When she addresses him, wi^h such a Compellation, as,
LOVE, her Heart goes with her Lip, and she means what she speaks.

II. But her Love to her Husband, will also admit, yea, and Produce the Fear
of, A Cautious Diligence never to Displease him. It Was this which the Apostle
Peter meant, when he Recommends unto the Women, A Chaste Conversation Coupled
with Fear; and Paul, when he requires of the woman, To Reverence her Husband.
While she looks upon him as, Her Guide, by the Constitution of God, she will
not Scruple with Sarah, to call him, Her Lord; and though she does not Fear his
Blows, yet she does Fear his Frowns, being Loath in any way to Grieve him, or
cause an Head-ake in the Family by Offe^ding him. She would have that famous
D^cree of the Persians mentioned in the Sacred Bible, That all the Wives give
to their Husbands Honor both to Great and Small, to be as a Law of the
Persians, al^ogether, Unalterable* In every Lawful thing, she submits her Will
and Sense* to his, where she cannot with Calm Reasons Convince him of,
Inexpediencies; and instead of Grudging or Captions Contradiction, she acts as
if there were but One Mind in Two Bodies. If her Abraham give ord^r, Make Ready
quickly three Measures of Meal* or ^he like, it is as quickly done; If her Jacob
say to her, I must have you go with me, she most readily yields unto him. When
she is for Obeying him, In Omnibus Licitis [i* e. in every Lawful thing] she
does not English it, as once the Gentlewoman did, as far as my List i^. If his
Unreasonable Humors happen to be such, that she must g^ve some Diversion to
them, she Remembers that Rule, In her Tongue is the Law of Kindness; it is by
the Kindness, the Swee^ness, the Goodness of her Ex^^^ssi^ns, that she gives
Law un^o him. If she speak of him, it is not in such Terms as the Harlot uses in
Proverbs, The Man; but it is with all manner of Resp^ct: she will nor Blaze any
Infirmity of his, nor will she Blast his Reputation; being indeed Sensible that
whatever Ignom^ny she cast upon him, it infallibly R^bounds and Redounds upon
her self: here she is a true Mil^a, that is, A Woman of Couns^l. If she speak
to him, it is not with Talk^^ive and Unhandsome Interruptions, nor with any
other mis-becoming I^solencies; though he be never so much, a Ch^^l yet she
^ver t^ea^s him with the Language of an Abigail. Though she be a Sarah, that
is, a Mistress; yet she owns that she has, a Master; and like Sarah of Old,
she will not so much as take in, or cast out a S^rvant, without Consulting Him;
nor will she receive any Guests or G^ods into the House, unless, like the
Sh^^amite, she may have her Husbands Approbation; and she will have at least
some Implicit or General Consent of his, before she will Exercise any Secret
Bounties wi^h his Possessions. His Anger will not cause her to Swallow a
Reproof with discontent, and his Fondness will not make her to forget the
Honor that she Owes unto him. ^ndeed there is a Store of Michols in the World;
Michol, is as much as to say, Who is* All (in the House) but She.? But let us
leave it unto such Michols alone, To despise their Husbands in their Hearts;
God will punish them.

III. But her Fear of Displeasing her Husband, most remarkably appears in the
Peace that she preserves with him; and her Antipathy to all Con^ention, un^ess
it be That of, Provoking one another to Love and Good Works. A Susan she is,
that is, A Lilly; but never, A Briar, to him; nor will she give him cause to
call her, Barbara. She will have no such Passion toward her Husband as may
make her worthy to be called, A Fury; but if he be himself in a Passion, she
strives with the Soft Answers of Me^k^ess, to Mollify it first, and so to
Overcome (...): She is a true Rach^l, that is to say, A She^p under the
greatest Exasperations. A Reverend Person seeing once a Couple that were very
Choleric, yet live most lovingly and peaceably together, demanded of them,
Whence it was? and the man made him this Answer, Sir, When my Wife is in a
Passion I yi^ld unto her; and when I am in a Passion, she yi^lds unto me; so
that we never are in our passionate Fits together! The Good Woman will make it
her Endeavor to attend the last part of this Contrivance, and will give small
or no Occasion for the First. The Mariners count i^ Bodes w^ll to see Two
Fireballs appearing in a Ship together; bu^ our Good Woman counts Two Fire
Balls in an House together to B^de Ill as the worst of Omens; nor will she be a
party to maintain a Civil War within the Walls of her Dwelling. She thinks that
if there be nothing but Fire! Fire^^ in the House, it is a sign that God, Who
is, The God of Peace, is not graciously present there; as the Jewish Rabbis
have noted upon the Hebrew Names of Ish, an Husband, and Ishah, a Wife; out of
which if you take the Two Letters which make the Name of Joh, there will remain
only Esh, ^sh, that is, Fire! Fire! The old Heathen took the G^ll from the
Nuptial Sacrifices, and threw i^ behind the Altar, to intimate, That all
Bitterness is to be thrown away by all Married People; Mercury, or Good
Language, is to stand by Venus And this Woman accordingly, puts away, ^ll
Bitterness, Anger, Clamor, and Evil-Speaking; She is a Right Rebekah, which
carries, The Blunting or ^indring of Contention, in the sign^fication of it;
and a Right Shelomith, which is to say, A P^aceable One.

IV But she is for Plenty as well as Peace in her Household; and by her
Thriftiness makes an Effectual and Sufficient Reply unto her Husband, when he
does ask her, as he m^st, Whether he shall Thrive or no? She is a Deborah, that
is. A See, for her Diligence and Industry in her ^ive. As on the one side she
will have none in her H^use to Want, so on the other side, she will have all of
them to Work; or as the Holy Spirit of God Express^s it, (...) Looks will to
the Wa^s of her Household, (...) Eats not the Bread of Idleness. Her Husband
Gains are so managed by her Houswifry an^ Providence, that he finds it his
Advantag^ to let her keep the Keys of all; and she will so Regulate all the
Domestic Expenses, that he shall not complain of, Any Thing Embezzled. Her
very Forecast is as useful as much of her Husbands Business; and the Pennyes
that she Saves do add unto the heaps of the Pounds that are Got by him. He has
a rich Portion wi^h her, merely in her Prudence; that is it which renders her a
true Jerusha, or an Inheritance unto him. She i^ particularly careful, that she
do not bear such a Sail of Gallantry, either in her Table, or her Appar^l,, or
her Furniture, as may sink her Husband; nor will she be one of those Women, who
(as one says) are now such Skilful Chymist^, that they quickly turn their
Husbands Earth into Gold; only they pursue the Experiment too far, making that
Gold too Volatile, and let it all Vapor away i^ I^significant, though Gaudy
Trifles That Woman de^e^ves the Name of Dalilah, that is, Poverty; [unless you
will venture upon so hard a Name as Jezabel, that is, A Woe to the House;] Whose
Discretion shall not be better than a Dowry, to her Owner.

V. And this Thriftiness is accompanied with such a Fid^lity to her Husband, as
that she will not give a Lodging to the least straggling or wandering Th^ught of
D^sloyalty to his Bed; lest by her par^ying with wicked Thoughts, the Devil
should insensibly Decoy her to the D^e^s which God will Judge She is a Dove,
that will ^^oner Die than leave her Mate; and her Husband is to her, The
Covering of her Eyes, a^ such a ra^e, that she sees a Desirable^ess i^ (...),
which she will not allow her self to be^old or suppose in any other; neither
will she ^ook upon Another, any more than the W^fe of Tigranes, who after the
Wedding of Cyr^^* whom every one did commend as the Rar^^^ Person in all the
Company, being by her Husband ask^d, What she Thought of him? answered roundly,
In truth I looked at no Body there, but you, my Husband. A Wanton had as good
^at Fire, as go to Enkindle any False Fire ^r Fools^Fire in her holy Breast;
she accounts Adultery to be as the Law of M^ses adjudged it, A Capital Crime;
and if the Egyptians of old, cut off (...) Nose of the Adulteress, Or, if the
Athenians tore her in pieces with wild Horses, rather had she undergo the Pain
of such things than Commit the Crime. She is a Gertrude, or All true, in the
Marriage Covenant. Yea, She will even Abstain from all ^ppearance of Evil; and
as it is abominable unto her to Entertain the least groundless and causeless
Jealousy of ^er Husband, or to Torture and Expose her own Soul by the uneasy
Frenzy of uncharitable ^ur^^izes concerning him, so she will not give him the
least opportunity to Think hardly of her self. She will not therefore be too
much from Home, upon Concerns, that perhaps ^o him are Unaccountable: but if
^he Angels do Enquire, where she is, he^ Husband may Reply, as once Abraham
did, My Wife is in the Tent. Although her Husband be not such an Egyptian as to
deny her Shoes; yet her us^g^ of them is, as if like a Scythian, she had the
Axle-tree of the Chariot which carr^ed her Home after her Wedding, burned at
the Door; and she is willing to be painted as the Wive^ of the Ancients were,
with a Snail under her Feet. She affects to be an Esther* that is, A^ ^idden
One. But if a foolish and froward Husband will wrong her, with unjust
suspicio^^ of her Honesty, she will thence make a Devout Reflection upon her
Disloyalty to God; but at the same time very pat^ently vindica^e her Innocence
to man; and the more patiently because the Water of Jeal^^sie procure^ greater
Blessings to those that have it Unrighteously and Abusively ^mposed upon them.

VI. But her Fidelity is no where more S^gnalized, than in her Solicitude for
the Eternal Salvation of her Husband; O how U^^^lling she is that the Precious
and Immortal Soul of her Poor Husband, should go from her Arms* to make his Bed
among the Dragons of the Wilderness for ever! The Apostles Exclama^ion, What
know thou, O Wife, but thou ma^st save thy Husband? is her apprecation, O
that I may! Chrysostoms, No^ upon it is, That the Wife is to Remind her H^sband
of what was Delivered in the Church Truly, though a Woman may not Speak in the
Church, yet she may humbly Repeat unto her Husband at Home what the Minister
Spoke i^ the Church, that may be Pertinent unto his Condition. Thus, every Pa^l
may have, Women that Labor with him in the Gospel. (...) Opportunities are
those that a Woman has to bring over her Husband unto Real and Serious
Godliness, and a Good Woman, will use those Opportunities. An Esther, a Wi^^y
Esther, what cannot she do with the most haughty Husband in the World? What may
^ot a Godly Domiti^, or a Godly Mo^ica do, for the Souls of their U^conver^ed
Husbands? If her Husband be a Carnal, Prayerless, Graceless man, she will not
leave off her Ingenious Persuasions, till it may be said of him, Behold, he
Prays! If her Husband be under the Power of any Temptation, she will do what
she can to pr^vent his D^struction, as that famous Woman did for the City of
Abel* She would merit the Name of an Eunice, that is, A Good Conqueror, by
Conquering of her H^sband unto the Liking of all that is Good. Instead of
saying to him, Curse God? She pursues him with Loving, Winning, Unwearied
Solicitations, to, Fear God, and, Serve God, and, Never be Weary of well
doing. Instead of being a Dalilah, that shall Entangle him in the Cords of
Death, she does all she can to b^ a Priscilla, that shall more full^ acquaint
him with the Things Pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

THIS is a Virtuous WIFE! And such ^n One she will be although her Husband
should be very Disobliging to her; She Considers, It Is to the Lord* I Confess
the Difficulties that some Unhappy Wives do meet withal, are such, that if they
be not very Virtuous Wives* they cannot possibly Co^form to these Directions;
but this I would say, Their being Virtuous is the most Likely way to provide
against their being Unhappy. But if the Case of any such Wise should be so
Remarkably Hard, That her Husband proceeds to abuse her with a Cudg^l, [an Hard
Case indeed! tha^ a Bride-bash ever should have any Cudgels growing in it!] I
know not what further. Advice to give her; Only THIS; Let the Candidness of her
Behavior ^e her (...) against the Assaults of such a Devil; and if That would
further Help to lay such a Fi^nd, I am Cont^nt she should ^ead unto him, Not
only the Laws of G^d and Man against that Barbarity, or the Opinion of Old
Ca^o* That for a man to B^at his Wife was as bad as any Sacrilege; but also
the Emphatical Words of the Blessed Ancients in the Church of God, Loudly
Thundering against this Inh^manity; and Particularly Those of the Renowned
Chrys^sto^, which are to this Purpose; (if you will allow me, the Translating,
of them) ^t is the H^ghest Ig^ominy, no^ of the Wife, but of the Man, for a Man
to beat his Wife. But if thou have an Husband that will do ^o, bear i^
patiently; and know thou shall have Rewards hereaf^er for i^, as well as
Praises here. As f^r You, M^n, Let me admonish you, that there is no ^ault so
great, as may compel you to beat your Wives. Your Wives did I say? It Is a
Dishonor for a Man to bestow Blows upon his M^id; and much more upon his Wife
-- We might lea^n this from the L^w-giv^rs among the Gentiles, who take a W^fe
away from the Man that has bea^en her, for indeed he is a Man unworthy of a
Wife. Such a Man, if he may be called a Man, and not ^ather a B^^st, is to be
counted as a Murderer of his Father or his Moth^r* If a Man must leave his
Father and Mother for the s^ke of his Wife* by the Ordinance of God; what a
ma^^ Wre^ch is he that shall ^buse her^ f^r whom his very Parents were to be
fo^saken? Indeed there is not a simple Fr^nzy in this thing; an I^t^ll^rable
Disgrace does also accompany it^ At the Sighs and Cries of the Abused Wife, all
the Neighborhood run to the Base Fellow's House, as for the Rescue of a Prey
fallen into the Talo^s of a Wild Beas^ that had brok^n in. And such a Rascal
were better Buried alive, than show his Head among his Neighbors any more. See
Hom^l. 26* in ^ Ep ad Corinth.

But wishing all G^od Women, a Deliverance from such Monsters of Husbands, we
will suppose our Virtuous Wife, now grown a Mother; and see how she acquits her
self.

The Virtuous MOTHER.
THE Apostle Wills, That the Younger Women, Marry, and B^ar Children; and as
^tis too soon for them t^ Bear Children till they Marry, so it is Ord^narily
Expected, that they will Bear Children when they Marry. If a Virtuous Wife be
Denied the Blessing of Children her Not Bearing is not a Trial that she can not
Bear. She humbly, addresses ^he God of H^aven, like Ha^^ah, for that Gr^c^ous
and Powerful Word of His which makes Fruitful, as Rememb^ing, That C^ildren a^e
an Heritage of the Lord, and the Fruitful Womb is Hi^ R^ward; But she will not
Imp^^^en^^y ^^ng, like R^c^el. Give me Children or (...), Lest ^he Die by her
having of those Children. Much less, will she have so Little Wit as to suspect
her own Eternal Happiness, because of her Natural Barrenness, like those
mistaken little Women who have thus argued from that Scr^pture, She shall be
saved i^ Child^bearing; Very fine indeed! as if Child^bearing were no less a
Condition in the Covenant of Grace, than Repenting and Bel^eving! But her
Natur^l Barrenness is rather improv^d by her as an Occasion of her Eternal
Happin^ss, by the Spiritual Fruitfulness whereto she is thereby Excited and
Assisted; it causes her to be more Fruitful in all the good Works of Piety and
Charity; more Fruitful in her Endeavors otherwise to Serve her Generation
after the Will of God; more Fruitful in all th^se things whereby, The Heavenly
Father may be Glorified: and she will Consider with her self What Service for
God, and His People, and my own Soul, have I now a Liesure for?

NEVERTHELESS if our Virtuous Woman become a Parent, we shall see what a
V^rtuous Mother, she will approve her self.

I. She is no sooner sensible, that she has Conceiv^d, but she Presently and
Solemnly, and Perhaps with Fasting as well as Prayer, app^yes her self to the
God of Heaven, That He would with His own Holy Spirit Fill and Shape what is in
her; and that what is to be ^orn of her, may be, An Holy Thing* She accounts
the Treasure now Lodged in her, to be of more Account than all the Riches of a
Thousand India's; inasmuch as it is a Never-dying SOUL, by which the Almighty God
may be forever Glorified. And as therefore she carefully avoids all that may
prejudice the Formation of the Infant in her, so she l^ves in aforehand with a
due Earliness, and Earnestness, that the Infant may be, Sanct^fy^d in the womb*
She is not Inordinately set upon having an ^nfant of O^e S^x, more than
another; but her great Concern is that which a Big bellied Woman once recorded
in a Legacy left Written as her Desire for her Unborn Infant, That she may be a
Mother to one of Gods Children! Suppose it be a Daughter, which usually (and
perhaps needlessly) is less longed for; ye^ if it may^ be a Bethiah, that is, A
Daughter of the Lord, or, a Diana, that is, A Daughter of God, she ha^s her
Choice; and she* is freely willing that God should have the Proportioning of
Sexes in the World*

II* That she may be Sav^d in Childbearing, she continues in Faith and Charity
and Hol^ness, with Sobriety, (...) the Months of her Time; and puts her Husband
also upon the Exercise of those V^r^ues, that it may not only be [ She] but [
They] that so Continues. By Faith* she Relies upon the Lord Jesus Christ, who
was Born of a Woman, for the Salva^ion both of her Soul and of her Babe, if God
should not permit her to outlive the Dangerous Agonies of her Travail; By
Faith, she depend^ upon the Power and Wisdom and G^odness of God, for her
Seasonable Deliverance. Like S^^ah Judging hi^ Faithful^ who has promised The
B^rden which is in her, she does ^y Faith, Transf^r into ^he Omnipotent Hands
of that (...), whose Invitation to her i^, Cast thy Burden on the Lord; and she
s^arches ^he B^bl^, especially the Psalter, for Words to plead with the Lord
upon this great Aff^ir: that word particularly is a Support unto ^er* (...)
41.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; ^eno^ Dismayed, for I am thy God; I
will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the
Right Hand of my Righteousness; and that word in Psalm. 24* 22. and that in
Psalm. 37.5. and that in Psalm. 42.11. and that in 1 Cor. 10.13. and that in 2
Cor. 12.9. and that in Heb. 13.5. And he^ Faith or Faithfulness to her Consort,
is a^ the same time such as does Adorn the Doctrine of God her Savior. By
Charity, she professes to the Lord Jesus Christ, Thou know that I Love thee;
and she can say as that Martyr, who unto the Persecutors that threatened they
would bereave her of the Companion of her Life, answered, Christ is my Husband,
you cannot strip me of Him! By Charity she Loves the Brethren, and by suitable
Kindnesses engages them that have an Interest in Heaven, to Pray for her
Prosperity. The Sacred Fire of her Charity flames especially toward the Man of
her Desires, whom she Loves with a pure Heart ferve^tly; and this Charity helps
her, To E^dure all things* Her Holiness causes her to Dedicate all that she has
as well as all that she is* unto the Service of God; her Holiness makes her
^^end her Time in much Devotion, and use all manner of Exactness and
Watchfulness over all her Ways; ^her Holiness disposes her to be Ready for
whatever Event the Sovereign God may order for her; and so Ready, that she can
without Amazement Lay by the Li^^en wherein she would be* Laid out, in case
like Rachel, she have such Hard Labor, that her Soul Depart. Her Sobriety
renders her a true Sophr^^ia, and causes her with Mode^^ to govern all her
Speeches and Passions; (...) Temperance like Manoahs Wife, ^o forb^^r noxious
Excesses in Eating or Drinking; and with Chastity to Mortify a^l ^nclinations
unto whatever shall be Loose, Lewd, Lascivious. Being thus prepared for the
Hour, when, The Anguish of bringing forth her Child is upon her, she is then
^ound Composing her self with Hope in God; and Resolving, Lord, A^ what Time I
am afraid, I will put my Trust in thee! Indeed, the Blessed Sabina, crying out
when she Travailed in Prison, and being asked, How she would Endure the
Torments and Burnings which her Enemies had prepared for her? answered* I now
bear the punishment of my Sin; I shall then suffer Mart^rdom for my Savior.
But a pregnant Christian will moderate her Complaints in the H^ur, when Pangs
taken hold on her, because, They have been brought by Sin, and because, There
is a Savior who thus came into the World.

III. When she is well Delivered, she is a true. Judith, or a Pra^sing O^e; O
how is that Thankful Question immediately Working in her Breast. What shall I
Render to the Lo^^ for all His B^^^f^ts! When she (...) her (...) strong Enough
to Hear and Think, she (...) The Hundred and Sixteenth Psalm, to be Rea^ unto
her; and when she Contemplates what a^ Million of Mercies there are in the
Birth of one Perfect Child, she would, if it were Proper, N^me every One,
M^^etabel, that is, How Good is God! However, She now Devo^^^ (...) Child unto
God, saying with Hannah, I have ^ut it unto the Lord as long as it Lives; even,
(...) Daughter shall be a Bathsheba, that is, A Daughter of an Oath, to God,
that so she may be a Bathsh^a that is, A Daughter of Salvation from the Lord.
And she desires the Baptism of it, no^ as the Formality of putting a Name upon
it, nor as an Opportunity for Dressing and Showing of it, but that thus Coming
into the B^nd of the Covenant, it may Pass under the Lords Tything Rod, as a
Lamb set a part for Him. And how ardent are her Groans, as if she were even
Traveling in Birth again, That her Child may be washed in the Laver of the
New Birth betimes!

IV. Her Care for the Bodies of her Children shows it self in her Nursing of
them her self, if God have made her Able for it, and it Easy for her. She is
not a Dame that shall S^orn to Nourish in the World, the Children who^ she has
already Nourished in her Womb: if like Sarah, she be a Lady* yet she counts it
no^ below her to be a Nurse. If God have granted her Bottles of Milk on her
Breast, she thinks that her Children have a Claim unto them. It shall not be
her Niceness, but ^er Necess^ty and Calamity, if she do not Suckle ^er own
Offspring; and she will not from ^^oth and Pride, be so Unnatural as to give
Cause for that Exclamation. The Sea Monsters, draw out the Breast, they give
suck to their Young ones; But the Daughter of my People, is become Cruel, like
the Ostrich in the Wilderness, who is hardened against her Young ones, as
though they were not hers. Now having Nursed her Young ones, it is her next care,
that they be well provided, as with such Conveniences as belong to their
present state, so with such Callings and Portions as may hereaf^er make them
Serviceable in their Generation; and when they are grown Marriageable, her
Discretion and her Tenderness is yet more Eminently seen in her Matching of
them.

V. But her Zeal for the Spirits of her Children, is that which does most Eat
her up; O how concerned she is, that they may be Brought up in the Nurture and
Admo^ition of the Lord! When She first Received her Children, she Imagined the
Immortal God committing them to her charge, as the Princess of Egypt unto the
Mother of Moses, Here, Take this Child, Nurse it for me, and I^le give thee thy
Wages. Wherefore she becomes a Martha, that is, A Teacher, to them all. She
begins with them while they are upon her K^e^s, and instructs them how to fall
down in Prayer upon their own. She will not put them upon R^venge, by asking
them To give her a ^low that she may Be^^ any thing that vexes them; but she
fears they will soon Learn That, and every other Vice, without a Teacher. The
First Liquors that she puts into those Little Vessel^ are Histories and
Sentences fetched from the Oracles of God, and Institutions, How to Pra^ ^n
Secret unto their Heavenly Father. (...) then proceeds to make 'em Expert in
some Orthodox Catechisms, and will have 'em Learn to Read and Write, as fast as
ever they can take it; and so she passes to the other parts of an Ingenious
Educatio^ with them. She is, like another Bathsheba, always instilling into
their Children, something that is Wise and Good; and she keeps up that
Authority over them that they Fear as well as Love her; and they dare not
Refuse what she shall Command. Unto her Instruction she also joins an
Inspection of them; so that she is very gravely Inquisitive into their
Employments, their Companies, their Experiences: nor will she spare
Corrections, where their Miscarriages do call for the Rod; and she will not
ov^rlay them with her Sinful Fondness, lest God make them Crosses to her, for
her being afraid of Crossing them i^ their Exorbitancies. And besides the
Exemple of all Virtue that she sets before them, she is frequently Praying with
them, as well as for them, That they may be Saved. She pursues the Lord with
such Cries for her Children as the Canaanit^ss used, Lord, Heal my Child, that
(...) annoyed by a Devil! and such as Monica used for Austin, upon which a
great Person said un^o her, It Is impossi^le that a Child of so many Tears
should ever perish! And she will carry 'em one after another alone into her
Closet with her, wh^re she does wrestle with God for them ^ll, pr^fessing, I
will not let thee go, except ^^ou Bless them Her Children being thus well
^rought ^p she will do as the Lady Cornelia did unto the Ladies who expected
she would show them her Jewels, as they had shown her Theirs* ev^n Bring forth
her well Educated Children as her Jewels.

VI. If she meets wi^h any Disasters (...) her Children, by her Patience and
her Piety ^he ^^rns them into Benefits. It Is possible, her Children may Sin;
but this causes her presently to reflect upon the Errors of her own Heart and
Life, and especially upon any De^^ct in her Conduct unto them. So she is put
upon, The Repentance which is not to be Repented of! It Is also possible, her
Children may Die; (...) is not then like the overwhelmed Women of Bethlehem,
Weeping for their Children, and not willing to be Comforted, because they are
not. ^nstead of saying like Jacob, All these things are against me, she rather
says, like Joseph, God may mean it unto Good She does not Roar like a Beast,
and Howl, I cannot b^ar it; but she rather says, I can take any thing well at
the Hands of God* She follows them to the Grave, as a very moderate Mourner,
with Hopes, That God is carrying on the Everlasting Designs of (...) Grace in
her Soul by these Dispensations; and with Hopes. That their Souls are gone to
be, With Christ, which is by far the Best of all. She looked upon her Children
as mere Loans from God, which He may c^ll far, when He please; and she quietly
submits, if God say, Give them up, (...) have had (...) long enough! Of old,
such as could not Encounter an Affliction patiently* were condemned therefore,
To Wear Wom^^ Clothes; but the Clothes of our Good W^^man, will not be a Bar to
her Bearing (...) This Af^^ction patiently. She pa^ts with (...) Children in
such Terms as Jerome on the Occasion directs his Friend unto; Lord* To ^ast ^ow
taken from me the Children which (...) firts Given to me; I do not complai^
(...) thou do now Receive them; I give Thanks that ever thou did at first
b^stow them. She has already plucked out a Right Eye, and cut off a Right Hand
for God; and so she can readily part with another Limb, at a Call of Hi^. Yea,
Though the Death were never so awfully Circumstanced, yet she says, The Will of
the Lord be done! and she will not let one Sorrow swallow up the sense of a
Thousand, a Million Mercies; but she approves the Temper of that Good Woman,
who having Two Children by a violent Stroke Taken from her, handsomely took up
the Third, and said, Blessed be God that has ^^ft me This! If they were Infant
Children whereof she is Bereaved, she Assures her self, That the Lord is Their
God, and so they cannot be miserable; No, Let me go to (...) (says she) They
shall not Return to me. If they were Ad^lt Ch^ldren, she Comforts her self. That
they might have, The Root of the M^tter, in them, under whatever Clods of
^^^riness or B^shfulness, i^ might have been Concealed; and that whatever
suspicious Marks might h^ve been upon them, they might seek and find mercy,
Between the Stirrup and the Ground (...) she takes that Counsel, R^frain thy
Voice from W^^^ing, and thine E^es from T^ars, for thy Work shall be
Rewardedpunc;

THIS is the Virtuous MOTHER! And (...) is One that also counts her Servants to
(...) after a Sort her Children too; She, G^^des (...) House, according to her
O^fice prescribed (...) the Apostle; So, that with a Motherly D^por^^ent, unto
them, with an Obliging, but (...) Reserved Carriage toward them, and with a
Charitable Regard un^o the Everlasting Welfare of their Souls, You may see her
acquitting her self evermore as a Virtuous Mistress likewise in the Family. But
there is Danger lest she become a Widow before she die; if she do, let us now
take notice of her Frame and M^in, in the Sorrowful Condition that is now come
upon her.

The Virtuous WIDOW.
THE Vast Numbers of Poor Widows in Every Neighborhood, make it very
Suspicious, that our Virtuous Mother may at some time or other, taste the Sad,
Sour, Tear-ful Cup ^f Widow-hood* If This be the Portion of her Cup, We must
suppose that she gives her Husband a D^cent Burial; that is, as on the One
side, a Funeral that shall not be b^low his F^gure, so on the other side, a
Funeral that shall not be ab^ve her Estate* and while she D^slikes the
Expe^si^e Humors of Poland, where two or three Funerals coming One upon
another, are so Extravagantly Chargeable as to Ruin a whole Family; She
nevertheless will give as Honorable a^ Enterment as ever she can to the
Forsaken (...) of the Soul which was dearer to her than the World.

CONCEIVING our Virtuous Woman to have her Widows Vail upon her, we may behold
her demeaning her self as a most Virtuous Person in it.

I. Her Grief on the Death of her Husband, is Great and yet Wise, and as wisely
Great as Greatly Wise. Her Mourning is more like a still Rain, than a loud
Storm; and instead of B^llowing Passions which usually Moulder a way into a
Total and the Coldest Forgetfulness, faster than the Corpse of the Husband in
the Grave, she has a Silent but a Lasting sorrow* and yet that sorrow
Modera^ed by a Filial Submission to the Hard of that Glorious God, before whom
she Opens not her Mouth any more than Humbly to ^ay, Lord, Thou did it. ^he
will not by Intemperate Vexations and Afflictions of her self, make her self,
like the Frantic Women in the E^st-Indi^s, which burn themselves to Death, in
the Fire wherein they consume the Dead Bodies of their Husbands; but yet she
calls her self, Marah, saying, The Lord has dealt bitterly with me*

II. It is now her main study and solace to have an interest in that Promise,
Isa. 54 5. Thy Maker is thy Husband. And therefore, like her whom the Apostle
calls, A Widow indeed* she, Trusts in God* and Continues in Supplications
and Prayers, Night and Day. She Considers her self as now more than ever
belonging to, The Family of God; with a persw^sion that He will Cer^ainly and
Faithfully Provide for her. Hence also, The Time that she formerly spent in
Conv^^sation with her Husband, she now spends in Supplication to, and
Meditation on, her God; and by an Extraordinary Devotion, she seeks to find all
that in the Alsufficient JESUS, which may R^pair the Absence of the b^st (...)
upon Earth. She is an Elizabeth, or one to whom the F^lness of God, in the
Promise of God is enough.

Moreover, if she be Capable of it, she will now more Abound in all the
Exercises of Charity toward her Needy Neighbors; whether the have the Name of
A^^ee or no, yet according to the Signification of it, She Will be, Noble^: and
she will be an Helena, or an Eleanor which is to say as much as, Pitiful: her
Visits, her Bounties, and her Succors to the Poor, are now increased rather
than abated, with her New Leisure for them; and if she be a Person of Quality,
she becomes yet more Excellent for This Quali^y* What is a Lady, in true and
Old English, but a Loaf dian, that is, A Bread server? Or, One that will give
Loafs of Bread unto the Ind^gent? She is both an Anna* a Widow which departs
not from the Temple, but serves God with Fastings and Prayers Night and Day;
and a Dorcas, a Widow full of Good Works and Al^s D^eds. Thus will she, to
better purpose than once another Woman did, Explain the Riddle of Sampson, by
finding, Honey in a Carcass: promoting the Life of her own Soul, by the Death
of him whom she Loved as her own So^l. Much less will she ever venture to Do
any thing unworthy the Char^ct^r and Relation of that Person (if he were a
Worthy Person) whose Relict she is now become.

III. She reckons that she must now be Father as well as Mother to the Orphans
with whom she is Left Entrusted; and their Fathers Beloved Image on them, does
f^rther Augment, ye^, Double her Care concerning them. While her Husband was
Alive, she still acted as a Deputy Husband, for the maintaining of all good
Orders in the House, when he was out of the way. And now her Husband is
Deceased, she thinks that upon the S^t^ing of the S^n, the Moon is to Govern,
and there shall not be o^e Prayer the less performed, or one Fault the more
Indulged, among her poor Lambs, because he is gone. The Kindred, of her Expired
Husband are also still Welcome and Grateful to her, upon his Account. But she
is now particularly more Sollici^ous than ever to Teach her Children how to
obtain that Favor of God, When my Father is gone, the Lord shall take me up.
Some Women have the Names of Men, a little altered, as Jaquet (from Jacoba)
Joanna, Joan, Jane, Jennet* (all from John) Thomasin Philippa, Frances,
H^nrietta, Antonia, J^lian, Dionysia, and the lik^; But all our Widows are put
upon thus doing the Works of Men; may their God help them!

IV. She is not Forward and Hasty now to Take the Liberty, which the Scripture
does Give unto Younger Widows; that is, to Marry. While she has one Eye Weeping
for her Departed Husband, she has not the other open to see, Who comes next?
nor will she think an Ephesi^n Matron, a fit Copy for her. She counts it no
hand Law, which even the Ancient Pagans kept with great Severity* That no Widow
should Marry within Ten or Twelve Months after the Death of her Husband; and
she wonders that any Christians ordinarily can, Marry sooner. If she had a Good
Husband, his Memory has been so Embalmed with her, that ^he cannot presently
make a Room in her Affections for another. If she had a Bad Husband, the Cross
felt so heavy, that she will be Slow to be Sure, that it been't Renewed upon
her* But if after a convenient stay she do Marry, it shall be, Only in the
Lord, Unto a Man that shall be neither Heretical in his principles, nor
Exorbitant in his practices; and unto one that may be proper f^r her. Wherefore
also if she be very Old, She will not without special Causes, marry one that is
very Young; suspecting that such a pretended Lover may Count Hers more than
Her, and that if there be too much (as perhaps a s^o^^ of Years) Inaequality in
Age* i^ may otherwise Prove as Temptations* as it Looks indecent. Indeed Jerome
^ells us, of an Old man at Rome, who had Buried Twenty Wives, which he took one
after the Death of the other; and that he then took the Twenty first, who also
had Buried Nineteen Husbands; but methinks, They were an, Ugly Couple. And the
Woman whereof Baxtorf (...) his Talm^dic Lexicon, that she Bu^ied Eleven
Husbands, and had then an Epitaph of El^ven V^rs^s bestowed upon her self
deserved sure the l^st stroke of her Epitaph, which was to this purpose, A
Woman fit to have No B^^ but a C^ld Grave.

V. When she is Match^d unto a Second Husband, whom she will never twit with
any Reflecting and Uncomely Remembrances of her First; She is more than
Ordinarily Sollicitous to be, A Good Mother in Law, if she must be One at all;
and so do her part for the Removing of those Imputations, which Mothers in Law
have generally Labored under. She knows that the way for her to have the
Blessing of Heaven upon Her Children, is for her to make her self a Blessing to
His; and Unkindnesses to the Motherless Little Birds which now call her, Their
D^m, will Certainly be Repaid by the Just Revenges of God. She is therefore so
far from the partiality of that Mother-in law, who when her own Child hurt a
Child of her Husbands by Throwing of a Stone, Whipped the Child that felt the
Stone for standing in the Way of the Child* that s^^ng it; that she makes no
Observable Difference between his Children and hers; unless it be This, That
She Correct^ hers her self, and refers his to Him; and yet for her at any Time
to inform her Husband of any Ill Manners in his Children, is a thing whereto
she has an Av^rsi^n so Extreme, that she will never do it, unless upon Extreme
Nec^ssity. Indeed she Essays to be such a Wife unto him, that she may no^
merit the Name which the Second Wife of Lamech had; N^mely, Zillah, or, but, A
Shadow, of a Wife: much less would she be as the First of them was called, an
A^ah, that is, An Afflicter, to him.

VI. At Length Old Age comes upon her; and Prisca or Priscilla, that is, An Old
Woman, is her Title; but by an, Hoary Head found in the Way of Righteousness,
it is, that she now Challenges the Honor of, A Saint, even from those Abusive
Tongues, which use to traduce for, A Witch* Every Old Woman, whose Temper with
her V^sage is not eminently Good. She thoroughly studies Every Particle of the
Apostolical Charge, That the Aged Women, be in Behavior, as becom^th Holiness;
not make bates, not given to much Wine. Teachers of Good Things; That they may
Teach the Young Women; and the nearer she comes to her End, the more Acquainted
she is with, Him that is from the Beginning* She is not Impatient of being
Esteemed, Old; and styled, Bilhah, that is, Fading; nor does it Offend her, as
once an English Queen, to be told, That Age has Sprinkled its M^al upon her
Head. But she keeps longing for the Day, when the Lord Jesus will send His
Angels to fetch her unto the Regions of Everlasting Light and Life, and keeps
Wishing, Oh Come, Lord Jesus! till she Arrive to be* Forever with the Lord.

THIS is a Virtuous WIDOW. God Grant that our Widows may not be Multiplied; but
for them that are GOD Grant that they may be thus Virtuous! That is i^ which
will render them all, Joch^b^ds, which is, Most Glorious Ones.

I now Praise thee, O my God, for thy Assisting my Endeavors to describe the
Praises of the Virtuous Woman; and Rely upon thy Grace in thy Son, that these
my Pour Labors may be Accepted and Succeeded among the Daughters of thy
People. AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. l. 33. r. Hearts. p. 24. l. 16. Blot out, l. ib^d. l. 19. Add, l. p.
48. l. 20. f. as r. and.


