The Duty and Property OF A Religious Householder OPENED IN A SERMON Delivered
at Charlestown, on Lords Day December. 25. 1692.

By DEODAT LAWSON, Preacher of the GOSPEL.

Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen that know the not, and upon
the Families that call not upon thy Name: etc. Genesis 18. 19. For I know him,
that he will Command his Children and his Household; and they shall keep the way
of the Lord: etc. Boston in New England. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and Sold
by Samuel Phillips, at the Exchange. 1693.

IMPRIMATUR, Increase Mather.

July. 27. 1693.
To the Worshipful AND Worthily Honored SAMUEL SEWAL Esquire.
A Zealous Imitator of the Renowned JOSHUA, and Singular Pattern, of Religious
Order and Government in his Family. This Discourse upon that Subject, As a
Token of his Sincere Respects and Service, is humbly Offered, and Dedicated, by

Deodat Lawson.

TO THE READER.
JOB the Great and Good man of the East, did by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
Lay it down for an undeniable Truth; Chap. 14. 1. Man that is born of a woman,
is of few days and full of Trouble. As also the same Holy Ghost, does
throughout the Holy Scriptures, Compare the Life of Man, to things that are of
Swift motion, and of Short continuance. And I, may well from my own Experience,
Declare as Jacob did, Genesis 47. 9. -- Few and Evil, have the days of the Years,
of my life been; In respect of those many Afflictive Changes, which have gone
over my head; by which I have been Emptyed, from Vessel to Vessel. May all the
various Dispensations, of Divine Providence toward me, both in Mercies and
Afflictions, be Sanctified to the Drawing, and Driving of me, to that God with
whom there is no Variableness, nor Shadow of turning. That my Soul, with all
its Faculties, and Affections, may be fully and firmly Centred upon Him, as the
Strength of my heart, and my Portion for ever. Being now therefore, Arrived
unto the middle Years of a Man; I cannot but with Shame and Grief, look-back;
considering how little I have done for the Service and Glory of God, in my Day
and Generation; and Solemnly Pondering, the Declining of my Sun; the Lengthning
of my Shaddows; and Shortning of my Days; and hence being assured, that my
Last times are hastening upon me: I am through grace Convinced, how much it is
both my Duty and Interest, To lay out, the utmost of my remaining Time,
Strength, and All, that I have and am, to Glorify God, and do good unto the
Souls of Men; according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ, and the Talent
with which I am betrusted, by my Sovereign Lord and Master; Desiring by Divine
Assistance to Live much to God, and to Be and Do as much as I can for Him, in a
Little Time. On this account it is my Constant Care, and Continual Endeavor,
to sequester my self, from Worldly business, and to discharge my mind as much
as I can possibly, from the Cares and Cumbers thereof; that I may according to
my Duty, Embrace all Regular Opportunities, to dispense the Word, both
Publicly and Privately; not knowing which shall Prosper, either this or that.
Accordingly, the Ensuing Discourse, was Prepared and Delivered, at the Request
of a Godly Housekeeper in this Place; who together with his Wife, and Only
Child, had all at the same time, but a few days before, given up themselves to
the LORD, by Covenant to walk in full Communion with a Church of Christ here,
as Heirs of the Grace of Life: Who being admitted, to a Participation of all
Gospel Ordinances, thought it their Concernment, to Live in the Practice of all
Gospel Duties; and Particularly to seek direction, about the Important Duties
of Family Government: whereby they might walk Worthy of the Lord to all
Pleasing. The Master of the Family therefore, propounded this Josh. 24. ^5. As
a Text in the Explication and Application whereof; they Expected, through
Divine Assistance, suitable Counsels and Directions, in that great Affair. I
must indeed humbly acknowledge, that so many ^^^lings and Infirmities, did then
and do still appear in the Composure thereof, as might justly Condemn it to
utter Obscurity. Especially being so much inferior, to what has been already
Published, by Learned and Judicious men, on that Subject; some of which have
handled this Text. But seeing that Variety is Delightsome; and finding upon
Observation, that there are scarce any Duties, which Christians stand in more
need to be Excited unto, than those which concern Family Religion: And Books
treating on that Subject, not being easily obtained by every Householder:
Therefore although I pretend not to speak or write New things, but only Old
Truths after a New, or at least Another manner and method; Yet GOD having been
pleased, of His free Grace, to make this Discourse Acceptable, and Profitable,
to some of that Family-Meeting which then heard it; and since to many others,
in a more Public Assembly: I do Adventure at the Request of several Persons,
to make it Public, in the most Plain and Familiar Style, that I can;
Endeavoring according to my Poor Ability, with Clearness to Illustrate; and
Fervency to Press and Inculcate; the Necessity, and Excellency, of these
Duties; and the Pernicious Consequences of their being Neglected: Propounding
such Directions, and Pressing such Motives, as are grounded on Scripture, and
Confirmed by my own Observation and Experience: some whereof are but briefly
hinted, as being at first view, Obvious to every Christian, who makes it his
business, to Live up to his Profession; and to observe and bewail his Short
comings in these things.

Finally, May the Blessing of That God, whom I desire to Serve with my whole
heart, and whole Family; Accompany it, to the Hearts and Souls, of all that
shall peruse it: That it may promote Religion in Families, by stirring up all
Fathers and Masters; to use their utmost Endeavors, to Advance the Spiritual
and Eternal Happiness; as well as Temporal Welfare, and Advantage, of their
Children, Servants, and others under their Charge, To the Glory of God; the
good Example of others; and the unspeakable Comfort, of themselves and theirs
in the Day of Account; Is the Earnest Desire, and hearty Prayer of,

Yours to his utmost, in all Ways and Means, by which he may promote the
Service of God, and Salvation of Men; DEODAT LAWSON.
Boston. N. E. May. 12. 1693.
The Duty and Property of a Religious Householder.
Joshua. 24. 15. -- But as for ME and my HOUSE we will Serve the LORD.
THE Great and Glorious God the Creator and Former of all things; In whom the
whole Family, of Heaven and Earth is Named; Has in Infinite Wisdom, so Ordered
and Disposed, all His Creatures, as may most Harmoniously and Eminently, tend
to advance His own Glory. And therefore has distributed, the several
Communities, Societies, and Relations, of the Children of men (as to the
Government of them) in such a manner as may be every way conducible, to that
Supreme and Ultimate end of His. Hence then it is, that as the Heavens are the
Habitation of His Throne, and the Place where He is attended, with Innumerable
Companies of Angels, which do His pleasure and fulfill His Commands: So He has
given the Earth unto the Children of men. Expecting and Requiring, That every
one, in their several Places, Stations, Relations, and Capacities, should by
Serving of Him, and sincerely Engaging themselves thereunto; testify their
Absolute dependence on Him; Trust in Him; and Resignation of themselves, and
their ALL unto Him; according to the Example of this Renowned Patriot, in the
words now before us; But as for me and my House we will etc.

This Book of which our Text is part, Describes the Entrance of the Childen of
Israel, into the Promised Land; It is entitled the Book of Joshua (as some
think) because he was the Penman of it, Others judge it bears his Name, because
the Principal matters handled therein, are the Acts of Joshua, The Successor
of Moses; The Leader of the People; And Chief Captain of Israel; under whose
Conduct, they Conquered the land, Divided it, and took possession of it; The
Scope of this Book then, is particularly, to display and illustrate, Gods Exact
Faithfulness, in fulfiling all that he had Promised to his People; As to their
Deliverance out of Egypt, Entrance into, and Residence in, the Land of Canaan;
after their Toilsome, Troublesome, and Tedious March, through the Wilderness,
and Conflict with many Enemies, and Oppositions: All which is surely, A
representation of the Deliverance of Sinners, from the bondage of Sin, their
being outed of all self Sufficiency, and Excellency; in their Wilderness state,
of Spiritual Distress; And their entrance into, and residence in, the Canaan of
Complacency in, and Peace with God: All this being under the Powerful Conduct,
of the Blessed Jesus, of whom this Joshua, was in these things a lively, Tipe
and Figure; As he was also in his Name, which is Derived from the same Hebrew
word ( JASHANG) which signifies to save or make safe, and is so interpreted
Respecting the Savior of the World; Matthew. 1. 21.

This Twenty fourth Chapter Contains, the Declaration of those things, which
Joshua testified, in a way of Historical Recitation, and in a way of Vehement
Exhortation, to the People immediately before his Death.

Particularly, In it we have (First) Joshua's Oration or Sermon, in which he
Commemorates, the many Mercies they had been partakers of, in their coming
forth out of Egypt, and since that unto this day. And this he improves, as a
Cogent Argument, that they should wholly, and Only give up themselves to the
Service of the Lord, with all truth and sincerity of heart. This from the 1 st.
to the 16. Verse.

Secondly, We have account, of the Renewal of Covenant betwixt God and the
People, or a new Obligation of the People, to the Obedience of the Law; in a
Solemn manner, Verse 16. to the 29.

Thirdly, We have account of the Death of Joshua and Eleazar the High Priest;
Ver. 29. to the end of the Chapter and of the Book.

In this 15. v. we may note Briefly,

1. Explicitly Propounded, A seeming Permission to them, upon Supposition of
an Evil Inclination in them, to depart from the Lord, to Idolatry and
Superstition. And if it seem Evil unto you, to serve the Lord, Choose you this
day whom ye will serve etc. Yet in this manner of speaking, there is
Implicitly contained, a serious warning and solemn Dehortation, against their
turning aside, from following the Lord, to the worship and service of false
Gods: He desires them to the Plain, Clear, and aboveboard, whom they would
Choose to serve, and worship, whether the God who had done such great things for
them, or other Gods on this side, or on the other side of the flood, whether
the Gods which your Fathers served etc.

2. We have his Personal, and Pious Resolution, Exhibited to them, for their
Example, and as a Testimony of his own Uprightness, -- But as for me and my
house we will serve the Lord. Here then we may Note. (1.) The Person Engaging,
and that is Joshua for himself and those under his special Charge, he does
engage for them and with them; As for Me and my house etc. (2.) The Duty He
Engages unto the performance of, and that is to Serve the Lord. (3.)We have
here A free and voluntary, and yet firm and steadfast Resolution, with full
Consent of the Will engaged for performance thereof? We Will serve the Lord. In
a word, It is an Explicit Declaration, of an inward, Pious, Resolution. Now
Scripture Examples, are for our Instruction, and the practice of this Eminent
Person, thus Presented unto us, ought to be imitated by Us, and lays
Obligation upon Us, to do according thereunto.

So that the DOCTRINE is, That it is the special Duty and Peculiar Property, of
all Religious Householders, to bind themselves and all under their Charge; by a
Firm, Solemn, and Explicit Resolution, to serve the Lord.

In Opening this Doctrine we may Inquire (1.)How it Appears, that Joshua speaks
this as an Householder or Master of a Family, (2.)What we are to Understand here
by Serving the Lord (3.)What Influence a Solemn and ^^^p^cite Resolution has,
upon the Vigorous Exercise of Religion in a Family, (4.)Why it is the Duty and
Property of a Religious Householder thus to Resolve and Practice. And so we may
Proceed to the Application.

Quest. 1. How does it Appear, that Joshua speaks this as an Householder or
Master of a Family?

For Answer. The Hebrew word (BETH) here rendered House, is sometimes taken
literally and properly, for a dwelling House or material building, in which
Persons do dwell and inhabit; so it is used, Genesis 19.4. -- They beset the House
round,(i.e.) the dwelling place of Lot, and his Family. This House cannot serve
the Lord. But besides this Proper, the word House has many Figurative
acceptations in Scripture, I shall mention only such as tend to clear up the
matter now before us; sometimes then, it is a Comprehensive Term including a
whole People, Nation, or Kingdom; Thus the People of Israel, are called The
House of Israel, Ezekiel. 3.1,4,7. A Rebellious House; Chap. 2. 5.

Again, Sometimes it is put for a particular Tribe, Thus the Tribe of Benjemin
is called, The whole House of Benjamin, 2 Samuel 3.19. Sometimes it is taken yet
more strictly, for a Particular Stock or Lineage, Those of the same Race,
Descending from the same Ancestors; Thus it is said I Sam. 25.3. -- He was of
the House of Caleb, (i. e.) of his stock or lineage. But yet more directly to
our present purpose, It is put for all that dwell together in a Family,
Collectively considered; and for the several persons there, sustaining several
Relations, of Superiors, Inferiors, and Equals; Thus Genesis 7. 1. Come thou and
all thy House into the Ark etc. For the Salvation of this House, Noah is said
to be greatly concerned; Heb. 11. 7. Here in special a man's Children and
natural Posterity are his House; Psalm. 49. 11. -- That their Houses shall
continue for ever etc.(i. e.) that their Children and Posterity, shall be
multiplied upon the Earth from time to time, and their Race and Lineage not be
cut off: Of this Household and Family, every Master has a Particular care, and
Charge, committed unto him by the Blessed God, the neglect whereof is a great
Sin and Shame; as we read 1 Timothy 5.8. Such a neglecter has denied the Faith
and is worse than an Infidel. Now Joshua was the Chief Captain, Leader, and
Ruler of the whole Nation or House of Israel, as he was the successor of
Moses; Hence he had inclusively the Charge of every Particular Tribe,
especially his own Tribe; There (more strictly) he had peculiar regard to his
proper Race and Lineage, those of his Kindred on whom he had influence by
Relation, as well as Office; And in short his own Household and Family, were to
be the immediate objects, of his daily care and Government; He therefore in our
Text gives us his Resolution to Serve and Honor God, in and with his Family;
by his holy Dictates and Examples: Declaring though other Tribes, Families, and
Households, should forsake the Lord; Yet He and his Family would serve Him, with
all their heart.

Quest. 2. What are we to Understand by Serving the Lord?

For Answer. The Hebrew word ( GNABHAD) here used, is very Comprehensive, and
is variously interpreted; being put for the Service of God, of Man, and of the
Earth; That which we are concerned about, it the Service of the LORD: Hence
more generally, it is oftentimes put for all Religion; Deuteronomy. 6. ^. Thout shall
Fear the Lord thy God and Serve Him only. Thus it Comprehends in it, all kind
of Religious Duties, which are to be attended, in a well Ordered and Holy
Conversation, here in the world. For this Serving the Lord is enjoined with
Fearing of Him; I Sam: 12. 24. Only Fear the Lord and Serve Him etc. Fearing
the Lord implies a Gracious Principle in the Soul, serving of Him denotes the
Exercise of Grace manifested by a Cheerful and Diligent attending unto all
Duties which are to be performed: But of those many acceptations of this word (
Serve) in Scripture, there are principally Three which do afford us Light, to
the understanding the matter now before us; (1.) It is put for Worship; and so
read by the Apostle, Hebr. 12. 28. -- To Serve Him acceptably, with reverence
and Godly fear. (i. e.) To Worship Him. (2.) It is put for Subjection to his
Sovereignty; Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with fear etc. The words following
clear it, to imply Subjection. Verse. 12. Kiss the Son, least he be Angry, and
we perish in the way That is, with a Kiss of Subjection to his Authorily; (3.)
It is put for Obedience, to his will and Command; so the Three Children, Dan.
3. 17. The God whom we Serve (i. e.) Whom we devote our selves to Obey; both in
doing His will, and Suffering His Pleasure; Thus the Apostle Explaines Service
by Obedience; Romans 6.16. His Servants ye are to whom ye Obey etc. These things
are employed in Serving the Lord; As therefore the Expression referres to the
Constant, and Conscientious performance, of all Religious Family Duties: I
reserve the handling of them, to the Application as properly belonging to
Practical Godlyness. And Proceed to the Third thing, to be inquired into, for
Opening the Doctrine.

Viz.

Quest. 3. What influence an Explicit Resolution, has upon the Vigorous
Exercise of Religion in a Family?

This will be cleared up in Considering these things.

First. An Explicit Resolution denotes a Particular Choice Of, and
Determination of the mind About, the thing concerning which the Resolution is
made. Man is a cause by Counsel, of his own Acts; He is a Rational Agent, and
while he is debating in his own mind, Comparing one thing with another, and
Endeavoring to satisfy his Understanding, which is most Eligible, and
Advantageous; This or that: His mind hangs in suspense, and is like the beam of
the balances on an even poize. But when Judgment pitcheth on one thing as an
Object, much to be preferred to the other, the Choice is made; the Scale is
turned; and a firm Resolution puts the matter out of Doubt; and makes appear to
every one, the man accounts That, the most Acceptable and Excellent Object,
utterly contemning whatsoever stands any way in Competition therewith. Thus
Joshua, in our Text and Context, declares his fixed Resolution, and
unalterable fixation, by an acquiescing of his Soul on God, and devoting
himself to His Service, as the most suitable and adoequate Object of Choice;
rejecting and contemning all other Gods; -- Choose you this day whom you will
Serve -- But As for me and my House we will Serve the Lord; Now the firmness of
this Resolution, it grounded on the Eminency, of the Properties of this Act of
Choosing. (1.) It is a Free Act being the very Elicite Act of the will; hence
where there is not an absolute freedom of will in the subject choosing, there
cannot be a choice made, of This more than of another object. (2.) It is a
Deliberate Act; When the judgment is called in, to cast the Scale and deterimne
the matter; Thus Joshua here signifies, he had weighed the matter in the
balance of sound judgment, and found that the Service of the LORD, out weighed
all other Service whatsoever. (3.) It is an Act that puts Respect, Preference,
and Pre-eminence, upon the thing chosen; above all other things; So here in the
Text, ( q. d.) Choose you whom you will, to Serve and Worship, whom you will
value and Esteem, as the supreme Object, of Divine Honor and Adoration; for my
part, I am fully satisfied, there is none like unto the LORD the God of Heaven,
Neither is there any other god to be Compared with Him; Isa. 46. 50.

Secondly. An Explicit Resolution, lays a Person under special Awe of GOD, in
the things concerning which the Resolution is made. These Resolutions are
Covenant Transactions with God, and Obligations of Soul to Him. Now to transact
with the Infinitely Holy GOD, in a way of Covenant, is a very Awful thing; Yea
it cannot be done, without the greatest care imaginable, to comply with out
Engagements. Thus Joshua Endeavors to possess the minds and Souls of the
People, with the Solemnity of their binding themselves by Covenant to Serve the
Lord; and Him only, as in the 19. Verse of this Chap, Ye cannot Serve the Lord
your God, for He is an Holy God, He is a Jealous God, He will not forgive your
Iniquity and your Sin etc. (i. e.) Ye Cannot, unless you are Resolved in your
minds, by the help of His Grace, to cleave close to Him, with all sincerity of
heart, so: if you are deceitful in Making, or negligent in Keeping, your
Covenant with God; He will Return and do you Hurt, after that He has done you
Good; Verse. 20. So Solemn is the Obligation of an Explicit Resolution, in
this great Duty of Serving the Lord.

Thirdly. An Explicit Resolution, will in its own Nature, produce those
Effects, which may prevent a Persons neglecting or delaying, the things about
which he is Resolved. This Argument Jephtha used, to his Daughter; Jud. 11. 35.
I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I cannot go back. He had not only
thought in his heart, but spoken with his mouth, and thereby Explicitly
engaged himself in the matter; This made David, take special care of performing
his Vows; Because; His Lips had uttered them, and his Mouth had spoken, when he
was in distress. Psalm. 66. 14.

Particularly; these Effects are,

1. Diligent Attending unto these means, which tend directly to promote, that
unto which a person is resolved. Such a Resolution is a General Obligation,
under which all Particular Duties, are comprehended.

2. Steadfast Withstanding, and careful Avoiding, whatsoever might hinder our
Complying with our Resolution. So soon as any Person comes up to a firm
Resolution, in a matter of such importance, there are many Enemies and
Oppositions step into the way to hinder their Compliance with it, and if
Possible to make them break and violate it. I shall mention three.

First. Satan; He Endeavors, all he can to divert us From, or interrupt us In,
our Obedience; But a resolved Soul Answers the Temptation, with Detestation,
Get thee behind me Satan, I am Resolved to Serve the Lord, and will not (Divine
Grace Assisting) be diverted, from my steadfast Obedience to Him; or betrayed by
any of thy Power or Policy, to the Service of any false God whatsoever.

Secondly. Corruption within; Such is the Property of that Corrupt Principle,
that is in every one by nature, that so soon as any Check is given to its
motions and Operations, immediately it swells, strives, and struggles; appears
in its Colors, looks like it self, and becomes Exceeding Sin ul; Romans 7. 8.
Now Holy and Solemn Resolutions, and Covenants, are as Dammes to stop the Tide,
and Obstruct the Course of Sin; And when firmly, and Regularly made, they
cannot readily be overborn, no not by the Rapid torrent of Original
Concupiscence: Because the Lord Himself will Assist unto the fulfilling of them.

Thirdly. Carnal and Sensual Objects; Or, Worldly things; are ready to ensnare
and entangle us. The World is an Enemy to a Christians Holiness, and thence
Opposes all things tending thereunto: So that unless our Resolutions be well
fixed, the Whisperings of this business; and Emergency of the other affair;
will Obstruct the course of our Obedience. Worldly things, will be as so many
Snares and Traps, to entangle us, unless we can chase them away, with like Holy
Zeal as the Psalmist did his wicked Enemies Psalm. 119. 115. Depart from me ye
Evil doers; for I Will keep the Commandments of my God. (i. e.) I will maintain
my stedfastness of holy Resolution, and not let go my Integrity, so long as
ever I live.

Fourthly and Lastly. Explicit Resolutions, have influence upon others, As
(...) render those about us inexcuseable, who do not take Example by them, and
Endeavor to Practice accordingly. This is employed in this Text, Choose you this
day whom you will serve etc. (q.d.) But if you do not choose to serve the Lord,
be Assured I shall by my Practice Condemn you; and bear Testimony against you;
for I am come to a point in the matter, I and my House etc. Thus Noah and his
Family, where God was Served, and his Worship Celebrated, Condemned the Old
World, Heb. 11. 7. Thus Lot and his Family, Condemned Sodom, and Gomorrah; 2
Pet. 2. 6,7. Yea a Particular Godly Family, in the midst of a Sinful, and
Degenerous People, does Condemn their Neighbors; for not Serving the Lord. And
the Master of a Family, who is Conscientious in his Duty; will Condemn all
under his Charge, if they do not join with him in serving the Lord, with full
Purpose of heart, and Resolution of Soul.

The REASONS of the Doctrine are.

REASON. I. Because Our Service does in all Respects, and by special Right
belong unto God. He has a Sovereign Right unto Us, and Ours, and all that We
and They have and are: And that on these accounts.

First. He is our Creator by His Power. Thus we read; Gen: I. 26,27. God
Created man etc. (i.e.) the first man, and all mankind in him: Now he that made
us; may by right of Soveraingty, challeng all that we Have, Are, and Can do;
for his Service and Glory. He has given us being, and in the making of us,
has Power as the Potter over the clay, (Jer. 18. 6.) and therefore, may justly
Require our utmost Service and Obedience, by this Argument, the Psalmist moves
Himself and others, to humble and Holy Adoration; Psalm. 95. 6. -- Let us
Worship and fall down and Kneel before the Lord Our Maker. On this Account
also; he Presses the most Triumphant and Elevated Praises, to be Offered unto
the Lord; Psalm.100.1,2,3. Know that the Lord He is God, He has made us and not
We our selves etc. Now Prayers, and Praises, are duties of Natural Worship,
which we owe unto God as our Creator, and are Constantly to be attended, in the
Exercise of Religion in Families.

Secondly. He is Our Preserver, by His Providence. As he did at first gives us
our Beings, so he upholds us in our beings: Our Lives; Motions, and Actions,
are continually Dependent upon His Influence; Acts. 17. 28. In Him we Live, and
Move, and have our Being. Now this Providence is over us, in Two Respects. (1.)
In Providing for us, all that is Necessary; to the maintaining both our Bodies,
and Souls in Life. Hence we read, That He has According to his Divine Power,
given unto us, all things which pertain to Life and Godlyness; 2. Per. 1, 3. It
is from this Liberal Hand of Divine Bounty, that Common Favors are
Promiscuously dispensed, to Good and Bad; Mat. 5. 45. -- Makes His Sun to
Rise, on the Evil and on the Good, and sends Rain, on the Just and on the
Unjust. Thus Jacob acknowledged, the Lord to have been his Feeder, all his Life
long; Genesis 48. 15. (2.) In Protecting of us from Injuries. We are every Day,
every Night, yea every Hour, exposed unto Various Dangers, and Casualties;
Wrongs and Injuries; form which the Lord does Preserve and Deliver us, He then,
that is our Defender, may well challenge our Service at all times; Now it is
the Lords Peculiar Property, to Defend us from ALL Evil; To Preserve our Goings
out, and our Comings in from hence forth and for ever. Psalm 121. 7,8. Hence
without His Protection, we cannot be safe; Except the LORD Keep the City, the
Watchman waketh in vain. Psalm. 121.1. On this account, the People of God apply
themselves to Him, under such Metaphors and Titles, as denote the greatest
Security, Protection, and Defense; Thus David, I Love Thee O Lord my Strength,
my Rock -- Fortress, Deliverer, -- Buckler, Horn of Salvation, and High Tower,
Psalm. 18. 1,2. (i. e.) A Suitable and Sufficient Defense, at all Times and on
all Occasions; Hereby then are we strongly oblidged, to Love, Fear, and Serve
Him.

Thirdly. He is our Rewarder; and Therefore may Challenge our Service. Thus He
is Propounded, in the Gospel as the Adaequate Object of our Faith; Heb. 11. 6.
He that comes unto God must Relieve that He is; and that He is a Rewarder of
all them that Diligently seek Him; His Faithfulness, is engaged by His Promise,
to Reward those that Serve Him. And the Apostle assures us, Heb. 6. 10. God is
not Unrighteous, that He should Forget our Work and Labor of Love, etc. Yea so
Faithful is He that has Promised, in this Respect, that even the Smallest
Service, shall not pass unrewarded. As our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, has
Affirmed to us. Matt. 10. 42. Whosoever shall give to Drink unto one of these
Little ones, a Cup of cold Water; in the Name of a Disciple; Verily I say unto
you, He shall in no wise loose his Reward. Therefore as the LORD is our
Creator, Preserver, and Rewarder, our Service must needs of Right belong unto
Him.

REASON. II. Because the Lord does Expect, Command, and Require, Our Service,
Worship, and Obedience. I need not insist long here. It is plain, that the
Maine End and Design of God is; by all the Precepts of the Scriptures, to
Oblige us; by the Precedents, To Encourage us; by the Promises To Allure us
unto his Service; and by the Threatenings, To Deter us from the neglect
thereof. Thus the Prophet Sums up the People's Duty, in two Words; I Sam.
12.24. Only Fear the Lord, and Serve Him in Truth; etc. David also, Declares,
it to be the Lord's Command, that we should Keep His Precepts Diligently. Psalm.
119.4.

REASON. III. As it is the Duty, so it is the Property, of the Religious
Householder thus to do; Appears From the Tendency of Grace, in such as do
themselves sincerely Serve the Lord. The Grace of God is of a Diffusive, and
Communicative Nature; Compared therefore by our Savior to Leaven, a little
whereof will Leaven the whole Lump, and Overspread by is influence the three
Measures of Meal, in which it is hidden; Matt.13.33. So So Grace will season
and Sanctify the whole man, in Body, Soul, and Spirit: And having obtained
Dominion over That Man, proceeds to the Next, and Extends its Efficacy, to
the Sanctification of Others, so far as may be. Hence the true Disciples of the
Lord Jesus, are said to be the Salt of the Earth; Matt. 5. 13. Salt to prevent
Putrefaction; Salt to di^use a Savoury Relish to those with whom they Converse.
Again Saints are Lights of the World; Matt. 5.14. Lights for their own Luster,
and Brightness of Holy Conversation; As also to give Guidance and Direction, to
others with whom they Converse. Thus the Religions Householder, is willing to
bring as many others as possible he can, to Serve the LORD; Endeavoring to
have his Family like that of the Devout Cornelius; Who Feared God with All his
House, etc. It is a special token of Sincerity, to Endeavor to the utmost of
our Capacity, the Good and Salvation of others: and to be grieved, when we
cannot prevail upon them; hence David, Psalm. 119. 136. Rivers of waters run
down mine eyes; Because men keep not thy Law. So if we would approve our
selves, to have a Principle of Grace and Holiness in us, we should mourn over
the Sins of others, which we cannot prevent. Thus shall we come to be Known,
(i. e.) Acknowledged, and Accepted of God, as Abraham was; Genesis 18. 19. For I
Know him, that he will Command his Children and he Household, etc. This will be
matter of Comfort to us now, and Rejoiceing in the Day of the Lord.

For APPLICATION of this Doctrine to our selves.

There are three Uses to be insisted upon (First) Of Exhortation and Direction;
how it may be so with us in our Families. (Secondly) OF Lamentation, because it
is not so. (Thirdly) Of Caution against these things, which do Oftentimes
hinder it from being so.

USE. I.
Let it be for EXHORTATION to all Householders now before the Lord; I call upon
you, and Solemnly Exhort you in the Name and Fear of God, To Write after this
Fair Copy, and to follow this Eminent Leader the Godly JOSHUA Who seems to
speak, to all in that Capacity here present, in the Words of Gideon; Judge.
7.17. Look on me -- and as I Do so shall Ye Do. Viz. Bind your selves, and all
under your Charge, in a Firm and Explicit Resolution to Serve the Lord; with
Singleness and Uprightness of heart. Now for the Pressing this Duty, I shall
here insert those Directions, under which this, Duty may be fully Opened,
subjoyning those Motives which may be the Help of the Spirit of God, Awaken,
and Encourage, unto the Conscientious Practice thereof. This being referred
hither as the most probable Method; (If the Lord please) By which to inform the
Judgment, and Excite the Affections together.

DIRECTION. I.
Let us make it Our Constant Care, and Diligent Endeavor, to Live in the
Constant and Conscientious Practice, of all manner of ChristianFamily-Duties
Incumbent on the Heads of Families. Now those Relative Duties which concern the
several Persons in Families, are to be reduced to Three heads. (1.) The Duties
of Superiors, to Inferiors. (2.) Of Inferiors, to Superiors. (3.) Of
Equals, one toward another. Those which we are now Concerned to Enquire into,
are the Duties of Superiors to Inferiors; for the maintaining a Constant
course of Religions Service to God in Families; which belongs unto Practical
Godliness, and consists in daily Exercise of these things. The People are wont
oftentimes to say unto the Preachers; The Life of Doctrine lies in Application;
surely the Preachers may as truly and Properly Answer them, The Life of
Application lies in Practice. Especially in these Important Duties, of such
Universal Concernment.

The Duties are,

1. Reading the Scriptures, daily in the Family. A Duty too too much neglected
(I fear) even amongst Professors. The Scriptures are the Words of the Eternal
God; Containing the Words of Eternal Life; Written by men Inspired by the Holy
Ghost; 2 Pet. 1. ult. Now What is written is written for our Learning; etc.
Romans 15. 4. Therefore surely for our Reading, without which we are not Capable
to Learn. It is Recorded in Commendation of Timothy 2 Timothy 3.15. That from a
Child, thou have Known the Holy Scriptures etc. Surely the way to know them, so
as to grow Wiser unto Salvation, is to Read them. Once more, It is Required of
the King; Deuteronomy. 17.19. That he should Read in the Book of the Law, all the
Days of his Life. If the King is to Read daily in the Book of the Law, then
surely Professors of the Name of Christ ought to Read in the Books of the
Gospel every day; As proper means, to prepare them For, and quicken them To,
other Duties of Family Worship.

2. Follow this with Family prayer, This is a Duty belonging to Natural
Worship, and therefore binds all Persons, at all Times; As the Apostle
Exhorts, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying Always, with All Prayer and Supplication, etc.
Of which Family Prayer is one kind, and is necessary, both for the Example, and
Encouragment, of those that are under our charge. This is brought in, as a
special evidence of Cornelius's Devoutness, in the Fear and Service of the
Lord, with all his House, He Prayed Always, Act. 10. 2. Besides Prayer is a
Necessary duty, Pertaining to a Christians Walk, when he walks like himself;
Surely then David did not walk in his House or Family, with a Perfect heart,
but that he Prayed for them and with them; as Psalm. 101.2. There is indeed, a
Praying for our Children and Servants, in Secret; which is the Duty of all
sincere Christians: An earnest Plying the Throne of Grace, As Abraham did, Genesis
17. 18. O that Ishmael might Love before Thee. So should we, particularly
Recommend our Children to the Mercy of God, in our Secret Addresses every day;
But that They may be Assured, that we pray For Them, and may also be Encouraged
to do the like, if they shall Live to come into the same Capacity of
Family-Government, we ought Conscientiously, to attend Family Prayer With Them
every day. And that We and our Families may find acceptance, with the Lord in
our Daily-(...)-Supplications, Let us Carefully Watch against Two things; (1.)
Coldness, and Formality. This is a Frame we are in great danger to fall into;
Frequency in Prayer, if we are not very careful, will abate the Fervency of our
attendance therein; Let us not be Slothful, Cold, or Formal, in this Business;
but Fervent in Spirit, etc. Romans 12.11. Serving that GOD who is a SPIRIT, with
our Spirits; John 4.24. Finding in our Heart, to Pray our Prayer as David; 2 Samuel 7.27. And Pouring out our Soul before the Lord, as Hannah I Sam. 1 15.
Otherwise we cannot Expect, to obtain any Mercy at the Hand of God, for our
Selves or Ours. The Apostle James informs us, That such a man as is Faint,
Weak, Doubting, Cannot Expect to Receive any thing of the Lord; Jam. 1.6.
Surely we all find by woeful Experience, how much we stand in need of such a
Watch Word as this. (2.) Let us Watch against Distractions in Family Duties.
Many Occasions will Intrude upon us, to Distract our minds, and abate the
Intensness of our Souls in these Duties. Let us do our Utmost, so to Order and
Compose every Business, and to Govern every Person, in their several
Capacities, that there may be no distraction but what is purely Accidental; but
as much as possible we may Attend upon the Lord, in Family Prayer Without
Distraction; I Cor. 7.35. Remembering we are in the Presence of GOD, who cannot
Endure to behold Iniquity; About things of Everlasting Concernment, that our
Hearts and Souls, may be Engaged in the Duty; and we may do it with ALL our
Might; Distractions in Duties are very Evil things, and we are never more in
Danger to be Pestered with them, than in Family Prayer; Let us do by them as
Abraham did by the Birds, that annoyed his Sacrifice, Gen 15. 11. Use our
utmost Endeavor, by the Assistance of the Spirit of God, to Drive them away.
Heartily grieving, for what we cannot prevent.

3. Let us Carefully Attend Catechizing of Our Families. This is a Duty of
Great Concernment, for the bringing Young ones, to a Sound and Methodical
knowledge of God, Christ, and the Way of Salvation. Indeed the Word is not
Expressly set down in Scripture, yet in many places, we find the Thing intended
thereby; Particularly, Gal.6.6. Let him that is Taught in the Word Communicate
etc. The Greek word (CATECHOUMENOS) there used, for Him that is Taught gives us
the derivation of the Name, and the true Notion of the thing. For it is an
Orderly and Methodical Instructing, Persons in the Great Doctrine of Godliness,
Or the Fundamental Points of Religion Necessary unto Salvation. Hence, It
comprehends under it, both the Credenda, and Agenda, (i. e.) Truths to be
believed, and Duties to be performed. By this means Persons well Catechized,
will Attain unto, and Retain, the form of sound Words, or Summary of Christian
Religion, according to the Apostles Exhortation, 2 Timothy 1.13. Holdfast the Form
of Sound Words, which thou have heard of me, etc. (i. e.) in which he had
Instructed or Cathechized him. We are Commanded, to Trent frequently, and
Familiarly, with out Children; etc; about the great things, of their Salvation,
Deuteronomy. 6.6,7. Thou shall Talk of them, as thou (...) House, and when thou
Walk by the way, and when thou Lie down and when thou (...) Now
Catechizing, is an Apposite, (...) and Compendious way, to Insinuate and (...)
Divine things; The want whereof, makes so many grown persons, confused in their
Knowledge, even of the Important Doctrines of Faith and Repentance, As also of
the Glorious Mysteries of the Mediatorial Office of our Lord Jesus Christ; Viz.
His Incarnation, Humiliation, and Exaltation, with the Benefits redounding
there from, Represented to us in Symbols and Sacraments Let this Duty then, be
constantly attended by us, at certain times every Week, so shall we find our
Children, etc. To grow in Knowledge, as they grow in Years; and may have ground
to hope, that by the help of the Spirit of God, they shall also grow in Grace.
I humbly Recommend, For Grown Persons, The Assemblies Catechism, for young
Children Dr. Owens, Primer Catechism, and for bringing them to a Familiarity,
with the Words of the Sacred Text; the Scriptural Catechism, lately set forth
by the Reverend Mr. Cotton Mather, is of Excellent use.

4. A Fourth Duty, is Reproof Of, and bearing full testimony Against,
whatsoever we find in these of our Families, Contrary to God and Godliness. Now
Reproof is the Orderly Application, of the Rule of God to them, to Convince
then wherein they have Transgressed it, and to bear Testimony against the
Delinquence. Hence our Security, ought (...) proportion to their Iniquity;
Otherwise (...) ^^mes Short of Divine Acceptance: as in the are of Eli's Sons,
Their Transgression was very Great, I Sam. 2. 22. Yet his Reproof was very
Mild, favoring of too much Indulgence; Verse 23,24,25; And Chap. 3.13. We have
Gods Testimony against his neglect, upon that account; Because his Sons made
themselves Vile, and he Restrained them not. The word in the Hebrew (CAHAH)
signifies to bend the Brows, and wrinkle the Forebead with anger; He did not
severely Browbeat them fully testifying, against the Evil of their Ways, and
Heinousness of their Sin in the Sight of God. (i. e.) By Severely Chiding them
as he was a FATHER, Deposing them as he was High Priest, and Punishing them
Corporally as he was a Judge. So Diodat, Ann^t, Belg, Piso.

And we must always, Remember, that overmuch Mildness in Reprooving, reflects
the guilt of the Transgression, upon the Reproover; When therefore any in our
Families, Sin Greatly, and Heinotsly, Let us Reproove them Sharply, and
Effectually.

5 ly. And Lastly. When other means fails, and we find an Obstinate Persisting
in Evil Practices, We must add Correction to all the Rest. This is the Last
Remedy, and though it is Rough and Unpleasant, yet it is sometimes Necessary,
and Profitable. Thus the Wise man gives a Rule, Prove. 19. 18. Chasten thy Sin
while there is Hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his Crying. Indeed it must
be acknowledged, That as strong Working Physic, must be Skilfully Corrected;
So Chastisements must be very Prudently. Managed, by the Sober and Religious
Householder, who is to dispense them, according to the Age, Temper, Inclination,
and Disposition, of the Offender; whether it be Child or Servant. As also with
due regard to the Quality, Circumstances, and Aggravations, of the Offense, for
which it is Administered.

Now although in Performing these Family Duties, all Persons in their
Particular Stations are concerned, Superiors, to Injoyne and Practice them;
Inferiors, to Attend on them, and Submit unto them; And Equals to Excite one
another thereunto: Yet the main Stress of all, lies on the Master, or Head of
the Family, as will Appear if we Consider Three things;

1. The Master of the Family, is as it were the SOUL of the Family. He is the
Correlate, of every Relation there, Viz. The Husband, or the Wife; The Father
of the Children; The (...) of the Servants; The Governor or all the Governed;
He is the Spring of Motion to all persons there; Every Child and Servant, acts,
By, From, and Under him, The Wife indeed mooves By, and With, but all others
From and Under him; when they move aright. As the Soul gives Wife and Motion,
to the Body-Natural; So the Head of the Family, puts Vigor and Activity, into
the Body-OEconomical; Hence JOSHUA in our Text, Moves First, Resolving that all
the Rest of his Family, shall Move and Engage along with him: As for ME and my
HOUSE, we will Serve the Lord.

2. The Master of the Family, has an Especial Betrustment, with all the SOULS
in the Family, and must One Day be Accountable for them. Masters of Families,
do in a sort sustain a Public Capacity, and such must give Account of the
Persons Committed unto their Charge: For they are not Betrusted only with the
Bodies in their Families (although the Neglect of them were an unaccountable
Transgression) But also with their SOULS, and with them Especially, as the most
Excellent Constituent Parts of Man; Hence when another Person is added, to the
Family, there is one Soul more, for whose Eternal Salvation, the Godly
Householder is to be Eminently Concerned. The Children born in Our Families, are
Born unto God, and a strict account will one day be Required of us, what we
have done With, and how we have discharged Duty Unto; GODS Children, Ezekiel.
16.20,21. -- Thou have Slain Mr Children; These Children, God Commits unto
us for Education, He does (To speak with Reverence) Put them Out to us; as
Pharaohs Daughter did Moses, to the Hebrew Woman his Mother, saying as She Did;
Exodus 2. 9. Take this Child, and Nurse it for ME, etc. Being therefore thus
Committed unto us, Account concerning them may Justly, and will Certainly, be
Required Of us, in the Great Day: When if it shall Appear, that by means of our
Neglect of Duty they be missing; Our Life must go for Theirs; Especially, being
so Solemnly Warned beforehand; as he was in another case, (Kings 20. 43.)

3. Inferiors are Generally Ordered in their Manners, according to the
Practice and Example of their Superiors. The Poet has told us,

Regis ad Exemplum, T^^us comp^nitur Orbis.

As is the Prince, So is the People.

And we Commonly say, (...) Exempla Movent. Precepts do Instruct, but Examples
do Move, and Ex^^^. Hence such Masters of Families, as give good Counsels, to
their Children and Servants; And at the same time Practice what is Clean
contrary, will find by Woeful Experence that one Evil Example, will do more
Hurt, than Ten good Precepts will Rectify and Amend. Indeed such Masters are
like Rowers, who Look one way and Row another, speak Well but do Ill, so that I
may allude to what He said in another case (Genesis 2^.22.) The Voice is Jacobs,
but the Hands are the Hands of Esau. And surely that Degeneracy in the Leaders
of a State, which the Lord Complains of; has a Proportionable influence Upon,
and may properly be referred Unto; the Leaders in Families, and there will
certainly be like fatal Consequence of Misleading there; Isa. 9. 16. For the
Leaders of this People, cause them to Err; Amd those that are led by them, are
Destoyed.

DIRECTION. 2.
Labor to give every Duty, its Proper Season allowing full time unto the
Performance thereof. What the Wise man says, of a Word spoken in Season; Prove.
15. 23. I may properly Apply, unto a Duty done in Season, and say in like
manner; How good is it? This puts a Beauty of Holiness, upon all other
occasions o the Family. And for Encouraging our Care and Conscience herein, we
may Consider (1.) This will make our Duties, so much the more Acceptable to
GOD. He is a God of Order, and does all His works in the most Proper Season,
and Therefore Expects, and Requires, that we should Endeavor to comply with
His Precept and Example, therein. It is said, Eccl. 3. 11. He has made every
thing, Beautiful in His Time. Hence then, the more Seasonable, the more
Beautiful things are, in the Sight of God and Man; But Neglect of the due
Season, for our Family Duties, introduces many uncomfortable Disorders, and
Distractions in the other affairs of our Families, and we find our selves,
Taken in those Evil Nets, for not Knowing our Time; (Eccl. 9.12.) To the
Dishonnour of God, and our Profession of Godlyness; Convinceing us by our own
Woeful Experience, of the truth of what the Wise Man Asserts, Eccl.8.6. Because
to Every Purpose, there is Time and Judgment: therefore the Misery of man is
Great upon him (i. e.) because he has not Understanding, to comply therewith.

(2.) Our Conscientious Care in this matter, will Convince our Children and
Servants, that these Duties are of great Importance, In that we are so much
concerned, about the Ordering, and Timeing of them. It is very good, to State
and Keep, a certain Hour of Prayer, as that was at the Temple, when Peter and
John Attended there Acts 3. 1. So if the Heads of Families, are carefully to
attend, at the Stated Times (as near as Possible they Can) all others in the
Family, will be under an Awe of such a Godly Practice; and Remember that all
Affairs, in which they are concerned; either within Doors, or without; must
be dispatched accordingly. And for Compliance with this Direction take these
RULES.

RULE. I. Make every Occasion (that Possibly may) Give Way to the Time of
Family Duties; all Suffer not them Ordinarily to give way to any thing. It must
be Acknowledged; that there are several Duties incumbent on Christians, in
their Particular Callings, besides those of their General Calling, but God
allows time for Both, and it belongs to every ones Care and Conscience, so to
manage the Former, that they may not Entersere with, or Obstruct the Latter:
Let then the Momentous Duties of our General Calling, have a Proper and
Propotionable Time, all other business being Forecasted and Modelled
accordingly. The Want of Care herein, does too too often Obstruct, Relious
Duties, Even in some of the Strictest Families.

RULE. II. Be sure to Begin with Religion, Earth in the Morning. This will have
a Special Influence, upon the Orderly management of All the Duties of the Day,
both in our General and Particular calling. The Poet could say, A Jove
Principium etc. Begin with God: And the Sweet Psalmist of Israel pleads his
Earliness, and Earnestness, For acceptance in his Devotions, Psalm. 5. 3. My
voice shall Thou Hear in the Morning O Lord: in the Morning will I direct my
Prayer unto Thee and will Look up. It is Admirable to Observe, how Religion
Thrives, in those few Persons and Families; who make Conscience, of Ea^ly
attending Family Duties. But on the Contrary; where Sloth is Indulged in the
Morning, Religious Duties are long Deferred, so that this Person comes In, or
the other Business Calls for Attendance, and the pretended Necessary delay of
them, does too often issue, in a Sinful and therefore Shameful, Obstruction or
Omission for that Day and Time.

RULE. III. Let all General Family Duties, be attended in such Seasonable
manner, as that Every Person of Understanding, and Capacity to Profit, may
Without Fail be Present at them. We ought not to let our Children or Servants,
want a Meal for their Bodies; Oh! Let none of them Miss of a Chapter, a Prayer,
An Exhortation or Counsel, for their Precious and Immortal Souls. For if they
do Perceive Us, not to be concerned, about their being Present at such Duties;
they may well imagine, the Attending of them is of No Great Importance, and the
Neglect of them is of No very Dangerous Consequence. And under those Pernicious
Misapprehensions, may be ready to harden themselves in Sin, and to Persist in
Careless and Sinful Neglect of Duty; so as to hazard the Utter Ruin and
Destruction of their Souls for ever.

RULE. IV. And Lastly. Be not overedious in Family Duties. I Confess, this is
an Error on the Right hand, yet it is an Error; which some Professors Do fall
into: Now if we are Over-Tedious in Duties, it detracts from the Seasonableness
of them, hence a Duty begun in good Time, may be Unseasonably Ended by the
Length of it. God is in Heaven, and thou on Earth, therefore let thy Words be
few, (i. e.) Humble, Sensible, Faithful, and Fervent; I would not be thought,
to Diswade or Discourage Pious Souls, from enlarging their Prayers, when they
want any Special Family-Mercies, and would Jointly Apply themselves to the
Throne of Grace to obtain them: Or when they have received any
Family-Blessings, and would Jointly return their Praises, and Thansgivings for
them; But it has been observed, that the most Pious and Zealous Ministers;
have not been long in Family Duties, no nor yet in Public Prayer on Ordinary
Occasions; giving this Reason, they were willing to Pray their Hearers Hearts
Into Heaven (by a warmth of Holy Zeal and Fervency) but not by Tediousness to
Pray them Out again. Besides the Parts of Prayer are not many, and the
Petitions in the Lords Prayer, that Most Excellent Platform, are but Six,
besides the Preface and the Conclusion. Again the Spirit is never so willing as
it ought to be; but when it is Most willing, the Flesh is Weak. Finally, God is
not moved by a Multitude of Words, he needs not Information, but has Commanded
us only to be his Remembrancers, who has graciously Commended, and
Encouraged, Sincerity and Fervency; James 5. 16. And by Our Savior Himself
severely Reprooved, and Condemned, Prolixity and Vain Repetitions, as a
Heathenish Practice Matthew. 6.7.

DIRECTION. 3.
Labor we, to keep our Hearts Continually, in Gracious, Solemn, and holy frame
to Serve God. Let us Carry with us, such a Frame of Heart into our Particular
Callings; Let All our Motions both Natural and Civil, as well as Religious,
have a Vein of Grace, and Strain of Holiness, Observable in them. Let it be
our Constant Care and Endeavor, Whatsoever we Do, to Do it to the Praise and
Glory of God I. Cor. 10. 31. (i. e.) So to demean our selves, that our whole
Course and Carriage, may Demonstrate us, to be fully Resolved, to Serve and
Glorify the Lord. Hence let all our Speeches be with Grace, Col. 4. 6. (i. e.)
Accented with Sobriety and Gravity, to that degree as may Administer Grace to
the Hearers, Ephe. 4. 29. (i. e.) Manifesting the Exercise of Grace, in him
that speaks; and Stirring up the Exercise of Grace in them that Hear. As for
our Actions Let them be Commendable and Exemplary, so as we may turn even Civil
Actions the Affairs of our Particular Callings, to Good account; in the Sight
of God. The Wise Man tells us Prove. 21. 4. The Plowing of the Wicked is Sin.
(i. e.) because he attends it with an, Evil Frame of heart; Not from a Good
Principle, nor yet for a Right end. Hence Contrariorum Contraria Consequentia.
The Plowing, Sowing, Tradeing, and Merchandise, of the Godly man is Good,
because he aims at the Glory of GOD in All; Once more, Let our Gestures and
the Whole Course of our Behavior in our Families, be such as may Adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior, Titus. 2. 10. (It is spoken there, of Servants but
it is the Duty of Masters also) ( i. e.) so as may be an Honnour to the
Religion we profess; This we see in David If he will Walk in his House with a
perfect Heart, he must behave himself Wisely in a perfect Way; Psalm. 101. 2.
Accordingly, thus to Engage our selves Dilligently to Observe and Do, all His
Commandments, will Entitle us to All Manner of Blessings; Deuteronomy. 28. 1. 2. etc.

DIRECTION. 4.
Let us be Often Crying, Proving, and Examining; how Religion Grows, and
Flourishes in our Families; By This Practice, we shall come to know what Fruit
there is, of our Care, Pains; and Prayers; If upon Trial we find they do grow
in the Knowledge of God, Christ, and the things of Eternal Salvation; this will
be Exceeding Pleasing unto Us: If we find Other-wise, we must be deeply Humbled
Under it, Heartily Lament Over it, and Earnestly Pray, to Him that is the
Author of all success, in the most Pious Endeavors, That It may be otherwise
for the Time to Come. The Wise Man directs Prove. 27.23. Be deligent to Know the
State of thy Flock etc. Every man's Family, is his Peculiar Flock; over which he
has a Special Charge, and of which he must render an Awful Account in the Day
of the Lord: Surely then he ought to be greatly Concerned, to Understand how
Religion Thrives among them, that it may Be well with them Now; and Go well
with them in That Day.

DIRECTION. 5.
Would we Serve the Lord Daily, and Sincerely, in our Families; Let us make one
Resolution about the Sanctifying GODS Holy Day. We shall never Serve the Lord
as we ought, on the Week Days, if we do not Resolve Strickly to keep, and
Hallow the LORDS Day. The Great Lawgiver, has put a Remember upon it, let us
be sure not to Forget it. Know that Religion will Flourish or Languish, as we
Do, or do not, Keep Holy the Lords Day. Now because it is a Rest from Labor,
our Children and Servants, are very apt to Indulge themselves in Evil Courses,
when out of our Sight and Hearing; Let US and All in our Families Read with
Observation; and Reverence, Isai. 58. 13,14. If thou keep thy foot from my
Sabbath, from doing thy Work on Mine Holy Day etc. And let us Endeavor,
Conscientiously to Practice, what is there Solemnly Enjoined; That we may
Sanctify Gods Holy Day, by a Due and Seasonable Preparation For it, By a
faithful Attending all Kind of Duties In it; Public, Private, Secret. And by
Meditateing upon what we have heard, and Taking Account of Particular Persons
in our Families, what they Remember, that We and They, may Live in the Practice
thereof continually. Here then, I would Humbly Offer one Word of Advice, Let
none of Gods Holy Time be lost, in our Families, by our Controverting between
the Differing Opinions, about the Time when the Sabbath Begins; But whether we
apprehend the Day to begin at the Evening before; as some Learned and Pious do
Believe; Or At or Toward Morning, as others Equally Pious and Learned do Judge
and Practice; Let us Make sure, that there be as much time Expended in
Religious Exercises, Public, Private, Secret, as we allow to our
Daily-Secular-Affaires: even a full Proportion of a Seventh part of time; as
ALL in general do Conclude. I am very Sensible Religion has Suffered much
amongst us, by Our different Sentiments in this matter; Oh! Let it not be so in
our Families; But In a word, for our Encouragment, Let us be Faithful to Keep
Gods Holy Day, Honnouring It, and Him In it, as He Requires of us: And we may
be Assured, He will make us Prosperous in the Week Days; So that We and Ours,
shall Ride on the High Places of the Earth, and be Fed with the Heritage of
Jacob; For the Mouth of the LORD has Spoken it.

DIRECTION. 6.
Let us be Careful, to Discharge Duty unto our Children, in Every Respect, so
soon as they are Capable, and have Understanding to Attend us therein. The
Reason why many Children in our Families, Serve the Lord no more, when they are
grown up; but rather Addict themselves, to the Service of Satan, Sin, and
Sensuallity, is in great measure, to be Attributed unto their Parents Neglect
of Duty toward them, in their Minority. For although there is a Corrupt Nature
in Every Child, in its Infancy: Yea From the very Birth, they Go Astray
Speaking Lies (Psalm. 58. 3.) Yet Care and Education will much Prevail, to keep
under that Corrupt Principle, and Promote better Inclinations in them. Care and
Government, will Tame the Wildest Creatures, such as have the most Savage
natures, may be rendered Familiar to if handled whilst they are Young; Even
such as after-ward become Utterly Unreduceable to our Subjection. Particularly
then,

First. Begin to Instruct them betimes. Endeavor to Season them in their very
Infancy, with Savoury Principles, both of Morallity and Religion, that they may
as it were Suck them in with their Mothers Milk; You know not what Influence
your Godly Dictates and Directions, may have upon them for many Years after,
when they are grown up Into the World, and we are gone Out of it; Teach them to
READ, and as soon as you can Possible, accustom them to Read the Holy
Scriptures, Which are Able to make them Wise unto Salvation 2 Timothy 3.15. Thus
may they come to Remember their Creator, in the Days of their Youth
(Eccl.12.1.) And to Know Him, Whom to Know is Life Eternal. And the more Early,
the more Honorable: both in the Sight of God and Good men. Early Instruction
is of Lasting Impression; The Poet could say, Quo semel est imbuta recens
Servabit Odorem; Testa diu -- Horat. A Cask will long retain the Scent, of that
wherewith it is first Seasoned; And a Better man than he, by Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, declares unto us, Prove. 22. 6. Train up a Child, in the Way that he
should GO: and we find it True by Woeful Experience, if he be Trained in a Way
(...) which he should Not go, when he is Old be will not Depart from it.

Secondly Begin to Correct (...); Bear Early Testimony (...) the Beginnings of
Sin. We should not Permit, much less Countenance, the least Appearance of Evil,
in our Children; Sin in their Natures, is like a Deadly Plague; We should
Venienti Morbo occurrere, Take the Disease in Time, and Nip the very buddings
of Original Corruption; (...) no Wise pleasing our Selves With, but several,
Testifying Against, the Vain and Sinful Speeches, and Actions of Our Children,
not Indulging Of Them or Dallying With Them, in the least Violations of Gods
Holy Commands in their very Childhood; for if we do, we shall find By woeful
Experience, they will not only Dally with, but Despise our Commands, when they
are grown up. David's Indulgence, to his Son Adonijah from his Youth upward;
brought himself to Sorrow, and the Young man to Ruin; I King. 1. 6. And his
Father had not Displeased him at any Time, in saying Why have thou done so,
etc. The fatal Consequences whereof, are Represented to us in the following
part of That Chapter, Viz. The Rebellion, and Destruction of Adonijah.

Lastly. DIRECTION. 7.
Let us Conscientiously Endeavor, to keep our Families Clear, of such as we
find to be Obstinately Resolved, not to J^ine with Us in Serving of the Lord.
We should be very Careful, not to Admit any into our Service, as near as we
Can, who are not willing to Serve the Lord with us: when we would S^ye out one
to Serve us; We should as David did, Look amongst the Faithful in the Land (i.
e.) Such as will walk with us in a Perfect Way; That they may Serve us, Psalm.
101. 6. But if when ALL is done, we are mistaken, and have Unawares Admitted
such into our Service, as are Unreduceable to Religious Order and Government;
We ought to take the First Opportunity, to rid our Hands and Families of them,
as David also did: Verse 7. He that Works Deceit, shall not dwell within my
House: be that tells Lies, shall not Tarry in my Sight. Let not Lucre and
Covetousness, Betray us to take such Into, or keep them In our Families, as
will either divert us From, or Interrupt us In, our Conscientious Serving of
the Lord. But let us Mourn over, what cannot be Prevented in that Respect.

So much for the DIRECTIONS.

By way of MOTIVE then, unto these Duties, briefly,

Let us CONSIDER. I. The Service of the LORD is the most Excellent Service, In
which any Person can be Employed. It is an Happiness, A Privilege, A Dignity,
to Serve the Lord What the Psalmist says of the Precepts of the Word, I may
say in this Case (Psalm. 19.11.) In the Performance thereof, there is great
Reward; God is our Master in Heaven, Ephesians. 6. 9. And His Glorious Properties,
are engaged to Direct, Assist, and Uphold His Servants; There is Honor in
Serving the Lord, As they that serve great Princes, are honorable for Their
sakes; So Our Lord Jesus says, If any man Serve ME, Him will MY Father
Honnour; Joh. 12. 26. Besides there is True Happiness, in Serving the Lord;
what the Queen of Sheba said of the servants of Solomon, is much more true of
those who Serve Him, who is Greater then Solomon; I King. 10. 8. Happy are thy
men, and Happy are these thy Servants, who stand Continually before Thee; and
hear Thy Wisdom. So Great, so Good, and Gracious, is the God whom we Serve.
Again, This LORD and Master, gives the most Excellent wages; such as Serve the
Lord, they Do not, they Shall not, Serve Him for naught; Job 1. 9. But shall
find by Experience, That To Him that works Righteousness, shall be a Sure
Reward; Prove. 11. 18. All manner of Blessings in this Life, are Promised to
Faithful Serving the Lord; Deuteronomy. 28. 2. etc. And not only so, but this
Practical Godlyness, has the Promise of the Life that is to Come. I Tim. 4. 8.
The Transcendent Excellency, of which Rewards, are Represented unto us by the
most Illustrious Metaphors, Viz. Of a Kingdom; Luke. 22. 29. A Throne Rev. 3.
21. A Crown of Life; Rev. 2. 10. A Crown of Righteousness; 2 Timothy 4. 8. A Crown
of Glory that fades not away; 1 Pet. 5. 4. And in a word, Eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man to Conceive, what God
has Prepared for those that Love Him and Serve Him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. This, This,
is the Portion of him that Faithfully Serves the Lord: and the Heritage,
Appointed unto him of God.

CONSIDER. II. The Miserable Condition, of such Masters and Families, as do not
Serve the Lord. They are the Objects of Divine Fury. The Inspired Penmen of the
Holy Scriptures, have by the Holy Ghost; uttered direful Imprecations, That
Divine Wrath might not only be Dropped, but Poured down, upon those that Call
not on the Name of the Lord (i.e.) Such as Live in the Total Neglect, of Family
Worship and Religion; Jer. 10. 25. A Family which do not Serve and Worship the
Lord, is an Heathenish Family; And is therefore Exposed to the Wrath and Curse,
of the Infinite and Eternal God. Consider this, Ye that Forget your Maker, and
from time to time Neglect His Worship and Service in your Families. Lest He
Tear you in Pieces, and there be none to Deliver.

CONSIDER. III. If any of those that make the fairest Profession, can allow
themselves in the Neglect or Slighty Performance of Family Duties, they have
great Reason to question the Truth of their Profession. It is one thing to Fall
Into, or to be Forced Unto, a Neglect of Duty; and another thing to Allow our
selves in that Neglect. The best of all, may Casually be Interrupted or
hindered, but it is their grief. To allow the Omission of Known Duty; or
Commission of Known Sin; Shows that Person to be under the Power of some Lust,
which lays a Wound at the very Root and Foundation, of their Profession of
Religion. Now the most distinguishing signs; of a Sincere Profession, are
taken from a Spiritual and Fervent Performance, of Private Duties; Hence a man
is not to Judge of himself or others, by the show that he or they make, of Zeal
and Devotion, in the Church, Town, or Company of Godly men: But by his or their
Care, and Conscience; Zeal, and Fervency; in the Private, Secret, and most
retired Duties, of Practical Godliness. It is oftentimes said, and that too
truly, that Some men are Saints abroad, and Devils at home. Amongst those that
Countenance Religion, they can look as Demure, and speak as Fair as the best;
but observe them at home, and they are guilty of many Sinful, and Shameful
Neglects, of Family Worship and Religion. Surely such may Justly fear, that God
will one day Write upon their whole Profession. TEKEL thou are weighed in the
balance, and art found wanting.

CONSIDER. IV. The Sincerity of our (...) to our Families and every Person
under our Charge is best Approved by our Care of their SOULS. It is the
Property of True Love to Endeavor the Best Good of the Object. Now a Natural
Affection may move us to take care of the Bodies of our Children; Our own
Worldly interest may Excite us to take care of the Bodies of our Servants, that
they may Serve us the better; but it is only a True Christian-Love that will
Engage us to Concern our selves about their Souls. The Soul of man is the
Better Part, and Love of that is the Best of Love. Hence those Duties of
Religion which do in a special Manner tend to the good of SOULS are of the
Highest concernment: For our Savior Himself says, What will it Profit a man,
if he should Gain the whole World, and Loose his own SOUL: or What shall a man
give in Exchange for his SOUL. Matt.16.26.

CONSIDER. V. Our Faithful and Diligent Serving the LORD; In and With our
Families; will Influence those about us to be Diligent and Industrious in
Serving of Us. If we are Conscientious, in Serving our Master in Heaven; it
will oblige them to be Circumspect in Serving Us, who are our Servants on
Earth. Sanctification is the Renewal of the Image of God, and that lays an Awe
Upon; and Challenges a Reverence From; those about us; so that Godly Persons
will Serve us out of Conscience; because they Serve God in Serving of us;
Ungodly Persons, will be under special Awe of Religion and Godliness; though
not merely out of Conscience, yet from Unavoidable Conviction, which ever
accompanies the Power of Godliness: So that Falling down, they will and Must
acknowledge that God is in you of a Truth. I Cor.14.25. And therefore that
Reverence, and Service is due unto you.

CONSIDER. VI. The Faithful Discharge of these Duties, will make our Families
seem Like Little Churches. A Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, is a Number of
Saints, that are engaged and Resolved; to perform Duties, and Celebrate
Ordinances together. Where therefore, a Family does Constantly, and Carefully,
attend all manner of Religious Duties, belonging thereunto: There is a
Resemblance of an Holy and Church Communion, hence we read of a CHURCH which is
in their House, I Cor.16.19.

CONSIDER. VII. A Family, which Live in the Total Neglect of Religious Duties,
is a mere Nursery of Satan, and Cage of Unclean Birds. Because there GOD is
Dishonored; His Name Blasphemed; His Worship Neglected; and Sin Committed,
without Control; Insomuch that SATAN has Therein and Thereby Dominion over
them; Hence those Spriggs, which are Transplanted out of such a Nursery; into
the Orchard of the Commonwealth, cannot bring forth any, but Sour and
Unsavory fruit, which will be Rejected of GOD, being nigh unto Cursing, whose
End is to be Burned, Heb. 6.8.

CONSIDER. VIII. The Foundation of a whole People or Kingdoms Reformation, or
Defection, Religion, or Rebellion, is laid in Families. Families are the
Constituent Parts of Nations, and Kingdoms; hence as Families are Well or Ill
Disciplined, so will the whole be Well Disposed, or Ill Inclined. Ataxy and
Disorder Here, the Lord threatens to Punish His own People for; Isai.3.5. The
Child Rises up against the Ancient, and that seems to be the Reason of what
follows, Viz. The Base behaves himself Unbecomingly Against the Honorable. And
as for our selves, we need not wonder at the Disorders that happen in the
State; when we observe the Neglects that are among us in respect of
Family-Government. For whereas, the Fifth Commandment Requires us; to Honor
and Reverence our Parents, both in Word and Gesture, some Professors amongst
us, seem to make Conscience not to Expect or Challeng it from their Children,
either in Word or Gesture, being ready to account it a Sin so to do; As that
which Christian Parents Ought not, or at least Need not be concerned about. But
it is certainly a Truth that such as carry themselves Ill in the Family, will
not be likely to Demean themselves Well in the Common-Weatlh.

CONSIDER. IX. The Remembrance of our Conscientious Endeavor, to Serve the
Lord in and with our Families, will be Living Comfort to us in a Dying Hour.
Friends, the Time is Coming; yea and hasteneth a pace, in which we must be
Separated from our Families, and Every Particular Person in them; Viz. Either
by our being Taken from them, or they from Us: and then the Place that knew us
here, shall know us again no more. Now the Hours of near approaching Death, are
filled up, with many Cares, and Fears, about our Children and Relations which
we are are to leave behind us: Surely, Then the Witness of a good Conscience,
That we have Endeavored with David, to Walk in our Houses with a Perfect
Heart: And with Abraham, to Teach our Children and Household; in a Godly manner:
will be unto us the Best Cordial in the Whole World. If then we can Plead with
the Lord, as Hezekiah did; Isa.28.2. Remember O Lord, How I have Walked before
Thee in Truth; and done that which is Right in Thy Sight. (i.e.) Filled up
every Relation I Sustained, with a Conscientious Discharge of Duty therein: And
accordingly have Reason to Believe, that we are Just going, to Receive a
Blessed Reward: we may even under our Sharpest Conflicts, with the King of
Terrors; Rejoice with Joy unspeakable and Full of Glory. On the other hand; if
any in our Families, are by Death removing From Us, and it is a Dying Hour with
Them: we shall be able with Humble Subjection of Spirit, to Resign them up to
that God, to whom we have so often Recommended them, by our Fervent Prayers;
having Reason in our Mourning to Hope and Believe, that God will answer the
Sincere desires of our Souls, on their behalf, and Receive them into His Arms
of Everlasting Mercy. I These.4.13. How Quietly, How Comfortably; may we bear a
Separation from them New; in hopes of a Joyful Meeting with them In the DAY of
the LORD; which will never more Admit of any Separation.

CONSIDER. X. And Lastly. What Shame, and Confusion of face will Cover us, when
we shall meet our Children and Servants, before the Great Judge of the Quick
and the Dead, if we shall Then and There, be accused by them, that they lost
their SOULS, by means of our Neglect of Duty toward them! It is Appointed unto
Men once to Die; as in Heb.9.27. Then all We and all Ours Must Appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ ^ Cor.5.10. And Oh! What will then Become of us? What
shall we Say for our selves? What Horrors will Seize upon us? How will the
Joints of our Lions be Loosed, and Our Knees smite one against another? If this
or that Child or Servant, shall before that Great Tribunal, Testify against us
and say; Lord, there is my Father or Master, I never heard him Pray in all my
Life; he never Instructed me in the great Concerns of my Soul, and Salvation;
nor Discharged any part of his Duty toward me; and now I am undone for ever.
And further, if as an Aggravation, any Servant of ours should have reason to
alledg and say, Lord, I was Born of Religiour Parents, who made it their
business, to Season my young and tender years, with the Nurture and Admonition
of the Lord; who Carefully, and Faithfully, Exhorted and Exampled me in the
Great and Important Duties, of Religion and Godliness, whereby according to my
Age and Capacity, I had some Light and Influence of Divine Truth upon my heart;
and through the Common workings of the Spirit; I felt some Convictions of Sin,
and had some Measure of Love To, and Desires After, the things of God; But
being cast into This man's Family, to Serve some years with him, through his
Sinful Examples, and Shameful Neglects of Duty, both to GOD and Me; my
Convictions weakened, Corruption Strengthened, the Spirit withdrew His
Striveings with me, and I became at length, hardened In Sin, and From the Fear
of God, to the Utter undoing of my Precious and Immortal Soul. How will the
Torments of Hell, Rack the Soul and Conscience of such a Father or Master! How
will they be a Thousand times more afraid, before the Great Judge, then Haman
was, before the Great Ahasuerus, when he perceived, that Evil was determined
against him, as to his Bodily Life; How will they Wish that thy might Shrivle
and Vanish away into Nothing: That they might be Metamorphosed or Changed, into
the most Venomous Serpent, the most Loathsome Toad; yea into A Stock, A Stone,
or any sort of being, that is destitute of a Rational and Immortal Soul. But
because those things are Impossible to be accomplished for ever: How will they
Join with those Kings of the Earth and Great Men, Rich Men, Chief Captains,
and Mighty Men, etc. (who had been Occasions of the loss of Souls under their
Charge; by evil Examples, and neglect of Duty toward them) In their Fearful
Clamours, and yet Fruitless Cries, when they shall say, Rev. 6.16. -- To the
Mountains, and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us, from the Face of Him that
Sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb -- Let all Masters of
Families, Seriously Consider these things; before it is too Late, that they may
be Forewarned, to Flee from the Wrath to come.

USE. II.
Let it be for LAMENTATION, to us all before the Lord, in two Branches.

1. That there are amongst us, so many Ungodly and Jrreligious Householders, who
live in the Total Neglect of all these Religious Family Duties: The First
Planters of this Country, were a Generation of Pious Souls, who came into this
Land, on Purpose to Serve GOD, and Worship Him in the Purity of his Ordinances;
Adorning their Profession, with all Holy Conversation, in the discharge of the
most Private and Secret, as well as the most Public Duties, of Practical
Godliness: Then Every Family, was as it were a Beth-el a House of God, where
the Name of God was called upon Daily; and his Worship Celebrated Constantly
and Conscientiously; But since That Generation is gone off the Stage, they have
Finished their Course, Done their Work in their Day, according to the Will of
God, and are Fallen Asleep in Jesus; How justly may the Lord Upbraid us, As He
did his People of Old; Jer.2.21. Yet I had Planted thee a Noble Vine, wholly a
right seed, how then art thou turned into the Degenerate Plant, of a Strange
Vine unto me. Hence then it may Sadly; and yet Too truly be said, that there is
Risen and Riseing, Another Generation; which Know not the Lord; nor the Works
which He has Done. Now that ever there should be Families, yea Many Families
in New England; a Land of Light, and Famous for Religion; Yea and in the Chief
Places thereof, which are without the Practice of Religious Duties in them;
this is matter of Great Grief, to all Serious and Piour Observers; But Oh! Woe
and Alas for us, The Blindness; Ignorance, and Atheism, that abounds in the
Remoter Plantations, for the most part; by reason of the Total Neglect, of
Religious-Family-Worship; These Do certainly Provoke the Lord, to Pour out His
Fury upon those Heathenish Families, which call not upon His Name. Jer.10.25.
Have we not then, great Reason to conclude, with the Wise man; Eccl. 9.18. That
One, a Few, much more Many such Sinners destroy much Good, and procure much
Evil, Suffering and Calamity, to the Place and People amongst whom they Live.
This is For a Lamentation, and in shall be For a Lamentation.

2. Let us humbly and heartily Lament and Bewail, the Omissions, and
Interruptions in our Family Duties, of which even the Strictest Professors
amongst us, are too often Guilty. Who can say he is clean In this matter? So as
never to turn aside, by Occasional Omissions, or Perfunctory Performance of
these Duties: Are there not many Children and Servants in Professors (yea and
(Alas for us) in Church Members) Families; of Twelve, Fourteen, or Sixteen,
Years of Age, who (To my great Grief I have Observed) can Read Little, and
Understand Less, of the Holy Scriptures: Are Strangers to Catechetical
Instructions; And hence Are; and cannot but Be; most Shamefully, and
Unaccountably Ignorant, of those Fundamental Principles, of Christian-Religion,
which are Indispensibly Necessary to be known, in order to the Salvation of
their Immortal Souls. How justly then, may we fear, that the Controversy of the
Great GOD, with the People of this Land, at This Time, in those many
Afflictions that are upon us; Is for the Degeneracy of Professors, and the
Unbecoming Carriage of those that are in Visible Covenant; For the Provoking of
His Sons and Daughters; and the Profaneness, of Our Sons, and Daughters:
Occasioned by too much Indulgence of Parents, and too Great Neglect of
Family-Duty and Instruction: In and by which they should from their Infancy, be
devoted to God, and His Service in their Day and Generation. Hence Justly has
the Holy God, Permitted Satan, to Endeavor the Forcing, and Affrighting some
of the Children of our People, in to (...) To him, and Covenant With him;
because Parents have not so Conscientiously as they ought, by Fervent-Prayers,
and Dilligent discharge of every Duty to them, given them up to God in a way of
Subjection to the Lord Jesus Christ, by a Covenant never to be broken or
forgotten; Here also is to be lamented the Unconstancy, of some Visible
Professors; in Performing; that most Important Duty of FamilyPrayer, some
attending it but Few Times in a Week, others but Once in a Day; or it may be
when the Thunder of Gods Power startleth them, and Awakeneth their Consciences:
Or when some Heavy Affliction is upon them or theirs: Sure these are but
Nominally and not Really Christians; When therefore, we that desire to Approve
our selves Upright with God, are (Contrary to our Graceout and holy
Disposition) forced to Interruptions of our Daily Course, of Family Duties in
Any degree, Let it be for a Lamentation to us, and let us with all diligence
Endeavor to Sue out our Pardon by Jesus Christ; that through Him, we may be at
Peace with GOD, and be found Of Him in That Day without Spot and Blameless.

USE. III.
The Third and Last: Use is of CAUTION, against those things that would hinder
us, in the Fulfilling of our Holy Resolutions to Serve the LORD.

1. Take heed of Worldly-Mindedness. Watch against an Eager and Earnest Desire,
to get Great things in the World. The Neglect of Religious Duties in our
Families are some of those Snares, and (...) drowning and undoing Lusts; unto
which they that Will be (...), whatsoever comes on it are Miserably Exposed; I
Tim.6.9. And we are told, I Joh.2.1.5. -- If any man Love the World the Love of
the Father is not in him. And without Love, all our Service of God is of no
Value. Yea a Greater than the Apostle John tells us, Mat.6.24. Ye cannot Serve
God and Mammon; He that indulges a fixed Worldly Principle in him, shall
Certainly find, that the most Important Duties, of Family Worship, will be
either Neglected, or Shuffled over, if any Worldly Affairs Enterfere, or stand
in Competition with them. For The Love of Money (i.e.) of Worldly Wealth and
Riches, is The Root of all Evil, and those that Covet after it (i. e.) set
their Heart upon it, so as to Neglect their Duties to God, either Public or
Private, will find themselves Pierced through with Many Sorrows; I Tim.6.10. In
the Name and Words then, of our Lord Jesus Christ, Luke.12.15. -- Take heed and
beware of Covetousness.

2. Let us Take heed, of Suffering Our Anthority to be Disputed, or Exampled
upon, by any of Our Children or Servants. If we do not maintain, the Vigor of
Family-Government to the utmost; Religious Duties, are so much against the
Grain of Natural Corruption, that we shall not be able to Comply with our own
Resolutions, to Serve the Lord: because this Child and the other Servant, will
Neglect, Dispute against, and at last Despise to be Counseled, Catechized, and
Instructed, much more to be Rebuked or Corrected, for the greatest
miscarriages. Maintain we then, a Civil Order and Decorum, by Vigorous
Exercise of Family- Discipline, to every one in their Places and Relations,
This will make way for their Ready Compliance, with FamilyReligious Duties;
Whereas Remisness herein, will Introduce Confusion, Rebellion, Dissobedience,
to God and Man; Yea and Every Evil Work.

3. Let us Take heed of Resolving In our own Strength. If we would have our
Resolutions Sincere, Firm, and Lasting, Let us Implore the Guidance and
Direction of the Spirit of God, in Making of them and depend upon His
Influence and Assistance, for the Keeping of them, For we may be assured, that
if we make never so Many Resolutions, and those never so Firm in our own
Strength, we shall find by Woeful Experience, that they are but like the
Goodness of Ephraim and Judah, which is by the Prophet in Hos. 6.4. Compared to
a Morning Cloud, and an Early Dew which Suddenly and Insensibly Passes away.

4. And Lastly, Take heed of giving way to Seruples About, or Objections
Against, any kind of Family Duties. This is the ready way, to bring them out of
Respect with Us; and to betray us to Neglect of Them. Now the Excuses and
Objections, which are Commonly made, about Prayer, and other Family Worship;
are reduceable to Three heads.

Obj. I. Some are ready to say, I would Perform these Duties in my Family, but
I want Expression: I cannot Express my self in a Suitable manner, to Pray with,
or to Instruct others.

Ans. I. May thou not justly Blame, thy Former Neglect, for thy Present
Inability, to perform these Duties? We say Use Legs and have Legs; and God
says He Will give Grace to the Humble; I Pet.5.5. Yea and His Holy Spirit to
those that ask Him. Luk.11.13. (i.e.) The Gifts and Graces of His Spirit, to
those that are waiteing upon Him for it in a way of Duty; be deeply humbled,
for Past Neglects; and let want of Utterance, be no longer any Hinderance.

2. Get Suitable Impressions, and that will help unto proper Expressions. Be we
under a Deep and Humble sense, of the Need, that We and all Ours stand in, of
Pardoning Mercy, and Purging Grace, Of Justification, from the Guilt of Sin, by
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness To Us: Of Sanctification from the
Pollution of Sin, by the Implantation of that Righteousness In Us: Be we under
Sensible Impressions, that there is Enough in Christ, to supply all our Soul
Necessities; even All Fullness. Col 1.19. And that it is Promised, that we shall
Receive thereof Grace for Grace, Joh.1.16. As need Requires, Heb.4.16. And as
Need will make the Naked man to Run; So sense thereof, will make the
Needy-Soul, able to Express himself so as may obtain Audience, Acceptance, and
Answer, from that God, who never accounts Himself better Served in Prayer; than
when the Spirit helps a Sincere Soul, to Address Him: Cum Suspirijs
Inenarrabilibus; with Groanings which cannot be Uttered Rom.8.26.

3. Do as well as you Can, and improve all Advantages to do better. Up and be
doing, manifest a willing mind, and be assured the Lord will accept you,
according to what you have, and not according to what you have not. 2 Cor. 8.12.

4. Exercise Faith on Jesus Christ, and that will make the least Sincere
Service acceptable to God. Whereas Without Faith it is Impossible to please
Him. Heb.11.6.

5. Be Frequent and Fervent in Secret Duties, and that will fit us for Family
Duties.

Obj. 2. But I am a Poor man, I cannot Spare Time to Attend these Duties, least
my Family Want thereby.

Ans. I. What Man! Do thou want Time? Can thou not afford One Hour, to the
Service of that God who gives thee Twenty Four Hours Every Day, For thy Worldly
Affairs?

2. Trust GOD, that thou shall not loose by the time thou Expendest in His
Service. He has Promised, that if we Honnour the Lord with our Substance, Our
Earnes shall be filled, Prove.3.10. He Challenges His People to Prove Him, and
see if He will not Open the Windows of Heaven, and Rain down a Blessing, that
there shall not be Room to Receive it. Mal. 3.10.

3. Do you not Squander away much more time; than these Duties would take up?
In Unseasonable Sleeping, Smoking, Drinking, Company Keeping, In Hearing or
Telling News; Yea it may be Worse than that, In Reproaching, Slandering, and
Backbiteing your Neighbors; Spend less time in these things; and there will
Remain Sufficient time, for all Duties both of Our General and Particular
Calling. In a word, Devote a Proportion of Every Day unto God, and He will
Bless the Rest, so as shall fully make you Amends for so doing.

Obj. 3. But, There are many Grown Persons in my Family, I am Ashamed to attend
These Duties before them.

Ans. I. This is a Shame, which we have reason to be Ashamed of, and Humbled
for; What ashamed! Of our Religion, Our Duty, Our Glory, Our GOD.

2. All the Rest in our Families, are our Inferiors. It argues great holly and
Weakness, to be Ashamed before such as are Our Inferiors.

3. And Lastly, If we are now Ashamed of the Service and Worship of God; Our
Lord Jesus Christ will be Ashamed of Us, when He comes in the Glory of His
Father, with the Holy Angles, Mark 8.38.

To Conclude, We that are Now before the Lord, are all of us Concerned in
Families; being either In or Under Family-Government. It is of Special
Concernment, that we do see to our Desires, Designs, Resolutions, and
Endeavors, in those Duties Incumbent on us; that we may Walk in our Places,
and Stations, with an Upright Heart, in every Way of Serving, Worshipping, and
Glorifying the LORD: Who is yet Pleased, to afford us so much Peace, in our
Borders, and Health, in our Dwellings. That He may still Delight to Do For us,
and Abide With us, as He was with our Fathers; and may Never Leave us nor
Forsake us. Let us then be Faithful, and Constant, in Serving the Lord, Doing
our Duty with Diligence, Suffering the Will of God with Patience, Going on to
the Last, Holding out to the End, and being Faithful unto Death: That in the
day of Account, we may be able to say, with Holy Boldness, before the Great
Judge: Here we Are, and those of Our Families, which the Lord was Graciously
Pleased, to betrust us with the Care, Education, and Government of; And we have
Brought them Up, in the Nurture and Admonition of the LORD. Then shall we,
together with them, Receive His Well Done, Good and Faithful Servants: Enter
into Our Masters Joy: And be made Partakers, of that Everlasting Blessedness,
which shall Assuredly be the Portion, of Every Servant, whom his Lord when he
Comes, shall find So Doing. AMEN.

FINIS.

