CHRIST'S FIDELITY The only Shield AGAINST SATAN'S MALIGNITY. ASSERTED in a
SERMON Delivered at SALEM-VILLAGE, the 24 th of March, 1692. Being Lecture day
there, and a time of Public Examination, of some Suspected for WITCHCRAFT.

By Deodat Lawson, formerly Preacher of the Gospel there.

Rev. 12. 12 Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and of the S ea, for the Devil
is come down unto you, having Great Wrath, because he knows that he has but
a short time. Romans 16. 20. And the God of Peace shall Bruise Satan under, your
Feet shortly, etc. Boston Printed, by B. Harris, and Sold by Nicholds Buttolph,
next to Guttridg's Coffee-House, 1693.

Licensed according to Order.

To the Worshipful AND Worthily Honored Bartholomew Gidney John Hathorne
Jonathan Corwin Esqrs.
Together with the REVEREND Mr. John Higginson Pastor, AND Mr. Nicholas Neyes
Teacher Of the Church of Christ at SALEM.

THIS Discourse, concerning CHRIST'S Prevailing Intercession, against SATAN'S
Malicious Operations: Being Delivered in a Congregation of that Vicinity, where
most of them were present, as a Token of his Sincere Respects and Observance,
is humbly Offered and Dedicated by Deodat Lawson.

HAving Perused this Discourse, Entitled, Christ's Fidelity the only Shield,
against Satan's Malignity. We are willing, to show so much Respect, to the
Author, and his Friends; as to signify: That we Apprehend several Weighty,
Profitable, and Seasonable Truths, are therein soberly Explained; some of the
Mysterious Methods, and Malicious Operations of Satan, modestly Discussed; the
main Scope of this Excellent Subject, by Scripture and Argument solidly
Confirmed; And the whole Suitably applied to All sorts of persons. That the
Blessing of the Lord that has Chosen Jerusalem, may accompany it, to the
Spiritual Benefit, of all that shall peruse it; and that the Author, may have
much of the Grace and Spirit of Christ, to assist him in his Labors, and so
become an Instrument, of doing much Service For, and bringing Great Glory To
the Name of God, in his Day, and Generation, is the Prayer of,

Your Servants for Christ's Sake. Increase Mather, Coll. Harv. Praes. Charles
Morton James Allen. Samuel Willard. John Bailey Cotton Mather.


To all my Christian Friends and Acquaintance; the Inhabitants of SALEM VILLAGE.
Christian Friends.
THE Sermon here presented unto you, was Delivered in your Audience; by that
unworthy Instrument, who did formerly spend some years among you, in the work
of the Ministry, though attended with manifold sinful failings and infirmities,
for which I do implore, the Pardoning Mercy of God in Jesus Christ, and entreat
from you the Covering of Love. As this was prepared, for that Particular
Occasion, when it was delivered amongst you; so the Publication of it, is to be
Particularly recommended to your service.

My hearts desire, and Continual Prayer, to God for you ALL is; that you may be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ, and accordingly that all means He is
using with you, by Mercies and Afflictions, Ordinances and Providence, may be
Sanctified, to the building you up in G race and Holiness, and preparing you
for the Kingdom of Glory. We are told by the Apostle, Acts 14. 22: That through
many Tribulations, we must enter into the Kingdom of God. Now since (besides
your share in the Common Calamities, under the burden whereof, this poor people
are groaning at this time the Righteous and Holy God, has been pleased to
permit a sore and grievous affliction to befall you such as can hardly be said
to be Common to men viz. By giving liberty to SATAN; to range and rage amongst
you, to the Torturing the Bodies, and Distracting the Minds, of some of the
(...) sheep and Lambs, of the Lord Jesus Christ. And (which is yet more
astonishing) he who is THE ACCUSER of the Brethren, endeavors to introduce as
Criminal, some of the visible Subjects of Christ's Kingdom, by whose sober and
godly Conversation in times past, we could draw no other (...) than that they
were real members of His Mystical Body, representing them, as the Instruments
of his malice, against their Friends and Neighbors.

I thought meet thus to give you the best assistance I could, to help you out
of your distresses. And since the ways of the Lord, in his Permissive, as well
as Effective Providence, are unsearchable and his doings past finding out. And
Pious souls, are at a loss, what will be the Issue of these things. I Therefore
how my knees, unto the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ that he would
cause all grace to abound to you, and in you, that your poor place may be
delivered, from those breaking and ruining Calamities, which are threatened as
the Pernicious consequences of Satan's malicious Operations. And that you may
not be left to bite and devour one another, in your Sacred or Civil society, in
your Relations or Families: to the destroying much good, and promoting much
evil among you: So as, in any kind, to weaken the hands, or discourage the
Heart, of your Reverend and Pious Pastor, whose family also, being so much
under the influence of these troubles, Spiritual sympathy, cannot but stir you
up, to assist him as at all times, so Especially at such a time as this: He (as
well his neighbors) being under such awful Circumstances. As to this
discourse; my humble desire, and Endeavor is, that it may appear to be,
according to the form of sound words and in Expressions every way Inteligible
to the meanest Capacities. It pleased GOD; of his Free Grace, to give it some
acceptance, with those that heard it, and some that heard of it; desired me to
Transcribe it, and afterward to give way to the Printing of it. I present it
therefore, to your Acceptance; and Commend it, to the Divine Benediction: And
that it my Please the ALMIGHTY GOD, to manifest his Power, in putting an end,
to your sorrows of this Nature, by Bruiseing Satan under your feet shortly.
Caussing these and all other YOUR and OUR troubles, to work together for our
good Now; and salvation in the day of the Lord; Is the unfeigned desire, and
shall be the uncessant Prayer of,

Less then the Least, of all those that serve, in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus.
Deodat Lawson.

TO THE Reader.
AMongst all the great and sore Afflictions, with which the Sovereign and Holy
God, has visited this his Poor People; there is none more full of amazing
Considerations, and Distressing Influences, than that of his Permitting Satan,
to Range and Rage in the midst of us, by his direful Operations Afflicting some
in a most fearful and unusual manner, and accordingly accusing others, as the
Instruments of his malice, in those Diabolical Tortures; And how much further
it may proceed, or longer it shall continue, is only known to him, Who gives
no Account of his Matters, to any of the Children of men.

I being Occasionally at S alem-Village, upon a visit when this Affliction was
newly; come upon them, was desired to Preach among them; and this Discourse
(for the substance of it) was then Delivered. The Copy whereof being desired,
by some Friends here, who were willing to Contribute toward the publication of
it; Not knowing but that God which gives S eed to the Sower, and Bread to the
Eater. Who chooses the things that are not as if they were; having pleased to
make it acceptable to the Hearers, might also vouchsafe to make it profitable
to the Readers. I have yielded to their desire, that it might be thus exposed
to public view. Which also I have, much the rather done, that I may (the best
I can at so great a distance as the other England) make humble tender of most
dutiful Observances, to my Honored Father (if yet on this side the Mansions of
Eternal Rest) as a Pepper-corn acknowledgment, of all his unrequiteable Care,
Cast, and Pains, in my Education; Entreating his Acceptance, of what I hope I
may truly say, the Lord has brought unto me, that his Soul may Bless the
before he dies: And that I may obtain the continuance of those servent Prayers,
and affectionate benedictions, in the Name of God; which I have throughout my
whole life been under the refreshing influences of; but more especially, since
I was called to the Ministry; as appears by a Letter directed to me, at
Martha's Vineyard, Dated January 20 1676. wherein he bespeaks me, and God for
me, in such Expressions as these. And will the Lord Remember for me his
Glorious Name; A God hearing Prayer; and make my heart rejoice even mine, in a
Son whose Eyes the Lord has opened, and whose heart as Japhets he has
persuaded and enlarged, to serve him in that work, whereunto Parents had
designed him; and for which they begged him as a loan. And has the Lord
allured you: and brought you into a wilderness, to speak comfortably unto you;
and give you Vineyards from thence, And will the Lord Indeed, Zach 10, 9. Take
of my seed, and sow among the Gentiles, to remember him in far countries that
they may live with their Children, and turn again. Gen 49: 18. I wait for by
salvation O Lord. And Praise waits in silence, from my soul in, Zion, when he
shall further evidence his Return to you in mercy, and your Return to him in
Covenanted Duty. Now the good Lord; who has pleased to put you into his
service, put a Rich anointing of his Spirit upon you, Make you Wisehearted,
skilful, Faithful, Painful, and Successful in the service of his Tabernacle;
and set many a Pearl in your Crown, in Conversion of Sinners, and Edification
of Converts. The Lord T he Angel of the Covenant, that Redeems my soul from all
evil, Bless you, and lay the Foundations of a Family for you in Righteousness:
so building up my house in yours, and yours in wholly a Right seed, that may be
accounted to him for a generation, that he may build up his own in both. (that
so you and yours may do worthily in Ephratha, and Famously in Israel. Now to
him that is able to keep you from falling, and to Build you up, and give you an
Inheritance, among them that are Sanctified.

I Commend you with Incessant Prayers, etc. With the same fervor of Holy Zeal
and Affection, he expressed himself by Letters to Mr. Thomas Mayhew, late
Governor of Martha's Vineyard; that good old Simeon, who about Ten Years ago,
had his Nunc dimittis, into the Mansions of Everlasting Peace; particularly
upon the Receipt of Letters, from the Ministers of Boston concerning me. Thus
his Letter begins. I understand by Letters from my Son, that the Lord has
lengthened out your life, to a good old age, and Crowned your gray Head with a
Gracious Heart, found in the way of Righteousness, which I longed to hear, and
rejoice much at the hearing of; as good News from a far Country; But much more,
in those Concomitant Letters, from several Ministers, whose Praise is in the
Gospel; Recommending my Son Deodat with their concurrent Testimonies, of his
walking in the Truth, with his Yoke Fellow, in all Godly Conversation, as Heirs
of the Grace of Life, for which my heart rejoices in the Lord, as seeing the
Priat of the Fingers, as a Return of Prayer upon it. Blessed be the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, into whose Living Arms, his Dying Mother (within a
few weeks after his birth,) by the hand of Faith presented him, and by Prayer
Dedicated him to his Service in the Gospel. And Oh! that these pious Wishes,
and fervent prayers, may be heard and answered by the Lord accordingly.

However the serious Consideration, of such a solemn Designation of me, by
both my Parents, to the service of God in the Ministry; Seconded by my Fathers
proportionable endeavors, in my Education (both in School and College
learneing) has engaged my heart and soul, to attend thereunto, if so the will
of the Lord be. And whereas by my Fathers being silenced, and his Estate much
weakened, I was hindered of some Academical Preferments, and after-Six Years
Standing at College, necessitated to make digression to secular affairs; yet I
found from time to time, the Sovereign Providence of God, in a continued
series, disappointing, and frowning upon me: so that I trust, the Lord has
been by his Grace and Spirit, carrying on a good work in my Soul, thereby the
better to fit me, for future service to him and his People in my generation.
Under the influence of these considerations, I have still reserved my self at
liberty, from worldly entanglements any further then duty bound me, to prevent
Infidel-Negligence of my Family. I Tim. 5. 8. And I do seriously declare; that
whatsoever has hindered, my whole and sole, devoting my Time, Strength, and
All, to the service of God in the Ministry; has been for many years, and still
is, my burden and not my choice.

Although the Unkindnesses, and Reflections, hard Travails and difficulties; I
have met with, in that service, had long ere now, Totally discouraged me, had
not the Lord by the assistance of his grace, strongly inclined me thereunto.
Out of design to glorify God therein, and not for any secular advantages
accruing thereby. And I do further profess, that I do earnestly desire, by
divine assistance to Do all, and Be all, unto the Glory of God; declaring, that
whatsoever either in word or deed, I have been overtaken by, tending to the
dishonor of God, or the grief of any sincere souls, I do desire, and will
endeavor, by the assistance of his Grace and Spirit to reform it; though never
so pleasing to the Flesh, or agreeable to Natural Constitution, and be humbly
thankful, to such as shall give me notice thereof. Or did I know and duty I
allowed my self in the neglect of, I would by the help of the same grace, come
up to the practice of it, though never so contrary to Flesh and Blood. And
wherein I have at any time, given just offense, to the meanest of those that
fear the Lord, I do heartily beg their Pity and Prayers, that the God of all
grace, would pardon and heal, what is past for his names sake. strengthening my
soul, in all holy resolutions, and endeavors, to walk more Circumspectly for
the future, Redeeming the time, or trading with it, to my Spiritual and Eternal
advantage; in all things Adorning the Doctrine, of God my Savior.

And although, in thus obliging my soul to God, I do labor under many sinful
frailties and Infirmities yet the sincerity of my heart in the maine, is now
before the Omniscient God, and will be revealed, when Jesus Christ shall Judge
the secrets of all hearts, at his appearance and his Kingdom. I commit these
things to the Readers Consideration, and the Ensuing discourse to his Perusal:
Earnestly entreating, the incessant Prayers, of all my Relations, Friends and
Readers, that the Lord would please to assist me, by his Holy Spirit to Do or
Suffer, whatsoever he shall call me unto, in my passage through this vail o
tears: To the Glory of his Great Name, and the good of others, that so I may,
in the Day of account, inherit that Blessedness, which shall be the everlasting
portion, of that servant whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so doing. Who
am

The Chief of Sinners, and the Least of Saints; Deodat Lawson.

CHRIST'S FIDELITY The only Shield AGAINST Satan's Malignity.
Zech. 3. 2. And the LORD said unto SATAN, the LORD Rebuke thee, O SATAN; even
the LORD that has Chosen Jerusalem, Rebuke thee: Is not this a Brand plucked
out of the Fire?
IT seemed good to the Great and Glorious God, the Infinite and Eternal ELOHIM
in the beginning, to Create the Heavens and the Earth; and together with and in
the Third Heavens, a numberless number of glorious Angels; that were Ordained
to do his Pleasure, and obey his Commands. To these he appointed (as a trial of
their obedience) a Ministration in this lower world, for the good of the
Children of Men, and especially of the Heirs of Salvation. But a number of
these Intelligent Spirits, being unwilling (as some Learned conceive) to yield
their Service to man, of so much an inferior nature to themselves being made
of Earth: They Rebelled against the Will of their Sovereign Lord and Creator;
For which their borrid Transgression, they were by the Righteous Judgment of
God; thrust down from that Glorious Place, which was once Appointed to be their
own Habitation, into the Lake of Eternal Perdition, there to be Reserved in
Chains of Darkness, to the Judgment of the Great Day. Jude 6. SATAN himself
then, and all his accursed Legions being Fallen into a miserable and
irrecoverable Estate, are filled with Envy at and Malice against, all Mankind;
and do set themselves by all ways and means, to work their Ruin and
Destruction for ever: Opposing to the utmost, all Persons and Things, Appointed
by the Lord Jesus Christ, as Means or Instruments of their Comfort here, or
Salvation hereafter. Hence when Joshua (the Type of JESUS) stood to Minister,
as High Priest before the Lord, to make Atonemement for the People of his
Covenant; SATAN stands at his Right Hand, to withstand and oppose him in his
Ministration: which the Blessed Jesus (the Antitype of Joshua) taking notice
of, he does according to his Sovereign and Irresistible Power and Authority
Command Deliverances to his Chosen Ones, by Stilling the Clamor and
Suppressing the Power and Malice of SATAN, their Grand Adversary and Implacable
Opposer, as in the Words now before us; And the LORD said unto SATAN, the LORD
Rebuke thee, O SATAN, etc.

THESE Words are part of the Prophecy of Zechariah, whose Name by
Interpretation, signifies the Remembrance or Memory of the Lord, and his Title
agrees to the very Nature of this Prophecy; which was to put them in mind, what
GOD had done for them, in delivering them from Captivity, and what they had
done against him by Iniquity; that so they might be awakened unto Reformation
of what was amiss. He was the Second Prophet, that came from the Lord to the
People of Israel, after their Return from the Babylonish Captivity. He was
Contemporary and Colleague with Haggai, beginning to Prophecy but two Months
after him, and backing what the other had said, more briefly, with more full
and mysterious Testimonies; especially as to the Coming of the Messiah, etc. He
Warns them of the Amazing Revolutions, were coming upon them, in the
Destruction of Jerusalem, and the Second Temple by the Romans, and Foretells
the Rejection of the Jews, for their Sins, and especially, for Rejecting of the
MESSIAH, who was to be Porn among them according to the Flesh. The Prophecy
contains then, Exhortations to true Repentance, dispersed throughout the
Prophecy: Predictions of many Blessings and Mercies to the Faithful, relating
to the Times of the Gospel, viz. The Coming of the LORD JESUS, the Calling of
the Gentiles, and the Protection of his Church to the end of the World,
notwithstanding all the Rage and Fury of his and their Enemies; together with
severe Comminations against the Enemies of the Jews, and against the Impenitent
among themselves; Intermingling Encouragements to Joshua, and all Leaders, both
in Civil and Sacred Order, to be Faithful in the Discharge of Duty incumbent on
them in all respects as the matter might require. These are the principal
matters in the whole Prophecy.

In this Chapter, we have an account of Zechariahs Fourth Vision, concerning
the Restoration and Establishment of the Priesthood, and Temple-Worship; and
the Comforts Redounding to the Church from those Administrations; Typically by
Joshua the Brand, Spiritually and Mystically by JESUS the Branch.

Particularly, First we have the Conflict of the A ngel of the Lord, that is
Christ, against SATAN on behalf of Joshua, whom, the Mischievous (yet seemingly
zealous) Devil, (transforming into an Angel of light) objected against, and
despised, by reason of his filthy garments; verse, 2, 3.

Secondly, SATAN being rebuked for his malice, the cause of his objection is
removed, by taking away the filthy garments, and giveing him change of
raiment; verse 4. And in order to his New inauguration, or Enstailment in the
Priesthood, there is bestowed on him, those ornaments which might Represent
him, full of Splendor, and fitly qualified for that Office, verse. 5.

Upon his Installment, the Angel of the Lord gives him a renewed Charge, in a
Solemn Protestation of the Continuance of his Office, and that he would be with
him, and assist him in all Administrations, that were according to his own
Institution, verse 6, 7.

Thirdly, We have GOD the FATHER, Revealing the Lord Jesus C hrist, the Great
and True High Priest.

First, Under the Title and Metaphor, of the BRANCH, Verse 8.

Secondly, of a STONE with Eyes, being full of Providence and Wisdom for the
Church Verse 9. Adjoining the Special Effects, of his Coming, in Taking away
Iniquity, latter end of Verse 9. And in Propagation, and Enlargement of his
Kingdom and Interest, under the Gospel; Verse 10.

Here then, In the first Verse, We have the Representation of Joshua the
High Priest, or Great Priest, as the Hebrew, who was so by Descent, a great
Officer in the Church, however mean he was in his Garb, and being a Public
Person, Represented the whole Church, And as he C onducted the People out of
Babylon, and Rebuilt the Temple, was a Type of Christ, both in his Name and
Office. (2) We have the posture of this Joshua; standing before the Angel of
the Lord, the Angel of the Covenant, as he is elsewhere called. Now Joshua is
brought in Standing (1) as a Servant, to show Inferiority as sitting, denotes
Dignity, and Superiority; As a Servant deriving Authority, in his Office; from
his Lord; As a Servant manifesting all Readiness, and Reverence in Obedience.
As a Servant, to be by his Lord directed, as also under his Eye, for Support
and Protection. Or,

2. Standing, as a guilty Person; As one unworthy to be employed, in such
Eminent service; And as a Public Person, had much to answer for the sins of
the People, as well as his own.

3. Here is the Opposition Joshua met with, And SATAN the Adversary; whose
malice appears, against all good men, and good things in the world.

4. We have the Posture, and Order of SATAN in Opposing, and accusing of
Joshua; standing at his Right Hand the Right Hand is the place of the accuser
that being.

1. The Weapon Hand.

2. The Working Hand. Satan the accuser or opposer there, takes his
advantageous station.

5. We have the end of Satan's of standing; viz. To resist him, to oppose his
Execution of the Priests Office, the words in the Hebrew signify the
withstander stood to withstand him, both to accuse, and oppose him.

In this second verse we have the LORD appearing in the vindication of Joshua,
from the malicious accusation of Satan, according to his Covenant Mercy, and
Special Favor showed to him, and the People in delivering them from the
Babylonish Captivity; Particularly Here we Note.

1. The Person speaking, the LORD, that is Jesus Christ, set forth by a Title
of Glorious Sovereignty and Power, the LORD-REDEEMER, and Restorer of Mercy, to
His Covenant People. The LORD-MEDIATOR, King and Head of His Church; He before
whom, Joshua but now stood, as a SOVEREIGN LORD, appears for him, as a Glorious
Advocate, and Intercessor.

2. We have The Person spoken to, and that it Satan the ADVERSARY and Enemy, as
the Livel ever was and the Notation of the Title here given to him holds forth.
(3.) The Testimony of the Blessed Jesus, against the cursed Satan, the Enemy of
Gods Covanant. People; The Lord Rebuke thee, O Satan, etc.

Where Note we, First, The Glorious Name, and Sovereign Authority, he uses for
the Repelling of Satan, and Repressing his Malice, and Opposition, Viz. The
Dreadful Name, of GOD the FATHER, the Great and Everlasting JEHOVAH. (2) The
Sovereign and Powerful Manner of his Checking Satan, and that is, The Lord
Rebuke thee, O Satan, he does not stand to dispute the matter with him, but
stlenceth him at once, and the reduplication of the Rebuke points out of us
(1.) S atans Earnestness in his Opposition; he stands in need of Rebukes, again
and again, before he would yield and begone. (2) CHRIST's Pity, T enderness,
and Fidelity, in opposition to Satan's Impudence and Importunity: Thirdly, We
have the Rebuke armed and strengthened, by Arguments drawn from the C ovenant
of GOD, with Joshua and the People, in that Expression T he God that has
chosen Jerusalem. (4) There is also Argument drawn, from that S pecial
Salvation of which Joshua and the People had so lately been made partakers; (
qs. d.) It is but a vain thing for thee, O S atan, to move me against them, I
know their faults, but I will now admit no further accusations, being resolved
to perfect my Mercy to them, Is not this a Brand plucked out of the Fire? The
Hebrew Word rendered Brand, signifies Light and Sparkling on Fire, so that it
would have been utterly burnt up, if the Lord had not been exceeding Merciful;
and therefore nothing but Diabolical C ruelty, could put it into the Fire
again, the like Expression we have, Amos 4. 11. Ye are as Brand plucked out of
the Burning, The Sum is here then; I have ( qs. d.) but now graciously
delivered them, and I will not by any of thy Malicious C lamours, be moved to
Reject or Afflict them.

The Doctrine then is:

That the LORD JESUS CHRIST, is the only Prevalent Intercessor with GOD the
FATHER, for the relief of those that are in Covenant with him, and are made
partakers of his special mercy; when they are under the most threatening and
amazing distresses, that by therage and malice of Satan they can be exposed
unto.

The whole Explication, and Confirmation of this Doctrine, will be dispatched,
in the Illustration of these Propositions contained therein.

PROPOSITION I.
Satan is the ADVERSARY and Enemy. He is the Original, the Fountain of malice,
the Instigator of all Contrariety, Malignity and Enmity; It is to be observed,
this Title is here given to the Devil in our Text, and Context, on account of
the Malicious Opposition, he made to Joshua as a Type of Christ, and
representative of the People, for it is noted by Critics the Hebrew word Satan
signifies the most Universal Opposition both in words and deeds; and is a
Radical Noun, derived from the Verb, which is in the close of the foregoing
verse, rendered Resist, Oppose, or Withstand. Hence it is read frequently,
Adversary, importing the same with the Greek. Word 'ANTIDIXOS, used I Pet. 5.
8. which signifies not barely Adversary, but Adversary in Cause, S uit or
Action; The Scope then of this Proposition is couched under the Name or Epithet
here given to the Devil, which is SATAN, the Adversary, or ARCH-ENEMY: And this
Title is given him, in two eminent cases, by our Savior himself, as in the
Parable of the good Seed and Tares; Mat. 13.28. An Enemy has done this, which
our Lord himself declares, verse 39. in Opening the Parable, is the Devil.
Again, Luke 10. 19. Over all the Power of the Enemy, which is Interpreted of
the Devil, or Unclean Spirits, Verse. 20. In this Rejoice not that the S pirits
are subject to you, but rather etc.

In a word, what was foretold concerning Ishmael, is in the most absolute sense
true of him, Genesis 16. 12 His Hand is against every Man, and every Man's Hand is
(or should be) against him. Such an Universal and Implacable Adversary and
Enemy is this S atan. But to Instance briefly in the Objects of his Enmity

1. First He is Gods Enemy. He sets himself against the Infinite and Eternal
GOD, All Satan's designs and Operations; do strike and level, at the very being
of God; he would dethrone and Un-God him, if it were possible. He fell from
Gods favor at first, by rebellion, and hence by his righteous Judgment, was
doomed to continue, under the power of irreconcilable enmity, against him for
ever. He is an Enemy to all the Divine Attributes, and most glorious Persons in
all their holy designs and operations. To all the Divine Attributes, Negative,
Positive, Relative, and Endeavors by Blasphemous denying them to Eclipse the
glory of them; he was a liar in and from the beginning, against the Truth and
Holiness of GOD; Genesis 3. 1. Yea has GOD said etc. He puts them, upon scrupling
the truth of the threatening and in the fourth verse; down right denies it, ye
shall not surely by etc. Herein also he reflected upon the Holiness of God, by
which he was engaged in that threatening, to advance his own glory; viz. The
glory of his justice, by punishing man's transgression with Dying the Death as
is denounced, Genesis 2. 17. Thou shall surely die, or die the Death.

Thus the Unclean lying satan, set himself against these Essential, and
Inseparable Attributes, of the Blessed God: and in the same manner, does he
Eclipse the rest, so far as he is permitted to do it. Again, he is an Enemy to
all the most glorious Persons in the Godhead; FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST, in
their Joint Determinations, and Eternal Decrees, concerning the Redemption, and
Salvation of sinners; by and under the Mediator; and he is an Enemy to them in
their Distinct Operations, in a way of Efficiency, for the promoting that which
is Holy, and Just, and Good. To GOD the FATHER in Managing his Eternal Purposes
of Grace, to Sinners by and in the New Covenant, and manifesting his Electing
Love unto them, which is Primarily and properly ascribed to him, 2 These. 2. 13.
As also, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5. Of these Purposes, Designs and Resolutions, Satan
mightily opposes the Execution: As in this Instance of Joshua; GOD the FATHER,
had a Decree of Mercy to him, and to his Covenant People Represented by him;
Satan stands in Opposition to that Gracious Resolution. He is an Enemy to GOD
the SON, to God made Man, and the more, because he was Made Flesh, and showed
such Favor to Mankind, as to Tabernacle among them; John 1. 14. And indeed,
this Humiliation of the SON of GOD being made Man gave Satan advantage to show
and exercise his Enmity against him, (i. e.) as he was the Seed of the Woman,
for as he was the SON of GOD, he could not any way come at him, being God over
all Blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. But when once Incarnate, and become an
Inhabitant of this Lower World, where Satan Ranges to and fro continually; then
he Spits his Venemcus Malice against him, To cut him off by Herod's bloody
Decree, Mat. 2. 16. To Overthrow his Obedience, and draw him to Sin; Mat. 4. to
11. To Destroyhim, by stirring up Judas to Betray him into the Hands of his
Enemies, Luke 22. 3. Satan Entered into Judas, etc. Again, he is the Enemy of
the HOLY GHOST, as he is the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29. The Spirit of Truth
John 14. 17. The Spirit of Holiness, or Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4. ^0. And his being
so called, imports the Holiness of his Nature, and Operations, in opposition to
the Unclean Spirit, and his Operations. Hence Annanias is said to Lie against
the HOLY GHOST, or Spirit of Truth, Acts 5. 3. And indeed, this Unclean Spirit,
or Grand Fomenter of Spiritual Wickedness, is over doing all he can, to Oppose
and do Despite unto the Holy Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 29. By stirring up men
to Resist him Acts 7. 51. Thus Satan is an Enemy to GOD CREATOR, to
GOD-REDEEMER, to GOD SANCTIFIER, in all their Operations, and Designs of Grace.

2. Satan is the GRAND Enemy of all mankind He is full of Enmity, against the
Woman and all her Seed, as Eve was the Mother of all living; Genesis 3. 15. And I
will put enmity betwixt thee and the woman etc.

Now Enmity, denotes a principle of Irreconcilable Hatred, an Innate C
ontrariety; which vents it self in all manner of Endeavor, to prevent the
good, and promote the hurt, ruin and destruction of the Object. This Enmity of
Satan, appears in the Names given him in Scripture, relating to man, as the
Object of his Malice; He is called THE A ccuser, even of the Brethren, Rev 12
10. THE Tempter, Mat. 4. 3. The Devourer 1 Pet. 5. 8. The Destroyer, hence the
Easters Antichrist, is so named in two Languages, Abaddon in the Hebrew; and
Apollyon in the Greek Rev. 9. 11. because he acts in his horrible Destructions
and Devastations of People and Kingdoms as the inspired Instrument substitute
and representative of Satan the Grand Destroyer. It appears also, by Allusions
made in the Sacred Pages, to Creatures that are a dread to man He is called a
Serpent, Genesis 3. 13. T he Old Serpent Rev. 20. 2. A Dragon, Rev. 12. 13. A I
you, I Pet. 5. 8. Now put all these three together, that Satan has the
subtilty of the Serpent, the malice of the Dragon, and strength of the Lion,
and suppose all these to be improved to the utmost vigor, of Angelical
Activity; and we must believe him to be a most Formidable Enemy. He as such,
did set upon, and was too hard for our First Parents, striking at the Stock and
Root of all Mankind, in order to the certain confusion of the whole Progeny and
Posterity: which Hellish Design had undoubtedly succeeded to full effect, had
not the promise of the MESSIAH been Revealed to Lost Man, to lay hold of for
his Restoring to a State of Reconciliation, and consequently to Eternal
Salvation. The Sum is, Satan being doomed to the Chains of Eternal Darkness,
for his Treason against his Creator, and Spite against Man, his
Fellow Creature; swells with cursed Enmity, against the children of men, yea,
and the adopted children of GOD, so long as they are in this world; and being a
spiritual Enemy, he is the more formidable, because an UNEQUAL match, for poor
mortal flesh: For though by his fall, he lost his Angelical Holiness, yet he
did not loose his Angelical nature, so that his Enmity must needs be Exceeding
fierce. and Penetrateing, and although his Powers are much debased, from what
they were in his State of integrity, yet do they vastly exceed, the most
Elevated Powers of-any mere mortal whatsoever. But

Particularly here; First, He is the Enemy of the SOULS of men. And indeed,
this is that he drives at, in all his designs, and operations, and to catch
devour and destroy SOULS; Hence when he draws wretched mortals, to Contract
with him; He bargains with them, that after the time of his service to them, he
will have their Souls, viz Intending to Torment them for ever.

He is a S pirit, and hence strikes at the Spiritual part the most Excellent
(Constituent) part of man. Primarily disturbing, and Interrupting, the Animal
and Vital Spirits, he maliciously Operates upon, the more Common Powers of the
Soul, by strange and frightful Representations to the Fancy, or Imagination,
and by violent, Tortures of the body, often threatening to extinguish life; as
has been observed, in those that are afflicted amongst us. And not only so,
but he vents his malice, in Diabolical Operations, on the more sublime and
distinguishing faculties, of the Rational Soul, raising Mists of Darkness, and
ignorance, in the Understanding. Ephesians. 4. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 4: Stirring up, the
innate Rebellion of the will, though he cannot force it unto sin. Introducing
Universal Ataxy, and inordinacy, in the Passions, both Love and Hatred, the
Cardinat or Radical affections, with all other that accompany or flow from
them; Hence we read of Hating God, who ought above all to be loved; Romans 1. 30.
And loving the world (i e) the Pleasures, Treasures, and Honors thereof, in
such a degree as is inconsistent, with the love of the chief good; I John 2.
15. James 4. 4. And although it must be acknowledged, that there is a Corrupt
Principle in Fallen Man; yet it is Satan, that frequently moves it unto act,
and all he intends thereby is the Captivating the whole Soul, and by
consequence the Whole Man, to Disobedience of the Command of GOD; that by his
Holy, and Righteous Judgment, his Wrath might be Revealed to the utmost,
against the Souls and Bodies of Impenitent Sinners, Cursing them to Everlasting
Burnings, Prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41. And thus he would
destroy all Souls, did not Divine Grace prevent.

Secondly, Satan is the ENEMY of the BODIES of Men. The Soul being the better
part, is the principal object of his Malice, but together with that (as an
Instrument by which it Exerteth its Powers in the State of Union) the Body is
often sorely afflicted by him, when he cannot obtain leave to go any further.
And here

1. Sometimes he brings Distress upon the Bodies of Men, by malignant
Operations in, and Diabolical Impressions on, the Spirituous Principle or
Vehicle of life and Motion. This we have set before us in the case of the
Possessed, Mark. 9. 18. and wheresoever he takes him, he teareth him, and be
foameth, and gnasheth with his Teeth, etc, Now although Actual Possessions,
were most frequent and observable, while our SAVIOR was on the Earth, and it
seems to be so much permitted in that time, that the Eternal Power and GODHEAD,
of the Lord Jesus might appear, in the subduing Satan, and Suppressing his
Tyranny, over the Souls and Bodies of the Children of Men: Yet there are
certainly some Lower Operations of Satan, (whereof there are sundry Examples
among us) which the Bodies of Men and Women, are liable unto. And whosoever,
has carefully observed these things, must needs be Convinced, that the Motions
of the Persons Afflicted, both as to the Manner, and as to the violence of
them, are the mere effects of Diabolical Malice and Operations, and that it
cannot rationally be imagined, to proceed from any other cause whatsoever.

2. Sometimes by Moving and Exasperating the Corrupt Particles of the Blood,
and vitiated Humors of the Body, be does (by God's Permission) Smite the
Bodies of Men, with Grievous, Pestilential and Loathsome Diseases; Of this JOB
was a special Instance, Job 2. 7. S o S atan went and smote Job with sore
Boiles, etc. It is not expressed, what Disease it was, with which the Devil
smote Job; but certainly it Seized him, with the utmost degree of Malignity and
Loathsomeness, that natural causes, under the influence of Diabolical Malice,
could produce; and we may rationally conceive that never any man, had that
Disease or those Boiles (as Job had them) who outlived the Tormenting Pains,
and Malignity thereof. Neither can we deny, but that Satan may (by Divine
Permission) spread the Contagious Attomes of Epidemical Diseases, in the Aerie
Region (the Territory assigned to him) who is Prince of the Power of the Air,
Ephesians. 2. 2) And make them Penetrate, so as to render them the more Afflictive
and Destructive to the Bodies of such as are Infected by them. This he did by
Permission (not only for Trial as in Jobs case) but also for the Punishment of
Sinners; hence we read of his being employed sometimes by the Great God, as the
Executioner of his just Revenges, in the Destruction of his and his People
Enemies; and thus he was among the Egyptians when the Lord plagued them, Psalm.
78. 49, 50. By sending Evil Angels among them. He spared not their Souls from
Death, but gave them over to the Pestilence. Besides, I may not insist here,
How Satan by wicked men his Instruments brings outward Calamities, Sorrows,
Pains and Punishments on the Bodies even of the Children of God; of whom as the
Apostle declares the World was not worthy, Heb. 11. 37, 38. They Wandered in
Sheepskins and Goat Skins, in Dent and Caves of the Earth, etc. by reason of
the malicious Persecutions of wicked Tyrants, the Instruments of Satan, and who
doubtless were hurried on by his Instigations. And surely what is said
concerning Casting into Prison, is likewise true of other Afflictions, as
Scourgings, or any Corporal Punishments for Righteousness sake. That though men
are the Actors, yet it is the Devil, that shall Cast some into Prison, Rev. 2.
10. He is the principal Instigator, in all such Designs for the hurting the
Bodies of men, when not permitted to proceed further, being willing to do all
the mischief that he can, when he cannot do so much as he would: But

Thirdly, Satan vents, his Malice against the very LIVES of men, to cut them
off and destroy them. He is the Prince of Death, that has the Power of Death,
Heb. 2. 14. He is the DESTROYER of all Life, both Spiritual and Corporal. All
his Designs against the Souls and Bodies of men, terminate here, even in the
Weakening or Extinguishing of Life, and when he touches the life of the Body,
he aims at the Life of the Soul: He it was that stirred up Cain, to Commit the
first Murder in the World, when he slew Abcl his Brother, for which he is said
to be of the Wicked One I Joh. 3. 12. (i. e.) Acting from the same principle of
Enmity: as if he were his very Spawn and Offspring. He it was that Raised a
'wind, that smote the House where Jobs Sons and Daughters were, and slew them
all, Job 1. 19. having permission so to do, verse 12. This same Adversary it
was, that stirred up David to Number the People, that so by displeasing GOD,
70000 men might be cut off by the Pestilence; I Chron. 21. 1. 2 Samuel 24. 15.
This Design against the Lives of Men, the GRAND Destroyer has been carrying
on, from the beginning, by stirring up Wars, Tumults, Insurrections, Commotions
and Confusions, amongst People, Nations and Kingdoms, by which means multitudes
of multitudes have fallen in the valley of Destruction, and gone down to the
Congregation of the Dead; the Devil has begotten Pride, Pride has Created
Wars, and Wars promoted Slaughter, and Destructions; so that it is the true
Mark and Character of Satan's Kingdom, that it is Established, Supported, and
Propogated by Malice, Enmity, Wars, Blood, Slaughter, and Destruction of
Mankind.

PROPOSITION II.
That Satan makes it his business to improve all Opportunities and Advantages,
to Exercise his Malice upon the Children of Men. He is an indefatigable, as
well as an implacable Enemy: Thus he was willing to represent himself, as
appears by his answer given to the GREAT GOD, when he inquired of him, Job 2.
2. Whence come thou? Satan said from going to and fro in the earth, etc. (i.
e.) Traversing the Earth, to spy out what mischief he could do, against the
Inhabitants thereof. This is the Argument used by the Apostle P eter, I Pet. 5.
8. Be sober, (i. e.) be in a Holy Frame, to Attend all Duty; Be vigilant, (i.
e.) be careful to avoid all that Sin which might betray you, Because your
Adversary the Devil goes about as a Roaring Lion, seeking whom he may Devour;
here note we his strength, a Lion; his Malice, a Roaring Lion; his Industry, he
goes about; his End and Design seeking whom he may devour: and he exerts his
malice, either (1) Immediately, or (2) Mediately; Of each of these briefly.

1. Immediately and directly, Operating in, and upon the object by his own
power and influence. And indeed his Angelical Activity is such, as does render
him capable to Operate far beyond Humane Power of Resistance, without any
Instrument whatsoever, whenever he has obtained the Divine Permission, and
this he does

1. Sometimes by sudden injections, or suggestions working upon the corrupt
principle, or Original Depravity that is in man. Thus Satan is said to have
filled the hearts of Annanias to Lie against the Holy Ghost, Acts 5. 3,

2. Sometimes by false Representations to the Eyes, or only to the minds of
men, concerning things delightful to the Senses: Of this kind was the
Representation of the Kingdoms of the World to our LORD Jesus Christ, Mat. 4.
8. Some think it was in a Vision, or Illusion, some by pointing at the four
quarters and in words relating the glory thereof; Doctor Tailor judges the
Devil offered the Images, and Representations of them all, sensibly and
actually, in a strange manner, making their Images appear to his Senses, and
not by vision or illusion, which did not so well agree to the perfection of
Christ's mind. But Christ did indeed, see the Images and most glorious
Representations of the World and the Kingdoms thereof. And the better to
persuade him, that he saw the things indeed, he set him on an exceeding High
Mountain; I do the rather conceive this to be the manner, because men by art
can Represent to the Senses in a Glass, the Lively Image of a person or thing,
and Satan certainly can do it much more; and besides, it seems hardly safe to
believe, that the Devil was capable, to impose upon the pure and sinless
imagination of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, by any Illusion whatsoever.

3. Sometimes by Entering into, and Possessing the Souls of the Man; bringing
him unto full Submission, and entire Resignation to his Hellish Designs; that
it is Totally Enslaved him to his Authority and direction. In this manner he
Captivates the whole Soul in all its faculties by seven Spirits (i. e.)
Fullness of Devils, Luke 11. 26. And this may be, in those that are not Bodily
Possessed, and indeed is in a sort, in all Unregenerate SINNERS, as 2 Timothy 2
26. Who are taken Captive by him at his Will; The Greek Word there used,
signifies to Hunt and Catch alive. The man with all his Faculties and Powers,
are at the Devils Beck; and Devoted to his Service.

Secondly, Mediately by employing some of manking or other creatures, and he
frequently uses other persons or things, that his Designs may be the more
undiscernable. Thus he used the Serpent in the first Temptation, Genesis 3. 1. Now
when he uses Mankind, he seems to bring in what he intends, in a way of
Familiar Converse with us Mortals, that he may not be suspected at the bottom
of all. Hence he Contracts and Indents with Witches and Wizzards, that they
shall be the Instruments by whom he may more secretly Affect, and Afflict the
Bodies and Minds of others, and if he can prevail, upon those that make a
Visible Profession, it may be the better Covert to his Diabolical Enterprises:
And may the more readily pervert others to Consenting unto his subjection. Thus
in Tempters to any Wickedness, but in reference to the present occasion,
especially in Witches, Sorcerers, Diviners, etc. So far as we can look into
those Hellish Mysteries, and guess at the Administration of that Kingdom of
Darkness (...) may learn that Witches make Witches, by persuading one the other
to Subscribe to a Book, or Articles, etc. And the Devil, having them in this
subjection, by their Consent, he will use their Bodies and Minds, Shapes and
Representations, to Affright and Afflict others, at his pleasure, for the
Propagation of his Infernal Kingdom, and accomplishing his Devised Mischiefs,
to the Souls, Bodies and Lives of the Children of men; yea, and of the Children
of GOD too, so far as permitted and is possible.

PROPOSITION III.
The Covenant People of God, and those that would Devote themselves entirely to
his Service, are the special objects of SATAN'S Rage and Fury.

He is the malicious Enemy of the Church of God, and of every Member thereof;
and that on account of the Kingdom of Christ that is established, and the
Ordinances of the LORD JESUS that are celebrated there; and the benefits that
acrue to the Souls of men, by those blessed Institutions, for the Translating
of them, from the Power of Satan unto the Subjection of the Lord Jesus Christ;
the Redeemer of his People, and Head of his Church; hence when the Church is
Resembled to a Woman, for Beauty of Holy Profession, clothed with the Sun, (i.
e.) adorned with all Sanctifying Gifts and Saving Graces of the Spirit of GOD,
shining with utmost brightness, of the Faith and Order of the Gospel, Rev. 12.
1. To a Woman, for Tenderness and Weakness. Yea, and to a Woman, for
Fruitfulness, being with Child and ready to be Delivered, verse 2. Then do we
find, the Implacable Adversary of Mankind Represented by a Great-Red-Dragon,
verse 3. (i. e.) most formidable, both for his Power, a Great Dragon, and for
his venomous Rage and Fury, A Red Dragon; and he is set forth, pouting, out his
Malice against her, in a fearful manner, by a Flood out of his mouth, verse 15.
And here we may note two things.

First, That the more solemnly, and Person or People are Devoted to God, and
thence do shine with Luster of Holiness, both of Heart and Life, the more
vehemently does he oppose, malign, and Persecute them. That which makes him so
malicious against the Children of GOD, is his accursed Contrariety, to the
Image of GOD that is on them, and the Principle of Holiness that is in them. So
that the more Beauty of Holiness, they hold forth in their Conversation, the
more violently, and outragiously does he Oppose them: A special Instance of
this, we have in Job, concerning whom the Searcher of Hearts, did (before his
afflictions) give this Testimony, that he feared God, and eschewed evil, Job 1.
8. Upon the notice whereof, Satan set himself against him, to interrupt him in,
and divert him from, that Sincerity and Universallity of Obedience, by
obtaining permission to bring Crosses and Afflictions upon him, in his Estate
and Children chap. And finding him to be constant in his Resolution, to Serve
GOD Uprightly, according to the Testimnoy of GOD himself, chap. 2, 3. He pleads
for a farther Permission, against his Person, chap. 2. 5. And in the management
of his Designs, he did Transform himself into an Angel of Light, as the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 11. 14. (i. e.) pretend to as much Holiness in outward
appearance, as the best; hence when the Sons of GOD, viz. the Angles, the
Eldest Sons of GOD by Creation, came, to present themselves before the Lord,
(i. e.) to pay their Homage unto, and to receive the Commands of their
Sovereign LORD, Satan came also among them, Job. 1. 6. Thus also by Seducers,
and False Teachers; 2 Cor. 11. 13. be insinuates into the Society of the
Adopted Children of GOD in their most Solemn Aproaches to him, in Sacred
Ordinances; endeavoring to look so like the true Saints, and Ministers of
Christ, that if it were possible, he would deceive the very Elect, Mat. 24. 24.
by his subtilty; for it is certain, he never works more like the Prince of
Darkness, than when he looks moss like an angel of Light, and when he most
pretends to Holiness, he then does most secretly, and by consequence most
surely undermine it, and those that most Excel in the Exercise thereof.

Secondly, That the more eminent Service, or Office any person is employed IN,
or called to the discharge OF, for the glory of GGD, and the good of his
Church, the more violently does Satan resist, withstand or oppose him.

In this Context, we have Jeshua who was Ordained to be the High Priest of GOD,
a Representative of the whole People, whose Office it was, to Offer Sacrifice
for their sins, and to Enter into the Holy-place once a year, with the Blood of
Atonement, Exodus 30. 10. (being therein also a Type of Christ, the Great
High Priest of his People) He stood before the Angel, or Messenger of the
Covenant of the LORD to attend his Duty, and discharge his Office; and
presently the Devil or (...) stands up no accuse, and Satan, or the Withstander
to resist him; yea, such was the Subtilty, Impudence and Enmity of the Old
Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, (all engaged against our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Antitype of Joshua,) that no sooner, was he explicitly Ordained,
to the work he came into the World for, Mat. 3. 17. but immediately Satan sets
upon him to hinder him, and (if it had been possible) to make void the whole
Design, Mat. 4. 1. to the 11 Thus also we find Paul, the Apostle or our Lord
Jesus Christ, (who was so Laborious, and indefatigable, in the Work of the
Gospel, I Cor. 15. 10. complaining of Satan's putting Impediments or
Discouragements in his way of coming to the Thessalonians, I These. 2. ^18.
Wherefore we would have come unto you (even I Paul) once and again, but Satan
hindered as: partly by Persecutions, raised against him, and the Lying in wait
of the Jews, mentioned, Acts 20. 19. and again, chap. 23. 16. as a
Discouragement to him, partly by Raising Troubles in other Churches, and
thereby finding Paul other business, as an Impediment to his Serving them. Thus
Satan still is, and will be, the Opposer of the Faithful and Fervent Officers
of the Church, to the end of the World; and so I pass to the next Proposition.

PROPOSITION IV.
That in all Satan's Malicious Designs, and Operations, he is absolutely Bounded
and Limited, by the Power and Pleasure of the Great and Everlasting GOD, the
LORD JEHOVAH.

That is the Title given to God the Father in our Text, and although many times
particularly applied to GOD the FATHER, yet is comprehensive of all the Persons
in the Godhead, and especially, relating to the Execution of the Eternal
Purposes of Grace, and Good Will to the Elect, for Opera Trinta^^s ad Extra,
sunt indivisa and indistincta. Polan. syn. Here then are two of the Persons in
the Ever Blessed Trinity, mentioned, each under the Title of JEHOVAH in the
Hebrew; whereby we are confirmed in the Doctrine of the Trinity; By JEHOVAH,
the LORD the SON, making use of the Sovereign Name and Authority, of Jehovah
the FATHER, The Lord Rebuke thee O Satan, the Lord that has Chosen Jerusalem
Rebnke thee. Now Election, is Primarily ascribed, to the Eternal purpose, and
Sovereign Pleasure, of GOD the Father In concurrence with GOD the Son and GOD
the Holy Ghost, These Glorious Divine Persons, Coequal, Coessential, and
Coeternal do hold Satan, in the chain of their absolute power and sovereignty
being able at their pleasure, with a word of rebuke, to remand and restrain,
yea totally to vanquish and suppress him, in his most outrageous efforts of
malice, against the Children of men, or servants of the MOST HIGH GOD. This is
presented to us in that Expression used, in our Text, The LORD REBUKE thee the
Hebrew world GAGNAR used here, signifies to rebuke, not only in word but in
Deed; Cum potestate Objurgare, to rebuke with power, so as totally to subdue,
and suppress, thus it is used, Ps. 9: 6. Thou have rebuked the heathen, (i. e.)
suppressed their power, and rage, even to their utter destruction, as in the
next words, thou have destroyed the wicked, and put out their name for ever,
the words then, The Lord Rebuke thee, Import.

First Authority of Office, to reprove and rebuke, Titus is directed, Ch1 13.
Rebuke them sharply (i: e) by virtue of thing Office Power and Authority thus
their Lord and master, Rebuked the Heat and Rashness of his Disciples, Luke 9.
54,55 But he turned and rebuked them and said ye know not what manner of spirit
ye are of.

Secondly Rebukeing imports, putting to shame, in sense of weakness in
argueing, or disputeing; Jude; 9. -- brought not raileing accusation; but made
the Grand Railer. ashamed by saying the LORD Rebuke thee, or confound thee in
thy Argument.

And (Thirdly) it imports Checking and putting to silence. Luke 19. 39. Master
Rebuke thy Disciples (i. e.) put them to silence, Thus it belongs to the
Sovereignty, of the blessed Jehovah, One God in Three Persons with authority to
Rebuke Satan, to Shame him in his accusations, and to Silence his clamours,
against the servants of God. And that will appear, if we consider three things,

(First) The Great God the Eternal Jehovah, did at first Create him by his
Power, He made him in a Glorious state of Happiness, and perfection of
Holiness, in the beginning of time; when the innumerable company of Angels were
made in and with the highest heavens, to do his pleasure Ps. 103. 20. 21. And
although, the Apostate Angels, that fell by rebellion are reserved in Chains
etc. Jude ver. 6. Yet our Savior tells the Devil Math. 4. 10. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God etc. Therein not only testifying his own Son like
subjection to God his Father, and steadfast, resolution, to exalt his glory,
against all manner of temptations, but also thereby, putting Satan in mind,
that even He and all other creatures, are bound to worship GOD, their Sovereign
Lord and Maker and thence that the Devil ought to worship the Lord Jesus who
was Truly and Essentially God his Creator. For surely he is even the Devils God
by Creation, in which he was made a glorious Angel, but he made himself by
transgression an horrible Devil.

(Secondly) The Sovereign Power, of the Great God to rebuke Satan, appears, In
that he does manage and overruled, all his motions and Operations, to serve his
own most Holy Ends, and to advance his own glory in the winding up. Angelical
natures are very active, and as the blessed Angels, are very diligent in
serving, and glorifying, GOD, and ministering for the good of the heirs of
salvation, Hebr. 1. 14. So the cursed Devils, are full of subtle contrivance,
malicious designs, and Diabolical operations, for the dishonor of GOD, the
ruin of Mankind, and injuring the Heirs of Promise, to the uttermost of their
Permission and Ability.

But what the wise man says, wisely and truly concerning the Devices of man,
is every way true of the Designs of Satan, Prove: 19: 21. There are many devices
in a man's heart, but the Counsel of the Lord it shall stand, (i. e.) totally to
defeat the accomplishment of them, or to overruled the issues, effects and
consequences of them to his own Glory. Thus the GREAT GOD, does many times
outdo Satan's Politics, and over-shootes him in his own how, making that which
he designed, as means to Prevent the good of the Church, appear to be a most
proper medium to promote the benefit thereof, according to his Blessed will and
Counsel, who can say concerning his own most Holy Design; and be as good as his
word, in despite of Men and Devils, Isa. 46: 10. My counsel shall stand, And I
will do all my pleasure. This will appear, if we consider the pernicious
designs, and malicious methods of Satan, in order to the Crucifixion of Our
LORD JESUS, and the end he aimed at in his being cut off; and how in a
stupendous manner; all was overruled, to accomplish Gods Eternal Purposes, in
the Salvation of this Elect.

(Briefly then, The Devil finding nothing in him) (as our Savior says, John.
14. 30.) On which to fix any temptation, whereby he might stain him in his
Holiness; or pervert him from his Obedience; but was totally overcome, and
routed, in a Single conflict, with the Captaion of our Salvation, Math: 4: 1,
to, 11. He is resolved to prosecute another design, even the taking away his
bodily life, in order whereunto He entered unto Judas, Named Iscariot one of the
Twelve. Luke 22. 3. Who presently went and set himself to take opportunity, to
betray him, Ver. 6. Then Satan stirred up, the Envy of the people, to deliver
him to the Judgment, Math. 27. 18. Brought in Two false Witnesses against him;
Math. 26. 60. Moved Herod, and Pontius Pilate Gentiles, to condemn him, and
therein gratify the wicked people. of Israel, that were gathered together, Acts
4. 27. And (to complete the Diabolical Tragedy) Instigated the people, with
wicked hands to Crucify him. Acts. 2. 23. And after his Buryal, they endeavor
to prevent his Rising again, or removal out of the Sepulcher (as they
pretended) by setting a guard about it, rolling a great stone upon it, and
sealing it to make it unalterable; Math. 27. 66. etc.

SATAN then had thus far gained the Point, and prevailed in his Hellish
designs, against the life of the Man-CHRIST-JESUS; yet in all this process he
had neither broken the Chain by which the GREAT GOD holds him, nor could he
(in, the least) overstraine one link thereof; nor yet deviate one inch from
the methods determined, and traced out, by the Purpose of the Eternal God in
any one step or intreague, of this whole affair: but in spite of all the
Malice, Power, and Policy, of EARTH and HELL, it came to pass in every
particular passage thereof, As the Hand of GOD disposed, in the Course of his
Providence: According as his Counsel fore-determined should be done, Acts. 4:
27. 28. As also, Acts. 2. 23. Hitherto we may observe, how Satan's - plot and
project, seemed to be agreeable, (though against his will,) to the purpose, and
Eternal Counsel of the blessed GOD: but in the ends and issues proposed, Behold
how vastly (even Toto Coelo) they differ! For instance, Satan's Design herein
was to cut off the hopes of the sons of men, as to Redemption and Salvation by
the Man-Christ-Jesus, 1. Tim 2: 5 That so the benefits of the New Covenant, of
which he was the ONE, and only MEDIATOR, might utterly fail, and poor
miserable man, might again fall, Fearfully, Fatally, and Irecoverably, into the
hands of the LIVING GOD, Heb: 10, 31. And by the Infinite weight, of his
vindictive Justice be crushed down to the Nethermost Hell: But on the other
hand, GODS designs was far otherwise, even by the Deep Humiliation, and death
of the Man Christ on the Cross, to produce such Effects as these, Namely that
Man's Redemption, might be wrought out and Finished, John 19, 30. Peace made by
the blood of his Cross, betwixt an offended God, and sinful man. Ephesians: 2, 14,
16, Sinners Redeemed from the Curse of the Law, by Christ's being made a Curse
for them, Gal. 3: 13: And be made heirs of the blessing, ver. 14 A number of
lost Souls, bought with a price from the Bondage of Satan, and Power of Sin,
to be Instruments of Glorifying God, in their Bodies and Spirits which are
Gods. 1 Cor. 6. 20. In a word; that the Eternal Power and GodHead of the LORD
JESUS, ( the Blessed S eed of the Woman, according to his Humane Nature) might
appear in a fatal wounding and Bruising the head of the Old S erpent, Genesis 3.
15. And a final Destruction of Death, and him that had the Power of Death, that
is the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. And no less Eminent, is the Sovereign Wisdom and
Power of God, in Overruling this Tragical Scene of Diabolical Malice, in the
glorious Consequences thereof, viz. Loosing the Pains of Death, by which it was
impossible, the LORD JESUS should be held, Acts 2. 24. Raising him from the
Dead, verse 32. That having Conquered Death, Hell, and Satan; and Spoiled
Principalities and Powers, openly T riumphing over them, Col. 2. 16. He might
appear to be the Author of Eternal Salvation, to all them that obey him, Heb. 5
^ And having humbled himself to death, even the Death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 8.
Might by GOD the FATHER, be highly Exalted, verse 11. And ascending on high,
might Lead Captivity Captive, Psalm. 68. 18. Ephesians. 4. 8. And set down at the
Right Hand of the Majesty on High, Col. 3. 1. For above all Principalities and
Powers, Ephesians. 1. 21. Expecting, until all his Enemies be made his Footstool,
Heb. 10. 13. Until the day be come; in which he shall appear, in Power and
great Glory, Mat. 24. 30. To Judge the Quick and the Dead, at his Appearance
and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4 ^^ T hus T hus; did the Ever Blessed God, Overruled
the Grand Project of the Old Serpent against the Savior, and Salvation of his
Elect, bringing his mischievous Devices, upon his own pate, to his utter
amazement and Confusion for ever. And since the Salvation of us All, is so much
concerned therein, this may excuse my so free and large dilating upon
Description thereof. Thus is S atan under the limitations of Gods Sovereignty
in all his Operations which yet farther appears.

Thirdly, In that God will Judge and S entence him at last, unto Eternal
Punishment. Satan is now but Gods Instrument, as all other Creatures are; and
it is the Property of an Instrument, to be absolutely subservient to the
Pleasure of the principal Agent, or Efficient; when therefore the GREAT GOD
has used him for a while, to Serve his own most Holy Designs, in the world, by
the trying of his People, and the Judicial Blinding, and hardening of obstinate
and impenitent Sinners unto their Eternal Destruction: When the day is come, in
which he has Appointed to Judge the World by Jesus Christ, Acts 17. 31. Then
shall that Old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, be Judged, Sentenced, and
Confined to those Everlasting T orments Prepared for him, and together with
him, for all such miserable, accursed Souls as have here been Deluded, and
Ensnared by him. As appears by that dreadful Definitive Sentence, that shall
then be Pronounced, by the GREAT KING, in the day of his wrath, and Revelation
of his Power Mat 25:41. Go ye Cursed into Everlasting burnings Prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. If therefore GOD Created him; Overrules all his
Operations; And shall at last Judge him to Eternal Destruction; then it will
follow, he is always absolutely bounded, and limited, by the same Sovereignty
of GOD, which sets bounds to the Sea permitting if so far, Hitherto shall thou
go, and prohibiting it from going any farther, and here shall thy proud Waves
be stayed, Job 48: 11. The like limitations Satan had, in his permission
concerning Job, as in Chap. 1. 12. and 2:6. And he could in no degree, exceed
the limits of Gods Power and Pleasure, notwithstanding all his Malicious
Inclinations thereunto.

V. PROPOSITION.
That Whenever, God has declared a person or people, to be in Covenant with
him, as the Objects of his special mercy and favor, he will assuredly and
shortly, suppress the malice of Satan, however violently engaged against them.

To Explain this Proposition, we may consider the Arguments used in the Text,
to Repress Satan's importunity and Magnify God's Mercy, which are Twofold,

First; God's Free-Love, set on them from Eternity, in that expression, T he
LORD that has chosen Jerusalem. etc.

Secondly HIS particular favor, in delivering Joshua and them, from the
Babylonish Captivity. Is not this a Brand plucked out of the Fire? Of each of
these a few words.

First; God free love from Eternity, placed on his Covenant people. The Lord
that has chosen Jerusalem etc. God at the first, chose the seed of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, to be a people to himself, above all the nations of the earth,
Psalm. 105. 6. And avouched them to be His peculiar people, Deuteronomy. 26. 16. He
chose the land of Judea, to be the place of their abode, and there he chose the
City Jerusalem, or the vision of peace, as the name signifies, in which his
people might enjoy peace and quietness; after their travels, toils and troubles
in the wilderness, where the Thrones of Judgment were established, Psalm. 122.
5. Where also the Temple was builded, and the Worship and Ordinances of GOD,
Celebrated, and the tokens of Gods presence were placed. So that audience, and
acceptance of prayers; might be expected, when offered toward this City and
House, I Kings 8. 44. Hence by a Metonymis of the City, put for the
inhabitants, it notes the people of Jerusalem, and by a Senecdoche of the part
for the whole, implies that whole people which was in Covenant with GOD in
those days, which did also figuratively represent, the Evangelical Church, the
Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12. 22. Now Choosing is an act of freedom and Liberty
in God; and a Testimony of Love and Mercy, to such as are chosen; By which he
is inclined to help them in Misery.

Secondly HIS particular favor, in delivering Joshua and them, from the
Babylonish Captivity is not this a brand etc. Where GOD has begun to show
special favor, he will complete it, in opposition to Earth and Hell. As he
said so the Lords people find it, God is not a man that he should lie, Numbers
23. 19. ( i. e.) as to his promise, nor that he should fail in his Providence,
to carry on those works, in which he has made such blessed beginnings, is not
this a brand plucked out etc. ( i. e.) with an holy pity rescued, when all on a
light fire, now CHRIST is brought in, using this argument in his Intercession
for his people, who in imitation of him may also use it for themselves, and it
seems thus to be framed ( qs.d.) KNOW O S atan, GOD the FATHER, has begun to
own Joshua and the People, in their deliverance in part, and that may encourage
them to expect all that remains, for the LORD will perfect what concerns them,
and will not forsake the works of his own hands, because his mercies endure for
ever, Psalm. 138. 8. The force of a gument then, for clearing the Proposition
lies in these two assertions.

First, GOD in choosing of and covenanting with a Person or People, does engage
all his Glorious Attributes, for their good as the matter does require. When he
Declares he will be their GOD, all his Sufficiency and Efficiency, is for
them, ( i. e.) to the utmost of what he has Engaged by Covenant: hence his
Negative, Positive, and Relative Attributes, do Recommend his as a proper
Object of Faith, for Present help to his People in time of Trouble, Psalm. 46.
1. So that humble Reminding him of his Covenant, does in its own Nature prevail
with him to exert His Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Truth and Faithfulness, etc. in
a proportionable degree, to Relieve the Distressed, as their occasion does or
may require: For He Remembered his Covenant, and Repented according to the
multitude of his Mercies, Psalm. 106.45.

Secondly, Where GOD has given some Experience of his Mercy, it is to be used
as argument to prevail with Him, for what we may further stand in need of. Thus
in the Text, Jeshua is as a brand plucked out of the Fire, and therefore may
depend on it, to be Established in the Priesthood, and owned accordingly. Thus
then the scope of the Proposition is cleared up, viz. When God has taken a
person or people into Covenant, and showed them special Favor, The Gates of
Hell (as our Savior says, Mat. 16. 18.) shall never prevail against them.
Lastly,

PROPOSITION VI.
The Great GOD, does manage all his Designs of Mercy to his People, under the
Gospel Dispensation, in and through the Mediator, The very Tenure of the Gospel
Covenant, is such; and the Terms thereof, are so Methodized, as to introduce a
necessity of depending on a Mediator. The whole Transaction of the Gospel
Covenant, betwixt the GREAT GOD, and Fallen Man, is by the Mediator; hence it
is on better Terms, than the Covenant of Works, H eb. 8. 6. Under the New
Covenant, all Addresses to God, are by the Mediator, Heb. 4. 15, 16. and all
Communications of Grace from God, are by the Mediator, Joh. 1. 16. Here than
three things are briefly to be considered.

First, JESUS CHRIST is appointed, according to the method of the Covenant of
Grace, to be the Only Mediator betwixt God and Man, I Tim. 2. 5. For there is
ONE GOD, and ONE MEDIATOR, betwixt GOD and Man, the Man Christ-Jesus. And He
is, the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12. 24. To his Mediatorial Office,
is to be referred; His Intercession with GOD the FATHER, for all Good to his
Elect; which he ever Lives to Discharge, Heb. 7.25. By Him our Prayers Ascend
to GOD, Heb. 4. 14. By Him all Answers of Grace from GOD Descend to us. Hence
he promises, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father is my Name, he will give it,
Joh. 16. 23.

Secondly, In the Management of this Office, He is invested with Kingly Power.
He is a KING for Dignity, Psalm. 2.6. A KING for Authority of Government: KING
OF KINGS and LORD OF LORDS, Rev. 19. 16. A King for Judgment, All Judgment is
Committed unto Him, John 5. 22. And it shall finally be Managed by him, Mat.
25. 34. and 41.

Thirdly, It is one special Administration of CHRIST'S Mediatorial Kingdom, to
Oppose, Suppress, and Destroy, the Kingdom and Power of Satan, that Grand Enemy
of the Souls, and Salvation of men. Betwixt CHRIST'S Kingdom, and Satan's
Kingdom, there is a direct Contrariety and Opposition: Now Contraries do
mutually endeavor to Overcome each other, and bring them to naught. Hence when
CHRIST'S Kingdom goes up, S atans must go down; On this special Errand, our
Savior is said to come into the World: For this the S on of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the D evil, 1 John 3. 8. He was
Incarnate, not only to Oppose his most secret Insinuations and Temptations; but
to Over power his most violent motions, and hostile Invasions, when he ruffles
in the Titles of the God of this World; 2 Cor.4.4. And the Prince of this
World, who is by CHRIST (...) of his Dignity, and Cast out of all his Power and
Dominion, which he had over the Children of men, John 12. 31. The reason is, by
CHRIST'S Execution of His Kingly Office in Heaven, Satan's Power is S uppressed,
and the Prince of this World is judged, John 16. 8. ( i. e.) Condemned to Lose
all his Authority, that His Kingdom may be no more; such then was and is the
Divine Authority and Power of CHRIST-MEDIATOR; that he could have Rebuked, and
totally Vanquished Satan by his own Power, Who is over all God blessed for
ever, Romans 9. 5. But was pleased rather, to Magnify his Mediatorial Capacity,
presenting it to us, as a blessed Rule to direct us in our Addresses to GOD;
The Name and Merits of the LORD JESUS, being so acceptable with the FATHER,
because every way corresponding with his Designs of Grace to the Souls of men
Revealed in the Gospel.

The APPLICATION of this Doctrine to our selves remains now to be Attended.

USE I.
And First, Let it be for solemn WARNING, and awakening, to all of us that are
before the Lord at this time, and to all other of this whole people, who shall
come to the knowledge, of these direful Operations of S atan, which the HOLY
GOD has permitted in the midst of us.

The LORD does terrible things amongst us, by lengthening the Chain of the
Roaring Lion, in an Extraordinary manner; so that the Devil is come down in
great wrath, Rev. 12. 12. Endeavoring to set (...) his Kingdom, and by Racking
Torments on the Bodies, and Affrighting Representations to the Minds of many
amongst us, to Force and Fright them, to become his subjects. I may well say
then, in the words of the Prophet; Micah, 6. 9. The Lords voice cries to the
City, and to the Country also, with an unusual and amazing loudness, and the
Man of Wisdom (or Substance) will see his N ame: Hear Ye the Rod, and who bath
appointed it. Surely it warns us, to awaken out of all sleep, of Security or
Stupidity; to arise, and take our Bibles, turn to, and learn that lesson, not
by Rote only, but by Heart. I Pet. 5. 8. Be SOBER, be VIGILANT; because your
adversary the Devil, goes as a ROARING LION seeking whom amongst you he may
distress, delude, and devoir. And let this warning have suitable Impression on
us all.

First, according to our Spiritual State, respecting our Regeneracy, or
Unregeneracy: And therefore.

1. Let Regenerate Souls, that are in good hope of their Interest in GOD, and
his Covenant, stir up themselves to Confirm and Improve, that Interest to the
uttermost. Under shaking dispensations, we should take the faster hold of GOD
by Faith, and cleave the closer to him, that Satan may not, by any of his
Devices or Operations, draw us from our stedfastness, of hope, and dependence,
on the God of our Salvation. We would hope we are Interested in the Everlasting
Covenant of GOD, and delivered from the Raging Tyranny of the Roaring Lion. It
is good to be sure, and too sure we cannot be at any time, much less at such a
time as this: That it may appear before Angels and Men, that we are chosen unto
Salvation, by the GOD of Jerusalem, and are accordingly devoted to him, and to
his service in an Unviolable Covenant, against which the gates of Hell shall
never have any power. And the clearing up that we are in Covenant with GOD, is
a Sovereign Antidote, against all attempts of Satan, to bring us into Covenant
with him, or Subjection to him. And in order to this let us be Awakened.

First, To put our selves, upon faithful and through Trial and examination, what
has bin amiss. We all, even the best of us, have by sin a hand and share, in
Provoking God thus to let Satan loose, in an unusual manner, WHO can say he is
clean? This is a time then, for Solemn-self-examination.

In this time of sore affliction, there should be great Searching of heart, as
there was for the Divisions of Reuben; Judges 5: 19. GOD is a GOD of Wisdom, A
Righteous and Holy GOD, and he never afflicts the people of his Covenant
without a Cause, and that Cause is always Just: We should go, as far as we can
in the search, by the light of conscience, conducted by the Rule of the word,
and when we can go no farther, we should pray the prayer of Job; chap, 10, 2.
Do not condemn me; show me wherefore thou Contendest with me. Yet was he
Upright; and (even in God's account;) One that feared GOD, and eschewed evil,
Ch 1: 8. The Like prayer David makes, Ps; 139: 23, 24. Search me O GOD, and
know my Heart, try me and know my thoughts. And see if there be any wicked way
in me ande. These malicious operations of Satan, are the sorest afflictions can
befall a person or people: And if under the Consideration of Grievous
Calamities, upon the People of GOD, the Nations round about, will inquire with
amazement after the Cause: Then surely the People themselves, ought strictly to
Examine, as Deuteronomy. 29. 24. -- What means the Heat of this great Anger? And to
the making this Improvement of remarkable Afflictions, we are directed by the
Example of the Church, I am. 3. 40. Let us Search and T ry our Ways, and Turn
again unto the Lord. Which leads to the second thing.

2. Add then to the former, True and unfeigned Reformation, of whatsoever
appears to be the P rovoking Evils, we fall into. He or they that to Serious
Examination, (which must be supposed to include Hearty Confession of what has
been amiss) Adds through Reformation, may only hope to obtain Pardoning Mercy at
the Hand of God, Prove. 28. 13. And may it not be said, even to the Purest
Churches, as he said to them, 2 Chronicles. 28. 10. but are there not with you, even
with you Sins against the LORD your God. And certainly, no Provokings are so
abhorred of the Lord, as those of his Sons and Daughters, Deuteronomy. 32. 19. This
Returning and Reforming then, is the Duty Required of, and Pressed upon Israel,
or the Visible Covenant People of God, when by sin they had departed from him,
Hosea 14. 1. O ISRAEL, Return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by
thine Iniquity. Hence the neglect of this Returning, in those that are under
many and great Afflictions, is very displeasing unto God, Amos 4. 11. And ye
were as a Firebrand plucked out of the Burning, yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord. Insomuch, that obstinate persisting, in the neglect of it,
after frequent Warnings, provokes the Lord, to punish those that are guilty
thereof, seven and seven times more, Lev. 26. 23, 24. If we would then, avoid
the displeasure, and obtain the Covenant Favor of GOD, we must both in
Profession, and practice, fall in with the Example, of the formerly Degenerous,
but afterward Reformed Ephraim, Jer. 31. 18, 19. Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was Turned, I
Repented, and after that I was Instructed, I smote upon my Thigh, etc. Then,
and not till then, will the Rowels of the LORD, be turned within him, and his
Repentings kindled together for us. Now that our Reformation may be unto Divine
Acceptance, it must be,

First Personal and particular ( in universalibus latet delus) We commonly say,
that which is every Bodies work, is no Bodies work. Every one is guilty, in the
Provocation, and therefore every one should apply themselves to Reformation.
Every one of us should set our selves to do our own Duty, and Repent of our own
Sin. There is an inclination in the best, to Charge the Sins of others, as the
procuring cause of GODS Judgments and to reflect severely on the Pride,
Lukewarmness, Coveteousness, Contention, Intemperance, and Uneven Conversation
of others; but we can hardly be brought, to smite upon our own Breast, and say,
What have I done? Unless we be, in particular Charged, and Convicted, as David
was by the Prophet Nathan, in the 2 Samuel 12. 7. Thou art the man. Thou art he (
qs. d.) that art concerned in this Provocation by thy Transgression.

Secondly, Reformation, (by which we may clear up, that we are the Covenant
People of God) must be Universal. We must turn from all and every sin which
has been Committed, and apply our selves to the discharge of every Duty, which
has been neglected. We must have no sinful Reserves, as he, 2 Kings 5. 18. In
this thing pardon thy Servant, etc. He was Convicted it was a Sin, that needed
Pardon, and yet would fain be Excused in the Commission thereof. Thus Junius,
and Trem. and the Dutch Annotators Translate it, and Pisc. Interprets it of his
desire to continue in that Office, which he could not with good Conscience
discharge. Though some Learned and Judicious understand it as a craving of
pardon for what he had therein done amiss in time past. In short so far as we
are guilty of Reservations in our Reformation so far will there remain a Cloud
upon the Evidences of our Covenant Interest in GOD that has Chosen Jerusalem.
This to Regenerate Souls. Secondly then

Let Unregenerate sinners, be warned and awakned, to get out of that miserable
state of sin, and consequently of subjection to Satan, (That Tyrannical,
Implacable, and Indefatigable, Enemy of souls) in which you are. O break off
your first by repentance, and your Iniquities by a saving closure with the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, for Justification, Sanctification and Salvation, That ye may be
delivered, from the Power, and domination of Satan, under which you are
ensnared, to do his will, although utterly cross to the will of GOD, and may be
wanslated, into the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, the Dear Son of God, and Blessed
Savious of the souls of men Col: 1. 13. Being by infinite mercy, recovered out
of the snare of the Devil, who are (now) taken Captive by him at his will. 2 Timothy: 2, 2^. Awake, Awake then, I beseech you, and remain no longer under the
Dominion of that Prince of Cruelty and malice, whose Tyrannical (...) we see,
thus exerted, against the Bodies and Minds of these afflicted persons. Surely
no Sinner in this Congregation who is sensible of his Bondage to Satan, that
cruel (and worse than Egyptian) Task-master and Tyrant, can be willing, to
continue quietly, in subjection to him one day or hour longer. Thus much in
respect of the Spiritual State of men.

Secondly This warning is directed to all manner of persons, according to their
condition of life, both in civil and sacred Order: Both High and Low, Rich and
Poor, Old and Y oung, Bond and Free. O let the observation, of these amazing
dispensations of GODS unusual and strange providence, quicken us to our Duty at
such a time as this, in our respective Places and Stations, Relations, and
Capacities. The GREAT GOD, has done such things amongst us, as do make the
ears of those that hear them to tingle; Jer. 1, 3. and serious souls, are at a
loss to what these things may grow; and what we shall find to be the end, of
this dreadful visitation, in the permission whereof the provoked GOD as a Lion
has roared; who can but Fear? The LORD has spoken, who can but P rophecy?
Amos 3: 8. The Loud Trumpet of God, in this thundering providence, is Blown in
the City, and the Echo of it, is heard throughout the Country, surely then, the
People must, and ought to be afraid, Amos 3: 6.

USE II.
Let it be for DEEP HUMILIATION, to the people of this place which is in
special under the influence of this Fearful Judgment of GOD. The Lord does at
this day, manage a great control versy with you, to the astonishment of your
selves and others. You are therefore, to be deeply humbled, and fit in the dust
Considering.

First, The signal hand of God, in singling out this place, this poor Village,
for the first seat of Satan's Tyranny, and to make it (as 'twere) the Rendezvous
of Devils, where they Muster their infernal forces appearing to the afflicted,
as coming Armed, to carry on their malicious designs, against the Bodies, and
if God in mercy prevent not, against the Souls of many in this place. Great
Afflictions, attended with Remarkable circumstances, do surely call for, more
then ordinary degrees of Humiliation

But Secondly be Humbled also, That so many Members of this Church, of the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, should be under the influences of Satan's malice, in these his
Operations; some as the Objects of his Tyranny, or their Bodies to that degree
of distress, which none can be sensible of, but those that see and fell it, who
are in the mean time also, sorely distressed in their minds, by frightful
Representations, made by the Devils unto them. Other professors, and visible
Members of this Church, are under the awful accusations, and imputations, of
being the Instruments of Satan in his mischievous actings. It cannot but be
matter of deep humiliation, to such as are Innocent, that the Righteous and
Holy GOD, should permit them to be named, in such pernicious and unheard of
practices, and not only so, but that HE who cannot but do right, should suffer
the stain of suspected Guilt, to be as it were Rubbed on; and Soaked in, by
many sore and amazing circumstances; and it is matter of soul abasement, to all
that are in the Bond of GODS Holy Covenant in this place, that Satan's seat
should be amongst them, where he attempts to set up his Kingdom, in Opposition
to C hrists Kingdom, and to take some of the Visible Subjects of our LORD
JESUS, and use at least their shapes and appearances, instrumentally, to
Afflict and Torture, other Visible Subjects of the same Kingdom. Surely his
design is, that CHRIST'S Kingdom, may be divided against it self, that being
thereby weakened, he may the better take Opportunity to set up his own accursed
powers and Dominions. It calls aloud then, to all in this place, in the Name of
the Blessed JESUS and words of his Holy Apostle; I Pet. 5: 6. Humble
yourselves, under the mighty hand of God, thus lift up in the midst of you, and
he shall exalt, save, and deliver you, in due time.

USE III.
It is matter of TERROR, Amazement, and Astonishment, to all such wretched
Souls (if there be any here in the Congregation, (and God of his Infinite mercy
grant that none of you mayever be found such) as have given up their Names, and
Souls, to the Devil: who by Covenant explicit or implicit, have bound
themselves to be his Slaves and Drudges, consenting to be instruments, in whose
shapes, he may Torment and Afflict their Fellow Creatures (even of their own
kind,) to the amazing and astonishing of the standers by.

I would hope, I might have spared this Use, but I desire (by Divine
assistance) to declare the whole Counsel of God; and if it come not as
Conviction where it is so, it may serve for Warning, that it may never be so:
For it is a most dreadful thing to consider, that any should change the service
of GOD, for the service of the Devil, the worship of the Blessed GOD for the
worship of the cursed Enemy, of GOD and Man. But Oh! (which is yet a Thousand
times worse) how shall I name it? If any that are in the Visible Covenant of
God, should break that covenant, and make a League with Satan, if any that have
set down and eat at CHRIST'S Table should so lift up their Heal against him, as
to have Fellowship at the T able of Devils; and (as it has been represented to
some of the Afflicted) Eat of the Bread, and Drink of the Wine, that Satan has
mingled. Surely if this be so, the Poet is in the right; Audax omnia perpeti,
Gens Humana ruit, per vetitum nefas. Audacious Mortals are grown to a fearful
height of Impiety. And we must cry out in Scripture Language, and that
Emphatical Apostrophe of the Prophet Jeremy; chap.2. 2. Be astonished O ye
Heavens at this, and be horribly afraid; be ye very Desolate, says the Lord.
Now Terrors may justly seiz upon those, that have so done, on these accounts.

First, All Mankind is now (as well by Gods Authority, as their own I nterest)
set against you. You have proclaimed your selves Mortal Enemies to all men, and
they cannot but mortally hate and abominate you. If you are in League with the
DESTROYER, what is said of Ishmael is true, not only of Satan, but also of you,
Genesis 16.12. His Hand will be against every man and every man's hand against him:
So every man's hand is, and will be against you to accuse, condemn, destroy and
cut you off, from the Land of the Living, The Enmity that God in just Judgment
placed, betwixt the Old Serpent and the Woman, and betwixt her Seed, and his
Seed, Genesis 3. 15. is improved to the height against you, as you S tand, Look
and Act, like your Father and King the Devil.

2. If you have been guilty of such Impiety, The P rayers of the People of God,
are against you on that account. It is their Duty to Pray daily, that Satan's
Kingdom may be Suppressed, Weakened, brought down, and at last totally
destroyed; hence that all Abetters, Subjects, Defenders, and Promoters thereof,
may be utterly Crushed and Confounded. They are constrained, to Suppress that
Kindness and Compassion, that in their Sacred Addresses, they once bare unto
you (as those of their own kind, and framed out of the same mould) Praying with
one consent, as the Royal Prophet did against his malicious Enemies ( the
Instruments of Satan) Psalm. 109. 6. S et thou a wicked man over him, and let
Satan stand at his Right Hand (i. e.) to withstand all that is for his good,
and promote all that is for his hurt, and ver. 7. When he is Judged, let him be
Condemned, and let his Prayer become Sin. What a miserable condition must they
be in, who have all the Faithful, that have Interest in Heaven thus engaged
against them? But

Thirdly, If this seems a light thing KNOW, That if you are in C ovenant with
the Devil, the Intercession of the BLESSED JESUS is a against you, for your
Contract with his Grand Implacable Enemy. His Prayer is for the Subduing of S
atans Power and Kingdom, and the utter C onfounding of all his Instruments. He
is Exalted at the Right hand of GOD, to make Intercession for his Elect, as
also expecting, till all his Enemies (and such are all the Sworn S ubjects and
Vassals of Satan) be made his Footstool (i. e.) put to shame, and Everlasting
Contempt, Psalm. 110. 1. Heb. 10. 13. Hence in the Text, He Interceed with GOD
the FATHER for Joshua and the People, against S atan and all his Powers and
Instruments. And the LORD (i.e.) The INTERCESSOR) said unto Satan, the Lord
Rebuke thee; etc.

Lastly, If it be so, Then the GREAT GOD is set against you. The Omnipotent
JEHOVAH One God in three Persons, FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST in Their Several
distinct Operations, and all Their Divine Attributes, are engaged against you:
as it has been already noted, they are against Satan: even so because you are
his Offspring, Officers, Instruments, of mischiefs, cruelty; murder etc.
Against you. You justify the Old S ubjection, made by our first Parents in the
T ransgression, of themselves (and for theirs) to the Dominion of S atan, and
show, that if it were to be done again you would do the same. Therefore KNOW
YE, that are guilty of such Monstrous Iniquity, That since you are the People,
that have no more understanding, than to forsake the Covenant of your God, to
enter into Covenant with S atan; He that made you, will not save you, and he
that formed you will show you no favor, Isa. 27. 11. And so you are utterly
undone for ever, unless by the Infinite Power and Mercy of GOD, you are rescued
out of the horrible Pit, and snare of THE Destroyer. Be assured, that although
you should now Evade, the C ondemnation of man's Judgment, and escape a violent
death by the Hand of Justice: Yet unless God shall give you Repentance, (which
we heartily pray for) there is a day coming, when the S ecrets of all Hearts
shall be Revealed by JESUS CHRIST, Romans 2. 16. Then, Then your sin will find
you out; and you shall be punished with Everlasting Destruction, from the
Presence of the LORD, and Doomed to those Endless, Easeless and Remediless
Torments, Prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41.

The Reverend Mr. Simmes, some time since Minister of this Country, coming into
Prison to a Condemned Witch; though he knew her not, yet she took knowledge of
him, and said, O Mr. Simmes, I remember a Text you Preached on in England
Twenty Four Years since, from those words, Your Sin will find you out, for I
find it to be true in mine own case.

USE IV.
Let it be for CAUTION to all of us that are before the Lord: As ever we would
prevail with God, to prevent the spreading of this sore affliction, and to
rebuke Satan for us; Let us take heed of sideing with, or giving place unto,
the Devil Ephesians. 4: 27 Neither give place to the Devil, yield no subjection to
him no not for an hour Thus we may be said to do in general, when we give way
voluntarily, to the Commission of any sin, he that Commits sin (i: e)
sinnoth sciens volens, wittingly, and willingly, is of the Devil, I John 3: 8.
(i.e) Joins with him in his rebellion against GOD, hence the more there is, of
a Man's will in any sin, the more he is rendered like Satan, who wills nothing
but sin from the beginning. Ibid. And it gratifies the Devil, because the man
appears Captivated by that sin, hence so far as the Regenerate fall into known
sin, they please the Devil, and are ( in a sort) guilty of yielding to him, and
siding with him.

And we do especially, give place to him by these sins.

First, By giving way unto sinful and unruly Passions, such as Envy, Malice, or
Hatred of our Neighbors and Brethren. These Devil like, corrupted passions,
are contrary unto, and do endanger the letting our of, the life of grace and
Holiness; and letting in Satan and his Temptations, yea he generally, comes
into the soul at these Doors, to captivate any person to the horrid sin of
Covenanting with him. These are greedy and insatiable P assions, that strike at
the being as well as the good of the Object, and to gratify these, many have
been Overcome by Satan's temptations, so that (as the wise man says in another
case He has Wounded, yea many strong men have been slain by him, Prove: 7: 26.
And as for you of this place, you may do well S eriously to Examine, whether
the LORD has not in Righteous Judgment sent this Fire of his Holy displeasure,
to put out some Fires of Contention, that have been amongst you by which the
Fruits of the Spirit Gal. 5. 22. Have been ( as I may say) much Blasted, and
the Fruits of the (...) Cherished to maturity, so as to threaten the Choking
of all that is good, with the Principles thereof; through the Malice of your
Adversary the Devil, who is now come down among you, with open mouth as a
Roaring Lion to devour you: by setting you one against another with
earnestness, He sows discord amongst brethren (both in Civil and S acred Order
Prove. 6. 19. Stirring them up to bite and devour one another, that they may be
consumed one of another, Gal: 5. 15. Upon this ground the Apostle brings in
this Caution Ephesians. 4. 26. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, Neither
give place to the Devil. Inveterate Anger and Ill Will, makes way for the
Devil, and gives place to him. And the same we do

Secondly By using indirect means to prevent or remove this afflction; and
trying unwarrantable projects, to reveal S ecrets, or discover future events.
When persons have been under long exercise, those about them are very desirous,
to relieve them out of, or prevent those grievous fits, of Diabolical tortures,
with which they are distressed. And hence do not consider the Efficacy or
Tendency of those things they use. I call such indirect means, as being duly
observed, cannot be found to have any Natural or Physical virtue in them, to
produce the Desired Effect of themselves: Nor yet have any warrant from the
word of GOD, which if they had; ought to be believed and depended upon, to
produce the Effect for which they were Instituted; though never so mean in their
own nature. Because the Power of the GREAT GOD, is engaged, to uphold the
decisive influence of his own instituted means, as we find in the bitter water
which caused the curse, Number: 5: 17. which was only compounded, of Holy Water
(or common water set apart unto sacred use) and the dust of the floor of the
sanctuary; This we may imagine had not any physical influence in its own
nature, proportionable, to such a solemn effect or consequence, as was in that
case appointed thereunto; It must then depend, wholly and only, on the Divine
Institution of it, to be for the Cursing, or Clearing, of the woman as she was
in the sight of GOD, Guilty or not Guilty, as we read ver. 27 and 28. viz if
Guilty her Belly should S well, and her Thigh should Rot, if clear, she should
be free (i. e.) from any hurt, and should Conceive Seed. But seeing we find no
means instituted of God, to make Trial of Witches, or to Charm away Witchcraft,
(both which are a kind of Witchcraft) we are to expect Effects in the ordinary
course of Providence, suitable to the natural virtue of Causes, and means used
accordingly; but what is otherwise, must be of the Nature of Enchantments;
these indirect means, are such as, Burning the Afflicted Persons Hair; parings
of Nails, stopping up and Lovling the Urine. Their Scratching the Accused, or
otherwise fetching Blood of them, with many more, which I forbear to mention,
least unwary persons should be inclined to try these Diabolical Feats. But as
to the Effect, this is plainly found, a Giving place to the Devil, for he
giving way to it, and Ceasing to Afflict, upon the use of it, brings such
projects into Esteem, and Gains to his own Devices (for I can call them no
better) too much Credit and Observance: For hence such as use them, finding him
slay thereupon, are encouraged to the frequent use of them, and are (as a
Learned Writer faith) made Witches, by endeavoring, to defend themselves
against Witchcraft, and using the Devils Shield, against the Devils S word, or
(as I may allude) going down to the Philistines, to have those Weapons
sharpened and pointed, with which we intend to Fight against them.

In a word, is it because there is not a GOD in the midst of us, able to Rebuke
and Vanquish Satan, in all his Operations: If there be, then away with
whatsoever has not Scripture P recept or President for its Warrantee. And let
us use those Weapons, which are not C arnal, but Mighty through God, to the
pulling down strong Holds, etc. 2 Cor. 10. 4. Thus may we put to the worse,
those P rincipalities and Powers of Darkness which do in such a fearful manner,
wrestle and Contend with us at this time, Ephesians. 6. 12.

But I must not conclude this particular, without testifying against some other
practices amongst us Condemned by the Rule of God, and writings of learned and
judicious men as yielding to, and tampring with the Devil, Viz the sive and
scyssers; the Bible and Key; The white of an Egg in a Glass; The horse-shooe
nailed on the threshold; A stone hung over the Rack in a stable: with many
more: which I would not make known to any, that are ignorant of them; because
they are no better then Conjurations, and if in the use of them Discoveryes are
made; or Effects produced, to the gratifying their sinful Curiosity in any
degree, it must be from the Devil, and not from GOD; who never instituted any
such ways, by and in which, to discover secret things or future Events to the
Children of Men. Hence such as by these Experiments, adventure to play on the
hole of the aspe, and approach unto the Den of the Dragons; are in great Danger
To become a prey unto Satan's malice, being (or ever they are aware) seduced by
his subtilty into an entire subjection to his Infernal powers, so as at last to
be Destroyed by him, and cast with him, into the Lake that burns with Fire
and Brimstone for ever.

Thirdly, Give no place to the Devil by Rash Censuring of others, without
sufficient grounds, or false accusing any willingly. This is indeed to be like
the Devil, who has the Title (Diabolos) in the Greek, because he is a
Calumniator, or False Accuser. Hence when we read of such false Accusers in the
Latter Days, they are in the Original called (Diab^^^) Calumniatores, 2 Timothy
3.3. It is a time of Temptation amongst you such as never was be fore: Let me
entreat you not to be lavish or severe in reflecting on the Malice or Envy of
your Neighbors, by whom any of you have been accused lest while you falsely
charge one another, viz. The Relations of the Afflicted, and Relations of the
Accused; the Grand Accuser, (who loves to Fish in Troubled Waters) should take
advantage upon you. Look at Sin the procuring cause, GOD in Justice the S
overaign Efficient, and S atan THE E nemy, the principal Instrument, both in
afflicting some and accusing others: And if Innocent Persons, be suspected, it
is to be ascribed to GODS P leisure supreamly permitting, and Satan's Malice
subordinately troubling, by Representation of such to the Afflicting of others,
even of such as have all the while, we have reason to believe, (especially some
of them) no kind of Ill will, of disrespect, unto those that have been
complained of by them. This giving place to the Devil avoid, for it will have
uncomfortable and pernicious influence, upon the Affairs of this place, by
letting out Peace, and bringing in Confusion and every evil work which we
heartily pray, God in mercy to prevent. Fourthly and Lastly,

Then we give place to the Devil, When we are guilty of unbelief of God, and
his Power, promise and Providence; for our benefit and relief under our
troubles. Unbelief betrayed our first Parents, to the first sin. The Devil in
the serpent, first moved them to question the truth of the Threatening, and so
they came to deny. it Gen 3. 1 and 4. Yielding to the God of this world, the
Author and main Fomenter of Unbelief, by and in which he reigns over the
children of perdition, 2 Cor.4.4. Unbelief is a mother sin, and there are many
sins, to which men could nor be drawn, were it not for Unbelief of the
Threatenings, denounced in the word of GOD, against that sin, which they do so
boldly perpetrate: and of the Promise made unto the contrary Duty, which they
do so abominably neglect. Indeed Unbeleif of the truth of God's promise, or
Efficacy of His providence, extending toward us (these being Inseparable
attributes of the Blessed God) brings in question whether he is or has a
being. For he can as soon cease to Be as to be most P owerful, most Faithful,
most Gracious, and Bountiful, which are all Attributes relating to his P
rovidence, and this is to go away from GOD, For he that comes to GOD, must
believe that he is Heb: 11: 6. Hence the Apostle, Cautions even the brethren,
that they may not be guilty of it, Heb 3: 12. Take heed Brethren Lest there be
in any of you, an evil heart of Unbelief, Departing from the Living God.
Intimating, that so far as the best fall into Unbelief, they go from God, and
so far must needs give place to the Devil. For there are but these two Rulers,
over all men in the world, and all that leave the one go to the other. But to
proceed.

USE V
Let it be for EXHORTATION and direction, to this whole Assembly, and to all
others that shall come to the knowledge of these amazeing dispensations, Here
then give me leave, to press those special Duties, which all persons are
concerned to put in practice, at such a time as this.

1. Be we Exhorted and directed, to Exercise True Spiritual sympathy with, and
Compassion toward, those poor afflicted persons, that are by Divine P
ermission, under the Direful Influences of Satan's malice Deep sense of all
these things, and being heartily affected with them, makes way for, and stirs
up unto, those other dutys which are now incumbent on us. I fear we are not
enough affected, with this solemn providence, unless it be those few that have
seen these fearful things who by their eyes, have had their hearts affected
accordingly. There is a Divine P recept enjoining the practice of this Duty,
Heb. 13. 4. Remember them that suffer Adversity, as being your selves also in
the Body; (i. e.) being of the same mould; in the same mortal and frail Estate;
and therefore liable to the same Affliction, if the Holy GOD should please to
permit Satan to bring it upon us: Let us then be deeply sensible, and as the
Elect of God, put on Bowels of Mercy, toward those in misery, Col. 3. 12. Oh P
itty, P itty them, for the Hand of the LORD has touched them, and the Malice
of Devils has fallen upon them.

Secondly, Let us be sure to take unto us and PUTON, the whose Armor of God,
and every piece of it, let none be wanting. Let us labor to be in the
Exercise, and P ractice, of the whole Company of Sanctifying Graces, and
Religious Duties. This Important Duty is pressed, and the particular pieces, of
that Armor recited, Ephesians. 6. 11. and 13 to the 18. Satan is Representing his
Infernal Forces, and the Devils seem to come Armed, mustering amongst us. I am
this day Commanded to call and Cry an Alarm unto you, ARM; ARM; ARM; handle
your Arms, see that you are fixed and in a readiness, as faithful Soldiers
under the Captain of our Salvation, that by the Shield of FAITH, ye and we All
may Resist the Fiery Darts of the Wicked. And may be Faithful unto Death, in
our Spiritual Warfare, so shall we assuredly Receive the Crown of Life, Rev. 2.
10.

Thirdly, Let us be watchful, to take all advantages and strenuously to improve
all means (unto which the word directs us) for the managing of our spiritual
conflict, with the Powers of Darkness. Let us admit no parley, give no quarter,
let none of S atans Forces or Furies, be more vigilant to hurt us than we are
to resist and repress them, in the NAME and by the S pirit, Grace, and S
trength, of Our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Let us watch the first motions of the Enemy,
for if we let him get within us, he will certainly be too hard for us. Let us
take the Apostles Counsel; James 4: 7. Resist the D evil and he will flee from
you. but qs. d. If you yield to him by Flight, he will pursue you, to the very
Death. Avoid therefore all fellowship with him, under any of his insinuating
pretenses, and let us Wrestle, vigorously, against Principalities and Powers,
etc. Ephesians. 6. 12, Let us make sure, that in nothing we give them advantage
against us, seeing (through Grace) we are not Ignorant of S atans devices 2.
Cor. 2. 11.

Fourthly, Let us Ply the T hrone of Grace, in the Name and Merit, of Our
Blessed Mediator. With our Frequent, Faithful, and Fervent Prayers. Let us be
Frequent in the Duty, taking all possible Opportunities. Public, Private, and
S ecret, to Pour out our Supplications, to the GOD of our Salvation, Prayer is
the most proper, and potent Antidote, against the old Serpent's Venomous
Operations. When Legions of Devils, do come down amongst us; Multitudes of
Prayers should go up to God; for suitable Grace and Strength, to defend us,
from being deceived, and destroyed by them, in that case of the Apostle Paul,
when he was under the violent Assaults of a Messenger of S atan. He doubled and
trebled his Ordinary Devotions; For this I besought the Lord thrice, that it
might depart from me. 2. Cor. 12. 8.

Again let us be faithful in Prayer. The life of Prayer, lies in the Exercise
of Faith therein. It is to the Prayer of Faith that the Promise of Answer is
made; by Him in whom all the Promises, are Yea and Amen; Math: 21.21.
Whatsoever ye ask believing in my Name ye shall receive it. Besides It is said
the prayer of Faith, shall save the S ick; James 5. 15. ((...)) Whatsoever kind
of sickness it is, under which they labor. Faith in Prayer, engages the
glorious Intercessor on our behalf, according to his promise, and thereby makes
way for us to be accepted with the FATHER, in all our requests, Faith in CHRIST
Excercised in prayer, is the Token, of Gods Covenant, with his Elect under the
Gospel, As the how in the Clouds, was the token of his Covenant with the world,
in the days of Noah; Genesis 9. 12, 13. And through Christ it is prevalent, for
him the Father hears always, Joh: 11. 42. And therefore us also through him
for He has made us accepted, in the Beloved; Ephe 1.6.

Yet once more, Let ours be Fervent prayers; even with our whole heart, Psalm.
119. 10. for such Prayer (only) has the promise, of finding God and his
Salvation. Then shall ye find me when ye seek me with all your heart, Jer. 29.
13. Hence David pronounces all those blessed, that thus seek the LORD Ps. 119.
2. This is when we do Rouse up our Soul, with all it is faculties unto Prayer,
as the Psalmist does unto praise, psalm. 103. 1. 2. When our whole Soul in all
its affections are poured out before the Lord as Hannah I Sam. 1. 15. This
prayer is like to speed, we say amongst men, Qui timmide rogat, docet negare;
he that begs faintly, may expect a denial. And in this case Justly; the Apostle
James tells us, Let not such a man as if Faint, Weak, Doubting In prayer,
Expect any thing of the LORD, James 1: 7. yet on the other hand, the same
Apostle assures us the Effectual fervent prayer, of a Righteous man AVAILS
MUCH Chap 5: 16. This Faithful and Fervent Prayer, frequently put in practice,
is the most Powerful Exorcisme, to drive away Devils; some of which, will not
stir without it, Mark9.29. This Kind can come forth by nothing, but by Prayer
and Fasting.

Let us then use this Weapon; It has a kind of Omnipotency, because it
interesteth us, in the help of THE OMNIPOTENT: Satan the worst of all our
Enemies, is called in Scripture a DRAGON, to note his Malice; a SERPENT to note
his Subtilty; a LION to note his Strength. But none of all these can stand
before Prayer, The most inveterate Malice, (as that of Haman) Sinks under the
Prayer of Estber; chap. 4. 16. The deepest policy (the counsel of Achitophel)
Withers before the Prayer of David. 2 Samuel 15. 31. And the vastest Army (an
Host of a Thousand Thousand Ethiopians) Ran away like so many Cowards, before
the prayer of Asa. 2 Chronicles. 14. 11, 12.

What therefore I say unto one, I say unto all, in this Important Case; PRAY,
PRAY, PRAY.

Fifthly and Lastly; To Our HONORED MAGISTRATES, here present this day, to
inquire into these things; Give me leave much Honored; to offer One word, to
your Consideration, Do all that in you Lies, to Check and Rebuke S atan;
Endeavoring by all ways and means, that are according to the Rule of GOD, to
discover his Instruments in these Horrid Operations: You are Concerned in the
Civil Government of this People, being invested with Power, by their Sacred
MAJESTY'S; under this Glorious JESUS, (the King and Governor of his Church)
for the Supporting, of CHRIST'S Kingdom, against all Oppositions of S atans
Kingdom, and his Instruments. Being Ordained of GOD to such a station, Romans 13.
1. We entreat you, Bear not the sword in vain, as Ver. 4. But approve your
selves, a Terror of, and Punishment to, evil doers; and a Praise to them that
do well. 1 Pet. 2 14. Ever remembering, that ye Judge not for men, but for the
Lord; 2 Chronicles. 19.6. And as his promise is, so our Prayer shall be for you,
without Ceasing, that he would be with you in the Judgment, As he that can and
will, Direct, Assist, and Reward you. Follow the Example, of the Upright Job,
Chap. 29. 16. Be a Father to the poor; to these poor Afflicted persons, (in
pitiful and painful, endeavors to help them) and the Cause that seems to be
so dark, as you know not how to determine it, do your utmost in the use of all
regular means to search it out. And if after all, it still remains too hard for
you, carry it unto GOD by Christ, as the Israelites were ordered, to do theirs
by Moses; Deuteronomy. 1. 17. For the Judgment is Gods, and the cause that is too hard
for you, bring unto me, and I will hear it.

USE VI.
The Sixth and Last USE, is in two words of Comfort, to bear up the fainting
Souls of those that are Personally under, or Relatively Concerned in, these
direful Operations, of the GRAND Enemy of Mankind.

First, there is Comfort for you, in that ye are the visible Covenant People of
GOD. In General, this whole People of New England, As to the maine bulk of them
(or in and by their Godly Leaders, who engage themselves and all under them,
both in C ivil and Sacred Order) are in Covenant with GOD, and have many times
(as such) been signally owned by Him; notwithstanding all their Defections and
Degeneracies. Besides, there are many that have both Explicitly, and
Implicitly; Visibly and Really Devoted themselves to God: And are indeed of
the Number Chosen by the GOD of Jerusalem; True Citizens of that Jerusalem that
is above, which is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. Yea, some of those, that
are under these Afflictions, may plead these Privileges, to prevail with the
LORD, to Rebuke S atan, and Deliver them and theirs, from these his malicious
and woeful Oppressions. And to this, that there are scarce any, who are under
the influence, of this Affliction, but are also under the Solemn Obligation, of
a Baptismal Covenant, which in its own nature, ligeth them, to be for God, and
is a valid Argument to plead with GOD to be for them, and against Satan. Put
all these together, and surely we shall not cast away our Confidence in GOD,
for deliverance from these fore Calamities. For we are all his people on one
account or other: And the LORD will not forsake his people, because it has
pleased him to make you his People, I Sam. 12. 22 But Secondly,

2. There is Comfort, in Considering, that the LORD JESUS the Captain of our
Salvation, has already overcome the Devil. CHRIST that Blessed Seed of the
woman, has given this cursed old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, a
mortal, and incurable, Bruise on the head, Gen 3: 15. He was too hard for him
in a Single conflict Matthew 4: Beg: He opposed his Power and Kingdom in the
Possessed; He suffered not the Devils To speak, Because they knew him Mark: 1:
34. He completed his Victory, by his Death on the Cross, and Destroyed his
Dominion, Hebr 2: 14. That through Death he might destroy Death, and him that
had the Powers of Death, that is the DEVIL; and by and after His Resurection,
made show openly unto the would, that he had spoiled Principalites and Powers,
Triumphing over them Col 2: 15. Hence, if we are by Faith united to him, his
victory is an earnest and praelibation of our Conquest at last. All Satan's
strugtings now, are but those of a Conquered enemy; to a believer: And although
(...) may give a Child of God, great (...) (...) way to the Kingdom, such as
may (...) him to his knees, in earnest prayer, (...) for more Grace, yet it may
he truly (...) him, which was Prophetically said of God, Gen 49: 19 A Troop
shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at the last. The Exaltation also, of
Our LORD JESUS, does assure us that we shall be Exalted, to the throne of Glory
with him, Rev. 3: 21. Comfort we then, one another with these words That the
God of Peace, Even JESUS the Prince of Peace, will T otally and Finally, Bruise
Satan under our feet, and Little while, before we shall enter into, and take
Possession of, that place, into which shall in no wise enter, any thing that
defiles, neither works abomination, or makes a Lie, Rev. 21. 27. where we
shall sin no more, sorrow no more, Nor the Spiritual Wickedness, afflict us any
more for ever.

To conclude; The Lord is known by the Judgments which he Executes in the midst
of us. The Dispensations of his providence, appear to be Unsearchable, and his
doing past finding out. He seems to have allowed Satan, to afflict many of our
people, and that there upon he is come down in Great wrath, threatening the
Destruction of the Bodies, and (if the Infinite mercy of GOD prevent not) of
the Souls of many in this place. Yet may we say in the midst of the terrible
things which he does in righteousness; He alone is the GOD of our Salvation,
who represents himself, as the Savior of all that are in a low and distressed
Condition, because he is good, and His mercy endures for ever.

Let us then Return, and Repent, rent our hearts, and not our Garments. Who can
tell, if the Lord will Return in mercy unto us? And by his Spirit life up a
Standard, against the GRAND Enemy, who threatens to come in like a Flood, among
us, and overthrow all that is Holy, and Just, and Good. It is no small comfort,
to consider, that Job's exercise of Patience, had it is beginning from the
Devil; but we have seen the End to be from the LORD, James 5. 11. That we also,
may find by experience, the same Blessed Issue, of our present distresses, by
Satan's Malice. Let us Repent of every Sin, that has been Committed; and
Labor to practice, every Duty which has been Neglected. And when we are
Humbled, and Proved for our good in the latter end: Then we shall assuredly,
and speedily find, that the Kingly Power of Our LORD and SAVIOR, shall be
Magnifyed, in delivering his Poor Sheep and Lambs, out of the Jews, and Paws,
of the Roaring Lion.

Then will JESUS the Blessed Antitype of Joshua, the Redeemer, and Chooser
(...), Quell, Suppress, and uterly Vanquish this Adversary of ours, with
Irresistible Power and Authority, according to our Text. And the LORD said unto
Satan, the Lord Rebuke thee O Satan, Even the LORD that has Chosen Jerusalem,
Rebuke, thee: is not this a Brand plucked out of the FIRE?

FINIS.

