THE Heresy and Hatred Which was falsely Charged upon the INNOCENT Justly
returned upon the GUILTY.

Giving some brief and impartial Account of the most material Passages of a
late Dispute in Writing, that has passed at Philadelphia betwixt John Delavall
and George Keith, With some intermixed Remarks and Observations on the whole.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at Philadelphia, Anno Dom. 1693.

Heresy and Hatred justly returned on the GUILTY, etc.
NOtwithstanding the many tendious and vexatious Disputes and Controversies
that have been among us of late concerning Doctrines and Principles of
Religion, one Party affirming, and the other denying, yet at other times in
public. Thomas L^^yd and Party, have ^ndeavoured to cast a Mist before the
People to make them believe, That there is no difference in Doctrine betwixt
(...) and Geoge Keith. But on the 11th of the 10th Month, 1692. being the first
Day of the Week, in the Public Meeting at Philadelphia before several Hundred
People, (...) Delavall silenced that pretense, by (...) me o^ being guilty o^
Works of the Flesh, in two particulars, viz. Heresy and Hatred, using this as
an Argument why I should not be heard, but my Ministry stopped and denied: The
Heresy whereof he accused was, That I have been heard to affirm, That the
Light within is not sufficient to Salvation without something else. This he
undertook to prove to be a Heresy, but not from any one place of Scripture,
but from Friends books and particularly from a passage in W. Penn's part (...)
the Book called, The Christian Quaker, where he says, The Talent is in it self
suffici^^t.

Next, he undertook to prove me guilty of Hatred, because, as he (...), I had
reviled Friend, and (...) accused them in diverse things. But did not prove his
Charge in any one Particular.

And the said John Delavall has diverse times accused me in public Meetings,
That (...) would prove me to be no (...), both from my own Books and the Books
of Friends. To which I replied, That to prove me to be guilty of Heresy, and
to be no Quaker, he ought first to begin with the Scripture, and prove me
guilty of Heresy from the Scripture, and then let him proceed to prove it from
my own and Friends Books.

Sam. Jenings replied in the public Meeting, We are not to prove it from
Scripture, but from Books Friends; for the Question betwixt us and G. K. is
not, who is the best Christian, but who is the best Quaker.

G. K. answered, If I am a good Christian I am a good Quaker, seeing the
Quakers own themselves to be nothing else but true Christians. And also seeing,
that we profess to own the Scriptures, and (...) them to all other Writings, ye
ought to begin with the Scripture, and from them prove me to be guilty of
Heresy.

John Delavall did f^^ther accuse me, That my Heresy and Error was in a
Fundamental Doctrine of the Quakers, in saying, The Light within is not
sufficient (...) not something else.

G. K. answered, I am glad to find the Controversy at last come to this plain
issue, that ye and we differ in Doctrine, which ye would not acknowledge
publicly before, but generally said, ye had nothing against my Doctrine, but
against my Passion, etc. But now it plainly appears, that ye have against my
Doctrine, and that ye and I differ Fundamentally. But however, John Delavall
has not proved it from any Friends Books, that I am guilty of Heresy; for
though William Penn says in the Christian Quaker, That the Talent or Light
within is sufficient in it self to Salvation, yet he does not say, it is
sufficient without the Man Christ Jesus, and what he did and suffered for us on
Earth, and without his present Intercession and Mediation for us in Heaven,
which is that so nothing else that I have affirmed to be necessary to our
Salvation, together with the Light within, as one entire cause of our
Salvation; and I can and dare appeal to William Penn in the case, who I hope is
a living man, Whether his words bear any such sense, as (...) would impose upon
them, to prove me guilty of Heresy in a Fundamental Doctrine of the Quakers?

And for his Charge of Hatred, I told them, That it was no sin nor evil to hate
men's Errors and Hypocrisy, and to bear a Zealous Testimony against them; nor
is it any Reviling to use sharp words of Reproof against the Guilty, unless ye
will prove that I have falsely accused (...) in any thing, which ye can never
do, though they have falsely accused me, (...) prove; and therefore both the
Heresy and Hatred (...) at your door. And ye have not been short in giving
hard words against me, but have far exceeded me, as can well be proved.

It may be farther observed, that several first Days one after another John
Delavall brought to the public Meeting his Pocket full of Books, interrupting
me in my Testimony, and read passages out of the same, pretending he would
prove by my own Books, that I contradicted my (...) Doctrine. To which I have
answered, That it was an act of Incivility that both J. Delavall and his
Brethren were guilty of, (as well as a Breach of the chief Fundamental Law of
this Province, than requires, That no (...) be disturbed in the practice of
his R^^^gion, tho or a differing (...) if he profess to believe in Almighty
God) for them (...) to leave us, and then again to come in upon us, and in such
a rude manner to interrupt and oppose (...) my (...) Testimony (sometimes
crying out, We have heard an old (...) handle such a subject better than thou
does* other times, Who does not believe this? what need thou preach this to us?
And then again at other times, many of them at once coming out, This (...)
Doctrine George, this is not according to an^ient Friends*) though I have
interrupted none of them, nor intend to do; but on the contrary we sent a
proposal to their Monthly Meeting, for them and us to confer about it, and see
if we could accomodate the matter so as to prevent so great Confusion, and all
the answer we could get, was, That the Spirit of the Lord could not be
limited; thereby making the Spirit of God the Author of so great Confusion as
has happened amongst us, that a Person of Note, living in New York Province
coming into the Meeting, compared it to a (...)-baiting.

And I then told them further, That seeing John Delavall did proffer to prove
me to contradict my former Doctrine, and to be no Quaker. I was most willing,
and did desire that a day might be appointed for a Public Dispute, wherein he
might have opportunity to prove his Charge, if he could. To which John Delavall
positively assented, without any reservation, restriction, or proviso; but
sometime after being put in mind of it by me, in a Letter to him, he declined
it, by making excuse, that he would dispute with me in public, providing he
had the consent of his Brethren. And on a First Day, some time after. I
pressing J. D. to perform (...), Thomas Lloyd said, He would not permit a
public Dispute, left it should occasion a (...). But let the impartial Reader
judge, whether this was not a mere (...), seeing they so constantly on a first
day made Interruptions and Oppositions to me and my Testimony, which caused
greater Confusion than ever was like to happen at a Dispute.

Therefore, seeing that they declined a Dispute, to prove their Charge, I writ
a few lines to J. Delavall, That whereas he had (...) me to be guilty of
Heresy and Hatred, (...) him to make good his Charge against me. In answer to
which he writes ^ Letter, dated the 16 of 10 Month, 1692. in which he does
acknowledge (but very min^^ngly) that he had charged me with Heresy and
Hatred, and does positively lay, [This being a Difference in a Fundamental
Doctrine] (...) to send in writing, what he had to ^ay on the first head, viz.
That the Light within is not sufficient without something else, which he call,
Heresy.

And in another Letter of his, bearing date the 3d of 11 Month, (referring to
his Paper he sent me the 24th of 10 Month,) he says, Wherein I have fully
proved thee to differ in a Fundamental Doctrine from thy former, and other
Friends Writings. And further to prove me guilty of Heresy, in the said
Letter, he gives his sense of the word Heresy, as intended by him, when
mentioned in the public Meeting. It is the same (says he) as the Fathers (so
called) defined it: Heresy is a mis-belief of some points of Faith, contrary
to the Doctrine universaily received in the Church.

To this his Definition of Heresy, out of the Fathers (so called) as he
alleged, I replied to him, in a Letter bearing date the 2d of 12th Month, That
his Definition of Heresy seems rather to be taken out of some Popish Writer,
than any approved ancient Fathers (so called) further adding, That the best way
to know what Heresy is, is to examine it by the Spirit of Truth within, and
the Testimony of the Scripture without, and to lay most weight on these two.
But what has been the universal Testimony of the Church in all Ages, or what
it is at present, is far more hard and difficult in many things to determine,
and too tedious to enquire into, but however* I doubt not but I have more the
Consent of the Universal Church for me, than against me, in this particular.

And in his said Paper, bearing date 24 of 10 Mo. 92. wherein he alleges,
That he ^ath fully proved me to differ in a Fundamental Doctrine from my former
and other Friends Writings, he spends most of his Paper, containing about a
Sheet and a half in Writing, citing particular Testimonies out of mine and
other Friends printed Books, and Particularly my Book of Universal Grace, page
7, 3, 4, 18, 16, 83, 94. and (...), called, The Mystery of the great Where,
Epist. to the Reader by (...) and p. 19, 20, 21. and W. Penn in his part of the
(...) Quaker, p. 36, 85, 86. and G. Whitehead in his part of the (...) Quaker,
page ^^, 31. and Rob. Barclay in his English Apology, (...) 167^, page 101,
112, 1^^, and p. 96, 97.

To this I replied in two Sheets of Writing, in a very Friendly way, in
compliance with J. Ds expectation, having said in his Paper, That he expected
my Friendly Reply, wherein (...) him, that I have (...) read over again and
again all these Testimonies co^ected by him, out of mine and other Friends
Books, and have diligently (...) and considered them, and find not the least
inconsistency with (...), and my late or present Doctrine, (...) in print or by
word of mouth, nor with the Assertions he draws from them, rightly
understood; As 1 st, That this Light wherewithal every man is enlightened with,
is Christ Jesus; 2dly, That it is the very Grace of the Gospel, and Object of
the Faith thereof ( viz. chiefly, as with respect to the second Ministration
thereof, the which lies hid within the first) 3dly, That by Belief in the
Light, and Obedience thereunto, Salvation is obtained. And I further said, As I
can freely appeal to such of them as are alive in the Body, whether their sense
of their words bear J. D's Construction, so I can sincerely say, it is a g^oss
mistake of his, the Construction he puts upon my words, cited by him out of my
(...) book of Universal Grace.

And for a Proof that John Delavall had put a wrong Construction upon my words,
as is my present Assertion, ( viz. That the Light (...) in is not sufficient
without the Man Christ Jesus, and his Death and Sufferings, and Mediation, etc.
which is that something else (as J. D. has confessed) is understood by me) did
contradict the Doctrine in that Book, I did refer for my Vindication to my said
Book of Univers Grace, (...) part stating the Controversy, N. 3, 4, 6. and
ans. ^^ 25 Obj. To which J. D. has not given any Reply. And because the (...)
places to which I have referred for my Vindication, are so plain and evident* I
earnestly recommend them to the Reader to weigh and consider at their full
length, and only shall give a hint of things therein (...) at present, for
(...) sake. In the 3d p^rticular of the first part, I treat largely of the Two
inward Ministrations of the Light within, (...) Law and Gospel, and that both
in Jews and Gentiles (...), and how the Gospel lay hid within the Law, as
within a Vail, even as the Holy Place and the Holy of Holies was within the
(...) But this Distinction given by me of the Two inward (...) (...) Light, as
laid down in my said Book that has been in print (...) 22 Years past, J. D.
accuses as a Novelty, as also my other Distinction of Salvation begun and
per^ected, according to the first and (...) measures of more Light and (...)
further to be given, sufficiently hinted as, N.6. 1 part of said (...). And in
the answer to Obit. 25 of said Book, I am so far from (...) the sufficiency of
the Light within, so as to exclude the Man Christ, and the benefit of his
outward Coming, Obedience, Death and Sufferings from having a part in our
Salvation (together with the Light within) that I do expressly join them
together, plainly affirming, That they are both sufficient and useful and
necessary in their own kind and way, consummating, and being consummated in one
another. It can hardly be construed (...) adverten^y in J. D. but rather a
wilful and deliberate Omission in him, thus to pass by what made so clearly
to vidicate me, in my said Book, that so he might seem to have some Color to
pervert my words to a contrary (...) from what was ever intended by me.

And whereas J. D. has said in his Paper, That he does friendly entreat me,
not to put a wrong Construction on (...) words, for accusing me of Heresy, as
if lie and his (...) did exclude the Man Christ Jesus from (...) any part in
our Salvation; and does often earnestly affirm, both in his first and second
Paper, That neither (...) nor his Brethren exclude the Man Christ from having a
part in our Salvation.

To this I did answer, in my first Paper, That seeing he does blame my
Assertion, as being a Heresy, That the Light within is not sufficient to
Salvation without something else, he must needs hold the Antithesis, or
Contradictory, viz. That the Light within Is sufficient without any thing else,
that is to say, in other equivolent Terms, without any thing [beside] [more] or
[other] as the English Particle [(...)] does signi^ie: but this Assertion
excludes wholly the Person of Christ, both the Body, and Fullness of Light,
Grace and Truth that dwells in him, and his Death and sufferings, etc all
which are (...), i. e. some what other; or beside, or more, than the measure
(...) Light (...), though Christ within and without is still but one Christ.
(...) put him in mind, that Contradictory Propositions (...) two Particulars,
as some and some, but betwixt one (...) and the other Universal, the one (...)
and the other (...) therefore for J. D. to say, The (...) within is suffi^^^^^
(...) some what else, is no Contradiction for the Light within (...) without
Thousands of some (...) else, but yet not with^^^^ (...) every thing else, for
then it would exclude the Man Christ, (...) and Sufferings, from having any
part in our Salvation I further told him, That it could not be said, that the
Man Christ was the Light in us, otherwise than by a ^igurative Speech of a
(...) or Netonyme or Allegory.

And whereas John Delavall did mainly blame my Assertion, That the Light within
is not sufficient without something else, i. e. the Man Christ Jesus, 1 st.
Because I said in my Book of Universal Grate, That the Light ( viz. within) is
the immediate (...) of the Christian Faith 2dly, That I said, It is inseparable
from God and Christ, as the (...) of the Sun are inseparable from the Sun.

To this I replied, That I did not say, the Light within is the [Only] Object,
and though the Light within, and the Man Christ without and the (...) of Light
that dwells in him, he inseparable one from another, yet the one is not the
other; for things may be inseparable, and yet the one not be the other, whereof
I gave diverse Instances, as Faith and Repentance are inseparable, yet Faith is
not Repentance. Remission of Sin and Sanctification are inseparable, yet
Sanctification is not Remission of Sin, but somewhat else; and Christ's
glorified Soul and Body are inseparable, yet his Body is not his Soul: The God
head and Manhood of Christ are inseparable, yet the Godhead of Christ is not
his Manhood: The Measure and Fullness are inseparable, yet the Measure is not
the Fullness: The River and Ocean are inseparable, yet the River is not the
Ocean; The Beams and the great Body of the sun are inseparable, and yet the
Beams are not the great Body of the Sun; Also, the glorified Saints in Heaven
and Christ are inseparable, yet they are not Christ, but Christ is somewhat
else. (...), I told him in my former Paper, that G. F. E. B. and W. P. (...)
distinguish betwixt the Measure and Fullness in the Testimonies mentioned,
withal citing a Passage in T. (...) Book, (...) (...) of Tithes shaken, page
238. saying Nor (...) the Quakers (...) Salvation to the following the Light
within, (...) they (...) Salvation to Christ Jesus, to whom the Light within
leads these that truly follow it. And he has another observable Passage, page
240. If any one expects ^^mission of Sins by any other way than the Death of
Christ, be readers the Death of Christ useless. Thus T. Ellwood. And surely the
Death of Christ it something else than the Light within. And W. Penn (...) and
to (...) p. 192. says, The Light within is not God, but of God. And neither
^.Barclays words, cited by J. D. nor any others hold forth the (...) of the
Light, without the Man Christ Jesus, that something else that I always affirmed
to be concerned in our Salvation, together with the Light within.

And (...) J. D. in the last Leaf his first Paper lays down fix Heads, which
he says, he is willing to controvert with me. To this I replied, that the four
first of these Heads I will not controvert with him, for they are a part of my
Testimony, and always owned by me, rightly understood; and for the two last, I
will readily controvert with him, after the Controversy about the Light is
ended.

And in my first Paper I did further inform J. D. That my assertion, viz. That
(...) Light within is not sufficient without something else; that something
else being the Man Christ Jesus, and his Obedience, Death and Sufferings,
Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation for us in Heaven, does no wise infer the
Light its being not sufficient; and for J.D. to think it does so infer,
proceeds from either his great Weakness or Inadvertency, not considering the
Signification of such or the like (...) Propoutions, giving diversful Examples,
and particularly he that says, Man is not sufficient without the Grace of God,
to work out his Salvation, does not deny man to be sufficient or able to do it,
with and by the help of Gods Grace; and therefore, he who says, the Grace of
Christ or Light within is not sufficient to save us without the Man Christ,
does not deny the Grace and Light of Christ is sufficient, together with him. I
further saying, That as God infinitely wise has ordained diverse concurring
Natural Causes to produce one Natural Effect, all subordinate to him, the first
and highest Cause; so to effect our Salvation he has ordained diverse
concurring Causes; some without us and some within us, and every one sufficient
and able in their manner and way of working, to answer to the end and effect,
all in Harmony together.

And because J. D. in his former Papers had not stated aright the matter of
Difference betwixt him and me, as concerning the sufficiency of the Light
within to Salvation, therefore I did state my Persuasion concerning the
sufficiency of the Light, and also concerning the Scriptures being sufficient
to afford us words whereby to express our Faith in all matters of Christian
Doctrine, in twelve several particulars. To which, as yet, J.D. has sent no
particular Reply; therefore as to that the matter rests at present. And this is
a brief account of the most material Passages in the first Paper that J. D.
sent to me, and in the Reply that I made unto his said first Paper.

In answer to my first Paper, which was writ is a very fair and friendly manner
to John Delavall, he sends me a second Paper, by way of Reply, containing
many bitter Expressions, unfriendly Reflections and false Accusations, too
tedious here to relate, but which will sufficiently appear, if the Paper happen
to be printed, most grossly mis-applying that place of Scripture to me, Ezeh.
18. 24. as if I were turned a wicked man; And why? because of my zealously
opposing his and their Antichristian Doctrine, and detecting their Hypocrisy,
Ignorance and Errors, even as Friends in England (...) wicked (...) for their
opposing and detecting the Ignorance, Errors and Hypocrisy of their Oppose^s.

To m^ former Reply, that I said, The Light, ( viz. within) is not the (...) of
(...) J. D. does answer, in his second Paper, (...) where I blame our (...),
that they do not hold it ( viz. the divine Illumination of Christ within) to be
the immediate Object (...) the Christian Faith.

To this I answered, in my 2d Paper, That to say the Light within is the (...)
Object of the Christian Faith, is not to say, it is the Only Object of the
Christian Faith, excluding the Man Christ Jesus, and his Death and Sufferings,
Resurrection, As^ention, and Mediation for us in Heaven, which are owned
generally by Friends, yea, and by J. D. though in Contradiction to himself, to
be also the Objects of our Christian Faith, seeing he expressly grants, That
he and his Brethren do believe in the Man Christ Jesus, and (...) R. Barclay,
saying, (...) Unbelief not to believe these things where declared. (...) Note,
R. B. in his printed Letter to H. Pae^s, a (...) does distinguish betwixt the
material and formal Object of Faith, granting that Christ's Death and
sufferings, Resurrection, Ascension and Intercession, etc with other parts of
Christ's Doctrine, are the material Object of Faith, but affirming, that the
divine Revelation of the Light within is the formal Object thereof: And
therefore if J. D. were not blinded with Prejudice, he would see there is not
the least Inconsistency here. And (...) the word Object is not a Scripture
word, yet it is used not only by R. Barclay, but by J. Burnet, see his
Collection, printed 1691, in his Answer to Ja. Harry, page 212. where he says
expressly, Therefore we expect he should inform (...) what Gospel he has to
(...) to the^ Christ-dyed not for, and what Object of Faith he has to lay down
(...) them to believe (...); for Faith (...) have (...) Object. Or whether they
do not, (...) as a Duty upon all to believe; and then let (...) know their
Method of Distinction, who preach not the Gospel to every one, for sure there
can be no Gospel of Glad Tidings to them Christ dyed not for. Thus John
Burnyeat: Where it is plain, that he understands Christ's dying for all to be
the Object of (...) Faith, and a Doctrine of the Gospel, as well as that he
does inwardly enlighten all, as it was of that Gospel which* Paul preached, as
it does plainly appear from 1 Cor. 15. 1, 23. Romans 10. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24,
25. and many other places. And I put J. D. in mind how at the school-house
Meeting, about 12 Months past, he brought the forecited place, Romans 10. 9, 8.
in opposition to T. Lloyd, his Fatherin-Law, to prove that it was not
sufficient to Salvation, to believe only in the Light within, but to believe
also that Christ dyed and rose again; And to this, as to other things, I expect
his particular Answer.

And I say still, that Christ's inwardly enlightening all, is a Doctrine of the
Gospel, and the Object of our Faith, as well as that Christ dyed for all. But I
was so far from denying Christ's coming the Flesh, and his Death, and
Sufferings, to be any part of the Object of the Christian Faith, in that
Treatise of Universal Grace, cited by J. D. that page 92. I particularly
mention Christ's Coming in the Flesh, his Miraculous birth is Doctrine,
Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, etc. as being things of
the Christian Faith and Religion, which the Light within brings us to own; and
the same upon the matter is confessed by J. D. in both his Papers: How then am
I guilty of Heresy, for saying the same that J. D. faith?

To my saying, that J. D. his blaming my Assertion, as being Heresy, ( viz
That the Light within is not sufficient without something else) does oblige him
to hold the Antithesis or Contradictory Assertion, That the Light within is
sufficient without any thing else. J. D. Replyeth, That is but my (...), and
none of his words. To which I replied, That some affirm, they heard him say so,
in so many words; but suppose he did not say it, yet seeing ^e has accused me
of the former, the necessary and unavoidable Consequence of his words makes it
to be his, and to deny this, is to be guilty of the greatest T^ifflig and
Non-fence that ever I knew in any pretending to common Reason: His scurrilous
Reflection upon me, as (...) my School-Craft, as he calls it, I pass over, not
valuing it, being conscious of my sincerity, and which I freely leave to the
Impartial to judge.

For a Proof that W. Penn lays not our whole Salvation upon the Light within
only, as sufficient without the Man Christ Jesus, I did cite W. P. in answer to
J. Faldo, part ^. page 243. J. Faldo charging it upon the Quakers, That they
expect to be saved by the Light within only* W. P. answers in behalf of the
Quakers, This is a wicked Suggestion against us; see also his following words.
And as I said to J. D. in my 2d Paper, Now let the Impartial Reader judge, who
has any thing of common Reason, Whether by these words W. Penn does not
Plainly declare his Mind, That we are not saved by the Light within without
something else? For as the word Only is exclusive, so are the words Without
something else.

And here let it be noted, that John Delavall finding that he could not make
good his Charge against me, viz. his accusing me of Heresy for saying, The
Light (...) is not sufficient without something else, he goes about (most
(...)) to change the state of the Question; for whereas the state of the
Question was, Whether the Light within was sufficient to Salvation without
something else, viz without the Man Christ Jesus, and is Death and Sufferings,
and present Intercession for us in Heaven, he goes about (not so slyly as
(...)) quite to alter and change it to another Question, altogether different
from the former, as Whether any can be perfectly saved and made perfectly happy
without all knowledge and faith of the Man Christ Jesus without us, and of his
Death and Sufferings, etc?

To which I have answered him in my second Paper, That these two are quite
differing Questions; for if this last should be granted, yet it still
remains, that the Light within only, without the Man Christ Jesus, does not
save any; for even many who do not know him, nor believe in him (having some
measure of sincerity under the first Ministration of the Light within them)
receive the benefit of his Death, and Sufferings, and Mediation (by the general
acknowledgment of all that ever I have formerly known of the People called
Quakers) at least in some measure to begin a good work in them, as is clear in
the case of (...), before he received the Knowledge and Faith of Christ
crucified and raised again; and therefore, as I have told J. D. he will sooner
wash an Ethiopian until he be white, than he can prove me guilty of Heresy or
Error, for affirming, The Light is not sufficient without something else,
either according to Scripture or sound Friends. But to say, The knowledge and
Faith of Christ, both as he is God and Man, and as he dyed for our sins, and
rose again for our Justification, and is (...) Mediator in Heaven, even the Man
Christ Jesus, is necessary to finish and perfect the Salvation and Eternal
Happiness of all that shall be Eternally saved, This does no ways derogate
from the sufficiency of the Light within, for the Light within being God and
Christ, is abundantly sufficient to reveal this Knowledge and Faith in all them
who shall be saved, and that either without or with means, as God pleases,
though in Gods ordinary way of working, he makes use of outward means; and
therefore if any have not the Knowledge and Faith of Christ crucified, as
outwardly, this does no more prove, that the Light is not sufficient in it
self, than if any have not the Faith and Obedience of the Light inwardly, does
prove that the Light is not sufficient; for as J. D. has confe^^ed in his
first Paper, Faith and Obedience are the blessed Effects produced by the
sufficiency (...) this Light (...) is true Followers; So that Faith and
Obedience, with respect to the Light, are not the Cause of its Sufficiency,
though it Then only comes to be sufficient to us, when we believe in it, and obey
it. And thus, what J.D. affirms with respect to the Light (...), I affirm also,
with respect to the Man Christ without us, as he dyed and rose again, and is
our Intercessor in Heaven; for, as not to believe in the Light within, is no
argument of its Insufficiency, so not to believe in the Man Christ without us,
is no argument that the Light within is not sufficient to men's Salvation
universally, because the Light within being a real measure of the eternal Word,
Christ Jesus, can as (...) reveal the Faith of the Man Christ without, and of
his Death and Sufferings, etc. as it can reveal the Faith of Christ within,
both which J.D. does acknowledge to be necessary to all such to whom it is
preached or declared, for their Eternal Salvation.

John Delavall`s silly Taunt and Reflection, That I cause him not to s^^ggar by
my profound Logic, (as he terms it) I regard not, further, (as I told him in my
2d Paper) but to take notice of his scoffing Spirit, more like Ishmael than a
true Christian or true Minister of Christ: I used no profound Logic in the
case, but one or two of the easiest and plainest Rules in that ca^ed Logic,
belonging to the Rudiments of it, and as I told him, true Reason teaches it,
without all Art of Logic; but J. D. in meddling with that he calls my
Logic, has showed his profound Ignorance in common Reason.

His accusing me of Pride, (...) and Rage, I told him, is one of the Unclean
Streams that ^ow from his Unclean ^ountain; and so I pass it, with other his
(...) Reflections and false (...).

I also told him, his positively charging me with that he calls my late
modelied Doctrine of the Revolutions, is a base and vile Forgery and Calumny,
which I have sufficiently answered in my printed Treatise, called, (...) and
Innocence, etc. I never made that (vulgarly) called the Revolutions, any matter
of any Christian Faith, and no man living can justly say, that ever I did: I
can defend my Christian Faith without the Doctrine of the Revolutions, as well
as all other true Christians can, who are of the same Faith with me concerning
the Necessity of the Knowledge and Faith (...) Christ (...), to (...)
Salvation. Nor has the Doctrine of the two Ministrations, and of Salvation
began, and Salvation perfected, a dependence on the Revolutions, so called,
whether true or false; for what has a dependence on another, is the Effect of
that other; but the two Ministrations of the Light within, and the Work of our
Salvation, both in its beginning and finishing, have no other Cause but God,
and Christ, and the Spirit, and therefore wholly depend thereupon. And I freely
at any time proffer to defend my Perswal^on and Faith concerning the Two
Ministrations, and Salvation begun and finished, without running either to the
(...) Purgatory, or the Hypothesis of the Revolutions; and let John Delavall or
any of his Associates, try their strength, whether they can drive me, by the
force of their Arguments to any such pinch or strait, as he does basely
insinuate against me in his 2d Paper. And his Accusations in this particular do
not only strike against me* but G.F.E.B. W.P. (...) whom I can Prove to hold
the distinction of two inward Ministrations of the Light, and two states of
Men, answering thereunto, the first of which G. F. calls, The state of the
first Adam, which he was in before (...), which he calls, A state of danger,
where he may fall again, but to come to Christ's stature, and to him before the
World began, (...) is first and last, beginning and ending, such shall know a
state that will never (...); see his printed Epistle, 1666. directed, To be
read in all the Assent (...) of the Righteous; and concerning this second state
he says further, Christ that never fell is a state beyond Adam, and he is to
be heard and (...) that never fell, and in him are People to sit down, who is
the (...), and Peace, and Life, who de^troyeth the Devil and his Works, and
makes an end of Sin; now this being manifest and known in all, then the Lamb
is known to have the Victory. And a little after, speaking of this second
state, he says, And, here, as you live in the Seed, Christ Jesus, your (...)
you know before the World began, and Reprobation since the World began. And
these two states W. Penn plainly distinguishes in his part of the Chr. Quaker,
calling the one that of the Law, the other that of the Gospel, the one that of
a Servant, the other that of a Son; and E. Borough says, page 56. of his
Works in folio, The Law must have its through Operation, before the Gospel be
witnessed. It is therefore manifest that John Delavall is greatly Ignorance, as
in the holy Scriptures, so in the Quakers Principles, so to fault my Testimony
concerning the two Ministrations, and Salvation begun and Salvation finished,
which perfect Salvation (according to G. F.) belongs only to the second State
and Ministration.

And whereas J. D. in his 2d Paper makes an Essay to show, That Propositions
may be Inconsistent, that are not strictly Contradictory the one to the other,
giving an Instance in four Examples. To this I have answered. That all these
are Contradictory, being either betwixt definite Particulars, or such as
contain necessary matter of Truth and Falsehood, and therefore are strictly
Contradictory; but Propositions betwixt Indefinite Particulars, as some and
some, are never Contradictory nor Contrary, nor have the least Inconsistency,
when the matter of them is not any necessary Truth and Falsehood, but are both
True, as is the present case in our Debate; for as it is true, That the Light
within is [Nor] sufficient without something else, that something else being
the Man Christ Jesus, and his Death and Sufferings, and Intercession for us in
Heaven, so is it also true, That the Light within [Is] (...) without (...) of
some other things else. And if Jo. Delavall think not himself obliged (by the
Law of Dispute) to show the Antithesis o^ strict Contradictory Proposition held
by him, (which is most proper) if he have not renounced all use of common
Reason, he must show the Proposition that is (if not Contradictory) at least
contrary or inconsistent therewith; but it has none other than that I
mentioned to him in my first Paper, viz. That the Light [is] sufficient without
[Any] thing else; and this he must needs hold, unless he resolves wholly to
unman himself; for it is the nature of all Indefinite particular Propositions,
that they have no contrary but what is strictly Contradictory, as is out
present Case. And in any 2d Paper I put him inmind of the common Proverb, Let
not the shoesmaker go beyond his Last, not that I upbraid him with his
Ignorance in the Art of Logic, but for his Pedantick Vanity, that he would
seem to know what he is as ignorant of ^s a Child.

To his saying, We never differed about the meaning of the Particle [(...)] I
told him, he is grossly dis-ingenuous; for he knows the contrary in his
Conscience; and he may remember, how that not long ago, when I was declaring in
the public Meeting, That the (...) Christ's Light in us, was not sufficient
without (...), that (...) in the (...) Christ Jesus, and the Fullness (...)
something (...) than (...) Measure, Sam. Je^ings, in the public Meeting
interrupted me, most (...), as he has at other times done, (though I have never
interrupted him, nor any of them) and he cried out, (...), George, (...) is
something [more] but is it something (...)] To which I answered, Yea, it is
something else; and therefore if J. Delavall had any thing of shame-facedness
left in him, he might be (...) of his (...) and dissimulation in this
particular.

To his blaming me for saying, The Man Christ was the Light in us, was a
figurative Speech of Synecdoche, Netonyme or Allegory. I answered him, That
seeing he blames me for this, according to him, the Man Christ is within us,
wholly, both Soul and Body, without all figure, with all his Fullness; which is
as gross a Doctrine as the Papist* is concerning the Man Christ being in the
consecrated Cake. And I told him, that Christ, as God, was in us, without a
figure, but not as Man, without some figure or figurative Speech of Synecdoche,
Netonyme or Alleg^ry. And as to his Citation out of one of my Books, That where
it is (...) in Scripture, that Rock was Christ, I denied it to be a Figure; my
sense is plain, being in opposition to them who say, That Rock was not really
Christ, but only a Type or Figure of him: Whereas I affirmed, That Christ was
really with the Church in the Wilderness, and not only Typically and
Symbolically or Figuratively; and so is Christ really now with and in his
Church. And he blames me for giving some Examples of the Figure (...), used in
common Speech, as if I did (...) to Christ (...) us; but I made no Application,
and yet if I had, the Scripture, I told him, (...) the like; for what is to be
understood in Scripture by the Revelation of the Lords Hand or Arm in us, but
the measure of his Life? And (...) in Scriptare, Christ is compared to a (...)
that the Saints put on, and is their Clothing from Head to Feet, so he is said
to put them on; and Shoes in Scripture have a spiritual signification, as in
(...). (...) How Beautiful are thy (...) with Shoes! And the Prodigal at his
Return to his Fathers House, had Shoes put upon him, Luke 15. 22. And it was
the Life of Christ that clothed the Prodigal at his Return to his Fathers
House, from his Head to his Feet; and therefore the Scripture uses the Figure
of Shoes in a very high sense, though this is as a strange Doctrine (...) John
Delavall's (...) ignorance, who yet profe^^eth himself to be a Master in the
Israel of his Ignorant Associates and Hearers, who (belike) is the best and
ablest they can find to controvert with G. K. to prove him a Heretic, for his
sound Christian Doctrine, well warranted both by Scripture; and sound Quakers,
yea, and all Christians every where; for let all Professions in Christendom be
searched, and it will not be found that ever any of them (owned to be true
Christians) condemned it as an Heresy or Error, to say, The Light within is
not (...) to Salvation without something else, to wit, the Man Christ Jesus;
for as I told J. D. I never knew any hold Salvation by the Light within only,
excluding the Man Christ Jesus, but Jeffery Bullock, whom G.Whitehead has well
refuted, (...) his ^ook, (...), Judgment fixed, page (...) where he says, (...)
not the Consistency betwixt Salvation by the (...) and the Man Christ Jesus,
art gone from the Light into Imaginations; and so (by G.W's Judgment) are John
Delavall and his Brethren (...) call it Heresy to say, (...) Light within is
not sufficient to Salvation without the Man Christ Jesus; wherein John Delavall
and his Apostate (...) in with (...), for proof of which see the judgment of
their (...) Meeting at Philadelphia, that clears T. (...) and (...) for
saying, The Light is not sufficient without something (...), which we have
caused to be printed, with our Answer to it. Now I do boldly say, these men are
fallen from the Fundamental Principle of the Quakers in this very particular,
and are guilty of Heresy the (...), and yet would lay their Brat (Whore-like)
at my door, but I return it to him and them.

And notwithstanding that John Delavall has made an absolute and (...) Appeal
to ancient Friends in Old England, to determine in this case, I cannot easily
be perfwaded, that after they have fully heard the Case truly stated betwixt J.
D. and me, that ever they will approve (...) Doctrine, but on the contrary, if
they hold to their former Principles, as I (...) charitable they do, they will
condemn it, and blame his (...), and all them that adhea^ to him,
notwithstanding of his Fawning and Flattery, whereby he seeks to have their
favor for his professed Subjection to their Determination, which if it prove a
Contradiction to what he at present thinks (...) the dic^ate of the
Infallible Spirit in himself, it shall be seen what manner of Person he i^, and
how unfit to teach others, that is not truly taught himself in one of the first
Principles of the Christian Doctrine. And notwithstanding his fawning to have
favor with Friends in England, he could not do a worse thing to render Friends
Odious, both in England, and every where else, to assert it as the Quakers
Principle, To be a Heresy and Error in a Fundamental Doctrine, to say, The
Light within is not sufficient without something else, that something else (as
confessed by him) being the Man Christ Jesus without us, and his Death and
Sufferings, and Intercession; for if the generality of Professors in
Christendom believe this to be the Quakers Doctrine, there cannot be a more
mischievous Stumbling block laid in their way, to hinder People generally from
joining in Society with them. Therefore I hope God will put it into the hearts
of faithful Friends in England, and elsewhere, zealously to withstand this
most pernicious Antichristian Doctrine of ^. Delavall and his Associates, that
say, It is a Heresy to (...) (this sound Christian Doctrine) That the Light
within (...) to save men, without the Man Christ without us, for if so, then
either there is no Man Christ without us, (...) he is no Savior to us at all,
and has only the (...) and empty Title of a Savior, to wit, the Man (...).

And though J. D. has again and again asserted, That (...) so (...), (...) does
(...) exclude the Man Christ Jesus in the Outward, from having a part in our
Salvation; yet who can believe him, but he that can believe the greatest
Contradiction, which no man ever can do, that has not lost his common Sense and
Reason, and is not become a Brute in Understanding. Beside, if he does not
exclude him from having a part in our Salvation, as neither do I, but include
him, then in what part of my Assertion lodges the Heresy, that he has
changed upon me, for saying, The Light is not sufficient without something
else, I confelling, that by something else, I neither understand Humane
Learnning, nor the Letter of the Scripture, nor outward Preaching, as
absolutely and universally necessary, but the Man Christ Jesus? And as great a
Contradiction is it in J. D. to blame me for cha^ging him, That he holds the
Measure to be sufficient without the Fullness; for if he holds not this, he
must needs hold, That the Light within is not sufficient without the Fullness,
that is something else than the measure of the Light within, or then he must
hold two Contradictory Propositions to be false, as thus,

It is false to say, The Light is [Not] sufficient without the Fullness,

And

It is false to say, The Light [is] sufficient without the Fullness.

Which is an absolute Contradiction to all common Reason of Mankind; and I do
solemnly say, that of all the Adversaries I ever had to do with in Dispute, I
never met with a more Ignorant or more Unreasonable Adversary. And tho in a
Letter to me (wherein he is concerned with some others) he falsely charge me,
as being either Crased, etc. I appeal to all impartial Readers of common
Reason, Whether ever they heard or knew a man that seems more (...) than he.
And to me it seems a Judgment of God upon him, to be so bewildered and
confounded in his common Sense and Reason as a man, for daring to oppose so
great a Christian Truth asserted by me, a poor Servant of the Lord, and to call
it Heresy, he having (...), and more than ordinary appeared but of late to
join with me in the same Testimony, as I told him in my former Paper, how by
his charging me with Heresy, he had unministred himself. To which he returns
not any thing of ^ollid (...), but instead thereof a (...) Jest, not worth
mentioning. And thus the Scripture is fullfilled in him, Because they received
not the Truth in Love, God gave them up to strong Delusions, to believe Lies.

To his saying, in his second Paper to me, My Answer, that things which are
inseparable yet are (...), gives me no Relief. I answered him, I need no
Relief in the Cafe, my Examples were proper and pertinent* as that Faith and
Repentance are inseparable, and yet we are not saved by Faith without
Repentance, which he in his Ignorance labors to render Ridiculous, by the
Addition of his own wo^ds, making them a Tautology. But he altogether passes
by my Example how Christ's Godhead and Manhood are inseparable; and yet it is
most congruous and proper to say, The Man Christ (...) save us without his
Godhead, which Christ taught himself, expressly saying, I can do nothing of my
self, i.e. without my Father. Also, it does no more infer (...) I deny the
sufficiency of the Light within, because I say it is not sufficient without the
Man Christ without us, than it infers, that he that says, John Delavall is
not (...) Man without his Soul, denies J. D. to be a Man; or, J. D. is not
sufficiently honest without honest dealing, denies J. D. to be sufficiently
honest, Or, because Rich (...) said, Christ is not Christ without God, that
Christ (...) not Christ; see his Collection, page 29.

As for his other Collections of Testimonies out of (...) other Friends Books,
in his second Paper, (...) to these (...), as I said before, I find none of
them inconsistent with my present Doctrine, and if he think they do, I shall
freely (...) he please, that he may expose them to the World in Print* (...)
other Papers he has sent me, that so Impartial (...) may (...) betwixt us.

To his charging me, with Gratifying (...) to (...), and my Contentious
Behavior in Church and (...); I (...) answered him, His Accusation (...) and
(...), and I reject it as (...) I have no way m^dled with the Government, but
have (...) my faithful (...) to (...) Principle, against the use of outward
(...). It is no new thing for (...) men to be charged with (...) Enemies to
Government, by m^n of (...) and (...) Spirit and (...); so were Friends (...)
in old England, at their (...) appearance, and particularly G. ^. (...) so were
the (...) in Germany, and elsewhere, by the (...).

In^ third Paper I sent John Delavall, in answer to his ^etter bearing (...)
the 3d of the 11 Month, I did argue with (...) length, (...) if because Christ
without (...) Christ within are (...) one Christ, therefore it may be said
(according to (...)) that it is sufficient to preach Christ within, as he and
many of his (...) argue, and that it is a Heresy to say, The Light within is
not sufficient without something else, viz the Man Christ Jesus. By the (...)
Argument, It is sufficient to preach Christ without, and it is a Heresy to
say, The Man Christ is not sufficient to Salvation without (...) viz the (...)
within. And therefore by John Delavall and (...) way of Argument, all these who
have only preached Christ without, have been in the right, and all Friends who
have (...) them, for not preaching Christ within, are blameworthy; Why*
Because Christ within and Christ without are inseperably (...) Christ* But to
this, and many other things in my three Papers, I have received no Return. And
as I have told him, I desire not further to Dispute (...) in private, that is
(...) little purpose, but am willing to (...) to public View, partly what is
already (...), or what may further pass, reserving some other weighty things. I
sent him in my former Answer, to another (...), as I may have Convenience

In the mean time (...) it be remembered, that he has not brought one place of
Scripture, in all his Papers, whereby to convince me, (...) am guilty of
Heresy in the matter he accuses me.

And seeing the matter is come to this plain issue, that they have now
publicly charged me and my Friends, (...) with me, of being (...) Heresy,
which formerly they did rather whisper and (...) in Corners, and that it now
openly appears in the face of the World, that they accuse that to be Heresy,
which is a Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Faith, received, as we can
prove, by Geo* Fox, George Whitehead, William Penn, and the best of Friends, as
well as by all Christians in the whole World, it evidently appea^eth* and most
necessarily follows, that the Heresy is theirs, and they are Heretics, and
therefore our Separation from them is just, and is a necessary Duty, we having
(...) admonished them before, in private Conferences and Meetings, the
Scripture saying, An Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, (...)

And thus having cleared my self of Heresy, the Hatred (no more than the
Heresy (he sought to fix on me) does not at all belong to me, and therefore I
(...) upon him, as his Due, until he Repent, which I can truly say, I sincerely
wish and desire.

George Keith.

THE END.
The Printer's Advertisement
THat notwithstanding the various Reports spread concerning my refusing to
Print for these that are George Keith's Opposers. These are (...). That I have
never refused, but often proffered to print any thing for them, and do now
again signify, that if John Delavall or any other of his Brethren have any
thing to print, I am most (...) to do it for them; not that I want to beg their
Wor^, I need it not, but (...) leave them without Excuse, that if they be any
way wronged or falsely charged by what is published in Print to the World, they
may have equal privilege to Vindicate themselves as Publicly; though I have
little cause to make this Offer to them, considering their many Abuses to me.

W. B.


