Anno Regni Gulielmi and Mariae, REGIS and REGINAE, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae
and Hiberniae, QUINTO. The 10 th of April, Anno Domini 1694.
An Act for raising six Thousand Pound for the payment of three Hundred
Volunteers, and their Officers, to be employed in the Re-inforcement of the
Frontiers of this Province at Alb^ny, from the first of May next, to the first
of May then next following, in the Year of our Lord 1694.
WHereas upon the first day of May next, the time does expire, wherein the
Forces lately raised for the defense of the Frontiers at Albany, were to abide,
which continuing still daily exposed to the Attempts of the French, their
Majesty's declared Enemies, it is of absolute necessity that they should from
the said time be well Reinforced, not only for the Preservation of this
Province, but also for the Security and Defense of all their Majesty's Subjects
in the adjacent Colonies. And to the end that the said purposes may be well and
truly effected, the Representatives convened in General Assembly, do pray, that
his Excellency would levy or cause to be levied in this and the adjacent
Collonies three hundred effectual Men, Volunteers, to be formed in four
Companies of Soldiers, and employed in their Majesty's service, for the
security and defense of the Frontiers of this Province at Albany, and there to
continue during the time hereafter mentioned and expressed. That is to say,
That his Excellency does forthwith, upon publication hereof, raise, or cause
to be raised, as aforesaid, two hundred effectual men Volunteers, which are to
be formed into four Companies of Soldiers, as aforesaid, and employed at
Albany, for their Majesty's Service as aforesaid, and there to continue in the
said Service from the first day of May next, until the first day of May then
next following, that shall be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety and Four. And also, That his Excellency shall likewise raise One Hundred
effective Men Volunteers more, which shall likewise be added to the four
Companions aforesaid, in equal Proportion, and posted at Albany, as aforesaid,
and there only to continue and remain from the first day of November next
ensuing, until the fifteenth day of March then following, and no longer.

And that his Excellency may be the better enabled to make such Levys as
aforesaid, the Representatives convened in general Assembly, do pray that it
may be Enacted, And be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and
Representatives convened in general Assembly, and by the Authority of the same
That a Levy of Six Thousand Pounds current Money of this Province be laid,
assessed, raised and levied upon all and every of the Inhabitants, Residents
and Free holders of and in this Province, etc. for the paying and maintaining
of the said three hundred Volunteers and their Officers, together with the
incidental Charges that shall arise thereon, according to the Establishment
hereunto annexed, and no otherwise, and for no other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever.

To be laid, assessed, raised and levied in each respective City and County,
throughout the Province, according to the Rates, Quota's and Proportions
hereafter following; that is to say,

For the City and County of New York, One Thousand Four Hundred and Fifty
Pounds, being their Quota and Proportion of the Levy of Six Thousand Pounds
aforesaid.

For the County of Suffolk, in the Island of Nassaw, Twelve Hundred Pounds,
being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid.

For Queens County, in the Island of Nassaw, One Thousand Pounds, being their
Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid.

For Kings County, in the said Island of Nassaw, Nine Hundred Pounds, being
their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid.

For the County of Westchester Five Hundred and Sixty Pounds, being their Quota
and Proportion, as aforesaid.

For the County of Vlster and Duchess County, Six Hundred and Thirty Pounds,
being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid.

For the County of Richmond, Two Hundred and Thirty Pounds, being their Quota
and Proportion, as aforesaid.

And for the County of Orange Thirty Pounds, being their Quota and Proportion,
as aforesaid.

All which Quota's and Proportions, as aforesaid, does in the whole amount unto
the Sum of Six Thousand Pounds current Money aforesaid, which said Sum of Six
Thousand Pound shall well and truly be paid by the respective Collectors of
each respective City and County aforesaid, unto their Majesty's Collector and
Receiver General for the time being, at their Majesty's Custom House in the
City of New York, in two equal Payments, that is to say, Three Thousand Pounds
current Money as aforesaid, being the one moiety or equal half part of the said
Thousand Pounds, at or before the nine and twentieth day of September next,
being the Feast Day of St. Michael the Archangel. And the other three Thousand
Pounds current Money aforesaid, being the other moiety or equal half part of
the Levy aforesaid, at or before the twenty fifth day of March then next
following, being the Feast day of the Anunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary,
which shall be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and
Four, under the pains and penalties herein after mentioned.

And that the said Sum of Six Thousand Pounds, according to the Quota's and
Proportions aforesaid, may be most truly and effectually assessed, raised,
collected and paid unto their Majesty's Receiver General, in manner aforesaid
and for the intent and purposes aforesaid. Be it further Enacted, and it is
hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor and Aldermen
within this City of New York, for the time being, and the Justices of the Peace
for the time being, for the several and respective Coun^ies aforesaid, for the
several Counties respectively, for the which they shall be Justices of the
Peace do within forty days after Publication hereof, assemble and meet together
in the Court Houses, for the several respective Cities and Counties, or such
other place or places as they shall agree upon amongst themselves, and shall
there order that Assessors and Collectors for the several and respective
Cities, Towns, Manors, and Liberties within their several Jurisdictions, for
the assessing, collecting and receiving of the public R^^es, for the defraying
the public and necessary Charges of each respective City and County aforesaid,
be the Assessors and Collectors for the assessing, collecting and receiving the
sum or sums of Money herein beforementioned, according to the proportions
before expressed, as to the said Mayor and Alder-men and Justices shall seem
meet and reasonable.

And forasmuch as there are several Manors and Jurisdictions within the
respective Counties aforesaid, who neglect, and do not elect annually or once
every Year Assessors and Collectors, whereby the intent of this Act may be
frustrated, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the
respective Manors and Jurisdictions within the several Counties aforesaid,
shall refuse or neglect to elect Assessors and Collectors for the assessing of
their respective Manors and Jurisdictions, and for the collecting the same,
according to the intent and direction of this Act, then and in such case the
Justices of the Peace of the Counties where such Manors or Jurisdictions are,
are hereby empowered and authorized to nominate and appoint Assessors and
Collectors for such Manors and Jurisdictions as shall neglect or refuse as
aforesaid; which Assessors and Collectors shall to all intents and purposes
observe the directions of this Act, any thing contained herein to the contrary
hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Justices of the Peace for the respective Cities and Counties,
Manors and Jurisdictions have and shall have Power and Authority by virtue of
this Act, each of them by himself to administer an Oath to the said Assessors,
Well, Truly, Equally and Impartially, and in due Proportion, as it shall appear
to them, according to their best Understanding, to assess and rate the
Inhabitants, Residents and Freeholders of the respective places for which they
shall be chosen Assessors.

And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons
who shall be chosen Assessors or Collectors, shall deny, neglect, or unequally,
or partially assess, or refuse to make such Assessment, as by this Act is
required, or shall deny, neglect or refuse to collect any Sum or Sums of Money,
in form aforementioned assest, that then and in such case, it shall and may be
lawful for any two Justices of the Peace of the Cities and Counties where such
Offenders shall happen to dwell or reside, and who by virtue of this Act, are
required and empowered to do the same by Warrant under their Hands and Seals,
to commit such Assessor or Assessors, Collector or Collectors so denying,
neglecting or unequally and partially assessing, or refusing to collect, as
aforesaid, to the common Goal, there to remain without Bayl or Mainprize till
he or they make Fine and Ransom to their Majesty's, for such Contempt, as
aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, of what Degree or Quality soever he or they be, within this Province,
who shall be assessed or rated any sum or sums of Money by virtue of this Act
to be raised and levied, shall deny, refuse or delay to pay and satify the
same, that then it shall and may be lawful for any such Collector, by virtue of
a Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any Justice of the Peace for the City or
County where such Offender shall dwell or reside, who by Virtue of this Act are
Required and Authorized to grant and issue forth such Warrant, to levy the same
by Distress and Sale of such Person or Persons Goods and Chattles, returning
the Overplus, if any be, to the Owners, the Sum assessed, and Charges of
Distress and Sale being first deducted. And that where any of the Goods and
Chattels shall be distrained for any of the Assesments and Rates aforesaid, and
the Owner of the said Goods shall not within five days next after such Distress
taken, and notice thereof, with the cause of such taking left at the House, or
other most known place where the distress was made, come and pay to the
Collector and Receiver of the Assessment aforesaid, that then after such
Distress, and notice as aforesaid, and expiration of the said five days, the
Collector, or person distraining shall and may cause the Goods and Chattels so
distrained, to be appraised by two sworn Appraisers, to appraise the same
truly, according to the best of their Understandings, and after such
appraisement shall and may lawfully carry and drive the said Goods and Chattels
so distrained, into any County or Town throughout the Province, and the said
Goods and Chattels shall and may there lawfully sell for the best Price can be
gotten for the same, toward satisfaction of the Rates aforesaid, and of the
Charges of such Distress, Appraisement and Sale, giving the Overplus to the
Owners.

And also, be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Mayor,
Alderman or Justice of the Peace within this Province, who are hereby Required,
Empowered and Authorized to take effectual care that this Act and every Article
and Clause therein be duly executed, according to the true intent and meaning
thereof, shall deny, neglect, refuse or delay to do, perform, fulfill and
execute all and every or any the Duties, Powers and Authorities, by this Act
required and empowered, by him or them to be done, performed, fullfilled and
executed, and shall thereof be convicted before the Governor and Council, or
before any of their Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province, he or they
shall suffer such pain, by Fine and Imprisonment, as by the discretion of the
said Governor and Council, and the Justices of the said Courts, shall be
adjudged.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That if any Action,
Bill, Plaint or Information shall be brought, moved or prosecuted at any time
hereafter against any Person or Persons, for any Matter, Clause or Thing, done
or acted in pursuance or execution of this Act, such Person or Persons so sued
or prosecuted in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue,
Not Guilty, and give this Act, and the special Matter in Evidence; and if the
Plantiff or Prosecutor shall be Nonsuited, or forbear further Prosecution, or
suffer Discontinuance or Verdict to pass against him, the Defendant or
Defendants shall recover Treble Costs, for which they shall have the like
Remedy, as in case where Costs by the Law are given to Defendants.

Provided always, That no Major, Alder-man or Justice of the Peace shall be
troubled, sued, prosecuted or molested for any Omission, Offense or Neglect by
virtue of this Act, but within the space of one year after such Omission,
Offense or Neglect, and not at any Time hereafter, any thing contained herein
to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Always provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the several Collectors of each respective City and County, as aforesaid, shall
have liberty to pay the several and respective Sums assessed, as aforesaid, at
the day aforesaid, in current Money at New York, or for want thereof in good
sufficient and merchantable Provisions, at the Rates and Prices hereafter
specified and expressed, to wit, good merchantable Pork at the Rates of fifty
Shillings per Barrel, the Barrel well repacked by the sworn Packer at New York,
and the Barrel containing Thirty One Gallons and half, Winchester Measure, at
least. Beef at the Rate of Thirty Two Shillings and Six Pence per Barrel, well
repackt by the sworn Packet of New York, aforesaid, the Barrel to contain
thirty one Gallons and a half, Winchester-Measure, at least. Good merchantable
Winter Wheat at four Shillings per Bushel. Tried Tallow at four pence half
penny per Pound.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if
it should so happen that his Excellency, pursuant to the Limitations aforesaid,
could not effect to raise so many Volunteers in manner aforesaid, but that for
the intent aforesaid his Excellency should be constrained to make
proportionable Detachments in the respective Cities and Counties within this
Province, to complete the Number of the Forces, as aforesaid, then it is the
true intent and meaning of this Act, that there shall only be allowed and paid
unto such person or persons so detached as aforesaid, for the service
aforesaid, the sum of Eight Pence per Diem for each Person so employed as
aforesaid, and no more, any thing contained herein, or mentioned in the
Establishment hereunto annexed, in any ways to the contrary hereof
notwithstanding.

An Establishment for the paying of the Officers and Soldiers, together with
the incidental Charges, which are to be raised for the Rainforcement of Albany,
etc. from the first day of May, 1693. until the first day of May. 1694
l. s. d. Four Captains at 8 s. per Diem 01 12 00 Four Lieutenants at 4 s. per
Diem 00 16 00 Four Lieutenants at 3 s. per Diem 00 12 00 One Chyrurgion at 2 s.
6 d per Diem 00 02 06 One Commissiary for the Stores per diem 00 02 06 One
Commissiary for Muster per Diem 00 02 06 Twelve Sergeants at 1 s. 6 d. per diem
00 18 00 Twelve Corporals at 1 s per diem 00 12 00 Four Drums at 1 s per diem
00 04 00 Four Clerks at 1 s. per diem 00 04 00 Four Montrosses at 1 s. per diem
00 04 00 164 private Sentinels at 1 s. per diem 08 04 00 13 13 06 l. s. d. For
365 days 13 l. 13 s. 06 d. is 4991 07 06 100 private Sentinels for 135 days at
12 d. 675 00 00 One Town Major for 365 days at 4 s. 073 00 00 Incidental
Charges 260 12 06 The Total 6000 00 00

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to King William and Queen Mary,
at the City of New York, 1693.


