Help for Distressed Parents. OR, Counsels and Comforts FOR Godly Parents
Afflicted with Ungodly Children; AND WARNINGS unto CHILDREN, to Beware of all
those EVIL COURSES, Which would be Afflictive unto their PARENTS.

By Cotton Mather.

H ac Casti maneant in Religione Nepotes, (...) Nati Natorum, et qui nascentur
ab illis. Boston, Printed by John Allen, for Vavasour Harris, and are to be
Sold at the Sign of the Bible over against the Blew Anchor. 1695.

Help for Distressed Parents. Offered, at the LECTURE in Boston, 14. d. 12. m.
1694.
Proverbs X. 1. A Wise Son makes a Glad Father, but a Foolish Son is the
Heaviness of his Mother.
WHen the Child of Jephtah was by him to be made a Sacrifice unto God, in those
Darker Days, wherein the Frequency of Humane Sacrifices among all Nations,
made a (...) Confession of the Divine (...), calling for no less a Sacrifice
than that of the Messiah, the Distressed (...) of that poor Iphigenia, [o
(...)] Cried out, in Judge. 11. 3^ Alas, my Daughter, Thou have brought (...)
very Low, and thou art one of them which Trouble me. Though I am not of the Age
to Feel it, yet I See daily, and very dismal Cause to Think it, That a more
Abasing Trouble, cannot befall a Godly Parent, than to behold their own
Children, by the Courses of Ungodliness, making Themselves a Sacrifice unto the
Devil Godly P arents, have such a Love to God in their own Souls, that it must
needs be a terrible T rouble unto them, to see any of their own Children
Herdding among the Haters of God. Godly Parents are so Gratefully Concerned for
the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ their Blessed Savior, that it must needs be
a terrible Trouble unto them, to see their own Children turn Traitors and
Rebels unto that Blessed Lord. It is the Joy of all Parents, to see their own
Image Conveyed unto their Children, as they are Humane Creatures; but it is the
Grief of all Godly Parents to see their Children partakers of their Image, as
they are Sinful Creatures; and therefore, it is the greatest of all their Cares,
about their Children, to obtain the Image of God Renewed on them, in Knowledge,
Holiness, and Righteousness; but when (...) thereof, they see the Image of
(...) horribly Defacing of them, and Expressed in all the motions of their
Hearts and Lives; This causes them to say, Alas, my Children, You bring me very
Low, you Trouble me exceedingly! Godly Parents are desirous of nothing for
their poor Children, so much as This; That the Holy Spirit of God may take
Possession of their Children, to make them Vessels of Honor for the Lord for
ever; For This they are Praying, for This they are Weeping, for This they are
Wishing before the Lord continually; yea, perhaps many months before their
Children were Born, with Solemn Fasting and Prayer before the Lord, they
implored such a Possession of the Holy Spirit for them. Now, to see these
Children afterward Possessed by the Evil Spirit, and (...) Employed, and (...)
Abused as instruments of (...) unto the most F aithful (...) and (...): Oh!
It Is the bitterest of all Troubles, unto a Parent that can understand the
meaning of a Godly Sorrow. It Is the Hope which carries Godly Parents,
cheerfully through all their Troubles about their Infant Children: I am (...)
up a Servant of the Lord, which, I (...) for ever (...) Praising of the Lord!
But for (...) now to see these Children among the visible Servants of the
Devil, Forsaking, and Reproaching of the Lord; This Troubles them unutterably.
It was a very Troublesome Thing which the Almighty Threatened, They shall bring
forth Children, for the Murderer. But unto a Child of God, it is a more
Troublesome Thing, to Bring forth, and Bring up Children, for the Devil, that
Everlasting Murderer! There are no Godly Parents, but who do a little apprehend
the Evil that pursues Sinners, and the Dreadful Vengeance of God, whereto the
Ungodly are Exposed: Now for them to see their own Children among those Ungodly
Sinners, must needs be an unspeakable Trouble unto them that, Know the Terror
of the Lord. They Live in a continual Agony over those miserable Children, and
not a Day comes over their Heads, but they may say, I am afraid Lest that poor
Child of mine, do full into Eternal Burnings! I am afraid, Lest the Child of my
Bowels, the Child which I have so often had on my Knees, and in my Hands, and
at my Table, do suddenly become a Prey to the Dragons of the Wilderness.

In a word; It is a sad Thing; to be the Parent of a Fool: but a Godly Parent
counts an Ungodly Child, a Fool; a Spiritual, and therefore an Egregious Fool:
as very a Fool, as, The Wild Asses Colt.

But although the Trouble of Godly Parents mourning over Ungodly Children, be
for the Pungency of it, Extraordinary; yet Alas, for he Frequency of it, it is
very very Ordinary. Of this Heavy Trial, I may say with Him in another matter,
It is an Evil, which I have seen under the Sun, and it is common among men. And
indeed, I do not see the Rising Generation in my own Country, so free from
fearful Instances of Degeneracy, but that there may be occasion enough to
Discourse particularly upon such a Trial.

If a Godly Parent, have many Children, it is very seldom seen that All of
them do prove Ungodly; but it is very often seen, that some of them do so; and
Holy David is among the Examples, that Confirm this Observation. That Great and
Good Man, who was a Man after Gods own Heart, a Penman of the Sacred Scripture,
a Picture of the Mighty Jesus, a Person, of whose Actions there is more
mentioned in the Oracles of Heaven, than any one mere Man's whatsoever; this
Excellent Person, had among his Children, Two Sons that are branded through all
Ages for their Wickedness, and a Third that was no Better than he should be.
Nevertheless, we are C ertain that several of his Children proved Godly
Persons; and it is Likely enough that the most of them did so. But most of all
Happy was David, in his Beloved and Renowned Son Solomon; whose Inspired Books,
in the Language whereof he much followed, but in the Number thereof, Exceeded
his Father, (...) him to have bin, An Holy Man of God.

Solomon himself had but One Son that we Read of; and He too was None of the
Best. The only Son and How, of that Great Man, had such unhappy Symptoms upon
him, that as we may guess from several Intimations, his Distressed Father
before his own Death, was often at a Loss, to think, what he would prove.
[Ecel. 2. 13, 19.] Now 'twas very much for the Caution of that One Son, that he
Wrote those Excellent Proverbs, wherein we all Enjoy him and Admire him, as the
true, Master of Sentences. Do but carry in your minds, how sollicitous he was,
left Reheboam should by his Male-Administrations Confound the Kingdom, and lest
the Kingdom should by some Rooted Prejudice, and by some Hasty Action, cast
off Reheboam; you will therein have a Golden Key to Unlock these Proverbs of
Israel.

The Text before you, is the first of those Proverbs: and I make no doubt, that
Solomon had his own, Only, Silly Son, in his Eye, when he Wrote it; the first
part of the Text, his Father had fulfilled in Himself; the last part of the
Text, Himself had fulfilled in Reheboam. The Gladness of a Father, over a Wise
Son, and the Sadness of a Mather, over a Foolish One, is in this Proverb
Declared; Nevertheless, the Gladness of the Mother as well as the Father, over
the Wise Son, and the Sadness of the Father as well as the Mother, over the
Foolish One, is herein Implied. In the Concise Proverbs here, there is usually
an (...), to be so Compared, that something not Expressed, is to be fetched and
learned from each part as plainly to be understood. Yea, the Daughter as well
as the Son, is herein also Comprehended. But yet it may be worth while to
Enquire, Why it is rather the Gladness of the Father than of the Mother, that is
here mentioned upon the Wise Child? Unto this I answer; It Is because the Father
ordinarily has most Share in procuring, and most Sense in perceiving, the
Wisdom of his Children. When Children are come to such Maturity, that their
Wisdom does become Observable, ordinarily the Mother has more dismissed them
from her Conversation, that the Father has from his: and the Father is many
ways more capable of the Joyful Resentments, arising from the Wisdom of His, I
say, His, Well Educated Children appearing now abroad in the World: the Child
is now more Emphatically become, an Abner, that is to say, The Father Light;
or, an Abigail, that is to say, The Fathers Joy. But if you will go on to
Enquire, Why it is rather the Sadness of the Mother, than of the Father that is
mentioned upon the Foolish Child? Unto this I answer; It Is because when
Children miscarry, the Mother is (...) most B lamed for It: People will be most
ready to say, and very Often say, it very Justly too, 'Twas (...) of them, that
betrayed them into the Sinful F^^y which is now so bred in the Bone, that it
will never out of the Flash. It Is also because when Children miscarry, the
Mother is ordinarily most Slighted by Them: It Is said, A Foolish man Des^i^eth
his Mother; the Sinful Folly of the Young Wretches, makes them to trample more
upon Her that ^are them, than they dare to do upon Him that Begat them. It may
likewise be, Because when Children Turn Impious, the Mother, is many times more
impatient of it, than the Father is. 'Twas Rebeckah, rather than Isaac, that
was Weary of her Life, (...) a Child married against their (...) if the Child
Sin at home, She sees (...) most of it; it abroad, She bears (...) worst of it;
and so She becomes most (...) uneasy at i^.

I suppose you take it for granted, that the Godly Son, is the Wise One; for
it is that Child alone, that is, The Child Wise unto Salvation: and the very
First Advice of the Wise man, which we have in the Introduction unto the
Proverbs is, That the Fear of the (...) is the principal print of knowledge: in
which Advice, we find his Father, ha^ long before instructed him. So then, the
Foolish Son, is the Wicked One; (...) person is called A (...) (...) of
Solomon: at least Fifty ^mes over; vea, and every Wicked Child, so perishing, I
tell you, will at last call himself, A Fool, for more than Fifty millions of
Ages.

There are two very Necessary CASES, which I would now speak unto.

The first CASE.
What is to be said for the Counsil and Comfort of Godly PARENTS Afflicted
(...) Ungodly Children?

(...) Children, are all without the (...) Symptoms of Regeneration upon (...);
all such as do more mind the (...) o^ this World, than the Great Salvation of
their Souls; all such as continue in a Careless. Prayerless, Christless Estate,
before the Lord. But the Brand of Ungodly Children, is most of all to be fixed
upon, such as Vex the Hearts of their P arents, by an Unthankful, ^ndutiful,
Disobedient Behavior, or by falling into any Damnable Hoeresy, (...) any
Scandalous Action, whatsoever.

If: any of you are Afflicted with and for, such miserable Children, Let these
Lessons be acceptable to you.

I. Though you are Afflicted with Ungodly Children, you must not be discouraged
as if you were altogether Singular, in your Affliction. Godly Parents are full
of Lamentations, over their Ungodly Children; and among the rest of their
Lamentations, they often make That, in Lam. 1. 12. Behold, and See, if there be
any Sorrow like unto my Sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
Afflicted me, in the Day of his Fierce Anger. They conclude, that among the
Children of God, there are none punished with such Ungodly Children, and they
suspect whether they be themselves indeed the Children of God, and not
themselves Ungodly: Why? Because the Fierce Anger of God, appears in their
Affliction. But you are very much mistaken! There are many Godly Parents, whose
Children have given them cause to complain, like that Worthy Minister, who
Printing a Little Book, Entitled, Parents Groans over their Wicked Children,
Dedicated it unto his own Children, with these grievous words, There are some
of you that have made me the Father of Fools. There is an Italian saying
wellknown, which intimates, That the man was not Born of Mankind, whose Family
has no Blemishes akin unto it. Even so, If in a Family of many Children, there
should be some Ungodly One to Blemish it, this is a Thing whereof I may say,
It Is Nothing but what is common to man.

It Is true, That the Eternal Election of God, most generally falls upon the
Children of Godly Parents. We read in Psalm. 103. 17. The Merey of the Lord is
from Everlasting to Everlasting, upon them that Fear Him, and His Righteousness
unto Childrens Children. Though they are not only, yet they are chiefly, the
Children of Godly Parents, whom the Lords Everlasting Purposes of Mercy take
notice of. The Line of Election, does generally run in the Book of Life, after
that manner, Mine Elect and their Off spring with them, are the Blessed of the
Lord There are whole Constellations of passages in the Bible, which do signify
thus much unto us, That where God has Chosen any to Salvation, He generally
Chooses others from the House which He has thus graciously begun to Look upon.
And I humbly conceive, that if an Account should now be taken of all that Fear
God in the World, they would mostly appear to have sprung from the Loins of God
fearing Ancestors. It Is also true, That among the Children of Godly Parents,
the most by far do Really become, The Lords for ever, and go to Heaven, where
they shall be, For ever with the Lord. We read, in 1 Cor. 7. 14. about the
Children of the Faithful, They are Holy. The Children of Godly Parents, we are
bound in a Judgment of Charity to reckon, as much belonging unto the Lord, as
Themselves. The most of them do Die in their Infancy; and God forbid, that we
should imagine a Believer to have no better ground of Hope for his Departed
Offspring, than an Infidel. But of those that Live to be Adult also, very many,
if not The most come to Serve the God of their Fathers. Insomuch, that our
Brethren of the Antipoedobaptist Persuasion, have no more Argument against
Infant B aptism, from the Apostasy of those whom we B aptise in Childhood,
than we might have, to speak of those that are B aptised in Riper Years. This I
am sure of; It Is a Popish and a Cursed LIE, that the Children of Ministers do
usually miscarry more than Others; every Day confutes the LIE.

Nevertheless, the Great Sovereign of the World, that He may Show the
Sovereignty of His Grace, as He sometimes will Convert the Children of a Wicked
Parent, so He sometimes will Refuse the Children of a Godly One. God will make
it Evident, that it is not in the power of One man, to give Grace unto another;
yea, that it is not in the power of Parents which have Grace, to Convey That,
as they do Sin, and Woe, unto their own Children; and hence, the Children of
Godly Parents, do sometimes prove unlike unto themselves.

Afflicted Parents! Will you hear the Names of some that have been your Fellow
Sufferers?

The First Godly P arents in the World, were Adam and Eve, the First Parents of
the World. Now, their first Child, and a Child in which they seem to have
promised unto themselves a more than ordinary Satisfaction: he proved, as the
Apostle calls him, A Child of the Devil: a most Bloody, Cursed, Unnatural
Monster was he!

Come to Our World: The best man in our New-World, (...); a Righteous and a
Perfect Man in (...) Generations. Yet this Godly Parent, this famous ^reacher,
who had but Three Sons, had a wicked Cham among them. Was there not an Ishmael
among the Sons of Abraham? There may be Vipers among those who say, We have
Abraham for our Father.

Isaac, was a most Godly Parent, of no more than Two Sons; and about One of
them, though it is said, His Father Loved him, yet it is also said, The Lord
Hated him.

However, it is said of Jacob, His Blessings prevailed above the Blessings of
his Progenitors. All the Twelve Sons of that (...), could lay their Claim to
the Promises of God; which was a B lessing, that he had above his Progenitors.

Two Sons of Aaron, the Priest of the Lord, were Sons that perished by an
Untimely Death, in and for their Contempt of God.

Two Sons of Eli, the Priest of the Lord, were (...) Adulterous, Abominable
Sons of B e^^al

Samuel, that (...) Judge of Israel, had it said unto him, in 1 Samuel 8. 15. Thy
Sons do (...) in thy Ways.

Jehoshaphat was a Godly Parent: but Jeh^ram, what was he, but a Child of Hell?

Hezekiah was (...) Parent; but, what was (...).

Josiah was a Godly Parent; but, what was Jehojakim the Son?

Would you have an Example from the New Testament, as well as the Old? That
Blessed man, Rabbi Simeon, who was a most Reverend Confessor of the Lord Jesus
Christ: had, if the Learned mistake not, a Son, R. Gamaliel, who was an
Unbeliever. I Will Exemplify no further: Here Is enough to let you see, That you
are not Alone.

Now, the Result of all this, is thus much; You ought patiently to submit unto
the Sovereign Will of God, in the Affliction that he has laid upon you. Art
thou an Afflicted Parent? It is the Will of an Heavenly Father, that it should
be so; and He therein deals no more Hardly with thee, than He has sometimes
dealt with His own dearest Children. It Is a Sour Cup that is given you; but
say, The Cup that an Heavenly F ather gives me, shall not I take it?

And there is this further to be said upon (...) No Reasonable man will dare to
Censure you, for the Affliction with which the Sovereign Hand of God, is thus
Mortifying of you. Art thou an Afflicted Parent? Then, (...) him that is
Afflicted party will be (...) Friend. They that Fear God, will not Judge the
worse of your State before Him, for the In which they see in your Children:
They know that persons with Uncircumcised Hearts, are Born of such as had
themselves Experienced a Circumcision of God upon their Souls.

II. Since you are Afflicted with Ungodly Children, you should set your selves
to make a Right Use of your Affliction. Indeed there are Scorpions at the End
of the Rods, when God makes Rods of Children, to Scourge the P arents with
them; and now it is time to do that thing, whereto we are called, in Mic. 6. 9.
Hear the Rod. Parents, The Use that you should make of your deplorable
Affliction, is to be in a suitable Examination, Humination, and Reformation.

Have you any Ungodly Children? They may serve as Glasses, wherein you may
Behold something of your Sinfulness before the Lord. Your own Original Sin, is
written with (...) in all the Ungodliness or your Children. Your Children had
never been Ungodly, if they had not from you been, Shapen in iniquity, and
Conceived in Sin. Reflect (...) The (...) Nature which carries out this poor
(...), unto all these Exorbitancies, it is by Me derived unto them; it is I, it is
my Corruption, that is the Parent of an the Wickedness, in any Depraved and
(...) Offspring. It would be a very Lamentable Thing, if a man should, though
out Occasionally and Involuntarily, Hurt one of his own Children. Man, Thou
have Poisoned all thy Children; Their Sinning against God, is but the Swelling
of the Poison, that is by Thee Transfused into them. When thou (...) them Sin,
Oh! Remember This, and Let thy Soul be Humbled in thee. And it is possible,
That much of your Actual Sin may likewise be Read by you, in their Ungodliness.

These are especially, two sorts of Sins in your selves, after which the
Ungodliness of your Children, should provoke your Enquiries.

First, Have not you formerly Grieved the Hearts of your own Parents? It may
be, it is for Thus, that your Children are now Grieving of yours. When the
Children of Jacob were in Distress, they could call to mind their Faulty
Carriage toward their Aged Parent, above Twenty Years ago, and now they cried
in Genesis 42. 21. We are verily Guilty concerning That, and therefore is this
Distress come upon us. There is no Sin, so sure of Recompense in this Life, as
that of, (...) Grieving the Heart of a Parent. Yea, it is a Sin, that rarely,
if ever, misses of an Exemplary Retaliation here. It was an Impudent Speech,
but a True and a Sad One, uttered by a Young Varlet, who when his Father said,
Never any man had such a Wicked Son; replied, Yes, my Grand father had. I
beseech you, to call your selves unto an Account, Whether the Grand-P arents of
the Children, that make you uneasy were not once as uneasy, upon your
Account? Many a Father that is Heart broken by the Misdemeanors of his
Children, may acknowledge with him, in Job 13. 26. Thou writest Bitter Things
against me, and make me to possess the Iniquities of my Youth. A just God,
thus reminds him of his Old Iniquities, whereby the Heart of his Father before
him was disturbed. The Sons of Jacob wretchedly abused him, with the Garments
of their Absent Brother: But, I pray Sir, Did not you, a great while ago, Serve
your Father Isaac so? Or,

Secondly; Have not you Sinned about these Untowardly Children? it may be, the
very Subjects of your Sin, are made the Authors of your Sorrow? I beseech you,
to Search and Try your Ways. Have (...) Instructed these Children as you
should have done? The Philosopher, seeing once a Child misbehave himself, he
gave a Box on the Ear, to the Father that should have Taught him otherwise.
Truly, Many a P arent has cause to Chastise and Reproach himself, because of
his Childrens misbehaviours. It Is of Him, that they have been, Better Fed than
Taught. Or, Ask your selves, Whether your Conduct in your House, has been
according to that Rule, in Ephesians. 6. 4. Fathers, provoke not your Children to
wrath, and yet bring them up in the Narture and Admenition of the Lord. Have
you not sometimes been too Fond of them? You have heard, what Sons they were,
whereof it is said, Their Fathers do not Restrain them: You have heard, what
Sons they were, of whom it is said, T heir Father never Displeased them at any
time. One truly says, There are other creatures, besides Apes, that bug their
(...) to Death. Or, Have you not (...) been too Fierce to them? The Severity
(...) a Father in Austere Looks, Raging Words, Cruel Blows, and Rigid (...) the
Authority of a Father unreasonably Strained, especially about their Callings,
or their Matches, often, like Spanish Flies, raises those Plisters on the Minds
of the Sons, that the Sons can show nothing but Ill Humor after it. Or,
finally, Have you Pras'd for your Children, with Effectually fervent
Supplications? There is cause to judge, that all the Children of Job were such,
that none of them were Lost for ever. Now, it is noted, in Job 1. 5. Job offered
Burnt Offerings, according to the Number of them all: for Job said, It may be
that my Sons have Sinned, and have taken their Leave of God, [for so I take
Leave to Translate it] in their Hearts; Thus did Job continually. Have any of
your Children, so Sinned against God, as to Take their Leave of Serving Him?
See whether you have Prayed for them Every One by Name, Every Day, since you
have had them, that it might not be so?

If neither of these Two Enquiries, do Discover any Transgression in you then
put a Third Interrogatory, of this Importance: Whether, you have Thoroughly
Repented of all your own Youthful Ungodliness, in any kind whatever. Your
Hearts it may be, have never yet been Endamed, unto a due degree of Revenge,
against all your own Sins; and so God permits this New Occasion for it; Oh!
thus is the Murderer that has killed my poor Child! Methinks, this may Enkindle
in you a fresh Animosity against all Sins wherever you can discover it. When
the Ungodly Absalom was afflicting of his Father, T hen, as it is thought, the
Old Man was awakened unto that Petition, in Psalm. 25. 7. Remember not the Sins
of my Youth, nor my T ransgressions, O Lord. Many a Godly person, had need of a
Renewed Repentance, for the Youthful Iniquity of his Heels, which by their
Forgetfulness they have now, even Laid at their Heels. Now, their Children
afterward are Left unto the very Same Iniquities, that so T hey may,
withsuitable Recollections Repent of their own Iniquities, over and over again.
And thus it is, especially, when Sins against the Seventh Commandment, have not
been agreeably Repented of: Let him that has Ear to hear, Hear what I say!

Yea. It Is the Expectation of God, that we should Bewayl the Sins of Or
Children, as Our Own. When David said, Remember not the Sins of my Youth, nor
my T ransgressions, there are some who take it so; q. d. Remember not the Sins
of my Young S on, which are in some sort, my own Transgressions. You make the
Sins of your Neighbors, your own (...) you are not, Vexed, Like Lot, and
Grieved, Like David, for them. O but the Sins of your Children, are in some
sort, already your own; and they will be much more so, if they do not Grieve
you, and Vex you, and Cause you to Ly in the Dust before the Lord. Yea, Let a
certain Horror take hold of you, to see, These poor Children, that are part of
my self, do not keep thy Laws, O Lord And then, Let me tell you for your
Consolation; As you should make this Use of the Ungodliness in your Children,
To promote your own Repentance; Thus you may make this Use of your being
Afflicted for that Ungodliness, to strengthen your Assurance. Are you much
Afflicted, when you see your Children Strangers unto God, unto Christ, unto
Holiness? And are you more Afflicted for their Contrariety unto God, and for
the Guilt and Filth and Loss of their Souls, than for any thing else? This now,
is a comfortable Mark, of a New Creature in you: it shows that your Hearts are
Blassed by the Great Matters of the Eternal World. It is said, of Ungodly
Parents, in Job 21. (...) 14. Their Children Dance; and they (...) unto God, we
desire not the Knowledge of thy Ways. If their Children can but be Dressed up,
in few Idle Gayeties, and perhaps usel^^ Accomplishments, This is all that they
care for; though the Souls of those poor Children are altogether Unacquainted
with the Ways of God. Whereas, This is it that kills You at the Heart; That
poor Child of mine, is Well shaped, otherwise, but Christ is not yet Formed in
the Soul of that Child! Or, That poor Child is Well clad, otherwise, but the
Soul of the Child has not the Garments of Righteousness upon it! Or, This Child
has Learnt many fine things! Oh! but they have not Learnt the Beginning of
Wisdom yet! It shows, that you are indeed, Godly Parents; when you are thus
concerned. They are Godly Parents, who are more afraid of their Childrens being
Ungodly, than of their being any other way Unhappy. Thus, it was the Godly
Speech of a Worthy Minister on his Deathbed, As for my Children, I am very
sure, that if my Children Fear God, they shall not want; but if they do not
Fear God, I wish they may want, until they do.

III. But is there not a Cure to be Endeavored? Being Afflicted with Ungodly
Children, give not ever your Endeavors to get the Affliction Cured, in their
Conversion unto God.

In the pursuance of this Blessed (...) I would in the first place put in a
Caution, That you would by no means make your Children Desperate; for that will
make the Cure so. Although you are never so much, and never so long Exasperated,
if it be possible, do not utterly Cast them off, or, Lay them under Incurable
Disobligation, Invincible Discouragement. When you pour out your Anger, never
so vehemently, upon them, yet let them see your Love Tempering of it; and never
Let your Passion carry you so far, that they shall think you have no Compassion
for them. A Parent like Saul, of an Implacable Fury, will be like to Loose
Children that were as Good as Jonathan himself. Alluding to what occurs in the
Prophet [Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20.] In the Hottest Rage that you may have, against
the Offenses of an Ungodly Child, yet let them if it be possible, a little
perceive those workings in your Parental Bowels; Ever since I spoke against
him, I earnestly Remember him still; therefore my bowels are Troubled for him.
It may be the Obstinate Ephraim will at length Bemoan himself, and say, I am
Ashamed, yea, even Confounded, for the Reproach of my Youth.

And unto this Caution, I would Importunately, add my Entreaty, That you would
never suffer your Mouths, no, nor your Minds, to Curse your Children; for that
will be the way, never to Cure them. Whatever Indignation may be Raised in You,
by any Prevarication of Theirs, do not fly out into any In Wishes concerning
them; Your Ill Wishes will after an unknown manner Commissionate the Angels of
Death to Execute quick Plagues upon them, which, doubtless, you will afterward
be sorry for. The Imprecations of a Parent, make an incredible Entail of
Mischiefs, on the Execrated Children: Mischiefs, which the Greatest Monarchs
have sometimes been unable to Stand before. Even, an Idolatrous Micah, [Judg.
17. 23.] How sollicitous was he, that the Direful Curses, of his passionate,
and provoked Mother, might not overtake him! A Graceless Child once making a
Wry Mouth at his Mother, She thereat Enraged, then Wished, Wretch, I hope thou will come to make that Mouth upon the Gallows; and that very thing, in the most
particular Circumstances of it, was quickly and sadly accomplished.

Having (...) these two Cautions, there are now Three Me (...) of Cure, for
your Ungodly Children, to be Recommended. Reproofs, Restraints, and Requests.

First, Admonish your Ungodly Children, of all the Evils, whereinto they are
precipitating themselves by their Ungodliness. Do, as Abraham, and as David,
would have done; Solemnly Charge your Children, To keep the Way of the Lord;
Solemnly Charge your Children, To Serve the Lord with a Perfect Heart, and a
Willing Mind. If there be any peculiar, Paths of the Destroyer, which your
Children, are too prone unto, Frequently, Fervently, Faithfully Lay before them
the Destruction, whereto those Ungodly Paths will carry them. And that you may
give these Admonitions, the more Effectually, give them Scripturally; Single
out the Scriptures, which do plainly condemn the^ Vices, and causing them to
Read those awful Scriptures then with all the Solemnity in the World, Charge
them, T hat, as they (...) it, before God, and before you another day they
Conform themselves accordingly. Me thinks I see that brave woman, calling her
Son before her, in Prove. 31. 1. and saying, What, my Son! and what, the Son of
my Womb! and what, the S on of my Vows? Will thou give thy Strength to Women?
Will thou Drink and Forget the Law? Parents, Go, and bestow such Lively
Admonitions, upon the Children that are, A Grief of Mind, unto you; and Let
them see the Grief of Mind, with which you Dispense those Admonitions.

Secondly, Curb and Check, and Correct, as far as you can, all the Ungodliness,
into the Excesses whereof your Ungodly Children would be Running. While your
Children are under your Government, so Govern them, that they may not have
their Way, when they shall be set upon Going out of the Way. While they are yet
but Children, it is said, If thou beat them with the Rod, they shall not Die;
thou shall S ave their Soul from Hell. Better Whipped, than Damned And
afterward, Don't Humor your Children, in every Fantastical and Exeravagant
Vanity, which you may see grateful unto their Unrenewed Hearts. Be as Ingenious
as you can, to make a Thorn Hedges, against every Way of Sinning, which they
would be Walking in; therefore Begin Betimes to observe their Doings, whether
their Work be Pure, or whether it be Right. This I say, If you cannot Cross your
Children, in their Proud, Mad, Ungodly Inclinations, God will ere long make
them Crosses unto you. Be especially Inquisitive, what Company they keep. If
you Leave them to be, The Companions of Fools, they will soon be Destroyed
Fools themselves: Wherefore, do all you can to Rescue them from all the Snares,
and Haunts of all Evil Company. O Forewarn them, and Withold them, as much as
ever you can, from those Knots of Profane, Gaming, Scoffing, Drinking, and
Unclean Wretches, that keep so many of our Young People, in the Bond of
Iniquity for ever: and, the Evening after the Sabbath, when, alas, there is
more Villainy, they say, done among us, than all the Nights of the Week besides,
if they will Then be singularly Exposing themselves unto Temptation, don't you
consent unto it, but confine them, with your own watchful Eye, at home upon
them. I shall say no more; but set before you that word, in Prove. 29. 15. A
Child Left unto himself, brings his Mother to shame. It seems, the Mother is
usually most ready to let them have their Wills; and Lo, She pays for it.

Thirdly, Pray over your Ungodly Children; Pray without ceasing over them. Were
the Spirit of God, poured out, upon your Ungodly Children, they would no longer
be Ungodly. Now there is a Promise of God, in Luke 11. 13. Your Heavenly Father
will give the Holy S pirit, unto them that ask him. And there is a further
Promise of God, in Isa. 44. 3. I will pour my Spirit upon thy S eed, and my
Blessing upon thy Offspring. Well then; Dearly Beloved, Having these Promises
plead them in Importunate P rayers before the Lord; Plead, and Beg, and Mourn
and Weep, and Fast before the Lord, for this thing, Lord, I ask that the
Outpourings of thy Spirit upon the Heart of this poor Child, may, Cure all the
Ungodliness that is bound up in that Sinful Heart. It may be, the Lord will at
last Answer, Concerning Ishmael, I have heard thee! If whole Churches would
oftener keep Days of P rayer with Pasting, That the Spirit of God, and of
Grace, may take a Saving Hold of their Posterity, it is probable, there would
not be so (...), as there is in the Rising Generation. It is Reported, that a
Number of Praying Saints, did spend a whole Night in Prayer, for the success of
a Sermon to be Preached the Day after, in a dark part of Scotland; and the
Spirit of God so accompanied that one Sermon, that no less than Five Hundred
Souls thereon, Believed and Turned unto the Lord.

However, Let all particular Parents continue in Prayer, with Fasting, that the
S pirit of God may infuse His Verticordious Grace, into their own Posterity.
Yea, Do it, with such undeniable Agony of Soul, as to say before the Lord, what
Jacob, when Wrestling for the Salvation of his Children did, Lord, I will not
go, except thou Bless me. Distressed Parents brought their Diseased Children
unto the Lord Jesus Christ of old, and He helped them all. Yea, one came to our
Lord, saying, [Mark 4. 17] Lord, I have brought unto thee my S on, which has
an Evil Spirit. Another came to our Lord, saying, [Matth. 15 22.] Have mercy on
me, O Lord, for I have a Daughter grievously vexed with a Devil. And the Event
was mavelous! Thus, go plead before the Lord! Lord, I have a Child that has
un Evil Spirit; T here is a Lying Devil, a Wanton Devil, a Drinking Devil, a
Playing Devil, a Proud Devil, in this poor Child of mine: O magnify thy Grace,
by Casting this Devil out, and S aving the S oul of my poor Child, from the
Fire, into which the Devil is throwing of it. It may be, the Lord will do it
for thee. While Austin was yet an Ungodly Child, his Gracious Mother kept
crying to the Lord for him, at such a rate, that an Eminent Minister said unto
her, Fire i nonpotest ut Filius istarum Lachrymarum pereat; that is, It cannot
be, that a Child of so many Tears should perish after all.

The Covenant of God is, in Genesis 17 7. I will be a God unto Thee, and unto thy
S eed after Thee. Oh! Plead with God, His own Covenant of Grace; and Let your
Prayers Extend it, even unto that Ungodly Child. Under the Invitation thereof
say, as a Pious Parent once, Had L Twenty Children, I would not Rate the Lord,
so much as one of them. Yea, Strive in Prayer, till, if it may be, you find the
Spirit of God raising your Souls, unto a Particular Faith for that Lost Child;
a Particular Faith, I say, which though it be an Arbitrary, and somewhat
Extraordinary Gift, of the Holy Spirit, unto some Godly Parents, yet the
Effects thereof have been in all Ages, Notorious, Illustrious, and Amazing. The
Lord said unto Abraham, in Genesis 15. 5. Look toward Heaven; Tell the S tars, if
thou can Number them; so shall thy S eed be. An Ingenious Jew lately
Converted unto Christianity, has Instructed me, That not only the Innumerable
Multitude, but also the Interminable Happiness, of the Faithful Children of
Abraham, is here pointed at. The Hebrew word is a Note of P lace. The Lord not
only said, Number the S tars, if thou can, SO shall thy Seed be; but also,
Look toward Heaven, THERE shall thy Seed be. Even so, The God of Heaven
sometimes, does carry the Thoughts and Hopes of Godly Parents up to Heaven,
where (...) do with Triumphing Souls, ^^hold the Lord Jesus Christ, Surrounded
with His Holy Ones; and the Holy S pirit of God, now irresistibly bears in this
persuasion npon their Souls, THERE shall thy S eed be; THERE shall thou, and
thy Children with thee, Glorify me, for infinite millions of Ages. Parents, Go
on pleading with God; it may be, the Spirit of God, may bring thee at last unto
this Assurance, with Joy Unspeakable, and full of Glory. It is mentioned in the
Life of (...) Strict Walker with God, Mr. B lackerby (...) had a strange
Particular F aith, for his (...) many of his Offspring at the Right Hand of the
Lord Jesus Christ; and the Survivers accordingly saw, all his own Children
prove Godly, and all his Grand Children prove Hopeful, and some of his Great
Grand Children at this Day do Fear God. Oh the Blessednesses of such a man!

IV. Have you done all This? Then Despair not, though you do not presently Reap
the Fruit of all. Delays are no Denials; Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi. It may
be, That after you are Dead and Gone, must be the Month wherein the Wild Asses
are to be found, by the Grace of Heaven. The Angels may a long while hence,
bring the Tidings to Heaven after you, That the Ungodly Child which you Left
behind you, is now Turned unto God; So will you join in the Triumphs of Heaven
over it, saying, This may Child was Dead, and is Alive, was Lost and is Found;
Glory, Glory to God in the Highest for ever.

Or, Suppose you have seen your Ungodly, Children Die before (...) without
Evident Marks of a S aving Change upon them: However still Hope the best. A
famous man would say, If I see a Child that has either a Godly Father, or a
Godly Mother, I shall have Hope for Him a Long while: B ut if he has a Godly
Father and Mother too, I Will never Leave Hoping for him, till I see him Turned
off the Gallows. Who can tell, what the Grace of God may have done for them, in
their Last Minutes? It may be, B etween the Stirrup and the Ground. Yea, and if
They should be Lost, who can tell, what the Lord may do for the Third
Generation. Though the Son of Samuel were not as he should be, yet his Grand S on
was a most Notaable Prophet of the Lord. Or, if some of These be Lost, may not
your Blessings be doubled in Others of your own? One Solomon makes amends for
an Amnon, and an Absalom too. But, after all, you may say with David, 2 Samuel
23. 5 Although my House be not so with God, yet He has made with me a Covenant,
ordered in all Things and Sure. The Almighty God has given you His Own Son, and
all Things with Him, all Things in Him; That may satisfy you, when your
Children, be not as you would have them. This I am sure of; Ere Long the Will
of God will so Swallow up our Will, that our Lost Children will be no more unto
us than, The Children of Ethtopians.

Thus has the Sad Case of Godly Parents afflicted with Ungodly Children, been
considered. But we may not pass unto what remains, until we have made some
Reflections upon the B etter C ase of some other Godly Parents which hence
arise unto us.

First. A Lesson of Easiness, is hence taught unto those that are Denied, or
Deprived of Children. The strongest of all the Desires, which God has Implanted
in the Nature of Man, T o Live after Death with a sort of Jointed Eternity in
a Lasting P osteritie, is that, it seems, wherein God has Crossed you. But I am
now to tell you, That your Condition in this Thing, is Easier, than the
Condition of many Godly Persons, who have their Children about them. It was
denounced as a sore Affliction upon Jechonias, in Jer. 22. 30. Write ye this
man Childless. They that will have the Salathiel mentioned in our Lords
Genealogy, to be the proper S on, of that Jechonias, yet a Son who was
prevented from Succeeding his Father in his Royal State, choose to read it so,
Write this man Desolate, or Distressed. Indeed, the Childless, are Childishly
enough oftentimes Distressed, as if they were Desolate, while they have not
parts of Themselves to Leave their Name and their Wealth unto. But I can tell
you of a worse thing far away than this; Write ye this man the Parent of
Ungodly Children! and that is worse a thousand times.

Are you by S terilitie Debarred of Children? The Prophet of God has told you,
That you may have a Name better than of Sons and of Daughters. If by Union with
the Lord Jesus Christ, you come to have that Name. A Child of God, you have
then a Better Name, than if you should be called, The Parent of never so many
Sons or Daughters. An Absaloms Pillar, what is it worth? As for the Name of
such a Parent, it is Better to have no such Name at all, than to have Wicked S
ons or Daughters: They do all they can, to make your Name suffer abroad in the
World, and Rot, and Stink, like their own. How many therefore have you heard
wishing, O Utinam coelebs man ^issem, et prole carerem! or, It had been well
for me, if I had never had Children thus to wound me! When the Romans made
rueful Havoc among the Children of the Jews, it was Exclaimed, in Luc. 23. 29.
Blessed are the Barren, and the Wombs that never Bare, and the Paps that never
gave Suck. Truly, when you see Devils making Havoc among the Wicked Children
of many Troubled P arents, you may Bless your selves, and say, It Is better to
be Barren, than to Bear and Suckle such Wicked Enemies of God! And at the same
Time, you have an Advantage to Lay out your Estates upon those Pious Uses, for
the Good of others, which will turn to a far more glorious Account, than if
your Children had them.

Or, Are you Bereaved of Children by Mortality? You may be satisfied concerning
your Children (...) in their Infancy, That the (...) God, will according to His
(...) unto them, throughout Eternal Ages. My Brethren, This Blessing of (...)
upon you, by the Lord Jesus Christ (...) may inscribe upon their (...) that
Epitaph, OF SUCH IS THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN: or that Epitaph RESERVED FOR A
GLORIOUS RESURRECTION: or that Epitaph, GONE, BUT NOT LOST. I have seen such,
in our Dormitories! Let no Believing Parent, upon the Death of Children, say
with mistaken Jacob I am Bereaved of my Children, All these Things are against
me. No, Do like David, upon the Death of a Child; although the Death happened
before the Circumcision of the Child; Rise from the Earth, Raise your Heart
from the Grave where the Child is Laid; Cheerfully submit unto the Will of God,
and say, Can I bring the Child back again? I shall go to it, It shall not
Return to me. It was Excellently well Expressed, by our Celebrated ELIOT, when
he was asked, how he could bear the Death of his Children: My desire was, That
they should have S erved God on Earth; but if God will choose to have them
rather Serve Him in Heaven, I have nothing to object against it, but His Will
be done. Be sure, you are now past the Danger of their making you the Parents
of Wicked Children: It was foretold unto Eli, in 1 Samuel 2. 33. The man of
thine, whom I shall not one off, shall be to Consume thine Eyes, and to Grieve
thine Heart: And it is fulfilled upon many among us; many, alas, how many, may
say, That they have had more S orrow for one Living Child, then for seven Dead
Ones: Oh! it is better for our Children to be safely Lodged among the Angels of
God in Heaven, than for them to be Sinning against Him Like Devils on Earth.

But, Secondly, A Lesson of Thankfulness, is hence taught, unto those that have
Godly Children It may be, that some of you are Blessed with Sons as Young
Plants growing up in their Youth, with Daughters as Corner Stones polished
after the fashion of a Palace, with Children that are every way Virtuous and
Laudable. These are Blessings indeed, and such Blessings, as many Godly Persons
go without. Oh Give Thanks to God; and let His Free Grace alone, Let not your
Merit, nor your (...) have the Glory of it. When David had a Son Born unto him,
which all the People of God, were Like to be the Better for; he sang upon it in
Psalm. 127. 3, (...) Lo, Children (so qualified) are an Heritage of the Lord.
Blessed is the man, that has his Quiver (...) of such Arrows! And when David
saw that Son afterward actually become a Leader un^o the People of God, how
was the Heart of the Old man even transported with it! said he, in 1 Kings 1.
48. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has given me such a Son, mine Eyes
even seeing of it. And that Son of his, afterward, did often over, and over
again intimate, what a Glad Father, and a Glad Mother, such Worthy Children
made. You may, some of you, behold your Children presenting their Good Works
before you, like Jacob his Venison, or, like Sampson his Honey, that so your
Souls may Bless them. Do That! But I rather say, Oh Bless God for them. When
Israel, had a Son, a Joseph, by whom his whole Family was not only Honored,
but Sustained also; when Aaron had a Son, an Eleazar, whom he saw Ordained unto
a Great Service in the Church of God; when Joab, had a Son, a Gideon, whomhe
saw bravely testifying against the I dolatries of his Age; And when the Prophet
Isaiah, had a Son, Shear jashub, whom the Lord joined in the same Commission
with him, Go Thou, and thy Son unto the King: And when the Daughter, though but
a Daughter-in law, of Naomi, said unto her Godly Mother, Thy People shall be my
People, and thy God shall be my God: Surely, They had a more than ordinary
Satisfaction in that Smile of God upon them. Children Walking in the Truth,
made an Old John to say, I Rejoice greatly; though they were not his own: how
Great would be the Rejoicing, of those, who have Children of their own; so
Walking before the Lord! What said the Wise man, in Pro. 23. 15. My Son, if thy
Heart be wise, my Heart shall be glad, even mine. A Roman Lady, having been
shown the Jewels of the other Ladies in the City, whom she visited, They
visited her, demanding in like manner to see the Jewels of her Closer; she
delayed them, until her Children came home from School, and then bringing those
Towa^dly Children before them, she said, Behold! Here are my Jewels! This I
say, The Good God has Enriched you with Invaluable Jewels, in your
Well-disposed Children, Yea, as Jewels indeed you will have them hanging about
you, in the Joyful Day of God, when you shall Joyfully appear before Him,
saying, Behold Me, and the Children which thou have given Me! Oh! be very T
hankful for them, Thankful, I say; But in the Name of God, I vehemently
Admonish you, That you do not make Idols of them. If once you let any Vanity
overcome your Minds, when you see what Praiseworthy Children you have; Mind
what I say, either God may quickly Kill those Children, or Kill you with what
you may Endure from Others of your Children.

But it remains, that we now pass on unto,

The Second CASE.
What may be said, for the Engaging of CHILDREN, to avoid those Courses of
Ungodliness, which will be Afflictive unto their Godly Parents?

Wherefore now, Come, ye Children, Hearken to me, and I will Teach you the Fear
of the Lord. You are to be Exhorted, Oh, that you would be Persuaded, seriously
to Beware of Afflicting your Parents, by any Ungodly Principles, or Practices
whatsoever. You know very well, Doubtless They have told you, what Ungodliness
of yours, it is, that will Afflict them. Will you then penitently say, Father,
If I have Sinned against Heaven, and in your Sight, I hope, through the Help of
Heaven, it shall be so no more! To prevail with you, That it may be so.

Consider, Firstly, How Importunate, How Ungainsayable, the Demands of your
Afflicted Parents are, that you would Abandon all the Courses of Ungodliness!
Have not your Parents, with most Lively Exhortations called upon you? Yea, you
have been your Fathers Children, Tender and Beloved in the Sight of your
Mother; They have also Taught you, and said unto you, Oh! Get Wisdom, Get
Understanding, Forget it not, it is the principal Thing. But, think now, ye
Ungodly Children, think, what moving Things these Demands of your Parents are.

These your Godly Parents, They Live in a continual Anguish, and, they Go
Mourning all the Day Long, as long as they see you Going on in the Ways of
your Ungodliness. When you were first Born unto your Parents, they fondly hoped
concerning you, as in Gen 5. 29. This Child shall be a Comfort unto us! But
alas, their Disappointed Souls, find that you are an Unspeakable Trouble unto
them, while you continue in your Ungodliness; yea, you bring them to that pass
of the Psalmist, I am so Troubled, that I cannot speak! They Live in a Daily
Fear concerning you; it is a Tormenting Fear, which you bring every Day upon
them, Left you should be Sinning against the Lord, and Wronging of your own
Souls; and Left you should Perish in your Unbelief. If you should be cut off in
your Unregeracy, They would not be able to bear the Anguish of their Souls
about you, when they shall cry after you, like her, after her Lost Sons of old,
Quo Pueri Estis profecti^ or, Lord, what is become of them for Eternal Ages?
Yea, and their Shame of you, is almost equal to their bear. As the Emperor
Augustus called his Three Daughters, Tres Vomicas, Tria Carcinomata, three such
Ulcers and Cancers on him, that he was Ashamed of them: Even so, they are
Ashamed of having you seen, as they would be of Impost hums on their Bodies.

But this is not all; I must further, and sadly tell you, You are in a fair way
to be the Death of your poor Parents, if you will yet give your selves up, unto
the Phrensies of Ungodliness: I tell you, You Will make T hem to Die before their T
i am: and what are you then, but Wicked Overmuch. Unworthy Creatures; How can
you find in your Hearts to shorten the Lives of those, through whom you your
selves have Derived your Lives? You do this, when you Chafe, and Cut, and Wast
the Hearts of your Parents, by the Heart breaking Sight, of your Ungodliness,
and make them e'n Weary of their Lives? I Remember, that the Apostle Paul,
reckoning up the Transgressors of the T en Commandments, the Transgressors of
the Fourth Commandment, he calls, T he Profane; but the Transgressors of the
Fifth Commandment, he calls, in 1 Timothy 1. 9. Murderers of Fathers, and
Murderers of Mothers. It seems, by breaking of the Fifth Commandment, you will
break the Sixth also; yea, by being Undutiful Children, you will become the
worst sort of Murderers. These Aggrieved Parents of yours, would with all
their Hearts Lay down their own Lives immediately, if T hat would Effectually
Recover you, out of all Ungodliness. As when David had an Ungodly Son, he
Sighed, in 2 Samuel 18. 33 O my Son, my Son; I would to God, I had dyed for thee,
my Son, my Son: Even so, your Parents are Sighing in your Ears, My Child, I had
rather my self Die to Night, than that thy Ungodly Soul should go where the Soul
of Absalom is Lodged for ever; my Child! my Child! And is this the Return, that
you make unto Them, ye Ungrateful Wretches; To Tire them out of their Lives, by
your being Incurable in your Ungodliness. Methinks, I overhear your Parents
with weeping Eyes, and bleeding Hearts thus calling upon you, O Unthankful
Children, After all that we have born, and all that we have done, for you, will
you kill us by your Obstinate Ungodliness; we cannot Live, if you go on in
Rebellions against the God of Heaven: But will you thus Requite you Parents, ye
Foolish Children, and Unwise! When the Murderers of Coesar were stabbing of
him, he saw one among them that was very Near unto himself; whereupon with a
mighty Passion he cried out, What? You, my Son! Have I a Son among you!
Children, your Parents have enough to Humble them, enough to Consume them,
enough to bring their Gray-hairs with Sorrow to the Grave, without any Help of
yours. Oh! Do not put them to say, What? My Child; will you Stab me too?
Parricides, or, Parent killers, have been thought such Unnatural Creatures,
that Great Law (...) have made no Laws against (...) Vipers; ^s thinking that
Mankind would never afford such Transgressors. But (...) has mentioned several
such Monstrous Devils; whose Names had best perish with them; I shall not
mention them: and, (...) have a care, Left my Ungodliness have such Effects
upon thy Parents that thou sha^ also deserve a Room in the History of (...)

Consider, Secondly, What Rich Encouragements you have to Abandon the Courses
of Ungodliness and (...) the Demands (...) You are altogether Bruttish if you
(...) count it one of the Greatest Honor, or Pleasures, that you can (...) me
the Comforts of the (...) whom God has given you (...) the Great Honor of a
Great (...) among the Romans (...) of his Parents, and for (...) name or (...)
put (...) Maximum (...) Capere, (...) Parents; He was glad of nothing so much
as This, That his Parents were yet Living, to see what Acceptance he found in
the World. Indeed, There have some Children been so extraordinarily
Circumstanced, as to be the Means of Converting their own Parents unto God. And
Oh! Children, It cannot Enter into the Heart of man to conceive, What Jones
must needs fill your Souls for ever; if by your Exemplary Piety, your Poor,
(...), Carnal P arents, may be awakened, so (...) T hink upon their Ways, as
to Turn their F ert unto Gods T estimonies! It was (...) Problem among the
Ancient Philosophers, Whether a Child may not confer more Benefits on his
Father, than he has Received from him? How bravely will you determine it, in
the Affirmative, if your Parents, may by you come to be Born again! Whereas, if
your Parents Die before they are yet Born Again, you may even Mourn over them,
almost like that poor Italian, who visiting the Sepulcher of his Father, first
washed the Monument with a Flood of Tears, and then with Sorrow and Horror fell
down Dead upon it. But I suppose your Parents already Converted; and say, It Is
enough, if you may be the means of Comforting them. One could not speak a more
Desirable Thing of you, than to say unto your Parents, for you, as they did
unto old Naomi, in Ruth 4. 14, 15. Blessed be the Lord, who has not Left thee
this Day without a Kinsman, who shall be unto thee a Restorer of thy Life, and
a Nourisher of thine Old Age. If you may now Sweeten, and so Lengthen, the
Lives of your Parents, by all Godliness, and Helpfulness, as They will Bless
God for you, so they will Authoritatively Bless you in the Name of God. You are
advised in Ephesians. 6. 2. Honor thy Father and thy Mother which is the First
Commandment (of the Second Table) with (a peculiar) Promise (anneked unto it)
The Promises of God unto Dutiful Children, carry in them all the Great and P
recious Things that you can ask for! and the Parents of those Children, may so
powerfully Challenge them, that they shall, either in the Letter, or in the
Better, be all of them infallibly accomplished. I take Notice, That in the
Commandment, what we Translate, That thy Days may be Long, is to be read, T
hat they may Prolong thy Days. They! Who? Thy Father, and thy Mother; THEY
shall P rolong thy Days, and make thee Happy, by their Blessing of thee, in
the Name of the Lord, if thou carry it well unto them. Enable your Parents to
plead thus before the Lord, on your behalf; Lord, This Child of mine has
deserved so well of me, by many Dutiful Endeavors to answer my Desires, that
if it were in my power to do him Good, he should never want any good Thing;
wherefore, I bring him to Thee, O my God, for T he to do him Good, and
Preserve him, and Honor him, and Satisfy him with Long Life, and Show him thy
Salvation. I assure you, these Blessings of your Obliged Parents, will cause
you to Prosper wonderfully!

But there is this further to Encourage you, if you have Godly Parents: The
Children of such Parents are under Advantages for the Fear of God, above any in
the World. With what Encouraged Souls, does a Jacob say, The God of my Father
has been with me! And a Moses, T he God of my Father was my Help! And a David,
O Lord, I am the Son of thy Handmaid. Oh, the many Prayers, Oh, the many
Patterns, whereby your Parents, are hearing of you to Do well! And there are
peculiar Promises which you have to Lay hold upon: What say you, to that P
romise, in Psalm. 112. 2. The Generation of the Upright shall be Blessed! Or
that Promise, in Psalm. 102. 28. The Children of thy Servants shall continue,
and their Seed shall be Established for ever! You are, The Children of the
Covenant; and you know how urgently the Apostle pressed the Jews unto Well
doing, from that very Argument. But will thou Despise this Privilege; and will thou Go on still in thy Ungodliness? Thou Profane Esau, Thou shall one Day, Rue
this Madness, with Tears of Blood! For;

Consider, Thirdly, What a Fiery Vengeance is pursuing of you, as Long as your
Afflicted Parents, continue Afflicted with your Ungodliness. If the Grandson
of a Moses become an Idolater, he shall [as the Jews remark upon Judge. 18.
30.] be destroyed, as if a Menasseb had been his Father. Covenant breakers I
find Ranked, and you shall find them Damned, among the worst of Sinners; but
you that slight the Obligations laid upon you, by your Parents, Oh! you are
among the worst of Covenant-breakers. Have you forgotten that Thunder of Heaven
in Psalm. 9. 17. The Wicked shall be (...) into Hell? Unto a Burning Hell are
you Posting every Hour, ye Ungodly Children. But why so fast? I say, why so
fast? Let me freely and fairly warn you, of This; The Godliness of your
Parents, will not Save you, from the Everlasting Destruction, which the
Presence of the Lord, shall bring upon them that Obey not the Gospel; Oh! Don't
Think to say with your selves, we have Parents who Pray so much for us, that we
shall do well enough, though we do nothing for our selves! For, I say unto you,
that if you bear no Fruits of Godliness your selves, you shall Unavoidably be
cast into the Unquenchable Fire. Yea, When you come to Ly and Broil in that
horrible Fire of the Wrath of God, all the Godliness of your Parents, will be
but Oil unto the Flame, in the Lowermost parts of the Hell reserved for you,
and render the Reflections of your Consciences, the more Furious and Amazing,
until the very Heavens be no more. Better thy Father had been an Indian or a
Negroe! We read of one, in Luke 16. 23, 24. In Hell, be Lift up his Eyes, being
in Torments; and he Cried, Father Abraham, have mercy on me; for I am Tormented
in this Name. Tormented indeed will They be, and None so Tormented as They,
that in Hell shall call to mind, Oh! I am one that had an Abraham for my
Father, and a Sarah for my Mother. My Believing Parents are Gone to Glory, and
(...) Child of the Kingdom am here in Outer Darkness, weeping and Wailing, and
Gnashing of my Teeth for ever! It was said in Lev. 21. 9. If the Daughter of
any Priest profane her self, she profaneth her Father, she shall be Burnt with
Fire: Behold, ye Children of Ministers, what will become of you, if you be
Profane in your Behaviors! There is an Everlasting Fire prepared for you, even
such an Everlasting Fire as the Apostate Angels, that Fallen Generation of
Ministers, are Damned unto. But indeed, all Christians are Priests in our
Days: And there is a formidable Fire which their profane Children shall above
others, be Cruciated with. But that which will exceedingly Aggravate these
Torments of your Damnation, will be the Encounter which you shall have with
your Godly Parents, before the Glorious High Throne of the Lord Jesus Christ,
in the Day of His Appearing. The Famous Mr. Bolton used those words to his
Children on his Death bed, Let none of you Dare to meet me at the Day of
Judgment, in your Unregeneracy. Thus do I now say to you; Do, Go on in your
Ungodliness; and how will you dare to meet your Godly Parents, before the
Tribunal of the Lord Jesus Christ? how will you dare to meet them that have so
earnestly been concerned for your Conversion? Those P arents which now Love you
so dearly, and count nothing too much for you; if the Lord Jesus Christ then
refer your Eternal Sentence unto Those very P arents, even They must concur
with the Judge of all the Earth, in your Condemnation, and say, Lord, we cannot
object against the Proceedings of thy Justice upon these Ungodly Wretches;
while they were our Children, all our pains to make them thy Servants, were
Lost upon them; Wherefore we now know them no more, Let them depart among the
Workers of Iniquity. How will you bear to hear such Thunderclaps. And Oh!
what an Infinite Consternation will fall upon your Souls, when your Fathers,
your Mothers, will shake you off, and say, You have Troubled us, and now God
shall Trouble you (...)! Wretch! If Thy Heart strings were not Sinews of Iron,
thou would Relent at such Thoughts as these.

But if this will not make thee Relent. I am afraid, thou art not far from the
Fate of them, who Being often Reproved, and harden their Necks: That is, To he
Destroyed suddenly and without Remedy. It was a Remark upon the Sons of Elt, in
1 Samuel 2. 25. They hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because the
Lord would stay them. Children, I do solemnly Forewarn you of this Thing. If
you don't Hearken unto your P arents, when they are advising of you, that you
would not Afflict them, with Courses of Ungodliness, I am verily Afraid, That
the Lord will Stay you, Ban you, Damn you, before you are aware. It was the
Usage in Israel, to have that Anniversary Proclamation, from the Top of Mount
Ebal, in Deuteronomy. 27. 16. Cursed be he that: sets Light by his Father, or his
Mother And all the people shall say Amen. As it were from the Top of that
Mount, I do here this day Loudly Proclaim this unto you, The Curse of God, will
make a Quick Work with you, if you go on to Afflict your Fathers, or your
Mothers, with your Ungodliness.

All Ages have been filled with Examples, of Strange (...), which Undutiful
Children have been overtaken with. And few have Died upon the Gallows, at the
Last, but what have gone Roaring out of the World, for this, Oh! It Is my
Undutifulness unto my P arents, that has brought me hither! It would be a Long
Work, to Repeat all, that well attested Narratives do Report of this matter;
But He only Relate, That our Blessed WILSON, once observing a Son to behave
himself undutifully toward his Father, in the Ferry boat, which was carrying
of them over, that Man of God, saw cause to speak unto that Young man after
this manner, Young man, I am sorry to see you so little Regard your F ather; I
would seriously persuade you to Repent of your Undutifulness, or I will
solemnly Assure you, I expect the Killing Judgments of God will overtake you,
before a year come to an End. And behold, before that year was out, that Young
man came (...) a very Tragical and Untimely Death. In like manner, I must now
speak to you this Day. Children, Regard the Desires and Commands of your
Parents, and Forsake that Ungodliness whereby they will be grievously
Afflicted: Or else It Is to be feared, That it will not be long before the
Indignation of God, set a Visible and a Terrible Mark upon you.

But methinks, I hear some of you now Enquiring,

What shall we do, that we may become Agreeable unto our Parents?

Do! Do This. In the first place, Become Religious; Repent of Sin, Believe on
Christ, Give your selves up to God! Walk with the Wise: which is the Great
Thing that your P arents have desired of you. And then, out of Duty to God,
faithfully do your Duty to your, Parents; But know, that your GrandParents also
are to be considered as your Parents, in your doing of this Duty. But what is
the Duty? It Is This; Love your P arents heartily. You never can have but One
Friend, which you are to Love above them, and for which you are to Leave them.
What Joys Them, Let That Joy you: What Grieves Them, Let That Grieve You. Make
them to see, that you Love to be with them. Count it an Intolerable Calamity,
to Sleep under their Displeasure. And be not able to see any Evil befalling of
them; No; Say with Judah, in Genesis 44. 34. How shall I see Evil come upon my
Father! O Discover a (...) Affection to them, that have always Expressed a
Parental Affection to you.

Again, Honor your Parents mightily. Be not such Chams, as to Think Basely of
them, or to Expose, and Reproach any of their Weaknesses. Be like Joseph, who B
owed unto his Father; be like Solomon who Bowed unto his Mother; Treat them
with all the Reverence imaginable. Yea, though they should have their Little
Infirmities, yet abate not of that Reverence. The Call of Heaven is, Despise
not thy Mother, when she is old. Even the Old Grandmother must not be slighted
Remember the Charge of God, in Le^. 19. 2. Ye shall Fear, every man his Mother,
and his Father: Where the Mother is put, First, because the Fear of her, is
First and most, Laid aside.

I add, Requite your Parents Gratefully. You owe them all that you are, all
that you have; you will never come out of their Debt. Pray for them every Day
distinctly, zealously, as for your own Souls. Do for them every thing that you
can; and let not the Stork among the Birds of Heaven, be a witness against you.
Are they fallen into any Decays? Oh! Take a wondrous Delight in Relieving of
them, unto the utmost of your Ability. To see an Aged Father, or an Aged
Mother, nourished in thy House, 'twill be the Glory of that House: and God will
Bless that House of thine, as He did the House of Obed Edom. The very Pagans
have sometimes called These, Their Household Gods. A Mine of Gold found in thy
Ground, would not Enrich thee so much, as for thee to send thy crazy Dam, such
a Message as that, of Joseph, Thus says thy Son, Come down to me, Tarry not;
Thou shall be Near to me. It Is the Evangelical Injunction, in 1 Timothy 5. 4. Let
them Learn, with Piety at home, to Requite their Parents, for that is Good and
Acceptable toward God. Thus, Dr. Tailor the Martyr, going to Suffer, said unto
his Son, When thy Mother is waxen Old, Forsake her not, but provide for her to
thy power, and see that she Lack nothing; so will God Bless thee, and give thee
Long Life and Prosperity.

Finally, Obey your P arents Conscientiously. Yea, though you should be as much
above Twenty as Isaac was, when his Father bad him Ly down upon his Altar, yet
I say, Obey them Conscientiously: For, This is well-pleasing to the Lord. And
indeed our Lord Himself, Subject unto His Parents, did Exemplify it. The Father
of the Rechabites forbad several Things unto them; and the Lord said afterward
unto them, in Jer. 35. 19. Because ye have Obeyed the Commandments of your
Father, Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, Ye shall Stand before me for
ever. Children, If your, Parents Command you any thing that is (...) Sinful,
you Sin, if you do not Obey them: How much more, if they Command you, to Hate
and Shun, the Things that are Sinful: In all things of moment especially, in
your Matches, you should' Ask the Counsils of your Parents. [ Judah, Married a
Canaanitess, without his Fathers Consent; and he had a couple of Children so
damnably wicked, that Almighty God Killed them with His own Hands!] And it is
of no small moment for you^ to Take their Counsils, whenever they give you what
is Lawful, what is Wholesome. The Copies also which your Parents do set before
you, in their Prayerful, Watchful, Fruitful Conversation; Write after those
Copies, when they may say, The Things which you have heard and seen in me, Do;
and the God of Peace be with you! What shall I say? Learn every Truth which
your Parents Infill; Seek every Grace which your Parents Commend; Shun every
Sin, which your Parents Rebuke; Do every Work which your Parents Require;
Beware of every Temptation, which your Parents foresee: And as the Wise man
says, My Son, keep thy Fathers Commandment, and Forsake not the Law of thy
Mother.

Briefly, Let the Admonitions of your Parents, never be forgotten with you.
Treasure up their Admonitions, as the Sons of Cassius, did the Books of their
Father; who being Threatened, That the B ooks of their Father should be Burnt,
bravely Answered, Then must you B urn us too, for we have his Books in our
Hearts. Let your P arents be thus acknowledged: and God Grant, that my own
Children particularly, if he shall mercifully Give and Spare such Blessings
unto me, may when they (...) up, Consider the Books written by their Father; as
likely to be terrible witnesses against them, if they should not, as I trust in
Him they will, Know and Serve the God of their F ather. Children, Be advised by
your Parents; (...) so you will make a Glad Father, so you will nor be the
Heaviness of your Mother.

FINIS.
An Appendix Reporting some Remarkable Judgments of Heaven, upon Disobedient
and Undutiful Children. From Undoubted Histories.
1. WHat a Lamentable Fate overtook the Rebellious Absalom, is well known unto
all of us, that have the Happiness to be acquainted with the Sacred Oracles of
the Scripture. Travelers Report That in the place where Absalom was Bu^ed,
there is now a vast Heap of Stones, thus produced: It is Customary, for them
that go by the place, to Throw a Stone upon it using these words, THUS IT SHALL
BE DONE, UNTO THE SON, THAT REBELLETH AGAINST HIS FATHER.

And what long since befell the Sons of (...) has befallen many (...) in Later
Ages, no Less than (...) whom the Trust of (...) of their Parents, the
Chronicles of Kingdoms have so Largely Related, as to Supersede any Collection
thereof.

II. It is Reported by Manlius, that a Poor, Needy, Crooked Old man, Addressed
his Wealthy Son, for some Relief; but the Young and Proud Blade Chased his
Father from him, as counting it a Dishonor to be Related unto one in such
Abject Circumstances. The Aged Father went away, drowned in Tears: but the God
of Heaven struck that Unnatural Son, with an Incurable Madness; in which he
continued Raving until he Dyed.

III. It is a Passage, which Dr. Beard, (...) his, Theater of Gods Judgments,
has Reported, from the, Theatnum Historioe, That a perverse and wicked Son did
once Beat his Old Father, and then Drag him unto the Threshold of the House, by
the Hair of the Head. Afterward, when he grew Old himself, (which was a (...)
Thing!) his own (...) in like manner did Beat him; and Dragged him also by the
Hair of the Head, out of Doors, into the Did: whereas he (...) I had been
pulled only to the Threshold, I had been Rightly Served!

III. Enguerus is our Author for it, that at Yuchi, an Ungodly Son; furiously
Turned his Mother out of Doors, thrice in one Day, protesting, T hat he had as
Liev see his House on Fire, as to have her continue there. And behold! on that
very Day, his House was Fired, none knew how; and, it, with all that was in it,
immediately Consumed.

IV. Mr. Swinneck, recites a Narrative, of a Yeoman in Leicestershire, who made
over his House and Land, unto an Unworthy Son, upon Marriage; Conditionally
that his Son should keep him, during his Life. But afterward, there fell out
some Difference between them, on which this Viper of a Son, bad his Father, Get
him out of Doors, and called him, A Bursten Belly Slave, (as indeed the Old man
had a Rupture.) The very next Day, as the Young man was walking in his Grounds,
Mr. Goodman, the Minister of the Parish, Riding by, asked him, How he did? He
answered, Very well! But before the Minister was out of light, the Young man's
Bowels Gushed out, and he miserably went home, carrying of them in his hands.
He then sent for the Minister, owned the Justice of God upon him for his
Undutifulness unto his Father, and made his Will, wherein he Bequeathed unto
his Father much of what he had, and that Night he Dyed.

V. It is now Twenty Years ago, that them was Preached and Printed in this
Land, a Sermon, upon that Scripture Eccl. 7, 17. Be not overmuch Wicked, Why
should thou Die before thy (...)? From whence I will take Leave to Transcribe
in this place, the Ensuing Lines.

Breaches of the Fifth Commandment, are to be found among us; They (...) Evils,
we may see them every where.

Mark What I say, IF EVER New England BE DESTROYED, (...) VERY SIN, OF (...)
THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT, WILL BE THE (...) OF THIS LAND.

Disobedience to (...) is often punished (...) is a Scripture, which, methinks
may strike Terror, and Trembling, into the Souls of Disobedient Children: It is
that in Prove. 30. 17. T he Eye that mocketh his Father, and Despises to obey
his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles
shall Eat it. Stubbornness and Contempt is to be seen in the Eye: The Eye that
mocketh his Father, is, he that is Stubborn and Rebellious against his Father
Well, A Father has many times that Wisdom and Authority, with him, that the
Child dare not Disobey him, but he cares not for his Mother: Therefore it is
added, He that Despises to obey his Mother. You Children, that Disobey your
Mothers, hearken to This! The Bavens are like to F eed upon you; That is to
say, Such Sinners shall come to an (...) Death, and it may be, not have a
Decent, Honorable Burial. It is to be feared, that such Children will come to
the Gallows, and be (...) up in Gibbets for the Ravens and (...) to seed upon
them, if they will

And it is greatly to be Observed, That the (...) those that (...) upon the
Gallows, do confess, that they have been Guilty of Disobedience to their
Parents. Yea, God is so provoked, with such Wicked Children, as that (...) does
Leave them sometimes Against Nature, to Destroy themselves, as a just
punishment of their Unnatural Disobedience. There was an Awful Exemple of this,
which happened in this Country, about Fifteen Years ago. A young man Drowned
himself; but before (...) did it; he (...) a Writing, directed unto his Father,
wherein he had such words as these. O Father, I have kept my Soul, as (...) as
ever I could: my Ruin was the Pride and Stubbornness of my Tender Years, which
should have been fetched out with (...) Correction. Disobedient Children, (...)
of it, and the Lord Strike it home to your Hearts.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some other Books.
1. THe Call of the Gospel. 2. Military Duties: An Artillery Sermon. 3. Right
Thoughts in Sad Hours. 4. Early Piety Exemplified. 5. Memorable Witchcrafts and
Possessions. 6. Discourses, to Serve the Designs of Practical Godliness. 7.
Soldiers Counseled and Comforted. 8. The Wonderful Works of God Commemorated.
9. Work upon the Ark. 10. Speedy Repentance Urged. 11. A Public Spirit. 12. A
Companion for Communicants. 13. The Serviceable Man: An Election Sermon. 14.
Serious Thoughts in Dying Times. 15. Addresses to Old men, Young men, Little
Children. 16. The Life of the Renowned John Eliot. 17. Expectanda: Or Things to
be Looked for. 18. Little Flocks Guarded against Grievous Wolves. 19. Ornaments
for the Daughters of Zion. 20. Blessed Unions Recommended. 21. A Sacred
Exorcism upon Sinful Discontent. 22. The Cause and Cure of a Wounded Spirit.
23. Meditations on the Day of Judgment. 24. A Midnight Cry. 25. Optanda: Good
Men Described, and Good Things Propounded. 26. The Wonders of the Invisible
World. 27. Awakenings for the Unregenerate. 28. Warnings from the Dead. 29. The
Day, and the Work of the Day. 30. Winter Meditations. 31. Early Religion Urged.
32. The Short History of New England. 33. Durable Riches.
All by this Author.

Advertisement.
UPon the (...) of some Well disposed Persons, There is now in the Press, A
Select Part of the CHURCH HISTORY of New England; Containing the Lives of Four
Eminent and Renowned Persons, who all Successively Died in the Immediate
Service of One Church in Boston; to wit, Mr. JOHN COTTON, Mr. JOHN NORTON, Mr.
JOHN WILSON, and Mr. JOHN DAVENPORT. With an Appendix, Containing the Life of
the Famous Mr. THOMAS HOOKER, Pastor of the Church at Hartford, in Connecticut.


