The LAW Established BY THE GOSPEL OR, A Brief DISCOURSE, wherein is Asserted
and Declared, the Great Honor which is put upon the Law of GOD, in the Gospel
way of JUSTIFICATION by Faith alone.

Being The Substance of A SERMON Preached on the Lecture in Boston, September
20. 1694.

By SAMUEL WILLARD, Teacher of a Church there.

Math. 5.17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets; I am
not come to destroy, but fulfill.

Boston in New England, Printed by Bartholomew Green, for Michael Perry, at the
West End of the Exchange. 1694.

Christian Readers.
THE Case handled in the following Discourse is of as great Moment as almost
any thing that I know of; a right understanding of this Truth is necessary, and
the disputes of the present times call unto a more accurate and distinct
enquiry into it. The danger is great, whiles some in pretense of honoring free
Grace, despise the Command, and open a door of Licentiousness; and others to
avoid this, verge as much to the Contrary extreme, and bring in a New Covenant
of Works: the keeping a due distance between both of these is a Christian's
wisdom: which is done, when we give to the LAW what is it is due, and to GRACE
that which belongs to it. If what is here offered, may Contribute any thing to
the Information, or Establishment of any so as to help them to steer steady
between these Rocks; the Publication of it will not be unseasonable: which that
it may, I Commend it to the Divine Blessing,

who am, Your ^^rvant for CHRIST'S sake, S. WILLARD.

The LAW Established by the GOSPEL.
Romans 3.31. Do we then make the Law void through Faith? God forbid? Yea, we
Establish the Law.


THE Principal Scope of the Doctrinal part of this Epistle, is to assert,
prove, and vindicate the great Article of the Christian Religion, Viz.
Justification by Faith in Jesus Christ; in Opposition to the Heterodox Doctrine
of Justification by the works of the Law: Though, in the prosecution of this,
the other Fundamentals of the Gospel are excellently introduced and handled.
Among other things he removes those blocks out of the way, at which men were
apt to stumble, by answering of those Objections that seemed to cast Reflection
on this Truth, and were accordingly improved by the false Teacher (...)
Calumniate it withal, thereby to prejudice the newly Converted Christians at
it. One of these Cavils our Apostle obviates in our Text; where it is briefly
proposed and replied unto. The question he starts is, Do we then make the Law
void through Faith? The great offense which the Jews took at Christ and his
Evangelical Doctrine, was an Opinion they had imbibed, that it was subversive
of the Law, under which they were born and Educated, and this they were not
able to bear: and because they expected, according to the received erroneous
Opinion that had then gotten footing among them, their Justification by by the
works of the Law personally performed, they could not endure to hear of
Justification by Faith alone in Christ, because it did directly militate
against that Tenent: for which cause they resolutely rejected Christ, and
bitterly Persecuted his followers. Hereupon, many Judaizing Christians, partly
in a mistaken zeal, for want of a right understanding of this point, partly to
avoid Persecution, which was raised principally on this account, were very much
unsettled in respect of this Article. From hence the false Teachers took
Occasion to insinuate their Pernicious Doctrines, tending to the subversion of
the Gospel, and grievous Scandalizing of the Apostles, not only among the Jews,
but the Gentiles too, as Paul makes his complaint in the Epistle to the
Galatians. He therefore starts the question, that so he may reply upon it, and
remove the Scandal with which the Doctrine of Justification had been
injuriously aspersed. The word here Translated to make void, signifies to
render a thing idle, unprofitoble, vain, or of no use; and this must needs be
an heavy charge, if true, with respect to the Law which was given by God
Himself unto men, and must carry in it an high reflection upon his both Wisdom
and Goodness, in bringing mankind under a Law that is vain and unprofitable.
Our Apostle therefore makes a double reply to it. (1.) By way of greatest
detestation; God forbid: in the Greek, it is, Let it not be; and is affirmed to
be an usual form of speech then in custom, by which men were wont to express
their abhorrence of a thing as most vile, and accounting it most injurious to
be charged with it. q. d. I detest the very mention of such a thing, and look
upon it to be no less than Blasphemy. (2.) By asserting the contrary to this as
a Truth, Tea, we establish the Law. The Greek word signifies to make a thing to
stand, to ratify or confirm it, to set it upon its basis: q. d. we give the Law
the greatest honor that may be. The only thing here to be enquired after, is,
what Law the Apostle intends in our Text: and out of doubt one of these two
must needs be designed, Viz. either the Moral Law, or else the Mosaical
Paedagogy, in which there were adjoined to the Law Moral, the Ceremonial and
the Judicial, which was given by God to the Nation of Israel, to be observed by
them. In which latter sense Paul most frequently uses it in his Epistles,
though sometimes with a more particular aim at the Moral, and else where at the
Ceremonial part of it: and it may without danger be thus understood in our
Text; though I shall have a more especial respect to that which is Moral in the
following Discourse: and we may hence Observe this,

DOCTRINE. The Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Christ, does not make void
the Law of God, but Establish it.

This Observation is not a merely Theoretical point; for indeed there are no
such in Divinity; but highly practical, the right ordering of our Conversation
being very eminently concerned in it. Nor is the Calumny at an end, but the
^^^^our still continues, and invectives from time to time spread abroad against
us, as if, because we are not professedly Arminians, we must needs therefore be
Antinomians; or as if we did cast great contempt upon the Command, because we
deny our Obedience to it to have any ingrediency into our Justification: and
thereby open a door not of Gospel Liberty, but to all manner of Licentiousness;
and not only give men leave, but offer them the greatest encouragement to live
as they list. Nor is it less on the other side, as if because we give to the
Law its Authority and usefulness in Gospel times, we went about to undermine
the Gospel, and bring the Children of God under a Yoke of bondage from which
Christ has freed them: for the removal of both these, and clearing up of the
Gospel Truth in this respect, there may this Case of Conscience be briefly
discussed, Viz.

Quest. Wherein the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone does Establish the
Law?

Ans. In the resolution of this, I shall briefly pass over the Consideration of
the Paedagogy of Moses, in which the Cerimonial Law was added to the Moral: Of
the Abrogation of which Paedagogy, with respect to the Ceremonial part of it, I
know not that there is now any dispute among understanding Christians; the
Gospel being so full and clear in the asserting and proving of it. Yet
notwithstanding, the Doctrine of Justification by Faith in Christ, does in no
wise declare that to have been a vain Law, and of none effect; but
acknowledges to it the whole honor that God has put upon it. We read in,
Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law, for Righteousness, to every one that
believes; and this refers to the Law given by Moses; from whence we infer,
That that Law had a proper aim at Christ, and Justification through his
Righteousness, by faith in him. Christ was directly and intentionally the
design of it. It was given on purpose to point out a CHRIST to his People. As
soon as man's Apostasy had brought him into a necessity of a Savior, without
whom he must perish for ever; there was a Gracious discovery made of one to
fallen man, in that Precious Promise, Genesis 3 15. But there was a long tract of
time to pass between the Promise of this Savior, and his coming in the flesh
to accomplish the work he was designed for: and least this hope deferred should
make them to faint, God would that his People should, in the mean time, have
something to shadow him out to them, for the help of their Faith, and among
other means, this Law was one. It was therefore unto them a veiled Gospel, in
which the Person, Natures, Offices, and Work of Christ were represented. Here
then let us Observe.

1. That Law was to show them their absolute need of an Expiatory Sacrifice to
take away the guilt of sin from them. It was to convince them of sin; hence we
read, Heb. 10.3. In these Sacrifices there is a remembrance of sins. There were
hereupon in that Law many Ceremonial uncleanness by a positive Command, added
unto such as were in themselves Moral, which was to give them a deeper
Conviction of sin: and this Law requiring an Offering upon the breach of any
Precept Moral or Ceremonial, under a severe threatening of being cut off from
their People, in case of the Omission, told them, that the wrath of God
certainly abode on them, except they obtained an Interest in, and applied
themselves accordingly unto another who might make an Atonement unto God for
them. It said that they could not satisfy the Justice of God for their own
sins, so as to obtain a discharge from the guilt of them, by any righteousness
of their own, but must have a Sacrifice to do it for them, else the
Condemnation must abide upon them. The Sacrifice was to be presented, their
sins must be laid on the head of it, they must be confessed over it, it must
then be slain, and its blood sprinkled and powered out, and we are told Heb.
9.22. Without shedding of blood there is no remission.

2. It was also to give them good hope of obtaining pardon through the offering
of another. It was to encourage them not to despair of Pardon of sin, and peace
with God, notwithstanding the guilt of sin, and sense of Gods wrath lying heavy
upon them. The Moral Law was given with Thundrings and Lightnings very
terribly; but the Law of Sacrifices came in to relieve them against those
amazing terrors: It told them indeed that their hope was not, could not be in
any righteousness of their own; it had a direct aim at driving them out of
themselves, and letting them know that if ever they were pardoned, it must be
in the virtue and efficacy of the Sacrifice that was offered for them; but it
gave them all encouragement to look for it in that way: it said that God had
found out a way in which they might escape his wrath; that he had provided a
Ransom for them, that they need not die: we shall find that whatever
Confessions they made of their sins, and what ever repentance they testified,
there must be a Sacrifice added thereto, and it was upon that, and not before
it or without it that God accepted of them, and witnessed to his forgiving
them. We therefore find, that when God appointed the Sacrifice for this or that
Transgression, he annexeth the promise of pardon to the performance of these
rites; that then is the burden of all, Lev 4.26, -- 31 -- ult. and 5.10, 13,
16, 18. And it shall be forgiven them This was to convince men of there own
inability to make satisfaction to God for sin, of the indispensible necessity
of such a Satisfaction; and withal to tell them, that there was such an one
provided for them.

3. That the whole virtue of all this flowed from Christ. It was not any innate
virtue in the Ceremonies and Sacrifices themselves that did profit those who
used them: they had no saving virtue, exopere operato, they that merely relied
on them, and looked no further for their help, Offered vain Oblations; and on
that account God so often, in the Prophets, blows upon their Sacrifices. They
did not of themselves purge away sin, or remove the guilt of it; for it was not
in them so to do; they had not that in them which could appease the Justice of
God, or answer the sentence of the Law which was out against sin. Heb. 10.^.
The Law can never with these Sacrifices make the comers thereto perfect. And
Verse 4. It is not possible that the blood of bulls and of goats should take
away sins; and Chap. 9.9. Were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could
not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience. All
the virtue in them then was, as they were Ordinances of God, and had a
reference to him that was to come, whom they did represent, and were dark
signs of; for this reason, they that offered them were to exercise faith on
him, that so they might become influential after a Sacramental manner; upon
which account they are called the shadow of things to come, Heb. 10.1. And
Christ was the substance: their whole Efficacy depended upon his institution
and blessing.

4. Hence, by believing on Christ alone for Justification, the aim and end of
that Law is attained. For this was the very ultimate Scope and design of it.
God gave it to his People for the time merely with an eye to this: and they,
and only they who were by it helped to and in the Faith of Christ, complied
with the mind of God in it. Now, because that Law was only to serve to this end
and purpose, till Christ himself should come in the flesh, and offer up the
real Sacrifice for the appeasing of Gods anger, whereof these were but the
Types and Representations; hence, though this Law be now laid aside, as being
of no further Service for the People of God, yet it is with an honorable
remembrance of it, as having been an excellent instrument in the hand of the
Spirit of God, for the Salvation of Old Testament believers by Jesus Christ.
Though since he has taken away the Vail, it be now antiquated, and because the
Sun is risen, the shadows are fled; and there being no need of any more
representative offerings, since he has offered up that which is the substance
of them; which is every way sufficient for our Salvation; yet it still retains
the memory of having once been a precious Ordinance of God.

But I pass from this to the Consideration of the Law Moral; which was given to
man at the beginning, as soon as God had Created him, to be a Rule of
Righteousness unto him; and according as he behaved himself toward it, by
Obedience or Disobedience, so was he to stand or fall: and that which is here
to be made evident is That the Doctrine of Evangelical Justification is so far
from vacating this Law, that it defers to it the greatest honor that can be
thought of: And whiles we deny our works at the best, whether of Morality, or
of true Sanctification to have any ingrediency into our Justification before
God, we are so far from undervaluing the Law herein, that we do indeed
acknowledge it in its dignity: yea that in no way do we undervalue the Law, but
acknowledge it with all its due respect. For the more distinct clearing up of
this Assertion, and thereby giving a satisfactory resolution of the case in
hand, let us Observe, that there is a threefold usefulness of the Law Moral,
two whereof relate to man under the Consideration of that Relation which he
bare to the Special Government of God at the first, and when he was in his
uprightness; the other has respect to him Considered as in his Apostate
condition, and we shall find all these to be ratified and established by the
Doctrine of Gospel Justification by Faith, and that which is acknowledged to be
useful, is not made in vain: vanity is the the loss of the end which a thing
is designed for, but the Law attains all its ends in this way. Let us then take
the account of them, and how they are hereby complied withal.

1. The Law was at first given to man in a Covenant way with its Sanctions. God
not only gave it to be man's Rule, of which we may take totice anon; but also to
be the Rule of his own Relative Justice, in his proceeding with man, in his
Government over him. It was therefore the Law of Special Government: and that
it might be adapted to this purpose, there was annexed to it, a promise of a
constant life of happiness in case of man's perfect Obedience to it; and a
threatening of all miseries on the supposal of his disobeying it: and
accordingly there was a double Sacrament added in the Ratification of it, Viz.
The tree of Life, and of Knowledge, these were set as Seals to the Covenant, to
signify that God would undoubtedly stand to the terms of it; that he was in
earnest, and had obliged himself to see to the accomplishment of the terms of
it. Now the Doctrine of Justification by Faith fully Answers this end of the
Law to the utmost extent of it, as will be manifest by the following
Conclusions.

1. That fallen man has by sin forfeited the good of the promise, and procured
to himself the evil of the threatening in the first Covenant. The life that was
therein promised was engaged to perfect Obedience to the whole Law, but man
has not obeyed at all, and on that account his claim to life is gone; he can
make no challenge at all of it, the threatened death was against all
disobedience, even the least defect in the performance of it therein required;
and he has disobeyed, and on that account is fallen under the efficacy of the
threatening. Hereupon, for fallen man to be personally under the Law, and under
the Curse of it are inseparable, Gal. 3.10. Whosoever is of the works of the
Law, is under the Curse. And this is the true state of every one of Adams
Posterity as they come into the World, and as long as they abide in their
natural state, and now the Justice of God stands armed against them with
vengeance, and is ready to fall upon them, and execute on them all that wrath
unto which they are sentenced by the Law.

2. Hence there is a double Righteousness requisite for the Justification of
fallen man. There are two things requisite for the entire Justification of one
who stands upon his trial, Viz. The acquittance of him from Condemnation, and
the declaring of him to be a Righteous Person; that so he may both escape the
misery he was in hazard of, and be invested with happiness according to the
Law: and in the declaration of both these, the Law of Righteousness must be
regarded, otherwise the sentence cannot be righteous; to this end there must be
a perfect active Obedience to it, every way Commensurate to all the Commands of
it, or else he is not righteous: and there must be a full Satisfaction given
for all the Offense that has been given by any Prevarication or departure from
it, else he remains under the Condemnation of it: and if there be not both of
these found for him, and belonging to him, before, or in order to his being
Justified, the Law is superseded, and trampled upon; it is neglected and so
made void, which must not be, for so Justice would suffer, which it ought not
to do. We shall therefore find both of these put together, Romans 3.26. That he
may be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus Christ.

3. That fallen man cannot personally answer either of these two, much less
both. He cannot perform, for the future that perfect Obedience which is
required by the Command; and this by reason of the Impotency, and the Enmity
that he is under the efficacy of. He has lost all his strength, and is not now
able to perform any one duty as it ought to be done, and therefore is said to
be without strength, Romans 5.6. which is the condition of every man in his
natural state. He is also acted by a Spirit of malignity against the Law, Romans
8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be: and although in Conversion the man is renewed
again, yet it is but in part, and he has not attained to be sinless, nor ever
will in this life; 1 John 1.8. If we say we are without sin, we lie, and the
truth is not in us. So that ^f the best duties of the most holy mere man upon
earth, should be accepted for his Justification, the Law must so far depart
from its rigor, as to abate him these great imperfections that it allows not;
and thus it must not do, for, Matt. 5.18. Till heaven and earth pass* one jot
or tittle shall no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. Nor yet can
he make Satisfaction to the Justice of God for his sin, the guilt whereof he
has contracted to himself, not by his active Obedience to the Law, in as much
as he cannot come up to, much less can he ever do that which the Law requires,
besides, the transgression of the Law is not satisfied for by doing, but by
suffering. Not by passive Obedience, or undergoing the penalties denounced,
because sin is against an Infinite Object, and hence eternal sufferings are in
the threatening, according to the Language of the word of God: and the reason is
because the sufferings of a mere Creature are not sufficient to discharge the
debt: otherwise, Eternity of the duration is not Essential to the punishment,
for the Son of God undertook it, discharged it, and is delivered from it.

4. That faith in Jesus Christ, fully answers all this Rightoousness thus
required in the Law of us. We read, Romans 3.21, 22. The Righteousness, of God
without the Law is manifested, even the righteousness of God which is by faith
in Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe. Justice in this way has
all the Satisfaction that it does or can demand, whiles the Grace of God is
withal exalted in the Justifying of a sinner, according to, Psalm. 85.10. Mercy
and Truth are met together, righteousness* and peace have kissed each other.

This may be opened and confirmed in these four Conclusions.

1. That the righteousness of Christ fully answers the Law in its demands. He
has fulfilled all righteousness, for he tells us that it behooved him so to
do, Matt. 3 15. Upon this account he is called Jesus the Righteous, 1 John 2.2.
He was in his Incarnation made under the Law, to that end that he might be
capable of paying all that Obedience to it which it required, Gal. 4.4. He
therefore not only assumed an Humane nature, but the seed of Abraham, Heb.
2.16. i. e. He became one of the stock or lineage who were concerned in the
first Covenant, and unto whom the Law of it did extend: and in this nature thus
Considered did he pay a double Obedience to the Law under the which he had
submitted himself; and both of them were complete. In his Active Obedience he
did whatsoever the Law required, he had no Spot of Original sin in him, nor had
be any Blemish upon him, contracted by Actual sin; he therefore fully pleased
his Father in every thing; which he not only attested to when he entered upon
his Public Ministry at his Baptism, Matt 3 17. But also in his
Transfiguration, when he was at the latter end of it, and ready to lay down his
life, Chap. 17.5. We have a character given of him, Heb. 7.26. Holy, Harmless,
Undefiled, separate from sinners, and he answered it in all respects, for He
did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. And in his
Passive Obedience, he suffered whatsoever Justice denounced against man for
sin; he underwent the whole essence of the punishment which the Law had
Ordained; be bare the wrath of God, he was made a curse, Gal. 3.13. He made his
Soul a Sacrifice for sin, Isa. 53.10. And in these two, he completely answered
all the demands of the Law.

2. That this Righteousness of Christ was not for Himself but his People. He
did not accomplish it on his own personal account, but in their stead. We read,
Dan. 9.26. Messiah shall be cut off, but not for himself. And the Prophet
fully* Observes that all that he went through was with regard to us, in, Isai.
53. He has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, Verse, 3. He was wounded
for our Transgressions, etc. Verse, 5. By his knowledge shall my righteous
Servant Justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities, Verse, 11. As for his
Active Obedience, although, being a man and under the Law, humane Obedience was
due to it from him; and indeed, if he had not been so, he could not have
answered the Law; yet the Manhood of Christ was not a distinct Person from his
Godhead, in which he differed from other men, but it was the Manhood of the Son
of God the second Person in the sacred Trinity and was accordingly swallowed up
in his Person, who owed no Obedience to the Law, as being above it; nor to take
a nature upon him in which he might so obey; he therefore did it in our stead,
who were not able to do it for our selves. And as to his Passive Obedience, He
could not deserve to suffer the wrath of God, as the penalty of the Law, in a
way of Justice, upon his own account: for that pronounces the threatening
against none but delinquents or transgressors; but he, having neither Original
sin, nor Actual transgression wherewith he might be charged, yea, having
actually Obeyed, and thereby completely answered the condition of the Covenant
promise, so the reward of Life was due to him, and then he could not deserve to
suffer upon his own score; for, for the same Person on his own account to
fulfill the condition of the promise, and to come under the condition of the
threatening are incompatible. It was therefore for his People that he went
through all this; Gal. 2.20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me. 2 Cor.
5.21. Who was made sin for us, who knew no sin. And in this regard he is called
our Surety, Heb. 7.22.

3. That this Righteousness of Christ is sufficient to satisfy the Law for them
in all respects. It was not only enough to have done for himself, had he needed
it, but there is virtue and value enough in it to procure for us all that is
requisite to our entire Justification; even for as many as he shall see meet to
apply it unto, the efficacy of it is vastly extensive; nor is it exhausted by
all that is laid out upon all the Elect. As to the Condition upon which, the
good and happiness which was exhibited in the Promise of that Covenant, he has
fulfilled it perfectly, as has been already evidenced; he has done that which
had (...) engaged to man upon his doing of it: and as to the other Condition on
which death was threatened, he has suffered for sin, as our surety, till he was
discharged. Justice it self which had him in durance, and under the sentence,
has set him at liberty, and his Resurrection was a glorious testimony of it,
in that it was after he had stood to answer for us, and born the penalty which
was due to us, according to, Rom 4.25. Who was delivered for our Offenses, and
raised again for our Justification. Now the sufficiency of this to respond for
us appears in the value of it, and that is Infinite; it being the Obedience of
an Infinite Person, though in a finite nature, it is therefore called the Blood
of God, Acts 20.28. And that is asserted of his thus offering up of himself,
Heb. 10.14. By one Offering he has perfected for ever them that are
Sanctified. And indeed, there was no other way in which the Law could possibly
be so magnified as in this. The Justice of God never sat in such seat and
Majesty, as when it Arraigned, Condemned and did Execution upon the Lord of
life and glory standing in our stead, and taking on him to answer the Law for
us. God herein showed what a precious value he put upon his own Law; in that he
smote his fellow, spared not his own only begotten Son, when he stood
Obnixious to it by becoming our surety. All the sufferings of all the damned do
not put such a luster upon it as this does: needs then must it have enough in
it altogether to justify as many as come to partake of an interest in it.

4. That Faith entituleth us to this Righteousness. The New Covenant tenure, on
which all that Christ did and suffered becomes ours, is by believing on the Son
of God. This indeed is no Article in the first Covenant, nor needs it to our
being benefited by it; Christ as surety for us, responded that in our name, and
so it is in his hands for us; but there must be a way of Conveyance by which we
may be actually benefited by it; and thus is it. Jesus Christ is the next and
immediate Object of that Faith which is in the Gospel required for our
Justification; and one great design of his offering himself in our stead, was
that he might have this benefit to convey to us, on which account he is said to
be our Justification, 1 Cor. 1.30. And that he may be so unto us, his
Righteousness is exhibited for us to embrace that so we may have it made ours;
for, without a righteousness there can be no Justification; for that must be
that upon which such a sentence proceeds; now we have none of our own that will
do, our best is ragged, and polluted; it will not bear a Law trial; whereas
that of Christ is perfect, and the Law has no exceptions to make against it:
but it will not stand to Justfy any but those whose it is. It is not its mere
sufficiency, but the Application of it, that will benefit the person. Now the
Gospel invites us to accept of Christ on the terms proposed in it, and tells us
that so his Righteousness shall be ours; and this is done by believing on him;
and for this Reason, we are told, Rom 4 5. That to him that works not, but
believes on him that Justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for
Righteousness. Not that faith it self does answer the Law, for there is no such
cl^use in the whole Law that engages the life of that Covenant to believing;
but because in and by believing we accept of Christ's Righteousness on Gods
offer, and thus it becomes ours by imputation, and is every whit as pleadable
by us at Gods Ear, for our Justification, (...) it had been our own personal,
performed (...) being that of our surety for us, and done (...) our name; and
this is called the Righteousness of God by faith, Phil. 3.9. It is of God both
because it is of his providing, and because he who wrought it out is a Divine
Person: and it is said to be by Faith, because so it comes to be applied to us.
So that though God Justifies us freely by his Grace, in as much as he reckons
the Righteousness of his Son to us on our believing, without any merit in our
faith: yet he does it in such away as the Law has its complete Satisfaction,
and the Justice as well as the Mercy of God is made to shine forth in it
Illustriously, because he does it with a regard to the Righteousness of Christ
which he performed in our stead, according to the tenor of the eternal
compact; we are therefore told, 1 Jeh. 1.9. If we confess our sins, be as
faithful and just to forgive us our sins. Thus Justification by faith in
Christ, establishes the Law considered as a Covenant in respect to (...)
Sanctions.

2. The Law was given to man at first to be the Rule of his whole Life This
also refers to the Consideration of Special Government, in the which God set
before man a way in which he should serve to his end. If we consider the Law by
it self, abstracted from the Sanctions added to it, by which (...) past into a
Covenant of works, so it was (...) to the Humane nature, being every (...)
suited to his frame and constitution: and God gave it to man to be an
everlasting Rule to direct him in all things; and it is man's both duty and
wisdom to conform to it accordingly, Job 28.28: To man he said, the fear of God
is Wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. Now though the Apostasy,
having robbed man of Gods Image, or those created Graces of Sanctification, by
which he was furnished for conformity to this Law, has rendered him unable to
perform by himself the Obedience required; so as to answer it as a Covenant,
and to stand for his Justification in the sight of God: and on this account God
has provided another for him, which can only be his by Imputation, else his
Salvation had been a thing desperate, and never to have been hoped for; yet
this faith does not make void the Law as a Rule to men, according to which they
ought to order their whole Conversation in this world; nor does it discharge
them from the duty of Obedience which they owe to it, but it requires it. God
has not repealed the Command, although he has provided to take off the Curse
from men, in the way before pointed: and though the Gospel encourages men to
believe for Gods acceptance of that Obedience which is sincere, notwithstanding
all its adherent imperfections; yet it enjoins him to practice conformity
thereto; and thus also it establishes the Law. For,

1. The Gospel, which is the Rule of our Faith* requires our Obedience to God,
as we hope for eternal life. I might here be endless in counting up
New Testament instances for this. See, Romans 8* 13. If ye live after the flesh
ye shall die. Heb. 12.14. Follow holiness, without which no man shall see God.
1 John 3.3. He that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure.
Yea, this is the very teaching of the Gospel, expressed in, Tit 2.11, 12. The
grace of, etc. i. e. the Gospel of Grace, teaching us that denying ungodliness
and worldly lust, we should live soberly, righteously and Godly in this present
world. The Gospel no where encourages men to neglect themselves, to take no
heed to their ways, but live as they list, and indulge themselves in the sins
whereby their fleshly lusts are gratified, upon the account of their believing
in Christ for his Righteousness to Justify them, but it every where disclaims
it, as a thing contrary to the design of it, and the Apostle looks upon the
very mentioning of such a thing with utmost detestation, Romans 6 1, 2. What
shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid.

2. All the duties of the Moral Law are of the matter of the Obedience required
by the Gospel. It is true, Repententance toward God, and Faith in Jesus
Christ, considered as they are terms of the New Covenant, unto which the
promise of special mercy is annexed, are purely Evangelical; and how far they
are, as Commanded by God, referrible to the Moral Law, I now dispute not: But
this is observable, that the whole Decalogue is reinforced in the
New Testament, not merely to show men their impotency, but to direct them in
their present duty; and all the several Precepts of it are there urged upon
believers, and they are Commanded to obey them, as they are the Subjects of the
Gospel dispensation. This needs not to be particularly exemplified, being
obvious to all such as are Conversant in the Scriptures, and particularly in
the Hortatory part of the Apostolical Epistles, in the which we shall find all
the duties of the Law, both toward God and our Neighbor inculcated; and we
read, Jam. 1.25. Whosoever looks into the perfect Law of liberty, and
continues therein, etc. this man shall be blessed in his dead.

3. That Jesus Christ, as our Redeemer, has bought us for this Obedience.
True, the last end of Redemption is for the Exaltation of the glory of the
riches of free Grace; but this also is a subordinate design which was aimed at
by it. Christ purchased his people, that he might have a Seed to serve him,
when the world lay in wickedness. Hence, not only our eternal Salvation, but
also our holy living is frequently made mention of as that which he had an eye
at, when he came to lay down his life for us. See for this, Luke 1.74, 75. That
being delivered out of the hands of out enemies we might serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life. Tit. 2.14. Who
gave himself for us, that he might (...) us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works* 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye were redeemed
from your vain Conversation. And upon this account, holiness is pressed upon us,
from the Consideration of the price which was paid for us, 1 Cor. 6.28. Ye are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit.

4. Jesus Christ is to this and made our Sanctification. These two therefore
are put together, 1 Cor. 1.30. Who is of God made to us, our Righteousness, our
Sanctification: and they are evermore inseparable, wherever Christ is one he is
also the other: he therefore not only came to save us from Hell, but from our
Sins two; hence he is said to take them away, Joh. 1.29. Behold* the Lamb of
God, who takes away the sins of the world. And this is the reason rendered why
he was called Jesus, Matt. 1.21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall
save his People from their sins. He is not our Sanctification by way of
imputation, as he is our Righteousness, but as he is the Author of our Holiness
in us, and the Subject in whom all those graces are laid up which are requisite
for our Sanctification, as in a Treasury, from whom they are to derive unto us,
that so we may be Sanctified by them; so that virtue proceeds from him to us
for this end, hence that, Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness we have all received, and
grace for grace. And what is this Communicated unto us for, but that we may
hereby be enabled again to perform true Obedience to the Law or Command of God,
which we were before altogether incapable of doing? And this is by restoring of
the Image of God again to us, which we had forfeited and lost in the Apostasy.
This is called the new man, because it contains in it a whole body of grace;
and it is said to be renewed after God, Ephesians. 4.24. Now if God had not designed
to have Obedience to his Law paid him by those who are redeemed by Christ, this
had not been necessary; the restoring of it then evidently declares what it is
that he expects of us, Viz. that we should regulate our lives according to this
principle.

5. The Spirit as our Sanctifier, together with faith, puts all the Sanctifying
graces into us. That faith by which we believe unto Justification, is in it
self one of the graces of Sanctification; and all saving graces are infused
into us at once. Sanctification is an entire work as to parts, though it be at
first imperfect in respect of degrees; in which regard it is called a new man,
and a new creature; and in it the whole is said to be renewed, 2 Cor. 5.17. If
any man be in Christ Jesus, he is a new Creature, old things are past away,
behold all things are become new. We are also said to be Sanctified throughout,
in Soul, Body, and Spirit, 1 These. 5.23. And what are all these graces for, but
to empower us for the discharge of the duties which are required of us; it is
because without them we cannot serve God according to the Command. It was by
the loss of them at first that man lost his strength, and became unable to
serve God: this strength is again restored to us, when these graces are
recovered in us: and of what use or service would they be to us, but that we
may thereby be helped to serve God in newness of life? the being of them in us,
needs then must infer the to be our duty.

6. Faith is to carry us to Christ for grace and strength to help us in our
work. This is certainly one Service about which it is to be employed, as well
as to rely upon him for Righteousness: in which regard we are directed to him
for strength also, Isai. 45.24. In the Lord have I Righteousness, and strength.
There is a new life which we are to live, and this is to be done by the
Exercise of Faith, Gal. 2.20. I live by the faith of the Son of God. And we are
told, Heb. 10.38. The Just shall live by faith, which points, not only to the
life of dependence, but also to that of Obedience. And the Apostle dares not to
presume upon himself, but upon the strength of Christ, Phil. 4.13. I can do all
things through Christ strengthening of me. And the reason why our faith is thus
to depend on him for his Assistance in helping of us so to do, is because
there is a love in which it is to exert it self, Gal. 5.6. Faith which works by
love. It is not an idle but a working faith which is in the Children of God,
now that it may thus work, it is not sufficient in it self; for though it be an
active principle, and disposed to such a manner of operation, yet it is
dependent, not only for the maintaining of it in being, but also that it may
exert it self, Joh. 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing; and for this it is to
be always going forth to Christ for the fetching in of fresh supplies. And what
is this love about which faith is so to be conversant, but the fulfilling of
the Law? Romans 13.10. It therefore says, that the Law is its Rule.

7. Hence, the Spirit, together with faith, puts an holy fear into us; and
offers motives to excite it, Faith is frequently in the Scriptures of the Old
Testament expressed by the fear of God: and the reason is, because of the
inseparable concomitancy of this fear, it being a genuine fruit of faith; and
the very things which it credits do serve to excite and maintain this fear in
us; and we are told that it is a new Covenant blessing, for God to put his fear
into the hearts of his People, Jer. 32.40. I will make an everlasting Covenant,
etc. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me:
here then we have the end or design of his putting it into them, Viz. to keep
them from disobedience; and what need of that, except this Obedience were
required of, and expected from them? It is to keep them in aw, that so the
corrupt part in them may not prevail, or take advantage by their carnal
security, to draw them into such things as would be displeasing to God: and to
promove this God gives Solemn Gospel warnings to his Children, of the danger
they will certainly expose themselves to, in case by their self neglect they
should be drawn away from their duty, into the transgression of his Commands.
Here are also the sharp rebukes of Providence which sometimes Gods own Children
do meet with in this regard; and they are exemplary, that all Israel may here
and fear, and avoid doing the like.

8. And the Gospel directs us to renewed acts of Repentance and Faith upon our
short comings. The Children of God, being renewed but in part, can do no duty
entirely perfect, according to the tenor of the first Covenant; and having the
remainders of sin in them, which is a Law in their members, and a body of
death, often takes advantage to make Captives of them, and draw them to acts of
disobedience: now all the defects, in the Obedience of the Children of God are
hidden under the Robe of Christ's Righteousness; and there is a pardon out upon
his account, to be applied to them for all their follies; but yet, as faith
tells us that there is an Advocate with the Father for us if we sin, so it
tells us that we ought not to sin, 1 John 2.1. And besides, we are acquainted,
that all the sins of believers themselves, which have boldness or presumption
attending upon them, do make a breach between God and them, though not to their
rejection, yet to their feeling of his holy displeasure, by some manifest
discoveries of it: and the way to have this breach made up again is thus
prescribed. And we are told, 2 Cor. 7.10. That Godly sorrow works repentance
into Salvation not to be repented of. Yea the very daily unavoidable
imperfections of Gods Children, call for the continued exercise of Repentance
and Faith: In which Repentance we acknowledge our sins, and our just deservings
by them, and do with grief and hatred renounce them; and in which Faith, we go
to Christ for the pardon of these, the covering of them under his Robe, and the
new witnessing in us to our Justification, and for more strength to be given us
to withstand the Suggestions of Satan and Solicitations of the carnal part in
us. All of these things most plainly discover what a value the Doctrine of
faith in Christ puts upon the Law of God as a Rule.

3. The Law is, since the fall of man, made use of by God to be an help to
bring men to Christ, and faith in him. The Apostle says, Gal. 3.23, 24. Before
faith came, we were kept under the Law* shut up unto the faith; where the Law
was our School master, to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by
faith. God improves the Law to drive sinners to a Savior; to make at Christ
welcome, and readily accepted by them: and this is done in the work of
Conviction, which the Spirit of God produces in men, in order to their
accepting of Christ, and thus also Faith does not make void the Law, but
establish it.

Observe then,

1. The Spirit of God by the Law convinces men of sin. And indeed there is no
other way to convince them of it: for sin in its very nature bears a relation
to the Law, and is accordingly described from this relation, 1 John 3.4. Sin is
the Transgression of the Law. There is therefore no other light but that which
can make such a discovery in the Consciences of men, hence, that in, Romans 7 7.
I had not known sin but by the Law. So that if we should make void the Law, we
thereby wholly take away all the distinction between sin and holiness, for that
is a certain truth, Romans 4.15. Where there is no Law, there is no
transgression. It must be by a Law that a difference is made between right and
wrong. The way therefore by which the Spirit of God brings men to know
themselves to be sinners, is by showing them the Law, making them to see and
know that they are under the Command of it, owing Obedience to it; and making
them to see the face of their Souls and of their lives in it, as in a glass;
and when they are made to compare the one with the other, they hereby come to
see their own sinful condition, which, for the want of such an Application,
they were before strangers to.

2. By the Law he convinces them of their great misery by sin. The Spirit of
God, when he comes to apply himself powerfully to the Souls of men, is wont,
not only to make them see and confess themselves to be sinners, i. e.
transgressors of the Precept to which they owed Obedience; but to be rendered
Guilty by their sin; which that he may do, he shows them the misery which sin
has exposed them to, and brought them under the doom of, hence that, Jer.
2.19. Know and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that then have forsaken
the Lord thy God: not only that they have so done, but that it has made them
miserable. And this he does by discovering to them the Law in its Sanctions. He
sets before them the curse that there is in it, the death that it meriteth
against all the breakers of it; and makes them feelingly to confess that all
this belongs to them, because they are guitly of the sin against which it is
denounced, and are under the Law as a Covenant in their natural estate, in as
much as they are not under grace, by which only they can be freed from the
Dominion of the Law. Thus Guilt comes to be festared upon their Consciences,
according to, Romans 3.19. Whatsoever things the Law says, it says to them that
are under the Law; that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world become
guilty before God.

3. By the Law he convinces them of the necessity of their perishing, unless
this guilt be removed from them. And this is consequent upon the two former:
for, having made him to see his sin, and the Curse of God which is out against
him for it; he now shows him the righteous severity of the Law, and thereby how
strongly it holds him bound over unto death, unless the Law have its full
Satisfaction for him. Next to the Conviction of sin, wrought by the Spirit of
God in the man, is that of Righteousness, Joh. 16.8. He shall convince the
world of sin, of righteousness. And there is a double Righteousness here
designed, one is the righteousness of his Condemnation, the other is the
righteousness necessary for his deliverance. He causes him to see that the
sentence declared in the Law is just, and no more than his sin deserves, that
God is righteous in denouncing of it, Romans 7.12. The Law is holy and just, and
that the Justice of God stands engaged to see to the Execution of this
sentence, according to the tenor of it, except there be such a Righteousness
interposed as may fully answer it, and be every way as large as the Law
demands; for though the Law had not this exception expressly inserted in it, yet
the whole tenor of the Gospel declares that it did not exclude it, for so it
had put a bar to the possibility of fallen man's Salvation, which it did not,
but was a medium to the Exaltation of Gods rich Grace in it. He shows man the
positiveness of the threatening, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die. Ezekiel. 18.4. The soul that sins, it shall die.

4. By the Law he shows them their utter insufficiency to offer to the Justice
of God, such a Righteousness of their own, as shall answer its demands. The
Apostle tells us, Romans 7 9. When the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died.
i. e. I found my self to be but a dead man; that all my righteousness would not
save me from the death therein threatened. The Law discovers the nature of the
Righteousness required in it to be Spiritual, and the man himself to be carnal,
and so no ways able to comport with it, Romans 7.1^ The Law is Spiritual, but I
am carnal, sold under sin. And thus he is convinced that he can do nothing
spiritually, so as the Law requires; yea that in every thing he comes short of
legal perfection; Verse 15. and so he concludes that it is but a vain attempt
for him to go about to seek the reparation of his condition by any strength of
his own; and that if he have not a better righteousness than this to stand for
him, he is of necessity undone for ever.

5. By this means he makes a Savior welcome. It is true, that all this will
not of it self recover the heart, which is full of enmity, to the Gospel way of
Salvation by Christ; there must therefore be something else done; but the
Spirit of God treats with men in a way accommodated to their nature, and to
that end he sets home these Convictions for this purpose: hear how the Apostle
expresses it, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am Chief. This
right sense of Sin, drove him to admire and embrace the Doctrine of Salvation
by Christ. Now,

1. As if there were no sin, there would be no need of a Savior, so without
the sight of it, this necessity cannot be apprehended. What says Christ
himself? Matt. 9 12. The whole have no need of a Physician, but they that were
sick. Hence, whiles men feel not the (...), they enquire not after a Christ,
nor is the glad tidings pf the Gospel at all welcome to them: whereupon all the
urgent pleadings with them to be reconciled to God which are used, are
disregarded, and they can say unto Christ depart from us; and tell him they
have no Occasion for him.

2. If there be no danger by sin, there would be no want to be saved from it.
If men were not under wrath and a Curse for sin, they could see no necessity of
seeking a deliverance from it: and hence so long as men live in a fearlessness
of this, thinking that all is well, and that there is no controversy between
God and them, they do not seek to fly from the wrath to come. Secure sinners,
who think God to be one like themselves, and to approve of their ways, can have
no regard to a Christ, whose business is to bring Salvation to them: whereas
they know no need of Salvation, who were never touched with the fear of
Damnation.

3. If there were help any where else, Christ would not be regarded. Proud men
will never repair to Christ, till they know that relief is to be had no where
else, and are made to say as, Jer. 3.23. Truly in vain is Salvation hoped for
from the hills; truly in the Lord our God is the Salvation of Israel. Every
natural man would fain be his own Savior; and hence, Slight Convictions do but
drive men to legal Reformations, and to rest there* none but they that feel
themselves perishing will cry out to him. Now in all this the Law is
acknowledged, Justified, magnified; and by this way it reaches the glorious
end for which it was designed in the Everlasting purpose of God, referring to
his chosen in Christ. Labor we then to get this right apprehension of the
Gospel, and the Faith therein discovered unto us; and let us carefully practice
according to it, endeavoring always to pay this respect to the Law of God So
shall we not be justly charged either with NEONOMIANISM or ANTINOMIANISM.

FINIS.

