The Wonders of the Invisible World.

OBSERVATIONS as well Historical as Theological, upon the NATURE, the NUMBER,
and the OPERATIONS of the DEVILS.

Accompanied with, Some Accounts of the Grievous Molestations, by DEMONS and
WITCHCRAFTS, which have lately annoyed the Country; and the Trials of some
eminent Malefactors Executed upon occasion thereof: with several Remarkable
Curiosities therein occurring. Some Counsils, Directing a due Improvement of
the terrible things, lately done, by the Unusual and Amazing Range of EVIL
SPIRITS, in Our Neighborhood: and the methods to prevent the Wrongs which
those Evil Angels may intend against all sorts of people among us; especially
in Accusations of the Innocent. Some Conjectures upon the great EVENTS, likely
to befall, the WORLD in General, and NEW ENGLAND in Particular; as also upon
the Advances of the TIME, when we shall see BETTER DAYS. ^V. A short Narrative
of a late Outrage committed by a knot of WITCHES in Swedeland, very much
Resembling, and so far Explaining, That under which our parts of America have
labored! V. THE DEVIL DISCOVERED: In a Brief Discourse upon those TEMPTATIONS,
which are the more Ordinary Devices of the Wicked One.


By Cotton Mather.

Boston Printed, and Sold by Benjamin Harris, 1693.

PUblished by the Special Command of His EXCELLENCY, the Governor of the
Province (...) the Massachusetts Bay in New England.

The Authors Defense.
It Is as I Remember, the Learned Scribonius, who Reports, that One of his
Acquaintance, devoutly making his Prayers on the behalf of a Person molested by
Evil Spirits, received from those Evil Spirits an horrible ^low over the Face:
And I may my self Expect not few or small Buffetings from Evil Spirits, for the
Endeavors wherewith I am now going to Encounter them. I am far from
Insensible, That at this Extraordinary Time of the Devils Coming down in Great
Wrath upon us, there are too many Tongues and Hearts thereby Set on Fire of
Hell; that the various Opinions about the Witchcrafts which of Later Time have
Troubled us, are maintained by some with so much Cloudy Fury, as if they could
never be sufficiently Stated, unless written in the Liquor wherewith Witches
use to write their Covenants; and that he who becomes an Author at such a Time,
had need be, Fenced with Iron, and the Staff of a Spear. The unaccountable
Frowardness, Asperity, Untreatableness, and Inconsistency of many persons,
every Day gives a Visible Exposition of that passage, An Evil Spirit from the
Lord came upon Saul; and Illustration of that Story, There met him two
Possessed with Devils, exceeding Fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.
To send abroad a Book, among such Readers, were a very unadvised Thing if a man
had not such Reasons to give as I can bring, for such an Undertaking. Briefly,
I hope it cannot be said, They are all so: No, I hope the Body of this People,
are yet in such a Temper, as to be capable of Applying their Thoughts, to make
a Right Use, of the Stupendous and prodigious Things that are happening among
us: and because I was concerned, when I saw that no Abler Hand Emitted any
Essays to Engage the Minds of this People in such Holy, Pious, Fruitful
Improvements, as God would have to be made of His Amazing Dispensations now
upon us, THEREFORE it is that One of the Least among the Children of
New England, has here done, what is done. None, but, The Father who sees in
Secret, knows the Heartbreaking Exercises, wherewith I have Composed what is
now going to be Exposed; ^est I should in any One Thing, miss of Doing my
Designed Service for His Glory, and for His People; But I am now somewhat
comfortably Assured of His favorable Acceptance; and, I will not Fear; what
can a Satan do unto me!

Having Performed, Something of what God Required, in laboring to suit His
Words unto His Works, at this Day among us, and therewithal handled a Theme
that has been sometimes counted no^ unworthy the Pen, even of a King, it will
easily b^ perceived, that some* subordinate Ends have bee^ considered in these
Endeavors.

I have indeed set my self to Countermine the ^^ole PLOT of the Devil, against
New England, (...) every Branch of it, as far as one of my Darkness, (...)
comprehend such a Work of Darkness. I may (...), that I have herein also aimed
at the Information and Satisfaction of Good men in another Coun^^y, a Thousand
Leagues off, where I have, it may (...) More, or however, more Considerable,
Friends, (...) in My Own; And I do what I can to have that ^ountrey, now, as
well as always, in the best Terms with, My Own. But while I am doing these
things, I have been driven a little to do something likewise for My self; I
mean, by taking off the false Reports and hard Censures about my Opinion (...)
these matters, the Parters Portion, which my pur^^^ of Peace, has procured me
among the Keen. My hitherto Unvaried Thoughts are here Publish^d; and, I
believe, they will be owned by most, of the Ministers of God in these (...) nor
can amends be well made me, for the wrong done me, by other sorts of
Representations.

In fine, For the Dogmatical part of my Discourse, I want no Defense; for the
Historical part of it, I have a very Great One. The Lieutenant Governor of
New England, having per^used it, has done me the Honor of giving me a Shield*
under the Umbrage whereo^ I now dare to walk Abroad.

Reverend and Dear Sir,
YOU Very much Gratified me, as well as (...) a kind Respect upon me, when you
pu^ into my hands. Your Elaborate and most seasonable Discourse, entitled, The
Wonders of The Invisi^ble World. And having now Perused so fruitf^^ and happy a
Composure, upon such a Subje^^ at this Juncture of Time, and considering the
Place that I Hold in the Court of Oyer and Terminer, still Laboring and
proceeding in the Trial of the persons Accused and Con^icted for Witchraft, I
find that I am more nearly and high^ly concerned than as a mere Ordinary
Reader, ^word Express my Obligation and Thankfulness to yo^ for so great pains;
and cannot but hold my (...) many ways bound, even to the utmost of what (...)
proper for me, in my present Public Capacity to decla^e my Singular
Approbation thereof. Suc^ is Your Design, most plainly expressed throughou^ the
whole; such Your Zeal for God; Your E^^mity to Satan and his Kingdom; Your
Faithfulnes^ and Compassion to this poor people; Such the V^^gour, but yet
great Temper of your Spirit; Such your Instruction and Counsel; your CARE O^
TRUTH; Your Wisdom and Dexterity in allaying and moderating, that among us,
which needs it; Such Your clear Dis^^rning of Divine Pr^^vidences and Periods,
now ^unning on apace to^wards their Glorious Issues in the World; and finally,
Such your Good News of, The Shortness of the Devils Time; That all Good Men
must needs Desire the making of this your Discourse, Public to the World; and
will greatly Rejoice that the Spirit of the Lord has thus Enabled you to Lift
up a Standard against the Infernal Enemy, that has been Coming in like a Flood
upon us. I do therefore make it my particular and Earnest Request unto you,
that as soon as may be, you will Commit the same unto the PRESS accordingly.

I am, Your Assured Friend, William Stoughton.


I Live by Neighbors, that force me to produce these Undeserved Lines. But
now, as when Mr. Wilson, beholding a great Muster of Soldiers, had it by a
Gentleman then present, said unto him, Sir, I Will tell you a great Thing; here is
a mighty Body of People; and there is not SEVEN of them all but what Loves Mr.
Wilson; that Gracious Man presently and pleasantly Replied, Sir, I Will tell you
as good a thing as that; here is a mighty Body of People; and there is not so
much as ONE among them all, but Mr. Wilson Loves him. Somewhat so; ^Tis
possible that among, this Body of People, there may be few, that Love the
Writer of this Book; but, give me leave to boast so far, there is not one among
all this Body of People, whom this Mather would not Study to Serve, as well as
to Love. With such a Spirit of Love, is the Book now before us written; I
appeal to all this World; and if this World, will deny me the Right of
acknowledging so much, I Appeal to the Other, that it is, Not written with an
Evil Spirit: for which cause, I shall not wonder if Evil Spirits, be
Exasperat^d by what is Writter, as the Sadducees doubtless were with what was
Discoursed in the Days of our Savior. I only Demand the Justice, that others
Read it, with the same Spirit wherewith I writ it.

Enchantments Encountered.
S 1. IT was as long ago, as the year 1637. that a Faithful Minister of the
Church of England, whose Name was Mr Edward Symons, did in a Sermon afterward
Printed, thus Express himself; At New England now the Sun of Comfort begins to
appear, and the Glorious Day Star to show it self; -- Sea Venient Annis Saecula
Seris, there will come Times, in after-ages when the Clouds will over-shadow
and darken the Sky there. Many now promise to themselves nothing but successive
Happiness there, which for a Time through Gods Mercy they may Enjoy; and I Pray
God, they may a Long Time; but in this World there is no Happiness perpetual.
An Observation, Or, I had almost said, an Inspiration, very dismally now
verified upon us! It has been affirmed by some who best knew New England, That
the World will do New England a great piece of Injustice, if it acknowledge not
a measure of Religion, Loyalty, Honesty and Industry, in the people there*
beyond what is to be found with any other people for the Number of them When I
did a few years ago, publish a Book, which mentioned a few Memorable
Witchcrafts, committed in this Country; the Excellent Baxter graced the Second
Edition of that Book, with a kind Preface, wherein he sees cause to say, If any
are Scandalized, that New England, a place of as serious Piety, as any I can
hear of, under Heaven, should be Troubled so much with Witches, I think, it is no
Wonder: Where will the Devil show m^st Malice, but where he is Hated, and
Hates most; And I hope, the Country will still deserve and answer, the Charity
so Expressed by that Reverend man of God! Whosoever travels over this
Wilderness, will see it richly bespangled with Evangelical Churches, whose
Pastors are Holy, Able, and Painful O^erseers of their Flocks, Lively
Preachers, and Virtuous Livers; and such as in their Several Neighbourly
Ass^ciatio^s, have had their Meetings whereat Ecclesiastical matters of common
Concernment are Considered: Churches, whose Communicants have been seriously
Examined about their Experiences of Regeneration, as well as about their
Knowledge, and Belief and Blameless Conversation, before their Admission to the
Sacred Communion; although others of less but Hopeful Seize in
Christianity are not ordinarily denied Baptism for themselves and theirs;
Churches, which are Shy of using any thing in the Worship of God, for which
they cannot see a Warrant of God; but with whom yet the Names of
Congregational, Presbyterian, Episcopalian, or, Antipaedobaptist, are swallowed
up in that of, Christian; Persons of all those Persuasions being actually taken
into our Fellowship, when Visible Godliness has Recommended them: Churches,
which usually do within themselves manage their own Discipline, under the
Conduct of their Elders; but yet call in the help of Synods upon Emergencies,
or Aggrievances. Churches, Lastly, wherein Multitudes are growing Ripe for
Heaven every Day; and as fast as these are taken off, others are daily Rising
up. And by the pre^sence and power of the Divine Institutions thus mentai^^ed
in the Country, we are still so Happy, that, I sup^pose, there is no Land in
the Universe more free from the Debauching, and the Debasing Vices of
Ungodlines^* The Body of the People are hitherto so disposed, tha^ Swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, Whoring, Drunkenness, and the like, do not make a Gentleman,
but a Monster, or ^ Goblin, in the Vulgar Estimation. All this
notwith^standing, we must humbly Confess to our God, tha^ we are miserably
Degenerated from the First Love, (...) our Predecessors; however we boast our
selves a litile, when Men would go to trample upon us, and we venture to say,
Whereinsoever any is bold (we speak foolishly) we are bold also. The first
Planters of these Colonies were a Chosen Generation of men, who were first so
Pure, as to disrelish many things which they thought wanted Reformation else
where; and yet withal so Peaceable, that they Embraced a Voluntary Exile in a
Squalid, horrid, American Desert, rather than to Live in Contentions with their
Brethren. Those Good men imagined that they should Leave their Posterity, in a
place, where they should never see the Inroads of Profanity, or Supersti^ion;
and a famous Person returning hence could in a Sermon before the Parliament,
profess, I have now been seven years in a Country, where I never saw one man
drunk, or heard one Oath sworn, or beheld one Beggar in the Streets, all the
while. Such great persons as Budaeus, and others, who mistook Sir. Thomas Mores
UTOPIA, for a Country really Existent, and stirr^d up some Divines Charitably
to undertake a Voyage thither, might now have certainly found a Truth in their
Mistake: New England was a true Vtopia. But alas, the Children, and Servants of
those Old Planters, must needs afford many, Degenerate Plants, and there is now
Ris^n up a Number of people, otherwise Inclined than our Joshua's and the
Elders that outlived them. Those two things, our Holy Progenitors, and our
Happy Advantages, make Omissions of Duty, and such Spiritual Disorders as the
whole World abroad is overwhelmed with, to be as Provoking in us, as the most
flagitious wickednesses Committed in other places; and the Ministers of God are
accordingly severe in their Testimonies. But in Short, Those Interests of the
Gospel, which were the Errand of our Fathers into these Ends of the Earth, have
been too much Neglected and Postponed, and the Seize of an hand-some
Education, have been too much undervalued, by Multitudes, that have not fallen
into Exorbitancies of Wickedness; and some, especially of our Young ones, when
they have got abroad from under the Restraints here laid upon them, have become
extravagantly and abom^nably Vicious. Hence t^s, that the Happiness of
New England, has been, but for a Time, as it was foretold, and not for a Long
Time, as has been desired for us. A Variety of Calamity has long followed
this Plantation; and we have all the Reason imaginable to ascribe it unto the
Rebuke of cleaven upon us for our manifold Apostasies; we make no Right use of
our Disasters, if we do not, Remember whence we are fa^len, and Repent, and Do
the first works. But yet our Afflictions may come under a further Consideration
with us: there is a further cause of our Afflictions, whose Due must be Given
him.

S II. The New-Englanders, are a People of God settled in those, which were
once the Devils Territories; and it may easily be supposed that the Devil was
Exceedingly disturbed, when he perceived such a people here accom^plishing the
Promise of old made unto our Blessed Jesus That He should have the Utmost parts
of she Earth for Hi^ Possession. There was not a greater Uproar among the
Ephesians, when the Gospel was first brought among them then there was among,
The Powers of the Air (after whom those Ephesians walked) when first the Silver
Trumpet^ o^ the Gospel here made the Joyful Sound. The Devil thu^ Irri^^ted,
immediately tried all sorts of Methods to ove^ turn this poor Plantation: and
so much of the Church as was Fled into this Wilderness, immediately found, The
Serpent cast out of his Mouth, a Flood for the carrying of (...) away. I
believe, that never were more Satanical Device^ used for the Unsetling of any
People under the Sun, than what have been Employed for the Extirpation of the
Vin^^ which God has here Planted, Casting out the Heathen, and Preparing a Room
before it, and causing it to take deep Root, and fill the Land; so that it sent
its Boughs unto the Attlantic Sea Eastward, and its Branches unto the
Connecticut River Westward, and the Hills were covered with the Shadow thereof.
But, All those Attempts of Hell, have hitherto been Abortive, many an Ebe^^zer
has been Erected unto the Praise of God, by His Poor People here; and, Having
obtained Help from God, we continue to this Day. Wherefore the Devil is now
making one Attempt more upon us; an Attempt more Difficult, more Surprising,
more snarl'd with unintelligible Circumstances than any that we have hitherto
Encountered; an Attempt, so Critical, tha^ if we get well through, we shall soon
Enjoy Halcyon Day^ with all the Vultures of Hell, Trodden under our Feet. H^^
has wanted his Incarnate Legions, to Persecute us, as the People of God, have
in the other Hemisphere been Persecuted: he has therefore drawn forth his more
Spiritua^ ones to make an Attacque upon us. We have been ad^vised, by some
Credible Christians yet alive, that a Malefactor, accused of Witchcraft as well
as Murder, and Executed in this place more than Forty Years ago, did then give
Notice, of, An Horrible PLOT against the Country, by WITCHCRAFT, and a
Foundation of WITCHRAFT then Laid, which if it were not seasonably Dis^^vered,
would probably Blow up, and pull down all the Churches in the Country. And we
have now with Horror seen the Discovery of such a Witchcraft! An Army of Devils
is horribly broke in, upon the place which is the Center and after a sort, the
Firstborn of our English Settlements: and the Houses of the Good People there,
are filled with the doleful Shrieks of their Children and Servants, Tormented
by Invisible Hands, with Tortures altogether preternatural. After the Mischiefs
there Endeavored, and since in part Conquered, the terrible Plague, of, Evil
Angels, has made its progress into some other places, where other persons have
been in like manner Diabolically handled. These our poor Afflicted Neighbors,
quickly after they become Infected and Infested with these Demons, arrive to a
Capacity of Discerning those which they conceive the Shapes of their Troublers;
and notwithstanding the Great and Just Suspicion, that the Demons might Impose
the Shapes of Innocent Persons in their Spectral Exhibitions upon the
Sufferers, (which may perhaps prove no small part of the Witch-Plot in the
issue) yet many of the persons thus Represented, being Examined, several of
them have been Convicted of a very Damnable Witchcraft: yea, more than One
Twenty have Confessed, that they have Signed unto a Book, which the Devil
showed them, and Engaged in his Hellish Design of Bewitching, and Ruining our
Land. We know not, at least I know not, how far the Delusions of Satan may be
Interwoven into some Circumstances of the Confess^^ns; but one would think, all
the Rules of Understanding Humane Affayrs are at an end, if after so many most
Voluntary Harmonious Confessions, made by Intelligent persons of all Ages, in
sund^y Towns, at several Times, we must not Believe the main strokes wherein
those Confessions all agree: especially when we have a thousand preternatural
Things every day before our eyes, wherein the Confessors do acknowledge their
Concernment, and give Demonstration of their being so Concerned. If the Devils
now can strike the minds of men, with any Poisons o^ so fine a Compo^^tion and
Operation, that scores of Innocent People shall Unite, in Confessions of a
Crime, which we see actually committed, it is a thing prodigious, beyond the
Wonders of the former Ages, and it threatens no less than a sort of a
Dissolution upon the World. Now, by these Confessions it is Agreed, That the
Devil has made a dreadful Knot of Witches in the Country, and by the help of
Witches has dreadfully Increased that Knot: That these Witches have driven a
Trade of Commissioning their Confederate Spirits* to do all sorts of Mischiefs
to the Neighbors, whereupon there have Ensued such Mischievous consequences
upon the Bodies, and Estates of the Neighborhood, as could not otherwise be
accounted for: yea, That at prodigious Witch-Meetings, the Wretches have
proceeded so far, as to Concert and Consult the Methods of Rooting out the
Christian Religion from this Country, and setting up instead of it, perhaps a
more gross Diabolism, than ever the World saw before. And yet it will be a
thing little short of Miracle, if in so spread a Business, as this, the Devil
should not get in some of his Juggles, to confound the Discovery of all the
rest.

S. 3. Doubtless, the Thoughts of many will receive a Great Scandal against
New England, from the Number of Persons that have been Accused, or Suspected,
for Witchcraft, in this Country: But it were easy to offer many things, that
may Answer and Abate the Scandal. If the Holy God should any where permit the
Devils to hook two or three wicked Scholars, into Witchcraft, and then by their
Assistance to Range with their Poisonous Insinuations, among Ignorant, Envious,
Discontented People, till they have cunningly decoyed them into some sudden
Act, whereby the Toyls of Hell shall be perhaps inextricably cast over them:
what Country in the World, would not afford Witches, numerous to a Prodigy?
Accordingly, The Kingdoms of Sweeden, Denm^rk, Scotland, yea, and England it
self, as well as the Province of New England, have had their Storms of
Witchcrafts breaking upon them, which have made most Lamentable Devastations:
which also I wish, may be, The Last. And it is not uneasy to be imagined, That
God has not brought out all the Witchcrafts in many other Lands, with such a
speedy, dreadful, destroying Jealousy, as burns forth upon such High Treasons
committed here in, A Land of Vprightness: Transgressors, may more quickly here,
than else where become a prey to the Vengeance of Him, Who has Eyes like a
Flame of Fire, and, who walks in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks.
Moreover, There are many parts of the World, who if they do upon this Occasion
insult over this People of God, need only to be told the Story of what happened
at Loim, in the Duchy of Gulic, where, a Popish Curate, having ineffectually
tried many Charms, to Eject the Devil out of a Damsel there possessed, he
Passionately bid the Devil come out of her, into himself; but the Devil
answered him, Quid mihi Opus est eum te^tare, quem Novissimo Die, Jure Optimo
sum Possessurus? that is, What n^ed (...) meddle with one, whom I am sure to
have and hold (...) the Last Day, as my own forever!

But besides all this, give me Leave to add; it is to b^ hoped, That among the
persons represented by the Specter which now afflict our Neighbour^, there
will b^ ^ound some that never explicitly contracted with any o^ the Evil
Angels. The Witches have not only intimat^d* but some of them acknowledged,
That they have p^otte^ the Representations of Innocent Persons, to c^ver and
shel^ter themselves in their Witchcrafts; now, although our good God has hitherto
generally preserved us, from the Abus^ therein Designed by the Devils for us,
yet who of us ca^ Exactly State, How far our God may for our Ch^s^isemen^
permit the Devil to proceed in such an Abuse? It was the Result of a Discourse,
lately held at a Meeting of some very ^ious, and Learned, Ministers among us,
That the Devils may sometimes have a permission to Represent an Innocent
Person, as Tormenting such as are under Diabolical Molestations: But that such
Things are Rare and Extraordinary, especially, when such Matters come before
Civil Judicature. The Opinion Expressed with so much Caution and Judgment,
seems to be the prevai^ing Sense of many others; who are men Eminently Cautious
and Judicious; and have both Argument and History to Countenance them in it. It
is Rare and Extraordina^y, for an Honest Nab^th to have his Life it self Sworn
away, by two Children of Belial, and yet no Infringement hereby made on the
Rectora^ Righteousness of our Eternal Sovereign, whose Judgmen^^ are a Great
Deep, and who gives none Account of Hi^ matters. Thus, although, the Appearance
of Innocent Persons, in Spectral Exhibitions afflicting the Neighborhood, be a
thing Rare and Extraordinary; yet who ca^ be sure, that the great Belial of
Hell must needs b^ always Yoked up, from this Piece of Mischief? The best man
that ever lived has been called a Witch: and why may not this too usual and
unhappy Symp^om of, A Witch, even a Spectral Representation, befall a person
that shall be none of the worst? Is it not possible? the Laplanders will tell
us it is possible: for Persons to be unwittingly attended with officious
Demons, bequeathed unto them, and imposed upon them, by Relations that have
been Witches. Quaere, also, Whether at a Time, when the Devils with his Witches
are engaged in an actual War upon a people, some certain steps of ours, in such
a War, may not be followed with our appearing so and so for a while among them
in the Visions of our afflicted Forlorns! And, Who can certainly say, what
other Degrees, and Methods of sinning, besides that of a Diabolical Compact,
may give the Devils advantage, to act in the Shape of them that have
miscarried? Besides what may happen for a while, to try the Patience of the
Virtuous. May not some that have been r^ady upon feeble grounds uncharitably to
Censure and Reproach other people, be punished for it by Specter for a while
exposing them to Censure and Reproach? And furthermore, I pray, that it may be
considered, Whether a World of Magical Tricks often used in the World, may not
insensibly oblige Devils to wait upon the Superstitious Users of them. A Witty
Writer against Sadducism, has this Observation, That persons, who never made
any Express Contract with Apostate Spirits, yet may Act strange Things by
Diabolick Aids, which they procure by the use of those wicked Forms and Arts,
that the Devil first Imparted unto his Confederates. And he adds, We know not,
but the Laws of the Dark Kingdom, may Enjoin a particular Attendence upon all
those that practice their Mysteries, whether they know them to be theirs or no.
Some of them that have been Cried out upon, as Employing Evil Spirits to Hurt
our Land, have been known to be most bloody Fortune Tellers; and some of them
have Confessed, That when they told Fortunes, they would pretend the Rules of
Chiromancy and the like Ignorant Sciences, but indeed, they had no Rule (they
said) but this, The Things were then Darted into their Minds. Darted! Ye
Wretches; By whom, I pray. Surely, by none but the Devils; who, though perhaps
they did not exactly Foreknow all the thus Predicted Contingencies; yet having
once Foretold them, they stood bound in Honor now, to use their Interest,
which alas, in This World, is very great, for the Accomplishment of their own
Predictions. There are others, that have used most wicked Sorceri^s to gratify
their unlawful Curiosities, or to prevent Inconveniences in Man and Beast;
Sorceries; which I will not Name, lest I should by Naming, Teach them. Now,
some Devil is overmore Invited into the Service of the Person that shall
practice these Witchcrafts; and if they have gone on Impenitently in these
Communions with any Devil, the Devil may perhaps become at last a F^miliar to
them, and so assume their Livery, that they cannot shake him often in any way,
but that One, which I would most heartily prescribe unto them, Namely, That of
a deep and long Repentance. Should these Impieties, have been committed in such
a place as New England* for my part I should not wonder, if when Devils are
Exposing the Gros^er Witches among us, God permit them, to bring in these
Lesser ones with the rest, for their perpetual Humiliation. In the Issue
therefore, may it not be found, that New England i^ not ^ Stocked with Rattle
Snakes, as was imagined?

S 4. But I do not believe, that the progress of Witchcraft among us, is all
the Plot, which the Devil is managing in the Witchcraft now upon us* I^ is
judged, That the Devil Raised the Storm, whereof we read in the Eighth Chapter
of Matthew, on purpose to oversett the little Vessel, wherein the Disciples of
Our Lord, were Embarked with Him. And it may be feared, that in the Horrible
Tempest, which is now upon ourselves, the design of the Devil is to sink that
Happy settlement of Government, wherewith Almighty, God, has graciously
enc^ined their Majesty's to favor us. We are blessed with a GOVERNOR, than
whom no man can be more willing to serve their Majesty's or this their
Province: He is continually venturing his All to do it: and were not the
Interests of His Prince, dearer to him, than his own, he could not but soon he
weary of the He^m, whereat he sits. We are under the Influence of a LIEUTENANT
GOVERNOR, who not only by being admirably accomplished both with Natural and
Acquired Endowments, is fitted for the Service of Their Majesty's, but also
with an unspotted Fidelity, applys himself to that Service. Our COUNCILLORS,
are some of our most Eminent persons, and as Loyal Subjects to the Crown, as
hearty lovers of their Country. Our Constitution also is attended with
singular Privileges; All which Things are by the Devil exceedingly Envied unto
us. And the Devil will doubtless take this occasion, for the Raising of such
complaints and clamo^rs, as may be of pernicious consequence, unto some part of
our present Settlement, if he can so far Impose. But that which most of all
Threatens us, in our present Circumstances, is the Misunderstanding, and so the
Animosity, whereinto the Witchcraft now Raging, has Enchanted us. The
Embroiling, first, of our Spirits, and then of our Aff^y^s, is evidently, as
considerable a Branch of the Hellish Intreague, which now vexes us, as any one
Thing whatever. The Devil has made us like a Troubled Sea; and the Mire and
Mud, begins now also to heave up apace. Even, Good and Wise Men, suffer
themselves to fall into their Paroxysms; and the Shake which the Devil is now
giving us, fetches up the Dirt which before lay still, at the Bottom of our
sinful Hearts. If we allow the Mad Dogs of He^l to poison us by Biting us, we
shall imagine that we see nothing but such Things about us, and like such
Things (...) upon all that we see. Were it not for what is IN US, for my part,
I should not fear a Thousand Legions of Devils; it is by our Quarrels that we
spoil our Prayers; and if our Humble, Zealous, and United, Prayers, are once
Hindered, alas, the Philistines of Hell have cut our Locks for us; they will
then blind us, mock us, ruin us. In Truth* I cannot altogether blame it, If
people are a little Transported, when they conceive all the Secular Interests
of Themselves and their Families, at the Stake; and yet, at the sight of these
Heart-Burnings, I cannot forbear the Exclamation of the Sweet-spirited Austin,
in his Pacificatory Epistle, to Jerome on his Contest with Ruffin, O misera et
miseranda Conditio! O Condition, truly miserable! But what shall be done to
cure these Distractions? It is wonderfully necessary, that some Healing
Attempts, be made at this time; and I must needs confess, if I may speak so
much, like a Nazianzen, I am so desirous of a share in them, that if, Being
thrown Overboard, were needful to allay the Storm, I should think, Dying, a
Trifle to be undergone, for so great a Blessedness.

S 5. I would most importunately in the first place, entreat every man to
maintain an Holy Jealousy over his own Soul, at this Time, and think, May not
the Devil make me, though ignorantly, and unwillingly, to be an Instrument of
doing something that he would have to be done? For my part I freely own my
Suspicion, Lest something of Enchantment, have reached more Persons and Spirits
among us, then we are well aware of But then, let us more generally Agree to
maintain a kind Opinion, one of another. That Charity without which, even our
Giving our Bodies to be Burned, would Profit N^thing, uses to proceed by this
Rule, It is kind, it is not easily provoked, it is thinks no Evil, it believes
all things, hopes all things. But if we disregard this Rule, of Charity, we
shall indeed give our Body P^litic to be Burned. I have heard it affirmed, That
in the Late Great Flood upon Connecticut, those Creatures which could not but
have Quarrelled at another Time, yet now being driven together, very Agreeably
stood by one another. I am sure we shall be worse than Brutish, if we fly upon
one another, at a Time when the Floods of Belial make us afraid. On the one
Side, [alas, my Pen, must thou write the word, Side, in the Business?] there
are very worthy men, who having been called by God, when and where this
W^^chcraft, first Appeared upon the Stage, to Encounter it, are earnestly
desirous to have it Sifted unto the Bottom of it. And, I pray, which of us all,
that should live under the continual Impressions, of the Tortures, Outcries,
and Havocks, which Devils confessedly Commissioned by Witches, make among their
distressed Neighbors, would not have a Biass that way, beyond other men?
Persons this way disposed, have been men eminent for Wisdom and Virtue, and
men acted by a noble principle of Conscience: Had not Conscience of Duty to
God, prevailed above other Considerations with them, they would not for all
they are worth in the world, have meddled in this Thorn^ Business! Have there
been any Disputed Methods used, in Discovering the Works of Darkness? It may be
none, but what have had great Precedents in other parts of the world: which
may, though not altogether Justify, yet much Alleviate a mistake in us, if there
should happen to be found any such mistake, in so Dark a matter. They have
done, what they have done, with multiplied Addresses to God, for his guidance,
and have not been Insensible how much they ha^^ exposed themselves in what they
have done. Yea, the^ would gladly contrive, and receive, an expedient, how ti^
Shedding of Blood, might be spared, by the Recovery (...) Witches, not gone
beyond the reach of Pardon And afte^ all, They invite all Good men, in Terms to
this purpose, B^^ing amazed, at the Number, and Quality of those Accused, (...)
Late, we do not know, but Satan, by his Wi^^s, may ha^^ Enwrapped some Innocent
persons, and therefore should E^^nestly and H^mbly desire, the most C^itical
Enquiry upon the place, to find out the Fallacy; that there may be non^ of the
Servants of the Lord, with the W^rshippers of Baal. may also add, That whereas,
if once a Witch do inge^nuously confess among us, no more Spect^es do in their
Shapes after this, Trouble the Vi^inage; if any Guilty Creatures will
accordingly to so good purpose Confe^^ their Crime to any Minister of God, and
get out o^ the Snare of the Devil, as no Minister will discover such a
Conscientious Confession, so I believe none in the Authority* will press him to
Discover it; but Rejoice in* A Soul saved from Death* On the other Side [if I
must again use the word, Side, which yet I hope, to Live, to blot out] there
are very worthy men, who are not a Little Dissatisfied at the Proceedings in
the Prosecution of this Witchcraft. And why? Not because they would have any
such Abominable Thing Defended from the Strokes of Impartial Justice. No, those
Reverend Persons who gave in this Advice unto the Honorable Council, That
Presumptions, whereupon Persons may be Committed, and much more Convictions,
whereupon Persons may be Condemned, as Guilty of Witchcrafts, ought certainly
to be more Considerable, than barely the Accused Persons being represented by a
Sp^^^re, unto the Afflicted; Nor are Alteration^ made in the Sufferers, by a
Look or Touch of the Accused, to be esteemed an Infallible Evidence of Guilt;
but frequently Liable to be Abused by the Devils Legerd^mai^s: I say, Those
very men of God, most Conscientiously Subjoined this Article, to that Advice,
-- Nevertheless, we cannot but Humbly Recommend unto the Government, the Speedy
and Vigorous Prosecution of such, as have rendered themselves Obnoxious;
according to the best Directions g^ven ^n the Laws of God, and the wholesome
Statutes of the English Nation, for the Detection of Witchraft. Only, It Is a
most Commendable Cautiousness, in those Gracious men, to be very Shye lest the
Devil get so far into our Faith, as that for the sake of many Truths which we
fin^ ^e tells us, we come at length, to believe any Lies, wherewith he may
abuse us: whereupon, what a Desolation of Names would soon ensue, besides a
thousand other Pernicious Consequences? and lest there should be any such
Principles taken up, as when put into Practice must unavoidably cause the
Righteous to Perish with the Wicked; or procure the Bloodshed of any Persons,
like the Gibeonites, whom some Learned men suppose to be under a false Notion
of Witches, by Saul Exterminated. They would have all Due steps taken for the
Extinction of Witches; but they would fain have them to be Sure ones: nor i^ ^t
from any thing, but the Real and Hearty Goodness (...) men, that they are Loath
to surmise Ill of other (...), till there be the fullest Evidence, for the
surmises. As for the Honorable Judges, that have been hitherto in the
Commission, they are Above my Consideration: wherefore, I will only say thus
much of them, That such of them as I have the Honor of a Personal Acquaintance
with, are Men of an Excellent Spirit; and as at first they went (...) the work
for which they were Commissioned, with a very great Aversion, so they have
still been under Heartbreaking Sollicitudes, how they might therein best
serve, both God and Man. In fine, Have there been Faults on any Side fallen
into? Surely, They have at worst been but the Faults of a well-meaning
Ignorance On every Side then, Why should not we Endeavor with Amicable
Correspondencies, to help one another out of the Snares, wherein the Devil
would Involve us? To Wrangle the Devil, out of the Country, will be truly a New
Experiment! Alas, we are not Aware of the Devil, (...) we do not think, that he
aims at Enflaming us one against another; and shall we suffer our selves to be
Devil-Ridden? or, by any Vnadviseableness, contribute unto the Widening of our
Breaches? To say no more, There is a Published and a Credible Relation, which
affirms, That very lately, in a part of England, where some of the
Neighborhood were Quarrelling, a RAVEN, from the Top of a Tree very
Articulately and Unaccountably cried out, Read the Third to the Colossians, and
the Fifteenth! Were I my self to choose what sort of Bird I would be transformed
into, I would say, O that I had wings like a D^ve* Nevertheless, I will for
once do the Office, which as it seems, Heaven sent that Raven upon; even to
beg, That the Peace of God may Rule in our Hearts.

S 6^ It Is necessary that we Unite in every Thing: but there are especially Two
Things wherein our Union must carry us along together. We are to Unite in our
Endeavors to Deliver our Distressed Neighbors, from the horrible Annoyances
and Molestations with which a dreadful Witchcraft is now persecuting of them.
To have an Hand in any thing, that may stifle or obstruct a Regular Detection
of that Witchcraft, is what we may well with an Holy Fear, Avoid. Their
Majesty's good Subjects, must not every day be Torn to pieces, by Horrid
Witch^es, and those bloody Felons, be wholly left Unprosecuted. The Witchcraft
is a Business, that will not be Shamed, without plunging us into sore plagues
and of Long Continuance. But then, we are to Unite in such Methods, for this
Deliverance, as may be unquestionably Safe; Lest, The Latter End be worse then
the Beginning. And here, what I shall say? I will venture to say, thus much;
That we are Safe, when we make just as much Use of all Advice from the
Invisible World, as God sends it for. It is a Safe Principle, That when God
Almighty permits any Spirits from the Unseen Regions, to visit u^ with
Surprising Informations, there is then something to be Enquired after; we are
then to Enquire of one another, What Cause there is for such Things? The
peculiar Government of God, over the Unbodied Intelligences, is a sufficient
Foundation for this Principle. When there has been a Murder Committed, an
Apparition of the slain Party Accu^^ng of any man, although such Apparitions have
oftener spoke True than False, is not enough to Convict the man, as Guilty of
that Murder; but yet it is a sufficient Occasion for Magistrates to make a
particular Enquiry, whether such a man have afforded any ground for such an
Accusation* Eve^ so, a Spectre, exactly Resembling such or such a person when
the Neighborhood are Tormented by such Spctres, may reasonably make
Magistrates Inquisitive, whether the person so Represented have done or sa^d
any thing that may Argue their Confederacy with Evil Spirits; although it may be
defective enough in point of Convicion; especially at a Time, when it is
possible, some Over-powerful Conjurer may have got the skill of thus Exhibiting
the Shapes of all sorts o^ persons, on purpose to stop the proecution of the
Wretches whom due Enquiries thus provoke, might have made obnoxious unto
Justice. Quaere, Wh^her if God would have us, to proceed any further than (...)
Enquiry, upon what Reports there may come against any man, from the Worl^ of
Spirits, He will not by His Providence at the same time have brought into our
Hands, these more Evident and Sensible Things, where^^ (...), a man is to be
esteemed ^ Criminal. But I will venture to say this further; That it will be
Safe, to account the Names as well as the Lives of our Neighbors, too
considerable Things to be brought under a Ju^dicial Process, until it be found
by Humane Observations, tha^ the peace of Mankind, is thereby disturbed. We an^
Humane Creatures; and we are Safe while we say, the^ must be Humane Witnes^es,
who also have in the particula^ Act of Seeing, or Hearing* which enables them
to be Wit^nesses, had no more than Humane Assistences, that are to Turn the
Scale, when Laws are to be Executed. And upon this Head, ^ will further add; A
Wise and a Ju^^ Magistrate, may so far give way to a common Strea^^ of
Dissatisfaction as to forbear Acting up to the Height^ of his own perwasion,
about, what may be judged Con^victive, of a Crime, whose Nature shall he so
abstruse and obscure, as (...) raise much Disputation. Though he may not Do what
he should Leave Undone, yet he may Leave Vn^done something that else he could
Do, when the Public Safety, males an Exigency.

S 7. I was going to make one Venture more* that is, to offer some Safe Rules,
for the finding out of the Witches which (...) at this Da^ our Accursed
Trou^l^^s* but this were a Venture too Presumptuous and (...) for Me to make. I
leave that unto those Excellent and Judicious Persons, with whom I am not
worthy to be Numbered: all that shall do, shall he to lay before my Readers,
brief Synopsis of what has been Written on that Subject, by a Triumvi^^t^, of
as Eminen^ Persons* as have eve^ handled it* I will beg^n with,

An Abstract of Mr. Perkin's way for the Discovery of Witches.
I. There are Presumptions, which do at least Probably and Conject^rally (...)
one to be a Witch. These, give Occa^^^n to Examine, yet they are no Sufficient
Causes of Conviction.

II. If any man or woman, be ^otoriously def^med for a Witch; this yields a
strong Suspicion. Yet the Judge ought Carefully to Look, that the Report be
made by men of Honesty and Credit: III. If a Fellow Witch* or Magician, give
Testimony of any Person to be a Witch; this indeed is not sufficient for
Condemnation; but (...) is a fit Presumption, to cause a strait Examination.
IV. If after Cursing there follow Death, or at least, some mischief: for
Witches are wont to practice their mischievous Facts, by Cursing and Banning:
This also is a suffi^ient matter of Examination, though not of Conviction. V. If
after Enmity, Quarrelling, or Threatening, a present mischief does follow; that
also is a great Presumption. VI. If the Party suspected be the Son or Daughter,
the manservant or maidservant, the F^miliar Friend; near Neighbor, or old
Comp^nion, of a known and Con^i^ted Witch: This may be likewise a presumption:
for Witchcraft is an Art, that may be Learned, and Conveyed from man to man.
VII. Some add this for a Presumption; If the party Suspected be found to have
the Devils mark; for it is Commonly thought, when the Devil makes his Covenant
with them, he always Leaves his mark behind them, whereby he knows them for
his own: -- a mark, whereof no Evident Reason, in Nature can be given. VIII.
Lastly, If the party Examined be Vnconstan^, or Contrary to himself, in his
Deliberate Answers, it argues a Guilty Conscien^^, which stops the Freedom of
Utterance. And yet, there are causes of Astonishment, which may befall the Good,
a^ we^^ as the Baa. ^X. But then there is a Conviction, discovering the Witch;
which must proceed from just and sufficient p^oofs, and not from bare
Presumptions. X (...) of the Suspected Party, and Reco^ery thereupon; with
se^^^ral other such weak proofs; as also, the Fleeting of the Susp^^cted Party,
thrown upon the Water; These pro^f^ are so (...) from being sufficient, that
some of them, are after a sort, pr^^tices of Witchcraft. XI. The Testimony of
some Wizzar^ though offering to show the Witches face in a Glass; This I gran^
may be a good presumption, to cause a strait Examination; b^ a sufficient proof
of Conviction, it cannot be. If the Devil to the Grand Jury, that the Person in
Question, is a Witch, an^ offers withal, to confirm the same by Oath, should
the Inque^^ Receive his Oath or Accusation to Condemn the man? Assu^redly No.
And yet, that is as much as the Testimony of ano^ther Wizzard, who only by the
Devils Help, Re^eals the Witch XII. If a man being dangerously Sick, and like
to Die, upon Suspicion, will take it on his Death, that such an one has
Be^witched him, it is an Allegation of the same Nature, which may move the
Judge to Examine the Party,; but it is of (...) moment for Conviction. XIII.
Among the sufficient means of C^nviction, the first is, the Free and Voluntary
Confession of the C^ime, made by the Party Suspected, and Accused, after
Examination. I say not, that a bare Confession is suff^cient, but a Confession
after due Examination, taken upon pregnant presumptions. What needs now more
Witness, (...) further Enquiry? XIV. There is a second sufficient Conviction,
by the Testimony of Two Witnesses, of Good and Honest Report avouching before
the Magistrate upon their own Knowledge, these two Things: either that the
Party Accused, has made a League with the D^vil, or has done some known
pra^^ices of Witchcraft. And, all Arguments that do Necessarily prove either of
these, being brought by two sufficient Witnesses, are of Force, fully to
Convince the Party Suspected. XV. If it can be proved that the Party Suspected,
has called upon the Devil, or desired his Help; this is a pregnant proof of a
League formerly made between them. XVI If it can be proved, that the Party has
Entertained a Familiar Spirit, and had Conference with i^, in the Likeness of
some visible Cre^tures: here is Evidence of Witchcraft. XVII. If the Witnesses
affirm upon Out^^, that the Suspected person, has done any Action, or work,
which necessarily infers a Covenant made: as that he has used Enchantments*
Divined of things before they come to pass, and that peremptorily; Raised
Tempests; caused the Form of a Dead Man to appear; it proves sufficiently that
he or she is a Witch.

This is the Substance of Mr. Perkins. Take, Next, The Sum of Mr. Gauls
Judgment, about the Detection of Witches.

I Some Tokens for the Trial of Witches, are altogether Unwarrantable. Such a^e
the old Paganish Sign, The Witches Long Eyes; The Tradition, of the Witches not
weeping; The casting of ^he Witch into the Water, with Thumbs, and Toes, t^'d
across. And many more such Marks, which if they are to know a witch by,
certainly it is no other witch, but the U^er of them. II. There are some Tokens
for the Trial of Witches, more probable: and yet not so certain as to afford
Conviction. Such are, strong and long Suspicion: Suspected Ancestors: some
Appearance of Fact: The Corpse bleeding upon the Witches Touch: The Testimo^y
of the Party Bewitched: The Supposed, Witches unusual Bodily Marks; The Witches
usual Cursing and Banning: The Witches lewd and naughty kind of Life. III. Some
Signs there are of a Witch, more certain and infallible. As, Firstly, Declining
of Judicature, or Faltring, Faulty, Unconstant, and Contrary Answers, upon
Judicial and Deliberate Examination Secondly, when upon due Encuiry, into a
persons Faith and Manners, there are found all or most of the causes, which
produce Witchcraft; namely, God Forsaking, Satan invading, particular Sins
disposing, and Lastly a Compact completing all. Thirdly, The Witches free
Confession, together with Full Evidence of the Fact. Confession without Fact,
may be a mere Delusion; and Fact without Confession may be a mere Accident 4*
thl^* The Semblable Gestures and Actions of suspected Witches, with the
comparable Expressions of Affections* which in all Witches have been observed
and found very much alike. Fifthly, The Testimony of the Party Bewitched,
whether Pining or Dying, together with the joint Oaths of sufficient persons,
that have seen certain prodigious Pranks or Feats, wrought by the Party
Accused. IV. Among the most unhappy Circumstances, to Convict a Witch. One is,
A Maligning and Oppugning, the Word, Work, and worship of God: and by any
Extraordinary Sign ^eeking to seduce any from it. See Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. Math.
24.24. Act. 13.8, 10. 2 Timothy 3*8. Do but mark well the places; and for this
very Property (of thus Opposing and perverting) they are all there concluded
arrant and absolute Witches. V. It is not requisite, that so palpable Evidence
of Conviction, should here come i^* as in other more sensible matters. It Is
enough, if there be but so much Circumstantial proof or Evidence; as the
Substance, ^^tter, and Nature of such an Ab^^ruse Mystery of Iniqu^^y will well
admit. [I suppose he means, that whereas in ot^^r Crimes, we Look for more
Direct Proofs, in this there is a greater use of Consequential ones] But I
could heartily w^h that the Juries were Empannelled of the most Emi^ent
Physicians, Lawyers, and Divines, that a Country could afford. In the mean
time, it is not to be called a To^ration, if Witches escape, where Conviction is
wantin^. To this purpose our Gaul.

I will T^anscribe a Little from one Author more. It Is the Judicious Bernard of
Batcombe; who in his Guide to Grand Jury men, after he has mentioned several
Things that are shrowed Presumptions of a Witch, proceeds to such Things as are
the Convictions of such an one. And he say^, A Witch, in League with the Devil,
is Con^icted by these Evidences; I. By a Witches Mark; which is upon the Baser
sort of Witches; and this, by the Devils either Sucking or Touching of them.
Tertullian says, It is the Devils custom to mark his. And note, That this mark
is I^sensible, and being pricl^'d it will not Bleed. Sometimes, its like a
Teate; sometimes but a Bluish Spot: sometimes a Red one; and sometimes the
Flesh Sunk: but the Witches do sometimes cover them. II. By the Witches Words.
As when they have been heard calling on, speaking to, or Talking of, their
Fami^^^rs; or, when they have been heard Telling of Hurt they have done to man
or beast: Or when they have been heard Threatening of such Hurt* Or if they have
been heard Relating their Transportations. III. By the Witches Deeds. As when
they have been seen with their Spirits, or seen secretly Feeding any of their
Imps. Or, when there can be found their Pictures, Poppets, and other Hellish
Compositions. IV. By the Witches Ecstasies: With the Delight whereof, Witches
are so taken, that they will hardly conceal the same: Or, however at some time
or other, they may be found in them. V. By one or more Fellow-Witches,
Confessing their own Witchcraft, and bearing Witness against others; if they
can make good the Truth of their Witness, and give sufficient proof of it. As,
that they have seen them with their Spirits; or, that they have Received
Spirits from them; or, that they can tell, when they used Witchery-Tricks to Do
Harm; o^, that they told them what Harm they had done; or that they can show
the mark upon them; or, that they have been together in their Meetings; and
such like. VI. By some Witness of God Himself, happening upon the Execrable
Curses of Witches upon themselves, Praying of God to show some Token, if they
be Guilty. VII. By the Witches own Confession, of Giving their Souls to the
Devil. It is no Rare thing, for Witches to Confess.

They are Considerable Things, which I have the Recited; and yet it must be
with Open Eyes, kept upon Open Rules, that we are to follow these things.

S. 8. But Juries are not the only Instruments to be employed in such a Work;
all Christians are to be concerne^ with daily and fervent Prayers, for the
assisting of it. I^ the Days of Athanasius, the Devils were found unable to
stand before, that Prayer, however then used perhaps with too much o^ Ceremony,
Let God A^is^, Let his Enemies b^ Scattered, Let them also that Hate Him, flee
before Him.

O that instead of letting our Hearts Rise against one another, our Prayers
might Rise unto an high pitch of Importunity, for such a Rising of the Lord!
Especially, Le^ them that are Suffering by Witchcraft, be sure to stay and
pray, and Beseech the Lord thrice, even as much as ever they can, before they
complain of any Neighbor for afflicting them Let them also that are A^cused of
Witchcraft, set themselves to Fast and Pray, and so shake off the Demons that
would like Vipers fasten upon them; and get the Waters of Jealousy made
profitable to them.

And Now, O Thou Hope of, New England, and the Savior thereof in the Time of
Troubles, Do thou look mercifully down upon us, and Rescue us, out of the
Trouble which at this time does threat^n to swallow us up. Let Satan be shortly
bruised under our Feet, and Let the Covenanted Vassals of Satan which have
Traitorously br^ught him i^ upon us, be Gloriously Conquered, by thy Powerful
and Gracious Pre^sence in the midst of us. Abhor us not, O God, but cleanse us,
but (...) us, but save us, for the sake of thy Glory, Enwrapped in our
S^lvations. By thy Spirit, Lift up a Standard against our infernal a^versaries;
Let us quickly find thee making of us glad, according t^ the Days wherein we
have been afflicted. Accept of all our Endeavors to glorify thee, in the Fi^^s
that are upon us; and among the rest, Let these my poor and weak essays,
composed with what Tears, what Cares, what Prayers, the^ only know, not want
the Ac^ceptance of the Lord. Amen.

A Discourse: ON The Wonders of the Invisible World.
Uttered (in part) on Aug. 4. 1692.
ECclesiastical History has Reported it unto us, That a Renowned Martyr at the
Stake, seeing the Book of THE REVELATION thrown by his no less Profane than
Bloody Persecutors, to be Burned in the same Fire with himself, he cried out, O
Beata Apocalypsis; quam been mecum agitur, qui tecum Comburar! BLESSED
REVELATION! said he; How blessed am I in this Fire, while I have Thee to bear
me Company. As for our selves this Day, it is a Fire of sore Affliction and
Confusion, wherein we are Embroiled; but it is no Inconsiderable Advantage unto
us, that we have the Company of this Glorious and Sacred Book, THE REVELATION,
to assist us in our Exercises. From that Book, there is one Text, which I would
single out, at this Time, to lay before you; it is that in

Rev. XII.12. Woe to the Inhabiters of the (...), and of the Sea; for the Devil
is come down unto you, having great Wrath; because he knows, that he has but
a sho^^ time.

THE Text is like the Cloudy and Fi^ery ^illar, vouchsafed unto Israel in the
Wilderness of old; there i^ a very dark (...) of it, in the Inti^mation, that,
The Devil is come dow^ having great Wrath; but it has also a bright side when
it assures us, that, He has but a short time^ Unto the Contemplation of both, I
do this Da^ Invite you.

We have in our Hands a Letter from our Ascended ^^rd in Heaven, to Advise us
of his being still alive, and of hi^ Purpose e're long, to give us a Visit,
wherein we shall see our Living Redeemer, stand at the latter day upon the
Earth. It Is the la^^ Advice that we have had from Heaven, for now sixteen
H^^dred years; and the scope of it, is, to represent how the Lord Jesus Christ,
having begun to set up his Kingdom in the World, by the Preaching of the
Gospel, he would from time to time utterly break to pieces all Powers that
should make Head against it, until, The Kingdoms of this Wor^ are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord, and of (...) Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and
ever. It Is a Commentary on what had been written by Dan^^l, about, The Fourth
Monarchy; with some Touches upon, The Fifth; wherein, The greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people of the Saints of
the most High: And although it have, as it is expressed by one of the Ancients,
Tot Sacramenta, quot verba, a Mystery in every Syllable, yet it is not
altogether to be neglected with such a Despair, as that, I cannot Read, for the
Book is Sealed: it is a REVELATION, and a singular, and notable Blessing is
pronounced upon them that humbly study it.

The Divine Oracles, have with a most admirable Artifice and Carefulness,
drawn, as the very pious Beverley, has laboriously Evinced, an exact LINE OF
TIME, from the First Sabbath at the Creation of the World, unto the great
Sabbatism at the Restitution of all Things. In that famous Line of Time, from
the Decree for the Restoring of Jerusalem, after the Babylonish Captivity,
there seem to remain a matter of Two Thousand and Three Hundred Years, unto
that New Jerusalem, whereto the Church is to be advanced, when the Mystical
Babylon shall be fallen. At the Resurrection of our Lord, there were seventeen
or eighteen Hundred of those Years, yet upon the Line, to Run unto, The Rest
which Remains for the People of God; and this Remnant in the Line of Time, is
here in our Apocalypse, variously Embossed, Adorned, and Signalized with such
Distinguished Events, if we mind them, will help us escape that Censure, Ca^ ye
not Discern the Signs of the Times?

The Apostle John, for the View of these Things, had laid before him, as I
conc^ive, a Bo^k, with leaves, or folds; which V^^^mn was written both on the
Backside, and on the Ins^de, and Rolled up in a Cylindri^cal Form, under seven
Label^, fastened with so many Seals. The First Seal b^ing opened, and the First
Label removed, under the first Label the Apostle saw what he saw, of a first
Rider Portrayed, and so on* till the last Seal was broken up; each of the
Sculptures being enlarged with Agreeable Visions and Voices, to Illustrate it.
The Book being now Unrolled, there were Trumpets, with wonderful Concomitants,
Exhibited successively on the Expanding Backside of it. Whereupon the Book was
Eaten, as it were to be Hidden, from Interpretations; till afterward, in the
Inside of it, the Kingdom of Antichrist came to be Exposed. Thus, the Judgments
of God on the Roman Empire, first unto the Downfall of Paganism, and then, unto
the Downfall of Popery, which is but Revived Paganism, are in these Displayes
with Lively Colors and Features made sensible unto us.

Accordingly, in the Twelfth Chapter of this Book* (...) have an August
Preface, to the Description o^ that Horrid Kingdom, which our Lord Christ
refused, but Antichrist accepted, from the Devils Hands; a Kingdom, which for
Twelve Hundred and Sixty Years together, was to be a continual oppression upon
the People of God, and opposition unto his Interests; until the Arrival of that
Illustrious Day, wherein, The Kingdom shall be the Lords, and he shall be
Governor among the N^^i^ns. The Chapter is (as an Excellent Person calls it)
an Extravasa^ed Account, of the Circumstances, which be^el the Primitive
Church, du^ing the first Four or Five Hundred Years of Chri^tianity: it shows
us the Face of the Church, first in Rome Heatheni^h, and then in Rome
Converted, before the Man ^f Sin wa^ yet come to Man's Estate. Our Text contains
the Acclamations made upon the most Glorious Revolution that ever yet happened
upon the Roman Empire; namely, That wherein the Travailing Church brought forth
a Christian Emperor. This was a most Eminent Victory over the Devil, and
Resemblance of the State, wherein the World, ere long shall see, The Kingdom of
our God, and the Power of His Christ. It is here noted.

First, As a matter of Triumph. It Is said, Rejoice, ye Heavens, and ye that
dwell in them. The Saints in both Worlds, took the Comfort of this Revolution;
the Devout Ones that had outlived the la^e Persecutions, were filled with
Transporting Joys, when they saw the Christian become the Imperial Religion,
and when they saw Good Men come to give Law unto the rest of Mankind; the
Deceas^d Ones also, whose Blood had been Sacrificed in the Ten Persecutions,
doubtless made the Light Regions to ring with Hallelujahs unto God, when there
were brought unto them, the Tidings of the Advances now g^^ven to the Christian
Religion, for which they ha^ suffered Martyrdom.

Secondly, As a matter of Horror. It Is said, (...) to the Inhabiters of the
Earth and of the Sea. The Earth still means the False Church, the Sea mean the
Wide World, in Prophetical Phrasaeology. Ther^ was yet left a vast party of men
that were Enemy to the Christian Religion, in the power of it; ^ vast party
left for the Devil to work upon: unt^ these is, a Woe denounced; and why so?
it is added For the Devil is come down unto you, having great Wrath, because he
knows, that he has but a short time* These were it seems to have some desperate
and peculiar Attempts of the Devil, made upon them In the mean time, we may
Entertain this for ou^

DOCTRINE.

Great WOE proceeds from the Great WRATH, wit^ which the DEVIL, toward the End
of his TIME, will make a DESCENT upon a miserable World.

I have now Published a most awful and solemn Warning for our selves at this
day; which has fou^ Propositions, comprehended in it.

Proposition I.
That there is a Devil, is a Thing Doubted by none but such as are under the
Influence of the Devil. For any to Deny the Being of a Devil must be from an
Ignorance or Profaneness, worse than Diabolical. A Devil! What is that? We have
a Definition of the Monster, in Ephesians. 6.12. A Spiritual Wickedness, that is, A
wicked Spirit. A Devil is a Fallen Angel, an Angel Fallen from the Fear and
Love of God, and from all Celestial Glories; but Fallen to all manner of
Wretchedness and Cursedness. He was once in that Order of Heavenly Creatures,
which God in the Beginning made Ministering Spirits, for his own peculiar
Service and Honor, in the management of the Universe; but we may now write
that Epitaph upon him, How art thou fallen from Heaven* thou have said in thine
Heart, I will Exalt my Throne above the Stars of God; but thou art brought down
to Hell! A Devil is a Spiritual and a Rational Substance, by his Apostasy from
God. Inclined unto all that is Vicious, and for that Apostasy confin^d unto the
Atmosphere of this Earth, in Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the
Great Day. This is a Devil; and the Experience of Mankind as well as the
Testimony of Scripture, does abundantly prove the Existence of such a Devil.

About this Devil* there are many Things, wh^reof we may reasonably and
profitably be Inqusitive; such things, I mean, as are in our ^ibles Revealed
unto us; according to which if we do not speak, on so Dark a Subject, but
according to our own uncertain, and perhaps humoursome Conje^tures, There is no
Light in us. I will carry you with me, but unto one Paragraph of the Bible to
be informed of three Things, relating to the Devil; `tis the Story of the
Gadaren Energumen^ in the fifth Chapter of Mark.

First, then; `Tis to be granted; The Devils are so many, that some Thousands,
can sometimes a^ once apply themselves to vex one Child of Man* It is said, in
Marc. 5.15. He that was Possesse^ with the Devil, had the Legion. Dreadful to
be spoken! A Legion consisted of Twelve Thousand Five Hundred people: and we
see that in one man o^ two, so many Devils can be spared for a Garrison. As the
Prophet cry`d out, Multitudes, Multitudes* in the Valley of Decision! So I say,
There are multi^ud^s, multitudes, in the valley of Destruction* where the
Devils are! When we speak of, The Devil, `tis, A Name of Multitude; it means
not One Individual Devil, so Potent and Scient, as perhaps a Man chee would
imagine; but it means a Kind, which a Multitude belongs unto. Alas, The Devils,
they swarm about us, like the Frogs of Egypt, in the most Retired of our
Chambers. Are we at our Boards? There will be Devils to Tempt us unto
Sensuality: Are we in our Beds? There will be Devils to Tempt us unto
Carnality; Are we in our Shop^? There will be Devils to Tempt us unto
Dishonesty. Yea, Though we get into the Church of God, there will be Devils to
Haunt us in the very Temple it self, and there Tempt us to manifold
Misbehaviours. I am verily persuaded, That there are very few Humane Affayrs,
whereinto some Devils are not Insinuated; There is not so much as a Journey
intended, but Satan will have an Hand in Hindering or Furthering of it.

Secondly, `Tis to be supposed, That there is a sort of Arbitrary, even
Military Government, among the Devils. This is intimated, when in Mar. 5.9. The
Unclean Spirit ^^id, My Name is Legion: they are under such a Discipline as
Legions use to be. Hence we read about, The Prince of the Power of the Air: Our
A^r has ^ Power! or an Army, of Devils in the High ^^aces of it; and these
Devils have a Prince over them, who is, King over the Children of Pride. `Tis
probable, That the Devil, who was the Ringleader of that mutinous and
rebellious Crew, which first shook off the Authority of God, is now the General
of those Hellish Armies; Our Lord, that Conquered him, has told us the Name of
him; it is Beelzebub; it is he that is, the Devil, and the re^t are, his Angels, or
his Soldiers. Think on, vast Regiments, of cruel, and bloody French Dragoons,
with an Intendant over them, overrunning a ^illaged Neighborhood, and you
will think a little, what the Constitution among the Devils is.

Thirdly, It Is to be supposed, That some Devils are more peculiarly
Commission^d, and perhaps Qualified, for some Countries, while others are for
others. This is intimated when in Mar. 5.10. The Devils besought Our Lord,
Much, that he would not send them away out of the Country. Why was that? But
in all probability, Because These Devils were more Able, to, Do the Works of
the Devil, i^ such a Country, than in another. It is not like^ that every
Devil do`s know every Language; o^ that every Devil can do every Mischief. It Is
po^^sible that the Experience, or, if I may call it so, the Education, of all
Devils, is not alike, and that ther^ may be some Difference in their Abilitie^.
I^ on^ might make an Inference from what the Devils D^ to what they are, One
cannot forbear Dreaming, th^^ there are Degrees of Devils. Who can allow tha^
such T^i^ing Demons, as that of Ma^con, or those tha^ once infested our New
berry, are o^ ^o much Gra^^deur, as those Demons, whose Games are might^
Kingdoms? Yea, It Is Certain, that all Divel^ do not make a like Figure, in the
Invisible Worl^ Nor do^s it look agreeably, That the Demons, which were the
Familiars of such a Man as the Ol^ Apollonius, differ not from those Baser
Goblins tha^ choose to Nest in the filthy and loathsome Rags, o^ a Beastly
Sorceress. Accordingly, why may no^ some Devils, be more Accomplished for what
is to be done in such and such places: when others must be Detach^d for other
Ter^itories? Each Dive^ as he sees his advantage, Cries out, Let me be in this
Country, rather than another. But Enough, if not To^ much, of these Things.

Proposition II.
There is a Divellish Wrath against Mankind, wit^ which the Devil is, for Gods
Sake Inspired. The Devil is himself broiling under the intolerable and
interminable Wrath of God; and a fiery Wrath at God, is that with which the
Devil is for that cause Enflamed. Methinks I see the posture of the Devils in
Isa. 8.21. They fret themselves, and Cur^e their God, and l^ok ^pward. The
first and chief Wrath of the Devil, is at the Almighty God Himself; He knows,
The God that made him, will not have m^^cy on him, and the God that formed him,
w^^l show him no favor; and so he can have no Kindness for that God, who has
no Mercy, nor Favor for him. Hence it is, that he cannot bear the Name of God
should be Acknowledged in the World; Every Acknowledgment paid unto God, is a
fresh Drop of Furning Brimstone falling upon the Devil; He dos make his
Insolent, though Impotent Batteries, even upon the Throne of God Himself: and
foolishly affects to have himself exalted unto that Glorious High Throne, by
all people, as he sometimes is, by Exer^a^^le Witch^s. This hor^ible Dragon
does not only with ^is Ta^l st^ike at the Stars of God, but at the God Himself,
who made the Stars, b^ing desirous to outshine them all. God and the Devil are
swo^n Enemies to each other; the Terms between them, are those, in Zech. 11.18.
My Soul ^oathed them, and their Soul also Abhorred me. And from this Furious
Wrath, or Displeasure and Prejudice at God, proceeds the Devils Wrath at us,
the poor Children of Men. Our doing the Service of God, is one thing that
Exposes us to the Wrath of the Devil. We are the Highpriests of the World;
when a^ Creatures are called upon, Praise ye the Lord, the bring to us those
demanded Praises of God, say^ing, Do you Offer them for us. Hence it is, th^^
the Devil has a a Quarrel with us, as he had wit^ the High Priest in the Vision
of Old. Our bear^ing the Image of God, is another thing that bring the Wrath of
the Devil upon us. As a Tygr^ th^o his Hatred at a man, will tear the very
Pic^^ure of him, if it come in his way; such a Tygr^ the Devil is; because God
said of old, Let us ma^^ Man in our Image, the Devil is ever saying, Let (...)
pull this man to pieces. But the envious Pride of the Devil, is one thing more
that gives an Edge unto his Fu^ious Whrath against us. The Apostle has gi^ven
us an hi^t, as it Pride had been the C^ndem^^^ion of the Devil. It Is not
unlikely, that the Devils Affectation to be above that Condition which he might
learn that Mankind was to be preferr`d unto, might be the occasion of his
taking up Arms against the Immortal King. However, the Devil now sees Man lying
in the Bosom of God, but Himself damned in the Bottom of Hell; and thi^
Enrages him exceedingly; O, says he, I cannot be^^ it, that man should not be
as miserable as myself.

Proposition III.
The Devil, in the prosecution, and for the execution of His wrath upon them,
often getts a Liberty to make a Descent upon the Children of men. When the
Devil does Hurt unto us, he Comes Down unto us; for the Randezvouze of the
Infernal Troops, is indeed in the Supernal Parts of our Air. But as it is said, A
sparrow of the Air does not fall down without the will of God; so I may say,
Not a Devil in the Air, can come down without the leave of God. Of this we have
a famous Instance in that Arabian Prince, of whom the Devil was unable so much
as to Touch any thing, till the most High God gave him a permission, to go
down. The Devil stands with all the Instruments of Death, aiming at us, and
begging of the Lord, as that King ask`d for the Hood-winck`d Syrians of old,
Shall I Smite `em, shall I Smite `em? He cannot strike a Blow, till the Lord
say, Go down and smite, but sometimes He does obtain from the High Possessor of
Heaven and Earth, a License for the doing of it. The Devil sometimes does make
most rucful Havoc among us; but still we may say to him, as our Lord said unto
a great servant of his, Thou could have no power against me, except it were
given thee from above. The Devil is called in 1 pet. 5.8. your Adversary. It Is a
Law-term; and it notes, An Adversary at Law. The Devil cannot come at us,
except in some sense according to Law; but sometimes he does procure sad things
to be inflicted, according to that Law of the eternal King, upon us. The Devil
First Goes up as an Accuser against us: He is therefore styled The Accuser; and
it is on this account, that his proper Name, does belong unto him. There is a
Court somewhere kept; a Court of Spirits, where the Devil enters all sorts of
Complaints against us all; he charges us with manifold sins against the Lord
our God: The^^ he loads us with heavey Imputations, of Hypocrisy, Iniquity,
Disobedience; where upon he urges, (...), ^et `em now have the Death, which is
their Wages, paid unto `em! If our Advocate in the Heavens do not now take off
his Libels, the Devil then with a Con^^^sion of God, Comes down, as a Destroyer
upon us. Ha^ing first been an Attorney, to bespeak that the Judgments of Heaven
may ^e Ordered for us, he then also pleads that he may be the Executioner of
those Judgments; and the God of Heaven sometimes after a sort signs a Warrant,
for this D^stroying Angel, to do what has bin desired to be come for the
Destro^^ng of men. But such a Permission from God, for the Devil to Come down,
and Break in upon man^i^d, oftentimes must be Accompanied with a Commission
from some wretches of manki^d i^sel^. Every man i^, a^ it is hi^^ed in Genesis 4.9.
His Brothers Kee^per. We are to keep one another from the inroad^ of the Devil,
by mutual and Cordial Wi^hes of prosperi^y to one another. When ungodly people,
give their C^nsents in witchcrafts diabolically per^ormed, for the Devil to
annoy their Neighbo^r^, he finds a Breach made in the Hedge about us, w^e^eat
he Rushe^ in upon us, with g^i^vous molestation^. Yea, when Impious people,
that never saw the Devil, do but utter their Curses against their Neighbors,
those are so many Watch words whereby the Mas^ives of Hell are animated
presently to ^all upon us. It Is thus, that the Devil gets Leave to worry us.

Proposition IV.
Most Horrible Woes come to be inflicted upon Mankind, when the Devil do^s in
Great Wrath, make a Descent upon them. The Devil, is a Do-Evil, and wholly set
upon mischief. When Our Lord once was going to Muzzel him, that he might not
mischief others, he cried out, Art thou come to Torment me? He is, it seems,
himself Tormented, it he be but Restrained from the Tormenting of Men. If upon
the Sounding of the Three last Apoclyptical Angels, it was an outcry made in
Heaven, Woe, Woe, Woe, to the inhabitants of the Earth by reason of the voice of
the Trumpet. I am sure, a Descent made by the Angel of Death, would give cause
for the like Exclamation: Woe to the World, by reason of the Wrath of the Devil!
What a Woeful plight, Mankind would by the Descent of the Devil, be brought
into, may be gathered from the Woeful pains, and wounds, and hideous
desolations, which the Devil brings upon them, of whom he has with a Bodily
Possession made a Seizure. You may both in Sacred and Profane History, read
many a direful Account of the Woes, which they, that are possessed by the
Devil, do undergo: And from thence conclude, What must the Children of Men,
hope from such a Devil! Moreover the Tyrannical Ceremonies, whereto the Devil
uses to subjugate such Woeful Nations or Orders of men, as are more Entirely
under his Dominion, do declare what Woeful Work, the Devil would make where he
comes. The very Devotions of those forlorn Pa^gans, to whom the Devil is a
Leader, are most bloo^dy Penances: and what VVoes indeed must we expect from
such a Devil of a M^loch, as relishes n^ Sacrifices like those of Humane
Heart-Blood, and unto whom there is no music like the bitter, dy^ing, doleful
Groans, ejulated by the Roasting Children of men.

Furthermore, the Servile, Abject, Needy Circumstances wherein the Devil keeps
the Slaves, that are under his more sensible Vassallage, do suggest unto us,
How woeful the Devil would render all of ou^ Lives. We that live in a Province,
which afford unto us, all that may be Necessary or Comfortabl^ for us, found
the Province filled with vast Herd^ of Salvages, that never saw so much as a
Knife, o^ a Nail, or a Board, or a Grain of Salt, in all their days. No better
would the Devil have the World provided for! Nor should we, or any else, have
one convenient Thing about us; but be as Indigent as usually our most Ragg^d
Witches are; if the Devils Malice were not overruled by a Compassionate God,
Who Preserves Man and Beast. Hence it is, That the Devil, even like a Dragon,
keeping a Guard upon such Fruits as would Refresh a Languishing World, has
hindered Mankind for many Ages, from bitting upon those useful Inventions, which
yet were so Obvious and Facil, that it is every bodies wonder, they were no
sooner bit upon. The ^emisted World, must ^og on for Thousands of Years,
without the knowledge of the Loadston^, till a Neapolitan stumbled upon it*
about Three Hundred years ago. Nor must the world be blessed with such a
matchless Engine of Learning and Virtue, as that of, Printing, till about the
middle of the Fifteenth Century. Nor could one Old Man all over the Face of the
whole Earth, have the benefit of such a Little, though most Needful, Thing, as a
pair of Spectacles, till a Dutchman, a little while ago accommodated us.

Indeed, as the Devil does begrutch us all manner of Good, so he does Annoy us
with all manner of VVo, as often as he finds himself capable of doing it. But
shall we mention some of the special woes with which the Devil do^s usually
infest the World! ^reefly then; Plagues are some of those woes, with which the
Devil troubles us. It is said of the Isra^^^tes, in 1. Cor. 10.10 They were
destroyed of the destroyer. That is, they had the Plague among them. It Is the
Destroyer, or the Devil, that scatters Plagues about the World: Pestilential
and Contagious Diseases, it is the Devil, who does oftentimes ^nvade us with
them. It Is no uneasy thing, for the Devil, to impregnate the Air about us, with
such Malignant Salts, as meeting with the Salt of our Microcosin, shall
immediately cast us into that ^ermentation and Putrefaction, which will utterly
dissolve all the Vital Ties within us; Even as an Aquafortis, made with a
conjunction of Nitre and Vitriol, Co^rode^ what is Siezes upon. And when the
Devil has raised those Arsenical Fumes, which become Venomous Quivers full of
Terrible Arrows, ^ow easily (...) he shoot the deleterious Miasms into those
Juices or Bowels of Men's Bodies, which will soon Inflame them with a Mortal
Fire! Hence come such Plagues, as that Beesome of Destruction which within our
memory swept away such a Throng o^ people from One English City in one
Visi^ation ^ and hence those Infectious Fevers, which are but so many
Disguised Plagues among us, Causing Epidemical Desolations. Again, Wars are
also some of those VVoes, with which the Devil causes ou^ Trouble. It is said
in Rev. 12.17. The Dragon was wroth, and went to m^^e war: And there is in
Truth, scarce any War, but what is of the Dragon^ kindling. The Devil is that
Vulcan, out of whos^ Forge come the instruments of our Wars, and i^ is he that
finds us Employments for those Instru^ments. We read concerning Daemoniacks, or
people in whom the Devil was, that they would cut and wound themselves; and so,
when the Devil is in Men, he puts 'em upon dealing in that barbarous fashion
with one another. Wars do often furnish him with some Thousands of Souls in
one Morning from one Acre of Ground; and for the sake of such Thyest^^^n
Banquets, he will push us upon as many Wars as he can.

Once more, why may not Storms be rekoned among those VVoes, wish which the
Devil does disturb us? It is not improbable, that Natural Storms* on the World,
are often of the Devils raising. We are told in Job. 1.11.12, 19. that the
Devil made a Storm, which Hurricano'd the House of Job, u^pon the Heads of them
that were feasting in i^ Paracelsus could have informed the Devil, if he had
not been informed, as be sure he was before, That ^f much Aluminious matter,
with Saltpeter not ^hroughly prepared, be mixed, they will send up a cloud of
Smoke, which will come down in Rain. But undoubtedly the Devil understands as
well ^he way to make a Tempest, as to turn the Winds ^t the Solicitation of a
Laplander; Whence perhaps ^t is, that Thunders are observed oftener to break
upon Churches, than upon any other Buildings; and besides many a Man, yea many
a Ship, yea many a Town has miscarried, when the Devil has been permitted from
above to make an Horrible tempest. However that the Devil has raised many
Metapho^ical Storms upon the Church, is a thing, than which ^here is nothing
more notorious. It was said unto ^elievers, in Rev. 2.10. The Devil shall cast
some of ^ou into Prison. The Devil was he that at first set ^ain uon Abel, to
butcher him, as the Apostle ^eems to suggest, for his Faith in God, as a
Rewarder. And, in how many Persecutions, as well as Haeresies, has the Devil
been ever since Engaging all the Children of Cain! That Serpent the Devil has
acted his cursed Seed, in unwearied Endeavors to have them, Of whom the World
is not worthy, treated ^s those who are, Not Worthy to live in the World. By
the Impulse of the Devil, it is that first the old Heathens, and then the mad
Arians, were Pricking ^riars, to the true Servants of God; and that the Papists
that came after them, have outdone them ^ll, for Slaughters, upon those (...)
have been Accounted as the shee^ for the Slaughters. The late Fren^^
Persecution, is perhaps the Horriblest that ever w^^ in the World: and as the
Devil of Mascon seen before to have meant it, in his outcries, upon, T^
miseries preparing for the poor Hugonots! thus it ha^ been all acted, by a
singular Fury of the old Dr^^gon inspiring of his Emissaries.

But in reality, Spiritual Woes, are the Princip^ Woes, among all those that
the Devil would have us undone withal. Sins are the worst of W^e and the Devil
seeks nothing so much, as to plung^ us into Sins. When men do commit a Crime
for which they are to be Indicted, they are usually Moved by the Instigation of
the Devil. The Devi^ will put Ill Men upon being worse. Was it not he that said
in 1 King 22.22. I will go forth, and be ^ Lying Spirit in the Mouth of all the
Prophets? Even so, the Devil becomes an Unclean Spirit, a Drinking Spirit, a
Swea^ing Spirit, a Worldly Spirit, a Passio^nate Spirit, a Revengful Spirit,
and the like, in the Hearts of those that are already too much of such a
Spirit; and thus* they become Improved ^n ^^^^fulness. Yea, the Devil will put
Good Men upon doing Ill. Thus we read, in 1 Chronicles. 21.1. Satan provoked David
to Number Israel. And so, the Devil provokes men that are Eminent in Holiness,
unto such Things as may become eminently pernicious; he provokes them
especially unto Pride, and unto many unsuitable Emulations. There are like wise
most lamentable Impressions, which the Devi^ makes upon the Souls of men, by
way of punish^ment upon them for their (...). It Is thus, when an Offended God,
puts the Souls of men over into the Hands of that Officer, Who has the Power of
Death, that is, the Devil. It is the woeful misery of Unbelievers, in 2 Cor.
4.4. The God of this World has blinded their minds. And thus it may be said of
those Woeful Wretches, whom the Devil is a God unto, The Devil so Muffles them,
that they cannot see the things of their Peace. And, The Devil so Hardens them,
that nothing will awaken their cares about their Souls: How come so many to be
Seared in their Sins? It Is the Devil, that with a Red Hot Iron fetch^t from his
Hell, does cauterise them. Thus it is, till perhaps at last they come to have a
Wounded Conscience in them, and the Devil has often a share in their Torturing
and Confounding Anguishes. The Devil who Terrified Cain, and Saul, and Judas,
into Desperation, still becomes a King of Terrors, to many Sinners, and frights
them from laying hold on the Mercy of God in the Lord Je^sus Christ. In these
regards, Woe to us, when the Devil comes down upon us.

Proposition V.
Toward the End of his Time the Descent of the Devil in Wrath upon the World,
will produce more woeful Effects, than what have been in Former Ages. The Dying
Dragon, will bite more Cruelly, and sting more Bloodily than ever he did
before: The ^eath-pangs of the Devil will make him to be more of a Devil than
ever he was; and the Furnace o^ this Nebuchadnezaear will be heated seven times
hotter, just before its putting out.

We are in the first place, to Apprehend, That there is a Time fixed and stated
by God, for the Devil to enjoy a Dominion over our sinful and therefore woeful
World. The Devil once Exclaimed, in Mat. 8.29. Jesus, thou Son of God, art tho^
come hither to Torment us before our Time? It i^ plain, That until the Second
Coming of our Lord* the Devil must have a Time of plaguing the World, which he
was afraid, would have Expired at His First. The Devil is, By the wrath of God,
the Prince of this World; and the Time of his Reign, is to continue until the
Time, when our Lord Himself, shall, Take to Himself, his great Power and Reign.
Then it is that the Devil shall hear the Son of God, swearing with loud Thunders
against him, Thy Time shall now be no more! Then shall the Devil with his
Angels, receive their Doom, which will be, Depart into the Everlasting Fire
prepared for you.

We are also to Apprehend, that in the mean time, the Devil can give a shroud
guess, when he draws near to the End of his Time. When he saw Christianity
enthroned among the Romans, it is here said, in our Rev, 12 12, He knows he
has but a short time^ And how does he know it? Why, Reason will make the Devil
to know that God will not suffer him to have, the Everlasting Dominion; and that
when God h^^ once begun to rescue the world out of his hands He Will go through
with it, until The Captives of the mighty shall be taken away and the prey of
the Ter^^ble shall be delivered. But the Devil will have Scripture also, to
make him Know that when his Antichristian Vicar the seven headed Beast on the
seven-hilled City, shall have spent his determined years, he with his Vicar
must unavoidably go down into the Bottomless Pit. It is not Improbable, that
the Devil often hears the Scripture expounded in our congregations; yea that we
never Assemble without a Satan among us. As there are some Divines, who do with
more uncertainty conjecture, from a ^e^rtain P^a^e in the Epistle to the
Ephesians, That the Angels do some times come into our Churches, to gain some
Advantage from our Ministry. But be sure our Demonstrable Interpretations, may
give Repeated Notices to the Devil, That his time is almost out: and that the
preacher says unto the Young Man, Know thou, that God will bring thee into
Judgment! THAT may our Sermons tell unto that Old Wretch, Know thou, that the
time of thy Judgment is at hand*

But we must now, likewise, Apprehend, that in such a time, The Woes of the
world, will be heightened, beyond what they were at any Time yet from the
foundation of the world. Hence it is, that the Apostle has forewarned us, in 2.
Tim. 3.1. this know, that in the last days, perilous times shall come. Truly,
when the Devil knows, that he is got into his Last days, he will make Perilous
Times for us; the times will grow more full of Devils, and therefore more full
of Perils, than ever they were before. Of this if we would Know, what cause is
to be assigned; It is no^ only, because the Devil grows more Able and more
Eager to Vex the world; but also, and chiefly, Be^cause the world is more
worthy to be Vexed by the Devil, than ever heretofore. The Sins of men in thi^
Generation, will be more mighty Sins, than those of the Former Ages; men will
be more Accurate and Exquisite, and Refined in the Arts of Sinning, than they
(...) be. And besides, their own sins, the sins of all the Forme^ Ages will
also lie upon the sinners of this generation Do we ask why the mischievous
powers of darkness are to prevail more in our days, than they did in those that
are past and gone! It Is because that men by sinning over again the sins of the
Former days, have a Fellowship with all those unfruitful works of darkness. As
'twas said in Math. 23.36. All these things shall come upon this generation;
so, the men of the Last generation, will find themselves involved in the guilt
of all that went before them. Of Sinners it is said, They Heap up Wrath; and the
sinners of the Last generations do not only add unto the Heap of sin that has
been pil^ing up, ever since the Fall of man, but they Interest themselves in
every sin of that enormous Heap. There has been a Cry of sin in all Former Ages
going up to God, That the Devil may come down! and the sinners of the Last
generations, do sharpen and louden that cry, till the thing do come to pass, as
Destructively as I^remediably. From whence it follows, that the Thrice Holy
God, with His Holy Angels, will now after a sort more Abandon the World, than
in the former Ages. The Roaring Impieties of the Old World, at last gave
Mankind such a Distaste in the Heart of the Just God, that he came to say, It
Repents me, that I have made such a Creature! And however, it may be but a
witty Fancy, in a Late Learned Writer, that the Earth before the Flood was
nearer to the Sun, than it is at this Day; and that Gods Hurling down the Earth
to a further Distance from the Sun, were the cause of that Flood; yet we may
fitly enough say, that men perished by a Rejection from the God of Heaven.
Thus, the Enhanc'd Impieties of this our World, will Exasperate the Displeasure
of God, at such a rate, as that he will more Cast us off, than heretofore;
until at last, He do with a more than ordinary Indignation say, Go Devils; do
you take them, and make them beyond all former measure^ miserable!

If Lastly, We are inquisitive after Instances of those Aggravated Woes, with
which the Devil will toward the End of his Time assault us; Let it be
Remembered, That all the Extremities which were foretold by the Trumpets and the
Vials in the Apocalyptic Schemes of these things, to come upon the world, were
the woes to come from the wrath of the Devil, upon the shortning of his Time,
The horrendous desolations that have come upon mankind, by the Irruptions of
the old Barbarians upon the Roman World, and then of the Saracens, and since,
of the Turks, were such woes, as men had never seen before. The Infandous
Blindness and Vileness which then came upon mankind, and the Monstrous
Croisadoes which thereupon carried the Roman world by the Millions together
unto the shambles, were also such woes as had never yet had a Parallel. And yet
these were some of the things here intended, when it was said, woe! For the
Devil is come down in Great wrath, having but a short Time.

But besides all these things, and besides, the Increase of Plagues and Wars,
and Storms, and Internal Maladies now in our days, there are especially two
most extraordinary Woes, one would fear, will in these days become very
ordinary. One Woe that may be looked for is, A frequent Repetition of
Earthquakes, and this perhaps by the energy of the Devil in the Earth. The
Devil will be clap't up, as a Prisoner in or near the Bowels of the earth, when
once that Conflagration shall be dispatched, which will make, The New Earth
wherein shall dwell Righteousness; and that Conflagration will doubtless be
much promoted, by the Subterraneous Fires, which are a cause of the Earthquakes
in our Days. Accordingly, we read, Great Earthquakes in diverse places,
enumerated among the Tokens of the Time approaching, when the Devil shall have
no longer Time. I suspect, That we shall now be visited with more Usual, and
yet more Fatal Earthquakes, than were our Ancestors; inasmuch as the Fires that
are shortly to, Burn unto the Lowest Hell, and set on Fire the Foundations of
the Mountains, will now get more Head than they use to do; and it is not
impossible, that the Devil, who is e're long to be punished in those Fires, may
aforehand augment his Desert of it, by having an hand in using some of those
Fires, for our Detriment. Learned Men have made no scruple to charge the Devil
with it; Deo permittente, Terraemotus causat. The Devil surely, was a party in
the Earthquake, whereby the Vengeance of God, in one black Night sunk Twelve
considerable Cities of Asia, in the Reign of Tiberius. But there will be more
such Catastrophe's in our Days! Italy has lately been Shaking, till its
Earthquakes have brought Ruins at once upon more than thirty Towns; but it
will within a little while, shake again, and shake till the ^ire of God have
made an Entire Etna of it. And behold, This very Morning, when I was intending
to utter among you such Things as these, we are cast into an Heartquake by
Tidings of an Earthquake that has lately happened at Jamaica: an horrible
Earthquake, whereby the Tyrus of the English America, was at once pulled into
the Jaws of the Gaping and Groaning Earth, and many Hundreds of the
Inhabitants buried alive. The Lord sanctify so dismal a Dispensation of his
Providence, unto all the American Plantations! But be assured, my Neighbors,
the Earthquakes are not over yet! We have not yet seen the Last. And then,
Another Woe that may be Looked for is, The Devils being now let Loose in
preternatural Operations more than formerly; and perhaps in Possessions and
Obsessions that shall be very mavelous. You are not Ignorant, That just
before our Lords First Coming, there were most observable Outrages committed by
the Devil upon the Children of Men* And I am suspicious, That there will again
be an unusual Range of the Devil among us, a little before the Second Coming of
our Lord, which will be, to give the last stroke in, Destroying the Works of
the Devil. The Evening Wolves will be much abroad, when we are near the Evening
of the World. The Devil is going to be Dislodged of the Air, where his present
Quarters are; God will with flashes of hot Lightning upon him, cause him to
fall as Lightning from his Ancient Habitations: And the Raised Saints will
there have a New Heaven, which, We expect according to the Promise of God. Now,
a little before this thing, you will be like to see the Devil, more sensibly and
visibly Busy upon Earth perhaps, than ever he was before: You shall oftener hear
about Apparitions of the Devil, and about poor people strangely Bewitched,
Possessed and Obsessed, by Infernal Fiends. When our Lord is going to set up
His Kingdom, in the most sensible and visible manner that ever was, and in a
manner answering the Transfiguration in the Mount, it is a thousand to one, but
the Devil will in sundry parts of the World, assay the like for Himself, with a
most Apish Imitation: and Men, at least in some Corners of the World, and
perhaps in such as God may have some special Designs upon, will to their Cost,
be more Familiarized with the World of Spirits than they had been formerly.

So that, in fine, if just before the End when the Times of the Jews were to be
finished, a man then ran about every where, crying, W^ to the Nation! Woe to the
City! Woe to the Temple! Woe! Woe! Woe! Much more may the descent of the Devil,
just before his End, when also the Times of the Gentiles will be finished,
cause us to cry out, Woe! Woe! Woe! because of the Black things that Threaten us!

But it is now Time to make our Improvement of what has been said. And, first,
we shall entertain ourselves with a few Corollaries: deduced from what has been
thus asserted.

Corollary I.
What cause have we to bless God, for our preservation from the Devils wrath,
in this which may too reasonably be called the Devils World! While we are in,
this present evil world, We are continually surrounded with swarms of those
Devils, who make this present world, become so evil. What a wonder of Mercy is
it, that no Devil could ever yet make a prey of us! We can set our foot no
where but we shall tread in the midst of most Hellish Rattle-Snakes; and one of
those Rattle-Snakes once through the mouth of a Man on whom he had Siezed, hissed
out such a Truth as this, If God would let me loose upon you, I should find
enough in the Best of you all, to make you all mine. What shall I say? The
Wilderness through which we are passing to the Promised Land, is all over filled
with, Fiery flying serpents. But blessed be God; None of them have hitherto so
fastened upon us, as to confound us utterly! All our way to Heaven, lies by the
Dens of Lions, and the Mounts of Leopards; there are incredible Droves of
Devils in our way. But have we safely got on our way thus far? O let us be
thankful to our Eternal preserver for it. It is said in, Psalm. 76.10. Surely
the wrath of Man shall praise thee, and the Remainder of wrath shall thou
restrain But surely It becomes us to praise God, in that we have yet sustained
no more Damage by the wrath of the Devil, and in that he has restrained that
Overwhelming wrath. We are poor Travelers in a World, which is as well the
Devils Field, as the Devils Ga^l; a World, in every Nook whereof, the Devil is
encamped, with Bands of Robbers, to pes^^r all that have their Face looking
Zion-ward: And are we all this while preserved from the undoing Snares of the
Devil! it is, Thou, O keeper of Israel, that have hitherto been our Keeper! And
therefore, Bless the Lord, O my soul, Bless his Holy Name, who has redeemed thy
Life from the Distroyer!

Corollary. II.
We may see the rise of those multiplied magnified, and Singularly stinged
Afflictions, with which aged or dying Saints frequently have their Death
Prefaced, and their Age embittered. When the Saints of God are going to leave
the World, it is usually a more Stormy World with them, than ever it was; and
they find more Vanity, and more Vexation in the world than ever they did
before. It is true, That many are the afflictions of the Righteous but a little
before they bid adieu to all those many Afflictions, they often have greater,
harder, Sorer, Loads thereof laid upon them, than they had yet endured. It is
true, That through much Tribulation we must enter in the Kingdom of God; but a
little before our Entrance thereinto, our Tribulation may have some sharper
accents of Sorrow, than ever were yet upon it. And what is the cause of this!
It is indeed the Faithfulness of our God unto us, that we should find the Earth
mo^e full of Thorns and Briars than ever, just before he fetches us from Earth
to Heaven; that so we may go away the more willingly, the more easily, and with
less Convulsion, at his calling for us. O there are ugly Ties, by which we are
fastened unto this world; but God will by Thorns and Briars tear those Ties
asunder. But, Is not the Hand of Joab here? Sure, There is the wrath of the
Dev^l also in it. A little before we step into Heaven, the Devil thinks with
himself, My time to abuse that Saint is now but short; what Mischief I am to do
that Saint, must be done quickly, if at all; he will shortly be out of my Reach
for ever. And for this cause he will now fly upon us with the Fiercest Efforts
and Furies of his Wrath. It was allowed unto the Serpent, in Genesis 2.15. To
Bruise the Heel. Why, at the Heel, or at the Close, of our Lives, the Serpent
will be nibbling, more than ever in our Lives before: and it is, Because now he
has but a short time. He knows, That we shall very shortly be, Where the Wicked
cease from Troubling, and when the Weary are at Rest; wherefore that Wicked one
will now Trouble us, more than ever he did, and we shall have so much Disrest,
as will make us more weary than ever we were, of things here below.

Corollary. III
What a Reasonable Thing then is it, that they whose Time is but short, should
make as great Use of their Time, as ever they can! I pray, let us learn some
good* even from the Wicked One himself. It has been advised, Be Wise as
Serpents: why, there is a piece o^ Wisdom, whereto that old Serpent, the Devil
himself, may be our Monitor. When the Devil perceives his Time is but short, it
puts him upon Great Wrath. But how should it be with us, when we perceive that
our Time is but short? why, it should put us upon Great Work. The motive which
makes the Devil to be more full of wrath, should make us more full of warmth,
(...) full of watch, and more full of All Diligence to make our Vocation, and
Election sure. Our Pace in our Journey Heavenward, must be Quickened, if our
space for that Journey be shortened: even as Israel went further the two last
years of their Journey Canaan-ward, than they did in Thirty eight years before.
The Apostle brings this, as a spur to the Devotions of Christians, in. 1. Cor.
7.29. This I say, Brether^n, the time is short. Even so, I say this day; some
things I ^ay before you, which I do only think, or guess, but here is a thing
which I venture to say with all the freedom Imaginable. You have now a Time to
Get good; even a Time to make sure of Grace and Glory, and every good thing, by
true Repentance; But, This I say, the time is but short. You have now Time to
Do good; even to serve out your generation, as by the Will, so for the Praise
of God; But, This I say the time is but short. And what I say thus to
All-People, I say to Old People, with a Peculiar Vehemence: Syrs, It Cannot be
long, before your Time is out; there are but a few Sands Left in the glass of
your Time: And it is of all things the saddest, for a man to say, My Time is
done but my work undone! O then, To work as fast as you can; and of Soul-Work,
and Church-Work, Dispatch as much as ever you can. Say to all Hindrances, as
the Gracious Jeremiah Burrows would sometimes to Visitants: You Will excuse me if
I ask you to be short with me, for my work is great, and my Time is but short.
Methinks every Time, we hear a clock, or see a watch, we have an Admonition
given us, That our Time is upon the wing, and it will all be gone within a
little while. I Remember I have read of a famous man, who having a Clock-Watch
long Lying by him, out of Kilture in his Trunk, it unaccountably Struck Eleven
just before he Died. Why, there are many of you, for whom I am to do that
office this day: I am to tell you, You are come to your Eleventh Hour; there is
no more than a Twelfth Part at most, of your life yet behind. But if we neglect
our business, till our short Time shall be reduced into None, then, woe to us,
for the great wrath of God will send us down from whence there is no Redemption.

Corollary. IV.
How welcome should a Death in the Lord, be unto them, that belong not unto
the Devil, but unto the Lord! While We are sojourning in this world, we are in
what may upon too many accounts be called The Devils Country: we are where the
Devil may Come down upon us in Great Wrath continually* The day when God shall
take us out of this world* will be, The Day when the Lord will deliver us from
the Hand of all our enemies, and from the Hand of Satan* In such a day, why
should not our Song be that o^ the Psalmist, Blessed be my Rock, and let the
God of my Salvation be Exalted! While we are here, we are in the Valley of the
shadow of Death; and wha^ is it that makes it so! It Is because the Wild Beasts
of Hell are lurking on every side of us, and every minute ready to Salley forth
upon us. But our Death will fetch us out of that Valley, and carry us where we
shall be, For ever with the Lord. We are now un^der the daily Buffetings of the
Devil, and he doe^ molest us with such Fiery Darts, as cause us even to cry
out, I am weary of my Life. Yea, but are we as Willing to Die, as, Weary of
Life? Our Death will then soon set us where we cannot be Reached by the, Fist
of Wickedness: and where the, Perfect cannot be shotten at. It is said, in Rev.
14.13. Blesse^ are the Dead, which Die in the Lord, They Rest from their
Labors. But we may say, Blessed are the Dea^ in the Lord, inasmuch they Rest
from the Devils! Ou^ Dying will be but our Taking Wing: When, attended with a
Convoy of Winged Angels, we shall be conveyed into that Heaven, from whence the
Devil having been thrown, he shall never more come thither after us. What if
God should now say to us, as to Moses, Go up and Die! As long as we Go up, when
we Die, Let us receive the Message with a Joyful Soul; we shall soon be there,
where the Devil cannot Come Down upon us. If the, God of our Life, should now
send that Order to us, which he gave to Hezekiah, Set thy House in Order, for
thou shall Die, and not Live; We need not be cast into such deadly Agonies
thereupon, as Hezekiah was: We are but going to that House, the Golden Doors
whereof, cannot be Entered by the Devil that here did use to Persecute us.
Methinks, I see the Departed Spirit of a Believer, Triumphantly carried through
the Devils Territories, in such a Stately and Fiery, Chariot, as the
Spiritualizing Body of Elias had; methinks, I see the Devil, with whole Flocks
of Harpies, grinning at this Child of God, but unable to fasten any of their
Griping Talons upon him: And then, upon the utmost Edge of our Atmosphaere,
methinks I over-hear the Holy Soul, with a most Heavenly Gallantry deriding the
Defeated Fiend, and saying, Ah! Satan! Return to thy Dungeons again; I am going
where thou can not come for ever! O it is a Brave Thing so to Die! And
especially so to Die, in Our Time. For, though when we call to mind, That the
Devils Time is now but short, it may almost make us wish to Live unto the End
of it; and to say with the Psalmist, Because the Lord will shortly appear in
His Glory, to Build up Zion. O my God, Take me not away in the midst of my
Days! Yet when we bear in mind, That the Devils Wrath is now most Great, it
would make one willing to be, Out of the Way. Inasmuch as now is the Time for
the doing of those things in the prospect whereof Balaam long ago cried out,
Who shall ^ive when such Things are done! We should not be inordinately ^oth to
Die at such a Time. In a word, The Times are so Bad, that we may well count it,
as Good a Time to Die in, as ever we saw.

Corollary. V.
Good News for the Israel of God, and particularly for His New-English Israel!
If the Devils Time were above a Thousand Years ago, pronounced, Short, What may
we suppose it now in Our Time? Surely We are not a Thousand Years distant from
those Happy Thousand Years of rest and peace, and [which is better] Holiness,
reserved for the people of God in the latter days; and if we are not a Thousand
Years yet short of that Golden Age, there is cause to think, that we are not an
Hundred. That the blessed Thousand Years are not yet begun, is abundantly clear
from this, We do not see the Devil bound; No, the Devil was never more let
Loose than in our Days; and it is very much that any should imagine otherwise:
But the same thing that proves the Thousand Years of Prosperity for the Church
of God, UNDER THE WHOLE HEAVEN, to be not yet Begun, does also prove, that it
is not very Far Off; and that is the prodigious Wrath with which the Devil does
in our Days Prosecute, yea, Desolate the World. Let us cast our Eyes almost
where we will, and we shall see the Devils Domineering at such a rate as may
justly fill us with astonishment; it is Quaestionable whether Iniquity ever
were so Rampant, or whether Calamity were ever so Pungent, as in this
Lamentable Time; We may truly say, It Is the Hour and the Power of Darkness. But,
though the Wrath be so Great, the Time is but Short: when we are perplexed with
the Wrath of the Devil, the Word of our God at the same time unto us, is that,
in Romans 16.20. The God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet SHORTLY.
SHORTLY, did thou say, Dearest Lord! O! Gladsome word! Amen, Even so, Come,
Lord! Lord Jesus, Come Quickly! We shall never be rid of this Troublesome
Devil, till, Thou do come to Chain him up!

But because the people of God, would willingly be told Whereabouts we are with
reference to the Wrath and the Time, of the Devil, you shall give me leave
humbly to set before you a few, Conjectures.

The first Conjecture^
The Devils Eldest Son seems to be toward the End of his last Half-time; and
if it be so, the Devils Whole-time, cannot but be very near it is End. It is a
very scandalous thing that any Protestant, should be at a loss where to find,
The Antichrist. But, we have sufficient Assurance, that the Duration of
Antichrist, is to be but for a Time, and for Times, and for Half a time; that
is for Twelve-hundred and Sixty Years. And indeed, those Twelve Hundred and
Sixty years, were the very Spott of Time left for the Devil, and meant when
it is here said, He has but a short time. Now, I should have an Easy Time of it,
if I were never put upon an Harder Task* than to produce what might render it
extremely probable, That Antichrist entered his last Half-time, or the Last
Hundred and Fourscore years of his Reign, at or soon after the Celebrated
Reformation which began at the year 1517 in the former Century. Indeed, it is
very agreeable to see how Antichrist then Lost Half of his Empire; and how that
Half which then became Reformed, have been upon many accounts little more than
Half-Reformed. But by this Computaion, we must needs be within a very few
years of such a Mortification to befall the Sea of Rome, as that Antichrist who
has lately been planting (what proves no more lasting than) a Tabernacle in
the Glorious Holy Mountain between the Seas, must quickly, Come to his End and
none shall help him. So then, within a very little while, we shall see the
Devil stripped of the Grand, yea, the Last, Vehicle, wherein he will be capable
to abuse our World. The Fires, with which, That Beast, is to be consumed, will
so singe the Wings of the Devil too, that he shall no more set the Affairs of
this world on Fire. Yea, they shall both go into the same Fire, to be tormented
for ever and ever.

The Second Conjecture.
That which is, perhaps, the greatest Effect of the Devils Wrath, seems to be
in a manner at an end: and this would make one hope that the Devils Time cannot
be far from its end. It is in PERSECUTION, that the wrath of the Devil uses to
break forth, with its greatest Fury. N^w there want not Probabilities, that the
Last Persecution intended for the Church of God, before the Advent of Our Lord,
has been upon it. When we see the, Second Woe Passing away, we have a fair
signal given unto us, That the Last Slaughter of our Lords Witnesses is over:
and then what QUICKLY follows? The Next thing is, The Kingdoms of this World,
are become the Kingdoms of Our Lord, and of His Christ: and then Down goes the
Kingdom of the Devil, so that he cannot any more come down upon us. Now, the
Irrecoverable and Irretrievable Humiliations that have Lately befallen the
Turkish Power, are but so many Declarations of the, Second Woe Passing away. And
the dealings of God with the European parts of the world, at this day, do
further strengthen this our Expectation. We do see, At this Hour a great
Earthquake all Europe over: and we shall see, that this Great Earthquake, and
these great Commotions, will but Contribute unto the Advancement of Our Lords
Hitherto-Depressed Interests. It Is also to be Remarked that, A Disposition to
Recognize the Empire of God over the Conscience of man, does now prevail more
in the world than formerly; and God from on High more touches the Hearts of
Princes and Rulers with an Averseness to Persecution. It Is Particularly the
unspeakable Happiness of the English Nation, to be under the Influences of that
Excellent Queen, who could say, Inasmuch as a man cannot make himself Believe
what he will, why should we Persecute men for not Believing as we do! I wish I
could see all good men of one mind; but in the mean time I pray, let them
however Love one another. Words Worthy to be written in Letters of Gold! and by
us the more to be consider^d, because to one of Ours did that Royal Person
^^press Her Self so Excellently, so Obligingly. ^hen the late King James
published his Declaration ^or, Liberty of Conscience, a Worthy Divine in the
Church of England, then studying the Revelation, saw cause upon Revelational
Grounds,, to Declare himself in such words as these, Whatsoever others may
intend or design by this Liberty of Conscience, I cannot believe, that it will
ever be recalled in England, as long as the World stands. And you know how
Miraculously the Earthquake which then immediately came upon the Kingdom, ha^s
established that Liberty! But that which exceeds all the tendencies this way,
is, The Dispensation of God at this Day, toward the bl^ss^d Va^do^s. Those
Renowned Waldenses, which were a sort of Root unto all the Protestant Churches,
were never dissipated, by all the Persecutions of many Ages, till within these
few years, the French King and the Duke of Savoy Leagued for their Dissipation.
But just Three ^ears and half after the scattering of that Holy people, to the
Surprise of all the world, a Spirit of life from God is come into them; and
having with a Thousand Miracles Repossessed themselves of their ancient Seats,
their Hot Persecutor is become their great Protector. Whereupon the Reflection
of the Worthy person, that writes the story is, The Churches of Piemont, being
the Root of the Protestant Churches, They have been the first Established; the
Churches of other places, being but the Branches, shall be Established in due
time, God will deliver them speedily, He has already delivered the Mother, and
He will not l^ng leave the Daughter behind: He will Finish what he has
Gloriously begun!

The Third Conjecture.
There is a Little Room for Hope, that the Great Wrath of the Devil, will not
prove the Present Ruin of our poor New England in particular. I believe, there
never was a poor Plan^ation, more Pursued by the Wrath of the Devil, than (...)
poor New England; and that which makes our Condition very much the more
deplorable is, That the Wrath of the Great God Himself, at the same Time also
presses hard upon us. It was a Rowsing Alarm to the Devil, when a great Company
of English Protestants and Puritans, came to Erect Evangelical Churches, in a
corner of the World, where he had Reigned without any Control for many Ages;
and it is a vexing Eyesore, to the Devil, that our Lord Christ should be
known, and owned, and preached in this Howling Wilderness. Wherefore he has
left no Stone Unturned, that so he might undermine his Plantation, and force us
out of our Country.

First, The Indian Powawes, used all their Sorceries to molest the First
Planters here; but God said unto them, Touch them not! Then, Seducing Spirits,
came to Root in this Vineyard, but God so Rated them off, that they have not
prevailed much further than the Edges of our Land. After this, we have had a
continual Blast upon some of our principal Grain, Annually diminishing a vast
part of our Ordinary Food. Herewithal, Wasting Sicknesses, especially Burning,
and Mortal Agues, have Shot the Arrows of Death in at our Windows. Next, We
have had many Adversaries of our own Language, who have been perpetually
assaying to deprive us of those English Liberties, in the Encouragement whereof
these Territories have been Settled. As if this had not been enough; The
Tawnies among whom we came, have Watered our Soil, with the Blood, of many
Hundreds of our Inhabitants. Desolating Fires also have many times laid the
chief Treasure of the whole Province in Ashes. As for Losses by Sea, they have
been multiplied upon us: and particularly in the present French War, the whole
English Nation have observed, That no part of the Nation has proportionably had
so many Vessels taken, as our poor New England. Besides all which, now at last
the Devils are (if I may so speak) in Person come down upon us, with such a
Wrath, as is justly much, and will quickly be more, the Astonishment of the
World. Alas, I may Sigh over this Wilderness, as Moses did over his, in Psalm.
90.7, 9. We are consumed by thine Anger, and by thy Wrath we are Troubled: All
our Days are passed away in thy Wrath. And I may add this unto it, The Wrath
of the Devil too has been Troubling and Spending of us, all our Days.

But what will become of this poor New England after all? Shall we Sink,
Expire, Perish, before the Short Time of the Devil shall be finished? I must
confess, That when I consider the lamentable Unfruitfulness of men, among us,
under as powerful and perspicuous Dispensations of the Gospel, as are in the
World; and when I consider the Declining State of the Power of Godliness in our
Churches, with the most horrible Indisposition that perhaps ever was, to
Recover out of this Declension; I cannot but Fear lest it comes to this, and
lest an Asiatic Removal of Candlesticks come upon us. But upon some other
Accounts, I would fain Hope otherwise; and I will give you therefore the
opportunity to Try what Inferences may be drawn from these probable
Prognostications.

I say, First, That surely, America's Fa^e, mu^^ at the long run, include
New-Englands in it. Wha^ was the Design of our God, in bringing over (...) many
Europaeans hither of later years? Of wha^ Use or State will America be, when
the Kingdom of God shall come? If it must all be the Devils propriety, while
the Saved Nations of the other Ha^misphere, shall be, Walking in the Light of
the New Jerusalem, Our New England has then, it is likely* done all that i^ was
Erected for. But if God have a Purpose to make here a Seat for any of, Thos^
Glorious Things, which are spoken of Thee, O thou City of God; then even Thou,
O New England, (...) within a very little while of Better Days than over yet
have Dawned upon thee.

I say, Secondly, That though there be very Threatening Symptoms on America, yet
there are some Hopeful ones. I confess, when one thinks upon the crying
Barbarities with which the most of those Europaeans that have Peopled this New
world, became the Masters of it; it looks but Ominously. When one also thinks,
How much the way of Living in many parts of America, is utterly Inconsistent
with the very Essentials of Christianity; yea, how much Injury and Violence is
therein done to Humanity it self; it is enough to Damp the Hopes of the most
Sanguine Complexion. And the Frown of Heaven which has hitherto been upon
Attempts of better Gospellizing the Plantations, considered, will but increase
the Damp. Nevertheless, on the other side, what shall be said of all the
Promises, That our Lord Jesus Christ shall have the uttermost parts of the
Earth for his Possession? and of all the Prophecies, That All the ends of the
Earth shall Remember and Turn unto the Lord? Or does it look Agreeably, That
such a Rich Quarter of the World, equal in some Regards to all the Rest,
should never be out of the Devils Hands, from the first Inhabitation unto the
Last Dissolution of it? No sure; why may not the ^^st be the first? and the Sun
of Righteousness come to shine Brightest, in Climates which it Rose Latest upon!

I say, Thirdly, That as it fares with Old England, so it will be most likely
to fare with New England. For which cause, by the way, there may be more of the
Divine Favor in the present Circumstances of our Dependence on England, than
we are well aware of. This is very sure, if matters Go Ill with our Mother, her
poor American Daughter here, must feel it; nor could our former Happy
Settlement have hindered our Sympathy in that Unhappiness. But if matters Go
Well in the Three Kingdoms; as long as God shall Bless the English Nation, with
Rulers that shall Encourage Piety, Honesty, Industry, in their Subjects, and
that shall cast a Benign Aspect upon the Interests of our Glorious Gospel,
Abroad as well as at Home; so long, New England will at least keep its Head
above Water: and so much the more, for our Comfortable Settlement in such a
Form as we are now cast into. Unless, there should be any Singular, Destroying,
Topical Plagues, whereby an offended God should at last make us Rise; But,
Alas, O Lord, what other H^ve have Tho^ Provided for us!

I say, Fourthly, That the ^lder England will certainly and speedily be Visited
with the Ancient Loving kindness of God. When one sees, how strangely the Curse
of our Joshua, has fallen upon the Persons and Houses of them, that have
attempted the Rebuilding of the Old Romish Jericho, which has there been so far
de^molished, they cannot but say, That the Reformation there, shall not only be
maintained, but also pursued* proceeded, perfected; and that God will shortly
there have a New Jerusalem. Or, Let a Man in his Thoughts run over; but the
Series of amazing Providence toward the English Nation for the last Thirty
Years: Let him Reflect, How many Plots for the Ruin of the Nation, have been
strangely discovered? yea, How very unaccountably, those very Persons, yea, I
may also say, and those very Methods which were intended for the Tools of that
Ruin, have become the Instruments, or Occasions of Deliverances? A man cannot
but say upon these Reflections, as the Wife of Manoah once prudently expressed
her self, If the Lord were pleased to have Destroyed us, He would not have
showed us, all these things. Indeed, It is not unlikely, that the Enemies of
the English Nation, may yet provoke such a Shake unto it, as may perhaps exceed
any that has hitherto been undergone: the Lord prevent the Machinations of his
Adversaries! But, that Shake will usher in the most Glorious Times, that ever
arose upon the English Horizon* As for the French Cloud which hangs over
England, though it be like to Rain Showers of Blood upon a Nation, where the
Blood of the Blessed Jesus, has been too much treated, as an Unholy Thing; yet
I believe, God will shortly scatter it: and my Belief is grounded upon a
Bottom, that will bear it. If that overgrown French Leviathan, should
accomplish any thing like a Conquest of England, what could there be to hinder
him from the Universal Empire of the West? But the Visions of the Western
World, in the Views both of Daniel and of John, do assure us, that whatever
Monarch, shall while the Papacy continues, go to smallow up the Ten Kings which
received Their Power upon the Fall of the Western Empire, he must miscarry in
the Attempt. The French Phaetons Epitaph seems written in that, Sure Word of
Prophecy!

[Since the making of this Conjecture, there are Arrived unto us, the News of a
Victory obtained by the English over the French, which further confirms our
Conjecture; and causes us to sing, Pharaohs Chariots, and his Host, has the
Lord cast down into the Sea; Thy Right Hand has dashed in pieces the Enemy!

Now, In the Salvation of England, the Plantations cannot but Rejoice, and
New England also will be Glad.

But so much for our Corollaries, I hasten to the main Thing designed for your
Entertainment. And that is,

An Hortatory and Necessary ADDRESS. To a Country now Extraordinarily Alarmed
by the Wrath of the Devil. It Is this,
LEt us now make a Good and a Right use, o^ the Prodigious Descent, which the
Devil, i^ Great Wrath, is at this day making upon our Land* Upon the Death of a
Great Man once, an O^rator called the Town together, crying out, Co^^currite
Cives, Dilapsa sunt vestra Maenia! that is Come together, Neighbors, your
Town-Walls, are fal^len down! But such is the Descent of the De^vil at this day
upon ourselves, that I may truly tell you, The Walls of the whole World are
broken down! The usual Walls of Defense about mankind have such a Gap made in
them, that the very De^vils are broke in upon us, to Seduce the Souls, Torment
the Bodies, Sully the Credits, and consume the Estates of our Neighbors, with
Impressions both as Real and as Furious, as if the Invisible World were
be^coming Incarnate, on purpose for the vexing of us* And what use ought now to
be made of so Tremendous a dispensation? We are engaged in a Fast this day; but
(...) try to fetch, Meat ou^ of the Eater, and make the Lion to afford some
Hon^ for our Souls.

That the Devil, is Come down unto us with great Wrath, we find, we feel, we
now deplo^e. In many ways, for many years, hat the Devil been assaying to
Extirpate the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus here. New England may complain of the
Devil, as in Psalm. 129.1, 2. Many a time have they Afflicted me, from my Youth,
may, New England now say; many a time have they Afflicted me from my Youth; yet
they have not prevailed against me. But now there is a more than Ordinary
Affliction, with which the Devil is Galling of us: and such an one as is indeed
Unparallellable. The Things Confessed by Witches and the Things Endured by
Others, ^^id together, amount unto this account of our Affliction. The Devil,
Exhibiting himself ordinarily as a small Black man, has decoyed a fearful Knot
of Proud, Froward, Ignorant, Envious, and Malicious Creatures, to List
themselves in his Horrid Service, by Entering their Names in a Book by him
Tendered unto them. These Witches, whereof above a Score have now Confessed, and
shown their Deeds, and some are now Tormented by the Devils, for Confessing,
have met in Hellish Randezvouzes, wherein the Confessors do say, they have had
their Diabolical Sacraments, imitating the Baptism and the Supper of our Lord.
In these Hellish Meetings, these Monsters have associated themselves to do no
less a Thing than, To Destroy the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, in these
parts of the World; and in order hereunto, First, they each of them have their
Specter, or Devils, Commissioned by them, and Representing of them, to be the
Engines of their Malice. By these wicked Specter, they Sieze poor people about
the Country, with Various and bloody Torments; and of those Evidently
Preternatural Torments there are some have Died. They have bewitched some, even
so far as to make them Self-Destroyers: and others are in many Towns here and
there Languishing under their Evil Hands. The People thus Afflicted, are
miserably Scratched and Bitten, so that the Marks are most Visible to all the
World, but the causes utterly Invisible; and the same Invisible (...), do most
Visibly stick Pins into the Bodies o^ the Afflicted, and Scald them, and
hideously Di^^ort, and Disjoint all their members, besides a thousand other
sorts of Plagues beyond these of any Natural Diseases which they give unto
them. Yea, they sometimes drag the poor People out of their Chambers, and Carry
them over Trees and H^lls, for diverse Miles together. A large part of the
Persons tortured by these Diabolical Specter, are horribly Tempted by them,
sometimes with fair Promises, and sometimes with hard Threatenings, but always
with felt Miseries, to sign the Devils Laws, in a Spectral Book laid before
them; which two or three of these poor Sufferers, being by their Tiresome
Sufferings overcome to do, they have immediately been released from all their
Miseries, and they appeared in Spectre then to Torture those that were before
their Fellow Sufferers. The Witches which by their Covenant with the Devil, are
become Owners of Specter, are oftentimes by their own Specter Required and
Compelled to give their Consent, for the Molestation of some, which they had no
mind otherwise to fall upon; and Cruel Depredations are then made upon the
Vicinage. In the Prosecution of these Witchcrafts, among a thousand other
unaccountable Things, the Specter have an odd Faculty of Clothing the most
Substantial and Corporeal Instruments of Torture, with Invisibility, while the
Wounds thereby given have been the most palpable Things in the World; so that
the Sufferers assaulted with Instruments of Iron wholly unseen to the
Standers-by, though to their cost seen by themselves, have upon snatching,
wrested the Instruments out of the Specter Hands, and every one has then
immediately not only beheld, but handled, an Iron Instrument taken by a Devil
from a Neighbor. These wicked Specter have proceeded so far, as to Steal
several Quantities of Money from diverse people, part of which Money has before
sufficient Spectators been dropped out of the Air into the Hands of the
Sufferers, while the Specter have been urging them to Subscribe their Covenant
with Death. In such extravagant ways, have these Wretches propounded, the
Dragooning of as many as they can, into their own Combination, and the
Destroying of others, with Lingering, Spreading, Deadly Diseases; till our
Country should at last become too hot for us. Among the Ghastly Instances of
the Success which those Bloody Witches have had, we have seen even some of
their own Children, so Dedicated unto the Devil, that in their Infancy, it is
found, the Imps have Sucked them, and Rendered them Venomous to a Prodigy. We
have also seen Devils First Batteries, upon the Town, where the First Church of
our Lord in this Colony was Gathered, producing those Distractions, which have
almost Ruined the Town. We have seen likewise the Plague reaching afterward
into other Towns far and near, where the Houses of Good Men have the Devils
filling of them with terrible Vexations!

This is the Descent which, as i^ seems, the Devil has now made upon us. But
that which makes this Descent the more formidable is; The Multitude and Quality
or Persons Accused of an Interest in this Witchcraft, by the Efficacy of the
Specter which take their Name and Shape upon them; causing very many Good and
Wise, men to fear, That many Innocent, yea, and some Virtuous Persons, are by
the Devils in this matter Imposed upon; That the Devils have obtained the
power, to take on them the Likeness of Harmless People, and in that Likeness to
Afflict other People, and be so abused by Praestigious Demons, that upon their
Look or Touch, the Afflicted shall be oddly Affected. Arguments from the
Providence of God, on the one side, and from our Charity toward Man, on the
other side, have made This now to become a most Agitated Controversy among us.
There is an Agony produced in the minds of men, Lest the Devil should sham us
with Devices, of perhaps a finer Thread, than was ever yet practiced upon the
World. The whole Business is become hereupon so Snarled, and the Determination
of the Question one way or another, so Dismal, that our Honorable Judges, have
a Room for Jehoshaphats Exclamation, We know not what to do! They have used, as
Judges have heretofore done, the Spectral Evidences, to introduce their further
Enquiries into the Lives of the Persons Accused; and they have thereupon, by
the wonderful Providence of God, been so strengthened with Other Evidences,
that some of the Witch Gang have been f^irly Executed. But what shall be done,
as to those against whom the Evidence is chiefly founded in the Dark World?
Here they do solemnly demand our Addresses to the, Father of Lights, on their
Behalf. But in the mean time, the Devil improves the Darkness of this Affair,
to push us into a Blind Man's Buffet, and we are even ready to be Sinfully, yea,
Hotly, and Madly, Mauling one another, in the Dark.

The Consequence of these things, every Considerate man trembles at; and the
more, because the frequent Cheats of Passion, and Rumor, do precipitate so
many, that I wish I could say, The most were Considerate.

But that which carries on the Formidableness of our Trialls, unto that which
may be called, A wrath unto the uttermost, is this: It is not without the wrath
of the Almighty God Himself, that the Devil is permitted thus to come down upon
us in wrath. It was said, in Isa. 9.19. Through the wrath of the Lord of Hosts,
the Land is Darkened. Our Land is Darkened indeed; since the Powers of Darkness
are turned in upon us,: it is a Dark Time, yea, a Black Night indeed, now the
Ty-Dogs of the Pit, are abroad among us: but, It is through the wrath of the Lord
of Hosts! Inasmuch as the Firebrarnds of Hell it self are used for the
Scorching of us, with cause Enough may we cry out, What means the Heat of this
Anger? Blessed Lord! Are all the other Instruments of thy Vengeance, too Good
for the chastisement of such transgressors as we are? Must the very Devils be
sent out of Their own place, to be our Troublers? Must we be lashed with
Scorpions, fetched from the Place of Torment? Must this Wilderness be made a
Receptacle for the Dragons of the Wilderness? If a Lapland should nourish in it
vast numbers, the Successors of the old Biarmi, who can with looks or words
bewitch other people, or Sell Winds to Mariners, and have their Familiar
Spirits which they bequeath to their Children when they die, and by their
Enchan^ed Kettle-Drums can learn things done a Thousand Leagues off; If a
Swedeland should afford a Village, where some scores of Haggs, may not only
have their Meetings with Familiar Spirits, but also by their Enchantments drag
many scores of poor Children out of their Bed-Chambers, to be spoiled at those
meetings; This, were not altogether a matter of so much wonder! But that
New England should this way be harassed! They are not Chaldeans, that Bitter,
and Hasty Nation, but they are, Bitter and Burning Devils; They are not Swarthy
Indians, but they are Sooty Devils; that are let loose upon us* Ah, Poor
New England! Must the plague of Old Egypt come upon thee? Whereof we read in
Psalm* 78.49. He cast upon them, the fierceness of his Anger, Wrath, and
Indignation, and Trouble, by sending Evil Angels among them. What? O what must
next be looked for. Must that which is there next mentioned, be next
encountered? He spared not their soul from death, but gave their life over to
the Pestilence. For my part, when I consider what Melancthon says, in one of
his Epistles, That these Diabolical Spectacles are often Prodigies; and when I
consider, how often people have been by Specter called upon, just before their
Deaths; I am verily afraid, Lest some wasting Mortality, be among the things,
which this plague is the Forerunner of. I pray God, prevent it!

But now, What shall we do?

I. Let the Devils coming down in great wrath upon us, cause us to come down in
great grief before the Lord. We may truly and sadly say, We are brought very
low! Low, indeed when the Serpents of the dust, are crawling and coyling about
us, and Insulting over us. May we not say, We are in the very belly of Hell.
when Hell it self is feeding upon us? But how Low is that! O let us then most
Penitently lay ourselves very Low, before the God of Heaven, who has thus
Abased us. When a Truculent Nero, a Devil of a man, was turned in upon the
World, it was said in, 1. P^t. 5.6, Humble yourselves under the mighty hand of
God. How much more now ought we to Humble ourselves, under that Mighty Hand of
that God who indeed has the Devil in a Chain, but has horribly lengthened out
the Chain! When the Old People of God, heard any Blasphemie^ tearing of his
Ever-Blessed Name to pieces, they were to Rend their Clothes at what they
heard. I am sure, that we have cause to Rend our Hearts this Day, when we see
what an High Treason has been committed against the most High God, by the
Witchcrafts in our Neighborhood. We may say; and shall we not be Humbled when
we say it? We have seen an horrible thing done in our Land! O it is a most
humbling thing, to think, that ever there should be such an abomination among
us, as for a Crew of Humane Race, to renounce their Maker, and to unite with
the Devil, for the Troubling of Mankind, and for people to be, (as is by some
confessed) Baptized by a Fiend using this form upon them, Thou art mine, and I
have a full power over thee! afterward communicating in an Hellish Bread and
Wine, by that Fiend Admnistred unto them. It was said in Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12.
There shall not be found among you an Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a
Consulter with Familiar Spirits, or a Wizzard or a Necromancer; For all that do
these things are an Abomination to the Lord, and because of these Abominations,
the Lord thy God does drive them out before thee. That New England now should
have these Abominations in it, yea, that some of no m^n Profession, should be
found guilty of them: Alas* what Humiliations are we all ^^reby obliged unto? O
It Is a Defiled Land, wherein we Live; Let us be Humbled for these Defiling
Abominations, Lest we be driven out of our Land* It Is a very Humbling Thing to
think, what Reproaches will be cast upon us, for this Matter, among, The
Daughters of the Philistines. Indeed, enough might easily be said for the
Vindication of this Country from the Singularity of this Matter, by Ripping up,
what has been discovered in others. Great Britain alone, and this also in our
Days of Greatest Light, has had that in it, which may divert the Calumnies of
an Ill-natured World, from Centring here. They are the words of the Devout
Bishop Hall, Satan's Prevalency in this Age, is most clear in the marvell^us
Number of Witches abounding in all places. Now Hundreds are discovered in one
Shire; and, if Fame Deceive us not, in a Village of Fourteen Houses in the
North, are found so many of this Damned Brood. Yea, and those of both Sexes,
who have Professed much Knowledge, Holiness, and Devotion, are drawn into this
Damnable Practice. I suppose the Doctor in the first of those Passages, may
refer to what happened in the Year 1645. When so many Vassals of the Devil were
Detected, that there were Thirty Tried at one time, whereas about Fourteen were
Hanged, and an Hundred more Detained in the Prisons of Suffolk and Essex. Among
other things which many of these Acknowledged, one was, That they were to
undergo certain Punishments, if they did not such and such Hurts, as were
appointed them. And, among the Rest that were then Executed, there was an Old
Parson, called, Lowis, who Confessed, that he had a Couple of Imps, whereof One
was always putting him upon the doing of Mischief; Once particularly, that Imp
calling for his Consent so (...) do, went immediately and Sunk a Ship, the^
under Sail. I pray, Let not New England be^come of an Unsavory and a
Sulphurous Re^sentment in the Opinion of the World Abroad for the Doleful
Things which are now fallen out among us, while there are such Histories o^
other places abroad in the World. Nevertheless I am sure that we, the People of
New England have cause enough to Humble our selves under our most Humbling
Circumstances. We must (...) more, be, Haughty, because of the Lords Ho^^
Mountain among us; No, it becomes us rather (...) be, Humble, because we have
been such an Habit^^tion of Unholy Devils!

II. Since the Devil is come down in great wrat^ upon us, let not us in our
great wrath against one another provide a Lodging for him. It was a mo^^
wholesome caution, in Ephesians. 4.26.27. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath:
Neither give place t^ the Devil. The Devil is come down to see wha^ Quarter he
shall find among us: and, if his comin^ down, do now fill us with wrath against
one a^ other* and if between the cause of the Sufferers o^ one hand, and the
cause of the Suspected on the other* we carry things to such extremes of Passion
as a^ now gaining upon us, the Devil will Bless himself to find such a
convenient Lodging as we shall ther^ in afford unto him. And it may be that the
wra^^ which we have had against one another has ha^ more then a little
Influence upon the coming down of the Devil in that wrath which now amazes us.
Have not many of us been Devils one unto another for Slanderings, for
Backbitings, for Animosities? For this, among other causes, perhaps, God ha^s
permitted the Devils to be Worrying, as they now are, among us. But it is high
time to leave off all Devilism, when the Devil himself is falling upon us: and
it is no time for us to be Censu^ing and Reviling one another, with a Devilish
Wrath, when the Wrath of the Devil is annoying of us. The way for us to out-wit
the Devil, in the Wiles with which he now Vexes us, would be for us, to join as
one man in our cries to God, for the Directing, and Issuing of this Thorny
Business; but if we do not Lift up our Hands to Heaven, Without Wrath, we
cannot then do it without Doubt, of speeding in it. I am ashamed when I read
French Authors giving this Character of Englishmen [Ils se haissent Les uns les
autres, et sont en Division Continuelle.] They hate one one another, and are
always Quarrelling one with another. And I shall be much more ashamed, if it
become the Character of New-Englanders; which is indeed, what the Devil would
have. Satan would ^ake us Bruise one another, by breaking of the Peace among
us; but O let us disappoint him. We read of a thing that sometimes happens to
the Devil, when he is foaming with his Wrath, in Mat. 12.4^. The unclean Spirit
seeks rest, and finds none. But we give Rest unto the Devil, by Wrath one
against another. If we would lay aside all fierceness, and keeness, in the
disputes which the Devil has raise^ among us; and if we would use to one
another none but the, Soft Answers, which Turn away Wrat^ I should hope that we
might light upon such Coun^sels, as would quickly Extricate us out of our
Laby^rinths. But the Old Incendiary of the world, is come from Hell, with
Sparks of Hellfire Flashing on every side of him; and we make ourselves Tynder
to the Sparks. When the Emperor Henry III. kept the Feast of Pentecost, at the
City Mentz, there arose a Dissension among some of the People there, which came
from words to Blows, and at last it passed o^ to the Shedding of Blood. After
the Tumult was over* when they came to that clause in their Devotions* Thou
have made this day Glorious; the Devil to the unexpressible Terror of that
vast Assembly* made the Temple Ring with that Outcry But (...) have made this
Day Quarrelsome* We are truly come into a day, which by being well managed
might be very Glorious, for the exterminating o^ those, Accursed Things, which
have hitherto bee^ the Clogs of our Prosperity; but if we make this day
Quarrelsome, through any Raging Confidences, Alas, O Lord, my Flesh Trembles for
fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. Erasmus, among other
Historians, tells us, that at a Town in Germany, a Witch or Devil, appeared on
the Top of a Chimney, Threatening to set the Town on Fire* and at length,
Scattering a Pot of Ashes abroad, the Town was presently and Horribly Burned
unto the Ground. Methinks, I see the Specter, from the Tops of the Chimneys to
the North, ward, threatening to Scatter Fire, about the Country; but let us
Quench that Fire by the most amicable Correspondencies: Lest, as the Specter,
have, they say, already most Literally Burned some of our Dwellings, there do
come forth a further Fire from the Brambles of Hell, which may more terribly
Devour us. Let us not be like a Troubled House, although we are so much haunted by
the Devils. Let our Long Suffering be a Well-placed piece of Armor, about us,
against the Fiery Darts of the wicked ones. History informs us, That so long
ago, as the year, 858. a certain Pestilent and Ma: lignant sort of a Demon,
molested Caumont in Germany with all sorts of methods to stir up Strife among
the Citizens. He uttered Prophecies, he detected Villainies, he branded people
with all kind of Infamies. He incensed the Neighborhood against one Man
particularly, as the cause of all the mischiefs* who yet proved himself
innocent. He threw stones at the Inhabitants, and at length burned their
Habitations, till the Commissiion of the Demon could go no further. I say, Let
us be well aware lest such Demons do, Come hither also!

III. Inasmuch as the Devil is come down in Great Wrath, we had need Labor,
with all the Care and Speed we can to Divert the Great Wrath of Heaven from
coming at the same Time upon us. The God of Heaven has with ^ong and loud
Admonitio^s, been calling us to, A Reformation of our Provoking Evils, as the
only way to avoid that Wrath of His, which does not only Threaten, but Consume
us. It Is because we have been Deaf to those Calls, that we are now by a
provoked God, laid open to the Wrath of the Devil himself. It is said in Prove.
16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, He makes even his Enemies to be at
peace with him. The Devil is our Grand Enemy: and though we would not be at peace
with him, yet we would be at peace from him; that is, we would have him unable
to Disquiet our Peace. But inasmuch as the Wrath which we Endure from this
Enemy, will allow us no Peace, we may be sure, Our Ways have not pleased the
Lord. It is because we have Broken the Hedge of Gods Precepts, that the Hedge
of Gods Provodence is not so Entire as it uses to be about us; but Serpents are
Biting of us. O let us then set our selves to make our Peace with our God, whom
we have Displeased by our Iniquities: and let us not imagine that we can
Encounter the Wrath of the Devil, while there is the Wrath of God Almighty to
set that Mastiff upon us. REFORMATION! REFORMATION! has been the Repeated Cry,
of all the Judgments, that have hitherto been upon us: because we have been as
Deaf Adders thereunto, the Adders of the Infernal Pit are now hissing about us*
At length, as it was of old said in Luc 16.30. If on^ went unto them, from the
Dead, they will Repent; Eve^ so, There are some come unto us from the Damned*
The Great God has Loosed the Bars of the Pit, so that many Damned Spirits are
come in among us, to make us Repent of our Misdemeanors. The means which the
Lord had formerly Employed for our Awakening, were such, that he might well
have said, What could I have done more? and yet after all, He has done more, in
some regards, than was ever done for the Awakening of any People in the World.
The Things now done to Awaken our Enquiries after our Provoking Evils, and our
Endeavors to Reform those Evils; are most EXTRAORDINARY Things; For which
cause I would freely speak it, If we now do not some EXTRAORDINARY Things in
Returning to God, we are the most Incurable, and I wish it be not quickly said,
the most Miserable, People under the Sun. Believe me, it is a Time for all
people to do something EXTRAORDINARY In Searching and in Trying ^f their Ways,
and in Turning to the Lord. It is at an EXTRAORDINARY Rate of Circumspection
and Spiritual Mindedness, that we should all now maintain a Walk with God. At
such a Time as This, ought Magistrates to Do something EXTRAORDINARY in
promoting of what is Laudable, and in Restraining and Chastising of Evil Doers.
At ^^ch a Time as This, ought Ministers to Do something EXTRAORDINARY in
pulling the Souls of men out of the Snares of the Devil, not only (...) public
Preaching, but by personal Visits and Counsels, from House to House. At such a
Time as this, ought Churches to Do something EXTRAORDINARY, in Renewing of
their Covenants, and in Remembering, and Reviving the Obligations of what they
have Renewed. Some Admirable Designs about the Reformation of Manners, have
lately been on foot in the English Nation, in pursuance of the most Excellent
Admonitions, which have been given for it, by the Letters of Their Majesty's.
Besides the vigorous Agreements of the Justices here and there in the Kingdom;
assisted by Godly Gentlemen and Informers, to Execute the Laws upon Profane
Offenders: there has been started, A PROPOSAL, for the well-affected people in
every Parish, to enter into orderly Societies, whereof every Member shall bind
himself, not only to Avoid Profaneness in himself, but also according unto
their Place, to do their utmost in first Reproving, and, if it must be so* then
Exposing, and so Punishing, as the Law directs, for, others that shall be
guilty. It has been observed, That the English Nation has had some of its
greatest Successes, upon some special, and signal Actions this way; and a
Discouragement given unto Legal Proceedings of this Kind, must needs be very
exercising to the, Wise that observe these Things. But, O why should not
New England be the most forward part of the English Nation in such
Reformations? Methinks, I hear the Lord from Heaven saying over us, O that my
People had hearkened unto me; Then I should soon have subdued the Devils, as
well as their other Enemies! There have been some some feeble Essays toward
Reformation, of late in our Churches; but, I pray, what comes of them? Do we
stay till the Storm of his Wrath be over? Nay, let us be Doing what we can as
fast as we can, to divert the Storm. The Devil^, having broke in upon our
World, there is great Asking, Who is it that have brought them in? and many do
by Spectral Exhibitions come to be cried out upon. I hope in Gods Time, it will
be found, that among those that are thus Cried out upon, ^here are persons yet
Clear from the Great Transgression; but indeed, all the Unreformed among us,
nay justly be Cried out upon, as having too much of an Hand in letting of the
Devils in to our Borders; it is our Worldliness, our Formality, our Sensuality,
and our Iniquity, that has helped this Letting of the Devils in. O Let us then
at last, Consider our Ways. It Is a strange passage recorded by Mr. Clark, in
the Life of his Father, That the People of his Parish refusing to be Reclaimed
from their Sabbath Breaking, by all the zealous Testimonies which that Good man
bore against it; at last, on a Night after the people had Retired Home from a
Revelling Profanation of the L^^ds Day, there was heard a Great Noise, with
(...) of Chains, up and down the Town, and (...) horrid Scent of Brimstone
filled the Neighborhood. Upon which the Guilty Consciences of the Wretches,
told them, the Devil was come to fetch them away: and it so terrified them,
that an Eminent Reformation followed the Sermons which that man of God Preached
thereupon. Behold, Sinners, Behold, and Wonder, lest you Perish; the very
Devils are Walking about our Streets, with Lengthened Chains, making a dreadful
Noise in our Ears, and Brimstone, even without a Metaphor, is making an Hellish
and Horrid Stench in our Nostrils. I Pray, Leave off all those things, where^of
your Guilty Consciences may now accuse you, le^^ these Devils do yet more
direfully fall upon (...) Reformation is at this Time, our only Preservatio^*

IV. When the Devil is come down in Great Wrath, Let every Great Vice which may
have a more Particular Tendency to make us a Prey unto that Wrath, come into a
due Discredit with us. It is the General Concession of all men, who are not
become too Unreasonable for Common Conversation, That the Invitation of
VVitchcraft^ is the Thing that has now Introduced the Devil into the midst of
us. I say then, Let not only all VVitchcrafts be duly abominated with us, but
also Let us be duly Watchful against all the Steps Leading thereunto. There
are Lesser Sorceries which, they say, are too frequent in our Land. (...) it
was said in 2 King. 17.9. The Children of (...) did Secr^^ly* those things that
were not Right a^^inst the Lord their God. So it is to be feared, The Children of
New England have Secretly done many things that have been pleasing to the
Devil* They say, That in some Towns, it has been an usual Thing for People to
Cure Hurts with Spells, or to use Detestable Conjurations, with Sieves, and
Keys, and Pease, and Nails, and Horse-Shooes, an^ I know not what other
Implements, to Lear^ the Things, for which they have a Forbidden, and an
Impious Curiosity. It Is in the Devils Name, that such Things are done; and in
Gods Name I do this Day Charge them, as vile Impieties. By these Courses
'(...), that people play upon The Hole of the Asp; till that cruelly venomous
Asp has pulled many of them, into the Deep Hole, of Witchcraft it self. It has
been ^cknowledged by some who have sunk the deepest into this Horrible Pit,
that they began, at these Little Witchcrafts; on which it is pity but the Laws
of the English Nation, whereby the Incorrigible Repetition of those Tricks, is
made Felony, were severally Executed. From the like Sinful Curiosity it is,
that the Prognostications of Judicial Astrology, are so Injudiciously Regarded
by multitudes among us; and although the Juggling Astrologers do scarce ever hit
Right, except it be in such Weighty Judgments, forsooth, as that many Old Men
will Die such a year, and that there will be many Losses felt by some that
Venture to Sea, and that there will be much Lying and Cheating in the World;
yet their Foolish Admirers, will not be persuaded, but (...) the Innocent Stars
have been concerned in (...) Events. It is a Disgrace to the English Nation
that the Phamphlets of such Idle, Futil, Trifli^^ Star-gazers are so much
Considered; and the Countenance hereby given to a Study, wherein at Last, all
is done by Impulse, if any thing be done to any purpose at all, is not a little
perilous to the Souls of men. It is, ( a Science, I dare not call it, but) a
Juggle, whereof the Learned Hall, well says, It is presumptuous and
unwarrantable, and cried ever down by Councils and Fathers, as un^awful, as
that which Lies in the midway between Magic, and Imposture, and partakes not
a little of both. Men Consult the Aspects of Planets, whose Northern or
Southern Motions receive Denominations from a Caelestial Dragon, till the
Infernal Dragon at length insinuate into them, with a Poison of Witchcraft that
cannot be cured* Has there not also been a world of Discontent in our Borders?
It Is no wonder, that the Fiery Serpents are so Stinging of us; We have been a
most Murmuring Generation. It is not Irrational, to ascribe the late Stupendous
Growth of Witches among us, partly to the Bitter Discontents, which Affliction
and Poverty has filled us with: it is inconceivable, what Advantage the Devil
gains over men, by Discontent. Moreover, The Sin of Unbelief may be reckoned as
perhaps the chief Crime of our Land. We are told, God Swears in Wrath, against
them that believe not; and ^^at follows then but this, That the Devil comes
(...) them in wrath? Never were the Offers of the Gospel, more freely Tendered,
or more basely Despised, among any people under the whole Cope of Heaven, then
in This New England. Seems it at all mavelous unto us, that the Devil should
get such Footing in our Country? Why, it is because the Savior has been
slighted here, perhaps more than any where. The Blessed Lord Jesus Christ has
been profering to us, Grace, and Glory, and every good thing, and been alluring
of us to Accept of Him, with such Terms as these; Undone Sinner, I (...) All;
Art thou willing that I should be thy All? ^ut, as a proof of that Contempt
which this Unbelief has cast upon these proffers, I would seriously ask of the
so many Hundreds above a Thousand People within these Walls; Which of you all,
O how few of you, can indeed say, Christ is mine, and I am his, and He is the
Beloved of my Soul? I would only say thus much: When the precious and glorious
Jesus, is Entreating of us to Receive Him* in all His Offices, with all His
Benefits; the Devil minds what Respect we pay unto that Heavenly Lord; if we
Refuse Him that speaks from Heaven, then he that, Comes from Hell, does with a
sort of claim set in, and cry out, Lord, since this Wretch is not willing that
thou should have him, I pray, let me have him. And thus, by the just
vengeance of Heaven, the Devil becomes a Master, a Prince, a God, unto the
miserable Unbelievers: but O what are many of them then hurried unto! All of
these Evil Things, do I now set before you, as Branded with the Mark of the
Devil upon them.

V. With Great Regard, with Great Pity, should we Lay to Heart the Condition
of those, who are cast into Affliction, by the Great Wrath of the Devil. There
is a Number of our Good Neighbors, and some of them very particularly noted ^o
Goodness and Virtue, of whom we may say, Lord, They are vexed with Devils.
Their Tortures being primarily Inflicted on their Spirits, may indeed cause the
Impressions thereof upon their Bodies to be the less Durable, though rather the
more Sensible: but they Endure Horrible Things, and many have been actually
Murdered. Hard Censures now bestowed upon these poor Sufferers, cannot but be
very Displeasing unto our Lord, who, as He said, about some that had been
Butchered by a Pilate, in Luc. 13.2, 3. Think ye that these were Sinners above
others, because they suffered such Things? I tell you No, But except ye Repent,
ye shall all likewise Perish: Even so, he now says, Think ye that they who now
suffer by the Devil, have been greater Sinners than their Neighbors. No, Do
you Repent of your own Sins, Lest the Devil come (...) fall foul of you, as he
has done to them. And if this be so, How Rash a thing would it be, if such of
the poor Sufferers, as carry it with a Becoming Piety, Seriousness, and
Humiliation under their present Suffering, should be unjustly Censured; or have
their very Calamity imputed unto them as a Crime? It is an easy thing* for us
to fall into, the Fault of, Adding Affliction to the Afflicted, and of, Talking
to the Grief of those that are already VVounded: Nor can it be Wisdom to slight
the Dangers of such a Fault. In the mean time, We have no Bowels in us, if we
do not Compassionate the Distressed County of Essex, now crying to all these
Colonies, Have pity on me, O ye my Friend^, Have pity on me, for the Hand of
the Lord has Touched me, and the Wrath of the Devil has been therewithal turned
upon me. But indeed, if an hearty pity be due to any, I am sure, the
Difficulties which attend our Honorable Judges, do demand no Inconsiderable
share in that Pity. What a Difficult, what an Arduous Task, have those Worthy
Personages now upon their Hands? To carry the Knife so exactly, that on the one
side, there may be no Innocent Blood Shed, by too unseeing a Zeal for the
Children of Israel* and that on the other side, there may be no Shelter given
to those Diabolical Works of Darkness, without the Removal whereof we never
shall have Peace; or to those Furies whereof several have killed more people
perhaps than would serve to make a Village: Hic Labor, Hoc Opus est! O what
need have we, to be concerned, that the Sins of our Israel, may not provoke the
God of Heaven to leave his David's, unto a wrong Step, in a matter of such
Consequence, as is now before them! Our Disingenuous, Uncharitable, Unchristian
Reproching of such Faithful Men, after all, The Prayers and Supplications, with
strong Crying and Tears, with which we are daily plying the Throne of Grace,
that they may be kept, from what They Fear, is none of the way for our
preventing of what We Fear. Nor all this while, ought our Pity to forget such
Accused ones, as call for indeed our most Compassionate Pity, till there be
fuller Evidences that they are less worthy of it. If Satan have any where
maliciously brought upon the Stage, those that have hitherto had a just and
good stock of Reputation* for their just and good Living, among (...); If the
Evil One have obtained a permission to Appear, in the Figure of such as we have
cause to think, have hitherto Abstained, even from the Appearance of Evil: It
is in Truth, such an Invasion upon Mankind, as may well Raise an Horror in us
all: But, O what Compassions are due to such as may come under such
Misrepresentations, of the Great Accuser! Who of us can say, what may be shown
in the Glasses of the Great Lying Spirit? Although the Usual Providence of God
[we praise Him!] keeps us from such a Mishap; yet where have we an Absolute
Promise, that we shall every one always be kept from it? As long as Charity is
bound, to Think no Evil, it will not Hurt us that are Private Persons, to
forbear the Judgment which belongs not unto us. Let it rather be our Wish: May
the Lord help them to Learn the Lessons, for which they are now put unto so
hard a School.

VI. With a Great Zeal, we should lay hold on the Covenant of God, that we may
Secure Us and Ours, from the Great Wrath, with which the Devil Rages. Let us
come into the Covenant of Grace, and then we shall not be hooked into a
Covenant with the Devil, nor be altogether unfurnished with armor, against the
Wretches that are in that Covenant. The way to come under the Saving Influences
of the New Covenant, is, to close with the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the All
sufficient Mediator of it: Let us therefore do that, by Resigning up ourselves
unto the Saving, Teaching, and Ruling, Hands of this Blessed Mediator. Then we
shall be, what we read in Jude, 1. Preserved in Christ Jesus: That is, as the
Destroying Angel, could not meddle with such as had been distinguished, by the
Blood of the Passover on their Houses, Thus the Blood of the Lord Jesus
Christ, Sprinkled on our Souls, will Preserve us from the Devil. The Birds of
prey (and indeed the Devils most literally in the shape of great Birds!) are
flying about: Would we find a Covert from these Vultures: Let us then Hear Our
Lord Jesus from Heaven Clocqing unto us, O that you would be gathered under my
Wings. Well; When this is done, Then let us own the Covenant, which we are now
come into, by joining ourselves to a Particular Church, walking in the Order of
the Gospel; at the doing whereof, according to that Covenant of God, We give up
Ourselves unto the Lord, and in Him unto One Another. While others have had
their Names Entered in the Devils Book; let our Names be found in the Church
Book, and let us be, Written among the Living in Jerusalem. By no means let,
Church-Work sink and fail in the midst of us; but let the Tragical Accidents
which now happen, exceedingly Quicken that Work. So many of the Rising
Generation, utterly forgetting the Errand of our Fathers to build Churches in
this Wilderness, and so many of Our Cottages being allowed to Live, where they
do no^, and perhaps cannot, wait upon God with the Churches of His People! it is
as likely as any one thing to procure the swarmings of Witch-crafts among (...)
But it becomes us, with a like Ardour, to bring (...) poor Children with us, as
we shall do, when we come ourselves, into the Covenant of God. It would break
an heart of Stone, to have seen, what I have lately seen; Even poor Children of
several Ages, even from seven to twenty more or less, Confess^^^ their
Familiarity with Devils; but at the same time* in Doleful bitter Lamentations,
that made a Little Pour traiture of Hell it self, Expostulating with (...)
execrable Parents, for Devoting them to the Devil in their Infancy, and so
Entailing of Devillism upon them! Now, as the Psalmist could say, My (...) has
Consumed me, because my Enemies have forgott^^ thy Words: Even so, let the
nefarious wickedness of those that have Explicitly dedicated their Children to
the Devil, even with Devilish Symbols, of such a Dedication, Provoke our Zeal
to have our Children, Sincerely, Signally, and openly Consecrated unto God;
with an Education afterward assuring and confirming that Consecration.

VII. Let our Prayer Go up with Great Faith, against the Devil, that comes down
in Great Wrath. Such is the Antipathy of the Devil to our Prayer, that he
cannot bear to stay long where much of it is: indeed it is Diaboli Flagellum,
as well as, Miseriae Remedium; the Devil will soon be Scourg^d out of the Lords
Temple, by a Whip, made and used, with the, Effectua^ Fervent Prayer of
Righteous Men. When the De^vil by Afflicting of us, drives us to our Prayers,
he is, The Fool making a Whip for his own Back. Our Lord said of the Devil, in
Mat. 17.21. This Kind goes not out, but by Prayer and Fasting. But, Prayer and
Fasting will soon make the Devil be gone. Here are Charms indeed! Sacred and
Blessed Charms, which the Devil cannot stand before. A Promise of God, being
well ^anaged in the Hands of them, that are much upon their Knees, will so,
Resist the Devil, that ^e will Flee from us. At every other Weapon, (...)
Devils will be too hard for us; the Spiritual Wickednesses in High Places, have
manifestly the Upper Hand of us; that Old Serpent will be too Old for us, too
cunning, too subtle; they will soon (...)-wit us, if we think to Encounter them
with any Wit of our own. But when we come to Prayers, Incessant and Vehement
Prayers before the Lord, there we shall be too hard for them* When
well-directed Prayers, that great Artillery of Heaven, are brought into the
Field, There, methinks I see, There are these Workers of Iniquity fallen, all
of them! And who can tell, how much the most Obscure Christian among you all,
may do toward the Deliverance of our Land from the Molestations which the
Devil is now giving unto us. I have Read, That on a Day of Prayer kept by some
Good People for and with a Possessed Person, the Devil at last flew out of the
Window, and referring to a Devout, plain, mean Woman then in the Room, he cried
out, O the Woman behind the Door! It Is that Woman that forces me away! Thus,
the Devil that now Troubles us, may be forced within a while to Forsake us: and
it shall be said, He was driven away by the prayers of some Obscu^^ and Retired
Souls, which the world has taken but little notice of! The Great God, is about
a Great Work at this Day among us; now there is extreme Hazard lest the Devil
who by Compulsion must submit unto that Great Work, may also by Permission com^
to Confound that Work: both in the Detections o^ some, and in the Confessions
of others, whose Un^godly Deeds may be brought forth, by a Great Work of God,
there is Hazard lest the Devil intertwi^^ some of his Delusions. It Is PRAYER,
I say, it is PRAYER, that must carry us well through the Strange things that are
now upon us. Only that Prayer, must then be, The Prayer of Faith: O where i^
our Faith in Him, Who has Spoiled these Principalities and Powers, on His
Cross Triumphing over them!

VIII. Lastly, Shake off, every Soul, Shake off the Hard Yoke of the Devil, if
you would not perish* (...) the Great Wrath of the Devil. Where it is said, The
whole World lies in Wickedness, it is by some of the Ancients rendered, The whole
world lies in the Devil. The Devil is a Prince, yea, the Devil is a God unto
all the Unregenerate; and alas, there is, A whole world of them. Desolate
Sinners, Consider what an Horrid Lord it is that you are Enslaved unto; and Oh
shake off your Slavery to such a Lord. Instead of him, now make your Choice of
the Eternal God in Jesus Christ; Choose Him with a most unalterable Resolution;
and unto Him say, with Thomas, My Lord, and my God! Say with the Church, Lord,
other Lords have had the Dominion over us, but now thou alone shall be our Lord
for ever. Then instead of your perishing under the wrath of the Devils, God
will fetch you to a place among those that fill up the Room of the Devils, ^eft
by their Fall from the Ethereal Regions. It was a most awful Speech made by the
Devil, Possessing a young Woman, at a Village in Germany, By the Command of
God, I am come to Torment the Body of this young Woman, though I cannot hurt
her Soul; and it is that I may warn men, to take heed of Sinnin^ against God.
Indeed (said he) it is very sore against my will that I do it; but the command
of God forces me to declare what I do; Howeveer I know that at the Last Day, I
shall have more Souls than God Himself. So spoke that horrible Devil! But O
that none of our Souls may be found among the Prizes of the Devil, in the Day
of God! O that what the Devil has been forced to Declare, of his Kingdom among
us, may prejudice our Hearts against him for ever!

My Text says, The Devil is come down to Great Wrath, for he has but a short
Time. Yea, but if you do not by a Speedy and Thorough Conversion to God, Escape
the Wrath of the Devil, yon will yourselves Go down, where the Devil is to be,
and you will there be sweltring under the Devils Wrath, not for a Short Time,
but, World without End; not for a Short Time, but for, Infinite Millions of
Ages. The smoke of your Torment under that Wrath, will As^cend for ever and
ever! Indeed the Devils Time for his Wrath upon you in this World, can be but
short, but his Time for you to do his Work, or, which is all one, to delay your
turning to God, that is a Long Time. When the Devil was going to be
Dispossessed of a Man* he Roared out, Am I to be Tormented before my Time. You
will Torment the Devil, i^ you Re^scue your Souls out of his hands, by true
Repentance if once you begin to look that way, he will Cry out, O This is before
my Time, I must have more Time, yet in the service of such a guilty Soul. But,
I beseech you, let us join thus to Torment the Devil, in an Holy Revenge upon
him, for all the Injuries which he has done unto us; let us tell him, Satan,
Thy Time with me is but short, Nay, thy Time with me shall be no more; I am
unutterably sorry that it has been s^ much; Depart from me thou Evil-Doer, that
would have me to be an Evil-Doer Like thy self; I will now for ever keep the
Commandments of that God, in whom (...) Live, and Move, and have my Being! The
Devil ha^ played a fine Game for himself indeed, if by his Troubling of our
Land, the souls of many People shoul come to, Think upon their Ways, (...)
^urn they turn their Feet into the Testimonies of the Lord Now that the Devil
may be thus outshot in his own Bow, is the Desire of all that Love the
Salvation (...) God among us, as well as of him, who has thus Ad^dressed You.
Amen.

HAving thus discoursed on the Wonders of the Invisible World, I shall now,
with Gods Help, go on to relate some Remarkable and Memorable Instances of
Wonders which that World has given to ourselves. And although the chief
Entertainment which my Readers do Expect, and shall Receive, will be, a True
History of what has occurred, respecting the WITCHCRAFTS wherewith we are at
this day persecuted, yet I shall choose to Usher in the mention of those
Things, with

A Narrative OF AN APPARITION Which a Gentleman in Boston, had of his Brother,
just then Murdered in London.
IT was, on the Second of May in the Year 1687 that a most ingenious,
accomplished and well-disposed young Gentleman, Mr. Joseph Beacon, by Name,
about Five a clock in the Morning, as he lay, whether Sleeping or Waking he
could not say, (but judged the latter of them,) had a View of his Brother then
at London, although he was now himself at Our Boston, distanced from him a
Thousand Leagues. This his Brother appeared unto him, in the Morning, about
five a Clock at Boston, having on him a Benga^e Gown, which he usually wore*
with a Napkin Tied about his Head; His Counte^nance was very Pale, Ghastly,
Deadly, and he had a Bloody Wound On one Side of hi^ Forehead! Brother!
Answered the Apparition. Said Joseph, What Is the matter, Brother! How came you
here! The Apparition replied, Brother, I have been most Barbarously and
Injuriously Butchered, by ^ Debauched, Drunken Fellow, to whom I never di^ any
wrong in my life. Whereupon he gave a particular Description of the Murderer;
adding* Brother, This Fellow, changing his Name, is attempting to come cover
unto New England, in Foy or Wild; I would pray you, on the first Arrival of
^i^her of these, to get an Order from the Governor, to ^eiz the person, whom I
have now described; and then do you Indict him for the Murder of (...) your
Brother: I Will Stand by you, and prove the Indictment. And so he vanished. Mr.
Beacon was extremely astonished at what he had seen and heard; and the People
of the Family not only observed an extraordinary Alteration upon him, for the
Week following, but have also given me under their Hands a full Testimony, that
he then gave them an Account of this Apparition.

All this while, Mr. Beacon had no Advice of any thing amiss attending his
Brother then in England; but about the latter end of June following, he
understood by the common ways of communication, that the April before, his
Brother going in have by night to call a coach for a Lady, met a fellow then
in drink, with his Doxy in his hand. Some way or other the fellow thought
himself affrontted in the hasty passage of this Beacon, and immediately ran in
to the Fireside of a Neighboring Tavern, from whence he fetched out a
Fire-fork, wherewith he grievously wounded Beacon in the skull; even in that
very part, where the Apparition showed his wound. Of this Wound he Languished
until he Died, on the second of May, about five of the Clock in the morning at
London. The murderer it seems, was endeavoring an escap^* as the Apparition
affirmed, but the Friends of the Deceased Beacon siezed him: and prosecuting
him at Law, he found the help of such Friends, as brought him off without the
loss of his Life; since which, there has no more been heard of the Business.

This History I received of Mr Joseph Beacon himself; who, a little before his
own Pious and Hopeful Death, which followed not long after, gave me the Story
written and signed with his own Hand, and Attested with the Circumstances I
have already mentioned.

BUt I shall no longer detain my Reader, from His expected entertainment; in a
Brief Account of the Trials, which have passed upon some of the Malefactors,
Lately Executed at Salem, for the Witchcrafts, whereof they stood Convicted.
For my own part, I was not Present at any of Them; nor ever Had I any personal
prejudice at the persons thus brought upon the Stage; much less, at the
Surviving Relations of those persons, with and for whom I would be as Hearty a
mourner as any man Living in the World: The Lord Comfort them! But having
Received a Command, so to do, I can do no other than shortly Relate the Chief
Matters of fact which accurr'd in the Trials of some that where Executed; in an
Abridgment collected out of the ^ourt-Papers, on this occasion put into my
Hands. You are to take the Truth, just as it was; and the Truth will hurt no
good man. There might have been more of these, if my Book would not thereby
have been swollen too big; and if some other worthy hands (...) not perhaps
intend something further. in these Collections; for which cause I have only
singled out Four or Five which may serve to Illustrate the way of dealing,
wherein Witchcrafts use to be concerned; and I Report matters not as an
Advocate but as an Historian.

They were some of the Gracious Words, inserted in the Advice, which many of
the Neighboring Ministers, did this Summer humbly lay before our Honorable
Judges, We cannot but with all thankfulness, acknowledge the success which the
Merciful God has given unto the Sedulous and Assiduous endeavors of Our
Honorable Rulers, to detect the abominable Witchcrafts which have been
committed in the Country; Humbly Praying that the discovery of those mysterious
and mischievous wickednesses, may be perfected. If in the midst of the many
Dissatisfactions among us, the publication of these Trials, may promote such a
pious Thankfulness unto God, for Justice being so far, executed among us, I
shall Rejoice that God is Glorified; and pray that no wrong steps of ours may
ever fully any of His Glorious Works.

But we will begin with,

A Modern Instance of Witches Discovered and Condemned, in a Trial, before that
Celebrated Judge, Sir. Matthew Hale.
IT may cast some Light upon the Dark Things now in America, if we just give a
glance upon the Like Things lately hapening in Europe. We may see the
Witchcrafts here, most exactly resemble the Witchcrafts there; and we may learn
what sort of Devils do trouble the World.

The Venerable Baxter very truly sais, Judge Hale was a Person, than whom no
Man, was more backward, to Condemn a Witch, without full Evidence.

Now, One of the Latest Printed Accounts, about a, Trial of Witches, is of what
was before him; and it ran on this wise. [Printed in the Year 1682] And it is
here the rather mentioned, because it was a Trial, much considered by the
Judges of New England.

I. Rose Cullender, and Amy Duny, were severally Indicted, for Bewitching
Elizabeth Durent, Ann Durent, Jane Bocking, Susan Chandler, William Durent,
Elizabeth and Deborah Pacy. And the evidence, whereon they were Convicted,
stood upon diverse particular Circumstances.

II. Ann Durent, Susan Chandler, and Elizabeh Pacy* when they came into the
Hall, to give Instructions for the drawing the Bills of Indictments, they fell
into strange and violent Fitts, so that they were unable to give in their
Depositions, not only then but also During the whole Assizes. William Durent
being an Infant, his Mother Swore, That Amy Duny looking after her Child one
Day in her absence, did at her return confess, that she had given suc^ to the
Child: (though she were an Old Woman:) Whereat, when Durent expressed her
displeasure, Duny went away with Discontents and Menaces.

The Night after, the Child fell into strange and sad Fitts, wherein it
continued for Diverse Weeks. One Doctor Jacob advised her to hang up the Child's
Blanket, in the Chimney Corner all Day, and at Night, when she went to put the
Child into it, if she found any Thing in it then to throw it without fear into
the Fire. Accordingly, at Night, there fell a great Toad out of the Blanket,
which ran up and down the Hearth. A Boy, caught it, and held it in the Fire
with the Tongs: where it made an horrible Noise, and Flashed like to
Gunpowder, with a report like that of a Pistol: Whereupon the Toad (...) no
more to be seen. The next Day a kinswoman of Duny's, told the Deponent, that
her Aunt was all grievously scorched with the Fire, and the Deponent going to
her House, found her in such a Condition. Duny told her, she might thank her
for it; but she should live to see some of her Children Dead, and her self upon
Crutches. But after the Burning of the Toad, this Child Recovered.

This Deponent further Testified, That Her Daughter Elizabeth, being about the
Age of Ten Years, was taken in like manner, as her first Child was, and in her
Fitts complained much of Amy Duny, and said, that she did appear to Her, and
afflict her in such manner as the former. One Day she found Amy Duny in her
House, and thrusting her out of Doors, Duny said, You need not be so Angry,
your Child wont live long. And within three Days the Child Dyed. The Deponent
added, that she was Her self, not long after taken with such a Lameness, in
both her Legs, that she was forced to go upon Crutches; and she was now in
Court upon them. [It was Remarkable, that immediately upon the Juries bringing
in Duny Guilty, Durent was restored unto the use of her Limbs, and went Home
without Her Crutches.]

III. As for Elizabeth and Deborah Pacy, one Aged Eleven years, the other Nine;
the ^lder, being in Court, was made utterly senseless, during all the time of
the Trial: or at least speechless. By the direction of the Judge, Duny was
privately brought to Elizabeth Pacy, and she touched her Hand: whereupon the
child, without, so much as seeing her, suddenly leaped up and flew upon the
prisoner; the younger was too ill, to be brought unto the Assizes. But Samuel
Pacy, their Father, testified, that his Daughter Deborah, was taken with a
sudden lameness; and upon the grumbling of Amy Duny, for being denied
something, where this child was then sitting, the child was taken with an
extreme pain in her stomach,, like the pricking of pins; and shricking at a
dreadful manner, like a Whelp, rather then a Rational creature. The Physicians
could not conjecture the cause of the Distemper; but Amy Duny being a woman of
Ill Fame, and the child in fitts crying out of Amy Duny, as affrighting her
with the Apparition of her person, the deponent suspected her, and procured her
to be set in the stocks. While she was there, she said in the hearing of two
Witnesses, Mr Pacy keeps a great stir about his child, but let him stay till he
has done as much by his Children, as I have done by mine: and being asked, What
she had done to her Children, she answered, She had been fain to open her
Child's mouth with a Tap to give it Victuals. The Deponent added, that within
two Days, the Fits of his Daughters were such, that they could not preserve
either Life or Breath, without the help of a Tap. And that the Children cried
out of Amy Duny, and of Rose Cullender, as afflicting them, with their
Apparitions.

IV. The Fits of the Children, were various. They would sometimes be Lame on
one side* sometimes on the other. Sometimes very sore; sometimes restored unto
their Limbs, and then Deaf, or Blind, or Dumb, for a long while together. Upon
the Recovery of their Speech, they would Cough extremely; and with much Phlegm,
they would bring up Crooked Pins; and one time, a Two-penny Nail, with a very
broad Head. Commonly at the end of every Fit, they would cast up a Pin. When
the Children Read, they could not pronounce the Name of, Lord, or Jesus or
Christ, but would fall into Fitts; and say, Amy Duny says, I must not use that
Name. When they came to the Name of Satan, or Devil, they would clap their
Fingers on the Book, crying out, This bites, but it makes me speak right well!
The Children in their Fitts, would often cry out, There stands Amy Duny, or,
Rose Cullender; and they would afterward relate, That these Witches appearing
before them, threatened them, that if they told what they saw or heard, they
would Torment them ten times more than ever they did before.

V. Margaret Arnold, the Sister of Mr. Pacy, testified unto the like Sufferings
being upon the Children, at her House, whither her Brother had Removed them.
And that sometimes, the Children ( only) would see things like Mice, run about
the House; and one of them suddenly snap't one with the Tongs, and threw it
into the Fire, where it screeched out like a Rat. At another time, a thing like
a Be, flew at the Face of the younger Child; the Child fell into a Fit; and
at last Vomited up a, Two-penny Nail, with a Broad Head; affirming, That the
Be brought this Nail, and forced it into her mouth. The Child would in like
manner be assaulted with Flies, which brought Crooked Pins, unto her, and made
her first swallow them, and then Vomit them. She one Day caught, an Invisible
Mouse, and throwing it into the Fire, it Flashed like to Gunpowder. None
besides the Child saw the Mouse, but every one saw the Flash. She also
declared, out of her Fitts, that in them, Amy Duny, much tempted her to Destroy
Her self.

VI. As for Ann Durent, her Father Testified That upon a Discontent of Rose
Cull^nder, His Daughter was taken with much Illness in her Stomach and great
and sore Pains, like the pricking of pins: and then Swooning Fitts, from which
Recovering she declared, She had s^en the Apparition of Rose Cullender,
Threatening to Torment her. She likewise Vomited up diverse Pins. The Maid was
Present at Court, but when Cullender looked upon her, she fell into such Fitts,
as made her utterly unable to declare any thing.

Ann Baldwin, deposed the same.

VII. Jane Bocking, was too weak, to be at the Assizes. But her Mother
Testified, that Her Daughter having formerly been Afflicted with Swooning
Fitts, and Recovered of them; was now taken with a great Pain in her Stomach;
and New Swooning Fitts. That she took little Food, but every Day Vomited
Crooked Pins. In her first Fitts, she would Extend her Arms, and use Postures,
as if she catched at something, and when her Clutched Hands were forced open,
they would find several Pins diversely Crooked, unaccountably lodged there. She
would also maintain a Discourse with some that were Invisibly present, when
casting abroad her Arms, she would often say, I will not have it! but at last
say, Then I will have it! and closing her Hand, which when they presently after
opened, a Lath-Nail was found in it. But Her great complaints were of being
Visited by the shapes of Amy Duny, and Rose Cullender.

VIII. As for Susan Chandler, Her Mother Testified, That being at the search of
Rose Cullender, they found on her Belly a thing like a Teat, of an Inch long;
which the said Rose ascribed to a ^^^ain. But near her Privy parts, they found
Three mo^e, that were smaller than the former. At the end of the long Teat,
there was a little Hole, which appeared, is if newly Sucked; and upon straining
it, a white milky matter issued out. The Deponent further said, That her
Daughter being one day concerned at Rose Cullenders taking her by the Hand, she
fell very sick, and at Night cried out, That Rose Cullendet woald come to Bed
unto her* Her Fitts grew violent, and in the Intervals of them, she declared,
That she saw Rose Cullender in them, and once having of a great Dog with her.
She also vomited up crooked Pins; and when she was brought into Court, she fell
into her Fitts. She Recovered her self in some Time, and was asked by the
Court, whether she was in a Condition to take an Oath, and give Evidence. She
said, she could; but having been Sworn, she fell into her Fitts again, and,
Burn her! Burn her! were all the words that she could obtain power to speak.
Her Father likewise gave the same Testimony with her Mother; as to all but the
Search.

IX. Here was the Sum of the Evidence: which Mr. Sergeant Keeling, thought not
sufficient to Convict the Prisoners. For admitting the Children were Bewitched,
yet, said he, it can never be Applied unto the ^^isoners, upon the Imagination
only of the Parties Afflicted; inasmuch as no person whatsoever could then be
in Safety.

Dr. Brown, a very Learned Person then present, gave his Opinion, that these
persons were Bewitched. He added, That in Denmark, there had been lately a
great Discovery of Witches; who used the very same way of Afflicting people, by
Conveying Pins and Nails into them. His Opinion was, that the Devil in
Witchcrafts, did Work upon the Bodies of Men and Women, upon a Natural
Foundation; and that he did Extraordinarily afflict them, with such Distempers
as their Bodies were most subject unto.

X. The Experiment about the Usefulness, yea, or Lawfulness whereof Good Men
have sometimes disputed, was diverse Times made, That though the Afflicted were
utterly deprived of all sense in their Fitts, yet upon the Touch of the
Accused, they would so screech out, and Fly up, as not upon any other persons.
And yet it was also found that once upon the touch of an innocent person, the
like effect followed, which put the whole Court unto a stand: although a small
Reason was at length attempted to be given for it.

XI. However, to strengthen the Credit of what had been already produced
against the Prisoners. One John Soam testified, That bringing home his Hay in
three Carts, one of the Carts wrenched the Window of Rose Cullenders House
whereupon she flew out, with violent Threat^^^ings against the Deponent. The
other two Ca^^s, passed by twice, Loaded, that Day afterward; but the Cart
which touched Cullenders House, was twice or thrice that Day overturned. Having
again Loaded it, as they brought it through the Gate which Leads out of the
Field* the Cart stuck so fast in the Gates Head, that they could not possibly
get it through, but were forced to cut down the Post of the Gate, to make the
Cart pass through, although they could not perceive that the Cart did of either
sid^ touch the Gate-Post. They afterward, did with much Difficulty get it home
to the yard; but could not for their Lives get the Cart near the place, where
they should unload. They were fain to unload at a great Distance; and when they
were Tired, the Noses of them that came to Assist them, would burst forth a
Bleeding; so they were fain to give over till next m^^ning; and then they
unloaded without any Difficulty.

XII. Robert Sherringham also testified, That the Axle-Tree of his Cart,
happening in passing, to break some part of Rose Cullenders House, in her Anger
at it, she vehemently threatened him, Hi^ Horses should suffer for it. And
within a short time, all his ^our Horses died; after which he sustained many
other losses in the sudden Dying of his Cattle. He was also taken with a
Lameness in his limbs; and so vexed with lice of an extraordinary Number and
Bigness, that no Art could hinder the Swarming of them, till he burnt up, two
suits of Apparel.

XIII. As for Amy Duny, it was testfi'd by one Richard Spencer' that he heard
her say, The Devil would not let her Rest; until she were Revenged on the wife
of Cornelius Sandswel And that Sandswel testified, that her Poultrey died
suddenly, upon Am^ Dunyes threatening of them; and that her Husband Chimney
fell, quickly after Duny had spoken^^ such a disaster. And a ^irkin of Fish
could not be kept from falling into the water, upon suspicious words of Duny's.

XIV. The Judge, told the Jury, they were to inquire now, first, whether these
Children were Bewitched; and secondly, Whether the Prisoners at the Bar were
guilty of it. He made no doubt, there were such Creatures as Witches; for the
Scriptures affirmed it; and the Wisdom of all Nations had provided Laws against
such persons. He prayed the God of Heaven, to direct their Hearts in the
weighty thing they had in hand; for, To Condemn the Innocent, and let the
Guilty go free, were both an Abomination to the Lord.

The Jury in half an Hour, brought them in Guilty, upon their several
Indictments, which were Nineteen in Number.

The next morning, the Children with their Parents, came to the Lodgings of the
Lord Chief Justice, and were in as good Health, as ever in their Lives; being
Restored within half an Hour after the Witches were Convicted.

The Witches were Executed; and Confessed no^^ing; which indeed will not be
wondered by them, who Consider and Entertain the Judgment (...) a Judicious
Writer, That the Unpardonable Sin* most usually Committed by Professors of the
Christian Religion* falling into Witchcraft.

We will now proceed unto several of the like Trials among our selves.

I. THE TRIAL of G. B. At a Court of Oyer and Terminer, Held in Salem. 1692.
GLad should I have been, if I had never known the Name of this man; or never
had this occasion to mention so much as the first Letters of his Name. But the
Government requiring some Account, of his Trial, to be Inserted in this Book,
it becomes me with all Obedience, to submit unto the Order.

I* This G. B. was Indicted for Witchcrafts; and in the Prosecution of the
Charge against him, (...) was Accused by five or six of the Bewitched, (...)
the Author of their Miseries; he was Accused (...) eight of the Confessing
Witches, as being an Hea^^^ Actor of some of their Hellish Randezvouses, an^
one who had the promise of being a King in Satan's Kingdom, now going to be
Erected; he was Accused by nine persons, for extraordinary Lifting, and such
Feats of Strength, could not be done without a Diabolical Assistance. And for
other such Things he was Accused, until about Thirty Testimonies were brought
in against him; nor were these, judged the half of what might have been
considered, for his Conviction: however they were enough to fix the Character
of a Witch upon him, according to the Rules of Reasoning, by the Judicious
Gaul, in that Case directed.

II. The Court being sensible, that the Testimo^ies of the Parties Bewitched,
use to have a Room among the Suspicions, or Presumptions, brought in against
one Indicted for Witchcraft, there were now heard the Testimonies of several
Persons, who were most notoriously Bewitched, and every day Tortured by
Invisible Hands, and these now all charged the Specter of G. B. to have a
share in their Torments. At the Examination of this G. B. the Bewitched People
were grievously harassed, with Preternatural Mischiefs, which could not
possibly be Dissembled; and they still ascribed it unto the Endeavors of G. B.
to kill them. And ^ow upon his Trial, one of the Bewitched Persons testified,
That in her Agonies, a little Black (...) man came to her, saying his Name was
(...) bidding her set her hand unto a Book which* (...) showed unto her; and
br^gging that he was a Conjurer above the ordinary Rank of Witches; That he
often persecuted her, with the offer of that Book, saying, She should be well,
and need fear no body, if she would but Sign it: but he inflicted cruel Pains
and Hurts upon her, because of her Denying so to do. The Testimonies of the
other Sufferers concurred with these; and it was I markable, that whereas
Biting, was one of the ways which the Witches used, for the vexing of the
Sufferers, when they cried out of G. B. biting them, the print of the Teeth,
would be seen on the Flesh of the Complainers; and just such a set of Teeth,
as G. B. 's would then appear upon them, which could be distinguished from
those of some other men's. Others of them testified, That in their Torments, G.
B. tempted them, to go unto a Sacrament, unto which they perceived him with a
sound of Trumpet Summoning of other Witches* who quickly after the Sound would
come from all Quarters unto the Rendezvous. One of them falling into a kind of
Trance, afterward affirmed, That G. B. had carried her into a very high
Mountain, where he showed her mighty and glorious Kingdoms, and said, He would
give them all to her, if she would write in his Book; but she told him, They
were none of his to give; and refused the motions; enduring of much misery for
that Refusal.

It cost the Court a wonderful deal of Trouble, to hear the Testimonies of the
Sufferers; for when they were going to give in their Depositions, the^ would
for a long while be taken with fitts, that made them incapable of saying any
thing. The Chief Judge asked the prisoner, who he thought hindered these
witnesses from giving their testimonies? and he answered, He supposed, it was
the Divel^ That Honorable person, then replied, How comes the Devil so loathe
to have any Testimony born against you? Which cast him into very great
confusion.

III. It has been a frequent thing for the Bewitched people, to be entertained
with Apparitions of Ghosts of murdered people, at the same time, that the
Specter of the witches trouble them. These Ghosts do always affright the
Beholders, more than ^^ll the other spectral Representations; and when they
exhibit themselves, they cry out, of being Murdered by the witchcrafts or other
violences of the persons who are then in spectre present. It is further
considerable, that once or twice, these Apparitions have been seen by others at
the very same time that they have shown them selves to the Bewitched; and
seldom have there been these Apparition but when something unusual and suspected
had attended the Death of the party thus Appearing. Some that have bin accused
by these Apparitions, accosting of the Bewitched People, who had never heard a
word of any such persons, ever being in the world, have upon a fair examination
freely, and fully, confessed ^he murders of those very persons, although these
also (...) not know how the Apparitions had complained (...) them* Accordingly
several of the Bewitched, had given in their Testimony, that they had been
troubled with the Apparitions of two women, who said, that they were G. Bs. two
wives; and that he had been the Death of them; and that the Magistrates must be
told of it, before whom if B. upon his trial denied it, they did not know but
that they should appear again in the Court. Now, G. B. had been infamous for
the Barbarous usage of his two successive wives, all the Country over.
Moreover; It was testi^^'d, the spectre of G. B. threatening of the sufferers
told them, he had killed (besides others) Mrs Lawson and her Daughter Ann. And
it was noted, That these were the virtuous wife and Daughter, of one at whom
this G. B. might have a prejudice for his being serviceable at Salem-^illage,
from whence himself had in ^ll Terms re^^^^ved some years before: and that when
they died, which was long since, there were some odd circumstances about them,
which made some of the Attendents there suspect something of witchcraft, though
none Imagined from what Quarter it should come.

We^^ G. B. being now upon his Trial, one of the Bewitched persons was cast
into Horror at the Ghosts of B's. two deceased wives, then appearing before
him, and crying for, Vengeance, against him. Hereupon several of the Bewitched
persons were successively called in, who all not knowing what the former had
seen and said, concurred in their Horror, of the Apparition, which the^
affirmed, that he had before him. But he, though much appalled, utterly denied
that he discerned any thing of it; nor was it any part of his Conviction.

IV Judicious Writers, have assigned it a great place, in the Conviction of
witches, when persons are Impeached by other Notorious witches, to be as Ill as
themselves; especially, if the persons have been much noted for neglecting the
Worship of God. Now, as there might have been Testimonies Enough of G. B's.
Antipathy to Prayer and the other Ordinances of God, though by his profession
singularly obliged thereunto; so, there now came in against the prisoner, the
Testimonies of several persons, who confessed their own having been Horrible
Witches, and ever since their confessions had been themselves terribly Tortured
by the Devils and other Witches, even like the other Sufferers; and therein
undergone the pains of many Deaths for their Confessions.

These now Testified, that G. B. had been at Witch-Meetings with them; and that
he was the Person who had Seduced, and Compelled them into the snares of
Witchcraft: That he promised them Fine Clothes, for doing it; that he brought
Poppets to them, and thorns to stick into those Poppets, for the afflicting of
other People: And that he exhorted them, with the rest of the Crew, to bewitch
all Salem-Village, but before to do it Gradually, if they would prevail in what
they did.

When the Lancashire Witches were condemned, I don't Remember that there was
any considerable further Evidence, than that of the Bewitched, and then that of
some that confessed. We see so much already against G. B. But this being indeed
not Enough. there were, other things to render what had been already produced
credible.

V. A famous Divine, recites this among the Convictions of a Witch; The
Testimony of the Party Bewitched, whether Pining or Dying; together with the
Joint Oaths of Sufficient Persons, that have seen certain Prodigious Pranks or
Feats, wrought by the (...) Accused. Now God had (...) pleased so to leave this
G. B. that he had ensnared himself, by several Instances which he had formerly
given of a Prete^natural strength, and which were now produced against him. He
was a very Puny man; yet ^e had often done things beyond the strength of a
Giant. A Gun of about seven foot barrel, (...) heavy that strong men could not
steadily (...) it out, with both hands; there were several Testimonies, given
in by Persons of Credit and Honor, that he made nothing of taking up such a
Gun behind the Lock, with but one hand, and holding it out like a Pistol, at
Arms-end. G. B. ^n his Vindication was so foolish as ^o say, That an Indian was
there, and held it out at the same time: Whereas, none of the Spectators ever
saw any such Indian; but they supposed the Black man (as the Witches call the
Devil; and they generally say he resembles an Indian) might give him that
Assistence. There was Evidence, likewise, brought in, that he made nothing of
Taking up whole Barrels filled with Malasses, or Cider, in very Disadvantagious
Postures, and Carrying of them through the Difficultest Places, out of a Ca^oo
to the Shore.

[Yea, there were Two Testimonies, that G. B. with only putting the Forefinger
of his Right ^and, into the Muzzel of an heavy Gun, a Fowling-piece, of about
six or seven foot Barrel, did Lift up the Gun, and hold it out at Arms end; a
Gun which the Deponents, though strong men, could not with both hands Lift up,
and hold out, at the Butt end, as is usual. Indeed one of these Witnesses, was
over persuaded by some persons, to be out of the way, upon G. B.'s Trial; but
he ^ame afterward, with sorrow for his withdraw, and gave in his Testimony:
Nor were either of these Witnesses made use of as evidences in the Trial.]

VI. There came in several Testimonies, relating to the Domestic Affayrs of G.
B. which had a very hard Aspect upon him; and not only proved him a very ill
man; but also confirmed the Belief of the Character, which had been already
fastened on him. e. g.

It Was testified, That keeping his two Successive Wives in a strange kind of
Slavery, he would when he came home from abroad, pretend to tell the Talk which
any had with them* That he has brought them to the point of Death, by his
Harsh Dealings with his Wives, and then made the People about him to promise
that in Case Death should happen, they would say nothing of it. That he used
all means to make his Wives, Write, Sign, Seal, and Swear a Covenant, never to
Reveal any of his Secrets. That his W^^es had privately complained unto the
Neighbors about frightful Apparitions of Evil Spirits, with which their House
was sometimes infested; and that many such things have been Whispered among the
Neighborhood. There were also some other Testimonies, relating to the Death of
People, whereby the Consciences of an Impartial Jury, were convinced, that G.
B. had Bewitched the persons mentioned in the Complaints. But I am forced to
omit several such passages, in this, as well as in all the succeeding Trials,
because the Scribes who took Notice of them, have not Supplied me.

VII. One Mr. Ruck, Brother in Law to this G. B. Testified, that G. B. and he
himself, and his Sister, who was G. B.'s Wife, going out for Two or three
Miles, to gather Straw-Berries, Ruck, with his Sister the Wife of G. B. Rode
home very Softly, with G. B. on Foot in their Com^any, G. B. stepped aside a
little into the Bushes; Whereupon they Halted and Halloo'd for him. He not
answering, they went away homewards, with a Quickened pace; without any
expectation of seeing him in a considerable while: and yet when they were got
near home, to their Astonishment they found him on foot, with them, having a
Basket of Straw-Berries. G. B. immediately, then fell to chiding his Wife, on
the account of what she had been speaking to her Brother, of him, on the Road:
which when they wondered at, he said, He knew their thoughts. Ruck being
startled at that, made some Reply, intimating that the Devil himself did not
know so far; but G. B. answered, My God, makes known your Thoughts unto me. The
prisoner now at the Bar had nothing to answer, unto what was thus Witnessed
against him, that was wo^th considering. Only he said, Ruck, and his Wife left
a man with him, when they left him. Which Ruck now affirmed to be false; and
when the Court asked G. B. What the Man's Name was? his countenance was much
altered; nor could he say, who 'twas. But the Court began to think, that he
then stepped aside, only that by the assistance of the Black Man, he might put
on his Invisibility, and in that Fascinating Mist, gratify his own Jealous
humor, to hear what they said of him. Which trick of rendering themselves
Invisible, our Witches do in their confessions pretend that they sometimes are
Masters of; and it it is the more credible, because there is Demonstration that
they often render many other things utterly Invisible.

VIII. Faltring, Fau^ty, unconstant, and contrary Answers upon Judicial and
deliberate examination, are counted some unlucky symptoms of guilt, in all
crimes; Especially in Witchcrafts. Now there never was a prisoner more Eminent
for them, tha^ G.B. both at his Examination and on his Trial. His
Tergiversations, Contradictions, and Falsehoods, were very sensible: he had
little to say, but that he had heard some things that he could not prove,
Reflecting upon the Reputation of some of the witnesses. Only he gave in a
paper, to the Jury; wherein, although he had many times before, granted, not only
that there are Witches, but also that the present sufferings of the Country
are the Effect of horrible Witchcrafts, yet he now goes to, evince it, That
there neither are, nor ever were, Witches that having made a compact with the
Devil, Can se^d a Dive^ to Torment other people at a distance. This paper was
Transcribed out of Ady; which the Court presently knew, as soon as they heard
it. But he said, he had taken none of it out of any Book; for which his evasion
afterward was, that a Gentleman gave him the discourse, in a manuscript, from
whence he Transcribed it.

IX. The Jury brought him in guilty* But when he came to Die, he utterly denied
the Fact, whereof he had been thus convicted.

II. The TRIA^ (...) Bridget Bishop: alias, Oliver. At the COURT of Oyer and
Terminer Held at Salem. June 2. 1692.
I. SHe was Indicted for Bewitching of several persons in the Neighborhood,
the Indictment being drawn up, according to the Form in such Cases Usual. And
pleading, Not Guilty, there were brought in several persons, who had long
undergone many kinds of Miseries, which were preternaturally Inflicted, and
generally ascribed unto an horrible Witchcraft. There was little Occasion to
prove the Witchcraft; it being Evident and Noto^ious to all Beholders. Now to
fix the Witchcraft on the Prisoner at the Bar, the first thing used was, the
Testimony of the Bewitched; whereof, several Testified, That the Shape of the
Prisoner did oftentimes very grievously pinch them, choke them, Bite them, and
Aff^ict them; urging them to write their Names in a Book, which the said
Spectre called, Ours. One of them did further Testify, that it was the Shape of
this Prisoner, with another, which one Day took her from her Wheel* and
carrying her to the River side, threatn^^ there to Drown her, if she did not
Sign to the Book mentioned: which yet she refused. Others of them did also
Testify, that the said Shape, did in her Threats, brag to them, that she had
been the Death of sundry persons, then by her Named; that she had Ridden a man,
then likewise Named. Another Testified, the Apparition of Ghosts unto the
Spectre of Bishop, crying out, You Murdered us! About the Truth whereof, there
was in the matter of Fact, but too much Suspicion.

II. It was Testified, That at the Examination of the Prisoner, before the
Magistrates, the Bewitched were extremely Tortured. If she did but cast her
Eyes on them, they were presently struck down; and this in such a manner as
there could be no Collusion in the Business. But upon the Touch of her Hand
upon them, when they lay in their Swoons, they would immediately Revive; and
not upon the Touch of any ones else. Moreover, upon some Special Actions of her
Body, as the shaking of her Head, or the Turning of her Eyes, they presently
and painfully f^ll into the like postures. And many of the like Accidents now
fell out, while she was at the Ba^. One at the same time testifying, That she
said, She could not be Troubled to see the Afflicted thus Tormented.

III. There was Testimony likewise brought in, that a man striking once at the
place, where a Bewitched person said, the Shape of this Bishop stood, the
Bewitched cried out, that he had Tore her Coat, in the place then particularly
specified; and the Woman's Coat, was found to be Torn in that very place.

IV. One Deliverance Hobbs, who had Confessed her being a Witch, was now
Tormented by the Specter, for her Confession. And she now Testified, That this
Bishop, tempted her to Sign the Book again, and to Deny what she had Confessed.
She affirmed, that it was the Shape of this Prisoner, which whipped her with
Iron Rods, to compel her thereunto. And she affirmed, that this Bishop was at a
General Meeting of the Witches, in a ^ield at Salem-Village and there partook
of a Dia^olical Sacrament, in Bread and Wine then Administered!

V. To render it further Unquestionable, that the prisoner at the Bar, was the
Person truly charged in THIS Witchcraft, there were produced many Evidences of
OTHER Witchcrafts, by her perpetra^ed. For Instance, John Cook testified, that
about ^^ve or six years ago, One morning, about Sunrise, ^e was in his
Chamber, assaulted by the Shape of ^his prisoner: which Looked on him, g^in'd
at him, and very much hurt him, with a Blow on the ^ide of the Head* and that
on the same day, a^out Noon, the same Shape walked in the Room where he was,
and an Apple strangely flew out of his Hand, into the Lap of his mother, six or
eight foot from him.

VI. Samuel Gray, testified, That about fourteen years ago, he waked on a
Night, and saw the Room where he lay, full of Light; and that he then saw
plainly a Woman between the Cradle, and the Bedside, which looked upon him. He
Rose, and it vanished; though he found the Doors all fast. Looking ^ut at the
Entry-Door, he saw the same Woman, in the same Garb again; and said, In Gods
Name, what do you come for? He went to Bed, and had ^he same Woman again
assaulting him. The Child ^n the Cradle gave a great schreech, and the Woman
Disappeared. It was long before the Child could be quieted; and though it were a
very likely thriving Child, yet from this time it pined away, and after diverse
months died in a sad Condition* He knew not Bishop, nor her Name; but when he
saw her after this, he knew by her Countenance, and Apparel, and all
Circumstances, that it was the Apparition of this Bishop, which had thus
troubled him.

VII. John Bly and his wife, testified, that he bought a sow of Edward Bishop,
the Husband of the prisoner; and was to pay the price agreed, unto another
person. This Prisoner being Angry that she was thus hindered from fingring the
money, Quarreled with Bly. Soon after which the Sow, was taken with strange
Fits; Jumping, Leaping, and knocking her head against the Fence, she seemed
Blind and Deaf, and would neither ^eat nor be sucked. Whereupon a neighbor
said, she believed the Creature was Over-Looked; and sundry other circumstances
concurred, which made the Deponents Belive that Bishop had Bewitched it.

VIII. Richard Coman testified, that eight years ago, as he lay Awake in his
Bed, with a Light Burning in the Room, he was annoyed with the Apparition of
this Bishop, and of two more that were strangers to him; who came and oppressed
him so that he could neither stir himself, nor wake any one else: and that he
was the night after, molested again in the like manner; the said Bishop taking
him by the Throat, and pulling him almost out of the Bed. His kinsman offered
for this cause to lodge with him; and that Night, as they were Awake
Discoursing together: this Coman was once more ^isited, by the Guests which had
formerly been so troublesome; his kinsman being at the same time ^^ook
speechless and unable to move Hand or Foot. He had laid his sword by him; which
these unhappy specter, did strive much to wrest from him; only he held too
fast for them. He then grew able ^o call the People of his house; but although
they heard him, yet they had not power to speak or stir, until (...) last, one
of the people crying out, what is the matter! the specter all vanished.

IX. Samuel Shattock testified, That in the Year 168O. this Bridget Bishop,
often came to his house upon such frivolous and foolish errands, that they
suspected she came indeed with a purpose of mischief. Presently whereupon his
eldest child, which was of as promising Health and Sense, as any child of (...)
Age, began to droop exceedingly; and the oftener that Bishop came to the House,
the worse grew the Child. As the Child would be standing at the Door, he would
be thrown and bruised against the Stones, by an Invisible Hand, and in like
sort knock his Face against the sides of the House, and bruise it after a
miserable manner. Afterward this Bishop would ^^ing him things to Die, whereof
he could not Imagine any use; and when she paid him a piece of Money, the Purse
and Money were unaccountably ^^nveyed out of a Locked box, and never seen more.
The Child was immediately hereupon taken with terrible fit^, whereof his
Friends thought he would have dyed: indeed he did almost nothing but cry and
Sleep for several Months together: and at length his understanding was utterly
taken away. Among other Symptoms of an Enchantment upon him, one was, that
there was a Board in the Garden, whereon he would walk; and all the invitations
in the world could never fetch him off. About Seventeen or Eighteen years
after, there came a Stranger to Shattocks House, who seeing the Child* said,
This poor Child is Bewitched; and you have (...) Neighbor living not far off,
who is a Witch. He ad^ded, Your Neighbor has had a falling out with you^ Wife;
and she said in her Heart, your Wife is a proud Woman, and she would bring down
her Pride in this Child: He then Remembered, that Bishop had parted from his
Wife in muttering and menacing Terms, a little before the Child was taken Ill.
The abovesaid Stranger would needs carry the Bewitched Boy with him, to Bishops
House, on pretense of buying a pot of Cider. The Woman Entertained him in
furious manner; and flew also upon the Boy, scratching his Face till the Blood
came, and saying, Thou Rogue, what? do thou bring this Fellow here to plague
me? Now it seems the man had said before he went, that he would fetch Blood of
her. Ever after the Boy was followed with grievous Fits, which the Doctors
themselves generally ascribed unto Withcraft; and wherein he would b^ thrown
still into the Fire or the Water, if he were not constantly looked after; and
it was verily believed that Bishop was the cause of it.

X. John Louder testified, that upon some little controversy with Bishop about
her fowls, going well to Bed, he did awake in the Night by moonlight, and did
see clearly the likeness of this woman grievously oppressing him; in which
miserable condition she held him unable to help him self, till ^ear Day. He
told Bishop of this; but she denied it, and threatened him, very much. Quickly
after this, being at home on a Lords Day, with the doors ^^utt about him, he
saw a Black Pig approach him; (...) which he going to kick, it vanished away.
Immediately after, sitting down, he saw a Black thing ^ump in at the Window,
and come and stand before him. The Body, was like that of a Monkey, the Feet
like a Cocks, but the Face much like a man's. He being so extreemly affrighted,
that he could not speak; this Monster spoke to him, and said, I am a Messenger
sent unto you, for I understand that you are in some Trouble of Mind, and if
you will be ruled by me, you shalll want for nothing in this world. Whereupon
he endeavored to clap his hands upon it; but he could feel no substance, and
it jum^ed out of the window again; but immediately came in by the Porch, though
the Doors were shut, and said, You had better take my Counsel! He then struck
at it with a stick, but struck only the Ground^el, and broke the Stick. The Arm
with which he struck was presently Disenabled, and it vanished away. He
presently went out at the Backdoor, and spyed, this Bishop* in her Orchard,
going toward her House; but he had not power to set one foot forward unto her.
Whereupon returning into the House, he was immediately accosted by the Monster
he had seen before; which Goblin was now going to Fly at him: whereat he cried
out, The whole Armor of God, be between me and you! So it sprang back, and
flew over the Apple Tree; shaking many Apples off the Tree, in its flying over.
At its Leap, it flung Dirt with its Feet, against the Stomach of the man;
whereon he was then struck Dumb, and so continued for three Days together. Upon
the producing of this Testimony, Bishop denied that she knew this Deponent: yet
their two Orchards joined, and they had often had their Little Quarrels for
some years together.

XI. William Stacy, Testified, That, receiving Money of this Bishop, for work
done by him, he (...) gone but a matter of Three Rods from her, and looking for
his money, found it unaccountably gone from him. Some time after, Bishop asked
him whether his Father would grind her gri^t for her? He demanded why? she
Replied, Because Folks count me a witch. He answered, No Question, but he will
grind it for you. Being then gone about six Rods from her, with a small Load in
his Cart, suddenly the Off-wheel slump't and sunk down into an Hole upon plain
ground, so that the Deponent, was forced to get help for the Recovering of the
wheel. But stepping Back to look for the Hole which might give him this
disaster, there was none at all to be found. Some time after* he was wake^ in
the Night; but it seemed as Light as Day, and he perfectly saw the shape of
this Bishop, in the Room, ^roubling of him; but upon her going out, all was
Dark again. He charged Bishop afterward with it: and she denied it not; but
was very angry. Quickly after, this Deponent having been threatened by Bishop,
as he was in a dark Night going to the Barn, he was very suddenly taken or
lifted from the ground, and thrown against a stone wall; After that, he was
again hoisted up and thrown down a Bank, at the end of his House. After this
again, passing by this Bishop, his Horse with a small load, striving to Draw,
all his Gears flew to pieces, and the Cart fell down; and this deponent going
then to lift a Bag of corn, of about two Bushels; could not budge it, with all
his might.

Many other pranks, of this Bishops, this deponent was Ready to testify. He
also testified, that he verily Believed, the said Bishop, was the Instrument of
his Daughter, Priscilla's Death; of which suspicion, pregnant Reasons were
assigned.

XII. To Crown all, John Bly, and William Bly, Testified, That being Employed
by Bridget Bishop, to help take down the Cellar-wall, of the old House, wherein
she formerly Lived, they did in Holes of the said old Wall, find several
Poppets, made up of Rags, and Hogs* Brussels, with Headless Pins in them, the
points being outward. Whereof she could now give no Account unto the Court,
that was Reasonable or Tolerable.

XIII. One thing that made against the Prisoner was, her being evidently
convicted of Gross Lying, in the Court, several Times, while she was making her
Plea. But besides this, a Jury of Women, found a preternatural Teat upon her
Body; but upon a second search, within Three or four Hours, there was no such
thing to be seen. There was also an account of other people whom this woman had
afflicted. And there might have been many more, if they had been, enquired for.
But there was no need of them.

XVI. There was one very strange thing more, with which the Court was newly
Entertained. As this Woman was under a Guard, passing by the Great and
Spacious Mee^ing-House of Salem, she gave a Look toward the House. And
immediately a Demon Invisibly Entering the Meeting House, Tore down a part of
it; so that though there were no person to be seen there, yet the people at the
Noise running in, found a Board, which was strongly fastened with several
Nails, transported unto another quarter of the House.

III. The Trial of Susanna Martin: At the Court of Oyer and Terminer: Held by
Adjournment at Salem. June 29, 1692.
I. SUsanna Martin, pleading, Not Guilty, to the Indictment of Witchcrafts
brought in against her, there were produced the evidences of many persons very
sensibly and grievously Bewitched; who all complaned of the prisoner at the
Bar, as the person whom they Believed the cause of their Miseries. And now, as
well as in the other Trials, there was an extraordinary endeavor by
witchcrafts, with Cruel and Frequent Fits, to hinder the poor sufferers, from
giving in their complaints; which the Court was forced with much patience to
obtain, by much waiting and watching for it.

II. There was now also an Account given, of what passed at her first
examination before the Magistrates. The cast of her eye, then striking (...)
Afflicted People to the ground, whether they saw that Cast or no; there were
these among other passages, between the Magistrates, and the Examinate.

Magistrate. Pray, what ails these People?


Martin. I don,t know*


Magistrate. But, what do you think ails them?


Martin. I don't desire to spend my Judgment upon it.


Magistrate. Don't you think they are Bewitched?


Martin. No, I do not think they are.


Magistrate. Tell us your thoughts about them then.


Martin. No, my thoughts are my own when they are in, but when they are out,
they are another. Their Master. --


Magistrate. Their Master? who do you think, is their Master;


Martin. If they be dealing in the Black Art, you may know as well as I.


Magistrate. Well, what have you done toward this?


Martin. Nothing at all.


Magistrate. Why, it is you or your Appearance.


Martin I cannot help it.


Magistrate. Is it not Your Master? How comes your Appearance to hurt these?


Martin. How do I know? He that appeared in the shape of Samuel, a Glorified
Saint, may Appear in any ones shape.


It was then also noted in her, as in others like her, that if the Afflicted
went to approach her, they were flung down to the Ground. And, when she was
asked the Reason of it, she said, I cannot ^ell; it may be, the Devil bears me
more Malice than another.

III. The Court accounted themselves Alarmed by these things, to Enquire
further into the Conversation of the Prisoner; and see what there might occur
to render these Accusations further credible. Whereupon, John Allen, of
Salisbury, testified, That he refusing, because of the weakness of his Oxen, to
Cart some Staves, at the request of this Martin, she was displeased at it, and
said, It had been as good that he had; for his Oxen should never do him much
more Service. Whereupon, this Deponent said, Do thou threaten me, thou old
Witch: I'^ throw thee into the Brook: Which to avoid, she flew over the Bridge,
and escaped. But, as he was going home, one of his Oxen Tired, so that he was
forced to Unyoke him, that he might get him home. He then put his Oxen, with
many more, upon Salisbury Beach, where Cattle did use to get Flesh. In a few
days, all the Oxen upon the Beach were found by their Tracks, to have run unto
the mouth of Merrimack-River, and not returned; but the next day they were
found come ashore upon Plum-Island. They that sought them, used all imaginable
gentleness, but they would still run away with a violence that seemed wholly
Diabolical, till they came near the mouth of Merrimack-River; when they ran
right into the Sea, swimming as far as they could be seen. One of them then
swam back again, with a swiftness, amazing to the Beholders, who stood ready to
receive him, and help up his Tired Carcass: but the Beast ran furiously up into
the Island, and from thence, thorough the Marshes, up into Newbury Town, and
so up into the Woods; and there after a while found near Amesbury. So that, of
Fourteen good Oxen, there was only this saved: the Rest were all cast up, some
in one place, and some in another, Drowned.

IV. John Atkinson Testified, That he Exchanged a Cow, with a Son of Susanna
Martins, whereat she muttered, and was unwilling he should have it. Going to
Receive this Cow, though he Hamstring'd her, and Halter'd her, she of a Tame
Creature grew so mad, that they could scarce get her along. She broke all the
Ropes that were fastened unto her, and though she were Tied fast unto a Tree,
yet she made her Escape, and gave them such further Trouble, as they could
ascribe to no cause but Witchcraft.

V. Bernard Peache testified, That being in Bed, on a Lords-day^Night, he heard
a scrabbling at the Window, whereat he then saw, Susanna Martin come in, and
jump down upon the Floor. She took hold of this Deponents Feet, and drawing his
Body up into an Heap, she lay upon him, near Two Hours; in all which time he
could neither speak nor stir. At length, when he could begin to move, he laid
hold on her Hand, and pulling it up to his mouth, he bit three of her Fingers,
as he judged, unto the Bone. Whereupon she went from the Chamber, down the
Stairs, out at the Door. This Deponent thereupon called unto the people of the
House, to advise them, of what passed; and he himself did follow her. The
people saw her not; but there being a Bucket at the Left^ hand of the Door,
there was a drop of Blood found on it; and several more drops of Blood upon the
Snow newly fallen abroad. There was likewise the print of her two Feet just
without the Threshold; but no more sign of any Footing further off.

At another time this Deponent was desired by the Prisoner, to come unto an
Husking of Corn, at her House; and she said, If he did not come, it were better
that he did! He went not; but the Night following, Susanna Martin, as he
judged, and another came toward him. One of them said, Here he is! but he
having a Quarter-staff, made a Blovv at them. The Roof of the Barn, broke his
Blow; but following them to the Window, he made another Blow at them, and
struck them down; yet they got up, and got out, and he saw no more of them.

About this time, there was a Rumor about the Town, that Martin had a Broken
Head; but the Deponent could say nothing to that.

The said Peache also testified, the Bevvitching of Cattle to Death, upon
Martins Discontents.

VI. Robert Downer testified, That this Prisoner being some years ago
prosecuted at Court for a Witch, he then said unto her, He believed she was a
Witch. Whereat she being Dissatisfied, Said, That some Shee-Devil would Shortly
fetch him away! Which words were heard by others, as well as himself. The Night
following, as he lay in his Bed, there came in at the Window, the likeness of a
Cat, which Flew upon him, took fast hold of his Throat, lay on him a
considerable while, and almost killed him. At length he remembered, what Susanna
Martin, had threatened the Day before; and with much striving he cried out,
Avoid, thou Shee-Devil! In the Name of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, Avoid! Whereupon it left him, leaped on the Floor, and Flew out at the
Window.

And there also came in several Testimonies, that before ever (...) Accident,
Susanna Ma^^^n and her ^amily, had related, How this Downer had been Handled!

VII. John Kembal, testified, that Susanna Martin, upon a Causeless Disgust,
had threatened him, about a certain Cow of his, That she should never do him
any more Good: and it came to pass accordingly. For soon aster the Cow was
found stark Dead on the dry Ground; without any Distemper to be discerned upon
her. Upon which he was followed with a strange Death upon more of his Cattle,
whereof he lost in One Spring to the value of Thirty Pounds. But the said John
Kemb^l had a further Testimony to give in against the Prisoner which was truly
admirable.

Being desirous to furnish himself with a Dog, he applied himself to buy one of
this Martin, who had a Bitch with Whelps in her House. But she not letting him
have his Choice, he said, he would supply himself then at one Blezdels. Having
marked a puppy, which he liked at Blezdels, he met George Martin, the Husband
of the prisoner, going by, who asked him, Whether he would no^ have one of his
Wives Puppies; and he answered, No. The same Day, one Edmund Eliot, being at
Martins House, heard George Martin relate, where this Kembal had been, and what
he had said. Whereupon Susanna Martin replied, If I live, I Will give him Puppies
enough! Within a few days after, this Kembal coming out of the Woods, there
arose a little Black Cloud, in the N.W. and ^embal immediately felt a Force
upon him, which made him not able to avoid running upon the stumps of Trees,
that were before him, ^^beit, he had a broad, plain Cart way, before him; but
though he had his Ax also on his Shoulder to endanger him in his Falls, he could
not forbear going out of his way to tumble over them. When he came below the
Meeting House, there appeared unto him, a little thing like a Puppy, of a
Darkish Color; and it shot Backwards and forwards between his Legs. He had
the Courage to use all possible Endeavors of Cutting it, with his Ax; but he
could not Hit it; the Puppy gave a jump from him, and went, as to him, it
seemed into the Ground. Going a little further, there appeared unto him a Black
Puppy, somewhat bigger than the first; but as Black as a Cole. ^ts motions were
quicker than those of his Ax; it Flew at his Belly- and away; then at his
Throat* so, over his Shoulder one way, and then over his Shoulder another way.
His heart now began to ^ail him, and he thought the Dog would have Tore his
Throat out. But he recovered himself, and called upon God in his Distress; and
Naming the Name of JESUS CHRIST, it Vanished away at once. The Deponent Spoke
not one Word of these Accidents, for fear of affrighting his wife. But the next
Morning, Edmund Eliot, going into Martins house, this woman asked him where
Kembal was? He Replied, At home, a bed, for ought he knew. She return^d, They
say, he was frighted last Night. Eliot asked With what? She answered, With
Puppies. Eliot asked, Where she heard of it, for he had heard nothing of it!
She rejoined, About the Town. Although, Kembal had mentioned the Matter to no
Creature Living.

VIII. William Brown testified, that Heaven having blessed him with a most
Pious and prudent wife, this wife of his, one day met with Susanna Martin^ but
when she approch'd just unto her Martin, vanished out of sight, and left her
extremely affrighted. After which time, the said Martin, often appeared unto
her, giving her no little trouble; and when she did come, she was visited with
Birds that sorely peck't and Pricked her; and sometimes, a Bunch, like a
pullets egg would Rise in her throat, ready to Choke her, till she cried out,
Witch, you shall not Choke me! While this good Woman was in this Extremity, the
Church appointed a Day of Prayer, on her behalf; whereupon her Trouble ceased;
she saw not Martin as formerly; and the Church, instead of their Fast, gave
Thanks for her Deliverance. But a considerable while after, she being Summoned
to give in some Evidence at the Court, against this Martin, quickly thereupon,
this Martin came behind her, while she was milking her Cow, and said unto her,
For thy defaming me at her Court, I Will make thee the miserablest Creature in the
World. Soon after which, she fell into a strange kind of Distemper, and became
horribly Frantic, and incapable of any Reasonable Action; the Physicians
declaring, that her Distemper was preternatural, and that some Devil had
certainly Bewitched ^er; and in that Condition she now remained.

IX. Sarah Atkinson testified, That Susanna Martin came from Amesbury, to their
House at Newbury, in an extraordinary Season, when it was not (...) for any one
to Travel. She came (as she said, unto Atkinson,) all that long way on Foot.
She bragged, and showed, how dry she was; nor could ^t be perceived that so much
as the Soles of her ^hoes were wet. Atkinson was amazed at it; and professed,
that she should her self have been wet ^p to the knees, if she had then came so
far; but Martin replied, She scorned to be Drabbled! It was ^oted, that this
Testimony upon her Trial, cast ^er into a very singular Confusion.

10. John Pressy, testified, That being one Evening very unaccountably
Bewildred, near a field of Martins, and several times, as one under an
Enchantment, returning to the place he had left, at ^ength he saw a mavelous
Light, about the Bigness of an Half-Bushel, near two Rod, out of the way. He
went, and struck at it with a Stick, and laid it on with all his might. He gave
it near forty blows; and felt it a palpable substance. But going from it, his
Heels were struck up, and he was laid with his Back on the Ground: Sliding as
he thought, into a Pit; from whence he recovered, by taking hold on the Bush:
although afterward he could find no such Pit in the place. Having after his
Recovery, gone five or six Rod, he saw Susan^na Martin standing on his
Left Hand, as the Light had done before; but they changed no words with one
another. He could scarce find his House in his Return; but at length he got
home, extremely affrighted. The next day, it was upon Enquir^ understood, that
Martin was in a miserable condi^tion by pains and hurts that were upon her.

It was further testified by this Deponent, Tha^ after he had given in some
Evidence against Su^sanna Martin, many years ago, she gave him foul words about
it; and said, He should never pros^^^ more; particularly, That he should never
have mo^^ than two Cows; that though he were never so likely (...) have more, yet
he should never have them. And tha^ from tha^ very Day to this; namely for
Twenty Years together, he could never exceed that Num^ber; but some strange
thing or other- still prevent^ed his having of any more.

XI. Jarvis Ring, testified, that about seven years ago, he was oftentimes and
grievously Oppressed i^ the Night; but saw not who Troubled him, unt^^ at last
he Lying perfectly Awake, plainly savv Susanna Martin approach him. She came to
him, and forceably Bit him by the Finger; so that the Print of the Bite is now
so long after to be seen upon him.

XII. But besides all of these ^^^dences, there (...) most wonderful Account of
one Joseph Ring, pro^uced on this Occasion.

This man has been strangely carried about by ^aemons, from one Witch-Meeting
to ano^^er, for near two years together; and for one Quarter of this Time, they
have made him, and ^^pt him Dumb, though he is now again able to speak. ^here was
one T. H. who having as it is judged, a ^esign of engaging this Joseph Ring, in a
Snare of Devillism, contrived a wile, to bring this Ring two ^^illings in Debt
unto him.

Afterward, this poor man would be visited with ^nknown shapes, and this T. H.
sometimes among ^^em; which would force him away with them, un^^ unknown
Places, where he saw meetings, Feast^ngs, Dancings,; and after his Return,
wherein they ^^rried him a long through the Air, he gave Demon^^rations to the
Neighbors, that he had indeed ^een so transported. When he was brought unto
these Hellish meetings, one of the First things ^hey still did unto him, was to
give him a knock on ^he Back, whereupon he was ever as if Bound with Chains,
incapable of Stirring out of the place, (...) ^^ey should Release him. He
related, that there ^^ten came to him a man, who presented him a (...), whereto
he would have him set his Hand; ^^omising to him, that he should then have eve^
that he would; and presenting him with all the ^^lectable Things, persons, and
places, that he could ^^agine. But he refusing to subscribe, the business ^ould
and with dreadful Shapes, Noises and Screeches, which almost scared him out of
his wits. Once with the Book, there was a Pen offered him, and an Inkhorn,
with Liquor in it, that seemed like Blood: but he never touched it.

This man did now affirm, that he saw the Prisoner, at several of those Hellish
Randezvouzes.

Note, This Woman was one of the most Impu^dent, Scurrilous, wicked creatures
in the world; and she did now throughout her whole Trial, discove^ her self to
be such an one. Yet when she was aske^ what she had to say for her self, her
Cheef Ple^ was, That she had Led a most virtuous and Holy Life*

IV The TRIAL of ELIZABETH HOW, at the Court of Oyer and Terminer, Held by
Adjournment at Salem, June* 30. 1692.
I. ELIZABETH HOW, pleading, Not Guilty to the Indictment of Withcrafts, the^
charged upon her; the Court, according to the (...) proceeding of ^he Courts in
England, in such Cases, began with he^ring the Depositions of Seve^al Afflicted
People, who were grievously Tortured by sensible and evident Witchcrafts, and
all complained of the Prisoner, as the cause of their Trouble. It was also
found that the Sufferers were not able to bear her Look, as likewise, that in
their greatest Swoons, they distinguished her Touch from other peoples, being
thereby raised out of them.

And there was other Testimony of people to whom the shape of this How, gave
trouble Nine or Ten years ago.

II. It has been a most usual thing for the Bewitched persons, at the same time
that the Specter representing the Witches Troubled them, to be visited with
Apparitions of Ghosts, pretending to have bin Murdered by the Witches then
represented. And sometimes the confessions of the witches afterward
acknowledged those very Murders, which these Apparitions* charged upon them;
although they had never heard what Informations had been given by the Sufferers.

There were such Apparitions of Ghosts testified by some of the present
sufferers, and the Ghosts affirmed that this How had Murdered them: which
things were Feared but not proved.

III. This How, had made some Attempts of ^oyning to the Church, at Ipswich,
several years ago; ^ut she was denied an Admission into that Holy Society,
partly, through a suspicion of witchcraft, then urged against her. And there now
came in Testimony, of Preternatural Mischiefs, presently befalling some that
had been Instrumental to Debar her from the Communion, whereupon she was
Intruding.

IV. There was a particular Deposition of Joseph Safford, That his Wife had
conceived an extreme Aversion, to this How, on the Reports of her Witchcrafts:
but How, one day taking her by the hand, and saying, I believe you are not
Ignorant of the great Scandal, that I ly under, by an evil Report Raised upon
me. She immediately, unreasonably, and unperswadeably, even like one Enchanted,
began to take this Woman's part. How being soon after propounded, as desiring an
Admission to the Table of the Lord, some of the pious Brethren were unsatisfied
about her. The Elders appointed, a Meeting to hear Matters objected against
her; and no Arguments in the world could hinder this Goodwife Safford, from
going to the Lecture. She did indeed promise with much ado* that she would not
go to the Church-Meeting, yet she could not refrain going thither also. How Is
Affayrs there were so Canvased, that she came off rather Guilty, than Cleared;
nevertheless Goodwi^e Safford could not forbear taking her by the hand, and
saying, Though you are Condemned before men, you are Justified before God. She
was quickly taken i^ a very strange manner; Frantic, Raring, Raging* and
Crying out, Goody How must come into the Church; she is a precious Saint, and
though she be Condemned before Men, she is Justified before God. So she continued
for the space of two or three Hours; and then fell into a Trance. But coming to
her self, she cry^d out, Ha! I was mistaken, and afterward again repeated,
(...) I was mistaken! Being asked by a stander-b^, Wherein? She replied, I
thought Goody How, had been a Precious Saint of God, but now I see she is a
Witch. She has Bewitched me, and my Child, and we shall never be well, till
there be Testimony for her, that she may be taken into the Church. And How said
afterward, that she was very Sorry to see Safford at the Church-Meeting
mentioned. Safford after this, declared herself to be afflicted by the Shape,
of How; and from that Shape she endured many Miseries.

V. John How Brother to the Husband of the prisoner testified, that he refusing
to accompany the prisoner unto her Examination as was by her desired,
immediately some of his Cattle, were Bewitched to Death, Leaping three or four
foot high, turning about, Squeaking, Falling, and Dying, at once; and ^oing to
cut off an Ear, for an use, that might as well perhaps have been Omitted, the
Hand wherein he held his knife, was taken very Numb; and so it remained, and
full of Pain for several Days; being not well at this very Time. And he
suspect^d this prisoner, for the Author of it.

VI. Nehemiah Abbot testify,d, that unusual and mischievous Accidents would
befall his cattle, whenever he had any Difference with this Prisoner* Once,
Particularly, she wished his Ox Choked* and within a Little while, that Ox
was Choked with a Tu^nip in his Throat. At another time, refusing to lend his
horse, at the Request of her Daughter, the horse was in a Preternatural manner
abused. And several other Odd Things, of that kind were testified.

VII. There came in Testimony, that one goodwife Sherwin, upon some Difference
with How, was Bewitched, and, that she Died, Charging this How of ^aving an
Hand in her Death. And that other People, had their Barrels of Drink
unaccountably mischief'd, spoilt, and spilt, upon their Displeasing of her.

The things in themselves, were Trivial; but there being such a Course of them,
it made them the more to be considered. Among others, Marth^ Wood gave her
Testimony, that a Little after, her Father had been employed in gathering an
Account of this Howes Conversation, they once and again Lost Great Quantities
of Drink, out of their Uessels* in such a manner, as they could ascribe to
nothing but Witchcraft. As also, that How giving her some Apples, when she had
eaten of them, she was taken with a very strange kind of a maze, insomuch that
she knew not what she said or did.

VIII. There was Likewise a cluster of Depositions, that one Isaac Cummings,
refusing to lend hi^ Mare, unto the Husband of this How, the mare was within a
Day or two* taken in a strange condition. The Beast seemed much Abused; being
Bruised, ^s if she had been Running over the Rocks, and marked where the Bridle
went, as if burnt with a Red hot Bridle. Moreover, one using a Pipe of Tobacco
for the Cure of the Beast, a blew Flame ^ssued out of her, took hold of her
Hair, and not only Spread and Burnt on her, but it also flew upwards toward
the Roof of the Barn, and had ^ike to have set the Barn on Fire. And the Mare
^y'd very suddenly.

IX. Timothy Perley and his Wife, Testified, not ^nly that unaccountable
Mischiefs, befell their Cat^le, upon their having of Differences, with this
Prisoner: but also, that they had a Daughter de^troy'd by Witchcrafts; which
Daughter still charged How, as the cause of her Affliction: and it was noted,
that she would be struck down, whenever How were spoken of. She was often
endeavored to be Thrown into the Fire, and into the Water, in her strange
Fits; though her Father had Corrected her, for Charging How with Bewitching her,
yet (as was testified by others also) she said, she was sure of it, and must die
standing to (...). Accordingly she Charged How to the very Death; and said,
Though How could Afflict and Tor^ent her Body, yet she could not Hurt her Soul:
and, that the Truth of this matter would appear, when she ^ould be Dead and
Gone*

X. Francis Lane, testified, That being hired by the Husband of this How, to
get him a parcel of Posts and Rails, this Lane hired John Pearly to assist him.
This Prisoner then told Lane, that she believed the Posts and Rails would not
do, because John Perley helped him; but that if he had got them alone, without
John Pearlies help, they might have done well enough. When James How came to
receive his Posts and Rails of Lane, How taking them up by the ends, they, though
good and sound, yet unaccountably broke off, so that Lane was forced to get
Thirty or Forty more. And this Prisoner being informed of it, she said, she
told him so before; because Pearly helped about them.

XI. Afterward, ^^ere came in the Confessions of several other (penitent)
Witches, which affirmed this How, to be one of those, who with the^ had been
baptized by the Devil, in the River, (...) Newbery-Falls: before which, he made
them there kneel down by the Brink of the River, and Worship him.

V The TRIAL of MARTHA CARRIER, at the Court of Oyer and Terminer Held by
Adjournment at, Salem. August 2. 1692.
I. MARTHA CARRIER, was Indicted for the Bewitching of certain Person^
according to the Form usual in such Cases. Plead^ng Not Guilty, to her
Indictment, there were First ^^ought in a considerable number of the Bewitched
^ersons; who not only made the Court sensible of (...) horrid Witchcraft
committed upon them, but al^^ deposed, That it was Martha Carrier, or her
^hape, that Grievously Tormented them, by Biting, Pricking, Pinching, and
Choking of them. It was further deposed, that while this Carrier was on her
Examination, before the Magistrates, the Poor People were so Tortured that
every one Expected their Death upon the very Spott; but that upon the binding
of Carrier, they were eased. Moreover the Look of Carrier, then laid the
Afflicted people for Dead; and her Touch, if her Eye at the same Time were off
them, raised tnem again. Which things were also ^ow seen upon her Trial. And it
was Testified, that upon the mention of some having their Necks twisted almost
round, by the Shape of this Carrier, she replied, Its no matter, though their
Necks had been twisted quite off.

II. Before the Trial of this prisoner, several of her own Children, had
frankly and fully confessed, not only that they were Witches themselves, but
that this their Mother had made them so. This Confession they made with great
shows of Repen^ance, and with much Demonstration of Truth. They Related Place,
Time, Occasion; they gave ^n account of Journeyes, Meetings, and Mischiefs ^y
them performed; and were very credible in what they said. Nevertheless, this
Evidence was not produced against the Prisoner at the Bar, inasmuch as there
was other Evidence enough to proceed upon.

III. Benjamin Abbot, gave in his Testimony, that last March was a twelve
month, this Carrier was very Angry with him, upon laying out some Land, near
her Husbands: Her Expressions in this Anger, were, That she would stick as
close to Abbot, as the Bark stuck to the Tree, and that he should Repent of it,
before seven years came to an end, so as Doctor Prescot should never cure him.
These words were heard by others, besides Abbot himself; who also heard her
say, She would hold his Nose as close to the Grindstone, as ever it was held
since his Name was Abbot. Presently after this, he was taken with a swelling in
his Foot, and then with a pain in his side: and exceedingly Tormented. It bred
unto a sore, which was Lanced by Doctor Prescot, and several Gallons of
Corruption ran out of it. For six weeks it continued very bad; and then another
sore bred in his Groin, which was also Lanc'd by Doctor Prescot. Another Sore
then bred in his Groin, which was likewise Cut, and put him to very great
Misery. He was brought unto Deaths Door, and so remained until Carrier was
taken, and carried away by the Constable; from which very day, he began to
mend, and so grew better every day, and is well ever since.

Sarah Abbot also his Wife testified, that her Husband was not only all this
while Afflicted in his Body, but also that strange, extraordinary and
unaccountable Calamities befell his Cattle; their Death being such as they could
guess at no Natural Reason for.

IV. Allin Toothaker testified, That Richard, the Son of Martha Carrier, having
some Difference with him, pulled him down by the Hair of the Head. When he Rose
again, he was going to strike at Richard Carrier; but fell down flat on his
Back to ^he ground, and had not power to stir hand or ^oot, until he told
Carrier he yielded; and the^ ^e saw the Shape of Martha Carrier, go off his
Breast.

This Toothaker, had Received a Wound in the Wars; and he now testified, that
Martha Carrier ^old him, He should never be Cured. Just before the Apprehending
of Carrier, he could thrust a knitting Needle into his Wound, four Inches Deep;
but presently after her being Siezed, he was thoroughly Healed.

He further testified, That when Carrier and he sometimes were at variance, she
would clap her hands at him, and say, He should get nothing by it; Whereupon he
several times lost his Cattle, by strange Deaths, whereof no Natural Causes
could be given.

V. John Rogger also testified, That upon the threatening words of this
malicious Carrier, his Cattle would be strangely Bewitched; as was more
particularly then described.

VI. Samuel Preston testified, that about two years ago, having some Difference
with Martha Carrier, he lost a Cow in a strange Preternatural unusual manner;
and about a month after this, the said Carrier, having again some Difference
with him, she told him; He had Lately lost a Cow, and it should not be long
before he Lost another! which accordingly came to Pass; for he had a Thriving
and well-kept Cow, which without any known cause quickly fell down and Died.

VII. Phebe Chandler testified, that about a Fortnight before the apprehension
of Martha Carrier, on a Lord's Day, while the Psalm was singing, in the Church,
this Carrier then took her by the shoulder and shaking her, asked her, where
she Lived? she made her no Answer, although as Carrier, who lived next door to
her Fathers House, could not in reason but know who she was. Quickly after
this, as she was at several times crossing the Fields, she heard a voice, that
she took to be Martha Carriers, and it seemed as if it was over her Head. The
voice told her, she should within two or three days be Poisoned. Accordingly,
within such a Little time, One Half of her Right Hand, became greatly swollen,
and very painful; as also part of her Face; whereof she can give no account how
it came. It continued very ^ad for some days; and several times since, she has
had a great pain in her Breast; and been so siezed on her Legs, that she has
hardly been able to go. She added, that lately, going well to the House of God,
Richard, the Son of Martha Carrier, Looked very earnestly upon her, and
immediately her hand, which had formerly been poisoned, as is abovesaid, began
to pain her greatly, and she had a strange Burning at her stomach; but was
then struck deaf, so that she could not hear any of the prayer, or singing,
till the two or three last words of the Psalm.

VIII. One Foster, who confessed her own Share in the Witchcraft for which the
Prisoner stood indicted, affirmed, That she had seen the Prisoner at some of
their Witch-Meetings, and that it was this Carrier, who persuaded her to be a
Witch. She confessed, That the Devil carried them on a Pole, to a
Witch-Meeting; but the Pole broke, and she hanging about Carriers Neck, they
both fell down, and she then Received an Hurt by the Fall, whereof she was not
at this very time Recovered.

IX. One Lacy, who likewise confessed her Share in this Witchcraft, now
Testified, That she and the Prisoner were once Bodily present at a
Witch-meeting in Salem-Village; and that she knew the Prisoner to be a Witch,
and to have been at ^ Diabolical Sacrament, and that the Prisoner was ^he
undoing of her, and her Children, by Enticing them into the Snare of the Devil.

X. Another Lacy, who also Confessed her share in this Witchcraft, now
Testified, That the Prisoner was at the Witch-Meeting, in Salem Village, Where
they had Bread and Wine Administered unto them.

XI. In the Time of this Prisoners Trial, one Susanna Shelden, in open Court
had her Hands Unaccountably Tied together with a Wheel-band, so fast that
without Cutting, it could not be Loosed: It was done by a Spectre; and the
Sufferer affirmed, it was the Prisoners.

Memorandum* This Rampant Hag, Martha Carrier, (...) the Person, of whom the
Confessions of the W^^ches, and of her own Children among the (...), agreed,
That the Devil had pro^^sed he^, (...) should be Queen of Hell.

HAving thus far done the Service imposed upon me; I will further pursue it, by
relating a few of those Matchless, CURIOSITIES, with which the Witchcraft now
upon us, has entertained us. And I shall Report nothing but with Good
Authority, and what I would Invite all my Readers to examine, while it is yet
Fresh and New, that if there be found any mistake, it may be as willingly
Retracted, as it was unwillingly Committed.

The First CURIOSITY.
I. It Is very Remarkable to see what an Impious and Impudent Imitation of Divine
Things, is Api^^ly affected by the Devil, in several of those matters, whereof
the Confessions of our Witches, and the Afflictions of our Sufferers have
informed us.

That Reverend and Excellent Person, Mr. John Higginson, in My Conversation
with him, Once invited me to this Reflection; That the Indians which came from
far to settle about Mexico, were in their Progress to that Settlement, under a
Conduct of the Devil, very strangely Emulating what the Blessed God gave to
Israel in the Wilderness.

Acosta, is our Author for it, That the Devil in their Idol Vitzlipultzli,
governed that mighty Nation. He commanded them to leave their Country,
promising to make them Lords over all the Provinces possessed by Six other
Nations of Indians, and give them a Land abounding with all precious things.
They went forth, carrying their Idol with them, in a Coffer of Reeds, supported
by Four of their Principal Priests; with whom he still Discoursed, in secret;
Revealing to them the Successes, and Accidents of their way. He advised them,
when to March, and where to Stay, and without his Commandment they moved not.
The first thing they did, wherever they came, was to Erect a Tabernacle, for
their False God; which they set always in the midst of their Camp, and there
placed the Ark upon an Altar. When they, Tired with pains, talked of,
proceeding no f^rther in their Journey, than a certain pleasant Stage, whereto
they were arrived, this Devil in one Night, horribly killed them that had
started this Talk, by pulling out their Hearts. And so they passed on, till
they came to Mexico.

The Devil which then thus imitated what was in the Church of the Old
Testament, now among Us would Imitate the Affayrs of the Church in the New. The
Witches do say, that they form themselves much after the manner of
Congregational Churches; and that they have a Baptism and a Supper, and
Officers among them, abominably Resembling those of our Lord.

But there are many more of these Bloody Imitations, if the Confessions of the
Witches are to be Received; which I confess, ought to be but with very much of
Caution.

What is their striking down with a fierce Look? What is their making of the
Afflicted Rise, with a touch of their Hand? What is their Transportation through
the Air? What is their Traveling in Spirit, while their Body is cast into a
Trance? What is their causing of Gatt^^ to run mad and perish? What is their
Entering their Names in a Book? What is their coming together from all parts, at
the Sound of a Trumpet? What is their Appearing sometimes Clothed with Light
or Fire upon them? What is their Covering of themselves and their Instruments
with Invisibility? But a Blasphemous Imitation of certain things recorded about
our Savior, or His Prophets, or the Saints in the Kingdom of God.

A Second CURIOSITY.
II. In all the Witchcraft which now Grievous^^^ Vexes us, I know not whether
any thing be more Unaccountable, than the Trick which the Witches have to
render themselves, and their Tools Invisible. Witchcraft seems to be the Skill
of Applying the Plastic Spirit of the World, unto some unlawful purposes, by
means of a Confederacy with Evil Spirits. Yet one would wonder how the Evil
Spirits themselves can do some things; especially at Invisibilizing of the
Grossest Bodies. I can tell the Name of an Ancient Author, who pretends to show
the way, how a man may come to walk about Invisible, and I can tell the Name of
another Ancient Author, who pretends to Explode that way. But I will not speak
too plainly, Lest I should unawares Poison some of my Readers, as the Pious
Hemingius did one of his ^^^pils, when he only by way of Diversion recited
^^^pell, which, they had said, would cure Agues. Thus much I will say; The
notion of procuring Invisibility, by any Natural Expedient, yet known, is* I
Believe, a mere PLINYISM; How far it may be obtained by a Magical Sacrament, is
best known to the Dangerous Knaves that have Tried it. But our Witches do seem
to have got the Knack: and this is one of the Things, mat make me think,
Witchcraft will not be fully understood, until the Day when there shall not be
one Witch in the World.

There are certain people, very Dogmatical about these matters; but I Will give
them only these Three^Bones to Pick.

First, One of our Bewitched people, was cruelly assaulted by a Spectre* that,
she said, ran at her with a Spindle: though no body else in the Room, could see
either, the Spectre or the Spindle. A^ last, in her miseries, giving a Snatch
at the Spectre, she pulled the Spindle away; and it was no sooner got into her
hand, but the other people then present, beheld, that it was indeed a Real,
Proper, Iron Spindle, belonging they knew, to whom; which when they Locked up
very safe, it was nevertheless by Demons unaccountably stole away, to do
further mischief.

Secondly. Another of our Bewitched People, was haunted with a most abusive
Spectre, which came to her, she said, with a Sheet about her. After she had
undergone a deal of Teaze, from the Annoyances of the Spectre, she gave a
Violent Snatch at the Sheet that was upon it; wherefrom she tore a Corner,
which in her Hand immediately became Visible to a Roomful of Spectators; a
Palpable Corner of a Sheet. Her Father, who was now holding her, Caught that
he might Keep what his Daughter had so strangely Siezed* ^ut the unseen
Spectre* had like to have pulled his Hand off, by Endeavoring to wrest it from
him; however he still held it, and I suppose has it, still to show: it being
but a few Hours ago, namely about the Beginning of this October, that this
Accident happened; in the family of one Pitman, at Manchester.

Thirdly, A young man, delaying to procure Testimonials for his Parents, who
being under confinement on Suspicion of Witchcraft, required him to do that
Service for them, was quickly pur^^ed with odd Inconveniences. But once above
^he Rest, an Officer going to put his Brand on the Horns of some Cows,
belonging to these people, which though he had Siez'd for some of their Debts,
yet he was willing to leave in their Possession, for the Subsistence, of the
poor Family* this young man helped in holding the Cows to be thus Branded. The
three first Cows he held well enough; but when the hot Brand was clap't upon
the Fourth, he winc'd and shrunk at such a rate, as that he could hold the Cow
no longer. Being afterward Examined about it, he Confessed, That at that very
Instant when the Brand entered the Cows (...), exactly the like Bur^ing Brand
was clapped upon his own Thigh; where he has Exposed the Lasting Marks of it,
unto such as asked to see them.

Unriddle these Things. -- Et Eris mihi magnus Apollo.

A Third CURIOSITY.
III. If a Drop of Innocent Blood should be shed, in the Prosecution of the
Witchcrafts among us, how unhappy are we! For which cause, I cannot express my
self in better terms, than those of a most Worthy Person, who lives near the
present Center of these things. The Mind of God in these matters, is to be
carefully looked into, with due Circumspection, that Satan deceive us not with
his Devices, who transforms himself into an Angel of Light, and may pretend
justice, and yet intend Mischief. But on the other side, if the Storm of
Justice do now fall only on the Heads of those Guilty Witches and Wretches
which have defiled our Land, How Happy!

The Execution of some that have lately Dyed, has been immediately attended,
with a strange Deliverance of some, that had lain for many years, in a most sad
Condition, under, they knew not whose Evil Hands. As I am abundantly satisfied,
That many of the Self-Murders committed here, have been the effects of a Cruel,
and Bloody, Witchcraft leting fly Demons upon the miserable Seneca's* thus, it
has been admirable unto me to see* how a Devilish Witchcraft sending Devils
upon them, has, driven many poor people to Despair, and persecuted their minds,
with such Buzzes of Atheism and Blasphemy, as has made them even run Distract^^
with Terrors: and some long Bowed down under such a Spirit of Infirmity, have
been marvelously Recovered upon the Death of the Witches.

One Whetford particularly ten years ago, challenging ^f Bridge^ Bishop (whose
Trial you have had) with ^tealing of a Spoon, Bishop threatened her very
direful^y: presently after this, was Whetford in the Night, and (...) her Bed,
visited by Bishop, with one Parker, who ^aking the Room Light at their coming
in, there dis^oursed of several mischiefs they would inflict upon ^er. At last,
they pulled her out, and carried her unto the Seaside, there to drown her; but
she calling upon God, they left her, though not without Expressions of their
Fury. From that very Time, this poor Whetford ^as utterly spoilt, and grew, a
Tempted, Froward, Crazed sort of a Woman; a vexation to her self, and all about
her; and many ways unreasonable. In this Distraction she lay, till those women
were Apprehended, by the Authority; then she began to mend; and upon their
Execution, was presently and perfectly Recovered, from the ten years madness
that had been upon her.

A Fourth CURIOSITY.
IV. It Is a thousand pitties, that we should permit our Eyes, to be so
Blood-shot with passions, as to loose the sight of many wonderful Things,
wherein the Wisdom and Justice of God, would be Glorified. Some of those
Things, are the frequent Apparitions of Ghosts, whereby many Old Murders among
us, come to be considered. And, among many Instances of this kind, I will
single out one, which concerned a poor* man, lately Pressed unto Death, because
of his Refusing to Plead for his Life. I shall make an Extra^^ of a (...),
which was written to my Honorable Friend, Samuel Sewal, Esquire by Mr. Putman, to
this purpose;

The Last Night my Daughter Ann, was grievously Tormented by Witches,
Threatening that she should be Pressed to Death, before Giles Cory. But through
the Goodness of a Gracious God, she had at last a little Respite. Whereupon
there appeared unto her (she said) a man in a Winding Sheet; who told her that
Giles Cor^ had Murdered him, by Pressing him to Death with his Feet; but that
the Devil there appeared unto him, and Covenanted with him, and promised him,
He should not be Hanged. The Apparition said* God Hardened his Heart; that he
should not hearken to the Advice of the Court, and so Die an easy Death* because
as it said, It must be done to him as he has done to me. The Apparition also
said, That Giles Cory, was carried to the Court for this, and that the Jury had
found the Murder, and that her Father knew the man, and the thing was done
before she was born. Now Sir, This is not a little strange to us; that no body
should Remember these things, all the while that Giles Cory was in Prison, and
so often before the Court. For all people now Remember very well, (and the
Records of the Court also mention it,) That about Seventeen Years ago, Giles
Cory kept a man in his House, that was almost a Natural Fool; which Man Died
suddenly. A Jury was Impannel'd upon him, among whom was Dr. Zorobbabel
En^icot; who found the man bruised to Death, and having clodders of Blood about
his Heart. The Jury, whereof several are yet alive, brought in the man
Murdered; but as if some Enchantment had hindered the Prosecution of the Matter,
the Court Proceeded not against Giles Cory, though it cost him a great deal of
Money to get off. Thus the Story.

THE Reverend and Worthy Author, having at the Direction of His EXCELLENCY the
Governor, so far Obliged the Public, as to give some Account of the
Sufferings brought upon the Country by Witchcraft; and of the Trials which
have passed upon several Executed for the Same:

Upon Perusal thereof, We find the Matters of Fact and Evidence, Truly
reported. And a Prospect given, of the, Methods of Conviction, used in the
Proceedings of the Court at Salem

Boston Octo^. 11. 1692. William Stoughton Samuel Sewall.


BUT is New England, the only Christian Country, that has undergone such
Diabolical Molestations? No, there are other Good people, that have in this way
been harassed; but none in Circumstances more like to Ou^s, than the people of
God, in Sweedland. The story is a very ^amous one; and it comes to Speak
English by the Acute Pen of the Excellent and Renowned Dr. Horneck. I shall
only Single out a few of the more Memorable passages therein Occuring; and
where it agrees with what happened among ourselves, my Reader shall understand,
by my inserting a Word of every such thing in Black Letter.

I. It was in the Year 1669. and 1670. That at Mo^ra in Sweedland, the Devils
by the help of Witches, committed a most horrible outrage. Among other
Instances of Hellish Tyranny there exercised, One was, That Hundreds of their
Children, were usually in the Night fetched from their Lodgings, to a Diabolical
Rendezvous, at a place they called, Blockula, where the Monsters that so
Spirited them, Tempted them all manner of Ways to Associate with them. Yea,
such was the perilous Growth of this Witchcraft, that Persons of Quality began
to send their Children into other Countries to avoid it.

II. The Inhabitants had earnestly sought God by Prayer; and Yet their
Affliction Continued. Whereupon Judges had a Special Commission; to find and
root out the Hellish Crew; and the rather, because another County in the
Kingdom, which had been so molested, was Delivered upon the Execution of the
Witches.

III. The Cxamination, was begun with a Day of Humiliation, appointed by
Authority. Whereupon the Commissioners Consulting, how they might resist such a
Dangerous Flood, the Suffering Children, were first Examined; and though they
were Questioned One by One apart, yet their Declarations All Agreed. The
Witches Accused in these Declarations, were then Examined; and though at first
they obstinately Denied, yet at length many of them Ingenuously Confessed the
Truth of what the Children had said; owning with Tears, that the Devil, whom
they called, L^eyta, had Scopt their Mouths; but he being now Gone from them,
they could No Longer Conceal the Business. The things by them Acknowleged, most
wonderfully Agreed with what other Witches in other places had Confessed.

IV. They Confessed, That they did use to Call upon the Devil, who thereupon
would Carry them away, over the Tops of Houses, to a Green Meddow, where they
gave themselves unto him. Only one of them said, That sometimes the Devil only
took away her Strength, Leaving her Body on the Ground; but she went at other
times in Body too.

V. Their manner was to come into the Chambers of people, and fetch away their
Children upon Beasts, of the Devils providing: promising Fine Clothes and other
Fine Things unto them, to Inveagle them. They said, They never had power to do
thus, till of Late; but now the Devil did Plague and Beat them, if they did not
gratify him, in this piece of Mischief. They said, They made use of all sorts
of Instruments in their Journeys! Of Men, of Beasts, of Posts; the M^n they
commonly laid asleep at the place, whereto they Rode them; and if the Children
mentioned the Names of them that Stole them away, they were miserably Scourged
for it, until some of them were killed. The Judges found the Marks of the
Lashes on some of them; but the Witches said, They would Quickly vanish.
Moreover the Children would be in strange Fits, after they were brought home,
from these Transportations.

VI. The First Thing, they said, they were to do at Bl^ckula, was to Give
Themselves unto the Devil, and Vow that they would serve him. Hereupon, they
Cut their Fingers, and with Blood, writ their Names in his Book. And he also
caused them to be Baptized by such Priests, as he had, in this Horrid Company.
In some of them, the Mark of the Cat Finger was to be found. They said, That
the Devil gave Meat and Drink, as to Them, so to the Children they brought with
them: that afterward their Custom was to Dance before him; and Swear and
Curse most horribly. They said, That the Devil showed them a great, Frightful,
Cruel Dragon, telling them, If they Confessed any Thing, he would let loose
that Great Devil upon them. They added, That the Devil had a Church; and that
when the Judges were coming, he told them, He would kill them all; and that
some of them had Attempted to Murder the Judges, but Could Not.

VII. Some of the Children, talked much of a White Angel, which did use to
Forbid them, what the Devil had Bid them to do; and Assure them that these
Doings would Not Last Long; but that what had been done was permitted for the
wickedness of the People. This White Angel, would sometimes rescue the
Children, from Going in, with the Witches.

VIII. The Witches confessed many mischiefs done by them; declaring with what
kind of Enchanted Tools, they did their Mischiefs. They sought especially to
Kill the Mini^ter, of E^fdale, but could not. But some of them said, That such
as they wounded, would Be recovered, upon or before their Execution.

IX. The Judges would fain have seen them show some of their Tricks; but they
Unanimously Declared, That Since they had Confessed, all, they found all their
Witchcraft gone; and the Devil then Appeared very Terrible unto them,
threatening with an Iron Fork, to thrust them into a Burning Pi^, if they
persisted in their Confession.

X. There were discovered no less than Threescore and ten Witches: in One
Village, Three and Twenty of which Freely Confessing their Crimes, were
condemned to Die. The rest, ( One pretending she was with Child) were sent to
Fahlun^, where most of them were afterward executed. Fifteen Children, which
confessed themselves engaged in this Witchery, Dyed as the Rest. Six and Thirty
of them, between Nine and Sixteen years of Age, who had been less guilty, were
forced to run the Gantlet, and be lashed on their hands, once a Week, for a
year together. Twenty more who had less inclination to these Infernal
enterprises, were lashed with Rods upon their Hands for three Sundays together,
at the Church-Door. The number of the seduced Children, was about Three
Hundred. This course, together with Weekly Prayers, in all the Churches through
the Kingdom, issued in the Deliverance of the Country.

XI. The most Accomplished Dr. Horneck inserts a most wise cauti^n, in his
preface to this Narrative; says he, There is no Public Calamity, but some Ill
people, will serve themselves of the sad providence, and make use of it for
their own Ends; as Thieves, when an House or Town is on Fire, will steal what
they can. And he mentions a Remarkable Story of a Young Woman, at Stockholm, in
the year, 1676. Who accused her own Mother of being a Witch; and swore
positively, that she had carried her away in the Night. The poor Woman was
burnt upon it: professing her Innocence to the last. But though she had been an
Ill Woman, yet it afterward proved, that she was not such an one; for her
Daughter came to the Judges, with hideous Lamentations, Confessing, That she
had wronged her Mother, out of a wicked spite against her; whereupon the Judges
gave order for her Execution too.

But, so much of these things; And, now, Lord, make these Labors of thy
Servant, Profitable to thy People!

Errata.
PAge 3. l. Last ^. as if p. 6. l. 22. f. four. r. five p. 19. l. 3. r.
Aluminous. p. 52. l. 20. r. these be. p. 57. l. 21. r. whereof. p. 67. l. 14.
r. Severely. p. 80. l. 16. r. over. The Discourse on, The Devil Discovered, is
wrong paged, after p. 8. (17) being put for (9)

THE Devil Discovered
2. Cor. II.11. We are not Ignorant of His DEVICES.


OUr Blessed Savior has blessed us, with a counsil, as Wholesome and as
Needful, as any that can be given us, in Math. 26.41. Watch and Pray, that ye
Enter not into Temptation. As there is a Tempting Flesh, and a Tempting World,
which would seduce us from Our Obedience to the Laws of God, so there is a Busy
Devil, who is by way of Eminency called, The Tempter; because by him, the
Temptations of the Flesh and the World are managed.

It is not One Devil alone, that has Cunning or Power enough to apply the
Multitudes of Temptations, whereby Mankind is daily diverted from the Service
of God; No, the High Places of Our Air, are Swarming full of those Wicked
Spirits, whose Temptations trouble us; they are so many, that it seems, no less
than a Legion, or more than Twelve Thousands may be spared, for the Vexation of
one miserable man. But because those Apostate Angels, are all United, under one
Infernal Monarch, in the Designs of Mischief, ^tis in the Singular Number, tha^
they are spoken of. Now, the Devil, whose Malice and Envy, prompts him to do
what he can, that We may be as Unhappy as himself, does ordinarily use more
Fraud, than Force, in his assaulting of us; he that assailed our First Parents,
in a Serpent, will still Act Like a Serpent, rather then a Lion, in prosecuting
of his wicked purposes upon us, and for us to guard against the Wiles of the
Wicked One, is one of the greatest cares, with which our God has charged us.

We are all of us liable to various Temptations every day, whereby if we are
carried aside from the strait Paths of Righteousness, we get all sorts of
wounds unto ourselves. Of Temptation, I may say, as the Wise Man said, of
Mortality; There is no discharge from that War. The Devil fell hard upon both
Adams, nor may any among the Children of both, imagine to be excused. The Son
of God Himself, had this Dog of Hell, barking at Him; and much more may the
Children of Men, look to be thus Visited; indeed, there is hardly any
Temptation, but what is, Common to Man. When I was considering, how to spend
one Hour in Raising a most Effectual and Profitable Breast-Work, against the
Inroads of this En^my, I perceived it would be done, by a short answer to this
CASE

What are those Usual Methods of Temptation, with which the Powers of Darkness
do assault the Children of Men?

The ^^^inthians, having upon the Apostles Direction, Excommunicated one of
their Society, who had married his Mother-in-law, and this, as it is thought,
while his own Father was Living too; the Apostle encourages them to Re-admit
that man, upon his very deep and ^harp Repentance. He gives diverse Reasons of
his propounding this unto them; whereof one is, Lest Satan should get advantage
of them; for, had the man miscarried, under any Rigor of the Sentence
continued upon him, after his Repentance, it is well if the Church it self had
not quickly fallen to pieces thereupon; be sure, the Success of the Gospel had
been more than a little Incommoded. The Apostle upon this Occasion, intimates,
That Satan has his Devices; by which word are meant, Artifices or Contrivances
used for the Deceiving of those that are Treated with them* Well, But what
shall we do that we may come to this Corinthian Attainment, We are not Ignorant
of Satan's Devices? [Non euivis homini Contingit!]

Truly, The Devil has Mill Necendi Arts; and it will be impossible for us, to
run over all the Stratagems and Policies of our Adversary. I shall only attempt
a few Observations upon the Tempta^^^^ of our Lord Jesus Christ: who was
Tempted in all things like unto us, except in our Sins. When we read the
Temptations of our Lord Jes^^ Christ, in the Fourth Chapter of Matthew, There,
Thence, you will understand, what was once counted so difficult; Even, The way
of a Serpent upon the Rock. There are certain Ancient and Famous Methods which
the Devil (...) his Temptations, does mostly accustom himself unto; which is
not so much from any B^rrenness, or Sluggishness in the Devil, but because he
has had the Encouragement of a, ^rob^^um es^, upon those horrid Methods. How
did the Devil assault the First Adam? It was with Temptations drawn from
Pleasure, and Profit, and Honor, which, as the Apostle notes, in 1 John 2.16.
are, All that is in the World. With the very same Temptations it (...), that he
fell upon the Second Adam too. Now* in those Temptations, you will see the more
Usual Methods, whereby the Devil would be Ensnaring of us; and I beseech you to
attend unto the following Admonitions, a^ those Warnings of God, which the
Lives of your Souls depend upon your taking of.

There were especially Three Remarkable Assaults of Temptations, which the
Devil it seems, visibly made upon our Lord; after he had been more Invisibly
for Forty Days together Tempting of that Holy One; and we may make a few
Distinct Remarks upon them all.

The first of our Lords three Temptations is thus related, in Mat. 4.3. He was
an Hungry; and when the Tempter came to Him, he said, If thou be the Son of God
Command that these Stones be made Bread.

From whence, take these Remarks.

I. The Devil will ordinarily make our Conditions, to be the Advantages of his
Temptations. When our Lord was Hungry, then, Bread! Bread! shall be all the Cry
of his Temptation; the Devil puts him upon a wrong step^ for the getting of
Bread. There is no Condition, bu^ what has indeed some Hunger accompanying of
it; and the Devil marks what it is, that we are Hungry for. One man's Condition
makes him Hunger for Preferments, or Employments; another man's makes him Hunger
for Cash* or Land, or Trade; another man's makes him Hunger for M^^riments, or
Diversions: And the Condition (...) every Afflicted Man, makes him Hunger with
Impatience for Deliverance. Now the Devil will be sure to suit his P^^s^asions
with our Conditions. When he has our Condition ^o speak with him, and for him,
then thinks he, I am sure this man will now hearken to my Proposa^^! Hence* if
men are in Prosperity, the Devil will Tempt them to Forgetfulness of God; if
they ae in Adversit^* he will Tempt them to Murmu^ing at God* in all the
Expressions of those Impieties. Wise Agur was ^ware of this; in Prove. 30.9.
says he, ^f a man be Full, he shall be* Tempted, To Deny God and say, Who is
the Lord? I^ a man be Poor, he shall be Tempted, To Steal, and take the Name of
God in vain. The Devil will Talk suitably. If you ponder your Conditions, you
may expect you shall be Tempted agreeably thereunto.

II. The Devil does often manage his Temptations, by urging of our Necessities.
Our Lord, was thus by the Devil bawled upon; You want Bread; and you^l Starve,
if in my way you get it not. The Devil will show some Forbidden Thing unto us,
and plead concerning it, as of Bread we use to say, It must be had. Necessity
has a wonderful Compulsion in it. You may see what Necessity will do, if you
read in Deuteronomy. 28.56. The Tender and the Delicate Woman among you, her eye shall
be evil toward the Children what she shall Bear, for she shall eat them for
want of all Things. The Devil will persuade us that there is a Necessity of our
doing what he does propound unto us; and then though the Laws of God about us
were so many Walls of Stone, yet we shall break through them all. That little
Inconvenience, of our coming to Beg our Bread, O what a fearful Representation
does the Devil make of it! and when once the Devil scares us to think of a
sinful thing. It must be done, we soon come to think, It ^ay be done. When the
Devil has frighted us, into an Apprehension, that it is a Needful thing which
we are prompted unto, he presently Engages all the Faculties of our Souls, to
prove, that it may be a Lawful one. The Devil told Esau, You Will Die if you don't
Sell your Birthright; the Devil told Aaron, You Will pull all the People about
your ears, if you do not countenance their Superstitions; and then they
complied immediately. Yea, sometimes, if the Devil do but Feign a Necessity, he
does thereby Gain the Hearts of Men; he did but Feign a Need, when he told
Saul, The Cattle must be Spared, and the Sacrifice must be precipitated; and he
does but Feign a Need, when he tells many a man, If you do no Service work on
the Sabbath Day, and if you don't Rob God of His Evening, you will never subsist
in the World. All the Denials of God, in the world, use to be from this Fallacy
Imposed upon us. It never can be Necessary for us to violate any Negative
Commandment in the Law of our God; where God says, Thou shall not, we cannot
upon any pretense Reply, I must. But the Devil will put a most formidable and
astonishing face of Necessity upon many of those, Abominable Things which are
hateful to the Soul of God. He Will say nothing to us about The One Thing
Needful; but the petite and the sorry Need-nots of this world, he^l set off
with most bloody Colors of Necessity. He will not say, It Is necessary for you
to maintain the Favor of your God, and secure the Welfare of your Soul; but
he will say, It Is Necessary for you to keep in with your Neighbors; and that you
and yours may have a Good Living among them.

III. The Devil does insinuate his most Horrible Temptations, with pretense, of
much Friendship and Kindness for us. He seemed very unwilling that our Lord
should want any thing that might be comfortable for him; but, he was a Devil
still! The Devil flatters our Mother Eve, as if he was desirous to make her
more Happy than her Maker did; but there was the Devil in that flattery* Sub
Amici fallere Nomen; -- to Salute men with profers to do all manner of Service
for them; and at ^he same time to Stab them as Joab did Abner of old; this is
just like the Devil, and the Devil truly has many Children that Imitate him in
it. Some very Affectionate Things were spoken once unto our Lord; Lord, be it
far from thee, that thou should suffer any Trouble! but our Lords Answer
was, in Math. 16.23. Get thee behind me, Satan. The Devil will say to a man, I
would have thee to Consult thy own Interest, and I would have Trouble to be far
from thee. He speaks there Fair Things, by the Mouths of our professed Friends
unto us, as he did by the Tongue of a Speckled Snake unto our Deluded Parents
at the first. But all this while, it is a Direction that has been wisely given
us; When he speaks fair, Believe him not; for there are Seven Abominations in
his Heart.

IV. Things in themselves Allowable and Convenient, are oftentimes turned into
sore Temptations by the Devil. He pressed our Lord unto the making of Bread;
Why, that very thing was afterward done by our Lord, in the Miracles of the
Loaves; and yet it is now a motion of the Devil, Pray, make thy self a Little
Bread. The Devil will frequently put men by, from the doing of a Seasonable
Duty; but how? truly by putting us upon another Duty, which may be at that
juncture a most Unseasonable Thing. It is said in Eccl. 8.5. A Wise man's heart
discerns both Time and Judgment. The Ill-Timing of Good Things, is One of the
chief Intregues, which the Devil has to Prosecute. The Devil himself, will Egg
us on to many a Duty; and why so? but because at that very Time a more proper
and Useful Duty, will have a Supersedeas given thereunto. And, thus there are
many Things, whereof we can say, though no more tha^ this* yet so much as this,
They are Lawful ones; by which Lawful Things -- Perimus Omnes. Where shall w^
find that the Devil has Laid our most fatal Snares? Truly, our Snares are on
the Bed, where it is Lawf^^ for us to Sleep; at the Board, where it is Lawful
for us to Sit; in the Cups, where it is Lawful to Drink; and in the Shops, where
we have Lawful Business to do. The Devil will decoye us, unto the utmost Edge
of the Liberty that is Lawful for us; and then one Little push, hurries us into
a Transgression against the Lord. And the Devil by Inviting us to a Lawful
Thing, at a wrong Time for it, Lays us under further Entanglement of Guilt
before God. It Is Lawful for people to use Recreations; but in the Evening of the
Lord Day, or the Morning of any Day, how Enmaring are they! the Devil then too
commonly bears part in the Spo^t. If Promiscuous Dancing were Lawful; though
almost all the Christian Churches in the World, have made a Scandal of it; yet
for persons to go presently from a Sermon to a Dance, is to do a thing, which
Doubtless the Devil makes good Earnings of.

V. To Distrust Gods Providence and Protection, is one of the worst Things,
into which the Devil by hi^ Temptations would be hurrying of us. He would fai^^
have driven our Lord unto a Suspicion of Gods care about Him; sa^d the Devil,
You may Die for Lack of Bread, if you do not Look better after your self, than
God is like to do for you. It is an usual Thing for Persons to des^pai^ of Gods
Fatherly Care Concerning them; they tor^ture themselves with distracting and
amazing Fears that they shall come to want before they die* Ye^, they even say
with Jonas, in Chap. 2.4. I am cast out of the Sight of God; He will not look
after me! Be i^ i^ the Devil that is the Author of all such Melancholy
Suggestions in the minds of men. It is a Thought that often raises a Fever in
the Hearts of Married Persons, when Charges grow upon them; God will never be
able in the way of my Calling, to feed and cloth all my Little Folks. It is a
Thought with which Aged Persons are often tormented, The God has all my Days
hitherto supplied me, yet I shall be pinch^d with Straits before I come to my
Journeys end. It Is a malicious Devil that raises these Evil Surmisings in the
Hearts of men. And sometimes a Distemper of Body affords a Lodging for the
Devil, from whence he shoots the cruel Bombs of such Fiery Thoughts into the
minds of many other persons. With such Thoughts does the Devil choose to
persecute us; because thereby we come to Forfeit what we Question. We Question
the Care of God, and so we Forfeit it, until perhaps the Devil do utterly Drown
us in Perdition. Our God says, Trust in the Lord, and do good, and verily thou
shall be fed. But the Devil says, Don't you Trust in God; Be afraid that you
shall not be fed; and thus he hinders men from the Doing of Good.

VI. There is nothing more Frequent in the Temptations of the Devil, then for
our Adoption to be doubted, because of our Affliction. When our Lord was in his
Penury, then says the Devil, If thou be the Son of God; he now makes an If, of
it; What? the Son of God, and yet not be able to Command a Pit of Broad! Thus,
when we are in very Afflictive Circumstances, this will be the Devils
Inference, Thou art not a Child of God. The Bible says in Heb. 12.7. If you are
Chastened, it is a shrowed sign that you cannot be Children. Since he cannot Rob
us of our Grace, he would Rob us of our Joy; and therefore having Accused us
unto God, he then Accuses God unto us. When Israel was weak and faint in the
Wilderness, then did Amalek set upon them; just so, does the Devil set upon the
People of God, when their Losses, their Crosses, their Exercises have Enfeebled
their Souls within them; and what says the Devil? Even the same that was
muttered in the Ear of the Afflicted Job, Is not this the Vprightness of thy
Ways? Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished, being Innocent? If thou wer'^ a
Child of God, He would never follow thee, with such Testimonies of his
Indignation. This is the Logic of the Devil; and he thus interrupts that
patience, and that Cheerfulness wherewith we should Suffer the Will of God.

VII. To Dispute the Divine Original and Authority of Gods Word, is not the
least of those Temptations with which the Devil Troubles us. God from Heaven,
had newly said unto our Lord, This is my Beloved Son; but now the Devil would
have him to make a Dispute of it, If thou be the Son of God. The Devil durst
not be so Impudent, and Brasen-faced, as to bid men use Pharaohs Language, Who
is the Lord, that I should obey his voice? But he will whisper into our Ears,
what he did unto our Mother Eve of old, It is not the Lord, that has spoken,
what you call his Word. The Devil would have men say unto the Scripture, what
they said unto the Prophet, in Jer. 43.2. Thou speak falsely; the Lord our
God has not sent thee to speak what thou say unto us; and he would fain have
secret and cursed Misgivings in our Hearts, That things are not altogether so
as the Scripture has represented them. The Devil would wit^ all his Heart, make
one huge Bonefire of all the Bibles in the World; and he has got millions of
Persecutors to assist him in the Suppression of that Miraculous Book. It was
the Devil once in the Tongue of a Papist that cried out, A Plague on this
Bible; this it is that does all our mischief. But because he cannot Suppress this
Book, he sets himself, to Disgrace it all that he can. Although the Scripture
carries its own Evidence with it, and be all over, so pure, so great, so true,
and so powerful, that it is impossible it should proceed from any but God
alone; yet the Devil would gladly bring some Discredit upon it, as if it were
but some Humane Contrivance; Of nothing, is the Devil more desirous, than this;
That we should not count, Christ so precious, Heaven so Glorious, Hell so
Dreadful, and Sin so odious, as the Scripture has declared it.

The Second of our Lords Three Temptatons, is related after this manner, in
Mat. 4.5, 6. Then the Devil takes him up, into the Holy City, and sets him
upon a Pinnacle of the Temple; and says unto him, if thou be the Son of God,
cast thy self down; For it is written, He shall give his Angels charge
concerning thee, and in thy Hands, they shall bear thee up, lest at any time
thou dash thy Foot against a Stone.

From whence take these Remarks.

I. The places of the greatest Holiness will not secure us from Annoyance by
the Temptations of the Devil, to the greatest wickedness. When our Lord was in
the Holy City, the Devil fell upon him there. Indeed, there is now no proper
Holiness of Places in our Days; the Signs and Means of Gods more special
Presence are not under the Gospel, tied unto any certain places: Nevertheless
there are places, where we use to enjoy much of God; and where, although God
visit not the Persons for the sake of the Places, yet he visits the Places for
the sake of the Persons. But, I am to tell you, that the Devil will visit those
Places and the best Persons there. No Place, that I know of, has got such a
Spell upon it, as will always keep the Devil out. The Meeting House wherein we
Assemble for the Worship of God, is filled with many Holy People, and many Holy
Concerns continually; but if our Eyes were so refined as the Servant of the
Prophet had his of old, I suppose we should now see a Throng of Devils in this
very place. The Apostle has intimated, that Angels come in among us; there are
Angels it seems, that hark, how I Preach, and how you Hear, at this Hour. And
our own sad Experience is enough to intimate, That the Devils are likewise
Rendevouzing here* It is Reported, in Job 1.5. When the Sons of God, came to
present themselves before the Lord, Satan came also among them. When we are in
our Church Assemblies, O how many Devils, do you imagine, crowd in among us!
There is a Devil that rocques one to Sleep; there is a Devil that makes another
to be thinking of, he scarce knows what himself; and there is a Devil, that
makes another, to be pleasing himself with wanton and wicked Speculations. It
is also possible, that we have our Closets, or our Studies, gloriously perfumed
with Devotions every day; but alas, can we shut the Devil out of them? No, Let
us go where we will, we shall still find a Devil nigh unto us. Only, when we
come to Heaven, we shall be out of his Reach for ever; O thou foul Devil; we
are going where thou can not come! He was hissed out of Paradise, and shall
never enter it any more. Yea, more than so, when the New Jerusalem comes down
into the High Places of our Air, from whence the Devil shall then be Banished,
there shall be no Devil within the Walls of that Holy City. Amen, ^ven so, Lord
Jesus* Come quickly*

II* Any other Acknowledgments of the Lord Jesus Christ, will be permitted by
the Temptations of the Devil, provided those Acknowledgments of Him, which are
True and Fu^^, may be thereby prevented. What was it, that the Devil hurried
our Lord Jesus Christ unto the Top of the Temple for? Surely it could not
merely be to and Precipices; any part of the Wilderness would have ^fforded
Them. No, it was rather to have Spectators. And why so? Why, the carnal Jews
had an Expectation a^ong them; that Elias was to fly from Heaven to the Temple;
and the Devil seems willing, that our Lord should be cried up for Elias, among
the giddy multi^ude; or any thing in the World, though never so considera^le
otherwise, rather than to be Received as, The Christ of God. The Devil will
allow his Followers to think very ^^ghly of the Lord Jesus Christ; O but he is
very loathe ^o have them think, All. We read in Col. 1.19. It has ^^eased the
Father, that in Him there should all Fullness dwell. But it is pleasing to the
Devil, that we Deny something of ^he Immense Fullness, which is in our Lord.
The Devil ^ould confess to our Lord, Thou art the Holy One of God! ^ut then he
claps in, Thou art Jesus of Nazareth; which was to conceal our Lords being,
Jesus of Bethlehem, and so, his being, The True Messiah. All the Heresies, and
all the Persecutions, that ever plagued the Church of God, have still been, to
strike at some Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. A CHRIST Entirely Acknowledged,
will save ^he Souls of them that so Acknowledge Him; but, says ^he Devil,
Whatever I do, I must not give way to that. As ^hey say, the Devil makes
Witches unable to utter all the Lords Prayer, or some such System of Religion,
without some Depravations of it; thus the Devil will consent that we may make a
very large Confession of the Lord Jesus Christ, only he will have us to deprave
it, at least in some one Important Article. Some one Honor, some one Office,
and some one Ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ* must be always left
unacknowledged, by those that (...) do as the Devil would have them.

III. High Stations in the Church of God, lay men open to violent and peculiar
Temptations of the Devil. When Our Lord was upon the Pinnacle, that is, not the
^ane, or Spire, but the Battlements of the Temple, there did the Devil pester
him, with singular Molestations, and he therein, seem^ to intend an
Entanglement for the Jews, as well as for Our Lord. Believe me, they that Stand
High, cannot Stand safe* The Devil is a Nimrod, a mighty Hunter; and common o^
little Game, will not serve his Turn: he is a Leviathan, (...) whom we may say,
as in Job. 41.34. He beholds all high Things. Men of High Seize, and Men
of High Employments, in the Church of God, must look, like Peter to be more
Sifted, and like Paul, to be more Buffeted than other Men. Feriunt Summos
Fulmina Montes* -- The Devil can raise a Storm, when God permits it, but as
for those Men that stand near Heaven, the Devil will attack them with his most
cruel storms of Thunder and Lightning. It was said, Let him that stands take
heed; but we may say, They that stand most high, have cause to take most Heed.
The Devil is a Goliath; and when he finds a Champion, he will be sure most fiercely
to Combat such a man. He is for, Killing many Birds with one Stone; and he
knows that he shall hinder a world of Good, and produce a world of Ill, if once
he can bring a man Eminently Stationed into his Toyls. Hence it is that the
Ministers of God, are more dogged by the Devil, than other persons are.
Especially such Ministers, as move in the highest Orb of Serviceableness; and
most of all such Ministers as have spent many years in Laudable Endeavors to
be Serviceable; Those Ministers are the Stars of Heaven, at which the Tail of
the Dragon, will give the most sweeping and most stinging strokes; the Devil
will find that for them, that shall make them Walk softly all their Days.
These are the men, that have ^^eepled, and vexed the Devil more than other men;
for which the Devil has an old Quarrel with them. O Neighbors, Little do you
think, what black Days of Mourn^ng, and Fasting, and Praying before the Lord,
a Raging Devil does fill the lives of such Men of God withal.

IV. The devil will make a deceitful and unfaithful use of the Scriptures to
make his Temptations forceable. When ^he Devil Solicited our Lord, unto an
evil thing, he quo^ed the Ninety first Psalm unto him, though indeed he
fallaci^usly clipped it, and maimed it, of one clause very material in (...). O
never does the Devil make such dangerous Passes at ^s, as when he does wrest
our own Sword out of our Hands, and push That upon us. We have to defend us,
that Weapon in Ephesians. 6.16. The Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God;
but when the Devil has that very Weapon to fight us with, he makes terrible
work of it. When the Devil would poison men with false Doctrines, he will quote
Scriptures for them; a Quaker himself, will have the First Chapter of John
always in his mouth. When the Devil would persuade men to vile Actions, he will
quote Scriptures for them; he will encourage men to go on in Sin, by show^ng them,
where it is said, The Lord is Ready to Pardon. I say this, The One Story of
David's Fall, in the Scripture, has been made by the Devil, an Engine for the
Damnation of many millions. The Devil will fright men from doing those things,
that are, The Things of their Peace; but How? He Will turn a Scripture into a
Scare-^row for them. The Devil will fright them from all constant Prayer to
God, by quoting that Scripture, The Sacrifice of the Wicked, is an Abomination
to the Lord; the Devil will fright them from the Holy Su^^per of God, by
quoting that Scripture, He that Eats and Drinks unworthily, Eats and Drinks
Damnation to himself. And thus the Devil will by some Abused Scripture, Terrify
the Children of God; the Scripture is written, as we are told, For our Comfort;
but it is quoted by the Devil, For our Terror. How many Godly Souls have been
cast into sinful Doubts and Fears, by the Devils foolish glosses upon that
Scripture, He that Doubts is Damned; and that, The Fearful shall have their
portion in the Burning Lake: The Devil sometimes has played the Preacher, but I
say, Be^are all silly Souls, when such a Fool is Preaching.

V. Grievous and Pulling Hurries to Self-Murder are none of the smallest
outrages, which the Devil in his Temptations commits upon us. Why, did the
Devil say to Our Lord, Cast thy self down, but in hopes that Our Lord would
have broke his Bones, in the fall? The Devil is an Old Murderer; and he loves
to Murder men, but no Murder gives him so much satisfaction, as that which at
his Instigation, Men perpetrate upon themselves. We see that such as are
Bewitched and Possessed by the devil, do quickly lay violent hands upon
themselves, if they be not watched continually, and we see that when persons
have begun that Unnatural business of killing themselves, there is a
Preternatural Stupendous Prodigious Assistence, by the devil given thereunto.
When people are going to Harm themselves, we call upon them, like those to the
Jailor, in Acts. 16.28 Do thy self no harm! And we have this Argument for it,
It is the Devil that is dragging of you to this mischief; but will you believe,
will you obey such an one as the Devil is? What was it that made Judas to
Strangle himself? We read it was when the Devil was in him. I suppose there are
few Self-Murderers, but what are first very strangely fallen into the Devils
hands; and possibly, it is by some Extraordinary Discontent, against God, or
Backsliding from Him, that the Devil first entered into those disturbed Souls.
Indeed, some very great Saints of God, have sometimes had hideous Royls raised
by the Devil in their minds; until they have even cried out with Jo^, I choose
Strangling rather than life; and sometimes the Ill Humors or Vapors in the
Bodies of such Good Men, do so harbor the Devil that they have this woeful
motion every day thence made unto them; You must kill your self! you must! you
must! But it is rarely any other than a Saul, an Abimelek, an Achitophel, or a
Judas; rarely any other, than a very Reprobate, whom the Devil can drive, while
the man is, Compos Mentis, to Consummate such a Villainy. Yea, no Child of God,
in his Right Senses can go so far in this Impiety, as to be left without all
Time and Room, for true Repentance of the Crime; it is thus done, by none but
those that go to the Devil. A Self-Murder, acted by one that is upon other
accounts, a Reasonable Man, is but such an Attempt of Revenge upon the God that
made him, as none but one full of the Devil can be guilty of. If any of you are
Dragoon'd by the Devil, unto the Murdering of your selves, my Advice to you is,
Disclose it, Reveal it, make it known immediately. One that Cut his own Throat
among us, Expired crying out, O that I had told^* O that I had told! You may
Spoil the Devil, if you will Tell what he is a doing of.

VI. Presumptuous and Unwarrantable Trials of the Blessed God, are some of
those things whereinto the Devil would fain hook us with his Temptations. This
was that which the Devil would have brought our Lord unto, even, A Tempting of
the Lord our God. It is the charge of our God upon us, in Deuteronomy. 6.16. Thou
shall not Tempt the Lord thy God. But that which the Devil Tries, is, to put us
upon Trying in a sinful way, whether God be such a God as indeed He is. It Is
true, as to the Ways of Obedience, our God says unto us, Prove me, in th^se
ways; Try, Whether I will not be as Good as my Word. But then, there are ways of
Presumption, wherein the Devil would have us to Try, what a God it is, With
whom we have to do. The Devil would have us to Try the Purpose of God, about
our selves or others; but how? By going to the Devil himself; by Consulting
Astrologers, or Fortune Tellers, or perhaps, by letting the Bible fall open, to
see what is the first Sentence we light upon. The Devil would have (...) Try
the Mercy of God; But how? By ^unning into Dangers, which we have no call unto.
He would have us Try the Power of God; But how? By Looking for Good Things,
without the use of Means for the getting of them. He would have us Try the
Justi^e of God; but how? By venturing upon Sin, in a Corner, with an
Imagination that God will never bring us out. He would have us Try the Promise
of God; but how? By Limiting the Lord, unto such or such a way of Manifesting
Himself, or else believing of nothing at all. He would have us Try the
Threatening of God; but how? By going on Impenitently in those things, for which
the Wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience. Thus would the Devil
have us, to affront the Majesty of Heaven every day.

VII. The Temptations of the Devil* aim at puffing and Bloating of us up, with
Pride; as much perhaps as any one iniquity. The Devil would have had Our Lord
make a Vainglorious Discovery of himself unto the world, by Flying in the air,
so as no mortal can. Hoe I^na^us (...) the Devil would have us to fear aloft,
and not only to be above other men, but also to know that we are so. Pride is
the Devils own sin; and he affects especially to be, The King over the Children
of Pride, It is a caution, in 1. Tim. 3.6. A Pastor must not be A Novice; Lest
being lifted up with Pride, He fall into the condemnation of the Devil. [Summo
ac Pio cum Tremore Hunc Textum Legamus nos Ministri Juven^s!] Accordingly, the
Devil would have us to be inordinately taken and moved with what Excellencies
our God has bestowed upon us. If our Estates rise, he would have us rise in
our Spirits too. If we have been blessed with beauty, with breeding, with
Honor, with Success, with Attire, with spiritual Privileges, or with
Praiseworthy Performances; Now says the Devil, Think thy self better than
other Men. Yea, the Devil, would have us arrogate unto ourselves, those
Excellencies, which really we (...) were owners of; and, Boast of a false g^st.
He would have us moreover to Thirst after Applause among others that may see
Our Excellencies; and be impatient if we are not accounted somebody. He would
have us furthermore, to aspire after such a Figure, as God has never yet seen
fitting for us; and crowd into some High Chair that becomes us not. Thus would
the Devil Elevate us into the Air, above our Neighbors; and why so! It Is that
we may be punis^^d with such Falls, as may make us cry out with David, O my
Bones are broken with my Falls! The Devil cannot endure to see men lying in the
Dust; because there is no falling thence. He is a Fallen Spirit himself, and it
pleases him to see the Falls of men.

The Third of Our Lords Three Temptations, is related in such Terms as these.
Math. 4.8, 9. Again the Devil takes him up, into an exc^^ding High Mountain,
and shows him all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them: and
says unto him, all these things will I give thee, if Thou will fall down and
Worship me. From whence take these Remarks*

I. The Devil in his Temptations will set the Delights of this world before us;
but he will set a fair, and a false Varnish upon those Delights. They were some
unknown Perspect^ves, which the Devil had, both for the Refracting of the
Medium, and for the Magnifying of the Object, whereby he gave our Lord at once
a prospect of the whole Roman Empire; but what was it? It was the World, and
the Glory of it; he says not a word of the World, and the Trouble of it. No
sure; not a word of that; the Devil will not have his (...) so barely exposed
unto us. The Devil sets off the Delights of Sin, which he offers unto us, with
a stretch^ed and a raised Rhetoric; but he will not own, That in the midst of
our Laughter, our Heart shall be sorrowful; and, That the end of our Mirth
shall be Hea^iness. There is but one Glass in the Spectacles, with which the
Devil would have us to read, those passages in Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice, O young man
in thy youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the Day of thy youth and walk in
the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes. Thus far the Devil would
have us to Read, and he will make many a fine Comment upon it; he will tell us, That
if we^l follow the Courses of the World, we shall swim in all the Delights of
the World. But he is not willing you should Read out the next words; But know
thou, that for all these things G^d shall bring thee into Judgment. O he is loath
we should be aware of the dreadful Issues, and Reckonings that our Worldly
Delights will be attended with. He sets before us, The Pleasures of Sin; but he
will not say, T^^se are but for a Season. He sets before us, The sweet Waters
of Stealth; but he will not say, There is Death in the (...). He is a
Mountebank, that will bestow nothing but Romantic Praises upon all that he
makes us the Offers of.

II. There are most Hellish Blasphemies often buzzed by the Temptation^ of the
Devil, into the minds of the best men alive. What a most Execrable Thing was
here laid before our Lord Himself: Even, To own the Devil (...) God! a thing
that cannot be uttered, without unutterable Horror of Soul. The best man on
earth, may have such Fiery Darts from Hell shot into his mind. One that was
acted by the Devil, had the impudence to propound this, unto such a good (...),
Curse God. And the Devil pleases himself, by ch^sing the Hearts of good men,
with his base Injections, That there is no God, or, That God is not a Righteous
God; and a thousand more such things, too Devilish to be mentioned A good man
is extremely grieved at it, when he hears a Blasphemy from the mouth of another
man; said the Psalmist, in Psalm. 4^.15, 16. My Confusion is continually before
me, for the voice of him that Blasphemeth. But much more, when a good man finds
a Blasphemy in his own Heart; O it throws him into most Fevourish Agonies of
Soul. For this cause, a mischievous Devil, will Fly-blow the Heart of such a
man, with such Blasphemous Thoughts, as make him cry out, Lord, I am e'n weary
of my life. Yea, the Devil serves the man just as the Mistress of Joseph dealt
with him; he importunes the man to Think wickedly from Day to Day; and if the
man refuse, he cries out at last, Behold, what wicked Thoughts this man has
lodging in him. Say thou so? Satan! No, they are Brats of thy own; and at thy
Door alone shall they be laid for ever.

III. There is a sort of Witchcraft in those things, whereto the Temptations of
the Devil would Inveigle us. To worship the Devil is Witchcraft, and under that
notion was Our Lord urged unto sin. We are told in, 1. Sam. 15.23. Rebellion is
as the sin of Witchcraft: When the Devil would have us to sin, he would have us
to do the things which the forlorn Witches use to do. Perhaps there are few
persons, ever allured by the Devil unto an Explicit Covenant with himself. If
any among ourselves be so, my counsil is, that you hunt the Devil from you,
with such words as the Psalmist had, Be gone: Depart from (...), ye evil Doers,
for I will keep the Commandments of my God. But alas, the most of men, are by
the Devil, put upon doing the Things that are Analagous to the worst usages of
Witches. The Devil says to the sinner, Despise thy Baptism, and all the Bond
of it, and all the Good of it. The Devil says to the sinner, Come, cast off
the Authority of God, and refuse the Salvation of Christ, for ever. Yea the
Devil who is called, The God of this World, would have us to take Him for Our
God; and rather hear Him, Trust Him, Serve Him, than the God that formed us.

IV. The Temptations of the Devil do Tug and Pull for nothing more, than that
the Rulers of the World may yield Homage unto him. Our Lord has had this by His
Father Engaged unto him, That He shall one day be Governor of the Nations The
Devil does extremely dread the Approach of that Illustrious time when, The
Kingdom of God shall come and His Will be ^one, as in Heaven, and on Earth.
For this cause it was that he was desirous, Our Lord should rather have
Accepted of him, that Kingdom, which Antichrist afterward accepted of him, for
the Establishment of Devil-worship, in the World. I may tell you, The Devil is
mighty unwilling, that there should be one Godly Magistrate upon the face of
the Earth. Such is the influence of Government, that the Devil will every where
stickle migh^ily, to have That siding with him. What R^^ers would the Devil
have, to command all mankind, if he might have his will? Even, such as are
called, in Psalm. 94.20. The Thr^^e of Iniquity, which frames mischief by a Law;
such as will promote Vice, by both Connivance, and Example; and such as will
Oppress all that shall be Holy, and Just and Good. All men have cause
therefore, to be jealous, what Use the Devil may make of them, with reference
to the Affairs of Government; but Rulers may most of all think, that the Lord
Jesus from Heaven calls upon them, Satan has desired that he might Sift you,
and have you; O Look to it, what side (...) Take.

Thus have you (...) Temptations of our Lord, seen the principal of those
Devices, which the Devil has to Entrap our Souls. But what shall we now do,
that we may be fortified against those Devices? O that we might be well
furnished with the whole Armor of God! But, methinks, there were some things
attending the Temptations of our Lord, which would especially Recommend those
few Hints unto us for our Guard.

First, If you are not fond of Temptation, be not fond of Needless, or Too much
Retirement. Where was it, that the Devil fell upon our Lord? it was when he was
Alone in the Wilderness. We should all have our Times to be Alone every Day;
and if the Devil go to scare us out of our Chambers, with such a Bugbear, as
That he will appear to us, yet stay in spite of his teeth, stay to finish your
Devotions; he Lies, he dare not show his head. But on the other-side by being
too solitary, we may lay ourselves too much open to the Devil; You know who
says, Woe to him that is alone.

Secondly, Let an Oracle of God be your defense against a Temptation of Hell.
How did our Lord Silence the Devil? It was with an, It is Written! And all his
Three Citations were from that one Book of Deuteronomy. What a full armoury
then have we, in all the sacred Pages that ly before us* Whatever the Words of
the Devil are, drown them with the words of the Great God. Say, It is Written.
The Belshazzar of Hell will Tremble and Withdraw, if you show these
Hand-writings of the Lord.

Lastly, Si^ee the Lord Jesus Christ, has Conquered all the Temptations of the
Devil, Fly to that Lord, Cry to that Lord, that He would give you a share in
his Happy Victory. It was for Us that our Lord overcame the Devil: and when he
did but say, Satan, Get hence, away presently the Tygre flew. Does the Devil
Molest Us? Then Let us Repair to our Lord, who says, I know how to Succor the
Tempted. Said the Psalmist, in Psalm. 61.2. Lead me to the Rock that is higher
than I. A Woman in this Land being under the Possession of Devils, the Devils
within her, audibly spoke of diverse Harms they would inflict upon (...); but
still they made this answer, Ah! She Runs to the Rock! She Runs to the Rock!
and that hindered all. O this Running to the Rock it is the best Preservation in
the World; the Vultures of Hell can not prey upon the Doves in the Clefts of
that Rock May our God now Lead us thereunto.

FINIS.

