AN ANSWER TO George Keith's Libel. Against A CATECHISM Published, by Francis
Makemie.

To which is Added, by way of Postscript. A Brief Narration of a Late
Difference among the Quakers, begun at P hiladelphia.

BOSTON, Printed, by Benjamin Harris, at the Sign of the BIBLE, over against
the Blew-Anchor.

MDCXCIIII.

Imprimatur, Increase Mather

March 31 st. 1694.
Christian Reader,
S Uch is, not only the Impiety, Irreligion, and Contradiction to clear
Scripture Light, which the Doctrine of the Quackers is stuffed withal; but the
Unreasonableness, Nonsense, and Selfcontradiction, which it carries with it;
that it may well seem a wonder to men of Understanding, that it has not long
since been Exploded: and that the Abetters of it have not been a shame and
ridicule to themselves, and one to another: and that it had not died alone, if
no attempts had been made against it by so many worthy Champions of the Truth:
and indeed there can be no other account given of it, but that God, in his
awful and righteous Judgment, has left men to Believe a Lie, because they
received not the Truth in the Love of it: and so, a Deceived Heart has turned
them aside, that they cannot say, is there not a Lie in our Right hand? and
were it not that there are so many, Laboring of such ignorance, as to think
that holding our peace, were a yielding up the cause, it were pity, at this
time of day, to take so much notice of their Scriblings, as to waste Paper in
replying upon them. But since there is a kind of a necessity for it, lest the
sacred Oracles should seem to some, not sufficiently defended without it, it
may not be thought unadvisable to comply with the second part of the Wisemans
Antithesis, Prove. 26. 5. and, though no Truth is to be foregone, yet when the
Foundations are stricken at, and those Articles on which our hopes for Eternal
Life are built, be Undermined, it is time to arm in Defense of them.

The following Discourses then will be ound both seasonable and profitable, in
which the venom and sophistry of a grand Apostate, and one of the most
unwearied Supporters of that tottering Fabric of Enthusiasm, are detected; and
the perverse spirit which God has sewn among them, in suffering them to lay
open each others follies, is discovered by the Reverend and Judicious Author.
We do therefore Commend him, and these Labors of his to the Blessing of God,
who alone can recover the fallen, settle the wavering, and confirm such as
stand, and make the faithful Endeavors of this his Servant become instrumental
to those Desired Ends.

Increase Mather. James Allen Samuel Willard John Baily Cotton Mather


An Epistle to the Reader,
Reader,
I Cannot but admire the Instability of many who are so easily, and soon drawn
to Embrace and Espouse that persuasion and way of those called Quakers, and
that because of an outward and seeming Sanctity, that is to be found, and to be
discerned among many of them consisting only in Negatives, making up a
Pharisaical Righteousness, made of those things that are not peculiar to
Quakers only, of not Swearing, Drinking, and Ranting: but if they would but
cautiously Look, before they Leap, they would find the principles of many of
the Reformed Churches as much against all those, and many more evils, as theirs
can be, and thousands of Professors exceed them in a shining Holiness, and
Christian Universal Piety; and though others walk disorderly, and not
answerable to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, is not to be imputed to our
Profession, Principles or manner of Worshipping God; otherwise all Religion
would soon be rejected, and Quakerism it self would be soon deserted. The most
of their Religion is composed of Negative, for many of them are as void of the
positive part of Religion, as worshipping God in the public, private and
secret Duties of Religion, as many moral Heathens, who if they had but Learned
their usual tone, and grown sullen and unmannerly, might pass for Quakers all
over the world. If we take a view of their principles in believing every one of
them severally by themselves, and the Books of particular Writers, they are not
only repugnant to truth, contrary to Gods Word, and the public received
Doctrine of the Churches of Christ for many Centurys past; but also dangerous
and damnable. They cannot be looked upon as a Church, having not unanimouslyand
fairly, or faithfully published all their opinions, and principles, which is
the cause many Espouse they know not what; they have not in any of their
Writings declared their Church Order, Constitution, Government nor Discipline.
They have no orderly way of Admission for Teaching Officers, but as many men,
and women, as say, the Spirit of the Lord is upon them, must be received,
though they can give no convincing proof, but to those already Deluded to their
way from which they want the pure and powerful Preaching of the Gospel, and all
Administration of Sacraments, which they slightly ridicule, rather than own;
they hold or maintain a common Christ in all, even in the Reprobate, in whom
the Spirit of God says, Christ (...) not; and a sufficient saving Light, and
grace in all, even the children of Darkness, denying Original and Damnable
Guilt in any Infants, even in their natural State; Railing against Singing of
Psalms, denying the Resurrection of the same Body; many of them scoff at the
Imputed Righteousness of Christ for our Justification, and Salvation,
maintaining an absolute perfection for many years in this Life, by a Popish
Possibility of keeping all Gods Commands, of which neither they, nor Papist
could ever in any age produce are known Instance.

Reader, I offer here some Sheets to thy impartial perusal, which was
occasioned by a Paper writ by George Keith, and delivered by his own hands into
the hands of Mr. George Layfield at Rehoboth in Pocamok, from whence as many as
read, may soon conclude, this debate was first set on foot by themselves, and
by promoting, it gave occasion for Laying open both their Principles, and their
practices, more in these corners of the World, then they have yet been. In
which Answer, I have given Reply to all the Calumnies and Charges in that Paper
against my Catechism, which I am obliged to Justify and Defend. And the only
Apology why (...) not Enlarged in the proof of some points, (...) I
particularly of our Doctrine concerning the Sabbath, though I have sufficiently
(...) scared (...) Charge, because they are fully handled by others. And
concerning this Subject, I Recommend Keith and all of them to Candree and
Palmer, Mr. John Brown, sometime of Holland, and Mr. Matthew Crawford; and
whoever answers them, shall answer me; If any should Censure me for my
tediousness in answering; I had finished it a year ago, but by reason of my
tedious Affliction, not Transcribed until now.

I had a visit from Keith at my house in Virginia, which though promised and
intimated by his Harbinger to be on Friday, was not performed until Saturday,
in the Afternoon, and by the uncertainty of their coming, was prevented of
having any of my Friends present, though some few dropped in occasionally, at
which time we had several Charges and Questions, concerning several things,
which were too tedious to Rehearse here: but I wish they had been Recorded
then, to prevent many misrepresentations, that were spread abroad by that
Party. And though there was no real Debate; and he often told me, he came not to
Dispute with me, yet Son after they boasted of a Victory; which if they find
after a diligent perusal, and impartial consideration of these Sheets, let them
improve and post it if they will. Yet after some Discourse, be impudently
Charged me as a False Teacher, and challenged me to a Public Dispute, before
the Multitude, which I scorned with a sharp retorsion, and that for these
reasons: 1. Their Principles were unknown, because never unanimously agreed
upon, nor fairly Published to the World, therefore not to be Disputed within
words. 2. We should Dispute before an ignorant and illeterate Multitude who
should be most incompetent Judges. 3. Because he would run into Learning, and I
must follow, and so what should be Delivered, should not tend to their
Edification, but fall to the ground, and be Lost. But afterward I gave him a
Challenge to oppose my Catechism, or Principles in Writing, and he should have
an Answer to every Particular; though Keith gave not the least intimation of
this Paper left behind him, though he dropped an Expression, which I understood
not then, that he would Write no more then he had done; this I took for
Declining my Challenge: Now I Leave it to all to Determine whose Challenges or
Overture was fairest, for 1. What either of us should Deliver, should be on
Record, and we could not fly from it. 2. If the Hearing a verbal Debate, in
angry words, should Edify, much more a written Debate, frequently read over.
3. Many might be Judges of a written Debate, who had no opportunity of hearing
it Disputed publicly. And as I have prefixed his Paper verbatim, so I expect
the same privilege for mine, if any Answer is Published. I have greater and
better work then Controversy to Follow; but in the Strength of the Lord, shall
not only Defend my Principles still by Writing, but if called thereunto, shall
(...) Seal them with my Blood. And so (...) Leave thee Reader to the Counsel,
and Direction of God, whose Unworthy Servant I am in the Lord Jesus. Amen.

At Rehoboth in Pocamok Maryland. This 26 July, 1692. Francis Makemie.

Reader,
I also offer thee, these Following Questions which I expect and desire
Resolution and Satisfaction, from such as are concerned, and that Plainly,
Positively, Sincerely and Faithfully, according to the Judgment of all of that
Party, without Obscurity, Equivocation, or Subtle and Unfair Reservation, and
so I bid the Farewell, and Remains as above

F. M.

Several mixed Quoeries, to be resolved by Quakers in this juncture, for the
Justification of themselves and satisfaction of all. July 26 th. 1692.
( Question I.) WHat is the Reason Quakers are so far Metamorphosed, or
Changed, both in Judgment, and Practice at this Day, from what they once were,
at their first rise in Europe?

II. What is the Reason Quakers that look upon themselves, as the only pure
Church in the World, has never yet adventured to Publish a form of sound words
according to the Apostles language, containing a confession of their faith, and
principles, unanimously agreed upon among themselves, as all other churches in
the world have done.

III Seeing they own themselves divinely inspired from an immediate call, and
Apostolic mission, why they have not adventured to publish interpretations of
Scripture seeing they condemn and so far disapprove all other Commentaries, as
far from the mind of God, and full of gross Errors, and mistakes.

IV Wherefore did they write, and Bark so much against all witnessing to truth,
conviction of falsehood, in Judicatures, by an oath, as sinful, and unlawful
under the Gospel, and now in Pensilvania, and Maryland, seem only to quarrel,
the manner and way of Swearing on the Book according to the English Form, and
are willing to Swear now in Judicatures, with lifted up hands, which many look
upon to be more solemn than the former?

V. Whether it be the same individual numerical Body for substance which
falls that shall rise again at the Resurrection, notwithstanding of Changes,
in Respect of Quality?

VI. If there be a sufficient and saving light in all men to instruct, direct,
and to teach them; what necessity is there for multiplying so many Teachers,
both of Men and Women, among Quakers?

VII. Why Quakers are so hot, and Zealous for K. James, a Popish and Abdicated
Prince, and was never so for any other Protestant King, though King WILLIAM and
Queen MARY has been kinder than any other, by giving a Liberty established by
Law?

VIII. Whether the same individual Jesus, that was clothed with Flesh,
suffered, and died at Jerusalem, is the same that rose again, and is ascended
to Glory, and the same they hold substantially in all men and women?

IX How Christ, the Spirit of God, saving Grace, an d Light can be in those,
who have not the least knowledge of him as Mediator and Intercessour between God
and sinners.

X Whether the omission of duty, as prayer or any other duty for a certain
time, a week, a month, or 2 year, is excusable in Quakers, before an all-seeing
and Just God from this pretense, that they had no impulse or motion of the
Spirit thereunto.

XI Why they use not means for edifying and reforming those of their families,
by calling them together, reading Scripture daily to them and praying with and
for them, as other Christians in all Churches, and Ages have done, and is
approved in the Word of God.

XII Wherefore Quakers have not adventured to publish their doctrines publicly
taught, which they say is immediate from the spirit of God, as most other
Churches have done frequently.

XIII Seeing they decry the civil salutations of the Kingdom, and people, among
whom they live, what warrant can they produce for their singular, ugly, and bad
natured way of salutation, their Males and Females taking one another by the
hands or wrists, continuing a considerable space, wringing them hard, and
looking steadfastly in each others faces, without one word speaking.

XIV Whether it is Christ completely as mediator, you believe in, and is in all
men.

XV Whether two men differing in a Fundamental truth, absolutely necessary to
salvation can be guided by the same infallible Spirit.

XVI. Whether Quakers do direct their Prayers to God in themselves, or to God
in Heaven.

XVII Where God is really, personally, and substantially; is he not in all
fullness of Grace and Goodness.

XVIII What Worship, or Divine Service do the heathen nations perform unto the
Living, and True God.

XIX Whether the inflicting of corporal punishments on children, servants, and
other offenders, and hiring of men to take a Vessel by force from Privateers,
be not an using of the carnal Weapon.

XX Whether the receiving of a Competent maintenance, or necessary Aliment by
Quakers teachers, however so freely and Voluntarily given, without appointment
of humane law, and all compulsion, be a Preaching the Gospel freely.

A True Copy of George Keith's Paper, Delivered to Mr. George Layfield, At
POCAMOK in MARYLAND.
K IND Friend George Lay-field, my Dear Love in the Lord Jesus Christ Saluteth
thee, with Earnest Supplication and Prayer to God for thee, that God, who has
begun his good work in thee, may perfect it, until the Day of Christ, and that
the Precious Seed, that God has Sown in thy Heart may grow not only to be the
greatest of Herbs, but a great Tree, bringing forth Fruit, to Gods Everlasting
Praise, and to thy Souls Everlasting Comfort and Happiness.

As concerning the Catechism, Published by F. M. I have diligently read, and
considered it, and though it holds forth diverse true things, yet it has a
great mixture of Error, and many false, and unsound hurtful things it does
contain; which my present shortness of time in these Parts, does not permit me
to mention in most particulars; and as the same Catechism abounds with many
Errors; so it falls exceeding short, in not mentioning in the least, many
necessary Truths, and Doctrines, which are of great necessity, to be taught
unto people, as belonging to the first Principles of Christian Religion, which
he altogether omitteth; nor does he in the least declare that he receives any
one of these things, delivered by him, in his said Catechism, from any inward
opening or discovery of Gods Spirit in his Heart: Nor does he mention, any one
thing of his own experience; of the work of God in his heart, but as his Title
Page shows, his whole Work is but a Collection from others; he mentions
nothing in all his Catechism, that people are to be turned or directed to God,
or Christ, or the Spirit of God in them, he tells not People, that it is God
or Christ, or the Spirit of God convinces them, and reproves them for sins of
all sorts, as Lying, Pride, Envy, Coveteousness, Unbelief, he does not instruct
People, how they are to find God and Christ in their Hearts, and how they are
to wait in silence of mind, and thoughts, to hear God, and Christ speak
inwardly unto them in their Hearts, in the silence of all Flesh; and how they
are to have God and Christ, and the Holy Spirit to dwell and walk in them, and
to teach them over and beyond all outward teaching; he mentions very little of
the Spirit at all, and what he mentions of it is, very Obscurely, so that
without breach of Charity, I can freely say, he is a great Stranger to the
inward Dealings and Workings of Gods Holy Spirit in the Hearts of his People:
and whereas he mentions, his Compassion over the Tender Souls, in an American
Desert, ready to perish for want of a Vision, in his Epistle to the Reader; his
Catechism can nothing help them in that respect; for not one word in all his
Catechism, directs People were to find the true Vision of God in any measure;
but on the contrary, according to his, and his Bretherens False Faith, all true
Divine Vision, and Revelation, and all Divine Inspiration, in ceased since the
Apostles Days, both among Teachers and People, and God has committed His
Counsel wholly to Writing, the former ways of Gods revealing himself being
ceased; and they say further, there is no inward voice, or word of God in
people, but the Scripture is the only Word, and only Rule, all which is most
false, and hurtful Doctrine, and does more hurt where it is received, then all
his Catechism can do good. And all the People in Virginia both English and
Scots, whom he seems to reflect upon for their Ignorance, have the Holy
Scriptures without, and the Holy teachings; and illuminations of God and Christ
within, to teach them what is needful to their Salvation, if they will hearken
thereunto, far better then this Catehism of F M. which is defective, and
wanting of many Principal and necessary doctrines, belonging to the Christian
Faith.

In the first Page of his Catechism, He says, God made the World out of
Nothing; but this is no Scripture Language and indeed in very many of his
Answers, he holds not to Scripture Language, but uses the invented words of
Man's Wisdom, not according, but contrary unto the Holy Scriptures. May it not
suffice to say, God Created all things by Jesus Christ; as the Scriptures
declares, without adding to the Word of God.

Page Third. He mentions no other Teacher but the Scriptures given to men, to
serve and Glorify God; And thus according to him; all these great Nations who
have not the Scriptures, are wholly left without all Teaching of God to Serve
and Glorify him, in the least measure, but this is expressly contrary to
Scripture, which say concerning the Gentiles, who had not the Law outwardly
delivered in Scripture, that they did show the work of the Law in their hearts,
and what was to be known of God, was manifest in them; for God had shown it
unto to them, and when they knew God, they Glorified him not as God and Christ
the Light of the World, has enlightened every man that comes into the World;
and teaches every man in some measure to serve God, which is to obey him,
otherwise they could not have sin; if there were nothing in the Gentiles, to
require obedience or service of them unto God.

It had been much better in this Author to have instructed People, that they
had some other helps, and means of knowledge with the Scriptures, and these
some outward, and some inward, although it is to be granted that the Scriptures
are the best of all Books outward, yet there is the Book of Gods Creation, and
the Book of His Providence over all his Creatures; that are no small helps and
means, in their place being duly used and together with God, Christ, and the
Spirit, are inwardly present to teach all People, in some things to serve God,
and as every one is faithful in the little, more is given to them.

Besides, that the Writer of this Catechism should have joined the spirit of
God and Christ with the Scriptures, as the Opener, and Interpreter of them,
informing people that the Scriptures are the Organ and Instrument of Gods
Spirit; and that Gods Good, and Holy Spirit, is the principal Author and cause
of all true knowledge of God, as the does inwardly inspire, and enlighten every
one; and that there is no true saving knowledge of God, and Christ, without the
Spirits Inspiration, and Teaching; and that how much soever people read or hear
the Scriptures, if they neglect or turn away their minds from Gods inward
teachings, by his Word, Spirit, and Light within their hearts, they remain
Blind, and Dark; and Ignorant of God.

Page Third. That he says there are Three Persons in the Godhead; this is not
Scripture Language, to say Three Persons, The Mystery of the Three, to wit, the
Father the Son, and the Holy Ghost, who are One GOD, is Great, and Glorious,
and ought to be Reverently conceived and expressed, in Scripture words, which
the Holy Ghost has Taught; but not in words of Man's Wisdom.

Page Ninth and Tenth. In mentioning the Offices of Christ, being Three, Viz.
Prophet Priest, and King; he should have mentioned how that not only without
us, he did perform these Offices, and now is both Priest and King in Heaven,
whither he is ascended but that also within us. Viz. All true Believers in him,
he is both Prophet, and King, and Priest also, who offers up their Prayers
unto God, and by whom they have access unto God, beside that Christ is not only
King, Priest, and Prophet, over his Church; but Bishop, Shepherd, Physician,
Captain, and Husband, etc. as the Scripture declares:

And that he says, Christ reveals the Will of God to us, by His Word and
Spirit; in Page 10. He delivers this matter very barely, and obscurely; for
he does not tell people where they may find the Spirit of God; he does not
instruct them, That the Spirit of God is in them to teach them, and open the
Scriptures unto them: And though he delivers diverse things in his Catechism,
concerning the New Covenant, yet he neglects a Principal matter belonging to
the same; Viz. That God has Promised, in his New Covenant, to teach His People
Himself, and to dwell in them, and walk in them, and that they shall be his
Temple. etc.

Page 10 11. Although he mention the death and Sacrifice of Christ for sinners,
yet he does not well, that he does not hold forth that Christ died for all, and
tasted Death for every man, as the Scripture expressly declares: which is a
most great, and weighty testimony of Gods universal Love for sinners.

Page Eleventh. Though he say, The Holy Saints works faith in us, and Uniteth
us to (...) yet he does this very barely, and (...), yea in contradiction to
his and his Brethrens Doctrine; who say, all inward Divine Revelation, and
Inspiration is ceased since the Apostles Days, and if so then the Holy Spirit
has ceased to work or operate on men's hearts, for his operation is not in the
dark, or in a blind and insensible manner, but in Light, and Demonstration,
sensibly, and clearly, revealing his power in them, and opening the eyes of
their understanding; and thence it is that the Spirit of God, is called in
Scripture, the Spirit of Wisdom, and Revelation, and that Spirit works in
true Beleivers.

Page Eleventh. That he calls Regeneration a New and Spiritual Birth, by the
Spirit of God, is true, but this Contradicts His, and His Brethrens Doctrine,
who say, they have no infallible Spirit, and all Divine Revelation is ceased,
and that there is no immediate communion with God or his Spirit which is False
Doctrine, and contrary to Scripture, and the Saints Experience, who know that
as they are Born of Gods Spirit, so they are sensibly Fed, and Nourished by the
Spirit of God, and Suck the Breasts of their Heavenly Mather, Jerusalem from
above; and feel themselves embraced by the same, as sensibly as the Child
feels the Mothers Embraces, and see and behold Her Beauty, hear her voice,
and Language, and all this is Spiritually, and Inwardly known and witnessed in
all True Believers.

Again, that he says, True Believers are United to Christ; is true and very
comfortable, but is in contradiction to His and his Brethrens Doctrine; who say
it is Blasphemy to affirm, that Christ (...) really in the Saints, for if he be
not really in them, by himself, they cannot be United to him, for true Union
requires the near presence of the things United one to another, as the Body
cannot be United to the Soul, if the Soul be not really in the Body, and all
true Believers are United to Christ in Heaven, by their being United to the
measure of him in themselves, as the Members of the Body are United to the
Head, by being United to a measure of the same Life, and Spirit in them, that
is in the Head.

Page Eleven Twelve. He defines Effectual Calling, to be, A powerful call of
God, whereby he calls, and draws sinners out of Sin into Grace, which as it is
true, so is in contradiction to him and his Brethren, who say, All inward
calling, and speaking of God is ceased, and there is no other Voice, or Word of
God, but the Scripture; and yet he confesses, all have not that Effectual
Calling, (...) have the Scripture. Again, he contradicts, by saying, that God
calls, and draws sinners out of sin, unto Grace; and yet in Page Twelve,
faith, All are still sinners; And in Page Thirty, says, The Godly cannot keep
Gods commands perfectly: And His Brethrens Doctrine is, that the Saints sin in
every Thought, Word, and Dead.

Page Fifteen. He says, Justification, and Adoption, are acts of God without
us, and make only a Relative change, but no real change, and are completed at
once.

And in Page Sixteen. He says, Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification,
once had, can never be wanted; all which are False, and hurtful Assertions, and
contrary to Scripture; for Gods Justifying Believers, is his speaking peace to
them in their Consciences, and Absolving them from Condemnation, as a Judge
absolveth or clears an Accused Person, and surely that is within and if not
within, he should have told where without; if he mean in Heaven, this can be no
assurance not comfort to any, unless it be revealed, and done also within in
men's hearts: Again, that God makes any men to be his Children, without a Real
change, is most absurd, is not Faith and Regeneration, a real change; and none
are made the children of God, but by Faith and Regeneration: and again, to say
that Sanctification, and Justification, cannot be lost, is most absurd, and
serves to flatter people in great sins, yea the greatest, as if they were
still Saints; for according to this False Doctrine, David remained a Saint and
perfectly Justified, when he committed Murder and Adultery, and at this rate,
the worst of men may be Saints while such; but the Scripture faith, No
Murderer, nor Unrighteous Person, can Inherit the Kingdom of God, but they must
be washed. etc. But if they still remain Saints after Murder, they may inherit
Gods Kingdom, for all the Saints are in measure in Gods Kingdom.

Page Twenty four. Concerning the Sabbath he expressly contradicts the
Scripture, which expressly enjoined the seventh Day to be kept, and not
indifferently one of seven

Page Twenty-six. He most grossly wrongeth and most falsely accuses the People
of God, called in scorn Quakers, saying that the Quakers, and all Profane
Persons are enemies to a Sabbath, but it is no new, nor strange thing that Gods
People is numbered with Transgressors of the greatest sort, seeing Christ our
Lord and Head, was so used by men high in an outward Profession, and the people
called Quakers own Christ to be the True Spiritual Sabbath, or Rest of all True
Believers, the substance, and thing signified by the Jewish Sabbaths, and New
Moons, and other Types and Figures of the (...) yet they set apart the First
day of the week from Servile Labor, and spend it Religiously in Public and
Private Religious exercises as their Neighbors can witness, among whom they
live; and give up not only that Day, but many other days, and times to the
Worship of God, and are careful to live to God all the days of their life.

Page Twenty-eight. What he delivers in his Catechism concerning Ministers,
is most Lame, and Defective: He says, People are to maintain their Ministers
[that is a principal thing with him] but he fails in these Three great
Particulars.

1. That he does not inform people, that none are true Ministers of Christ, but
such as are really Holy and Godly Men, and have a Living Experience of the work
and dealings of Gods Spirit in their hearts, that so they may Preach their own
Spiritual Experiences unto people, as David did, who said, Come, and I will
tell you what God has done for my soul; and as these did, who said, What we
have heard, and seen, and handled of the word of Life, we declare unto you.

2. That he does not inform People, concerning the true Call of the true
Ministers of God, and of Christ, who are called, and furnished by the Spirit of
Chaist, in the work of their Ministry, to Preach, and Pray, but seeing he and
his Brethren, Called Presbyterian Ministers, deny this manner of immediate
calling by the Spirit of God, they run to the Church, and Pope of Rome, by that
Dirty Channel, and Conduit, to (...) their Call conveyed to them; for they know
that their Presbyterian Church, nor indeed any other called a Church, has been
a Visible Church, ever since the Apostles Days, but only the Church of Rome
has called her self the Visible Church; and they confess, and say with us,
that the True Church of God has been that Woman who has fled to the
Wilderness, and has not been always visible, but hid, and that for about
Twelve Hundred Years, and so had no visible Officers or Ministers, to call
their successors: And therefore they derive their Call, and Authority by the
Church, and Pope of Rome; as James Durham in his Commentary on the Revelations,
and many others, whose Call and Ordination, Dr. Owen, so called, has refuted,
and these called Independent Ministers, where of John Owen was one, have
another poor shift, and evasion, saying they are called by the Church; but if
the Church was not visible for so many ages, the Church could not call them,
the Ministers are before the Church, and therefore cannot be called by the
Church originally; but all these poor shifts are in opposition to the Inward
Call, and work, and motion of Gods Spirit in the hearts of the Faithful, which
if they knew, they would never (...) to such broken Cysterns to Draw (...).

3. That he does not inform people, that all true Ministers of Christ, as they
have (...) received, so they freely give, without desiring or bargaining for
any settled maintenance, nor exacting it by force as Presbyterian Ministers
commonly do.

(...) Thirty-Nine and Forty. He does very barely, and obscurely, and very
defectively and in some things falsely deliver his Doctrine concerning Baptism,
and the Lord's Supper, he does not distinguish Christ's Baptism which is with the
Holy Ghost and Fire, from John's Baptism, that is with Water; he barely
alleges, that Children of Believing Parrents, Viz. Infants are to be
Baptized; he gives no account by what Authority or Call they Baptize, for they
have no other Call but by the Pope of Rome, and they have learned that practice
of Sprinkling or pouring Water on a Child's Forehead, and calling it. Baptism
from the Church of Rome, which they call the Whore of Babylon; and as
concerning the Supper of the Lord, he is also very defective, and he and his
Brethren usurp and assume and Authority to themselves to Consecrate, and
Administer the Supper, because of their Ordination originally derived by the
Pope; but all good Christians may and ought to Eat and Drink, remembering
Christ's Death, and may, and do receive him by Faith, together with their
outward eating with Prayer, and Thanksgiving, and so fulfill Christ's
Institution, without any Prelate, Presbyter, or Priest, of the Popes making;
for all true Christians are a Kingdom of Priests unto God, and have the Word,
and Spirit of Prayer, that only does, and can Sanctify their Eating and
Drinking. etc.

If any Question the Truth of this Copy, they may satisfy themselves by
perusing the Original, at Rehoboth in Pocamok, Maryland.

A Short Answer, to George Keith's Lybel, Against a CATECHISM Published, by F.
M. And left in the Hands of, Mr. George Layfield.
I AM not a little surprised to recieve from the hands of Mr George Layfield a
paper containing so many mistakes, false, unjust, and invidous charges against
a Catechism Published by F. M. and the rather because of his high pretenses to
an immideate mision, and vain boasting of an extraordinary Apostolic call,
insulting over all others from unusual high and enthusiastic seize
complete perfection, and unheard of experiences, which the most serious and
Godly are strangers unto, and what they have any experience of most modest in
discoursing of them and self denied under their greatest enjoyments I shall
wave two things First it is being delivered without a subscription whereby it is
to be looked upon as a Libel not to be Answered, nor Regarded. Secondly, that
complementing and flattering preamble, they have ever Condemned in others, and
withal am glad to Hear they have any Charity for any of a different Opinion
from themselves, which coming to hear their Teachers will procure at any time.
First, He begins with a general Charge of many Errors, false and unsound things
comprehended in the Catechism; And next, He asserts the Author to be guilty of
many Omissions and this from one pretending to Learning, who has diligently
read and considered it, as he says, is so insignificant and idle Imputation,
which all modest, and ingenuous men, must never disown; and that there are
Omissions, wilful and designed Omissions, I shall never deny, for after it was
first Composed, I did Compendize and Abreviate it ofter than once, to suit it
to the Capacities of, such for whom it was prepared, even young ones, to whom,
Quakers have had little regard hitherto, as to their Instruction in Religious
Fundamentals: Neither have I seen any Writings of Quakers, even those
pretending to give accounts of their Principles, but justly may be charged with
greater Omissions, then any yet discovered in the Catechism, Published by F. M.
as the Doctrine of the Trinity, of Persons in the God head, the Ten
Commandments, and the Lords Prayer, the Pattern of all Prayer; and George Fox
his Received Catechism, industriously spread by Quakers, not only favors of
Humane Learning, and words of man's wisdom, but guilty of many weighty
Omissions, and fills up a great part with stuff wherein there is no Religion'
far less can they be called Fundamentals, as Salutations by words and Gestures,
Covering and Uncovering the Head, condemning Preaching in Steeple Houses and
Churches. Yea I appeal to the impartial, and unbiassed Reader, if the Catechism
Composed by F. M. contains not more of the Principles of Religion, then one
containing Quakers Principles, Composed by several Hands, as Crook, Pennington,
Buroughs, Parker, Smith, and several others; now I refer my self to every man,
how invidious and unjust it is to Charge a Catechism composed by one with
Omissions, while so many pretenders to immediate Revelations and Inspirations,
are guilty of so great Omissions, and vain Repetitions; and there is not a Book
which I have see writ by George Keith, but may as justly lie under this Charge,
as my Catechism; andit were vain Ostentation to disown it. And for my own part,
I have ever observed in all the Writings of men, Ignorance, Infirmity, and
Imperfection, to magnify the Excellency of the Scriptures above all Books of
men's Composure; but it is no strange thing to find Quakers quarrelling our
succinct way, of composing our Principles for young ones, because they are
opposite to so early Edification, which practice is very inconsistent with
Scripture Precepts, and Presidents of Training a Child when young, bringing up
Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord; and Timothy knew the
Scriptures from a Child; and the advantage of an early Instruction is witnessed
by the experiences of many Godly in all Ages, where attended with the Blessing
of God, and pursued with Exhortation, until they arrive at a riper age: Now I
leave all to consider how insignificant and imputation this of Omission is.

Another general Charge is, that I have not declared from whence I have
Received these things, and that I have owned in the Title Page of my Catechism,
to be but a Collection from others: These are heavy Charges with him, therefore
shall answer them particularly. 1. Any that reads his Paper, may understand he
is as guilty of that Omission as any of his Neighbors, for he has not told
from whence he had what is delivered in this Paper, and it was the best policy;
for he durst not assert it was from the Spirit of God, because of the falsehood
and malice it contains, as! shall make appear. 2. If they are the Truths of
God, and agreeable to Scripture, it is easily determined from whence these
Truths are, which were questioned by few, until G. K. whose Trade has been to
Foment Contention, and stir up strife in the Churches of Christ in the World;
and whose Arguments are so slender and thread bare, that they scarce deserve an
Answer. 3. If I inclined to stuff my Doctrines and Discourse upon all
occasions, with enlarged Accounts of Conversion or a work of Grace, with
concomitant and consequent Experiences of the Operations of Gods Holy Spirit,
as Keith pretends to do, I might amuse my Hearers; but Actions and Conversation
are better demonstrations of a work of Grace, then all Keith's vain boasting
Language, which with his self magnifying Language, can be esteemed nothing else
then a Crying up and Preaching himself, instead of Christ; for though Paul often
declared his Conversion, and gloried in his Seize, it was, that the Free
Grace of God might be exalted, and self abased; which Quakers are rarely
acquainted with, either in Praying or Teaching, as many who have heard them
always declare.

And because Keith has shown himself void of Charity, by shooting his invidious
Thunderbolt at a distance, e're he knew or saw me, or I him, That I am
infallibly a great stranger to the dealings of Gods Spirit on the hearts of his
People; I am constrained to Justify my Office, from those Uncharitable
Calumnies, and that Grace might be magnified, by giving this Relation, in the
sight of an All seeing and Omnipresent God, that e're I Received the Imposition
of Hands, in that Scriptural and Orderly Separation unto my Holy and
Ministerial Calling, that I gave requiring satisfaction to Godly, Learned, and
Judicious Discerning Men, of a work of Grace and Conversion wrought on my
heart, at fifteen years of Age, by, and from the pains of a Godly Schoolmaster,
who used no small diligence in Gaining Tender Souls to Gods Service and Fear;
since which time, to the Glory of his Free Grace be it spoke, I have had the
sure Experiences of Gods various Dealings with me according to his Infinite and
Unerring Wisdom, to my (...) comfort, whereby all may see how far Grace is
expected and desired, with (...) to qualify for the Ministerial Office; for
not only, was this required of me, but is expected of all Ordained by
Presbyters; which experience shall enable me not to value what Keith, or any
other Quakers shall ignorantly and groundlesly affirm, in Judging rashly of my
State, for we are looked upon as of the World, and they only the People of God,
as they commonly Cauterize us, but this is our comfort, we shall not be Judged
in the Last Day by Quakers, who must as well as their Neighbors, give an
account of their rash and uncharitable judgings to a most Righteous Judge.

And that it is a Collection from the Scriptures of the Living God, I never
will deny, but glory in it; (...) Keith mean from others, it is false, and
there is (...), mention of those others in the Title Page; (...) what has
Keith Published in most of his Books, but Collections, and many of them from
the worst of men, Heretics long since confuted, with some, vild, sophistical,
and unscriptural Nations of his own, both repugnant to Scripture, and opposite
to his Quaking Brethren: And

Turpe ext doctors cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

He asserts, I declare not that it is God, or Christ, or the Spirit of God,
that convinces or reproves people of their sins; but this is so false a
Calumny* that none in charity can judge Keith to be so great a Perfectionist as
he proclaims himself to be; and this every one may be satisfied in, if they
will but turn over to page 12 where it is plainly delivered; That God in
Turning or Calling Sinners unto himself, does convince them of Sin and Misery,
Enlighten their Minds with the Knowledge of Christ, (...) their wills, etc.
which is also the judgment of all my. Brethren, and particularly of those of
the Westminister Assembly, both in their Shorten and larger Catechism. And
whereas he charges me with this, that I mention but little of the Spirit of God
at all; and that this may appear as false as the former, I refer my self to
every Reader, and especially those who have read and considered, better then
Keith has done; and let them turn over to the several pages, where I have made
frequent mention of the Spirit of God, in so small a Volumn, ascribing to him
that which was and is his peculiar work. 1. As being the Original Author, and
Inditer of the Scriptures, page 3. 2. As being one distinct from the Father and
the Son, page 4. 3. Of Christ's revealing the Will of God to us, by His Word
and Spirit page 10. 4. The Spirit of God applies to us the Redemption purchased
by Christ, page 11. 5. In the same page, being the Author of Re-generation, or
the New Birth, according to the Scriptures, Joh 3. 6. The Spirits sanctifying
of us, page 15. 7. That he teaches us to pray aright, and acceptably to God,
page 41. From hence every one may learn, what credit to give to Keith's words
and Calumnies for the future; and though he constructs my Compassion over the
tender Souls in an American Desert, to be a reflection against the Scots and
English in Virginia, I am satisfied, it has not been so Received by them for
whom it was intended, neither judged so by the Spirit of God, who much after
the same manner pitties and compassionates the Ignorance of his own people, by
the Prophet Hos. 4. 6. My People are destroyed for lack of knowledge. And I am
persuaded, Quakers should not have so great success in drawing aside silly
Souls from the Truths and Ways of God, if it were not for the abounding
Ignorance of Virginia, and other dark Corners of the World, who have not yet
received, and comprehended the Light shining about them; and even their
ignorance of those Fundamental Truths contained in the Catechism. And none
deserves more to be pitied for their Ignorance, than Quakers, and of the most
Fundamental Truths, notwithstanding of their high pretenses to the Spirit and
Light within, as John Drummond, a Reputed and Received Quaker, a Reader of
Keith's Books, with many others, who lately at my House at Poccamok, before
Keith and several other Witnesses, published his gross Ignorance of that
Fundamental Article, That none could be Saved without-Faith in Jesus Christ;
from which I understand since, that he had often reproached me, drawing his own
ignorant conclusions from thence. And if Quakers are ignorant hereof, what can
they pretend to know.

Another general charge is, That I nothing help the Ignorant, neither do I
direct them to the true Vision; but whoever will but consider how many
Fundamental Truths are laid down in the Catechism, for the Edification of the
Ignorant, and plainly asserted, That Christ teaches his People with his Word
and Spirit; and if this be not the true Vision of God, Quakers must lose
themselves, and be puzzled in finding of it: but be rather would insinuate what
harm it would do, if received, but this may discover how far men are for
keeping sinners in ignorance, by possessing their minds with a dislike of this
mean of Knowledge, which leads and directs sinners to the Scriptures as the
great mean of Knowledge, and profitable for instruction, containing all things
(...) to be known by Christians; and also to Christ and his Holy Spirit the
Author and Efficient Cause of Knowledge, who can Enlighten without means, in a
most immediate manner, but most ordinarily conveyes Knowledge by Means and
Ordinances of his own Appointment concurring with his Holy Spirit, blessing and
making them effectual to whom he pleases. And in Catechism many savoury truths
delivered, no sins, indulged, most duties relating to our general and special
callings enjoined: Now how the receiving such a form of sound words containing
positive Divinity, should be prejudicial, and Kieth's works stuffed with
Quibling, and Sophistical Controversy, and his teachings filled with often
repeated Calumnys against all the Reformed Churches, and Un-scriptural or
unheard of Long-winded Similitudes, which amuse the deluded, and ignorant,
should become profitable, let every one determine; and I am persuaded, none has
received or can receive injury therefrom, but by slighting and disregarding it.
And this my experience can testify, that since the Catechism was opposed by
Quakers, they have had a more universal, and kindly welcome, and reception. And
here is no new Doctrine, but what Keith had often seen in the Catechisms of our
Reformed Churches, which he had often impugned with all his might and Sophistry;
and his repeating his old Arguments, is only with vain Ostentation, to show
himself among a poor, ignorant, and deluded people, and once possessing them
with this, that what he delivers is immediately from the Spirit of God, he may
driver what he will, as infallible, and never to be questioned.

Having answered his Generals, I proceed to examine his particulars; and he
suffers not the first page to pass without a Censure, because I have affirmed,
God made the World out of Nothing: and that this is not only true, and
agreeable to Scripture, that to word and express it otherwise, were
inconsistent with the Revelation of God, and it were to jump in with the
Adversaries of Gods Truth, for we cannot conceive of Creation; without saying
it was made out of Nothing which all describe to be, Productio ex nihilo;
therefore as many places of Scripture as but mention Creation, say as much as I
have done, for which I am quarrelled. Did not Creation give the First Being to
all things that were made, and consequently were all nothing before God
commanded them to be, for was nor Light nothing till God said, Let there be
Light (...) Further, if God made the World, he either made it out of his own
Essence, or some pre existent matter from Eternity, or produced it out of
nothing. I presume you will not be so absurd as to assert any of the first two,
not the first, for so the Essence of God should become divisible and
corruptible; not the second, for then some matter should be Coeternal with
God, which were blasphemy to affirm: And it is no small argument of the
Omnipotence of God, to declare and affirm, especially to young ones, the Word
was made out of nothing, seeing they know not that it is implied in the word
Creation; for because of the Omnipotent Power of God in Creation. Acclamations
of Praise are ascribed to him, Psalm. 33. 6. By the word of the Lord were the
Heavens made, and all the Host of them, by the breath of his mouth, Acts 4. 24,
In that joint Acclamation of the Apostles, Lord thou art good, which have made
Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is: And it is no adding to
the Word of God, while nothing is delivered but Gods Mind in his Word; though
Keith next in his pretenses to Nailor himself should discover so much palpable
weakness as to censure it again: And I have also asserted in my Catechism, that
there is no work so peculiar to any of the Persons of the Holy Trinity, but all
of them have a hand in each; so that his advice which he called sufficient, is
prevented, if he had diligently read and considered it, as he has said.

In page 3. He charge me for (...) no other Teacher but the Scriptures to
direct us to Serve and Glorify God, this is no strange imputation from
Quakers, who notwithstanding of all their fair pretenses, yet have uttered many
vilipending expressions thereof, calling it a dead Letter, a nose of Wax, Pen
and Ink Divinity; and Keith in his public Teaching in Accomack, compared it to
a Letter wrote from an absent Husband to his Wise, which as soon as be Returns,
is to be laid aside; any may easily apprehend what this Gentleman would be at,
who also in his Book, though he would make fools believe he commands the
Scriptures; yet immediately he accuses it of insufficiency, and imperfection,
and affirms there are several things which the Scriptures Teachers not, for
which we must have immediate Revelations; and Daniel Acres, a Teacher in North
Carolina, declared to me, it bordered with Basphemy to call the Scriptures the
Word of God But the further affirms, I should have joined the Spirit of God and
Christ with the Scriptures, and that I should not only have done it, but that
it is really done, every Reader may find page 10 where it is taught, That
Christ Reveals his Will by his Word and Spirit; neither dare any assert, I have
said it was only the Scriptures, excluding Christ or the Holy Spirit of God;
and yet we have ground from the Scriptures themselves to affirm, that the
Scriptures are a rule to which we are directed by the Spirit of God, and our
Savior too, and the fullness and sufficiency of the Scriptures often our
direction, is assered from the Spirit of God, though we are unanimous in
depending on the Blessing of God, presence of Christ, and concurrence of his
Holy Spirit, to make the Scriptures effectual to our Salvation, with all other
Means and Ordinances; yet the Scriptures are the Rule for our Instruction and
Direction, though Christ, and the Holy Spirit of God the Opener up, and sole
Interpreter of the Scriptures to us, as all of us Teach, Believe and Own; which
is evident, from our Praying before and after all and our public and private
Administrations, which many Quakers are absolute (...) to, as John (...), of
Elizabeth River, who never was heard to Pray either before or after Teaching;
this Savours of Opus Operatum; I say, the Holy Spirit of God endures us with
skill to understand, apply and obey the Scriptures; so that Quakers confound
the Rule, with the skill in making use of that Rule; but our judgment is fully
delivered in answer to that Question in the Assemblies Catechism. How is the
Word made effectual to Salvation: and that all that read those Sheets may see
how pernicious it is to quarrel our Doctrine concerning the Scriptures, let
them peruse those following Scriptures; 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by
(...) God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for
Instruction in Righteousness; and in the foregoing verse, The Holy Scriptures
which is able to make thee wise unto Salvation, (...), Faith which is in Jesus.
17 That the man at God may be (...) thoroughly furnished unto every good work;
and are we not directed to the Law and to the (...), but no where directed to
the Light in all men, and conesquently in the Heathen and Reprobate, to be our
Guide to Glory: Our (...) and confirms our Judgment; Search the Scriptures, for
in them you think ye have External (...), and (...) that testify of me. And we
find out Lord in (...) with the Capcious Jews, appealing to the Scriptures as
the Rule of Faith, and Judge of Controversies, saying, It is written, and Cites
the Prophets often for their Conviction, and charges them with ignorance of the
Scripture, as the cause and ground of their Error, saying, Ye Err, not knowing
the Scriptures, nor the power of God. And though dim Natures Light, the
Rellicks of one fallen from perfection, and the works of Creation, render all
inexcusable for their Ignorance of their Creator, yet are very lame, and
insufficient fully to teach their Duty, or to discover all their sins, or teach
them the knowledge of God and his Son Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, whom Quakers
say is in ail men; but can this Jesus of theirs be the true Christ, and
savingly in all men; seeing there are Nations and Kingdoms, who have not the
least remote or dim notions of Christ the Son of God, as Savior, or Mediator
between Sinners, and God, who was in Christ Reconciling the World to himself;
and if so as Quakers affirm, then blinded Pagan Nations are in as brave a case,
as the Churches of Christ, to whom the Oracles of God are committed, who are
pronounced blessed beyond all others, at Gods Chosen Inheritance, and
particularly from that great and transcending privilege of enjoying the
Revealed Will of God, to whom the Divine Oracles were committed, and blinded
Nations were our Predecessors, within some few Centuries past.

And what Keith understands by silent waiting on God, which he calls a silence
of mind and thoughts; I fear neither he, nor any Quaker for him, can ever
demonstrate from plain Scripture Testimony; and it is not the first time they
have been puzzled to tell us what it is, though some have preferred it to the
Reading of the Scriptures, and a Mean appointed of God, for right understanding
of the Scriptures; but this new notion of theirs is warranted no where is the
Scripture; some of them have taken upon them to call it a silent posture of the
heart, without thinking good or evil; but this is so strange a conceit, that it
is inconsistent with the nature of the heart and Spirit of man, which is in the
judgment of most, and to solid experience of all, so stirring and active a
thing, that it is never at quiet or rest, but always employed about either good
or evil, and this so many as call a Spirit Res C^gitandi, say, is while man is
asleep; but further it is inconsistent with Scripture waiting, for herein there
must be an exercise of the Graces of Faith, Patience, Hope, etc. Psalm 4. 1. I
waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and board my Cry; here
is both the exercise of Patience, and the use of Prayer, in the Psalmists
successful waiting, and how this can be without exercising the heart about good
or evil; this is much like the Commentary and vulgar gloss of Quakers on that
Text, Mat. 6. 6. When thou prayest, enter it no thy Closet, and whom thou have
shut the door, or according to these able Commentators,) shut thy heart, which
is an unfit frame for God, to whom we must open, and before whom we must pour
out our hearts. Another Instance of Scripture waiting, very unlike Quakers
waiting you May find in Lam. 3. 26. It is good that a man should both hope and
quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord; and let every one be umpire in this
case, whether there can be the exercise of those Graces, where the heart thinks
neither good nor evil; and they are often puzzled to satisfy us, whether their
silent waiting be public or private Worship; for if it is not done in Faith,
it must be sin, and consequently no acceptable Service so God, it private of
secret, it ought to be gone about with as great secrecy, and to go too public
with it, is visible Hypocrisy to be seen of men. If public Worship, it must
and to the Edification of others; but how the perfect silence, without all
Admonition, Rebuke, Prayer, Introduction, or expressions of Praise edifies is
unconceivable, and as they meet, so they disperse often, without the least motion
to speak, which demonstrates how (...) man, such Meetings are; and what they
amuse the World with their imaginary experiences of refreshments from their
silent Meeting, when nothing is said, they must needs be like those, which an
English Congregation received from a Quaking Dutch, woman, Teaching in an
unknown Language; and what reason we have of believing their boasted of
Experiences from negative imaginary Worship, and they regard not the
Experiences of thousands of the Godly, of ravishings of Soul, and ineffable Joy
and Comfort from Praising of God in singing of Psalms, and from Communicating
in the Supper of the Lord, as performed by us, and in most of the Reformed
Churches.

In the next place he condemns our asserting and believing there are Three
Persons in the God head: It is no wonder to find so great and transcending a
Mystery, rather to be Reverenced, Adored, and Believed, then Reasoned and
Disputed, as it has been mistaken and quarrelled both by Ancient and Modern
Heretics in the World. (...) not to lip up the gross Errors of Ancient
Heretics concerning this Doctrine, as of (...) Nestorious, Sabe (...), and
(...), and am not a little concerned, that Quakers pretending no so great and
so good things, should join hand in hand with such, whose (...) have been long
since cunningly (...) and exploded; and that they by their frequent and
scurrilous Barkings against so Fundamental a Truth, as solomon Acl^s, who in
Barbadoe^ asserted this Doctrine to be a Presbyterian Fiction, and most others
of that Gang I have conversed with, had most Ignorant, and gross Notions of a
person, dreaming it to be some gross, material, visible and corporeal
Substance, like unto man, and looked upon it, an absurdity to apply any such
thing to God at all; and here I find one of their Learned and Litigious
Champions, quarreling Three Persons in the Godhead, or Divine Essence, and how
such men can be Reconciled among themselves, I leave to those that are
concerned; I must confess, it I understood what Keith intends by this Charge so
obscurely delivered, I could with greater fullness and particularity answer; and
waving that uncharitableness he was notoriously guilty of concerning me, and
others, I conceive he only contends about words, by calling Three Persons in
the God head, not Scripture Language; but words of man's wisdom, as all our
Doctrines and Writings are commonly Calumniated by such. And this I must
Animadvert the Reader, that I am the more confirmed in that which I charged him
with at my House, that most of his Writings are quibling Controversies, and his
Debates a disputing about words, little to the Edification of Souls, but
tending to Foment Divisions in the Churches of Christ upon Earth of which he
had been a great Instrument already, by making perverse Disputings his Trade in
the World, and to confirm it, he brings a sublime and transcending Mystery,
rather to be adored and believed, then disputed and brought under the Debate of
men of corrupt minds; but 1. If words not expressed in Scriptures in the same
Letters and Syllables, be words of man's wisdom, and an adding to the
Scriptures, the Words of the Living God, then all Expositions of Scriptures,
though agreeable to Scripture, if not numerically the same words, must be
condemned and thrust but of doors; and then what will become of most of Keith's
Teachings, which are delivered in public as immediately from the Spirit of
God, yet stuffed to the amusing rather than Edification of him Hearers, with
unscriptural, unusual, and unheard of Allusions of a Key, and losing and
finding a Key, at also of a Table and covering of Tailing, with Trenchers and
Napkins, and a Cupboard at Home, and no Meat in it, as also a Husbands Writing
Letters to his Wife, while absent, all which was delivered in Long winded
Discourses at Thomas Fooks his House in Onankok, and Nus^waddux, to numerous
and (...), Auditories of men and women, rather offended then edified and
affrighted from, then engaged to Quakers Principles, or Practices 2. If I
should make it appear, that Quakers are as guilty of using words not to be
found in the Scriptures, as any of their Neighbors, will no all men believe
them very perverse to Censure others for that which they practice themselves,
and consequently from Keith's words and to the words of the Scriptures; And 1.
Let any be prevailed with, to observe the Writing of this (...) Author, which
is fil'ed in every page with Humane Learning, and Scholastic Notions, making
as much use of School Art in all his sophistical Argumentation, as any that has
put Pen to Paper, as he himself owned the use of Humane Learning in all his
Writings. 2. I shall instance to you from themselves not only words, but
sentences and phrases, which none could ever yet find or hear of, in or from
the Scriptures, some whereof are pens, others belong to Barclay, others are
usual and common in the mouths of most Quakers, as those uncouch phrases of
Miracles in Spirit, which Keith made use of at my House; a measure of God, as
if God were divided in parcels, from the Spirit in Ward by ravening the Seed in
Captivity ravening comprehending brain, fleshly comprehensions, Traditional
Read Knowledge, Vulturous Eye, with many others, and for words none more new
and invented, without any foundation in the Scriptures, then some used by
Quakers; as Vehicle of the Spirit, Fermentation of the Spirit, and many such
like. 3. How much is it to be Lamented, that the frequent Debates, and needless
Janglings of Keith concerning this Subject, could not have sufficed him; he
must now upon his running Circuit, raise a new Debate, and Controversy, about
words, which is Censured in the Words of the Holy Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 4. He is
proud knowing nothing, but doting about Questions, and Strifes of words,
whereby comes Strifes, Railing, Evil Surmisings. 5. Perverse Disputings of men
of corrupt minds, and destitute of the Truth, supposing that Gain is Godliness,
from such turn away, or withdraw thy self: And all such are Censured in the
words of Holy Calvin, that Eminent man of God, Lib. 1. Cap. 13. The Heretics
bark at the name Person, and others too precise Carp at all words devised by
men, and would have all to restrain not only their meanings, but their very
words, strictly within the bounds of Scripture; who are be Calvin Charged as
unreasonable; who quarrel words expressing nothing but what is testified and
approved by Scripture, and what hinders, faith he, but we may in more plain
words express such things as are mysterious to ordinary thereunto? such, faith
he, as quarrel this, must be reputed, to be grieved at the Light of the Truth,
because he quarrels this, that the Truth is made so easy and plain to be
discerned; and the reason or ground given by this worthy Author, why the
Churches of Christ are necessitated to use such novelty of words, if they may
be so called; is when the Truth is to be Defended against Ranglers, who deride
it with Quibbles; so the Old Fathers being troubled with False Doctrines, were
necessitated to express themselves in exquisite plainness, least they should
leave any crooked by ways to the wicked, to whom the doubtful Constructions of
words, were hiding Holes of Error; therefore it was that the Fathers, in
confutation of Arius, were necessitated in asserting the Divinity of the Son,
to call him HOMOUSION, or Consubstantial with the Father: And against
Sabe^^ius, who denied all Distinction between the Father, son, and Holy Ghost,
but what was Nominal; the Defenders of Truth were necessitated to say, there is
subsist in the Unity of God, a Trinity of Persons, which is most suitable to,
though not rigidly the same with the Language of John, There are Three, and
these Three are One Trinity, Tres Unes, or Tres in Uno, Trinity.

Having offered these Generals, I come particularly to the Charge, for
asserting there are Three Persons in the Godhead: All that Keith would seem to
Allege, is only that it is not Scripture Language; whereby he would seem to
favor the great Fundamental Principle, most, of his Brethren have been
blasphemously barking against these Thirty or Forty Years; and devoutly to say,
There are Three in One: But it were to be wished, that he, and all of them,
would demonstrate themselves according to their usual boasting, more skilful in
the Scriptures, then any of their Neighbors, by declaring freely, and
ingenuously, what those Three are called, that are but One God, and what
Substantive, they join with the Adjective three, which is distinguished in the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and then they would have dealt plainly without all
Popish Equivocation, or Reservation; which all that Read their Books, and
frequently Converse with them, will find the generality of Quakers as guilty
of, as any subtle Jesuit at St. Omers. For if this great and Fundamental
Truth, would be made plain to the Edification of the Church of God, to which it
is so highly necessary that God can neither be known, believed in, or called
upon aright without it, then some denomination must be ascribed, and given,
differing from one another in Incommunicable Properties; for they must either
be three somethings, or three nothings; the former being rejected, if three
somethings, they must be either three Gods, three Essences, three Parts, of the
same Essence, or three Qualities, or three Names, or three Manners, or ways of
Subsisting; To assert to Three Gods, were insufferable Blasphemy: though Josiah
Coal is as guilty of as great Blasphem^ in a Letter to George Fox, which as it
came from Quaker, was also Approved of by P en himself, in his Answer to Mr.
John Faldo, a Minister I lately saw in London; which for the Readers
satisfaction, and abhorrence of all, I shall here Insert.

Dear George Fox, who art the Father of many Nations, whose Life has reached
through us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off; to the Begetting of many
again unto a Lively Hope; for which, Generations to come, shall call thee
Blessed: whose Being and Habitation is in the power of the Highest, in which
thou Rules and Governs in Righteousness: And thy Kingdom is Established in
Peace, and the Increase thereof is without End.

Let Pen, and as many as will dare to Justify this, consider the (...) that
Justifies (...) Just, even they (...) are Abomination to the Lord.

But to return, To assert Three Essences, were to conceal Three Essentially
Distinct, which were to fall in with the former absurdity: To receive or
believe three parts of the same Essence, or God head which were most
inconsistent with that Oneness and absolute Simplicity in the Nature of God,
which cannot be conceived divisible, and to call the three in one, three
qualities or accidents, were to believe accidents in God, which were absurd;
and to assert nothing else but three Names, were to fall in with the long since
exploded Heresy of Apollinarius, and to hold Faith repugnant to the Rule of
Gods Word whence he has twice Three Names, and yet asserted to be but Three
only; so that it must be Three Distinct Manners, Methods, or Ways of
Subsisting, and is Termed in the Schools, Ens, and Modus Entis. And according
to the unanimous Opinion of our Reforming and Reformed Divines: A Person in the
Godhead, is whole God, not absolutely or simply considered, but by way of some
personal Properties, or a manner of Being, or Distinct Subsistence, having the
whole Godhead in it. Usher, and Calvin, call a Divine Person, a Subsistence in
the Divine Nature, which having relation to the other, is distinguished from
them, with Incommunicable Properties: So that though the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, be really and essentially the same in Essence or Being, yet they have
something differing from one another; for if the Word, Joh. 1. 1. had been
simply, and absolutely God without any thing peculiar to it self, it had been
improper, and amiss to have said, it was not only God, but with God. To which
Doctrine Tertullian agrees, saying, there is in God a certain Disposition, or
Distribution, which changes nothing of the Unity of the Essence. I need not
heap up these manifold Testimonies both of old, and New Testament, asserting
Three in One, and One in Three; and if any quarrel the word person, they shall
find this plain Scripture Language, Heb 1. 3. speaking of Christ the Second
Person in the Trinity; says* He is the Brightness of his Fathers Glory; and
Express I mage of his P erson, can any serious, and illuminated Reader pass
over this Text, without owning the word Person, to be Scripture Language, and
that the Father is a Person, distinct in Person from God the Son; for he is not
called the Fathers Person, Remark it Reader, but the Express Image of his
Fathers P erson: And if none must be called a Person, but the Father, as some
Quakers have said, then what was Christ's Person, when Mediator, having two
Natures of God and man, not man's personality, for so Divine Nature would have
satisfied in the Person of the Humane Nature, which would imply no small
Absurdities, or he should be the Pe rson of the Father, which were repugnant to
the formerly cited Text: Our Mediator was without all Person And finally, if
the Father is a Person, and the Son the Image of this Person, why not the Holy
Ghost a Person also, and Three in One, and One in Three

The Next Charge is, and that a Weighty one in P. 9, and 10 And that is for
mentioning only Three Offices of Christ, as Mediator, a Prophet, Priest, and
King. And that (...), Saving^y, and only to those that Believe in him, and to
whom He is Actually a Savior; and that those Three Offices include, All that
Christ did, and was Requesite to be done as Mediator; None, even Kieth himself
cannot deny, as he readily owned at my House, all was Reducible to those Three
Offices, which are all we have mentioned in the Scriptures, and those Three*
are very Obvious and Plain.

1. He is called, and that Deservedly, The Great Prophet of His Church,
according to that Promise of, and Prophecy concerning him; A Prophet shall the
Lord your God raise up unto you, like unto his Brethren, Him shall ye hear in
all things. And this Promise was fulfilled in his Coming, and Executing this
his Prophetical Office, by being the Great Gospel-Preacher to his Church, and
People; Declaring the Way, and Means of Salvation, by a Mediator, delivering
the Will of His Father; This was Prophesied also of him in Isaiah. 61. 1, 2, 3.
and Hebr. 3. 1. He is called, the Apostle of our Profession. And He is the Sole
Teacher of the Mysterys of Salvation from the Father. Matthew. 11. 27 No Man
knows the Father save the Son, and he to whom soever the Son will reveal him.
And this Our Great Prophet does not always immediately, else K's. Teachings and
all the Teachings among Quakers, were most needless, and vain, but,

1 By the Holy Scriptures, Profitable for Doctrine, and able to make the Man of
God, Wise unto Salvation

2. By His Messengers, and Ministers, whom he has commanded to Go, and Teach
all Nations; and sent to give Warning to His Churches, and People, Therefore
from their Office, and Teaching, called Teachers.

And Lastly, by his Holy Spirit in the Hearts of his People, where Christ
dwells not Substantially, as Quakers say, but Spiritually by Faith; and so is
united by Faith though Locally Distant, without the Presence of the things
United, as K. would insinuate, and assert in his Paper. For if there can be a
Moral Union, and Relation standing firm betwixt a Husband, and Wife, the one in
Europe, the other in America, and a Natural Union, and nigh Relation, between
Parent, and Child, much more between Christ in Heaven, and believers on Earth,
by a Spiritual, and indissolvible Union, by Faith, which is not an absent
Christ to Believers, with whom he is by Gracious, and Spiritual Influences in
their Hearty. And K's. Subtle, and Sophistical Arguments from the General, and
Universal Presence of Christ as God, to his special and Gracious Presence as
Mediator, will take Place with none, but Ignorant, and Deluded Quakers; for so
the Devils in Hell* should enjoy as great a Privilege as Believers on Earth.

And also it is granted that he is the Eternal High Priest of His Church, who
Offered and gave Himself a Sacrifice once upon the Cross for Sinners and by the
Efficacious Merits of this Death, renders the Persons and Services of his
People acceptable unto God, not only Teaching them by His Holy Spirit, what to
pray for as they ought; but also continues an High-P riest at the Right Hand of
God, making continual I ntercession for Believers, Heb. 7 25. Wherefore he is
able to Save them to the uttermost, that come to God by Him, seeing be ever L
iveth to make Intercession for us; all which is fully and soundly delivered in
the Catechisms, and Confessions of Faith of our Divines of the Westminster
Assembly.

And Lastly, He is the Sole King, Head and Lawgiver of his Church; by which
Kingly Power, and Authority, he Appoints Laws and Statutes, for the Counsel and
Direction of his people, even to the binding of Conscience, with the whole
inward man, in whom Christ does Rule, and Reign, even in and over such as
subject their Souls to his Government, suffering Christ to Reign over them.

2 He Subdues and Conquers sinners Naturally Rebels to himself, making them
from an Un-willing, a Willing People, in the Day of his power.

3 In defending of his Church from all their Enemies, assuring them, the Gates
of Hell shall not prevail against them.

4 He restrains the Fury, and rage of, and Finally, executes his Wrath on all
His, and their Enemies.

And we never did disown that the special Fruits of all these Three Offices are
wrought in the hearts of Believers; which is inconsistent with that Prophet, P
riest, and King in all men according to Quakers Doctrine, while the Scripture
affirms, they are Reprobate, in whom Christ is not. And it is plain the Quakers
common Christ, is not the true Mediator and Messiah, who only dwells in the
hearts of Believers by Faith, and not of Infidels that do not so much as know
by any kind of knowledge, and yet they are Enlightened by him, as they say, with
a sufficient, and saving knowledge. How unnecessary must it be to multiply
Offices in our Mediator, seeing all are reducible to those Three? and must he
not be a Man of a Perverse Spirit, and contentious mind, that would raise a
Debate upon this head? and K's Evasion and Quibble for this is extreemly silly,
and weak; for (says he) the Commands of Gods Moral Law are reducible to two;
yet also branched out into Ten; for the first Division of the Divine Commands,
was by God himself into two (...) or two Commands; yet the same God makes the
Enumeration or Division unto ten; but no such Warrant can be produced for this
Enumeration or Multiplication of Offices in our Mediator; for it were as
impertinent, and idle, as if every Duty required, and every Sin prohibited in
every Command, were a new Command; and there should be thrice ten instead of
ten; and what must be thought of those that multiply Offices in Christ, calling
every thing that Christ is called a new Office in the Mediator, as a Father, a
Shepherd, an Husband, Physician, etc. Whence he is called the Way, a Rock, a
Door, a Vine; all which denote no new Offices, but signify his Richness,
Fullness, Benefits, Love and Favor to Believers, denoting that Spiritual
Relation to Believers, and Christ's usefulness to them in all Estates and
Conditions.

His next Charge, Page 10, 11. I have affirmed Christ Died, or was Sacrificed
for Sinners. Now let any determine whether this Answer does not set forth the
Fruit, and Satisfaction of Christ's Death for Sinners; for if he Died for
Sinners, and for our Sins, is it not enough to us; for if we had not been
Sinners, we should not have stood in need of Redemption: and if sinners were
Redeemed, no others did want it. And though he seems to reprehend it with
Scripture Language, yet his Charge is more obscure, and defective, then that he
finds fault with; either that quarrelled at must be true, or false, or
deficient; if true, why Censured, if false, let Quakers speak their minds
plainly; if deficient, there must be some for whom Christ Died, besides
Sinners. If I have not multiplied words, to humor captious and critical
Quakers, I hope I shall never have cause to repent it, where I Studiously
avoided all prolixity, and endeavored all succinctness and brevity.

But to return to the matter in hand concerning the Nature, Efficacy, and
Extent of Christ's Redemption, we have to do with many Adversaries, whose
various Sentiments are not to be reconciled either among themselves, or with
the Holy Scriptures: for some say, Christ Died absolutely for all, and every
individual sinner, and in Laying down his Life, did equally intend the
Salvation of all; others say, he Died for all conditionally, from a foreseen
condition of Faith; so it was only a conditional Salvation, or Redemption,
wherein not one was absolutely Redeemed; this by some is called a possible
Salvation; whereby they explain Universal Redemption to be nothing else, then
Christ's Pacifying an Angry God for all, and leaving all in a possibility of
Salvation if they will; others of a middle sort, say, he Died absolutely for
the Elect of God, but conditionally for the Reprobate: But the most unanimous,
and received Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, is, That whom Christ Died for,
be absolutely and completely Redeemed; and that was some Select and Chosen
Number, given him of God the Father, to Lay down his Life for them, as our Lord
himself hints plainly to us in John 17. at large, of which says he, None was
Lost.

That I may discover the absurdities of the former Opinion; consider first,
Christ's absolute Redemption for all, and every individual Sinner: For 1. So
Christ should have intended to have saved those that were actually in Hell, and
condemned to Eternal Flames, before his Death, under an Irrevocable Sentence of
Wrath. 2. What a Dishonor were it to God to say, he intended, and at so dear a
rate, as the Death of his own Son, to go about the Redeeming of those whom he
knew from all Eternity should be infallibly Damned; can it be imagined, Christ
intended to Save such? 3. If all men and women, were absolutely Redeemed, all
should be infallibly Saved, for Salvation supposes Redemption, and Redemption
secures Salvation; but it is evident to all, the smallest number shall Enter in
at the Strait Gate 4. If God should purpose and intend the Salvation of all
absolutely, and yet the smallest ^umber escape Eternal Wrath, what should the
purposes and intentions of God be more then the purposes, and intentions of his
Creatures that can be frustrated, disappointed and come to naught?

Let us view the absurdities and inconsistencies that flow naturally from the
universal, ^^^ditional Redemption, whereby all are left under a possibility of
Salvation, if they will; and 1. If so, then it would have been possible, for
all to have been Damned, and not one Saved; for if man had but resisted as it
was in his Power, because not absolutely Redeemed, then Christ might have Died
really for nothing, and have seen no Fruit of the Travail of his Soul: And, Let
serious Souls consider what an insignificant Death, and fruitless inefficacious
Redemption should he have Paid. 2. If a conditional Redemption, and a
possibility of Salvation was all that Christ Died for, I would Enquire, Who it
is that performs the Condition, God or man; if men can believe or repent of
themselves, then the Conditional Salvation, might avail them something; but he
cannot believe, it is Gods special Gift, Ephesians. 2. And man cannot repent, for
it is his grant, 2 Timothy

1 What will a Possibility of Salvation for all men avail, and a conditional
Redemption signify, if all men are not left also in a Possibility of believing
and Repenting also, if, and when they would. 3. If a conditional Universal
Redemption, be all the Redemption accomplished by Christ, then it is as
impossible for man to be saved, as if he had not been Redeemed at all; seeing
it is as impossible for man to perform the Conditions, as it is for him to
redeem himself; and all may see it this be Quakers universal Redemption, what a
poor, lame, ineffectual and half Redemption they believe in, and build upon for
their Salvation; as Barclay has declared, in Publishing his Universal
Redemption, sufficiently confuted, by Mr. Brown; not answered till he was
Removed off the Stage, by Death.

And such as tread the middle path, holding an absolute, Redemption of Gods
Elect, and only a Conditional Salvation of the Reprobate; They ^old (1.) A
Twofold manner of Redemption, which we have no ground for in the Scriptures;
all that are Redeemed, being Redeemed alike.

2 If so, the greatest part of Mankind are left in as bad a state, as if they
were not Redeemed at all.

I^ we consider the Merit of Christ's Crucifixion and Death, materially in
regard of its Sufficiency, Dignity, Worth, and Merit, by Reflecting on the
Person who Suffered and Died, and of the manner how he Accomplished it, with
Faithfulness, and that most Willingly, and Cheerfully, that it was no less
Price then the Death of him, who was God, Equal with God the Father; The
Ransom must be owned, and believed, of Infinite Value, and Worth, Merit, and
Dignity, and so not only a complete, and sufficient Satisfaction for the sins
of the whole World, but was in it self a complete Ransom, for the Offenses of
a Thousand Worlds. And so if we consider the Sufficiency of his Price, and
Ransom, he Died for all, he Offered a Sacrifice, and gave an Atonement that
was enough for all, he gave himself a Ransom for all, and Tasted Death for
every man; further we assert, and believe, that all Nations, Kingdoms, Tongues,
and People were Redeemed by Jesus Christ; so according to the School
distinction, He Dyed, for, Generibus S^ngulorum, for, All kinds of men, not for
Singulis Generum, not for, Every I ndividual Man and Woman according to John's
Vision, Rev. 5. 9. For thou wast slain, and have Redeemed us to God, by thy
Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, so that all
and every one that is or shall be Redeemed, are Redeemed by Jesus Christ, who
is the only Savior, and no Name given under Heaven whereby we can be Saved,
but by the Name Jesus; so he is the Savior of all. And this we dare most
boldly and Warrantably affirm, that Christ's Death is Efficacious for the
Salvation of all, whom he died for, and not one of these Predestined to
Eternal Life, shall Perish, but be brought Infallibly to Glory; Rom 8. 30. Whom
he did Predestinate them he also Called, and whom he Called, them he also
Justified, and whom he Justified, them he also Glorified. From which Scripture,
none can be Ignorant, unless they wilfully stop, and Blind the Eyes of their
understandings, what an inseparable connection is between the Means, and the
End, and all flowing from the Everlasting Purpose, and immutable Predestination
of God; and as many as Christ Died for, shall be infallibly Saved, and to
whomsoever he has purchased Salvation, to as many he has Purchased all the
Means and Conditions, of Salvation, as Faith, Repentance, and all the Holy
Graces of the Spirit of God; for says the Spirit of God, as many as were
ordained to Eternal Life, Believed; neither dare we believe such an ineffectual
Redemption, as Quakers hand in hand with Arminians, and Pelagians do hold,
which only leaves man in a possibility of Salvation, if the sinner will; but
may be, the most of Christ's Redeemed ones, go to Hell notwithstanding; while
Christ, John 17. Speaks of his Redeemed and Ransomed ones, as those Select
Ones, whom the Father had given him out of the World, for whom, that is the
World, He would not so much as Pray, far less dye; and Keith himself owns in
his Malicious Uncharitable Book, Against New England Ministers, that there are
those for whom it may be said, Christ Dyed not. And so this must be the
Gentleman's Position, Christ dyed for all, and dyed not for all; which is a
plain contradiction; and farewell Keith's universal Redemption, which if it had
not evanished in a contradiction, was uncomfortable, and ineffectual to the
greatest number of Redeemed ones.

I Remember in the beginning Keith says, I speak very little of the Spirit of
God at all, which I have already shown in the most convincing, and particular
manner to be False, by directing the Reader to the particular Pages, and now I
am to show he contradicts himself, by owning in several Questions, and
Answers, my asserting, The Spirits Operations, in calling Effectually, in
Regeneration, in Working Faith in us, and Uniting us to Christ? But while he is
necessitated to own this; He affirms it, To be inconsistent with, and
contradictory to, my own and My Brethrens Doctrine; which he endeavors to
confirm, by a far fetched, and inconsequential reason, because we deny all
extraordinary immediate, and objective Revelation, such as the Apostles had;
and though we disown this Doctrine of theirs, how it shall Follow, we renounce,
all the special Gracious, and saving operations of the Spirit of God, in and by
the use of means, and Ordinances of Gods own appointment, and sometimes
immediately, where External means of our Salvation are Wanting; in the
Regeneration, Sanctification of Souls, and in making them meet for himself in
Glory; Heave both to Natural and Gracious Souls to Determine.

But every Christian Reader may discover, in this person, a most Arrogant
Spirit, to pretend to know my Principles, and Opinions better than I know them
my self, and with impudent falsehood, to affirm and declare, I have Published an
Account of Principles I do not believe; and that they are repugnant to my
Brethrens Doctrine; seeing our public Confessions of Faith, and Catechisms
known to the whole Christian World, says the same things, and particularly in
the Description of Effectual Calling, which is further confirmed in all our
common places, and Bodies of Divinity, and in all the practical Pieces,
treating of these Subjects, as Mr. Allen of Conversion, Mr. Burgess, and Mr.
Cole of Regeneration, and many others; and I am satisfied, how often I have
delivered in public my Opinion in these matters. I must needs declare, it is
an evil Principle, and unfair Undertaking for any to take upon them to Publish
Principles, and contradict Principles, of those he is an absolute stranger
unto; and it is the true Character of a Deceiver, to possess others with
prejudices against our Principles, only by misrepresenting of them, and
Fastening Principles on us, which we abhor. And as to all inward Revelation, or
speaking of God to the Souls and Hearts of Believers, I never read nor heard of
any of our Divines, absolutely deny or disown i^: And I have upon all
occasions, publicly Taught, and Do, and shall in the Strength of Jesus Christ,
firmly believe, and that unto the end, the Illuminating, Sanctifying,
Mortifying, Quickening Operations of the Holy Spirit of God, in the hearts of
every sound Believer, in restoring the Corrupted Soul to the Forfeited Image of
God; so it is evident, how inclinable Keith is to Calumniate, and misrepresent
us, upon all occasions. How great must the Ignorance of Quakers needs be, who
cannot, or their perverseness be that will not, distinguish between
Enthusiastic, Immediate, Extraordinary and Objective Revelations; from the
Spirits Gracious and Spiritual Illumination (...) his mind, impressing those
Truths made known, and Revealed in an ordinary way, by Means of Heavens
Appointment; giving them Efficacious Grace to see, Embrace, Close with, and
make Saving Application of them to their hearts, and Grace to observe the same
in their Lives; which ordinary and extraordinary Operations they confound
together, as they do the Universal, or General P resence of Christ, with his
special, saving, and gracious Presence, holding him to be in all, after the
same manner. And whereas he has assumed boldness to affirm, we call it
Blasphemy to say, Christ is really in the Saints All the Answer this deserves,
is, that it is Notoriously False, and a groundless Calumny; For all of us
firmly believe, T hat unless the Spirit of Christ be in us, we are none of his;
and Christ is in us, except we be Reprobate, and he dwells in all Believers;
but from Paul's words, it is by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. as I declared, and that fully
from that Text, Colos 1. 27 Christ in you the Hope of Glory. And it is no
contradiction to affirm, and believe that God has called Sinners out of Sin,
unto Grace, yet at the same time to feel, and assert, that all have sin
remaining in them; for it is no hard matter to distinguish betwixt Sinners
being under the Power, Dominion, and Slavery, or Drudgery of Sin, and a Sinners
having some Relics and Remainders of Sin, and Corruption in them, whereby even
in Believers there is a constant and spiritual Warfare raised in the believing
Soul, whereas formerly the Strong Man kept the House, the Apostle gives us this
distinction; Sin shall not have Dominion over you, you are not under the Law,
but under Grace; and the same Apostle, even after his Conversion, complains of
his own sinful, wretched Corruption, and at the same time Triumphs in the
Victory obtained, for in the next breath; Thanks be to God who has given us the
victory; and if Sin in some measure be not contemporary with saving Grace, or
Conversion, what must become of Quakers universal sufficient, and saving Grace,
and all the multitudes of them, I have ever seen, must according to their own
Opinion, be void of Conversion, Grace and Justification; for Sin have been
easily discernable in all, neither did ever any of them produce one instance
for their absolute perfection; and yet none of us assert, that the Saints
Sincerity, Thought, Word and Deed* as Keith falsely words it; yet if strictly,
and spiritually taken; all are attended with Infirmities. I am quarrelled, for
asserting in my Catechism, page 25. This Justification and Adoption, are Acts
of God, without us, and and work only a relative Change; and that
Justification, Adoption and Sanctification once had cannot be Lost. As to the
first, Justification is according to the Judgment of all Protestant Divines, a
gracious Act of Gods Love, in a Judicial Way, upon the account of Christ's
Imputed Righteousness, acquitting, and absolving the sinner from Guilt, and
consequently from Condemnation. I hope Quakers will not jump in with Papists,
who assert, Justification to be the making of one Just, and so Confound it with
Sanctification, which the Spirit of God makes to be distinct Acts, though always
unseparable. As to Adoption in its nature, it is Gods Numbering us among his
Children, a taking us from among the Children of Satan, and Giving us a Right
to all the Privileges of Gods Children; and pray where is the falsehood, and
danger, in asserting, they are Acts of God without us, bringing Believers into
a new Relation unto God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit, to whom they are Enemies
and Strangers by Nature; seeing at the same time we firmly believe, that there
is no Relative Change wrought by God on any Sinner, in Justification or
Adoption, without a real, saving, inward, gracious, and universal Change upon
the whole man by Sanctification, which are as different by the Language of the
Apostle Paul, as Sanctification and Glorification is, Romans 8. And none are
Justified or Adopted, but Sanctified also; all which is asserted in my
Catechism; if Keith's contentious, Cavelling, and Carping Spirit had allowed
him to take notice thereof; for none of us hold, that God makes any his people,
or children, without a real, gracious Change, as Pen and Keith would
inviduously and falsely Calumniate us, and our universally known Doctrine,
fairly published to the World; any yet that renewing work is not properly
Justification, but Sanctification, which is a gradual work; whereby the Old man
of sin and corruption, is Crucyfyed, and the New man of Grace, Righteousness or
Holiness, is r^newed and put on, more and more; and though Keith would make
Peace of Conscience to be the Essence, and Nature of Justification; yet all
Reformed Divines, with the Apostle Paul make it a concomitant, or rather a
consequent Blessing to our Justification, Rom 5. 1. Being Justified Faith, we
have Peace with God. And whoever denied Regeneration to work a real change,
which my Catechism plainly asserts. And that Justification, Adoption and
Sanctification may be Lost, is not only the Doctrine of Quakers, but of
Pelagians, Papists and Arminians too; though Keith and Barclay own that some
may Arrive to such a pitch and measure that they cannot Fall away; now this
measure must either be higher than Justification, Sanctification, or
Regeneration, or they contradict themselves, in opposing Free Grace, and
denying the Perseverance of the Saints in Grace with most discouraging and
comfortless arguments to Believers, which imply many gross absurdities; and
concerning this Head, Mr. John Brown our Country man, in confutation of
Barclay, lays down our unanimous Doctrine, and first animadverts all that we
hold, the Perseverance of none, but such as are Regenerated; and how false and
absurd were it to say, a Sinner Regenerated, or made a Child of God to Day, and
yet be a Child of the Devil to morrow, made meet for Heaven, and yet go to
Hell, Pardoned, and yet Damned. 2. We do not hold a special and inevitable
necessary of Perseverance, though unwilling and lying in Sin, as Enemies would
insinuate to the prejudice of Truth, as Quakers often have done. 3. We do not
maintain a Perseverance depending on the will of man, but on the gracious
Covenant, The Everlasting Purpose of God, the Unchangeableness of his Love, and
Efficaciousness of Christ's Death.

4 That a Believer may fall away, Back-slide and Depart from God by many
degrees, as, (1) From Duty, as Hearing, Reading, Praying, Praising etc. (2)
Into Grievous Sins, as Noah, David, Soloman, and Peter. (3) In^o great Doubts,
and Fears (...) their State. (4) From Degrees of Grace, as from a Strong unto a
Weakness of Faith, their Zeal for God, and Religion, may grow very cold, they
may fall from their First Love; they may fall from their former measure of Fear
And (5) they may Fall from the Truth of the Gospel, from the Doctrine of Our
Lord Jesus, and embrace many gross, and dangerous Errors, and Believe a Lie.
(6) They may fall from the Accidentals of their Gracious State, as Sense of
Favor, Assurance of Gods Love, Strength of Habits, Measures of Comfort, is often
times and may be remitted, and lost. And yet in the last place, we Believe
mentain and hold, There can be no Total and Final Apostasy, and Defection from
a Regenerate State, or the Essence, and Habits of all Grace, and this is not
only our Doctrine, but the Doctrine of all our Reformed Churches: though K's
Invidious Malice is most commonly set against the Reformed Church of Scotland;
verifying the Ancient and common saying, Omnis Apostata sua S^cte osor. And
every serious soul may easily conceive how comfortless, and discouraging the
Doctrine of Quakers must needs be, to all Regenerated, and Believing Souls; if
after Regeneration, being (...) Covenant with God, Sealed with the Holy Spirit
of Promise, Redeemed with the Blood of Jesus, they may yet be Damned in the
End, this, and many more are the Absurdities that attend this Ancient Pelagian,
and Arminian Error, as [1] Is it not inconsistent with that Puffing up Doctrine
of their Perfection, they could never yet demonstrate from instances. [2] It is
inconsistent with the Immutability of Gods Love, for whom He Loves He L oves
unto the end, for his Gracious purposes, are Unalterable, and his Will
Irresistible, Isa. 41. 31 They that wait on the Lord, shall renew their
Strength, they shall mount up with Wings, as Eagles they shall run, and not be
weary, and they shall walk and not be Faint. [3] It is inconsistent with the
Stability of the Covenant, that is well ordered in all things, and sure, and
all its Mercies, are sure Mercies; hence called frequently, an Everlasting
Covenant. Jer. 32 40. And I will (...) make an Everlasting Covenant with them,
and I will not turn away from them, to do them Good, but I will put my Fear in
their Heart, that they shall not depart from me. And all Objecting Instances,
from Scripture, must implye no Saving Faith, or true Regeneration, or their
Fall was neither Final, nor Total. [4] It is inconsistent with the Faithfulness
of Christ's undertaking to God the Father in the Covenant of Redemption, it
destroys the Efficacy of His Death. Let any Read Christ's Prayer to God the
Father in, John 17. And he may soon be satisfied, there was a Select Number
given unso Christ to redeem and Ransom. 24. And Father I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am. And he prays, 15. And that God
would keep them from the Evil. And he has engaged to God the Father, that none
that the Father had given him should be Lost; otherwise Christ might be Charged
with Unfaithfulness. And such as deny the Perseverance of the Saints must be
ignorant of what Christ has done for the confirmation of the Gracious State of
Believers. (1) His Redeeming them from all the Demands of Divine Justice, with
his Precious Blood. (2) Redeeming them from the power of Satan. (3) From the
Dominion of sin. (4) He is gone to prepare a Place for them. 5 He makes
intercession in Heaven for them. (6) He promises his Holy Spirit to abide in
them, to complete his begun work in them, and establish them, all which is
abundantly confirmed from Scripture.

5 The Final and Total fall or Apostasy of Regenerate Saints is inconsistent
with the Nature of Grace which is an Incorruptible Seed, that cannot be totally
extinguished where e're it is planted of God. And farther, it much weakneth the
Faith of the Saints, their Hope and Confidence in Gods Preservation of them
from Falling which the experience and confidence of the Apostle P aul testifies
they firmly Believe Romans 8. 35. 38. 39. and that in their deepest Trials, and
sharpest Afflictions. Finally, it Robs the Regenerated Children of God, of
their Spiritual Joy, and Holy Consolation in the Holy Ghost, by filling them
with Perpetual Fears Anxiety, and Doubts about their State. And we find Keith
insinuating this, That the Doctrine of Perseverance Flatters men in great sins;
for though the Godly cannot Fall, Finally nor Totally, yet as we have said, they
may Fall into many Evils provoking to God, and injurious to their own Peace,
and comfort, which they are ever watchful against, lest they should lose the
sense and comfort of Gods Special Love, and Favor; any measure or degree of
Grace, or Holiness, which would be most Wounding, and Grievous to them, and so
far from Flattery; but this his Calumny is like unto the rest. And I dare refer
my self to Quakers themselves, if Universal Grace, saving and divine Light, the
Spirit of God, and Christ, Substantially present in all men, even the most
ignorant, wicked and Profane, and absolute Perfection in some, be not more
soul-deluding, and self-Flattering Doctrine, then the Perseverance of the
Saints once Regenerated, whose sins and infirmityes, humbled, and makes them
constantly watchful; and so it is evident, it destroys the promise of Gods
Establishing and confirming Spirit, and leaves the Catholic Church of God
which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against, upon a most Ticklish
Foundation, and Liable to (...) come to nothing; it would annul all Christian
Communion and Fellowship, for according to Quakers opinion, one may be a Saint
to day, and in Christian Fellowship, and may Fall away, and be Damned to
morrow; it renders out Pardon comfortless, seeing after Pardon we may perish
Eterna^^y, and destroys the Hope and Faith of Life Everlasting, seeing no man
can firmly believe it, until he have the Enjoyment of it.

The next grand Charge, that highly offended many of that Gang, is concerning a
Question in my Catechism concerning the Sabbath; in the Answer I affirm,
Quakers and Profane Persons are Enemies to a Sabbath, and now I am satisfied to
have an opportunity of showing my reasons to the World, how just, and not
invidious this my Charge was, though I mentioned no other Enemies in Judgment,
besides Quakers; and notwithstanding of all reasons given to Keith and others
at my House, they seem still to be dissatisfied, but it is for the most part,
the peculiar Temper of such as Rangle, and oppose all Reasoning: And that I may
refer^ my self to the Censures of the more unprejudiced, and rational; and I am
so far from Recanting, Denying, or Giving any submission for the Charge, that I
am the rather confirmed, it was most just and deserving, and that without all
shadow of the guilt of a Calumny, and that for these following reasons. 1.
Because I never met with any others that in reallity opposed this Doctrine
besides that Party, and though I might hear common Fame accuse others, and
meeting with none of their Writings, I had no Warrant, for including them under
the public Charge, though my Answer does no way exclude them. 2. All the
Quakers I ever conversed with in Europe or America, declared this as their
undoubted Judgment, that all Days were alike under the Gospel, and none of
perpetual Observation as a Day of Rest; and further, That they were as free to
Work, or Labor in their several Callings, and Trades on the First Day of the
Week, (called now the Christian Sabbath, or Day of Rest, under the Gospel,) as
any other Day of the Week; of which I gave, and am able yet to give several
Instances: And I am lately informed, of several Servants of Quakers, otherwise
Educated, who have made complaint to Magistrates, of their Masters, causing
them to follow their daily Labor; and a Witness yet alive, can declare, being
on a Sabbath at Thomas Everdens House, perceived no manner of Worship with his
Family, but great diligence in dispatching one of his Servants with Necessaries
for Building a Sloop; and I have met one of them with a Gun in the Woods on the
Sabbath, or First Day of the Week, while we were going to the Public Worship
of God; if such are not to be looked on, without any just Accusation, of an
invidious Calumny, Enemies to a Sabbath, let the World judge. 3. They need not
make so great a noise, and clamor at this Charge; forhowever others may remain
ignorant, yet it is not unknown to Keith, how often by several others Quakers
have been ranked in with several others, Enemies of the Sabbath, long before I
had any acquaintance with their principles: as by Mr John Brown, in his Latin
Treatise, concerning the Sabbath, also Mr Matthew Crawford in his Learned
defense of the Morality of the Fourth Commandment, called Exercitacio
Apologetica; therefore this charge is not mine only, but of as many as Treat of
that Subject. 4. I f I can produce their own Word, charging them with as much
as I say, will it not appear how unjustly they seem to to be offended at my
charge; and if any would peruse that small, but angry Pamphlet of Quakers,
soberly answered by Mr. Mitchel of Aberdeen; and they shall find it confidently
asserted, that all Days, are alike, and are told from Romans 14. 6. and Gal. 4.
10, 11. To Reprehend all such as observe one day of Seven as a Day of Rest; and
that all Weekly Observation of a Day is Abolished under the Gospel; And how
Keith comes in now of Late to tell us of their keeping the first Day of the
Week, without being first reconciled to his own Brethren, both in Practice, and
Judgment; And it yet remains for him to declare, By what Authority, or from
what Command they keep that Day, and not another; whether it is commanded of
God, or only an Ecclesiastic, and Humane Constitution, which until proved to
be the Unanimous Judgment of Quakers, must be looked upon to be the Private
Judgment of Keith only. But he is Pleased to say, That Quakers keep the first
Day of the Week, and spend it in the Religious Exercise of Public, and Private
Worship; but this is said, and not Proved; for the contrary is known to most
who resort to, and frequent their Houses; where they discern no more Worship in
many of their Families, than in the Families of Indians: And He Appeals to
their Neighbors as Witnesses, but (...) their Witnesses have affirmed the
contrary, and how they can attest to a Worship which can be neither seen nor
heard, it passes my skill to Determine

Lastly, As many as know Quakers in England, Scotland, and (...), cannot be
ignorant how neither from Obedience to God or Man, could be persuaded to
observe the First Day of the Week, but would keep open their Shops, and follow
their several Callings; for which they were often drawn to Prisons, and their
Goods carried away; this was not done in a Corner, but manifest and known to
all And though Keith blamed me, for not charging Mr. John Ca^ume, as an Enemy, as
well as they, but had not the least reason for so doing, for I had often
conversed with Calumis^s, and Read the Writings of his Followers, who stoutly
defended the Morality of a Sabbath, or the Fourth Command. And whatever over
zealous mistake that Eminent Man of God was under, when he Wrote his I
nstitutions, yet in his Exposition on Genesis, about Eighteen Years after he
Wrote his I nstitutions, owns the Morality of the Fourth Command, and it could
not be ceremonial, seeing the Institution of a perpetual Sabbath, was before
all Ceremonies, and that this was Calums last Sentiments, is not only Evident
from that Commentary, but also from the Principles and Practices, of the
Reformed Churches of France, and Geneva, of which Ca^^ume was the First
Reformer Now all these things duly considered, and put together, I leave it to
any to determine, how far they are wronged in being reckoned with, or numbered
among the Enemies to a Sabbath; which has set their peevish Spirit in a flame
against my Catechism, and stirred up their Venom against me, which I ever shall
little regard

In page 28. I am Charged with Deficiency, concerning Ministers, and that in
three things: and I am ready to own I have wilfully Omitted twice three things
concerning Ministers Qualifications, and Call; and pray where is the
crimeseeing there are so full Treatises by others on that Subject already
Published; and all I intended in my Catechism for Young Ones, was only to lay
down the several Duties of Ministers and People; and if I had been guilty of an
Omission in that Enumeration, he might have found fault; but I must take notice
of an invidious Parenthesis, that Peoples Maintaining their Ministers is a main
thing with me. Let the Reader examine my Catechism, and he shall not find
ground for this malicious Reflection; for it is expressed in as few words as
any other Duty without in fisting thereon, and this was the expression of an
absolute Strange r to me, and my practice in Relation to a Maintenance, to
which I am bold to assert, I have been ever undenied as Keith, or any of his
Brethren. And whatever others have done, I dare affirm, I never bargained with
any people about a Maintenance; and have often refused money when freely offered,
and never Enjoyed any Maintenance, but what was most freely offered to me;
though I deny not to the Magistrate, a power of Determining Maintainances, when
Necessity requires it; and none so unwilling to pay it as perverse Quakers,
though I could wish it were voluntary Offerings; yet this partial Author would
insinuate, as if Presbyterians only were Guilty; exacting Maintenance by
force; whereas he cannot be ignorant, that the Maintenance of Ministers in
Scotland, are not to be compared to what Prelates have, whether Popish or
Protestant, neither for quantity, not manner of Exacting. And it is observable,
that the Quakers have been brawling and barking unreasonably against all who
receive Maintenance, as Hirelings; but the greatest Champions among them, were
never able to defend so bad a Cause, as they have been tenacious in for a long
time; though now of late, they seem to change their Tunes, and own a
Maintenance, providing it be voluntary, and not by Compulsion, as Barclay has
owned, who has taken upon him to Publish Quakers Principles, though he never
produced any Commission for it; and I am persuaded, he will find it as hard a
matter to procure their universal Consent, and Approbation to all he has Wrote;
but a Ministers Maintenance among Quakers must be voluntary, and free, for
they would never Exact it by force, for two Reasons 1. Because they never had
the Government solely in their Hands, for in Pensilvania they are a mixed
people; neither would the Infancy of that Plantation bear it; beside that,
their former Railings would have Retorted upon themselves. 2. Because of the
multitude of their Teachers, and the Weakness of many of them, that dare not
claim a Right to any such Maintenance, as many silly women, and ignorant
Mechanics And it must be for measure or quantity, a necessary Competency, or
Aliment, as Barclay calls it; but must Quakers only be Judges of this
Competency, or should the Giver, or rather the Civil Magistrate to determine it
according to the several Abilities of the People: And consider what narrow and
niggardly Souls these people have, who would allow no more to the Ministers of
the Gospel, then common Charity obliges them to give to the most common beggar
that goes from Door to Door, even a necessary Competency, and Aliment; whereas
M inisters should have such a Maintenance as they may not be necessitated to
entangle, and incumber themselves with secular Affairs, and be diverted from
their holy Office, and Ministerial Calling, whereunto they have been Called,
and to which they are to be Separated according to the Command of God,
concerning Paul and Barnabas; and further, they ought to have such an
Honorable Allowance, as they may not only Live answerable to their Station,
and be able to maintain Duties to Hospitality, which Quakers Competency, and
necessary Aliment, will never render them capable to perform: And it were no
hard matter to prove, that many Quakers, even Keith and Barclay themselves,
whose Birth, Education, Travels and Estates are known to many yet alive, have
had much more given then their necessary Aliment.

And I know not what Evasion can be found for K's Hundred Pound Per Annum
settled on him by the Government in Pensilvania, Exacted of a mixed People, who
neither hear him, nor enjoy any benefit or advantage from his School-Keeping,
which is their only shift and Backdoor, they would fly out at; which will
never Blind the eyes of the Rational; for School Keeping has a peculiar
advantage attending it self, without any Public Tax by compulsion, as they
call all our Mentainances. And I Dare be bold to say, in behalf of
Prosbyterians whom he would chiefly seem to reproach, that they are as little
concerned about mentainances as any of the Reformed Church s, and value them
not, when they come in competition with theirs. And have not the Ministers of
the Reformed Church of Scot and, these Thirty years past, have suffered
Persecution, even unto Death it self, for preaching the Gospel under to much
want, that they have been necessitated to Labor with their won hands, and be
take themselves for a time to Merchandising, and yet never would dare to lay
aside the Preaching of the Gospel And it is not unknown, how little Ministers
have had of Mentainance in Maryland, either voluntary or compelled; And Quakers
themselves, own they have Stock Purses, out of which they Supply their
Teachers, and others; and what call you this but a Maintenance; and it is
(...) easy when they come abroad, to conceal their Plenty at home, that the
Stock Purses may be the more Liberal unto them, as I doubt not but those of
Maryland, and Virginia too, were in his Late Travels, which was the least he
could have, for he gained but few Proselytes. And let all Judge how
inconsistent their present practices are, with their former unreasonable
prattling against every thing that looked like a Maintenance, urging as K. still
does, that Text, Freely ye have Received, Freely Give, which was the Advice of
Out Savior to his Apostles, when he enabled them to go forth and work
Miracles, Heal the Sick, Cleanse this Lepers, Raise the Dead, Cast out Devils,
of which they should make no Merchandiz; though they were Commanded to Preach tho
Gospel as they go along, tending them that the Time of the Promised Messiah,
was now come, who was setting up his Kingdom in the Word, and to whose Laws
they were to be obedient. This Doctrine they were to confirm by Miracles, which
he gives them a Charge, they should work freely, without receiving any Reward
for them; that the Miracles being used to their private use, and profit, might
not lose their End, which was the confirmation of their Doctrine; now it hereby
was understood they should receive no necessary Maintenance, the Apostles might
Rationally Judge, they had (...) then to provide well for their journey; no,
as, if Our Lord had said, Provide neither God, no Silver, I nor Brass in your
(...), nor Scrip for your (...), neither two Coats, neither shoes, nor staves;
and the reason added, for the workman is warthy of his Meat, an else where, is
worthy of his Hire, and pray what is Mear, and Hire, but the best of
Maintenance; and it is observable, the Command for going abroad to bare, in the
to of Matthew was only a Temporary Command for that short Journey; for in Luke;
they were commanded to take both P urse and S crip, ch 22 If they were
commanded to take none of these things and yet to go abread, and Preach the
Gospel, confirming the same with Miracles, they must have received maintenance,
or they must have perished if their Journey had been long; but Our Lord
designed thereby (1) To give his Apostles an experience of depending on his
Good Providence and (2) Also teach People, That the Labourer is worthy of his
Hire; and let Keith consider that in respect of God all things is free,
therefore his School-keeping should be free also. And it is not to be doubt^d
that our Savior took Mentainance himself, sometimes asking, sometimes taking
without asking, what he stood in need of, as Water from the Samaritan Woman,
and the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath. And it is to be admitted with what
Impudence Quakers plead against the Apostle Paul in denying the lawfulness of
Ministerial Receiving a Maintenance, seeing he gives so particular a Precept,
Gal. 6 6. Let him that is Taught in the Word, Communicate unto him that
Teaches, in all good things; and if this be the Command of God, it must be Sin
in the people to omit it. But the same Apostle pleads for, and reasons the case
fully, 1 Cor. 9. wherein he has many convincing Arguments against all Quakers
in the world; proving first, That the Maintaining of Ministers and Families is
warrantable, from 4, 5, 6 verses. 2. In the following Verse he declares the Law
says as much, both the Law of God and the Law of Nature, built upon Equity,
pleads for it, 8, 9, 10 verse. 3. Common Equity and Justice pleads for it,
verse 11. I f we have sown to you Spiritual Things, is it a great thing, if we
shall Reap your Carnal Things; yet all Paul's forbearing at several times to
partake of Peoples Carnal Things, did not at all demonstrate the unlawfulness
thereof, but only his prudential declining of that he had really a Right unto
as expressed, verse 12.

If others be Partakers of this power over you, are not we rather: Nevertheless
we have not used this power, but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the
Gospel of Christ, and this was the reason why he wrought with his own Hands;
and Lastly the Apostle concludes with the Necessity of Ministers living by the
Gospel, they Preach from the Ordination of God 14 Even so has the Lord
Ordained, that they that Preach the Gospel, should Live of the Gospel. But if
Quakers all this while, are only against Superfluous Maintenances they have
lost their Labor, for we pleaded not for such, (...) for any other accidental
Abuses, that through Warrant from the Word of God, that we are to believe no
Immediate or Extraordinary Mission, or Call, even from the Highest Pretenders
without Extraordinary, and Answerable Demonstrations; as Our Savior, when John
sent His Dilciples to be informed, Whether he was the Promised Messiah? and our
Lord, who might have easily dispatched them with words, bids them, Go and tell
him, The Lame Walk, the Sick are healed, and the Blind receive their sight; and
Let him, not trust Words, Lest Seducers, should take an Opportunity, and
advantage thereby to deceive. And when Quakers are pursued hotly about
Miracles, they Smilingly say, John the Baptist wrought no Miracles, and yet his
Mission was Extraordinary, and immediate, as K, Alleged at my House,; and
(...) improved it, and Particularly against the N England Ministers; and they
suppose, they have gained the Day; but me thinks, K as I told him, and all
others may justly be ashamed of Producing this as an instance for the Future;
for, though John wrought (...) Miracles, yet being Co-temporary with our Lord
Jesus, and his Apostles, and they who wrought many Miracles, confirmed this
Mission, that he was the Promised Elias; but the Immediate Mission of Quakers
never was confirmed, either by their own, or by the Miracles of others; though
some of them have presumed boldly on Miracles, which Prophesying Miracles, As
the Eating Quaker in England, (Justly made the Monument of Gods Wrath, and
Monster of Mankind) For daring to imitate Our Lord, in that Miraculous Action
of His Fasting, Forty Days, and Forty Nights in the Wilderness. And Solomon
Ackles who Boastingly challenged Ministers to Fast with him, and Justly
Punished for his Unchristian, and bold Arrogance. Another once in Barbadore,
^^king upon him, to Prophecy the Death of a Child, which in all humane
Probability was beyond all expectation of Recovery; but GOD to confound his
Boldness, and discover him to be a Deceiver, was pleased to restore the Child,
who Lived in health for many Years, and the Quaking P rophet was necessitated
shamefully to Publish his Recantation, wherein he affirmed, he had Belyed the
Spirit of God And if so, it is no Wonder they Belie their Neighbors; but any
man may see how they come off with their L ying Wonders, and so shall come off
in the End, with their immediate Mission: but it is at Length, come to this,
that you must recieve their Verbal testimony, or remain altogether
dissatisfyed, about their Extraordinary Call, though some as Keith informed us,
at my house run that Self-Confounding, and Universal Gulf of Miracles in
Spirit, a New invented Phrase, of worse then man's Wisdom, Far from the
Language of the Spirit of God, whose Saving Operations are not Miracles at all,
to the Spirit of God, and if Miracles, they are Gods Properly, and not Quakers,
but this with many more Phrases of theirs, has no Foundation in the Scriptures
And we desire to know how many of them ever Spoke with Tongues, who were not
Taught them in the School, or Learned them of others. Farewell then immediate
Mission, if you take it not upon the Words of a Quaker.

And that Presbyterians, and Independants, and them only, as he invidiously
expresses it, should run to the Church of Rome and Pope for to derive the
mission pall, and ordination from thence; is the grossest calumny, and most
notorious Lie, that could be hatchell out of hell; and must be of Satan the
Father of Lies: but if K had asserted this, of such has hold no ordination, but
from the hands of a Bishop or Pretate, he might have had some plea for his
charge; for Rome, and all that Party sufficiently know, there are none so
opposite to, nor so faithful, and Zealous against them as Dissenting P
rotestants were; no not Quakers themselves, who would not have been so great at
the English Court, in the late Reign, if they had; therefore a Noted Person
lately gained from Rome, affirmed, The Dissenting Protestants, were the
Bulwarks of the Protestant Interest in Europe. And I must greatly suspect, what
K told me, at my House, as another Lie, and Calumny, that Mr. John Cetton, of
Hampton, in New England, acknowledged in a Public Dispute, that He derived his
Ordination from the Pope, and the rather, because he abused me, upon is Return,
to Mr. Davis, affirming the same thing of me; that, I owned our Mission, and
Ordination, from the P open of Rome; but I am confident, his own Conscience
could not but witness the contrary to his Face [But it is to be Feared, it was
not the First time, he had Learned to Baffle Conscience in more Weighty
Matters] For I not only Abhorred, Disclaimed, and Denied it; but Positively,
and Plainly, affirmed, Our Mission was from Jesus Christ, and Warranted from
the Scriptures. Hence I give caution to all, not to be Credulous of K's words,
however so confidently affirmed; but he were no fit Deciever, if not Possessed
with a Spirit of L yes, and Calumnys But we can casily Justify ourselves from
this Aspersion thrown invidiously upon us by Quakers, and particularly, by K in
all his Public, and Private Discourses, and also in some of his Writings,
repeated over and over, with an empty noise of Words for if we should say with
Calvin, that he and others of our Primitive Reformers were Evangilists,
extraordinarily Raised, and Immediately Called of God, in that great Exigence
of the Church, in calling the People of God out of Popish Darkness, and
Superstition, in bringing them out of Babylon; yet this will prove but a
slender Argument for Quakers holding Extraordinary Calls, and immediate
Missions, to be Gods ordinary and usual uninterrupted way to the end of the
World; because it might be allowed of in that juncture of the Necessity of the
Church; for though our Lord himself, the King of his Church, at the beginning
of the Promulgation of the Gospel, Called some in an Extraordinary Manner;
though at the same time, they had an External Call from Christ as man; yet as
soon as the Christian Church began to Increase, he Commands them to use second
Means for that Calling, and Separation of others to the Holy Office of the
Ministry in an Ordinary and Holy Separation to that Sacred Work, as Paul and
Barnabas was commanded to be Separated, and there was Casting of Lots used in
supplying the number of the Apostles; and the Apostle P aul commands Timothy,
and Impowers him to Ordain Elders in every Church, and not to neglect the Gift
that was given him by Prophecy, with the Laying on of the Hands of the P
resbytery, who are Commanded to Lay Hands suddenly on no man without sufficient
proof of his Parts, and Piety. And further, for their direction in this
Scriptural and Orderly Separation and Ordination, God has laid down all the
Qualifications of Ministers of the Gospel; which Quakers can never find in all
their Teachers, especially of the Feminine Sex.

As to our Reformers receiving their Ordination, Mission and Call from Rome,
and conveying it to us, which would seem to be the first great puzling and
confounding Argument. I shall answer it in (...) following particulars. 1. I
would inquire of all Quakers, whether God in that great defection and universal
Corruption of the Church, under Romish Idolatry, had then a Church in the
World, though in the Wilderness; to deny all Churches, whether Visible or
Invisible, really belonging to God, and Jesus Christ, were to overthrow many
Promises of God to his Church, of Building her upon an immovable Rock and that
the Gates of Hell should not prevail against her, and it is inconsistent to
say, God had a Church among the Jews under their Defections, and Fallings away
to Idolatry, and Superstition: Now where Christ has a Church, though invisible
and in the Wilderness, there are the Essentials of Religion, Ordination, and
Church-constitution, though much infected with Error, and corrupted with Romish
Superstition, and these Essentials are still Gods, and to esteem his and not
theirs, who are the chief Instruments, Heads, and Authors of all the
Corruptions, under that Defection to whom only and properly belong those
Errors, Corruptions, Idolatries and Superstitions they have invented and
introduced to the Church; And yet the soundest of Divines believe, that upon
all Reformations, which undoubtedly are originally and efficiently of God; a
people, or particular persons leaving and Renouncing the Abominations of
Antichrist, and their submitting to, and embracing the Truth of the Gospel, and
the Purity of all Ordinances, and Worship, abandoning the P open as their Head,
and Subjecting themselves to Christ's Kingdom, they are ipso fact; Constituted
Churches of Jesus Christ, and the Gospel Truths, Ordination and Ordinances,
Word and Sacraments they adhere to, are not theirs, nor from those they
Separated front, (...) Keith ignorantly and invidiously asserts; but they are
still the Lords, and belong to Jesus Christ; for even in the Church of Rome,
and under Antichrist, there were Ordinances of Jesus Christ, Word and
Sacraments, Praying Preaching, and Praising of Gods, though much veiled and
corrupted; and consequently they had Ministers or Officers to Dispense these
Ordinances, who undoubredly had some of the Essentials of Ordination, which was
the Lords, and nothing was properly Antichrists, but Antichristian Corruptions,
of which he is Author; for differentle (...) specicon: so that we no more have
(...) from the Pope, upon Reformation, then we have Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, Reading and Praising; and Quakers have Prayer, Teaching the Scriptures,
and their new Observation of the First Day of the Week.

And we would gladly know from what part of Gods Word is it, or can it be made
to appear, that upon every Defection and Corruption of the Church, God will
Beget and Create New Churches in an immediate manner under the Gospel, more
^^on under the Law; For after the Detections of (...) and long continuance in
Idolatry, upon their (...) and Reformation from all their Coruptions, and
Abuses, they were Re Established and to (...) unto all the Ordinances, and
Privileges of the Church of God; and what does Keith (...) of them, and their
Reformation, dare he affirm they had all their Ordination and Worship from
(...) Who made Israel to Sin, and other chief idolaters; so it will
unquestionably follow, that (...) Ordination, Dectrine, Worship, (...) while
warranted from the Authoor of Gods Word, are from Rome, the Pope, or any
Prelate in the World, as Quakers, after the manner of Satan, would Accuse the
Brethren. Thus Keiths invincible Armado is beat to pieces; whereby he thought
to have overthrown all Churches, who have obeyed Gods Call; and are come out of
Babylon. And we are confident that a great part of our Teachings are Christian
Experiences, to which we often publicly do Appeal for Confirmation of what is
delivered, and many Preachers have a peculiar way of Preaching their own
Experiences.

And finally, as he begins, so he closes and shuts up his Paper with
groundless, and False Calumnies, and invidious Reflections; affirming, I aslert
and allege False things, concerning Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and First
concerning Baptism, (he says) First, I do not distinguish between John's
Baptism, and Christ; In answer to this, I Freely assent to any, and all the
distinction made in the Scriptures; which is not in Substance, or Essence, but
in Fruit, and Efficacy, and the same distinction I still make between our
External Administration, and Christ's Efficacious Blessing thereof: for what
John said, we and all Ministers of the Gospel to the end of the World, must
still acknowledge; we Baptize with Water, but Christ, and he alone, Baptiseth
with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire, And if the Baptism Administered by Christ's
Disciples, in His Name, Authority and Presence, was Christ's and no doubt it was
the same with John's for Substance, as you or any other may Read John 2. 22, 23,
24, 26. verses. For,

1. That Baptism wherewith Christ and His Disciples Baptized in the Land of
Judes was Water Baptism. 2. It was an outward, visible, and discernable Baptism
to Spectators; says John's Disciples to him, Rabbi, he that was with thee
beyond Jordan, the same Baptizeth, and all men come unto him: it is observable,
that it was not the Baptism with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, as distinct from
the outward Ordinance; for it is said, John 4 2. Jesus himself Baptized not,
but His Disciples; yet it is called his, in the (...) of this chap. and in the
22. v. of the former chap (1) Because done by his Disciples. (2) By his
Command, and Authority. And it was the same Baptism, his Disciples, and
Apostles, performed in all and Every Church, where they Preached the Gospel,
according to that last Commission of Our Lords, immediately before His
Ascension, M atth 28. and last Go Teach, and Baptize all Nations, and Lord am
with you, to the end of the World. Hence Four things are observable in this
Text. 1 That, Teaching of Nations, yea, All Nations, by external means, and
instruments, is a Standing and Perpetual Ordinance in the Church of Christ, to
the end of the World. 2 That, as many as are Called Ministers of the Gospel,
are also Commissionated To Baptize also, Go Teach all Nations Baptising them. 3
That Water Baptism, or the External Ordinance, is that Enjoined, or Commanded
in the Words, and not the Baptism with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire; for it is
enjoined to mere men who can do no more then John could do, who Professed he
Baptized with Water, and yet we believe many who were Baptized by John,
received also the Holy Ghost, otherwise a very empty, and insignificant
Ordinance, and unprofitable to all, if nothing else was reaped thereby, but
Sprinkling, or Washing with Water; and yet the Outward Mean, Ordinance, and
Administration, was from John, and the fruit, efficacy and blessing, was from
Jesus Christ, and it is bold Impudence, and Arrogant Presumption, for any to
pretend to Baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, which is Christ's peculiar
Work, and Prerogative. And Keiths answer here^ unto in his Book, is void of all
satisfaction to any Intelligent Person; for he affirms, though no man Baptize
with the Holy Ghost efficiently, yet they may instrumentally; we who use the
outward mean, Instrument and Ordinance, may through the Blessing, of God, and
Efficacious Presence of Christ's Spirit, (...) undoubtedly are made Instruments
of the (...) Grace, Life, and Advantage of that Ordinance: but how Quakers can
be Instruments of Baptizing, Spiritually, who are opposite to, and ridicule the
outward Ordinance, which is the only proper means, and instrument of Gods own
Appointment, I cannot resolve; unless they will take Gods place, by working
without Means, and contrary to Means; or they imagine to work Effects by
unsuitable causes, and attain an end by improper means; as if a man intended to
Merchandise, by Laboring in the Ground, intend for Europe from America, and
yet Steer to the South; or by Planting Tobacco, to imagine to Reap Corn; for I
am persuaded, that such as in Faith, Administers the outward Ordinance of
Baptism, and that purely according to the Divine Institution, Praying, and
Depending on God for his Blessing, and Christ for his Virtue, and Presence, are
in the most probable way of being Instruments of the Grace of Baptism; so that
this Baptism is a standing and penpetual Ordinance, to the End of the World;
which is clearly inferred from the Promise annexed, which is perpetual; and, Lo
I am with you to the End of the World, as durable as Teaching it self, which
the after practice of the Apostles, and Servants of Christ to this day
Confirm,and should be continued until Christ's Second Coming, notwithstanding
of all Gainsayers. He further would insinuate, That we Learned and Received
Sprinkling of Children from the Church of Rome; but it is easy to make appear,
they go hand in hand with Rome in more things than we do, who are known to all
the Followers of Antichrist to walk more opposite to; and in abhorrence of
their Principles and Practices, then any others: for their Universal
Redemption, their Free will, their denying Perseverance, their possible
Perfection in this Life, their Vilipending the Scriptures, and denying it to be
the Rule, and their holding the P open of Rome not to be Antichrist, and their
Denying the Morality of the Fourth Command, they have ^aked and picked these
with many more out of that filthy Sink, and stinking puddle of Romish
Corruption; and as for our Sprinkling in Baptism, it is not so repugnant to
Scripture, as perverse Quakers do imagine: For Water in Baptism, Represents the
Blood of Jesus Christ, and why not Sprinkling, the Sprinkling of the Blood of
Christ, which is so clearly expressed by the Apostle Paul to the Hebrews; but
neither Infant Baptism, nor Sprinkling is a Controversy between Quakers and us;
for 1 They are against the Baptism of Old as well as Young. (2.) They are
against Washing or Dipping as well as Sprinkling; therefore I wave both. And
next, I shall make appear, That George Keith is guilty of a double falsehood
concerning Baptism, in his Book. 1. In opposition to Scripture, to say with his
Brethren, that Water Baptism was only for John's Dispensation, and consequently
Abolished, or abrogated in Christ; where it was continued all the time of
Christ's Life, and after he was Dead and Gone, and still does without all
interruption, as any may read in the Acts of the Apostle. 2 He contradicts
himself, and his Brethren too, in saying, that only it stood in force in John's
time, and abolished immediately; yet some may be Sent of the Lord, and
Instructed to Baptize with Water, and if they can prove they are Sent of the
Lord, should be gladly Received; but His Labor, he Opus est; for how they go
about to prove this, they have never yet told us. Now let his Friends and
Followers consider and examine, what this man would be at; so^, it is
abolished, and yet they may be called by the Spirit of God to Administer it;
can it be supposed, that the Spirit of God will call any to Administer that
Worship, that is Removed and Abolished by God and His Holy Spirit; were not
this to make God and His Holy Spirit, who are Essentially one, to Clash with
themselves, which were Biasphemy to affirm? He impugnes Water Baptism, with all
his might, as not now warranted by Scripture; and yet will Justify a Call, and
Mission to Administer Abrogated Worship; and from the same Argument, why not
Called and Sent to perform all the Abrogated Services, Rites and Sacrifices
under the Law, as Circumcision, the Passover, and all L egal Sacrifices; and so
from a pretended Call, to set up again the M^saical Worship? This would be a
brave Spiritual Work indeed; and to make this appear to be the Judgment of
others of that Party, as well as his own; he acknowledged at my House, A Quaker
once Baptized with Water, and was approved of for it. Is Water Baptism not
warranted by Scripture, but Abolished since John's Days, and yet performed and
approved of by those who are Enemies thereunto, from an imaginary, and unknown
Cast, and Mission, which would be to introduce the grossest Enthusiasm (...)
the World, and an open door to all wild fancies, and imaginations? Let Keiths
Friends and Followers, beware of this man's principles, and Books.

And concerning the Lords Supper, he asperses us all; but I doubt not to make
it convincingly appear, that he both contradicts Scripture, and his Brethren
too: 1 He contradicts Scripture, in undervaluing this great Ordinance, as no
Special, Divine, Spiritual (...) Gospel Ordinance; but Jumbles it in with the
common and daily Eating, and ordinary means of Believers: an high indignity to
this Ordinance, and the Author of it, repugnant to Scripture, and inconsistent
with the sure, and certain experience of thousands of the Godly, who have Eat
at the Table of the Lord, to their unspeakable comfort, and transporting
Consolation, more then they reaped by their ordinary Meals, so that Christian
Experience witnesses against them, and confures all their Quibling Arguments,
and Sophistical Quirks; and my own experience of the Grace, Blessings, and
Benefits, of this Great Special, and Solemn Ordinance, shall be an unanswerable
Argument to me, against all Heretics in the World. And it is also strange,
with what impudent Spirit, they can call the Supper of the Lord no Special
Ordinance distinct from Ordinary Meals. For, (1) Our Lord often Eat with Mixed
Multitudes; but in this Ordinance with a Select Number of his own, even his
Apostles: (2) He never did Celebrate that Ordinance, but one, and that was in
the very Night, wherein he was Betrayed; a great Argument of his Love, and
Faithfulness to his Church. (2) He Instituted it immediately after the P
assover, and that Hymn that was usually Sung, after the Passover, was deferred
till after the Administration of the Lords Supper, to signify the Abrogation of
the one, and Institution of the other in its Room, and Place (4) At what other
Meals, did ever Our Lord say, This is my Body and as often as you do it, do it in
Remembrance of me? (5) Those that make their Ordinary Meals to be the Lords
Supper, which is a new notion of K's, they alter the Ellements at your
Pleasure, which are Signs instituted of God, the Bread to signify his Flesh,
and Wine to signify his Blood; and they Arrogantly and Presumptuously appoint
others, Fish, Flesh, and what ever comes in the way, far from the practice of
the Apostle Paul, in the Church of Corinth, who delivered nothing to that
Church in this great Ordinance, but what he received of the Lord Jesus, the
Author of it^^ retaining all, the Essentials both for matter, and manner,
waving only some occasional, and accidental Circumstances, therefore
Administers it in Bread and Wine. 2 He Reflects on us, by charging us with
Popish Consecrations, but in this, and many things else, he cannot be so
Ignorant, as Malicious; for he knows, we abhor all Popish Consecration; And all
we do, is only to Pray to God for a Blessing on the Elements, that God would be
preased to vouchsafe his Gracious Presence, and Sanctify the Elements of Bread
and Wine, making his own Ordinance Effectual, for the Spiritual Nourishment of
Believers: and as we Eat Bread, and Drink Wine, so we may Feed by Faith, and
Spiritually upon Jesus Christ, and what Popery is here, let the World judge.
All this K has seen in our Directory for Public Worship.

Lastly, In his Book, he Quarrels our Eating in this Ordinance so Sparingly,
and would seem to approve of a Plentiful Meal, and a full Stomach, and commend
the Quantity; but I am sure this is not Spiritual, but Carnal: Arguing to the
Pampening of our Flesh; and Flarly contrary to the Apprehension Paul gives to
the carnal Corinthians, even Eating at the Lords Table, to the Nourishment of
their Bodies; which was a great and Sinful abuse of that Holy Ordinance, 1 Cor.
11. 22. What have ye not Houses to Eat and Drink in, or despise ye the Church
of God; showing that Eating the Lords Supper, is another thing then Eating at
home, only to the Nourishment of our Bodies, for which the Holy Ordinance of the
Lords Supper was never instituted.

FINIS.
A Brief Narrative of a Late Difference among Quakers begun at Philadelphia.
HAving in August 1692. Satisfied my Longing Desire, in visiting Pensilvania, I
no sooner Arrived in that Government, but perceived a Remarkable Difference
between the Gestures, and Behavior of Quakers there, and all others. I have
been acquainted with elsewhere, M^^es, and Females; using that Masculine way of
Bowing the Body: and Alarmed with a Rent and Division between (...) Quakers in
Philadelphia, who are divided into two Factions, and Partys; and soon meeting
with two Pamphlets ^ulished to acquaint the World there (...), and that by G.
Keith who is the Head, and Ringleader, on Public Mouth of one Party. And
Thomas Lieyd, President, and Deputy Governor, head of the other Party; the
matter in Difference was occasioned by G. Keith his urging them to Publish
their Fundamental Truths and Principles, as a Confession of their (...); and
Unanimously agreed upon, which the (...) has never been yet done; and from what
rent and separation has already (...) upon the (...) motion of such a design is
no difficulty to determine, what shall Unquestionably happen before its
accomplishment; the points already mentioned where in the Difference Lies; are
weighty, Fundamental and Saving, absolutely necessary to Salvation. As,

1. Concerning the only Object of Saving Faith, even Christ Jesus, God-man,
Savior and Mediator. 2. Concerning the Sufficiency of the Light in all men to
Salvation; which Light they Call Christ our Savior; and that I may give a
Narrative to the Work. I shall give a Relation from their own Writings, and
also from their own Testimonies, and the open and public Discourses of both
Parties I Converst with while at Philadelphia. 1 I shall give an Account of
what G K has Published in a Book, called, (...) Plea of the Innocent, being a
Vindication of G. K and his Followers, from the false Informations, Judgments
and Defamations of Thomas L loyd, Samuel Ginnings, John Simcock and others, to
the number of Twenty Eight. It happened many Months ago that Thomas Lloyd and
his Party had signed an Epistle to the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in P
ensilvania, East and West Jassey: Informing them of the tedious Exercise and
vexatious Perplexity they met with it their Late Friend G K for several months
past, from whence the Reader may warrantably conclude two things: 1 That there
has been much Division, Contention, Jangling and Difference among themselves
(...) broke forth to public view; and no private measures of Inspired Judges
could prove effectual for reconciling those divided Parties, who used to take
away either justly or unjustly all those Difference among themselves about
Civil and Worldly Matters which gives to believe it was a Matter in Debate
Among them of another Nature, and of greater weight, amp; of a considerable
continuance; some say for fifteen Months, e're that Fire of contenton broke
forth into a Flame

2. That these Twenty Eight pretended Preachers at this time look on George
Keith and consequently all his Party, none of their present but late Friend,
and consequently now their Enemy; and so the name Friend must no longer be a
general Epithet or universal title peculiar to that Party, o r George Keith
must be only a Late Quaker.

The Occasion of all this Clamor, and Heat, is given by K. page 2 To be an
Accusation of K by W. Stockdale, an ancient Quaker Teacher, For Preaching two
Christ's; because he Preached Faith in Christ within them, and Faith in Christ
without; and if this was a new thing from K. his frequent Teaching before, must
have been void of Christ, and so Christless Sermons; or if he did, it was so
obscurely delivered, that he was never plainly understood till now: But K
having dealt privately with the said Stockdale, but unsuccessfully, laid his
complaint before twelve of their Ministry, in a meeting at Rt. Ewers house, who
rather defended and excused Stockdale, then Condemned him; whereby ten of these
able Doctors, two only dissenting, became as Guilty of Ignorance and Errors as
Stockdale himself. And next the Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia, and so at
length, six several Meetings had this matter in debate, and under their
determination; who gave so slender a determination at last, that they all
appeared rather at a stand and demurr about it; and K. Justly accuses them of
partiality, ignorance, and Unbelief page 4. Reader, all may easily perceive
from the unchristian Labyrinth, in which these men have involved themselves
about so weighty and so plain a Fundamental, how great Strangers they are to
the True knowledge of the Gospel Mystery of Christ Jesus; that of six several
Meetings of their greatest Dons, in the three forementioned Governments, they
are in confusion about the Christ to be Believed in, for our Salvation; and
understand not Christ as he is Revealed in the Scriptures, God Man, Suffering
and Dying for us; whence it is evident, what Christ the generality of Quakers
have been hitherto believing in; which is clear from the Prayer of Thomas
Fittz-Watter, at a Meeting, saying O God that Dyed in us, and L aid down thy
Life in us, and took it up again. etc. Which G K justly called blasphemy: if
this Spiritual Man, suppose Christ as God Mortal, is most inconsistant with
Scripture, which affirms; that to him belongs Immortality, and absolute
Eternity; both a part ante and post: and by this prayer, directs in to
something within himself, and not according to Divine Pattern, to Our Father in
Heaven; and Rt. Young one of their pretended Teachers said, that he did not
find Christ without in all the Scriptures; and further, that Christ, when he
ascended into the Cloud, was separated from his Body; and Arthur Cook, accused
G. K. for saving, that Christ's Body that was Crucified, and Buried, is gone
into Heaven, and was, and is in heaven; even the very same Body; which Cook and
others called a Novelty, imposed upon is Ancient Brethren. And John Simtock
asked G K Did Christ's Bones, Arise; and Thomas Lloyd did object against G. K.
his imposing Unscriptural Faith on his Brethren: further, that Faith in Christ
without us, as he Dyed, for our sins and rose again, was not necessary to
Salvation; and further, that Christ within did all. Can any Repeat such
Blasphemous expressions without horror, when they consider the deplorable case
of such, as are Lead, and Taught by these men; who openly, publicly, and
avowedly, profess their Ignorance of the true Christ, which is but One, and can
be no other; even, He that was Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered in the World,
was Crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem; was Buried, and Rose again, with
the same Body, having his wounds upon him, as he showed to Thomas the Apostle;
and after some time of Converse in the World, proving thereby the Reality of
his Resurrection, was received Bodily into a Cloud, in the open view of his
Apostles, and Ascended into Heaven, and now Sits at the Right Hand of God the
Father, making continual intercession for sinners; and the same Man-Christ,
that Lives for Ever, and Ever, shall come in his Glory, with all his Holy
Angels, to Judge the World in Righteousness at the Last Day: All which is
abundantly testified in the Holy Scriptures. And now whosoever Believes not in
Christ, nor receives him as described in the Word of God; seeing he himself
says, John 5. 39. They are they that testify of him; it may warrantably be
concluded, they believe not in him at all; and therefore I leave it to others
to determine, what sort of Christians Quakers must needs be; and also what we
must judge of their Sufficient, and Saving, and Divine Light, of which they
have been boasting universally; and magnifying them selves from above all
others in the world; and what do they now think of their immediate Call, and
Apostolic Mission, seeing they discover themselves so grossly Ignorant, and so
much in the dark the Foundation of our Salvation, even Christ Jesus, who is so
fully described in the very Letter of the Scriptures.

And this Breach is Risen to such a height, that the Railings, Revilings,
bitter anduncharitable Accusations, they were wont to vomit maliciously,
against all the Reformed Churches, are now justly turned against one another;
for Lloyd and his Party fly out against Keith, calling him a Reviler of the
Brethren, Brat of Babylon, Accuser of the Brethren; one that always
endeavors to keep down the power of Truth; drawing from the Gift of God;
calling him also Pope, Primate of P ensilvania, Father Confessor, accusing him
of Envy, extreme Passion, a turbulent and unsubdued Spirit: Let the Authors of
these make good their Charge, or let them take what follows. Shall ever such a
man be followed by such as have given him such a monstrous Character, as none
but the greatest of Impostors deserve; and it is observable, that in all which
K has Published, for he has carried the day in his Prints; that he has not
fairly, nor fully Explained himself, for it wants to be determined, when Christ
is said to be in all men, by the name Light; whether he and his Party, who say
with all Quakers, He is substantially in them, believe him to be in them as
Mediator and Savior, as K seems to assert in his Grounds of Separation. page
32 and William P en, in Reason against Railing, asserts the true Light with
which every man is Enlightened, to be sufficient for Salvation; and how P en, G.
K. and his Adversaries can jump again into a Knot, after so plain and palpable
Difference about their great Fundamental of the Sufficiency of the Light
within; I Leave it to other Judges to determine; and it deserves observation,
that in their Epistle to their Brethren, and their Commendation, what high,
lofty, and proud Titles of Commendation, scarce applicable to men, they gave to
G. K. as, That he Walked in the Counsel of God, was Lovely in that Day, When
the Beauty of the Lord was upon him, and his Comeliness covered him; and
immediately with the same Breath, they throw him down, any look upon him as
Falien from the high Places of Israel, as a man Slain in his High Places: and
as they fix hard names upon him as formerly; (...) he pays them home again in
the same Coin; and calls Lloyd and his Party, which are some thousands, Fools,
Ignorant Heathens, Infidels, Silly Souls, Liars, Heretics, Rotten Ranters,
Muggletonians, etc So that if we were inclinable to give them Names, we have no
Room, for they have done it to our hands themselves: And I must confess, they
are better able than we; for they are better acquainted with one another, and
privy to their Errors, Heresies, and other Hidden Works of Darkness, which they
have hitherto been ashamed to Publish to the World: and yet it is admirable to
think, where these men find such a stock of Confidence, as to wipe their
mouths, and say they have not Railed all this while, but all they have said on
both sides, is in the uprightness of their hearts, and all these Names given
are Truth, I shall leave them so, disproving neither; one of Lloyds Party,
William Gabitas desired K to forbear Preaching Christ without, seeing it gave
Offense to his Brethren, as Paul did concerning Eating of Flesh: an able Doctor
indeed, and very probable to have Christ in him, who valued the Preaching of
Christ Crucified no more than the Eating of Feline and must not such Brethren
as take Offense as such Doctrine be acted by a Diabolical Spirit? Thomas Lloyd,
in a Public Meeting affirmed, no man could differ with G. K. but he was in
danger of the L ife of his Soul by him; and farther, that he had bin a more
vexatious Adversary to Friends, then Hicks, or Scande^et, or the greatest
Enemies; sure such Uncharitableness and Ranchor must have great provocations,
and flow from no good Spirit: another proud and self-conceited expression of a
plain Quaker, Must, I truckle under thee; indeed it was not fit a Governor
should; and further, G. K. affirmed, That no such Damnable Heresies, and
Doctrines of Devils were Tolerated in any Protestant Society, as among Quakers,
at Philadelphia; if this Charge is true, I am persuaded it will extend to most
Quakers in the World, or they must yet be in Confusion and Undetermined about
their Principles Many other most dangerous Positions were urged and disputed
among them, savouring of nothing but Blindness and Error, as one that owned no
man Christ Jesus as Mediator in Heaven without him, but the Grace of God
within; and also the Christ was only a Spirit in Heaven, and had nothing of the
Body; and many of them denying the Day of Judgment, and any Resurrection, but
what they have already attained; and John Willsford said, Christ was a Mediator
for no Drunkards and wicked persons, but for his own Disciples; many of them
denied Gods Presence in all his Creatures, Arguing most ignorantly, and
blasphemously: if God be in Herbs and Grass, then who tramples on them,
tramples on God; and this occasioned a new Dispute, whether God be present in
Lice? Some denying they were any part of the Creation; another Preaches, that
Christ Cures men's Souls perfectly at once, and makes them free of all sin; and
when we are perfect, we are Kings, and are not to Beg or Pray to God for our
selves: another says Whether that Body that was Crucified, be in Heaven, Let
the Church determine? one Samuel Ginnings declared in a Meeting, That to do
Gods Business we needed Gods Wisdom, but to do our own Business as men, we
needed it not! another affirmed, That a man might speak unsound Words in the L
ife; and at another Meeting the same man bids us wait, That the Scepter might
depart from Judah, that Shiloh might come. Is it not evident from these gross,
impertinent, and abominable Ignorances, and Blasphemous Heresies, That God has
justly given them over to a Spirit of Delusion, to believe the grossest Lies
that ever was hatched; and that for their ambitious and deceiving pretenses to
unwarrantable Inspirations. Another Quarrel was, G. K's Objecting against their
Discipline, as too Loose; but for my part, I never knew, nor heard any they had
that was purely Ecclesiastic; and what they pretended to was most absolute and
arbitrary: though I understand of late G. K. had Composed a new Draught in many
particulars, which though not allowed a Reading at their Yearly Meeting, yet was
sent to the Yearly Meeting at London, for their Approbation and Sanction: of
which I shall give my Reader a small taste in these following particulars: 1.
That all faithful Friends shall give in a few words less or more a pure
Confession unto the Truth generally Received by Friends. 2. If Friends be
satisfied with this Confession, they are to express their Christian Love, and
signify their owning them, by taking them by the hand, or giving the hand unto
them. 3. That all Friends who have Children come to years of Discretion, whom
they have Instructed in the Principles of Truth, that they further Labor with
their Children to be willing to be Received into the Number of Friends, in the
manner above mentioned. 4. Whether there should not be Elders and Deacons
Chosen, and Appointed, and Named by the Consen^ of the whole Church, for the
Help and Assistance of the Friends of the Ministry. 5. That no raw and
unseasoned persons do presume to speak or pray in the Meetings, until they give
proof of their sound Knowledge, Experience, and Spiritual Abilities to their
Elder Brethren, the Elders and the Church. 6. That no Friends join in Marriage
with any, but such as are Received into the Society of Fiends, by a solemn
Confession of their Faith, and Profession of Truth in the manner aforesaid.

These are but a few of many Articles of the like nature, which had a very cold
Reception, that though they did not allow it a public Reading, yet cried it down
as downright Popery; but sure if this take place, Quakers will look with
another Face then ever they have yet done; and many of their silly, ignorant
and impertinent, and blaspemous Teachers, Shall be laid aside as useless. And
the Breach was so great, that the two Emissaryes from London, T. W. and J D.
was so far from accomplishing a Reconcileation, that they Condemned him for the
Separation, and pronounced Woes against him; and J. D. compared the Difference
there, to Childrens falling out about trifles; sure these men so much admired
at Barbados, and elsewhere, discover both their ignorance and weakness in
joining with the strongest Party, the Magistrates;and looking upon the Doctrine
of Christ Crucified, and the Sufficiency of the L ight within to be but Trifles.

Lastly, G. K is blamed for calling W. Stockdal, and a whole Meeting, ignorant
Heathens; but says Keith, if there is Light sufficient to Salvation in all men
without the man Christ, then an honest Heathen is a true Christian; hence every
man may Learn, That honest Heathens are good Quakers, or Quakers are good
Heathens.

George Keith having his Sentence, Lay under Charges and no possibility of
obtaining (as he says) any redress or Gospel Order; but it is strange that
(...) man of Sense, should expect order from Ignorance, Distraction, and
Confusion, as the whole Scheme of this Controversy appears to be to every
Rational and considering Man; he at Length breaks off, and separates from their
Society, and sets up for himself. First at his own House, and generally since,
at the Barbado's House in Philade^phia; and as he endeavors to Justify himself
from all former Imputations, so he essays a Vindication of the Late Separation
which he does by a Pamphlet, called the, Reasons and Causes thereof; which I
shall give my Reader as Follows.

1. Because Thomas Lloyd, so far failed in Proving his Charge against G. K For
denying the sufficiency of the Light within; and after Judgment was passed, by
a Monthly Meeting at Philadelphia, the 22 d of the 12 th Month 1691. Would not
give forth a Paper of Condemnation of his False Charge: but any may perceive
K's cunning, who not only escaped the Just Judgment of this Meeting, according
to Quakers Principles, but by denying the charge with a Reservation, made his
accuser guilty; for as he declared before, and since saying the Light within is
not sufficient without the Man Christ Without us

2. Reason for his Separation, because K's Antagonists kept a Public Meeting,
in the Afternoon at the Bank, without the consent of the whole Body of Friends
there; which K says should be universal, and Unanimous, and not by any
Plurality of Votes: and so G K and his party kept a Meeting for that Day in the
Afternoon at his own House, which he called Private, and finding as they say,
they resolved to continue the Separation, which is still done. I would
Animadvert the Reader, that the Second Reason in Frivolous, arising from a
Nicety and circumstance of Place, which as carried by a Plurality of Votes,
though K would not submit to it, without the Unanimous Consent of all; which he
says is the allowed method of Friends; but it is not to be doubted if the
Plurality had determined for him, he would never have gone about to invalidate
the determination; and if the Unanimous consent of all be requisite in such
trifles, we expect K will do nothing in greater Matters without it 3 Reason:
because most Gross, and Unchristian Errors, against the Fundamental Doctrines
of the Christian Faith, are held by diverse of them that are Public Teachers,
and many are Unqualified for the Ministry; this is a weighty Ground indeed, and
a just Cause; and it is not to be doubted, but applicable to both Partys; so
that a separation from them both is Warrantable, which all good Christians are
to pray that God may accomplish to the Glory of his own Name, and the Honor of
Truth as the Issue of the begun Controversy and Confusions; and alas! it must
be strange, that all these things have been (...) so long since the Rise of
Quakers in Europe, and none found Faithful or Zealous for Truth among them, to
bring them to Light until this very Prejudice, Passion, and Malice, or envy
among them; for it is not to be doubted but K in his Travels over the World
could not meet with as many Insufficient Teachers as are now among them, in the
Government of P ensilvania, East and West Jerl^s; and also Innumerable
impetinencys, Inconsistencys, Errors, and Falsehoods, as he has been sensible
of, of late, abounds among them; so that it is to be feared, he has been moved
from Prejudice, Passion, and other Quarrels, whereby he has taken this time and
place, for assuming the Honor of New Reformer; for what he charges them with,
is no New thing, but known by all who have converst with that Party, to have
been their Constant Sentiments, as much known to K, as any now in being, for
the Time he has followed that Novelty. And according to the Present State of
Affairs, and Notable Alterations in a Place, so the Discourses of all
Regulated, and Directed, for most places of this Province; this Division has
given all Partys a Theme of Discourse, and Subject of Debate, and K in his
Postscript to his Reasons, gives a Brief account of the matters Controversed,
both at Meeting and other Places, we suppose for the Information of Inspired
Men. As.

1. Whether we are only to believe in Christ Within or in him without also, and
in Heaven Our Advocate with the Father

2. Whether to Preach Faith in Christ within, and Faith in Christ without, be
to Preach two Christ?

3. Whether it be a Doctrine necessary to be Preached, to Believe in Christ
without? 4. Whether Christ's Body that was Nailed to the Cross, and was Buried,
and Arose again, be with him in Heaven? Some of them saying, as Keith told me
at his House, it never Rose, but Evanished, or Remained in the Grave: others
saying, it arose, but after it Ascended in the Cloud, was separated from it:
others say, it is a Nicety, and to be ignorant of it, does not hinder a man
from being a true Christian, and a Minister of Christ: Others saying, it is a
dividing of Christ. Others accusing of some, for Denying the Sufficiency of the
Light within; from all which it is evident, notwithstanding of all their high
pretenses to Immediate Inspirations, and Extraordinary Illuminations from the
Spirit of God, what great Error, Ignorance, and Blindness, they discover to the
World. 1. Their Ignorance of Christ Jesus our Savior, whom to Know is External
Life; and whom Quakers say, is, and dwells substantially in all of them; and if
so, could it be possible to Remain so Ignorant of him, as they proclaim
themselves to be; and who in their right wits, but must look upon them as
deluded Souls, rather than Inspired from Heaven. 2. They know not how necessary
the Faith and Knowledge of the true Christ as Mediator, is, to make a true
Christian, and real Minister; hence they plainly tell us. what Christians and
Ministers will pass among Quakers, even such as neither know Christ aright, nor
believe the true Knowledge of him necessary; seeing they call Christ man,
Ascended and Glorified in Heaven, a Nicety; conclude all such, Christless
Christians, and Christless Ministers.

As an Appendix to the reasons, we have an Account of the Faith of Quakers,
published by ^^ith, and called in its Frontispiece, the Faith of some Quakers
in Pensilvania, which is an Argument of their difference in Principles, and
Fundamentals; but this will not do, being so far from being Quakers Principles
every where, that they are not even the Principles of all in Pensilvania, and
for any thing I know, but of a very few; for though it is the Ambition of both
Parties, to Increase their Numbers, and Engross Followers, yet to this Account
of Faith, he has procured but five Subscribers, beside himself; and as I am
Informed, men of mean Parts, and Account; but that I may briefly animadvert all
Lovers of Truth, concerning this Account of Faith, which should be Fundamentals
chiefly; I shall deliver something in general, and something particularly: And
in general 1. It is more guilty of Deficiency and Omission, then a Catechism
surely Censured by him, to which he has in Answer; for there are none
acquainted with Quakers Principles, can conclude this Account to be Faithful or
Full. 2. Their Faith is here so obscurely delivered in Scripture Language in
controversy, as to the Exposition of them, between them and the Reformed
Churches, that, except in some few things, that are not Fundamental, they are
the Faith of others, as well as of Quakers; and so not fairly done. But
particularly; 1 In page 29. He owns a particular Election (...) all that shall
be (...), before the Foundations of the World: which he must never recede from.
2. Page 30. He is lame in describing the Corruption conve^ed from Adam to his
Posterity; and says, It is not Imputed to Damnation; but if there be any Sin
nor Damnable with Quakers, Death must not be the Wages of Sin with them;
neither must the Loss of our (...) Righteousness, or the Image of God be
Damnable; Strange flattering Doctrine to Natural Sinners 3 He says, Page 31.
That the (...) Ministration, which they say it in all, even in their mere
Gentile State, is of a Saving Nature, and tendency in a general war; so that
any may see what a Change is in this (...) mind, from all Quakers, who full
have asserted the Sufficiency of this Universal Grace, for Salvation; for here
he neither (...) it Sufficient, not Saving; but only it is to a Saving Nature
and tendency: and yet Page 22. He (...) by saying, it is sufficient to (...)
every man 4 (...) wholly any thing concerning the Covenant of Work, and Grace,
(...) points of Faith; seeing (...) to the (...) of the Covenant of Grace,
every Sinner must (...) Saved and Christ is (...) the (...) Covenant 5. He
tells us nothing of Women Teachers at all in his Section concerning, but
perhaps he (...) not tell his mind yet in that point, as he says of other
things. 6. He Transiently runs over the Ten Commandments. 7. He continues to
cry down Swearing, in Witnessing to Truth; while they decry the name, they
really maintain and practice the thing in all Courts in Pensilvania. 8. He
fills up a whole Section of their Faith, with Baptism, and the Lords Supper;
but seeing it is known to all, they deny the use of both, they should be
ashamed ever to Treat of them at all; especially among their Fundamentals; for
he might as well have filled up a Section with Circumcision, and the P assover:
if it be only to deceive, this is no ingenuous dealing. 9 If plain Language and
plain Habits be Fundamentals with Quakers, what need is there of any other mark
to know a Quaker by: and why the Language of others, are not as plain as
Quakers, I know not; especially, as Jacob Tilman, when Preaching and Praying in
Dutch, to an English Congregation. Lastly, I fear, according to his Description
of Church of Christ, who ought, as he says, to manifest their Faith, to one
another, by the Confession of the mouth;there will no such be found among
Quakers, who never had any public, and unanimous Confession of their Faith,
yet extant; otherwise there would be no room for the present Division, about
the greatest of Fundamentals. In the next place, I proceed to take notice of G.
K's Appeal from the twenty eight Judges, and it has a cunning and ambiguous
Title, viz. To the Spirit of Truth and true Judgment, in all Faithful Friends
called Quakers; that meet at the Yearly Meeting at Burlington; whereby any man
may perceive, if they judge and determine against him, he has a back Door to
fly out at, and will not stand to their judgment; therefore his Appeal is most
idle, and an empty Bravado; for either he looks on them, as Competent Judges,
or not; if competent Judges, why does he not submit himself to their Judgmen,
without such a Reservation; or thus, if he believes them to have the Spirit of
Truth, why does he scruple a submission to the judgment of Friends, as Quakers
are commonly called, if they have not the Spirit of Truth, whether it were not
safer to wave the Appeal which has the ambiguity of a dubious Oracle, for still
it must terminate here; if the whole Meeting should not be of K's judgment, he
shall declare them destitute of the Spirit of Truth, and void of true judgment;
for he has disapproved the plurality of Votes in another case. And in the
Appeal, there is first by way of Preamble, the Grounds thereof laid down; and
next, twelve particulars by way of Query proposed to be Debated at the said
Yearly Meeting, which highly offended the Governor, with the rest of the
Magistracy that were Quakers; and particularly charges them, though it is all
along by way of Question, with giving a Commission to, and hiring men to Fight,
by recovering a Sloop from Privateers, contrary to the Principles of Quakers
who are against the use of the Carnal Weapon, which they transgress also by
providing the Indians with Powder, and Lead, to fight against other Indians;
and a so that one of those pretended Ministers Taught, not to take an Eye for
an Eye; and in a short time, by passing Sentence on Malefactors, takes Life for
L ife; and finally enquires, whether there is any Example for it in Scripture,
or in all Christendom, That Ministers should Ingross the Worldly Government, as
they do in Philadelphia, which has proved of very evil tendency. Now the last
particular proves so offensive, Governor L loyd after some Consultation, sends
for a Tailor, who had Nailed up the Appeal on a Board at his Shop Window, to
public view; and after some Examination, he told them, he was not ashamed, to
look Persecutors in the Face, but being Required to give Securities, to answer
the Quarter Sessions; they gave him till to morrow morning, to provide them;
but from what sharp Retorting Answers, he gave them, he was dismissed without
any further noise: but immediately sent for the Printer, and Requiring
Securities of him, which he denied; his Shop was Searched, and all the said
Papers, and his Printing Letters, to the value of Ten Pounds Sterling, as K.
says, were taken away; and the said Printer, William Bradford was Committed to
the Sheriffs House as a Prison. And another John Mackomb, sent for, and
Committed, for Selling some of the said Papers at his House, all which was done
in a Legal Mittimus, charging the Printer, and Seller as Publishers; which was
a mistake, for properly the Author is the Publisher; and this makes a great
noise, both in City and Country, that Quakers begin to Imprison and Persecute
one another, proving what they would do to others if they had power,
opportunity, and provocation; but to wipe off all suspicion of Persecution,
they make use of the same plea as all other Persecutors do, even the
Disturbance of the Peace, and Subversion of the Government: but this Salve will
not Cure the Sore: The next measures taken, is, to Consult how to punish G K.
the known Author; and as many of the Subscribers as were under their
Government: and next day being the 26 th of August a Conclave was appointed;
but two of the Commissioners being no Quakers, Dissenting, they could not bring
it to bear, to Sign a Mittimus, for Committing K; therefore next day, resolves
to publish a Proclamation against G K discharging him, or his A betters from
publishing any such Seditious Papers for the future; but it is Observable, that
in the Proclamation there is not any mention made of Their Majesty's Names;
which every Loyal Subject must Resent; but of the Late K. twice,
notwithstanding they had Caution given, to mention what King they meant, Verbum
set Sapienti But the former Prisoners continue still in Confinement; which is
palpable and most evident Partiality, to punish the Printer and Seller, and
suffer the known Author, and Subscribers to escape. But on the Monday
following, the Appeal, with the Mittimus, and a Postscript is Re printed; and
in the Postscript, as is very Remarkable, that it is Asserted by K that it is
contrary to Quakers principles, to make use of the Carnal Weapon; but they
found in their Experience, it was impossible to maintain Magistracy without it,
that is, the Carnal Sword, who can but smile to see these men overthrowing
their own Principles, by asserting the Inconsistency of them with Magistracy,
which is an Ordinance of God; and consequently no Government should be put into
Quakers Hands: but great things were expected from the Yearly Meeting at
Burlington, which was to begin within few days; though little expectation of a
Friendly Accommodation; for G K. kept out of Town, lest he should by a Prison,
be prevented to attend that Meeting; but K came off there with Flying Colors;
for the other Party being Summoned again and again to Appeal, but declined it:
Whether they disowned the Authority of that Meeting, or suspected the badness
of their Cause, which they had reason to do, or feared G. K. his Party to be
too strong, they can best answer for themselves; but that Meeting justified G K
and condemned Lloyd and his Party, discharging them to Teach or Pray in public
Meetings, till they had condemn^^ their former Judgment, by a public Writing;
and how this Order was slighted, is too palpable to be denied, both Parties are
discharged from Raising, which supposes both were guilty; but while the Meeting
at Burlington clears K. the Yearly Meeting at Maryland, condemns him, and
justifies the other Party, whereby that infallible Discerning Spirit Quakers
boast of, and say is in every true Quaker, is overthrown; for great Meetings of
their greatest Dons, can be mistaken, and make contrary and contradictory
Orders. I am Informed, the Division has Reached England; for in London, one
Party who were against Keith, bought up all his Pamphlets, to prevent the
Spreading of the Difference: Another Party Orders a new Impression of all his
Books, relating to that Controversy; this I had lately of one of themselves. I
shall conclude with some passages from undoubted Information. 1. One affirmed
the Difference at present concerning Christ, was an empty Barrel, from whence
it is evident, what mean thoughts this Zealote had of Christ, as Man. 2.
Another said, he did not believe to be Saved by that which Dyed at Jerusalem;
What a poor case must such a Soul be in? 2, John Delava! has expressed his fear
that Cotton Mather's Prophecy of G. K is now accomplishing. Lastly, there is
among Quakers in Pensilvania, one Jacob, a Dutchman, who takes upon him to
Preach and Pray in the Dutch Language, to an English Congregation, pretending
an Immediate Call thereunto which John Delaval, and the Teachers Son-in-law
used to Interpret, for the understanding of the people; but some time after,
the Hearers desired the Interpreters to forbear, for they were more Edified
without Interpretation, then with it; though they understood not a word he
said; would any have supposed there was such blind implicit Faith out of Rome,
and that these Spiritual Professors should lay open their Delusions to the
World, at so plain a rate.

But what impression the Loss of their Government may have, and what
Alterations it may make among them, I leave to Further Information. And whoever
would have more of this Nature, even the (...) War (...) Quakers, chiefly
promoted by the Carnal Weapons of the Tongue, I recommend them to Philadelphia,
for an enlargement of this Narrative Which is all their own, excepting some
Observations, and Animadversions on both Sides.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, and will quickly be Published: A new Book,
Entitled, A Present to be given to Teeming Women, by their Husbands or
Friends. Containing Directions for Women with Child. How (...) Prepare for the
Hour of TRAVAIL. (...) first for the Private Use of a Gentleman of Quality: and
now Published for (...) common good. By John Oliver. First ^^^nted at London,
and Received with great ^^^mendation, and general Acceptance: And (...)
Reprinted and Sold at Boston in New-^^and, by Benjamin Harris, at the Sign of
the (...), over against the Blew Anchor.


