Warnings from the Dead. OR Solemn Admonitions Unto ALL PEOPLE; but Especially
unto YOUNG PERSONS to Beware Of such EVILS as would bring them to the Dead.

By COTTON MATHER.

IN Two Discourses, Occasioned by Sentence of DEATH, Executed on some Unhappy
MALEFACTORS. Together with the Last CONFESSION, made by a Young Woman, who Dyed
on June 8. 1693. ONE of these Malefactors.

BOSTON in New England; Printed by Bartholomew Green, for Samuel Phillips, at
the West End of the Exchange. 1693.

A Blessed Medicine for Sinful Madness.
A Discourse, Occasioned by a Sentence of DEATH, passed upon several
Malefactors, who were then in the Congregation.
Ecclesiastes IX, Madness is in their Hearts, while they Live, and after that
they go to the Dead.
IT is a very doleful Thing, that upon the Reading of this Text, I may do as
our Savior, upon a better Occasion did; even shut the Book, and Begin to say,
This day is this Scripture fulfiled in your Eyes. The Beginning of it has been
woefully fulfilled by the Mad Lives of some unhappy and condemned Malefactors,
who make a Sight in this house at this Time, very moving unto all Spectators.
The Endeavor of one Sermon more is to be bestowed upon them before they Die,
that their Madness many not accompany them unto their Execution, to be cured
only by Death, which is indeed an Effectual, but a very miserable Cure for all
Diseases.

We have in our Text, A Wise man, describing of a Mad man. It Is an Impenitent
and an unreclameable Sinner, which has here the Title of a Mad man too justly
put upon him; and the Madness of such a man has both the Cause of in and the
End of it, here Assigned.

First, For the Cause of this Madness. A great thing that inspires wicked men
with so much Madness is, their Observing, That there is one Event unto all.
Many a man is too Pore-blind to see any Difference between Good and Bad men in
the World. As to the Comforts of this Life, he sees an Ishmael to live as long
as an Isaac, an Epicure to fare as well as an Abraham. As to the Troubles of
this Life, he sees a Job, a David, a Lazarus in as terrible Distresses, as any
that befall the worst of men, and Saul and Jonathan in their Deaths not
Divided. What follows now? Madnes^ is in their hearts while they live. Tha^
passage, While they live, notes the continuance, and Obstinacy of the Malady.
And for an Instance, this Madness Expresses it self particularly, in that one
Mad Imagination, That the basest Life here, is better than the best hereafter;
or as the Proverb in our Context has it, A Living Dog is better than a dead
Lion.

Secondly, For the End of this Madness. It Is here concluded in that clause,
After that, they go to the Dead. A clause capable of a Various Interpretation.
Some carry it, as a further Account of the Promiscuous Events happening both to
Good and Bad men. They both Go to the Dead. But we may rather conceive the
Issue of the Madness that is in wicked men, here pointed at. It Expires in
Death; of which Death we must understand, That it is Agreeable to the Life
which went before; and therefore a Wretched, Woeful, Shameful Death, a Death in
Madness, and therefore a Death in Misery, must be implied in this Assertion.
Wherefore the Doctrine, which demands your Attention is, (...) DOCT. (...)

A Sad Death, after a (...) is, the Condition which (...) Ungodliness is
attended with.

We have Two very Sorrowful Subjects to discourse upon; and therefore my whole
Sermon must be like Ezekiels Roll, full of Lamentation and Mourning and Woe.

The first PROPOSITION which does Arrest our Thoughts, is this,

It is a Mad Life, that Ungodly men use to Lead.

There is an Horrible Madness which does possess the Hearts, and thereupon
pollute the Lives of all ungodly men. Every Penitent in this Assembly, will in
much Bitterness of Soul, confess the Truth of this Proposition, and say, None
but Mad men would ever do as we have done!

The Word of God calls every thing by its Right Name; and Ungodly men are
called Mad men in those unerring Oracles. As the Preacher tells us, in Ecc. 2.
2. I said of Laughter, it is mad; So does the Bible assure us concerning the
Merry Jolly Sinner, He is Mad, and there is a Madness in all his ways. It
assuresus concerning all that Renounce and Forsake the Blessed God, in Jere.
30. 38. They are mad upon their Idels. Our First Father by his Fall, gave
himself a sore blow in his Head; he Cracked and Crazed his own Brain; and the
Madness has ever since run in a Blood; his poor Children derive it from him.
Hence it is the Name of a Sinner, in Psalm 14. 1. He is a Fool! and Solomon who
Preached and Wrote with some Imitation of his Father, does espouse that Phrase,
as the most proper to denote, A Sinner, by. Now it specifies but a Degree of
the same Distemper; the Dotage of a Sinner quickly grows up into Phrensy, which
makes a perfect Mad man of him.

Truly, the World is almost an Entire Bethlem, and none but that infinite
Wisdom, which keeps the Waves of the Sea, within their Bounds, could Govern the
Madness, and manage the Exorbitancies and Confusions of it.

Let us a little reflect upon the Symptoms of MADNESS, which appear in the
Lives of ungodly men.

First. An ungodly man, Believes like a Mad man. His Fancy, like a mad man's* is
disturbed and depraved, and he has very Ridiculous Opinions in his mind. His
madness lies in that, in Isa. 5. 20. To (...) evil good, and rood evil; to put
darkness for light, and light for darkness. He has such Frantic Whimseys in
him! What thinks he of God? He madly thinks, God is altogether such an one, as
my self. What thinks he of Christ? He madly thinks, Christ is a Stumblingblock
and Foolishness. What will he think of Religion? He madly thinks, What is the
Almighty that I should serve Him, and what profit shall I have, if I pray unto
Him? He has mad Thoughts about Sin, as if, The Stolen Waters of it were sweet.
He has mad Thoughts about the World, as if, Here were his Resting place. And
he has as mad. Thoughts about himself: with a Laodicean madness in him, he
counts himself, Rich and Increased in Goods and having Need of Nothing, when he
is Wretched and Miserable and poor and blind and naked. Go into a Case de Locos
among the proud Spaniards, and you shall see one fancying himself a King,
another a Pope, and a third, an Emperor. Such a Swelling madness is in every
ungodly man; he does really count himself, The best man in the World. The Word
used for madness, in our Text, is one that carries Pride in the Signification
of it. The Vapors of Pride have disordered the Head of an ungodly man. And in
all his Thoughts, he will be sure to Contradict whatever the Blessed God has
Revel'd unto us.

Secondly. An Ungodly man, Chooses like a Mad man. We say, Quis nisi meant is
Inops? Who but a madman will Refuse offered Gold, and prefer a Counter, or a
Gew-gaw, before it? It is the way to Try a Fool; set a piece of Gold, and some
sorry Trifle before him; if he choose the Trifle rather than the Gold, he is, A
Fool. Such a Mad fool is every ungodly man! His Choice is mentioned in Isai.
66. 3. They have chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in their
Abominations. There are Various Objects presented unto the Choice of the
Sinner; but what a Choice does he make? There is both Life Eternal and Eternal
Death set before him; but so mad is he, that he chooses Death rather than Life.
His prodigious Choice is that in Jere. 2. 13. They have forsaken the Fountain
of Living waters, and have hewenthem out Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that can
hold no water. What a mad man is he? On the one side, Wisdom offers unto the
Sinner, Spiritual Riches and Spiritual Honors, and Eternal Privileges; on the
other side, Satan offers unto him. A few Short-lived sensual Delights, that
shall forfeit all the Blessings of the New Covenant forever; but like a madman
he chooses the offers of Satan before those of Wisdom. He may have his Choice,
and that profer is made unto him, Ask what thou will have, and thou shall have
it, though there be more than the half of a Kingdom in it. But this Madman, he
chooses a Straw before a Crown, before a Throne. He chooses a Daughel, yea, a
Dungeon, before a Kingdom. He had rather have Husks with H^gs, than Bread in
the Heavenly Fathers House. A Pebble Stone, or a Barley Corn, is of more Esteem
with him, than the Pearl of great price. Behold, a very Stupendous Madness here!

Thirdly. An Ungodly man has the Rashness, and Boldness, of a madman in him.
He troubles not himself with any, Wherefores, and, What if's? He does not ask
himself, Wherefore did I come into the World? Nor, What if I go out of the
World before I have made better Provision for it? He is one of those, whose
Pourtraiture we have in Prove. 27.12. The Simple pass on and are Punished. He
Drinks all that he sees before him, and he never ponders, Is there no poison in
it? He is not Sollicitous about the Dangers, and the Downfalls, which he is
continually Exposed unto. And hence he permits himself to be cheated, worse
than ever any madman was. Doubtless, Adam was Mad, when he suffered himself to
be cheated of his Innocence and his Paradise, with an Apple? The Devil is a
notable Hu^ster and Juggler! and he cheats the mad Sinner of all he has; the
mad Creature will part with his precious Time, though all the Angels in Heaven
cannot Recall one Lost Hour of it; and he will part with his Immortal Soul,
though the Gain of the whole World, would not Repair the Loss; The Devil gets
these things of him, for a Song. And he runs as Mad Ventures, as he makes Mad
Bargains. There is that foaming Madness in him, that he Values not the Terrors
of the Almighty God; He hears the Threatenings of God; He sees the Judgments of
God, for Sin, and yet he will, Go on still in his Trespasses. He does, as we
read in Jere. 8. 6. As the Horse rusheth into the Battle. Though he is fairly
Warned, that if he Venture on in his Evil ways, the Omnipotent God will make
him feel the force of His Iron Fiery Arms, What cares he? He goes on in the
Rage of Sin, and mocking at fear, he plays with Folly before the Canons
Roaring Mouth. Such a furious Madman the ungodly Sinner is!

Fourthly. An ungodly man, like a madman, endeavors the Hurt of all are about
him; especially of those by whom his own Good is most Endeavored. His madness,
makes him given to mischief. We read in Eccl. 10. 13; about, Mischievous
madness. That is it which the Sinner is under the continual Hurries of; and as
it is said in Prove. 10. 23. It is a Sport unto a Fool to do mischief. He is
always doing mischief to himself. He does what is worse than tearing his own
Hair, cutting his own Flesh, and killing his own Children, which madmen use to
do for with a Thousand Stabs and Wounds he Wrongs his own Soul. And, he is
doing mischief to where too as fast as he can. The Estate, and Credit, and
Health of his Neighbors all fare the worse for him; they find him, A Madman
casting Firebrarnds and Arrows and Death. Nor is he content to Go to Hell
alone, but he draws ^as many with him thither as he can. But especially, if any
man shall go to Restrain him or Oppose him in his Extravagancies, this madman
will grow yet more outrageous at it. It was a Quality which Balaam was marked
for, in 2 Pet. 2. 16. The Madness of the Prophet. Wherein did he show his
Madness? In this; That when he met with a Stop in his way, it flung him into
such a Passion, that there was no coming a near him. It Is thus with such a man;
Tell him the Truth, and he will treat you like the most mortal and cruel
Adversary: Go to Stop him, or bind him, or thwait him, and you had as good Meet
a Bear bereaved of her Whelps. And hence his Vexation Spends it self upon the
Faithful Ministers of God with a peculiar Animosity; if he see such an one, he
cries out, That man, I hate him! if he meet such an one, he cries out, Have I
found thee, O mine Enemy? He cannot Endure to be Controlled in his Wickedness.

Fifthly. The ungodly man has, The Devil in him. There is an Unaccountablean
Unexpressible Interest of Satan oftentimes in the Distemp^^^ madness. It was a
common sentiment among the Jews of old, That madness was oftentimes produced by
an Invasion and Possession of Evil Spirits; Especially, if the madness were
Sine Febri. Hence they said in one of their Slanderous Blasphemies against our
Lord, as in Joh. 10. 20. He has a Devil, and is mad. It is often some Devil,
which takes Advantage of the Poisonous Fires which madness is inflamed with, to
carry on the hideous Hurly Burly's that are in the minds of the Distempered.
Hence also it was said concerning one that was mad, in Match. 17. 15,18. He is
Lunatic; that is, one Distracted at certain Times of the Moon. And it follows;
Jesus rebuked the Devil. Be sure, An ungodly Sinner has this point of madness
in him, That he is under a Remarkable Energy of the Devil. It was said unto a
Cheater, in Act. 5. 3. Why has Satan filled thine Heart? And so it may be said
of every other Sinner, Satan has a Strong-hold in the Heart of such a Sinner.
He has given himself up to the Devil, resolving and engaging, To walk after
the Prince of the power of the Air. He has a thousand times over said unto
Satan, as Ahab to the Syrian, I am thine and all that I have. And hereupon, He
is moved by the Devil, and led by the Devil in his whole Conversation. This is
his Madness while he Lives!

But what becomes of him afterward: This is the Business of

The Second PROPOSITION,

Which we ought Soberly to meditate a while upon. You are now to hear, That

A Sad Death is that which the Incureable Madness of ungodly men brings them at
length unto.

This is a Thing that should reach the Heart of every Person here; but
especially of those who by a more sensible Approach of Death, have it said unto
them, Set thy Soul in Order, for thou shall Die and not Live.

First, there is a Natural Death which ungodly men must have Experience of.
They must Go to the Dead, which by Rotting in the Grave. This is a thing which
there is no avoiding and, There is no discharge in this War Will the Wealth of
the ungodly man Excuse him from Dying? No. It Is said, in Psalm. 49. 6. They that
boast themselves in the multitude of Riches, contact Redeem from the Stroke of
Death. Will the Strength of the ungodly man Excuse him from Dying? No. It Is said
in Job 21. 23. One Dies in his full strength. Will his Hunour Protect him from
it? No. It Was said in Psalm. 82. 6,7. I have said, ye are Gods, but ye shall Die
like men. Will his Wisdom defend him? NO. It Was said in Psalm. 49. 10. The Wise
men Die. The man must come to it, whether he will, or no. And there is a double
sadness in the Natural Death of an ungodly man.

First. His Natural Death is the Execution of a Divine and a Dreadful Curse
upon him. It was Gods Curse for our Sin, in Genesis 3. 17. Thou shall surely Die.
The Sting is taken out of that Curse, to the true Believer, and the Snake has
more of Cordial than of (...) in it. But the Death of an (...) comes upon him,
as part of (...) and Satisfaction which (...) Justice of God calls (...)
Justice of the Great God, (...) not let such a Transgressor Live; but will Pay
him home the Wages; that his Faults make due unto him. The Blessed God will not
let his Creatures any longer groan under the Burden of serving such a Monster,
and therefore. He gives to His Officer Death, such an order as this, Go
Marshal, Take some away, carry him to his own place!

Secondly. His Natural Death has often some very Dismal Circumstances to
Embitter it. It is said of some, in Jere. 16. 4. They shall Die of Grievous
Deaths. There occurs frequently some Grievous Accident, in the Death of a
notoriously ungodly man. Perhaps there may be some Grievous Plagues and Pains
upon him in his Dying Hours. Or, an Early Death, and also a Sudden Death, which
is a Grievous Death to a man that has not made his Peace with God, though it
be not so to a Believer; such a Death may be his portion. Yea, it may be that a
Violent Death may sieze upon him, and this by the Hands of a Common
Executioner; the Sword of Civil Justice may take him off, and Men Clapping
their Hands at him, hiss him out of his Place. This is the Grievous Death which
many a forlorn Creature comes unto. But it were well if This were all. There
are yet more terrible things to be laid before you. For,

Secondly, There is an Eternal Death which ungodly men are Obnoxious unto. They
must Go to the Dead which ly Roaring in the Fiery Bottom of Hell forever. Death
arrives unto them, with such an horrible Train, as we have represented in Rev.
6. 8. Behold, a Pale Horse, and his Name that satt thereon was Death, and Hell
followed with him. Ay, This is that which makes their Death look so Pale, so
Ghastly, so Hideous; Hell follows! It is that whereof we are told more than
once in the Old Testament, as in Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned into
Hell. And that it may no want Sufficient Witnesses, we have it over and over
Confirmed in the New, as in Math. 25. 46. The Wicked shall go away into
Everlasting Punishment. If a man go Christless and Graceless out of This World,
he passes unto Various Torments in Another; and these make up the Second Death.

Now the Sadness of the Eternal Death, which falls upon an ungodly man, has
these Aggravations in it.

First. It is an Intolerable Anguish which he shall then be Tortured with.
Doubtless there will be multitudes of Miseries to Cruciate the ungodly man
among the Damned In all those things wherein he can be Sensible, he shall be
Miserable. But there are especially two things which Hell consists of; and
those two the Scripture calls in Mark 9. sin.: A Fire, and, A Worm. There shall
be a Fire, to Vex and Scald upon a Damned Soul; and what shall that Fire be?
Truly, It shall be the Wrath, the fierce and hot Wrath of the Great God, making
Immediate Impressions upon the souls. It is said, in Heb. 12. 29. Our God is a
Consuming Fire. Our God, Will then flash in very (...) Rebakes upon the Sinner,
and (as Paul speaks) he shall be; Destroy'ed By the Presence of the Lord. There
shall also be a Worm, to Gnaw the very Vitals of a Damned Soul; and that Worm
shall be an Enraged Conscience, making most Angry and Horrid Reflections upon
the Condition of the Soul. It is said in Prove. 1. 31. They shall be Filled with
their own Devices. Out of the Sinners own Corruption will be bred a Viper, that
shall keep feeding forever upon his very Heart within him. Alas, my Friends,
what a formidable Death is this? They that have only tasted the Beginnings of
it, in a Wounded Spirit here, have made the Town Ring with the Noises and
Clamours of their Agonies. One so Visited, over-hearing some body to speak
about some Exquisite Anguishes, Cried out, All that is but a Metaphor to what I
am feeling of! O what a Death is that unto which the worst of Deaths is but a
Metaphor!

Secondly. The Eternity of that Intolerable Anguish, will render the Anguish
yet more Intolerable. We have it thrice ever told unto us, in Mark 9 sin. The
Worm Dies (...), and the Fire is not (...). That the Calamities of the Damned
will be Truly Eternal, is Evident both from Scripture and Consent. The
Scripture asserts the Eternity thereof, Expressing it by the very same word
which is used to declare the Eternity of God Himself; and it were easy to
multiply Quotations for it. The Consent of Good men hereabout, has been such,
That the Church in all Ages has Agreed in Receiving it as an Article of
Religion. The Consent of Bad men hereabout, is discovered in the Indelible
Suspicions and Jelousies thereof, which can by no means be wholly rooted out of
their minds. That these Calamities will be Justly Eternal, is evident from
This, That it is very Just for the measures of a Poenalty to be taken from the
Quality of the Object Affronted and Offended by the Fault. As now; To kill a
Fly, is a Sport for a Beggar, as well as an Emperor; but to Kill a Man, this
is justly counted, a Capital Crime. Thus, It is an Infinite God that is Injured
and Provoked by Our Sin. Hence an Infinite Wrath is but proportionable
thereunto. We cannot sustain a Revenge Infinite for the Intention of it; hence
one Infinite for the Duration of it, is but very Reasonable. Here then make
another Pause! What an Astonishing Death is this? To be under Inconceivable
Vexations, for as many Millions of Ages, as there are Stars in the Sky, or
Sands on the Shore, or Drops within the Ocean, and yet be no nearer to the
period of them, than the first Moment they began! Ah! Lord, I am afraid of thy
Judgments! Well might once a poor Sinner say, If I were to Endure the wrath of
God for a Thousand years, I might go through it; but Eternity, Eternity, that
Amazes me!

But what Improvement is to be made of such things as these? For the

First USE.
There is both Comfort and Counsil hence to be laid before those that have beed
Cured of their Madness by a true Conversion unto God. Some of us there are that
have been brought unto a Right sense of things, by the Renewing of the Holy
Spirit, and unto a just Contemplation and Reformation of our Manners. We may
indeed with much Humility look back, and say with the Apostle, in Act. 26. 11.
I was once Exceeding mad. We were Mad and worse than so, when we (...) without
God, and without Christ, and without Hope, and went along without Fear or Wit,
in the Lewd Courses of our Unregeneracy. But our God has reduced us unto a
blessed measure of Sobriety, by Changing of our Hearts within us. Now,

First. There is Rich matter of Comfort, in our Cure. Our Deliverance foretells
many Comfortable Things unto us; but This Particularly, That it will not be a
Sad, but a Sweet kind of Death, which we must quickly Encounter with. We shall
shortly Go to the Dead; and this is one of the Greatest, the Blackest Fears
that we are Afflicted with. But, be now assured, Ye Recovered Souls, That when
you go to the Dead, you shall not Go to the Mad. Indeed you shall then be
Gathered unto your People, as it is said, Abraham was. But who are they? Not the
Mad people, whose boisterous Excesses were unto you always Abominable here.
No, a Departing Saint sometimes pleaded that with God, Lord, Let me not go to
be with the Wicked forever, for I did not care to be with them here! But the
people which you shall go unto, will be that, in Heb. 12. 22,22,24. An
Innumerable Company of Holy Angels, and the Spirits of Just men made Perfect
and Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant. Happy Souls, Never then be Afraid
of Dying any more. T'wil be but going from a World full of Dangerous Madmen,
unto the most Reasonable and most Desirable Society that ever was. Well then,
when Grim Death lays his Cold Hand upon you, methinks, he should look
pleasantly; he says, Come, will you go; I wont hurt you! and you should answer,
Yea, Friend, with all my Heart! Do not now tremble at his Approaches, as
before, A King of Terrors, any more!

But, Secondly, We are to find matter of Counsil, on our Cure. Particularly,

First, Let us be Thankful that we are Cured our selves. To be Restored from
Natural Madness is a most Invaluable mercy; much more, to be Restored from
Spiritual. What Praises, Millions of Praises, must our Glorious Physician have!
The people were Surprised, when they saw a Madman in Mark 5. 15. Sitting, and
Clothed and in his Right mind. Surely, That man must servently and forever
Love the Lord Jesus, that had Healed him. Christians, It Is our own Case. As he
said of old, This I know, that I was Blind but now I see; So may we say, This I
Know, I was mad, but now it is otherwise. Let us then with a Right mind admire
and adore the Lordour Healer. Nebuchadnezzar did so, when he came out of his
Lycanthropy. And let us herewithal, be much in pondering, What shall we do for
the Honor of Him that has wrought such a Miracle?

But, Secondly. Let us be concerned for others that are not Cured yet. Alas, we
may see the Streets full of Madmen from Day to Day; and as it was find of Egypt,
There was not an House, in which there was not one Dead; So may it be said of
This Place, There is hardly an House wherein there is not one Mad. O Let us
make them the Objects of out Pity, and the Subjects of our Prayer. Let us
mourn over them with a very deep Affection; and if they give never so much
Affront and Abuse unto out selves, Let us resent it no otherwise, than we would
the Tricks of a Madman: but say for them, like out Savior in Luke 23. 34
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. Let us do them all the
Good we can; If it be in our power, Let us Govern and Restrain all the Freaks
which they are madly ready to run into; and Let us carry them in the Arms of
our Supplications unto the Lord Jesus, for His Help, as the Friends of such
people did of old. O be concerned for them; they Know not what they do. It Is in
Compliance with this Advise, that I shall now my self, pass unto a

Second USE.
Let all ungodly Persons be now called upon to Take-heed of that Mad Life which
will bring a Sad-Death upon them at the Last. To speak Reason unto such as are
Mad, may seem a Mad and a Vain Attempt. But that God who hid His Minister to
Prophesy over the Dead, has made it a Reasonable Thing for us also to,
Prophesy over the Mad. Let me then Apply my self to all those Carnal and
Careless people here, that are Madly pursuing the Interests of the Flesh, and
the World and the Devil, and Forsaking their own Mercies. Poor Souls, what a
Wretched and a Raving State is it that you are in? It was denounced as a very
direful Calamity, in Deuteronomy 28. 28. The Lord shall smite thee, with madness. It Is
that which every despiser of Christ and Life, and Holiness, is most
Prodigiously Smitten with. But, O Stop, O Stand, O Come to a little
Consideration, if you can, before you, Go to the Dead, and the Cure be, All too
Late! Though Sinners are desperately Mad, yet with a Word of Advice God can
make a Word of Power, to reach unto their Souls, and they may be made Sober if
the Alsufficient Grace of God accompany His dispensations. 1 I First Bow my
knees unto the Father of Spirits, for the Concurrence of His Grace, and I shall
then set before every ungodly Sinner, these few Directions for the Cure of his
Madness.

Direction. I.
Accustom your selves to (...) upon your own Condition. Let me say to you, as
in Isai. 46. 8. Show (...) selves men, O ye Transgressor You that play the
Fool, every Day, be persuaded once to Play the Men. Act like men by Arguing
upon your own Affayrs. Argue, and Ponder with your selves, Whether you Act
Wise^^orno? Think, whether you would count that to be Prudence in your
Temporal, which you do every day in your Spiritual concerns. Ask your selves,
What Good, and what End you propound in what you are doing of and see well,
whether there be, Nothing unworthy of a man, in your Deportments.

Direction. 2.
Avoid the Company and Fellowship of them that Madness is yet Prevailing in.
Achish of old would not ^^dure one that pretended Madness, to be near him; said
he, Have I any need of madmen? So impatient be you, of any Familiarity with
Vicious men; if any such Entice you to join with them in any of their
Impieties, then say, What shall I get by being among madmen? Depart from me,
ye workers of Iniquity. It was the Wish of the Apostle Paul, in 2 These. 3. 2.
To (...) Delivered from on cas^nable and Wicked men. O It Is an Hell upon Earth
to be among them! If you are Entangled in any Knot of them, I Pray, quickly
Deliver your selves. Their Madness has This Peculiar in it, that it is
Contagions. As the Biting of a Mad Dog, disposes a man to Lap, and Pant, and
Perish, just like the Dog that has bitten him: thus it is with many a man, when
the Venom and spittle of a W'rld Companion has infused it sel^ into him. O
that every Soul were awfully mindful of that Admonition, in Prove. 13.20. He
that walks with the Wife shall be Wife; but a Companion of Fools shall be
Destroyed.

Direction. 3.
Remember and Consider much, That you are Going to the Dead. The Thoughts of
Death have a marvelous Efficacy to Compose and Settle the Madness of our
Hearts. If you find your selves Mad upon any thing, the way to allay that
Madness will be, by thinking, I am to Die Shortly! Let the First Death be often
in your Thoughts; and often say with your selves like Job, in (...) I know that
God will bring (...) Death. (...) Are you Mad upon any Pleasures? Then think,
It Is but a M^ment that I can Enjoy them. Are you Mad upon any Profits? Then
think, I must be gone from them all, within a (...) while. A Clod of that
Earth; which must Ere long be laid upon us, we should find a wonderful Cooler
of all that Madness which we are carried away withal. A Mad Sinner will (...)
of a thing that he never thought of, (...) thought no more of it than of my
Dying day. Forlorn Soul, I believe thee. Did thou think of thy Dying day, we
should see more Sobriety in thy whole Behavior. Let the Second Death also have
a room in your Thoughts. It is a smart passage in Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice, O young
man, in thy Youth; yea, that I will, says he; he thinks the Wiseman in Earnest,
and mad mirth is an (...) with him. But stay there (...) Hear what a Reprimand
follows hereupon, But know thou, that for all these Things, God will bring thee
into Judgment. Even so, Let the Mad Sinner Know, that God will call him to a
Reckoning for all his Mad Frolicks here; Know thou, that there is an Eternity
of Destruction and Confusion for them that now live without the Fear of God;
Know thou, that the Contemners of the Lord Jesus, and of His Word, and of His
House, will be Broken sore in the Place of Dragons World without End. This
Knowledge actually and frequently revived in us, would strangely remove that
Madness which is in many of our Souls.

These Directions are useful unto all the Mad Sinners here. But I must Press
them, with a very Particular Inculcation upon You, the condemned Persons, whose
Madness has been so fatal to you, that for it you now see your selves apace
Going to the Dead Poor Creatures, You must confess, That if you had not been
Mad, you had never come to stand under a Sentence of Death in Irons here. It Is
because you have been Mad, that you are now clap't in Chains, as Mad men use to
be; for this it is, that you are come to Sit in the Shadow of Death, being bound
in Affliction and Iron. Some of you have professed, That you would rather go to
the Death which you are sentenced unto, then return to such a Life as you have
Led heretofore. God grant there may be Sincerity in that Profession! I am sure,
There can be no. Sincerity, if you either Affirm what you know to be False, or
Deny what you know to be True, as too many if you do. It Is notorious, That you
have gone a stray in the Greatness of your Folly; and that you are come to own
it, is a Sign that your Madness is beginning to Decline. We are now concerned,
that you may not Go down to the Congregation of the Dead, before your Madness
be, Sufficiently rooted out of your Souls.

I am to tell you,

First, That you have been fearfully Mad all this While. You were indeed Born
like the Wild Asses Colt, and so you have lived all your Days, Was it not a mad
thing for you, to follow the Motions of the Devil, rather than to follow the
Motions of the Savior, as you have done in all your Conversation? Was it not a
mad thing for you to make your selves the Common Enemies of mankind, when you
were in a Country, where no man who don't Scorn to Work, need fear to Starve?
Has it not been a Mad thing for you to sell your Lives, yea, to fell your
Souls, for a little Meat and Drink, when you might have secured Food more
Convenient for you, by preserving your own Lives and Souls? When Esau threw
away a Birthright for a Breakfast he was not half so mad as you (...)
Methinks, you should make, A Great and Exceeding bitter Cry, at the mention of
it?

I am to tell-you,

Secondly, That a true Repentance is the Thing your Madness must be Rectified
withal. It Is Repentance, which must Undo now in a few days, all that you have
been Doing ever since you came into the World. Repentance, I say; a Great-Word:
What is Repentance, but a Growing Wise-again? You have been mad; but by
Repentance you must Bewayl, and Confess, and Forsake all your Madness; and by
Repentance you must Repair to the Lord Jesus for the Redress of all thee.
Guilt, and all that Woe, which by your Madness you are involved in. A Soldier
that was to Die for Stealing a few Grapes, went Eating of them-on-the way to his
Execution: being rebuked for it, he answered, Pray, Envy me not my Grapes, I
have paid for them dear enough! Alas, you may say the like of all your Mad
Courses, I have Paid dear, or those forbidden Grapes! But for that very cause,
you should now throw them all away. You are mad, and worse than so, till a
Profound Repentance be discovered in you. Among the Romans of old, They that
were under a Public Accusation, betook themselves to a Squalid and Ragged
Habit, a dejected Countenance, and the Hair of their Head; and Face neglected;
and One famous man procured a Banishment, because he would not submit unto the
Ceremonies. Doubtless, he was mad! Surely, All that can show Repentance well
becomes you, that are now arrived unto a righteous Condemnation; neither Earth
must keep you, nor will Heaven receive you, if your madness continue any longer.

I am to tell you, Thirdly, That if you know leave of your madness, you shall
Experience Gods Mercy forever Indeed, if your madness continue a little more,
you shall be Turned out not into a Pasture with Bruits, as Nebucadnezzar was,
but into an Hell with Devil^ forever. Nevertheless, It Is a very Unreasonable
thing which I now have to set before you; and a Million Deaths will be the
portion of the man, that Encourages himself to any further madness, from what
I am going to say. But it is this, None of all your past madness will keep you
out of the Kingdom of God, if you are now Sober for the remaining Hours that
are before you. Though you are Going, you are not yet Gone to the Dead. Well,
there is yet a Door of Hope set open for you; Come in, and Welcome. We read
concerning the mad Prodigal, That when he Came to himself, then his Father met
him and kis^ him with a wonderful Affiction. You have been Prodigals with a
Witness; but Return^ Return; ye poor Prodigals; and the Merciful-God will yet
say concerning you, They are pleasant Children, and I will surely; have Mercy
on them.

I am to tell you, Lastly; That if your own madness be Cured, you will study
very much to prevent the madness of other (...). You-will then Labor to
Convince and Caution all that are about you, about those Paths of the
Destroyer which your madness has heretofore been running on Headlong in O do
it, if you can. Especially, Those of you, that are Young in Age, though Old in
Sin; do you call upon all Young men to beware of treading in the steps of your
wicked madness. You have been like that mad Young man, of whom Solomon says, in
Prove. 7.7. He was a young man Void of Understanding, and hence you have gone to
the House of the Harlot, as an O^ to the Slaughter, and a Fool to the
Correction of the Stocks, I beseech you, to leave a Mark upon those Hellish
Baudy-house; and upon all the other. Scandals that have-Ruin'd you. Shall I
assist you in it? Behold, O Young People, that are now before the Lord; Here is
one Young person that cries out, My Sabbath-breaking has Ruined me! Here Is one
cries Out, M^ Drunkenness has Ruined me! Here Is one cries out, My Company has
undone me And they all cry out, My Prayerless Neglect of my God and my Soul,
have brought me unto this. O take, the Warning, ye mad Youths: be Warned
against all this madness and Flee Youthful (...) for ever! You see, you see
what Youthful Madness brings miserable Sou^ unto.

An Holy Rebuke to the Unclean Spirit.
Uttered on a Day when Two Persons were Executed for Murdering of their
Bastard-Children.
JOB. XXXVI. 14 They Die in Youth, and their Life is among the Unclean.
IT IS a Text, whereupon you may this Day, in this Congregation, behold a very
doleful Commentary! You have before your Eyes, a Couple of Malefactors, whose
Murderous Uncleanness, has now in their Youth brought upon them, a most
miserable Death. May your Hearts now give a profitable Attention unto the Use
that should be made of such a dismal Spectacle; and of the Text now Read, which
has been dreadfully* fulfilled in the Spectacle. There are two Persons in this
Assembly, who shall never another Sermon; their Unclean life, is within these
few Hours to be Extinguished by the Justice of God; ere the Clock that just new
Struck, and the Glass that now* runs, have done so, about five Times more, they
are to be gone before God the Judge of all; and because they have been Fools,
therefore their Souls before this Night, shall be Required of them. I Suppose,
The Circumstances of These will oblige Them, to entertain the* Truths of God,
this Afternoon, with a most singular Agony of Soul; but, I demand this from
Allthe rest of You, that the Circumstances of These, do quicken you all to
mind, What you shall be told, concerning the Lamentable Desolations, which an
Unclean Life does bring upon the Children of men. Breef^y, As Father Latymer
once presented unto a great man, a New Testament, with this Inscription
^mbossed* on the Cover of it, Wheremongers and Adulterers God shall Judge:
Thus, I am to present, especially Young People, with a Bible this ^^ay, and
show them this Line upon it, They Die in Youth, whose Life is among the Unclean.
There was, you know, a man whose Name was Job, and that man was Perfect and
Upright, and one that feared God, and Shunned Evil. He was a Persored of
Quality, who dwelt in Arabia the Happy* and indeed, he made it Happy, by his
dwelling there. Horrid and Hideous Trials nevertheless befell this Excellent
Person; who under these Trials, was Visited by some Comfortable Neighbors,
that yet proved but miserable Comforters. There were Three more Aged men, and
all of them, Venerable Saints, of God, who took their Turns, in dealing with
Afflicted Job, about his Condition before the Lord. But at length is came unto
the Turn of a Fourth, named El^hu, who stood somewhat longer than, the rest, in
the Disputation; and among other Arguments, by that Eminent person handled, One
in our Context is, The sad plight of Ungodly men, in the Black day, when the
Vengeance of God shall overtake them for their Ungodliness: Especially when
there is any thing beyond the Common measures of Impiety, in that ungodliness.
There will come a Time, when the Wrath of God shall no longer forbear the
Recompenses, which belong to ungodly men; and in our Text, we have an
Intimation, both When, and Why, such a Time shall come upon them. These ungodly
Creatures are here called, ^^^^rites in this Book of Job; as they (...) justly
also called Fools, in the Books (...) David and of Solomon: because every
Sinner would be counted better than Indeed he is. Now,

First, If you would know, WHEN, the Displeasure of God shall break upon the
Heads of ungodly Sinners, You are here informed, They Die in Youth. It seems,
That an Early Death, a Death in the Prime, and Spring of their Days, is that
whereunto they make themselves Obnoxious. In the Original it is, Their Soul
Dies; so that it is a Spiritual and an Eternal, as well as a Temporal Death,
which is to come upon them In Youth: -- Some Read it, In a Tempest, or With a
Shaking: and thus, it notes their coming to a Death, which may be called
Violent; some Storm or Stroke of the Divine Anger, shall Violently hurry them
out of the World. And there are who so Translate it, They Die Rearing; as if,
their Death were to be (...) with such Rearing Distresses as Wretches upon the
Gallows use to be Turned over with. Be sure, It Is a Woeful Death, as well as an
Early one, that abides those who give themselves up to the Courses of
Remarkable ungodliness.

Secondly, If you would know WHY, these ungodly Sinners are thus, overwhelmed,
with the Indignation of God, You are here advised, Their Life is among the
Unclean. It may be rendered, Among the Sodomites: and it is possible, that here
may be an Allusion to the Destruction, that came upon the Sodomites, when our
Lord Jesus Christ, giving a Type of the Conflagration which He will shortly
make upon this Earth* Rained from Heaven the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, upon
the Cities which He Spared not. q. d. They are for their Abominable
Uncleanness, just like what the Young people in Sodom were; and therefore God
shall in their Youth sieze them with Snares, Fire, and Brimstone, and an
Horrible Tempest. You may see however, That Uncleanness is a most remarkable
instance of Ungodliness: to say of one, He is Unclean, is to say, He is very
Wicked. Receive then the Doctrine, which requires to be Lodged in your
Meditations.

An Early and a Woeful Death, is the Fruit of an Unclean and a Wicked. Life.

We have two Assertions here to be Advanced and mentioned.

Assertion. I.
As a Wicked Life in general may be called, an Unclean one, so an Unclean,
Life, in particular is a very Wicked one. It is true, That all Wickedness, is
called Uncleanness, in those Oracles, of Truth, which never miscalled any
thing. Thus, the Wicked Nature which we were all born into the World withal,
has that said of it, in Job 14.4. It is an Unclean thing. Thus, the Wicked
Person who does Renounce God, has that said of him, in Eccl. 9.2. He is
Unclean. All our Sinfulness, is called, A Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit. When
a Child of God has asked, for a Deliverance from Sin, he so Expresses it, Wash
me thoroughly from my Iniquity, and Cleanse me from my Sin. And a man that
Lives in Sin against the God that made him, is denominated in Job 15.16. An
Abominable and Filthy man. Why? Because the most Loathsome. Dirty, Nasty Object
in the World, is not so Distastful unto us, as all Wickedness is unto our God,
who is, Not a God that has pleasure in Wickedness.

But then there is One peculiar sort of Wickedness, which the Term of
Uncleanness is more strictly put upon; it is the Violation of that Chastity,
which is Enjoined upon us, by the Seventh Commandment, in the Holy, and Just,
and Good, Laws of our God. And why is this Luxury called Uncleanness, but
because of a Special Filthiness, and Ugliness, which this Vice is attended
with? Indeed, such is the Wretchedness of the Corruption, in man, that it is
hardly safe so much as to mention in his Hea^ing, the Several kinds of his
Damnable Wickedness. It was the Apostolical Council, in Ephesians. 5.3. All
Uncleanness, let it not be once Named among you. And accordingly, The Holy
Spirit of God here in our Text, as well as else where, has used a Notable
Antiphrasis, to describe the worst Uncleanness by. The word for, The Unclean,
is The Holy; because it is not easy to find any word Convenient and Emphatical
Enough, to set out the detestable Unholiness, that is in such Uncleanness.
However, we may with some Scripture-Phrases indigitate the Chief of those
Diabolical Pranks, that are Committed by those whose Life is among the Unclean.
Breefly,

There is then a Cursed Self-Pollution, which is usually the first Pit of
Uncleanness, where into they fall, that are, The Abhorred of the Lord. Wretches
there are, that like Wicked Onan, do so Sacrifice their seed unto the Devil:
and these are meant by those Effoeminate, concerning whom it is said, in 1 Cor.
6*9,10. Be not Deceived, They shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God.

There is next, an Odious Fornication, which is a further Step, of that
Uncleanness, where unto the Raging Lusts of men do carry them. It Is that,
wherein Unwedded Persons, of both Sexes, do prostitute themselves; and it is
reckoned among those Works of the Flesh, whereof we are assured in Gal.5.
20,21. They which do such Things, shall not Inherit the Kingdom.

If they that have been thus* Unclean, do come to Marry, it is well if the
Unclean Spirit still haunt them not. The^^ are Inexpressible Uncleanness, in
the Married Stare, which the word of (...) has Branded, in Col. 3.5. Under the
(...) the of, Inordinate Affection; for which Things sale the Wrath of God
comes upon the Children of Disobedience.

And sometimes, the Uncleanness grows into Adultery; Yea, Perhaps a doubled
Adultery: wherein the Marriage-Covenant is fearfully broken by Sinful
Creatures, that shake off the Yoke of God, imposed from the Beginning. The
Iniquity so often Damned in the Word of God; but especially in Prove. 6. 29,32.
Whosoever touches his Neighbors Wife, shall not be Innocent; whose Commits
Adultery with a Woman, Lacks understanding; he that does it, destroys his
own soul.

Sometimes also, There is an Incest perpetrated in that Uncleanness, whereto
the Hellish Fires in the Hearts of men do carry them. They will needs invade
that Comfortable, and Profitable, Order, which God has Established in Humane
Society, as now increased, for the Propagation of mankind. It was the Edict of
Heaven, in Lev. 18.6. None of you shall approach to any, that is near of kin to
him. And to show, that such and such Degrees were not forbidden unto Israel
alone the Lord adds, For in all these the Nations are Defiled, which I cast out
before you.

Yea, which is horrible to be Spoken! such a Vile Uncleanness, do some among
the debased Children of men, sink down into, that Sodomy and Buggery it self,
has been among their Crimes. The Great God has had Occasion to issue out such
precepts, as those, in Lev. 18.22,23 -- against such unutterable Abominations
and Confusions. Alas, There is in Europe, a Land Professing the Christian
Religion, where such Devilish Practices are, they say, very frequent; but
flaming Fire from Heaven will shortly destroy that Accursed Land. Nay, And in
this Land of Uprightness too there have been some that have thus Dealt
Wickedly. And I have one very wonderful Example to tell you of it. In the
Southern Parts of this Country, about the Year 1641. a Beast brought forth a
Creature that had something of an Humane shape. This Monster had a ^lemi^h in
one Eye, just like what a loose Lewd Fellow in the Town, was known to have.
This greater Monster, being upon this Account Suspected, was Examined upon that
suspicion, and upon his Examination Confessed his Guilt of most infandous
Bestialities, for which he underwent a deserved Execution. You hear what the
Acts of Uncleanness are; but I am to tell you, That there are Unclean Thoughts,
which are Prohibited by the Lord our God; even as in Math. 5.28. A Looking upon
a Woman to Last after her. And there are Unclean Words, which are also
Prohibited; Even, as in Ephesians.5.4. Filthiness and Foolish Talking. In all of
these things, there is Uncleanness. But what shall be said of this Uncleanness.
In one Word, It is a Wickedness. It Is Rebuked every where the whole Bible over.
Bat indeed, I need not Appeal unto the Bible, to prove the Wickedness of
Uncleanness. The Natural Reason and Conscience in man, will testify unto it.
Even an Abimelek, a Philistine, will pronounce it, A Great Sin. Until the Souls
of men, come to be debauched, into the Vilest of Degeneracies, they cannot but
see a World of Wickedness in this Uncleanness. Why, the plain Wrongs which all
the Unclean do both to themselves, and others, are enough to make every
sensible Person, say, God forbid, I should ever do such Wickedness! Wherefore,
to pass on.

Assertion. II.
An Early, Death, and a Woeful Death, is likely to beside them that Lead such a
Life. We should a little Particularize, upon both Articles in this Proportion.
I say then,

First. The Death of the Unclean, is like to be an Early Death. Of Uncleanness,
we may say as the Wise man says of the Adulteress, in Prove. 6.26. It will bent
for the Precious Life. The Life will be by that Sin, quickly preyed upon. It Is
the Commination of God, in Mal. 3.5. I will be a Swift Witness against the
Adulterers. Truly, when our God Comes to Anim^dvert upon them that live in
Uncleanness, He will make a Swift work of it. As our Lord says, I will Early
Destroy all the wicked of the Land; Why, the Unclean of the Land, are some of
the most Wicked in the Land. If you Enquire, Wherefore the Death of the Unclean
must be an Early One? For Answer, This, Punishment is both Naturally and
Morally Entailed upon them. Uncleanness is a^ thing that will Cruelly wast the
Bodies of those that are addicted thereunto; as the Apostle says, He that
Commits Fornication, Sins against his own Body. So may it be said of him
that Commits any other Uncleanness whatsoever. It Is said about Uncleanness,
in Prove. 5.8,11. Remove thy way* far from her; Lest thou mourn at Last, when
thy Flesh and thy Body are Consumed. It will bloodily Disturb the Frame our
Bodies, and Exhaust and Poison the Spirits, in our Bodies, until an Incurable
Consumption at Last, shall out us down, out of Time. It procures many Grievous
Diseases: Hence come Gouts, Cramps, Palseyes, and Scorbutic Taints, upon the
whole Mass with in us: Yea, There is a Grievous Disease that sometimes Invades
Horses, and because that Men do now so much Play the Brui^, that very Grievous
^^^ease, is in a disguise come upon Men also, to Chastise their Bru^shness The
Seventh Commandment well fellows the Sixth; Uncleanness has a Self Murder in
it. ^ut that which further ^astens this misery of Uncleanness, is the Just
Revenge of Almighty God upon it. It was the Almighty God upon it. It was the
Admen^^^^n, in Eccl. 7.17. Be not over much Wicked, Why should thou Die
before thy Time? Now the Unclean are indeed Wicked Over much. Uncleanness is a
most Villianous Abuse Offered unto that Plastic Spirit, by which Permeating
the whole Creation, the Great God forms all things. Well might the Lord then
say, concerning this very Sin, Shall not my Soul Visit for such an Evil as
this? Why, It Is an High Treason against the Majesty of Heaven; it is a Clipping
of the Coin, that has the Image of the Great God upon it; and it is treated as
a Capital Offense, accordingly. What is man himself, but the Picture of God?
Yea, There is one man, who Lies in the very Bosom of God, and is God Himself
Blessed forever. The Roman ^mperour made it a Criminal Thing for any man to
Carry his Picture into any Sordid places: but how then shall the Glorious God
bear it, for a man to Smutty His Picture with all the Superfluities of
Naughtiness? Or, will that Man, who is God, and in the Bosom of God, bear it,
that by our Fault, it should be said, There is a man, that is a Beast? There Is
a man Wall* wing Like a Dog, and Like a Swine, in the most base Uncleanness!
We pretend all of us, to be the Members of the Lord Jesus Christ; Yea, but
shall we make those Members, to become the Weapont of Unrighteousness? We are
Built all of us, to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost: Yea, but shall we make
these Temples, to become the Hig^sties of the Devil? Truly Death, and an Early
Death, is but the Proper Wages of Such a Wickedness?

Secondly, The Death of the Unclean, is, like also to be a Woeful Death. There
are indeed Innumerable Woes, which they that Live in Uncleanness, are, while
they Live, Exposed unto. Particularly, If they come to be settled in a
Marriage, among their Neighbors: it is well, if they don't meet with sore
Crosses, Vanities and Vexations, in their Marriage, to Correct them for the
Uncleanness, in which while they were Single they indulged themselves. When
David had been Unclean, this followed upon it, in 2 Samuel 12. 10,11. The Sword
shall never depart from the House; Behold, I will Raise up Evil against thee,
out of thine own House. But it is when thy come to Die, that the Unclean see the
Extremity of their Woes.

If you Enquire, Wherein the Death of the Unclean will be a Woeful One? For
Answer, It will Probably be in much Poverty, however in much Dishonor, that
the Unclean must leave the World. Uncleanness, is that whereof we are told, in
Prove.6.26. By means thereof, a man is brought unto a piece of Bread. It is
Commonly by Fullness of Bread, that persons do Pamper themselves into
Uncleanness; Yea, but by Uncleanness they come to be Scarce worth a Piece of
Bread, when they go off the Stage. It brings a Secret, but a Certain I last,
upon the Estates of men: Job said of it, It is a Fire that consumes to
Destruction, and it would R^^t out all my Increase. Uncleanness, is that also,
whereof we are told in Prove. 6.33. A wound and a Dishonor shall he get, and
his Reproach shall not be wiped away; that Commits it. However Honorable a
man may be otherwise, Uncleanness will soon lay his Honor in the Dust; there
is a Hot in the Scutcheon, when Uncleanness has defiled it: Paul said of it, It
is a Vile Affection.

Again, The Unclean must Probabl^ leave the World, with the Humiliation of
seeing None, or however, but a Poor Posterity rising after them. It Is a frequent
Thing, for that Great Blessing of Children, to be Denied where the Guild of
much Uncleanness is Lying on the Soul. It was Threatened in Hos. 4. 10. They
shall commit Whoredom, and shall not Increase. There was no Conception in the
House of Abimelek, while Uncleanness was designed there. We read of one
Committing Adultery, and Presently said our Lord Jesus upon it, I will kill her
Children with Death. It Is no Uncommon Chastisement for Uncleanness, Write this
Person Childless, says the Lord. Or, if Children are not always* Denied, yet
they are often Cursed, where much Uncleanness is cleaving to the Family. It was
Threatened, in Hos. 2. 4. I will not have Mercy upon her Children, for they are
the Children of Whoredoms. It has been Commonly said, Peccatum Seminis
punietur in Sem^^e: Men are very unhappy in their Seed, because of the
Uncleanness which those men have used. The Sin of their Bodies, they pay for it
in the Fruit of their Bodies. Their Uncleanness has this Consequence, that
their Offspring are not only an Infirm Generation, but also they do themselves
fall into the Like Iniquities that their Parents did before them; to bring the
Gray Hairs of those Drooping Mourning Parents with Sorrow to the Grave.

But, Lastly, and Chiefly. There is an Horrible Death of Soul, with which the
Death of the Unclean is to be Aggravated. The Second Death, is indeed a Woeful
One; but such, O such, will be the Death of the Unclean forever. We are assured
Concerning such, in Rev. ^1. 8. They shall have their Part, in the Lake which
burns with Fire and Brimstone; which is the Second Death. Alas, There is a
Judicial Cecity and Sottishness, which Uncleanness does for a long while bring
upon the Souls of men: we read* It takes away the Heart. Ay, But, when the
Sinners come to Die, Oh! Wha^ Horror does then distress their Forsaken Souls!
They Tremble, as the Unclean Felix did; They Tremble, in the ForeThoughts of
the Judgment to come; and they are horribly afraid of coming into that
Judgment. Nay, But the Judgment cannot be avoided. And what will it be? Will
the Thrice Holy God, Receive any of them, into His Everlasting Rest? No, No. We
are Assured in Rev. 21.27. There shall in no Wise Enter into it any thing that
defiles. But what then (...) Then Imagine this Day, that you see these Unclean
Goats, Quaking, and Shaking, before the Tribunal of the Lord Jesus Christ, as
they shall at the Last Day, with a Fearful Expectation of a Fiery Indignation
to devour them. And now, Hear the Judgment! Why, The Unclean have Cherished an
Infernal Fire in their own Bowels. For this Cause, the Judgment of God upon
them, will (...) Depart, ye cursed into Everlasting Fire! The Unclean have
Gratified the Devil, who is a Foul-Fiend, in their Filthinesses. For this cause
the Judgment of God upon them, will be, Depart, ye Cursed, with the Devil and
his Angels. The Unclean have done Brutish Things with their Bodies in this
World; they shall therefore be Raised with Ugly Bodies in the World to come;
and in these Bodies, they shall be so Tormented as to cry out, O for a Drop of
Water to cool my Tongue! It is said of the Unclean, in Hos. 7.4,6. They are as
an Oven heated by the Baker, they have made ready their Heart as an Oven. Well,
for this very cause, in the Day of the Lord, that shall Burn like an Oven, they
shall fall under such a Formidable Doom as that, in Psalm. 21.9. Thou shall make
them as a fiery Oven, in the Time of thine Anger; the Lord shall swallow them
up in His Wrath, and the Fire shall devour them.

It Remains that these things have now their, APPLICATION

And I Behold, Who, Behold, What, is the Mortal (...) of the World! The most of
men do now Die in Youth; More Die before Twenty, than after Sixty: Yea, it is now
to no more than Se^on Years that a Life is by the Reckoning of the Law
Abbreviated. But what is it that so drags us along to an Untimely Death? Truly,
It Is Wickedness, and especially, it is Uncleanness; That is the Knife which cutts
the Throats of Millions in every Generation. It was demanded, in Joh 21. 17.
How is the Candle, of the Wicked put out? Our Lives are not permitted, of
themselves to go out, but they are put out by Hasty Anticipations of Mortality.
Whence is this? It Is our Wickedness that is the Extinguisher. Ah! SIN; He that
sees it, may say upon it, and unto it, Have I found thee, O mine Enemy! SIN
it is, that I do in the Name of the Great God, Indict this Day, for the Murdering
of the World. It was That which at first Robbed us of the Immortality, whereof
our God made us Capable; and it is That which Continually further Weakens, and
Shortens, and Forfeits our Lives. Every Sin is Mortal; there is none Venial.
Wherefore, If any of you are going to meddle with any Wickedness, and
especially with Uncleanness, I am to call upon you, Man, There is Death in* the
(...)! I^ thou Love thy Life; O do not that Abominable thing, which is hated
by the Soul of the Lord! By Sinning against God, it is that men, do Run upon
the Thick Bosses of His Buckler: Yea, but those Thick Bosses will be the Death
of all that R^n upon them. And there are some Degrees of Sinning, which the
Magistrates, the Vicegerents of God, must also in his Name, inflict a Death
upon. There are Particularly, some sorts of Turpitude, wherein if men Offend,
the Officers of God in the World, are to Rid and Cleanse the World of these
Offenders. Job said, If my Heart have been deceived by a Woman, this is an
heinous Crime, yea, it is an Iniquity to be Punished by the Judges. And the
Crime sometimes may become so unnaturally heinous, that nothing less than
Death, should be the Punishment from the Judges for that Iniquity. But on the
other hand, It is a Maxim of Wisdom, in Prove. 19. 23. The Fear of the Lord,
tends to Life; and in Prove. 19. 26. The Fear of the Lord, prolongeth Days.
No Elixir Like to that! Religion, it will Establish those Good Terms between God
and Us, that we shall not complain, Lord, we are Consumed by thine Anger! And
Religion, will beget such a Calmness, a Serenity, a Satisfaction unto our
Spirits, as will Contribute more than a little to their long Abode in their
Clay-Tabernacles But after all, if a Religious man do Die Betimes; as many old
^^^lves Live, when Young Lambs Die* What then? Suppose it be so.

At hene si Moritur, Vita Perennis erit. The man is to Live in another and
better World forever; Even for infinitely, more than Hundreds of Thousands; of
Millions of Ages. His Life, in that World, after the Efflux of more Years, than
the Stars in the Sky, than the Sands; on the Shore, than the Drops of Water in
the Deepest Ocean, shall be no nearer to an End, than the first Minute it
Commenced! Of Religion, I do then say with Moses, in Deuteronomy. 32. 47. Man, it is
thy Life! A Bad man once cried out, Wh^ shall Live? And a Good man after long
answered the Problem so, The Just, he shall Live.

II. Behold, One Ground of the Mortality, which we daily Behold upon the Rising
Generation in our Land. What multitudes among us, do we see Die in Youth! This
Land is making the Lamentation that was made by the Church of old, The Lord
has called an Assembly against me, to Crush my Young men, How many Scores of
Young men have sometime (...) been lost from one Little Town, within two or
three Years, by the Disastrous Plagues and Wars that have been upon us! And how
many of our Young men that have Traveled into other Countries, have there
fallen under the Terrible Hand of God! Unto us may our God say, as He said unto
Israel of old, Your, Young men have I Slain. But what for, I pray? Now,
Methinks, the Wickedness, and Especially the Uncleanness too rise among our
Young People, should be acknowledged, among the Causes of these Calamities.
What said the Prophet in Isa. 9.17. The Lord shall have no Joy in their Young
men, for every one is an evil door. So little Joy indeed has our God in our
Young People, that He is every day saying over them, Indians, Do you come;
Frenchmen do you come; Fevers, do you come; and cut off as many of those young
People, as come in your way! Dreadful case! But, O Lord, what means the Heat of
this thine Anger, against my poor miserable Generation? Truly, you see the Rise
of all this Mischief. It Is because there are so many Evil Doers in this
Generation. But of all the Evildoers, among our Young people, there is one
more frequent, or more fatal, than the Uncleanness, wherein so many of them do
manifest their Wickedness. It is possible, that Old people, may by their
Beastly Baseness help to pull down the Fury of a Provoked God upon the Land. It
is here said The Hypocrites in Heart have their Life among the Unclean. Why,
There may be Old Professors, Old Church Members, that may be Old Hypocrites in
this regard. They seem to be Religious, they will be much at Meetings, they
Look devout at the Table of the Lord, they will be very Zealous and Precise
about some little Niceties; Yea, but they are most Wanton Satyrs in Secret
places; their Wantonness makes them Stink, before the Son of God, who will have
the Churches to know, that He Searches the Hearts and Tryes the Reins of the
Children of men. Such thing as these, are the Achans of the Land. But it is the
Young people that are this way the most Extravagant. How few* Oh! how few can
say as the Blessed Ezekiel did, Ah! Lord God, Behold my Soul has not been
polluted from my Youth! No, I remember a strange passage which Erasmus's
Confessor had in a Sermon against Adultery; If, said he, the Law of Stoning
Adulterers to Death were now Execited, all the Stones of this Great Rocky
mountain here, would not be enough to serve the Executions. Instead of that, I
might say, If all the Young People, that have many ways, Polluted themselves,
from their Youth up, were turned out of our Assemblies, we should have Thin
Assemblies Left! And there are especially two of the most ungrateful Seasons,
that Young People take to multiply those their Diabolical Pollutions. There is
the Close of the Sabbath, and there is the Joy of the Harvest; these instead of
being improved in Thankfulness to God, are Employed in spreading of Uncleanness
through the Land. Yea, But for this very Cause it is, that God Almighty is by
His Desolating Judgments apace turning of them out of our Assemblies. God from
Heaven, is denouncing of that Wofulness upon us, in Jere. 6.11. I am full of
the Fury of the Lord, I will pour it on the Assembly of the Young men together;
and that in, Jere. 42.26. Her Young men, shall fall in her Streets. But I now
tell you, Why such Things do come to pass? The Time was, that there were
Unclean Young men among the people of God; Yea, even those Young men that were
set a part for the Service of the Tabernacle, were, how Unclean! It was then
said, The Sin of the Young men was very great before the Lord. And what comes
of it, but this? The Lord Slew the Young; men with sweeping Desolations. Mark
what I say, The Omnipresent God, He is a Witness to all the Unclean Things done
by you in Secret places, which, as the Apostle says, T were a Shame to speak
of. The All-seeing Eye of God is upon you, in all the Revels, and all the
Riots, and all the Baudy Unclean Exorbitancies, wherein you, Work out all
Filthiness with all Greediness. Yea, but the Jealous God immediately then says
to the Angel of Death; Go Brand those Young Wretches, for Destruction; set a
Mark upon them, that so the Beesom of Destruction of may sweep them away, among
the Generation of my wrath. So it is, that so many of you come to Die in Youth!
Leave off then, O Young people, all these Evil ways. Let me call upon you, as
the Angel did upon Austin; Take up the Bible and Read! Take up the Bible and
Read! And now turn, as Austin did, unto that place in the Bible, Romans
13.11,12,13. It is High Time to Awake out of Sleep; cast off the Works of
Darkness; Walk Honestly, -- not in Chambering and Wentonness. Unclean Austin
was thus Reclamed; Good God, That we may now see many an Unclean Sinner so!

But,

III. Behold, what we are to do, that so an Early, and a Woeful Death, may not
Overtake us. Do that which the Apostle Directs in 2 Timothy 2. 22. Flee Youthful
Lusts.

Let me now, with all due Solemnity Address all those who are yet in their
Youth, with some Necessary Crho^tations unto those things, that may prevent
their Dying in this their Youth. When Solomon was going to make the Report, of
the Wickedness, and especially of the Uncleanness, practiced in Jerusalem, he
said, in Prove. 7. 7. I Discerned among the Youths, a Young Man void of
Understanding, Such an one there was in the Snares of Death. Are there none of
those Youths, no such Young Ones, void of Understanding, or, at least, none
that are in a desperate Hazard of becoming such, in this Great Congregation?
It is with You, that we are now to Expostulate; and unto you, I say; Consider
what you are doing, Consider where you are going; Hear the Compassionate Jesus
now Sighing over you, O that they were wise, and that they would Consider their
Latter End! Upon every Act of more Enormous Wickedness, and especially of
Uncleanness; you may say, as in Isa 38. 12. I have out (...) my Life. You
Ripe^^ in Sin apace, except you Bewayl and Forsake that Sin. You are Likely to
Die in Youth, if you do not now Turn in Youth, from the Sins that make you
worthy to D y. It has been Celebrated, as a property of our Nation; They are,
[as Lucan said of Another] Prodiga Gens Animi, properare facillima morte^^.

Yea, But if we are forward enough to throw away our Lives, in a way of
Courage, yet, Oh! Let us not be so in (...) way of Wickedness, and of
Uncleaness. Young man, why so fast? If thou arrive at Hell, half an Hundred
Years hence, one would think, That should be soon enough! But art thou mad upon
going down to dwell in the Consuming Fire, and in the Everlasting Burnings;
before the ordinary period of Humane Life? Foolish Youth! Who has Bewitched
thee? Consid^^ seriously, the direful Concomitants of the Death, which thou art
in such a furious career unto: The Rattle Snake is Leaping apace toward thee,
young man; and it will fasten a thousand Stings (...) thy Soul, when it shall
shortly Coyl about ^^ee. Consider, the Anguish which (...) wilt feel in thy
Heart, when thou art passing out of this World. How will thou Mourn at the
Last, and then Gnash thy Teeth, What a Fool was I thus to destroy my own Life
and Soul for ever! For a young man to be thus Cursed, L ike a Sinner of an
Hundred Years Old! Consider the Welcome which the Devils will give thee, at thy
passing into the other World. How will those Fiends of Darkness then insult
over thee? and say, What? Are you come hither! Young man, whence came you?
what, from a place where you had the Gospel of God ever Sounding in your Ears!
Do they then from such a place as that, make such haste unto this Place of
Torment! And O Consider the Everlasting Regret, that will Torture thy Soul,
when thou shall have the Unclean Dragons of the Wilderness, about thee for ever.

Under the Influence of these Considerations, Let these Counsels be Acceptable
with you.

First. Whatever you do, you must keep this Rule as your Life; Let not your
Life, be among the Unclean. Have you fallen into the Quagmires of Uncleanness?
O Get up, like true Sheep, immediately; get your selves Washed in the Blood of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and Rinsed in the Saving Waters of Regeneration and
Repentance; yea, Let the Fifty First Psalm for ever be the Tune of your
Devotions. About this you have cause to be the more earnest, because there are
very few Recovered out of this Iniquity. Says the Wiseman, in Prove. 2. 19. Few
Return! even when they are quite worn out, their poisoned Souls will still be
using Looks, and Words, that show them to be still Open Sepulchers. O Return,
if possible, Return. And now, whenever and however you may be Urged any more
unto Uncleanness, Repel the Temptations, as the pious young Joseph did, in Genesis
39. 9. How can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God! If the
Temptation grow yet more outrageous, what if you should set your selves to Sing
unto the Lord a proper Hymn, that may be a special Antidote against the
Infestations of the Fiery Flying Serpents? It may be Music may Compose and
Allay the Royls in your Souls, and the Evil Spirit may withdraw, at the Harp of
David.

[Such a Shield as this, has been sometimes held up against such Fiery Darts.

Oh! Glorious God, who do Improve.
The Son of thy Vast Love,
To be a Saving P rince unto
Them who to Him shall go.
Thy Second Person took on Him
Man's Nature, to Redeem
Men's Children from all Sin, and from
The Plagues which thence do come*
He having Done thy Will, Resigned
Himself to every kind
Of Blows, from thy Enkindled Wrath
Inflicting Hell and Death.
This past; That Just and Humble One
Revived, and took His Throne:
All, That my Soul, may Live, and I
Each Lust may Crucify.
Now is He Able by His Merit,
And Willing with His Spirit,
To Succor them, that in Distress
At His Word Him Address
Pity! Dear Lord: some pity show,
By Him, to Me that Go
Sad all the Day, because a Slave
Poor, Me vile Devils have.
Let Him, I beg, O Let Him be,
Priest, Prophet, King, to me;
And of my Soul-foes make me more
Than a brave Conqueror!
Such Thoughts as these leisurely and thoroughly prosecuted, will Nail thy Lust
unto the Cross of the Lord Jesus Christ; and let ^me tell thee, there is no wa
y to Mortify a Lust, but by Hanging it, on that Blessed Cross]

But suppose a Disposition to Uncleanness, may be such a Grain in a man's.
Temper, that it may be called, His own Iniquity; what shall we do then? Why
then, there is a famous Prescription, Ores, casta L egas, Jejunes, otia vites,
St Servare Voles Corpora Casta D eo.


First, P ray much, and pray with him, Lord, Create in me a clean Heart. Then
East as well as Pray; if you Fast, the Unclean Kind may go out: Fasting Spittle
will kill a Boil. Nextly, Read much the Sanctifying Truths of God: It is by
Taking heed thereto, that, The Young man may cleanse his way: but shun all
obscaene Books, as you would the Rags that had the Plague about them. Once
more; Be not Idle, be not Slothful, have something at your Calling still to do.
So you may come to say, as one usually too hard for the Devil did, The Devil
never finds me at leisure for him. You know, when and how David fell! But
permit me to add one Advice more; and that is; Call for a Chafing-D ish of
Burning Coals A Chaste Person solicited unto Folly requested the young man, to
do one thing for her, first; That was, To hold his hand one quarter of an Hour
in a Chasing-D ish of Burning Coals for her sake. He refused this, as a very
unreasonable Thing; but she then Replied, And how then can you ask me, for your
sake, to throw my self Body and Soul, into the Fire of Hell, to L y and Burn
and Broil in that Fire throughout Eternal Ages! Is not that more unreasonable?
Argue at such a Rate as that; perhaps one Fire will fetch out another? Even an
Heathen of old, Chaffering: about an Unclean Bargain, could sa y, No, I will not
Buy Sorrow at so dear a Rate. O Think, what a p^rensy it is, to cast a Soul into
Eternal Fire, for the Dream of, The pleasures of Sin, which also are, But for a
season. But unto all add this; wha^ will all signify, if you associate your
selve among the Unclean? It was with reference to Uncleanness, that it is said
in Prove. 6 17. Can a man take fire in his Bosom, and his Clothes not be burnt?
Why, if you take the Unclean, for your Companions, it you D rink with them, if
you D ance with them, if you Game with them, and if you spend your Time, in
their Nocturnal Frosicks, you take Fire in your Bosoms; your Souls will take
Fire from such Incentives. Be not such a Beast as to run into the Fire; A
Companion of such Fools will be destroyed.

But ^ert* Among whom then, shall be your Life? The Rule is, let your L ife be
among them, that have the Fear of God within them. Don't think, That a Young
Saint will make an Old Devil; but know, that if thy life be not among Young
Saints, thou art like to go to the Devil before thou art Old Say, with the
Psalmist in Psalm. 119. 63. I am a Companion of all them, that fear thee, O
Lord, and that keep Thy Precepts. There are young Persons, that lead a Godly, a
Sober, a Righteous Life; Let your Life be among persons of such a Life! Let
your Life be among the Young Josiahs, that Seek the Lord while they are yet
young; among the Young Timothies, that from a Child have known the Holy
Scriptures; among the young Obadiahs, that can say, I fear the Lord from my
Youth. There are young persons, both Men and Maids, who sincerely and secretl y
give themselves up to the Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Spirit, in the
Covenant of His ^rac^; and who then openly Lay hold on that Covenant among the
People of God; May your Life be among such young ones! There are young persons,
both Men and Maids, in this Town, who do not spend the Sabbath-Evening in such
polluting Diversions, as too many do; but they then in Little Knots come
together, to seek the Face of God, and Sing the Praise of God, and Repeat the
Sermons of the foregoing Day; May your L ife be among such young Ones! I am
confident, you all wish, Let me die the D eath of those Righteous young
persons, and let my L ast End be like Theirs! But I say to you, Let your L ife
be among them, or else your D eath will be your Eternal Separation from them.

And (...) of all; Be at last prevailed withal, to take the Warnings of such as
have D 'd in Y^uth, because their L ife has been among the Unclean. You have
seen some, in their youth carried from the Living, by the Whirlwind of the
Wrath, of God! Oh! may the Groans, the Cries, the Dolorous and the Dying
Ejulations of those Young Transgressors, become Effectual Warnings into all of
you that are yet alive. Let it be so, Lest, that come upon you, which is
foretold, in Prove. 29. 1. He that being often Reproved, hardens his Neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy. The young persons that
have sometimes Died in and for their Uncleanness among us; have you not heard
their solemn Admonitions when their Trouble, their D arkness, and the, D imness
of their Anguish, has been upon them. When those forlorn Outcasts have stood
just upon the Edges of an awful Eternity, how vehemently have they called upon
all Survivers, to Beware of coming to the place to Torment after them! Oh! how
they have Roared unto our young ones, Whatever you do, Sirs, do not L ead such
Unclean, P rofane, P rayerless L ives as we have done: How have they Roared,
Whatever you do, make sure of a precious Christ, for an I mmortal S oul, before
it be too L ate! Well, Take these Affectionate Warnings And among the rest,
Give Ear unto the Dying Speeches of the young Woman, whose Execution you are to
see this Afternoon. She has put into my Hand, and signed with her own, these
Dying Expressions of her Distressed Soul; which it will not be unprofitable,
for me to publish this Day among you.

I Am a Miserable Sinner; and I have Justly Provoked the Holy God to leave me
unto that Folly of my own Heart, for which I am now Condemned to Die. I cannot
but see much of the Anger of God against me, in the Circumstances; of my Woeful
Death; He has Fulfilled upon me, that Word of His, Evil Pursues Sinners. I
therefore desire, Humbly to Confess my many Sins before God, and the World: but
most particularly my Blood-Guiltiness. Before the Birth of my Twin-Infants, I
too much Parlyed with the Temptations of the Devil, to Smother my Wickedness by
Murdering of them: At length, when they were Born, I was not unsensible, that
at least, One of them was alive; but such a Wretch was I, as to use a Murderous
Carriage toward them, in the place where I lay, on purpose to Dispatch them
out of the World. I acknowledge that I have been more Hard-Hearted than the
Sea Monsters: and yet for the Pardon of these my Sins, I would Fly to the Blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ, which is the only Fountain set open for Sin and
Uncleanness I know not how better to Glorify God, for giving me such an
Opportunity as I have had to make sure of His Mercy, than by advising and
entreating the Rising Generation here, to take Warning by my Example; and I
will therefore tell the Sins, that have brought me to m y shameful End. I do
Warn all People, and especially, Young People, against the Sin of Uncleanness
in particular; it is that Sin, that has been m y Ruin; well had it been for
me, if I had answered all Temptations to that Sin, as Joseph did, How shall I
do this Wickedness and Sin against God? But, I see, Bad Company is that, which
leads to that, and all other Sins; and I therefore beg all that Love their
Souls to be familiar with none but such as fear God. I believe, the chief thing
that has, brought me, into my present Condition, is my Disobedience to my
Parents: I despised all their Godly Counsils and Reproofs; and I was always of
an Haughty and Stubborn Spirit. So that now I am bebecome a dreadful Instance
of the Curse of God belonging to Disobedient Children. I must Beway I this
also, that although I was Baptized, yet when I grow up, I forgot the Bonds that
were laid upon me to be the Lords, Had I given my self to God, as soon as I was
capable to consider that I had been in Baptism, set apart for him, How happy
had I been! It was my Delay to Repent of my former Sins, that Provoked God to
leave me unto the Crimes, for which I am now to Die. Had I Seriously Repented of
my Uncleanness the First T i am I fell into it, I do Suppose, I had not been
left unto what followed. Let all take it from me; the y* little think, what the
y do, when they put off turning from Sin to God* and Resist the Strivings of
the Holy Spirit. I fear, it is for this, that I have been given up to such
Hardness of Heart, not only since my long Imprisonment, but also since my Just
Condemnation. I now know not what will become of my Distressed, perishing Soul.
but I would humbly Commit it unto the Mercy of God in Jesus Christ; Amen

E very Clause of this Writing, has more than Once or Twice been Distinctly
Owned by this Dying Soul, before Various Witnesses. Indeed, I Fear, I Fear!
This is not All that she should have Acknowledged. However as far as they go,
may the Lord God now Sanctify these Warnings, to all the Young Ones, for whom
they are intended!

And now, unto you that are presently to Die, an Early and a Woeful Death,
because of your Life among the Unclean [as well as unto the other Poor
Creature, that for the very same Crime, stands here in the same Condemnation
with you] I have but One Word more to speak.

I Question whether ever any Prisoner in this World, enjoyed such means of
Grace as you have done since your Imprisonment; and it may be there never was a
Prisoner more Hard-Hearted, and more Unfruitful, than you have been under those
means for a long while together. Many Hours would not serve to Recite the
Instructions and Awakenings that have been inculcated upon you, since you were
first Apprehended; and you have now but a few Minutes left you, to make Sure of
that Great Salvation which has in all been tendered you. But Miserable Soul, How
can thou Escape, if thou neglected that Great Salvation? However, there is
One Word, wherewith I am to acquaint you after all; it is in Zech. 13. 1. There
shall be a Fountain Opened for S in, and for Uncleanness. Your Sin has been
Uncleanness, Repeated Uncleanness, Impudent Uncleanness, Murderous Uncleanness:
You must, like the Leper, Cry out, Unclean! Unclean! But behold; there is a
Fountain set Open for you. Only be it known unto thee, that all thy known Sins
must be Vomited out by thy Penitent Confession of them, when thou come unto
that Open Fountain. And Oh! How should this Dissolve your Adamantine Heart into
the most Penitent Confession, when that although you have shed the Blood of your
own Children, to cover your Uncleanness, yet the Son of God, is willing to Wash
your Soul, in his own most Invaluable Blood? Come then I beseech you, unto
that, Open Fountain; Come with Importunate entreaties that the Blood of the
Lord Jesus Christ, may Wash away all your sins; and that you may be S anctify'd
as well as Justified, by this Blood of the New Covenant. Because you have been
a Blocdy Wretch, therefore it is that now you must not Live out half your Days;
The Primitive Christians, I find sometimes using these words, We count it a
sort of Murder to disturb Conception; and what shall we count it then to Kill
Infants already Born into the World? Why, Thou Elizabeth, (and thy Black
Fellow-Sufferer there!) has been such a Bloody Murderer. But Oh! See to it,
that you be not a Deceitful One; you say, That sin becomes Bitter, and that
Christ becomes P recious, to your Soul; O be concerned that you be not Ruined
by this thing. A Deceitful heart has turned her aside, she D ^es with a Lie in
her Right Hand! Although Solomon speaking of them that have been Rescued from the
entanglements of Uncleanness, could sa y One man among a Thousand have I found,
but a Woman among all those have I not found; yet, why may not thou, what
ails that Unconquerable Heart of thine, that thou ma yest not be such a Saved
Woman? What shall I sa y? though thou have gone a Whoring, yet Return unto me
says the Lord. Say then! Within a few Minutes thou shall be standing before
the Judgment Seat of God, from whence there was never made the offer of a S
aviour,; But I am now once more to Renew that Offer in thine hearing. Say, thou
Forsaken Soul! The Lord of Heaven Himself, does from Heaven yet once more ask
of thee; S hall be thy Lord-Redeemer? Shall I bestow on thee Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption? Do thou Consent, Poor
Soul, Can thou Consent? Behold, this is the last time of asking. The Lord of
Glory does now, after all thy Abominations, put this upon thee; S hall I give
unto thee, both Repentance and Remission of Sins? Shall I bring thee into a
state of Reconciliation with God? If thou do Refuse, thou shall never hear
one Kind Word from the Lord Jesus more; thou shall hear nothing but the Thunder
of his Wrath Cursing of thee in the Bottom of Hell, till the very Heavens be no
more! If thou do Comply, there is then yet Hope in the Latter End; thou art
then yet a Prisoner of Hope!

Oh that we may now see thee Washing the Feet of Our Lord with thy Tears, and
with a moved Melted, Broken Soul. Clasping about those His Glorious F eet,
until He shall say, Her Sins which were many are Forgiven her!

FINIS.

