Province of New York, ss. Anno Regni Gulielmi and Mariae, REGIS and REGINAE,
Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, QUINTO.
An ACT for Restraining and Punishing Privateers and Pirates.
WHereas nothing can more contribute to their Majesty's Honor than such
Articles as are concluded and agreed on in all Treaties of Peace, should by all
their Majesty's Subjects, according to their Duty, be most inviolably preserved
and kept, in and over all their Majesty's Dominions and Territories. And
whereas against such Treaties of Peace made between their Majesty's and their
Allies, several of their Majesty's Subjectts do continually sail under
Commissions of Foreign Princes and States, contrary to their Duty and good
Allegiance, and by fair means cannot be restrained from so doing, Be it
therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority of the same, That from and after Publication hereof,
it shall be Felony for any Person which now does or hereafter shall inhabit in
or belong to this Province, to serve in America in an Hostile manner under any
Foreign Prince, State or Potentate in Amity with their Majesty's, without
special Lisence for so doing, under the Hand and Seal of their Majesty's
Governor or Commander in Chief of this Province for the time being, and that
all and every such Offender and Offenders, contrary to the true intent of this
Act, being thereof duly convicted in their Majesty's Court of Judicature
within this Province (to which Courts Authority is hereby given to hear and
determine the same, as other cases of Felony) shall suffer pains of Death,
without benefit of Clergy. Provided nevertheless that this Act, nor any thing
therein contained, shall extend to any Person or Persons, which now are or have
been in the Service or Employment of any foreign Prince, State or Potentate
whatsoever, that shall return to this Province, and leave and desert such
Service and ^mployment, before the first day of September next ensuing,
rendering themselves to their Majesty's Governor or Commander in Chief for the
time being, and giving such Security as he shall appoint, for their future*
good Behavior, and also that they shall not depart this Province without the
Lisence of their Majesty's Governor or Commander in chief.

And for the better and more speedy Execution of Justice upon such who having
committed Pyracies, Fellonies, and other Offenses upon the Sea, shall be
apprehended in or brought prisoners to this Province, Be it further enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That all Fellonyes, Pyracies, Roberies, Murders, or
Confederacies committed, that hereafter shall be committed upon the Sea, or in
any Haven, Creek or Bay, within the Jurisdiction of the Admirality, shall be
enquired, tried, heard, determined and judged in such Form as if such Offense
had been committed in and upon the Land, and to that end and purpose
Commissions shall be had under their Majesty's Seal of this Province, directed
to the Judge or Judges of the Admirality of this Province for the time being,
and to such other substantial persons, as by their Majesty's Governor or
Commander in chief of this Province, for the time being, shall be named or
appointed; which said Commissioners, or such a Quorum of them, as by such
Commission shall be thereunto authorized, shall have full Power to do all
things in and about the enquiry, hearing, determining, adjudging and punishing
of any of the Crimes and Offenses aforesaid, as any Commissioners appointed by
Commission under the great Seal of England, by Virtue of a Statute made in the
Twenty Eight Year of the Reign of King Henry the eight, are Empowered to do and
execute within the Kingdom of England. And that the said Offenders which are or
shall be apprehended in or brought Prisoners to this Province, shall be liable
to such Order, Process, Judgment and Execution, by Virtue of such Commission to
be grounded upon this Act, as might be awarded or given against them, if they
were proceeded against within the Realm of England, by Virtue of any Commission
grounded upon the said Statute.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person or
persons that shall any way knowingly entertain, harbor, conceal, trade, or
hold any correspondence by Letters, or otherwise, with any person or persons
that shall be deemed or judged to be Privateers, Pirates, or other Offenders
within the Construction of this Act, and shall not readily endeavor, to the
best of his and their power, to apprehend, or cause to be apprehended such
Offender or Offenders, shall be liable to be prosecuted against, as Accesaries
and Confederate, to suffer such pains and penalties, (...) by Law is provided.

And for the better and more effectual Execution of this Act, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Commission Officers, in their
several Precincts within this Province, are hereby required and empowered, upon
his or their Knowledge, or Notice given, That any Privateers, Pirates, or other
Persons, suspected to be upon any Unlawful Design, are in any place within
their respective Precincts, to raise and levy such Number of well Armed Men, as
he or they shall think needful, for the seizing, apprehending, and carryinig
to Goal all and every such person and persons, and in case of any Resistance,
or Refusal to yield Obedience to their Majesty's Authority, it shall be lawful
to Kill or Destroy such Person or Persons. And all and every Person or Persons
that shall Oppose or Resist, by Striking or Firing upon any of the Commanded
Parties, shall be deemed, taken and adjudged Fellons, without Benefit of the
Clergy. And every such Officer that shall omit or neglect his Duty herein,
shall forfeit Fifty Pounds current Money of this Province for every such
Offense, to be Recovered in any of their Majesty's Courts of Record within this
Province, by Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein is no Effoyn, Wager of Law or
Protection shall be allowed, one moiety thereof to be to their Majesty's, their
Heirs and Successors, for and toward the support of the Government of this
Province, and the contingent Charges thereof, and the other moiety to the
Informer. And all and every Person and Persons that upon Orders given him or
them, shall refuse to repair immediately, with his or their Arms well fixed,
and Ammunition, to such place or places us shall be appointed by any super
Officer or Officers, and not readily Obey his or their Commands, in the
Execution of the Premises, shall be liable to such Fine or Corporal Punishment
as shall be awarded against them within the Courts to which the Recognizeance
of the Fact does belong.

FINIS

