Rules For the DISCERNING Of the Present Times.

Recommended To the People of God, in New England. In a Sermon. Preached on the
Lecture in Boston; November 27 th. 1692.

By Samuel Willard.

Eccl. 8.5. A Wise Man's Heart discerns both Time and Judgment.

Boston Printed by Benjamin Harris, Over Against the Old-Meeting-House. 1693.

RULES For the DISCERNING Of the Present Times. etc.
Math. 16.3. Ye Hypocrities, Ye can discern the Face of the Sky, but can Ye
not discern the Signs of the Times?


THe Occasion of these words, spoken by Christ himself to the Pharisees and
Sadduces, we shall find in the History. We read at the latter end of the
foregoing Chapter, that Christ had been showing of his Divine power, in a
miraculous feeding of a multitude with a few Loaves and Fishes; which one would
have thought should have sufficiently convinced them who he was; even the
expected Messiah. Upon this, in the beginning of this Chapter, we have the
Pharisees and Sadduces coming to him, and asking a sign of him, verse 1. And
this was just as he had been giving of them an eminent one: So impertinent does
unbelief make men to be. Our Savior hereupon very suitably in v. 2.3. Sharply
reproves them for not making use of those Signs which they had: and this
reproof he establishes upon the consideration of their curiosity in observing,
and aptness to conclude from their observation of Natural and Fallible Signs
with respect to Fair and Foul Weather; in Conjunction with their Dullness and
Incogitancy in observing, and Incredulity in concluding about greater, and more
Momentous affairs; Viz. The Signs of the Times.

Our Text is the Reddition of this Comparison, or the Conviction it self which
he applies from the foregoing consideration.

In the words then we may observe these Two things.

1. An Exprobation or a Contumelious Title which he puts upon them; O ye
Hypocrites: An Hypocrite is one that makes a fair and dissembling show of
something that he intends not: these pretended to an earnest desire of being
informed about Christ and his Authority, but it was a mere pre^ence.

2. The ground or reason of this Exprobation, Ye can discern etc. The Sum is,
that they had studied and gotten skill in a matter of so little moment, and yet
were unacquainted with things of the highest concernment. Viz. The Signs of the
Times.

A Sign is something that represents some other thing unto us, and gives us
some notification about it. We are by it instructed about something else and we
may from it receive information, make observation, and draw conclusions
accordingly.

Now these Signs are either Natural, or Positive and Instituted. Natural are
such as have in them a Natural Connection with the thing signified, or the
reason of the signification is in the nature of them. Such were these in the
Sky here mentioned* thus Natural Causes are Signs of those effects that are
indicated by them: so proper accidents are Signs of their Subjects; and many
the like. Positive or Instituted are such as are so made by appointment, which
puts their signification into them; and that whether of God or of Man. Of man's
appointment; so was Rahabs Scarlet Thread to be a Sign to the Spies, Josh 2.18.
Of Gods appointment; so the Rainbow was given to Noah, Genesis 9.12, 13. And
Circumcision to Abraham, Chapt. 17.10. For a Sign. Thus all those things which
the Scripture Predicted should come to pass, either as Forerunners, or
Concomitants of Christ's Coming and Appearance in the Flesh, were to be Signs by
which men were to know it, and to Judge of it: and these seem to be more
peculiarly the things which Christ aims at in our Text.

There are also Mixed and Moral Signs, which are partly of Institution, and
partly have a Moral Influence into the things which they signify; and have a
real signification in them.

By the Signs of the Times we may here understand such Tokens by which we are
advantaged to Judge what Times we are fallen into, and what Prognostics may be
made of them, on a Moral account.

The word here used for Discerning, is of a middle signification; it is
sometimes used for debating and hesitating in a matter that is dubious and we
are at a loss to determine about it; and sometimes for Judging rationally of
things, and drawing Conclusions from premises, whether probable or certain,
according to the force there appears to be in them, and in this latter Sense,
we are here to take it: Hence.

DOCTRINE

It is an Important Duty lying upon the People of God* to labor after a skill
in discerning the Signs of the Times which they live in.

Our Savior here upbraids these Pharisees, who were men that pretended high to
Religion, and would be thought to out do others in the knowledge and practice
of it, yet they were unacquainted in this great affair: they were times wherein
men were in great expectation, and yet they did not understand these signal
discoveries which God then made in his Providence.

The importance of this Duty will briefly appear, if we lay these things
together.

1. That there are varieties of Times which pass over men. The times are not
always alike, there are good days, and there are evil days: (...) a day of
prosperity, and a day of adversity: a time of peace and a time of trouble. The
wise man makes such an observation as this in, Eccl. 3. begin. and they are the
various aspects of God* providence upon men that make these differences in the
times; for it is he who orders all the changes that go over men, whether
public or private, this David confesses in, Psa. 31.15. My times are in thy
Hand.

2. That there are Signs of these Times. God is wont frequently to foresignify
to men what revolutions there are likely to come upon them. There are certain
indications or forerunning Symptoms, which as they intimate what the present
times are, and what remarks are to be made upon them, so they carry in them the
Pregnostick of what days are coming. As to Natural Signs which some pretend to
from Astrologicall Observations, and Predictions grounded thereupon, I meddle
not with them, nor is there any credit to be given to those that do; and it is
to be lamented that so many Christians are seduced into a good Opinion of them:
But as to Moral and Instiiuted Signs, they are such as God himself has
therefore appointed in his word* because he would have men to improve them: as
therefore it is his Command, Jer. 10.2. Learn not the way of the Heathen, and
be not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven. so also we have the complaint of the
Church in Psalm. 74.9. We see not our signs

3. These signs are capable of being discerned, not only the things themselves
that are signs may be known, but under this consideration as they are so: i. e.
there may be a discovery made of the thing signified by them. The very reason
why God has appointed them to be signs, is that men may so be instructed by
them; and hereupon they would lose their end of being so, if they were not to
be understood; nor yet would men come under blame from God for their not
discerning of them, as they do, Text There are therefore such Rules given us in
the word of God, as are for our discretion in this regard, and according unto
which we may and ought to judge of the times; only if we would not mistake or
fall short in our Judgment, and be led into error, we must be Critical, and
take pains in the Application of these Rules.

4. There are special Duties relating to these times as they are circumstanced.
As the disposing of the times according to his Holy pleasure, is one part of
the Government of the World by God; so, as they have any reference to mankind,
they have a respect to his special Government, which always has an eye to the
Law of that Government, according unto which God manageth the affairs of this
sort of beings, and for that reason there is a Moral consideration to be had of
them, because they have a regard to the Rule of Relative Justice, which God
has Fixed: from which it follows, that there are Moral Duties to be
particularly inferred from them. There is a voice in every turn of providence
which passes over men, and it speaks to them, signifying what it is that God
requires of them at such a time, and it hyghly* concerns them to hear it, that
so they may practice accordingly: and these Duties vary as to their specialty,
as the times vary; hence that* Eccl. 7.14. in the day of Prosperity rejoice;
and in the days of adversity consider.

5. The way for men to know these Duties is by Discerning the times. It is
true, there are the General Duties of Religion which are accommodated to all
times, we are to trust in God at all times, and whatever difficulties and
darknesses are upon us, we are to Pray evermore, and not to be discouraged at
any thing that would persuade us that God hears us not* we are without ceasing
to serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling: these Duties can never
be out of season, let the Times be what they will. But there are more
particular engagements lying upon us, which are urged from the times, and the
arguments to press them upon us are to be fetched from thence: there is a
present work to be done, something that GOD NOW more eminently calls for, and it
is pointed unto by the time it self, hence is that reproof given unto them
Jer. 8.7. yea the stork in the heavens knows her appointed times etc: but my
people know not the Judgments of the Lord. Now, if men do not regard, and
thereupon are unacquainted with the time, how shall they understand what this
Duty is that they are now to set upon?

6. The consequence of doing or neglecting of these Duties is very great. A
peoples happiness or misery depend upon it: a mistake here may prove woefully
hazardous to men. If the times for the present are good* they may be either
continued or lost, according as men improve them; we may observe what a
threatening God utters against them, Deuteronomy. 28.47.48. because thou servedst not
the Lord with joyfulness and gladness of heart, for the abundance of all
things, therefore shall thou serve thine enemies: if the times are bad, and men
carry not answerable to them, but contrarily, it is the way to make them worse,
hear what God says, Isa. 22.12.13. In that day the Lord of Hosts called to
weeping, etc. and behold joy and gladness, etc. surely this iniquity shall not
be purged from you till you dye. Nay, if bad times are fore-boded and
predicted, men may either precipitate or avert them by their answerable
demeanure, how eminently have we this exmplified in the men of Nineveh: Jonall
3. and the truth is, men may thank themselves, if after their being thus
forewarned, they yet fall into mischief, they might have prevented it, if they
had attended the voice of providence, and known the day of their visitation;
hence that expostulation, Isa 48.18.19. oh that thou had hearkened to my
commandments, then had thy peace been as a river, etc. they prove themselves to
be but simple fools; for what says the wise man? Prove. 27. 12. The prudent
foreseeth the evil and hides himself, but the simple passes on and is
punished. Hence then the case I am here to endeavor some resolution of is this.

Quest. By what Rules may we truly and profitably discern the present times?

A. Here let me premise;

1. That this case may be applied to the Prophetical times mentioned in the
Scriptures, which respect that Glorious state of the Church which is believed
and expected by the servants of God, in the latter days: That there shall be
such a time; that it is stated and determined in the Counsel of God; That there
are the signs of its approaching; that the day of it is coming on apace; and
that it is our duty soberly to acquaint our selves with the tokens of it, the
word of God is our warrant, nor ought they who fear God in New England to look
upon themselves or theirs as unconcerned in it, because they dwell in a remote
corner of the earth: But I shall altogether wave this in the present enquiry.

2. It might also be extended generally to the whole affair of the people of
God in the world at this day, and it would be a profitable speculation; for if
we are bound to pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, we ought then to be very
inquisitive after the condition which the Church is in, that we may accordingly
direct our petitions to God in its behalf, and understand what answer our
prayers do receive from him, and to neglect it will argue that we are but a
little concerned about them. But I shall not directly intend this neither;
although the Rules to be given may be generally applicable; hence,

3. I shall direct the resolution of this case more especially to our selves,
or this little company of a professing people, in this nook or corner of the
world; and let it here be observed; That although, not only Christ's Mystical
body is but one, but also the Visible Church of Christ on earth is in some
respects but one too, since they do or ought to profess the same God, the same
Christ, the same Faith, the same ordinances, and consequently are subjects of
the same Government of Christ; yet as they are dispersed up and down in diverse
places of the world; and thereupon are severally combined, the times may be
exceedingly diversified unto them, and consequently the signs be very various:
Religion may flourish in this place, and it may at the same time be under great
decays in another; here there may be good, and there may be bad Symptoms. Nor
does this only respect particular Churches, or Congregations, although these
also may be very unlike, but the Collective body of them too, as they are
involved in a more immediate Communion one with another in Sacred and Civil
respects: for God is wont to treat with them in his Providence under the
Consideration of such a people so combined, as is evidently to be observed from
the word of God.

Signs, according to the Scripture use of the word, are by Critics ranked
under three heads. 1. Indicative or notifying signs: such as carry in them a
discovery of the present State of affairs, and tell men what they are to Judge
of things as they now are; or give light for a Prediction of some future
events, having a reason in them for this Conclusion, whether Natural or Moral
from which men may raise a conjecture of what is near at hand, or in great
likelihood shortly to come to pass: such are the signs of the sky taken notice
of Text. Thus the Death of Hophni and Phinehas in one day, were a sign to Eli
of the Accomplishment of all that God had threatened against his family, 1. Sam.
2.34. this shall be a sign unto thee. 2. Monitory; viz. such as carry moral
instruction in them to others, and bid them to beware: thus the Judgments of
God which befall some sinners for Notorious sins, are signs to others,
admonishing them to consider what they came for, and beware of exposing
themselves to the like Judgments by like sins, lest they also suffer as those
did; thus Korah and his accomplices are said to be made a sign in Israel, numb.
26:10, and thus God threatens them to make them a sign and a Proverb; Ezekiel.
14.8.

3. For the Confirmation of things done.

There are Ratifying Signs. Thus a man's setting of his hand to a Deed is called
his Signing of it; and thus Circumcision is called a Sign, it being given for a
Ratification of the Covenant which God made with Abraham, Romans 4.11. but this
last is not so much of our present consideration; it being the former which the
case in hand has a more peculiar Relation unto. Now that we may have a right
discerning of the present times, there are two things which call for our
observation.

1 What times are new upon us?

2 What aspects there is upon those times? Or what are the Symptoms, and what
are Prognostics of the present Times?

1 What times are now upon us? And this may come under either a Physical or
Moral consideration: and both of them call for our observation.

1. In a Physical Consideration, times are to be accounted either as good or
bad, according to the dispensations of Providence in Mercies or Afflictions.
There is indeed for the most part a mixture of these, it is seldom that times
are so good, as that it can be said of a People, as it was once of them, 1
King. 5.4. There is neither Adversary, nor evil Occurrent. Nor is it ordinary,
but that the greatest Affliction are tempered with a mixture of many Mercies,
so that a Judgment is here to be made according to the prevalent degree of
either* and by this Rule, it is now certainly an evil day with this People: it
is beyond question a time of Trouble; and I think I have no need to go about to
reason them into a belief of this Assertion, whereof there are so many sensible
Demonstrations: and doubtless Sense is a competent Judge of sensible evils:
surely seeing and feeling is believing in such a case: there is no persuading
of one who is under the apprehension of acute pains which make him to roar,
that all is well with him: I may then pass over this a a thing beyond doubt.

2. In a moral consideration, and here the great Enquiry will be, whether these
Afflictions under which we are, be merely probationary, or not also paena^?
There is a very great difference between these two, and there are Signs by
which it is to be proved, and according unto which a judgment is to be made: a
mistake here is dangerous, since there are Duties incumbent on us, referring to
our State in these respects: to help us in this regard let us observe,

1. I suppose that the Rule which many take up with, viz. that private or
personal afflictions may be for Trial, but that public Calamities are always
Punishments, or Chastisement for sin, will not hold universally. It may
possibly be true for the most part, (...) it may not be fixed for a certain
unerring Rule. That God has tied himself up to this way of proceeding is hard
to determine, since there may be a reason given for his so dealing in way of
Trial with a People, as well as with a person: Nor am I able to give any other
account of that Remarkable Passage referring to Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.1. After
these things and the establishment of them, Senacherib King of Assyria came and
entered into Judah, and encamped against the Fenced Cities, etc. when was this,
but after Hezekiah had wrought an eminent Reformation, and Settled the Matters
of Religion in the Kingdom? and that in Asa's Reign Recorded, 2 Chronicles 16.
begin. seems to carry the same face upon it; just before, in Chap. 15.17. God
had testified that the heart of Asa was perfect all his days. Out of doubt
there are follies in the best times, but God does not impute them, or chide for
them, or take the advantage of them to enter into Controversies with his
People, Psalm. 130.3, 4.

2. Public Calamities may sometimes be the punishments of some sins that have
been long before committed: God is pleased in his Sovereignty sometimes to
Reserve his Testimony against them till afterward, yea till they that were the
principals in the commitring of them are Dead and Gone; so that a People may be
called to look a great way back, if they would find out what is the sign in
this respect.

There was a famine which came upon Jsrael in David's reign. 2. Sam 24. begin.
but upon inquiry, it was found to be for act of unjust cruelty which Saul had
committed in his reign, and God tells Moses that he will remember the sin of
making the Golden Calf afterward, Exed. 32.34. whence the Jews have a
Proverb, that in every Judgment that after befell them, there was an Ounce of
the Calf: and it is very signal, that if there has been no public Testimony
of Repentance for such Sins as the Public has been involved in, they have
just ground to believe that God is in such Afflictions calling of those Sins to
remembrance, and visiting for them.

3. Afflictions that are Paenal, do usually come upon a Generation, for the
sins of the Generation that is so Afflicted. It is true, and it often so comes
to pass, that their sins may be Filling Sins; what says Christ to the Jews of
his time, Mat. 23.32. Fill up the Measure of your Fathers; but however, God
himself has given us to understand, that if the Children observe their Fathers
sins, and take warning by them, and Repent thoroughly, this shall be prevented,
Ezekiel. 18.14. etc. so that the reason is because they pursue the same refractory
courses, till the Ephah is full: and so these are the sins that nextly pull
down the Anger of God. Now there are these three signs by which we may discern
that the Calamities on a People are not mere Trials, but the effects of Divine
Displeasure, and say, that God who sends them is angry with such a people.

1. If they are guilty of apparent and sensible Apostasy. If a People that walk
close with God, and maintain the life of Religion in their Profession, are
notwithstanding thus oppressed with Troubles, they may take this for a Trial,
and accordingly improve it: but if there be notorious decays and too general
declinings either in the Duties themselves, or in the zealous pursuit and
practice of them, an increase of sin among them, and now Calamities come upon
them, it says that God is angry, and that he is now punishing of them for
these things; for this is according to the threatenings which he has
pronounced: If Ephesus departs from her first love, and neglects her first
works, she thereby endangers the removing of the Candlestick, Rev. 2.3.4.

2. If God has stirred up his Servants to bear witness against these
Apostacy's, and they are not hereby reformed. God is wont to warn a Professing
People before he strikes them; and if his warnings are sultably entertained,
they are to end there, and the compliance of such a people with them, uses to
avert the evil: yea though he has proceeded to severe threatenings against them
yet thus there may a stop be put to the execution of them, Jer. 18.7.8. It is
Gods way to send Messages by his Servants, whom he has made sensible of the
decays under, which a people are fallen, and to stir up an Holy Zeal in them to
bear witness against such backslidings; if these be despised, or not regarded,
and the people are not convinced and awakend and reformed; but they hold on in
their evil courses, and it may be decline yet more after all, and there is no
appearance of any likelihood that it should be otherwise; and now calamities
come upon them, this can be judged to be no other but the confirmation of his
word in the mouth of his Messengers; this therefore is given as a reason of
their miseries, Je. 44.4, 5, 6. Howbeit I sent unto you all my Servants the
Prophets, rising early and sending them, saying, Oh do not this abominable
thing that I hate: But they hearkened not, etc. Wherefore my fury and mine anger
was poured forth. etc.

3. If they were not reclaimed by the higher and easier afflictions which they
felt. God for the most part uses to proceed gradually, and when he has laid
some more gentle strokes upon a sinning people that would not be warned to
prevent them, he hearkens to hear if they will not lay these to heart, and
recieve instruction thereby, so as to be reformed, Jer. 8.6 I hearkened and
heard. But if they are unregardful of these, they do not take the hint of them,
but still turn to their old course, and there follow more grievous and
distressing troubles, these are Judgments and the manifest fruits of his anger;
and this also is consonant to the Rule which himself has given us of his
proceeding in this case, Levit. 26.18. And if ye will not for all this hearken
unto me, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins.

By these Rules a people maw know themselves to be under the impressions of
Divine Anger, and that God is undoubtedly managing a controversy with them: and
they are sure signs.

2. What aspect there is upon these times? There are signs whereby we are to
Judge, not only what the times are at present, but also what is their tendency,
or what prospect we may have for the future of the state of our affairs: and
this is an enquiry which every one is apt enough to be sollicitous and anxious
about, that is under the apprehension of the present distress* who is not ready
to ask, what hopes there are that the storm will blow over; or must we expect
the continuance and increase of our troubles? and to those that make this
enquiry for Good ends, and with an heart desirous to comply with God in his
pleasure, I shall take leave to offer some General Rules which may be improved
to satisfaction in this respect.

1. That all the afflictions which befall a people at any time, are brought
upon them by God. He challenges himself to be the author of this sort of evil,
whenever it befalls any; Am. 3.6. Is there any Evil in the City, and the Lord
has not done it? Isa. 45.7. I form the Light, and create Darkness; I make
Peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things. There is therefore his
Wisdom, Holiness, Righteousness, concerned in it; these are acts of his special
Government accommodated to the Laws of it: he does these things as he is the
Judge of the whole Earth, and cannot but do right.

2. That all mediate or second causes that are used in them, are his
instruments, and altogether at his dispose. In these things God uses a mediate
Providence in which he improves Creatures to afflict a sinful people by; and
although some of these are causes by counsel, have wills of their own, act upon
deliberation in their own minds, have a meaning, and proceed upon reasons
vastly different from, and contrary to Gods design in it; yet they are entirely
under the Management of his Providence, as Rods and Swords; and they can do no
more than fulfill his counsel, nor can they go one step farther such was the
Assyrian, Isai. 10.5.7. Oh Assyrian the Rod of mine Anger, and the staff in
their hand is mine indignation: howbeit he means not so. So that the whole of
these afflictions, and every circumstance in them is ordered and governed by
God.

3. Hence there is nothing signal in them, but what he can alter at pleasure.
There is a rational conjecture which men may raise by observing the posture of
second causes, from whence we may judge of the probabilities of things, and in
these it is that carnal wisdom is wont to terminate: but, Christians have
farther to look; Let the aspect of second Causes be never so promising, or
never so ill boding, from whence we (...) apt either to flatter or frighten
ourselves, yet (...) can turn it about in a moment whenever he (...) meet^, and
he has many secret unknown ways (...) do it in, which cannot possibly be
frustrated if once he be resolved. He can make men to change their most
obstinate resolutions, as he did by Pharaoh, who had made his heart so hardened
against letting Israel go out of his land. He can find men other work to do,
which shall divert them, in the very birth of their malicious designs against
his people, as he did by Saul, to whom, when he was just ready to sieze David,
a Messenger comes in have to tell him, the Philistines had invaded the land. He
can fright men with noises in the Air, fill them with Pan^ick fears, and
put-them to the run, as he did by Benhadads Army that beleagured Samaria, and
would else in a very little time have possessed themselves of it, and there are
many such things as these with him. These Signs therefore, though they are not
to be despised, because they are Providentially threatening of calamity, yet
they ought not to terrify us, because there is a (...) ^or them to be remedied,
by engaging God to take our part; and a people may lay as, Romans 8.31. If God be
for us, who shall be against us.

4. Though God be angry with a sinning people yet he is placable. His anger may
be turned away, and his wrath be appeased toward them though the case be
dangerous yet it is not desperate. He is a God of mercy, and there is
forgiveness with him that he may be feared: he is a God of Compassion, and is
Prone to Pardon, he has relenting bowels, and has exemplified this in
Remarkable instances, to encourage men to hope in him, notwithstanding their
sins have procured his displeasure against them: even an ungodly Ahab, one who
had sold himself to do wickedness, if upon the severe threatenings of God
declared by the Prophet he Humbles himself, puts on sackcloth, and walks
softly shall be so far taken notice of, that the Judgment shall be deferred as
to the Complete execution of it: 1 Kings. 21.29. even an Idolatrous and
flagitious Nineveh, who were arrived at the height of wickedness, if upon the
Preaching of Jonah, they Fast and reform from their debaucheries and
oppressions, shall experience his favor, and he will repent of the evil which
he was ready to bring upon them, Jon. 3 9. and what do these stand upon record
for, but to encourage sinful men, and People to seek Gods mercy in the way of a
true and through Repentance?

5. Hence he offers fair terms, and makes Gracious Promises in case they be
complied withal, God is not only wont to give men warning of what he is about
to do, before he smites them with afflictions, that so they may be cautioned to
avoid them, by taking due and proper courses to that end, but he also
vouchsafes to send them messages when they are under the rod, and feel the
smart of it, in which he invites them to a compliance, with him upon easy and
fair terms; assuring them that if they do accept of them he will put a stop to
his anger, and return again unto them in mercy, and this not once nor twice,
but very often. How many such errands, as these were the Prophets of old sent
upon to the people of Israel* in evil times? yea and when he had so sent them,
God hearkened diligently to hear what entertainment they found as one, that
would have taken great delight in the good success of them, Jer. 8 6.

6. It is of God to work these te^ms in men That a sinful people do not comply
with them is their own fault, and will be charged upon them as the fruit of
their obstinacy, and rebellious frame of heart: but that they do entertain them
is of Gods grace: there is in the depraved nature of man a corrupt principle of
enmity which sets him against any subjection to the will of God, so that if he
leaves men to their own carelessness and stupidity they never will hearken to
him; and this dereliction is Judicial; but if they be made sensible of their
folly, and become willing and obedient, this is the work of his own spirit in
them. It is the complaint which Moses makes over them, Deu.. 29.3, 4. The great
temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs and the miracles; yet the
Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to
hear, unto this day; when therefore God invites sinful men to turn to him, it
concerns them to pray unto him to turn them; so do they, ps. 80 ult. turn us
again oh God of our Salvation. True Repentance, on which these offers of mercy
are made unto men, is a Gift of God; and till he works it in them, all means
will fail of effecting it.

7. Hence, if God do bring them unto this, it is a sure sign for good; it is an
evidence that will never fail those in whom it is truly to be found: other
grounds of hope, which men are ready to nourish their expectations withal, nay,
and very often do prove to be vain presumptions; but this never will. God for
that reason gives a people an heart to turn to him from their Backslidings,
because he has a mind to return to them in mercy. The promise is full which is
in the Word of God made to this Condition* and God would have an afflicted
people to try him, and see whether he will fail of his word or no, Mal. 3.10.
Prove me now herewith says the Lord, and. Let a people be never so much
degenerated, and for it never so sorely distressed; yea let them be all the black
tokens imaginable in the face of Providence, of more troubles like to fall upon
them; let all the whole course of second causes bode never so ill, yet i^ that
people do humble them selves deeply before him, stir up themselves in good
earnest to seek God, and all orders of men among them, do in their places
according to their advantages, set themselves heartily and strenuously to put
away the evil that is gotten among them, and amend all their evil ways and
doings that have not been good; there is no doubt to be made of it, but that
God will save them and do them good: his word is past for it, and he will never
recede from it.

8. And till God does this for them, they abide under the threatening. The
Dealings of God with an Heathen World, are upon his mere Prerogative, for as
they stand in relation to the Old Covenant, so they are Condemned to all
misery, and their very lives are spared upon mere Indulgence, and he measures
out his Mercy or his Wrath to them in this World according as he sees meet:
whereas he treats with a Professing People, who are in visible Covenant with
him, according to the tenor of that Covenant, in which there are Conditionate
Promises and Threatenings. Now what concerns such a People as they are a Body,
or a Company of Professors standing under the Obligations of such a Covenant,
referrs unto this life and the Affairs of it, for they will not be considered
or treated after this life as a people; and the terms do here so run, as we
have the account of them, Isa. 1.19, 20. If ye be waking and obedient, ye shall
eat the good of the Land, but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be Devoured with
the Sword, etc. other Scripture Expressions to the same purpose. As long then
as such a people are not wrought up to a compliance with these terms on which
Salvations are promised, the threatening under which they were must continue
upon them; and therefore whatever God may do for them in his Sovereignty, a
liberty whereof he reserves to himself, and sometimes makes use of it, first to
save them, and then to reform them, and make these his mercies to be mel^ing
means to bring them to Repentance, as Ezekiel. 36.31 then shall you remember your
evil ways, etc. (i. e. when he had returned and settled them in Peace and
Prosperity: yet as to their present state they are a threatened people, and have
all reason to expect the Judgments of God.

9. Hence there are these signs by which we may discern the evil of evil times
to be in a likely way to continue and increase.

1. It iniquity abide and abound among a People after all that God has done.
Not that any times are here to be expected so good, as that there shall be no
Iniquity in them; there will be found some of the worst of men in the best of
times and places; but if the same sins which procured the Judgments for them,
do remain under the same circumstances, or are rather growing into more power
and prevalency, (and indeed Apostasy is seldom at a stay, till such time as
God turns the heart of such a people to himself again, but goes in a gradual
progress) it (...), that there is more wrath against them. It is a truth in
morals as well as in naturals, that if the Cause abide the effect is not like
to cease. The afflictions which (...) such a people, are Divine Testimonies
against such sins as God has warned them of, and threatened them for, and they
call men to repent of them; and if they do not comply with this call, the
Provoeation continues, and God has said it, that he will go on to punish them,
Lev. 26. if such men should say, is there no peace to be expected, his answer
to them would be like his to him, 2 King. 9.22. What peace so long as these
Whoredoms abide? and therefore God pronounces that Woe upon Jerusalem in Jer.
13.27. Woe to thee Jerusalem, will thou not be made clear? when shall it once be?

2 If the affliction that God brings upon them make them worse, instead of
reforming them. Those troubles which God brings a profesing people into, after
such time as warnings and threatenings have been despised by them, do belong
unto the Discipline which he uses with such as are in Covenant with him: they
are therefore called his C^rrections, and Chastenings: the use therefore and
improvement which they ought to make of them is to receive instruction by them:
they are the tokens and witnesses of Gods Holy anger, an,d call upon men to see
his hand, and seek his reconciled savor; and in this way only can they improve
them either to Gods acceptance, or their own advantage: If then instead of this
they grow more obstinate, and hold their iniquities the faster, and that under
the very hand of God, and his awful Judgments that are upon them, when he said
surely they will receive instruction, and presumed that in their affliction
they would seek him early; what is this but to stout it out against God; and
that must needs be a very ill boding Symptom. This is the fearful brand which
God him self sets upon Ahaz. 2. Chron. 28.22. and in the time of his distress
did he yet trespass more against the Lord; this is that King Ahaz. God is very
angry when it is so, and declares against it, as that which highly provokes
him, he therefore so articleth against them in Jer. 2.30. In vain have I
smitten your Children, they received no Correction; and it provokes him to give
over Correcting them, and take a more awful course with them; to lay by the
rod, and to take the Sword into his hand: to turn castigatory punishments into
vindictive; hence that Isa. 1.5. why will you be smitten any more? ye will
revolt more and more, q. d. you grow worse and worse under all the disciplicary
means that are used with you, it is therefore high time to give them over, and
take another way; there is nothing now but desolation that remains. All the
endeavors that are used for Reformation prove unsuccessful. It is sometimes
so, that there is Balm in Gilead, and a Physician there, and vet there is no
good done for it. There are those among a professing People who do Zealously
set themselves against the sins of the times and places they live in, and would
fain be instrumental, if it might be, of promoting a sincere and through
Reformation among their People, but all their most prudent and Vigilant
endeavors fail and are lost; the same iniquities abide, and get head in the
midst of them; Synods may be solmenly convened, provoking evils diligently
sought out, suitable remedies faithfully prescribed, wholesome Laws prudently
enacted, Churches be called upon to, and engaged in the renewal of the
Covenant, and after all this, nothing may be amended; or if the wound be a
little skinned over for a while, it breaks out again presently, and more
fearfully. Thus it was with the Kingdom of Judah in the times of Joash, as is
at fully recorded in 2 Chr 24. yea, and how much better was it in the times of
that excellent Josiah? we may read the complaint that God makes against them,
in the Book of Zephaniah, and that threatening denounced, Chap. 1.12, 13. and
what indeed is there in such a case to be expected, but that God should cause
his Wrath to fall upon such a people.

4. If Rulers are left to do things which are greatly provoking unto God,
Delirant Reges, plectuntur Activi. The Error of Rulers in their places are wont
to have awful influence upon the Condition of that people over whom they are
set; and the gross mistakes of these will make all to suffer: for they are
public persons, and the Representatives of their People. If Saul in his zeal
thinks that the Gibeonites ought to be cut off, because they were among the
number of the once devoted people; and we know that the former Judges had erred
in their suffering of them, and for that reason had been for so many ages
afflicted; and hereupon he attempts; a three years famine is procured to the
Land by it; 2 Samuel 21. begin. yea good and wise men have been sometimes left by
God when he has been angry with a people, hereby to procure more Judgments for
them, so it was in David's case, 2 Samuel 24.1. the Anger of the Lord was kindled
against Israel and he moved David to say, Go Number the People.

5 If a Spirit of Division be gotten amongst a people. If when the hand of God
is heavy upon them, they, instead of joining heart and hand in seeking after a
redress of those things, which God is provoked by* do fall into dissentions,
and there are divided judgments and divided hearts among them; so that they
study and endeavor to thwart one the other, and to impede each other in all
attempts for good; whereupon nothing can go forward, but all things are put
under an unavoidable check; this carries a very ill Omen in it; it is in it
self a great punishment, and tending to many mischievous events that will
naturally arise from it. Some good Interpreters so understand that in, Hos.
10.2. Their heart is divided; now shall they be found faulty. It is indeed a
terrible thing, for a people to be left to such a frame, that when providence
call for unanimous endeavors in averting the wrath of God and their safety
mainly depends on their unity, they expose themselves to become a prey, by
their divisions, Isa. 9.21.

6. If Gods faithful messengers are despised, and their advise is trampled
upon. It has been an usual thing for God to stir up his servants in the
Ministry, to bear their testimony at such times, to declare against the sins
which are Prevailing, and by which Gods displeasure has bin stirred up; and to
give counsels and warnings to His People, both public and private; and it
belongs to their office so to do, and Gods warrant will bear them out in it:
but if they be scorned, and their counsels are disregarded, and they themselves
are censured as those that meddle with that which they have nothing to do
withal; it is an ill sign. Such a people shall know before God has done that
they had Prophets. Asa is angry and enraged at the Prophet who brought him a
message from God, but it occasioned him more trouble, 2 Chro. 16. Amaziah bids
the Prophet who came to reprove him for his Idolatry, to meddle with own
business, and not to talk to him; but what follows? 2. Chron. 25.16. I know,
that God has determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have
not hearkened unto my counsel. Elijah is counted by Ahab to be the troubler of
Israel, because he bore a faithful Testimony against Isreal's sins: and Jeremiah
is voted to be a Man of death, for his serious warnings and admonitions, but
these were fearful presages of growing calamities, and were accordingly
followed therewithal. God will be deeply provoked at such things, and
answerable fruits ate to be expected. These are some of those Rules that are to
be made use of in judging of the Times: and the application belongs to every
one to make according as they are concerned.

FINIS

