JOHANNES in Eremo. Memoirs, Relating to the LIVES, OF THE Ever-MEMORABLE,

Mr. JOHN COTTON, Who Dyed, 23. d. 10. m. 1652.

Mr. JOHN NORTON, Who Dyed, 5. d. 2. m. 1663.

Mr. JOHN WILSON, Who Dyed, 7. d. 6. m. 1667.

Mr. JOHN DAVENPORT, Who Dyed, 15. d. ^. ^. 1670.

Reverend and Renowned Ministers of the Gospel, All, in the more Immediate
Service of One Church, in Boston; AND Mr. THOMAS HOOKER, Who Dyed, 7. d. 5. m.
1647.

Pastor of the Church at Hartford; New England.

Written, by COTTON MATHER.

Forte nimis Videor Lauds Cantare. MEORUM;
Forte nimis cineres Videor celebrare repostos;
Non it a me Facilem Sine Vero Credit! --
Printed for and Sold by Michael Perry, at his Shop, under the West End of the
Townhouse. 1695.

Faithfully Collected,

From the Information of many Surviving Friends to the Deceased, Persons of
Unquestionable Veracity.

From the Writings of the Deceased, both Published and Manuscript; and several
Books heretofore Printed, relating to the Affayrs of New England. And,

(For Three of the Lives, but Especially Two of them, namely Mr. Wilsons and
Mr. Hookers, in many material Points of History,) From the Papers of my
Reverend and Honored Friend, Mr. William Hubbard, whose Laudadable Industry in
Gathering and Preserving the Memorables of this Country, deserves Thanks, not
from Me alone, whom his Great Courtesy (...) favored with the Communications
thereof, but also from the whole Obliged People.

THE Reader is Requested, that he would Please, with his Pen to Correct the
following, (besides diverse Literal) Errors of the Press.

In Cottons Life. Page 23. l. 22. r. of His Church. p. 56 l. 2. Blot out, of.
p. 70. l. 6. r. Dives.

In Nortons Life. Page 3. l. 10. Blot out, a. p. 15. l. 18. r. Churches.

In Wilsons Life. Page 20. l. 11. r. Hands.

In Davenports Life. Page 17. l. 24. r. So very.

But especially, that in Page 23. l. Last. Where you are to Read, Detract NOT.

To the READER.
THAT little part of the Earth which this Age has known by the Name of
New England, has been an object of very signal both Frowns and Favors of
Heaven. Besides those Stars of the first Magnitude, which did sometimes Shine
and at last Set, in this Horizon, there have been several men of Renown, who
were preparing and fully resolved to Transport themselves hither, had not the
Lord seen Us Unworthy of more such Mercies. It is still fresh in the memory of
many yet Living, that that great man Dr. John Owen, had given order for his
passage in a Vessel bound for Boston; being invited to Succeed the other Famous
John's, who had been Burning and Shining Lights in that which was the first
Candlestick, set up in this Populous Town; but a special Providence diverted
him. Long before that, Dr. Ames (whose Family and whose Library New England has
had) was upon the Wing, for this American Desert: but-God then took him to the
Heavenly Canaan. Whether he left his fellow upon Earth I know not: such
acuteness of Judgment, and affectionate Zeal, as he Excelled in, seldom does
meet together in the same Person. I have often thought of Mr. Paul Bayne, his
farewell words to Dr. Ames when going for Holland; Mr. Bayne perceiving him to
be a man of Extraordinary parts, Beware (said he) of a Strong Head, and a Cold
Heart. It is rare for a Scholastical Wit, to be joined with an Heart warm in
Religion: But in him it was so. He has sometimes said, that he could be willing
to walk Twelve Miles on his Feet, on condition he might have an Opportunity to
Preach a Sermon: And he seldom did Preach a Sermon without Tears. When he lay
on his Deathbed, he had such Tastes of the First Fruits of Glory, as that a
Learned Physician (who was a Papist) wondering, said, Number Protestants sic
solent mori: Is the Latter End of Protestants like this man's? But although some
Excellent Persons, have, by a Divine hand been kept from coming into these Ends
of the Earth, yet there have been others, who whilst Living made this Land
(which before their Arrival was an Hell of Darkness) to be a place full of
Light and Glory: amonst whom the Champions, whose Lives are here described, are
worthy to be reckoned as those that have attained to the First Three.

There are many who have (and some to good purpose) Endeavored to Collect the
Memorable Passages that have occurred in the Lives of Eminent men, by means
whereof Posterity has had the knowledge of them. Hierom of old, wrote De Viris
illustribus: The like has been done by Gennadius, Epiphanius, Isidore,
Prochorus, and other Ancient Authors. Of Later Times, Schopfius, his Academia
Christi; Meurs^us, his Athenae Batavae; Verheiden, his Elogia Theologorum,
Melchior Adams, Lives of Modern Divines, have preserved the Memories of some
that did worthily, and were in their day Famous. There are two Learned men who
have very lately engaged in a Service of this nature, Viz. Paulus Freherus, who
has Published two Volumns in Folio, with the Title of, Theatrum virorum
Eruditione clarorum, ad haec usque Tempora. He proceeds as far as the year
1680. The other is Henningus Witten, who has Written, Memoriae Theologorum
nostri seculi. It is a Trite (yet a true) Assertion, that Historical Studies
are both Profitable and Pleasant. And of all Historical Narratives, those which
give a Faithful account of the Lives of Eminent Saints, must needs be the most
Edifying. The greatest part of the Sacred Writings are Historical; and a
Considerable part of them is taken up in relating the Actions, Speeches,
Exemplary Lives, and Deaths, of such as had been choice Instruments in the Hand
of the Lord, to promote His Glory in the World. No doubt but that the
Commemoration of the Remarkable Providence of God toward His Servants, will
be some part of their Work in Heaven for ever, that so He may have Eternal
Praises for the Wonders of His Grace in Christ toward them. It must needs
therefore be in it self, a thing pleasing to God, and a special act of
Obedience to the Fifth Commandment, to Endeavor the Preservation of the Names
and Honor of them, who have been Fathers in Israel. On which account, I caneot
but Rejoice in what is here done. Although New England has been favored with
many Faithful and Eminent Ministers of God, there are only Three of them all,
whose Lives have been as yet Published, Viz Mr. Cotton, whose Life was Written
by his Immediato Successor Mr. Norton: and my Father Mather, whose was done by
another Hand, and is Republished in Mr. Sam. Clark's last Volumn: and Mr.
Eliot, whose was done by the same Hand, which did these, and has been several
Times Reprinted in London. Here the Reader has presented to him Five of them
who were amongst the chief of the Fathers, in the Churches of New England. The
same Hand has done the like Office of Love and Duty, for many others who were
the Worthies of New England, not only in the Churches, but in the Civil State,
whom the Lord Christ saw meet to use as instruments in Planting the Heavens and
Laying the Foundation of the Earth, in this New World. If These find a Candid
Acceptance, Those may possibly see the Light in (...).

Whether what is herewith Emitted and Written by my Son, be as to the Manner of
it, Well performed, I have nothing to say, but shall leave it unto others to
judge as they shall see cause; only as to the Matter of the History, I am
ascertained that things are truly related. For although I had Little of
personal acquaintance with Mr. Cotton, being a Child not above Thirteen years
old when he Dyed, I shall never forget the last Sermon which he Preached at
Cambridge, and his particular Application to the Scholars there, amongst whom I
was then a Student newly admitted; and my Relation to his Family since, has
given me an Opportunity to know many observable things concerning him. Both
Bostons have reason to Honor his Memory; And New England-Boston most of all,
which owes its Name and being to him more than to any one Person in the World:
He might say of Boston, much what as Augustus said of Rome, Lateritiam reperi,
mar^^oream r^liqui: He found it Little better than a Wood or Wilderness, but
^^ft it a Famous Town with Two Churches in it. I remember, Dr. L^ghtfoot in
Honor to his Patron Sir Roland Cotton, called one of his Sons, Cotton: It does
not repent me, that I gave my Eldest Son, that name in Honor to his
GrandFather; And the Lord Grant that both of us may be Followers of him, as he
followed Christ.

As for the other three Worthies who have taught the Word of God in this Place,
they had their peculiar Excellencies.

Mr. Wilson (like John the Apostle) did Excel in Love: and he was also strong
in Faith. In the Time of the Pequod-War, he did not only hope, but had
assurance, that God would make the English Victorious. He declared that he was,
as certain of it, as if he had with his Eyes seen the Victories obtained* which
came to pass according to his Faith. I well remember, that I heard him once
say, that when one of his Daughters was Sick, and given up as Dead, past
recovery, he desired Mr. Cotton to Pray with that Child, and (said he) Whilst
Mr. Cotton was Praying I was sure that Child should not then Die but Live. That
Daughter did Live to be the Mother of many Children; Two of which are now
Useful Ministers of Christ: and She is still Liveing, a Pious Widow, another
Anna, Serving God Day and Night. When Mr. Norton was called from the Church of
Ipswich to Boston, Mr. Nathanael Rogers (that Excellent man who was Son to the
Famous Mr. Rogers of Dedham in Essex, and Pastor of the Church of Ipswich in N.
E.) opposed Mr. Nortons removal from Ipswich. Some saying, that Mr. Wilson
would by his Argument or Rhetoric or both, get Mr. Norton from them at last;
Mr. Rogers replied, That He was afraid of his Faith, more than his Arguments.
Sometimes he was transported with a Prophetical Afflatus, of which there were
mavelous Instances. His Conversation was both pleasant and profitable; in
that he could relate many Memorable Providence, which he himself had the
certain knowledge of. Whilst I am Writing this, there comes to my mind one
very Pleasant and yet very Serious Story, which he told me* and I do not
Remember that ever I met with it ^any where but from him. It was this. There
was one Mr. Snape, a Puritan Minister, who was by the Bishops, cast into Prison
for his Nonconformity; when his Money was spent, the Jailour was unkind to
him: but one day as Mr. Snape^ was on his knees at Prayer, the Window of his
Chamber being open, he perceived something was thrown into his Chamber, but
resolved he would finish his Work with God, before he would divert to see what
it was. When he arose from his knees, he saw a Purse on the Chamber floor,
which was full of Gold, by which he could make his Keeper better natured than
he had been. Many such passages, could that good man relate.

Mr. Norton, was one whose Memory I must acknowledge, I have peculiar cause to
Love and Honor. I was his Pupil several years. He had a very Scholastical
Genius. In the Doctrine of Grace, he was exceeding clear; indeed another
Austin. He Loved and Admired Dr. Twiss, more than any man that this Age has
produced. He has sometimes said to me, Doctor Twiss is Omni Exceptione Major.
He was much in Prayer: He would very often spend whole Days in Prayer with
Fasting before the Lord alone in his Study. He kept a strict daily Watch over
his own heart. He was an hard Student. He took notice in a private Diary, how
he spent his Time every Day: If he found himself not so much inclined to
diligence and study, as at other Times, he would reflect on his heart and
ways, lest happily some unobserved sin should provoke the Lord to give him up
(...) a Slothful Listless frame of Spirit. In his Diary, he would sometimes
have these words, Leve desiderium ad studendum: forsan ex peccato admiss^^. I
bless the Lord that ever I knew Mr. Norton, and that I know so much of him as I
did.

As for Mr. Davenport, I have in a Preface to his Sermons on the Canticles,
which are Transcribed for the Press, and now at London, given what accounted
could then obtain concerning the Remarkable passages of his Life. I several
Times desired him to imitate Ju^ius and some others, who had Written their own
Lives. He told me, he did intend it: but I could not find any thing of that
nature among his Maniscr^pts, when many years ^agoe, I had an Occasion to seek
after it. He was a Princely Preacher. I have heard some say, who knew him in
his Younger years, that he was then very Fervent and Vehement as to the manner
of his delivery: but in his Later Times, he did very much imitate Mr. Cotton,
whom in the Gravity of his Countenance, he did somewhat resemble. Sic ille
monus, sic ora ferebat.

The Reader will find many observable things in what is here related concerning
Mr. Hooker. Yet, great Pity it is that no more can be Collected of the
Memorables relating to so Good and so Great a man as he was; then whom
Connecticut never did, and perhaps never will, see a greater Person. Mr. Cotton
in his Preface to Mr. Nortons Answer to Apollonius, says of Mr. Hooker,
Dominatur in Concionibus. Dr. Ames used to say, He never knew his Equal: There
was a great Intimacy between them two. I remember, my Father told me, that Mr.
Hooker, was the Author of that large Preface which is before Dr. Ames, his
Fresh Suit against Ceremonies. He would sometimes say, that next to Converting
Grace, he Blessed God for his acquaintance with the Principles and Writings of
that Learned man, Mr. Alexander Richardson. It was a Black day to New England
when that Great Light was removed.

There are some who will not be pleased that any notice is taken of the hard
measure which these Excellent men had from those Persecuting Prelates, who were
willing to have the World rid of them. But it is impossible to Write the
History of New England, and of the Lives of them who were the chief in it, and
yet be wholly silent in that matter. That Eminent Person, Dr. Tillotson (the
Late Arch Bishop of Canterbury) did, not above Four years ago, sometimes
Express to Me his resentments of the injury which had been done to the first
Planters of New England, and his Great dislike of Arch Bishop Lauds Spirit
toward them. And (...) my knowledge, there are Bishops at this day, of the
same Christian Temper and Moderation with that Great and Good man, lately dead.
Had the Sees in England fourscore years ago been filled with such Arch Bishops
and Bishops as those which K. William (whom God Grant long to Live and to
Reign) has preferred to Episcopal Dignity, there had never been a New England.
It was therefore necessary that it should be otherwise then, than at this day,
that so the Gospel in the Power and Purity of it might come into these dark
Corners of the Earth, and that here might be seen a Specimen of the New Heavens
and a New Earth wherein Dwells Righteousness, which shall e're long be seen all
the World over, and which, According to His Promise we Look for.

Boston, New England, May. 16 1695. INCREASE MATHER.

THE INTRODUCTION.
. 1. WHEN the God of Heaven had carried a Nation into a Wilderness, upon the
Designs of a Glorious REFORMATION, He there gave them a Singular Conduct of His
Presence and Spirit, in a certain Pillar, which by Day appeared as a Cloud, and
by Night as a Fire, before them; and the Report of the Respect paid by the
Israelites unto this Pillar, became so Noised among the Gentiles, that the
Pagan Poets derided them on this Account,

Nil praeter Nubes et caeli Lumen adorant,

[Which is, I suppose, the True Reading of that Famous Verse in Juvenal: and I
thus Translate it,]

Only the Clouds and Fires of Heaven they do Worship at all Times.

But I must now Observe unto my Reader, That more than a Score of years after
the Beginning of the Age which is now expiring, our Lord Jesus Christ, With a
Thousand Wonders of His Providence, carried into an American Wilderness, a
People, Persecuted for their Desire, to See, and Seek a REFORMATION of the
Church ACCORDING TO THE SCRIPTURE: Of which Matter, it cannot give a Briefer,
and yet Fuller, History, than by Reciting the Memorable Words, of that Great
Man, Dr. JOHN OWEN, Who, in his Golden Book of, Communion with God, thus
Expresses it; They who hold Communion with the Lord Jesus Christ, will Admit
Nothing, Practice Nothing, in the Worship of God, but what they have His
Warrant for; Unless it comes in His Name, With a, Thus says the Lord Jesus,
they will not Hear an Angel from Heaven: They know, the Apostles themselves
were to teach the Saints, only What He Commanded them: And You know, How many
in this Very Nation, in the Days not long since passed, Yea, how many
Thousands, Left their Native Soil, and went into a Vast and howling Wilderness,
in the uttermost parts of the World, to keep their Souls Undefiled, and Chaste
unto their dear Lord Jesus, as to This of His Worship and Institutions. Now
though the Reformed Church, thus Fled into the Wilderness, Enjoyed not the
Miraculous Pillar Vouchsafed unto the Erratic Church, of Israel for about Forty
years together; Yet, for that Number of years, We Enjoyed many a Person, in
whom the Good Spirit of God, gave a Conduct unto us, and Mercifully dispensed,
th^se Directing, Defending, Refreshing Influences, which were as necessary for
us, as any that the Celebrated Pillar of Cloud, and Fire, could have afforded.
The Great and Good Shepherd of the Church, favored His distressed Flocks in
the Wilderness, with many Pastors, that were Learned, Prudent, and Holy, beyond
the Common Rates, and Men after His own Heart: and it would be an Ingratitude
many ways Pernicious, if the Churches of New England, should not, like those
of the Primitive Times, have their Diptychs, Wherein the Memory of those
Eminent CONFESSORS, may be Recorded and Preserved.

. 2. Four or Five of those Eminent Persons, are now to have their LIVES,
Described unto us, and Offered unto the Contemplation and Imitation, especially
of the Generation which are now Rising up, After the Death of COTTON, and of
the Elders that Outlived him, and had seen all the Great Works of the Lord,
which He did for New England. As for the Occasion of this Offer, the Reader may
know, That, With a Design thereby to Preserve the True Principles, the Good
Practices, and Famous Occurrences, Temptations and Salvations, of the Churches
in my Country, from Corruption, and Oblivion; and Assist the Interests of
Religion in the Churches abroad, with the Experiences of a Renowned Plantation,
Settled in a NEW WORLD, Purely for the sake of the most Reformed Religion; I
set my self to Write the Church History of these American Colonies. In the
Writing of this Church History, the Biography of several Persons, that were
Stars of the First Magnitude in our Heavens, was no little part of my Labor;
Wherein, my Memoirs of Mr. John Wilson happening to be seen by a Gentleman
related unto him, he Importuned me, that I would Permit the Publication of
those Memoirs apart themselves. That I might somewhat accommodate my self unto
this Importunity, I did consent that Mr. Wilson, should first Go out of my
Church History, provided he might go accompanied with no Less than Three other
JOHN'S, who were all of them, Successively Ministers of that One Church, Whereof
He was the First Pastor; all of them, Lovely in their Lives, and in the Place
of their Death, as well as in their Better Place after their Death, not
Divided; and, thought I, by my first sending abroad this Dove, I shall
understand, Whether the Flood of Disorders upon the World, be so Circumstanced,
That the rest of my Composure, Whereof These are but some Rescinded Sheets, may
have Encouragements also to come Abroad. Four of my Worthy Friends accordingly,
whose Names, I hope, are in the Book of Life, took the charge of these Four
Lives, and send forth a Little Book, embalming the Names, of Just men, Worthy
to be had in Everlasting Remembrance. But though this were the Occasion of this
Offer, yet here was not all the Intention of it: For I saw a Fearful
Degeneracy, Creeping, I cannot say, but Rushing, in upon these Churches; I saw
to multiply continually, our Dangers, of our Loosing no small Points in our
First Faith, as well as our First Love, and of our Giving up the Essentials of
that Church Order, which was the very END of these Colonies; I saw, a Visible
Shrink in all Orders of Men among us, from that Greatness, and that Goodness,
which was in the First Grain, that our God brought from Three Sifted Kingdoms,
into this Land, when it was a Land not Sown; That while the Papists in Europe
have grown better of late years, by the Growth of Jansenism among them, while
the Protestants have Prodigiously Waxed Worse, for a Revolt unto Pelagianism,
and Socinianism, or what is Half way to it, has not been more Surprising to me,
than to see that in America, while those parts which were at first Peopled by
the Refuse of the English Nation, do sensibly amend in the Regards of Sobriety
and Education, those parts which were Planted with a more Noble Vine, do so
fast give a Prospect of affording only the Degenerate Plants of a Strange Vine.
What should be done, for the Stop, the Turn, of this Degeneracy? It is Reported
of the Scythians, who were, doubtless, the Ancestors of the Indians first
Inhabiting these Regions, That in Battles, when they came to stand upon the
Graves of their Dead Fathers, they would there Stand, Immovable, till they
Died upon the Spot: And, thought I, Why may not such a Method now Effectually
Engage the English in these Regions, to Stand Fast in their Faith and their
Order, and in the Power of Godliness? I Will show them, the Graves of their Dead
Fathers; and if any of them do Retreat, unto a Contempt or Neglect of Learning,
or unto the Errors of Another Gospel, or unto the Superstitions of
Will Worship, or unto a Worldly, a Selfish, a Little Conversation, they shall
undergo the Irresistible Rebukes of their Progenitors, here fetched from the
Dead, for their Admonition: and I Will therewithal advertise my NEW-ENGLANDERS,
That if a Grand child of a Moses become an Idolater, he shall, [as the Jews
Remark upon Judge. 18. 30 be destroyed, as if not a Moses, but a Menasseh, had
been his Father. Besides, Plus Vivitur Exemplis quam Praeceptis!

. 3. Good Men in the CHURCH of ENGLAND, I hope, will not be Offended at it, if
the Unreasonable Impositions, and Intolerable Persecutions, of certain
Little-Soul'd Caeremony-Mongers, which drove these Worthy Men out of their
Native Country, into the horrid Thickets of America, be in their Lives
Complained, and Resented. For, Distinguishing between a ROMANIZING Faction in
the CHURCH of ENGLAND, and the TRUE PROTESTANT REFORMING CHURCH of ENGLAND,
(Things as different as a JEWEL, from an HEYLIN, or a GRINDAL, from a LAUD!)
the First Planters of New England, at their first Coming over, did in a Public
and a Printed Address, call the Church of England, Their Dear Mother, desiring
their Friends therein, To Recommend them unto the Mercies of God, in their
Constant Prayers, as a Church now Springing out of their own Bowels: Nor did
they think, that it was their Mother who Turned them out of Doors, but some of
their Angry Brethren, abusing the Name of their Mother, who so harshly treated
them. As for the ROMANIZING Faction in the CHURCH of ENGLAND, Or, that Party,
who Resolving (altogether Contrary to the Desire of the most Eminent Persons,
by whom the Common Prayer was made English) that the Reformation should never
proceed one ^ot further than the First Essay of it, in the former Century, did
make certain Unscriptural Canons, whereby all that could not Approve,
Subscribe, and Practice, a multitude of* (by themselves Confessed Purely
Humane) Inventions in the Worship of God, were Accursed, and Ips^ Facto
Excommunicate; and by the Ill obtained Aid of Bitter Laws to back these
Canons, did by Fines and Gaols and Innumerable Violences, contrary to the very
Magna Charta of the Nation, Ruin Many Thousands of the Soberest People in the
Kingdom; and who continually made as many Shibboleths as they could, for the
Discovering and the Extinguishing of all Real Godliness, and never gave over
Prosecuting, their Tripartite Plot, of Arminianism, and a Conciliation with the
Patriarch of the West, and Arbitrary Government in the State, until at last
they threw all into the Lamentable Confusions of a Civil War; The Churches of
New England say, Come not into their Secret, O my Soul. We dare not be Guilty
of the Schism, which we charge upon that, Party in the Church of ENGLAND: and
if any Faction of men, will Require the Assent and Consent of other men, to a
vast Number of Disputable, and Uninstituted Things, and, it may be, a
Mathematical Falsehood, among the first of them, and utterly Renounce all
Christian Communion with all that shall not give that Assent and Consent, We
Look upon those to be SEPARATISTS; We dare not be so Narrow*Spirited: The
Churches of New England profess to make only the Substantials of the Christian
Religion to be the Terms of our Sacred Fellowship: We dare make no Difference
between a Presbyterian, a Congregational, an Episcopalian, and an Antipaedo
^aptist, where their Visible Piety, makes it probable, that the Lord Jesus
Christ has Received them. And such Reverend Names, as HALL, and KIDDER, most
Worthy Bishops now adorning the English Church, as well as the Names of such
Reverend and Excellent Persons among the Dissenters, as BATES, ANNESLY, HOW,
MEAD, and ALSOP, (with many Others) are, on that Score, together Precious unto
this part of the Christian- America. On the other side; The TRUE PROTESTANT
REFORMING Church of ENGLAND, contains the whole Body of the Faithful, Scattered
through the English Dominions, though of Different Persuasions about some
Rites, and Modes, and Lesser points of Religion: And All the Friends of the
last Reformation, Who, whether they think there needs a Further Progress in
that Work or no, yet are Willing to make the WORD OF GOD, the Rule of their
Serving Him, do come under this Denomination. Those Divines, who, with
Archbishop Usher in the Head of them, did, more than Fifty years ago, give in
a Paper touching the Innovations of Doctrine and of Discipline in the Church of
England, and make near Forty Exceptions against Things in the Liturgy, were
still as Good Members of that Church, as they that Hated to be Reformed; and
the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, which made the Catechisms now used
among us, were as genuine Sons of the Church after they became Non-Conformists,
as while they Lived in Conformity, which every one of them, Except Eight or
Nine, did, when they first came together. One who is at this Day a Right
Reverend BISHOP, has in his Irenicum well Expressed, the Sense, which I
believe, the biggest party of Christians in the Realm, Three to One, have of
those matters, which have been, The Apples of Strife, among us: That Christ,
who came to take away the Insupportable Yoke of the Jewish Ceremonies,
certainly did never intend to Gall the Necks of the Disciples with another
instead of it; and it would be Strange, the Church would Require more than
Christ Himself did, and make more Terms of Communion, than our Savior did of
Disciple-ship. The Grand Commission the Apostles were sent out with, was only
to Teach, What Christ had Commanded them; not the Least Intimation of any
Power, given them to Impose or Require any Thing, beyond what He Himself had
spoken to them, or they were directed to, by the Immediate Guidance of the
Spirit of God. -- And, [Speaking of the Reason, why our first Compilers of the
Common Prayer, took in so much of the Papish Service] Certainly, those Holy
men, who did seek by any Means, to Draw in others, at such a Distance from
their Principles, as the Papists were, did never intend, by what they did for
that End, to Exclude any truly Tender Consciences, from their Communion; That
which they laid as a Bait for them, was never intended by Them as an Hook for
those of our own Profession. And if this be the TRUE, Church of ENGLAND, give
me leave to say, The Churches of New England, are no Inconsiderable part of it;
and that accordingly we may have a Room in it, I may safely, in the Name of
them all, offer, (as did the Renowned Author of our Martyr books, when they
demanded Subscription from him,) To Subscribe the New Testament.

Upon the whole then; If any be displeased at my Report of the Unjust
Impositions and Persecutions, which drove into America, as Good Christians, and
Protestants, as any that were Left behind them, it will not be, the TRUE Church
of ENGLAND; For why should That be called, The Church of England, which has
caused Thousands of as Real and Thorough Christians, as any upon Earth, to say,
It is better to dwell in the Wilderness, than with such an Contentious and
Angry One! That Church of ENGLAND, which alone is Worthy to be called So, will
bewayl, as, I know, diverse Excellent Persons, now it the Episcopal See's have
done, the Injuries offered unto our Puritan Fathers.

. 4. Let my Reader, thus Prepared, now Entertain himself, as far as he pleases,
with our Four JOHN'S, to whose Lives, I have, upon the Counsil and Command of an
Ever-Honoured Parent, Appendiced the Life of a Famous THOMAS, in this
Publication: JOHN'S, with whom among the Five or Six Hundred Noted Persons of
that Name, Celebrated by One Historian, I find not many that were Worthy to be
Compared; JOHN'S, fuller of Light and Grace and the Good Spirit, than all those
Four or Five and Twenty of that Name, who have Sat in the Chair that Pretends
to Infallibility. And, if he pleases, Let him see that Old Little Observations
Confirmed, that, as the Name Henry, has been Happy in Kings, Elizabeth, in
Queens, Edward, in Lawyers, William, in Physicians, Francis, in Scholars,
Robert, in Soldiers and Statesmen, So, JOHN, has been happy in Divines. But
let him Consider these Lives, as tendered unto the Public, upon an Account no
less, than that of keeping Alive, as far as this poor Essay may Contribute
thereunto, the Interests of Dying Religion in our Churches. I Remember a
Learned man's Conjecture, That [in 1 Timothy 3. 15.] it is Timothy, and not, The
Church, which is called, The Pillar and Ground of Faith: Such Able, Holy, and
Faithful Ministers, as Timothy, are the Great Proclamers, and Preservers of
Truth, for the Church of God: Such were these Famous JOHN'S, while they Lived,
and now they are Dead, I have done my Endeavor that they may still be Such,
unto the Churches, to whom I owe my All. I Will say but This. The Last words of
the most Renowned Pr^ebend of Canterbury, Dr. Peter du Moulin, who dyed, a very
Old Man, about Eleven years ago, were, Since Calvinism is Cried down [Actum est
de Religione Christi apud Anglos] Christianity is in Danger to be last in the
English Nation. Alluding to what he said, about his JOHN CALVIN, I will take
Leave to say with respect unto our JOHN COTTON, and the rest that here
accompany him, Christianity will be Lost among us, if their Faith and Zeal,
must all be Buried with them: Which, God Forbid! As there would be an hazard,
that the Early and Better Times of New England, would have the True Story
thereof, within a While, as Irrecoverably Lost, as the Story of the World,
relating to those Times, which Varro Distinguished unto Incognit, and Fabulous,
preceding the Historical, and we should Shortly have as Wretched Narratives of
the first Persons and Actions in this Land, as Justin gives of the Jews, when
he makes Moses the Son of their Joseph, and the Sixth of their Kings, or when
he makes Them Expelled from Egypt, because the Gods would not otherwise allay a
Plague that Raged there, or such as are given by Pliny, when he makes Moses a
Magician, or Strabo, that makes him an Egyptian Priest; if no speedy Care be
taken to preserve the Memorables of our First* Settlement; So, I wish, the
Laudable Principles and Practices of that First Settlement, may be kept from
utterly being Lost in our Apostasies, by the Care which is now taken thus to
preserve what was Memorable, of the Men that have delivered them down unto us.

. 5. Finally; When the Apostles had set before Christians, the Saints, which
were a Cloud of Witnesses, by Imitating of whose Exemplary Behavior we might
Enter into Rest, he concludes with a Looking unto Jesus; or, according to the
Emphasis of the Original, A Looking off (from them) unto Jesus, as the
Incomparably most perfect of all. So, Let my Reader do, when, all that was
Imitable, in the Lives of these Worthy Men, has had his Contemplation and
Admiration; They all yet had their Defects, and therefore, Look off unto Jesus;
Following Them no farther than they Followed Him. It is a notable Passage, [in
Luke 7. 28.] which we mis-translate; The Least in the Kingdom of God, is
Greater than JOHN. In the Greek, What we Translate, The Least, is, He that is
Lesser; that is, He that is Younger. [Minor, still has been the same with,
Junior.] Our Lord means Himself, who was Lesser, that is, Younger, than JOHN,
His Forerunner; but, Greater than He! Truly, whatever was Excellent in these
our JOHN'S, I would Pray, that the Minds of all that see it, may be Raised still
to Think, Our Precious Lord JESUS CHRIST, is Greater than these JOHN'S: All
their Excellencies, are in Him Transcendently, Infinitely; as they were from
Him Derived. High Thoughts of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, Provoked by Reading the
Descriptions, of these His Excellent Servants, that had in them a Little of
Him, and were no farther Excellent than as they had so, will make me an
abundant Recompense, for all the Difficulties, and all the Temptations, with
which my Writing is attended. And as, it quickens the Joys of my Hastening
Death, when I^ have through Grace, a Prospect of being then in that State,
whereto the Spirits of these Just Men made Perfect, are all of them Gathered,
So I would have This now to Out do all those Joys, To be with JESUS CHRIST,
That Surely, is by far the best of all.

Cotton Mather.

Monumenta Sepulchralia Justis non saciunt, nam Dict a eorum Sunt Memoriae
Eorum. Sentent. Judaic. in Bereschit Rabba.
ADVERTISEMENT.
INasmuch as the Following LIVES, are Pertaining and Prodromous to the
Church History of New England, about which the Author hereof, has in the midst
of his many other Studies, for diverse Months, at Subsecive Hours, been
Laboring, it was judged, not amiss in this Place to lay before the Reader,
(with an Humble desire of Assistence from the Prayers, and Favors, of Good
men, unto so Important an Undertaking)

A SCHAEME, of the Whole Work.
After the INTRODUCTION,

FIRST, The DESIGN Where- on, the MANNER Where- in, the PEOPLE Where- by, the
several Colonies of NEW ENGLAND were Planted, is Declared: And a Narrative is
given of many Memorable Passages, relating to the Settlement of those
Plantations: Concluded with an Ecclesiastical Map of the Country, or, a List of
the several Assemblies in these Colonies, Wherein the Gospel is at this Day
Preached, and of the Ministers who Preach the Gospel to those Assemblies.

The FIELD being thus prepared, We Proceed, Then, unto the History of what has
been Acted there*upon. And here,

First, The ACTORS of New England, are with a very Entertaining Variety of
Story, Introduced.

The ACTORS, in a Civil Order, are first brought in.

Here we Write the Lives of the Four among the First Governors, BRADFORD,
WINTHROP, HOPKINS, and EATON, in each of the Four Colonies, (and of WINTHROP,
the First Governor of Connecticut and New Haven united,) and Characters of all
the rest: With the ^ames, of all that have been their Magistrates.

The ACTORS, in a Sacred Order, are then brought in. Brief Memoirs, are here
attempted, concerning all the MINISTERS, Which have come over from England for
the Service of these Churches: With more Large Accounts of Mr. Bulkly, Bur,
Chauncey, Cobbet, Cotton, Davenport, Eliot, Fisk, Hooker, Knowles, Mather,
Newman, Norton, Parker, Philips, Rogers, Rogers, Shepard, Symmes, Stone, Ward,
Whiting, Wilson: Of all whom, a Biography is Endeavored. Whereto are
Appendiced, Brief Memoirs, on such as coming over in the Infancy of the
Settlement, Entered not upon their Ministry, until their Education was here
perfected, but Before or Without the Advantages of the College; With more
Large Accounts, of Mr. Sherman, and Mr. Thacher.

From hence, We pass on to the History of our University. Where, with its
Laws, Benefactors, and Vicissitudes, We give a Catalogue of such as have been
therein Educated; and many Historical Remarks upon that Catalogue. With fuller
Essays upon some that have been more Eminent Plants issuing from this N^rsery;
Especially, Mr. Samuel Mather, Mr. Mitchel, Oaks, Shepard, and Collins.

Secondly, The ACTIONS of New England, are then Considered: Which are of Two
Sorts.

First, The SYNODICAL ESTABLISHMENTS, are Produced; With many Material
Relations, and Conclusions, further tending to Illustrate the Determinations of
our several SYNODS.

Here we do at Large, Lay before the Reader,

The Faith professed by the Churches of New England.

The Discipline Practiced in the Churches of New England; With the Platform
agreed by the Synod, in 1648. Whereto are added, The Heads of Agreement, in the
Late Union between the Ministers formerly called, Presbyterian and
Congregational.

The Principles owned and Endeavors used by the Churches of New England
concerning the Church State of their Posterity: With the Propositions of the
Synod, in 1662: and following Occurrences.

The Reforming Synod. of New England, in 1679. With Subsequent Essays of
Reformation in the Churches.

Unto all which, there are annexed, The Proposals that have been made in these
Churches, about the Recording of Remarkable Providence: and many Remarkables
are here particularly Recorded.

Then, the OPPOSING, and AFFLICTIVE Disturbances, which have been given to the
Interests of the Churches under these Establishments, are Exhibited.

The General Heads of Temptation, which have been distressing of Good Men in
the Land, from the Beginning, are Enumerated, and Conveniently Exemplified.

The Encounters, which the Churches have had, with several Sorts of (...), are,
with Proper and Useful Reflections, described.

The Wars, with which the Salvages have annoyed the Churches, are with Brevity,
but much Curiosity, represented; and other Storms, which the Churches have Out
Lived, and the Ways whereby they have out lived them, not Omitted.

And, in the Whole Work, there is an Eye had, not only unto the Preservation of
Every Thing True and Good, in the Churches of New England, from the Threatening
Dangers of an Apostasy; but also unto the Satisfaction and Edification of the
Reforming Churches abroad in the World; Especially, in the Now Approaching
Days of Reformation.

COTTONUS Redivivus.
OR, THE LIFE OF Mr. JOHN COTTON.
. 1. WERE I Master of the Pen, wherewith Palladius embalmed his Chrysostom, the
Greek Patriark, or Posid^nius Eternized his Austin, the Latin Oracle, among the
Ancients; Or, were I Owner of the Quil, wherewith among the Moderns, Beza
celebrated his Immortal Calvin, or Fabius Immortalized his Venerable Beza; the
Merits of John Cotton would oblige me to Employ it, in the Embalming his Famous
Memory. If Boston be the chief ^eat of New England, it was Cotton that was the
Father and Glory of Boston: Upon which account it becomes a piece of pure
Justice, that the Life of Him, who above all men gave Life to his Country,
should bear no little Figure in its intended History; and indeed it any Person
in this Town or Land, had the Blessedness, which the Roman Historian, long
since pronounced Such, even, To do Things worthy to be Writ, and to Write
Things worthy to be Read, it was He; who now claims a Room in our Pages. If it
were a Comparison sometimes made of the Reformers, Pomeranus was a Grammarian,
Just^s Jonas was an Orator, Melancth^n was a Logician, but Luther was All: even
that Proportion, it may without Envy be acknowledged that Cotton bore to the
Rest of our New English Divines; He that, whilst he was Living had this Virtue
Extraordinarily Conspicuous in him, That it was his delight always, to
acknowledge the Gifts of God, in other men, must now he is Dead, have other men
acknowledge of him, what Erasmus does of Jerome, In boc uno conjunctum fuit et
Eximium, quicquid in al^is partim admiramur.

. 2. There was a good Heraldry in that speech of the Noble Romanus, It is not
the Blood of my Progenitors, but my Christian Profession that makes me Noble.
But our John Cotton, besides the Advantage of his Christian Profession, had a
Descent from Honorable Progenitors, to render him doubly Honorable. His
Immediate Proginitors being by some Injustice, Deprived of Great Revenues, his
Father Mr. Roland Cotton, had the Education of a Lawyer bestowed by his Friends
upon him, in hopes of his being the better capacitated thereby to Recover the
Estate, whereof his Family had been wronged; and so the Profession of a Lawyer,
was that unto which this Gentleman applied himself all his Days. But our John
Cotton, in this Happier than Austin, whose Father was carefuller to make an
Orator than a Christian of him, while his Gracious Mother was making him on
greater Accounts, A Son of her many Tears, had a very pious Father in this
worthy, Lawyer, as well as a pious Mother, to Interest him in the Covenant of
God. That worthy man was indeed very singular in two most Imitable Practices.
One was, that when any of his Neighbors desirous to Sue* one another,
addressed him for Counsel, it was his manner, in the most persuasive and
obliging terms that could be, to Endeavor a Reconciliation between both
parties; preferring the Consolations of a Peacemaker, before all the Fees,
that he might have got by Blowing up of Differences. Another was, that every
Night, it was his Custom to Examine Himself, with Reflections on the
Transactions of the Day past; wherein, if he found, that he had not either,
Done good unto others, or Got good unto his own Soul, he would be as much
grieved as ever the Famous Titus was, when he could complain in the Evening,
Amici Diem Perdidi! Of such Parents was Mr. John Cotton born, at the Town of
Derby, on the Fourth of December; in the year 1585.

. 3. The Religious Parents of Mr. Cotton, were Solicitous to have him endued
with a Learned, as well as a Pious Education; and being neither so Rich, that
the Matter Artis, could have no Room to do her part, nor so Poor that the Res
Augusta D^mi, should clog his Progress, they were well fitted thereby, to
bestow such an Education upon him. His first Instruction was under a Good
Schoolmaster, one Mr. Johnson, in the Town of Derby: whereon the Intellectual
Endowments of all sorts, with which the God of our Spirits, adorned him, so
discovered themselves, that at the Age of Thirteen, his Proficiency procured
him Admission into Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge. Indeed the Proverb, Soon
Ripe, Soon Rotten, has often been too Hastily applied unto Rathe-ripe Wits, in
young People; not only O^^^mpadius and M^^ancihon, who Commenced Batchelours of
Arts, at Fourteen years of Age, and Luther, who Commenced Master of Arts at
Twenty; but also our Dr. Juel sent unto Oxford, our Dr. Usher sent unto Dublin,
and our Mr. Cotton sent unto Cambridge, all at the Age of Thirteen, do put in a
Bar to the Universal Application, of that Proverb. While Mr. Cotton was at the
University, his Diligent Head, with Gods Blessing, made him a Rich Scholar; and
his Generous mind found no little Nourishment by that Labor, which like the
Sage Philosopher, he found Sweeter than any Idleness: insomuch that his being
Elected Fellow of Trinity College, as the Reward of his Quick-Proficiency, was
Diverted by nothing but this, that the Extraordinary Charges for their Great
Hall then in Building, did put by their Election. And there was this Remarkable
in the Education of this Chosen Vessel, at the University: That while he
continued there, his Father's Practice was, by the special Providence of God,
augmented so much beyond what it had been before, as was enough to mentain him
there: Upon which Observation Mr. Cotton afterward would say, 'Twas God that
kept me at the University! Indeed some have said, That the Great Notice quickly
taken of the Eminency in the Son, was one Reason, why his Father, not only came
to be complemented on all sides, and Omnes Omnia Bona dicere, and laudare
Fortunas ejus, qui Filium haberet Tali Ingenio praeditum, but also had his
Clients more than a little multiplied.

. 4. Upon the Desires of Emanuel-Colledge, Mr. Cotton was not only Removed unto
that College, but also Preferred unto a Fellowship in it; in order whereunto,
he did according to the Critical and Laudable Statutes of the House, go through
a very severe Examen of his Fitness for such a Station; wherein 'twas
particularly Remarked, that the Poser trying his Hebrew-skill by the Third
Chapter of Isaiah, a Chapter which, containing more Hard Words, than any one
Paragraph of the Bible, might therefore have puzzled a very good Hebrician, yet
he made nothing of it. He was afterward, the Head Lecturer, the Dean, the
Catechist, in that Famous College; and became a Tutor to many Scholars, who
afterward proved Famous Persons, and had cause to Bless God, for the Faithful,
and Ingenious and Laborious Communicativeness of this their Tutor. Here, all
his Academical Exercises, whether in Disputations or in Common-places, or
whatever else, did so smell of the, Lamp, that the Wit, the Strength, the
Gravity, and the Fullness, both of Reason and of Reading in them, caused him to
be much Admired by the Sparkling Wits of the University. But One thing among
the Rest, which caused a Great Notice to be taken of him, throughout the whole
University, was his Funeral Oration upon Dr. Some, the Master of Peter House,
wherein he approved himself such a Master of Periclaean, or Ciceronian Oratory,
that the Auditors were even ready to have Acclamed, Now Vox Hominem Sonat! And
that which added unto the Reputation, thus Raised for him, was, an
University-Sermon, wherein Aiming more to Preach Self, than Christ, he used
such Florid Strains, as extremely Recommended him, unto the most, who Relished
the Wisdom of words above the Words of Wisdom: though the Pompous Eloquence of
that Sermon, afterward gave such a Distaste unto his own Renewed Soul, that
with a Sacred Indignation he threw his Notes into the Fire.

. 5. Hitherto we have seen the Life of Mr. Cotton, while he was not yet Alive!
Though the Restraining and Preventing Grace of God, had kept him from such
Out-breakings of Sin, as Defile the Lives of most in the World, yet like the
Old man, who for such a cause ordered this Epitaph to he Written on his Grave,
Here lies an Old Man, who lived but Seven years, he Reckoned himself to have
been but a Dead Man, as being Alienated from the Life of God, until he had
Experienced that Regeneration, in his own Soul, which was thus Accomplished.
The Holy Spirit of God had been at work upon his Young Heart, by the Ministry
of that Reverend and Renowned Preacher of Righteousness, Mr. Perkins; but he
Resisted and Smothered those Convictions, through a vain Persuasion, that if he
became a Godly Man 'twould spoil him for being a Learned One. Yea such was the
Secret Enmity and Prejudice of a^ Unregenerate Soul, against Real Holiness, and
such the Torment, which our Lords Witnesses give t^ the Consciences of the
Earthly-minded, that when he heard the Bell toll for the Funeral of M^^
Perkins, his mind secretly rejoiced in his Delive^^ance, from that Powerful
Ministry, by which his Conscience had been so often Beleagured: The Remembrance
of which thing afterward, did break his Heart Exceedingly! But he was, at
length, more effectually awakened, by a Sermon o^ Dr. Sibs, wherein was
Discoursed the Misery of those, who had only a Negative Righteousness, or a
Civil, Sober, Honest Blamlesness before men. Mr* Cotton became now very
sensible of his own Miserable Condition before God; and the Arrows of these
Convictions, did stick so fast upon him, that after no less than Three years
Disconsolate Apprehensions under them, the Grace of God made him a thoroughly
Renewed Christian, and filled him with a Sacred Joy, which Accompanied him,
until he went unto the Fullness of Joy for ever. For this cause, as Persons
truly Converted unto God have a mighty and lasting Affection for the
Instruments of their Conversion; thus Mr. Cottons Veneration for Dr. Sibs, was
after this very particular and perpetual; and it caused him to have the Picture
of that Great Man, in that part of his house, where he ^ight oftenest Look upon
it. But so the Yoke ^f sore Temptations and Afflictons and long Spiritual
Trials, fitted him, to be an Eminently Use^^l Servant of God in his Generation!

. 6. Some time after this Change upon the (...) of Mr. Cotton, it came unto his
turn again to Preach at St. Mary's; and because he was to Preach, an High
Expectation was Raised, through the whole University, that they should have a
Sermon, flourishing indeed, with all the Learning of the whole University. Many
Difficulties had Mr* Cotton in his own Mind now, what Course to steer. On the
one side* he considered, That if he should Preach with a Scriptural and
Christian Plainness, he should not only wound his own Fame exceedingly, but
also Tempt Carnal men to Revive an Old Cavil, That Religion made Scholars turn
Dunces, whereby the Name of God might suffer not a little. On the other side,
he considered, That it was his Duty to Preach with such a Plainness, as became
the Oracles of God, which are intended for the Conduct of men in the Paths of
Life, and not for Theatrical Ostentations and Entertainments, and the Lord
needed not any Sin of ours to mentain His own Glory. Hereupon Mr. Cotton
Resolved that he would Preach a Plain Sermon, even such a Sermon, as, in his
own Conscience, he thought would be most pleasing unto the Lord Jesus Christ;
And he discoursed Practically and Powerfully, but very solidly upon the Plain
Doctrine of Repentance. The Vain Wits of the University, Disappointed thus,
with a more Excellent Sermon, that shot some Troublesome Admonitions into their
Consciences, discovered their Vexation at this Disappointment, by their not
Humming, as according to their sinful and absurd Custom, they had formerly
done; and the Vice Chancellor for the very same Reason also, Graced him not, as
he did others, that pleased him. Nevertheless, the satisfaction, which he
enjoyed in his own Faithful Soul, abundantly compensated unto him, the Lo^^ of
any Humane Favor or Honor; nor did he go without many Encouragements from
so^^ Doctors, then having a Better Sense of Religion upon them, who Prayed him
to persevere in the Good way of Preaching, which he had now taken* But Perhaps
the Greatest Consolation of all, was a Notable Effect of the Sermon then
Preached The Famous Dr. Preston, then a Fellow of Queen's College in
Cambridge, and of Great Note in the University, came to hear Mr. Cotton with
the same Itching Ears, as others were then led withal. For some good while
after the beginning of the Sermon, his Frustrated Expectation caused him to
manifest his Uneasiness all the ways that were then possible; but before the
Sermon was ended, like one of Peter's Hearers, he found himself Pierced at the
Heart* His Heart within him wa^ now struck with such Resentments of his ow^
Interior state before the God of Heaven, that (...) could have no Peace in his
own Soul, till with Wounded Soul, he had Repaired unto Mr. Cotton from whom he
received those Further Assistances wherein he became a Spiritual Father, unto
one of the Greatest men in his Age.

. 7. The Well-disposed People of Boston in Lincolnshire, after this, Invited
Mr. Cotton, to become their Minister; with which Invitation, out of a Sincere
and Serious Desire to Serve our Lord in His Gospel, after the Solemnest
Addresses to Heaven for Guidance in such a Solemn Affair, he complied. At this
Time, the Mayor of the Town, with a more Corrupt Party, having procured
another Scholar from Cambridge, more agreeable to them, would needs have him to
Preach before Mr. Cotton: but the Churchwarden pretending to more of
Influence, upon their Ecclesiastical matters, overruled it. However when the
matter came to a Vote, amongst those to whom the Right of Election did by
Charter belong, there was an Equi-Vote for Mr. Cotton, and that other Person;
Only the Mayor, who had the Casting-Vote, by a strange Mistake pricked for Mr.
Cotton. When the Mayor saw his Mistake, a New-Vote was urged and granted;
wherein it again proved an Equi-Vote; but the Mayor most unaccountably mistook
again, as he did before. Extremely Displeased here at, he pressed for a Third
Vote; but the Rest would not Consent unto it; and so the Election fell upon Mr.
Cotton, by the Involuntary Cast of that very Hand, which had most opposed it.
This Obstruction to the Settlement of Mr. Cotton in Boston, being thus
Conquered, another followed; For the Bishop of the Diocese, having understood
that Mr. Cotton was infected with Puritanism, set himself immediately to
Discourage his being there; only he could Object nothing but, That Mr. Cotton,
being a Young man, he was not so fit upon that Score, to be over such a
Numerous and such a Factious People. And Mr. Cotton, having Learned no
otherwise to value himself, than to Concur with the Apprehensions of the
Bishop; intended, therefore, to Return unto Cambridge: But some of his Friends,
against his Inclination, knowing the True way of doing it; soon charmed the
Bishop, into a Declared Opinion; that Mr. Cotton was an Honest, and a Learned
Man. Thus the Admission of Mr. Cotton unto the Exercise of his Ministry in
Boston, was Accomplished.

. 8. Mr. Cotton found the more Peaceable Reception among the People, through
his own want of Internal Peace; and because his continual Exercises, from his
Internal Temptations and Afflictions, made all People see, that instead o^
Serving this or that Party, his chief care was about the Salvation of his Own
Soul. But the Stirs, which had been made in the Town, b^ the Arminian
Controversies, then Raging, put him upon Further Exercises; whereof he has
himself given us a Narrative in the Ensuing Words When I was first called to
Boston in Lincolnshire^ so it was, that Mr. Dr. Baron, Son of Dr. Baron, (the
Divinity Reader of Cambridge) first broached, that which was, then, called
Lutheranism; since Arminianism: as being indeed himself, Learned, Acute,
Plausible in Discourse, and fit to Insinuate into the Hearts of his Neighbors.
And though he were a Physician by Profession (and of a good skill in that Art)
yet he spent the greatest Strength of his Studies, in clearing and promoting
the Arminian Tenants. Whence it came to pass, that in all the great Feasts of
the Town, the chiefest-Discourse at the Table, did ordinarily fall upon
Arminian Points, to the Great Offense of Godly Ministers, both in Boston, and
Neighbor-towns. I coming among them, a Young man, thought it a part both of
Modesty and Prudence, not to speak much to the Points, at first, among
Strangers and Ancients: Until afterward, after hearing of many Discourses, in
Public Meetings, and much Private Discourse with the Doctor, I had Learned at
length, where all the great Strength of the Doctor ^ay. And then Observing (by
the Strength of Christ) how to avoid such Expressions, as gave him any
Advantage, in the Expressions of Others, I began Publicly to Preach and in
Private Meetings to Defend, the Doctrine of Gods Eternal Election, before All
Foresight of Good or Evil, in the Creature; and the Redemption (ex gratia)
only of the Elect; the Effectual Vocation of a sinner, Per ^rresist^bilem
Gratiae Vim, without all Respect of the Preparations of Free Will; and Finally,
the Impossibility of the Fall of a Sincere Believer, either Totally or Finally
from a Sat of Grace. Hereupon, when the Doctor had Objected many Things; and
heard my Answers to those Scruples, which he was wont most plausibly to urge;
presently after, our Public Feasts, and Neighbourly Meetings were Silent, from
all further Debates about Predestination, or any of the Points, which depend
thereupon, and all matters of Religion were carried on Calmly and Peaceably.

About half a year after Mr. Cotton had been at Boston, thus usefully employed,
he visited Cambridge, that he might then and there proceed Batchelour of
Divinity; which he did: And his Concio ad Clerum* on Math. 5. 13. Vos estis Sal
Terrae, was highly esteemed by the Judicious. Nor was he less Admired for his
very Singular Acuteness, in Disputation, when he answered the Divinity Act in
the ^chools; wherein he had for his Opponent a most A^^te Antagonist, namely
Dr. Chapel, who was afterward Provost of Trinity-Colledge in Dublin; and one
unhappily Successful in promoting the New Pelagianism.

. 9. Settled now at Boston, his Dear Friend, Holy Mr. Bayns; recommended unto
him a Pious Gentlewoman, one Mrs. Elizabeth Horrocks* the Sister of Mr. James
Horrocks, a Famous Minister in Lancashire, to become his Consort in a Ma^^^yed
Estate. And it was Remarkable, that on the very Day of his Wedding, to that
Eminently Virtuous Gentlewoman, he first Received that Assurance of God's Love
unto his own Soul, by the Spirit of God, effectually Applying His Promise of
Eternal Grace and Life unto him, which happily kept with him all the Rest of
his Days: For which cause he would afterward often say, God made that Day a
Day of Double Marriage to me! The Wife which by the Favor of God, he had now
Found, was a very Great Help unto him, in the Service of God; but especially
upon this, among many other Accounts; That the People of her own Sex, observing
her more than Ordinary Discretion, Gravity, and Holiness, would still Improve
the Freedom* of their Address unto her, to acquaint her, with the Exercises of
their own Spirits; who acquainting her Husband with convenient Intimations
thereof, occasioned him in his Public Ministry more Particularly and
Profitably, to Discourse those things that were of Everlasting Benefit.

. 10. After he had been three years in Boston, his careful Studies and Prayers
brought him to apprehend more of Evil remaining Unreformed in the Church of
England, than he had heretofore considered; and from this time, he became a
Conscientious Nonconformist, unto the Unscriptural, Ceremonies and
Constitutions yet mentained by that Church; but such was his Interest in the
Hearts of the People, that his Nonconformity instead of being Disturbed, was
indeed Embraced, by the greatest part of the Town. However, at last, Complaints
being made against him unto the Bishops-Courts; he was for a while* then put
under the Circumstances of a Silenced Minister (...) in all which while, he
would still give his Presence at the Public Sermons, though never at the
Common Prayers, of the Conformable. He was now offered* not only the Liberty of
his Ministry, but very great Preferment in it also, if he would but Conform to
the Scrupled Rites, though but in One Act, and but for One Time: Nevertheless
his Tender Soul, afraid of being thereby Polluted, could not in the least
comply with such Temptations. A Storm of many Troubles upon him, was now
Gathering; but it was very Strangly diverted! For that very man, who had
Occasioned this Affliction to him, now became heartily Afflicted for his own
Sin in doing of it; and a Steadfast, Constant, Prudent Friend, Presenting a Pair
of Gloves to a Proctor of an Higher Court* then appealed unto, that Proctor
without Mr. Cotton's Knowledge, Swore (...) Animam Domini, that Mr. Cotton was
a Conformable man: which things Issued in Mr. Cotton's being Restored unto the
Exercise of his Ministry.

. 11. The Storm of Persecution being thus Blown over, Mr. Cotton enjoyed Rest
for many years. In which time he Faithfully employed his great Abilities, not
in Gaining, men to this or that Party of Christians, but in Acquainting them
with the more Essential and Substantial Points of Christianity. In the space of
Twenty years that he lived at Boston, on the Lord's Days in the Afternoons, he
Thrice went over the Body of Divinity in a Catechistical, way; and gave the
Heads of his Discourse to Young Scholars, and others in the Town, that they
might answer to his Questions in the Congregation; and the Answers he opened
and applied unto the General Advantage of the Hearers. Whilst he was in this
way Handling the Sixth Commandment, the Words of God which he uttered were so
Quick and Powerful, that a Woman among his Hearers, who had been Married
Sixteen years to a Second Husband, now in Horror of Conscience, openly
Confessed her Murdering her Former Husband by Poison, though thereby the
exposed her self to the Extemity of being Burned. In the Forenoons of the
Lord's Days, he Preached over the First Six Chapters in the Gospel of John, the
whole Book of Ecclesiastes, the Prophesy of Zephaniah, the Prophesy of Zechary,
and many other Scriptures. When the Lords Supper was Administered, which was
once a Month, he Handled the Eleventh Chapter in the First Epistle to the
Corinthians, and the Thirteenth Chapter in the Second Book of the Chronicles;
and some other pertinent Paragraphs of the Bible. In his Lectures, he went
through the whole First and Second Epistles of John; the whole Book of Solomon's
Song; the Parables of our Savior to the Seventeenth Chapter of Matthew. His
House also was full of Young Students; whereof some were sent unto him out of
Germany, some out of Holland; but most out of Cambridge. For Dr. Preston, would
still Advise his near-fledg'd Pupils, to go live with Mr. Cotton, that they
might be fitted for Public Service; insomuch that it was grown almost a
Proverb, That Mr. Cotton, was Dr. Prestons Seasoning Vessel: and of those, that
issued found this Learned Family, Famous, and Useful in their Generation, the
well known Dr. Hill, was not the least. Moreover he kept a Daily Lecture in his
House, which, as very Reverend Ear-Witnesses have expressed it, He performed
with much Grace, to the Edification of the Hearers: And unto this Lecture many
Pious People in the Town, would constantly resort, until upon a Suspicion of
some Inconveniency, which might arise, from the growing Numerousness of his
Auditory, he left it off. However, besides his Ordinary Lecture every Thursday,
he Preached thrice more; every Week, on the Weekdays; namely on Wednesdays and
Thursdays, early in the Morning, and on Sature-Dayes at Three in the Afternoon.
And besides these Immense Labors, he was frequently Employed, on Extraordinary
Days, kept Pro Tenipo^isbus and Causis, whereon he would spend sometimes no
less than Six Hours, in the Word and Prayer! Fur-thermore, 'twas his Custom,
once a year, to visit his Native-Town of Derby, where he was a Notable
Exception to the General Rule of, A Prophet without Honor in his own Country;
and by his Vigilant Cares, this Town was for many years kept supplied with Able
and Faithful Ministers of the Gospel. Thus was this Good man a most
Indefatigable Doer of Good.

. 12. The Good Spirit of God, so Plentifully, and Powerfully accompanied the
Ministry of this Excellent man, that a Great Reformation was thereby wrought in
the Town of Boston. Profaneness was extinguished, Superstition was abandoned,
Religion was Embraced and Practiced among the Body of the People; yea, the
Mayor with most of the Magistrates were now called P^ritans, and the Satanical
party, was become Insignificant. As to the matter of Non Conformity, Mr. Cotton
was come to Forbear the Ceremonies enjoined in the Church of England; for which
he gave this Account. The Grounds were two: First, The Significacy and Efficacy
put upon 'em, in the Preface to the Book of Common Prayer; That they were
neither Dumb, nor Dark, but apt to stir up the Dull Mind of Man, to the
Remembrance of his Duty to God, by some Notable and Special Signification
whereby (...) may be Edified; or Words to the like-purpos^ (...) Second was the
(...) of the Highest Ap^stolical Comm^^^ion, to the Observation of the
Commandments of Christ Matt. 28.20. Which made it appear to me utterly unlawful
for any Church Power to enjoin the Observation of Indifferent Ceremonies, which
Christ had not commanded: And all the Ceremonies were alike (...) of the
Commandment of Christ, though they had been Indifferent otherwise; which,
indeed Others have Justly pleaded, they were not. But this was not all; For Mr.
Cotton was also come to Believe, That Scripture-Bishops were appointed to Rule
no larger a Diocese, than a Particular Congregation; and that the Ministers of
the Lord, with the Keys of Ecclesiastical Government, are given by Him to a
Congregational Church. It hence came to pass that our Lord Jesus Christ, was
now Worshipped in Boston, without the use of the Liturgy, or of those Vestments,
which are by Zanchy called Execrabile^ Vestes; yea, the sign of the Cross was
laid aside, not only in Baptism, but also in the Mayors Mace, as worthy to be
made a Ne^ushtan, because it had been so much abused unto Idolatry. And besides
all this, there were some Scores of Pious People in the Town, who more exactly
formed themselves, into an Evangelical Church State, by entering into Covenant
with God, and with one another, To follow after the Lord, in the Purity of his
Worship. However the main Bent and Aim of Mr. Cottons Ministry was, To Preach a
Crucified Christ; and the Inhabitants of Boston Observed, that God Blessed them
in their Secular Concernments, remarkably the more, through his Dwelling among
them: For many Strangers, and some too, that were Gentlemen of Good Quality,
Resorted unto Boston, and some Removed their Habitations thither, on his
Account; whereby the Prosperity of the Place, was very much promoted.

. 13. As his Desert of it was very High, so the Respect which he met withal was
far from Low. The Best of his Hearers Loved him Greatly, and the Worst of them
Feared him, as Knowing that he was a Righteous and an Holy man. Yea, such was
the Greatness of his Learning, his Wisdom, his Holiness, that Great Men took no
little notice of him. A very Honorable Personage Rode Thirty Miles to see him;
and afterward professed, That he had as (...) Hear Mr. Cottons Ordinary
Exposition in his Family, as any Ministers Public Preaching that he knew in
England. Whilst he continued in Boston Dr. Preston also would constantly come
once a year to visit him; from his Exceeding value for Mr. Cottons Friendship.
Arch Bishop Williams did likewise greatly Esteem him, for his Incomparable
Parts; and when he was Keeper of the Great Seal* he Recommended Mr. Cotton to
the Royal Favor. Moverover the Earl of Dorchester and of Lindsey, had much
Regard unto him; which Happened partly on this Occasion: The Earl's coming into
Lincolnshire about the Dreyning of some Fenny Grounds. Mr. Cotton was then in
his course of Preaching on Gal. 2. 20. Intending to Preach on the Duties of
Living by Faith in Adversity; but considering that those Noblemen were not
much Acquainted with Afflictions, he altered his Intentions, and so ordered it,
that when they came to Boston, he Discoursed on the Duties of Living by Faith
in Prosperity: When the Noblemen were so much Taken with what they Heard, that
they assured him, If at any time, he should want a Friend at Court, They would
Improve all their Interest for him. And when Mr. Cotton did Plainly but Wisely
Admonish them, of certain Pastimes on the Lords Day, whereby they gave some
Scandal, they took it most kindly from him; and promised a Reformation. But
none of the Roses cast on this Applauded Actor, Smothered that Humble, that
Loving, that Gracious Disposition, which was his Perpetual Ornament.

. 14. At Length, doubtless to Chastise, the Seldom Unchastised Evils of
Divisions, crept in among the Christians of Boston, in pleased the God of
Heaven to deprive them of Mr. Cottons Ministry, by laying a Tertain Ague upon
him, for a year together. But being Invited unto the Earl of Lincoln's, in
pursuance to the Advice of his Physicians, that he should change the Air, he
removed thither; and thereupon he happily Recovered. Nevertheless, by the same
Sickness he then lost his Excellent Wife; who having lived with him Childless,
for Eighteen years, went from him now to be For ever with the Lord: whereupon
he traveled further a field, unto London, and some other Places, whereby the
Recovery of his Lost Health was further perfected. About a year after this, he
Practically appeared in Opposition to Tertullianism, by proceeding unto a
Second Marriage; wherein one Mrs. Sarah Story, a Virtuous Widow, very Dear to
his former Wife, became his Consort; and by her he had both Sons and Daughters.

. 15. Although our Lord had hitherto made the Discretion and Vigilance of Mr.
Thomas Leveret (afterward a double Honored Elder of the Church, in another
Land) the happy Occasion of Diverting many Designs, to molest Mr. Cotton for
his Non Conformity, yet when the Sins of the place had Ripened it, for so Dark
a Vengeance of Heaven, as the Removing of this Eminent Light, a Storm of
Persecution could no longer be avoided. A Debauched Fellow in the Town, who had
been punished by the Magistrates for his Debaucheries, Contrived and Resolved a
Revenge upon them, for their Justice: and having no more Effectual way to vent
the Cursed Malice of his heart, than by bringing them into Trouble at the High
Commission Court, up he goes to London, with Informations to that Court, that
the Magistrates did not Kneel at the Sacrament, nor observe some other
Ceremonies by Law imposed. When some that belonged unto the Court signified
unto this Informer, that he must put in the Ministers Name, Nay (said he) the
Minister is an Honest man, and never did me any wrong: but it being further
pressed upon him, that all his Complaints, would be Insignificant, if the
Ministers Name were not in them, he then did put i^ in: And Letters Missive
were dispatched Incontinently, to Convent Mr. Cotton, before the Infamous High
Commission Court. But before we Relate, what became of Mr. Cotton, we will
enquire, what became of his Accuser? The Renowned Mr. John Rogers of Dedham,
having been on his Lecture-Day, just before his going to Preach, Advised, that
Mr. Cotton, was brought into this Trouble, he took Occasion, to speak of it in
the Sermon, with just Lamentations for it; and among others, he used Words to
this purpose: As for that man, who has caused a Faithful Pastor, to be driven
from his Flock, he is a Wisp, used by the Hands of God, for the Scowring of his
People; But mark the words now spoken by a Minister of the Lord! I am verily
persuaded, the Judgments of God, will overtake the Man, that has done this
thing: Either he will Die under an Hedge, or something else, more than the
Ordinary Death of men shall befall him. Now behold, how this Prediction was
accomplished! This miserable man quickly after this, Died of the Plague, under
an Hedge in Yorkshire; and it was a long Time, e're any could be found, that
would Bury him. This it is to turn Persecutor!

. 16. Mr. Cotton, knowing that Letters Missive were out against him, from the
High Commission Court; and knowing, that if he appeared there, he could expect
no other, than to be choked with such a Perpetual Imprisonment, as had already
Murdered such men as Bates and Udal, he concealed himself as well as he could,
from the Raging Pursevants. Application was made, in the mean time, to the Earl
of Dorset, for the Fulfillment of his old Engagement unto Mr. Cotton; and the
Earl did indeed intercede for him, until the Archbishop of Cantebury, who
would often Wish, Oh! That I could meet with Cotton! Rendered all his
Intercessions both Ineffectual, and Unseasonable. Hereupon that Noble Person
sent Word unto him, that if he had been guilty of Drunkenness, or Uncleanness,
or any such Lesser-fault, he could have obtained his Pardon; but inasmuch as he
had been Guilty of Nonconformity, and Puritanism, the Crime was unpardonable;
and therefore, said he, You must Fly for your Safety! Doubtless, it was from
such unhappy Experiments, that Mr. Cotton afterward Published this Complaint;
The Ecclesiastical Courts are like the Courts of the High Priests and
Pharisees, which Solomon by a Spirit of Prophecy Styleth, Dens of Lions, and
Mountains of Leopards. And those who have to do with them, have found them
Markets of the Sins of the People, the Cages of Uncleanness, the Forges of
Extortion, the Tablernacles of Bribery, and they have been contrary to the End
of Civil Government, which is, The Punishment of Evil Doers, and the Praise of
them which do well.

. 17. Mr. Cotton, therefore, now, with Supplications unto the God of Heaven for
His Direction, joined Consultations of Good men on Earth; and among others, he
did with some of his Boston Friends, visit Old Mr. Dod, unto whom he laid open
the Difficult case now before him, without any Intimation of his Own.
Inclination, whereby the Advice of that Holy man, might have been at all
forestalled. Mr. Dod upon the whole, said thus unto him; I am Old Peter, and
therefore must stand still, and bear the Brunt; but you being Young Peter may
go whether you will, and ought, being Persecuted in one City, to Flee unto
another! And when the Boston Friends urged, That they would Support and Protect
Mr. Cotton, though Privately; and that if he should leave them, very many of
them would be exposed unto Extreme Temptations; he readily answered, That the
Removing of a Minister, was like the Draining of a Fish Pond; the Good Fish
will follow the Water, but Eeles and other Baggage Fish will stick in the Mud:
Which things when Mr. Cotton heard, he was not a little confirmed in his
Inclination to leave the Land. Nor did he forget the Concession of Cyprian,
That a Seasonable Flight, is in Effect* A Confession of our Faith; for it is a
Profession that our Faith is Dearer unto us, than All the Enjoyments from which
we Fly. But that which is further memorable in this Matter, is, That as the
Great God often makes His Truth to spread by the Sufferings of them, that
Profess the Truth; Four Hundred were Converted by the Death of one ^ersecuted
Cecilia; And the Scotch Bishop would leave off Burning of the Faithful, because
the Smoke of Hamilton infected as many, as it Blew upon; Thus, the Silencing
and Removing of Mr. Cotton, which was to him, a thing little short of
Martyrdom, was an Occasion of more through Repentance in sundry of his Bereaved
People, who now began to Consider, that God by taking away their Minister, was
Punishing their former Unfruitfulness under the most Fruitful Ministry, which
they had thus long Enjoyed. And there was yet another such Effect of the
matter, which is now to be Related.

. 18. To avoid them, that thirsted for his Ruin, Mr. Cotton, traveled under a
Changed Name and Garb, with a full purpose of going over for Holland; but when
he came near the Place; where he would have Shipped himself, he met with a
Kinsman, who Vehemently and Effectually persuaded him to Divert into London.
Here the Lord had A Work for him to Do, which he little thought of! Some
Reverend and Renowned Ministers of our Lord in that Great City, who yet had not
seen Sufficient Reason to Expose themselves unto Persecutions for the sake of
Nonconformity, but Looked upon the Imposed Ceremonies, as Indifferent and
Sufferable Trifles, and Weighed not the Aspect of the Second Commandment, upon
all the Parts and Means of Instituted Worship; took this Opportunity for a
Conference with Mr. Cotton; being persuaded, That since he was, No Passionate,
but a very Judicious man, they should prevail with him rather to Conform, than
to leave his Work and his Land. Unto the Motion of a Conference Mr. Cotton most
readily yielded; and First, all their Arguments for Conformity, together with
Mr. Byfields, Mr. Whatel^s and Mr. Sprints, were produced; all of which Mr.
Cotton answered, unto their Wonderful Satisfaction. Then, he gave his Arguments
for his Nonconformity, and the Reasons, why he must rather Forgo his
Ministry, or at least his Country, than Wound his Conscience with unlawful
Compliances: the issue whereof was, that instead of bringing Mr. Cotton (...)
to what he had now forsaken, he brought Them off altogether from what they had
hither to practiced; Every one of those Eminent Persons, Dr. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh,
and Mr. Davenport, now became all that he was, and, at last, left the Kingdom
for their being so. But Mr. Cotton* being now at London, there were Three
Places, which offered themselves to him for* his Retreat; Holland, Barbad^s,
and New England. As for Holland, The Character and Condition which Famous Mr.
Hooker had Reported thereof, took off his Intentions of Removing thither. And
Barbad^s had not near such Encouraging Circumstances, upon the best Accounts,
as New England; where ou^ Lord Jesus Christ, had a more than Ordinary Thing to
be done for His Glory, in an American Wilderness, and so would send over a more
than Ordinary Man, to be employed in the Doing of it. Thither, even to that
Religious and Reformed Plantation, after the Solemnest Applications to Heaven
for Direction, this Great Person bent his Resolutions: and Letters procured
from the Church of Boston, by Mr. Winthrop the Governor of the Colony, had
their Influence on the matter.

. 19. The God that had carried him through the Fire of Persecution, was now
Graciously with him in his Passage through the Water of the Atlantic Ocean; and
he enjoyed a Comfortable Voyage over the Great and Wide Sea. There were then,
three Eminent Ministers of God, in the Ship; namely Mr. Cotton, Mr. Hooker, and
Mr. Stone; which Glorious Triumvirate coming together, made the poor People in
the Wilderness, at their coming, to say, That the God of Heaven had supplied
them, with what would in some sort answer their Three Great necessities; Cotton
for their Clothing, Hooker for their Fishing, and Stone for their Building:
but by one or other of these Three Divines in the Ship, there was a Sermon
Preached every Day, all the while, they were aboard: Yea, they had Three
Sermons, or Expositions, for the most part every Day; Of, Mr. Cotton in the
Morning, Mr. Hooker in the Afternoon, Mr. Stone after Supper, in the Evening.
And after they had been a Month upon the Seas* Mr. Cotton received a Mercy,
which God had now for Twenty years denyd unto him, in the Birth of his Eldest
Son; whom he called Sea-born, in the Remembrance of the never-to-be-Forgotten
Blessings, which he thus enjoyed upon the Seas. But at the end of Seven Weeks,
they arrived at New England, September (...). in the year 1633. Where he put a
Shore at New-Boston, which in a few years by the Smile of God; especially upon
the Holy Wisdom, Conduct and Credit of our Mr. Cotton, upon some Accounts of
Growth, came to exceed Old Boston in every thing that Renders a Town
Considerable. And it is Remarkable, that his Arrival at New England, was just
after the People there, had been by Solemn Fasting and Prayer seeking unto God,
that in as much, as they had been engaging to walk with Him in His Ordinances,
according to His Word, He would mercyfully send over to them, such as might be
Eyes unto them in the Wilderness, and strengthen them in Discerning and
Following of that Word.

. 20. There were Diverse Churches Gathered in the Country, before the Arrival
of Mr. Cotton; but upon his Arrival, the Points of Church Order, were with more
of Exactness Revived, and Received in them, and further Observed in such as
were gathered after them. He found the whole Country in a perplexed, and a
Divided Estate, as to their Civil Constitution, but at the Public Desires,
Preaching a Sermon on those Words Hag. 2. 4. Be Strong, O Zerubbabel, says the
Lord; and be Strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech the High Priest; and be Strong
all ye People of the Land, says the Lord, and Work; for I am with you, says
the Lord of Hosts. The Good Spirit of God by that Sermon had a mighty
Influence, upon all Ranks of men, in the Infant-Plantation; who from this time,
carried on their Affairs* with a New-Life, Satisfaction, and Unanimity. It was
then, requested of Mr. Cotton; that he would, from the Laws, wherewith God
Governed His Ancient People, form an Abstract of such as were of a Moral and a
Lasting Equity; which he performed, as Acceptably; as Judiciously. But inasmuch
as very much or an Athenian Demacracy, was in the Mould of the Government, by
the Royal Charter, which was then Acted upon, Mr. Cotton Effectually
recommended it unto them, that none should be Electors nor Elected therein,
except such as were Visible Subjects of our Lord Jesus Christ; personally
Confederated in our Churches. In these, and many other ways, he Propounded unto
them, an Endeavor after a Theocracy, as near, as might be, to that which was
the Glory of Israel, the Peculiar People.

But the Ecclesiastical Constitution of the Country, was that on which, he
Employed his Peculiar Cares; and he was one of those Olive Trees, which
afforded a Singular measure of Oil, for the Illumination of our Sanctuary. Now
that the World may know the First Principles of New England, it must be known,
That until the Platform of Church Discipline, Published by a Synod in the year
1648 and Composed (chiefly) by Mr. Richard Mather, Next unto the Bible, which
was the Professed, Perpetual, and only Directory of these Churches; they had no
Platform of their Church Government; more Exact, than their famous JOHN COTTONS
Well-known Book of, THE KEYS; which Book, Endeavors to lay out the just Lines
and Bounds of all Church Power, and So defines the matter; That as in the
State, there is a Dispersion of Powers into Several Hands, which are to Concur
in all Acts of Common Concernment; from whence arises the Healthy Constitution
of a Commonwealth: in like sort, he assigns the Powers in the Church unto the
several Subjects, wherein the United Light of Scripture and of Nature, have
placed them, with a very Satisfactory Distribution He Asserts, That a
Presbyterated Society of the Faithful, has within it self; a Complete Power of
Self-Reformation, or if you will; of Self-Preservation, and may within it self
manage its own Choices of Officers, and Censures of Delinquents. Now, a Special
Statute Law of our Lord having Excepted Women and Children from Enjoying any
part of this Power, he finds only Elders and Brethren to be the Constituent
Members, who may Act in such a Sacred Corporation; the Elders he finds the
First Subject Entrusted with Government, the Brethren Endowed with Privilege,
insomuch that though the Elders only are to Rule the Church, and without Them,
there can be no Elections, Admissions, or, Excommunication^* and they have a
Negative upon the Acts of the Fraternity, as well as it is They only that have
the Power of Authoritative Preaching, and Administering the Sacraments (...)
Yet: the Brethren have such a Liberty, that without their Consent, nothing of
Common Con^^^rnment, may be Imposed upon them. Nevertheless because Particular
Churches, of Elders and Brethren, may abuse their Power, with manifold
miscarriages, he asserts the Necessary Communion of Churches in Synods, who
have Authority to Determine, Declare, and Enjoin, such things as may Rectify
the Male Administations, or any Disorders, Dissensions, and Confusions, of the
Congregations which fall under their Congnizance. But still so, as to leave
unto the Particular Churches themselves, the Formal Acts, which are to be done
pursuant unto the Advice of the Council; upon the Scandalous and Obstinate
Refusal whereof, the Council may Determine, To withdraw Communion from them, as
from those who will not be Counsello^^ against a Notorious Mismanagement of the
Jurisdiction which the Lord Jesus Christ has given them. THIS was the Design of
that Judicious Treatise, wherein was contained, the Substance of our Church
Discipline; and whereof I have one Remarkable thing to relate as we go along.
That Great Person, who afterward proved one of the Greatest Scholars, Divines,
and Writers, in this (...) then under the Prejudices of Conversation, for,
himself to Write a Confutation of this very Treatise, OF THE KEYS* but having
made a Considerable Progress in his Undertaking, such was the Strength if this
Unanswerable Book, that instead of his Confuting it, it Conquered him; and this
Book of, The Keys, was happily so Blessed of God for the Conveyance of
Congregational-Principles into the now Opened Mind of this Learned man, that he
not only Wrote in Defense of Mr. Cotton, but also Exposed himself to more than
a little Sorrow and Labor, all his Days for the mentaining of those
Principles. Upon which Occasion, the Words of the Doctor [OWEN, in his, Review
of the true Nature of Schism] are, This way of Impartial Examining all things
by the WORD, and laying aside all Prejudicate Respects, unto Persons, or
present Traditions, is a course that I would Admonish all to beware of, who
would avoid the danger of being made (what they call) Independents. Having said
thus much, of that Book, all that I shall and concerning it, is, That the
Eminent Mr. Rutherford himself, in his Treatise, Entitled, A Survey of the
Spiritual Antichrist, has these Words, Mr. COTTON, in his Treatise of the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven, is Well Sound in our way; if he had given some more
Power to Assembles; and in some lesser Points.

. 21. The Churches now had Rest, and were Edified; and there were daily added
unto the Churches, those that were to be Saved. Now, though the poor People
were fed with the Bread of Adversity, and the Water of Affliction, yet they
counted themselves abundantly compensated by This, That their Eyes might see
such Teachers, as were now to be seen among them. The Faith and the Order in
the Churches, was generally Glorious, whatever little Popular Confusions, might
in some few Places, Eclipse the Glory. But the Warm Sun Shine will produce a
Swarm of Insects; whilst matters were going on thus Prosperously, the Cunning
and Malice of Satan, to break the Prosperity of the Churches, brought in a
Generation of Hypocrites, who crept in unawares, turning the Grace of our God
into Lasciviousness. A Company of Antinomian and Familistical Sectaries, were
strangely crowded in among our more Orthodox Planters; by the Artifices of
which busy Opinionists, there was a Dangerous Blow given, first unto the Faith,
and so unto the Peace of the Churches. In the Storm thus Raised, it is
Incredible, what Obloquy came to be cast upon Mr. Cotton, as if he had been the
Patron of these Destroyers; meeirly because, they, willing to have a Great
Person, in Admiratation, because of Advantage, falsely used the Name of this
Great Person, by the Credit thereof to Disseminate and Dissemble their Errors;
and because the chief of them in their Private Conferences with him, would make
such fallacious Professions of Gospel Truths, that his Christian and Abused
Charity, would not permit him to be so Hasty, as many others were, in Censuring
of them. However the Report given of Mr. Cotton, on this Occasion, by one Baily
a Scotch man, in a most Scandalous Pamphlet, called, A Disswasive, written to
cast an Odium on the Churches of New England, by Vilifying him, that was one of
their most Eminent Servants, are most horrid Injuries. For, there being upon
the Encouragment of the Success, which the Old Nicene, Constan^inop^litane,
Ephesine and Chalcedonian Councils had, in the Extinguishing of several
Successive Heresies, a Council now called at Cambridge, Mr. Cotton after some
Debates with the Reverend Assembly, upon some Controverted Points of
Justification, most Vigorously Joined with the other Ministers of the Country;
in Testifying against the Hateful Doctrines, whereby the Churches had been
Troubled. Indeed there did happen Paroxysms in this Hour of Temptation, between
Mr. Cotton and some other Zealous and worthy Persons, which though they did not
amount unto the Heat and Height, of those that happened between Chrysostom and
Epiphanius, or between Hierom and Ruffinus, yet they Inclined him to meditate a
Removal into another Colony. But a certain Scandalous Writer, having Publicly
Reproached Mr. Cotton, with his former Inclination to Remove, there was thereby
provoked his Public and Patient Answer; which being a Summary Narrative of
this whole Business, I shall here transcribe it.

There was a Generation of Familists, in our own and other Towns, who under
Pretense of Holding forth, what I had taught, Touching Union with Christ, and
Evidencing that Union, did Secretly vent Sundry and Dangerous Errors and
Heresies, denying all Inherent Righteousness, and all Evidencing of a Good
Estate thereby in any sort, and some of them also Denying, the Immortality of
the Soul, and the Resurrection of the Body. When they were questioned by some
Brethren about those things, they carried it, as if they had Held forth
nothing, but what they had Received from me: whereof, when I was Advised, to
clear my self, I Publicly Preached against those Errors. Then, said the
Brethren to the Erring Party, See, Your Teacher declares himself clearly to
differ from you* No matter (say the other) what he says in Public, we
understand him otherwise, and we know what he says to us in Private. Yea, and
I my self could not easily Believe that those Erring Brethren and Sisters, were
so Corrupt in their Judgments as they were Reported; they seeming to me forward
Christians, and utterly Denying any such Tenants, or any thing else but what
they received from my self. All which bred in Sundry of the Country, a
Jealousy, that I was in Secret, A Fomentor of the Spirit of Familism, if not
Leavened my self that way. Which I discerning, it wrought in me, thoughts (as
it did in many other sincerely Godly Brethren of our Church) not of a
Separation from the Churches, but of a Removal to Newhaven, as being better
known to the Pastor, and some others there, than to such as were, at that time
Jealouse of me here. The true Ground whereof was an Inward Loathness to be
Troublesome unto Godly Minds, and a Fear of the Unprofitableness of my Ministry
there, where my way was suspected to be Doubtful and Dangerous. I chose
therefore rather to meditate a Silent Departure, in Peace, than by Tarrying
here, to make way for the Breaking forth of Temptations. But when, at the
Synod, I had discovered the Corruption of the Judgment of the Erring Brethren,
and saw their Fraudulent pretense of Holding forth no other, but what they
received from me (when as indeed they pleaded for Gross Errors contrary unto my
Judgment) I thereupon did bear Witness against them; and when in a private
Conference with some Chief Magistrates, and Elders, I perceived, that my
Removal upon such Differences was Unwelcome to them, and that such Points
needed nor to Occasion any Distance (neither in Place no^ in Heart^^y) amongst
Brethren, I then Rested Satisfied in my Abode amongst, them; and so have
Continued, by the Grace of Christ, unto this Day.

It Is true, such was Mr. Cottons Holy Ingenuity, that when he perceived the
Advantage, which Erroneous and Heretical Persons in his Church, had, from his
Abused Charity; taken to spread their Dangerous Opinions; before ^he was awa^^t
of them, he did Publicly sometimes with Tea^s bewail it* That the Enemy had
sown so many Tares whilst be had been Asleep. Nevertheless it is as true, that
nothing ever could be Baser than they Disingen^i^y of those Pamphlet^eers, who
took Advantage hence, to catch these Tears in their Venomous Ink horns, and
employ them for so many Blots upon the Memory, of a Righteous Man, worthy to be
had in Everlasting Remembrance.

. 22. When the Virulent and Violent Edwards, had been after a most Unchristian
manner, bespattering the Excellent Buroughs, That Reviled Saint, in his
Answer, had that Passage; The Extreme, Eagerness of some to asperse our Names,
makes us to think, that God has made more use of our Names, than we were aware
of, -- We see by their Anger even almost to Madness, bent that way, that they
had little Hope, to prevail with all their Arguments against the Cause we
profess, till they could get down our Esteem (such as it was) in the Hearts of
the People -- But our Names are not in the Power of their Tongues and Pens;
they are in the Hands of God, who will Preserve them so far, as he has use of
them; and further, we shall have no use of them our selves. That Bitter Spirit
in Baily, must for such causes expose the Name of the Incomparable Cotton unto
Irreparable Injuries: For, from the mere Hear says of that Uncharitable Writer,
hastily Published unto the World, the Learned and Worthy Dr. Hoornbeck, not
much less against the Rules of Charity, Printed a Short Account of Mr. Cotton,
whereof an Ingenious Author truly says, There were in it, Quot fere Verba; tot
Errores famosissimi; neque tantum quot Capita, tot Carpenda, sed quot fore
Sententiaru^^ punctula, tot Dispungenda. That Scandalous Account, it is Pity,
it should be Read in English, and greater Pity that ever that Reverend Person,
should make it be Read in Latin; but this it was; Cottonus, horrore Ordinis
Episcopalis, in Aliud Extremum prolapsus, Omnia plebi absque Vinculo
Ecclesiarum concedebat. -- Cottonus iste, primum in Anglia, alteri^^s Long
Sententiae fuerat, unde, et plurimorum Errorum Heresiumque Reus, Maximu^
Ordinis istius, vel potius ATAXIAS, promotor^ extitit; habuitque secum,
quemadmodum Montanus olim Maximillam, Saam Hutchinsonam, de qua, vari^^ and
prodigiosa multa referunt. From these miserable Historians* who would Imagine
what a Slur has been abroad cast upon the Name of as Holy, as Learned, as
Orthodox, and Eminent a Servant of our Lord, in his Reformed Churches, as was
known in his Age! Among the Rest, it is particularly Observable how a Laborious
and Ingenious Forreigner, in his Bibliotheca Anglorum Theologica, having in his
Index mentioned a Book of this our Mr. Cottons, under the Style of Johannis
Cottoni, Via Vitae, Liber Utilissimus, presently adds, Alius Johannes Cottonus
malae Notae Homo: whereas 'twas only by the Misrepresentations of Contentious
and Unadvised men, that John Cotton, the Experimental Author, of such an Useful
Book, must ^e branded with a Note of Infamy. But if the Reader will deal
justly, he must join these Gross Calumnies upon Cotton, with the Fables of
Luthers Devil, Zuinglius's Dreams, Galvin's Brands, and Junius's Cloven-Foot.
If Hoornbeck ever saw Cottons mild, but full Reply to Baily, which as the Good
Spirited Beverly says, would have been esteemed a Sufficient Refutation of all
these wretched Slanders, Nisi Fratrum quorundam aures erunt ad veritatem,
tanquam Aspidum, obtura^^ae, it is Impossible to excuse his wrongful Dealings
with a Venerable Minister of our Lord! Pray, Sir, charge not our Cotton, with
an Horror Ordinis Episcopalis; until you have chastised your Friend Honorius
Reggius, that is Georgius Hornius, for telling us, as Voetius quotes it;
Multorum Animos Subiit Recordatio illius, quod Venerabilis Beza, non sine
Prophetiae Spiritu, olim rescripsit Knoxo, Ecclesiae Scoticae Reformatori:
Sicut Episcopi Papatum pepererunt, ita Oculis poene ipsis jam cernitur,
Pseudo-Episcopos, papatus Reliquias, Epicureismum Terris Invecturos. Atque haec
praemittere Visum, ut eo manifestius esset Britanniam diutius Episcopos non
potuisse far, nisi in Papismum and Atheismum Labi vellet. Charge not our
Cotton with an, Omni^ Plebi absque Vinculo Aliarum Ecclesiarum concedebat;
until, besides the whole Scope and Scheme of his Ecclesiastical Writings, which
allow no more still unto the Fraternity, than Parker, Ames, Cartwright; and
advance no other than that Aristocrasie, that Beza, Zanchy, Whitaker, Bucer and
Blondel pleaded for; you have better construed his Words in his Golden Preface
to Nortons Answer unto the Sylloge Quaes^i^num, Neque nos Regimen proprie
dictum, alibi quam penes Presbyteros stabiliendum Cupimus: Convenimus ambo in
Subjecto Regiminis Ecclesiastici: Convenimus etiam in Regula Regiminis, ut
Administrentur Omnia Juxta Canonem Sacrarum Scripturarum: Convenimus etiam in
Fine Regiminis, ut Omnia Transigantur ad Edificationem Ecclesiae, non ad Pompam
aut Luxum Seculare^: Synodos nos, una Vobiscum, cum opus fuerit, et Suscipimus
and veneramur. Quantillum est, quod Restat, quod Distat! Actus Regiminis, quos
vos a Synodis peragi Velletis, ^os a Synodis porrigi Ecclesits, et ab
Ecclesi^s, ex Synodali DIORTHOSEI peragi peteremus. Charge not our Cotton with
an, ATAXIAS Promotor Extitit, until you, your self, Doctor, have Revoked your
own two Concessions, which are all the Ataxies that ever could, with so much as
the least Pretense, be imputed unto this Renowned Person; Ecclesia particularis
quaelibet Subjectum est Adaequatum and proprium plen^^ potestatis*
Ecclesiasticae; nec Congrue dicitur ejus a Synodo Dependentia, And, Neque enim
Synodi in alias Ecclesias potestatem habent Imperantem, quae Superiorum est, in
Inferiores sibi Subditos; Non-Communionis Sententia Potestatem Summam denotat.
As for the, Cottonus Plur^morum Errorum Hoeresiumque Reus, were Old Austin
alive, he would have charged no less a Crime than that of Sacrilege upon the
Man, that thus without all Color, should Rob the Church of a Name which would
justly be Dear unto it; for as the Great Caryl has expressed it, The Name of
Cotton is as an Ointment poured forth. But for the Top of all these Calumnies,
Cottoni Hutchinsona, instead of a Resemblance therein to Montani Maximilla, the
truer Comparison would have been, Mulier ista, quae per Calumniam notissimam
Objiciebatur Athanasio; All the Favor, which that Prophetess of Thyatira had
from this Angelical Man, was the same, that the provoked Paul showed unto the
Pythoniss. In fine, The Histories, which the World has had of the New-English
Churches, under the Influence of Mr. Cotton, I have sometimes thought much of a
piece, with what we have in the Old Histories of Lysimachus; That when a
Leprous, and Scabby fort of a People were Driven out of Egypt, into the
Wilderness, there was a certain man called Moses, who counseled them to March
on in a Body, till they came to some Good Soil. This Moses commanded them to be
Kind unto no man; To give Bad Advice rather than Good, upon all Occasions; and
to Destroy as many Temples as they could find; So, after much Travail, and
Trouble, they came to a Fruitful Soil, where they did all the Mischief that
Moses had recommended, and built a City, which was, at first, called Hier^syla,
from the spoiling of the Temples: but afterward, to shun the Disgrace of the
Occasion, they changed it into Hierosolyme, and bore the Name of
Hierosolymitans. But thus must a Bad Report, as well as a Good Report follow
such a man as Mr. Cotton, whose only Fault after all, was that, with which,
that memorable Ancient Nazianzen was taxed sometimes; namely, the Fault of
Mansuetude.

. 23. These Clouds being thus happily blown over, the Rest of his Days were
spent in a more settled Peace; and Mr. Cottons Growing and Spreading Fame, like
Joseph's Bough, Ran over the Wall of the Anlantic Ocean, unto such a Degree,
that in the year 1641. Some Great Persons in England, were intending to have
sent over a Ship, on purpose to fetch him over, for the sake of the Service,
that such a Man as He, might then Do to the Church of God, then, Traveling in
the Nation. But although their Doubt of his Willingness to Remove, caused them
to forbear that Method of obtaining him, yet the Principal Members in both
Houses of Parliament Wrote unto him, with an Importunity for his Return into
England; which had prevailed with him, if the Dismal Showers of Blood, quickly
after breaking upon the Nation, had not made such Afflictive Impressions upon
him, as to prevent his purpose. He continued, therefore, in Boston, unto his
Dying Day; Counting it a great Favor of Heaven unto him, that he was Delivered
from, the Unsettledness of Habitation, which was not among the least of the
Calamities, that Exercised the Apostles of our Lord. Nineteen Years and odd
Months, he spent in this Place, doing of Good, Publicly, and Privately, unto
all sorts of men, as it became, a Good Man, full of Faith, and of the Holy
Ghost. Here in an Expository way, he went over the Old Testament once, and a
Second Time as far as the Thirtieth Chapter of Isaiah; and the whole New
Testament, once, and a Second time, as far as the Eleventh Chapter to the
Hebrews. Upon Lord's-Dayes, and Lecture-Dayes, he Preached through the Acts of
the Apostles; the Prophesies of Haggai, and Zechariah; the Books of Ezra, the
Revelation, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, the Second and Third Epistles of John^ the
Epistle to Titus, both Epistles to Timothy; the Epistle to the Romans; with
Innumerable other Scriptures on Incidental Occasions. Though he had also, the
most Remarkable Faculty, perhaps of any man living, to Meet every Remarkable
Occasion, with pertinent Reflections, what ever Text, he were upon, without
ever wandering out of sight from his Text: and it is possible there might
sometimes be a particular Operation of Providence, to make the Works, and Words
of God, meet in the Ministry of this His Holy Servant. But thus did he Abound
in the Works of the Lord!

. 24. At Length, upon Desire, Going to Preach a Sermon at Cambridge, (which he
did, on Isa. 54. 13. Thy Children shall be all Taught of the Lord; and from
thence gave many Excellent Counsils, unto the Students of the College there)
he took Wet, in his Passage over the Ferry; but he presently felt the Effect of
it, by the falling of his Voice in Sermon time; which ever until now, had been
a clear, neat, audible Voice, and easily-heard in the most Capacious Auditory.
Being found So Doing, as it had often been his De^l7rarod Wish, That he might
not out live his Work! his Illness went o^^ to an Inflammation in his Lungs;
from whence he grew somewhat Asthmatical; but there was a Complication of other
Scorbutic Affects, which put him under many Symptoms of his approaching End. On
the Eighteenth of November, he took in Course for his Text, the Four Last
Verses of the Second Epistle to Timothy, giving this Reason for his Insisting
on so many Verses at once, Because else (he said) I shall not Live to make an
End of this Epistle; but he chiefly Insisted on those Words, Grace be with you
all. Upon the Lords Day following, he Preached his Last Sermon, on Joh 1. 14.
About that Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, from the Faith to the Sight whereof,
he was now Hastening. After this in that Study, which had been Perfumed with
many such Days before, he now spent a Day in Secret Humiliations and
Supplications, before the Lord; seeking the Special Assistences of the Holy
Spirit, for the Great Work of Dying, that was now before him. What Glorious
Transactions might one have Heard passing between the Lord Jesus Christ, and an
Excellent Servant of His, now coming unto Him, if he could have had an Hearing
Place behind the Hangings of the Chamber, in such a Day! But having finished
the Duties of the Day, he took his Leave of his Beloved Study, saying to his
Consort, I shall Go into that Room, no more! And he had all along Presages in
his Heart, that God would by his Present Sickness, give him an Entrance into
the Everlasting Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore, Setting his House
in Order, he was now so far from unwilling to Receive the Mercy-Stroke of
Death, as that he was Desirous to be with Him, With whom to be, is, by far, the
Best of All. And although the chief Ground of his Readiness to be Gone, was
from the unutterably Sweet and Rich Entertainments, which he did by Fore-tast,
as well as by Promise, know that the Lord had Reserved in the Heavenly Regions
for him, yet he said, it contributed unto this Readiness in him, when he
considered the Saints, whose Company and Communion he was Going unto;
Particularly Perlins, Ames, Preston, Hildersham, Dod, and others, which had
been peculiarly Dear unto himself; besides the Rest, in that General Assembly.

. 25. While he thus Lay Sick, the Magistrates, the Ministers, of the Country,
and Christians of all Sorts, Resorted unto him, as unto a Public Father, full
of sad Apprehensions, at the withdraw of such a Public Blessing; and the
Gracious Words, that Proceeded out of his Mouth, while he had Strength to utter
the profitable Conceptions of his Mind, caused them to Reckon these their
Visits, the Gainfullest that ^ver they had made. Among others, the then
President of the College, with many Tears, desired of Mr. Cotton, before his
Departure, to bestow his Blessing on him; saying, I know in my Heart, they whom
you Bless, shall be Blessed. And not long before his Death, he sent for the
Elders of the Church, whereof, he himself was also an Elder; who, having,
according to the Apostolical Direction, Pray^d over him, he Exhorted them to
Feed the Flock over which they were Overseers, and increase their Watch against
those Declensions, which he saw the Professors of Religion, Falling into:
Adding, I have now, through Grace, been more than Forty years a Servant unto
the Lord Jesus Christ, and have ever found Him a good Master. When his Colleague
Mr. Wilson, took his Leave of him, with a Wish, that God would Lift up the
Light of His Countenance upon him, he instantly Replied, God has done it
already, Brother! He then, called for his Children, with whom he left the
Gracious Covenant of God, as their never Failing Portion: and now desired, that
he might be left Private, the Rest of his Minutes, for the more Freedom of his
Applications unto the Lord. So, Lying Speechless a few Hours, he Breathed his
Blessed Soul into the Hands of his Heavenly Lord; on the Twenty third of
December 1652. Entering on the Sixty Eighth year of his own Age: And on the Day,
yea, at the Hour, of his constant Weekly Labors in the Lecture, wherein, he
had been so long Serviceable, even to all the Churches of New England. Upon
Tuesday the Twenty eighth of December, he was most Honorably Interred, with a
most Numerous Concourse of People, and the most Grievous and Solemn Funeral,
that was ever known perhaps upon the American Strand; and the Lectures in his
Church, the whole Winter following, performed by the Neighboring Ministers,
were but so many Funeral-Sermons, upon the Death and Worth of this
Extraordinary Person: Among which, the First, I think, was Preached by Mr.
Richard Mather, who gave unto the bereaved Church of Boston, this great
Character of their Incomparable COTTON, Let us Pray, that God would Raise up
some Eleazer to Succeed this Aaron: But you can hardly Expect, that so large a
Portion of the Spirit of God should dwell in any one, as dwelt in this Blessed
man! And generally in the other Churches through the Country, the Expiration of
this General Blessing to them all, did Produce Funeral-Sermons full of Honor
and Sorrow; even as many Miles above an Hundred, as Newhaven was distant for
the Massachuset-Bay, when the Tidings of Mr. Cottons Decease arrived there, Mr.
Davenport, with many Tears bewailed it, in a Public Discourse on that in a
Sam. 1. 26. I am Distressed for thee, my Brother Jonathan, very Pleasant have
thou been unto me. Yea, They speak of Mr. Cotton in their Lamentations to this
Day!

. 26. How vast a Treasure of Learning (...) laid in the Grave, which was
opened, on this, Occasion, can Scarce Crediby and Sufficiently be Related. Mr.
Cotton, was, indeed, a most Universe Scholar, and a Living System of the
Liberal (...) and a Walking Library. It would be Endless (...) Recite, all his
particular Accomplishments, (...) only Three Articles of Observation, shall
(...) offered. First, For his Grammar, he had a very Singular Skill in those
Three Languages, th^^ Knowledge whereof was by the Inscription o^^ the Cross of
our Savior, proposed unto the Perpetual Use of his Church. The Hebrew he
understood so exactly, and so readily, that (...) was able to Discourse in it.
In the Greek, he was a Cri^ick, so Accurate, and so Well-Versed, th^^ he needed
not, like Austin, to have Studied (...) in his Reduced Age. Thus, i^ many of
the Ancients committed Gross mistakes, in their Interpretations of the
Scriptures, through their want skill in the Originals, Mr. Cotton, was (...)
Qualified for an Interpreter. He both Wrote Spoke Latin also with great
Facility; and with most Ciceroman Elegancy, Exemplified in (...) Published
Composure. Next, for his Logic, (...) was completely furnished therewith to
Encounter the Subtilest Adversary of the Truth. (...) although he had been
Educated in the Per^^ patetick way, yet like the other Puritans of the times,
he rather affected the Romaean Discipline; and chose to follow the Methods of
that Excellent Ramus, who like Justin of old, was not only a Philosopher, but a
Christian, and a Martyr also; rather than the more Empty, Trifling, Altercative
Notions, to which the Works of the Pagan Aristotle derived unto us, through the
Mangling Hands of the Apostate Porphyrie, have Disposed his Disciples. Lastly,
for his Theology, There 'twas that he had his Greatest Ex^^^ordinariness, and
most of all, his Textual Divinity. His Abilities to Expound the Scriptures,
caused him to be Admired by the Ablest of his Hearers. Although his
Incomparable Modesty would not permit him to speak any more than the Least of
Himself, yet unto a private Friend he has said, That he knew not of any
Difficult Place in all the whole Bible, which ^e had not weighed, somewhat unto
Satisfaction. And hence, though he Ordinarily bestowed much pains upon his
Public Sermons, yet he has sometimes Preached most Admirably, without any
Warning at all; and a New Note upon a Text ^fore him, occurring to his mind,
but just as he was going into the Assembly, has taken up his Discourse for that
Hour, so Pertinently and Judiciously, that the most Critical of his Auditors,
imagined nothing Extemporaneous. Indeed his Library was vast, and vast was his
Acquaintance with it; but although amonst his Readings, he had given a Special
Room, unto the Fathers, and unto the Schoolmen, yet, at last, he preferred one
Calvin among them all. If Erasmus, when offered a Bishopric to Write against
Luther could answer, There was more Divinity in a (...) of Luther, than in all
Thomas Aquinas; T^ no wonder that Salmasius could so Venera^^ Calvin, as to
say, That he had rather be (...) Author of that One Book, The Institutions
written by Calvin, than have written all that was ev^^ done by Gro^i^s. Even
such a Calvinist (...) our Cotton! Said he, I have read the Fathers (...) the
School men, and Calvin too; but I find, The he that has Calvin, has 'em all.
And being asked why in his Latter Days, he Indulged Noctur^^^ Studies, more
than formerly, he pleasantly Replied, Because I Love to Sweeten my mouth with
piece of Calvin, before I go to sleep.

. 27. Indeed in his Common Preaching, did as Basil reports of Ephrem Syrus,
Pluri^^ distare a Mundana Sapientia; and though were a Great Scholar, yet he
did Conscientious forbear making to the Common People any Ostentation of it. He
had the Art of Concealing Art; and thought with Sohnius, Non minus Virtus
Populariter quam Argute Loqui, and (...) Dod, That Latin for the most part was
Flesh in Sermon. Accordingly, when he was Handle the Deepest Subjects, a Speech
of that Import (...) frequent with him, I desire to speak so, as to understood
by the meanest Capacity! And he would sometimes give the same Reason for it,
which the Great Austin gave, If I Preach more Scholastically, then only the
Learned, and not the Unlearned, can so Understand as to Profit by me; but if I
Preach plainly, then both Learned, and Unlearned, will understand me, and so I
shall profit all. When a Golden Key of Oratory would not so well open a Mystery
of Christianity, he made no stick to take an Iron One, that should be less
Rhetorical. You should hear few Terms of Art, few Latinities, no Exotic or
Obsolete Phrases, obscuring of the Truths, which he was to bring unto the
People of God. Nevertheless his more Judicious and Observing Hearers, could by
his most Untrim'd Sermons perceive that he was a man of more than Ordinary
Abilities. Hence when a Dutchman of Great Learning, heard Mr. Cotton Preach at
Boston, in England, he professed, That he never in his Life saw such a
Conjunction of Learning and Plainness, as there was in the Preaching of this
worthy man. The Glory of God, and not his own Glory, was that, at which he
aimed in his Labors; for which cause, at the End of his Notes, he still
Inserted that Clause, Tibi Domi^e: Or, For thy Glory, O God! For his Delivery,
though it were not like Farels, Noisy and Thundering, yet it had in it a very
awful Majesty, set off with a Natural and Becoming Motion of his Right Hand;
and the Lord was in the Still Voice at such a Rate, that Mr. Wilson would say,
Mr. Cotton Preaches with such Authority; Demonstration, and of Life, that
methinks, when he Preaches out of any Prophet, or Apostle, I hear not him; I
hear that very Prophet and Apostle; yea, I hear the Lord Jesus Christ Himself
speaking in my Heart. And the Success which God gave to these Plain Labors, of
His Faithful, Humble, Deligent Servant, was beyond what most Ministers in the
Country ever did Experience; There have been Few that have seen so many and
mighty Effects, given to the Travels of their Souls.

. 28. He was even from his Youth to his Age, an Indefatigable Student, under
the Conscience of the Apostolical Precept, Be not Sloathful in Business; but
Fervent in Spirit Serving the Lord. He was careful to Redeem his Hours, as well
as his Days; and might lay claim to that Character of the Blessed Martyr,
Sparing of Sleep, more Sparing of Words, but most Sparing of Time. If any came
to visit him, he would be very Civil to 'em, having Learned it as his Duty, To
use all Gentleness toward all Men: and yet he would often say with some
Regret, after the Departure of a Visitant, I had rather have given this Man an
Handful of Money, than have been kept, thus long, out of my Study: Reckoning
with Pliny* The Time not spent in Study for the most part, Sweel'd away. For
which cause, he went not much Abroad; but he judged Ordinarily that more
Benefit was obtained, according to the Advice of the Wise King, by conversing
with the Dead [in Books] than with the Living [in ^alks:] and that Needless
Visits do commonly Unframe our Spirits, and perhaps disturb our Comforts. He
was an Early Riser, taking the Morning for the Muses; and in his Latter Days
forbearing a Supper, he turned his former Supping-Time, into a Reading, a
Thinking, a Praying-Time. Twelve-Hours in a Day he commonly Studied, and would
call that, A Scholars-Day; resolving to wear out rather with Using, than with
Rusting. In Truth, had he not been of an Healthy and Hearty Constitution, and
had he not made a Careful though not Curious Diet serve him, instead of an
Hippocrates, his continued Labor must have made his Life, as well as his
Labor, to have been but of a Short Continuance. And, indeed, the Work which
lay upon him, could not have been performed, without a Labor more than
Ordinary: For besides his constant Preaching more than Once, every Week, many
Cases were brought unto him far and near, in Resolving whereof, as he took much
Time, so he did much Good: being a most Excellent Casuist. He was likewise very
Deeply concerned in Peaceable and Effectual Disquisitions of the Controversies
about Church Government, then Agitated in the Church of God. And though he
chiefly gave himself to Reading and Doctrine and Exhortation, depending much on
the Ruling Elders to Inform him, concerning the State of his Particular Flock,
that he might the Better Order himself in the Word and Prayer, yet he found his
Church-Work, in this Regard also, to call for no little Painfulness,
Watchfulness, and Faithfulness.

. 29. He was One so Clothed with Humility, that according to the Emphasis of
the Apostolical Direction, by this Livery his Relation as a Disciple to the
Lowly Jesus, was notably discovered; and hence he was Patient and Peaceable,
even to a Proverb. He had a more than Common Excellency in that Cool Spirit,
which the Oracles of Wisdom describe as, The Excellent Spirit in the Man of
Understanding; and therefore Mr. Norton would parallel him, with Moses among
the Patriarchs, with Melancthon among the Reformers. He was rather Excessive,
than Defective in Self-Denial, and had the Nimia Humilitas, which Luther
sometimes blamed in Staupicius: yea, he was, at last, himself sensible that
some fell very Deep into the Sin of Corah, through his Extreme Forbearance, in
matters relating to his own Just Rights in the Church of God. He has, to a
Judicious Friend, thus expressed himself, Angry men have an Advantage above me;
the People dare not set themselves against such men, because they know, it wont
be born; but some care not what they say or do about me, because they know I
went be angry with them again. One would have thought the Ingenuity of such a
Spirit should have broke the Hearts of Men, that had indeed, the Hearts of Men
in them; yea, that the hardest Flints would have been broken, as is usual, upon
such a Soft Bag of Cotton! But, alas! he found it otherwise, even among Some,
who pretended unto High Seize in Christianity. Once particularly, an
Humourous and Imperious Brother, following Mr. Cotton home to his House, after
his Public Labors, instead of the Grateful Respects with which these Holy
Labors, were to have been encouraged, Rudely told him, that his Ministry was
become Generally, either Dark, or Flat: whereto this Meek man, very mildely and
gravely, made only this Answer, B^^th, Brother, it may be, both; Let me have
your Prayers that it may be otherwise! But it is Remarkable, that the Man Sick
thus, of Wanton Singularities, afterward Dyed of those Damnable Heresies, for
which he was deservedly Excommunicated Another time, when Mr. Cotton had
modestly Replied unto one that would much Talk and Crack of his Insight into
the Revelations; Brother I must confess my self to want Light in those
Mysteries the man went home, and sent him A Pound (...) Candles; upon which
Action, this Good Man bestowed only a Silent Smile; he would not (...) the
Becon of his Great Soul on Fire, at the Lan^ing of such a Little Cock-boat. He
Learned the Lesson of Gregory, It is better, many times, to fly from an Injury
by silence, than to overcome it by Replying; and he used that Practice of
Grynaeus, To Revenge Wrongs, by Christian Taciturinty. And it may pass for a
Branch of the same Temper in him, That he extremely hated all
Allotri^-Episcopacy, and though he knew, as practically, as most men in the
World, That we have a Call to do Good, as often as we have Power and Occasion,
yet he was very Slow of Apprehending any Occasion of meddling At all, though he
might have had never so much Power to meddle For Good, any where but within the
Sphere of his own proper Calling. As he understood that Leontius blamed
Constantine, for Interposing too far in Ecclesiastical Affairs, thus Mr.
Cotton, on the Other side had a Great Aversion from Engaging in any Civil Ones;
he would Religiously Decline taking into his Cognizance all Civil Controversies
or Umpirages, and whatever Looked Heteroge^^ous to the Calling of One, whose
whole Business 'twas, To Feed the Flock of God. Nevertheless in the Things of
God, of Christ, of Conscience, his Condesending Temper did not hinder him, from
he most Immovable Resolution. He would not (...) Follow Peace with all men, as
to abandon or rejudice, one Jot, the Interests of Holiness.

. 30. His Command over his own Spirit, was particularly Observable in his
Government of his Family, where he would never Correct any thing in a Passion;
but, first, with much Deliberation show what Rule, in the Holy Word of God, had
been Violated, by the Fault lately committed. He was, indeed, one that Ruled
well his own House! He therein Morning and Evening, Read a Chapter, with a
Little Applicatory Exposition, before and after which, he made a Prayer; but he
was very Short in all, accounting as Mr. Dod, Mr. B^ins, and other great
Sainte^ ^^id before him, That it was a Thing inconvenient (...) ways to be
Tedious in Family Duties. He also Read constantly a Portion of the Scripture
alone, and he Prayed over what he Read; Prayed, I say; For he was very much in
Prayer, a very Man of Prayer; he would rarely sit down to Study; without a
Prayer over it, referring to the Presence of God, accompanying what he did. It
was the Advice of the Ancient, Si vis esse Semper (...) De^, Semper Ora, Semper
Lege; and agreeably hereunto, Mr. Cotton might say with David, Lord, I am still
with Thee! But he that was with God, all the Week, was more Intimately with
Him, on His Own Day, the Chief Day of the Week; which he Observed most
Conscientiously. The Sabbath, he began, the Evening Before; for which Keeping
of the Sabbath from Evening to Evening, he Wrote Arguments before his coming to
New England; and I Suppose, 'twas from his Reason and Practice, that the
Christians of New England have Generally done so too. When that Evening
arrived, he was usually Larger in his Exposition in his Family, than at other
times; He then Catechized his Children and Servants, and Prayed with them, and
S^ng a Psalm; from thence he Retired unto Study, and Secret Prayer, till the
Time of his going unto his Repose. The next Morning, after his Usual
F^mily-Worship, he betook himself to the Devotions of his Retirements (...) so
unto the Public. From thence tow^^^ Noon, he Repaired again to the like
Devotions, not permitting the Interruption of any other Dinner, than that of a
small Repast carried up unto him. Then to the Public, once more; from whence
Returning, his first Work was Cl^^set-P rayer, then Prayer with Repetitions of
the Sermons in the Family. After Supper he still Sang a Psalm; which he would
conclude with Uplifted Eyes and Hands, uttering this Doxology, -- Blessed ^e
God in Christ, our Savior! Last of all, just before his going to Sleep, he
would once again go into his Prayerful Study, and there Briefly Recommend All
to that God, Whom he Served with a Pure Conscience. These were his Ordinary
Sabbaths. But he also kept Extraordinary Ones, upon the Just Occasions for
them. He was in Fasting often, and would often keep whole Days by Himself,
wherein he would with Solemn Humiliations and Supplications Implore the Wanted
Mercys of Heaven: yea, he would likewise, by himself, keep whole Days of
Thanksgiving unto the Lord: besides the many Days of this Kind, which he
Celebrated in Public Assemblies with the People of God. Thus did this Man of
God Continually!

. 31. Without Liberality and Hospitality, he had been Really as Underserving of
the Character of a Minister of the Gospel, as the Sacrilegious Niggardliness of
the People dos^ often endeavor to make Ministers Incapable of answering that
Character. But Mr. Cotton was most Exemplary for this Virtue; wherein there are
of his Children, that have also Learned of him. The Stranger and the Needy were
still Entertained at his Table, Episcopaliter and Benign, as was the Phrase
Instructively used for a, Charitable Entertainment, of old. It might be said of
him, as once it was of the Generous Corinthian, Semper Aliquis in Cottoni Domo,
He was ever Showing of Kindness to Somebody or other. What Posidonius relates
of Austin, and what Peter Martyr affirms of Bucer, was very true of our Cotton;
His House was like an Inn, for the Constant Entertainment, which he gave upon
the Account of the Gospel; and he would say, If a man want an Heart for this
Charity, it is not fit, such a Man should be Ordained a Minister: consenting
therein to the Great Canonist, Hospitalitas usque adeo Episcopis est
Necessaria, at si ab ea inveniantur alieni, Jure prohibentur Ordinari. While he
lived Quietly in England, he was noted for his Bountiful Disposition;
especially toward Ministers driven into England, by the Storms of Persecution
then Raging in Germany; for which cause Libingus, Saumer, Tolner, and others of
the Germane Sufferers, in their Accounts of him, would Style him, Fautor
Doctissimus, Clarissimus, Fidelissimas, plarimumque Honorandus. It was
Remarked, that he never omitted Inviting unto his House any Minister Traveling
to or through the Town, but only that One man, who perfidiously Betrayed Mr.
Hildersham, with his Non Conformist Associates, into the Hands of their
Enemies. And after he came to New England, he changed not his Mind with his
Ai^; but with a Quantum ex Quantillo! continued his Beneficence upon all
Occasions, though his Abilities for it were very much Diminished; which brings
to mind a most Memorable Story. A Little Church, whereof the worthy Mr. White
was Pastor, being by the Strange and Strong, Malice of their Prevailing
Adversaries, forced off Barmudas in much Misery, into a Desert of America, the
Report of their Distresses came to their Fellow Sufferers, though not now
AlikeSufferers, at New England. Mr. Cotton Immediately applied himself to
obtain a Collection, for the Relief of those Distressed Saints; and a
Collection of about Seven Hundred Pounds, was immediately obtained, whereof Two
Hundred was Gathered in that One Church of Boston, where there was no man, who
did Exceed, and but one man who did Equal, this Deviser of Liberal Things, in
that Contribution. But Behold the Wonderful Providence of God! This
Contribution arrived unto the Poor People on the very Day^ after they had been
brought unto a Personal Division of the little Meal, then Left in the Barrel;
upon the Spending whereof, they could foresee nothing but a ^ing^ing Death; and
on That very Day, when their Pastor had Preached unto them, upon that most
suitable Text, Psalm. 23. 1. That Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.

. 32. The Reader, that is Inquisitive after the Prosopography of this Great
Man, may be Informed, That he was of a Clear, Fair, Sanguine Complexion, and
like David of a Ruddy Countenance. He was rather Low than Tall, and rather Fat
than Lean; but of a Becoming Mediocrity* In his Younger years, his Hair was
Brown, but in his Latter years, as White, as the Driven Snow* In his
Countenance there was an Inexpressible sort of Majesty, which Commanded
Reverence from all that approached him; This Cotton was indeed, the Cato of his
Age, for his Gravity, but had a Glory with it which Cato had not. I cannot,
indeed, say, what they Report of Hilary, that Serpents were not able to Look
upon him; nevertheless it was commonly Observed, that the worser sort of
Serpents, would from the awe of his Presence keep in their Poisons. As the
Keeper of the Inn, where he did use to Lodge, when he came to Derby, would
profanely say to his Companions, That he Wished Mr. Cotton, were gone out of
his House, for, he was not able to Swear white that man was under his Roof: So,
other wicked Persons could not show their Wickedness, whilst this Holy and
Righteous man was in the Company. But the Exacter Picture of him, is to be
taken from his Printed Works, whereof there are many, that Praise him in the
Gates; though few of them were Printed with his own Knowledge or Consent. The
Children of New England are to this Day most usually Fed with his Excellent
Catechism, which is Entitled, Milk for Babes. His well known Sermons on the
First Epistle of John, in Folio, have had their Acceptance with the Church of
God: though being Preached in his Youth, and not Published by himself, there
are some Things therein, which he would not have Inserted. There are also of
His abroad, Sermons on the Thirteenth of the Revelations, and on the Vials, and
on Rev. 20. 5, 6. and 2 Samuel (...) Last, in Quarto; as also a Savory Treatise
Entitled, The way of Life; The Reverend Prefacer whereto says, Ever since I
had any Knowledge of this Judicious Author, I have Looked upon him* as one
Entrusted with as Great a part of the Churches Treasure, as any other
whatsoever. Several Volumnes of his Expositions upon Ecclesiastes and
Canticles, are also Published in Octavo; As likewise A Treatise of the
New Covenant, which being a Posthumous Piece, and only Notes written after him,
is accordingly to be Judged of. And there have seen the Light, an Answer to Mr.
Bal^, about Forms of Prayer: A Discourse about the Grounds and Ends of Infant
Baptism: A Discourse about Singing of Psalms, proving it a Gospel-Ordinance: An
Abstract of Laws in Christ's Kingdom for Civil Government: A Treatise about the
Holiness of Church Members, proving that Visible Saints are the matter of a
Church: Another Discourse upon Things Indifferent, proving that no Church
Governors have Power, to Impose Indifferent Things upon the Consciences of
Men. Add hereto, The Way of the Churches in New England: And that Golden
Discourse of, The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; In a Written Copy whereof,
yet in our Hands, there were some Things, which were never Printed, mentaining,
that in the Government of the Church, Authority is peculiar to the Elders only,
and answering all the Brownistical Arguments to the Contrary. But whereas there
may Occur a Passage in his Book of The way of the Churches, which may have in
it a little more of the Morellian Tang, Reader, 'Twas none of Mr. Cottons; Mr.
Cotton was Troubled when he saw such a Passage, in an Imperfect Copy of his
Writings, exposed unto the World, under his Name, against his Will: and he took
an Opportunity, in the most Public manner, to Declare as much unto the World.
He was also sometimes put upon Writing yet more Polemically. Indeed there was
one Occasion of so Writing, which he Declined meddling withal; and that was
this. Mr. Cotton, having in his Younger years, Written to a Private Friend some
Things, tending (at his Desire) to Clear the Doctrine of Reprobation, from the
Exceptions of the Arminians; and this Manuscript falling into Dr. Twiss's Hand,
that Learned man Published it, with his own Confutation of certain Passages in
i^, which did not agree so well with the Doctor's own Supralapsarian Scheme.
Now, when Mr. Cotton saw himself Reviled for this Cause by Baily, as being a
Pelagian, he only made this meek Reply; I hope God will give me Opportunity
e're long to Consider of this, the Doctors Labor of Love. I Bless the Lord,
who has taught me to be willing to be Taught, of a far meaner Discriple, than
such a Doctor, whose Scholastical Acuteness, Pr^^gnancy of Wit, Solidity of
Judgment, and Dexterity of Argument, all Orthodox Divines do Highly Honor, and
whom all Arminians and Jesuits do sall down before, with Silence. God forbid I
should shut my Eyes against any Light brought to me by him. Only I desire I may
not be Condemned as a Pelagian or Arminian before I he heard. Moreover, Mr.
Cawdry fell hard upon him; to whom he prepared an Answer, which was afterward
Published and Seconded by Dr. Owen. But besides these, he was twice compelled
unto some other Eristical Writings: Once in Answer to Baily; another time in
Answer to Williams: In both of which, like Job, he Turned the Books, which his
Adversaries had written against him, into a Crown. I believe, never any mere
Man, under such open and horrid Injuries as these two Reporters heaped upon Mr.
Cotton, did Answer with more Christian Patience; his Answer are indeed a
Pattern for all Answerers to the World's End. But it was particularly
remarkable, that, in this matter, certain Persons, who had fallen under the
Censures of the Civil Authority in the Country, Singled out Mr. Cotton for the
Object of their Displeasure, although he had, most, of all men, declined
Interesting himself in the Actions of the Magistrate, and had also done more
than all men to obtain Healing and Favor for those ungrateful Delinquents.
However if Mr. Cotton would from his own profitable Experience, have added
Another Book unto this Catalogue, it might have been on the Subject Handled by
Plutarch De Capienda ex Hostibus Utilitate. This is the Elenchus of Mr. Cottons
Published Writings; whereupon we might make this Conclusion.

Digna Legi Scribis, Facis et Dignissima Scribi;
Scripta probant Doctum, Te, Tua, Facta, probum.
33. The Things, which have been Related, cause us to Account Mr. Cotton an
Extraordinary Person.

Divis eras Donis, etiamque Fidelis in Usu,
Lucratus Domino multa Talenta tuo.
Multus eras Studiis, multusque Laboribus, uno
Te, Fora, Templa, Domus, Te; cupiere frui.
Multa Laborabas Scribendo, Multa Docendo,
Invigilans Operi, Nocte Di^que, Dei.
Multa Laborabas Scribendo, Multa Ferendo,
Quae nisi Cottono, vix Subeunda forent.
Tu non unus eras, sed Multi; Multus in Uno,
Multorum Donts praeditus Unus eras.
Uno Te amisso, Multos Ami^^mus in Te,
Sed neque per Multos Restituendus eris.
These were some of the Lines, which the Renowned Bulkly, justly wept upon his
Grave. Yea, we may, on as many Accounts as These Days will allow, Reckon him
to have been a Prophet of the Lord: and when we have Entertained ou^ selves
with a Memorable Demonstration of it, in One Surprising and Stupendous Article
of our Church History, we will put a Period unto This part of it.

At the Time, when some unhappy Persons were just going from hence to England,
with certain Petitions, which had a Tendency to Disturb the Good Order of
Things in both Church and State, then settling among us, Mr. Cotton in the
Ordinary Course of his Lectures on the Canticles, Preached on Cant 2. 15. Take
us the Foxes, the Little Foxes, which Destroy the Vines. Having thence
observed, That when God has Delivered his Church from the Dangers of the
Persecuting Bear and Lion, then there were Foxes that would seek by Policy to
Undermine it; and, That all those who Go by a Fox like Policy to Undermine the
Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ, shall be taken and overtaken by his
Judgments; he came at Length to his Application, where with a more than
Ordinary Majesty, and Fervency, he after This manner, expressed himself.

First, Let such as Live in this Country Take Heed, how they go about in any
Indirect Way or Course to Prejudice the Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ in
the Land, or the Government of the Land. If you Do, The Keeper of Israel, who
neither Slumbereth nor Sleeps, will not Take it well at your Hands. He that
brought this People hither, and preserved them from the Rage of Persecution,
and made this Wilderness an Hidingplace for them, whilst he was Chastising our
Nation, with the other Nations round about it, and has manifested his Gracious
Presence in the midst of these His Golden Candlesticks, and secured us from the
Plots of the Late Arch Bishop, and his Confederates abroad, and from the Plots
of the Heathen here at home; there is no Question but He will Defend us from
the Underminings of False Brethren, and such as are Joined with them.
Wherefore, let such know, That this is, in many Respects Immanuels Land, and
they shall not Prosper that Rise up against it, but shall be Taken every One of
them in the Snares they lay for it. This I speak as a Poor Prophet of the Lord,
according to the Word of His Grace now Before us! But in the Second Place,
whereas many of our Brethren are Going to England, Let me Direct a Word unto
Them also. I desire the Gracious Presence of our God may Go with you, and ^^is
Angels Guard you, not only from the Dangers of the Seas, while you are
thereupon, but also from the Errors of the Times, when you arrive.
Nevertheless, If there be any among you, my Brethren, as it is Reported there
are, that have a Petition to prefer unto the High Court of Parliament, that may
Conduce to the Distraction and Annoyance of the Peace of our Churches, and the
Weakening the Government of the Land where we Live, Let Such Know, the Lord will
never Suffer them to Prosper, in their Subtle, Malicious, Desperate
Undertakings against His People, who are as Tender unto Him as the Apple of His
Eye. But if there be any such among You, who are to Go, I do exhort you, and I
would advise you, in the Fear of God, that when the Terrors of the Almighty
shall Beset the Vessel wherein you are, when the Heavens shall frown upon you,
and the Billows of the Sea, shall swell above you, and the Dangers of Death
shall Threaten you, as I am verily persuaded they will, I would have you then
to Consider your Ways. I will not give the Counsel, that was taken concerning
Jonas, to cast such a Person into the Sea; God forbid! But I Counsel such to
come then unto a Resolution in themselves to Desist from their Enterprises, and
Cast their Petitions into the Sea. It may be, that Hardness of Heart, and
Stoutness of Spirit may cause you to Persist, and yet in Mercy to some Gracious
Persons among you, the Lord may Deliver the Ship from Utter Destruction for
their sakes. But the Lord has further Judgments in Store; He is the God of the
Land, as well as of the Sea. I speak this also, as an unworthy Prophet of the
Lord!

These Things were then uttered by a Person, that was as Little of an
Enthusiast, as most men in the World. Now attend the Event!

That Ship, after many Stresses of Weather in the Harbor, puts out to Sea; but
at Sea, it had the Terriblest Passage, perhaps, that ever was Heard of; The
Mariners not being able to take any Observation of either Sun or Star, for
Seven Hundred Leagues together. Certain Well Disposed Persons aboard, now
Calling to Mind the Words of Mr. Cotton, thought it necessary to Admonish the
Persons, who were carrying over their Malignant Papers against the Country; and
some of those Papers were by them, thereupon Given to the Seamen, who
immediately cut them in Pieces, and threw them over board. The Storm forthwith
Abated; however there afterward, came up New Storms, which at last Hurried the
Ship amongst the Rocks, of Silly; where they yet Received a Deliverance, which
most of them that Considered it, pronounced Miraculous. When the Rude Cornish
men saw how Miraculously the Vessel had escaped, they said, God was a Good Man
to Save them So! But the more Instructed and Obliged Passengers, kept a Day of
Solemn Thanksgiving to God; in which, even the Profanest Persons on Board,
under the Impression of what had Happened, then bore a part. However, the
Cornfieldsd of New England, still stood Undisturbed, notwithstanding the
Various Names Affixed unto the Tails of Petitions against their Liberties.
For, as Mr. Cotton Elegantly expressed it, God then R^cqued Three Nations, with
Shaking Dispensations, that He might procure some Rest unto His People, in this
Wilderness!

. 34. This was Mr. Cotton! What more he was, Let these Lines, taking no License
but from the Real Truth, Delineate.

Upon the Tomb of the most Reverend Mr. John Cotton, Late Teacher of the Church
of Boston in New England.

HERE lies Magnanimous Humility;
Majesty, Meekness; Christian Apathy
On soft Affections; Liberty in Thrall;
A Noble Spirit, Servant unto All;
Learnings Great Masterpiece, who yet would sit
As a Disciple, at his Scholars Feet;
A Simple Serpent, or Serpentine Dove,
Made up of Wisdom, Innocence, and Love:
Neatness Embroidered with It self alone,
And Civils Canonized in a Gown;
Embracing Old and Young, and Low and High,
Ethies Imbodyed in Divinity;
Ambitious to be Lowest, and to Raise
His Brethrens Honor on his own Decays;
(Thus does the Sun Retire into his Bed,
That being Gone the Stars may show their Head)
Could Wound at Argument without Division,
Cut to the Quick, and yet make no Incision:
Ready to Sacrifice Domestic Notions
To Churches Peace, and Ministers Devotions:
Himself, indeed (and Singular in That)
Whom All Admired He Admired not:
Lived Like an Angel of a Mortal Birth,
Conversed in Heaven while he was on Earth:
Though not, as Moses, Radiant with Light
Whose Glory Dazelld the Beholders Sight,
Yet so Divinely Beautified, you would Count
He had been Born, and Bred upon the Mount:
A Living Breathing Bible: Tables where
Both Covenants, at Large, engraven were;
Gospel and Law in's Heart, had Each it is Column;
His Head an Index to the Sacred Volumn;
His very Name a Title Page; and next,
His Life a Commentary on the Text.
O, what a Monument of Glorious Worth,
When, in a New-Edition, he comes forth,
Without Errata's, may we think he will be
In Leaves and Covers of Eternity!
A Man of Might, at Heavenly Eloquence,
To Fix the Ear, and Charm the Conscience;
As if Apollos were Revived in Him,
Or he had Learned of a Seraphim:
Spoke Many Tongues in One: One Voice and Sense
Wrought, Joy and Sorrow, Fear and Confidence:
Rocks* Rent before him, Blind Received their Sight;
Souls Levelled to the Dunghill, stood Upright:
Infernal Furies, Burst with Rage to see
Their Prisoners Captived into Liberty:
A Star that, in our Eastern England, Rose,
Thence Hurried by the Blast of Stupid Foes,
Whose Foggy Darkness, and Benumbed Senses,
Brookt not his Daz'ling Fervent Influences:
Thus did he move on Earth, from East to West;
There he went down, and up to Heaven for Rest.
Nor from himself, whilst living, does he vary,
His Death has made him an Ubiguitary:
Where is his Sepulcher is Hard to say,
Who, in a Thousand Sepulchers, does lay
(Their Hearts, I mean, whom he has Left Behind,
In Them) his Sacred Relics, now, Enshrined.
But Let his Mourning Flock be Comforted,
Though Moses be, yet Joshua is not Dead:
I mean Renowned NORTON; worthy he,
Successor to our Moses, is to be.
O Happy Israel in AMERICA,
In such a MOSES, such a JOSHUA!
B. Woodbridge. 35. Three Sons, and Three Daughters, was this Renowned Walker
with God, Blessed withal.

His Eldest Son, did Spend (...) End his Days, in the Ministry of the Gospel
at Hampton: being esteemed a thorough Scholar, and an able Preacher; and though
his Name were Sea-born, yet none of the Lately Revived Heresies were more
Abominable to him, than that of his Name sake, Pelagius [or, Morgan] of whom
the Witness of the ancient Poet is true, Pestifero Vom^^t col^^^er Sermon
Britannus.


His Second Son, is at this Day, a Faithful Minister of the Gospel, at
Plymouth; and one by whom, not only the English but also the Indians, of
America, have the Glad Tidings of Salvation, in their own Language carried unto
them.

Of his Two Younger Daughters, the first was Married unto a Merchant of Good
Fashion, whose Name was Mr. Egginton; but She did not long Survive the Birth of
her first Child, as that Child also did not Survive many years after the Death
of her Mother. The next is at this Time, Living, the Consort of One Well known
in both Englands, namely Increase Mather, the President of Harvard College,
and the Teacher of a Church in Boston.

The Youngest of his Sons, called, Roland, and the Eldest of his Daughters,
called, Sarah, both of them Dyed rear together, of the Small Pox, which was
raging among the Inhabitants of Boston, in the Winter of the Year, 1649. The
Death of those two Lovely Children, Required the Faith of an Abraham, in the
Heart of their Gracious Father; who indeed most Exemplarily Expressed what was
Required. On this Occasion, I find, that on a Spare Leaf of his Almanac, he
Wrote in Greek Letters these English Verses;

In Saram
Farewell, Dear Daughter Sara; Now You Are gone,
(Whither thou much desiredst) to thine Home:
Pray, my Dear Father, Let me now go Home!
Were the Last Words thou Spak'st to me Alone.
Go then, Sweet Sara, take thy Sabbath Rest,
With thy Great Lord, and all in Heaven Blessed.
In Rolandum.
Our Eldest Daughter, and our Youngest Son,
Within Nine Days, both have their full Race run.
On the Twentieth of the Eleventh, Dyed She,
And on the Twenty Ninth Day Dyed He.
Both in their Lives, were Lovely and United,
And in their Deaths they were not much Divided.
Christ gave them Both, and He takes both again
To Live with Him; Blessed be His Holy Name.
In Usrumque.
Suffer, Says Christ, Your Little Ones,
To Come forth, Me unto,
For of such Ones my Kingdom is,
Of Grace and Glory too.
We do not only Suffer them,
But Offer them to Thee,
Now, blessed Lord, Let us Believe,
Accepted, that they be:
That Thou have Took them, in Thine Arms*
And on them Pat thine Hand,
And Blessed them with, Sight of Thee,
Wherein our Blessings Stand.
But he has at this Day, Five Grandsons, all of them Employed in the Public
Service of the Gospel; whereof, Let the Reader, count him the Meanest, that is
the Writer of this History; and accept further one Little Piece of History,
relating hereunto.

The Gathering of the Second Church in Boston, was evidently very much to the
Disadvantage of Mr. Cotton, in many of his Interests. But he was a JOHN, who
reckoned his Joy fulfilled in This, That in His own Decrease the Interests of
the Lord Jesus Christ would Increase; and therefore, with an Exemplary
Self-Denial, Divesting himself of all carnal Respects, he set himself to
Encourage the Foundation of that Church, out of Respect unto the Service and
Worship of our Common Lord. Now, it has Pleased the Lord so to Order it, That
many years after his Decease, that Self Denial of His Holy Servant, has turned
unto some Account, in the Opportunities which That very Church has given unto
His Children, to Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Conduct of it: His Son
in Law has been for more than Thrice Ten Years, and his Grandson for more than
Twice Seven Years, the Ministers of the Gospel, in That very Church,
accommodated with Happy Opportunities, To Serve that Generation.

Epitaphium.
JOHANNES COTTONUS,

Cujus Ultima Laus est, Quod fuerit inter Nov-Anglos Primus.

NORTONUS Honoratus.
THE LIFE OF Mr. JOHN NORTON.
. 1. THERE was a Famous JOHN whose Achievements are by our Lord Emblazoned in
those Terms; He was a Burning and a Shining Light. In the Tabernacle of Old,
erected by the Order and for the Worship, of God, there were those Two Things,
A Candlestick, and an Altar; in the One a Light, that might never Go out, in
the Other a Fire, that might never be Extinguished; and yet such an Affinity
between these that there was a Fire in the Light of the One, and a Light in the
Fire of the other. Such a Mixture of both Faith and Love, should be in Those,
that are employed about the Service of the Tabernacle: And though the
Tabernacle erected for our Lord in this Wilderness, had many such Burning and
Shining Lights; vet among the Chief of them is to be Reckoned, that JOHN which
we had in our Blessed NORTON.

. 2. He was Born, the Sixth of May 1605. at Starford in Hartfordshire;
descended of Honorable Ancestors. In his Early Childhood he discovered a
Ripeness of Wit, which gave just Hopes of his proving Extraordinary: and under
Mr. Strange in the School of Bunningford, he made (...) a Proficiency, that he
could betimes Write Good Latin, with a more than common Elegancie and
Invention. At Fourteen years of Age, being sent unto Peter-house, he staid
there, till after his taking of his First Degree; where a Romish Emissary,
taking a curious and exact Observation of his Notable Accomplishments, used all
the Methods he could think of, to have seduced him over unto the Romish
Irreligion: but God intending him to be a Pillar in His own Temple, Mercifully
prevented his Hearkening unto any Temptations to become a Support unto the
Tower of Babel.

. 3. In his Youth, he was Accustomed unto some Youthful Vanities; especially
unto Card-Playing; an Evil which he did first Ponder and Reform upon a Serious
Admonition, which a Servant of his Father's gave unto him. When he came to
Consider that a Lot, is a Solemn Appeal unto the God of Heaven, and even by the
Rudest Gentiles counted a Sacred Thing, he thought that Playing with it, was a
Breach of the Third Commandment in the Laws of our God; It should be used, he
thought, rather Prayerfully, than Sportfully. He considered, that the Papists
themselves do not allow these Games in Ecclesiastical Persons, and the Fathers
do Reprove them with a Vehement Zeal in all sorts of Persons. He considered,
that when the Roman Empire became a Christian, severe Edicts were made against
these Games, and that our Protestant Reformers have Branded them with an
Infamous Character; Wherefore Inclining now to follow Whatsoever Things are of
a Good Report, he would no longer meddle with Games that had so much of a
Scandal in them.

. 4. An Extreme Disaster befalling his Fathers Estate, he left the University;
and became at once Usher to the School, and Curate in the Church, at Starford:
Where a Lecture being mentained by a Combination of several Godly and Able
Ministers, he, on that Occasion, fell into Acquaintance with several of them;
especially Mr. Jeremiah Dyke of Epping, by whose Ministry the Holy Spirit of
God, gave him a Discovery of his own Manifold Sinfulness and Wretchedness in an
Unregenerate State, and Awakened him unto such a Self-Examination, as Drove him
to a Sorrow little short of Despair: but after some, time, the same Holy
Spirit, enabled him to Receive the Christ and Grace, tendered in the Promises
of the Gospel, with an Unspeakable Consolation. Where upon he thought himself
concerned in that Advice of Heaven, When thou art Converted, Strengthen thy
Brethren!

. 5. Having before This, been well Studied in the Tongues and Arts, he was the
better fitted for the Higher Studies of Divinity; whereto he now wholly
Addicted himself: And being in his own Happy Experience Acquainted with Faith,
and Repentance, and Holiness, he did from that Experience now make Lively
Sermons on those points unto his Hearers. He soon grew Eminent in his Ministry;
setting off the Truths he Delivered, not only with such Ornaments of Laconic
and Well contrived Expression, as made him worthy to be called, The Master of
Sentences, but also with such Experimental Passages of Devotion, as made him
Admired, for A Preacher seeking out Acceptable Words.

. 6. His Accomplishments Rendered him, as capable of Preferments, as most in
his Age; but Preferments were then so Glogg'd, with Troublesome and Scruplesome
Impositions, that Mr. Norton, as well as other Conscientious Young Ministers,
his Contemporaries, declined meddling with them His Aversion, and indeed
Antipathy, to Arminianism, and his Dislike of the Ceremonies, particularly
hindered him from a Considerable Benefice, whereto his Uncle might have helped
him. Dr. Sibs also, the Master of Katharine Hall in Cambridge, taken with his
Abilities, did earnestly Solicit him, to have Accepted of a Fellowship in
that, College; but his Conscience being now Satisfied in the Unlawfulness of
some Things then Required in Order thereunto, would not permit him to do it.
Wherefore he contented himself with a more Private Life, as Chaplain in a
Knights House at High-Laver in Essex, namely Sir William Masham's; there
waiting, till God might furnish, him with Unexceptionable Opportunities, for
his more Public Preaching of the Gospel. But generally, all those who had any
Taste of his Ministry, had a very high Opinion of it; nor was there any man in
that part of the Country more esteemed than he was, for all sorts of
Excellencies; insomuch, that when he came away, an Ancient Minister said, He
Believed there was not more Grace and Holiness left in all Essex, than what Mr.
Norton, had carried with him.

. 7. His Natural Temper had a Tincture of Choler in it; but as the Sowrest and
Harshest Fruits become the most Pleasant, when tempered with a due Proportion
of Sweetness added thereunto, so the Grace of God Sweetened the Disposition of
this Good Man, into a most Affable, Courteous, and Complaisant Behavior, which
rendered him exceeding Amiable. Indeed when the Apostle speaks of the Spirit,
and Soul and Body, being Sanctified, some do by Spirit Understand the Natural
Temper, or Humor; and accordingly the Spirit of this Quick Man being
Sanctified, he became a Man of an Excellent Spirit.

. 8. Vast was the Treasure of Learning in this Reverend Man. He was not only a
most Accurate Grammarian, which is abundantly manifested by his Printed Works
in Diverse Languages; but an Universal Scholar: nevertheless, 'twas as a School
man that he showed himself the most of a Scholar. He accounted that the
Excellency of a Scholar, lay more in Distinctness of Judgment, than in Elegancy
of Language; and therefore, though he had a neater Style than most other men,
yet he was Desirous to furnish himself a^ ^ugnam, rather than, ad pompam. Hence
having Intimately Acquainted himself with the Subtleties of Scholastic
Divinity, he made all to Illustrate the, Doctrine of Christ and of Grace, unto
which he made all the Spoils of the Schools gloriously Subservient. He was a
most Elegant Preacher, and the True Follower of Dr. Sibs!

. 9. But let his Excellencies have been what they will, there was in those
Days a Set of Men, Resolved that the Church of God should Lose the Benefit of
all those Excellencies, except the Person which had them, could comply with
certain Uninstituted Rites in the Worship of God; which Our Mr. Norton could
not; and it was That which made him Ours. This Drove him to the Remote Regions
of America, where he hoped, as well he might, that there would never be done so
Unreasonable a Thing, as to obstruct that Evangelical Worship of Our Lord Jesus
Christ, for the sake whereof, those Regions have been added unto the English
Dominions. Wherefore in the year 1634. Having Married a Gentle woman both of
Good Estate, and of Good Esteem, he took Shipping for New England; accompanied
in the same Ship with the Famous Mr. Thomas Shepard.

. 10. In the Road betwixt Harwich and Yarmouth, he very narrowly escaped a
Terrible. Shipwreck: for by the Venemency of a Storm, all their Anchors gave
way, so that they were Driven within a Cables Length of the Sands; but yet the
Anchor of their Hope in God, held fast unto the Last. Mr. Shepard having taken
the Mariners above Decks, Mr. Norton took the Passengers between Decks, and
each of them with their Company, applied themselves unto Fervent Prayer,
whereto the Almighty God gave a present Answer in their Wonderful Deliverance.
After this Tempest, which Disappointed their Voyage to New England for that
Season, Mr. Norton Returned unto his Friends in Essex; where Mr. Dyke welcomed
him, as One come from the Dead, professing to him, That he would have given
many Pounds for such a Trial of his Faith, as this his Friend had newly met
withal.

. 11. The next year Mr. Norton Renewed his Voyage to New England; but
intervening Accidents made it very late in the year, before he could begin the
Voyage: and so, coming upon the American Coast in the Month of October, they
encountered with Another very Terrible Storm, which lasted Eight and forty
Hours, with Great Extremity, and had broken the Vessel to pieces, (...) it had
not had a Strength more than Ordinary. One Wave remarkably washed some of the
Seamen overboard on one side and then threw them in again on 'tother; and so
Vehement was the Storm, that they were forced at Length to undergird the Ship
with the Cable, that they might keep her sides together. But within Ten Days
after this, they were brought safe into Plymouth Harbor.

. 12. There had been some Overtures between him, and Mr. Winslow, the Agent of
Plymouth now on board with him, about his Accepting of a Settlement in that
Plantation; and the People of Plymouth now Courteously and Earnestly Invited
him, accordingly to continue with them. Nevertheless the State of Things in the
Massachuset Colony, was more agreeable unto him; and the Church of Ipswich made
their speedy Applications unto him, to take the Pastoral charge of them. This
Occasioned his Deliberation, with his Friends in the Bay, What Course to Steer.

. 13. While he Sojourned in his Unsettled State at Boston, he came into
Acquaintance with the Ministers thereabouts, who entertained him with a very
high Opinion of him; especially Mr. Mather of Dorchester, who though of longer
standing than he, yet consulted him as an Oracle, in matters of greatest
Consequence unto him; and found him to Accomplished and Experienced a Person,
that he mentained a most Valuable Friendship with him to the Last. Yea, though
he were yet a Young man, and short of Thirty, when he first came into the
Country, yet the Magistrates of the Colony soon became so sensible of his
Abilities, as to make use of him in some of their most arduous Affairs. And
there happened several Occasions to try the Scholastic Emmencies, whereto he
was Arrived; One of which was, when there was in these parts a French Friar,
who found in Mr. Norton, a Protestant, equal to his own Schoolmen, and well
Acquainted with them all. Indeed there was in him the Union of two
Excellencies, which do not always meet. It was the Character of Hortensies,
that he was Weak in Writing, and yet able to Speak; It was the Character of
Abericus, that he was Weak in Speech, and yet Able in Writing; but our Norton
was in both of these a very Able Person.

. 14. It was the Church of Ipswich, that our Lord gave so Rich a Thing, as His
Eminent Servant Norton: but besides the constant Labors of his Holy and
Fruitful Man, in that Particular Church, he there did several great Services of
a more Extensive Influence to the whole Church of God; whereof One was This,
Guilielmus Apollonii, at the Direction of the Divines in Zealand, in the year
1644. Sent over to New England a Number of Questions, relating to our Way of
Church Government; whereto the Ministers of New England unanimously imposed
upon Mr. Norton the Task of Drawing up an Answer; which he finished in the year
1645. And it was, I suppose, the first Latin Book that ever was Written in this
Country. What satisfaction it gave, may be gathered, not only from the
Attestations of Dr. Goodwyn, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Sympson, thereunto, but also from the
Expressions of Dr. Hornbeck, who frequently magnifies the Reason, and the
Candor of our New-English Divine, even in those Points, wherein he dos himself
Dissent from him. Nor is it amiss to add the Words, in Dr. Fullers Church
History, hereupon; which are, Of all the Authors I have perused concerning
these Opinions, none to me was more Informative than Mr. John Norton, One of no
less Learning than Modesty, in his Answer to Apollonius, Pastor in the Church
of Middleburgh.

. 15. It will do no Hurt, for me to Repeat one Passage on this Occasion, which
to me seemed worthy of some Remark. While Mr. Norton was Deeply engaged in
Writing his Latin Account of our Church Discipline, some of his more Accurate
and Judicious Hearers, Imagined that his Public Sermons wanted a little of
that Exactness, which did use to attend them; Whereof one said something to
that Mr. Whiting, whom I may well call the Angel in the Church of Lyn. Mr.
Whiting hereupon in a very Respectful and Obliging manner, spoke to Mr. Norton,
saying, Sir, There are some of your People, who think that the Services wherein
you are engaged for all the Churches, Do something take off the Edge of the
Ministry, wherewith you should Serve your own particular Church: I would
entreat you, Sir, to consider this matter; for our Greatest Work is to Preach
the Gospel unto that Flock, whereof we are Overseers. Our Great and Good man
took the Excellent Oil of this Intimation, with the Kindness which became such
a Man, and made it Serviceable unto his Holy Studies.

. 16. Another considerable Service, which then called for the Studies of this
Excellent man, was the Advising, Modelling, and Recommending the Platform of
Church Discipline, Agreed by a Synod at Cambridge in the year 1647. Into that
Platform he would sain have had Inserted, certain Propositions concerning the
Watch, which our Churches are to have over the Children Born in them; which
Propositions were certainly, The First Principles of New England: only the
fierce Oppositions of One eminent Person, caused him that was of a Peaceable
Temper, to forbear urging them any further; by which means, when those very
Propositions came to be Advanced and Embraced in Another Synod, more than twice
Seven years after, many People did Ignorantly count them Novelties. Moreover,
when the Synod first Assembled, it was a thing of some unhappy Consequence,
that the Church of Boston would not send any Messengers unto it: but Mr. Norton
Preaching the next Lecture there, wherein he Handled the Nature of Councils,
and the Power of Civil Magistrates to call such Assemblies, and the Duty of the
Churches in Regarding their Advice, the Church of Boston were therewithal so
satisfied, as to Testify their Communion with the Rest of the Churches, by
sending three Messengers to accompany their Elders now in the Synod. And when
the Result of the Synod, came to try it is Acceptance in the Churches; he did
his part, especially in his own, with a Prudent and Pious Diligence, to obtain
it; which was happily Accomplished.

. 17. There was yet one Comprehensive Service more, which this Learned man here
did for the Church of God: and that was this. A Gentleman of New England* had
Written a Book, Entitled, The Meritorious Price of Man's Redemption, Wherein he
pretends to prove, That Christ Suffered not for us those unutterable Torments
of Gods Wrath, which are commonly called Hell Torments, to Redeem our Souls
from them; and that Christ bore not our Sins by Gods Imputation, and,
therefore, also did not bear the Curse of the Law for them. The General Court
of the Colony, concerned that the Glorious Truths of the Gospel might be
Rescued from the Confusions, whereinto the Essay of this Gentleman had thrown
them, and afraid lest the Church of God abroad should Suspect that New England
allowed of such Exorbitant Aberrations, appointed Mr. Norton to Draw up an
Answer to that Erroneous Treatise. This Work he performed with a most Elaborate
and Judicious Pen; in a Book afterward Published, under the Title of, A
Discussion of that Great Point in Divinity, The Sufferings of Christ; And the
Questions about His Active and Passive Righteousness, and the Imputation
thereof. In that Book the true Principles of the Gospel, are Stated with so
much Demonstration, as is indeed unanswerable. The Great Assertion therein
Explained and Mentained is (according to the Express Words of the Reverend
Author) That the Lord Jesus Christ as God-Man, and Mediator, according to the
Will of the Father, and His own Voluntary Consent, fully Obeyed the Law, Doing
the Command in a Way of Works, and Suffering the Essential Punishment of the
Curse, in a Way of Obedient Satisfaction unto Divine Justice, thereby Exactly
fulfilling the First-Covenant: Which Active and Passive Obedience of His,
together with His Original Righteousness, as a (...), God, of His Rich Grace,
actually Imputes unto Believes, whom, upon the Receipt thereof, by the Grace
of Faith, He Declares and Accepts, as Perfectly Righteous, and acknowledges
them to have a Right unto Eternal Life.

And in every Clause of this Position, the Author Expressed, not his own Sense
alone, but the Sense of all the Churches in the Country: In testimony whereof,
there was Published at the End of the Book, an Instrument Signed by Five
considerable Names, Cotton, Wilson, Mather, Symmes, and Tompson, who in the
Name of others, declare, As they Believe, they do also Profess, That the
Obedience of Christ to the whole Law, which is the Law of Righteousness, is the
Matter of our Justification; and the Imputation of our Sins to Christ (and
thereupon His Suffering the Sense of the Wrath of God upon Him, for our Sin)
and the Imputation of his Obedience and Sufferings to us, are the Formal Cause
of our Justification; and that they who Deny this, do now Take away both of
these, both Matter and Form of our Justification, and take away also our
Justification, which is the Life of our Souls and of our Religion, and
therefore called, The Justification of Life.

This being the Primitive Doctrine of JUSTIFICATION, among the Churches of
New England; the Things that were judged Opposite hereunto, in the Renowned
RICHARD BAXTERS Aphorisms of Justification, did then give a Great and Just
Offense unto the Faithful in this Country; albeit, the other more Practical and
Savoury Books of that Holy Man, were highly Valued, in these American Regions;
and not a sew have here Blessed God for him, and for his Labors. And as in
those Elder Days of New England, the esteem, which our Church had for that
Eminent Man, did not hinder them, from Rejecting that New Covenant of Works,
with which they thought he Confounded that most Important Article, upon the
Notions whereof the Church either Stands or Falls; thus, it is a Grief of Mind
unto our Churches at this Day, to find that Great and Good Man, in some of his
Last Works, under the Blinding Heat of his Indignation against some which we
also account, Unjustifiable, yea, Dangerous, Opinions and Expressions of Dr.
Crisp, Reproaching some of the most undoubted Points in our Common Faith. We
Read him unaccountably Enumerating among, Errors, which he says, have
Corrupted Christianity, and Subverted the Gospel, such things as these;

They Feign, That God made a Covenant with Adam, that if he stood, God would
continue him, and his Posterity and if he fell, God would take it, as if all
his Posterity, then Personally Sinned in him. -- Feigning God, to make Adam not
only the Natural Father and Root of Mankind, but also Arbitrarily; a
Constituted Representer of all the Persons that should Spring from him. Whence
they infer, that Christ was by Gods Imposition, and his own Sponsion, made the
Legal Representative Person of every one of the Elect, taken singularly: So
that, what He did for them, God Reputeth them to have done by Him. Hereby they
Falsely make the Person of the Mediator, to be the Legal Person of the Sinner.

They Forge a Law, that God never made, that says, Thou or thy Surety, shall
obey Perfectly or Die.

They Feign God to have made an Eternal Covenant with His Son.

They Feign Christ to have made such an Exchange with the Elect, as that having
taken all their Sins, He has given them all His Righteousness; not only the
Fruit of it, but the Thing in it self.

They say, That by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, Habitual and
Actual, We are Judged Perfectly Just.

They Talk of Justification in mere Ignorant Confusion; -- They say, That to
Justify is not to make Righteous, but to Judge Righteous.

They Err Grossly, saying, that by [ Faith Imputed for Righteousness] and [ our
being Justified by Faith] is not meant, the Act, or Habit of Faith, but the
Object, Christ's Righteousness: Not sticking thereby to turn such Texts into
worse than Nonsense.

These Things, which our Churches with amazement, behold Mr. Baxter thus
calling Fictions, Falsehoods, Forgeries, Ignorant Confusions, and Gross Errors,
Were Defended by Mr. Norton, as the, Faith once Delivered unto the Saints: Nor
do our Churches at this Day consider them, as any other than, Glorious Truths
of the Gospel; which, as they were mentained by Mr. Norton, So, two Divines
which were the Scholars of Mr. Norton, Well-known in both Englands, Nathanael
and Increase Mather, ( Fratrum D^lce Par;) and a Third, a Worthy Minister of
the Gospel, Mr. Samuel Willard, now Living in the same House from whence Mr.
Norton went, unto that not made with Hands, have in their Printed Labors most
accurately Expressed them, and Confirmed them* Hence, although, as on the One
side, I have this Passage of Mr. Baxters, in a Letter from him, written but a
few Months before he Dyed, I am as (...) a Lover (...) the New England
Churches, as any Man, according to Mr. Nortons, and the Synods, Model; So, on
the other side, the Memory of Mr. Baxter is on many accounts, Zealously Loved
among the Churches of New England, yet E^pousing the Principles, for their
Establishment wherein, Mr. Norton had appeared: Nevertheless, inasmuch as Mr.
Baxter, just before his Entrance into his Everlasting Rest, requested of my
Parent then in London, Sir, If you know of any Errors in any of my Writings, I
Pray you to Confute them after I am Dead! I thought it not amiss, to Regard so
far the Gospel Truths of Justification at this Day Laboring, as to take
Occasion from the Mention of Mr. Nortons Book, to say, That in that One Book of
his, There is a Confutation of Mr. Baxter, who seems to Oppose those things,
which, the Churches of New England judge cannot be Denied without Corrupting of
Christianity, and Subverting of the Gospel. But waving any further mention of
the Book, I cannot leave unmentioned a Couple of Passages in the Preface of it,
which is Dedicatory to the General Court of the Massachus^t Colony. One is
this; I appeal to any Competently Judicious and Saber-minded man, if the Denial
of Rule in the Presbytery, of a Decisive Voice in the Synod, and of the Power
of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, do not in this Point Translate the
Papal Power unto the Brotherhood of every Congregation. Another is this; You
have been among the First of Magistrates, which have approved and practiced the
Congregational Way; no small Favor from God, nor Honor to your selves, with
the Concration to come; when that shall appear to be, The Way to Christ.

(...) But we say nothing of Norton, if we (...) of An Orthodox Evangelist.
Being (...), Such an One, he Digested the Subtilties of the (...) into Solid
and Wholesome Christianity, which he Published in a Treatise Entitled, The
Orthodox Evangelist; wherein he handles the Abstruse Points of the Existence,
and Subsistence, and Efficience of God, and the Person of Christ, and the
A^thods of the Spirit in Uniting us to Him; and the Doctrine of Justification,
with the Future and Happy State of the Saints; all in such a manner, that Mr.
Cotton saw cause to say in his Preface to this Treatise, Clusters of Ripe
Grapes passing under the Press, are fit to be Transported unto All Nations;
thus, such Gifts and Labors passing under the Press, may be fitly Communicated
to All Churches. The Physicians do speak, there are Pillulae sine Quibus, that
is, Sine Quibus esse Nolo: So there are Libelli sine Quibus, Some Books, Sine
Quibus esse Nolo; and this is one of them. This Book he Dedicated unto his own
Church in Ipswich; and in the Close of his Dedication, I cannot forget this
Emphatical Passage, YOU are Our Glory and Joy: forget not the Emphasis in the
Word, Our: Ministers, compared with other Christians have little to Joy in, in
this World: It is not with the Ministers of the Present, as with the Ministers
of late Times; nor with the Exiles, as with the Rest; nor with your Exiles as
with some others; Let this Our, or, if you please Your Condition, for therein
you have been both Partakers with us, and Supporters of us, be your
Provocation. Thus and more than thus, useful was this Bradwardin of New
England, while Ipswich had him.

. 19. When COTTON, that Man of God, Lay S^^k, of the Sickness whereof he Dyed,
his Church desired that he would Nominate, and Recommend a fit Person to
succeed him; and he Advised them to Apply themselves unto Mr. Norton, hoping
that the Church of Ipswich being Accommodated with such another Eminent Person
as Mr. Rogers, would, out of Respect unto the General Good of all the People of
God throughout the Land, so far Deny themselves, as to Dismiss him from
themselves. That which gave Encouragment unto this Business, was not a Dream of
Mr. Cottons; though it was, indeed, a Strange Thing, that Mr. Cotton in his
Illness, being Sollicitous what Counsel to give unto his Church, he Dreamt,
that he saw Mr. Norton Riding unto B^ston, to Succeed him, upon a White Horse,
in Circumstances, that were exactly afterward Accomplished: but it was a
Design which Mr. Norton had of Returning for England; A Design which he had so
laid before his People, as to obtain their Grant, that if upon staying a Twelve
Month Longer among them, there did Occur no Occasion for him, to alter his
purposes, they would not Oppose his Going. Now, when the Agents of the Church
at Boston, made this Motion to the Church of Ipswich, there was much Debate
about it; Wherein at Length an Honest Brother made this Proposal, Brethren, A
Case in some things like to This, was once that Way determined, We will call
the Damsel, and Enquire at her Mouth; Wherefore I propose, that our Teacher
himself be Enquired of, whether he be Inclined to Go? They then put that
Question to Mr. Norton himself, who being Troubled at the Offer of the Qustion
unto him, answered, That, if they Judged such Reasons as caused his Removal
from Europe into America, now called for his Removal from Ipswich to Boston, he
should Resign himself; but he could not be Active. However, at Length, they
consented, that he should for the present, go sojourn at Boston, to Try, and
see how far the Will of God about this matter, might be afterward Discovered;
but after Mr. Norton was gone, many of the People fell into a very unreasonable
Indisposition toward Mr. Rogers, as if he had not been Active enough, although
he had, indeed, been as Active, as he well could be, to Retain his Colleague
among them. The Melancholy Temper of Mr. Rogers felt so Deep an Impression from
these Paroxysms, and Murmurings, of the People, that it is Thought, his End was
thereby Hastened; but the Church, upon the Death of Mr. Rogers, Renewing their
Demands of Mr. Nortons Return, a Council was upon that Occasion called; which
Council advised Ipswich to Grant Mr. Norton a fair Dismission unto the Service
of Boston, and in Boston, of All New England. However Diverse Les^er Councils,
that were Successively called on this Occasion, could not comfortably procure
this Dismission, till at last the Governor and Magistrates of the Colony
called a Council for this End; in their Order for which, they Intimate their
Concern, Lest, while the two Churches were contending, which of them should
enjoy Mr. Norton, they should both of them, and the whole Country with them,
Lose that Reverend Person, by his Prosecuting his Inclination to Remove into
England. Hereupon such a Dismission could not be Denied; but now Boston
Joyfully Receiving Mr. Norton, Ipswich applied themselves unto Mr. Cobbet, who
afterward continued a Rich Blessing among them. And Mr. Norton did, indeed,
the part of a Surviving Brother for Mr. Cotton, in Raising up, or, at least,
Keeping up, the Name of that Great Man, by Publishing a most Elegant Account of
his Life, part whereof was afterward Transcribed by Sam. Clark, into his
Collections.

. 20. Mr. Norton being now Transplanted into that Garden, which our Lord had in
Boston, did there bring forth much of that Fruit whereby the Heavenly Father
was Glorified. There he Preached, he Wrote, he Prayed, and mentained without
any Prelatical Episcopacy, a Care of all the Churches. And New England, being a
Country whose Interests were most Remarkably and Generally Enwrapped in its
Ecclesiastical Circumstances, there were many Good Offices, which Mr. Norton
did, for the Peace of the whole Country, by his Wise Counsels upon many
Occasions, given to its Counselors. In Truth, if he had never done any thing,
but that one thing of preventing by his Wise Interposition, the Acts of
Hostility, which were like to pass between Our People, and the Dutch at
Manhataes, That alone were well worth his coming into the Station, which he now
had at Boston. But the Service which now most Signalized him was, his Agency at
Whitehal; for, it being found necessary to Address the Restored King; the
Worshipful Simon Bradstreet Esquire. and this Reverend Mr. John Norton, were sent
over as Agents, from the Colony, with an Address unto His Majesty; wherein
there were among others, the following Passages.

We Supplicate Your Majesty for Your Gracious Protection of us, in the
Continuance both of our Civil, and of our Religious Liberties; according to the
Grantees known End of Sueing for the Patent; conferred upon this Plantation by
Your Royal Father. Our Liberty to Walk in the Faith of the Gospel, with all
Good Conscience, according to the Order of the Gospel, was the Cause of our
Transporting our selves, with our Wives, our Little Ones, and our Substance,
from that Pleasant Land, over the Atlantic Ocean, into the Vast Wilderness;
choosing rather the Pure Scripture Worship, with a Good Conscience, in this
Remote Wilderness, than the Pleasures of England, with Submission to the
Impositions of the, then so Disposed, and so far prevailing Hierarchy, which we
could not Do without an Evil Conscience. -- We are not Seditious as to the
Interests of Caesar, nor Schismatical as to the Matters of Religion. We
Distinguish between Churches, and their Impurities. -- We could not Live
without the Public Worship of God, nor be permitted the Public Worship
without such a Yoke of Subscription and Conformity, as we could not Consent
unto without Sin. That we might, therefore, enjoy Divine Worship, free from
Humane Mixtures, without Offense to God, Man, and our own Consciences, We, with
Leave, but not without Tears, departed from our Country, Kindred and Fathers
Houses, into this Patmos. --

It was in February 1661,2. that they Began their Voyage, and it was in
September following, that they Returned; Mr. Nortons place, being the mean time
supplied by the Neighboring Ministers, taking of their Turns. And by their
Hands the Country Received the Kings Letters, wherein he signified, that the
Expressions of their Loyalty and Affection to Him, were very Acceptable, and
that consuming to them their Privileges, He would Cherish them with all manner
of Encouragement, and Protection.

. 21. Such has been the Jealous Disposition of our New-Englanders about their
Dearly-bought Privileges, and such also has been the Various Understanding of
the People about the Extent of those Privileges, that of all the Agents, which
they have sent over unto the Court of England, for now Forty years together, I
know not any One, who did not at his Return, meet with some very froward
Entertainments among his Countrymen: and there may be the Wisdom of the Holy
and Righteous God, as well as the Malice of the Evil One, acknowledged, in the
Ordering of such Temptations. Of these Temptations, a Considerable share fell
to Mr. Norton; Concerning whom there were many, who would not stick to say,
that he had laid the Foundation of Ruin to all our Liberties; and his
Melancholy Mind Imagined, that his Best Friends began, therefore, to Look awry
upon him.

. 22. In the Spring before his Going for England, he Preached an Excellent
Sermon unto the Representatives of the whole Colony, Assembled at the Court of
Election, wherein, I take particular Notice of this Passage, Moses was the
Meekest Man on Earth, yet it went ill with Moses, it is said, for THEIR SAKES.
How long did Moses live at Meribah? Sure I am; it killed him in a Short Time; a
man of as Good a Temper as could be expected from a mere Man: I tell you, it
will not only Kill the People, but it will Quickly, Kill Moses too! And in the
Spring after his Return from England, he found his own Observation in himself
too much Exemplified. It was commonly Judged, That the Smothered Griefs of his
Mind, upon the Unkind Resentments, which he thought many People had of his
Faithful and Sincere Endeavors to Serve them, did, more than a Little, Hasten
his End; an End, whereat JOHN NORTON went, according to the Anagram of his Name
INTO HONOR. But he had the Privilege to enter into Immortality, without such
a Formal and Feeling Death, as the most of Mortals Encounter with; for though
in the Forenoon of April 5. 1663. it was his Design to have Preached in the
Afternoon, he was that Afternoon taken with a sudden ^^pothymie, which
presently and easily carried him away to those Glories, wherein the Weary are
at Rest; but it was a Dark Night, which the Inhabitants of Boston had upon the
Noise of his Death: Every Corner of the Town was filled with Lamentations,
which left a Character upon that Night, unto this Day, not forgotten! His
Dearest Neighbor, Mr. Richard Mather, wept over him, at his Funeral, which was
on the next Lecture Day, a Sermon most Agreeable to the Occasion; And the Son
o^ his Fellow-Traveller, Mr. Thomas Shepard, was One of the Many, who bestowed
their Elegies upon him; ^^^ing This, among his other Strokes.

The Schoolmens Doctors, whom soever they call,
(...) Seraphick, or Angelical:
(...): Their Tapers burnt exceeding Dim;
(...) might to School again, To Learn of Him.
^^mbard must out of Date; We now Profess
Norton, the Master of the Sentences;
Scotus, a Dunce to Him; should we compare*
Aquinas, here, None to be Named are.
Of a more Heavenly Strain, his Notions were,
More pure, Sublime, Scholastical, and clear.
More like the Apostles Paul, and John, I wist,
Was this our Orthodox Evangelist.
Which Lines accompanied with Mr. Wilsons Anagrammatising of JOHANNES NORTONUS
into Nonne is Honor^ius? Will Give him his Deserved Character.

. 23. He that shall Read the Tragical Romances, written by that Brasen-fac'd
Liar Bolsecus, concerning the Deaths of such men as Calvin and Beza, or such
monstrous Writings as those of Tympius, ^ochleus, Genebard, and some others,
who would bear the World in hand, that Luther and Occolampadius Learned the
Protestant Religion, of the Devil, and were at last, killed by him; and that
Bucer had his Guts Pulled out and cast about by the Devil; will not Wonder if I
tell him, that after the Death of Mr. Norton, the Quakers Published a Libel, by
them called, A Representation to King and Parliament; wherein, pretending to
Report some Remarkable Judgments upon their Persecutors, they Insert this
Passage, John Norton Chief Priest, in Boston, by the Immediate Power of the
Lord, was Smitten, and as he was Sinking down by the Fire side, being under
Just Judgment, he confessed, the Hand of the Lord was upon him, and so he Died.
-- Which they mention, as a Judgment upon a Persecutor. Whereas, the Death of
this Good man, was Attended with no Circumstances, but what unto a Good man
might be Eligible and Comfortable, and Circumstanced far otherwise, than it was
by those Revilers Represented. But it was necessary for that Enchanted People,
thus to Revenge themselves upon one, who amongst his others Services ^o the
Church of God, already mentioned, had, at the Desire of the General Court,
Written a Book, Entitled, The Heart of New England Rent, at the Blasphemies of
the Present Generation; Or, a Brief Tractate concerning the Doctrine of the
Quakers: Which Doctrine was in this Tractate, solidly Confuted. And perhaps, it
had been better i^ This had been All the Confutation; Which I add, Because I
will not, I cannot make my self a Vindicator of all the Severities, with which
the Zeal of some Eminent men has sometimes Enraged, and Increased, rather than
Reclamed, those Miserable Heretics: but wish that the Quakers may be treated,
as Q. Elizabeth directed the Lord President of the North to treat the Parists;
when She advised him to Convince them with Argument, rather then Suppress them
with (...); to that purpose using the Words of the Prophet, (...) Mortem
Peccatoris.

. 24. Not Long after his Death, his Friends Published Three Sermons of his,
which for the Circumstances of them, could have been Entitled, These were the
Last W^^ds of that Servant of the Lord. The (...) of the Sermons, was the Last
Sermon, which he (...) at the Court of (...) at Boston. It is on Jer 10 17.
Entitled, Si^n the Out* ca^^ Healed of her (...): and there are Two or Three
Passages in it, which I cannot but Recommend unto the Peculiar Consideration of
the Present (...).

To Differ from our Orthodox, Pious, and Learned Brethren, is such an
Affliction to a Christian and an Ingenuous Spirit, as nothing but Love to the
Truth could Arm a (...) Peace against. Our Profession being in (...) Differing
from these and those, it concerns us, that our Walking be very Caut^lous, and
that it be without Giving any Just Offense.

Again, In matters of State and Church, Let it be shown that we are His
Disciples, who said, Give unto Caesar the Things that are Cesars, and I Give
unto God the Things that are Gods: and in matters of Religion, Let it be Known,
That we are for Reformation and not for Separation:

-- Once more, -- I may say thus much (and pardon my speech) A more Yielding
Ministry unto the People, than ours, I believe is not in the World. I beseech
you, Let not Caesar be Killed in the Senate, after he has Conquered in the
Field: Let us Acknowledge the Order of the Eldership, in our Churches, in their
Way; and the Order of Councils in their Way, duly backed and encouraged:
without which Experience will Witness that these Churches cannot long consist.

The Second of the Sermons, was the Last Sermon, which he Preached on the Lords
Day. It is on Joh. 14. 3. Entitled, The Believers Consolation in the
Remembrance of his Heavenly Mansion, prepared for him by Christ.

The Third of the Sermons was the Last Sermon, which he Preached on his
Lecture. It is on Heb. 8. 5. Entitled, The Evangelical Worshipper, Subjecting
to the Prescription, and Sovereignty of Scripture Pattern.

. 25. The Three Sermons, thus Published, as the Last, or the Dropped Mantle of
this Elias, are Accompanied with the Translation of a Letter, which was
composed in Latin, by Mr. Norton, and Subscribed by more than Forty of the
Ministers, on this Occasion. The Famous John ^urn, having from the year 1635.
been most Indefatigably Laboring for a Pacification, between the Reformed
Churches in Europe, communicated his Design to the Ministers of New England,
requesting their Concurrence and Countenance unto his Generous Undertaking. In
Answer to Him, this Letter was Written; and there are One or Two Passages,
which I choose to Transcribe from it, because, as well the Spirit of our
Norton, as the Story of our Country, is therein Indigitated.

Redeunt in Memoriam, ^t redeunt quidem non sine Sanctiori Sympathia, Beat^^
Ill^^ Ammae, Melan^thonis and Parei N^N EN A^IOI^, hi^ int^r Reformatos, ille
inter Evangeli^os, Vir Consummatissimus. Quorum Alter Haganoam ^ter faciens,
(...).Inge^^^^.

Viximus in Synod^, et jam moriemur in illis.

Alter Ver^, Super Eristica Eucharistica Meditabundus, in (...) Verba Erupit,
Defessus sum Disputando. Nimirum, Illis Judicibus, Orandum p^tius quam --
Disputandum; Vivendum non Litigandum For^^tan (...) Consilia Pacis, quae
Sti^^lanti recenti Ira bac^enus, minus grata fuere, utri^sque partis Theologi
Rixis diuturnicribus aliquando fossi (...) Subacti, a^uis animis Suscipere, non
moleste ferent: Mare pacificum Aquis Meribanis, Longo Retu^ (...) Edocti,
anteferentes.

We may here call to Mind, and not without some Sacred Sympathy, Those Blessed
Souls, Melancthon and Pareus, now among the Blessed, The One no less Famous
among the Reformed, than the Other among the Evangelicks. Of these, The One
Going toward Haganoa, with Sighs uttered these Words, In Synods hitherto we
Lived have;
And now in Them, Return unto the Grave.


The Other Seriously Mediating on the Controversy of the Eucharist, brake forth
into these Words; I am weary with Disputing. Thus, if these, might be Judges,
we ought rather to Pray than Dispute, and Study how to Live, rather than
Contend. And perhaps the Divines of either Part, after they have been wearyed
and Broke, in their Spirits with Daily and Continual Contentions, will more
readily Accept of the Counsels of Peace, which hitherto have been le^s
Acceptable, while the sense of Anger has been Spurring* of them: After they
have been taught by long use, they may prefer the Waters of the Pacify Sea,
before those of Meribah.

Gratias agimus Domino Dureo, c^I Joseph^ Long terra marique a fratribus
Dissiti, meminisse Cordi fuit: Qui nos Misellos, in Cilicio, Cilicio autem ipsi
confidimus Evangelico, Militantes, ^am Auspicato Nuncio invisere dignatus est:
Qui Novam Angliam, quasi particulam aliquam Fimbria Vestiment^ Aaronici,
unguento pr^^diviti delib^tam, in Album Syncretismi, Long celeberrimi,
adscribere, non adspernatur: Qui porro Litterts a^. Syncretismum hortatoriis,
subinde nobis Ausam prae^uit Testimonium hoc, quale quale, perhibendi
Communionis nostrae fraternae, cum univer^a Chorte Protestantium, fidem Jesu
Christ^ pro^^^entium. Ingenue e^m fatemur, tranquilla tu^^ quumerant Omnia, nec
Signa Minantia signis ad bu^nobis conspici^bantur; quippe quibus, Episcopis,
illa Tempestate Rerum Dominis, publico Ministeri^ Defungi, nedum Sacris frui,
sine Subscriptione and. Conformitate, (ut loqui solent) atque adeo Humanarum
Adinventionum, in Divinis, Commixtione, non Liceret, ^t satius visum est, vel
in Longinquas, et Incultas Terrarum Oras, Cultus purioris Ergo concessisse,
quam Oner^ Hierarchico, cum Rerum Omnium Affluentia, Conscientiae autem
Dispendio, succubuisse. At patriam fugiendo, nos Ecclesiarum Evangelicarum
Communioni Nuncium misisse, hoc vero est quod fidenter and Sanct^ pernegam^s.

We give thanks to Mr. Dury, into whose heart it came to Remember, Joseph
Separate from his Brethren at so great a Distance both by Sea and Land: and who
has vouchsafed with so comfortable a Message to visit us, poor People,
clothed in Sackcloth, for our Warfare; yet, as we trust, the Sackcloth of the
Gospel: who has not refused to put New England as part of the skirt of Aarons
Garment, upon which has Descended some of the Precious Oil, into the Catalogue
of the so much famed Agreement: And who has by his Letter exhorting to such
Agreement given us an Occasion to bring in this Testimony, such as it is, for
our Brotherly Communion with the whole Company of Protestants professing the
Faith of Christ Jesus. For we must Ingenuously confess, that then, when all
Things were Quiet, and no Threatening Signs of War appeared, seeing we could not
be permitted, by the Bishops, at that time prevailing, to perform the Office of
the Ministry in Public, nor yet to enjoy the Holy Ordinances, without
Subscription and Conformity (as they were wont to speak) nor without the
Mixture of Humane Inventions with Divine Institutions, we chose rather to
Depart into the Remote, and unknown parts of the Earth, for the sake of a
Purer* Worship, than to ly down under the Hierarchy in the Abundance of all
Things, but with Prejudice of Conscience. But that in Flying from our Country,
we should Renounce Communion with such Churches, as profess the Gospel, is a
Thing, which we Confidently, and Solemnly Deny.

Quoscunque apud Catus, per Universum Evangelicorum chorum, Fundamentalia
Doctrinae et Essentialia Ordinis, Vigeant, quamvis in pleri^que Controversiae
Theologicae, Apicibus nobiscum juxta minus Sentiant, illos tamen ad unu^^
Omnes, pro Fratribus agnoscimus, iisque caetera pacificis, and Ordinate
incedentibus, DEXIAS KOINONIAS in Domino porrigere, paratissimos, nos esse
his^e palam facimus.

In whatever Assemblies amongst the whole Company of those that profess the
Gospel, the Fundamentals of Doctrine, and Essentials of Order, are mentained,
though in many Niceties of Controversal Divinity, they are a^ less Agreement
with us, we do hereby make it manifest, that we do acknowledge them all, and
every one for Brethren, and that we shall be ready to give unto them the Right
Hind of Fellowship in the Lord, if in other Things they be Peaceable, and walk
Orderly.

. 26. This was our Norton! And we might have given yet a fuller Account of him,
if we could have seen, the Diary, which he kept of his Daily Walk. However he
was well known to be a Great Example of Holiness, Watchfulness; and
Extraordinary Wisdom; and though he left no Children, yet he has a Better Name
than that of Sons and of Daughters. Moreover, There was one Considerable part
of Ministerial Work, wherein he not only went beyond most of his Age, but also
proved a Leader unto many Followers. Though the Ministers of New England
counted it Unlawful for them, Ordinarily to perform their Ministerial Acts of
Solemn and Public Prayer by Reading or Using any Forms of Prayer composed by
other Persons for them; They Reckoned an Ability to express the Case of a
Congregation in Prayer, to be a Ministerial Gift, which our Lord forbids His
Ministers to Neglect; They supposed that a Minister, who should only Read Forms
of Sermons composed for him, would as Truly Discharge the Duty of Preaching, as
One that should only Read such Forms of Prayers, would the Duty of Praying, in
it: They could not find, that any Humane Forms of Prayer were much used in any
part of the Church, until about Four Hundred years after Christ, nor any made
for more than some Single Province, until Six Hundred years; nor any Imposed
until Eight Hundred, when all manner of Ill-formed Things, began to be found in
the Temple of God: Nevertheless very many of our Greatest Ministers, in our
more Early times, did not use to Expatiate with such a Significant and
Admirable Variety in their Prayers before their Sermons, as many of our Later
Times have attained unto: Nor indeed Then did They, nor Still do We, count all
Forms of Prayer Simply Unlawful. But the more General Improvements and
Expressions of The Gift of Prayers, in our Ministers, have Since been the
matter of Observation; and Particularly Mr. Norton, therein was truly
Admirable! It even Transported the Souls of his Hearers, to accompany him in
his Devotions, wherein his Graces would make Wonderful Salleyes into the vast
Field of Entertainments, and Acknowledgments, with which we are furnished in
the New Covenant, for our Prayers. I have Heard of a Godly man in Ipswich, who
after Mr. Nortons Going to Boston, would Ordinarily Travel on foot from Ipswich
to Boston, which is about Thirty Miles, for nothing but the Weekly Lecture
there; and he would profess, That it was worth a Greater Journey, to be a
Partaker in One of Mr. Nortons Prayers* This Pattern of Prayer in Mr. Norton,
had some Influence upon it, that since his Time, our Pulpits have been fuller
than ever, of Experimental Demonstrations, that the Ministers of the Gospel may
on All Occasions present their Supplications before God, in the Discharge of
their Ministry, with more Pertinent, more Affecting, more Expanded Enlargments,
than any Form could Afford unto them. New England can show, even Young
Ministers, who never did in all Things Repeat One Prayer twice over, in that
part of their Ministry wherein we are First of All, to make Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and Thanksgivings; and yet sometimes, for much more
than an Hour together, they pour out their Souls unto the Almighty God in such
a Fervent, Copious, and yet Proper Manner, that their most Critical Auditors,
can complain of Nothing Disagreeable but profess themselves extremely Edifyed.

But our Praying Norton, who while he was among us, Prayed with the Tongue of
Angels, is now Gone to Praise with the Angels for ever.

Epitaphium.
JOHANNES NORTONUS.

Quis fuerat, Ultra si quaeras, Dignus es qui Nescias.

Memoria WILSONIANA.
THE LIFE OF Mr. JOHN WILSON.
. 1. SUCH is the Natural Tendency, in Humane Minds to Poetry, That, as it is
Observed, the Roman Historian, in the very first Line of his History, fell upon
a Verse,

Urbem Romam, In Principl^ Reges habuere;

So, the Roman Orator, though a very Mean Poet, yet making an Oration for a
Good One, could not let his First Sentence pass him, without a perfect
Hexameter, In Qua me non Inficior inedioeriter Esse.


If therefore, I were not of all men the most (...), my Reader might now Expect
an Entertainment altogether in Verse; for I am going to Write the Life of that
New-English Divine, who had so nimble, a Faculty of putting his Devour thoughts
into Verse, that he Signalized himself by the Greatest Frequency, perhaps, that
ever Man used, of sending Poems, to All Persons, in All Places, on All
Occasions; and upon this, as well as upon Greater Accounts, was a David unto
the Flocks of our Lord in the Wilderness: Quicquid tentabat Dicere, Versus erat;


Wherein, if the Curious Relished the Piety sometimes rather than the Poetry,
the Capacity of the Most, therein to be accommodated, must be Considered. But I
intend no further Account of this matter, than what is given by his Worthy Son,
(Reprinting at Boston in the year, 1680 the Verses of his Father, upon the
Famous Deliverances of the English Nation, Printed at London, as long ago, as
the year 1626) Whose Words are, What Volumns has he Penned, for the help of
Others, in their several Changes of Condition? How was his Heart full of Good
Matter? And has Verses past, like to the Handkerchiefs carried from Paul, to
uphold the Disconsolate, and Heal their Wounded Souls? For indeed this is the
Least Thing, that we have to Relate of that Great Saint; and accordingly, it is
under a more Considerable Character, that I must now Exhibit him, Even, as a
Father to the Infant Colonies of New England.

. 2. Mr. John Wilson, descending from Eminent Ancestors, was Born at Winsor in
the Wonderful Year 1588 The Third Son of Dr. William Wilson, a Prep^nd of St.
Paul's, of Rochester and of Winsor, and Rector of Cliff: having for his Mother,
a Niece of Dr. Edmund Grindal, the most Worthily Renowned Archbishop of
Canterbury. His exact Education under his Parents, which betimes Tinged! him
with an Aversation to Vice, and above all, to the very shadow of a Lie, fitted
him to Undergo the further Education, which he received in Eaton-Colledge,
under Udal (and Langely) whom now we may Venture, after Poor Tom. Tusser, to
call, The Severest of Men. Here he was most Remarkably Twice Delivered from
Drowning; but at his Book, he made such Proficiency, that while he was the
Least Boy in the School, he was made a Propositor; and when the Duke of Biron,
Emba^sador from the French King Henry IV, to Queen Elizabeth, Visited the
School, he made a Latin Oration, for which the Duke bestowed Three Angels upon
him. After four years Continuance at Eaton, he was Removed unto Cambridge,
between the Fourteenth and Fifteenth year of his Age; and Admitted into Kings
College in the year 1602. When he came to stand for a Fellowship in that
College, his Antipathy to some Horrid Wickednesses, whereto a Detestable
Wretch that had been Acquainted with him, would have betrayed him, caused that
Malicious Wretch by Devised and Accursed Slanders to ruin so far the Reputation
of this Chaste Youth with the other Fellows, that had not the Provost, who was a
Serious and a Reverend Person, interposed for him, he had utterly lost his
Privilege; which now by the Major Vote he Obtained. But this Affliction put
him upon many Thoughts and Prayers before the Lord.

. 3. He had hitherto been, according to his Good Education, very Civilly and
Soberly Disposed: but being by the Good Hand of God, Led unto the Ministry of
such Holy men as Mr. Rains, Dr. Tailor, Dr. Chadenton, he was by their Sermons
Enlightened and A wakened, unto more Sollicitous Enquiries after, The One Thing
yet Lacking in him. The Serious Dispositions of his Mind, were now such, that
besides his pursuance after the Works of Repentance in himself, he took no
little pains to pursue it in others; especially the Malefactors in the Prisons,
which he Visited with a Devout, Sedulous, and Successful Industry.
Nevertheless, being forestalled with Prejudices against the Puritans of those
Times, as if they had held, he knew not well what Odd Things, he Declined Their
Acquaintance; although his Good Conversation had made him to be accounted One
of them, Himself. Until going unto a Booksellers Shop to Augment his
Well-furnisht Library, he Lit upon that Famous Book of Mr. Richard Rogers,
called, The Seven Treatises; which, when he had Read, he so Affected, not only
the Matter, but also the Author of the Book, that he took a Journey unto
Wethersfield, on purpose to hear a Sermon, from that Boanerges. When, he had
heard the Heavenly Passages that fell from the Lips of that Worthy Man,
Privately, as well as Publicly, and compared therewithal the Writings of
Greenham, of Dod, and of Don't, especially The Path way to Heaven, Written by
the Author last mentioned, he saw that They who were Nicknamed, Puritans, were
like to be the Desirablest Companions, for One that intended his own
Everlasting Happiness; and pursuant unto the Advice, which he had from Dr.
Ames, he associated himself with a Pious Company in the University, who kept
their Meetings in Mr. Wilsons Chamber, for Prayer, Fasting, Holy Conference,
and the Exercises of true Devotion.

. 4. But now, perceiving many Good men to Scruple many of the Rites, Practiced
and Imposed in the Church of England, he furnished himself with all the Books,
that he could find Written on the Case of Conformity, both Pro and Con, and
pondered with a most Conscientious Deliberation, the Arguments on both sides
produced. He was hereby so convinced of the Evil in Conformity, that at Length,
for his Observeable Omission, of certain Uninstituted Ceremonies in the Worship
of God, the Bishop of Lincoln, then Visiting the University, pronounced upon
him the Sentence of Quindenum, that is, That, besides other Mortifications, he
must within Fifteen Days, have been Expelled, if he continued in his Offense.
His Father, being hereof Advised, with all Paternal Affection, Wrote unto him
to Conform; and at the same Time, interceded with the Bishop, that he might
have a Quarter of a year allowed him; in which time, if he could not be
Reduced, he should then leave his Fellowship in the College. Hereupon he sent
him unto several Doctors of Great Fame, to get his Objections Resolved; but
when much Discourse, and much Writing, had passed between them, he was rather
the more confirmed in his Principles about Church-Reformation. Wherefore his
Father, then diverting him from the Designs of the Ministry, disposed him to
the Inns of Court; where he fell into Acquaintance with some Young Gentlemen,
who associated with him in constant Exercises of Devotion, to which Meetings
the Repeated Sermons of Dr. Gouge were a continual Entertainment: and here it
was, that he came into the Advantageous Knowledge of the Learned Scultetus,
Chaplain to the Prince Palatine of the Rhine, then making some stay in England.

. 5. When he had continued Three years at the Inns of Court, his Father
discerning his Disposition to be a Minister of the Gospel, permitted his
Proceeding Master of Arts, in the University of Cambridge; but Advised him to
Address another College, than that, where he had formerly met with
Difficulties. Dr. Carry, who was then Vice Chancellor, understanding his former
Circumstances, would not Admit him without Subscription: but he refused to
Subscribe. In this Distress he Repaired unto his Father, at whose House there
happened then to be present, the Countess of Bedfords Chief Gentleman, who had
Business with the Earl of Northampton, the Chancellor of the University. And
this ^^^ble Person upon the Information, which that Gentleman gave him of the
matter, presently Wrote a Letter to the Vice Chancellor on the Behalf of our
Young Wilson; whereupon he received his Degree, and continued a while after
this, in Emanuel-Colledge: from whence he made frequent and useful Visits unto
his Friends, in the Counties adjoining, and became further fitted for his
Intended Service. But while he was passing under these Changes, he took up a
Resolution, which he thus expressed before the Lord; That if the Lord would
Grant him a Liberty of Conscience, with Purity of Worship, he would be content,
yea, thankful, though it were (...) the furthermost End of the World. A most
Prophetical Resolution!

. 6. At Length, Preaching his first Sermon at New-Port; he set his Hand unto
that Plough from whence he never afterward Looked Back: not very long after
which, his Father lying on his Death Bed, he kneeled, in his Turn, before him,
for his Blessing, and brought with him for a share in that Blessing, the
Virtuous Young Gentlewoman, the Daughter of the Lady Mansfield (Widow of Sir
John Mansfield Master of the Minarys and the Queens Surveyor) whom he Designed
afterward to Marry: Whereupon the Old Gentleman said, Ah, John I have taken
much Care about thee, such time as thou wast in the University, because thou
would not Conform; I would fain have brought thee to some higher Preferment,
then thou have yet attained unto: I see thy Conscience is very Scrupulous,
concerning some things that have been Observed and Imposed in the Church:
Nevertheless, I have Rejoiced to see the Grace and Fear of God, in thy Heart;
and seeing thou have kept a Good Conscience hitherto, and walked according to
thy Light So Do still; and Go by the Rules of Gods Holy Word: The Lord Bless
thee, and her, whom thou have chosen to be the Companion of thy Life! Among
other Places, where he now Preached, Moreclake was One; where his
Nonconformity exposed him to the Rage of Persecution; but by the Friendship of
the Justice, namely Sir William Bird, a Kinsman of his Wife, and by a Mistake
of the Informers, the Rage of that Storm was moderated.

. 7. After this, he Lived as a Chaplain Successively in Honorable and
Religious Families; and, at last, was Invited unto the House of the most Pious
Lady Scudamore. Here Mr. Wilson observing the Discourse of the Gentry at the
Table, on the Lord's Day, to be too Disagreeable unto the Devout Frame to be
mentained on such a Day, at Length he Zealously stood up at the Table, with
Words to this purpose, I will make bold to Speak a Word or Two; This is the
Lords Holy Day, and we have been hearing His Word, and after the Word Preached,
every One should think, and speak about such Things, as have been Delivered in
the Name of God; and not Lavish cut the Time in Discourses about Hawks and
Hounds. Whereupon, a Gentleman then present, made this Handsome and Civil
Answer, Sir We Deserve all of us to be thus Reproved by you; This is, indeed,
the SabbathDay, and we should, surely, have better Discourse; I hope, it will
be a Warning to us. Notwithstanding this, the next Lords Day, the Gentry at the
Table were at their Old Notes; which caused Mr. Wilson again to tell them, That
the Hawks which they Talked of, were the Birds, that Picked up the seed of the
Word, after the Sowing of it; and Prayed them, That their Talk might be of such
Things, as might Sanctify the Day, and Edify their own Souls; which caused the
former Gentleman to Renew his former Thankfulness for the Admonition. But Mr.
Leigh the Ladys Husband, was very angry; whereof when the Lady advised Mr.
Wilson, wishing him to say something, that might Satisfy him, he Replied, Good
Madam, I know not wherein I have given any just Offense; and therefore, I know
of no Satisfaction that I owe Your Ladyship has Invited me to Preach the Good
Word of God among you; and so I have endeavored according to my Ability: Now
such Discourse as this, on the Lords Day, is Profane and Disorderly: If your
Husband Like me not, I will be gone. When the Lady informed her Husband how
Peremptory Mr. Wilson was, in this matter, he mended his Countenance and
Carriage; and the Effect of this Reproof was, that unsuitable Discourse, on the
Lords Day, was cured among them.

. 8. Removing from this Family, after he had been, a while at Henly, he
continued for three years together, Preaching at Four Places, by Turns, which
lay near one another, on the Edges of Suffolk, namely Bumsted, Stoke, Clare,
and Candish. Here, some of Sudbury happening to hear him, they Invited him to
Succeed the Eminent Old Mr. Jenkins, with which Invitation, he cheerfully
complied, and the more cheerfully because of his Opportunity to be near Old Mr.
Richard Rogers, from whom afterward when Dying, he Received a Blessing among
his Children; yea, to encourage his Acceptance of this Place, the very Reader
of the Parish did Subscribe, with many Scores of others, their Desires of it;
and yet he accepted not the Pastoral Charge of the Place, without a Solemn Day
of Prayer with Fasting, (wherein the Neighboring Ministers assisted) at his
Election: Great notice was now taken of the Success, which God gave unto his
Labors, in this Famous Town; among other Instances whereof, One was this. A
Tradesman much given to Stealing, as well as other Profane and Vicious
Practices, One Day seeing People flock to Mr. Wilsons Lecture, thought with
himself, Why should I Tarry at Home to Work, when so many Go to Hear a Sermon?
Wherefore, for the sake of Company, he went unto the Lecture too; but when he
came, he found a Sermon, as it were, particularly Directed unto himself, on
Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that has Stole, Steal no more; and such was the Impression
thereof upon his Heart, that, from this Time, he became a Changed and Pious man.

. 9. But if, they that will Live Godlily must Suffer Persecution, a Peculiar
share of it must fall upon them, who are Zealous and Useful Instruments to make
other Live so. Mr. Wilson had a share of this Persecution; and one A -- n, was
a Principal Author of it. This A -- n had formerly been an Apprentice in
London, Where the Bishops detained him some years, under an hard Imprisonment,
because he Refused the Oath ex Officio, which was pressed upon him to tell,
Whether he had never heard his Master Pray against the Bishop? The Charity of
Well Disposed People now Supported him, till he got abroad, Recommended by his
Hard Sufferings, unto the Good Affections of the Puritans, at whose Meetings he
became so Conversant, and thereupon such a forward and zealous Professor, that,
at Length he Took upon (...), under the Confidence of some Latinity, whereof he
was Owner, to be a Sort of a Preacher among them. This man would Reverence Mr.
Wilson as his Father, and yet upon the Provocation of seeing Mr. Wilson more
highly Valued and Hououred, than himself, he not only became a Conformist
himself, but also, as Apostates use to be, a Malignant and Violent Persecutor
of those, from whom he had Apostatized. By his means, Mr. Wilson was put unto
Trouble in the Bishops Courts; from whence his Deliverance was, at Length
Obtained by certain Powerful Mediators. And once by his Tricks the most noted
Pursevant of those Times, was employed for the Siezing of Mr. Wilson; but
though he Siezed upon many Scores of the People coming from the Lecture, he
Dismissed the rest, because he could not meet with Mr. Wilson himself, who by a
Special Providence, went out of his direct way, to Visit a Worthy Neighbor,
and so escaped this Mighty Hunter. Afterward an Eminent Lady, happening
Innocently to make some Comparison between the Preaching of Mr. Wilson, and one
Dr. B. of B. the Angry Doctor presently applied himself unto the Bishop of
London, who for a while Suspended him. And when that Storm was over; he with
several other Worthy Ministers, came to be wholly Silenced, in another, that
was Raised upon Complaints made by one Mr. Bird, unto the Bishop of Norwich
against them. Concerning this Ill Bird, there happened one passage hereupon,
which had in it something Extraordinary. Falling very Sick, he had the help of
a Famous and Skilful Physician, One Dr. Duke of Colchester; who having left his
Patient, in his Opinion, safely Recovered, gave Mr. Wilson a Visit with an
Account of it. Recovered! Says Mr. Wilson; You are mistaken Mr. Doctor, He Is a
Dead man! The Doctor answered, I^ ever I recovered a Sick man in my Life, that
man is Recovered: but Mr. Wilson replied, No, Mr. Doctor, He Is a Dead man, he
shall not Live; Mark my Words! The Doctor smiled; but for all that, before they
parted, the News was brought them, that the man was Dead indeed, and, The Lord
known by the Judgment, which He Executed. But at last, Mr. Wilson obtained from
the truly Noble Earl of Warwick, to Sign a Letter, which the Earl bid himself
to draw up, unto the Bishop, on his be half; by the Operation of which Letter,
his Liberty, for the Exercise of his Ministry, was again procured. This Bishop
was the Well-known Dr. Harsnet, who a Little while after this, Traveling
Northward, upon Designs of mischief against the Reforming Pastors and
Christians there, certain Ministers of the South set apart a Day, for Solemn
Fasting and Prayer to Implore the Help of Heaven, against those Designs; and on
that very Day, he was taken with a Sore and an odd Fit, which caused him to
stop at a Blind House of Entertainment on the Road, where he suddenly Dyed.

. 10. At Last, being Persecuted in One Country, he must Flee into another. The
Plantation of a New-English Colony was begun; And Mr Wilson, with some of his
Neighbors, Embarked themselves in the Fleet, which came over thither in the
year 1630. Where he applied himself with all the Vigor Imaginable, to
Encourage the poor People, under the Difficulties of their New Plantation. This
Good People buried near Two Hundred of their Number, wit^ in a Quarter of a
year after their first Landing; which caused Mr. Wilson particularly to
Endeavor their Consolation, by Preaching on Jacobs not being disheartened by
the Death of his nearest Friends in the way, when God had called him to Remove.
And how Remarkably, perhaps I might say, Excessively, Liberal he was in
Employing his Estate for the Relief of the Needy, Every such One so beheld him,
as to Reckon him, The Father of them all: Yea, the poor Indians themselves also
tasted of his Bounty. If it were Celebrated, as the Glory of Bellarmine, that
he would Sell his Goods to convert them into Alms for the poor, yea, that,
Quadam Die proprium Atramentarium Argenteolum, it ditaret Inopes, inter pig
nora obligavit, out Mr. Wilson, though a greater Disclaimer of Merit, than
Bellarmine was, not only in his Writings, but on his Deathbed it self, yet
came not behind Bellarmine for the Extension of his Charity. To give Instances
of his, even over-doing Liberality, would be to do it Injuries; for indeed they
were Innumerable; He acted as if the Primitive Agreement of having All Things
in Common, had been of all things the most Agreeable unto him. I shall Sum up
all in the Lines of an Elegant Elegy, which Mr. Samuel Bache, an Ingenious
Merchant made upon him, at his Death;

When as the Poor want Succor, where is he
Can say, all can be said, Extempore?
Vie with the Lightning, and melt down to the quick
Their Souls, and make themselves their Pockets pick?
Where Is such a Leader, thus has got the Slight
T^ teach holy Hands to War, Fingers to Fight;
Their Arrow hit? Bowels to Bowels Meant it,
God, Christ, and Saints accept, but Wilson sint it.
Which way so ere the Propositions move,
The Ergo of his Syllogisms LOVE.
So Bountiful to all: But if the Poor
Was Christian too, Ali's Money went, and more,
His Coat, Rug, Blanket, Gloves; he thought their due
Was all his Money, Garments, One of Two.
But he was most set upon the Main Business of this New-Plantation; which was,
To Settle, and Enjoy the Ordinances of the Gospel, and Worship the Lord Jesus
Christ according to His own Institutions; and accordingly, He, with the
Governor, and others that came with him on the same Account, con^^ined into a
Church State, with all Convenient Expedition.

. 11. Mr. Wilsons Removal to New England, was rendered the more Difficult, by
the Indisposition of his Dearest Consort thereunto; but he hoping, that
according to a Dream, which he had before his coming hither, That he saw here a
little Temple, rising out of the Ground, which by Degrees increased into very
high and large Dimensions, the Lord had a Temple to build in these Regions;
Resolved never to be Discouraged from his Undertaking Wherefore, having first
sent over an Encouraging Account of the Good Order, both Civil and Sacred,
which now began to be Established in the Plantation, he did himself Return into
England, that he might further pursue the Effect thereof; and accordingly he
made it his Business, wherever he came, to Draw as many Good men, as he could,
into this Country, with him. His Wife remained unperswadeable till upon Prayer
with Fasting before the Almighty Turner of Hearts, he Received an Answer, in
her becoming Willing to accompany him over an Ocean into a Wilderness. A very
sorrowful Parting they now had from their Old Friends in Sudbury, but a Safe,
and a Quick Passage over the Atlantic; and whereas the Church of Boston,
observing that he Arrived not, at the Time expected, had set apart a Day of
Humiliation on his Behalf, his Joyful Arrival before the Day, caused them to
turn it into a Day of Thanksgiving. But Mrs. Wilson being thus persuaded over,
into the Difficulties of an American Desert, I have heard, that her Kinsman,
Old Mr. Dod, for her Consolation under those Difficulties, did sent her a
Present, with an Advice, which had in it, something of Curiosity. He sent her,
at the same Time, a Brass Counter, a Silver Crown, and a Gold Jacobus; all of
them severally wrapped up: With this Instruction unto the Gentlemen who carried
it; That he should first of all Deliver only the Counter, and if She Received
it with any Show of Discontent he should then take no further Notice of her
(...) but if She gratefully Resented that Small Thing, for the sake of the Hand
it came from, he should then go on to deliver the Silver, and so the Gold: But
withal assure her, That such would be the Dispensations of God unto her, and
the other Good People of New England: If they would be Content, and Thankful,
with such Little Things, as God at first bestowed upon them, they should in
Time, have Silver and Gold Enough. Mrs. Wilson accordingly, by her Cheerful
Entertainment of the Least Remembrance from Good Old Mr. Dod, gave the
Gentleman, Occasion to go through, with his whole Present, and the annexed
Advice, which has in a Good measure been accomplished.

. 12. It was not long before Mr. Wilsons Return to England once more, was
obliged by the Death of his Brother, whose Will, because it be queathed a
Legacy of a Thousand Pounds unto New England, gave Satisfaction unto our Mr.
Wilson, though it was otherwise Injurious unto himself. A Tedious and Winter
Voyage he now had; being Twice forced into Ireland, where first at Galloway,
then at Kingsale, afterward at Banl^ (...) Bridge, he Occasionally, but
Vigorously and Successfully Served the Kingdom of God. At last, he got safe
among, his Old Friends, at Sudbury; according to the Prediction, which he had
let Fall in his Former Farewell unto them, It may be John Wilson may come and
see Sudbury once again! From whence, Visiting Mr. Nathanael Rogers at Assing^m,
where he Arrived before their Morning-Prayers, Mr Rogers asked him, to (...)
something upon the Chapter that was Read, which happened then to be the first
Chapter, in the first Book of Chronicles: and from a Paragraph of mere Proper
Names, that seemed altogether Barren of any Edifying matter, he Raised so many
Fruitful and Useful Notes, that a Pious Person then present, amazed thereat,
could have no Rest, without going over into America after him Having dispatched
his Affairs in England, he again Embarked for New England, in Company with Four
Ministers, and near Two Hundred Passengers, whereof some were Persons of
Considerable ^uality; but they had all been lost by a Large Leak sprang in the
Ship, if God had not, on a Day of Solemn Fasting and Prayer, kept in board for
that purpose, mercifully Discovered this Dangerous Leak unto them.

. 13. That Phoenix of his Age, Dr. Ames, would say, That if he might have his
Option of the ^^st Condition, that he could Propound unto himself, (...) this
side Heaven, it would be, that he might be the Teacher of a Congregational
Church, whereof Mr. Wilson, should be the Pastor. This Happiness, this
Privilege, now had Mr. Cotton in the Church of Boston. But Satan Envious at
the Prosperity of that Flourishing Church, raised a Storm of Antinomian and
Familistical Errors, which had like to have thrown all into an Irrecoverable
Confusion, if the Good God had not Remarkably Blessed the Endeavors of a
Synod; and Mr. Wilson, for a while, met with hard measure for his Early
Opposition to those Errors, until by the Help of that Synod, the Storm was
Weathered out. At the Beginning of that Assembly, after much Discourse against
the Unscriptural Enthusiasms and Revelations, then by some contended for, Mr.
Wilson proposed, You that are against these Things, and that are for the Spirit
and the Word together, hold up your Na^uls! And the Multitude of Hands then
held up, was a Comfortable and Encouraging Introduction unto the other
Proceedings. At the Conclusion of that Assembly, a Catalogue of the Errors to
be Condemned, was produced; Whereof, when One asked, What shall be done with
them? The wonted Zeal of Mr. Wilson made this I'lunt Answer, Let them Go to the
Devil of Hell, from whence they came! In the midst of these Temptations also,
he was by a Lot chosen to Accompany the Forces, then sen^ forth upon an
Expedition against the Pe quod Indians; which he did with so much Faith and
Joy, that he professed himself as fully Satisfied that God would give the
English a Victory over those Enemies, as if he had seen the Victory already
obtained. And the whole Country Quickly shared with him in the Consolations of
that Remarkable Victory!

. 14. In the Wilderness, he met with his Difficulties; For beside, the Loss of
Houses, Di^erse Times by Fire, which yet he bore with such Cheerful Submission,
that Once One that met (...) on the Road, informing of him, Sir, I have sad
News for you; while you have been abroad, your House is burnt! His first Answer
was, Blessed be God: He has burnt this House, because He intends to Give me a
Better! (which accordingly came to (...);) he was also put upon Complying with
the Inclinations of his Eldest Son to Travel; who accordingly Traveled, first
into Holland, then into Italy, where he proceeded a Doctor of Physic, and so
Returned into England, Excellently well Adorned with all the Accomplishments of
a most ^ous and Useful Gentlemen. But this Worthy Person Dyed, about the year
1658. And this ^^stned the Death of his Mother, e're the year same about; which
more than Doubled the Grief of his Father. And these Afflictions were yet
further Embittered by the Death of his Eldest Daughter, Mrs. Rogers, in
Childbed with her first Child; at whose Interment, though he could not but
Express a deal of Sorrow, yet he did it with so much Patience, that, In Token,
he said, of his Grounded and Joyful Hopes, to meet her again in the Morning of
the Resurrectin, and of his Willingness to Resign her into the Hands of Him,
who would make all Things work together for Good, he himself took the Spade,
and threw in the First Shovelful of Earth upon her. And not long after, he
buried Three or Four of his Grandchildren by another Daughter Mrs. Danforth
(yet Living with her Worthy Son in Law Edward Bromfield Esquire. in Boston) Whereof
One Lying by the Walls, on a Day of Public Thanksgiving, this Holy man then
Preached a most Savoury Sermon, on Job 121. The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. The next Child, although so
Weakly, that all Despaired of it is Life, his Prophetical Grand Father, said,
Call him, John, I Believe in God, he shall Live, and be a Prophet too, and do
God Service in his Generation Which is, at this Day, fullfilled in Mr. John
Danforth, the present Pastor to the Church of Dorchester Encountering with such,
and many other Exercises, his years Rolled away, till he had Served New
England, Three years before Mr. Cottons Coming over, Twenty years with him Ten
years with Mr. Norton, and Four years after him.

. 15. In his Younger Time, he had been used unto a more Methodical way of
Preaching, and was therefore Admired above many, by no Let Auditors than Dr.
Goodwin, Mr. Buroughs, and Mr. Bridge, when they Traveled from Cambridg^ into
Essex, on purpose to observe the Minister in that County; but after he became a
Pastor joined with such Illuminating Teachers, he gave himself a Liberty, to
Preach more after the Primitive Manner; without any Distinct Propositions, but
Chiefly in Exhortations and Admonitions, and Good wholesome Counsils, tending
to Excite Good Motions, in the Minds of his Hearers; (but upon the same Texts
that were Doctrinally handled by his Colleague instantly before:) and yet
sometimes his Pastoral Discourses had such a Spirit in them, that Mr. Shepard
would say, Methinks I hear an Apostle, when I hear this Man! Yea, even One of
his Ex Temp^re Sermons, has been since his Death, counted worthy to be
Published unto the World. The Great Lecture of Boston, being disappointed of
him, that should have Preached it, Mr. Wilson Preached that Lecture, on a Text
occurring in the Chapter that had been read that Morning in his Family; Jer.
29.8. -- Neither hearken to you Dreams, which you cause to be Dreamed; from
whence he gave a Seasonable Warning, unto the People against the Dreams,
wherewith sundry Sorts of Opini^nists, had been Endeavoring to Seduce them. It
was the Last Boston Lecture that ever he Preached (Nov. 16. 1665.) and one, who
writ after him, in Short hand, about a Dozen years after Published it. But his
Last Sermon he Preached at Roxbury Lecture, for his most Worthy Son in Law, Mr.
Danforth; and after he had read his Text, which was in the Beginnings and
Conclusions of sundry of the Last Psalms, with a Seraphical Voice, he added, If
I were sure this were the Last Sermon that ever I should Preach, and these the
Last Words that ever I should Speak, yet^ would still say, Hallelujah,
Hallelujah, Praise y the Lord! Thus he Ended his Ministry on Earth, thus he
Began his Possession of Heaven, with Hallelujahs.

. 16. Indeed, if the Picture of this Good and therein Great Man, were to be
exactly given Great Zeal, with Great Love, would be the Two Principal Strokes,
that joined with Orthodoxy should make up his Pourtraiture. He had the Zeal of
a Phineas, I had almost said, of a Seraphim, in Testifying against every Thing
that he thought Offensive unto God. The Opinionists, which attempted at any
Time, to Debase the Scripture, or Confound the Order, embraced in our Churches,
underwent the most pungent Animadversions of this his Devout Zeal; whence, when
a certain Assembly of People, which he approved not, had set up in Boston, he
charged all his Family, that they should never Dare, so much as Once to enter
into that Assembly; I charge you, said he, That you do not Once Go to Hear
them; for whatsoever they may pretend, they will Rob you of Ordinances, Rob you
of your Souls, Rob you o^ your God. But though he were thus, like John, a Son
of Thunder, against Seducers, yet he was like that Blessed, and Beloved Apostle
also, all made up of Love. He was full of Affection, and ready to help and
Relieve, and Comfort the Distressed; His House was Renowned for Hospitality,
and his Purse was continually emptying it self into the hands of the Needy:
From which Disposition of Love in him, there once happened this Passage; When
he was Beholding a Great Muster of Soldiers, a Gentleman, then present, said
unto him, Sir, I Will tell you a Great Thing; here is a mighty body of People, and
there is not SEVEN of them all, but what Loves Mr. Wilson; but that Gracious
man presently and pleasantly replied, Sir, I Will tell you as Good a Thing as
that, here is a mighty Body of People, and there is not so much as ONE of them
all, but Mr. Wilson Loves him. Thus he did, by his own Exemple, notably Preach
that Lesson, which a Gentleman found in the Anagram of his Name, With no One
(...): And thus did he Continue, to Do Every One Good, until his Death gave the
same Gentleman Occasion thus to Elegize upon him:

Now may Celestial Spirits Sing yet Higher,
Since one more's added to their Sacred Quire;
WILSON the Holy, whose Good Name does still,
In Language Sweet, bid us [With no one (...).]
. 17. He was One, that Consulting not only his own Edification but the
Encouragement of the Ministry, and of Religion, with an Indefatigable Diligence
Visited the Congregations of the Neighboring Towns, at their Weekly Lectures,
until the Weaknesses of Old Age rendered him Incapable. And it was a delightful
Thing, then to see upon every Recurring Opportunity, a large Company of
Christians, and even Magistrates and Ministers among them, and Mr. Wilson in
the Head of them, Visiting the Lectures in all the Vicinage, with such Heavenly
Discourses on the Road, as caused the Hearts of the Disciples, to Burn within
them: and indeed it was Remarked, That though the Christians Then Spent Less
Time, in the Shop, or Field, than they do Now, yet they did in Both prosper
more. But for Mr. Wilson, I am saying, That a Lecture was a Treasure unto him;
he Prized it, he Sought it, until Old Age at Length brought with it a Sickness,
which a Long while confined him. In this Illness, he took a Solemn Farewell of
the Ministers, who had their Weekly Meetings, at his Hospitable House, and were
now come together from all parts, at the Anniversary Election for the
Government of the Colony. They asked him, to declare Solemnly, what he thought
might be the Sins, which provoked the Displeasure of God against the Country.
Whereto his Answer was, I have long feared several Sins; Whereof; One, he said,
was Corahism; That is, when People rise up as Corah against their Ministers, as
if they took too much upon them, when indeed they do but Rule for Christ, and
according to Christ; yet it is nothing for a Brother to stand up and Oppose,
without Scripture, or Reason, the Word of an Elder, saying [ I am not
Satisfied!] And hence, if he do not like the Administration (be it Baptism or
the Like) he will turn his back upon God and His Ordinances, and Go away. And
for our Neglect of Baptising the Children of the Church, those that some call
Grandchildren, I think God is provoked by it. Another Sin ( said he) I take,
to be the making Light of; and not Subjecting to the Authority of Synods,
without which the Churches cannot long Subsist.

. 18. Afterward, having Solemnly with Prayer, and Particularly and very
Prophetically Blessed his Relations and Attendants, he now thus comforted
himself, I shall e're Long be with my Old Friends, Dr. Preston, Dr. Sibs, Dr.
Tailor, Dr. Gouge, Dr. Ames, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Norton, my Inns of Court Friends,
and my Consort, Children, Grand children in the Kingdom of God. And when some
then present, magnified God, for making him a Man of such Use, and Lamented
themselves, in their own Loss of him, he replied, Alas, Alas; Use no such Words
concerning me; for I have been an Unprofitable Servant, not worthy to be called
a Servant (...) the Lord: but I must say, The Lord be merciful to me a Sinner,
and I must say, Let Thy Tender Mercies come unto me, O Lord, Even Thy Salvation
according to Thy Word. The Evening before he Dyed, his Daughter asking him,
Sit, How do you Do? he held up his Hand, and said Vanishing Things! Vanishing
Things! But he then made a most affectionate Prayer, with and for his Friends;
and so Quietly Fell Asleep on August 7.1667. in the Seventy ninth year of his
Age. Thus Expired that Reverend Old man: of whom, when he left England, an
Eminent Personage said, New England, shall Flourish, free from all General
Desolations, as long as that Good man Lives in it! Which was Comfortably
accomplished. He was Interred with more than Ordinary Solemnity; and his
Neighbor, Mr. Richard Mather of Dorchester, thereat Lamented the Public Loss
in his Departure, with a Sermon upon Zech. 1.5. Your Fathers where are they,
and the Prophets, do they Live for ever?

. 19. Being a Man of Prayer, he was very much a Man of God; and a certain
Prophetical Afflatus, which often directs the Speeches of such men, did
sometimes Remarkably appear in the Speeches of this Holy Man. Instances hereof
have been already given. A few more shall now be added.

Beholding a Young man, Extraordinarily Dutiful in all possible ways of being
Serviceable, unto his Aged Mother, then Weak in Body, and Poor in Estate, he,
declared unto some of his Family what he had Beheld; adding therewithal, I
charge you to take notice of what I say; God will certainly Bless that Young
man; John Hull (for that was his Name) shall grow Rich, and Live to do God good
Service in his Generation! It came to pass accordingly, That this Exemplary
Person, became a very Rich, as well as Emphatically a Good Man, and afterward
Dyed a Magistrate of the Colony.

When one Mr. Adams, who waited on him from Hartford unto Weathersfield, was
followed with the news of his Daughters being fallen suddenly and doubtfully
Sick, Mr. Wilson, looking up to Heaven, began mightily to Wrestle with God for
the Life of the Young woman: Lord (said he) with thou now take away thy
Servants Child, when thou see he is attending on thy Poor unworthy Servant in
most Christian Kindness; Oh! do it not! And then turning himself about unto Mr.
Adams, Brother (said he) I trust your Daughter shall Live, I believe in God She
shall Recover of this Sickness! And so it marvellously came to pass, and She is
now the fruitful Mother of several desirable Children.

A Pequot-Indian, in a Canoo, was espied by, the English, within Gunshot,
carrying away an English-Maid, with a Design to Destroy her or Abuse her. The
Soldiers, fearing to kill the Maid if they shot at the Indian, asked Mr.
Wilsons Counsel, who forbad them to Fear, and assured them, God will direct the
Bullet* They Shot accordingly; and killed the Indian, though then moving
swiftly upon the Water, and saved the Maid free from all harm whatever.

Upon the Death of the first and only Child (being an Infant) of his Daughter
Mrs. Danforth, he made a Poem, wherein were these Lines among the rest,

What if they part with their beloved one,
Their first Begotten, and their Only Son?
What Is this to that which Father Abram Suffered,
When his own hands his Only Darling offered,
In whom was bond up all his joy in this
Life present, and his hope of future Bliss?
And what it God their Other Children Call,
Second, Third, Fourth, suppose it should be All?
What Is this to Holy Job, his trials sad,
Who neither these nor ^^ther comforts had?
His Life was only given him for a Prey,
Yet all his Troubles were to Heaven the way;
Yea to far Greater Blessings on the Earth,
The Lord rewarding all his Tears with Mirth.
And behold, as if that he had been a Vates, in both Senses of it, a Poet, and
a Prophet, it pleased God afterward, to give his Daughter, a Second, a Third,
and a Fourth Child, and then to take them all away at once, even in one
Fortnights Time; but afterward, happily to make up the Loss.

Once passing over the Ferry unto a Lecture, on the other side of the Water, he
took notice of a Young man in the Boat, that Worded it very unhandsomely unto
his Aged Father: whereat this Faithful (...), being much Troubled, said unto
him Young man, I advise you to Repent of your Undutiful Rebellious Carriage
toward your Father; I expect else to hear, that God has ^ut you off, before a
Twelve month come to an End! And before this time expired, if came to pass,
that this unhappy Youth, going to the Southward, was there Hacked in pieces, by
the Pequod Indians.

A Company of People in this Country, were mighty hot upon a Project of
Removing to Providence, an Island in the West Indies; and a Veneratle Assembly
of the Chief Magistrates, and Ministers in the Colony, was addressed for their
Counsil about this undertaking; which Assembly laid before the Company very
weighty Reasons to Dissuade them from it. A Prime Ringleader in that Business,
was One Venner a Cooper of Salem, the Mad Blade, that afterward perished in a
Nonsensical Uproar, which he, with a Crew of Bedlamites, possessed like
himself, made in London. This Venner, with some others, now stood up, and said,
That notwithstanding, what had been Offered they were clear in their Call to
Remove. Where upon, Mr. Wilson stood up and answered, Ay, Do you come to Ask
Counsel in so weighty a matter at this, and to have Help from an Ordinance of
God in it? and are you aforehand Resolved, that you will Go on? Well, you may
Go, if you will; but you shall not prosper. What? Do you make a Mock o^ Gods
Ordinance? And it came to pass accordingly; The Enterprise was, not long after,
dashed in pieces; and Ve^ners precipitating Impulses, afterward carried him to
a miserable End.

A Council sitting at a Town, where some Ecclesiastical Differences called for
the Assistances of the Neighbors to Compose them, there was one man, observed
by Mr. Wilson, to be extremely perverse, and most Unreasonably Troublesome, and
Mischievous, to the Peace of the Church there; Whereupon Mr. Wilson told the
Council; he was confident, That the Jealousy of God would set a Mark upon that
Man, and that the Ordinary Death of men should not befall him. It happened
shortly after, that the man was barbarously Butchered by the Salvages!

While Mr. Wilson was Minister of Sudbury, in England, there was a Noted
Person, who had been absent, for some while among the Papists. This man
Returning Home, Offered himself to the Communion; whereat Mr. Wilson, in the
open Assembly Spoke unto him after this manner; Brother, you, here; present
your self, as if you would partake in the Holy Supper of the Lord. You cannot
be Ignorant of what you have done in withdrawing your self from our Communion,
and how you have been much conversant, for a Considerable while, with the
Papists, whose Religion is Antichristian. Therefore, though we cannot so
absolutely Charge you, God knows, who is the Searcher of All Hearts; and if you
have Defiled your self with their Worship and Way, and not Repented of it, by
offering to partake, at this Time, in the Holy Supper with us, you will Eat,
and Drink your own Damnation; but if you are clear, and have nothing wherewith
to charge your self; you your self know; upon this Account you may Receive. The
man did then partake at the Lords Table, professing his Innocence. But as if
the Devil had entered into him, he soon went and Hanged himself.

In the Circumstances of his own Children, he saw many Effects of an
Extraordinary Faith.

His Eldest Son, Edmund, while Traveling into the Countries, which the Bloody
Popish Inquisition, has made a Clime too Torrid for a Protestant, was Extremely
Exposed: but the Prayers of the Young Gentleman's continually Distressed Father,
for him, were answered, with Signal Preservations. When he was under
Examination by the Inquisitors, a Friend of the Chief among them, suddenly
arrived; and the Inquisitor not having seen this Friend for many years before,
was hereby so diverted and mollified, that he carried the Young Mr. Wilson to
Dinner with him; and, though he had passed hitherto Unknown by his True Name,
yet this Inquisitor could now call him, to his great Surpize, by the Name, of
Mr. Wilson, and report unto him the Character of his Father, and his Fathers
Industry in Serving the Heretics of New England. But, that which I here most
of all design, is an Account of a thing yet more Memorable and Unaccountable.
For, at another Time, his Father Dream'^ himself Transported into Italy, where
he saw a Beautiful Person in the Sons Chamber, Endeavoring, with a thousand
Enchantments to debauch him; whereupon the Old Gentleman made, and was by his
Bedfellow overheard making, first, Prayers to God full of Agony, and then
Warnings unto his Tempted Son, to Beware of Defiling himself with the Daughter
of a Strange God. Now, some Considerable while after this, the Young. Gentleman
Writes to his Father, that on such a Night, (which was upon Enquiry found the
very same Night,) a Gentlewoman had caressed him, thus and so (just according
to the Vision,) and that his Chastity had been Conquered, if he had not been
Strongly Possessed with a Sense of his Fathers Prayers over him, and Warnings
unto him, for his Escape from the Pits, whereinto do fall the Abhorred of the
Lord.

His other Son, John, When a Child, fell upon his Head from a Loft, Four
Stories high, into the Street; from whence he was taken up for Dead, and so
battered and bruised and bloody with his Fall, that it struck Horror into the
Beholders: but Mr. Wilson had a Wonderful Return of his Prayers, in the
Recovery of the Child, both unto Life, and unto Sense; insomuch, that he
continued unto Old Age, a Faithful, Painful, Useful Minister of the Gospel; and
but lately went from the Service of the Church in Medfield, unto the Glory of
the Church Triumphant.

After Mr. Wilsons arrival at New England, his Wife, who had Left off bearing
of Children for many years, brought him another Daughter; which Lamb, was
indeed unto him, as a Daughter; and He would present her unto other Ministers,
for their Blessing, with Great Affection, Saying This is my New England Token!
But this Child, fell Sick of a Malignant Fever, wherein She was gone so far,
that every one despaired of her Life; Except her Father, who called in several
Ministers, with other Christians, unto a Fast, on that Occasion; and hearing
the Prayers of Mr. Cotton for her, found his Heart so Raised, that he
Confidently declared, While I heard, Mr. Cotton at Prayer, I was Confident the
Child should Live! And the Child accordingly did Live; yea, She is to this Day
alive, a very Holy Woman, Adorned like them of Old Time, with a Spirit of Great
Price!

The Blessings Pronounced by Mr. Wilson, upon many Persons and Affayrs, were
observed so Prophetical, and especially his Deathbed Blessings upon his
Children and Grandchildren were so, that the most Considerable Persons in the
Country, thought it not much, to come from far, and bring their Children with
them, for the Enjoyment of his Patriarchal Benedictions, For which cause, Mr.
Thomas Shepard, in an Elegy upon him, at his Death, Pathetically thus Expressed
it;

Whosoever of Abraham, Moses Samuel, Reads,
Or of Elijah's or Elisha's Deeds,
Would surely say, Their Spirit and Power was his,
And think there were a Metempsychosis.
As Aged John, the Apostle used to Bless
The People, which they Judged their Happiness,
So did we count it worth our Pilgrimage
Unto him for his Blessing, in his Age.
These were Extraordinary Passages; Many of them, are Things, which Ordinary
Christians may more safely Ponder, and Wonder, than Expect, in Our Days!
Though sometimes Great Reformers, and Great Sufferers, must be Signalized with
them. I know very well, what Livy says Datur (...) Venia Antiquitati, ut
miscendo Humana Divini^, Primordia Urbium Augustiora faciat: but I have been
far from Imposing the Least Fable upon the World in Reporting such
Extraordinary Passages of Mr. Wilson, or any other Great Confessor, by whom the
Beginnings of this Country were made Illustrious; there are Witnesses Enough,
yet Living, of them.

. 20. There is a certain Little Sport of Wit, in Anagrammatizing the Names of
Men; which was used as long ago at Least as the Days of Old Lycophron: and
which sometimes has afforded Reflections very Monitory, as Alstedius by his
just Admirers changed into Sedulitas, or very Satirical, as when, Satan Rules
me, was found in the Transposed Name of a certain Active Persecutor: and when,
Lo and Damned Crew, was found in the Name of One that made a Figure, among the
Popish Plotters against the Nation. Yea, It Is possible, that they who affect
such Grammatical Curiosities, will be willing to plead a Prescription, of much
Higher and Elder Antiquity for them; Even the Temurah, or, Mutation, with which
the Jews do Criticize upon the Oracles of the Old Testament. There, they say,
You'^ find the Anagram of our First Fathers Name Ha^adam, to express Adamah,
the Name of the Earth, whence he had his Original. An Anagram, of a Good
Signification, they will ^^ow you [Gen. 6.8] and of a Bad one [Gen. 38.7.] in
those Glorious Oracles; and they will Endeavor to persuade you, that Maleachi
in Exodus is Anagrammatically Expounded Michael, in Daniel. But of all the
Anagrammatizers that have been Trying their Fancies, for the Two Thousand years
which have Run out, since the Days of Lycophron, yea, or for the more than
Five Thousand, since the Days of our First Father, I believe there never was
Man, that made so many, of so nimbly, as our Mr. Wilson; who, together with his
Quick Turns, upon the Names of his Friends, would Ordinarily Fetch, and rather
than Lose, would even Force, Devout Instructions out of his Anagrams. As once,
upon Hearing my Father Preach a Sermon about, The Glories of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Mr. Wilson immediately gave him that Anagram upon his Name, Crescentius
Matherus, Anagr. En! Christus Merces tua: So, there could Scarcely occurr the
Name of any Remarkable Person, at least, on any Remarkable Occasion unto him,
without an Anagram Raised thereupon; and he made this Poetical, and Peculiar,
Disposition of his Ingenuity, a Subject whereon he Grafted Thoughts far more
Solid and Solemn and Useful, than the Stock it self. Wherefore methoughts, is
Looked like a Piece of Injustice, that his Own Funeral produced (among the many
Poems afterward Printed) no more Anagrams upon his Name, who had so often thus
Handled the Names of Others; and some Thought the Muses Looked very much
Dissatisfied, when they saw these Lines upon his Hearse.

JOHN WILSON Anagr. John Wilson.

Oh! Change it not; No Sweeter Name or Thing,
Throughout the World, within our Ears shall Ring.
There was a Little more of Humor, in the Fancy of Mr. Ward, the Well-known
Simple Cobbler of Agawam, as that Witty Writer Styled himself, who observing the
Great Hospitality of Mr. Wilson, in Conjunction with his Meta-grammatismg
Temper, said, That the Anagram of JOHN WILSON was, I PRAY, COME IN, YOU ARE
HEARTILY WELCOME.

To make up this Want, I might conclude the Life of this Good man, with an
Anagram, which he Left on, and for himself.

Johannes Wilsonus

Anagr.

In uno Jesu, nos Salvi.
Vel
Non in uno Jesu Salus?
An non in Jesu, Credentum, figitur, uno, Tota Salus? Hic est, Hic Sita Tota
Salus.

. 21. But it is to the Last Place in our History of this Worthy Man, that I
reserve that part of his Character, which lay in his Disposition to allot unto
Himself the Last Place among all Worthy Men; for his Low Opinion of himself,
was the Top of all his other Excellencies. His Humility not only caused him, to
prefer the Meanest of his Brethren, above himself, but also to Comply with the
meanest Opportunities of being Serviceable: Hence it was, that when his Voice in
his Age did so ^ail him, that his Great Congregation could be no longer Edified
by his Public Labors, he Cheerfully and Painfully set himself to do all the
Good, that he could by his Private Visits; and such also, as he could not reach
with Sermons, he often found with Verses: Hence it was, that when that plea was
used with the Church of Ipswich to resign Mr. Norton unto the Church of Boston,
after the Death of Mr. Cotton; Because it was said, Let him that has two Coats
give to him that has None; and a Person of Quality replied, Boston has One,
[meaning Mr. Wilson:] this Good man answered; Who (...) Me! I am Nothing! Yea,
Hence it was, that when Malefactors had been openly Scourged upon the just
Sentence of Authority, he would presently send for them to his House, and
having first expressed his Bounty to them, he would then bestow upon them such
gracious Admonitions and Exhortations, as made them to become, instead of
Desperate, remarkably Penitent. Indeed, I know not whether his Humility, might
not have some Excess, in some Instances charged upon it; at least Once, when he
had Promised unto a Neighboring Minister, to Preach a Sermon for him, and
after his Promise came in Season to that Minister, saying, Sir, I told you,
that I would Preach for you, but it was rashly done of me; I have on my knees
begged the Pardon of it, from the Lord; That I should offer thus to deprive His
People, of your Labors, which are so much better than any of mine can be:
Wherefore, Sir, I now come Seasonably to tell you, that I shall fail you! And
accordingly, there was no persuading of him to the contrary.

But from the like Humility it was, That a Good ^insman, of his, who deserves
to Live in the same Story, as he now Lives in the same Heaven with him, namely
Mr. Edwards Rawson, the Honored Secretary of the Massachuset-Colony, could not
by all his Entreaties persuade him, to let his Picture be drawn; but still
refusing it, he would reply, What! Such a Poor, Vile Creature as I am! shall my
Picture be drawn? I say, No; it never shall! And when that Gentleman introduced
the Limner, with all things ready, Vehemently importuning him to gratify so far
the Desires of his Friends, as to sit a while, for the taking of his Essigies,
no Importunity could ever obtain it from him. However, being bound in Justice
to Employ my Hand, for the Memory of that Person, by whose Hand I was my self
Baptized, I have made an Essay, to draw his Picture, by this Account of his
Life; wherein if I have missed of doing to the Life, it might be made up, with
several Expressive Passages, which I find in Elegits Written and Printed upon
his Death: Whereof there were many Composed, by those, whose Opinion was well
Signified by one of them:

Sure Verseless he does Mean, to's Grave to Go,
And well deserves, that now no Verse can show.
But Waving the rest, Let the following POEM, never before Printed, Offer some
ODOURS, for the Readers further Entertainment.

Some OFFERS To Embalm the MEMORY of the Truly Reverend and Renowned, JOHN
WILSON;
The First Pastor of Boston, in New England;Interred (and a Great Part of his
Countries Glory with him) August. 11.1667. Aged, 79.

MIght Aarons Rod (such Funerals may not be Dry)
But broach the Rock, it would gush pure Elegy,
To round the Wilderness with purling Lays,
And tell the World, the Great Saint WILSONS Praise.
Here Is ONE, ( Pearls are not in great clusters found)
Here Is ONE, the Skill of Tongues and Arts had Crowned;
Here Is ONE (by frequent Martyrdom it was Tried)
That could forego Skill, Pelf, and Life beside,
For CHRIST: Both ENGLANDS Darling, whom in Swarms
They Pressed to See, and Hear, and felt his Charms.
It Is ONE, (when will it Rise to Number Two?
The World at once can but ONE Phoenix Show:)
For Truth, a PAUL; CEPHAS, for Zeal; for Love,
A JOHN; inspired by the Celestial Dove.
A^RA'MS true Son for Faith; and in his Tent Angels often had their Table and
Content.
So Humble, that alike on's Charity,
Wrought Extract Gent: with Extract Rudij.
Pardon this, Fault; his Great Excess lay there,
He Would Trade for Heaven, with all he came anear;
His Meat, Clothes, Cash, head still for Ventures send,
Consigned Per Brother Lazarus, his Friend.
Mighty in Prayer; his Hand, Uplifted reached
Mercies High Throne, and thence strange Bounties fetched,
Once and again, and often: So felt by all,
Who Weep his Death, as a Departing Paul.
All; Yea, Baptized with Tears, Lo, Children come,
( Their Baptism he maintained!) unto his Tomb.
'T'wixt an Apostle, and Evangelist,
Let stand his Order in the Heavenly List.
Had we the Costly Alablaster Box,
What Is Left, we would spend on this New-English KNOX;
True Knox, filled with that Great Reformers Grace,
In Truths Just cause, fearing no Mortals Face.
Christ's Word, it was his Life, Christ's Church, his Care;
And so Great with him his Least Brethren were,
Not Hear, not Cold, not Rain, or Frost, or Snow
Could hinder, but he would to their Sermons go:
Aarons Bells chim'd from far, he would Run, and then
His Ravished Soul Echoed, AMEN, AMEN!
He traverst often the fierce Atlantic Sea,
But, Patmos of Confessors, it was for THEE.
This Voyage Lands him on the Wished shore,
From Whence this Father will return no more,
To sit the Moderator of thy Sages.
But, Tell his Zeal for thee, to After-Ages,
His Care to Guide his Flock, and feed his Lambs.
By Words, Works, Prayers, Psalms, Alms, and ANAGRAMS:
Those Anagrams, in which he made to Start
Out of mere Nothings, by Creating Art,
Whole Worlds of Counsil; did to Motes Unsold
Names, till they Lessons gave Richer than Gold,
And Every Angle so Exactly say,
It should outshine the brightest Solar Ray.
Sacred his Verse, Writ with a Cherubs Quill;
But those Winged Choristers of Zion-Hill,
Pleased with the Notes, called him a part to bear,
With Them, where he his Anagram did hear,
I Pray come in, Heartily Welcome; Sir.
EPITAPHIUM.
Thinking, what EPITAPH, I should offer unto the Grave of this Worthy Man, I
called unto Mind, the fit^^st in the World, which was directed for him,
immediately upon his De^^ by an Honorable Person, who still Continues the same
Lover, as well as Instance, of Learning and Virtue, that he was when he Then
advised them to give Mr. Wilson this EPITAPH

And now Abides FAITH, HOPE, and CHARITY,
But CHARITIE'S the Greatest of the Three.
To which this might be added, from another Hand,

Aurea, quae (obstupeo referens!) Primaeva Vetustas
Condidit Arcano, Saecula Apostolica,
Officijs, D^nisque itideris Sanctissimus Heroes,
WILSONUS, tacitis Protulit Ex Tenebris.
Chrysostomus Nov-Anglorum.
THE LIFE OF Mr. JOHN DAVENPORT.
. 1. A Noted Author of more than Twice Seven Treatises, and Chaplain to two
Successive Queens of England, was that Christopher Davenport, whose Assumed
Name was, Franciscus a Sancta clara. And in Mr. Rashworth* Collection of
Speeches, made in the Celebrated Parlaiment, 1640. I find Sir, Benjamin
Rudyard; using these Words; Sancta Clara, has Published, That if a Synod were
held, Non intermixti^ Paritanis, Setting Puritans aside, Our Articles and,
Their Religion would soon be Agreed. They have so brought it to pass, that
under the Name of Puritans, all our Religion is branded Whosoever Squares his
Actions by any Rule, either Divine or Humane, He is a PURITAN: Whosoever would
be Governed by the Kings Laws, He is a PURITAN! -- Whether, this Account of
Matters be allowed or no; there was, though not a Brother (as a certain Wooden
Historian, in his Athenae Oxonienses, has reported) yet a Kinsman of that
Sancta Clara; who was among the most Eminent Puritans of those Days; And this
was our Holy and Famous Mr. John Davenport: One of whom I may, on many Accounts
use the Elogy, with which the Learned still mention Salmasius, Vir ^unguam
Satis Laudatus, nec Temere sine Laud nominandus.

. 2. Mr. John Davenport, was born at Coventry, in the year 1597. of Worthy
Parents; a Father, who was Mayor of the City, and a Pious Mother, who having
Lived just long enough, to devote him, as Hannah did her Samuel, unto the
Service of the Sanctuary, left him under the more immediate Care of Heaven to
fit him for that Service. The Grace of God Sanctified him with Good Principles,
while he had not yet seen Two Sevens of years in an Evil World; and by that Age
he had also made such Seize in Learning, as to be admitted into
Brasen-Nose College in Oxford. From thence, when he was but Nineteen years
Old, he was called unto Public and constant Preaching in the City of London,
as an Assistent unto another Divine; where his Notable Accomplishments for a
Minister, and his Courageous Residence with, and Visiting of, his Flock in a
dreadful Plague time, caused much notice to be quickly taken of him. His Degree
of Master of Arts, he took not until, in Course, he was to proceed Batchelour
of Divinity; and then with Universal Approbation, he Received both of these
Laurels together.

. 3. This Pious man was both an hard Student, and a Great Preacher. His Custom
was to sit up very late at his Lucubrations; whereby, though he found no
sensible Damage himself, and never felt his Head ache, yet his Counsil was that
other Students would not follow his Exemple. But the Effects of his Industry
were seen by all ^en, in his approving himself upon all Occasions, An Universal
Scholar. As for the Sermons, wherewith be fed the Church of God, he Wrote them
for the most part, more largely than the most of Ministers; and he Spoke them
with a Gravity, an Energy, an Acceptableness, whereto few Ministers ever have
arrived: indeed his Greatest Enemies, when they heard him, would acknowledge
him to be among the best of Preachers. The Ablest men about London were his
nearest Friends; among whom he held a very particular Correspondence with Dr.
Preston; He, when he Died, le^t his Notes with Mr. Davenport, by him to be
Published; and accordingly with Dr. Sibbs, you (...) Mr. Davenport signing some
of their Dedications.

4. About the year 1626. there were several Eminent Persons, among whom were
Two Doctors of Divinity, with two other Divines, and ^our Lawers, whereof One
of Kings Sergeant at Law, and four Citizens, whereof One the Lord Mayor of
London, engaged in a Design to procure a Purchase of Impropriations. and with
the Profits thereof to mentain a Constant, Able, and Painful Ministry, in those
parts of the Kingdom, were there was most want of such a Ministry. The Divines
concerned in this Design, were Dr. Gouge, Dr. Sibs, Mr. Offspring, and our Mr.
Davenport; and such an Incredible progress was made in it, that it is judged,
all the Impropriations it; England would have been honestly and easily
Recovered unto the Immediate Service of the Reformed Religion. But Bishop Laud
looking with a Jealous eye on this undertaking, least it might in time give a
Secret growth to Non Conformity, he obtained a Bill to be Exhibited in the
Exchequer Chamber, by the Kings Attorney General, against the Fe^ffees, that
had the Management of it. Upon this Occasion, I find this Great Man Writing in
his Great Bible, the Ensuing Passages;

Feb. 11. 1632. The Business of the Feoffees, being to be heard the third time
at the Exchequer, I Prayed earnestly, that God would Assist our Counselors in
opening the case, and be pleased to grant that they might get no Advantage
against us, to punish us as Evil Doers. Promising to observe what Answer He
gave Which, seeing. He has Graciously done, and delivered me, from the Thing I
feared, I Record to these ends,

1. To be more Industrious in my Family.

2. To check my Unthankfulness.

3. To Quicken my self to Thankfulness.

4. To Awaken my self to more Watchfulness for the Time to come, in Remembrance
of His Mercy.

Which I beseech the Lord to Grant; upon whose Faithfulness in His Covenant, I
cast my self, to be made Faithful in My Covenant.

John Davenport.

The Issue of the Business was This. The Court Condemned their Proceedings, as
Dangerous to the Church and State; pronouncing, the Gifts, Feoffments, and
Contrivances, made to the Uses aforesaid, to be Illegal; and so Dissolved the
same, Conficating their Money unto the Kings Use. Yet the Criminal Part
referred unto, was never prosecuted in the Star Chamber; because the Design was
generally approved, and multitudes of Discrete and Devo^ (...), extremely
Resented the Ruins of it.

5. It happened that soon after this, the Famous Mr. John Cotton was fallen
under such a Storm of Persecution for his Non Conformity, as made it necessary
for him to propose and purpose a Removal out of the Land: Whereupon, Mr.
Davenport, with several other Great and Good men, considering the Eminent
Learning, Prudence, and Holiness of that Excellent Person, could be at no Rest,
until they had by a Solemn Conference informed themselves of what might move
him to such a Resolution. The Issue of the Conference was, that instead of
their Dissuading him, from exposing himself to such Sufferings, as were now
before him, he convinced them of the Truth in the Cause for which he Suffered
and they became Satisfied both of the Evil in Sundry Matters of Worship and
Order imposed upon them, and of the Duty, which lay upon them, in their places
to endeavor the Reformation of things in the Church according to the Word of
God. Mr. Davenports Inclination to Non Conformity from this time, felt under
the Notice, and Anger of his Diocesan; who presently determined the Marks of
his Vengeance for him: Of which being Seasonably and Sufficiently advertised,
he convened the Principal Persons under his Pastoral Charge in Coleman-street,
at a General Vestry, desiring them on this Occasion to declare, what they would
advise; for, acknowledging the Right, which they had in him, as their Pastor,
he would not, by any Danger, be driven from any Service, which they should
expect or demand at his hands; but he would Imitate the Exemple of Luther, who
upon Letters from the Church of Written berg, from whence he had withdrawn for
his Security, upon the Direction of the Duke of Saxony, returned unto the
Courageous Exercise of his Ministry. Upon a Serious Deliberation, they
Discharged his Conscentious Obligations, by Agreeing with him, that it would be
best for him to Resign; but although he now Hoped for something of a Quiet
Life, his Hope, was disappointed; for he was continually dogged by Raging, Busy
Pursevants, from whom he had no safety but by Retiring into Holland.

. 6. Over to Holland he went, in the Latter end of the year 1633. Where the
Messengers of the Church under the charge of Mr. Paget, met him in his way to
Amsterdam, inviting him to become the Colleague of their Aged Pastor. But Mr.
Davenport had not been long there, before his Indisposition to the Promiscuous
Baptising of Children, concerning whom there was no Charitable or Tolerable
Testimony of their belonging to Christian Parents, was by Mr. Paget so improved
against him, as to procure him the Displeasure of the Dutch Classes in the
Neighborhood. The Contention on this Occasion, proceeded so far, that though
the Dutch Ministers had under their Hands declared. -- We desire nothing more,
than that Mr. Davenport, whose Eminent Learning and Singular Piety is much
approved and commended of all the English our Brethren, may be Lawfully
promoted unto the Ministry of the English Church; We do also greatly approve of
his Good Zeal and Care, of his having some precedent private Examination of the
Parents, and Sureties of Children to be Baptized, in the Christian Religion:
Yet the matter could not be Accommodated; Mr. Davenport could not be allowed
except he would promise to Baptize the Children of such whose Parents and
Sureties were, upon Examination, found never so much Unchristianised, Ignorant
or Scandalous. He, therefore, desisted from his Public Ministry in Amsterdam,
about the Beginning of the year 1635. Contenting himself to set up a
Catechetical Exercise in the Family, where he sojourned, on the Afternoon of
the Lords Days, and Hour after the Public Sermons were over. But some
considerable number of People, at Length, resorting to this Exercise, a
Jealousy was pretended by his Adversary, that the Design of it was to Promote
such Sects, as indeed the chief Design of it was to Prevent; and, upon this
pretense, he was hindered, even from this Lesser Opportunity of Doing Service
also. The fuller Story of these Uncomfortable, and Unreasonable Brangles, the
Reader may find in an Apologetical Discourse of Mr. Davenports, Published for
his own Vindication; wherein he does with a Learned Pen, handle several points
much controverted in the Reformed Churches, and show himself a Divine well
studied in the Controversies of the Present, and the Former Ages. But the
Upshot of all was, that he Returned back to London; where he told his Friends,
That he thought God carried him over into Holland, on purpose to bear Witness
against that Promiscuous Baptism, which at least Bordered very near upon a
Profanation of the Holy Institution.

7. He observed, that when a Reformation of the Church has been brought about
in any part of the World, it has rarely been Afterward carried on any One step
further, than the First Reformers did Succeed in their first Endeavors; He
observed that as easily might the Ark have been removed from the Mountains of
Ararat, where it first Grounded, as a People get any Ground in Reformation,
after (...) beyond the first Remove of the Reformers. And this Observation
quickened him to Embark in a Design of Reformation, wherein he might have
Opportunity to Drive things in the First Essay* as near to the Precept and
Pattern of Scripture, as they could be driven. The Plantation of New England
afforded him this Opportunity, with the Chief Undertakers whereof he had many
Consultations, before he had ever taken up any Purpose of Going himself into
that part of the World; and he had, indeed, a very great stroke in the
Encouraging and Enlivening of that Noble Undertaking. He was one of those by
whom the Patent for the Massachuset Colony was procured; and though his Name
were not among the Patentees, because he himself desired it might be omitted,
Left his Enemy, the Bishop of London, then of the Kings Privy. Council, should
upon his Account appear the more fiercely against it, yet his Purse was in it,
his Time was in it, and he contributed unto it all manner of Assistences: This
he did before his Going to Holland. And while he was in Holland, he received
Letters of Mr. Cotton, from the Country whereto he had thus been a Father;
telling him, That the Order of the Churches, and of the Common wealth, was now
so settled in New England by common consent, that it brought into his Mind the
New Heaven and the New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. Wherefore, soon
after his Return for London, he Shipped himself with several Eminent Christians
and their Families, for New England; where, by the Good Hand of God upon them,
they arrived in the Summer of the year 1637.

. 8. Mr. Cotton welcomed Mr. Davenport, as Moses did Jethro, hoping that he
would be as Eyes unto them in the Wilderness. For by the Cunning and Malice of
Satan, all things in this New-English Wilderness, were then Surprised, into a
deal of Confusion, on the Occasion of the Antinomian Opinions then spread
abroad; but the Learning and Wisdom of this Worthy ^an, in the Synod then
Assembled at Cambridge, did contribute more that a Little to dispel the
Fascinating Mists which had suddenly disordered all our Affairs. Having done
his part in that Blessed Work, (as we have else where more fully related) He,
with his Friends, who were more fit for Zebulons Ports, than for Issachars
Tents, chose to go farther Westward; Where they began a Plantation, and a
Colony, since distinguished by the Name of NEW HAVEN; and Endeavored,
according to his Understanding, a yet stricter Conformity, to the Word of God,
in Settling of all Matters, both Civil and Sacred, than he had yet seen
Exemplified in any other Part of the World. There, the Famous Church of New
haven, as well as the other Neighboring Towns, Enjoyed his Ministry, his
Discipline, his Government, and his Universal Direction, for many years
together; Even, till, after the Restoration of K. Charles II. Connecticut, and
New haven, were by One Charter Incorporated. And here, with what Holiness, with
what Watchfulness, with what Usefulness he discharged his Ministry, it is
Worthy of a Remembrance, among all that would propose unto themselves a Worthy
Exemple. Nevertheless, all that I shall here preserve of it, is this One
Article. A Young Minister, once Receiving of Wise and Good Counsils, from this
Good and Wise and Great Man, he Received this among the rest, That he should be
much in Circulatory Prayer: for indeed, Ejaculatory Prayers, As Arrows in the
Hand of a Mighty Man, so are they, Happy is the man that has his Quiver full of
them! And it was Believed, by some Curious Observers, That Mr. Davenport
himself, was well used unto that Sacred skill of, Walking with God, and, Having
his Eyes ever toward the Lord, and, Being in the Fear of the Lord all the Day
Long, by the use of Ejaculatory Prayers, on the Innumerable Occasions, which
every Turn of our Livers does bring for those Devotions. He was not only
Constant in more Settled, whether Social, or Secret, Prayers; but also in the
midst of all Besieging Encumbrances, tying the Wishes of his Devout Soul, unto
the Arrows of Ejaculatory Prayers, he would shoot them away unto the Heavens,
from whence he still Expected all his Help. With such a Glory, with such a
Defense, was New Haven Blessed!

9. But his Influences were not Confined unto his own Colony of New Haven; they
were Extended, as far as his General and Generous, Care of all the Churches,
could carry him. And hence, I find him, in a Particular manner, Expressing his
Good Affections, unto the Irenio Designs and Studies, which were in those Days
managing by some Great Men, for the Restoring of Communion, among the Divided
Churches of the Reformation. Perhaps, I cannot give an Exacter Character of
this Eminent Persons Disposition, than by my Transcribing, and my Translating,
of a few Passages, in a Letter, to the Famous Dury, by him composed, and by the
rest of the Ministers in his Colony Subscribed.

Flagrante Schismatis Incendio, Ecclesias, qua oportebat Arctissimo Pacis et
Unitatis Vinculo Colligari, misera in Sectas Invisa Deo Lacerabat Erinuys;
Usque adeo ut qui mutuam contra communes Hosts opem conferrent, prob dolor!
Concertationes Midianiticas invicem agunt; Sicut Enim Juvenes quos ad
Dimicandum Abnerus Provocabat, se mutuis Vulneribus Confecerunt; Sic, quorundam
Vitio, qui parts potius agunt male Disputantium, quam been Evangelizantium,
Jurgia, Lites, Animorum Divortia, Schismata et Scandala, in Ecclesits
Evangelicis, Suboriuntur, non sine gravi Infirmoram Offendiculo, nec sine Summo
Bonorum Omnium Maerore, ac Juimicorum Evangelicae Veritatis Oblectamento. --

While the Fire of Schism has been Raging, the Hateful Fury has miserably torn
to Pieces, the Churches, that should have been held together in the strictest
Bonds of Love and Unity; infomuch that they who should have united, for mutual
Help against the Common Enemy, alas, have even fallen upon one another, as in
the Day of Midian. As the Young men, upon the Provocation of Abner, Wounded one
another to Death; Thus, by the fault of some, who do the part rather of Bad
Wranglers, than of Good Preachers, there do arise in the Reformed Churches,
those Broils, and Strifes, and Animosities, and Schisms and Scandals, which
offend the Weak, and Afflict the Good, and are no little Satisfaction to the
Enemies of Gospel Truth.

Nunc Vero, Postquam Custos Israelis, Deus Pacis, dedit in Corda tot
Ecclesiarum et Magistratuum, ut Vulneribus ist^s Medicinam faciendam esse,
Necessarium Judicarint, En! Bonorum omnium Animi, in Spemerecti, Malorum
istorum Salutarem Clausulam Expectant, et Votis intimis. Patrem Misericor
diarum Vobiscum invocant, ut Spiritus ^ui Gratia, Secundum Verbum Suum,
Consilia et actiones Servorum Suorum dirigere, ad Sancti Nominis Sui Gloriam
dignetur. --

But now that the Keeper of Israel, the God of Peace, has put it into the
Hearts of many Churches and Rulers, to apprehend it Necessary, that a Cure
should be Sought, for these Wounds, Behold! the Minds of all Good Men, do with
a Raised Hope Expect an Happy Close of these Mischiefs; and with most Hearty
Prayers, do beseech the Father of Mercies, that He would, by the Grace of His
Spirit, according to His Word, please to Direct the Counsels and Actions of His
Servants, for the Glory of His own Holy Name.

Recte quidem fecisti, Reverend^ Frater Dur^e, quod nos etiam in eodem Vobiscum
Corpore, Sub e^dem Capite Jesu Christo, Constitutos, ad Negot^sm hoc, in
Sanctorum Communione, Promovendum, fraterne invitasti. --

You have done Right Well, Reverend Brother, in that you have, after a
Brotherly manner, unto the Promoting of this Affayr, in the Communion of
Saints, invited us, who belong to the same Mystical Body, with your selves,
under One Head, our Lord Jesus Christ.

Dica Vero non est Orthodoxis impingenda, quasi Optatissimae illi Paci, qu^e
inter Scissas Evangelicas Ecclesias qu^eritur, Offendiculum Posuerint, et
Remoram, qui, Necessitate Pestulante, ea^^utuntur Liberate Refu^^ndi Errores,
quam Pax non debet impedire: adeoque suo Exemplo futuram pacem pr^emuniant, a
(...) in Excessu positis. -- Quippe quod Sincere de Erroribus Judicare, et
Errores tamen in Fratribus Infirmis Tolerare, Utrumque Judicamus esse
Apostolic^e Doctrin^e Consonum, Toleratio Vero Fratrum Infirmorum, non debet
esse absque Redargutione, Sed ^antum absque Rejectione.

Nevertheless, it is not to be made an Article of Complaint against the Orthodox,
as if they would Hinder or Delay, the Peace desired so much among the Reformed
Churches, because they do, as Necessity shall call for it, use that Liberty of
Refuting Errors, which Peace ought to be no Bar unto; and by their Exemple,
would rescue the future Peace from the Extremes wherewith it would be rendered
Faulty -- For we Reckon, that as Well to Judge what things are Errors, as to
Bear with such Errors in Weaker Brethren, are both of them agreeable, to what
we have been taught by the Apostles. The Toleration of our Erroneous Brethren,
should not be without Rebuking, but it should be without Rejecting, of those
Brethren.

. 10. It is a Notable Expression, and a Wonderful Concession, of that Great
Cardinal Bellarmine, the last Goliath of the Romish Philistines Ecclesia ex
Intention Fideles tantum Colligit, et (...) nosset Impios et Incredulos; eos
aut nanquam admitteret, aut casu Admissos Excluderet: The Church (he says)
Intentionally Gathers only True Believers, and if She knew who were Wicked and
Faithless, either She would not Admit them at all, or if they were Accidentally
Admitted, She would Exclude them. Our Davenport conceiving it a Shame, that any
Protestant, should Protest for less Church-Purity, than what the Confessions of
a Learned Papist allowed e're he was aware, to be contended for, did now at New
haven, make Church Purity to be one of his Greatest Concernments and
Endeavors. It was his Declared Principle, That more is required of men, in
order to their being Members of an Instituted Church, than that they Profess
the Christian Faith, and ask the Visible Seals of the Covenant; in the
Fellowship of the Church; all which may be done, by Persons Notoriously
Scandalous in their Lives, from whom the Command is, Turn away: But only such
Persons may be Received as Members of a Particular Church, who (according to
Math. 16. 18,19.) make such a Public Profession of their Faith, as the Church
may, in Charitable Discretion judge, has Blessedness annexed unto it, and such
as Flesh and Blood has not Reveled. In Pursuance of this Principle, he was,
like his Dear Friend, that Great man, Dr. Thomas Good^in, persuaded, That (as
be speaks) there are (...) Rules in the Word, whereby it is meet for us, to
judge who are Saints; by which Rules, those who are Betrusted to Receive Men
unto Ordinances, in Churches, are to be Guided, and so to Separate between the
Precious and the Unclean, as the Priests of Old, were Enabled and Commanded by
Ceremonial Differences, which God then made, to Typify the Like Discrimination
of Persons. And therefore, making the Marks of a Repenting and Believing Soul,
given in the Word of God, the Rules of his Trials, he used a more than Ordinary
Exactness in Trying, those that were Admitted unto the Communion of the Church:
Indeed very Thoroughly, and I had almost said, Severely, Strict, were the Terms
of his Communion, and so much, I had well nigh said, Overmuch, were the Golden
Snuffers of the Sanctuary Employed by him in his Exercise of Discipline toward
those that were Admitted, that he did, all that was possible to render the
Renowned Church of New Haven, like the New-Jerusalem; and yet, after all, the
Lord gave him to see that in this World, it was impossible to see a Church
State, whereinto there Enters nothing which defiles. This Great Man, has
himself, in one of his own Treatises observed it, The Officers and Brethren of
the Church, are but Men, who judge by the outward Appearance. Therefore their
Judgment is fallible, and has been Deceived; as we see in the Judgment of the
Apostles, and the Church at Jerusalem, concerning Ananias and Sapphira; and in
that of Philip, and the Church in Samatia, concerning Simon Magus. Their Duty
is to proceed, as far as men may, by Rule, with due Moderation and Gentleness,
to Try them, who offer themselves to Fellowship, whether they be Believers or
not; Refusing known Hypocrites; Though when they have done all they can, Close
Hypocrites will Creep in. And now, because I shall thereby Entertain my Reader,
I hope, with a Profitable, I am sure, with a very Prodigious, History, I will
on this Occasion, Relate a most Horrible Thing done in the Land, which this
Good man saw, to Confirm his own Observation.

On June 6. 1662. At New haven, there was a most Unparalled Wretch, one
Potter by Name, about Sixty years of Age, Executed for Damnable Bestialities;
although this Wretch, had been for now Twenty years, a Member of the Church in
that Place, and kept up among the holy People of God there, a Reputation, for
Serious Christianity. It seems that the Unclean Devil, which had the possession
of this Monster, had carried all his Lusts with so much Fury into this One
Channel of Wickedness, that there was no Notice taken of his being Wicked in
any other. Hence it was, that he was Devout in Worship, Gifted in Prayer,
Forward in Edifying Discourse among the Religious, and Zealous in Reproving the
Sins of the other People; Every one counted him, A Saint: And he Enjoyed such a
Peace in his own mind, that in several Fits of Sickness, wherein he seemed Nigh
unto Death, he seemed Willing to Die; Yea, Death (he said) Smiled on him.
Nevertheless, this Diabolical Creature, had Lived in most infandous Buggeries
for no less than Fifty years together; and now at the Gallows, there were
killed before his Eyes, a Cow, Two Heifers, Three Sheep, and Two Sowes, with
all of which he had Committed his Brutalities. His Wife had seen him
Confounding himself with a Bitch, Ten years before; and he then Excused his
Filthiness, as well as he could, unto her, but Conjured her to keep it Secret:
but he afterward Hanged that Fitch himself, and then Returned unto his former
Villainies, until (...) last, his Son, saw him hideously converting with a Sow.
By these means, the burning Jealousy of the Lord Jesus Christ, at Length made
the Churches to know, that He had all this while seen the Covered Filthiness of
this Hellish Hypocrite, and Exposed him also to the Just Judgment of Death,
from the Civil Court of Judicature. Very Remarkable had been the Warnings,
which this HellHound, had Received from Heaven, to Repent of his Impieties.
Many years before this, he had a Daughter, who Dreamt a Dream, which caused
her, in her Sleep, to cry out most ^^^terly; and her Father, then with much
ado^ obtaining of her, to tell her Dream, She told him, she Dreamed, that she
was among a great Multitude of People, to see an Execution, and it proved her
own Father that was to be hanged, at whose Turning over, she thus cried out.
This happened, before the Time, that any of his Cursed Practices were known
unto her! At another Time, when there was a Malefactor adjudged in those parts
to Die, for the very same Transgressions, which this Rotten Fellow was guilty
of, 'the Governor with some of the Magistrates, most unaccountably, without,
any manner of Reason, for their so doing, turned about unto this Fellow, and
said, What think You? Is not this man worthy to Die? He now Confessed, That
these Warnings, did so awaken his Conscience, as to make him, for a Time, Leave
off his lately al Debauches; and so, he said, He thought, all was Pardoned, all
was well with him. Nevertheless, he Returned unto his Vomit, and his Quagmire,
until the Sentence of Death, at last fell upon him; and then he acknowledged,
That he had Lived in the Sin of Bestiality, ever since he was Ten years Old,
but had sometimes Intermitted the Perpetration of it, for some years together.
During his Imprisonment, he continued in a Sottish, and Stupid, frame of
Spirit, and marvellously Secure about his Everlasting Pardon and Welfare: but
the Church whereto he belonged, kept a Solemn Day of Humiliation on this
Occasion, wherein Mr. Davenport Preached on Josh. 22. 20. Did not Achan Commit
a* Trespass, in the Accursed Thing, and Wrath fell on all the Congregation of
Israel? And in the close of the Fast, that Faithful People of God,
Excommunicated this Accursed Achan, from their own Society. But as I have seen
Bewitched Self Poisoners, under a Singular Energy of some Devil, obstinately
Refuse all offered, Relief, until the Poisons had prevailed so far that all
Relief was too late, and then with roaring Agonies they would have given Ten
Worlds for it; So this Bewitched Beast, that, had not been afraid of Dying,
till he came to the Place of Execution, when he came There, he was Awakened
into a most Unutterable and Intolerable Anguish of Soul, and made most
Lamentably Desperate Outcries; Among which Outcries, he warned men,
particularly, to Take heed of Neglecting Secret Prayer; which he said, had been
his Bane. He said, he never used Secret Prayer in his Life, and that he
frequently omitted Family Prayer too; Yet, he said, he had Prayed and Sinned,
and Sinned and Prayed; namely, by Ejaculations, with which he Contented
himself, throwing Set-Prayer aside. But so he Perished!

Reader, If whole Ages, could have produced such another amazing Story as this,
I had not here inserted it! Make a Right Use of it; and, stand Amazed at the
Judas's, that are sometimes found in the Purest Families of our Lord.

. 11. After this, the Remaining Days of this Eminent Person were worn away
under the unhappy Temptations of a Wilderness! It so happened, that the most
part of the First Church in Boston, the Metropolis of the Colony, out of
Respect unto his vast Abilities, had Applied themselves unto him; to Succeed
those Famous Lights, Cotton and Norton and Wilson, who having from that Golden
Candlestick, illuminated the whole Country, were now gone to shine in an Higher
Orb. His Removal from New Haven was clogged with many Temptatiouse
Difficulties; (for, Miraculi star, vitae Iter, si longum, sine Offensione,
Percurrere:) but he broke through them all, in Expectation to d^ what he judged
would be a more Comprehensive Service unto the Churches of New England, than
could have been done by him, in his now Undistinguished Colony. On this
Occasion, if I should mention that Lamentable Observation of Old Epiphanius,
who says, I have known some Confessors, who delivered up their Body, and their
Spirit, for the Lord, and Persevering in Confession and Charity, obtained Great
Proof of the Sincerity of their Faith, and Excelled in. Piety, Humanity and
Religion, and were continual in Fastings, and in a Word, Flourished in Virtue;
and yet these very men, were Blemished with some Vice, as, either they were
prone to Reproach men, or, would Swear profanely, or were Over Talkative, or
were prone to Anger, or got Gold and Silver, or were defiled with some such
Filth; which nevertheless detract not from the Just Praises of their Virtue: I
must add upon it, that Mr. Davenport, was a Confessor, Flourishing in Virtue,
upon whom, they that upon the Score of his Removal, were most of all
dissatisfied at him, would not yet charge those Unhappy Blemishes: and if any
Good men in the Sifting Times, did court him either too Strait, or too High, in
some of his Apprehensions, Nevertheless these things also detract a from the
Just Praises of his Virtue.

. 12. So rich a Treasure, of the Best Gifts, as was in our Davenport, was well
worth Coveting by the Considerablest Church in the Land. He was a most
Incomparable Preacher, and a man of more than Ordinary Accomplishments; a
Prince of Preachers, and worthy to have been a Preacher to Princes: he had been
acquainted with Great Men and Great Things, and was Great himself, and had a
Great Fame abroad in the World; yea, now he was grown Old, like Moses, his
Force was not abated. And the Character, which I remember that Old Pagan
Historian, Diodorus the Sicilian, gave of our Moses, every body was ready to
give of our Davenport, He was a man of a Great Soul, and very Powerful in his
Life: But his Removal did seem too much to Verify an Observation, by the Famous
Dr. Tuckney thus Expressed; It is ill Transplanting a Tree that thrives in the
Soil: For, Accepting the Call of Boston- Church in the year 1667. that Church,
and the World, must enjoy him no longer than till the year 1670. When, on March
15. Aged Seventy two years, he was by an Apoplexy fetched away to that Glorious
World, where the Spirits of Cotton and Davenport, are together in Heaven, as
their Bodies are now in One Tomb on Earth.

. 13. His Constant and Various Employments otherwise, would not permit him to
Leave many Printed Effects of his Judicious Industry, besides those Few already
mentioned: although he were so close and bent a Student, that the rude Pagans
themselves took much notice of it, and the Indian Salvages in the
Neighborhood, would call him, So Big Study* Man. Only there is in the Hands
of the Faithful, a Savory Treatise of his, Entitled, The Saints Anchor-hold;
in the Preface whereof a Duumvirate of Renowned men, to wit, Mr. Hook and Mr.
Caryl, give this Attestation, As touching the Author of this Treatise, in whose
Heart the Text was written by the Finger of God, before the Discourse was
Penned by his own Hand; His Piety, Learning, Gravity, Experience, Judgment, do
not more commend him to all that know him, than this Work of his may commend it
self to them that read it. The Christian Faith has also been Solidly and
Learnedly mentain'd by him; in a Discourse, long since, Published, for the
Demonstration of our Blessed Jesus, to be the True Messiah. Nor would I forget
a Sermon of his on 2 Samuel 23. 3. at the Anniversary Court of Election at Boston
1669. afterward Published: And among the many Epistles which he has prefixed
unto the Books of other Authors, I know not whether his Excellent Epistle
before Mr. Scudders Dayly-Walk, may not, for the worth of it, be Reckoned it
self a Book: as the Book it self, was the Directory of his own Duyly-Walk.
Moreover, there is Published a Treatise of his, under this Title, The Power of
Congregational Churches; in the Preface where of, Mr. Nathanael, Mather, (at
this Time, the Worthy, and Well-known, Pastor of such a Church in the City of
London) has these very Significant Expressions concerning him. Certain it is,
The Principles held forth in this Treatise, cost the Reverend Author, not only
many Sufferings, but also many, very many sad Searchings, and much Reading and
Study on set purpose, accompanied with manifold Prayers and Cries to the Father
of Lights, for Light therein. After all which, he was more confirmed in them,
and attained to such comfortable Clearness therein, as bore him up with much
inward Peace and Satisfaction, under all his Afflictions on the Account of his
Persuasion in these points. And so persuaded Lived, and so Dyed, this Grave and
Serious Spirited Man! There is likewise Published, A Discourse about Civil
Government, in a New-Plantation, whose Design is Religion; in the Title Page
whereof, the Name of Mr. Cotton, is, by a Mistake, put for that of Mr.
Davenport. And there was lately transcribed for the Press, from his Notes, a
Large Volumn of Accurate and Elaborate Sermons, on the whole Book of Canticles.
But the Death of the Gentleman chiefly concerned in the Intended Impression,
proved the Death of the Impression it self.

. 14. To Conclude: There will be but an Unjust Account given of the Things
Preached and Written, by this Reverend Man, if we do not mention one Singular
Favor of Heaven unto him. It is well known, That in the Earliest of the
Primitive Times, the Faithful did in a Literal Sense, Believe, the Second
Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Rising and the Reigning of the Saints
with Him, a Thousand Years before the Rest of the Dead Live again: A Doctrine,
which however some of Later years have counted it Heretical, Yet, in the Days
of Irenaeus, was questioned by none but such as were counted Heretics. It Is
Evident from Justin Martyr, that this Doctrine of the Chiliad, was in his Days
Embraced, among all Orthodox Christians; nor did this Kingdom of our Lord,
begin to be doubted until the Kingdom of Antichrist began to advance into a
Considerable Figure; and then it fell chiefly under the Reproaches of such men,
as were faign to Deny the Divine Authority of the Book of Revelation, and of
the Second Epistle of Peter. He is a Stranger to Antiquity, who does not find
and own the Ancients generally of the Persuasion, which is Excellency Summed
up, in those Words of Lactantius, Veniet Summi et maximi Dei Filius. Verum
ILLE, cum deleverit Injustitiam, Judiciumque maximum fecerit, ac. Justos, qui a
Principio fuerunt, ad vitam Restauraverit, MILL ANNIS inter Homines
Versabitur, cosque Justiffimo Imperto reget. Nevertheless, at Last, Men came,
not only to lay aside the Modesty Expressed, by One of the first Considerable
Anti-Millenaries, namely Jerome, when he said, Quae Licet non Sequamur, tamen
Condemnare non Possumus, eo quod multi Virorum Ecclesiasticorum et Martyrum,
ista dixerint: but also with Violence to persecute the Millenary Truth as an
Heretical Pravity. So the Mystery of our Lords Appearing in his Kingdom, lay
buried in Popish Darkness, till the light thereof has had a fresh Dawn, since
the Antichrist entered into the Last Half Time of the Period allotted for him;
and Now, within the Last few Sevens of years, as things grow nearer to
Accomplishment, Learned and Pious Men, in Great Numbers every where, come to
Receive, Explain, and Mentain, the Old Faith about it. But here was the Special
Favor of Heaven, to our Davenport, That so many years ago, When in both
Englands, the True Notion of the Chiliad, was hardly apprehended by as many
Divines of Note, as there are Mouths of Nilus, Yet this Worthy Man, Clearly Saw
into it; and both Preached and Wrote, Those very Things, about the Future
State, the Coming of the Lord, the Calling of the Jews, and the First and
Second Resurrection of the Dead, which do now of Late years get more ground
against the Opposition of the otherwise minded, and find a kinder Entertainment
among them that Search the Scriptures: and whereof he afterward, when he (...)
an Old Man, gave the World a Little Taste, in a Judicious Preface before a most
Learned and Nervous Treatise, composed by one that was then a Young Man, about,
The Mystery of the Salvation of Israel. Even, Then, so long ago, it was, that
he asserted, A Personal, Visible, Powerful, and Glorious Coming of the LORD
JESUS CHRIST unto JUDGMENT, Long before the End of the World. But thus we take
our Leave of this Renowned Man, and Leave him Resting in Hope, to Stand in his
Lot, at that END.

Epitaphium.
JOHANNES DAVENPORTUS, in Portum Delatus.

Vivus Nov Angliae, ac Ecclesiae Ornamentum,
Et Mortuus, Utriusque Triste Desiderium.
FINIS.
Piscator Evangelicus. OR, The LIFE of Mr. THOMAS HOOKER, The Renowned, PASTOR
of Hartford-Church, AND PILLAR of Connecticut-Colony, IN NEW ENGLAND.

Essayed by COTTON MATHER.

Quod si digna Tua minus est mea pagina Laud, At voluisse sat est. Printed in
the Year 1695.

To the CHURCHES in the Colony of CONNECTICUT.
Although the Providence of Heaven, whereby the Bunds of People are set, has
carried you so far Westward, that some have pleasantly said, The Last Corflict
with Antichrist must be in your Colony, yet I believe, you do not reckon your
selves Removed beyond the reach of Temptation and Corruption. It Is a Great
World that you have done, for our Lord Jesus Christ, in Forming Colony of
Evange^iea Churches for Him, where Satan alone and Reigned without Control in
all former Ages: but your Incomparable HOOKER, who was one of the Greatest in
the Foundation of that Work, was in his Day, well aware, that Satan would make
all the Have he could, unhappily to get all Buried in the Degeneracies of
Ignorance, Worldliness, and Profanitie. To Advise you of your Dangers, and
uphold the Life of Religion among you, I presume Humbly to Lay before you, the
Life of that Excellent Man, who for Learning, Wisdom, and Religion, was a
Pattern well worthy of perpetual Consideration. Having Served my own Province,
with the History of no Less than Four Famous JOHN'S, all fetched from
One*Church, I was for certain special Causes unwilling to have it Complained,
as once it was of the Disciples, THOMAS was not with them; Wherefore. I was
willing to make this Appendix unto that History. Confessing that through want of
Information. I have Undered no in T his, more than in any part of the
Composure, yet So Done, that, I hope the Good Hand of the Lord whom I have
designed therein to Glorify, will make what Is D ^ne, to be neither
unacceptable nor unprofitable unto His People.

Cotton Mather.

Piscator Evangelicus.
THE LIFE OF Mr. THOMAS HOOKER.
. 1. WHEN Toxaris met with his Countryman Anacharsis in Athens, he gave him
this Invitation, Come along with me, and I will show Thee at once all the
Wonders of Greece: whereupon he showed him Solon, as the Person in whom there
Centered all the Glories of that City or Country. I shall now Invite my Reader
to Behold at once the Wonders of New England, and it is in one THOMAS HOOKER
that he shall behold them: Even in that Hooker, whom a Worthy Writer would
needs call, Saints HOOKER, for the same Reason, (he said) and with the same
Freedom, that Latymer, would speak of Saint ^ILNEY, in his Commemorations. It Is
that HOOKER, of whom I may venture to say, that the famous Romanist, who wrote
a Book, De Tribus THOMIS, or, of Three THOMASes, meaning THOMAS the Apostle,
THOMAS Becket, and Sir THOMAS MORE, did not a thousandth part so well sort his
THOMAS's, as a New Englander might; if he should write a Book, De Duckus
THOMIS, or, Of Two THOMAS's; and with THOMAS the Apostle, join our Celebrious
THOMAS HOOKER: my One THOMAS, even our Apostolical HOOKER, would in Just
Balances weigh down two of Campians Rebellious Archbishops, or bigoted
Lord-Chancellours.

2. This our HOOKER, was Born at Marfield in Leicester* shire, about the Year
1586. of Parents that were neither Unable, nor Unwilling, to bestow upon him a
Liberal Education; whereto the Early and Lively Sparkles of Wit observed in
him, old very much Encourage them. His Natural Temper was Cheerful and
Courteous, but it was accompanied with such a sensible Grandeur of Mind, as
caused his Friends, without the Help of Astrology, to Prognosticate that he was
Born to be Considerable. The Influence which he had upon the Reformation of
some Growing Abuses, when he was one of the Procters in the University, was a
Thing, that more eminently Signalized him, when his more public Appearance in
the World was coming on: which was attended with an Advancement unto a
Fellowship in Emanuel Colle^ge in Cambridge; the Students whereof were
Originally Designed for the Study of Divinity.

3. With what Ability and Fidelity be acquitted himself in his Fellowship, it
was a Thing sensible unto the whole University. And it was while he was in this
Employment, that the more Effectual Grace of God, gave him the Experience of a
true Regeneration. It pleased the Spirit of God very Powerfully to break into
the Soul of this person, with such a Sense of his being Exposed unto the Just
Wrath of Heaven, as filled him with most unusual Degrees of Horror and Anguish,
which broke not only his Rest, but his Heart also, and caused him to cry out,
While I suffer thy Terrors, O Lord, I am Distracted! While he long had a Soul
Harassed with such Distresses, he had a singular Help in the Prudent and
Piteous Carriage of Mr. Ash, who was the Sizer, that then waited upon him; and
attended him, with such Discreet and Proper Compassions, as made him afterward
to Respect him highly all his Days. He afterward gave this Account of
himself, That in the time of his Agonies, he could Reason himself to the Rule,
and Conclude that there was no way but Submission to God, and Lying, at the
Foot of his Mercy in Christ Jesus, and waiting humbly there, till He should
please to persuade the Soul of his Favor: nevertheless when he came to apply
this Rule unto himself in his own Condition, his Reasoning would fall him, he
was able to Do nothing. Having bin a considerable while thus Troubled with such
Impressions from the Spirit of Bondage, as were to fit him for the Great
Services and Enjoyments, which God intended him; at length he Received the
Spirit of Adoption, with well grounded Persuasions of his Interest in the
New Covenant. It became his manner, at his Lying down for Sleep in the Evening,
to Single out some certain Promise of God, which he would Repeat, and Ponder,
and Keep his Heart close unto it, until he found that satisfaction of Soul
wherewith he could say, I will Lay me down in Peace, and Sleep; for thou, O
Lord, make me Dwell in Assurance. And he would afterward Counsel others to
take the same Course; telling them, That the Promise was the Boat, which was to
carry a Perishing Sinner over unto the Lord Jesus Christ.

4. Mr. Hooker being now well got through the S torm of Soul, which had Helped
him unto a most Experimental Acquaintance with the Truths of the Gospel, and
the way of Employing and Applying those Truths, he was willing to Serve the
Church of God in the Ministry, whereto he was Devoted. At his first leaving of
the University, he Sojourned in the House of Mr. Drake, a Gentleman of great
Note, not far from London; whose worthy Comfort being Visited with such
Distresses of Soul, as Mr. Hooker himself had passed through, it proved an
unspeakable advantage unto both of them, that he had that opportunity of being
Serviceable; for, indeed, he now had no Superior, and scarce any Equal, for
the Skill of Treating a Troubled Soul. When he left Mr. Drakes Family, he did
more publicly and frequently Preach about London; and in a little time, he
grew famous for his Ministerial Abilities, but especially for his Notable
Faculty at the wise and fit management of Wounded Spirits. However he was not
Ambitious to Exercise his Ministry among the Great Ones of the World, from whom
the most of Preferment might be expected: but in this, Imitating the Example
and Character of our blessed Savior, of whom it is noted, that according to the
Prophecy of Isatah, by Him, The Poor had the Gospel Preached unto them; he
chose to be where great numbers of the Poor might Receive the Gospel from him.

5. About this time it was, the Mr. Hooker grew into a most intimate
Acquaintance with Mr. Rogers of Dedham; who so highly valued him for his
Multitarious Abilities, that he used and gained many Endeavors to get him
Settled at Colchester; whereto Mr. Hooker did very much Incline, because of its
being so near to Dedham, where he might Enjoy the Labors and Lectures of Mr.
Rogers, whom he would sometimes call, The Prince of all the Preachers in
England. But the Providence of God gave an Obstruction to that Settlement; and,
indeed, it was an Observation, which Mr. Hooker would sometimes afterward use
unto his Friends, That the Providence of God often Diverted him from Employment
in such Places, as he himself Desired, and still Directed him to such Places,
as he had no thoughts of. Accordingly, Chelmsford in Essex, a Town of great
Concourse, wanting one to Break the Bread of Life unto them; and hearing the
Fame of Mr. Hooker's Powerful Ministry; Addressed him to become their Lecturer:
and he accepted their Offer about the Year 1626. becoming not only their
Lecturer, but also on the Lord's Days, an Assistent unto one Mr. Mitchel, the
Incumbent of the Place; who though he were a Smaller, yet being a Godly Person,
gladly Encouraged Mr. Hooker, and Lived with him in a most Comfortable Amity.

6. Here his Lecture was exceedingly Frequented, and proportionably Succeeded;
and the Light of his Ministry shone through the whole County of Essex. There
was a ^are mixture of Pleasure and Profit in his Preachi^^; and his Hearers
felt those penetrating Impressions of his Ministry upon their Souls, which
caused them to Reverence him, as, A Teacher sent from God. He had a most
excellent Faculty at the Applications of his Doctrine; and he would therein so
Touch the Consciences of his Auditors, that a Judicious Person would say of
him, He was the Best at an Use that ever he heard. Hereby there was a great
Reformation wrought, not only in the Town, but in the Adjacent Country; from
all parts whereof they came to Hear the Wisdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, in His
Gospel, by this worthy man Dispensed: and some of great Quality among the rest,
would often Resort from far to his Assembly; particularly the truly Noble Ea^l
of Warwick, whose Countenance of Good Ministers, procured more Prayers to God
for him, than most Noble Men in England.

When he first Set up his Lecture, there was more Profaneness than Devotion in
the Town: and the Multitude of Inns and Shops in the Town produced one
particular Disorder, of Peoples filling the Streets with unsuitable Behaviors,
after the Public Services of the Lord's Day were over. But by the Power of his
Ministry in Public, and by the Prudence of his Carriage in Private, he quickly
cleared the Streets of this Disorder, and the Sabbath came to be very visibly
Sanctified among the People.

7. The Joy of the People in this Light was but for a Season. The Conscientious
Nonconformity of Mr. Hooker to some Rites of the Church of England, then
vigorously pressed, especially upon such Able and Useful Ministers, as were
most likely to be Laid aside by their scrupling of those Rites; made it
necessary for him to Lay down his Ministry in Chelmsford, when he had been
about four years there, Employed in it. Hereupon, at the Request of several
Eminent Persons, he kept a School, in his own Hired House, having our* Mr. John
Eliot for his Usher, at little ^addow not far from Chelmsford; (...) he managed
his Charge with such Discretion, such Authority, and such Efficacy, that, able
to do more with a Word, or a Look, than most other men could have done by a
Severer Discipline, he did very great Service to the Church of God, in the
Education of such, as afterward proved themselves not a little Serviceable. I
have in my Hands, a Manuscript, written by the Hands of our Blessed ELIOI,
wherein he gives a very Great Account of the Little Academy then mentained in
the House of Mr. Hooker: and among other things, he says, To this place I was
(...), through the Infinite Riches of Gods Mercy in Christ Jesus to my poor
Soul: For here the Lord said unto my Dead Soul, Live; and through the Grace of
Christ, I do Live, and I shall Live for ever! When I came to this Blessed
Family, I then saw, and never before, the Power of Godliness, in its Lively
Vigor and Efficacy.

8. While he continued thus in the Heart of Essex, and in the Hearts of the
People there, he signalized his Usefulness in many other Instances.

The Godly Ministers round about the Country, would have Recourse unto him to
be Directed and Resolved, in their Diffic^^ Cases; and it was by his means that
those Godly Ministers held their Monthly Meetings for Fasting and Prayer, and
profitable Conferences. 'Twas the E^fe^t of his Consultations also, that such
Godly Ministers, came to be here and there Settled in several parts of the
County; and many others came to be better established in some great points of
Christianity, by being in his Neighborhood and Acquaintance. He was indeed, a
General Blessing to the Church of God! But that which hindered is Taking his
Degree of Batch^lour in Divinity, must also it seems hinder his being a
Preacher of Divinity; namely his being a Nonconformist unto some things,
whereof true Divinity could not approve. And indeed that which made the
Silencing of Mr. Hooker, more unaccountable was, That no less than Seven and
Forty Conformable Ministers of the Neighboring Town, understanding that the
Bishop of London, pretended Mr. Hookers Ministry, to be Injurious or Offensive
to them, Subscribed a Petition to the Bishop, for his Continuance in the
Ministry at Chelmsford; in which Petition, though he was of a Persuasion so
Different from them, yet they Testify in so many words, That they esteem and
know the said Mr. Thomas Hooker, to be for Doctrine, Orthodox; for Life and
Conversation, Honest; for Disposition, Peaceable, and in no wise Turbulent or
Factions. And yet all would not avail: Bonus vir Hookerus, sed id^o ma'us, quia
Puritanus.

9. The Ground work of his Knowledge and Study of the Arts, was in the Tables
of Mr. Alexander Richardson, whom he closely followed, admiring him for a man
of Transcendent Ability, and a most Exalted Piety; and would say of him, That
he was a Master of so much Understanding, that like the Great Army of Gideon,
he was too many to be Employed in Doing what was to be Done for the Church of
God. This most Eminent Richardson, Leaving the University, Lived a private Life
in Essex, whither many Students in Cambridge Resorted unto him, to be
Illuminated in the abstruser parts of Learning; and from him it was that the
Incomparable Doctor Ames Imbibed those Principles both in Philosophy and in
Divinity, which afterward not only gave clearer Methods and Measures to all
the Liberal Arts, but also ^ed the whole Church of God with the choicest
Marrow. Nevertheless, this Excellent Man, as he Lived, so he Dyed in a most
Retired Obscurity; but so far as a Metem^ sychisis was attainable, the Soul of
him, I mean the Notions, the Accomplishments, the Dispositions of that Great
SOUL, Transmigrated into our most Richardsonian Hooker.

10 As his Person was thus Adorned with a well* grounded Learning, so his
Preaching was notably set off with a Liveliness Extraordinary: insomuch that I
cannot give a fu^er, and yet briefer Description of him, than that which I find
given of Bucholtzer; that Pattern of Preachers, before him; Vivida in to omnia
fuerunt, vivida vox, vividi oculi, vividae manus, gestus omnes vividi: he was
all that he was, and he did all that he did, Unto the Life: He not only had
that which Quintilian calls, A Natural Moveableness of Soul, whereby the
Distinct Images of Things would come so nimbly, and yet so fitly, into his
mind, that he could utter them with such fluent Expressions, as the old Orators
would usually Ascribe (...) a special Assistance of Heaven, [ Deum tune
Ad^u^sse, u^^eres Oratores aiebant] and counted that man did therein THE^OS
L^GEIN, or Speal Divinely; but the Rise of this Fluency in him, was the (...)
Relish which he had of the things to be spoken, the Sacred Panting of his holy
Soul after the Glorious Objects of the Invisible World; and the true zeal of
Religion, giving Fire to his Discourses. Whence, though the Ready and Notsy
Performances of many Preachers, when they are as Plato^ speaks, THEAIBOU
MESTOI, or Full of the Theater, Acting to the Height in the Public for their
Applause, may be ascribed unto very Mechanical Principles* vet the vigor in
the Ministry of our Rocker, being Raised by a Coal from the Altar of a most
Real Devotion, touching his Heart; it would be a wrong unto the Good Spirit of
our God, it He should not be Acknowledged the Author (...). That Spirit
accordingly gave a wonderful and unusual Success, unto the Ministry wherein be
Breathed so Remarkably. Of that Success there were many Instances; but one
particularly I find mentioned in Clarks Examples, to this purpose. A profane
person, Designing therein only an Ungodly Divers^on and Merriment, said unto
his Companions, Come, Let us go Hear, what thus Ban^ling Hooker will say to us;
and thereupon with an Intention to make sport, unto Chemsford Lecture they
came. The man had not been long in the Church, before the Quick and Powerful
Word of God, in the mouth of His Faithful Hooker, pierced the Soul of him; he
came out with an Awakened and a Distressed Soul, and by the further Blessing of
God upon Mr. Hooker's Ministry, he arrived unto a true Conversion; for which
cause he would not afterward Leave that Blessed Ministry, but went a Thousand
Leagues to Attend it, and Enjoy it. Another Memorable Thing of this kind, was
this; It was Mr Hooker's manner (...) a year to visit his Native County: and in
one of those Visits, he had an Invitation to Preach in the Great Church of
Leicester. One of the chief Burgesses in the Town, much Opposed his Preaching
there; and when he could not prevail to hinder it, he set certain Fiders a work
to Disturb him, in the Church Porch, or Churcheyard. But such was the Vivacity
of Mr. Hooker, as to proceed in what he was about, without either the Damping
of his Mind, or the Drowning of his Voice; whereupon the Man himself went unto
the Church*Door, to over-hear what he said. It pleased God, so to accompany
some woods uttered by Mr. H ooker, as thereby to procure, first the Attention,
and then the Conviction of that wretched man; who then came to Mr. H ooker,
with a penitent Confession of his Wickedness, and became in ^eed so penitent a
Convert, as to be at length a sincere Professor and Practiser of the Godliness,
whereof he had been a Persecutor.

11. The Spiritual Court, Sitting at Chelmsford, about the year 1630. had not
only Silenced Mr. Hooker, but also bound him over in a Bond of Fifty Pound, to
appear before the H igh Commission, which he could not now attend, because of
an Ague then upon him. One of his Hearers, namely Mr. Nash, a very honest
Yeoman, that Rented a great Farm of the Earl of Warwick, at Much* Waltham, was
Bound in that Sum for his Appearance; but as P aul was advised by his Friends,
that he would not venture into the Theater at Ephesus, thus Mr. H ooker's
Friends advised him to Forfeit his Bonds, rather than throw him e^r any further
into the Hands of his Enemies. Wherefore, when the Day for his Appearance came,
his honest Surety being Reimbursed by several good People in and near
Chelmsford, sent in the forfeited Sum into the Court; and Mr. H ooker having,
by the Earl of Warwick, a courteous and private Recess provided for his Family,
at a place called Old Park, for which I find, the Thanks of Dr. Hill afterward
publicly given in his Dedication of Mr. Fenners Treatise about Impenitency; He
went over to H olland. In his Passage thither, he quickly had Occasion to
Discover himself, when they were in Eminent Hazard of Shiowrack, upon a Shelf
of Sand, whereon they Ran in the Night; but Mr. Hooker, like P aul again, with
a Remarkable Confidence, Assured them, that they should be all Preserved; and
they had as Remarkable a Deliverance. I have also heard, that when he fled from
the Pursevants, to take his Passage for the Law-Countreyes, at his I ast
Parting with some of his friends, one of them said, Sir, What if the Wind
should not be fair, when you come to the Vessel? whereto he instantly replied,
Brother, Let us leave that with Him, who keeps the Wind in the Hollow of his
Hand: And it was observed, That although the Wind was Cross, until he came
Aboard, yet it immediately then came about fair and fresh, and he was no sooner
under Sail, but the Officer arrived at the Seaside, happily too Late now to
come at him: which minds me, of what befell Dr. Goodwin, not long after. That
Great man, Lay Wind^ound, in hourly suspicious that the Pursevants would stop
his Voyage, and S^iz his Person, before the Wind would favor his getting away
for Holland. In this Distress, Humbly Praying to the Lord Jesus Christ, for a
more propitious Wind, he yet said, Lord, If thou have at this time, any poor
Servant of thine, that want's this Wind, more than I do another, I do not ask
for the Changing of it; I submit unto it. And immediately the Wind came about,
unto the Right Point; and carried him clear from his Pursuners.

12. Arriving in Holland, he was Invited unto a Settlement with old Mr. Paget;
but the Old man being secretly willing that Mr. Hooker should not Accept of
this Invitation, he contrived many ways to render him suspected unto the
Classis, on a suspicion, that he favored the Brownists; unto whom he had,
indeed, an extreme Aversion. The Misunderstandings Operated so far, as to
occasion Mr. Hooker's Removal from Amsterdam; notwithstanding he had so fully
expressed himself, when in his Answer to one of Mr. Paget's Questions, he
declared, in these words, To Separate from the Faithful Assemblies and
Churches in England, as no Churches, is an Error in Judgment, and Sin in
Practice, held and mentained by the Brownists; and therefore to Communicate
with them in their Opinion or Practice, is sinful and utterful unlawful: and
care should be taken to prevent Offense, either by Encouraging them in their
way, or by Drawing others to a further Approbation of that way than is meet.
Going (...), A^^st^^d he went unto Delft; where he was made kindly Received by
Mr. Forbs, an Aged and Holy Search Minister, under whole Ministry many English
Merchants were then Settled. The Text whereon he first Preached at his coming
thither, was Phil. 1. 29. To you it is given not only to Believe, but also to
Suffer; and after that Sermon, Mr. Forbs manifested a strong Desire to Enjoy
the Fellowship of Mr Hooker in the Week of the Gospel; which he did for about
the space of two years: in all which time they Lived so like Brethren, that an
Observer might say of them, as they said of Basil and Nazianzen, They were but
One Soul in two Bodies; and it they had been for any little while asunder, they
still met with such Friendly and Joyful Congratulations as Testified a most
affectionate satisfaction in each others Company.

13. At the end of two years, he had a Call to Rotterdam; which he the more
heartily and readily Accepted, because it Renewed his Acquaintance with his
Invaluable Dr. Ames, who had newly Left his Place in the Frisian University.
With him he spent the Residue of his Time in Holland, and Assisted him in
Composing some of his Discourses, which are, His Fresh Suit against the
Ceremonies: for such was the Regard which Dr. Ames had for him, that
notwithstanding his vast Ability and Experience, yet when i^ came to the Narrow
of any Question about the Instituted Worship of God, he would still propels
himself Conquered by Mr. Hookers Reason; Declaring, that though he had been
Acquainted with many Scholars of diverse Nations, yet he never met with Mr.
Hookers Equal, either for Preaching or for Disputing. But having tarried in
Holland long enough to see the State of Religion in the Churches there, he
became satisfied, that it was neither Eligible for him to tarry in that
Country, nor Convenient for his Friends to be Invited thither after him. I have
at this time in my Hands, his Letter from Roterdam to Mr. Cotton, wherein are
these words; The State of these Provinces to my weak eye, seems wonderfully
ticklish and miserable. For the better part, Heart-Religion, They content
themselves with very Form^, though much Blemished; but the Power of Godliness,
for ought I (...) see or hear, they know not; and if it were thoroughly
pressed, I fear least it will be fiercely opposed. My Ague yet holds me; the
ways of Gods Providence, wherein He has walked toward me, in this long time
of my Sickness, and wherein I have drawn forth many wearyish Hours, under His
Almighty Hand (Blessed be His Name) together with Pursuits and Banishment,
which have waited upon me, as one Wave follows another, have driven me to an
Amazement: His Paths being too secret and past finding out by such an Ignorant,
Worthless Worm as my self. I have Looked over my Heart and Life, according to
my measure; aimed and guessed as well as I could: and Entreated His Majesty to
make known His Mind, wherein I missed; and yet methinks I cannot spell out
readily the Purpose of His Proceedings; which I confess have been wonderful in
Miseries, and more than wonderful in Mercies to me and mine. Wherefore, about
this time, understanding that many of his Friends in Essex, were upon the Wing,
for a Wilderness in America; where they hoped for an Opportunity to Enjoy and
Practice the Pure Worship of the Lord Jesus Christ, in Churches Gathered
according to His Direction, he readily answered their Invitation to Accompany
them in this Undertaking.

14. Returning into England in order to a further Voyage, he was quickly
Scented by the Pursevants; who at length got so far up with him, as to knock at
the Door of that very Chamber, where he was now Discoursing with Mr. Stone; who
was now become his Designed Companion and Assistent for the New English
Enterprise. Mr. Stone was at the Instant Smoking of Tobacco; for which Mr.
Hooker had been Reproving him, as being then used by few persons of Sobriety;
being also of a sudden and pleasant Wit, he stepped unto the Door, with his P ipe
in his mouth, and such an Air of Speech and Look, as gave him some Credit with
the Officer. The Officer Demanded, Whether Mr. Hooker were not there? Mr. Stone
replied with a braving sort of Confidence, What Hooker? Do you mean Hooker that
Lived once at Chelmsford! The Officer answered, Yes, He! Mr. Stone immediately,
with a Diversion like that which once helped Athanas^us, made this true answer,
If it be he you Look for, I saw him about an Hour ago, at such an House in the
Town; you had best hasten thither after him. The Officer took this for a
sufficient Account, and went his way: but Mr. Hooker, upon this Intimation
concealed himself more carefully and securely, till he went on Board, at the
Downs in the year 1633. the Ship which brought him, and Mr. Cotton, and Mr.
Stone to New England: Where none but Mr. Stone was owned for a Preacher, at
their first coming Aboard; the other two Delaying to take their Turns in the
Public Worship of the (...), till they were got so far into the Main Ocean,
that they might with safety Discover, Who they were.

15 Amongst Mr. Ferners Works, I find some Imperfect and Shattered, and I
believe, In^^^^^ Notes, of a Farewell Sermon upon Jer. 1^. 9. We are Called by
thy Name, Leave us not: Which Farewell Sermon was indeed, Mr. Hookers, at his
Leaving of England. There are in those Fragments of a Sermon, some very
Pathetical, and most Prophetical Passages, whereof some are these.

It is not Gold and Prosperity, which makes God to be our God; there is more
Gold in the West Indies, than there is in all Christendom; but it is Gods
Ordinances in the virtue of them, that show the Presence of God.

Again, Is not England Ripe? Is she not weary go God? way, she is fed fat for
the slaughter.

Once more, England has seen her Best Days, and now Evil Days are befalling
us.

And, Thou England, which have been Lifted up to Heaven with Means, shall be
Abased and brought down to Hell; for if the mighty works, which have been Done
in Thee, had been Done in India or Turkey, they would have Repented ^re this.

These Passages I quote, that I may the more effectually Describe the
Apprehensions, with which this Worthy man took his Farewell of his Native
Country.

16. Mr. H ooker and Mr. Cotton were, for their different Genius, the Luther
and Melancthon of New England; at their Arrival unto which Country, Mr. Co^ton
(...) with the Church of Boston, but Mr. H ooker with the Church of New Town,
having Mr. Stone for his Assistent. Inexpressible now was the Joy of Mr. H
ooker, to find himself Surrounded with his Friends, who were come over the year
before, to prepare for his Reception; with open aims he Embraced them, and
uttered these words, Now I Live, if you stand stast in the Lord. But such
multitudes stocked over to New England after them, that the Plantation of
New-Town became too straight for them; and it was Mr. Hookers Advice that they
should not Incur the Danger of a Sitna, on an Esek, where they might have a
Rehoboth, Accordingly in the Month of June 1636. they Removed an Hundred miles
to the Westward, with a purpose to Settle upon the Delightful Banks of
Connecticut River: and there were about an Hundred Persons in the first Company
that made this Removal, who not being able to Walk above ten miles a Day, took
up near a Fortnight in the Journey; having no Pillows to take their Nightly
Rest upon, but such as their Father Jacob sound in the way to Padan Atam. Here
Mr. Hooker was the chief Instrument of Beginning another Colony, as Mr. Cotton,
whom he Left behind him, was, of Preserving and Perfecting that Colony where he
Left him; for, indeed each of them were the Oracle of their several Colonies.

. 17. Though Mr. Hooker had thus Removed from the Massachusett-Bay, yet he
sometimes came down to visit the Churches in that Bay; But when ever he came,
he was Received with an Affection, like that which Paul found among the
Galatians; yea, it is thought, that once there seemed some Intimation from
Heaven as if the Good People had Overdone in that Affection. For on May 26.
1639. Mr. Hooker being here to Preach that Lords Day in the Afternoon, his
great Fame had gathered a vast multitude of Hearers from several other
Congregations, and among the Rest, the Governor himself, to be made Partakers
of his Ministry. But when he came to Preach, he found himself so unaccountably
at a Loss, that after some shattered and broken Attempts, to proceed, he made a
full stop; saying to the Assembly, That every thing, which he would have
spoken, was taken both out of his Mouth, and out of his Mind also; wherefore he
Desired them to Sing a Psalm, while he withdrew about half an Hour from them:
Returning then to the Congregation, he Preached a most admirable Sermon,
wherein he Held them for two Hours together in an extraordinary Strain, both of
Pertinency and Vivacity.

After Sermon, when some of his Friends were speaking of the Lords thus
Withdrawing His Assistance; from him, he humbly replied, We daily confess, that
we have nothing, and can do nothing, without Christ; and what if Christ will
make this manifest in us, and on us, before our Congregations? what remains,
but that we he humbly Contented? and what manner of Discouragement is there in
all of this? Thus Content was he to be Nullified, that the LORD might be
Magnified.

. 18. Mr. Hooker, that had been Born to Serve many, and was of such a Public
Spirit, that I find him occasionally Celebrated, if the Life of Mr. Angier
Lately Published, for One, Who would be continually Inquisitive, how it Fared
with the Church of God, both at home and abroad, on purpose that he might order
his Prayers and Cares accordingly: He never took his Opportunity to Serve
himself; but Lived a sort of Exile all his Days, except the Last Fourteen
Years of his Life, among his own Spiritual Children at Hartford; however, here
also, he was an Exile. Accordingly, wherever he came, he Lived like a Stranger
in the World! When at the Lands End, he took his last sight of England, he
said, Farewell England! I expect now no more to see that Religious Zeal, and
Power of Godliness, which I have seen among Professors in that Land! And he had
Sagacious and Prophetical Apprehensions of the Declensions which would attend
Reforming Churches, when they came to Enjoy a place of Liberty: he said, That
Adversity had slain its Thousands, but Prosperity would stay its Ten Thousands!
he feared, That they who had been Lovely Christians in the Fire of Persecution,
would soon become cold in the midst of Universal Peace, except some few, whom
God by sharp Trials, would keep in a Faithful, Watchful, Humble and Praying
Frame. But under these Preapprehension, it was his own Endeavor to beware of
Abating his own First Love! And of so Watchful, so Prayerful, so Fruitful a
Spirit was Mr. Hooker, that the Spirit of Prophecy it self, did seem to grant
him some singular Afflations. Indeed, every Wise man I^ a Prophet; but one so
Eminen^ly acquainted with Scripture and, Reason, and Church History, as our
Hooker, must needs be a Seer, from whom singular Prognostications were to be
expected. Accordingly, there were many things Prognosticated by him, where in
the Future State of New England, particularly of Connecticut, has been so much
concerned, that its pity they should be forgotten. But I will in this History,
Record only Two of his Predictions. One was, That God would punish the wanton
Spirit of the Professors, in this Country, with a sad went of Able Men in all
Orders. Another was, That in certain places of great Light here Sinned against,
there would break forth such horrible Sins, as would be the Amazement of the
World.

. 19. He was a Man of Prayer, which was indeed, a ready way to become a Man of
God. He would say, That Prayer was the principal part of a Ministers Work;
'twas by this, that he was to carry on the Rest. Accordingly, he still Devoted
One Day in a Month, to Private Prayer with Fasting before the Lord, besides the
Public Fasts which often occurred unto him. He would say, That such
Extraordinary Favors, as the Life of Religion, and the Power of Godliness,
must be preserved by the frequent Use of such Extraordinary Means, as Prayer
with Fasting; and that if Professors grow negligent of these Means, Iniquity
will Abound, and the Love of many wax cold. Nevertheless in the Duty of Prayer,
he affected Strength, rather than Length; and though he had not so much variety
in his Public Praying, as in his Public Preaching, yet he always had a
seasonable Respect unto Present Occasions. And it was Observed, that his Prayer
was usually like Jacobs Ladder, wherein the nearer he came to an End, the
nearer he drew toward Heaven; and he grew into such Rapturous Pleadings with
God, and Praysings of God, as made some to say, That Like the Master of the
Feast, he Reserved the best Wine until the Last. Nor was the wonderful Success
of his Prayer upon special Concerns, unobserved by the whole Colony; who
Reckoned him the Moses, which Turned away the Wrath of God from them, and
obtained a Blast from Heaven upon their Indian Ama^ekites, by his Uplifted
Hands, in those Remarkable Deliverances which they sometimes experienced. It
was very particularly observed, when there was a Battle to be Fought between
the Narraganset, and the Monbegin Indians, in the year 1643. The Narraganset
Indians had Complotted the Ruin of the English, but the Monbegin were
Confederate with us; and a War now being between those two Nations, much notice
was taken of the prevailing Importunity, wherewith Mr. Hooker, urged for the
Accomplishment of that Great Promise unto the People of God, I will Bless them
that Bless thee, but I will Curse him that Curses thee. And the Effect of it
was, that the Narragansets Received a wonderful Overthrow from the Monbegins,
though the former did three or four to one, for Number, exceed the latter. Such
an Israel at Prayer was our Hooker! And this Praying Pastor was Blessed, as
indeed such Ministers use to be, with a Praying People; there fell up on His
pious people, a Double Portion of the Spirit, which they beheld in him.

. 20. That Reverend and Excellent Man, Mr. Whitfield, having spent many years
in Studying of Books, did at length take two or three years to Study Men; And
in pursuance of this Design, having Acquainted himself with the most
Considerable Divines in England, at last he fell into the Acquaintance of Mr.
Hooker; concerning whom, he afterward gave this Testimony; 'That he had not
thought there had been such a man on Earth; a man in whom there Shone so many
Excellencies, as were in this Incomparable Hooker; A man in whom Learning and
Wisdom, were so Tempered with Zeal, Holiness and Watchfulness. And the same
Observer, having exactly Noted Mr. Hooker, made this Remark, and gave this
Report, more particularly of him, That he had the best Command of his own
Spirit, which he ever saw in any man whatever. For though he were a man of a
Choleric Disposition, and had a mighty Vigo^ and Fervor of Spirit, which as
Occasion served, was wondrous useful unto him, yet, he had ordinarily as much
Government of his Choler, as a man has of a Mastiff Dog in a Chain; He could
Let out his Dog, and pull in his Dog, as he pleased. And another, that observed
the Heroical Spirit and Courage, with which this Great man, Fulfilled his
Ministry, gave this Account or him, He was a person, who while Doing his
Masters Work, would put a King in his Pocket!

. 21. He was indeed of a very Condescending Spirit, not only toward his
Brethren in the Ministry, but also toward the Meanest of any Christians
whatsoever. He was very willing to Sacrifice his own Apprehensions into the
Convincing Reason of another man; and very ready to acknowledge any Mistake or
Fai^ing in himself. I Will give one Example; There happened a Damage to be done
unto a Neighbor, immediately whereupon, Mr. Hooker meeting with an Unlucky
Boy, that often had his Name up, for the doing of such Mis^hiefs, he fell to
Chiding of that Joy, as the I (...) of This. The Boy denied it, and Mr. Hooker
still went on in an angry manner, charging of him; whereupon said the Boy, Sir,
I see you are in a passion, I Will say no more to you! and so ran away. Mr.
Hooker, upon further Enquiry, not finding that the Boy could be proved Guilty,
sent for him; and having first by a calm Question, given the Boy opportunity to
Renew his Denial of the Fact, he said unto him, Since I cannot prove the
contrary, I am bound to believe, and I do believe what you say; and then added,
Indeed I was in a Passion, when I spoke to you before; it was my Sin, and it is
my Shame, and I am truly sorry for it: and I hope in God, I shall be more
Watchful hereafter. So giving the Joy some good Counsel, the poor Lad went away
extremely affected with such a Carriage in so Good a man; and it proved an
Occasion of Good unto the Soul of the Lad all his Days.

. 22. He had a singular Ability, at Giving Answers to Cases of Conscience;
whereof happy was the Experience of some Thousands: And for this Work he
usually set apart the Second Day of the Week; wherein he admitted all sorts of
persons, in their Discourses with him, to Reap the Benefit of the Extraordinary
Experience, which himself had found of Satan's Devices. Once particularly Mr.
Hooker was Addressed by a Student in Divinity, who Entering upon his Ministry
was, as the most Useful Ministers, at their Entrance thereupon, use to be,
horribly Busseted with Temptations, which were become almost Intolerable:
Repairing to Mr. Hooker in the Distresses and Anguishes of his Mind, and
Bemoaning his own overwhelming Fears, while the Lion was thus Roaring at him,
Mr. Hooker answered, I can compare with any man Living for Fears! My Advice to
you is, That you Search out and Analyze the humbling Causes of them, and Refer
them to their proper places; then go and pour them out before the Lord; and
they shall prove more profitable to you than any Books you can Read. But Mr.
Hooker in his Dealing with Troubled Consciences, observed, that there were a
sort of Crusty and Guileful Souls, which he would find out with an Admirable
Dexterity; and of these he would say, as Paul of the Cretians, They must be
Reproved Sharply, that they may be Sound in the Faith; Sharp Rebukes make Sound
Christians. Indeed, of some he had Compassion, making a Difference; and others
he Saved with fear, pulling them out of the Fire.

. 23. Although he had a Notable Hand it the Discussing and Adjusting of
Controversal Points, yet he would hardly ever handle any Polemical Divinity in
the Pulpit; but the very Spirit of his Ministry lay in the points of the most
Practical Religion, and the Grand Concerns of a Sinner's Preparation for,
Implantation in, and Salvation by, the Glorious Lord Jesus Christ. And in these
Discourses he would frequently Intermix, most affectionate Warnings of the
Declensions, which would quickly Besal the Churches and Christians of
New England.

Many Volumns of the Sermons Preached by him were since Printed; and this
Account is to be given of them.

While he was Fellow of Immanuel-Colledge, he entertained a special Inclination
to those Principles of Divinity, which concerned, The Application of
Redemption; and that which eminently fitted him for the Handling of those
Principles, was, That he had been from his Youth Trained up, in the Experience
of those Humiliations and Consolations, and Sacred Communions, which belong to
the New Creature; and he had most critically compared his own Experience, with
the Accounts, which the Quick and Powerful Word of God, gives of those Glorious
Things. Accordingly, he Preached, first more briefly on these Points, whilst he
was a Catechist in Immanuel College, in a more Scholastic way; which was most
agreeable to his present Station; and the Notes of what he then Delivered were
so Esteemed, that many Copies thereof were Transcribed and Preserved.
Afterward, he Preached more largely on those Points, in a more popular way at
Chelmsford, the Product of which were those Books of Preparation for Christ,
Contrition, Humiliation, Vocation, Union with Christ, and Communion, and the
rest, which go under his Name; for many wrote after him in Shorthand; and some
were so bold, as to Publish many of them, without his Consent or Knowledge;
whereby his Notions came to be Deformedly misrepresented in multitudes of
Passages; among which I will suppose that Crude Passage, which Mr. Giles
Firm^in in his Real Christian, so well confutes, That if the Soul be rightly
Humbled, it is content to bear the State of Damnation. But when he came to New
England, many of his Church, which had been his Old Essex Hearers, desired him
once more to go over the Points of God's Regenerating Works upon the Souls of
His Elect; until, at last their Desires prevailed with him to Resume that
pleasant Subject. The Subject hereby came to have a Third Concoction, in the
Head and Heart of (...) as able to Digest it, as most men Living in the World;
and it was his Design to perfect with his own Hand his Composures for the
Press, and thereby (...) both Author and Matter, from the wrongs done to both,
by Surreptitious Editions heretofore. He did not Live to finish what he
intended; yet a Worthy Minister, namely, Mr. John Higginson, One richly able
himself to have been an Author of a not unlike Matter, Transcribed from his
Manuscripts, near two Hundred of these Excellent Sermons, which were sent over
into England, that they might be Published; but, by what means I know not,
scarce half of them have seen the Light unto this Day. However, it is possible,
the valuableness of those that are Published, may at some time or other awaken
some Enquiries after the Unknown Hands wherein the rest, are as yet concealed.

. 24. But this was not all the Service, which the Pen of Mr. Hooker, did for
the Church of God! It was his Opinion, That there were Two great Reserves of
Enquiry, for this Age of the World; the First, Wherein the Spiritual Rule of
our Lord's Kingdom does Consist, and after what manner it is Internally
Revealed, Managed, and Maintained in the Souls of his People? The Second, After
what Order the Government of our Lord's Kingdom is to be Externally Managed and
Maintained in his Churches? Accordingly, having done his part for Delivering
the Former Subject from Pharisaical Formality, on the one Hand, and from
Familistical Enthusiasm on the other; he was by the sollicitous Importunity of
his Friends prevailed withal to Compose a Treatise on the Other Subject also.
Upon this Occasion, he Wrote his Excellent Book. which is Entitled, A Survey
of Church Discipline; wherein, having in the Name of the other Ministers in the
Country, as well as his own, professed his Concurrence with Holy, and Learned,
Mr. Rutherford, as to the Number and Nature of Church Officers; The Right of
People to call their own Officers; The Unfitness of Scandalous Persons to be
Members of a Visible Church; The Unwarrantableness of S eparation from Churches
for certain Defective Circumstances; The Lawfulness, yea, Needfulness, of a
Consociation among Churches; and Calling in the Help of such Consociations,
upon Emerging Difficulties; and the Power of such Consociations to proceed
against a Particular Church, pertinaciously offending, with a Sentence of
Non-Communion: He then proceeds to consider, a Church-Congregational completely
constituted with all its Officers, as having full power in its self to Exercise
all Church Discipline, in all the Censures thereof; and the Interest, which the
Consent of the People is to have in the Exercise of this Discipline. The first
fair and full Copy of this Book, was Drowned in its Passage to England, with
many Serious and Eminent Christians, which were then Buried by Shipwreck in the
Ocean: for which cause there was another Copy sent afterward, which through
the Premature Death of the Author, was not so perfect as the former; but it was
a Reflection, which Dr. Goodwin made upon it, The Destiny which has attended
this Book, has visited my Thoughts with an Apprehension of something like Omen
to the Cause it self: That after the Overwhelming of it with a Flood of
Obloquies, and Disadvantages and Misrepresentations, and injurious Oppressions
cast out after it, it might in the time, which God alone has put in His own
Power, be again Emergent. He adds, I have Looked for this; That this Truth, and
all that should be said of it, was Ordained, as Christ of whom every Truth is a
Ray, to be as a Seed-corn, which unless it fall to the Ground and Die, and this
perhaps together with some of the Persons that profess it, it brings not forth
much Fruit. However, the Ingenious Mr. Stone, who was Colleague to Mr. Hooker,
accompanied this Book, with a little Epigram, whereof these were the concluding
Disticks,

If any to this Platform can Reply
With better Reason, Let this Volumn Die;
But better Arguments, if none can give,
Then Thomas Hookers Policy shall Live.
25. In his Administration of Church Discipline there were several Things, as
Imitable, as Observable. As he was an hearty Friend unto the Consociation of
Churches; and hence all the time, that he Lived, the Pastors of the Neighboring
Churches, held their frequent Meetings for mutual Consultation in things of
common Concernment; so, in his own particular Church, he was very careful, to
have every thing done with a Christian Moderation, and Unanimity. Wherefore he
would have nothing publicly propounded unto the Brethren of the Church, but
what had been first privately prepared by the Elders; and if he feared the
happening of any Debate, his way aforehand was, to visit some of the more Noted
and Leading Brethren, and having Engaged Them to second what he should move
unto the Church, he rarely missed of a full Concurrence: to which purpose he
would say, The Elders must have a Church in a Church, if they would preserve
the Peace of the Church. But if any difficult or divided Agitation was Raised
in the Church, about any matter offered, he would ever put a stop to that
public Agitation, by Delaying the Vote, until another Meeting; before which
time, he would ordinarily by private Conserences, gain over such as were
unsatisfied. As for the Admission of Communicants unto the Lord's Table, he
kept the Examination of them unto the Elders of the Church, as properly
belonging unto their Work and Charge; and with his Elders he would order them
to make before the whole Church a Profession of a Repenting Faith, as they were
able, or willing to do it. Some, that could unto Edification do it, he put upon
thus Relating the manner of their Conversion to God; but usually they only
answered unto certain probatory Questions, which were rendered them; and so
after their Names had been for a few weeks before signified unto the
Congregation, to Learn whether any Objection or Exception could be made against
them, of any thing Scandalous in their Conversations, now Consenting unto, The
Covenant, they were Admitted into the Church Communion. As for Ecclesiastical
Censures, he was very watchful to prevent all Proceedures unto Them, as far as
was consistent with the Rules of our Lord; for which cause (except in grosser
Abominations) when Offenses happened, he did his utmost, that the Notice
thereof might be extended no further, than it was when they first were laid
before him; and having Reconciled the Offenders with sensible and convenient
Acknowledgments of their Miscarriages, he would let the Notice thereof be
confined unto such as were aforehand therewith acquainted; and hence there was
but one person Admonished in, and but one person Excommunicated from, the
Church of Hartford, in all the fourteen years, that Mr. Hooker Lived there. He
was much troubled at the too frequent Censures in some other Churches; and he
would say, Church Censures are things, wherewith neither we, nor our Fathers
have been acquainted, in the practice of them; and therefore the utmost
Circumspection is needful, that we do not spoil the Ordinances of God, by our
management thereof. In this point he was like Beza, who defended the Ordinance
of Excommunication against Erastus; and yet, he with his Colleagues, were so
cautelous in the use of it, that in eleven years, there was but one
Excommunication passed in all Geneva.

26. He would say, That he should Esteem it a Favor from God if he might Live
no Longer, than he should be able to hold up Lively in the Work of his Place;
and that, when the Time of his Departure should come, God would shorten the
Time: and he had his Desire. Some of his most Observant Hearers, observed an
astonishing sort or a Cloud, in his Congregation, the last Lords Day of his
public Ministry, when he also Administered the Lo^^^ Supper among them; and a
most unaccountable Heaviness and Sleepiness, even in the most Watchful
Christians of the place, not unlike the Drowsiness of the Disciples, when our
Lord was going to Die; for which. One of the Elders publicly Rebuked them. When
those Devout People afterward perceived, that this was the Last Sermon and
Sacrament, wherein they were to have the Presence of their Pastor with them,
it is Inexpressible, how much they bewailed their Unattentiveness unto his
Farewell Dispensations; and some of them could Enjoy no peace in their own
Souls, until they had obtained Leave of the Elders, to confess before the whole
Congregation with many Tears, that Inadvertency. But as for Mr. Hooker himself;
an Epidemical Sickness, which had proved mortal to many, though at first small
or no Danger appeared in it, Arrested him. In the time of his Sickness, he did
not say much to the Standers by; but being asked, that he would utter his
Apprehensions about some Important Things, especially about the State of New
England, he answered, I have not that Work now to do; I have already Declared
the Counsel of the Lord: and when one that stood weeping by the Bed side said
unto him, Sir, You are going to Receive the Reward of all your Labors, he
Replied, Brother, I am going to Receive Mercy! At Last, he Closed his own Eyes,
with his own Hands, and gently stro^king his own Forehead, with a Smile in his
Countenance, he gave a little Groan, and so Expired his Blessed Soul into the
Arms of his Fellow Servants, the Holy Angels, on July 7. 1647. In which Last
Hours, the Glorious Peace of Soul, which he had Enjoyed without any
Interruption for near Thirty Years together, so gloriously accompanied him,
that a worthy Spectator than Writing to Mr. Cotton a Relation thereof, made
this Reflection, Truly Sir, the fight of his Death, will make me have more
pleasant Thoughts of Death, than ever I yet had in my Life!

27. Thus Lived, and thus Dyed, One of the First Three. He, of whom the Great
Mr. Cotton gave this Character, that he did, Agmen ducere et dominari in
Concionibus, gratia Spiritus Sancti et virtute plenis; and that he was, Vir
Solertis et Acerrimi Judicij; and at length uttered his Lamentations in a
Funeral Elegy, whereof some Lines were these.

'Twas of Geneva's Worthies said with Wonder,
( Those Worthies Three) Farel was went to Thunder,
Viret like Rain on tender Grass to shower,
But Calvin, Lively Qracles to pour.
All These in Hooker's Spirit did Remain,
A Son of Thunder, and a Shower of Rain;
A Pourer forth of (...) Oracles,
In Saving Souls, The Sum of Miracles.
This was He, of whom his Pupil Mr. Ash, gives this Tellimony; For his great
Abilities, and glorious Services, both in This, and in the Other England, he
Deserves a Place in the first Rank of them, whose Lives are of Late Recorded.
And this was He, of whom his Reverend Contemporary, Mr. Ezekiel Rogers,
tendered this for an Epitaph; in every Line whereof, methinks the Writer
deserves a Reward equal to what Virgil had, when for every Line, referring to
Marcellus in the end of his Sixth (...) he received a Sum, not much less than
Eighty Pounds in Money, or as ample a Requital as Cardinal Richleu gave to a
Poet, when he bestowed upon him two thousand Sequins for a witty Conceit in One
Verse, of but seven words, upon his Coat of Arms.

America, although She do not Boast,
Of all the Gold and Silver from that Coast,
Lent to her Sister Europe's Need or Pride;
(For that is Repaid her, with much Gain beside,
In one Rich Pearl, which Heaven did thence afford,
As Pious Herbert gave his honest word;)
Yet thinks, She in the Catalogue may come
With Europe, Afric, Asia, for One Tomb.
But as Ambrose could say concerning Theodosius, Non Totus rece^sit; reliquit
nobis Liberos, in quihas even debenas agnoscere, et in quibus eum Cernimas et
Tenmus; thus we have to this Day among us, our Dead Hooker yet Living in his
Worthy Son, Mr. Samuel Hooker, an Able, Faithful, Useful, Minister, at
Farmington, in the Colony of Connecticut.

EPITAPHIUM.
THOMAS HOOKER.
Heu! Pietas; Heu! prisca Fides.
Or, for a more extended EPITHAPH, we may take the Abridgment of his Life, as
offered in some Lines of Mr. ELIJAH CORLET, that memorable old School master in
Cambridge, from whose Education our College and Country, has Received so many
of its Worthy men, that he is himself Worthy to have his Name Celebrated in no
Less a Paragraph of our Church History, than That wherein I may Introduce him
Endeavoring to Celebrate the Name of our Great HOOKER; unto this purpose.

Si mea cum Vestris, valuissent vota, Nov-Angli,
HOOKERUS Yardo viserat Astra Gradu.
Te, Reverende Senex, Sic Te deleximus omnes,
Ipsa In visa forent ut tihi Jura poli.
Morte Tua Infandum Cogor Renovare docrem,
Quippe Tua videat Terra Nov-Angla suam.
Dignus eras, Aquil^ similis, Renovasse Jurentam,
Et Fato in Terris Candidiore frui.
Tu Domus Emanuel, Sorer Augustissima, Matter
Mill Prophetarum, Tu mihi Testis eris.
Te Testem appello, quondam Chelmsfordia, Calis
Proxima; Te praco sustulit ille Yuus.
Now tulit hac Chalcas, Arcis Phabique Sacerdos,
Nam populo Sperni sic sua sacra videt.
Vidit et ex Rostris Gensi Pradicere vatem
Bella, quod in Christum Tota Rebellis erat.
Quem Patria exegit, ferus Hostis Episcopus; Hostis
Hune minus, in Batavis, vexat amara Febris.
Post varios casus, Quassata Nov Anglia, tandem
Ramifer' inde Tibi Diva Columba venit.
Ige Tuos Cxtus Ornat, pascitque Fideles,
Laudthus Innumerts addit et ille Tuss.
Dulcis Amicus erat, Pastorque Insignis, et Altus
Dot^hus, Eloquio, Moribus, Ingenio.
Proh Pudor! Ereptum Te vivi vidimus, et Non
Excessura (...) a Struximus Insidias!
Insidias precibus, Lacrymisque perennibus, unde
Semita Calestis (...) cla^sa soret,
Sed Frustra (...)
Lustra per ECCKIRUS ter quinque Viator, erat: jam
Casestem patriom Possidet ille suam.
FINIS
A Catalogue of some other Books.
1. THe Call of the Gospel. 2. Military Duties: An Artillery Sermon. 3. Right
Thought in Sad Hours. 4. Early Piety Exam li^^ed. 5. Memorable Wi^chcrafts and
Possessions. 6. Discourses, to Serve the Designs of Practical Godliness. 7.
Soldiers Counseled and Comforted. 8. The Wonderful Works of God Commemorated.
9. Work upon the Ask. 10. Speedy Repentance Urged. 11. A Public Spirit. 12. A
Companion for Communicants. 13. The Serviceable Man: An Election Sermon. 14.
Serious Thoughts in Dying Times. 15. Addresses to Old men, Young men, Little
Children. 16. The L^^e of the Renowned John Eliot. 17. Expectanda: Or Things to
be Looked for. 18. Little I locks Guarded against Grievous Wolves. 18.
Ornaments for the Daughters of Zion. 20. Blessed Unions Recommended. 21. A
Sacred Exorcism upon Sinful Discontent. 22. The Cause and (...) of a Wounded
Spirit. 23. Meditations on the (...) of Judgment. 24. A Midnight Cry. 25.
Optanda: Good Men Described, and Good Things Propounded. 26. The Wonders of the
Invisible World. 27. Awakenings for the Unregenerate. 28. Warnings from the
Dead. 29. The Day, and the Work of the Day. 30. Winter Meditations. 31. Early
Religion Urged. 32. The Short History of New England. 33. Durable Riches. 34.
Help for Distressed Parents.
All by this AUTHOR.


