Anno Regni Guliel^i and Marie, REGIS and REGINAE, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae
and Hiberniae, QUINTO.
An ACT for granting to King William and Queen Mary the Rate of One Penny per
Pound upon the clear Value of all the Real and Personal Estates, and Six
Shillings per Head upon such as are not otherwise rated by this Act. To be
employed by the Governor of this Province of Pennsilvania and Territories
thereof, for the Time being, toward the Support of this Government.
SInce it has pleased the King and Queen to take the Government of this
Province and Counties into Their own hands, and supply the absence of our
Proprietor, by so worthy a Person, who gave us such great Assurances of his
good desires to preserve and confirm us in our Rights and Liberties: We the
Representatives met in general Assembly, with humble Submission to the King and
Queens Pleasure therein, and with all dutiful Acknowledgments of their Care and
tender Regard to the reasonable Laws and Constitutions, as well as Protections
of this Government, do humbly present the said King and Queen with the free
Gift of the Rates and Assesments herein after-mentioned, which we desire they
would please to accept of, as a Testimony of our dutiful Affections toward
them; and we do likewise desire that the King and Queen would be pleased to
give and allow one half thereof to Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and
Governor in Chief in and over this Province and Country, etc. that it may be
so enacted.

Be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor and Aldermen
within the City of New York for the time being, and the Mayor and Aldermen
within the City of Albany for the time being, and the Justices of the Peace for
the time being, for the several and respective Counties within this Province,
for the several Counties respectively, for the which they shall be Justices of
the Peace, do within six Months after Publication hereof assemble and meet
together in the Court Houses, for the several respective Cities and Counties,
or such other place or places as they shall agree among themselves, and shall
there order, That the Assessors and Collectors for the several and respective
Cities, Towns, Mannours, and Liberties, within their several Jurisdictions, for
the assessing, collecting and receiving of the Public Rates for the defraying
of the Public and Necessary Charge of each respective City and County
aforesaid, be the Assessors and Collectors for the assessing, collecting and
receiving the Rate of One Penny per Pound, as aforesaid, as to the said Mayors
and Aldermen and Justices of the Peace shall seem (...) and reasonable.

And forasmuch as there are several Manors and Jurisdictions within the
respective Counties aforesaid, who neglect, and do not elect annually, or once
every year Assessors and Collectors, whereby the intent of this Act may be
frustrated, Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the
respective Mannours and Jurisdictions within the several Counties aforesaid,
shall refuse or neglect to elect Assessors and Collectors, for the assessing
their respective Mannours and Jurisdictions, and for the Collecting the same,
according to the intent and direction of this Act; Then and in such case the
Justices of the Peace of the County where such Mannours or Jurisdictions are,
Are hereby empowered and authorized to nominate and appoint Assessors and
Collectors, for such Manors and Jurisdictions as shall neglect and refuse as
aforesaid; which Assessors and Collectors shall, to all intents and purposes,
observe the directions of this Act, any thing contained herein to the contrary
hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayors,
Aldermen and Justices of the Peace, for the respective Cities and Counties,
Manors and Jurisdictions, have and shall have Power and Authority by Virtue of
this Act, each of them by himself, to administer an Oath to the said Assessors,
Well, Truly, Equally and Impartially, in due Proportion, as it shall appear to
them, according to their best understanding, to assess and rate the
Inhabitants, Residents and Freeholders of the respective places, for which
they shall be chosen Assessors.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, who shall be chosen Assessors and Collectors, shall deny, neglect, or
unequally or partially assess or refuse to make such Assesment, as by this Act
is required, or shall deny, neglect or refuse to collect any Sum or Sums of
Money, in form aforementioned assest, that then and in such case, it shall and
may be lawful for any two Justices of the Peace of the Cities and Counties
where such Offenders shall happen to dwell or reside, and who by virtue of this
Act, are required and empowered to do the same by Warrant under their Hands and
Seals, to commit such Assessor or Assessors, Collector or Collectors so
denying, neglecting or unequally and partially assessing or refusing to
collect, as aforesaid, to the common Goal, there to remain without Bayl or
Mainprize till he or they make Fine and Ransom to their, Majesty's, as
aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons, of what degree or Quality soever he or they be, within this Province,
who shall be assessed or rated any sum or sums of Money by virtue of this Act
to be raised and levied, shall deny, refuse or delay to pay, and ratify the
same, that then it shall and may be lawful for any such Collector, by Virtue of
a Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any Justice of the Peace for the City or
County where such Offender shall dwell or reside, who by Virtue of this Act are
Required and Authorized to grant and issue forth such Warrant, to levy the same
by Distress and Sale of such Person or Persons Goods and Chattles, returning
the Overplus, if any be, to the Owners, the Sum assessed, and Charges of
Distress and Sale being first deducted.

And also, be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Mayor,
Alderman or Justice of the Peace within this Province, who are hereby Required,
Empowered and Authorized to take effectual care that this Act, and every
Article and Clause therein be duly executed, according to the true intent and
meaning thereof, shall deny, neglect, refuse or delay to do, perform, fulfill
and execute all and every or any the Duties, Powers and Authorities, by this
Act required and empowered, by him or them to be done, performed, fullfilled or
executed, and shall thereof be convicted before his Excellency, the Governor
and Captain General, and Council, or before any of their Majesty's Courts of
Record within this Province, he or they shall suffer such pain, by Fine and
Imprisonment, as by the direction of the said Governor and Captain General, and
Council, and the Justices of the said Courts, shall be adjudged.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Bill, Plaint or Information shall be brought, moved or presented at any time
hereafter against any Person or Persons, for any Matter, Choose or Thing, done
or acted in pursuance or execution of this Act, such Person or Persons so Sued
or prosecuted in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue,
Not Guilty, and give this (...) and the special Matter in Evidence; and if the
Plaintiff or Proseedor shall be Nonsuited, or forbear further Prosecution,
(...) to pass against him, the Defendant and (...) Costs, for which they shall
have the like Remedy, as in (...) by the Law are given to Defendants.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Moneys or
Effects gathered and received by the said Collectors within their respective
Limits, by virtue of this Act, shall from time to time be duly paid to such
Treasurer or Treasurers as shall be appointed by the Governor to receive the
same, whose Receipts shall be a sufficient Discharge unto such Collectors,
which said Collectors for gathering the said particular Sums, shall retain in
their hands respectively, for every Twenty Shillings by them paid in, as
aforesaid, the sum of One Shilling, as a Reward for their pains and service.

Provided always, That if any person or persons certified, assessed or rated,
for or in respect of any Estate, for which by this Act he or they is or may be
rated, do find him or themselves agrieved with such rating, and do within ten
days after complain to any three of the Assessors, that signed or allowed his
or their Rate, who shall within ten days after such Complaint particularly
examine the person complaining, or any other person, touching the value of the
Complainants real and personal Estate, and there-upon the said assessors shall
abate, defaulk, or increase the said assessments, according as Complainants
shall appear to be worth, either by the parties own attest or proof of others.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person be
sued for any thing done in pursuance of this Act, such person so sued may plead
the general Issue, and give this Act (...) Matter in Evidence; and if the
Plantiff or Prosecutor (...) shall (...) Damages.

(...) of this Act, for any neglect or miscarriage in the Execution thereof,
but within one year after such Offense.

Provided also, and be it further Enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the
several Collectors shall gather and receive the respective sums assessed, as
aforesaid, in current Money of this Province, or for want thereof in good
Merchantable Country Produce at the Current Market price.


