AN ACT Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their Majesty's
Province of the Massachusets-Bay, in New England.

Begun at Boston the Eighth Day of June, 1692, And Continued by several
Adjournments unto Thursday the Second of March following, being the Fourth
Sessions.

Anno Regni, Gulielmi, et Mariae, Regis et Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae Quinto.

BOSTON Printed by Benjamin Harris, Printer to His Excellency, the Governor
and Council, 1692.

An Act, For the Proportioning and Settling of the Tax or Assessment of Thirty
Thousand Pounds Granted unto Their Majesty's.
WHEREAS the Commissioners of the Respective Counties, in pursuance of the Act
Entitled An Act, For Regulating the former Assessment, and for Granting an
Additional Supply of Money, made at the Second Sessions of this Court have met
in Boston as a Committee, and taken an account of the Sum Total of the Lists
laid before them of each Town respectively, and made a further Addition to the
several Sums of each List, as near as they judged proportionably (including the
Sum already Returned unto the Treasurer, for which his Warrants are gone forth)
toward making up the Sum of Thirty Thousand Pounds Granted upon the whole
Province.

Upon Consideration had of the Return made by the said Committee.

It is Declared and Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same

That the Additions made by the said Committee, as well on Polls as Estates
according to their Report, Be, and hereby are approved of and accepted as a
Regulation of said Assessment, in compliance with said Act: And that the
Treasurer forthwith Issue out his Warants, together with the said Lists
returned from the several Towns, to the Constables or Collectors appointed
within the Respective Towns, to Collect and Pay in the Sum in each List
respectively mentioned, by the First Day of May next, as by the Act is
directed, and for such Towns and places as have Omitted to return the List of
their Assessments, The Treasurer is Empowered to send his Warrants to the
Select-men and Town Commissioner, to Assess the Polls and Estates within said
Town or place the Sum proposed by the said Committee for said Towns proportion
of said Tax, in manner, and according to the Rules set down in the Act for
Regulation of the same, and in this present Act: Saving a lib^^y to such Towns
only to apply to the General Assembly at their ^ext Sessions, for an Ease and
Abatement of the Sum proposed by the Committee, and set upon said Towns
respectively, they Returning a true List in the mean time, and making it appear
that they have been over-done.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid

That the Treasurer do likewise send out his Warrant to the Select-men, and
Town-Commissioner of each Town, respectively within the Province, forthwith to
Assess and Proportion the Additional Sum returned by the aforesaid Committee to
complete the said Tax remaining to such Town after Subduction of the Respective
Sums of both the Lists of said Town as well that formerly returned for the
first part of said Tax as their present List, the said Remainder to be Assessed
upon the Estate lying within such Town, according to the Rules prescribed by
the before recited Act, only taking in such Polls as formerly were Omitted
(Polls to be Assessed but at Twenty Shillings Per Poll upon the whole Tax) and
the Lists so made to return unto the Treasurer, at or before the last day of
May next, who is hereby Empowered upon Receipt thereof to Grant forth his
Warrants as aforesaid, for Collecting and Paying in the same to Their Majesty's
Treasury of this Their Province, by the first day of February next Ensuing, in
the Year One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Three.

Provided nevertheless, and it is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority
aforesaid, That neither the Rules and Directions for the making the said Tax
and Assessment prescribed by this present Act, or any former Act in any wise
relating to said Assessment, nor any of them, nor the proportioning of the said
Tax or Assessment upon the several Towns shall hereafter be drawn into
President or Example as a Rule or Proportion for the future ^aising of Money,
but is from necessity consented unto for this Time only, and no other: Any
thing in this, or any other Act contained, or to be from thence drawn or
employed to intend the contrary in any wise Notwithstanding.

FINIS

