UNUM NECESSARIUM AWAKENINGS FOR THE Unregenerate. OR, The NATURE and NECESSITY
OF REGENERATION.

Handled in a DISCOURSE designed for the Service of any that may be thereby
assisted in the GRAND CONCERN of Conversion unto God; but especially the RISING
GENERATION.

With an Addition of some other Sermons relating to that Important Subject.

By Cotton Mather.

Ezekiel XXXVII.3, 4. He said unto me, Son of Man, can these Bones Live? And I
answered, O Lord God, thou know. Again He said unto me, Prophesy upon these
Bones, and say unto them, O ye Dry Bones, Hear the Word of the Lord

Boston Printed, by B. H. for Duncan Campbell, Bookseller at the Dock head
over against the Conduit. 1693.

Introduction.
THere are Three most undoing Mischiefs, which Threaten my Country with
Grievous Confusions, yea, there are Four Evils that have a dire Aspect upon us,
boding of something like Barbarism, and Extinction, unless the plentiful
Effusions of the Good Spirit from on High, relieve the Inconveniences of our
Wilderness. The first is, The Neglect and Contempt of a well-form'd Education,
appearing in a backwardness to Encourage Schools of Learning; and a Disposition
unto a way of Living so scattered, as that it may be called, A Running wild
into the Woods. The second is, The slothful, careless, quarrelsome Delay of
Destitute Churches, to furnish themselves with Officers appointed by the Lord
Jesus Christ, for their Edification; by which Omission, Plantations quickly
become full, either of, Sinners pining away in their Iniquities, or of,
Christians plagued with Leanness sent into their Soul. The Third is, the Crime
of Ingratitude unto Public Servants; and the making of Censure, Slander and
Hatred, the Common P^^ of such as with most In^^olate Integrity, seek the
Common Good: which Unthankfulness, will at last make our Times Perilous,
because it will render us Friendless and Helpless. But the Fourth, and worst of
all, is the lamentable want of REGENERATION in the Rising Generation. The God
of Heaven is with no less Terrible than Evident Blows, from Heaven, Rebuking of
that Generation; but alas, how few of them do seriously consider on the
Condition of their own Souls! How few of them do suitably Re^^ect on the End
for which God at first Made them, or for which He now Smites them! How few of
them do become experimentally Acquainted with that Faith, and Repentance, and
Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord! It is indeed a matter of
Exceeding Joy, that there are, so many of our Young Ones, that have their Faces
Zion ward; but it is of all Grie^^ the most bitter and pungent, that there are,
No more. The obtaining of a Cure for this wre^chedness would be to Redress all
the rest, and it would contribute more than any One Thing whatever, to, All
Things Going Well. Now there are Two Things, for which I take the Boldness, to
Publish my Wishes, in order thereunto. The One is, That all our Congregations
would oftener do what some of them have sometimes done, in setting apart whole
Days for Fasting and Prayer before the Lord, that his Powerful (...) may
multiply sincere and thorough Conversions in the Rising Generation. The Other
is, That the most Faithful, and Pious Ministers of the Gospel wherewith our God
has blessed us, would, as He shall give them Opportunity, personally visit all
the Families in their Flocks; and in those Visits, most affectionately Address
the Rising Generation, upon the Nature and Necessity of that Conversion, which
in their Public Ministry is pressed upon them.

It Is in the pursuance of ^is Design, that I have here printed the Notes of two
or three Sermons upon Regeneration, Preached almost seven years ago;
accompanied with two or three more since Delivered: hoping that the Young, may
give a particular Attention to One who so belonged unto their Generation. I
make not a large Impression to ask Readers, abroad in the World: I have already
done enough, and it may be too much of that; but I was willing to be furnished
at least with so many Copies, as might serve me, with Gods permission, to Leave
one in every House of the Dear People, whom He has commanded me to treat about,
The Things of their Eternal Peace. Briefly, The Book is Printed, but I can
hardly say, it is published. Doubtless the World Rings, with the Noise of a
strange Descent, which the Devils have lately made upon several parts of this
Land, wherein those Evil Spirits, have horribly Tortured, Wounded, Scalded, and
with a Thousand sensible and exquisite Cruelties, been trying to Dragoon our
poor people, into their Services; which those Filthy Specter propound, with
laying before them the Shape of a BOOK to be by them Entertained. Now, among
the Engines to oppose the Devils Interests, there is also no little use to be
made of, BOOKS; first, that Book of Books, the BIBLE; and then such other
Books, as are to Explain the Lively Oracles of That. Among those Books, I have
here endeavored ONE more; whereof I would only say thus much; Reader, if thou
can ever be concerned about a more Important Subject than what is here
handled, I am content, that THIS BOOK should never come into thy Hand: But if
it come into thy Hand, Let the Desires of an Awakened Soul accompany it, that
it may come ^^^thy Heart; and that both our Names may be Written in the Lambs
Book of Life.

Lectoris de vita Animaeque Salute Tractatur.
AWAKENINGS FOR THE UNREGENERATE.
TWere more charitable to Bewayl it, than it looks Uncharitably to Suspect it,
that our Country is become like that Valley, whereof we Read in Ezekiel. 37.1, 2.
That it was, A Valley full of Bones, that were very dry. The Dry Bones there,
are too like the Dead Souls here; the Subjects of the Blackest Calamities, the
Objects of the greatest Compassions, because of their Estrangement from Him,
Whom to know is Life Eternal. Our Land is in the Divine Dispensations dealt
withal as if it were Unclean, and is it not the multitude of, The Dead, among
us, that makes it so? Yea so generally and unhappily extended is the Number of
them, who were never yet Converted unto God, that we may fear whether we are
not under a plague beyond that of Egypt, when there was One Dead in every
House, And now what shall be done for them? Truly, The way which the God of
Heaven presc^ibed, is now to be used on the beh^l^ of These: Prophecy over
them! Wherefore in the Name of the Almighty God, Let me now say, O ye Dry
Bones* O ye Dead Soul* Hear the Word of the Lord. But the Word which now more
particularly demands your Attention, is That in

John III.3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a Man be Born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God.

BEhold a Saying, than which there can be ^o^e mo^e Faithful, none more Worthy
of Acceptance! It Is a Saying which fell from the (...) of ^^im that is the
Faithful and the True ^itness, and of (...) ^ho as He would be the Savior, so
will be the Disposer of your Immortal Souls for ever: He that spoke so as never
man spoke, here utters a Saying which every man (...) Hear; Man, Hear, that thy
Soul may Live. 'Ti^ a Saying thus occasioned. A Person of some Estate and
Figure among the Jews, who, as if having some Interest among the Greeks also,
was named Nicodemus (by his own people pronounced Nacdimon) gave a visit by
Night unto our Lord Jesus Christ. Although his dread of a Disreputation, and
perhaps an Excommunication, among the Builders which refused, That (...) Corner
(...), caused him to Address our (...), By Night; yet in that Address, he
Acknowledged, We know that thou art a Teacher come from God. Our Lord hereupon
gi^es Hi^ a Lesson worthy of such a Teacher; which Lesson was the Sentence now
before u^; and He does therein intimate that a New birth would have Enabled him
to be sensible of our Lords being somewhat more than a mere Teacher, or Prophet
a^isen to the Church: indeed of His being no less than the Only Begotten Son of
God. The Jews were not Ignorant, that the Messiah would con^er upon His People,
A Kingdom which was to be for ever and ever: Not only Daniel, but even All the
Prophets as it were with one mouth, had given them Assurance of it; and there
were especially two very common Maxims about that Kingdom among them, whereto
our Lord seems to refer in his Answer to Nicodemus, who probably from some
Discourse in the Sanhedrim the Day before, might bring to our Lord some
Enquiries thereupon. It was an Oracle among them, Paenitentia est ad Messiae
Receptionem Necessaria; that is, we must Repent of our Sins, if we would
Receive our Messiah. This does our Lord seem to Approve; and he bids us, by the
New birth of Repentance to prepare our selves, that so we may partake in, The
Times of Refreshing by the presence of the Lord. It was likewise an Opinion
among them, Universo Israeli est portio in mundo futuro; that is, All the
Children of Israel shall be Advanced in the Kingdom of the Messiah. This our
Lord seems to Reprove, advising us, that it is not being the Children of any
Earthly Parent, but it is only a New birth, which will Entitle any of us to
Happiness in the World to come.

In the Text which thus falls into our Hands, there is first, An Affirmation; a
most Solemn and Awful Assertion delivered by Him that cannot Ly. It is, Except
a man be Born again.] Some Read it, Born from Above. But for the Translation of
this Clause, though not for the clear and full Signification of it, we may allow
Nicodemus himself to be our Interpreter; to be, Born Again, is to be, Born a
Second Time. The Name which the Jews did use to put upon a Proselyte, namely,
Recens natus, or, A newly-Born Person, seems here transferred unto a further
Intent and Purpose, by our Blessed Jesus. He cannot see the Kingdom of God.]
The Vision here imports Enjoyment, also; as the like Phrase often occurri^^,
elsewhere makes it Evident; thus among the Latins too, Cernere Hereditatem, is
to Enter upon an Inheritance. But mark seriously, the Universality of this
thing, Except a Man] whatever Man he be, whether Jew or Gentile, whether Mean
or Noble, whether Simple or Learned; it is true, of any One, of every One,
whoever that One shall be.

There is, Next, A Confirmation; and this is with a strong Asseveration.
Verily, Verily.] The Original here fetches an Adverb, of Assuring, and of
Promising, from the Hebrew Language: it is, as if it had been said, The Saying
is Faithful and Certain, and shall be brought surely to pass! And the Verity of
this position, like Pharaohs Dream of old, is Repeated; because the Thing
indeed is No Dream; no, The Thing is Established by God. Hereunto our Lord
adds, I say unto thee] Who is that I? To make a a just Paraphrase thereupon;
It Is that I, who ever speaks in Righteousness; that I, Who is the Way, the
Truth and the Life: that I, who is the Judge of Quick and of Dead; and if such
an One as He, say it, who dares to doubt it!

Wherefore the All-concerning DOCTRINE, which now calls for our Earnest Heed,
is this: That without Regeneration men cannot Enjoy the Kingdom of God

One of the Ancients wisely engraved that Motto upon his Table, No Back-biter
is to be Entertained here. But behold the Motto, which the Eternal God has
Inscribed upon His Kingdom, No ^an shall enjoy this, but he that is Born Again!
And now, may my God help me to (...) His Truth, with such Right Words, as thro^
the Co^operations of His Grace, may be Forceable, upon all your souls; May the
Lord God of my Master send me good speed this Day!

That we may Think distinctly, let this be,

The First PROPOSITION.
There is a REGENERATION, or New Birth, which the Elect of God, before their
Death, must have Experience of. This is one of the Links, in that which has of
old been called, The Golden Chain of Salvation; Romans 8.30. Whom He did
Predestinate, them He also Called; that is, he makes them Effectually to hear-
that voice of his, whereby they are Born A^gain. Predestination and
Regeneration are the things which God has Joined: it will be to the man's own
Everlasting Ruin if any man go to Put them asunder. We may be sure that, As
many as are Ordained to Eternal Life, will by a Spiritual Birth be made capable
for the Fruition of it. But what means that? How can a man be Born when He is
Old?

I Confess that as in Glorification, so in Regeneration, there are, Unutterable
Things: it is Consisting of, and Surrounded with Invisibles. That Unaccountable
Thing which is in Regeneration bestowed upon us, is called, in 1 Pet. 3.4. The
Hidden Man of the Heart. What the Wise man says, about Generation, may be said
about Regeneration too, We know not the way of the Spirit in us! Concerning
both, it was the Language of the Psalmist, and it may be ours, We are fearfully
and wonderfully made! Rude Pagans, it is true, have had their dark Notion,
about, a, Renascentia, or a New Birth, in their Philosophy: but how short were
their Conceptions as to the Regeneration, and the New Birth in Christianity?
That may be said of the New Birth, which has been said of the New Name, in Rev.
2.17. No man knows it, except he that Receives it. And yet it is hard, even
for such a man to Say, what he does Know about, such a mavelous work of God.
However, Let this be offered as a small Description of it. REGENERATION, is a
Real and Thorough Change, wrought by the Holy Spirit, in a Fallen Man, through
the Infusion of a Gracious Principle into him, which Restores in him, the Lost
Image of God, and therewithal Inclines him to comply with the Calls of the
Gospel.

Behold, what Conclusions we are to make.

I. There is a Real and a Thorough CHANGE wrought in every Regenerate Man.
Indeed the Substance of one Soul is not Removed or Dissolved in Regeneration,
and the Substance of an other Introduced, as the Jews fondly fancied. The Being
of our Soul is not scattered, but the Crookedness and Wickedness thereof is
Rectified, in Regeneration; the Metal of the Soul re^^^ns Old for the Sort of
it, but becomes New for the Stamp of it; nor is a New Faculty added unto the
Soul, but a New Quality unto the Faculty. Thus in Ezekiel. 36.26. a New Heart, and
a New Spirit, is ascribed unto the Newborn Man; but how? As we Read of New
Tongues, and New M^ons, which mean only a New Speech, and a Ne^ Light ado^ning
of the old: But yet, a Mighty Change is undergone by the Regenerate Man; he is
born again, that is, he is one come into another world, and has another way of
Living in that world, than before; he is, as we find him called, in Ephesians. 4.23.
A Renewed Man.

First, It is a REAL Change, that the Regenerate Man has passed upon him. It Is
not merely a Relative Change; and so the Change in Regeneration differs from
that in Justification. In one there is a Change of Estate, in the other a change
of Temper. In that, the Guilt of Sin is Blotted out; in this, the the Filth of
Sin is washed away. That is a Sentence on the Sinner; like that in 2 Samuel
12.13. The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die. This is a Filling of
the Sinner; as we may read, Ephesians. 2.1. You has he filled, who were Dead in
Trespasses and Sins. Nor is it merely a Nominal or a Notional Change: it is no
Brainsick Imagination. We have one picture of this Change drawn from Inanimate
Things; in Isa. 55.13. Instead of the Thorn, shall come up the Fir tree, and
instead of the Briar, shall come up the Myrtle-tree. We have another shadow of
this Change, fetched from Animate Things; in Isa. 11.6. The Wolf shall dwell
with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid. In Regeneration
thus it is; the man varies from what once he was, as much as a Fir from a
Thorn, as much as a Lamb from a Wolf! Thus, One of the Primitive Christians,
after his Conversion, being met by an Idolater of his old Acquaintance, had
that Salutation from him, Ego Sum, Sir, it is I? whereupon he Replied, At Ego
non sum Ego; But Sir, It Is not I; I am not the man I was. We may therefore add,

Secondly, It is a THOROUGH Change that passes upon the Regenerate Man. Of and
by such a man, it is said in 2 Cor. 5.17. Old things are past away, behold, all
things are become New; as the Conflagration at the Last Day, will bring a New
Face upon the Great World; so does a Regeneration at this Day upon the Small.
As the Light fills all the Air, as the Leaven spreads all the Lump, or, in a
word, as Original Sin reaches to the whole man; so Regeneration has its
Influences upon every part of the m^n, that becomes the Subject of i^; although
the Influence wi^^ ^e but in part, until we do in Glory Arrive ^o, The Stature
of a perfect man.

Particularly; A Regenerate Man has New ABILITIES conferred on him. While he
was Ungodly, he was, Without Strength* but now he may joyfully say, Lord, thou
have strengthened me with strength in my so^l (...) thing that may be s^oken by
a Regene^^^e man is that in Joh. 9.23. Whereas I was Blind, now I SEE. There is
an Illumination in Regeneration. The man comes to see an Infinite Glory in GOD;
though once he had ^ai^, Wh^ ^s the Lord, that I should Serve Him? He (...) to
see a singular Beauty in CHRIST; though once he had said, There is no (...) in
Him, for which I should Desire Him. He comes to see a wonderful Evil in SIN;
though once he had said, Sto^^n Waters are sweet. He now sees an Ungainsayable
Equity in RELIGION; though formerly he had said, I desire not the knowledge of
the Ways of the Almighty! He sees now an unspeakable Honor in HELL, though
heretofore he counted the Darts of God but Stubble. He see^ now an inef^^ble
pleasure in HEAVEN, though heretofore he Despised that good land of promise. And
he now sees Dreadful miseries upon HIMSELF; though heretofore he still said, I
have need of Nothing! Another thing that may be spoken by a regenerate man is
that in Phil. 4.13. I Can DO all things through Christ who strengthens me. It Is
by Regeneration that a man who looked upon Exercises of Piety and Charity, as
Intolerable, Insuperable, Impracticable, now comes to say, Lord, thy
Commandments are not grievous! Although he be more sensible of his own weakness
than ever he was; yet he more finds, The Grace of God sufficient for him. There
are those which Once he Counted, Hard Sayings, in the Laws of God; but now
with Gods help he can Do the things required in Gods word. Has God commanded
him, To Do JUSTICE and Love MERCY, and Walk HUMBLY? He Does it. Has God
commanded him, to Live Soberly, and Righteously, and Godlily? he Does it. Yea,
Has God bidden him, to pluck out a Right Eye, and cut off a Right Hand? He Does
it, by the Assistance of him that has Bidden it; He that was once a creeple,
now not only WALKS in the way that is called Holy, but even RUNS with patience
the Race that is set before him,

Again, A Regenerate man has New APPETITES breathing in him. Once indeed he
Drank in Iniquity Like water; but there is now another sort of Relish in the
Soul of him. The WILL of a Regenerate man, comes to make that choice, in Psalm.
73.25. Whom have I in Heaven, but thee, O Lord! and there is none upon Earth,
that I desire besides thee. Formerly, it he had been asked, What will satisfy
th^e? he would have itched upon a Long Life in this World, (...) with all the
Pleasures and Pr^^its and (...) of it. But now he is no more so Selfish, so
Idolatrous and Atheistical. The chief AND, which he now chooses, is, That the
Eternal God may by and from him have Eternal Ac^n^wl^dgments. And the MEANS,
which he chooses for this End, are, An Acquaintance with, and Obedience to, the
Lord Jesus Christ, in all the Methods directed by the Scriptures of Truth. When
the God of Heaven propounds unto this man, as he did unto Solomon, Ask, what I
shall give thee: it is nothing short of Heaven, that will content him: and he
cordially takes and likes that Appropriation of God upon him, This man have I
formed for my self, he shall show forth my praise. Those little Designs, and
sorry Delights, which the most of men do basely take up wi^hal, become very
contemptible to the Soul of such a man; and he heartily closes with it as his
main business in the world, By Repenting and Believing, to make sure of
Everlasting Happiness, and in the continual Exercise of Religion, to bear
Testimonies unto the Truths and Ways of our Maker. We may add, That the
AFFECTIONS of a Regenerate Man are such as Enable him to comply with that Rule,
in Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good. His LOVE
once was of those Abominable Things, which the Soul of the Lord Hates. But now
he says, I Love thee, O Lord my Strength! now he says, Oh! how I Love thy Law!
now he says, I have Loved the Habitation of thy House, and unto this he joins,
The L^w of the Brethren! His HOPE, once was only of Goods laid up for many
years; and all that while he was indeed, Without Hope. But now his Hope is, For
thy Salvation, O Lord! And his Fear is, Lest I fall short of Entering into Rest.
His JOY, was once only in the, Increase of Corn and Wine: but now it is, In the
Light of Gods Countenance. And his Grief is broached, by that Reflection, My
Iniquities have separated between me and my God; and that, My Trespasses have
pierced my Savior; and that, By my Sins I have wronged my own Soul. And what
are his Desires now, but an, Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness?

Furthermore, a Regenerate man has New EMPLOYMENTS followed by him. It might
indeed be said unto him. You were the Servant of Sin: but he is now vigorously
Engaged in the Service of another Lord: his Character is that in Psalm. 119.38.
Lord, Thy Servant, Devoted unto thy Fear. As to the SPIRIT of the Regenerate
man, that is otherwise Employed than once it was. The Thoughts that formerly
swarmed in him, were ^arthly, Sensual, Devilish; but now he can say, How
precious are thy Thoughts unto me, O Lord! His Meditations upon God, and the
Words and Works, of that Great God, are sweet unto him. And his Contrivances
are, What shall I do to b^ Saved? and, How may I bring forth much of that
Fruit, whereby my Heavenly Father may be Glorified? The BODY of a Regenerate
man, that also is Employed more Nobly, more Holily, more Divinely, than
heretofore, when its Members were, The (...) of Unrighteousness. May we a
little Anatomize this New Living Man! His EYES, were once wandering after, The
^us^ of the Eye: but now he has made a, Covenant with his Eyes; now he has his
Eyes unto the Lord; now, Rivers of Waters run down his Eyes, because the Law of
God is violated. His EARS, were once open unto, Rotten Communication; but now
those Ears have the Sayings of Jesus Christ s^aking down into them; now his
Ears will Hear what God the Lord will speak; now he has his Ears bored unto the
Service of God. His TONGUE once was a thing Set on Fire of Hell; but now it
becomes like choice Silver for the Truth and Worth of the Words proceeding from
it; now it will utter Psalms instead of Ballads, and Prayers instead of
Swearing and Cursing and Frothy Foolish Ribaldry: Yea, it is as the Pen of a
Ready Writer, when speaking about the King and Kingdom of the Saints. What are
his HANDS? not The Fists of Wickedness; but Lifted up in the Name of God. What
are his FEET? not, Swift to do Evil; but Turned unto the Testimonies of the
Lord. In fine, the whole Body of this man, becomes a Temple to the Holy Spirit
of God. And thus is the Regenerate man, all over New! But, O make a pause here,
and let thy Heart smi^e thee, if thou art a stranger to such a Renovation.
We Will then pass to, a Second Conclusion

II. The Change wrought in a Regenerate man, proceeds from a Gracious
PRINCIPLE, infused from on high into him. Thus we are told, for so I would now
Read it, in 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, there is a New Creature in
him. Besides, and beyond all the External Alterations undergone by a Regenerate
man, there is, Aliquid intus Existens, a certain something within him, which
once he was without; a certain Godly Principle, or, A Principle of Respect unto
God, which the Scripture puts various Names upon. There is the NEW MAN, that
is, a new posture of Spirit, in the Regenerate man, opposed unto the Old man,
that is, the old Habit of Sin, and Vice, which he was Born withal. The
Regenerate man, has the Branches of good Opinions, and good Practices, to be
observed in him: but he has in him also a gracious Principl^* called by Job, in
Chap. 19.28. The ROOT of the Matter, for them to grow upon. The Regenerate man
has the Fruits, of which the Spirit of God is the Author; even the peaceable
Fruits of Righteousness; but he has also a gracious Principle, called by John,
in 1 Ep. 3.9. The SEED of God, from whence they do proceed. The Regenerate man
has the Streams of much Goodness in his Conversation, whereby is made Glad the
City of God, which he belongs unto; but the Source of them is a gracious
Principle, which our Lord calls in Joh. 4.14. A WELL of Water springing up to
Everlasting Life. The Regenerate man has the Light of those Good Works, which
do so shine before men, as that the Heavenly Father is thereby Glorified: but
the continual supply thereof is from the gracious Principle which our Savior
calls, in Mat. 25.4. OIL in the Vessel. There is in the Regenerate man, that
which is called, in 2 Pet. 1.4. THE DIVINE NATURE; that is, a principle which
is Divine for the Original of it, and by means whereof all Godly Operations
become Natural, or Free, Frequent, Fervent and constant with him that has it.
It is not a Gilded but a Quickened Soul, that is in the Regenerate man; his
Motion and Action arises from a Life within; and that Life is the Result of his
Union with the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Life. Poor Soul, see now whether
the Spirit of Life in the Lord Jesus Christ, have thus Animated thee. Yea, or
No? But a Third Conclusion is then to take hold on the Heel of the foregoing.

III. Through the gracious Principle Infused into the Regenerate man, the ^o^t
IMAGE of God is Restored in him. For this cause we are informed in Col. 3.10.
The New Man is Renewed after the Image of Him which Created it. In this Lay the
Primitive Happiness of man at his Creation; it is the Account, which, In the
Head of Gods Book, is given of it, God Created Man in his own Image. But what
was that Image ^f God? Briefly, An Universal RECTITUDE in the Soul, was the
chief Thing, wherein that Image lay. Hence we are now told, in Ephesians. 4.24. The
new man after God, is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness. Alas, Man by
Sin, has lost this glorious Image; yea, the Image of Satan, instead thereof
has possessed him, and polluted him. As a man that is bitten by a Mad Dog,
horribly Barks, and Howls, and Laps, just like the Creature which Envenomed
him; so has the Infection conveyed unto us, by the Breath and Sting of our
Tempter, The Great Red Old Dragon, fearfu^ly assimilated us unto himself. But
now Regeneration happily Recovers in us, the thus Impaired Image of God; by
defacing the Impressions of Hell that had been made upon us. There is a
mavelous Agreement now between God and Man; wherein though not the Essence,
nor the Greatness of God, yet a Resemblance of His HOLINESS is in a blessed
measure Communicated unto the man thus, Born again. It may be said of him, He
is a man after Gods own Heart; he Likes, he Loves, he Lives after such a manner
as to describe unto all serious Beholders, a little of that Holiness, which is
Infinite in the Holy One of Israel. Hence, a Regenerate man studies a most
exact Conformity to the Example of the Lord Jesus Christ, and Attains very much
of what he studies. As a Renowned Minister could say, When I am to Preach a
Sermon, I set my self to think, How would Jesus Christ Preach, were He to
Handle my Subject! So a Regenerate man sometimes thinks, How did the Blessed
Jesus do such a Duty? or, How did the blessed Jesus bear such a Trial? and then
he endeavors to go and do Likewise. A Regenerate man, is a CHRISTIAN in
reality; that is, A Christ-like man; and it may be said of such ones, As thou
art, so are they* each one Resembling the Children of a King. What shall I say?
The view of the Imitable Virtue and Carriage in our Lord Jesus, even Transforms
the Regenerate man, till he be, Changed into the same Image from Glory to
Glory. Unto this we will annex but one Conclusion more: and O that you might
Feel, what you are now to Hear.

IV. The Gracious Principle, which Restores the Image of God, in a Regenerate
man, inclines him to comply with the CALLS of God, in the GOSPEL. Unto all the
Evangelical Proposals, the Return of the Regenerate man is not that, As for the
Word spoken in the Name of the Lord, I will not hearken thereunto; no, but it
is that, Lo, I come, I delight to do thy Will, O my God. There are especially
two things wherein the Calls of the Gospel are summed up unto us; namely, those
two, in Acts 20.21. Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ: but the Regenerate have the Repentance, and the Faith, so called for.
Such is the REPENTANCE of a Regenerate man; that he looks on his manifold
sinfulness both by Nature and Practice, with a thorough Conviction of it; and
he cries out, Lord, I am vile: He then mourns for that exceeding sinfulness,
and Loathes himself with the Contrition, of a Rent, a Pierced, a Broken Heart,
within him. He therewithal comes to an Ingenuous Confession thereof; and Sin
becomes as a Cup of Trembling, or Poison in his Bowels, which he does Cast up,
with penitent Acknowledgments, before such as have seen ^im take in the Deadly
Poison. Hereupon, with a just Recession from it, he cries out, I have do^^
Iniquity, but I will do so no more! he sets himself to Mortify every Lust, and
gives an Everlasting Divorce (...) all his former Courses of Ungodliness.
Instead thereof, he Devotes himself to God for ever: to the Flesh, he says, I
will no more Humor thee! to the World, he says, I will no more follow thee! to
the Devil, he says, I will no longer gratify thee, as formerly! but unto the
most High God, he says, Lord, I will be for thee, and not for another. Such is
the FAITH of a Regenerate man, that when the Lord Jesus Christ Invites him,
Look unto me, and be Saved! and, Come unto me and I will give you Rest; with a
Conquered Soul he answers, Lord, I Look, Lord, I come, Lord, Let me by thy
Mediation be Saved, and have Rest for ever! He has been so Awakened, as to see
himself perishing in all Spiritual and Eternal Calamities; Wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; and he has been in most uneasy
Agonies of Mind, until God has directed His Thoughts unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, as unto that Prince and Savior, who gives Repentance and Remission of
Sins. He cries out, In the Lord let me have Righteousness and Strength! because
he finds himself miserably destitute of both. He brings nothing but Sins and
Plagues to recommend him unto the Lord Jesus Christ; but at the Encouragement
of the Free Grace which has made the proffers thereof unto him, he Relies upon
the Lord Jesus Christ, for Wisdom, Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Redemption. He does with a Distressed Soul behold all the Offices of the Lord
Jesus Christ, whereupon he implores, Let me come to have Peace with God by the
Atonement of that Priest! and, Let me be under the Instruction of that Prophet!
and, Let me be under the Government of that King! His prejudice against the
Benefits of the Lord Jesus Christ, has been taken away in the, Day of Power,
when God made him willing! and his Comfortable Expectations from the no less
Compassionate than All sufficient Jesus, now are, To be forgiven all sin^ and,
To be cleansed from all Unrighteovsness.

In Fine, It Is by Regeneration that a man comes to consent unto the COVENANT of
GRACE, in all the parts, and in all the terms of it. When we are Firstborn, we
are under the First Covenant, and under the curse which the First Adam has
according to that Covenant Entailed upon us. But when we are Born again, we
come under the Wings of the New Covenant, by Resigning ourselves unto the
Second Adam, as unto our Head, Our Lord, Our Mediator. I beseech you to mind
what I am going to say: Set your hearts unto these things, for they are your
Life; and if while I am speaking these things, your hearts become really
Molded thereinto, we shall together praise God forever, that ever he gave us
this opportunity! Yea, I shall surely and shortly meet you with joy at the
Right Hand of the Lord Jesus Christ.

I say then, we are now advised of a Covenant wherein, The Glorious JESUS is
entrusted for His people, not only with Life to be bestowed upon them at the
Last; but also with Grace to enable them unto the Doing of all that must be
done to prepare them for it. A Covenant wherein, The Blessed Jesus will Confer
all saving mercies upon us, if we are but willing to Receive those mercies: and
all the Qualification that he demands in order to our being Justified, and so
Sanctified and Glorified, is our Hearty Acceptance of all those Blessednesses.
A Covenant wherein, Our having an Heart, even so much as to Will any good
thing, must be ascribed unto the Supernatural and Undeserved Assistences of a
God Sovereign as well as Gracious. A Covenant wherein, All the Called of the
Lord Jesus, must be willing to Express their Gratitude unto Him for Delivering
them from Spiritual and Eternal Miseries, by sincere Endeavors to walk before
Him in Holiness and Righteousness all their Days. A Covenant, Lastly, wherein,
The Imperfection of all our Duties, is Compensated by the perfect Obedience of
the Lord Jesus Christ; and our Inclination to Do as well as we can with Gods
Help, does an Effect proves its Cause, prove our Participation in that
Obedience. Well, when Almighty God makes this Demand of us, Art thou willing to
Converse with me, and have and own me for thy God, in the way of such a
Coveaant? the Regenerate Soul answers, Lord, I am willing! And I add, that when
once a man comes to Approve this way of Salvation by Jesus Christ, and Repose
and Venture all his Everlasting Interests upon it, there is a work of
Regeneration in the Soul of such a man. Consent! O Immortal Soul; Consent!
before we pass any further: say Amen, to this Covenant; and the God of Heaven
will immediately pronounce upon thee, This is a dear Son, this is a pleasant
Child, I will surely have mercy upon him! To set an Edge upon these things let
us now think on, what may be,

The Second PROPOSITION.
The KINGDOM of God, cannot be Enjoyed without the Experience of this
REGENERATION. Behold, a flaming Sword in the Mouth of the Lord Jesus, guarding
of Paradise from the Intrusions of all that are not Born again! Moreover, What
are the Unregenerate, but the Unrighteous? Now of them it is said, in 1 Cor.
6.9. Know ye not, that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?
Again, what are the Unregenerate, but the Unconverted? But of such it is said,
in Mat. 18.3. Verily, I say unto you, except ye be Converted, ye shall not
Enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. I freely say to you, if I speak any thing
without Book, believe me not, but now you see this Word established by the
mouth of two or three Witnesses! It then only needs to be Enquired,

What is that KINGDOM OF GOD, which without Regeneration, cannot be Enjoyed?

Know therefore, that it means, The Blessed state, whereinto God brings his
chosen by the Lord Jesus Christ.

A state wherein God Himself is the King of His people, and wherein the People
of God, will as (...), have a Dominion over all their Interior adversaries.
The Lord said unto hi^ Israel, in Exodus 19.6. Ye shall be unto me a Ki^gdome of
Priests and an holy Nation. And alluding thereunto, it is said of all the
Faithful in 1. Pet 2 9 Ye are a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar
People. Now there are singular privileges belonging to this Peculiar People*
all of which no man without Regeneration can be admitted unto. In our Birth
from si^^ul Parents, we are Born Slaves; Yea, the servants of servants. We are
children indeed; but of what? Children of Wrath, and the Heirs of death. But by
another Birth, from the Spirit of God making New Creatures of us, we are Born
Kings; there are many Crowns that belong unto us. Particularly.

I. Without Regeneration a man cannot enjoy a GOSPEL-ESTATE in this world. It
is true, an Unregenerate man may get into a Visible Church State, which is
called, The Kingdom of God. There are Black Tares in that field, there are a
Bad (...) in that Net, there are Foolish Virgins at that Feast; but still, they
are not proper Enjoyers of the Good in the State. There may be Traitors in the
Kingdom, and Ishmaels and Judases in the Families, of the Church; but unto
what purpose? It cannot be said of them, They have seen the Kingdom of God
come with power, all this while. Unregenerate Soul, Hear thy Circumstances, and
be Amazed!

First, Gospel Mysteries, cannot be Discerned by an Ungenerate Man. He is, Born
Blind, and so he continues, till the New Birth has once Enlightened him. There
are Thick scales upon the Eyes, which Regeneration has not opened. The Methods
and Rewards used by God, in Governing of the Unseen World, are most of all
Unseen by the Unregenerate: It is said, in 1 Cor. 2.14. The Natural man cannot
know them, because they are Spiritually Discerned. Without Regeneration a man
cannot come to understand, How man is to be Saved, or, How God is to be Served,
or, How things depend upon one another, in the Great Mystery of Godliness. It Is
with him, as in Luc. 14.34. The Eye is Evil, and the Body is full of Darkness!
and his Conceptions about the Things of God, are like those which a Beggar in
his Hovel, or an Indian his Wigwam, has about the Magnificence of a mighty
Kingdom. Lamentable man! Sampson with his Eyes extinguished, grinding for the
Philistines, was not in a Condition so deplorable^ (...)

Secondly, Gospel Services cannot be attended by an Unregenerate Man. We are
told, That the Kingdom of God, is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost; but without Regeneration there is no Attaining of them. There is a
certain Homage which we are to pay unto our Great King; but the Unregenerate
Man being of, The Brutish among the People, does labor under an utter and a
mortal Incapacit^ to render that, Reasonable Service. Thus it is said, in Romans
8.8. They that are in the Flesh cannot please God. The man is told, and warned,
and charged from time to time about, The Thing that Good is; but he can Do
nothing! He can yield unto God, no Worship that is Right for the Matter* the
Manner, and the Motive of it. He cannot Serve God Spiritually* for he is all
Flesh; and his very Soul within him, is as One of the Ancients has it, after a
sort Incarnated: he may too truly say, The Law is Spiritual, but I am carnal,
sold under Sin! When he pretends to wait upon God, it is with an Application of
his whole Soul: every Sacrifice that he brings has the Ill Omen of being,
without an Heart; he may say, I Lift up my Eyes, my Hands, my Voice! but he
cannot say with the Psalmist, Lord, I Lift my Soul unto thee; nor, Serve the
Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me! Nor can he Serve God Sincerely; for
he was conceived with what i^ contrary to, Tr^th in the Inward Parts; and it is
nothing but Fear of some Temporal Inconvenience, or Pride of being Applauded
among men, that makes him do what he does. It Is only Self, that Clay^^^ol,
Self, which puts this Pharisee upon Shows of Piety or Charity; and God is not
before him. It was said, in Joh. 4.24. They that Worship God must Worship him
in Spirit and in Truth. But what a vain Worship then, is that of the
Unregenerate! Useless Wretch, what is he good for?

Thirdly, Gospel Privileges may not be expected by a man that is Unregenerate.
What the Psalmist said about the City, we may say about the Kingdom, of God,
Glorious Things are spoken of thee! But until by Regeneration Men are
Naturalized, in this Kingdom, they cannot lay claim to those Glorious Things.
It Is Regeneration that helps us to that Wedding Garment, without which, if we
come to the Gospel Table, the Great King will say unto us, How came thou
hither?

But particularly, The Unregenerate Man can have no Union with the Lord Jesus
Christ: No, He is yet in the First Adam. A man cannot be United unto the
Heavenly Adam, without the Heavenly Image. It Is in Regeneration, that we come
to be Grafted upon the only Living and Lifegiving Olive Tree. The Apostle
counts it a filthy Absurdity, in 1 Cor. 6.15. Shall I take the Members of
Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot? God forbid. Even so, can a Mind
be United unto the Lord Jesus Christ, while it is yet. Enmity against God? Can
an Heart be United unto the Lord Jesus Christ, while it is yet, A Cage of
Unclean Lusts* Can the Lord Jesus take a Tongue into an Union with Himself, and
Leave the Poison of Asps Lurking and working under it? Shall the Mystical Body
of our Lord be like Nebuchadnezzars Image, the Head Gold, and the Members Clay?
God forbid?

Again, The Unregenerate Man, can have no Title to the Saving ^enefits of the
Lord Jesus Christ. I have now Three Wo-Trumpets, to Sound in the Ears of such a
man; so that it may be very truly said, a Dreadful Sound is in his Ears! Let
the Sinner, first, hear that Account of his wretchedness, in Prove. 9.12. He
shall be Holden with the Cords of his Sins. An Unregenerate Man, is an
Unjustify'd man. Since it may be said of him, Thy Heart is not Right in the
sight of God, it may be also said of him* Thy Iniquities keep thee in a
Condition more Bitter than any Gall, bound over to Suffer Eternal Punishments!
O Dreadful Condition! If Unregenerate, then Unpardoned. The Sins of such a man
are Followed by him, and so long they cannot be Forgiven to him. All the many
Thousands of Sins wherewith he has Rebelled against the God that made him, are
still fresh and full upon the score against him, as if they had been but this
very morning perpetrated; and the Loud Cry of them, Heaven, Pay us our Wages!
Pay us our Wages! Let the Death of the Sinner, which is our Wages, be paid
immediately; this Cry is going up to Heaven against him every Day. Thy Iniquity
is marked before Me, says the Lord! Let the Sinner take a further Account of
his Wretchedness, from Prove. 15.8. The Sacrifice of the Wicked, is an
Abomination to the Lord. The Unregenerate man is an Unaccepted man. The Delight
of God is only in Himself, and in what of Himself is in the Creature; but here
is One, Without God in the World. It is an Established Thing, Without Faith it
is impossible to please God; but the Unregenerate is also an Unbeliever. (...)
the poor man do never so many Religions, (...) Charitable and Serviceable
Things, they are but so many Splendid Sins, in the Account of God. All the
Oblations of such a man, are no better than Swines Blood; and the Blessed God,
says, I like them not* because they cannot be duly Qualified. His Good Works,
are but so many Cyph^es* wanting that Figure that should give a value to them
all: He is one who, Turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, and therefore his
very Prayers are an Abomination. But then Let it be entered as a Third Instance
of the Sinners wretchedness, what we have, in Heb. 12.8. Ye are Bastards and
not Sons. If without Castigation, much more without Regeneration, a man has no
pretense unto an Adoption by the Lord. The Honor and the Image of Gods
Children must ever go together. It Is only the Newborn that have, The power to
be called, the Sons of God: nor may any one else hope for, The Inheritance of
the Saints in Light. As none but, They that are Led by the Spirit are the Sons
of God, so, are none but they that are Born of that Spirit. Until persons come
out from among the Unregenerate, the Almighty God says not unto them, I will be
a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters. No, it is another
Family, that the Unregenerate belongs unto; what is the Name of him? only The
seed of the Serpent; and, A Generation of Vipers, and, Ye are of your Father
the Devil! That, there is all (...) Style that belongs to Wretched
Unregenerates.

Once more, Thirdly, those Holy Things, the Sealing Ordinances of the Lord
Jesus Christ, belong not unto an unregenerate man. There is a Seal but unto a
blank, if we administer those Seals unto such as have no Regeneration in them.
A man must be visibly Regenerate before he may lawfully claim the Baptism of
the Lord, for himself and his house. There is as well Purgation of Soul, as
Remission of Sin, Sealed in that Ordinance: which who has but the Regenerate!
It was of Old required, Repent and be Baptized: It was again required, If thou
believe with all thine heart, then may be Baptized; Now who does that, but
the Regenerate of the Lord? Until a man be hopefully washed in, The Laver of
Regeneration, he will but pollute, The Laver of Baptism, if he be brought unto
it. A John, would not Baptize, such as did not Confess their sins, and give
cause to think that they did Forsake, what they did Confess. Unto Baptism,
there is requisite, as we read, in 1. Pet. 3.21. The answer of a good
Conscience. The most High demands of us, Will thou be my servant and soldier
according to my Covenant for ever? but an unregenerate man does not with a good
Conscience make that Answer thereunto, Lord I will! and therefore the Waters of
Baptism* are but, stolen Waters, to such a man. Again, A man may not be
received unto the Supper of the Lord, until he make a probable, and credible
Profession of his being Regenerate. In that Ordinance is our Communion with the
Lord Jesus Christ, and our Participation in all the good effects of his Death,
sealed unto us; but except a man be Regenerate, how can he look for such things
as these? It is only in Evang^lical Churches that there is this Table to be
spread; and these are to be, Churches of Saints, and, Holy Brethren, and such
as are, Washed, Sanctified, Justified,; a main design of these Churches is to
Represent unto the world, who they are, that shall Ascend onto the Hill of the
Lord, and stand in His Holy Place for ever* but such as are not Regenerate, are
not of those. Dead Souls are not fit guests, for the Supper of our Living
Lord; it belongs to none but Penitents; others are to be Rebuked; Censured, and
Bound on Earth, from the liberties of such a Fellowship. A man taking the
Sacramental Bread and Wine, therein says, I have chosen the Lord Jesus Christ,
thus Exhibited, for my Lord Redeemer; but without Regeneration, a man utters
but a great Lie in saying so. It is enjoined on a Communicant, in 1. Cor 11.28:
let the man examine himself. Of what: One thing is, whe^^e^ (...) be not an
unregenerate man: or whether ^e have, the good Mind and, the pure Heart, and,
the virtuous Life, after which the Primitive Churches enquired, in their
Communicants: lest otherwise he may more fatally than ever the Emperor did,
swallow his Poison in the Eucharist. Behold O Immortal Souls, what a dismal
thing it is, to be unregenerate! But here is nor all the Lamentation and Mourning
and woe, which I am to fill my little Uolumn with. We must add.

II. Nor can a man enjoy a GLORIOUS ESTATE in an other world, without
Regeneration* We are told in 1. Pet. 1 24. God has begotten us again, to a
Lively hope; to an Inheritance Reserved in Heaven for us. Why, without being
Begotten again, we can have no Hope o^ ever coming to that Inheritance. The
very Pillars of Heaven, and the foundations of the Earth, are not more
Immoveble, than this purpose of our God, Without Holiness no man shall see the
Lord; now it is by Regeneration that we are partakers of that Holiness. There is
a Kingdom which God has promised; but only they that Love Him, are the Heirs
of that Kingdom; now of an unregenerate man it may be said, How dwells the
Love of God in such a man! Wherefore

First, The unregenerate man, shall be excluded from the Glorious Kingdom of
the Lord Jesus Christ in the Lower World, at the day of judgment. The Day is at
the Do^r, [ Lord Hasten it!] When the Papal and the Turkish Power being
extinguished, and the Devil also having no further power to Deceive the
Nations, is will be Proclaimed, The Kingdoms of this world are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of ^is Christ, and He shall Reign for ever and ever.
THEN comes, the Time of the Dead, that they should be Judged; THEN will our
Lord assume His Davidical Kingdom, and Reign before His Ancient People
Gloriously: THEN will be that Appearing and Kingdom of our Lord, wherein He
Will Judge the Quick and Dead. Our Lord, speaking of that Kingdom, calls it, in
Mat. 19 28. the REGENERATION, When the Son of Man, shall Sit on the Throne of
His Glory. Well, and Without Regeneration a man shall then have no comfortable
share in the Glory of that Kingdom. Both the New-Heaven, when our Lord with
His Raised ones, will occupy the Room now possessed by the Prince of the Power
of the Air, and the New-Earth where will be the Nations of the saved from the
conflagration; in both of these, there will, Dwell Righteousness; and surely
then there must be Regeneration in them. None but the Regenerate may Sing that
Song, in Rev. 5.10. We shall Reign over the Earth. None but Saints of the Most
High, shall then have the Kingdom given unto them. None but Overcomers are
then to have Power over the Nations. There will be no Lots in the Heavenly
Canaan for any but the Daniels of the Lord. They are only the Holy ones, who
now Rise from a Death of sin, that shall have a part in that First
Resurrection; it is only the Upright, who shall then have the Dominion. Unless
men be Regenerate, the Lord Jesus Christ will not at the great Day acknowledge
them with a, Come ye blessed, Inherit the Kingdom: nor shall they then meet
with any thing but, Shame and contempt. The New Jerusalem will not be Defiled
with any Unregenerate; but they shall be hissed out of that Holy City, with a,
Depart ye cursed into everlasting Fire, with the Devil and his Angels: and all
their Wickedness will therewithal be showed before the whole Congregation.

Secondly, The Unregenerate man shall be Banished from the Glorious Kingdom of
the Lord Jesus, in the Upper World, throughout the Days of Eternity. A Saul
must have Another Heart, before he were fit for ^ Kingdom; and so must a
Sinner, before he can be fit for this Kingdom. Between Glorification and
Regeneration, the Connection is Inseparable. No Unclean man might Enter into the
Temple of old; nor shall any Unregenerate One Enter into the Heaven often the
Blessed. As the Serpent himself shall no more come into the Paradise of God, so
the Seed of that Serpent shall be Exiled from thence, with what we have in
Math. 7.22. Depart, I know you not, ye workers of Iniquity! We may as well
suppose that a piece of Rotten Flesh may become a Glittering Star, in the
Firmament of God, as that there should be one Unregenerate man, in that Retinue
of many Thousands, which our Lord Jesus Christ, as a Standard Bearer* in the
Head of them, will conduct into the Caelestial Regions, when He shall Deliver
up the Kingdom unto the Father. Yea, it may be said of the Unregenerate, not
only that he SHALL NOT, but also, that he CANNOT have a part in that Kingdom.
For, it is, first, impossible, that the Exercises of Heaven should be performed
by an Unregenerate man. As for the Love of God, which is to Remain, in Heaven;
unless God Circumcise our Hearts* we cannot Love the Lord our God with all our
Hearts? As for the Praise of God, which for ever Employs the Hallelujahs of the
Glorified; how can the Blessing of God, come out of the bitter mouth, which is
full of Deadly Poison? And, secondly, it is impossible that the Recompenses of
Heaven, should be Relished by such a man. They must be Inlaid into the very
Frame of our Souls, if ever we have them; yea, Regeneration, is the Inchoation
of them. Were an Unregenerate man, on the Mountain of Transfiguration, he could
not say, It Is good for to be here! O fearful Case! The man that often said of a
Sabbath here, What a Weariness is it? would also be, Weary of the Rest which
Remains for the People of GOD* What Resentments can a Dead Carcass have of a
Robe or Crown put upon it? That Heaven would be rather a Torment, than a
Content unto an Unrenewed Soul. What can a Contemplation of God, signify to one
that says unto the Almighty, Depart? What can a Conformity to Christ, be with
one, who Loathes the Hidden Manna? THIS, This it is to be Unregenerate.

AND now there is a most Importunate EXHORTATION and EXCITATION to be given
unto those that are yet perishing in their Unregeneracy. It Is thus much;
Miserable Souls, make sure of Regeneration before it be too late: Give all
Diligence to make your Vocation and Election sure. Or, take it in the words of
the Prophet, Ezekiel. 18.31. Cast away from you all your Transgressions, and make
you a New Heart, and a New Spirit; for why will you Die? Sinners, you never were
Addressed, upon a Matter of more Importance for you: We must be in Earnest with
you; and there are two things to be Asked of you* yea, to be Charged on you, in
the Name of the God that made you.

I. In the first place then, Be very sensible of your own Inability to
accomplish your own Regeneration. Ly humbly under the Awe of that Assertion, in
Phil. 2.13. It is God, who Works in you, both to Will and to Do, of His own
Good Pleasure. It is God, who not only gives us the Power of Turning to
Himself, but every Act of Turning also, must be of His production. Without such
an Humiliation in your Souls, the Regeneration of your Souls, is utterly to be
despaired. How apt will men be to put off all cares about their own
Regeneration, if they imagine that they can always have within their own reach,
The Things that accompany Salvation, or that they have a Key in their own Hands
with which they can Unlock Heaven at their own Arbitrary Leisure? How unlikely
will the Sovereign God also be, to bestow Regeneration upon those who do not
own that Sovereignty, or do not feel that we are, Saved by Grace, through Faith;
and this not of our selves, it is the Gift of God? Indeed, the Natural and
Essential Freedom of our Will, remains unto us; it wills freely, wherever it
Wills at all: but alas, it is no better than, Free among the Dead: only Dead
Works are grateful to the Will of the Unregenerate: his Will, as well as the
rest of his whole Soul, is corrupted in him. It Is very true, that God Commands
us to Return unto Himself; yea, there is both Infinite Justice and Infinite
Wisdom, in his giving of that Command: there is Justice in it, because we Owe
unto God our Maker all manner of Obedience, and though we in the Apostasy of our
First Father, justly Imputed unto us, have sinned away our Ability to yield
that Obedience, yet Gods Right is not impaired by our Crime; there is Wisdom in
it, because God Requires nothing of us, but what our Natural ^aculties were
Originally suited unto; because (...) have new such an occasion to be convinced
of our own Impotency, as may fitly engage us to acknowledge the Help of God;
and because the Calls which God gives us to Do what we Cannot, are made proper
Vehicles for his Divine Assistances to be therein conveyed unto them whose
Names are in the Book of Life. But still, it is as true that we are of our
selves utterly Unable to Return unto our God: and that He will not Look in
mercy upon us, till He make us to be Sensible of our being thus unable. In
truth, while a man is Unregenerate, he can do nothing in Faith, and so nothing
but Sin, in all that he does; it may be said of him, That every Imagination of
the thoughts of his heart is only evil continually; it may be said of him, He
is Reprobate unto every Good Work: to miscarry in every thing, is though
Voluntary yet Necessary, with him; and it becomes us to make our bitter moans
accordingly. When God commands us to become Regenerate, Own that you are justly
Damned, if you do it not; and yet sadly mourn before the Lord, O I am Dead, in
Trespasses and Sins; Complain, Lord, my obstinate will cannot be ^^ee to a
Spiritual Good, until Thou make it free! Declare, Lord, I cannot come unto the
Son of God, except the Father draw me! Look upon Regeneration, as an
efficacious, and supernatural operation of God, wherein he does not only lay
Moral Persuasions before men, but also infuse a new Frame into the Will, and
Spiritually Heal, Quicken, and Reform, the formerly Rebellious Wills, of that
Select number which he did from all eternity set apart for the Sheep of the
Lord Jesus Christ- Say, that you are far from a capacity of Regenerating
yourselves, yea, that you cannot so far Dispose and Prepare yourselves for,
your own Regeneration, that God should be obliged by your well^improving of his
Common-Grace, to work it in you; Say, It Is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God that shows mercy. It Is an Article Asserted by the
Church of England, (the Tenth of the famous Thirty Nine) The Condition of man,
is such after the Fall, that he cannot turn, nor prepare himself by his own
natural strength, to Faith, and calling upon God; wherefore we have no power to
do good works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the Grace of God
preventing us, that we may have a good Will, and working with us, wh^^ we have
that good Will. And it is an Article that calls for the hearty Assent and
Consent of all that by Regeneration come into the Sheep fold of Our Lord Jesus
Christ.

II. And yet, in the Second place, O do what you can, and as much as Ever you
can, about your own Regeneration. Though you have no promise, that if you do
what you can, you shall certainly speed in what you do; yet you will be the
more inexcusable, if you have not so done, in the Day of Gods pleading with
you; and besides, in so doing there is an, It may be, there is an, Who can
tell! it is not unlikely, that the most High may so touch your souls, that ere
you are aware, you shall be, a willing People.

Particularly;

First, Can you not avoid the Society of those, by whom your own Regeneration
may be discouraged! O then avoid it. What should hinder you that you should not
be able to say, as in Psalm. 26.3. I have not sat with vain person^! There are
ungodly ones that would prejudice your hearts against the power of Godliness,
and that would entangle you in the snares of sin and hell: concerning those let
me vehemently cry unto you in words like those of Moses, Depart I pray you,
from these wicked ones, Lest you perish with them. O that you may be detered
from the Fascinations of evil company, by that admonition of wisdom, in Prove.
13.20. A^co^panion of fools shall be destroyed. If you see a Person profane,
vicious, extravagant, I say, My Son if that sinner entice thee consent thou
not; shun him, fly him, he may be the cutthroat of thy Soul. Tell him, you
cannot walk with him; except he will take, The way that is called holy.

Secondly, Can you not present some kind of Supplication before the Lord, for
your own Regeneration? O then present it. There was a man, to whom, although it
had been said, Thy Heart is not Right, yet there was that Advice given, in Acts
8.22. Pray to God! If the Life of your Bodies lay at stake, would you not be in
Earnest for Deliverance? Behold, O Dying Sinner, Thy SOUL, Thy Soul is in the
very Belly of Hell; and why then do thou not like the Psalmist, Call upon the
Name of the Lord, and say, I bese^ch thee to Deliver my Soul! Fall down upon
thy Knees before the God of Heaven, and pray, and say, as in Jer. 31.18. O Turn
thou me, and I shall be Turned. Beg of Him, Lord, fulfill in me the good
pleasure of thy Goodness, and the work of Faith with power! Plead with Him,
Lord, thou have said, that there are some to whom thou will give a New Heart
and a New Spirit; and if thou will, thou can make such a Wretch as I am, the
partaker of such a Blessedness! An Old Nature, is like an Old Devil; it goes
not out, without much Prayer to God. Cavil not, My Prayers are an Abomination:
it will be a greater Abomination to Neglect them, than to Perform them; at
least, you may see whether He that regards the Cries of the Needy Ravens and
Lions, may not have His Ear open unto thine; and if it may be said of thee,
Behold he Prays! it is hopeful, thou art upon such a Turn, that it may be
further said, This poor man Cried, and the Lord Heard and Saved!

Thirdly, Can you not Attend the Ministry of that Word whereby Regeneration is
Effected? O then Attend it. It is said, in 1 Pet. 1.23. We are, Born again by
the Word of God, which Lives and Abides for ever. Wherefore, place your
selves as much as you can, under the Dispensations of that New Creating Word!
Were you daily conversing with the Word of God, you would therein ^ie at the
Pool, in the House of Mercy: who knows, but God may there meet you, with a Cure
of all your Maladies? Can you not Read a Bible, as well as a Gazet, or a
Romance? Can you not as easily go to a Sermon, as a Tavern? O be continually
waiting, upon Wisdoms Lively Oracles, that so you may, Hear and Live! Said the
Apostle, in 1 Cor. 4.15. In Christ Jesus, I have Begotten you, through the
Gospel: so then, if the Gospel were always in your Eyes or Ears, it is Likely
that you might be, Begotten of Christ Jesus. The Breath of Satan was that which
did corrupt you, and the Breath of Jesus may now Amend you. It Is said, Where
the word of a King is, there is Power: If then, you seriously set your selves
before and under the Word of the Eternal King, it may have such a power on you,
as to bring you home unto God. When two or three Scriptures were Quoted unto
Peter's Hearers, they were soon; Pierced in Heart; and by the use of the
Scriptures may you come to be as well, Changed in Heart. When Austin was called
upon, Take up and Read, then the close of the Thirteenth Chapter to the Romans
whereto he was directed, proved the means of his Conversion. I say then, Take
up and Read.

Fourthly, You can CONSIDER; and Oh that you would! It is said, in Ezekiel. 18.28.
Because he Considers, and he Turns, he shall surely Live. It seems that
Consideration is the frequent Introduction of Regeneration: A Prodigal will be
likely to Come unto a Right Mind, if once he begin to Bethink himself. We have
been told of a wicked young man, who being obliged by his Dying Father, to
spend a quarter of an Hour every Day, only in Considering, even on any thing,
what he pleased; at length he began to Consider, what might be the Cause of his
Fathers giving him such a Charge: This filled him with serious Thoughts, and
his Considerations were so blessed, as to issue in his being brought home to God.
O that you would make this Experiment! Can you not ever now and then, (...)
from (...) Nones, (...) and Enchantments of the World, and Consider with your
selves, What is the present, and what is like to be the future condition of my
Soul? It Is no Extraordinary Difficulty, that is now Imposed upon you; I may
urge, My Neighbor, If I had asked you to do some great thing for the
Conversion and Salvation of your Soul; would you not have done it? A SOUL,
certainly it is well worth all that can be done for it. How much more when you
are only asked, that you would a little CONSIDER the things of your Everlasting
Peace? I say then, CONSIDER; and hope, none of you will Reply, That an Eternal
Kingdom, is not worth our taking so much pains, as that of a little
Consideration for it.

But there are seven or eight matters o^ most Awful CONSIDERATION, that have
now to lay before you: and because of a singular Efficacy not only in the
Assertions, but in the very Expressions of the Scripture, I shall Arrest your
Thoughts, with so many Sentences taken out from the Word of God; thus it is
with a, Thus says the Lord, That I require you to Consider. And,

I. The first Consideration proper for you is that, in 2 Pet. 1.4. There are
given to us, exceeding great and precious Promises, that by these you might be
made partakers of the Divine Nature. CONSIDER, That all the great and precious
Promises of God, will become your Portion, when once you are Born Again. As the
Lord showed unto our Father Abraham, the Land of Promise, and said, Lift up now
thine Eyes, and Look; for all the Land that thou see, unto thee, will I give
it; even so, Let us by Regeneration once become the Children of Abraham, and
then, whatever good Things are contained in all the Promises of God, He will
say, All that thou see, and infinitely more than thou can Think, will I
give unto thee: Whatever Promise we can find in any part of the Bible, we may
with an Appropriating Joy of Soul, say, Like one of the Ancients, thereupon,
This word is mine! Here Is a Promise that I am owner of! Let us become
Regenerate, and from that Moment, the Almighty GOD, will by His Promise, give
no Less than Himself unto us: we shall have an Interest in that Promise, Jer.
31.33. I will be their God. The Essence of God will then be for us, and
according to the Promise, Our Maker will be our Husband. The Great God now
promises, My power shall be thine to supply thee, and, My Wisdom shall be thine
to Direct thee, and, My Goodness thine to Relieve thee. The Subsistence of God
will then also be by Promise Engaged for us: God the Father now promises, I
will be thy Father: God the Son says, I will be thy Savior: and God the (...)
says, I will be thy Strengthener. Behold, enough to satisfy the vast Cravings
of the most Enlarged Soul! And yet, there is more for us; Let us become
Regenerate, and there are Innumerable sure Mercies, which the Promise will make
sure (...) us, as the consequent hereupon. We shall have an Interest in that
Promise, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun and a Shield, the Lord will give
grace and glory; No good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly:
Yea, and Help to Walk uprightly too. We now have that Godliness, which has, The
promise both of the Life which now is, and of that which is to come. We may now
Lay hold of that Promise, They that seek the Lord shall not want any good
Thing; that Promise, All things shall work together for Good unto them that
Love God; and that Promise, Thou shall Guide me with thy Counsel, and
afterward Receive me to Glory. All Temporal Blessings for which we may have
occasion, will now be made over to us; but especiall^ all Spiritual Ones; The
chief Things of (...) Ancient Mountains, and the precious (...) Everlasting
Hills. Obdurate Sinner, Thy Heart is more Impenetrable than the Nether
Millstone, if this Consideration do not move thee, melt thee, break thee!
Abraham could readily forego a Son, for a Promise; and wilt not thou forego a
Sin for all the Promises? What a profane Esau art thou, to Despise all of this
Invaluable Blessedness? But

II. A second Consideration useful for you, may be that in Isa. 1.2. Hear, O
Heavens, and Give ear, O Earth; for the Lord has spoken; I have Nourished and
brought up Children, and they have Rebelled against me. CONSIDER, That until
you are Born again, all the more than Fatherly Mercies of God are both Ill
bestowed, and Ill Requited. The God of Heaven has dealt like a Father with you,
all your Days hitherunto: and you speak but Reasonably, when you say unto Him,
Our Father! It is He that has produced you from Nothing, into Being, and it is
He that has preserved you in Being from Threatening and Invading Mischief. They
are Gods Creatures which Comfort you, and Cherish you; it is His Air you breath,
it is His Ground you tread, they are His Clothes that Cover you. It is He that
every Hour defends you from a Million Deaths; and supplies you with multitudes
of Conveniences both for Inward and Outward Man. And what is the Language of
all this Kindness? It Is that in Romans 2.4. The Goodness of God, Leads thee to
Repentance. By Regeneration we should now come to behave ourselves like
Children unto a Father so favorable, so compassionate! The voice of all the
Divine Benignity unto us, is that, O live unto that God, from whom, and on whom
it is that thou live at all! The Israelites could say to such a Benefactor as
Gideon, in Judge. 8.22. Rule thou over us, both thou and thy son, for thou have
delivered us. How much more ought we to become Regenerate, by resigning
ourselves unto the Government of that God, who has been our Deliverer all this
while, and who has Redeemed us from all Adversity? Be sure, till you are Born
again, all the Bounties of God are utterly lost upon you; Gods Corn and Gods
Wine is given unto Baal; and you are continually Fighting against God with
Weapons of His own. As David said of an Unthankful Nabal, In vain have I kept
all that this Fellow has; so may the Lord say of an Unholy Sinner; All my
Mercies to this Wretch, are merely thrown away: He makes me no suitable Returns
for all my Benefits. Never was any Ingratitude so monstrous, as that of
Unregeneracy! To continue in REBELLION against God, amongst His most wicked and
cursed Enemies, after all that He has done for you! it is the Worst Instance, of,
Requiting evil for Good, that ever was afforded. After all the Goodness and
Mercy wherewith God has followed you all your days* His demand is but that, in
Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now what does the Lord thy God Require of thee, but to fear
the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love Him? And O thou sinful
Unregenerate! What a Vile Disingenuity is it for thee to be, as thou art
continually A^fronting and Reproaching of God thy Savior? It seems that he
has, but as the Proverb speaks, Brought up the Whelps of Wolves, in all the
Cost that He has laid out upon thee. And Oh! How will all thy past enjoyments
come in, as confounding Witnesses against thee, in the day wherein, thou shall
find thy self to be Accountable. Particularly, Many a Life, has been spent and
Lost in the Service of thy Life; and all the Creatures will with Loud Clamours
plead against thee, saying, Lord, our Lives went, that so this Wretch might
have lived unto Thy Glory! We were all abused inasmuch as he did it not!

O Think on the kindnesses of the Ever-Gracious God: And let thy Heart relent,
as did the heart of Saul, when he saw David sparing of him; say, Lord I cannot
go on to wrong Thee any more!

III. A Third Consideration, That may be needful for you, is that* in Psalm
90.3. Thou turnest man to destruction, and say, Return ye Children of Men.
CONSIDER, That the Judgments of God, upon yourselves and others, are vehement
calls upon you to be Born again. Have you not felt many Afflictions upon
yourselves* Why, Hear the Rod; there is a Cry in that which makes you to Cry:
it says thus much, O that you were Born again. It is said, The Lord scourges
every Son whom He Receives; but He Scourges you that so you may become willing
to be Sons. The Cry of Sickness is, O that by Regeneration you may be Born
twice, before you die once through Mortality: your outward Man is decaying, see
then that your Inward may be renewed! The Cry of Reproach is, You that have a
Bad Name, Look after a New Name; you that have your Names Trampled in the Mire
of the Earth, see that your Names be Written in Heaven; and whatever else you
may be called, make sure that you be called, The Children of God! The Cry of
Bondage is, Look after the Redemption of your souls; Ask the Son of God that
you may be free indeed; Get out of the Bond of Iniquity! The Cry of Poverty is,
Lay up a Treasure in Heaven. Do you want food! Be concerned about the Meat
which Endures to everlasting Life. Do you want Clothes? Be concerned about the
Fine Linen, which is the Righteousness of the Saints. Do you want a dwelling!
Be sollicitous for a Room in the Fathers House, where there are many Mansions!
And if you have any Friends taken from you, That is the Cry of it, Close now
with the Lord Jesus Christ, who is better than Ten Sons, Let God become your
God, who is an Alsufficient one! It is the Direction of Heaven in Job 34.31.32.
Surely, it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisiment, I will not
offend any more. That which I see not, Teach thou me; if I have done Iniquity,
I will do no more. A Thief on a Cross, Blaspheming the Lord, was indeed a very
rueful sight; but every afflicted person remaining Unregenerate, is indeed such
a sight. Again, have you not seen many Miseries upon Others also? Why, there is
a Lesson given us by all those calamities, like that which the Historian tells
us, was upon the Statue of Senacherib, Let the spectator become a Godly person;
that is, One Born again. When you see others made the Monuments of Gods Anger,
it cries to you; and there is thus much in the Cry, O that by Regeneration, you
would secure yourselves, from the like indignation! It is the Use that Our Lord
has directed us to make of all Desolations, in Luc. 13.3, 5. I tell you Nay,
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And its by so Repenting, that
you are to become Regenerate!

IV. A Fou^th Consideration to Encourage you, may be that in Luc. 15.10 I say
unto you, there is Joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over one sinner
that Repents. CONSIDER, That, by your being born again, you will fill not
Earth only, but Heaven too, with Joy. All the Good men on Earth to whom the
Notice of your Regeneration, shall arrive, will be Ravished at the News of it.
Perhaps there are some ungodly Fools, that may flout and scoff, at your turning
unto God, and say, What? you are turning a Saint; are you? But they not being
Saints, are much worse than Bruits; and in the mean time for those that are
truly wise, and that are best able to Judge what Wisdom is, Of them you shall
be had in Honor. The Saints are, The Excellent in the Earth, and, More
Excellent than their Neighbors; Their Good word is of Ten thousand times more
account, than all the commendation of them that are, The men of this world: and
whenever you become Regenerate, all those your Excellent brethren, will
immediately Glorify God in you and for you: as when a Sa^^ was becoming a Paul,
it is reported, in Act. 9.21. All ^^at heard it, were amazed: so upon your Change
among the people of God, All that see it, will be affected! However, you will
set all Heaven on rejoicing, whenever you shall be brought home to God.

Would you this day give up yourselves to God in Christ sincerely and entirely,
the Tidings would immediately be carried into Heaven it self, and the very
Angels of the Highest, would in the Highest, Rejoice with Joy Unspeakable and
full of Glory! As at the First Creation of the World, so at a New Creation in
thy Soul, The Morning-stars would sing together, and the Sons of God shout for
joy: O Deny not such a Satisfaction to those Charitable Spirits, by thy Holding
fast of thy Unregeneracy, and thy Refusing to Return! As poor and mean a Wretch
as thou art, yet upon thy Regeneration, there would be unspeakable Triumphs
among the Angels of God; the Gladsome Rumor would be spread through the Ethereal
Regions, Behold, there is another Sinner Converted from the Error of his way;
and there is another Soul to be Saved from Death! Behold, there is come in
another Heir of Salvation, for us, to Minister unto! Behold, there is another
Branch of Humane Race, come in, to fill up the vacant Room, that the Apostate
Legions have left among us! O Let us now praise God for such as are coming to
praise God with us for ever. And if any of your Dead Relations may be now
Lodged among those Glorious Angels, I know not why They also may not be
admitted unto a Participation in that Caelestial Gladness: though our Prayers to
Them would be a Detestable Idolatry, yet their Praises for us may be without
any Harm imagined? Why may not* They Rejoice and say, Blessed be God, that the
Prayers which we made for the Conversion of our Friends below, are now
Answered; Blessed be God, that they are like to come hither after us! But it is
very certain, That there is a most Ineffable Joy in the Heart of the Infinite
God Himself, whenever you become Regenerate, and begin to Choose the Things
that please Him. You will be the Joy of the whole Trinity; God the Holy Ghost
will Rejoice and say, Behold, another Temple for me to have the possession of!
God the Son, will Rejoice and say, Behold, another Member, helping toward the
Fullness of my Mystical Body! And the Eternal Father will now Rejoice over the
Returning Prodigal, as in Luc. 15.32. See, One that was Dead, and is alive
again; One that was Lost, and is found! It was a surprising passage that fell
from the dying Lips of one in our Neighborhood, who after fifty years of
Impiety and Impenitence, becoming Regenerate, a few weeks before he Died, after
he had Lain for a while speechless and senseless in his Death-pangs, he to the
amazement of the Spectators, Recovered so far, as to utter these Rapturous
EXPRESSIONS, O my Friends, Heaven Rings all over at this; They wonder at This;
A Great and an Old Sinner coming to Heaven: O Glorify Free Grace for evermore.
And so he gave up the Ghost. Why, this is what I have said; Become Regenerate,
and all Heaven will Ring with it. Hard-hearted sinner! How can thou Resist
Perswasives, thus full of Argument?

V. A fifth Consideration to Alarm you, may be that in Luc. 10.42. One Thing
is Needful. CONSIDER, That without being Born again, there is nothing that
will, nothing that can, secure the Welfare of your Immortal Souls.
Regeneration is indeed a thing, which leaves no Room for Deliberation, inasmuch
as it is most absolutely Necessary for us all. Never say, Shall I! Shall I! be
Born again; for, Necessity is laid upon you, and Woe unto you, if you have it
not! What provision have you made for your poor Souls, ye miserable
Unregenerates? After all the Riches, and all the Honors, and all the Learning
which you can here attain unto, how miserably still are your poor Souls all
this while provided for? O that you would once at least Think to purpose upon
that Word of our Lord Jesus, which a Great King was advised every day to Think
upon; in Mat. 16.26. What is a man profited if be gain the whole World, and
Loose his own Soul? But it may be that you have conceived some Hopes of your
Everlasting Blessedness, upon some other feeble Accounts; and yet these also,
without Regeneration, will be found but so many Cobwebs, before the Fiery Besom
of Destruction, at the last. As now, it is not enough to say, I have many
Spiritual Privileges, which may stand my Soul in stead. What though you have
been partakers of the Sacraments? The Israelites were so, and yet it is said,
God was not well-pleased with them. What though you are Descended of Parents that
were the Favorites of Heaven? The Jews bragged, We have Abraham for our
Father! but our Lord could Reply upon them, You are of your Father the Devil.
In a word, whatever External Prerogative thou have, in the Church of God, thou
may be a woeful Citizen of Capernaum at the last.

Again, It Is not enough to say, My Gifts and Parts are considerable; the
Furniture of my Mind is too rich to be (...) of Heaven. Drowning Soul! All
the^e things may be but as a Bag of Gold about thee, to sink thee so much the
deeper in Perdition. I pray, what was the Death, what was the Last End that
Balaam had? May not one, Speak with the Tongues of Men, and of Angels, and yet
be destitute of a Saving Charity! Alas, a man, may be no less than an Able
Minister of the Gospel* and yet fare no better than One of Noah's Carpenters
after all.

Further, It Is not enough to say, I am Civil, Honest, Harmless; none of my
Neighbors are the worse for me. Was there not a Pharisee, who could boast, I
am not as other men, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers: and yet he was not
Justified? Was there not a Young Man, who could boast, All the Commandments of
the second Table, I have kept from my Youth: and yet (...), Lacked One Thing?
What Signified it unto Paul, that he was, Touching the Righteousness which is
in the Law blameless?

Moreover, It Is not enough to say, My Religious Exercises are not a few; I
Pray, I Hear, I Fast, and use much Devotion* The Jews have a saying, If only
two men in the World were to be Saved, the One of them would be a Scrib^e, the
other a Pharisee. 'Twas They, who could pretend, I fast twice a Week, and give
Tithes of all that I possess.. And yet, what said (...) who is Truth it self!
Except your Righteous^^^^ shall exceed that of the Scribes and I (...) shall in
no case enter into the kingdom of Heaven.

Furthermore, it is not enough to say, I have had many good affections moving in
me; I have had my heart mightily (...) in the Ordinances of God; and many a
(...) have I (...) fall upon the matters of Eternity Many an Ahab has been
Terrified by the Judgments, or Threatening, of God. Many an H^r^l, (...) himself
gladded under an Evangelical Ministry. Many a Balaam has had slothful desires,
after the Felicity of the Righteous. But what of all that?

Once more, It Is not enough to say, Good men Judge nothing but good of me, I
have a room in the heart of such as are eminent for Godliness; yea, I am of
their party, and have suffered with them. There was a time when David thought
as well of Achitophel. And among all the Disciples, who suspected Judas? A
Simon Magus may for a while be regarded by the most Eminent Apostles of Our
Lord. An Ananias, and a Sapphira, may get into the Church. And impious
Alexanders, have been famous Confessors, for the Cause of God.

Add hereunto; It Is not enough to say, God has smiled many ways upon me; He
has answered my Prayers, prevented my Fears, and shown himself concerned for
me. What if all your Preservations be but Reservations! Was there not an Ham
spared, when Millions of people perished about him? What if your petitions are
heard in the Court of Heaven, but in the course of Common Providence! Did not a
Pharaoh receive what he asked?

All these things will be but so many, Refuges of Lies, if you go to shelter
yourselves without Regeneration in them. God will no more spare you for these
things, than Samuel did Agag, for the Ornaments that were upon him.

VI. A Sixth Consideration to awaken you, shall be that in Psalm. 7.11^ The
mighty God is angry with the wicked every day. CONSIDER, That The wrath and
curse of the Great God abides on you, till you are Born again. We read in
Zech. 5.4. Concerning, A flying ROLL of Curses, Twenty Cubits Long, and Ten
Broad. But indeed such a ROLL were too little to hold all the Curses which an
Unregenerate man lies open unto. Either become Regenerate, or else look for,
all The Plagues written in Gods Book, ye souls desolate and forsaken! That
which was a Mistake in Job of old, may be too truly, but never too sadly,
concluded by all that are yet in their Sins, God counts me for his enemy! And
accordingly in all that He speaks to you, there are the Woes, in all that he
does to you, there are the Wounds, of an Enemy. It is said in Prove. 3.33. The
Curse of the Lord, is in the house of the Wicked. There are perhaps these and
those fine enjoyments in thy House, but the Curse of God like a Leprosy,
cleaves unto them all. Thy very Blessings themselves are Cursed, and thy Table
becomes a Snare. The Curse of God is the Sauce in every Dish, the Spice in
every Cup, with which thou meddlest; and that Curse is the Coverlid which thou
still sleep under. The Curse accompanies thee, like thy very shadow; every
thing does but help to poison thee, to undo thee, to destroy thee: thou have
the wrath of God, with all thy Quails. The most ^reful, Di^eful Plagues of God,
are therewithal sent upon thy forlo^ Soul. That Soul, is given over, as a
Captive to the Devils and a ^re^ to the Terrible ones. Never is, The Light of
Gods Countenance, uplifted upon that w^ful Soul; It Is a Soul altogether left in
Ignorance, Confu^ion, and Frozen-Midnights: a Soul abandoned by Grace, and
Pining away in its Iniquities. Soul to be Lamented! How can thou be quiett in
this Unregeneracy? Why, thou art in a Prison; which Prison is also on a Light
Fire over thine head! If thou art contented that God should Abhor thee, Ban
thee, Damn thee; what is thy heart but Adamant! What are thy Heart Strings but
Sinews of Iron?

VII, A Seventh Consideration, to be as a Go^^ unto you, must be that in Ezekiel.
18.31, 32. Why will you Die? Turn yourselves, and Live ye. (...), That if you
are not Born again, you are to Die for evermore. You have no ^^^ng to live in
this world; but I must plainly (...) you, that if you are not Newborn before
you Die, it had been good for you, that you never had been Born at all. If you
go Unregenerate out of this World, there will be No Remedy nor es^^ping, but
you must be Miserable in another; you must unavoidably Go down! even, Go down!
where, The Fire shall never be quenched. If you consult the Old Testament,
there you are told in, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and
all the Nations that forget God. If you consult the New Testament, there you
are told, in Math. 25.46. The wicked shall go away into everlasting Punishment.
So then, if your Departing Souls a little while hence, are found without the
marks of Regeneration upon them, the ^iends of Darkness will presently snat^h
them, seiz them, and hold those Naked Sou^ in Chains of Darkness, until the
dreadful Day of God. At the Arrival of which Notable and Amazing Day, when the
Son of God shall cause the Mountains to quake at the Sound of His Descending
Chariots, and the Hills to melt at the presence of His Majesty, and your Souls
again to animate these Contaminated Bodies, you must with fiery Thunders be
sentenced unto, The Vengeance of Eternal Fire. When Corah and his company went
down into the Pit, all the people, it is said, fled At the cry of them, saying,
lest the earth swallow us up also! Were the Hideous and Horrible Pit of Hell
set open before your eyes, you might see Millions of Unregenerates there
tortured by the rebukes, with which, as with Flashes of Hot Lightning, the
Eternal Spirit of God, is for ever smiting of them: there they ly, they vex,
they roar, I am tormented in this flame: and will not you now fly at this
formidable cry, saying, Lest Hell swallow me up also, in my unregeneracy! Take
that warning, O thou Soul in Peril; even that warning in Hebr. 10.32. It Is a
fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God. And know, that without
Regeneration, there is no Avoiding of those terrible Hands. But, Vain man, will thou make light of those Omnipotent Hands; the Hands that break the stoutest
Rocks to pieces, and make the very Pillars of Heaven to Tremble! If thou have
not the Heart of the Leviathan, the Monster that is, made without Fear, surely
thou can not but be afraid of those Iron Hands! Methinks, thou should with
an aching heart, hear the almighty God asking of thee, as in Evek. 22.14. Can
thine heart endure, or can thy hands be strong, in the day that I shall deal
with thee? Methinks, when thou be, beholdest the Thousands of Thousands that
are Lingering in the Anguishes of the Vault below, thou should cry out as
Moses, when he behe'd the Careases falling in the Wilderness, in Psalm. 90, 11.
Who knows the Power (...) thine Anger! And one would think, thou should now
be willing to be Regenerate, being Warned thus to Flee from the Wrath to come:
Even from a Wrath, so to come, that there will be still, more to come, after
it is already come, and, more to come, after it has been inflicted for more than
as many Millions of Ages, as the Sky has Stars, or the Shore has Sands, or as
the Ocean has Drops of Water in it.

VIII. And now there is one Consideration more to quicken you; it is that in 2
Cor. 6.2. Behold, Now is the Agreeable Time! Behold, Now is the Day of
Salvation! CONSIDER, That NOW, NOW is your Time to be Born again. Let me lay my
Hand upon you, as the Angel upon Lot, of old, that I may hasten and hurry you
out from the Sodom, of your Unregeneracy. You are to be spurred as Paul was,
Arise, why Tarriest thou? You are to be Rowz'd like David, Save thy Self to
night, for To morrow thou may be SLAIN. Regeneration is the Kings Business;
and I may say thereof, It Requires Have! You have Now a Time to be Born again;
but O Think, what a Time it is.

You have a Time, and it is a Sure Time. After all your Iniquities, and all
your Back. slidings, it is not yet after all, Too Late, for you to become
Regenerate. Behold, After so Long a Time, To Day if you will Hear the voice of
God! You are not only still informed, It is Good for you to Draw near unto
God, but also the GOLDEN Scepter is held out; you may Draw Near! Although you
have wasted many and many a year, in the Tents of Wickedness, there is a
Proclamation issued forth from the Lord, Yet Return unto me, and I will not
cause my Anger to fall upon you. Hear this, ye Inveterate Unregenerates, and
Let your Hearts Relent; The King of Heaven is a Merciful King.

Again, You have a Time, and it is a Fit Time. I may say to you, Arise, the
Master calls thee; and then I am sure, it is very unfit, that you should
refuse or defer to come in at His Call! Shall that Lord of Lords, whom all the
Angels in Heaven attend upon, wait the Leisure of a Despicable, a Refractory, a
sinful Worm! In your own Distress, you cry, O Lord Hear, Defer not! Why then do
you Defer, when you Hear of your Duty? I am to tell you, Old Age, and Sickness,
are no Convenient Season, for a Regeneration to be put off unto; though of That
you Dream, when you procrastinate until, A more convenient Season.

Yet again, You have a Time, and it is Short Time. Talk you of, To morrow? But
Wisdom says, Boast not of To morrow, for thou know not, what a Day may bring
forth. If you become not Regenerate in This Life, you will never be so at all;
but what is This Life? It Is a Vapor; aye, and a Vapor is enough to carry it
away. The Salvation work now pressed upon you, is that whereof it may be, and
has been said, O Do it with thy Might, for there is none of this work to be
done in the Grave, whither thou art Going. Going did we say? Yea, Running, yea,
Flying, every minute. ETERNITY, Eternity is just going to fasten its Iron Teeth
upon you; it will not, it cannot be long, before all the Opportunities of
Regeneration will be at an end.

And yet again; You have a Time, but it is an Only Time. God has not Entrusted
you, with so much as one Moment; if you do not now this Moment become
Regenerate, it is possible that you may not have another; it is less probable
that you will in another. Stay but a little more, Delay a little more, Dally a
little more, cry, A little more Slumber! and you will be gone where, O Lord, They
cannot Hope for thy Truth! But if once you are gone down, into the Floods of
ardent Sulphur, then, ye Foolish Ones, 'twill avail nothing to cry, Lord, Lord,
Open yet the Door of Regeneration for us! To cry, Lord, Lord, One Sermon more!
To cry, Lord, Lord, One Sabbath more! To beg with Tears of Blood, Lord, One
Season of Grace more! will be of no Avail at all.

Come then, Bring this matter to an Issue; Do not any longer keep Wounding of
your selves, among the Monuments of the Dead. It Is thus that the matter lies:
Thou have been horribly depraved by that Original Sin, which is derived unto
thee from thy First Father; but thy Ti^^ in this World is allowed thee, that
thou may obtain a Deliverance from that Image of the Devil, by such an Union,
as will be attended with and productive of a Likeness, to the Lord Jesus
Christ. If when thy State of probation here shall come unto its end, thou art
found utterly Uncured of those Disorders which thou wast Born withal, and
utterly Destitute of a Principle which may Dispose thee to The Life of God;
those Characters of Hell upon thy Soul, will become Eternally Indelible. And it
is Naturally impossible, that these Everlasting Impressions of Sin upon thy
Soul, should be unaccompany'd with Intolerable Griefs, and Fears, and Horrors;
and Infinite Regretts must become after a sort Essential to that lamentable
Soul. But, if thy Soul might now have a New Frame, a Frame Gracious and
Heavenly given thereunto, thou will shortly see that an Eternal Glory, is The
self same thing for which Almighty God is working of thee. Sav then, Are you
willing to be Newborn, or No? If you are now but made willing, I hope, that
the God who has thus far persuaded you, will yet more powerfully and
effectually persuade you to be more than Almost Regenerate: And O the Crown of
Rejoicing, that we shall then be to each other, In the Presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at His Coming! Well then, make a Trial. Reader, I shall set before
thee an Instrument, whereto if thou can heartily, sincerely, resolvedly,
Subscribe, thou have felt a saving work of REGENERATION upon thy Soul. Perhaps
thou have been like the man that had a Withered Hand; yet it being said unto
thee, Stretch out thy Hand! Now Try, Whether that Withered Hand is not so
quickened from above, that it can with a most cordial Approbation, set it self
unto these Acknowledgments.

O Eternal God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit!

Unto thy most Merciful Demands, Whether I am willing to Renounce the Corrupt
Interests of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, with Godly Sorrow for my
sinful Regards thereunto; and Have THEE for MY GOD, so that for me to Know
Thee, Serve Thee, Resemble Thee, Enjoy thy Good Will, and Promote thy Honor,
shall be my only Blessedness?

Whether I am willing, that the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the God man, and the
only Mediator between God and Man, should ^ustate me in thy Favor, by the
virtue of his most Acceptable Obedience and Intercession; and that He should by
His Gracious Influences Assist me, as one United unto Himself, to Glorify my
Ever Glorious God; and by His own Divine Methods both Instruct me in all my
Duty, and Incline me to it all?

And, whether I am willing to give back my whole self unto Thee in a way of
Thankfulness to thee for all thy Benefits, and especially for those of my
Redemption; Confessing my self under Everlasting Obligations to be for Thee and
not for Another?

My SOUL Answers; Lord, I am willing! And it is thy Sovereign Grace that has
made me so. May I now be kept by the Mighty Power of that Grace, through Faith
unto Salvation!

Isa. 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords, and another shall Subscribe with the
Hand unto the Lord.

Ezekiel. 16.8. I Entered into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou
becamest Mine.


GOOD COUNSEL In Answer to the GREAT QUESTION; What shall I do to be Saved?
John VII.37. In the Last Day, that Great Day of the Feast* Jesus stood and
cried, saying, If any man Thirst, let him come unto me and Drink.


BEhold, the Gracious and Glorious Invitation of the Gospel here set before us:
There are various and many Questions, about which the minds of men are most
sollicitously agitated; but there is no Question of more Importance to be
considered by them, than that, What shall I do to be Saved? In Answer to that
Inquiry, there is, The One Thing Needful, recommended unto us, in 1 John 3.23.
This is Gods Commandment, that we should Believe ^n the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ. Now to Encourage our Obedience unto that Commandment of God, we have
here a most compassionate Invitation of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself; wherein,
by, Coming to Him, He means nothing more nor less than, Believing on his Name.
The Feast of Tabernacles held in September, with an Anniversary Observation
among the ancient Jews, Typically Represented the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who, probably at that very time of the Year, first came to Tabernacle
in Flesh among us. Our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, the Antitype of that Feast,
we now find present at it; and inasmuch as the Day after the Seventh, darkly
pointing at our Christian Sabbath, was the Last and Great Day of those Eight,
wherein they Celebrated that Festivity, our Lord then made a most useful Sermon
to a Thronged Auditory. Our Text informs us, First, What He Did. He Stood; that
was that He might be (...)* He Cried; that was that He might be Heard. And
then, what He Said. That was, If any man Thirst, Let Him come to me, and Drink.
It was an usual Rite, among the Jews at that Solemnity, to fetch Water from
Siloam, and pour it out before the Lord, using the words of the Prophet, in
Isa. 12.3. With Joy shall ye Draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation. Perhaps
these Words of our Lord may be on Occasion thereof, and in Allusion thereto;
and it may be as if our Lord had said, Would you know where the true Wells of
Salvation are? It Is in me, that they are to be met withal: you must come to me
for them. The Blessings which our Lord Jesus Christ has to bestow upon us, are
here compared unto Water: and in his Inviting us thereunto, he seems to have
some Eye unto the Form of Speaking, used by the Prophet of old, in Isa. 55.1.
Ho every one that Thirsts, come ye unto the Waters. But there is a most
weighty Case which hence arises to be considered; and that is,

After what manner ought we to entertain the Invitations which the Lord Jesus
Christ in the Gospel gives us to come unto Him?

I would now pray my Hearers, to Set their Hearts, unto the Things which I am
going to speak; they are not Vain, or Light and Small Things; your Lives, yea,
the Lives of your Never-Dying Souls, are as deeply concerned in these things,
as in any that you were Ever Treated with.

I. There is a Thirsty, that is, a Distressed Condition of Soul, whereinto the
Children of Men are brought, before they will come unto the Lord Jesus Christ.
We shall never Comply with the Invitations of the Gospel; until our Hearts have
by an Heartbreaking work of the Law upon them, first been prepared for it: now
that work of the Law does raise a Mighty, and a Scalding Thirst, in the Souls
of them that feel it. When Our Lord was Dying for us, He Cried out, I Thirst!
and that must be our Cry, when we are Coming to Our Lord for the Good Effects
of His Death. Says Our Lord, If any man Thirst, Let him Come unto Me, not
because any Praeparatory Thirst, may entitle us unto the use of a Savior; but
because without such a Thirst, it is Ordinarily and Naturally impossible, that
we should care for Our Savior. All of us may come unto the Lord Jesus Christ;
but we never shall, yea, we never can, come, till we have Thirsty Souls within
us. The Waters of Life, will not be welcome to us, till we are like Sampson or
Hagar, even Dying in Thirsty Anguishes. As the best Honey, so the best Water,
is Loathed by the full Soul. Until we are Dry by the parchings of Guilt and
Grief within us, we shall be Deaf to all the proposals of the Lord Jesus
Christ. While men have not their Hearts Broken, Amazed, and Abased, by
Convictions, from the Spirit of God becoming a Spirit of Bondage unto them, our
Lord says, as in Joh. 5.44. How can you Believe? When our Lord Invites us to
Come unto Him, He supposes that the Wrath of God has given a dreadful
Inflammation unto our Souls; that we have seen the Eternal God Angry with us,
and the Everlasting Fire of His Indignation in the Fiery Vault below ready to
fly up and break out upon us; that our Souls have been as it were set on a
Light Fire, with hideous Apprehensions of the Sins which Ly upon us, and of the
Wants and Woes which we are exposed unto. Except men are thus Awakened, they
will for ever slight all overtures about coming to the Lord Jesus Christ; they
will say, There is no Beauty in him, for which he should be desired! Until we
are thus disturbed in that Rest which we had in our corrupt estate under the
first Adam, we shall never take one good step toward the Second. Well then,

It Is requisite, First, that we become sensible of our Emptiness, as to our
Happiness. We are to have an Exquisite and a Trou^blesome sense of this, that
we are Ungodly and without Strength; that we are, Dead in trespasses and sins;
that we are, Wretched and Poor, and Miserable, and Blind, and Naked. As he
cried out, in Romans 7.17, In me there dwells no Good thing. So are we to
complain, In me there is no Light! and, In me there is no Life! and, There is
nothing in me but an^ Hell upon Earth! The Veins of our Souls* are to Suck and
Pull and Prick within us, through the perceived Absence of all Spiritual Good;
they are pungent and painful resentments, of our destitute circumstances,
wherewith we should say, as in Psalm. 119.81. Lord, my Soul faints for thy
Salvation.

It Is requisite, Next, that we become Impatient of our Misery by our Emptiness.
We are to count that our being without the Knowledge, and without the Image,
and without the Favor of God, is An intolerable thing. As the people could not
bear it, when there happened unto them, that mischief, in Exodus 17.3. The
People thirsted for water. So, when we think on the Calamities of our Souls, we
should be able to say, Lord, I find my self not Able to Bear these Calamities.
We are to be Filled with Bitter and Grievous Anxieties, when we think how Empty
we are, of all manner of Good; and we are with pierced Hearts, to make that
Outcry in Act. 2.37. What shall we do?

But then, Thirdly, It Is requisite that we become Desirous of a Remedy for our
Misery. And since it is the Lord Jesus Christ alone, who says unto us, In me is
thy He^p, it is after our Lord Jesus Christ, that ou^ Souls are to cry, with
Raging Agonies. The Christ-ward Inclinations of our Souls are to be those in
Psalm. 42.12. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks* so pants my Soul
after thee, O God. My Soul thirsts for God, for the Living God. We must be
willing to Attend any Thing, to Fore go any Thing, to Deny our selves of any
thing, which in our Closure with the Lord Jesus Christ is called for. What the
Martyr in the Flames cried out, None but Christ, None but Christ! That must the
Enflamed Soul of the Sinner cry, though all the Pleasures, and all the Riches,
and all the Honors of this World should be set before him; A Christ! A Christ!
for an Undone Soul; or else I am Irrecoverably Undone! Never did the Drowning
An^ediluvians more wish for, An Ark! Never did a pursued Manslayer more wi^h
for, A Refuge City; Never did a poisoned Israelite more wish for, A Brazen
Serpent; than we are to wish for the Sure Mercies of our Lord Jesus Christ. As
David Longed, in 2 Samuel 23.15. Oh that one would give me to Drink of the Water
of the Well of Bethlehem! So must we Long for all Union and a Fellowship, with
that Messiah, who was Born at Bethlehem; and say, O that I had a Christ, for
the Satisfaction of a needy Soul.

Until we have some such Preparations wrought in our Hearts, we shall certainly
remain, Shut up in Unbelief; and our Lord Jesus Christ will say of us, as in
Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye may have Life!

II. In Coming to our Lord Jesus Christ, we must seek and ask for the Whole of
that Salvation, which He has to bestow upon us. It is no sinful Selfishness for
us, to propound our own Salvation, in our Coming unto the Lord Jesus Christ;
nor should we be discouraged about the Sincerity of our Coming, because we
therein acted for our own Salvation. The Honor and Glory of God is enwrap'd so
in our Salvation, that we shall do amiss if we go to Separate them: I may say,
What God has thus Joined, Let no man put asunder! Yea, a man should not forbear
Coming to the Lord Jesus Christ, although he can see nothing, but Self, stirring
him thereunto; Let him come, though it be at first upon Meaner Ends; that will be
the way for him to obtain an Impression of Nobler Ends upon him, when he shall
come again. However, what is to be, The End of our Faith? it is to be, The
Salvation of the Soul. Why then, Let us be sure therein to propound unto our
selves, the Enjoyment of ALL that Salvation. As it was of old said, Is Christ
Divided? so we must make no Division of that Salvation, for which the Lord
Jesus Christ is to be Sued unto. Even the Murderers of our Lord, were averse
unto Dividing of his Garments; and Believers on our Lord are as averse unto the
Dividing of His Mercies, Well then, Let us ponder with our selves, what a
Priest, what a Prophet, what a King, our Lord-Redeemer is, and let us beseech
Him, to Be such an One, and to Do all that is to be done by such an One for our
Souls.

Particularly, Atonement, is one of those things which we are to come unto the
Lord Jesus for. We are to come unto Him, as He is represented in Psalm. 110.4.
Thou art a Priest for ever! He demands of (...) Art thou willing that I should
be a Priest for thy Soul! and we must heartily consent unto his being so;
therewithal, saying like the Psalmist, in Psalm. 119. 122. O be surety for thy
servant for good. We must come unto Him, as unto, The Lamb of God, which takes
away the sin of the world: Come unto Him, as unto Him, That Loves us, and
washes us from our sins in His own Blood; Come unto Him, as unto that Jesus who
having made Satisfaction for us on the Cross, here below, goes up, and goes on,
to make Intercession for us, at the Right Hand of God* above. We must ask to
enjoy such a JESUS in him! yea, and at the same time, we should be willing to
pay the Dues of the High Priest unto him.

Again, Instruction is another of those things which we are to come unto the
Lord Jesus for. We are to come unto Him, as He is exhibited in Acts 3.22. A
Prophet shall the Lord Raise up unto you. He enquires of us, Art thou willing
that I should be the Prophet of thy Soul! and we must sincerely consent unto
His being that; saying with the Psalmist, in Psalm. 25.4. Show me thy Ways, O
Lord; Teach me thy Paths. We must come unto Him, for that Eye salve whereof He
has said, I counsel thee to buy it of me! Come unto Him, as of old that ^ind
Son of Sorrow, crying, Lord! that I may recieve my sight! Come unto Him a^ a
Scholar unto a Tutor, that He may show us, The Path of Life. So are we to
Resign ourselves unto the conduct of Our Lord, that by his unerring Scripture,
and Spirit, He may lead us in the Paths of Righteousness.

Once more, It Is for Government, and Protection, that our Lord Jesus Christ must
be come unto. We are to come unto him, as he is described Psalm. 2.6. The King
upon the Holy hill of Zion. He puts that on us, Art thou willing that I should
be a King unto thee? and we should immediately submit unto him, as the King,
the Lord, the Lawgiver, that is to save us; there withal spreading That, as
the wish of our Souls before Him, in Psalm. 119.5. O that my ways were directed
to keep thy Statutes! We must come unto him, that He would Bless us, by Turning
us every one from our Iniquities; Come unto Him, that he would Sanctify us
throughout in Spirit and Soul and Body, and preserve us Blameless to his
Heavenly Kingdom: Come unto him, that we may be Ruled by the Scepter of his
Righteousness; and made Conquerors and more than Conquerors, over our Spiritual
Adversaries. And thus, we are to take an Oath of Fidelity unto our Lord, Vowing
that we will Fight under his Banners, and Begging that he would make us
Faithful to the Death.

III. Coming to the Lord Jesus Christ, is a thing that calls for the Whole
Soul, and all proper motions of the Soul, to be engaged in it. As in Praising
of God, it is the Rule, in Psalm. 103.1. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that
is within me, Praise his Holy Name; so in coming to Christ, the same Rule is to
be observed; It must be done with the whole Soul, and all that is within us.
The mind, the will, the Affections, and all the Powers of the Soul, are to be
concerned in this Work of God. As now,

First, It is with a certain Persuasion of the Lord Jesus Christ, that we are
to come unto him. When we come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, we must Firmly
Believe all the Discoveries and Revelations, which God has given of him; and we
should come to the Attainment of the Apostle, in 2. Tim 1 12. I know whom I
have believed, and I am persuaded that He is able to keep that which I have
committed unto Him. We are to be well persuaded of the Excellent Qualities i^
our Lord Jesus Christ, when we come unto ^im, and we are to be more than Al^ost
persuaded, that In Him there does all Fullness dwell. There are especially four
persuasions which we are to Entertain, about our Lord Jesus Christ: or else we
shall be Lame in our Coming unto Him. One is, That He is Able to Save unto the
uttermost, all that Come unto God, by Him. A Second is, That there is none
other Name under Heaven, given among men, whereby we must be Saved. A Third is,
That whosoever comes unto Him, He will in no wise Cast him out. A Fourth is,
That he who Believes, shall be Saved. All of these, must be Looked upon as
most Faithful Sayings; and we must be ready to venture all the Interests of our
Immortal Souls upon them.

Secondly, It is with a fervent Petition to the Lord Jesus Christ, that we are
to Come unto Him. The posture wherein we should come unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, is upon our Knees: and we should present our prayers before him, as did
the leper, in Marc. 1.40. He came to him, Beseeching Him, and kneeling down to
him. It Is in the Quality of Petitioners; yea, and of Poor ones too, that we are
to sue unto our Lord Jesus Christ, when we come unto him. As a Beggar Petitions
for an Alms, or, as a Prisoner for his Life, so are we to Importune of our Lord
Jesus Christ; that He would be concerned for our good. The Petitions with which
the miserable besought the healing miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the
days of His flesh, are to be imitated in the Requests which we should make unto
Him for our Souls. We are to entreat of Him, Lord, I am so Blind, that I cannot
see the things of my Peace; Help this Blindness! We are to Entreat of Him,
Lord, I am so Lame, that I cannot Run the Way of thy Commandments; Help this
Lameness! We are to entreat, Lord, I have a Soul grievously vexed with the
Devil; O cast this evil Spirit out. Yea, we are to entreat, Lord, I am Dead in
Trespasses and sins; O thou that can Raise the Dead, Make my Soul to Live!
This is fit Language to visit a Jesus

Thirdly, We must come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, with a Lively Dependence on
him. When we come unto our Lord Jesus Christ, we are to Rely upon him for the
Communication of all that Blessedness, whereof He has encouraged our
expectation. When we have committed all our Soul-concerns into the hands of the
Lord Jesus Christ* we are to make a conclusion like (...). 25.2. O my God, I
trust in thee, (...) be Ashamed. We must with a (...) and Cheerfulness of Soul,
(...) upon the Lord Jesus Christ, that (...) certainly do for us, all the Thing
(...) in the Word, whereon He has (...) to Hope. Having first Confessed, (...)
Lord can, and then Implored, (...) would, be our Sufficient Redee^ (...) should
then Comfort our selves (...) that He will be so. We should now with a sweet
Acquiescence of Soul, wait upon him, for Grace, for Glory, for every Good
Thing. There is a certain Rest of Soul to be Endeavored, as well as to be
Propounded, in our Coming to the Lord Jesus Christ: the last Step of our Coming
to Him, is accompanied with a Leaning on Him; and a saying, Why art thou
disquieted within me, O my Soul! Hope in the Almighty and the Compassionate
Jesus; for He will bring thee unto the Praises of God for ever. Like the
ancient Psalmist, having first with bitter strivings pleaded before the Lord
Jesus Christ, O Lord, I beseech thee to deliver my Soul! then conclude, Return
to thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord will deal bountifully with thee.

IV. Being thoroughly Apprehensive, that we have no strength to come unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, we should first Cry for that Strength, and then Try whether
we cannot come. As for us, we cannot come unto the Lord Jesus Christ; although
our Precious and Immortal Souls do justly lie at the Stake, if we Do not come.
And we never shall Come unto the Lord Jesus Christ aright, until we do with
much anguish of Soul, see that we cannot come or stir toward Him. Nothing
renders men more Incapable of a due Coming to the Lord Jesus Christ, than a
vain and a proud Opinion of a Free will in themselves, of it self able to Do
this Good Work; Or than forgetting, That in all Salvation-work, it is God who
works in us, both to Will and to Do, of His own good pleasure. It Is very
unlikely, That God should give us the Faith to come unto the Lord Jesus Christ,
unless we subscribe to that, in Ephesians. 2.8. Faith is not of your selves, it is the
Gift of God. It is not likely that God should bestow upon us the Power to come
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, without making us to own that in Ephesians. 1.19. We
Believe, according to the working of His mighty Power. It was hardly a stranger
thing to see Peter walking on the Sea,, than to see a Sinner coming to the Lord
Jesus Christ. O be sensible of this accursed Impotency! but at the same time
see, that without the Grace of God we cannot so much as arrive to be thus far
sensible. And yet there are two* Things from which we should not be hereby
discouraged.

First, We are to Cry that God would help us to come. When we are advised of
such a thing as that in John. 6.44. No man can come unto me, Except the Father
which has sent me, Draw Him: It becomes us then humbly and warmly, to make
that moan unto him, in Cant. 5.4. O Draw me! We cannot come to the Lord Jesus
Christ, until we Turn; but how should we do That? That we may Turn, the way is
to Cry; make that Cry, in Jer. ^1.18. Turn thou me, and I shall be Turned. O Ly
before the Lord, and mourn before him, saying, Lord, I perish, and it is Just I
should perish, if I do not come unto thee; but yet I cannot come; a Stone may
as soon fly to Heaven, and become a Star in Heaven, as I of my self come to my
Heavenly Lord; O do thou then Help me to come, and so Grace, Grace, will have
all the Glory.

Secondly; Now Try whether God will not help us to come Attempt, I say; See, as
the well-disposed man, at length got so far as in Marc. 9.27. To say with
Tears, Lord, I Believe, Help mine Unbelief! So, see whether you cannot say,
Lord, now at Last I come! Lord, now at Last, I can trust my Soul in thy Hands,
for thee to make me Happy for ever. We find, that the man with a Withered Hand
in Math. 12.13. when he Tried, could Stretch it out; Even so, Let us Try,
whether the Withered Foot of our Souls be not Cured by the Sovereign Grace of
God; and whether we cannot come to what we never could of our selves come unto.

V. They that will come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, must Answer and Conquer all
the Objections of unbeleef, against coming to the Lord. You may be sure that
when our Faces are once Christ-ward, many Obstacles will be cast before us, by
An evil heart of unbeleef. But as the ways to the City of Refuge, were Exactly
and carefully cleared, among the Israelites of old, so must we do what we can
to clear out of the way those things that might hinder us, in Flying for Refuge
to the Hope set before us. As now,

It Is one objection of unbeleef, Thy sins are so Extraordinarily Circumstanced,
that if thou should come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, it is Impossible thou
should be welcome unto that Holy Lord. Let our Answer to this objection, be,
that in 1. Tim. 1.15. Jesus Christ came into the world to Save sinners, of whom
I am Chief. It Is for Sinners, that our Lord is become a Savior; They are the
Si^k Ones, whom He is a Physician for* and the worse, the deeper, the older
their Sickness is, the more will be His Glory in the Saving of them. Though we
are Great Sinners, yet we may plead it with Him, that He is, A Great Savior.
It Is true, we have been Ready to sin; but it is said of God in Jesus Christ,
Thou art Ready to Pardon. It Is true, we have sinned abundantly; but it is said
of our Lord, He will abundantly pardon. It was of old thrown upon Him as his
Disgrace, He Receives Sinners; but it is his Honor, His Renown. His Blood,
is, A Fountain set open for sin and for uncleanness; the most polluted Creature
among us all, may have Recourse to that Open Fountain. And, as long as we are
not come to be such Apostates, Blasphemers, and Persecutors, as to Hate the
Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, we may be sure that we are not fallen into the
Unpardonable sin. Yea, if we are but Afraid of that Sin, it is a sign that we
are not Fallen into it. He has already Received, not only to His Mercy, but
also to His Kingdom, such as have been Guilty of the very same Sins, that now
astonish our Consciences: He has Received a Menasseh; He has Received a Mary
Magdalene. Is it the Sin of Uncleanness, that affrights us? Remember, By Faith
Rahab the Harlot perished not. Is it the Sin of Thievery, that affrights us;
Remember, The Thief on the Cross. Yea, Murder, and the Murder of the Lord Jesus
Christ himself, did not put some out of Reach to the Mercy of that Blessed Lord.

It Is Another objection of unbeleef, Thou art not so prepared for the Lord Jesus
Christ, as that thou may without presumption dare to come unto him.

To this objection let us give that Answer, in Rev. 22.17. Lest him that is
athirst, come, and whosoever will, Let him take the water of Life Freely. What
is the true End of all those Preparations that are undergone by the Elect of
God, in their coming unto the Lord Jesus Christ? they are that we may be made
willing to come. So then, if we do but find our selves willing to have the Lord
Jesus Christ, we need not scruple our liberty to come unto him. Are we so
affected with our Ignorance, as to be willing that the Lord Jesus Christ should
be our Wisdom? Are we so concerned about our Guiltiness, as that we are willing
to have Righteousness by our Lord Jesus Christ? Are we so troubled for our
Pollutions, as to be willing that the Lord Jesus Christ, should be our
Sanctification? Is our Captivity so Irksome to us, that we are willing to have
Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ? Then Come, in Gods Name; say not, Shall I?
May I? but, Come, without any further Hesitation. We must not imagine to come
unto our Lord Jesus Christ, with any Recommendation but that of our being
wretched and miserable, and poor and blind and Naked. It is not under the
Notion of prepared, but under the Notion of perishing Sinners, that we are to
come unto Him. We would fain come unto Him with, such and such good Frames in
our Souls; but we are to come unto Him for, what we cannot come unto Him with.
Never stand pausing, whether you have undergone such Degrees of Compunction and
Contrition; beware lest you make a Christ of those things; but if you can come,
Do; or however Do what you can to come. Do not say, Lord, Depart from me, for I
am sinful man; but say, Lord, because I am a sinful man, therefore I will come
unto thee. Or argue at such a rate as the Lepers did, Be sure, if I sit still,
I die; I may go forth and live: If I stay from the Lord Jesus Christ, I am
ruined unavoidably; but I may come to Him, and have a good reception with Him:
so this I Will do!

VI. Because we have hearts most unaccountably Loathe to come unto the Lord
Jesus Christ, we should lay before our selves all sit Incentives, to Provoke
us, and Excite us thereunto. It Is Prodigious; but yet it is Notorious; There is
nothing in the world whereto we are more Indisposed, than unto Believing unto
the Lord Jesus Christ. Alas* How often do we put our Lord, upon making that
Lamentation over us, in Mat. 23.37. Ye would not! But it becomes us therefore
to stir and spur up our own Souls, with very penetrating Thoughts upon this
matter, till having no other way to betake our selves but un^^ the Lord Jesus
Christ, we are Shut up unto the Faith. May we then Retire, and ponder upon this
Path of Life! There,

Let our first Consideration be This: Who is it, that Invites thee, O my Soul,
yea, who is it, that Requires thee to come unto Him! It is no Less an One than
the King of Heaven, the Lord of Glory, and the Son of God. O Heart of Adamant,
that can Refuse the Favors of such an Illustrious Monarch! It Is a greater than
the Emperor of the World, that H^lds out His Golden Scepter unto us; and says,
Come, Sinners, you may Come and Live! It Is He that is, Mighty to Save, who bids
us to Draw near unto Him, that we may be Saved by Him; It Is He that is the
Des^re of all Nations, who Desires us, that we would but be willing to be
Saved. This Great Person, whom all the Angels in Heaven Worship, it is He that
has called for our coming unto Him; and He has not only Invited, but also
Required our doing so. If it be demanded of you, How dare you come unto the
Lord Jesus Christ? You may with all Humility Reply, Because I dare do no other?
The Winds, the Seas, the very Devils, were Obedient unto our Humbled Jesus: and
how dare we be Disobedient unto our Exalted Prince and Savior, when He
comman^^, Come unto me, that you may have Repentance and Remission of Sins!

Let our next Consideration be, Shall I be a Looser by coming to the Lord Jesus
Christ? No, shall I not. The Wise Man said, Of Labor there is Profit; but
there is no Profit like that of this Labor. Let us come to our Lord; we shall
find no mistake in that of the Psalmist, It is good for me to Draw near unto
God! This Coming to the Lord Jesus Christ, is the most considerable Thing in
that, Godliness which is profitable to all things. Come to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and immediately, the God of Heaven will say to you, Be of Good Cheer,
thy sins are forgiven thee! Immediately the same God of Heaven, will say, This
is a Dear Son, this is a pleasant Child, I will surely have mercy on him! You
will immediately be Entitled unto all the Great and Precious Promises of God;
whatever has been purchased by the Invaluable Blood of the precious Jesus, you
may now write upon it, It is all mine; the God of Heaven will show you all the
Good Things of Heaven it self, and say unto you, as once unto Abraham, All of
these things will I give unto thee! Ah, Rock indeed, that such a Motive will
not break!

Let our Third Consideration be, What will become of me, if I do not come unto
the Lord Jesus Christ! Or, How shall I Escape, if I neglect so great Salvation?
It is most Evident, That as there is more Glory given to God, by coming to the
Lord Jesus Christ, than in keeping all the Law; for God more Eminently
manifested His Glory in the way of our being Saved by Jesus Christ, than in
Giving of the Law; so, our Denying to come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, is the
most horrid Act of Enmity and Rebellion against the Glorious God. Men must sin
in some Instance above the Devil, or else God would not Eternally punish them
with the Devil; now this is done in Refusing to come unto the Lord Jesus
Christ: And assuredly, and accordingly will it be Avenged! What is, A portion
with Unbl^evers, but the most fiery, hideous Portion, in the Dismal Vault
below? O come now unto the Lord Jesus Christ, or else look to hear Him say,
Depart, in the dreadful Day of God, with a voice more terrible than the most
ast^^ishing Thunder? Come to Him, or else Resolve to Ly for ever under that
Formi^able wrath to come, from whence he would have delivered us: Resolve to
we^^^r under the Fierce wrath of God abiding on us; World without End.

Finally, Let this one thing more be considered with us. I have now a Time to
come unto the Lord Jesus Christ; and I know not how long this time will be
continued. Or, Behold now is my acceptable time, Behold now is my day of
Salvation! Suppose we ourselves to be urged from Heaven as was Paul of old,
Arise, why tarriest thou! As yet it is not altogether Too late; Blessed be God,
for His long-suffering; as yet we may come; it may yet be (...), The Master
calls thee! But it will quickly, shortly, presently be too late. Eterni^y is
just going to fasten its Iron Teeth upon our Soul^. Defer no more, Dally no
more, Procras^inate no Longer. A Dilatory Dispo^ition of Soul, is the most
Dangerous that can befall us. Dream not of, A more convenient Season, for there
is no Season so conv^^^ent as just now. Bring this then to the (...); I must
save my self to Night, or to Morrow I may be slain! What said the Lord by the
Apostle? To day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Pray, take
notice, we have This Day, the kind Messages of our Lord Jesus Christ,
bespeaking and alluring of us, this day, to come unto him. Do it this day; it
may be that some of us may never have another.

The CLOSE.
To Conclude, Let this one Consideration, at last put an edge upon this matter
with us: That the Last Sentence upon the world, will be, either Come, or* Go,
according to your present Closure, with the Invitations of the Gospel. The Day
flies toward (...) ^pace, when the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Heaven, will
descend from Heaven, into the Lower World, and sit upon the Throne of Glory to
Judge all the Nations of the World. Let me now plainly and freely, foretell unto
my Hearers, the Door which they shall then Receive at the Glorious Mouth of him
who shall then Judge the world in Righteousness.

There are some of you, that now yield the Obedience of Faith to the
Invitations of the Eternal Jesus. When He says unto you, Come, you are
wishing, you are struggling, to Come, unto Him for the Healing that is under
His Wings. Well, the Lord Jesus Christ will in the Notable Day of God, put
marks of Respect and Honor upon every one of you, to whom He is now Precious;
and He will pass this Sentence on you.

COME YE BLESSED OF MY FATHER, INHERIT THE KINGDOM PREPARED FOR YOU, FROM THE
FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD.

You heard his Voice when he said unto you, Come, in a way of Duty; you shall
Hear His voice, now saying unto you, Come, in a way of Gladness, and Glory. You
that have loved his Presence and His Coming, shall now be Rewarded with Coming
into his Presence. You have come unto Him to Request a Blessing^ even that he
would Bless you, by Turning you from your Iniquities; you shall now come unto
Him to Receive a Blessing; yea, all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Places. By
Coming unto Him, it is that you are Espoused and Married unto that Ever-blessed
Lord; his Father is now become your Father; and He has a Fathers Blessing for
you. Your Tenure of that Blessing shall be Free, Full, Sure, like that of an
Inheritance; you shall have a Lot now assigned you by way of Inheritance, in
the Caelestial Canaan of the Lord. Yes, It Is unto a King that you have Come;
and unto a Kingdom too; you shall share with him in a Kingdom. You shall
partake in all the Delights and Splendors of that Government, which our Lord
will Exercise over the New World, when He shall Reign before His Ancient People
Gloriously. 'Twas Purposed for you, 'twas Promised for you, ye Blessed
Believers, before the Foundation of the World; and at the Foundation of the
World there was Notice given of it, especially in the Sabbath of the Lord; yea,
the very Foundation of the World was Laid with a Regard unto it. This, This is
the Felicity, that is preparing for you; and it is your Coming to the Lord
Jesus Christ, that prepares you for this Felicity!

But from Gerizzim, Let us now take a step to Ebal!

If any of you, do after all the Invitations of the Lord, continue still The
Children of Unperswadableness, Think, in Gods Name Think, what will ensue upon
it? Although He say, Come, yet there are those who rather choose to Go; they Go
away one to his Farm another to his Merchandise. But will you attend unto the
Sentence which in the Terrible Day of God, the Lord Jesus Christ will pass upon
these, after He has raised them to* Shame and everlasting contempt. Every
Syllable will be a Thunderbolt.

GO FROM ME, YE CURSED, INTO EVERLASTING FIRE, PREPARED FOR THE DEVIL AND HIS
ANGELS.

You that would not, Come to Him, shall now Go from him: as you, like the
Gadarens, have said unto him, Go, He will now say the Like to you: you sent Him
away when He stood and knocked at the Door, of your Souls; and now He Will send
you away, though at the Door of Heaven you stand and cry, Lord, Lord, open to me!
Go! but you will Beg, Shall I not be Blessed before I go! No; you that would not
Come to Him for a Blessing, shall now Go from Him, with a Curse: you would not
Come to Him, that was made a Curse for us, and now you shall Go from Him with a
Curse lying upon yourselves. The Written Word, and the Preached Word, would not
move you,; and now the Flying Roll must Smite you. You have slighted the
Breath of the Lord, which called upon you to Come unto himself; and now you
shall be sent from him into a Fire, which the Breath of the Lord, shall as a
Stream of Brimstone, forever kindle. Your Souls will now be filled and vexed
with Furious Reflections upon your former Infidelity; and will be as it were on
a Light Fire under the wrath of God for your Impiety. You Resisted the Spirit
of God, when He would have been Melting of you to a Compliance with the Lord of
Heaven; but that Abused Spirit, will now be most exquisitely and continually
Sca^^^ing of you, in the Fire of Hell, for your Noncompliance. And as you have
here Lived in a Country, made pleasant by the Sunshine of the Gospel, you
shall now be so quartered, that you shall feel a further Incredible Anguish
from the Flames that shall produce and succeed the Conflagration, wherein a
large part at Least of this Globe, will be an Entire Vesuvius, for Ages not a
few. But How long, Alas, How Long, must you Roar, I am Tormented in the Fire?
It was for the sake of Pleasures, but for a Season, that you would not come
unto the Almighty Jesus; but for that sake, you must now Go into Torments, the
Smoke whereof shall ascend for ever and ever. You must be for ever Languishing
under a Wrath to come, a Wrath still to come after it is already come; Why?
because when you were urged to come unto Him, who Delivers from that Wrath, you
were still to come, and would never come. Your Sin, in slighting that Blood,
which is, The Blood of God, was a Sin against an Infinite Object; now none but
an Infinite Vengeance, could be proportionable to such a Sin; and that it may
be Infinite upon you, it must be no less than Eternal Possibly, you thought it
very tediously Long, to be detained an Hour at a Sermon or a Prayer, wherein a
Coming to the Lo^^ Jesus Christ was prosecuted; but it shall now be Requi^ed
with a Banishment from that Gracious Lord, into an Everlasting Destruction, and
into an Everlasting Punishment; a Destruction and a Punishment, the Duration
whereof could not be comprised, in a Scrowl as big as the starry Heaven, all
Filled with Figures of Nine, unto the utmost Edges of it! Yea, but with whom?
Truly, With the Devil and his Angels. Because you would not come unto the Lord,
that would have Recovered you out of your Apostasy, you shall now be confirmed
in that Apostasy, among those Irrecoverable Apostates, the Devils whose,
Redemption cease for ever. 'Twas because you Listened unto the Devils and his
Children, that you would not come unto the Lord Jesus Christ; it shall now be
Revenged by your being bidden to Go with, The Devil and his Angels. You would
not give the Good Angels, the satisfaction of seeing you pay a due Homage unto
that Lord, whom, ^ll the Angels of God worship; and so (...) must be now Lodged
among the Evil Angels; They whose Captives, and ^ome^slaves, you h^ve been,
must now be with you, confined in the same Fiery Prison. You scorned the only
Cure for the cruel Bite, which the Old Serpent had given you* and now, you must
be, Broken in the place of Dragons; and be Nested where the freckled Adders of
the Pit will be Crawling and Coyling about you, world without End.

Oh! Consider of it! and over-hear the Lord Jesus now saying over you, He th^^
Comes not unto me, wrongeth his own Soul; all that slight me, Love Death.

Well, And what Resolutions have you now taken up? Will you see whether after
all your sins you can come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, that he may Save you
from your Sins? Or, will you still Expose your selves to wrath unto the
uttermost, because you will not Come unto him, that would Save you to the
uttermost? Let me once more tell you; for I know not well how to give over my
Urgencies with you, till you find your selves prevailed upon! I say, Entreat me
not to Leave you, or to Turn from Following after you, until I have told you
this one thing more.

You are to come, unto the Lord Jesus Christ; but what for? Why, It Is that you
may be Married unto Him. Hear this, ye poor Beggars, lying by the Hedges and in
the Ditches of Hell; and be a^tonished at what you Hear; you are Invited this
Day, to Come unto the Lord Jesus Christ; and it is that you may be Married unto
that, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, who has filled not Earth only, but
Heaven also with his Glory. O how can you find in your Hearts, to Deny such
Overtures of the Caelestial Monarch: To Come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, indeed
is but thus much; it is, To be willing that the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ,
should Unite us unto Himself, and Make us, and Use us as His Own, in the
Everlasting Covenant. Oh! What Prodigies of Madness and Hardness are we, if we
don't fall in with such Propositions! The Invitations of the Lord unto us are,
Come to me, that so thy Maker may be thy Husband, Even thy Redeemer; and that
so thou mays^ Live to me, and Live with me, and Live on Me, and by Me, be
fruitful unto God! Say then; Are you willing to Come? Briefly, I am the Servant
of the God of Abraham, and I am sent unto you upon this Errand; My Master has a
Son, who is, The Heir of all things; and He demands of you to come, unto him,
that so He may for ever Be^^^th you unto Himself! Now, if ye will deal kindly
and truly with my Master, tell me. Solicited Soul, The Angels of my Lord in
this House at this Hour, are observing what Answer thou make unto this
Demand; Will thou go with this man? O Reply, I will Go! and Reply it with more
Sincerity than was in the Son, Who said, I go Sir, and went not! Come, and the
Everlasting Son of my Master, will shortly Carry thee to the Ineffable
Entertainments that are in, The Mansions of his Fathers House, for ever more

PLAIN ADVICE. In Answer to that HARD QUESTION, Who are they that shall be
Saved?
Rev. XX.XV, Whosoever was not found Written in the Book of Life, was cast into
the Lake of Fire.


THere is a Wonderful and a Notable World of Spirits, whereto we are all of us
Traveling, through a State of Probation, which our God has appointed for us;
and that we may be assisted in our Preparation for that GREAT WORLD, it is
necessary that we should be furnished with some true Notions of it. But while
we are Clothed with Flesh, the Notions of Spiritual Concerns, are most easily
conveyed unto us, by Metaphors fetched from such Objects, as do by our Flesh
become sensible unto us; and the Beams of Light must come unto us from that
Other World, with some Clothing from this upon them. Now Almighty God,
Condescending in His Instructions to our Capacities, has been pleased Himself,
to Intimate and as it were to Consecrate, certain Metaphors, for the use of our
understandings, in shaping our Conceptions of such things as otherwise would be
Unutterable, and He has pitched upon diverse things of common and famous use in
Humane affairs, giving us this Direction thereupon, Make those things the
Figures from whence your Thoughts are to take their Measures, when you go to
apprehend, the Deep things of God.

Among the Profound Mysteries, whereof our Merciful God has Mercifully advised
us, One is, That Everlasting and Immutable Counsel of His, whereby He has
Chosen a Certain and Special Number of Men, to be Vessels for the Glory of His
Grace forever, with an Eternal Reprobation passing over others. Now the Emblem
or Shadow, under which our God would give us notice of this Glorious Mystery,
is that of, A BOOK, wherein we may Imagine Entered, the Names of such as are to
be Saved by the Lord Jesus Christ. Suppose a Daniel, a Paul, a John might on
this Side the Third Heaven, have enjoyed a Vision of the Eternal Election,
passing upon the Heirs of Life, that Election would not have been otherwise
than under the Shape and Form of, A BOOK, represented unto them. And the
mention of A BOOK, in this case, may be supposed an allusion to the Public
Registers, used in Cities, Countries, Kingdoms, and with almost all the
Civilized Nations of this World; where the Names of such as might have any
claim to future Privileges, are usually Enrolled. The Ancient Israel of God,
had most particularly their Books, wherein they that could not find their Names
Inserted, were debarred from such Advantages as they which were therein
Recorded, might pretend unto. Now the BOOK of Life, which indeed like our Life,
is Hid with God* in Christ, is Gods Decree of Election, wherein these and those
men, are from all Eternity with a most particular Designation, (...) apart for
the Obtaining of Life Eternal. We read in Acts. 17, 48. About, As many as are
Ordained unto Eternal Life Now the Eternal Choice of God, is that Book, wherein
the Names of all that are thus Ordained, are most particularly Noted. The
Decree of God, which has all that are to Live Happily for ever, as
particularly, as if by Name Remembered in it: This is the Book of Life. And this
Book is in our Text here Exhibited unto us, as containing the Catalogue of all
the persons, who at the Approaching Day of Judgment, shall Escape, The
Vengeance of Eternal Fire.

Concerning this Illustrious BOOK of Life, there are two Assertions to be
Advanced, for the Introducing of the most weighty Case, that ever demanded your
meditations.

One Assertion is, That no man having His Name once written in the BOOK of
Life, shall or can, ever have it Blotted out again. Gods BOOK will never have
any Blot: but it is the Purpose and Promise of God concerning every man, that
has his Name in that BOOK, Rev. 8.5. I will not Blot his name out of the Book
of Life. If a Mortal Man could say concerning what he had written on the Cross
of our Lord, What ^ have written, I have written: Much more will the Immortal
God say, upon what He has written in His Book about them that are to have
Life, by the Death of our Lord, on that Cross, What I have Written, I have
Written; and it shall never be Liable to the Least Obliteration. This was the
Old Austins way of arguing.

It Is true, that Moses pleading for Sinful Israel, said, in Exodus 32.33. If
thou will, Forgive their Sin, and if not, Blot me, I pray thee, out of this
Book, which thou have Written: I Insist not on that which many, and especially
Jewish Interpreters, assign as the meaning of those words; That they refer to
the Book of the Law, or the Pentateuch, where the Name of Moses does Live
Renowned unto all Generations; q. d. I am willing it should never be Read or
Known, that there was a man of my Name in the World. But it is possible, that
the Man of God, might refer to the Book of Life Temporal, not the Book of Life
Eternal; there is a Book of Providence, which has in it the Names of such as
are to Outlive the Wasting Plagues, that are to come upon their Neighbors;
now says Moses, Let me rather now Die my self, than that thy Name should be
Dishonored in thy Blo^^ing out the Names of all this people from the Number of
the Living. This was the sense, by Jerome and others of the Ancients put upon
those words of Moses; and it is a Sense which the Context smiles very much
upon. But suppose that the Book of Election was intended in the words of Moses;
the Heroic Love and Zeal of that Saint, for the People of God, might
passionately propound, an Impossible Thing, in the pursuance of a Possi^le. Our
Lord Himself in His Agoni^^ mentioned such a Thing, and added, Father, If it be
possible. What if in the Efforts of his Ardors, Moses might say, Lord, rather
than this People should perish, I could be content, if that were possible, to
loose the Happiness, provided, I may not also Lose the Holiness, of my own
Eternal Salvation! It Is but like the Carriage of a Charitable Brother, who
Beseeching his Father to be Reconciled unto an Undutiful Son, should plead,
Sir, Either pardon this my faulty Brother, or else Run me through with your
Sword! a Thing which he knows will never be done. This, as to Moses.

There is indeed a Negative Deletion out of Gods Book, sometimes mentioned in
the Oracles of God; but not, a Positive. When we Read such places, as Psalm.
69.28. and Rev. 22.19. about men's being Blotted out of Gods Book, the meaning
of it is, That God will make it appear, they have never been at all Written
there. To affirm, that any one man, whom God has Appointed not unto wrath, but
unto the obtaining of Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ; may happen afterward
to be Blotted out of the Glorious Last which the Decree of God has made of His
Elect, this were a Tenet big with Many and Grievous Blasphemies. The Decree of
God, indeed Orders a million of Things, that are Conditionate, one unto
another; but the Decree it self is not Conditionate; no, it absolutely
determines, as well the End, as all the Means Leading to that End. The God of
Heaven has Decreed, that such and such men, shall arrive unto Eternal
Blessedness; of all whom, I may say, as Paul about some of them, in Phil. 4.3.
Their Names are in the Book of Life. But God has also Decreed that every one of
these men shall certainly Repent, and certainly Believe, and in that way arrive
to this Blessedness; nor can any one of these men, by perishing in Impenitent
Unbelief, procure his Name to be Blotted out of that Book. The old Pagans
feigned their Graces, to be all of them Linked unto each other, by an
Indissiluble Chain. But the Connexions between the Graces of our God, are still
more Inseparable: you have them in Romans 8:30: Whom He did pred^stinate, them He
also called; and whom He called, them He also Justified; and whom He Justified,
them He also Glorified. This, all of this Infallibly and Unfailingly comes of,
A Name written in the Book of Life! The Stability of the Divine Election, is a
Thing every where affirmed, by the Author of that Election; a thousand
Scriptures conspire to tell us, That the purpose of God, according to Election
shall stand. I Remember, that Solomon says, in Prove. 10.25. The Righteous is an
Everlasting Foundation. The Apostle Paul, applies this to all the Elect. They
that have their Names Written in the Book of Life, have a twofold Writing upon
themselves; One, The Lord knows who are his* The Other, Let every one that Names
the Name of Christ depart from iniquity. Now for them that are thus written,
it is said of Them, with Regard unto the writing in 2 Timothy 2.19. They are, first,
a foundation; and, secondly, a Foundation of God; and, Thirdly, a sure
Foundation; and, Fourthly, a Foundation that stands; and Fifthly, a Foundation
that has a Seal upon it; never shall the Writing of such a Foundation, be
scratched out! The principle of Grace, which must be infused into all that have
their Names in the Book,, is an immortal Seed; it Remains, it Abides, it is a
Well of Water springing up into Everlasting Life. The Covenant of Grace, which
all that have their Names in the Book must be brought into, is Everlasting, and
Perpetual; the Lord not only says, I will not Break it* but also says, That He
will keep us from (...) so; He says, I we never Leave thee, nor Forsake thee.
All that have their Names in the Book, shall be Married unto the Lord Jesus
Christ; but our Lord says, I hate putting away! The Power of God, and the
Promise of God, is Engaged for, The Perseverance of the Saints; and the
Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ, must be Unsuccessful, and Insufficient,
if any of them should not at last come to be, With Him, where He is!

In short, If any Name could be Really Blotted out from the Book of Life, it
must be, either, because that God knows not certainly who will come unto Life
Eternal at the last, or, because God could not confer the Grace, which is
Necessary to bring them unto that Life. But, it is fit, that such Pelagian,
Arminian, Socinian, Blasphemies, become Abominable among the People of God.

But then, a Second Assertion is,

That a man, having his Name written in the Book of Life, may by a Blessed
Assurance of it, be able to Read it there. Our Lord, said once unto His
Disciples, in Luc. 10.20: Rejoice, because your Names are written in Heaven;
and this is one of those things whereto He would have that Rule applied, What I
say to you, I say to all. So then a Disciple of Our Lord Jesus Christ on earth
may with Joy unspeakable see his Name written, In Heaven, among them that, For
Heaven, at the last. Why are we enjoined, in 2. Pet. 1 10 Give Diligence to
make your Election sure. It Is not a certainty of the Object, but a certainty of
the Subject, that we are directed unto the pursuance of: A man by diligence in
the Exercise of all virtue may come to be sure of this, I have my Name Written
among the Eternally Elected of God. The Inseparable consequents of a Name
written in the Book of Life, may be known by them, that have them. The Grace of
God, wrought in the hearts of them that have their Names in the Book of God;
this is a discernible sort of a Thing; it is compared unto Fire, unto Light, unto
Life, which make themselves evident where they are. One Good man has before now
been able to say, Lord, I believe. Another Good man has been able to say, Lord,
thou know that I Love thee. Yea, but they that are assured of such Things,
may readily tell, where their Names are to be found. Good men may come to say,
as in 1: Joh. 3 14. We know that we have passed from Death to Life; and this
knowledge may assure them, that they have Names Written in the Book of Life. It
was the assurance of a Job, I know that my Redeemer lives. But such a man may
be also assured, that his Redeemer has written him among them that are to be
Redeemed. It was the assurance of a David, The Lord is my Shepherd; but such a
Man may be also assured, that the Great Shepherd has written him, among the
sheep of his Right Hand. It was the assurance of a Paul, The Son of God has
loved me; but he was then likewise assured of a Room in the Book as well as in
the Heart of that Blessed Lord.

And this brings me to that most Important CASE. What should a Man do, that he
may be Assured of a Name, Written in the Book of LIFE?

The Roman Historian Reports, that the Son of a Senator, understanding certain
Honors to be decreed by the Senate for certain Soldiers, whose Names were for
that cause written in a Book, he begged of his Father to let him see the Book,
or to tell him at least, whether his Name were in the Book? His Father told
him, These were Secrets; whereupon the Son asked, Pray, Sir, tell me the
General Qualifications of them, that have their Names in the Book, which when
the Father did, the Son perceived himself to be none of them. Truly, The Book
of Life, is One of the, Secret Things which belong unto the Lord; it were a
vain and a mad curiosity, to think of Climbing Heaven for a view of That; we
may say of it, I cannot Read, for lo, the Book is a sealed Book; but the
Qualifications of them that may know their Names written in that Book, These
are the Revealed Things, which belong unto us, and unto our Children. Attend,
then, while I set Them a little before you; Attend, while I show you, what is
like to become of you throughout Eternal Ages.

I. If a man would be Assured of a Name in the Book of Life, Let him then make
sure of Regeneration, and of a New Life. In Well Ordered Commonwealths, all
that are Born* have their Names Written in a Book, designed for the Registring
of such Matters. Why, God has a Book, wherein all that are Newborn have their
Names written for ever. There is a Book of Names, which is called, in Mat. 1.1:
The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ. The Fathers of our Lord, as to a
Natural Generation, have their Names in that Book; but all that are Converted
unto God, are as to a Spiritual Generation the Children of our Lord* These are
styled, The Seed of the Self-Offering Messiah; and of these He says, Behold,
the Children that the Father has given me! Well, All of these Children have
their Names also, in, A Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ. God had His
Books of Genealogies in Israel, from which they that could not prove their
Birth of such or such Parents, were put by from the Priesthood of the Lord.
Yea, but it is a New Birth alone, which will help us to find our Names in Gods
Book of Genealogies. There were Foolish Questions about Genealogies, bandied in
the Schools of the old Grammarians and Philosophers; the Apostle has Hissed at
those Questions: but it is no Foolish Question, for a man to be Inquisitive
after this Genealogy, Am I Born again? or No? The man that is Born from Above,
may be sure that he has his Name written Above. We read of, A New Name. Thy
Name was, A Child of Wrath; but is thy Name now, A Child of God? He that has
this New Name, has his Name Written in the Book of Life. Let a man make sure of
This, That he be a New Creature; That he Think and Walk like, One come into
another World; That he have such a Respect unto God, biassing his Thoughts, his
Ends, his Affections, his Discourses, his Behaviors, as he was once a Stranger
unto; To a man thus Newborn, the Lord from Heaven speaks this Consolation,
Son, Be of Good Cheer, Thy Name is here in my Book of Life. We are informed,
There is Joy in Heaven among the Angels, over one Sinner that Repents. Truly,
if any of you will now come unto Repentance, you may be sure, the Angels of God
will have your Names presently among them; the Angels of God will sing and say,
Now we know the Name of one person more that must come to Live with us for ever.

II. Let a man Subscribe his Name to Gods Covenant, and he may be Assured, that
he has his Name Written in the Book of God. It is said in Exodus 24.7. Moses
took the Book of the Covenant, and Read in the Audience of the People, and they
said, All that the Lord has said, will we do, and be Obedient. You see, there
was, The Book of the Covenant; Now if a man would see his Name in Gods Book,
let him heartily Subscribe to the Covenant of God, and say, All that the Lord
has spoken in His Covenant, I Approve it, and I Embrace it all. I beseech you,
Let your Hearts Accompany what I am going to say. There is an Offer of a New
COVENANT, wherein the G^d of Heaven, demands of us, Whether we will have the
Lord Jehovah for our God, Renouncing the Flesh, the World, and the Devil? with
whatever Delights those Idols propound unto us as our chief Good? And, Whether
we are willing that the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only Mediator, should both
procure for us the Favor of this God, and also remove all the Ignorance and
Enmity in our Minds, that keeps us at a Distance from God? Give your serious
and solemn Consent, unto the Terms of this Covenant: Consent, my Neighbors,
Consent unto the Way of Salvation, in this Covenant provided for; with
Conquered Souls, make this Answer, Lord, I am willing to be Thine, in thy
Covenant of Grace; and it is thy Grace alone that has made me so. Thrice and
Four Times Happy Souls, your Names are then undoubtedly in the Book of Life.

Yea, but that I may carry this matter a little further; what says the Prophet,
in Isa 44.5. One shall say, I am the Lords, (...) another shall subscribe with
his hand unto (...) Lord? There are some who Read it, (...) shall give an
handwriting to be the Lords. It has been the Judgment and Advice of many
Divines, That it would be a profitable Thing, for men to have the Covenant of
Grace in a writing summarily laid before them, and for them with deep
Resentments of Soul, to Sign it with their Hands as well as their Hearts, and
to keep this Act forever by them, as a Perpetual Remembrancer unto them, that
they are the Lords. It Is not easy to make any objection, against our being thus
Explicit, in doing that, which must at least Implicitly be done by all Godly
men. If this now be discretly, sincerely, thoroughly done, you may safely
conclude, The Name that I have now written at the bottom of this Covenant, ^is
as undoubtedly written in the Book of Life, before God for ever. When a man has
thus by a deed^ of Gift made over himself unto the God that made him, the Deed
is presently Recorded as it were in a Book of God; the man when he comes to
Heaven, will find it there. There was a multitude of Devout Souls who came to
that Resolution in Neh. 9.^8. We make a sure covenant and write it, and sign
it. And presently you have the Names of them in the Book of God; even more than
fourscore of them together. Do something equivalent unto this Transaction; and
then, if in any Temptation, afterward you are prone to suspect, whether you
have a Name written in Gods Book, you may have Recourse to this evidence, for
your Eternal Satisfaction. This Indenture of yours, I tell you, has its
Counterpane, in the Book of Life!

III. Let the Written Book of God, have a due Entertainment with a man, and
that will be a comfortable Token, that he has his Name written in Gods Book.
Our Bible here, is that BOOK, whereby the Religion of God, is maintained in the
World. O set your Hands unto this Miraculous Book, saying, This do I Receive,
as the Book of God and of Life. It Is the Sanction at the close of the Bible, in
Rev. 22.1^. If any man shall take away from the words of the Book of this
Prophecy, GOD shall take away his part out of the Book of Life. Well then,
would you be certain of ^ part in the Book of Life? Let this most Invaluable
Book, in every part of it, be most invaluable with you. Visit this Book every
day; and whatever Day you miss doing so, count that you have not seen the Sun that
Day; that it has been a dark, a black, and cloudy Day. Repair s^^ll to this
Book, for all that you are to Believe, and for all that you are to Practice, in
Religion, and evermore Give Heed unto this Book, as unto a Light shining in a
Dark Place. As for all the Doctrines in this Book, say, These are all of them
Faithful Sayings, and worthy of all Acceptance: Great is the Mystery of
Godliness contained in them. As for all the Commandments in this Book, say,
These are all of them* Holy, and Just, and Good; I count these Precepts
concerning all things to be Right, and I would Hate every false way therein
Re^^^ed. As for all the Promise^ in this Book, say, These are all of them,
great and precious? I have taken them for my Heritage, and they shall be the
Rejoicing of my Soul. As for all the Threatenings of this Book, say, Lord, my
Flesh Trembles for Fear of Thee, and I am Afraid of thy Judgments. And* as for
all the Examples in this Book, say, Lord, By these is thy Servant Warned. Let
thy heart be set upon this Book, and This will be a Token, that as for that
other Book of God, thy Name is in it.

IV. Whatever man becomes a Believer on the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, who
is the Essential Word of God, may take it for granted, that his Name is in the
Eternal Book of God. The Lord Jesus Christ, is that Blessed Savior, who says,
in Psalm. 40.7. In the Volume of the Book, it is Written of me; or, as it may be
read, In the Beginning of the Book. Why, as the Lord Jesus Christ stands first,
in the Book of Election; Even in the Beginning of the Book; He is the first of
the Chosen, and then we are Chosen in Him; so, if you Look into the very
Beginning of this visible Book, you will find, The Promised Se^d of the Woman,
is Written of; and indeed, the whole Book from first to last, is written to
testify this Thing, That our Jesus is Exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to
give us, both Repentance and Remission of Sins. Come then, Let every Soul of
us, Receive the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Only Begotten and Ever-Beloved, Son
of God, and as the God-man, In whom it has pleased the Father, there should all
Fullness dwell. By Faith Receive Him, of whom it is Written in the Book, and we
may be sure, that we our selves are also Written in the Book. ^e we bitterly
affected, with a sight of our own Sinfulness, and Wretchedness, and when we are
even stung to Death, by the Fiery Serpents of Hell, then let us effectually
Hear that Call of our Lord Jesus Christ, Look unto Me, and be ye Saved, all the
Ends of the Earth. Utterly Despairing of Help for an Undone Soul, from any
other Quarter, Let us fly to the Lord Jesus Christ, as to the Hopeful Refuge,
which Almighty God has set before us: Of this Jesus, Let us declare, This is
He, in whose Righteousness only, I dare to appear before the Judgment Seat of
God! Let us declare, This is He, who shall Restore my Soul, and Lead me in the
Paths of Righteousness! And, This is He, who shall make me a Conqueror, and
more than a Conqueror, over my Ghostly Adversaries! Man, if this be, the
Resolved Language of thy Soul, concerning the Lord of Life, I can here open the
Book of Life, before thine eyes; Behold, with a Joyful Soul, Thy Name is
written in this Book. It was a dreadful Imprecation upon the Despisers of the
Lord Jesus Christ, in Psalm. 69.28. Let them be Blotted out of the Book of the
Living, and not be Written with the Righteous. Tremble at this, all you that
have been so busy about the Trifles of this World, as hitherto to continue
Christless all your Days. But as for you, To whom Christ is Precious; you may
be comforted in this, that you have your Names Written among the Royal
Priesthood, the Holy Nation, the Peculiar People, of the Lord.

V. He that belongs to the Mystical Body of the Lord Jesus Christ, may be
certain that His Name is written in the Mysterious Book of that Lord. The
Spirit of our Lord, in David, having an eye to his Mystical Body, says in
Psalm. 139.16. In thy Book, all my members were written. When once a man becomes
really Joined unto that Body even, the whole Body of Saints, he may then
Venture to think, I am certainly one of those that were in the Book of God,
from all Eternity, Laid out for the Members of Christ Mystical. Yea, But how
shall a man know that he belongs to the Mystical Body of the Lord Jesus Christ?
I Will tell you, How? Are you Acted by the same Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ,
that Actuates all the Rest of His Body? Is the the Lord Jesus Christ a
Quickening Spirit unto you, as He is unto the Rest of them, that are United unto
Himself? We read of Names Written in the Earth; so it is, When we have Hearts
cleaving to the Earth. Some there are, that never think, they have Earth
enough, and that subordinate all things to the getting of Earth. Such men are
strangers to the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ; God knows, whether they have
Names Written in Heaven, or no. But pray, mark what I say; the Spirit of the
Lord Jesus, Inclines all that belong unto Him, To prefer a Christ above a
World; and to abhor and avoid every Sin, as the worst Evil in the World; It
inclines them all, to prize Communion with God, in the Devotions of
Christianity, above all the Delights of this Life: It inclines them all, to do
all the Good they can, unto all that are about them. Say now, Are you Led by
this Holy Spirit of the Lord, or no? If you are, Then I say, That you are in
the Holy Body of the Lord. Let me add, How are you concerned for the Church of
the Lord Jesus Christ? Are the Joys of the Church, made your own; Are the
Griefs of the Church made your own: Do you Resent the Circumstances of the
Church, As being your selves also in the Body? Behold, another Demonstration
that you are Members of that Body. But if you will do something further to put
it out of doubt; pray, Join your selves in Fellowship, with a particular Church
of the Lord Jesus Christ, walking in the Order of the Gospel. The Apostle
speaks in Heb. 12.23. about, The General Assembly, and the Church of the First
born, which are Written in Heaven. It Is in allusion to the Church of Israel,
Assembled at Sinai of old. This I say, if men would not remain in Doubts,
whether they be Written in Heaven. Let them get into some Assembly of Zion,
some Church of the Living God. We read in Isa. 4.3. about some, Written among
the Living in Jerusalem. If any man, don't count it worth the while, for him to
have his Name, Written in the Church-Book, among them that are anew made Alive
by the Word of God, how should he be able to see his Name written in Gods Book,
among them that are to Live Eternally? I am verily persuaded, That God thus
punishes the fault of many a Christian, who Lies from year to year out of
Church Fellowship; He punishes it, by denying them an Assurance of an
Interest, in the Book of Life.

VI. He that can see his Name written on the Breast of the Lord, may plainly
see it also in the Book of the Lord. It was the usage of old, in Exodus 28.19.
Aaron shall bear the Names of the Children of Israel, upon his Heart, when he
goes in unto the Holy Place, for a Memorial before the Lord continu^ll^. Our
Lord Jesus Christ, is our High priest, gone for us into the most Holy Place;
and He has Engraved upon His Breast, the Names, of all that are to be Saved by
His Mediation. Well, Are your Names among them? An Hard Interrogatory! But if
you will Hearken to me a little, you shall see, whether your Names are there or
no. I say then, ^o you bear upon your Hearts, the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ
continually? Is it your Frequent, your Daily Study, What shall I do to advance
the Name of my dear Lord? And is it like a Dagger at your Hearts, that the Name
of your Lord is Honored so Little, or so much Blasphemed, in the World? Be
sure, your Names are upon His Heart, if his Name Ly much upon yours. But, there
is another Symptom, which may help you, in the Discovery: it is This. Have you,
in your own Wishes and Prayers, the Echo's of that Intercession, wherein our
Lord carries the Names of His People, before God, that they may be Saved unto
the uttermost? I ask you, that you would make a Liesure to look into the
seventeenth Chapter of John, where you have a little Copy of our Lords Glorious
Intercession. There, when you read the Demands of our Lord, that we may be kept
from the Evil of the World, That we may be Sanctified by the Word of Truth,
That we may be United unto Himself, and come to be with Him, where He is, to
behold His Glory, as our Heaven; Do you fervently and constantly, make Those
your own Intercessions for your selves? Can you say, Lord, Here is all my
Salvation, and all my Desire! Man, Thy Name, is then Written among those for
whom the Lord of Glory is is at this Day Interceding in his Glory.

VII. All the Servants, All the Soldiers, All the Friends, of God, have their
Names Entered in His Book,; Let every man Examine himself, whether he be such an
One, or no? Are you the Servants of God? The King of Egypt, as we Read in
Genesis, had a Box, where was Written the Names of the Servants belonging to
his Household. Thus the King of Heaven, has a Book, wherein are the Names of all
His true Servants written. There are some of whom it may be said, They are
always at work for God; and they are ever now and then contriving, What shall I
do for God? Let me confidently tell Them that are thus employed. The great God
has every one of your Names before him. There is not any one service, that we
do for our God, but it is in his Book: more exactly then ever Mordecai's
Fidelity was in the Persian Chronicles; and surely then, every servant of His,
must have a Name also there. We do not let fall one Tear, in our waiting upon
God; but, Lord it is in thy Book! and is there not also the Name of him, who
dropped the Tear? Again, Are you the Soldiers of God? Commanders use to have the
Names of all their Soldiers, in their Catalogues, and some very memorable
Generals have had such memories, as to know by Name the most of them. Truly so,
the Lord of Hosts, He has a Book, wherein he has Listed the Names of all the
Soldiers, that Fight under His Banners against the enemies of His Interests.
There are some, that are always bearing of their Testimonies for the Laboring
Truths, and the Neglected Ways of God, in the world; and that are always
morti^ying in their own Souls, those, Fleshly Lusts, that war against their
Souls. To these also, it may be freely said, Your Names are among the Champions
of the Great God. We read concerning, The Book of the wars of the Lord; and
indeed many Worthies had their Names in that Book. As for you, that faith fully
set your selves, in your places to bear down whatever is contrary to God and
Christ, and Grace and Piety and Charity in the world, I say, Your Names are
among those worthies of the Lord.

Once more, Are you among the Friends of God? It is an usual thing for a
Gentleman, that is a Traveller, to have an Album, or Bla^k Book, wherein the
Names of his Friends are Inserted, with certain Memorials of them. Why, if you
are the Friends of God, you shall have a Name, in His Book; so had Abraham, The
Friend of God! Keep you up an Acquaintance with God? Are you never so well, as
when Enlightened by the Countenance of God? Are you ready to Do any thing for
God, that He would have to be done? O Then, He has got all your Names in a Book
of His! Yea, His voice unto you is that, Behold, I have Engraven thee on the
Palms of my Hands, thy Wal^s are continually before me; Even as Jerusalem was
Engraven on the Rings commonly worn by persons of Quality among the Jews. There
was a Time when God, and Holiness, had many Enemies; but there were a few that
stood up for God, and Virtue, at such a Time; Now it is said, in Mal. 3.16. A
Book of Remembrance, was written before Him, for Them, that Feared the Lord,
and that Thought upon His Name. What? Are you Loath to have God offended, and
are you zealous for that si^e, which God would have maintained? Your Names are
then in the Book of His Remembrance.

VIII. He that is a true Follower of the Lamb, cannot but have his Name in the
Lambs Book of Life. We read in Rev. 13:8. Of some, Whose Names are not written
in the Book of Life, of the Lamb. It is needless to Distinguish this Book of
the Lamb, from the Book of Life; with some, who Interpret it, as if the Lamb,
were the Book it self. However, This may be said; The Lamb of God, is in some
sort a Book of God, unto us; that is, we are to Learn from the pattern of the
Lord Jesus Christ, how to form our Lives before God: The Life of that Lamb is a
sort of a Copy Book for us, from whence we are to take the Rules of our Lives.
Come then; what can you say to This? Can it be said of you, There is in yo^ the
Mind that was in Jesus Christ? Can it be said of you, You Walk even as Jesus
Christ walked? Can it be said of you, As was Christ, so you are in the World?
Are you often thinking, How did Christ perform such a Duty? and, How did Christ
endure such a Trial? and are you studious of a Conformity to that Lord from
Heaven? Why, That Lamb of God, has then written you among his Followers.
Particularly, Are you the Sheep of God? Are you Clea^ly, like Sheep? Are you
Harmless, like Sheep? Are you Patient, like Sheep? Like Sheep, are you
Tractable? And like Sheep, do you Study, to be very profitable? The Shepherd of
Israel says in Joh. 10.3. He calls his own Sheep by Name; Sirs, you are the
Sheep, so called, and your Names are in the Book of the Lamb.

IX. Such as duly long for the Day, when the Books are to be Opened, will
probably have their Names then found, in that Book, where it is most of all to
be desired. It is foretold unto us, in Rev. 20.12. I saw the Dead, Small and
Great, stand before God, and the Books were Opened; and the Dead were Judged
out of those Things, which were written in the Books. Now can you heartily say,
O That this Day might come on apace! Are you Longing for that Kingdom of the
Lord Jesus Christ, which is to be at His Appearing to Judge the Quick and the
Dead? Are you Longing for the Revo^ution, wherein* The Kingdoms of this World,
shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of His Christ, and the Time of the
Dead, shall come, that they should be Judged? There is a Day at Hand, when the
Lord Jesus Christ shall Judge the World, and make New Heavens and a New Earth,
wherein shall dwell Righteousness: Are you now Longing, as well as Locking for
that Great DAY? Do you Long for the Accomplishment of those Glorious Things
which are Spoken about the City of God? You pray, Thy Kingdom Come; Well,
Suppose the Lord Jesus Christ were immediately [ And, can any man prove that it
shall not be immediately?] to break in upon the World, and it upon the Throne
of His Glory; Would your Hearts even Leap and Spring within you, at the
Apprehensions of it? Surely, The Book of Life, then to be opened, will then
show you those things that shall Give you, Times of Refreshing in the Presence
of the Lord. I Will add but one short word more.

X. A man that would be sure of a Name in Gods Book, must have a care of a Name
in the Devils Book. The Devil in an Apish Affectation to Resemble our God, has
a Book, wherein he Writes the Names of all that carry on his Interests, in the
World. Not only those more Execrable Witches, who Make and Sign Explicit
Leagues with Evil Spirits, are thus Written down for Condemnation, but the Long
and Red Book of the Devil, has also in it, the Names of them who do any notable
thing to promote his Design; yea, the Names of all that are in any
Confederacies with him, or are Le^ Captive hy him at his Will. I say then, Call
your selves to a strict Account, Am I one of those that walk after the Prince
of the Power of the Air? O^, Am I one of those who Resist the Devil, when the
Devil does Assault them? We must be Turned from Satan, before we shall be,
Rased out of Satan's Book. But this is not all; we should also call our selves
to a strict Reckoning, Am I Embarked in some Affair which the Powers of
Darkness will make some Earning of? Or, Do I keep clear of every thing that
would contribute unto the Devils Kingdom: will the Devil get nothing by what I
do? To do so much as any great Job of Journec-work for Satan, will get us into
his Book; and how shall we then see that we are in the Lords?

The Enforcement.

But there is a double Improvement of these Things to be Endeavored.

(I.)
And now, Let all the persons thus privileged, with a Name written in the Book
of Life, take the blessed Consolations that belong unto them, and Rejoice with
Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. O Rejoice, ye Redeemed of the Lord, Rejoice*
In the Hope of the Glory of God! It is possible, that an abusive and a
slanderous World, may throw many of your Names, into the Dirt; But, its no
matter; as long as your Names are now written in Heaven, it is well enough? It
may be you are little in the Books of People among whom you dwell. What then?
You are in Gods Book; and that is enough! A Name written in the Book of Life,
will make a rich Compensation to some Great Saints, whose Names are now
scandalously traduced in Books Written by some Wooden and partial Historians.
Or, suppose, you have not, A Name of Sons and of Daughters, yet here is enough,
to make amends for it; you have, says the Lord, In my Book an Everlasting
Name, that shall not be cut off. It was a Great Thing, which God bestowed upon
David, whereof He said, I have made thee a Great Name, like unto the Name of
the Great Men that are in the Earth. But it is a Greater Thing, that God has
done for you, when He has given you a Name in his Book, among the Good Men that
have a Name, in the Heaven of the Blessed. What though it be a Dying World, in
which you are Sojourners before the Lord? You have your Names in the Book of
Life, and so safe enough are you! How glad was Hezekiah, when he was told, I
will add unto thy Days Fifteen Years! And how much more Glad may you be, that
have your Names, in that Book of Life, where you have a better Life Ensured,
for infinitely more then fifteen millions of Ages! Only let me leave this one
Counsel with you; Take heed that you don't B^^t your Evidences. It is the
wholesome Counsel in Ephesians. (...) not the Holy Spirit of God, (...) are Sealed
unto the Day of Redemption. We may be Written for the Day of Redemption; but it
is the special Office of the Holy Spirit, so to Enlighten us, that we shall be
able to Read the Writing. If we give way to any gross^r miscarriages, the
Grieved Spirit of God will withdraw his Comforting Illuminations, and we shall
see nothing but Blots instead of our Names. A true sense of, A Name written in
the Book of Life, is not maintained without much Holiness, much Diligence, and
exceeding Circumspection.

(II.)
But, Awake, Awake, Ye secure Souls, that have no Assurance yet, of a Name
Written in this Book of Life. It was reckoned, a lamentable plight, in Deuteronomy.
28.66. Thy Life shall hang in Doubt before thee, and thou shall fear Day and
Night, and shall have none Assurance of thy Life. This, This is the
pourtraiture of the Condition, wherein multitudes are perishing every Day. But,
What meanest thou O Sleeper! Perhaps, Your Books of your Accounts, may show
that you have a clear and a fair Estate: but what signifies all, if you have
not a Name in the Book of Life? You may have Books, in your Studies, which may
furnish you with the Knowledge of an Angel; but again I say, what avails it, if
you have not, a, Name in the Book of Life? It Is the first Question, in a famous
Catechism, What is your Name? Yea, but Let men Catechize themselves, I pray,
with another Question, which is, Where is your Name? I say, Is it in the Book
of Life, or no? They are fast asleep indeed, whom the Fire, will not Awaken?
Let me then break off, as I began; my Text, makes that Loud Cry, Fire, Fire! in
the Ears of them that have not a Name, in the Book of God. Know it then, and be
Assured of this; Till you have some Assurance of a Name written in the Book of
Life, you have No Assurance of your Life. You have, No Assurance, that you
shall not Go down into that Lake of Fire, where the Smoke of the Torment
Ascends for ever and ever. You have No Assurance, that you shall not be shortly
Doomed unto, Everlasting Fire with the Devil and his Angels. You have No
Assurance that you shall not be Weltering under the Scalding Wrath of God, like
the Fire of Lightning, preying upon you, in the Fiery Bottom of Hell, till the
very Heavens be no more. Forlorn Souls, you know not but you are to Roar among
the doleful Citizens of Sodom and Gomorrah for Ever. O Retire, and ponder with
your selves, What is like to be my Eternal Portion: and Let the Dread of that
Fire, which all that are not found in the Book of Life shall be Cast into,
cause you to be in Restless Agonies of Soul, till you have Attained some
Assurance of a Name in that Book. I Entreat you to be, Persuaded knowing the
Terror of the Lord; Or, At least, let the ETERNITY of the Fire, cause in you a
due Terror of it. A person once having spent some time in Unlawful Games,
could not sleep the Night following; and gave this answer to one that asked the
Reason of it, Why, Yesterday occasionally casting my eye upon a Book, I saw
that word ETERNITY in it; and O that word has broke my Heart within me. Reader,
thine Eye is now upon a BOOK, wherein thou see the Word ETERNITY; O let the
thoughts of the ETERNITY to which the Fire of the Damned shall continue,
Enkindle thy Zeal to make sure of a Name written in another BOOK; even, in the
Book of Life.

A Warning for the Unregenerate. Showing, Whence it is that many miss OF
Conversion and Salvation.
Acts VII.51. Ye do always Resist the Holy Ghost.


IT was a Mournful Question propounded by the Prophet, in Isa. 53.1. Who has
Believed? And it it is a Needful Question offered by the People in Isa. 63.17.
Why are our hearts hardened? An Answer to the former Question is afforded unto
us in the Bad Lives and the Ill Ways of many among our Neighbors every day; We
see that Few Believe, That Few are Chosen, That Few find the Strait Gate. An
Answer to the Latter Question is Couched in these words, among the Obstructions
of Conversion, with many Cautions and Warnings to be laid before you, none of
the least is intimated in the Text now Read unto us.

These words are among the last words of Stephen, the Martyr of our Lord. The
first Martyr of the New Testament, had the Name of Stephen, which signifies a
Crown, and Specif^es the Event and Reward of our Sufferings for God. This
Blessed Martyr being accused unto the Council at Jerusalem, as a Contemner,
yea, as a Blasphemer of their Temple Worship, he appeared before them with a
Face full of Majesty, and an Heart full of Magnanimity, and in a grave Speech
answered the Accusations. The chief drift of his Oration was, That the Worship
of God, was performed before, and might be truly performed without, the Temple
at Jerusalem; But he intermingles close hints that the Lord Jesus whom they had
newly Murdered, was the Savior sent by the Almighty to them. As the famous
Deacon was thus going on, they, it seems, interrupted him; upon which he turns
his Discourse into the sharp Reprehension; part of which we have now to insist
upon. Our Text first, Asserts the Impenitency of the Jews; and, secondly,
Assigns both an Instance and a Reason of that Impenitency. This is in that
Remarkable Clause, Ye do always Resist the Holy Ghost. So that we may observe,

DOCTRINE Men's Resisting of the Holy Ghost, is that which unhappily confirms
them in their Impenitent Unbelief?

By four or five Steps may the Illustration and the Demonstration of this Truth
be advanced unto.

Proposition I.
It Is Peculiarly and Remarkably the Work of the Holy Spirit, whereby Sinners
are Converted unto God. There are Three Persons in the Adorable God head; Three
Relative Properties, which we fitly call, the Father, the Son, and Holy Spirit.
We cannot indeed Fathom it, but yet we must Receive it, that there are those
Three Subsistences in the Divine Essence; and indeed even the very first Line
of the Bible points at it. This is a Thing, which not the Light of Nature,
but the Light of Scripture, has Revealed unto us. If any ask, How we come to
know this Trinity in God? I will answer, as Athanasius of old; Go to Jordan,
and thou shall see a Trinity. In Mat. 3.16, 17. On the Banks of Jordan, there
at once discovered themselves. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Though
indeed a Trinity of persons in the Godhead, might from the Old Testament also
be Evinced, unto the fullest confutation of the Blind Jews, who now deny the
Mystery. Now, there is the Glorious Cooperation of all these Three Persons in
every Act of God, of which the Creature is the Object; yet there is a distinct
manner of working to be ascribed unto each of them. Thus in the Salvation of a
Sinner, the Work of Contriving that Salvation, belongs to God the Father; the
Work of Effecting it, belongs to God the Son; But the Work of Applying it,
belongs to God the Holy Spirit. And thence the Conversion of Sinners is that in
which the Holy Spirit has a special Interest. When men are Converted unto God,
how is it wrought? We are told, Tit. 3.5. It Is by the Renewing of the Holy
Ghost. The Regeneration of Men, What cause has it? We find in Joh. 3.5. They
that are Born again are Born of the Spirit. The Sanctification of men, what is
the Rise of it? It was said of them in 1 Cor. 6.11. Ye are Sanctified by the
Spirit of our God. It is the Spirit of God that reduces men from their
Slaveries to the Enemies of their Souls; It is the Spirit of God, that produces
a ^lessed Agreement betwixt God and men; It is the Spirit of God, which Turns
the Disobedient unto the Wisdom of the Just; which causes the Wicked Man to
forsake his Way, and the Unrighteous man his Thoughts, and to Turn unto the
Lord. If any man ever come to Know, to Love, to Serve the Blessed God, it is
the Spirit of that God, who causes them to do so.

Proposition II.
There are many Methods by which the Conversion of Sinners is pursued by the
Holy Spirit of God. We read in Genesis 6.3. about the Strivings of the Spirit,
There are multiplied Strivings or Labors, with which the Spirit of God is at
work about the Souls of men. These Methods are with some Effectual, and the
Souls of men are thereby brought home to God. The Methods are with some
Ineffectual, yet such as to leave the vile men inexcus^ble before the Lord. But
we should enquire what these Methods are?

First, There are External Endeavors used by the Spirit of God for the
Conversion of men. As now; in the Ordinances of God, there are Endeavors of
the Holy Spirit for our Spiritual Good. The Spirit breaths and mov^s in the
Appointments of the Gospel. As it was said in Neh. 9.3. Thou testifiedst
against them by thy Spirit in thy Prophets; The Spirit of God sends Prophets,
Ministers, Messengers, with which he takes pains about the Conversion of
ungodly men. The Prophet Isaias could say, in Isa: 48.16. The Lord God, and His
Spirit has sent me* Why, when the Ambassadors of God, are beeseeching of men
to be Reconciled unto him, the Spirit of the Lord God himself, accompanys them,
in their Embassages and in those Beseechings. Again by the Providence of God
there are Endeavors of the Holy Spirit for our Eternal Good. The Mercies of
God, those are the things with which the Holy Spirit is drawing us to Christ;
it is in them, that the Spirit of God may say, as in Jer. 31.3. With Loving
Kindness have I drawn thee. The Language of the Spirit in every mercy is, O
Fear the Lord and His Goodness! and, O let the Goodness of God Lead thee to
Repentance! The Judgments of God, these are the Things, with which the Holy
Spirit is driving us from Sin; for Them we may acknowledge to the Spirit of
God, as in Job 10.2. Thou contendest with me. As the Rod has a voice, thus
there is in every Judgment that voice of the Spirit, O Learn Righteousness!
and, O see what an Evil and a Bitter Thing it is to Forsake thy God! In the
Hand of the Spirit, Mercies do oblige, Judgments do demand our Conversion to
the Lord.

Secondly, There are Internal Endeavors used also by the Spirit of God for the
Conversion of Men. And these are of two sorts.

First, the Holy Spirit attempts the Conversion of men by Informing of them. He
Enlightens them, and by their Illumination, they are made Partakers of the Holy
Ghost. We are told, 1 Cor. 12.3. No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the Holy Ghost. The Holy Spirit persuades many a man, That the Lord Jesus is
the Wonderful Med^ator, without whom, There is no Name given, whereby we may be
Saved; The Holy Spirit Enables many a man to Understand and Entertain the
Fundamental Articles of Religion, and thereby He makes their Conversion appear
to be, as it is indeed, an Important Thing before them. It Is said of the Holy
Spirit, Joh. 16.18. He shall convince the World. He convinces them, that they
have grievously sinned, and plunged themselves into innumerable Wants and Woes,
by doing so; He convinces them, that a precious Christ, embraced by a penitent
Faith, is the One Thing Needful; How often does He Convince men, That there is
a God, in whose Favor is Life,; that there is a Jesus, who delivers from the
Wrath to come; that they must Rely upon the Lord Christ for Wisdom and
Righteousness, and Sanctification and Redemption, if they would be made
partakers of true Blessedness? And this is that he may Convert the World.

Secondly The Holy Spirit attempts the Conversion of men by Affecting of them.
And there are three things, which the Spirit of God affects many men into, when
He is making Essays toward the Converting of them.

First, There are dismal Terrors which the Spirit of God often causes in
unconverted men. He terrifies them with hideous Visions of their own
Wretchedness and Misery: and aff^ightens them with a just Apprehension, that if
they continue as they are, He that made them will not have mercy on them, and
he that formed them will show them no favor. We read in Romans 8.15. about the
Spirit of bondage unto fear. The Spirit of God makes many a man see himself
bound over to endure the Fearful and Fiery Wrath of God for ever; He enkindles
in them a Fear, that He is angry with them every day, and that He will break
them sore in the place of Dragons at the Last Day. Thus the Spirit made Faelix
to tremble, in the Fore-bodings of a Judgment to come.

Secondly, There are serious Desires, which the Spirit of God often causes in
unconverted men. He inflames warm desires in them after the Things of their
Peace: and raises in them some Longings after Spiritual Blessings in heavenly
matters in Christ Jesus. It Is the Spirit of God, that made the Jews cry out,
Joh. 6.35. Lord, give us evermore the Bread of Life. The Spirit of God makes
many a man desirous, O that my sin were pardoned! and, O that my heart were
mollified! and, O that my Soul were bound up in the Bun^^^ of Life! Thus the
Spirit made Balaam wi^h, O that I might die the Death of the Righteous.

Thirdly, There are Devout Resolves, which the Spirit of God often causes in
Unconverted men. He fills them with Resolves, to break off their sins by
Righteousness: and with many purposes and intentions, that they will walk at
Peradventures with God no more. 'Twas the Spirit of God that procured such an
Inclination as that in them of old, Jer. 2.10. Thou say I will not
transgress. The Spirit of God puts many upon such Resolutions, I have done
Iniquity, but I will do so no more. The Vows men make, when a Dreadful Eternity
is before their eyes* their Sickbed Vows, and Sea-storm Vows and the Vows
which they make when Distress and Anguish is upon them, these are often excited
by the Spirit of God. Thus the Spirit of God was concerned with Is^^el, when*
they flattered God with their mouth. These are the Methods of the Holy Spirit,
while he strives for the conversion of lost undone fallen men.

Proposition, III.
Multitudes of wretched sinners Resist the Methods used by the Holy Spirit for
the Conversion of their Souls; and in so doing they Resist the Holy Ghost. But
how is this done? The Greek word here to Resist signifies To throw something in
the way, to hinder the Passage or Journey of another. The Spirit of God is in
the way of Converting many a man, but the mad sinner will throw, something or
other in the way of the Holy Spirit, so that He makes a stop, a stand, He goes
no further in it; This it is to Resist the Holy Ghost. Particularly;

First, Unconverted Sinners, Resist the Spirit of God by Diversion; when the
Spirit of God would be Renewing of them, they throw some Diversion in his Way.
Perhaps this Holy Spirit cannot come at them, because of their Business. When
the Spirit would have been Recovering of wicked Cain from his forlorn estate,
we find in Genesis 4.17. He went away to building of Cities. Men so get and keep
in the clattering noise of the world they always find something to do, and
create a Thousand Hurries for themselves: Hence the Spirit of God never finds
them at leisure enough, to do any thing upon them. Or, the Holy Spirit cannot
come at them, because of their Company. It Is said of bad Companions, in Prove.
5.9, Lest thou should ponder the path of Life, their ways are moveable. Even
so, least the Spirit of God should make men begin ^o Ponder, and Practice too,
as they ought to do, the moveable and mutable Humors of their Society prove a
fatal entangl^ment unto them; they hear so much and so loud their Boon
Companions, that the Spirit of God can have no Admission to speak unto them.

Secondly, Unconverted men Resist the Spirit of God by Denial. When the Spirit
of God would be Renewing of them, they do throw a Positive Denial in his way,
and so they send him away sorrowful. Their Impiety, is that in Job 21:14: They
say to God depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. They say
unto the Spirit of God Be gone, we desire not the happiness, which thou do
offer to us! They say unto him, Be gone, we desire not the Holiness, which thou
do a^^vize us to. It was a lamentable intercourse betwixt God and them, in
Jer: 44.16: As for the word thou have spoken to us, we will not hearken to
thee. Thus the Spirit of God says, Pray in thy Family, Pray in thy Retirement:
but lewd men say, No, we will not! The Spirt of God says, Bind thy self by an
Holy Covenant unto the service of the Lord; but wild men say, No, we will not!
The Spirit of God entreats, O do not the Abominable things which I hate! But
there are extravagant men that say, We will do them every day! The Spirit of
God now goes away grieved at this Cursed Obstinacy.

Thirdly, Unconverted men Resist the Spirit of God by affronting, and abusing
those in whom it is. Compare our Text with what follows, and you find things
thus expressed. Men's Resisting of the Holy Ghost, is explained by their
Persecuting of the Prophets: truly, to Persecute the Ministers of the Gospel,
who are Ministers of the Spirit; this is to Resist the Spirit Himself. To
scoff, or starve, or slay those men, whom the Holy Spirit has made His
Trumpets or His Temples, it is to Resist Him: So likewise to despise or oppose
and suppress the Means of Grace, in which are the Demonstration^ of the Holy
Spirit, this is to Resist Him. It Is to throw Malignity in His way.

Proposition IV.
This Resisting of the Holy Spirit, is that which confirms men in their
impenitent unbelief. And this there is too doleful Reason for.

The Reason of it is, in short thus much; The Resisting of the Holy Spirit
proves the withdrawing of that Spirit: He says in Gen: 6:3. My Spirit shall
not always strive; And if the Spirit shall cease to strive, the Sinner will
never begin to turn. The Rule, the Old Rule, about the Evil Spirit, is too
sadly verified in the motions of the Holy Spirit, if you Resist him he will
Flee from you. The Dove will not care to tarr^, where no good entertainment is
ever like to be afforded Him. Indeed the Power of the Holy Spirit, gives no bar
to his converting of them, who may be Resisting of Him; He can if he will
proceed and conquer the most obdurate Resistance in the World; He can cause the
most obdurate Resistance to give way before Almighty Arm. But it is the Justice
of the Holy Spirit that Countenances this order of things; when Men Resist the
Spirit of God it is but just with him to desert them. It is but just if men
resist him, that he should resolve concerning them, I will ease me of those my
Enemies, and avenge me of those my Adversaries! It was their woeful experience
long ago, in Isa: 63:10. They rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit, therefore He
was turned to be their Enemy. The Holy Spirit becomes a terri^le Enemy to them
that will always resist him; and alas, now their Conversion is to be despaired
of. Without the Efficacy of the Holy Spirit, no Conversion is to be hoped for;
but when He is long Resisted, he withholds that Efficacy, and instead of
Conversion there now ensues a nothing but a deplorable and Everlasting
Confusion in the Soul.

Particularly,

First, The External Methods of the Holy Spirit for our Conversion will cease
upon our long Resisting of Him. To Resist Him, will soon bring us to this, That
His Word will no more sound in our ears, and we shall know no more the joyful
sound. (...) was a most Awful threatening in Amos: 8.11. I will send a Famine of
hearing the Word of the Lord. Persons, that sat once under a Powerful Ministry,
some^imes for this, come to be where the Cloud^ will rain no more upon them;
where there is no H^use of God, no Fear of God, no Bread of ^ife. Whole
Churches and Na^ions of men that once enjoyed the word of Life, a^e for this
now perishing without any Vision. And it will soon bring us to this also, that
his Providence will no more be concerned for us. Many a man, once had the Light
of God shining upon his Tabernacle, but now every thing brings a Cross with it,
and he may say, All things are against me. It Is because the Spirit of God
speaking to him in his Prosperity has been resisted; even for that cause now
it is with him as in Ez: 7.26. Mischief shall come upon Mischief. On the other
side, many a man had his way so hedged up with thorns, that he could not sin so
easily, as else he would have done; but how God has done afflicting and
restraining of him. Why? He Resisted the Spirit of God speaking to him in his
Adversity; and now the Lord says as in Hos. 7.14: He is joined to Idols, Let
him alone: One of the Ancients upon that Scripture says, Vis Indignantis Dei
terribilem vocem audire? It Is the terriblest Thunder of a Provoked and Revenging
God!

Secondly, The Internal Methods of the Holy Spirit for our Conversion will also
cease upon our long Resisting of Him. It was said of Saul, wretched Saul, in 1 Samuel 16.14. The Spirit of the Lord, departed from him. It was again s^id to
Saul, bloody* Saul, in 1 Samuel 28.16. The Lord is departed from thee, and is
become thine Enemy. This was after and because that wretched bloody man, had
been long Fighting against that Blessed Spirit of the Lord. A long Resistance
of the Holy Spirit will bring a man to this woeful plight, The Spirit of the
Lord will ^^^^ly forsake that forlorn man; The Spirit of the Lord will take no
loving, no saving, no converting Notice of him.

Yet more particularly,

First, A Resisting of the Holy Spirit, will provoke Him to leave us unto a
Penal Blindness of Mind. It was the heavy vengeance of God, upon some in Isa.
44.18. He has shut their eyes, they cannot see. The Spirit of God may so leave
us, upon Resistance, that no Heresy, no Blasphemy shall come amiss unto us, but
we shall swallow down very damnable Delusions as the Oracles of God. Perhaps
all the Monsters of Quakerism or of Popery, or any other Disguised Paganism,
shall Recommend themselves unto us, as the most beautiful Mysteries of
Godliness.

Secondly, A Resisting of the Holy Spirit, will provoke Him to leave us unto a
Paenal Hardness of Heart. As it was of old said in Exodus 10.27. The Lord
hardened the Heart of Pharaoh; Upon Resistance the Spirit of God will so leave
us, that nothing shall melt us, nothing shall fright us, no calls, no cries, no
counsels will cause us to turn from our Evil Ways; our hearts will be like the
Nether Millstone before the Lord; we shall now lay nothing to Heart, and there
will be a seared Conscience in us: a Conscience that shall seldom, if ever
sting us, for our sinful Omissions, or Commissions, or for any of our Doings
against the Lord. Once more,

Thirdly, A Resisting of the Holy Spirit, will so exasperate Him, That He will
give us up to commit all manner of abominations without Remorse. 'Twas said of
some Romans 1.26. God gave them up to vile affections. Such an Horrendous
Desolation, comes at last upon the Souls, that have long stood it out, against
all the exhortations of the Eternal Spirit. That Spirit of God will so abandon
us, that we shall be Devils Incarnate, and yet never tremble as the Spiritual
Devils do; we shall come to swear Profanely, and violate Sabbaths, and Curse,
and be Drunkards, and Wantons, and Cheat, and Ly, and be all that is Earthly,
Sensual, Divelish, without any Horror of Soul upon it; We shall make light of
the most Roaring Iniquities, and being past feeling, work out all uncleaness
with greediness; this it is for men to be confirmed in their impenitent unbelief.
But something must now be said for the Improvement of these things, and let it
be in this

CAUTION.
Leave off then, Ye Unconverted sinners, leave off Resisting the Holy Spirit of
God! O how many Unreasonable (for I may call them Unreasonable) Souls are there
before the Lord this day, of whom it may be said, This has been their manner
from their Youth up? It Is indeed, the case, the crime of all you, that never
yet were Converted unto God. I believe there is hardly a Child of Twelve Years
Old among us, which the Spirit of God has not been in some sort working upon;
but in the Name of God, what is come of it? Are you not still in the Gall of
Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity? Are you not still Prayerless,
Graceless, Christless? Is not the day yet to dawn, the hour yet to come, of
your closing with the Lord Jesus upon Gospel terms? Alas, you have, then, all
this while been Resisting the Holy Spirit of God. ^ut have done, you unwary
Souls, have done, ^ay down your Arms; let not the Best Friend you have in the
world be any more treated ^o. The Lord could say as in Jerem: 2.5. What
Iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me. Thus
does the Holy Spirit of God plead with you, What Injury have I done thee, poor
Soul? What harm do I persuade thee to, that thou will not allow me to perfect a
work of Conversion in thee?

But, this matter should have a little more pressing discourse; Wherefore.

Consider, FIRST.
The Holy Spirit of God is, at this very day, using his Methods for the
converting of your Souls. As the Apostle speaking of what The Holy Ghost says,
he puts that Remark upon it, He says, to Day, after so long a Time, harden not
your hearts. This may I say, Behold after so long a time, after all the
Resistance, after all the Injustice you have given to the Holy Ghost, He still
begs of you, O that you would be Converted unto God! The cries of the Holy
Spirit in your ears are those in Ruth 1.16. Entreat me not to leave thee, or to
return from following after thee. Have you not Outward Offers of the Gospel
made unto you? at this very instant you have them. We read in Rev. 22.15. The
Spirit says come, and whosoever will let him come, and take of the Waters of
Life freely. It Is the Holy Spirit of God that is now urging of you, To turn and
live. You are now called upon, O come and give yourselves to the Son of God!
You are now called upon, O come and join yourselves to the Church of God! It is
the Holy Spirit of God that is bespeaking these needful and useful things at
your hands. Have you not also Inward Moving^ in your own souls to accept
hereof? You cannot well be without them. It is said in Isa. 30.21. Thine ears
shall hear a word behind thee, saying, this is the way walk ye in it. Thus you
have a word within you, saying, O depart from the Tents of wicked men, lest you
perish in all their sins! You have a word within you, saying, O let not matters
between your God, and your Soul, any more lie at uncertainties! It Is the Holy
Spirit of God that is in this Word within you. These Urgencies are from that
Holy Spirit. Let no discouraged person countenance any Despair in themselves
about this Affair; Let no disconsolate person say, The Spirit has wholly done
with me. Is this a thing that thou art afraid and concerned about? There Is a
sign, thou art not so unhappy yet: the Holy Spirit of God is yet at work about
thy Soul, and as it is said in Heb. 3.7 The Holy Spirit says, to day, O that
you would hear the Voice of God! Yet

Consider SECONDLY.
It Is possible, there are some of You, that have sad cause to fear that the
Spirit of God will quickly have done with you, if you Resist him any more. Some
of you, even some of you that are now before the Lord, may have so Resisted the
Holy Spirit of God, that you may fear, a little Resistance more may cause the
Eternal Departure of his influences from your Souls. Methinks I overhear the
Holy Spirit of God saying to some of us, Be instructed, poor soul, be
instructed quickly, lest I depart from thee, and thou become desolate for
evermore. There are Souls whose Time is almost our, whose Glass is almost Run;
the Inch of Candle is come just to the bottom with them; If they don't,
presently, make a Good Bargain for Eternal Happiness, they must necessarily
perish in the dark. But, who are they? Let me speak plainly, and as it becomes
a Watchman of your Precious and Immortal Souls, for which I would awfully
suppose my self accountable.

First, You that have bin long Incorrigible under the Dispensations of the Holy
Spirit, have cause to fear, that his Methods for your Conversion are very near
an end. The Holy Spirit of God has been Besieging and Bel^aguring of your
Souls; but have you long refused to yield unto Him? You have then cause to fear
that he will quickly break up and be gone; That He will quickly say as in Isa.
1.5. Why should you be stricken any more? The Holy Spirit is the Physician of
your Souls; perhaps He will try one or two Remedies more, for the Cure of your
Distempers; but if they succeed not, it is probable he will then quickly Resolve,
I will do no more for them, they will be filthy and they shall be filthy, they
will be wicked, and they shall be wicked; I will never have mercy on them.
Especially let those that are grown Old in their sins, tremble and be amazed,
and astonished at the thought of this; You that have Gray Hairs upon you, while
you are yet un^^quainted with the ways of God; If you shall Resist the Holy
Spirit any more, He will soon give that terrible Order in Luke 13.9. Cut him
down; let there be no more digging about that Irrecoverable Soul for ever.

Secondly, You that have sinned against, until you have sinned away, great
Convictions of the Holy Spirit, have cause to fear that shortly you shall not
have them any more. Ye Souls in Danger, Hear what I say; you that have had your
Consciences awakened by the words or works of God; you that by the Thunders of
God, have been awakened into some purposes to transgress no more; if you have
sti^^ed those Convictions, there is danger of your being speecily given over by
the Holy one of Israel. The Lord said o^ old in Psalm. 81.11.12. My people would
not hearken to my voice,; so I gave them up. In^^ead of harkening to the voice
of the Holy Spirit, many a Drunken, many an Uncl^^n, many a Gaming Extravagant,
will go, and commit the same sin again; at first they were in some trouble for
it, but now, they can repeat their Villainy without any Regret at all; Is this
thy condition, unreclaimable sinner? Is this the condition of thy lamentable
and incurable Soul! Thou art then under a direful symptom, that one Resistance
of the Holy Spirit more may bring thy Soul down to the Congregation of the Dead.

Thirdly, You that have Backslidden from some hopeful Professions and Practices
of Christianity, have yet further cause to fear this Fearful thing, that you
shall be no longer in the healing Hands of the Spirit of the Living God. It was
said in the 2 Chronicles. 15.2. If you forsake the Lord, he will forsake you. The
Spirit of the Lord will soon be gone, Remove, Wi^^draw, from those who do
forsake Him. Hear this, all you Apostates from Religion! You that once had in
you some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel; What is become of it? What
is become of the Devotion, which once carried you to your Closets, and to the
Private and Public Meetings of the upright? Have you Left off the thing that
is good? It Is a sign that the Holy Spirit of God has almost Left off all
endeavors for your Good. But

Consider THIRDLY.
If once the Resisted Spirit of God have done with you, you are then horribly
undone for ever! There will then be no Conversion to be expected for you, nor
will any Salvation be then attainable; Then you perish without any Remedy or
Escaping! Then you have nothing but a Fearful Expectation of a Fiery
Indignation to devour you. O Remember, the Day of Grace will then be over with
you, as it was with Esau, who in Genesis 27.34. Unsuccessfully Cr^'d with great
and exceeding Bitter Cry, Bless me, O my Father! Then, though like the Foolish
Virgins you Cry, Lord, Lord, open to me Though you Cry, Lord, Lord, Vouchsafe me
one tender of Jesus more! Or, Lord, Lord, afford me one Season of Mercy more!
It will be all in vain. I must now seasonably tell you, it will be as the
Outcry of some has been, All to Late! All to Late! Forsaken Souls, your Plight
will then be that of Israel, in Deuteronomy. 1.45. Who Returned and wept before the
Lord, but the Lord would not hearken to their voice. Though you should then beg
with tears of Blood, Lord, extend thy pity to a wretched Soul* it will signify
nothing at all. I do assure you, this Resisted Spirit of God, will at last
apply Himself unto the Spirits of Impenitents, no otherwise than as an Ireful
and a Dreadful Tormentor, world without end. That Almighty Spirit will Torture
the Spi^its of the Damned, with Immediate Impressions of an Almighty Fury, and
render them as glowing Irons fully possessed by the Indignation of God. All thy
cries for His F^^y will then have but this Answer No, No; Remember, what was in
thy Life time: I then strove with thee, and then would not hea^; Now I will
not hear, though thou do strive with me! Inasmuch as thou did nothing but
Resist me when time was, I will now Reject thee to all Eternity. Oh! consider
of it! And let the consideration of these Things have a Double effect upon you
all.

The First EFFECT.
An earnest Petition for the Spirit. It is a sweet Promise in Luke 11.13. Your
Heavenly Father will give the Holy Spirit unto them, that ask him. O then Ask:
especially let the Rising Generation Ask for this Blessing. You may plead your
Descent; for the Voice of the Lord is in Isa. 44.3. I will pour my Spirit upon
the seed of my servants. Go alone, then, and Pray, and say, Lord, Let me Enjoy
thy Holy Spirit, and have the Grace never to Resist him.

The Second EFFECT.
An hearty Compliance with the Spirit. Let every Soul answer Him, as the
Psalmist in Psalm. 27:8. When thou said seek my Face, my Heart answered, Thy
face I will seek. So when the Holy Spirit, says, Leave sin, or Prize Christ,
answer now; Lord I will do it, if thou will help me! Resign yourselves up to
the Conduct of that Good Spirit, that so you may be Led into the Land of
Uprightness Forever.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
INtrod. p. 4. l. 26. f. in r. into. Treat. p 13. l. 10. for Law r. Love. p.
23. l. 13. r. does as an Effect. p. 29. l. 25. r. it is. not with. p. 85. l.
^6: after Jesus, add, with. p. 112. l. Last r. I will.


