New-England's Spirit of Persecution Transmitted To PENNSILVANIA, And the
Pretended Quaker found Persecuting the True Christian-Quaker, IN THE TRIAL OF
Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas Budd, and William Bradford, At the Sessions
held at Philadelphia the Nineth, Tenth and Twelfeh Days of December, 1692.
Giving an Account of the most Arbitrary Procedure of that Court.

Printed in the Year 1693.

The Introduction.
TO the end that all Impartial People may have a right und^rstanding in the
present Prosecution, I intend to give a short Relation of the first rise and
cause and ground of this pr^sent Difference, and Persecution.

In the Year 1689. by the good Providence of God George Keith was earnestly
invited to remov^ from his Plantation in East-Iarsey, to keep a School in
Philadelphia, which he did; but kept an Usher and spent a great part of his
time in Reading, Meditation, Visiting Meetings, and answering the Conscientious
Doubts and Questions of many People; and there was a more than ordinary seeming
Satisfaction in general among the People called Quakers, that they were so
favored with the assistance of George Keith. But alas! this great lov^ was but
short lived; and as in other Cases one Extreme beget^ the contrary, so in this;
for their love and respects to him were never so great, but now the E^vy and
Hatred of many exceeds; and that upon the account of his Christian Testimony.
For it was but a little time that he had been amongst us, and preached the true
Faith of Christ, both without and within, but some began to ^e dissatisfied*
and whispered it about in private, which, when he came to unders^^nd, he
labour^d in much love and tenderness to undeceive and satis^^e those that he
came to know were dissatisfied; and some did receive good Satisfaction; but
others cast his Labors of Love behind their ba^ks; and much whispering and
backbiting there were in private against the Doctrine held forth by G. K. and
some began to contradict his Testimony in public Meetings; but yet this were
born with, and no open Difference until one William Stockdale accused Geo.
Keith of Preaching Two Christ's, because he held forth (as n^cessary to our
Salvation) The Faith o^ Christ as he dyed ^or our S^ns, rose again for our
Iustifi^ation, and ascended into Heaven and is in Heaven in the true and entire
glorified Nature of Man, our Mediator wit the Father* and also, That Christ was
spiritually present by his Light and Li^^, in all his C^^ldren. Whereupon he
dealt with him* and end^^voured much to con^ince him, but not prevailing, G. K.
laid it before a Meeting of them of the (...), but they did nothing in the
matter, but chiefly blam^ and contradict G. K. in his Doctrine. Whereupon G. K.
did again renew his Complaint to them of the Ministry at the Yearly Meeting at
(...) the 7^^ Mo^th, 1691. defi^ing to know their sense and judgment, viz.
Whether to preach Faith in Christ within us, and Faith in C rist wit^e^^ (...),
was to preach Two Christ's, or One? and six Meetings were held in debate about
^his matter, and yet nothing done in it: So this past ^n, and some Months after
T^o Fit^water openly in a Monthly Meeting accused G. Keith, That he denied the
sufficien^y of ^^e Light; which G.K. denied, but T.F. said, he would prove it
at the next Mont^ly Meeting; which being come, G. K. called on ^. Fitzwater to
prove his Charge, which he endeavored to do, and brought W. Stockdale for his
Evide^ce, but to no purpose, only W. Stockdale again renewed his Charge against
G. K. in the open Meeting, to the admiration of many, to see his great
Ignorance and Impudence; but seeing that T. F. was not like to prove his Charge
against G.K. Thomas Lloyd, and some few others with drew, yet the generality of
the Meeting stayed, and after some time it growing dark, John Ienne^, (a great
stickler against G K.) de^ired that the Meeting might be adjourned ti^l the
next day, which was unanimously agreed unto, and also by Tho. Fitzwater; the
next day all Parties appeared, and great and long Contention there was most
part of that day betwixt George Keith and Tho. Lloyd, Arthur Cook, etc. G. K.
affirmi^g and arguing for the Necessity of the Faith of Christ crucifi^d, etc.
the others denying, and arguing, That the Light within ^as su^^icient without
the Man Christ Jesus, etc. but finding that the stream went against them, T.
Lloyd, A. Cook and some others withdrew, and the Meeting (consisting of at
least Sixty Monthly Meeting Members pro^eeded and gave Judgment against T.
Fitzwater and W. Stockdale, the substance of which was, That they should
forbear preaching and praying in Meetings till they had condemned their
Ignorance and Unbelief, etc. but at the next Quarterly Meeting, a Party
withstood the said Judgments, and said, That the Persons being Ministers, none
but them of the Ministry were fit to judge; which many though^ relisht too much
of Popery; yet notwithstanding many showed their dislike thereto, Tho. Lloyd,
Arthur Cook, Sam. Ienings, etc. denied the said Meeting and Judgment; and then
it was that T. Lloyd's Party ^hanged their time and place of meeting against
and contrary to the declared mind of their then Brethren, who gave their
Reasons why they consented not to the changing the Time and Place of meeting;
but prevailed nothing with them, for the next first Day George Keith and Party
met at the usual time and place, and Tho. Lloyd and party went to the Meeting
house at the Center, which made the first Separation. Now the Difference being
thus far advanced, caused much discourse and enquiry into the matter by all
sorts (...) People, and great flocking to Meetings there (...), both in Town
and Country, where G. K. came, and his Testimony had much Reception in the
hearts of many; which being perceived by Tho. Lloyd and Party, the only
Expe^^^nt they could devi^e, was to condemn G. K. whereupon the 20th of the 4th
Mon. 1692. Twenty Eight of them called Ministers met together at Philadelphia,
and without ever so much as acquainting G K. published a Paper of Judgment
against him, condemning him as a Person without the fear of God before ^is
Eyes, etc. which done, Thomas Lloyd, Samuel Ienings, Arthur Cook, John
Delavall, and others made in their business to follow G. K. from Meeting to
Meeting, violently opposing his Testimony, and sometimes making use of their
Magistratical Power to effect their designs, which caused great Conteits and
Confusions; and G. K. from time to time complaining of their Injustice, for
condemning of him without all Hearing or Trial, upon a time in Chester-County,
Tho Llyod said, George, if thou think thy self agrieved by that Judgment,
there is Relief for thee; thou may appeal to the Yearly Meeting, which is now
approaching; which advice G.K. followed, and made an Appeal to the said Yearly
Meeting, and proposed tw^l^^ particular Heads to be considered, discoursed of
and resolved by the People ca^^ed Quakers at the said Yearly Meeting, and that
they might have Timely notice of the said Appeal, and be the better prepared to
answer it* G. K. procured the said Appeal to be printed. Which was no sooner
done, but they ^ssued forth a Warrant, and apprehended William Brad^ord the
Printer, and Io^n MccComb, who (as they were informed) had disposed of two of
the said Papers, and committed the said W. B. and I. M. to Goal; and also
seized all the said Papers they could meet with, and took away a good quantity
of W. Bradfords Letters* tending to the disabling of him to work for his Wife
and Children; and upon pretense of another Warrant granted without any
Conviction, ^igned by Samuel Ienings and Robert Ewer Justices, John White, the
Sheriff, took Goods out of the Shop of Will. Bradford (...) as much more as the
said Warrant was for. Whether these Actions are most like to the poor despised
and persecuted Quakers, or their Persecutors, is left to all Impartial People
to judge.

Here follows a Copy of the Mittimus.
WHereas William Bradford Printer, and John MccComb Tailor, being brought
before us, upon an ^^formation of Publishing, Uttering and Spreading a
Malicious and Seditious Paper, entitled, An Appeal from the twenty eight
Judges to the Spirit of Truth, etc. Tending to the Disturbance of the Peace a^
Subversion of the present Government; and the said Persons being required to
give Security to answer it at the next Court, but they re^using so to do,

These are therefore by the King and Queens Authority, and in (...)
Proprietary's Name, to require You to take into Your Custody the Bodies of
William Bradford and John Mcc Comb, and them safely keep till they shall be
discharged by due Course of Law. Whereof fail not at your Peril; and for your
so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under our Hands and
Seals this 24th of August, 1692.

These to John White Sherriff of Philadelphia, or his Deputy.

Arthur Cook,
Samuel Jenings,
Samuel Richardson,
Humphery Murrey,
Robert Ewer.

Now though they had got these two poor men into Goal, and though a^l sober
People did resent their Proceedings very ill, and as proceedding from a cruel
Spirit of Persecution; yet the next day they met again, in order to proceed
against G. K. and several other Persons in the like manner, and sent for two
other J^sti^es that were not called Quakers, to assist them in this work of
Prosecuting several seditious and dangerous Persons, that were like to su^vert
the Government! as they pretended; but contrary to their exp^ctation, the said
two Justices that were not called Quakers, viz* (...) Cock ^ Lutherai^, and
John Holme a Baptist, decla^ed their (...) from them in these Proce^dings,
signifying, That the matter was a Religious Difference among themselves, (viz.
the Quakers) and did not relate to the Government; John Holme particularly
advi^ing them To send for Geo. Keith, and let him interpret his own word^, and
upon a n^aring of him, if it a^y way appears that he strickes at the
Government, I will (said Justice Holme join with you against him with Heart and
Hand; but this Adivic^ had no weight wi^h them; whereupon the said two Justices
left them, and our New mod^lle^ Persecuting Quak^rs being wa^^ly bent to root
out Sedition forsooth! proceeded in their Work, and as they had judged G. K in
their Spiritual Court without all Hearing or Trial, so in like manner they
prosecuted him in their Temporal Co^^t without all Hearing: Why! to have done
otherwise would have g^ven the Lie and Contradiction to their Spirit o^
Discerning, which justice Cook declared to be such, That they could j^dge o^
matter o^ Fact without Evidence; and therefore it would have been ridiculous
for them to have sent for G. K. and asked him, Whether he was the Author of
such a Paper that his Name was to? or to have enquired of him, W^ether it was
against the Government that ^e intended by such and such words therein? No, for
their Spirit of Discerning told them all that, and therefore without more to
do, procl^imed G. K. by the common Crier in the Marketplace, To be a Seditious
Person, and an Enemy to the King and Queens Government: But these Magistrates
would do well to consider the Actions and End of Empson and Dudly, and whether
they have not violated the Fundamental Laws of English Subjects as well as
they, and that in convicting men without Trial, as shall be made appear ano^, 1
st. in the Case of George Keith and Tho. Budd, 2 ly, in the Case of William
Brad^ord, and ^ dly. in the Case of John Mc^ Comb.

1 st. Here follow^ a Copy of the Publick-Writing that was proclaimed by the
common Crier in the Market place against G. K.

A^ a Private Sessions held for the County of Philadelphia the 25th of the 6th
Month, 1692. before (...) Cook, Samuel Jenings, Samuel Richardson, Humphry
Murrey, Anthony Morris, Robert Ewer, Justices of the County.
WHereas the Government of this Province, being by the late King of E^gland ^
peculiar Favor vested, and sit^ence continued in Governor P^nn, who thought
fit to make his and our worthy Friend Thomas Lloyd his Deputy Governor, by and
under whom the Magistrates do act in t is Government. And whereas it has been
proved before us, that George Keith being a Resident here, did, contrary to his
Duty p^b^^ckly revi^e the said Deputy G^^e^nour, calling him an Impudent man,
(...) he was not fit to be Governor, and that his Name would (...), with many
other slighting and ab^sive Expressions, both to him and the Magistrates; and
^e that uses such Exorbitancy of Speech ^owards the said Governor, may be
supposed will easily dare to call the M mbers o^ Council and M^gistrates
Impudent Rascals, as he has lately called one in an open Assemb^y, that was
constituted by the Proprietary to be a Magistr^te And he also c^a^ges the
Magistrates who are Ministers here, with engrossing the Magistratical Power
into their hands, that they might usurp A^thority over him, saying also, he
hoped in God he should shortly see their Power taken from them; which he acted
in a most undecent manner. And further, the said G. K. with several of his
Adherents, having some few days since, with an unusual Insolency, by a printed
Sheet, called, An Appeal, etc. Traduced, and vilely misrepresented the
Industry, Care, Readiness and Vigilency of some Magistrat^s, and others here,
in their late Proceedings against some Privateers, viz. Babit and his Crew, in
order to bring them to Condign Punishment, whereby to discourage such Attempts
for the future; and has thereby also defamed and arreigned the Determinations
of Provincial Iudicatory against Murderers; and not only so, but by a wrong
Insinua^ion have labored to possess the Readers of their Pamphlet, That it is
in ^nsistent for those who are Ministers of the Gospel to act as Magistrates.
--

Now forasmuch as we, as well as others, have born, and still do patiently
endure the said George Keith and his Adherents many Personal Reflections
against us, and their gross Revilings of our Religious Society, yet we cannot
without the Violation of our Trust to the King and Governor, as also to the
Inhabitants of this Government, pass by or connive at such part of the said
Pamphlet and Speeches, that have a tendency to Sedition and Disturbance of the
Peace, as also to the Subversion of the present Government, or to the aspersing
the Magistracy thereof. Therefore for the undeceiving of all People we have
thought fit by this Publick-Writing, not only to signify that our Pro^cedure
against the Persons now in the Sheriffs Custody, as well as what we intend
against others concerned, in its proper place, respects only that part of (...)
printed Sheet, which appea^s to have the tendency aforesaid and not any part
relating to Differences in Religion. But also, these are to Cautio^^ such who
are well affected to the Security, Peac^ and Legal Administration of Justice in
this place, that they give no countenance to any Revilers and Conte^^ners of
A^thority, Magistrates or Magistracy; as also, to warn all other persons, that
they forbear the f^ture publishing and spreading of the said Pamphlet, as they
will answer the contrary at their peril. Given under our Hands and County-Seal,
the Day, Year and Place aforesaid.

Arthur Cook,
Samuel Jenings,
Samuel Richardson,
Humphery Murrey,
Robert Ewer.
Anthony Morris.

Note, There being an Answer to this Proclamation published in print by G. K.
and T. B. I shall only in this place (...) Observations.

First, They say, At a private Sessions, etc. and then relate a Preamble of the
Government being v^sted in W. Penn, who had made T. Lloyd his Deputy, Did they
think (...) this, or did they think we had forgot T^omas Lloyd was Deputy
Governor? Surely methinks not the latter, since we have been so smartly
remembered thereof by his Agent White, who (when they could not effect their
late great Tax) (...) -- (...) which many did to their Cost; so that one would
think tha passage might have been spared: Oh, but it is plain their end therein
is to insinuate, That Geo. Keith being legally and judicially brought before
the Governor to answer to some heinous Crime and Misdemeanour, and that a
Multitude of People were present to hear how he could answer for himself (for
they say, Publicly Reviled, etc.) yet this G. K. like a Rude man, though he
pretends to be a Minister, was so far from behaving himself before the
Governor like a C ristian, that he fell a Reviling him, and amongst other
scandalous Expressions, said to him, Thou Impudent Man, thou art not f^t to be
Governor, thy Name will stink: Certainly their drif^ was to possess the
Readers with this Belief, as is clear and evident from their following
supposition, or rather suggestion, where they say, He that uses such
Exorbitancy of Speech to the Governor, will easily dare to call the Members of
Council and Magistrates Impudent Rascals, as he has lately called one in on
open Assembly, who was constituted by the Governor to be a Magistrate. Which
also is a base and wicked Insinuation; for George Keith never spoke those words
to any of them as Magistrates or Officers in the Government, neither did he
ever speak to the present Governor all those words together, as is insinuated
by the said Paper, but on the contrary, what he spoke to Tho. Lloyd was in
Monthly Meetings and Religious Controversies, and T. Lloyd has said several
times, That he would take no advantage by words spoke at such times, but we
find them practice the contrary; for on a certain time T. L. stood up, and
affirmed, That G. K. was guilty of Contradiction, and being put to prove it,
said, That fifteen years ago in his printed Books he owned the Seed to be
Christ: Whereupon G. K. said, ^hou Impudent man, I do not deny it now, but own
it as much as ever. But by a^l the diligent enquiry that I have made, I cannot
find that G. K. said, he was not fit to be Governor, (...) its expressly
provided by the second Chapter of the Laws of this Province, That all Officers
and Persons commissionated and employed in the Government, shall be such as
profess and declare, They believe in Jesus Christ to be the Son of God the
Savior of the World, etc. (...) has often d^nyed and argued against the Faith
of Christ, as he dyed for our sins* etc. And as to G.K. saying, That his Name
would stink, T. L. knows in his Conscience, that it was spoke to him only as he
was one of the (...) false Judg^^^^ against him, and that without all hearing
or Trial. And as touching the (...) they say, he called, Impudent Rascal, it
was one whom he know not to be constituted, as they say he was; but his Brother
being so constituted, and refusing to serve, the People of the Town chose him
in his Brothers stead to serve as a Magistrate within that Town bounds, which
was altogether unknown to G. K. and therefore Paul's excuse, Acts 23 4. I wist
not Brethren that it was the High Priest, might be an Apology for him. But let
us consider the word Rascal; according to Goulaman's Dictionary, a Rascal is a
Brawler, and Empty Talker, and one that deceives is Neighbor by false and
weak Arguments, and Cole in his Latin and English Dictionary says, the Latin
word Nebulo, comes of the Hebrew word (...) Nabal, and any ordinary Schoolboy
that has but learned his Accidence, knows that Nebulo signifies, Rascal,
Villian, Knave or Rogue, and in Scripture we find the same word, see Isa. 32.6.
(...) For the Rascal will speak Villiany; and Ier. 29.23. (...) They commit
Villiany; and as Go^ldman in his Dictionary says, a Villian and a Rascal is of
the same Signification. But this Person whom they mention, went about to
deceive his Neighbors by false and weak Arguments* viz. Th^^ he did not expect
to be saved by that which dyed at Jerusalem; And that God was not present in
all his Creatures; which Unchristian and Atheistical Principles G. K. being
about to re^ute in a Monthly Meeting, and holding forth, That God was present
in all his Creatures, this Person stood up, and with much Opposition
Questioning, as Paul's fool did about the Resurrection) said, in a rude and
boisterous manner, What George! Do^^ the Spirit of God speak in Trees?
Whereupon G. K. said (being greatly provoked by his Interrupting of him, and
Unchristian behavior and Discourse) Thou Impudent Rascal, who faith the Spirit
of God speaks in Trees, as it does in men? But to make the thing seem Odious,
the Publishers of this Publick-Writing say, It was in a public Assembly, as if
it had been in some Court, or as if he had been brought before this Magistrate
(as they call him) upon some Examination, and there, instead of behaving
himself soberly, he presently calls him Impudent Rascal; this they would falsely
insinuate, as also, That before long he will go into the Council Room, and into
the Courts, and there Revile the Councilors and Magistrates, and call them
Impudent Rascals. Oh, the Horrid Impudency of these Men! Let Shame cover their
faces, if they have any left in them!

And whereas they further say, That G. K. with several of his Adherents with an
unusual Insolency having Traduced the Industry, Care and Vigilency of some
Magistrates here, in their la^e Proceedings against some Privateers, etc. and
has thereby also defamed and arreigned the determinations of the Provincial
Iudicatory, etc. As if G. K. and several others had printed a Book, and defamed
and arreigned them, and denied their Power of Magistracy; whereas all that
impartially read the said printed Appeal will find that G. K. did not defame
nor arreign them, but they having given a Commission and hired men to fight*
(which was diametrically opposite and contrary to the often declared and known
Principle of the People called Quakers, against a^l Use of the Carnal Sword,)
it was proposed, amongst other things, to be considered by all faithful Friends
at the Yearly Meeting, whether these men ought not to be condemned and disowned
as Quakers; but it was never intended to deny them to be Magistrates, for as
Magistrates they were obliged to do what they did, and it was Commendable in
them who did so Commissionate and hire men to fight, and also sea^ch the Town
for Arms, etc. But the great Question is, Whether they did not Transgress as
they professed to be Ministers and Quakers? If nay, but that the Ca^e and
Vigilency of these Magistrates here at Philadelphia, (...) Quakers, is worthy
of Commendation, as they intimate, for saving of a Sloop by Force of Arms, how
much more shall their care and vigilency be worthy of Commendation, to raise a
Militia to save and defend the whole Country, if any occasion should offer? but
how steadfast this does manifest them to be to the Quakers Principle of
Refusing in all cases to fight, and that for Conscience sake, I shall leave all
to judge. I always thought that which was a matter of Conscience to the Quakers
in Old-England, Barbados, and other places, had been a matter of Conscience to
them under a Government of their own, but I find the contrary in these
Magistrates and many others joined with them here. But that which seems the
most strange to several observing Persons in this place, is, that several
called Quakers in Maryland, Barbados, and other place^, that pretend its a
matter of Conscience to them not to b^ar Arms, yet now will own these here in
that Practice, unless they now think to leave that Article out of their Creed.

In the next place, whereas Peter Boss being offended with the Judgment of the
28. writ a Letter to Samuel Ienings, (being then in Church Fellowship with
him) showing his dislike thereof, and telling S. I. of some of the Scandals he
lay under, for this they issued forth a Warrant against him, and put him into
Prison, without ever dealing with him in a Church method, and at the next Court
presented him for the same, to which Court he was bound to answer, where he
gave his attendance, with his Witnesses ready, but not brought to Trial,
although much desired by him and his Wife, who urged the Injuries of the delay
thereof.

At the same Court William Bradford and John MccComb appeared, and desired they
might come to Trial, it being greatly to their prejudice to be kept Prisoners,
and saying, it is provided by Magna Charta, That Justice shall not be delayed
to any, and we being freeborn English Subjects, claim this as our Privilege,
and hope this Court will not deny it us, because not only o^^ Persons are
restrained, but William Bradford's working Tools are detained from him, with
which he should work to maintain his Family.

Justice Cook said, What Bold, Impudent and Confident Fellows are these to
stand thus confidently before the Court.

I. Mcc Comb, You may cause our Hats to be taken off, if you please.


W. Bradford, We are near only to desire that which is the Right of every free
born English Subject, which is speedy Justice, and its strange that that should
be accounted Impudence, and we Impudent Fellows therefore, when we have spoke
nothing but words of Truth and (...) in r^qu^^ting that which is our Right, and
which we want, (...) g^eatly to our prejudice to be detained Prisoners.


J. Cook, (speaking to W Bradford) said, If thou had been in Englan^ thou would
have ^ad ^^y Back sl^sht before now.


W. B. I do not know wherein I have broke any Law, so as to incur any such
Punishment.


Justice Ienings, Thou art very ignorant in the Law surely, does not thou know
that there is a Law that every Printer shall put his Name to the Books ^e
prints, or ^is Press is forfeited.


W. B. I know there was such a Law, and I know when it expired.


J. Cook. But it is reviv^d again, and is in force, and without any regard to
the matter of the Book, provides, that the Printer shall put his Name to all
that he prints, which thou have not done.


Bu^ waving from that, the Prisoners still pressed for a Trial. To which justice
Cook said, A Trial yo^ shall have, and that to your Cost too, it may be. And
Justice Ienings said, A Trial you shall have, but for some Reason known to us,
the Court defers it to the next Sessions; and that is the Answer we give, and
no other you shall have.

All this time, John While, Sheriff, pleaded vehemently against the Prisoners,
greatly aggravating their (pretended) Crimes; and when complained of, that the
Sheriff, (through whose hands goes all Fi^^^ and Forfeitures) should be so
bitter an Attorney against the Prisoners, he cloaked it under the Visor of a
Prothonitor.

So this Court passed over, and the said Persons not brought to Trial, but yet
not wholly barren of Action, nor void of Injustice; for though they had not only
got W. Bradford into Prison, and taken his Letters from him, (with which he
should work) and his Paper and Books out of his Shop, but also they had got the
Body of John Mcc Comb, with which one would think they might have been
satisfied, had any thing of tenderness remained in them, the time they
committed him being when his Wife was newly brought to Bed, and who lay very
weak in a strong Fever, and several thought she would not live, and though he
acquainted them of her Condition, and how destitute his Family was, requsting
them to let him go home, and he would promise to be ready at any time they
should call for him; This they would not grant, but to Prison he was sent;
(though to give every one their due, White the Goal^r was so kind as to let him
go home an hour or two sometim^s in an Evening after it was dark) yet our hot
spurred Justices (being newly booted and spurred with their Five Pound Spurs)
being not satisfied with having his Body, would do what in them lay, to ruin
him and his Family; for whereas he kept an Ordinary, and for his Lisence so to
do had paid Governor Lloyd Twelve Pieces of Eight, which is Three Pound Twelve
Shillings for the last twelve Months before [ No ^n^onsiderable Price for a
Licence] yet they now proceeded to suppress his keeping of an Ordinary, though
he had fullfilled, and in no respect transg^essed the Conditions of his
Lisence, as will appear by a Copy of the said Lisence, which here follows
verbatim, vi^.

By the Lieutenant Governor. Philadelphia Ss.
JOhn Mcc Comb requesting Lisence from me to keep an Ordinary in Philadelphia,
(...) being recommended to me as a fit and qualified Person for such an Employ;
I do hereby admit and Liscence the said John MccComb to keep an Ordinary, or a
House of Public Entertainment in the House ^e now lives in, ^e taking care,
according to Law, to keep good Orders and sufficient Conveniences for Man and
Horse. T^is Lisence to continue for a Twelve Month ensuing the date hereof.

Given at Philadelphia the Tenth day of the 4th Month, 1692. Thomas Lloyd.

Now let us hear what great and heinous Crimes are alleged for the su^^^^ssing
John Mcc Comb in his Employ: If he had transgrest any Law, or broke any
Conditions in his Lisence, they ought to have called him before them, and
convicted him thereof, but without ever so doing, they suppress his
so-dear-bought-Lisence, as follows.

At a Court held at Philadelphia the 4th of October, 1692.
THe Court taking notice of John Mcc Comb's Contemptuous Behavior, as also his
spreading a Seditious Paper in his House, to the Disturbance of the Peace, do
therefore suppress his Lisence, and do Command him not to presume to keep an
Ordinary after the Tenth Day of the next Month, being November, on pain of
incurring the Penalty of the Forfeiture of Five Pound for keeping an Ordinary
without a Lisence: And that notice be given him of this Order.

A true Copy by John White, Deputy Clark.

Note, Tha^ the Contemptuous Be^aviour they mention, was his and W. B's
requesting of the Court to come to a Trial, as before is related; and the
S^ditious Paper they mention, was the p^inted Appeal, which he having bought
two of them, and some Persons happening to see them, got them from him again,
because it suited not with their convenience to go so far as the Printer s; and
J. M. did not buy or receive them to sell again, but his disposing of those two
Papers was accidental, and for which he was imprisoned, and to come to Trial
for it, but this sati^fied not these cruel men, for they make that a main
matter whereby to suppress his Lisence [ No less than Two Punishments for one
Offence] and yet though they were so zealously warm to prosecute an^ punish
these Offenders, and waic^ (they said) they co^ld not avoid, without violating
their Trust to the King and Governor; yet without any Violation of their said
Trust they could pass by several others that were much more concerned in
spreadi^g those Papers than J. M. Oh! the Partiality, Deceit and Cruelty of
these Men!

This Sessions passes over, and the said Persons continued under Duress till
the next Sessions, which being come, let us hear the Proceedings, which here
follows, viz.

At a Court of Quarter-Sess^ons held by the King and Queens Authority, and in
the Proprietary's Name at Philadelphia the 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 12 days of the
10th Month, 1692.

There being present on the Bench, as Justices, Samuel Ienings, Arthur Cook,
Samuel Richardson, John Holmes, Robert Turner, 10th and 12th days. Lacy Cock,
and Anthony Morris on the 12 day. Robert Ewer, Quakers. Henry Waady, Quakers.
Griffith Owen, Quakers.


The Nam^s of the Persons, that presented Peter Boss, George Keith, Thomas
Budd, William Brad^ord, etc.

Alexander B^ardsly, William Carter, John Iennit, Will. Oxly, Emanuel Dauson,
William Allaway, Lewis Thomas, Reece Peter's, Io^n Comes, Christopher Pennock,
Mouns Jones, Thomas Griffith, William Harwood, William Hearn, Will. Finley,
Will. Lawrence.

Observe. That most, if not all of these men are known to be ^^ghly prejudiced
against G. K. T. B. and those that join with them, because of their zealous
Testimony to Christ without, as well as Christ within: And John W^ite, Sheriff,
is known to be greatly prejudiced against them, who packt this Jury on purpose
to present and defame G. K. and the r st, as was in some degree well observed
by Justice Holme, when he saw ^h y brought in new Presentiments against G. K. in
matters concerning their Religious Differences, for which he was sharply
reproved and menaced on the Bench by Samuel Ienings and Arthur Cook, the last
saying, They were the Fathers o^ the Country, and they had done well, and like
honest men, in bringing in those Presentiments, and they gave them Thanks ^or
their care and pains; but (said Justice Cook) if they must be found fault with,
who will serve upon a Grand Jury? and so went on highly resenting those few
words Justice Holme had spoke; A^thur Co^k not minding that himself had said
some little time before, to a Grand Jury of more substantial men than these
(upon their bringing in a Presentment that did not please him) you are a
Company of Infamous Men: and for which he was presented by the next Grand Ju^y,
but it is supposed that Presentment was buried in the Clarks study of Oblivion,
for we have never heard more of it.

The 9th day of the 10th Month, Peter Boss called into Court, and set to the
Bar.

Crier, O Yes, Silence is commanded, upon pain of Imprisonment.

The Presentment read,

Philadelphia, the 5 th of the 8 th Month, 1692. We of the Grand Jury for the
Body of th^^ County, do present Peter Boss, for that he has accused Samuel
Jenings, being a i e. Master-like, as says the English Expositor.
Magisterial Officer, with being an unjust Judge, and of his being Drun^k, and
of laying a Wager with John Slocum, and for many other scandalous, reproachful
and malicious Expressions, to the Defaming of him, and tending to the
Disturbance of the Peace, contrary to the Law in that case made and provided.

Clark. Peter Boss, What say thou, art thou guilty or not guilty?


Peter Boss, Not guilty in manner and form as there presented.


Clark, By whom will thou be tried?


Peter Boss, By God and the Country.


Clark, Call over the Jury.


Humphery Waterman, Joseph Kirle, Thomas Wharton, Tho. Marle, Richard Sutton,
Samuel Hoult, James Fox, Abraham Hardiman, Nicholas Rideout, Thomas Morris,
Richard Walter, John Whitpane.

Clark. Do thou object any thing against any of these Persons?


Prisoner. Yes, I object against all of them that are called Quakers, because
they are such as I know to be deeply prejudiced against G. K. and all that
favor him, but am willing to be tried by any that are not called Quakers, or
such of them as are not manifestly prejudiced. Bu^ they would not allow of his
Exception. Whereupon the Jury were atte^^ed. The form of the Attestation, as
follows viz.

In the Presence of Almighty God and this Court, you shall promise, well and
truly to Try and true D^liverance make betwixt the Honour^^le William Penn,
Proprietary and Governor of this Province, and the Prisoner at the Bar,
according to Evidence.

After which, David Lloyd first, and John White next pleaded very ^ard against
him, that that Letter did defame Sam. Ienings as a Magist^^te, confirming it,
as they pretended, by reading some Passages out of so^e Law Books, and some
Laws of this Province against defaming Magistrates.

To which the Attorneys of Peter Boss pleaded, That he acknowledged the writing
that Letter, but what was said therein concerning S. Iening^, was not against
him as he was a Magistrate, nor could it be reckoned a Defamation, because
'twas only a private Letter sent to himself, showing his dislike in some
things, and desiring him to clear himself of other gross and scandalous things
that were reported of him, as is usual for one Church Member to do to another;
and they brought a Case out of Shepherd's Faithful Counselor, that what is
said must be Falso and Maliciose, i. e. falsely and maliciously, otherwise not
actionable. And that if a man speak slightingly of a Magistrate, if it be when
he is not in the exercise of his Office, it is no defaming of him as a
Magistrate, and so no trespass against the Law alleged.

To which David Lloyd replied, That what was spoke against Samuel Jenings,
must needs relate to ^im as a Magistrate, for take away Samuel Jenings, and
where will the Magistrate be?

And Sam. Ienings said, Take away Sam. Jenings the Magistrate, and where will
Sam. Jenings the Quaker be?

Note, By this it se^meth to S. Ienings that it is as inherent in him to be a
Magistrate as to be a Quaker, and therefore when his Magistracy cease, his
Quakerism (according to him) must cease, and like Hypocrates Twins live and dye
together; but yet he may remain to be Sam. Ienings, when he is neither
Magistrate nor Quaker.

And when his Attornys were a^out further to open the matter, how he w^it to
him only as a Church Member, and offered to produce some Pre^idents in the
case, Arthur Cook, interrupted, saying, They woe ld not have matters of Religion
^iscoursed there, saying, W at must Religion be made a cover to revile and
defame me^, by saying, he did not write to him as a Magistrate, but as a Church
Member?

To which G. K. (as his Friend) desired Liberty to speak, as the Law in that
case a^^ows, but they were very unwilling to suffer him to say any thing in
behalf of Peter Boss, John White saying, G. K. was not Rectus in Curia; but
through much and long Importunity, he was permitted, who then told them, that a
Distinction must needs be allowed of words spoke to a man as he is only in a
private Capacity, and as he is a Magistrate; for when Magistrates, as Arthur
Cook and Sam. Ienings, give us hard words, calling us Ranters, Apostates,
Liars, Wicked and Ungodly men, etc. ye will not say ye give us these Na^es as
Magistra^^s; and then if ye can speak to us, not as ye are Magistrates, we may
also speak ^o you not as ye are Magistrat^s.

Thomas Harris his Attorney, and G. Keith his Friend, proffered to speak further
to several things that had been alleged by D. Lloyd and I. White, but were
much menaced by Arthur Cook, and so was Peter Boss himself, which was much
resented in the minds of many, that a man has not liberty boldly to speak in
his own defense, nor his Attorneys nor Friends for him, but often when they
were pleading, Commanded Silence upon pain of Imprisonment: Whereupon some
complained, that it was hard that he had not liberty fairly to plead his own
Cause. To which Arthur Cook said, That as a Christian he could bear any thing,
but not as a Magistrate. Which was noticed by many how A. Cook set the
Christian and Magistrate in opposition the one to the other, as if we were not
to expect that when they act as Magistrates, they are endued with Christian
Patience, Meekness, and Long-suffering, as if when they act the Magistrate,
they put off the Christian.

[ Note, That a little before Sam. Ienings and David Lloyd would not allow of
any distinction betwixt the Magistrate and Quaker, and yet now to serve his
turn their Brother Cook grants it: Oh! the Confusion, Deceit and Hypocrisy of
these men!]


G. Keith pleaded further, though with much difficulty, That Peter Bos^ being a
Member of the Quakers Church, they ought not to go to Law with him until they
had proceeded orderly with him in the r men's Meetings, and given him Gospel
Order; for the things of difference betwixt him and Sam. Ienings relate wholly
to Church Discipline, and b^lo^g to a spiritual Court, and not to this.


Da. Lloyd, T^is is a spiritual Court; for in England they can try Atheism t^is
Co^rt.


G. K. But Peter Bos^ is not accused of Atheism; and if a man profes^ one
Almighty God, this Count has nothing to do with him for his Opinions or
Persuasions in Religious matters.


Then D. Lloyd ^ead a pa^^age out of a Law-Book, T at certain words spoke
against a Bishop or Minist^r, were act ^nable, though no actionable when spoke
against a p^ivate person; which (said he) is the present case.

A Person standing by, said, May not sin be reproved in a Bishop or Magistrate?
At which they were greatly offended, and caused an Officer to t^k^ the said
Person viz. Ralph Ward, out of the Court.

Bu^ for the ^urther sati^f^ction of the Ju^y, and all others present, that he
did not defame Sam. Iening^ as a Magistrate, Peter Boss greatly pressed to have
his said Letter read, which after some time was done, th^' with great
Impatience. The which Letter here follows, viz. THe Paper lately published at
Philadelphia by 28. against G. K. and those joined with him, etc. has and is
like to occasion much Tro^bl^ and D fference among us, not only because o^ the
^alse Things compact in t, as is (...) known to many VVitn^sses, and now to
impose it on all the Meetings, is plain down right Popery, and gives j^st
occasion to all, not only to judge i^ as ^t is for the abuse, but also inspect
further into t^ings, and t^em ^^^se ministering Imposers upon other
mensConsciences, like unto the Roman Cl^rgy. And to show how ill the People do
resent these things, one w^o wa^ not a Q^aker, so soon as the Paper was made
public, says* What D -- li^^ work is here like to be! a Pack of Fools have
sent their Bu^ out: what a piece of work you will see in a short time, and how
they will expose themselves, and force others to send it home in Pri^t, say
(...), wit^ wo^^e words of some, unfit to mention here, etc. By exposing t^is
your Edict, you have made all people your Judges, into whose hands it shall
come (i. ^ Papists themselves) for your Unrighteous I^dgment, and drawing in
t^ose (...) that have subscribed to they know not what, w^o were not present
(...) the Meetings, so consequently did not near the words charged on G. K. to
be spoke by him, etc. but have taken all upon Trust, and signed as a man tha^
wo^ld be a false VVitnes^ to a Bill or Bond for Money, where ^one is due. It Is
hoped, that some will see their over-^^ste, and repent it, as well as others
have done: How can you expect this Act ^ yours will be accounted Righteous
Judgment, to condemn a man for Words, and cover one another Deeds, as well as
worse words in and among your selves. Has J. S. ever been dealt with for his
many Enormous palpable gross Miscarriages chargeable upon him, h^s Greatness
and Pride so Insolent and Lo^ty, none dared to touch him? and for his abuses to
a poor Worm, who writ to him for I^stice and Satisfaction, could have no
answer of said Letter; and being discontented to hear him preach to an
A^ditory, knowing his Life to be Unsavory, and an Unjust I^dge, I write the
second Letter to him o^ dislike to his preaching, which after he had read f^ ng
it in the Fire: Why did he not answer it, and get satisfaction from the Author,
but that he knew himself Tardy, resolved to Exercise Bonners Cruelty on my poor
paper: And its matter of sorrow there is diverse among you know enough of S. J.
but you cover him and one another, and whom you please to abase, down with him
amain; do you think people are blind, and without sense? be it known, they see,
they hear, etc.

1. Pray let it be queried into, whether it was not true that S. J. did wage
his Horse with John Slocum, to ride a Race with their Horses? and whether J.
Slocum did not re^use to take the advantage of him, because S. J. was D^unk,
etc.?

2. And pray let it be inquired into, whether S. J. at another time was not so
drunk, co^ld scarce get over the Ship side of Joseph Bryar, when at Burlington?

3. And pray let it be inq^ired, whether the said S. J. did not wickedly i^
surveying a Tract of Land which Joh. Antrum had actually begun to do?

4. And pray let it be enquired into, whether S. J. did not take away the
M^adow of Richard Matthews, who being in England, took the Advantage? What the
Effect will be, Time m^st mani^est, how Odious he will render others for S. J's
sake, he being a pretty eminent man in London.

5. And pray let be enquired into the Actions and Abuses of S. J. to John
Skeen, deceased, which should have been answered at Burlington Meeting.

6. And pray let it be inquired into, whether it was S. J. or J. Simcock that
was by two Persons carried to Bed Drunk?

7. And pray let it be further enquired into, whether it was the said S. J. and
J. Simcock that was so drunk lost a Coat that was borrowed of another man, etc?
Seeing so many of you have condemned G. K. for words let these Actions be also
condemned, they being as great Pretenders to be Mini^ters as him. And pray take
special care this be not burnt, as the former, having a Copy of the same.

Peter Boss.




Which being read, Peter Boss produced the Testimonys of several credible
Persons, concerning the matters contained in the said Letter, and pressed hard to
have them read, because they proved some of the things queried, at least. But
they were very unwilling to have them read, saying, it was no evidence unless
the persons were present in Court, although it is well known that Attestations in
writing have been often accepted in this Court; and it may be noted, that at
the former Sessions he had his Witnesses ready in Person waiting all the time
of the Court, which was great Charge to him, but by reason of the Extremity of
the Weather, could not be present now: However, at last, through much
importunity they admitted some of the Papers to be read, which here fo^^ow,
viz. Concerning a Report which has been about Sam. Jening's riding a Wager with
John S^locum, I do here testi^ie, That about three Years now past, Sarah
Biddle, VVi^e of W. Biddle, senior, she being at Burlington, did tell it me
thus, as follows, That she reproving her Son William, who had been riding
hard, she said, his answer was, Why Mother, may not I so well as Sam. Jenings,
he could ride a Race, or did ride one, with John Slocum, and John won his
Horse, but he would not take the advantage of Samuel, because S^muell was
Cacuse, ( John Slocum said) says William to his Mother: This I do here affirm,
that I had it from Sarah Biddles own ^^uth, and that we understand the word
Cacuse to be drunk.

Mary P^dd.
Burlington in West-New-Jarsey, the 1 st of October, 1692. Attested before me,
Edward Hemlock, Justice.
VV^ereas there is a Report of S. Jenings riding a Race with J. Slocum thus
much I William Bustill do hereby affirm to the truth of the said Repor^* Will.
Biddle, sen. did tell me, that S. Jenings and J. Slocum did ride a Race
together, and that John did win S. Jenings Horse, which was a whi^^ Gray, and
that which J. Slocum did ride on W. Biddle did b^y o^ J. Slocum; and that it
was at or about the time when the Provinces were divided, and that the Race was
run in some place between Amboy and George Keith'^ Land in East-Jarsey, as they
came from Amboy.

October, the 21th, 1692. Will. Bastill.

As concerning a Report of S. Jenings riding a Race with J. Slocum about three
Years ago, W. Biddle, sen. at Dinner, and his Wife in company at his own House
did tell me, that S. Jenings did ride a Wager with J. Slocum, and lost his
Horse, which I am ready to be attested to, if further need shall require, as
witness my hand hereunto set, this 2d of Novem. 1692.

Henry Beck.

Memorand. That my Sister Sarah Bainbridge told me, that William Biddle did say
in her ^ea^ing, that as he was riding from East-Jarsey toward his own Horse,
he hea^d a noise, where^p^n he looked behind him, and did set Sam. Jenings and
J. Slocum ride after him very ^ast, and J. Slocum said to S. Jenings, I have
won thy Horse as fair as ever any man won an^ thing in this World.

John Bainbridge.

A^ concerning the Report that S. Jenings surveyed the Mea^o^ of Rich.
Mat^hews, I have this to say, being then and there present, I b^ing assistant
at that time to Simon Charles in surveying Land for Samuel, I went with S.
Jenings to the said Meadow, and told him that was the Meadow that I had
^o^merly surv^y d to Rich. Matthews: He bid me show him the Lines of the sur
ey: we went and search^d, and ^ound only one Tree or two marked by the meadow
side, and no more; for there had been a fire, that had not only burnt up most
of the Trees there by the R^ot, but also the Surface of the Meadow it self, so
that we could find no marks in any order; then I produced a Copy of the R^cords
o^ the Survey, which was the same with this following, viz. ^^^veyed also that
piece of Meadow lying at the Northwe^^ co^^er of the said Land, extending to
the Neck or narrowest place of the same, as it is n^w marked, all making up the
number of 500 acres, as aforesaid. B^t notwit^standing Samuel bid Simon put it
into the s^rv^y, which he accordingly did. Now Elias Far being Attorney for
Rich. Matthews, and hearing of what Samuel had done, he made application to
me, whereupon I wrote to Sam. Jenings about it, and signified to him, that i^
my Judgment, he co^ld not ^old that Meadow, neither by Equity nor by Law. Thus
much is testifi^d by me,

Daniel Leeds.
Attested before me Edward Hemlock, Justice, Octo^. 1. 1692.



Memorandum, That I James Silver, then Servant to Sam. Jenings, being troubled
at his Severity toward both Servants and Creatures, viz. his ^^o^king (...)
down ^^d breaking his Kain upon him, and overloading and ^^ating both Servants
and Cattle, when not able to go forwards, and one time broke the Rib of an Ox
by his unmerciful Beating, and taking taking Benj. Moore by the Throat as he
was coming of his Bed, bore my Testimony against it, as uns^itable to the
Spirit of Christ, he took occasion to deal very hardly with me, and let me go
almost Naked, and when Winter grew on, and I complained under the sense of
Cold, he threatened to make me creep, or come on my hands and knees to him,
like a Dog or Spaniel, or break my Bones.

Burlington, the 5th Month, 1692. James Silver.



[ Note, This James Silver was a man in years, and a Friend, and one that has
h^d many Servants himself, whom he thus treated for witnessing against his
great Cruelty.]

John Smith says, That being at Philadelphia on or about the 28th of August,
1692. meeting with Sam. Jenings before his own door, his first Sal^tation to me
was thus, as follows, What! art thou a Keithian, Rascally Fellow, worse than
an Infide^l, that neither knows Law nor Gospel, must thou pra^e, sorry Rascally
Fellow, I'^l call for a Constable, and send tree to the Crew, thou art like
them, a Company of Rascally Fellow^; (...) have thee to know, that we are able
to judge both Georg^ Keith and the Country. And thus ^e did revile and call me
Rascal and worse than an Infidel many times over; and this was presently a^^er
he was come from a Meeting, and for no other Cause than saying to one who
hanged up the Proclama^ion, (against G. K. which they posted up both in Town
and C^unt^y) Ye may as well hang the other side forward, for it shows their
^olly, a little Haman-like: This abuse to me was not unlike his former Actions
and Behavior to other his Servants, as instance on a (...), James Silver, an
Ancient man, his poor Servant, for showing him his ^aked Thighs, and
complaining ^or want of Clot^^^, Sam. Jenings told him he would make him to
creep on his Hands an^ ^nees, like a Spaniel, and ^^ap his back, if he would
not hold his pra^ing* etc.

John Smith.

Note, That several other Testimonies might be here set down concerning S.
Ienings disorderly walking and behavior in his Family and among his
Neighbors* and particul^rly his Inhumane Whipping of his Servant Maid naked in
her Bed, the manner and circumstances of which I shall here omit for modesties
sake; but these here produced are sufficient to show* that there was cause for
Peter Boss to write to him* and though these Evidences do not prove every thing
queried in that Letter, yet these things being commonly reported abroad, were
cause enough, one would think, for the Quakers to ca^^ him to an account, and
search out the bottom of these things, but that he is grown so so Proud, so
High and Imperious, that none dares to touch him. Nay, lately one of his own
Church Me^^ers, no^ coming into Court at his Command, he bid Fetch him
H^a^long, and fined him Ten Pound for not coming, and committed him to Goal, to
remain till paid, though the man says, he had no business at Court, and it would
have been (...) his prejudice to have gone; but all People resenting th^se
Actions of Sam. Ienings very Ill, Arthur Cook said, I ll go to my Lord Judge,
and see if I can persuade him. Yet the next day he can put o^ his Canonical
Robe and imitate a Disciple of the Meek Jesus, and compare himself to poor
Mord^cai; and then again before he leaves the Pulpit, a^^ that on a Sunday or
first day of the Week, put on his Magist^atical Robes, and tell the People,
That now he speaks to t^em as a Magistrate; and because they did not break up
their Religious Meeting at his Command, he calls out, Is there ever an Offi er
there? let Proclamation be made in the King and Queen'^ Name for all Persons to
depart to their own Habitations, and see if they will dare to sit here. They that
cannot see this man swell d above the Meekness of a true Minister of Christ,
and transforming himself, like Satan into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14.
I must conclude they are blind, and have lost their senses.

But to leave this Digression, after the reading in Court of as many of the
above cited Testimonies, as they would suffer, the Jury went out upon it, and
brought in Peter Boss only Guilty (...) Transgressing the 29 Chapter of Laws of
this Province, viz. against speaking slightingly of a Magistrate. Upon which
the Bench gave Judgment, That Peter Boss should pay Six Pound.

And to back the former Instances and hints of the unjust Actions of this man,
take the breviate of a Letter from one of their present Church Members to him,
which is as follows, viz. Samuel Jenings, I perceive thou art no Change^ing,
thou looks like a man for Bulk and Talk, like a Christian sometimes; but really
Samuel, whatever thy self or others think of thee, I do hereby tell thee, and
that under my Hand, That I have met with more truly Noble and Manlike
Treatment, and the Exercise o^ better Christianity among the Turks, than has
appeared hitherto in thee t^wards me: Surely Samuel, had thou exercised but
the common sense and c^p^^ity o^ a Rational man, thou could not t^ink that
the Go^erno^r would ^en^ a man t ree t ousan^ (...) with Instr^ctions to take
ca^e and charge o^ ^is Servants, G^od^ and ^tock, should be in a meaner
capaci^y (...) Negro s, and not ^ave a supply of Ne^^ssaries, etc. but this
thou have very irrationally and unmanly denied unto me, and both thy sel^ and
Wife have proved Fal^^ and Deceit^^ll unto me: T ou re^^ested me to write ^or
thee, and promised Sati^^action for my ^ab^ur, and I wrote about 149 Laws of
the P^ovince, and a Copy of the King^ C^arter to the Governor, and a List of
the Governors Tenants in the County of Bucks, with the Quantity o^ Land they
hold, and upon what Tenure; but like a deceitful man thou re^usest to perform
thy promise; And know this, that beside thy Promise, I have thy Lett^r under
thy hand to p^oduce, as also the Evidence o^ one of the most Credible Persons
in the Town, whom t ou told, That I had wrote a Copy of the Laws for thee, and
thou wast to pay me 18 s. for it. Nay, yet ^urther, Samuel, when the
Commissioners, which are thy Overseers, (to whom t^ou art obliged to render an
Account, so often as they require (...) thee) had ordered thee to let me have
50 s. for a supply of Necessaries, thou refused to let me ^ave it, unless I
would take it in thy Shop Goods ((...) would ^ave proved little better than a
Cheat, for t^o^ would have charged 50 s. to the Governor's Account, when, its
like, I should not have had really the value of 25 s. o thee. I once more
consulted the Commissioners, who very freely and willingly wrote to thee a few
Li^es, signed with their own hands, and gave it to me to deliver to thee,
wherein they ordered thee to pay me 50 s. in Silver Money, according to their
former Order; b^^ thou returned them this Answer by me, That thou woudlst not
answer their Bi^l, bidding me carry it back to them again; which indeed is no
other than an unchristian and unmanly slighting of the Commissioners, and a
base and ^ordid Contempt of and trampling on that Power which the Governor
has invested them with over thee and his Affairs; one might think by thy De
ortment toward them, that thou do neither know thy sel^, nor the Station in
which thou art placed by the Governor; for Samuel, thou art no other than a
Mercinary Servant, and that during the will and pleasure of the Governor, and
the Commissioners are t^y Overseers and Controulers, to whom thou art obliged
to render an Account, etc.

Thy true Friend, John Phill^*




Then next George Keith called into Court and set to the Bar.

Crier, O Yes, Silence is commanded upon pain of Imprisonment.

The Presentment read,

We of the Grand Jury do present George Keith and Thomas Budd (...) Authors of
a Book, entitled, The Plea of the Innocent, w^ere in p. 13. about the latter
end of the same, they the said Geo. Keith and Tho. Budd defamingly accuse Sam.
Jenings, (he being a Judge and Magistrate of t^is Province) of being too high
and imperious in Worldly Courts, calling him an Ignorant, Presumptuous and
Insolent Man, greatly exposing his Reputation, and of an ill President, and
contrary to the Law in that made and provided.

Clark, What say you George Keith, are you guilty or not guilty of this
Presentment.


G. Keith, Before I be demanded to plead to the Presentment, I desire to be
heard a few words. Which the Court granting, he said, I would have you to
consider, that both ye and we are as Beacon set on a Hi^l, and the Eyes of God,
Angels and Men are upon us, and if ye do any thing against us that is not f^ir
and ju^t, not only these parts hereaway will hear of it, but Europe also; for
if we be wronged (if God permit) we think to make it known to the World.

Here some were very Impatient, telling him, he menaced the Count, but he would
do well to take heed what he did, for if he spoke or p^blished any thing in
derogation of the Sentence of Court, it was against a Law in this Province, and
he would be punished for it.


G. K. An able Law^er h^th said, when a man is w o^ged, and can have no other
Remedy, p^inting is his last: Ye (...) give Loos rs leave to complain: Our
Friends have done it formerly in Old England when they have been unjustly dealt
by, and particularly William Pen^ and George Whithead. I will not say any thing
against your Law, but I suppose the true sense of it is, that if any derogate
from the sentence of a Court, if the Sentence be ju^t, he is puni^h^ble, but
not otherwise. Are your Courts i^fa lible? Is it not possible that at times
they may give an unj^^t Sentence?


David Lloyd, Yea, our Courts are Infallible in Law, George, I assure thee.


G. K. Then why do ye admit of Appeals? If they be infallible, there is no
occasion to appeal to a higher Judicatory.

Then David Lloyd went about to mend the matter, saying, They were Infallible
so far as the Law (...) Infallible, and so far as they kept to the Law.

Note, This is as if he h^d said, they are infallible so far as they are (...),
which is not very good sense, unless they (...) are not absolutely Infallible,
but conditionally, and if conditionally only, it is possible they may give a
wrong Sentence, and he who they give it against may complain, without just
cause of Offense, otherwise their Court here is as Arbitrary as any in the
World.

Next, G. K. de^^red to know in what Capacity D. Lloyd did plead there against
them, ^e^ing he was not the King's Attorney?


Da* Lloyd, We have no Kings Attorney.


G K. I understood, that Patrick Robinson is the Kings Attorney*


D. Llo^d, No he is not.


G. K. But he is Attorney General.


D L. He is neit^er Kings Attorney, nor Attorney General.


G. K. What is he then?


D* Lloyd, He is the Proprietary's Attorney.

Now G K. still pressing to know in what Capacity D. Lloyd did plead, it was
answered, That the Court allowed him to plead.

Note; That it was admired by the Auditory, that this David Lloyd should be so
Confident and Brazen-fa^'d, as to tell, i^ an open Court, that Patrick Robinson
was not the Kings Attorney, and thrust himself into that place, purposely to
vent forth some of his inveterate Hatred and Malice against G. Keith and the
rest, which he did to pu^pose, by ^^r^ining and perverting the places, by him
brought, from their true ^ence; and yet this man pretends to be a late Convert
to the Religion of the People called Quakers. If they were all such, i^ would
make one abhor them for Notorious Hypocrites.


G. K. I de^^re you to ^ear me a little further, and that is, That I think it
very unfair, that these who are deeply prejudiced against me, and my opposite
Parties and Accusers, should be my Judges, as particularly Sam. Ienings and
Arthur Cook, the last of which but a few days ago (the 5 of 10 mon.) told me at
this own house, before diverse Witnesses, and John White, Sheriff, is witness,
that when he warned me to the Court, I told him, I thought to come, but did not
think to plead, unless I ^ad a fair Jury, A (...) Cook said, Truly George, a
Foul One will serve thee. Now let the Court judge, whether this man is fi^ to
sit upon the Bench to judge me, who says, That a Foul Jury will serve me.
Suppose I had been the greatest Malefactor, will any say, A Foul Jury will
serve to try me? Is no^ this to destroy all Fund^me^tal Laws? I appeal to you
here, the Justices and Jury, such (...) are most manifestly Prejudiced against
(...) Testimony to the Quakers an^ient Principle against all use of outwa^d
Weapons, Whether ye do as ye would be done by? Would ye be willing that a
company of men wholly of our side, (though honest) should be on a Jury to judge
you?


Sam. Jenings, We shall take care that ye shall not be our Judges: Which was an
Evasion from the Question, and seemed to be a Jest or Scoff that he pleased
himself with, and which are more frequent with him then Expressions of Mercy
and Justice.


G. K. I have yet something further to say, before I plead to the Presentment,
but being unacquainted with your Formalitys in Law, desire that no advantage
may be taken against me on that account.


Court, No advantage shall be taken against thee on that account.


Clark, What say you, George Keith, to your Presentment, are you Guilty or not
Guilty?


G. K. Not guilty in manner and form. And now that I have answered to the
Presentment, Not Guilty, my chief and only Plea that I think to make use of,
unless ye will say that so to do is a Contempt of the Court, and of your
Authority, which by no means I would be guilty of, my chief Plea is, That I am
not presentable by the Grand Jury for any thing alleged against me, they being
no Offenses against the King, Governor nor Country, what I have said was only
against particular Persons, who if they think themselves wronged by me, man sue
me in their own Names, and I am ready to answer them


Court and Clark, It is no Contempt of Court, but the season of your so
pleading is over, you should have said so before you pleaded, Not Guilty; now
you must submit to be tried by the Country.


G. K. I knew no^ this formality in Law, ye told me, ye would take no advantage
against me in that respect. But the Clark still pressing him to come to a
Trial, G. K. further said, I think not to make any other plea; for the things
for which I am presented are not against the King, Governor, nor any Nuisance
to the Country, nor against particular Persons, as Magistrates, and therefore
not presentable.


Clark, If ye refuse to be tried by the Jury, the Bench has Power to fine you.


G. K. I shall take my hazard of that; I have able Council that the things
whereof am accused, are not presentable by the grand Jury.


D. Lloyd, If able Council has so advised thee, their Counsel has failed in
this*


G. K. To call a man Proud and Imperious is not Actionable.


D. Lloyd, Though not Actionable, yet Presentable.


G. K. If not actionable, not presentable.


D. Lloyd, That is not a good Consequence.

^ut let all impa^^ia^ Re^ders judge, whether it be not a good Consequence,
that if words spoke concerning particular Persons, not as Magistra^es, be not
actionable, that therefore they are not presentable, because, for what are they
presentable, seeing they are neither against the King, no^ Go^ernour, nor
Country, nor particula^ men as Magistrates?


D. Lloyd. There is a Law of this Province, that no words of Defamation must be
spoken against a Magistrate, nor shall any speak slightingly or ab^sively of
them, which thou have done.


G. K. They were not spoke to him as a Magistrate, nor when he was in the
exercise of his Office; and to call him Hig^ and Imperious does not reflect on
him as a Magistrate: If I had called him Ignorant in the Laws, and Unjust in
the Execution of them, this would have reflected on him as a Magistrate, but
(...) to cal^ him High and Imperious, for Pi^ty; whereof Humility is a Branch,
is no essential Qualification of a Magistrate, tho it be of a Christian and
Minister of Christ; the only essential Qualifications of a Magistrate, are to
be knowing the Laws, and just in the Execution of them.

[ Note, That it is no Reflection on a Tailor, Shoemaker, or the like
Tradesman, to be called Proud, for he may be a good Artifi^er although he be
Proud, but to be Proud reflecteth on him as he professes to be a Christian or
Minister of Christ. And this distinction Sam. Ienings must needs allow, unless
he will say, that when he exercises his Magisterial Office he is no Christian,
but wholly puts off his Qualifications of a Christian, as a man puts off
one Garment and putt^th o^ another. But if he will say he is still a Christian,
as well as a Magistrate, then he ought to be humble, meek and forbearing,
especially to hi^ Fellow Church Members, not high and imperious, and exacting
the severity of the Law of them; for even the Law says, Sumum jus, Summa
Injuria; i. e. The Ri^our of the Law is high Inj^stice* for if the Law of
England be Lex Mis^^^^rdiae, as it is called, then well may the Law of
Christianity be called Lex Miserc^rdiae, i. e. The Law o^ Mercypunc; that is,
forbearing, and exacteth not the utmost farth^ng.

Note further* That one Reason of th^se word (...) in the Plea of the (...),
viz* (...)* ^enings, (...) ^oo high and imperious in wor^^ly Courts* was, that
a little time before he had commanded to bring one of his fellow Members (viz.
Samu^ll Buck^y) Headl^^^ to the Court, and fined him ten Pound for refusing to
come (...) his Command, and sent him to Prison, to remain without Bail till
paid. Now admit he did not illegally in this, or unbecoming a severe austere
Magisterial Officer, yet was it not unbecoming a tende^ Christian* who should
be meek and merciful?


G. K. Having refused to plead other wise than as above mentioned* Dav. Lloyd
bid the Cl^rk record him Nihil dicit, i. ^. he says nothing. To which G. K.
replied, Why should he record me nihil dicit? I think I have said a great deal.
And after some further disco^rse, G.K. was set aside, and Thomas Budd set to
the Bar, the most mat^rial discourse that passed here follows, viz.


The Presentment being read, the Clark said, Thomas Budd, Wh^^ say you, are you
guil^y, as you stand here presented, or not guilty?

T. B^dd, Not guilty, as there presented, but own my self to b^ one of the
Authors of that Book, called, The Plea of the Innocen^.


Clark, By whom will you be tried?


T. Budd, By God and the Country.


D. Lloyd, as Attorney against him, pleaded, That to ^all a man proud and
Ignorant, was to reflect on the Governor that constituted ^im, etc.


G. Keith, in behalf of Tho. Budd, answered, That what was there said of Sam.
Ienings, as to calling him Ignorant and Presumptuous, was not said of him, as
he was a Magistrate, but as he professed himself to be a Christian and Minister
of Christ; I pened those word^ in the Plea of the Innocent, concerning S.
Ienings, and know they were not intended against him as a Magistrate, as the
foregoing words in that Book do manifest; but that he is ignorant in Divinity,
that book gives an Instance, and we now here affirm, else he would never have
said, That to do Gods Business, we needed Gods Power, but to do o^r own
Business, as (...), we needed not a supernatural Power, nor have joined with
them th^^ say* The Light within is sufficient to Salvation without any thing
^lse* th^r^^y excluding the Man Christ Jesus from having any part in our
^alva^ion. And our calling him Presumptuous and Insolent did relate to ^is
severe pressing me to an absolute Su^mission to their Judgment* in a matter of
Conscience, whenas S. J. refused to submit to the Judgment of Friends, both
here and at London, in worldly matters; also, his calling me Apostate, and
wors^ than Profane, in a public Meeting, as well as in private, and saying,
We shall let thee to (...), George, that (...) shall judge thee, and his
signing that Paper of the 28 against me, wherein they so boldly assert, That
they have tenderly and orderly dealt with me; whenas they nev^r dealt with me.

After some further pleading, the Jury were called, and Tho. Budd was asked, If
he had any Exceptions to make against any of them?


Tho. Budd, Yes, I except against all of them that are called Quakers, because
I perc^ive they are them that are parties against me.


D. Lloyd, That is too general, and is no Exception in Law.


Tho. Budd, I except particularly against Ri^h. Walter, because (...) signed
the Paper of the 28 against us (which this Book was an Answer to) and against
Iam^s Fox, because he signed a Paper in the Quarterly against us; and I except
against Jos^ph Kirle and Jo^n Whitpane. because they have spoke against G. K.
and me, and justified these Presentiments against us.

But these Exceptions would not be allowed of, and therefore the above named
Jurors went forth, and next morning brought i^ their Verdict, That Thomas Budd
was guilty of saying, Samuel Jenings had behaved himself too high and
imperiously in Worldly Courts.

To which Tho. Budd and George Keith pleaded, That it was no Verdict, not being
found to be a breach of any Law, any more than the Verdict of the jury at Old
Bayley, which was* That they found W. Penn guilty of speaking in
Grace Church Street, which the Court took to be a clearing of him. But this was
nothing regarded by our Justices, for they proceeded and gave Judgment against
Thomas Budd and George Keith, viz. That they should each of them pay fi^e Pound
a piece, as a Fine. And though in this case Sam. Ienings was the Person only
concerned as the Adversary Party, yet he sat o^ the B^nch when they gav^
Judgment against G. K. and T. B. Which was judged most unreasonable and
illegal, that Sam. Jenings, (who is the Governor's Recei^^r of all Fines and
Forfeitures) should be so actively conc^rned i^ ^ining these men, having so
manifestly before showed his Prejudice against them. Beside, it being expr^sly
contrary to a Vote of an Ass^mbly of this Province, the 3d Month, 1689 (where
Arthur Cook was Speaker) viz.

Resolved, nemine contra dicents, That it is an Agrievance that any Person who
is commissionated or appointed by the Governor to receive the Governor's
Fines, Forfeitures and Revenues whatsoever, shall (...) in any Court of
Judicature within this Government, in any matte^ or cause whatsoever, where a
fine or forfeitur^ shall or may accrue to the Governor.

But Arthur Cook could now wink at this Ag^ievance, and let Samuel Ienings sit
on the Bench when these Persons were fined.

But for a further proof that Sam, Jenings ha^ shown himself too High and
Imperious, observe what follows, viz.

1 st. That when G. K. was pleading in Court, and showing how S. J* had behaved
himself too high and imperious, he said, If this be High and Imperious, I will
be yet more High and Imperious.

2 dly, Upon the Jury's bringing in their Verdict against The. Ashly, S. J.
thus menaces him, viz. Thou told me formerly that I had done any worst, but now
thou art fallen into my hands, thou shall know that I have not done my (...).

3 dly, He said to another Person, Thou shall have as little Justice as I can.

4 thly, He said to John Skeen, who had been Governor, and was then Judge,
Thou pitiful W^ip-jack, I despise thee; and yet we find not that Jo^. S^een
had him presented or prosecuted at Court for this more than ordinary abusive
and scurrilous Expression, short of common Humanity; and yet this is he who now
can say, He will bear no affront, thereby showing how ^^like he is to a true
Christian, and even to many as well Heathen as Christian Magistrates, who have
born with Patience great Aff^onts and Reflections from Persons far inferior to
them.

5 thly, Another Instance of S. J 's Pride and Insolency is, that on the 10 of
the 10 Month, coming out of Court, said to Ralph Ward and John Mcc Comb, in the
open Street, before many Witnesses, If I draw forth my Hand against you,
(stretching forth his Arm and shaking it) I will not pull it in until I have
quelled you all. This presumptuous Expression savoureth too much of Lucifer's
Pride, who said, I will be like the most High, I will exalt my Throne above the
Stars of God, Isa. 14.13, 14. It is too High an Expression, and too peremptory
for any mortal Man to say, If I draw forth my Hand, I will not pull it in
until I have quelled you all. What is this in a manner, but to equal himself
to God Almighty, Deuteronomy. 32.40, 41. For I lift up my Hand to Heaven, and say, I
live forever, If I whet my glittering Sword* and mine Hand take hold on
Judgment, I will render Vengeance to mine Enemies, etc. Oh! is it not above the
Power of mortal Man, to say, If I (...) out my Hand* I will not pull it in
until I have quelled you all! Is not this to talk a^ if he were the Almighty?
But know, O vain weak Man! thy Breath is in thy Nostrills, and that infinite
Power that made thee, (if thou draw forth thy Hand against the Innocent,
glorying in thy Power that is but small) may cause thy Hand to Wither or turn
Leprous, and lay thy Body and Power in the Dust, and cast both Soul and Body
into Hell Fire. And therefore Repent of this thy abominable Pride and Insolency
before it be too late.

And though Sam. Ienings is now so zealous for the prosecuting them that say any
thing against Magistrates, yet its not long ago that he spoke much against Tho.
Lloyd Deputy Governor, and carried about (out of one County into another) a
parcel of Lampooning Rhymes, made against T. L. called, Taffy's Fair, which he
repeated over his Pots of Beer to make sport for the Company.

But to r^^urn, although the Jury brought in a special Verdict, which was only,
that Thomas Budd was guilty of saying, Sam. Jenings had shown himself too high
and imperious in Worldly Courts, which is no Transgression of any particular
Law, yet the Bench gave Judgment against them as though they had broke some Law,
which was, That G.K. and T.B. should pay 5 l. a piece. Whereupon they finding
themselves aggrieved by this Judgment, craved an Appeal to the Provincial Court
in Law, which was denied them. Then by Advice of able Council, they requested
an Appeal to the King and Queen, and their Council in England, the King having
reserved all Final Appeals to himself, in the Charter to W. P. But this also
was denied them, (though Robert Turner declared his dissent in this matter, as in
several other their Proceedings) so that the said Persons are left without all
help or remedy, but must undergo the Arbitrary Sentence of this Court.

And as a further Mark of the miserable decle^sion of these men, and of their
cold zeal for the honor of God, take a view of two Laws which they now
execute; the first is the 5th Chapter of their Laws, where it is enacted, That
whosoever shall speak loosely and profanely of Almighty God, Jesus Christ, the
holy Scriptures or Spirit of Truth, shall for every such Offense pay 5 s. The
other place is Chap. 29. where it is enacted, That whosoever shall speak
slightingly, or carry himself abusively against a Magistrate, shall for every
such Offense suffer according to the Quality of the Magistrate, provided it be
not less than 20 s. according to which Law they have fined Peter Boss Six
Pound, and G. K. and T. B. e^^h Five Pound, for speaking slightingly of Sam.
Ienings, as they pretend. Whereas if they had spoke Profanely of Almighty God,
Jesus (...)* Christ, the Spirit of Truth or holy Scriptures, the Law in^lic^s
but (...) Were not these me^ far more zealous for their own Hono^r than the
Honor of God, they would never let this disproportion of Punishment for
offenses against Almighty God and poor Mortal Man, stand upon Record thus, to
their shame and Infamy.

The 10 of the 10 Month, 1692. William Bradford was called into Court, and set
to the Bar,

The Presentment read, the substance of which was, That they presented the 9,
10, 11, and 12 Articles of the ^aper, called, ^n Appeal* etc. as being o^ a
^end y to weaken the hands (...) the Magistrates. And we present (...) Bradford
^or printing o^ (...) said Seditious Pap^r, etc.


Clark, What say you, William Bradford, are you guilty as you stand presented,
or not guil^y?


W. Brad^ord, I^ the first place, I desire to know, whether I am clear of the
Mittimus, which di^^ers from the Presentment.

The ^lark and ttorney re^d and perused the Mittimus and Presentment, and
finding them to differ, said, T^^t when W. B. was cleared according to Law, he
was clear of the Mittimus.

^ut W. B. in^ist^d to know, Whether o^ the issue of the Pr^se^tment, he was
clear of the Mittimus? And after a long debate thereon, answer was made, That
W. B. was clear of the Mittimus on the Issue of the Presentment.

Next, W. B. desired to know what Law that Presentment was grounded on?


D. Lloyd, It is grounded both on Statute and Common Law?


W. B. Pra^ let me se^ that Statute and Common Law, else how shall I make my
Plea? Justice Cook told us last Court, That one reason why ye de^erred o^r
Trial then, was, that we might have time to prepare our selves ^o answer it;
but ye never let me have a Copy of my Presentment, nor will ye now let me know
what Law (...) prosecute me upon.


D. Lloyd and J. White, Its not us^al to insert in Indictments against what
Statute the Offense is, when its against several Statutes and Laws made, and
(...) thou will no^ pl^ad Guilty or no^ Guilty, thou will loose thy Opportunity
(...) bring tried by thy Country And they ordered the Clark to write ^own, t^^t
W. Brad^ord refused to plead; which he did; but as he w^^ting it down, W. B.
desired they would not take that advantage against him, for he refused not to
plead, but (...) requested that which was greatly necessary, in order to his
making his own Def^nce; and several in the Court requesting on the Prisoners
behalf, that the Court wo^ld not take advantage against hi^, they ^^mitted him
to plead, and he pleaded, Not Guilty.

Then the Jury were called over, and attested, viz. H^mphery Wa^e^^an, Joseph
Kirle, James ^^x, (...) Hoult, Thom^^ Wharton, (...) Marle, Nic^ola^ R^acou^,
John Wh^tpa^^, Richard Sutton, Richard Wa^t^r, Thomas Morris, Abraham (...).
But before they were attested, they asked W. B. if he had any Exceptions to
make against any of them that were returned for the Jury?


W. Bradford, Yes, I have, and particularly against two of them, (and which
Exceptions I think are rational,) and that is against Ios. Kirle a^^ James Fox;
for at the time when I was committed to Prison Ar^hur Co^k told me, That Joseph
Kirle had said, That if the proceedings o^ the Magistrates was t^us (...) fault
with, that they must not defend themselves against Thieves and Robbers,
Merchants would be discouraged of coming here with their V^ssels, etc. And I
except also against James Fox, because on the first day after Babi^ and his
Company were taken, I being at Sam. Carpenters, there was Governor Lloyd,
James Fox, and several others, and in discourse concerning taking of the said
Privateers, James Fox greatly blamed W. Walker, because he found fault with
some Justices that were Quakers, for commanding men, and as it were pressing
them to go against the said Privateers; and also James Fox joined with Tho.
Lloyd in saying, He would mark them as Enemies to the Government and well being
of the Province, who were neutrall in the case of going against Babit etc. By
which Instances I think it appears that these two Persons have prejudged the
Cause that is now to com before them; Joseph Kirl^ acknowledged he had spoke
such words, and desired to be on ^ha^g^d; but they would not al^ow of these
Exceptions* although it is frequent in these Courts to change Jurors on bearly
saying they do except against such a one.


^. Lloyd and Clark, These are no Exceptions in Law; have thou at any time
(...) say that thou printe^ that Paper? ^or that is only what they are to find.


W. ^. That is not only what they are to find, they are to find also, whether
this be a seditious Paper, or not, and whether it does not tend to the
we^kening of the hands of the Magistrate.


D. Lloyd, No, that is matter of Law, which the Jury is not to (...) with, but
find whether W. B. printed it or not, and the Ben^h is to judge whether it be a
seditious Paper, or not; for the Law has determined what is a Breach of the
Peace, and the penalty, which the Bench only is to give judgment on.


Sam. Jenings, You are only to try whether W. B. printed it, or not.


W. Bradford, This is wrong; for the Jury are Judges in Law, as well as in
matter of Fact. Which D. Lloyd again denied. Whereupon some of the Jury desired
to know what they were to be attested to try, for they did believe in their
Consciences, they were obliged to try and find whether that Paper was
seditious, as well as whether Will. Bradford printed; and some of them desired
to be discharged. -- A great Noise and Confusion among the People.

Some on the Bench showing their willingness to allow of W. B's Exceptions
against the two Jurors, Justice Cook said, I will not allow of it* is there
four of us of a mind?


Then D. Lloyd began to read the 9, 10, 11, and 12 Articles of the said Appeal,
and commented thereupon, denying, 1 st, That any men were hired to fight, but
only to fetch back the Sloop; 2dly, That there was no Commission given, but
only a Hue-and-Cry or Warrant, as might be in any other ordinary case, and what
was done was in case of great necessity, when a Company of Rogues had
Pyratically stolen away a Sloop to the great terror of the People of this
place; and if the Magistrates must be blamed for their proceedings herein, what
do you think will be the consequence thereof, but to encourage all manner of
wickedness? And Will. Bradford is presented for printing and publishing this
seditious Paper, whereof you of the Jury are to find him guilty, if it appear
to you that he has printed it.

W. Bradford, I desire you of the Jury, and all here present, to take notice,
that what is here contained in this Paper is not Seditious* but who^ly relating
to a Religious Difference, and asserting the Quakers ^nt^^nt Principles, and is
not laid down positive, that they ought not to have proceeded against the
Privateers, but laid down by way of Query, for the People called Quakers to
consider and resolve at their Yearly Meeting, Whether it was not a
Transgression of the Quakers Principles to hire and commissionate men to fight?


Justice Cook, If it was intended for the Yearly Meeting at Burlington, why was
it published and spread abroad before the Meeting?


VV. B. Because it might be perused and considered of by Friends before the
Meeting, even a^ the Bills that are prepared to be passed into Laws, they are
promulgated a certain Number of days, before the Assembly meets, that all may
have opportunity to consider them.

Then D. Lloyd read the Act against Printing, 14 Car. 2. cap. 33. against Books
being printed without the Printers Name to them, and he said, That was one Act
which they prosecuted W. Bradford upon.

To which ^. K. answered, and it may be observed, the singular and
extraordinary Severity of these Justices, called Quakers, who will pick out a
Statute made in Old England, and prosecute a man upon here, which might Ruin
him and his Family, though its not certain whether that Act be in force; whenas
most of W. Penn's and the Quakers Books were printed without the Printers Name
to them, when that Act was in force; and yet we never heard that any Printer in
England was prosecuted for that; and therefore these here have exceeded them in
England; which manifests their Malice and revengeful Spirit, that because they
cannot fix the matter to be any Breach of the Peace (though they pretend it is)
they will prosecute the Printer for not putting his Name to what they suppose he
Printed.

Note, That all the time these Persons were upon Trial, the grand Jury sat by
them, over-awing and threatening them when they spoke boldly in their own
defense, and one of the Jury had Pen, Ink and Paper to write down such words as
they disliked, signifying that they would present them, and Justice Cook other
times bid them take notice of such and such words, thereby over-awing the
Prisoners that they had not liberty to plead freely. And when Tho. Harris, at
the Request of the Prisoner began to say something to the matter, they stopped
him, and bid an Officer take him away, and Arthur Cook said, That he should
plead no more there.

After a long time of pleading, D. Lloyd began to summons up the matter to
Jury, How that the printed Appeal was a Seditious Paper, and tended to weaken
the Hands of the Magistrates, and encourage all manner of Wickedness; and that
it was evident W. Bradford printed it, he being (...) Printer in this place,
and the frame on which it was printed, was found in his House.


W. B. I desire the Jury, and all here present to take notice, that there ought
to be two Evidences, to prove the matter of Fact, but not one Evidence has been
brought in this case.


Sam. Jening, The Frame on which it was printed is Evidence enough.


W. B. But where is the Frame, there has no Frame been produced h^^e; and if
there had, it is no Evidence, unless ye saw me print on it.


S^^. ^enings, The Jury shall have the Frame with ^^em, it cannot well be
bro^ght here, (...) beside the Season is cold, and we are not to sit here to
^^da^ger our Health; yo^ are minded to put Tricks upon us.


VV. B. You of the Jury, and all here present, I desire you take notice, that
here has not one Evidence been brought to prove that I printed the Sheet,
called, A^ Appeal* And whereas they say, the Frame is Evidence, which the Jury
shall have; I say, the Jury ought not to hear or have any Evidence whatsoever,
but in the presence of the Judge and Prisoner.

Yet this was nothing minded, but Sam. Ienings summoned up to the Jury what
they were to do, viz. To find, 1st. whether or not that Paper, called, the
Appeal, had not a tendency to the weakening the hands of the Magistrates, and
encouragement of Wickedness: 2dly, Whether it did not tend to the Disturbance
of the Peace? And, 3dly, Whether William Bradford did not print it, without
putting his Name to it, as the Law requires?

The Jury had a Room provided them, and by that time they had been a quarter of
an hour together, the Sheriff caused the Frame to be carried in to them, for an
Evidence that W B. printed the Appeal.

The Jury continued about forty eight hours together, and could not agree, then
they came into Court to ask a Qu^stion, viz. Whether the Law did require two
Evidences to find a man guilty? To answer which D. Lloyd read a passage out of
a Law Book, That they were to find i^ by Evidences, or on their own knowledge,
or otherwise: Now (says ^. Lloyd) this otherwise is the Frame which you have,
which is Evidence sufficient.


VV. Bradford, The Frame which they have is no Evidence, for I have not seen
it, and how do I or the Jury know that that which was carried in to them, is
mine, -- Interrupted -- The Jury sent forth again, and an Officer commanded to
keep them without Meat, Drink, Fire or Tobacco.

In the Afternoon the Jury came into Court again, and told, they were not like
to agree. Whereupon the Court discharged them.

Then VV. Bradford told the Court, That seeing he had been so long detained
Prisoner, and his Utensils with which he should work having been so long
detained, he hoped now to have his Utensils returned, and to be discharged from
his Imprisonment.


Sam. Jenings, No, thou shall not have thy things again, nor be discharged, but
I now let thee know, t^o^ ^tands in the same Capacity to answer next Court, as
be^o^e.

Next Court being come, Will. Bradford attended, and desired to know whether
he should have his Utensils, and be discharged? Art^ur Cook answered, Tho^
shall not have thy Goods until released by Law.


VV. Brad^ord, The Law will not release them, unless executed.


Arthur Cook, I^ thou will request a Trial, thou may have it.

Whereupon I Query, 1 st. Whether it be practicable, or according to Law to
seize men's Goods and imprison their Persons, and so detain them under the
Terror of a Goal, one six Months after another, and not bring them to Trial,
unless requested by the Imprisoned?

2 dly. When a Jury is Sworn, Well and truly to Try, and true Deliverance make
between the Proprietor and Prisoner, Whether it be not very illegal to absolve
them from their Oath, dismiss them, and put it to another Jury to try?

Now it may be observed, that nine of these Jurors were Persons prejudiced
against G. K. and the rest, and the other three happened to be moderate Persons
that were not called Quakers, and the reason they could not agree, was (as some
of the said Jurors, called Quakers, have told) that these three Persons stood
upon the Nicity (as they ca^l'd it) of Evidence that VV. B. printed that Paper;
whereas the other Jurors called Quakers said, they believed that VV: B. printed
it, and that it was a seditious Paper, etc. and they would not acquit him.

Does not this show the great declension of these People from their ancient
Principle against the use of Carnal Weapons, that for only proposing it to be
enquired into, Whether it be not a Transgression of the Quakers Principle, for
any of that People to hire and commissionate men to fight, that they will cast
men into Goal, and prosecute them as Seditions Persons for so doing?

Here follows a breviate of a Paper that was presented to the Court, to show,
that it was agreeable to the Quakers ancient Testimony not to fight, which they
took little or no notice of.


A Declaration from the People of God, called Quakers, against all Plotters and
Fighters, etc. Presented to the King, 1660.
ALl Bloody Principles and Practices, we, as to our own particulars, do utterly
deny, with all outward Wars and Strife, and Fightings with outward Weapons, for
any end ( Mark) or under any pretense wha^soever. And this is our Testimony to
the whole World. -- And we do certainly know, and so testify to the World,
that the Spirit of Christ, which leads us into all Truth, will never move us to
fight and war against any man with o^^ward Weapons, either for the Kingdom of
Christ, nor for the Kingdoms of this World. -- We have used no Force nor
Violence against any man etc. when we have been wronged, we have not ^ought to
revenge our selves -- So that if we suffer as suspected to take up Arms, or
make War against any, its without any g^ound from us; for it neither is, nor
ever was in our hearts since we owned the Truth of God, neither shall we ever
do it, because it is con^^r to the Spirit o Christ, his Doctrine, and the
Practice of the Apost^e

Given forth by George Fox,
Rich. H^bberthorn,
John Boulton,
John Furley, jun.
John Stubs,
Francis Howgill,
Gerrard Roberts,
Thomas Moore,
Lenord Fell,
Samuel Fisher,
Henry Fell,
John Hind*

See also Rob. Apology, These. 15.. 15. p. 399. And. 15. p. 407. he says, As to
what relates to the present Magistrates of the Christian World, albeit we deny
them not altogether the Name of Christi^^s, because of the public Profession
they make of Christ's Name, ^et we may boldly affirm, that they are far from the
Perfection of the Christian Religion, because of the state in which they are,
they have not come to the pure Dispensation of the Gospel; but for such whom
Christ has brought hither, it is not lawful to defend themselves by Arms, but
ought over all to trust in the Lord.

Object. The Scriptures and old Fathers, so called, did only (...) private
Revenge, not the use of Arms for the Defense of our Country, Bodies, Wives,
Children, Goods, when the Magistrate commands it.

Ans. If the Magistrate be truly a Christian, or desires to be so, he ought in
the first place to obey the Command of his Master, saying, Love your Enemies,
etc.

R. B 's Answer to Brown,. 16. p. 181. Brown mentions the necessity of
Defensive War, to defend from those that unjustly assault, and Thieves,
Robbers and Cutthroats, etc. R. Barclay says, Herein he speaks more like an
Atheist, than a Christian, and like one who believes nothing of a divine
Providence in restraining evil Men.

FINIS.

