SOME Seasonable Considerations For the good People of CONNECTICUT
I Remember there was Advice given us in the Year 1689. when we were about to
make our Revolution, (as it is called) and for ought I know it had been good for
us that we had taken it. But we are so unwilling to be advised, and so ill
affected to any that tell us the Truth, that there is little Encouragement for
any to expose themselves in that kind for the future. The Prophet says, The
Prudent shall keep Silence, for it is an evil time: And the greatest of
Prophets hath-said, Cast not your Pearls before Swi^e, le^t they turn again and
rent you. But I would hope the case is not yet so desperate. And I remember it
is also said, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart, thou shall in any
wise rebuke him, and not suffer sin upon him. And me thinks no reasonable
Creature should look upon a Persuasion to Consideration as if it were evil
Council, or did proceed from ill Will. Therefore I will adventure for my
Countrymen and Brethrens sake to make one Essay.

It was said of Old, Consider, take Advice, and speak your Minds. Temerity is
always evil, Consideration is always good, but sometimes necessary. It is
requisite that we be always sober and considerate, but especially when we have
to do in things that immediately and deeply concern not our selves only, but
GOD and the KING too.

With relation to God, it is said, Be not rash with thy Mouth, and let not
thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, Ecles. 5. 2.

With reference to the King, Be not hasty to go out of his sight -- A Wise Man's
Heart discerns both Time and Judgment, Eccles. 8. 3, 5.

With reference to our selves, Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy
ways be established, Prove. 4. 26.

Verily, we have cause of Consideration. He is a stranger in Connecticut that
knows not what has lately been done there. Let us first reflect, and see what
we have done, and then examine and consider it.

The last Year their Majesty's gave a Commission of Lieutenancy to his
Excellency Sir William Phips, Knight. Captain General and Governor in chief of
their said Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts in New England, whereby he was
constituted their Majesty's Lieut^ and Commander in chief of the Militia, and
c. in Connecticut. But upon Notice hereof a General Assembly was called, and
met, and there it was resolved, Not to submit to it, nor to take any notice of
Sir William Phips in that capacity. Afterward, at another General Assembly we
resolve to address their Majesty's forthwith, and in the mean time request Sir
William Phips thereupon to suspend the Execution of his Commission till we can
have an Answer from their Majesty's: Yet no Address is made to their Majesty's,
as was pretended. After which, Sir William Phips making some further Demands in
the Spring, 1693. we promise to pay him some hundreds of Pounds and to take
upon us the Defense of the upper (...) upon this River, belonging to the
Massachusetts; as if these things would satisfy their Majesty's Commission.

This Year (1693.) Their Majesty's give a like Commission to his Excellency
Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in chief of their Majesty's
Province of New York and c. whereby he is constituted their Majesty's
Lieutenant and Commander in chief of the Militia, and of all Forces by Sea and
Land in their Majesty's Collony of Connecticut, and of all Forts and places of
Strength within the same.

But upon Notice hereof the Freemen and Soldiers in the several Towns are
convened, to see how they (...) affected, and what they will contribute toward
addressing their Majesty's in this behalf. A General Assembly also is called,
and meets, and there it is (...), Forthwith to send an Agent to England to
entreat their Majesty's favor in this and other respects, also^ to levy a Tax
of a penny in the Pound (in Money) upon all the People in the Collony, to defray
the charge of it, and that whatever more it amounts to, shall be paid out of
the public Treasury; and lastly, That if any such Commission do come in the
the mean time, they will not submit to it, but oppose it, till they have an
Answer from their Majesty's.

By these Methods the Freemen of the Corporation, and as many of the People as
will fall in with them, are ensnared and strongly pre-engaged to make
Opposition against their Majesty's Commission. Insomuch than one Jeers^ another
will spend his Blood to keep off his Excellency, another will scruple no more
to shoot him than to shoot a Deer, and can very well find in his heart to spend
a brace of Bullets upon him; beside other Flouts. At length the Commission
arrives and comes to his Excellency's hands. In pursuance thereof he speedily
takes a Journey to Hartford in the time of our General Assembly held at
Hartford, October 12. 1693. and causes his Commission to be publicly read in
the said General Assembly, and in their Majesty's Name requires and presses
Obedience to it, and gives us all reasonable satisfaction and encouragement for
that end. In particular, to prevent Mistakes, and in order to a good
accommodation, his Excellency leaves his Memorial of his Expectation with us in
Writing, desiring our Answer to it in Writing; and then further assures us,
That he ^ath neither power nor intent to invade our civil Liberties: That in
case of our Submission he would commissionate all that were in Commission
before, and take our advice for the supply of vacant places: and particularly,
tenders a Commission to our Governor for the command of all the Militia in the
Collony, only in subordination to this Their Majesty's Commission.

But what is the Effect of all? Why! the Deputies (diverse of them at least)
being so prepared, as aforesaid, are resolved before hand, and have determined
the Question before the Court meets; God has given them such a Privilege, and
therefore if their Majesty's put such things upon them, they must oppose and
hold their own, they are bound in Conscience to do it. When his Excellency
comes to the General Assembly, to publish his Commission, Order is given to the
Halberteers, To admit none but his Excellency and his Retinue; as if it were
not meet that their Majesty's Commission should be known to the People, who
therefore were kept back, and not admitted without hot bickering, nor till
after great part of the Commission was read; and no marvel, the General
Assembly themselves not ever-willingly give the Commission the hearing, take no
great Notice of his Excellency, wave the business, would bring him to
composition, (as they had done by Sir William Phips) and will not yield
Obedience to the Commission, but instead thereof (...) Orders to such as
command the F^rts, to prevent then Seizure; and it seems (if the common same be
true) it is their Opinion, That their Majesty's have nothing to do with us.
Hereupon some will not take Commissions from his Excellency, others, who
otherwise would, are deterred, that they dare not. And for the more common f^rt
of People, One maliciously slanders and reviles his Excellency, another basely
Libils him, others rudely affro^^ him; yea, some rise in Arms to oppose him,
and others are in readiness, upon Occasion^ to do the same. Such of the
Assembly as moved for a Submission, are thought unfit to be Magistrates or
Deputies any more: and such of the people as show their Resolution to pay their
Allegiance to their Majesty's, and yield Obedience to their Commission, are
traduced as Rogues, that would undo the Country, and accounted scarce worthy to
live.

His Excellency somewhat surprised (as well he might) at this strange carriage
of the King's Subjects; his Countrymen and prosessed Christians and
Protestants, and having but six or seven Persons attending on him, thinks it
most conducive to their Majesty's service to demur a while, hoping that we will
bethink our selves, and withal leaves a Proclamation pursuant to his Commission
with C^ll. (...) (in the Governor's absence) requiring him to deliver it to
our Governor, in order to the immediate Publication of it in the several
Counties^ And upon our Governor's Return, his Excellency did demand, whether
he had received the same? which (...) owned. And thereupon his Excellency
required him to give due Obedience thereto. But it is now above a Month since,
and yet we have no more of it.

Soon after his Return to York, his Excellency saw ^^^se to issue forth a
second Proclamation, given at Fort William Henry, November the 8th, 1693.
pursuant to the same Commission and former Proclamation; and sent it (as we are
informed) to our Governor, requiring him forthwith to publish it in the chief
Towns, and c. to the intent that the People might not be deluded and kept in
ignorance. But it is now above a Month since the date of that also, yet we
hear nothing of such publication of it, only there is a printed copy or two of
it casually come to the sight of some.

And whereas by the Publication of this their Majesty's Commission all former
Military Commissions are expressly determined, Hereupon arose a Question and
Doubt, Whether we had best to muster, and call men to Arms for Military
Exercise as formerly? Yet upon deliberation it is resolved upon, and in diverse
places Soldiers are commanded to muster, and are trained as confidently as
ever; and which is yet more, it is said, that after all this, we have taken
upon us to create a Major too. Thus we make all the Defiance to their Majesty's
and their Commission, Trample them into the very Dirt, and Offend with as high
an Hand as is well possible for us to do.

This is the entertainment that their Majesty's Authority finds in Connecticut;
and thus we ethink we have neatly and effectually defeated their Majesty's
Commission. But we have need to consider it.

There are two sorts of people, (as is usual in such cases) that are guilty of
this Error. Some there are of Factious and Turbulent Spirits, and such as are
preengaged by their Male-feazances, or other personal Interests; and these two
wittingly err themselves, and out of Design mis-lead others. Others again there
are, (and I would hope the most) that are plain honest minded men, who pinning
their faith upon other men's Sleeves, and being deluded by diverse Artifices
industriously used for that purpose, do think the matter is right, and if it
were not so, surely such and such whom they take to be godly, wise and able
men, would never have had a hand in it; and therefore think they must and ought
to follow them, and do as they do. Thus it was in Absalom's Rebellion, 2 Samuel
15. 11. With Absalom went two hundred Men out of Jerusalem, that were called,
they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing.^ They were not at
all privy to the Plot, knew not Absaloms design; if they had they would never
have gone with him; but thought it was meet and honorable to attend upon the
Kings Son: No doubt he had his Father's Warrant, or Lisence at least, and
indeed so he had, to go to Hebron to pay his Vow, but not to move Sedition:
This they had no thought or suspicion of; and so they went in the simplicity
and honesty of their Hearts.

And to this simplicity of the heart is too often adjoined the simplicity of
the Head, or Ignorance of the nature of the things men undertake and engage in:
Thus it was in King Charles the first's time, as we may see in the Regicides,
diverse of them seem to have been (of themselves) honest and well meaning men,
who being outwitted, seduced and over-driven by others, engaged in things too
high for them, and which they did not understand, and so became guilty of that
most Hellish and Execrable Murder and Treason; and when the poor men came upon
their ^ryal, and had their Eyes open to see what they had done, they had
^^thing to say for themselves, but to confess the Fact, (...) knowledge, That
they understood not what they (...) if they had, they would never have done it,
but (...) deluded, drawn and driven by others beyond the (...) of their Sphere,
and so to beg Mercy. And a (...) thing it is, (and such an Example as may (...)
Admonition of present and future Ages) that honest men should be so abused, as
to ruin and destroy themselves and Posterity by being made other men's Tools and
Instruments for the committing of such Wickedness. It must needs go ill with a
People when those who take upon them to be their Leaders, shall cause them to
err.

The former sort seem to be Desperate, there is little hope of bringing them to
better thoughts: For the latter fort therefore this Essay is chiefly intended.
He that is wise is wise for himself, and Wisdom is profitable to direct: Some
men cannot think, but others can; and usually second Thoughts are better than
the first. Peter wickedly denied his Lord and Master, and that thrice; but when
he thought thereon he wept bitterly. Verily it is high time, and now is the
time, if we can, to bethink our selves: Let us therefore seriously consider
these things.

1 st. Consider we, how by these carriages we blemish our Religion, and
scandalize the Gospel. We profess Religion, that we are Christians, yea,
Protestants, have Christ for our Teacher, and his Word for our Rule. But what!
have we so learned Christ, or have we learned these things of him? Does the
Christian Religion teach Disobedience and Contempt to Kings and their
Ministers? Will not our Religion command good Manners? Or does it make Loyalty
to our Prince a Crime and a Scandal? We insist very much upon our Religion and
would be thought to be Eminent, and that we do more than others in it:
Therefore give me leave to insist a little upon this Consideration.

I may not undertake to play the Divine, but it concerns every Christian to
keep a good Conscience. Conscience i^ not a Phantasy, nor an Affection, but a
Judgment. He therefore that will keep a good Conscience must be furnished with
good and sound Principles. Innocent Nature and the Scripture are the only
Magaziens of good Principles: Innocent Nature we cannot now boast of^ but
(though we may make a good use of the Relics of the Light of Nature, and
indeed better than we do, yet) we must now go to the Scriptures, and be
beholding to them for sound Principles: There we shall find the best Ethics,
and (in my Opinion) the best Politics too, far better sure, than either
Morellius or Matchiavell can teach.

My Principles, and I think agreeable to the Scriptures, teach me these things.

1 st. That Allegiance to our Prince, is a moral and necessary Duty: It is an
indispensible Duty, plainly and frequently commanded there: Prove. 24. 21. Fear
thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change.
Eccles. 8. 2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings command, and that in regard of
the Oath of God. Thus Christ in his own Person has taught us, (if we be his
Disciples) Mat. 22. 21. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to
God the things that are God's.

The Apostles of Christ tread in the steps of their Master, and studiously
vindicate the Christian Religion from this Scandal, by the diligent and fervent
pressing of the same Doctrine: so Paul, Romans 13. 1, 2, 5. Let every Soul be
subject to the higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God, etc. whosoever
therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist
receive to themselves Damnation. Wherefore you must needs be subject, not only
for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake. How is it then that some of our
Deputies say, They must resist and oppose, they are bound in Conscience to do
it? It Is true, a false God is in truth no God: An Idol is nothing in the World;
so a false usurped pretended Authority is not of God, and so is in truth no
Authority; it is but an Idol, there is no Obedience due to it; and if the King
be such an one, they say something: But all lawful Authority is of God, and be
that resists resists God: He that disobeys the King, as King, or exercising his
Kingly Office, disobeys God. Hence the true Christian Religion and Conscience
toward God, (if we have any) do necessitate us to yield Obedience to the King
and his Ministers. We must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for
Conscience sake.

So Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man
for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or to Governors, as
to those that are sent by him, etc for so is the Will of God, that by
well-doing you may put to silence the Ignorance of foolish men. And verse. 17.
Fear God, honor the King. We must do it for the Lords sake; and such as
despise Governments, being presumptuous and selfwilled, and are not afraid to
speak evil of Dignities, they are the spots and blemishes of Religion, and
reckoned among the worst of men, 2 Pet. 2. 10, 13 Jude 8. 12. The Kings Person
is sacred, he is a God upon Earth, and therefore to be feared, and his
Ministers, as such are Honorable; Who can stretch forth his Hand against the
Lords anointed, and be guiltless, says David? who when he had but cut off the
lap or skirt of Readiness Garment, his heart smote him, I have said, ye are Gods,
and Children of the most High, Psalm. 82. 6.

Yea, and this is a part of the Doctrine according to Godliness, commanded to
be taught by Ministers of the Word of God, Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to be
subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates. And to my knowledge,
this Doctrine has been preached in Connecticut forty Years ago, and more, and
then it was accounted sound Doctrine; but now its too much forgotten, and too
little practiced; yea, now it seems this sound Doctrine will not be endured,
it is not a season to preach it, because it cannot, at least, will not be born.
We want John Baptist to preach Repentance, and to turn the Disobedient to the
Wisdom of the Just. It was a Man of Belial who said, We have no part in David,
and c. and that lift up his Hand against the King, 2 Samuel 20. 1. 21.

2 dly. That true Religion comprises both Tables of the Law: Though it does
distinguish them, yet it does not separate them: Love the Lord thy God with all
thy Heart, and c. and Love thy Neighbor as thy self. Upon these two hang all
the Law and the Prophets. So, ^ear the Lord and the King: Render to Caesar, and
c. and Render to God, and c. Fear God and Honor the King. God has all along
joined these together, it is not for us to put them asunder; we offer Violence
to Religion, if we do.

So, James 1. 16, 17. If a Man seem to be Religions and bridles not his Tongue,
he deceives his own heart, that Man's Religion is vain: pure Religion and
undefiled before God, is to visit the Fatherless and Widow, and c. That is,
true Religion draws Righteousness and Mercy (the Duties of the second Table)
along with it, and is evidenced by them.

The Fifth Command is the Command of God as well as the rest of the ten, and he
that is a Transgressor of that is a Transgressor of all: He that said, Fear
God, has also said, Honor the King. If therefore a man say, he fears God, and
yet dishonours the King, he deceives his own heart, he should not believe
himself, for his fear of God is vain.

And (...) Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 4, 5. In the latter days ^erilous Times shall come,
for men shall be Traitorous, Heady, High-minded, andc. having a form of
Godliness, but denying the Power thereof.

The fear of God will, without doubt, produce a regard to Man, and bind the
hands from unlawful Violence, without other Manacles. When Joseph's Brethren,
having so greatly injured him, as they had done, were fallen into his hands,
that he could easily have revenged himself upon them, as he pleased; yet says
he, This do and live, for I fear God. How much more may any Man, doing nothing
but his Duty, promise himself Security among those that fear God. But we have
seen that of late in Connecticut, which if Abraham himself had been here, would
have made him say, as once he did to Abimelech, Because I thought, surely the
fear of God is not in this place.

3 dly, That the second Command or Table of the Law is like to the first, Mat.
22. 38, 39. Man is the Image of God, being made in his likeness, and the King
is the Image of God by way of Eminency: He is a created Ray of the divine
Majesty and Soveraignity, the next and immediate Deputy of God among men; to
whom God has lent his own Throne, and put his Name upon him, Psalm. 82. So the
Duties of the second Table are like to the Duties of the first. Duty to Parents
is called Piety, 1 Timothy 5. 4. for its likeness to it, and evidence of it. And
(as Peter du Moulin says very well) Then will the Power of Kings and
Magistrates be sound and safe [and I may add, then, and not before will
Religion too be sound and safe] when Obedience due to Princes shall be thought
to be a part of piety, and when the Pastors of the Church shall train up the
people by the Word of God, to perform Obedience to them. And so, on the other
hand, the Sins against the second Table are like to the sins against the first.
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft.

4 ly, That the moral Law is not abolished by Christ. Do we then make void the
Law, says Paul? (...), we establish the Law. Verily, the fifth Command,
Obedience to Parents and Princes, and c. is not abolished, but established by
the Gospel. The true Church is no Rebellious City, nor an Enemy unto Kings. A
Godly Rebel is a Solicism, a prodigious Monster that true Religion never
brought forth.

5 ly. and lastly, My Principles teach me, That as God is absolute Lord and
Sovereign, the King of Kings, and is to be obeyed absolutely, and without
reserve; so the King is next to God, Supreme upon Earth, chief Governor in all
his Dominions (1 Chronicles. 29. 22.) and to be obeyed, in subordination, (not in
Opposition) to God. Inferior Governors sent by the King, and (...) their
Authority from him, are to be obeyed, (according to the measure of their
Authority) in subordination, not in opposition to the King. We are not to ask
Inferior Governors, whether we shall obey the King, or not: The Son is not to
ask his Mother, (much less his Brethren and Sisters, or Servants of the House)
whether or no he shall obey his Father: No, there is the Law of Nature and
express Command of God for it. Children, Obey your Parents in the Lord, for
this is Right, Ephesians. 6. 1. so it is in this case. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14^ Be subject
to the King, as Supreme, for so is the Will of God, and c. And the Fathers
Authority is paramount to that of the Mother: So is the Authority of the King
to that of inferior Rulers; see Josh. 1. 16, 17, 18. Joshua was now made chief
Governor by God; Moses his Successor, who was King in Jesurun; and there you
see how straightly they bind themselves to Obedience to him; see also Ezra 7. 26.
I think these points are Orthodox, and may pass for a Touchstone, whereby to
give a true Judgment of our Profession.

If therefore our Religion be overgrown to that pass, that it teaches us to
deny Kings and Magistrates to be of God, until we can King it our selves, or
to deny and absolve our selves from Obedience to them, unless they be of our
mind, or will humor us: In a word, if it either be or do teach or tolerate
Rebellion, it is certain it cannot be true; it is high time to renounce it and
get a better: Such Religion is a scandal to the Gospel. We shall make the World
believe, we have our Religion to seek. It is good for us to read Romans 2. verse.
17. to 26. If therefore we desire to credit our Religion, and adorn the Gospel,
which we profess, let us consider and return to our Obedience; get good
Principles, and put them into practice. Let us look upon Allegiance not as an
Arbitrary thing, that we may pay it, or we may let it alone, or take our time
for it, and c. but let us look upon it as a matter of Necessity. We must needs
be subject. If others will not be Loyal, yet we must; and if this make us Vile,
then we must be more Vile. If for this we be Rogues that will Undo the Country,
then we must be Rogues still.

But possibly all this will easily be avoided: It grows too common an Opinion,
That the King has nothing to do with us: and if that be true, I must confess,
I am beside the Text. Therefore in the next place,

2 dly, Consider, That of our own accord, without any Command so to do, we have
long since proclaimed their Majesty's to be our King and Queen. The words of
which Proclamation do declare their Majesty's to be King and Queen of England,
France and Ireland, with all the Dominions and Territories thereto belonging;
who are accordingly so to be owned, deemed and taken by all the People of the
aforesaid Realms and Dominions, who are from ^ence forward bound to acknowledge
and pay to them all Faith and true Allegiance, and c.

We have accordingly in our Addresses to their Majesty's, declared, That we
resumed our Government till further Order, and professed our selves to be their
Majesty's most humble and dutiful Subjects; begged such Directions from their
Majesty's, as to their Princely Wisdom should seem meet: Very forward and
zealous we have pretended our selves to be for the Service and Interest of King
William and Queen Mary.

But to what end is all this? Did we not hereby engage Obedience to their
Majesty's, as our King and Queen? but what Truth and Reality is there in it?
for now their Majesty's exert their Authority, issue their Commissions, and
give us their Directions, they will not be received nor obeyed; as if their
Majesty's had nothing to do with us indeed! Thus in words we profess to
acknowledge their Majesty's, but in our works we deny them. What is this but to
mock their Majesty's, and belly our selves? Our Actions will signify more of
our Hearts, than our Words: For shame let us make haste to pay our Allegiance.
It is a manifest thing that this and the other Homurculus has a thousand times
more Authority, Respect and Obedience in Connecticut, than their Majesty's
have. If a Man come in their Majesty's Name, and with their Commission, he will
not be received by us; but if a man come in his own Name, without their
Majesty's Authority and Commission, him we will receive: This is not the
behavior of good Subjects. Have we not given our Hands, or do we repent of so
doing? Let us deal well and truly with their Majesty's. Have we a King, or no
King? or, why halt we between two Opinions? If their Majesty's be our King and
Queen, then let us follow and obey them; but if this and the other man be indeed
Kings, then let us follow them. Let us not flatter and mock, and call their
Majesty's King and Queen, and pretend they are Our Dread Sovereigns, our
Sovereign Lord and Lady, and We their most Humble and Obedient Subjects, and
make use of their Names to serve our own purposes, and in the mean time refuse
to yield them any Obedience, scorn their Commissions, malign, contemn and
abuse their Ministers. This is palpable Hypocrisy. Why call ye me Lord, Lord,
and do not the things which I say, Luke 6. 46. If I be a Father, where is my
Honor? If I be a Master, where is my fear? Mal. I. 6. If their Majesty's be
our King and Queen, where is our Obedience to them?

Yea, let us deal plainly and uprightly with one another also. We are not
willing to be kept in Ignorance, deluded and led hood-winked, till we are so
fast, and unawares entangled in the Snare laid for-our Life, that we shall not
be able to get out of it. There are many of us that bear a good affection to
our CharterGovernment, and for the sake of that have countenanced, at least not
discountenanced (so much as some others) the late Revolution, and have been
willing to contribute to the support and continuance of that Government, if it
might be. But we always understood it in subordination, not in opposition to
the King, his Government and Laws, and with a salvo, of all their Majesty's
Royal Rights. We never intended to Invade the Liberties of our Fellow Subjects,
or to use Rigor toward such as were not altogether of our mind, but desired
that moderation might be used, and that we might in no sort exceed the Powers
sometime granted to us; much less did we intend to invade the Throne, and
refuse to reader to Caesar that which it his^ and we thought that our Leaders
and principal Actors in this matter had been of the same mind. We thought also
we had spoken as we meant, when at the Revolution, May the 9 th. 1689. we
declared, That we took the Government only till we should receive further
Orders from the King. And in our Address to his Majesty, we showed his Majesty
the same thing, and withal professed our selves his Humble and Obedient
Subjects; and prayed his Majesty, in his Cl^mency to give us such Directions as
to his Princely Wisdom should seem meet; and we thought that it was our sincere
and unanimous purpose and resolution to follow his Majesty's Directions when
given, and not to put a Trick upon him. But now we are afraid we are deluded,
and not without Reason. He is blind that has not taken notice of that
notorious Falsehood that has been used, and the innumerable Lies of all sorts
that have all along from time to time been and are still raised and fomented;
the advantage that has been taken of men's Ignorance, and the Endeavors that
have been and are used to keep men in the Dark, as if we designed to train them
up in a blind Obedience to us, beside other ill measures taken; and now at
last, such open and resolute Opposition and Defiance is made to their
Majesty's, and their Royal Commission of (...), first and second. These things
make us jealous. And therefore if all our Declarations and Protestations
aforesaid be but a Cheat, and Rebellion be indeed couched and lurk under the
specious and enticing Terms of a Charter, our Liberties, Privileges and
Government, etc. pray deal plainly and truly with us, and let us know it. We
hope, that upon good Consideration the generality of the! good People in this
Collony intend no such thing; and therefore let us not be plunged blindfold
into the Pit of Rebellion. Some of us remember and consider, that in the
forementioned Passages we have given our Hand to their Majesty's.

But it may be some may think to avoid this also, and say, We are willing with
all our hearts to obey their Majesty's in all lawful things [good Words] but we
are not to obey unlawful Commands. True: Therefore yet further,

3 dly, Consider; Is not this Commission lawful? Is not the Militia the Kings,
and at his dispose? Why then shall we not give to Casar the things that are
Caesar's? If we could say the Commission was unlawful, it might excuse our
suitable Non-submission to it, though not our Contempt. For (...) the unlawful
Commands of lawful Authority (be they Unlawful in regard of the Law of God or
Man) are not to be performed, yet in such case, our Behavior ought to be
Humble and Honorable. Let us therefore inform ourselves in this point: it is
declared by two several Acts of Parliament of 13 and 13 and 14 Car. 2. (and of
this their Majesty's were pleased to put us in mind by express mention of the
first of these Statutes in the Commission to Sir William Phips) That within all
their Majesty's Realms and Dominions, the sole and supreme Power, Government,
Command and Disposition of the Militia, and of all Forces by Sea and Land, and
of all Forts and Places of Strength, is and by the Laws of England ever was the
undoubted Right of his Majesty, and his Royal Predecessors, Kings and Queens of
England; and that both or either Houses of Parliament, cannot, nor ought to
pretend to the same, nor can, nor lawfully may raise any War, Offensive or
Defensive, against his Majesty, his Heirs or Lawful Successors, etc.

Shall we then think, that our Corporation may pretend to it, and c. tho the
Parliament may not?

And that this is indeed so, we may see (beside other Authorities) in that
great case of Ship Money, so (...) it was agreed on all hands, That the King is
raised to the Throne for the Safeguard of the Law, and of, the Bodies and
Estates of the Subjects; and therefore the Defense is the Kings. The Safety of
the People committed to him, is incumbent upon our Lord the King.

That the Law has entrusted the King with the care of the Defense, both
Domestic and Foreign.

That all Jurisdiction legal, is wholly in his Majesty; that this is evident
even by the Law of Nations.

That the King is Pater Patriae, the Father of his Country, and therefore
bound, both in Hono^r and by his Oath, to provide for its safety on every side.

That for this end the Law has put the armed Power and means of Defense wholly
into his Majesty's hands, and when the Enemy is discovered and declared, it is
not in the power of the Subject to order the way and means of Defense, either
by Sea or by Land, as they think fit; for no man without Commission or special
Lisence from (...) Majesty, may set forth any Ships to Sea for that purpose,
not without such Commission or Lisence (unless upon ^uddain coming of Enemies)
may (...) a Fort^ (...) Nor (but upon some such (...)) is it lawful for any
Subject, without special Commission, to arm or draw together any Troops or
Companies of Soldiers, or to make any general Collection of Money on any of
the Kings Subjects, though with their consent.

That the King is Generalissimo, so that none may advance toward the Enemy,
without his Signal, of (...) manner than by his Direction^ and that he is armed
with all other Powers requ^s^t for the full Execution of so high a place, as
well in time of (...) Danger, as of actual War.

That the Law lays, the (...), of this Defense upon all ( Qui sentit commodum,
etc. He that feels the benefit, ought to feel the burden too) and makes the
quantity of each man's Estate the Rule whereby this Burden is to be equally
apportioned upon each Person.

In this great Case therefore the Question was not, Whether the sole and
supreme Power of the (...), and of all Forces, andc. belong to the King, or
not; otherwise how should he perform this great Trust? Therefore says Bracton
(that anti^^t Author) There are two things necessary in a King, LAWS and ARMS,
whereby he may rightly govern the Times both of Peace and War.

Nor was the Question, Upon whom the burden of it should be laid; for
Allegiance binds (...) Subject to yield his best Assistance (both of Counsel
and Aid) for the common Defense.

These things were, without Controversy, agreed on both hands; but the only
Question was concerning the Manner how the Charge of the Defense ought to be
levied? Whether by the Kings Writ, or by common consent?

Hereby therefore we may see, that by the Law of England the sole and supreme
Power, Government and Dispose of the (...), etc. is, and ever was the Kings
undoubted Right, and that these Statutes (abovementioned) do but declare the
ancient Law in that behalf.

This Commission therefore is a lawful Commission, being founded upon the
ancient and standing Laws of the Realm; yea, it is not only lawful, but
necessary, forasmuch as it is incumbent upon their Majesty's, both in Honor
and by their Oath, to provide for the safety of their People on every side.

The Designation or Appointment of this or that particular Person to be their
Majesty's Lieutenant, (being qualified according to Law) is by the Law left to
their Majesty's Wisdom and Pleasure. Consider we then, that (these things being
so) our Disobedience to this Commission is utterly inexcusable, and much more
our Contempt.

4 thly. It is to be considered also, That when their present Majesty's came to
the Throne, the Militia, and all Forces by Sea and Land, and all Forts, and
places of Strength in Connecticut; were in their Majesty's hands and
possession; it is good for us to be think us, Who took them out of their
Majesty's hands? or how it came to pass that they are not now in their
Majesty's hands, if it be so indeed? or who will adventure to give account of
that matter? Is it not more Wisdom for us to make sure of a Pardon for what is
past, than to go on to multiply and aggravate our Presumptions?

5 thly. Put the case that their Majesty's had granted such a Commission to us,
should we not have expected and compelled Obedience to it? Yea, no doubt; then
it had been a very lawful and good Commission, and necessary to be obeyed We
that can make so much of a bare silent Permission or Sufferance of our
Government, and make so much of the King's late Letter, which yet takes not so
much as the least Notice of any of us; and can be so severe and sharp upon any
di^acknowledgement of our disputable Authority, how brag and peremptory should
we have been, if this Commission (in terminis) had been given to us? Certainly
Fire and Faggot, or the Noose of an Halter had been good enough for any one
that should have offered to oppose it, or refuse Obedience to it: And how
should we have traduced them as Enemies and Rebels to King William and Queen
Mary?

Let us then turn the Scale. We know the Golden Rule, Whatsoever ye would that
others should do to you, do you the same to them. It is their Majesty's
Commission no less than if it had been directed to our selves.

6 thly. How greedily did we catch at the King's Letter of the 3d of March last
(although their Majesty does therein take no Notice of our Corporation, or any
particular Person in it, but directs it only in general, thus, [To such as for
the time being take care for the preservation of the Peace, etc.] in our
Collony of Connecticut) And how readily did we comply with it? And why? Why (it
will be said) it is his Majesty's Command, his Majesty's pleasure, we must obey
the King. Consider then, This Commission i^ their Majesty's Command also, this
is their Royal Pleasure^ In this case, (Rex pracipit, and Lex precipit) The
King commands, and the Law commands, is all one.

And is not this lawful Command as good as that? Is not the great Seal as
effectual as the little Seal?

But it may be thought, that Letter put a staff into our hands, in a sinister
manner to serve our selves of our fellow Subjects, (...) this Commission takes
it out again; and therefore we willingly complied with that, but will oppose
this. Possibly some may have cause to thank their Majesty's for that: But if
that be the case, where is our Obedience? Genuine Obedience is Universal.

7 thly. Consider we the vile Ingratitude of this our ill behavior toward
their Majesty's, and their Lieutenant? It is well known to the World what their
Majesty's have done, and how they have exposed themselves for the benefit of
the whole English Nation, of which we are a part, for the securing of all their
Rights, civil and (...), their Religion, Lives, Liberty and Property, and the
continual and unspeakable Labor and Hazards which his sacred Majesty
condescends from Year to Year to undergo, for that end. Whereby their Majesty's
have given abundant Evidence of their good affection to their Subjects, and
that they will take nothing from us which is our Right, nor deny us any thing
which their Royal Wisdom shall see to be good for us, but are willing to
purchase it for us at a dear Rate. Yea, and this very Commission is a singular
Instance of their tender care for our Defense and Safety in this perilous time
of War, as is manifest from the Commission it self: And do we thus requite
their Majesty's? O foolish we, and unwise! Who has bewitched us? There is
nothing so hateful and provoking as Ingratitude: Truly, we may do well to
remember Jotham's Parable (Judge. ^.) and the application of it, and apply it to
our selves; Hearken to me (says he) that God may hearken to you, etc. If you
have dealt well with Jerubbaal, and C. and have done to him according to the
deserving of his Hands; for he sought for you, and adventured his Life far, and
delivered you, etc. and you are risen up against him this day, etc. Have we
done to their Majesty's according to the deserving of their Hands? Shall we
require Love with Hatred? Tender Bowels with Malignity? For what else can our
Behavior signify, but a malignant Spirit and inveterate Hatred against the
King, as King, and who ever comes from him, as such? We have sufficiently
declared our Affections to the King, and what we should have done, if we had
him in our hands; we should soon rid the World of Kings, if we had them in our
Power. Remember Hazael, Is thy Servant a Dog (says he) that he should do this
great (i. e. this Abominable) thing; Yea, but when Temptation and Opportunity
met together, he did it notwithstanding; and verily so should we.

8 thly. Let us look through all their Majesty's Realms and Dominions, and see
where we can find any such President or Example. We are too apt to admire our
selves, and to bless God that we are not as this Publican! But who so
Ungrateful, who so Disobedient as we? Their Majesty's may look upon themselves
to be very Unhappily and Unequally yoked, as to us: The best of Princes with
the worst of Subjects.

9 thly. Consider we the Time. Is this a time for us to be Refractory and
Disobedient to our Prince? Between four and five Years ago, when there was no
War with France, we would needs have made the King and and the World believe,
That we were in continual danger of our Lives, by reason of the Natives being
at War with us, with whom (we said) we had just fears of our Neighboring
French to join; and therefore not receiving Orders or Directions what Methods
to take for our Security, we were necessitated to put our selves into some form
of Government. And yet now there has been open and strong War with France, and
with the French in all parts above this three Years, and that attended with not
a few or small Difficulties and Disappointments, and now that their Majesty's
have given their Orders and Directions what Methods to take for our Security in
this difficult and hazardous Time, there is yet so little danger, that we will
not receive their Majesty's Directions, but spurn at their Commission, scorn at
their Lieutenant, and will yield no obedience.

What! do we indeed intend to fall off to the French? We had as good fall to
the French, as fall from our King; and if we intend so to do, let us speak out;
if not, surely this is not a time to be Disobedient. For how is it possible for
any Prince to provide for the safety of his Subjects, or to manage the weighty
Affairs of War with effect, (and more especially at such a Distance) if his
Subjects will flight and disobey his Commissions, or take upon themselves to
wage War, without or against them?

10 thly. We are now addressing their Majesty's for their Favor (so we say)
and to the end that we may recommend our selves to them as (it seems) their
most Proud and Disobedient Subjects, at this very time we disobey their
Commission. Can we think that Disobedience and Contempt are the most likely way
to obtain access and acceptance? Is that the way to find favor? or do we think
that the King is afraid of us, and we shall force him to comply with us?
Verily, I doubt we shall tempt him and prove him.

Prayers and Pride, Supplication and Rebellion do not sort well together.

11 thly. Our great Champion in whom we trusted to vindicate us, and defend our
Cause, yields the Cause, and leaves us in the Lurch: Our Goliath, who defied all
as Pigmies that durst appear against us, the stone is sunk in his forehead,
and he is fallen upon the Earth; he is convinced in his Conscience, and tells
us with all the honesty and plainness that he can, That he will not ruin
himself and his Posterity; That he will not Hang for any of us. No doubt but
(whatever he has done, yet) now he speaks as he thinks; and shall we yet
harden our selves? shall we ruin our selves and our Posterity? Believe it, we
shall find it hard kicking against the Pricks. Therefore,

12. Lastly, Let us consider seriously the end and event of these things, and
what may reasonably follow thereupon. The fools Eyes are in his Heels: He can
see nothing but what is past, and repent when it is too late. But Solomon tells
us, The wise man's Eyes are in his Head: He looks before him. The Prudent man
fore-sees the Evil, and hides himself, but the simple pass on and are punished,
Prove. 22. 3. Therefore it is said, That the Wise Man begins at the end; and it
were good for us to begin there too: Let us consider it then. What do we think
will be the end of these strange Behaviors? What good can we promise our
selves?

I st. Where the Word of a King is, there is Power, and (in the Execution of
his Regal Authority) who may say to him, what do thou? Eccles. 8. 4. What
Aspect then will these things have abroad in the world, among those who know
what a King is? Such carriage would hardly have been expected from any part of
New England: Friends will be ashamed, Enemies will insult.

2 dly. What aspect do we think they will have at Home with the King and
Council? Surely their Majesty's promised themselves better things from their
Subjects in Connecticut.

3 dly. The Defense and safety of the Subject in all parts, is their Majesty's
great Interest and Care; and it is not easy for us to conceive how we
prejudice their Majesty's Interest, frustrate their Intentions, break their
Designs, defeat their Councils and obstruct their Service for the Defense of
their People, both here and elsewhere (the very end of this Commission) by our
(...).

(...) Commission takes no Notice of any former Military Commissions but that
which was the last year given to Sir William Phips, and that is expressly
determined by the Publication of this. So that by our Disobedience we are
without Defense our selves, and incapable of helping others. And who knows what
a Day, much more a Quarter or Half a Year may bring forth?

We may desire that this Disobedience to our Prince should not be told in Gath,
nor spoken of in the Streets of Askelon; but our desire is vain. The Hittites
dwell in the Land, and observe our Actions. The Report of it will sooner fly to
Canada (and it may be to France too) than some of us could wish; and what
Inferences will there be made, and Resolutions taken thereupon, is not
impossible to guess. They may conclude, they have Connecticut to Friend, at
least in a posture of Neutrality; which will animate them not a little.

The Mohaques also, and other Nations (...) Indians, will soon have the News of
it (if they have it not already) and who knows but it may give them occasion to
go over to the French; the effects whereof may be such as are not to be
desired, unless we intend to follow them. But if none of these should be, yet
(...) Behavior in this matter renders their Majesty's and their great Officers
vile and contemptible, and our selves base in the sight of the very Heathen.

4 thly. Is not their Majesty's Commission under the great Seal of England,
sufficient to authorize their Majesty's Lieutenant in Connecticut? if it be
not, what else can do it? The World is at an end; there is no more to be done
in a fair way: But if it be, why do we not submit to it? Verily, if the King's
Broad Seal will not run to be obeyed in Connecticut, we may justly expect that
something else shall.

Are we so ignorant that we do not know, That to levy War against the King is
High Treason, both by the Common and Stat^te Law; or, That an actual Rebellion
or Insurrection, is a levying of War against the King: That a gathering of
Force for the Removal of Counselors, altering of Laws, or the like, though
with pretense of Reformation, yet being without Warrant from the King, is a
levying of War against the King? or that the holding of a Fort on Castle by
force of Arms against the King and his Power, is a levying of War against the
King? What Construction then do we think it will have, if we shall be found to
rise in Arms against the King's Lieutenant, publishing his Commission, and
commanding Obedience to it^ and by Force and Arms to withold the Militia and
all Forces by Sea and Land, and all Forts and places of Strength in a whole
Collony or Province, from the King, against his plain Commission, published
under the great Seal?

Do we not know, That an Ambassador from a Ferreign Prince (though an Enemy)
ought to have safe Conduct in all King's Dominions, and it is against the Law of
Nations to offer him any Violence or Indignity? The Turks themselves would
abominate that.

Or can we be ignorant of this, That Disobedience and Contempt offered to the
Kings Ministers, redounds, and is done to the King himself? Is it not a sure
Rule in Humane, as well as Divine Things, He that despises me, despises him
that sent me. What face then will our Behavior have, when it shall appear,
that our own Kings Lieutenant cannot come among us to execute their Majesty's
Command, but (beside other vile Indignities, unfit to be named) he is in danger
of his very Life: Such as assert their Allegiance and declare their Submission,
run the same hazard^ and others, who are willing to serve their Majesty's, dare
not take Commissions, for fear of being destroyed. And by this means his
Excellency Returns, without effecting his Business, and with as much Disgrace
as we can well cast upon him. Yea, if any man advise or move another to take a
Commission from their Majesty's Lieutenant, it is accounted a Wicked thing, and
he an henious Offender.

Will this be acceptable News to their Majesty's? Or will they not rather
resent it, as David did that Reproach of his Messengers by Hanun? Verily, a
Contempt and Abuse from Subjects, is a thousand times worse than from Aliens.

Some may imagine they have found a neat way to defeat the Kings Commission:
They will not take Commissions from his Lieutenant themselves, but will also
deter others, that they shall not dare to do it, and think it a Project worthy
to be gloryed in. Truly, we have many ways made it evident enough, what low
thoughts we have of his Majesty. But what! do we think he is to be put off in
this manner by our ^^urvey silly little Tricks? or do we think that our
Obedience is an Arbitrary thing, and the King must be beholding to us for it?
or that he is made up (...) of Grace, and has nothing of Justice in him? If so
we do, doubtless we shall find our selves mistaken; and that he is (like Christ
whom he serves) both a Lamb and a Lion. I believe he will decide the
Controversy, and make us know who is King, before he has done with us. For
how can it consist with his Crown and Dignity, or with the safety of his
Government to pass by such high handed and mischievous Offenses, without
suitable Annimadversion. We very much forget Solomon's Advice, as if we had
never read it: I counsel thee, says he, to keep the Kings Commandment, and that
in regard of the Oath of God. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: Stand not in
an evil thing; for he does whatsoever pleases him. Where the Word of a King is,
there is Power, and who may say to him, what do thou? Whosoever keeps the
Commandment, shall feel no evil thing, Eccles. 8. 2, 3, 4, 5. Yea, but the
Kings Wrath is as the roaring of a Lion, and as Messengers of Death; but his
Favor is as the Dew upon the Grass, Prove. 19. 12. There is Life in the one,
but Death in the other.

We forget also the Parable of the Citizens that hated their Lord, and would
not have him to reign over them: Those mine Enemies (says he) that would not
that I should reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. It
is (...) a Comparison taken from things reasonable among men.

And how casie a thing is it for their Majesty's more ways than one to make us
weary of our Rebellion. What if their Majesty's should hereupon fetch over whom
they see cause to England, and there proceed against them according to their
Demerits? Shall we not hereby ruin our selves and our Posterity? Or, what if
they should declare us Rebels, and put us out of their Protection, and prohibit
all their Subjects any Commerce with us? For how can we expect that their
Majesty's should protect us, who scorn to be governed and protected by them,
but by our Unruliness break their Measures in the very point of Protection? Or,
if they should reduce us to our Obedience by Force, and keep us under the awe
of a strong Garrison, and lay the Charge of it upon us? Or, if they should but
lay a sore heavy Fine upon us: If they should do any of these, or the like,
what shall we do with our selves?^ Verily, we are in their Majesty's hands, and
it is a new sort of Grace if they do nothing.

Let all good Subjects then consider, and as they would deliver themselves from
the common Guilt so let them distinguish themselves, and make haste to yeild^
their due Obedience; and as for the rest, we may say^ Father forgive them, they
know no^ what they do. (...)

But against all this diverse things are objected, let us consider them also.
(...) Objection, The Militia is very well disposed of already: King Charles the
second (of happy Memory) did by his Charter, for himself and his Successors,
grant it to us and our Successors in the year 1662.

Answ. To this I answer diverse things:

1 st. We overween our Charter in more things than one, to the no little
Prejudice both of King and Subjects. Modesty might incline us to think that the
King understands our Charter, and how well the Militia was thereby disposed of,
at least as well as we do; and he knows what is his own Right and our Right
much better than we. Their Majesty's have given us no cause to suspect, that
they will take any thing from us that does of right belong to us. But to let
other things pass, let us here consider, That the Charter never granted us a
standing Militia, but only a Lisence upon occasion of Invasion, or the like, to
array men, and c. for our special Defense and safety in such case: The Charter
never gave us Power to (...) and send men abroad for the Defense and Aid of
others. The King's Letter of the 3d of March (...) give more power in that
behalf to those to whom it was directed, than ever we had by the Charter.

The Power of Arms granted by the Charter was not given to the General Court,
but only to the Governors, chief Commanders and Officers for the time being,
and c.

The Charter never granted us the command of any Forts or places of Strength.
Let us examine the Charter, and see if we can find th^se things there.

2 dly. Suppose we that all this had been granted by the Charter from King
Charles the second, and his Successors, ^o us and our Successors, yet then the
Grant had been void, because the Militia is a Jewel of (...) Crown, not to be
granted by the King from his Successors. It is like (...) the Shunamite: And
why do thou ask (...) the Shunamite for Adonijah? ask him for the Kingdom
also, says Solomen. Beware of the next words, God do so to me, etc. If the
King give away his Militia, he may give his Kingdom too. And of the truth of
this our present Behavior is an undeniable Instance.

3 dly. Suppose we, That it had been so granted, and that the Grant had been
good, yet we should remember that our Succession was determined in the Year
1688. So that we cannot talk of our Succession or Successors without some new
Grant. And when their Majesty's came to the Crown, the Militia and all Forces,
and c. and all Forts and places of strength were in their Majesty's hands. And
this was either by right or by wrong: If it were so by Right, there is no
color for this Objection: If by Wrong, we might then have preferred our
Petition of Right for the Recovery of it. But for us, without their Majesty's
Notice or Lisence, either ^urrepetitiously or by force, to take and withold
the Militia from the King, is such a Presumption as I know not who will
undertake to justify or excuse.

(...) Object. But we suspect that this Commission is (...) (...) it.

Answ. But, ^ st: Can we prove it to be a Cheat? otherwise this is a very bold
Objection.

2 dly. It is only our Ignorance that makes us suspect it to be a Cheat. For we
should know, 1 st, That the King is wont, when he goes out of the Realm, by his
Letters Patents under the great Seal, to constitute and leave behind him his
Proxer (or Deputy) who is Guardian or Keeper of the Realm, to exercise the
Government in his absence.

2 dly, But now there is a Queen Regent; his Majesty was pleased to commit the
Government to the Queen in his absence, and accordingly it was by Act of
Parliament (of anno 2. W. and M. May 20. 1690.) provided, That as often as his
Majesty shall be absent put of the Realm of England, the Queen shall exercise
and administer the Regal Power and Government of the Kingdom of England,
Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and the Plantations and
Territories thereto belonging, in the Names of both their Majesty's, etc. The
King's absence therefore is no argument that the Commission is a Cheat^ for if
the King did not give his Writ of Privy Seal before he went, for the affixing
of the great Seal, the Queen might ^awfully do it in his absence.

3 Object. But if it be not a Cheat, yet the King has given us no command to
surrender the Militia to his Excellency.

Answ. 1st. A poor shift! as if their Majesty's Commission to his Excellency to
command, were not a command for us to obey? or, as if his Excellency's command,
pursuant to his Commission received from their Majesty's, were not their
Majesty's Command. He commands in their Majesty's Name, and for this he has
their Majesty's Authority, Warrant and Commission under the great Seal; and do
not their Majesty's then command us to submit to him?

His Excellency demands no surrender of the Militia of us, but Obedience to his
Commission: The Militia is the Kings, and he has constituted his Lieutenant
over it, and thereby furnished him with all the Powers that any of their
Majesty's Captain Generals do or have lawfully exercised. Now the Kings
Lieutenants or Captain Generals may lawfully assemble men, form Regiments,
Troops and Companies, commissionate Officers, muster, lead and conduct them, or
cause them to be mustered, led and conducted, either for Military Exercise or
for actual Service, as occasion requires: And the Law not only requires
Obedience of all, but in particular requires all Officers and Ministers to be
aiding and assisting to the Kings Captain Generals in the execution of their
Commissions. He has Power to require assistance of whom he will, and they must
assist him at their Peril.

2 dly, Did their Majesty's ever give their Subjects any command to yield
Obedience to our resumed Power? We lately received a Letter from their
Majesty's, Did their Majesty's therein, or any otherwise give the People any
immediate and express Command to obey us in what we were thereupon about to do?
Yet we expect Obedience from them, without any such command. And are not we
their Majesty's Subjects, as well as the rest of the People?

4 Obj^ But we cannot manage our Government without the Militia.

Answ. Then we may either go to the King to help us, or let it alone. The Kings
Government is more General, more Necessary, more Worthy and more Legal than
ours; and how shall the King manage or maintain his Government without the
Milita? Laws and Arms are necessary in a King, that he may rightly govern the
Times both of Peace and War, as aforesaid. Our Government is but a particular
thing, and we may not set our Government in Competition with, much less in
Opposition to the Kings Government.

5 Obj. But we are afraid, that if we let the Militia go, our Government will
go too, and we shall be annexed to York.

Answ. That is no necessary consequence; but if it should be so, what then?
Whether we be annexed to York, or York annexed to us, it is as long as broad:
York has been annexed to us once or twice already, and what hurt did we
receive by it? it was in some sort annexed by our Charter, which extended to
the South Sea, and then it was (I Suppose with our consent) separated again.
York was again annexed to us by the late King James, and I know not any
detriment that ensued upon that.

We have also once in great measure annexed our selves to York, and without
question the King may as well annex us to York, as we annex our selves. We may
remember how readily at Leysler's motion, under the pretense of an Expedition
against (...), we confederated with him, took Commission from him, and put
their Majesty's Subjects under his command^ and have not their Majesty's a
better Right to put us under their own Lieutenant, commissionated by
themselves? Will the King take this well at our hands, that we should obey any
man rather than himself? We can willingly submit to Leysler's Authority, but
stubbornly reject the Kings Commission, and defy his Lieutenant.

2 dly, If we renounce the King and his Government we destroy our own: We
cannot pretend to any thing but from and under the King: and how can we demand
or expect that others should obey us, if we will not obey the King? All Loyal
Subjects may justly be afraid of having to do with us; for such Obedience is
indeed Unlawful.

3 dly. We cannot think that our Government shall always shoulder out the Kings
Government; and it is not to be doubted but their Majesty's have long had the
settlement of the Government of these Territories under consideration. The
Defense of the Dominion is their Majesty's great Interest and care. It is
obvious to every Eye that we are divided from the Massachusetts at Sea by the
shoals, and at Land by a great distance, and that Connecticut and York by their
natural situation lie much fairer than Connecticut and the Massachusetts, for
the defense of each other, and in particular of Albany, that key of the
Country, a Post necessary to be defended, and by the defense whereof we defend
our selves; and this is laid as the ground of their Majesty's dispose of the
Militia in this Commission. It is not for us to appoint or dictate to their
Majesty's, but to acquiese in their Majesty's Wisdom and Goodness in that
behalf, on whom we may rely, being assured that they will do that (...) shall
be best for us.

4 thly, We may remember also, That whereas their Majesty's did the last year
give a Commission to Sir William Phips; their Governor of the Massachusetts, we
had then the same jealousy of being annexed to the Massachusetts, and would not
submit to that Commission, nor take notice of Sir William in that capacity;
whereby (to make the fairest construction of it that may be) their Majesty's
might very well conclude, that we were not desirous to be annexed to the
Massachusetts, but had rather be annexed to (...), as being far more convenient.
Howbeit we may well look upon this Commission as the consequent of our
Non-submission to Sir William Phips. It is their Majesty's Grace so far to
overlook that Disobedience; if now we shall finally reject the second, the
Third may bring a greater inconvenience than any we can imagine to follow upon
our being annexed to York.

5 thly, The Regal and chief Government does not belong to us: The most that we
can pretend to is but that of a Corporation. The Regal Government is the
King's, and their Majesty's may commit it here or there, as pleases them, and
it is our Duty to submit. And which, I pray, is the most likely way to preserve
our Government, Obedience or Disobedience?

6 Object. But if we be annexed to York, we shall have great Rates to pay, and
be grievously oppressed^ The Long-Islanders complain that they are intollerably
oppressed by this Governor.

Answ. 1st. We have a Friend in the Country that has told the World, That this
is a Land full of Lies; and I wish it were not true. Howbeit, Malcontents
will never want Complaints, true or false.

2 dly, The Governor neither does nor can impose any Rates upon them, there is
none levied but what their Assembly of the Freeholders see needful for
defraying the necessary Charge.

3 dly, That small Province of New York has had (beside other arrears) the
burden of the Defense of Albany so long lying mainly upon them alone, by which
their Rates, no doubt, have been much more heavy than otherwise they would have
been. But have not we great Rates to pay also, now as we are standing alone?
And how does it appear that their Rates are greater than ours? If that matter
was well examined, possibly it might be found, that our Rates are as great, if
not greater than theirs; and yet we have had no such burden incumbent upon us.
How many Thousand of Pounds have been raised upon this Collony since the
Revolution? and who is he that can give account of a farthi^g benefit accrewing
to this Collony by it, except that little Skirmish at NewLondon, when two or
three French Vessels put in there?

4 thly, If we should be permitted to stand as we are, yet we shall have great
Rates to pay still, especially as long as the War lasts. We voluntarily take
upon us the Defense of the upper Towns belonging to the Massachusetts upon this
River, which appertains not to us. The King by his Letter commands assistance
of Men and Money to his Governor of York, and we seem willing to comply with
that; but these things must of necessity augment our Rates as it not more than
our annexion to York, if it should be so.

5 thly, If we should be annexed to the Massachusetts, shall we not have as
great Rates to pay, as if we be annexed to York, or greater? Do not they
complain as much as the other, or rather more? and we seen have^ something of
it too. So that this is but a common Objection; for look which way we will,
(whether we be annexed to York or to the Massachusetts, or stand as we are, yet)
the War continuing will make Rates greater than otherwise; yea, without any ^
War we can find ways to make great Rates. And if by any way they may be less
than other, it seems to be by our annexion to York^ Many hands make light Work;
and many Occasions whereby much Money is now expended to little purpose, will
by that means be taken away.

6 thly. Let us do our Duty, and let the Skey fall. These are but empty
Scar-crowes, contrived on purpose to fright men from their Duty: And let us
have their Majesty's Government, Law and Justice, and let it cost what it must.

7 Object. But the Governor of York is a Proud, Morose, Stearn and A^stere
Man, we do not desire to come under such Governors.

Answ. Who knows when the Devil and his Children will have done lying and
slandering? His Excellency may much better say of us, He desires not to be set
over such a Rude, Proud, Ungoverned and Disorderly People as we have declared
our selves to be. And truly it argues but a bad cause that cannot be
maintained without the Devils Help in lying and slandering; and but an
ungoverned Spirit, to call a Spirit of Government by the Names of Pride,
Morosity, Austerity, and such like: None but a Son of Belial will put such
Nicknames upon it.

We ought to know, that the Kings Captain General is a great Man: Abner was
Readiness, and after him Ishbosheths Captain General, and says David Know you not
that there is a Prince and a great Man this day fallen in Israel? 2 Samuel 3. 38.
Joab was David's Captain General, and how does Uriah (none of the least men
himself) speak of him, Why my Lord Joab, and the Servants of my Lord are
encamped in the open fields; shall I then go to my house, etc? 2 Samuel 11. 11.
Let us by the way observe and learn the Language of good Subjects.

A Spirit of Government does not dispose a man to be Hail Fellow well met ^ith
every Clown. True, yet it will condescend, as in courtesy, to all, so to the
Relief even of the meanest. Witness Solomon in all his Glory personally
deciding the Controversy between two Harlots. And so the poor Woman that cried
to the King of Israel, Help my Lord, O King: Alas, (says he) whence shall I
help, etc? Not that he was unwilling to help her, though the extremity of
Famine had disabled him. Read also Joh 29. 7, and c. and you shall see the
Distance that he would keep and the Reverence that he expected and received
from all (higher and lower) that were inferior to himself:^ If Job were here,
the Objector would say, That Job was a proud stern Fellow: But without cause,
for this notwithstanding, He delivered the Poor that cried, the Fatherless, and
him that had none to help him: The blessing of him that was ready to perish
came upon him, and he caused the Widows heart to sing for joy: He put on
Righteousness, and is clothed him, etc. He was Eyes to the blind and feet to
the Lame; a Father to the Poor, and the cause which he knew not be searched
out: He brake the Jaws of the Wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his Teeth,
verse. 12, to 17. Yea, he did not despise the cause of his Servant, cap. 31. 13.
It may be the Wicked, fearing to have his Jaws broken, would take occasion (but
none had cause) to complain of his Pride and Morosity. In a word, a great
Spirit becomes a great Man; A great Spirit, we see, may be a good Spirit, and a
Great Man a Good Man, and such a one, I trust, we shall find the Governor of
York to be.

8 Obj. But some say he is a Papist.

Answ. Verily if, this were true, it were the most legal Objection that I have
yet heard; for Papists are (...) by Law.

But these who are bold to say so, had need make good Evidence of it, (...)
they rank themselves among those filthy Dreamers who de^ile the Flesh, revile
Rulers, despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, and make themselves
guilty of all those mischiefs that follow thereupon.

For, 1 st How does it appear that he is a Papist? He professes that he is an
Episcopal Man, or for the way of the Church of England, which is established by
Law, whereby Popery is renounced.

He makes it his first care to provide for an able Gospel Ministry, and for the
due and strict sanctification of the Sabbath.

He is a Lover of sound Doctrine, and of the free and faithful preaching of
Christ crucified, and a Friend to good Men.

He pays his due Allegiance to their Majesty's, and vig^rously maintains their
Interest, and defends their Subject^ against Papists.

He improves his Authority for the suppression of Vice, and Reformation of
prevailing Evils.

He is a Peacemaker, and studies the composing and (...) of Differences among
their Majesty's Protestan^ (...).

He openly declares, That he will never mix his private Interest with the
Public.

He diligently seeks the Welfare of the People committed to his Trust; and is
careful to put such into places of Trust, as are duly qualified, that Law and
Justice may have their free Course. These things do not argue that he is a
Papist, but the contrary.

2 dly. His Excellency is better known to their Majesty's than to us: We know
how his Majesty has declared against the putting of Papists into place, who
are disabled by Law, and consequently all they do is void in Law: And therefore
we cannot think that he will do it himself: Yet he is a Governor, and to us a
Lieutenant of his Majesty's own choosing; and therefore no reason to think that
he is a Papist.

3 dly, What assurance have we that the Objector is not a Papist? Papists hold,
That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics (i.e. with Protestants) That the
Oath of Allegiance to Heretical (i. e. Protestant) Princes, is not to be taken,
or if it be taken, yet it is null and void, and binds not, or at least may be
dispensed with and made void. and such like. Let the Objector pay his
Allegiance, and submit to the Kings Commission, if he would not be thought to
be a Papist, or would be allowed to make this Objection.

1 Samuel 10. 26, 27. There went with Saul a Band of Men, whose hearts God had
touched. But the Children of Belial said, How shall this Man save us? and they
despised him, etc. but he held his peace.

John 1. 46. Nathaniel said, Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? Phillip
says to him, Come and see.

Lisenced by M. Clarkson, Secretary, and Printed at New York, Anno Domini. 1694.


