An Act for Granting to their Majesty's the Rate of One Penny per Pound upon
all the Real and Personal Estates within this Province of New York, etc. To be
allowed unto his Excellency the Governor, for the Care of the Province,
November the 12th, 1692.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly, in all humble and dutiful
Acknowledgement of their Majesty's most Gracious Favor and Regard to the
Subjects of this Province, by Commissionating and Appointing over them, a
Person to be their Governor, who is endued with most excellent Qualities, and
has given most signal Demonstration of his constant Loyalty and Fidelity unto
their Majesty's, by his prudent care and conduct, since his arrival into this
their Majesty's Province, and who by his unwearied vigilence has visited the
Frontiers of the same, and has put them into such posture as that all the
Subjects are in safety, though environed with a powerful Enemy; In the deepest
Sense thereof become humble Suppliants unto their most Excellent Majesty's, and
pray that they would be graciously pleased to accept, as a token of their most
Loyal and Sincere Affection unto their Majesty's, and their Government
established here, One Penny for every Pound value of all the Real and Personal
Estates of all and every the Freeholders and Inhabitants within this their
Majesty's Province and Dependancies; and do likewise humbly pray, that your
most excellent Majesty's would be pleased to give and allow the same unto
Benjamin Fletcher Esquire Capt. General and Governor in chief in and over their
Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories thereon depending, in America,
and pray that it be so enacted,

Be it therefore enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That there be
Assessed, Levied and Collected One Penny for every Pounds value of all the Real
and Personal Estates of all and every the Freeholders and Inhabitants within
this Province and Dependencies, to be assessed, levied, collected and paid in
manner and form following, that is to say, The one half or moiety of the
aforesaid Assesments of One Penny for every Pounds value of all the Real and
Personal Estates, as aforesaid, to be assessed* levied, collected and paid unto
their Majesty's Receiver General at New York, at or before the first day of
September next, which shall be in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety and Three, and the other half or moiety of the said Assesment to be paid
in like manner at or before (...) September then next following, which shall be
in the Year of (...) Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Four.

And for the more due and orderly Collection of the (...)

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That all and
every Person and Persons within this Government, having any Personal Estates,
either in their Possessions, or in the Possessions of others, in trust for
them, over and beside the Household Goods and Implements they use, and such
Sums of Money as they really owe or ought to pay, shall yield and pay to the
use aforesaid, after the rate of One Penny per Pound. And to the end that this
Tax may be laid with as much Equality and Indifferency as may be, upon all
Lands within this Government, and that a due regard may be had to the many
Tracts of uncultivated (...) Lands, which produce rather a (...) there^f, Be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Lands, and other Real, as also the
Personal Estates shall be, and are hereby charged for one Year only, and no
longer, with One Penny for every Pound clear Value.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Freemen within
this Province and Territories, who have been out of their Servitude by the
Space of six Months, and shall not be otherwise Rated by this Act, nor worth
one hundred Pound, shall pay unto the Use aforesaid the Sum of Six Shillings
per Head. Provided always, That our chief Proprietary and his late Deputies in
Government shall not be assessed or otherwise chargeable by virtue of this Act.
Provided also, That no Person or Persons shall be taxed by this Act who have a
great charge of Children, and become indigent in the World, and are so far in
debt that the clear Value of their Real and Personal Estate does not amount to
thirty Pounds.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
assessing, ordering, levying and collecting the several Sums of Money, so to be
paid as aforesaid, and for the more effectual putting this Act in Execution, It
shall and may be lawful for all or any two or more of the Members of this
Assembly, within the Respective Counties for which they serve, to call to their
assistance three of the Justices, or other substantial Freeholders of the
respective Counties, and within two Months after the publication hereof, to
meet t^gether at such place or places within each County, as they shall
respectively agree upon, in order to assess the Rates mentioned in this Act,
and also to appoint Receivers or Collectors to receive or gather the same. And
after such Meeting had, the said assessors shall by Warrant from some Justice
of the Peace of the proper County, cause the Constables within the said County,
to bring in Cirtificates in Writing of the Names of every pers^n residing
within the Limits of th^se places, with which they shall be charged; and of the
Substances and Values of every of them, who are to be rated by this Act; which
said Constables shall be paid or allowed by the Collectors three Pence per
Pound for their trouble therein. And the said assessors are hereby enjoined, to
assertain and inform themselves, by all lawful means they can, of the true
Valuation of the clear Estates, both real and personal, within th^se Counties
and Limits, with which they shall (...) ^^spectively. And being so thereof
ascertained, they are (...) themselves, and others for and in respect of the
said Estates, according to Rates aforementioned, having due regard to the
ability of the people, and to the unprofitable Land they held, and thereupon to
appoint such and so many Collectors or Receivers thereof as they the said
assessors shall think fit, within their respective Limits; for which service
the said assessors shall receive or be allowed six pence per Pound out of the
said assessment.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Rates,
Assesments and Taxations aforesaid, shall be made and ascertained with what
Expedition may be, so that the moiety or half part thereof may be levied,
collected and paid in to the Receivers respectively on or before the tenth day
of the ninth Month next, and the other half thereof on or before the tenth day
of the second Month, in the Year 1694. at such places as the said assessors
shall appoint. Which said assessments, with the Names and several Values of
their Respective Estates, together also with the real Sums levied by this Act,
shall be ^^turned and fairly certified by the said Collectors to the next
General Assembly, after the same is assessed, as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any of the said
assessors shall neglect or refuse to make such assessments, as by this Act is
required, or in case the Collectors, so as aforesaid chosen, shall deny,
neglect or refuse to collect any sum or sums of Money, in form afore-maetioned
assest, and be convicted thereof, shall be fined at the discretion of the
Justices of the respective County Courts.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons whatsoever within this Government, who shall be assest (...) any sum or
sums of Money, by virtue of this Act, to be levied, shall deny, refuse or delay
to pay the same, that then it shall and may be lawful for any such Collector,
by virtue of a Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any Justice of the Peace for
the County where such Offender shall reside, who by virtue of this act are
required and authorized to grant such Warrants to levy the same by distress and
sale of such person or persons Goods and Chattels, returning the Overplus, if
any be, to the Owners, after the sum assessed or distrained for, with all
Charges, are deducted.

Provided always, That no Mayor, Alderman or Justice of the Peace shall be
troubled, sued or molested for any Omission, Offense or Neglect by Virtue of
this Act, but within the space of one Year after such Omission, Offense or
Neglect, and not any time hereafter, any thing contained herein to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Always Provided, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the several Collectors of each respective City and County, as aforesaid, shall
have liberty to pay the several respective Sums assessed, as aforesaid, at the
Time and Days aforesaid in Current Money at New York, or for want thereof, in
good, sufficient and merchantable Provisions at the current Market Price.

FINIS

