Cases of Conscience Concerning evil SPIRITS Personating Men, Witchcrafts,
infallible Proofs of Guilt in such as are accused with that Crime.

All Considered according to the Scriptures, History, Experience, and the
Judgment of many Learned men.

By Increase Mather, President of Harvard College at Cambridge, and Teacher of
a Church at BOSTON in New England.

Prove. 22. 21. -- That thou might Answer the words of Truth, to them that
send unto thee. Efficient Daemones, ut quae non sunt, sic tamen, quasi sint,
conspicienda hominibus exhibeant. Lactantius Lib. 2. Instit. Cap. 15. Diabolus
Censulitur, cum ijs medijs utimur aliquid Cognoscendi, quae a Diabolo s^nt
introducta. Ames. Cas. Consc. L. 4. Cap. 23. BOSTON Printed, and Sold by
Benjamin Harris at the London Coffee-House. 1693.

Christian Reader.
SO Odious and Abominable is the name of a Witch, to the Civilized, much more
the Religious part of Mankind, that it is apt to grow up into a Scandal for
any, so much as to enter some sober cautions against the over hasty suspecting,
or too precipitant Judging of Persons on this account. But certainly, the more
execrable the Crime is, the more Critical care is to be used in the exposing of
the Names, Liberties, and Lives of men (especially of a Godly Conversation) to
the imputation of it. The awful hand of God now upon us, in letting loose of
evil Angels among us to perpetrate such horrid Mischiefs; and suffering of
Hells instruments, to do such fearful things as have bin scarce heard of; has
put serious persons into deep Musings, and upon curious enquiries what is to be
done for the detecting and defeating of this tremendous design of the grand
Adversary: and, though all that fear God are agreed, That no evil is to be
done, that Good may come of it; yet has the Devil obtained not a little of his
design, in the divisions of Reuben, about the application of this Rule.

That there are Devils and Witches, the Scripture asserts, and experience
confirms, That they are common enemies of Mankind, and set upon mischief, is
not to be doubted: That the Devil can (by Divine permission) and often does vex
men in Body and Estate, without the Instrumentality of Witches, is undeniable:
That he often has, and delights to have the Concurrence of Witches, and their
consent in harming men, is consonant to his Native Malice to man, and too
Lamentably exemplified: That Witches, when detected and convinced, ought to be
exterminated and cut (...) we have Gods warrant for; Exodus 22. 18. Only the
same God who has said, thou shall not suffer a Witch to live; has also said,
at the Mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses shall he that is worthy of
Death, be put to Death: but at the Mouth of one witness, he shall not be put to
Death. Deuteronomy. 17. 6. Much debate is made about (...) is sufficient Conviction,
and some have (in their Zeal) supposed that a less clear evidence ought to pass
in this than in other cases, supposing that else it will be hard (if possible)
to bring such to Condign Punishment, by Reason of the close Conveyances that
there are between the Devil and Witches: but this is a very dangerous, and
unjustifiable tenet. Men serve God in doing their Duty: he never intended that
all Persons Guilty of Capital Crimes should be discovered and Punished by men
in this Life, though they be (...) so curious in searching after iniquity. It
is therefore exceeding necessary that in such a day as this men be informed
what is evidence, and what is not. It concerns men in point of Charity; for,
though the most shining Professor may be secretly a most abomi^able sinner, yet
till he be detected, our Charity is bound to Judge according to what appears:
and notwithstanding that a clear evidence must determine a case; yet
Presumptions must and ought to be weighed against presumptions, and Charity is
not to be forgone as long as it ^ath the most preponderating on its side. And
it is of no less necessity in point of Justice; There are not only Testimonies
required by God, which are to be Credited according to the Rules given in His
Word referring to witnesses: but there is also an Evidence supposed to be in
the Testimony, which is thoroughly to be weighed, and if it do not infallibly
prove the crime against the person accused, it ought not ^o determine him
guilty of it; for so a righteous man may be Condemned unjustly. In the case of
Witchcraft we know that the Devil is the immediate Agent in the Mischief done,
the consent or compact of the Witch is the thing to be Demonstrated.

Among many Arguments to evince this, that which is most under present debate,
is that which refers to something Vulgarly, called Sp^ctre Evidence, and a
certain sort of Ordeal or trial by the sight and touch. The Principal plea to
justify the convictive evidence in these, is fetc^t from the Consideration of
the Wisdom and Righteousness of God in Governing the World, which they suppose
would fail, if such things were permitted to befall an Innocent person: but it
is certain, that too resolute conclusions drawn from hence, are bold
usurpations upon spotless Sovereignty; and though, some things, if suffered to
be common, would subvert this Government, and disband, yea ruin H^mane
society; yet God does sometimes suffer such things to evene, that we may
thereby know how much we are beholden to Him, for that restraint which he Lays
upon the infernal Spirits, who would else reduce a World into a Chaos. That the
Resolutions of such Cases as these is proper for the Servants of Christ in the
Ministry cannot be denied; The seasonableness of doing it now, will be
Justified by the Consideration of the necessity there is at this time of a
right information of men's Judgments about these things, and the danger of their
being misinformed.

T he Reverend, Learned, and Judicious Author of the ensuing Cases, is too well
known to need our Commendation: all that we are concerned in, is to assert our
hearty Consent to, and Concurrence with the substance of what is contained in
the following Discourse: and, with our hearty Requests to God, that He would
discover the depths of this Hellish Design; direct in the whole Management of
this affair; prevent the taking any wrong steps in this dark way; and that He
would in particular Bless these faithful endeavors of His Servant to that end,
we Commend it and you to His Divine Benediction.

William Hubbard John Baily Samuel Phillips Jabez Fox Charles Morton Joseph
Gerri^h James Allen Samuel Angier Michael Wigglesworth John Wise Samuel Whiting
Sen. Joseph Capen Samuel Willard Nehemiah Walter


Cases of Conscience Concerning Witchcrafts.
THE First Case that I am desired to express my Judgment in, is this, Whether
it is not Possible for the Devil to impose on the Imaginations of Persons
Bewitched, and to cause them to Believe that an Innocent, yea that a Pious
person does torment them, when the Devil himself does it, or whether Satan may
not appear in the Shape of an Innocent and Pious, as well as of a Nocent and
Wicked Person to Afflict such as suffer by Diabolical Molestations?

The Answer to the Question must be Affirmative; Let the following Arguments be
duly weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary.

Argu. 1. There are several Scriptures from which we may infer the Possibility
of what is Affirmed.

1. We find that the Devil by the Instigation of the Witch at Endor appeared in
the Likeness of the Prophet Samuel. I am not Ignorant that some have asserted
that, which, if it were proved would evert this Argument, Viz. that it was the
true and not a delusive Samuel which the Witch brought to converse with Saul.
Of this Opinion are some of the Jewish Rabbis R. Sa^ctias. R. Eleazer Athias.
Lyranus, Sic ^t J^s^phus.
and some Christian Doctors Ambro^e, Hicro^^ Basil, Nazianzen*
and many late Popish Authors Thomas, To^tatus, Suarez, cajetan.
amongst whom Cornel. In Eccl^^ia^t. Chap. 46. 22,23.
Lapide is most elaborate. But that it was a Demon representing Samuel has bin
evinced by Learned and Orthodox Writers: especially In Locum.
Peter Martyr, In 2 Cor. 11. 14. Page 555.
Balduin^s De Spec^ris. Cap. 7.^
Lavater, and our Incomparable John Rainolde. I shall not here insist on the
clearing of that, especially considering, that elsewhere I have done it: only
let me add that the Witch said to Saul, I see E^him, i. e. A God; (for the
whole Context shows, that a single Person is intended) Ascending out of the
Earth. 1 Samuel 28. 13. The Devil would be Worshipped as a God, and Saul now,
that he was become a Necromancer, must bow himself to him. Moreover, had it bin
the true Samuel from Heaven reprehending Saul, there is great Reason to believe
that he would not. only have reproved him for his sin, in not executing
Judgment on the Amalekites; as in Ver. 18. But for his wickedness in consulting
with Familiar Spi^its: for which Sin it was in special that he Dy^d. 2. Chr^n.
10. 13. But in as much as there is not one word to Testi^y against that
Abomination, we may conclude that it was not Real Samuel that appeared to S^ul.
And if it were the Devil in his likeness the Argument seems very strong, that
if the Devil, may appear in the Form of a Saint in Glory, much more is it
possible for him, to put on the Likeness, of the most Pious and innocent Saint
on Earth. There are, who acknowledge that a Demon may appear in the Shape of a
Godly Person, But not as doing Evil. Whereas the Devil in Samuels likeness told
a Pernici^^s Lie, when he said Thou have Disquieted me. It was not in the Power
of Saul, nor of all the Devils in Hell, to di^quiet a Soul in Heaven, where
Samuel had been for Two years before this Apparition. Nor did the Spectre speak
true, when he said, Thou and thy Sons shall be with me; though Saul himself at
his Death went to be with the Devil, his Son Jonathan did not so. Besides,
(which suits with the matter in hand) the Devil in Samuels shape confirmed
Necromancy and cursed Witchery. He that can in the likeness of Saints encourage
Witches to Familiarity with Hell, may possibly in the Likene^^ ofa Saint
afflict a Bewitched Person. But this we see from Scripture, Satan may be
Permitted to do.

And whereas it is objected, that the Devil may appear indeed in the Form of
Dead Persons, but that he cannot represent such as are living; The Cont^^^ is
manifest. No Question had Saul said to the Witch, bring me David who was then
living, she could as easily have shown living David as dead Samuel, as easily
as that great Conjurer, of whom De Prae^tig^^s Daemo^^^ni. Lib. 1. Cap. 16.
Wierus speaks, brought the appearance of Hector and Achilles and after that of
David before the Emperor Maximilian.

And that evil Angels have sometimes appeared in the likeness of living absent
persons is a thing abundantly confirmed by History.

De C. D (...).
Austin tells us of one that went for Resolution in some intricate Questions,
to a Philosopher of whom he could get no Answer; but in the night the
Philosopher comes to him, and, resolve, all his Doubts. Not long after, he
demanded the Reason why he could not answer him in the day as well as in the
night; The Philosopher professed he was not with him in the night, only
acknowledged that he dreamed of his having such Conversation with his Friend,
but he was all the time at home, and asleep. Pau^^s and Palladius did both of
them profess to Austin, that one in his Shape, had diverse times, and in diverse
places appeared to them De Appar. (...) Lib. 2 Cap* 7.
Thyreus: mentions several Apparitions of, absent living persons, which
happened in his time. which he had the certain knowledge of A Man that is in one
place cannot (Aut^pro^opos) at the same time be in another. It remains then
that such specter are Prodigious and Supernatural, and not without Diabolical
Operation. It has been Controverted among Learned men, whether innocent persons
may not by the malice and deluding Power of the Devil be represented as present
amongst witches at their dark Assemblies. The mentioned Thyreus says that the
Devil may and often does represent the Forms of innocent persons out of those
Conventions, and that there is no Question to be made of it, but as to his
natural Power and Art he is able to make their shapes appear amongst his own
ser^^ants, but he suppo^eth the Providence of God will not suffer such an
Injury to be done to an Innocent Person. With him Disq. Magicar: Lib. 2. C. 12.
Delrio, and Spineus concur. But Cumanus in his Lucerna Inquisit^rum (a Book
which I have not yet seen) defends the Affirmative in this Question. Bins
fieldius in his Treatise, concerning the Confession of Witches, inclines to the
negative, only De conf^^. sag. page 191.
he acknowledges Dei extraordinaria Permissione Posse Innocents sic
representari. And he that shall assert, that the great and Holy God never did
nor ever will permit the Devil thus far to abuse an Innocent Person, affirms
more than he is able to prove. The story of Germanus his discovering a
Diabolical illusion of this nature concerning a great Number of Persons that
seemed to be at a feast when they were really at home and asleep, is mentioned
by many Authors. But the Particulars insisted on, do sufficiently evince the
truth of what we assert, viz. that the Devil may by Divne Permission appear in
the shape of Innocent and Pious Persons. Nevertheless, it is evident from
another Scripture, viz. that in, 2 Cor 11. 1^. For Satan himself is transformed
into an Angel of Light. He seems to be what he is not, and makes others seem to
be what they are not. He represents evil men as good, and good men as evil. The
Angels of Heaven (who are the Angels of Light) love truth and Righteousness,
the Devil will seem to do so to. And does therefore sometimes lay before men
excellent good principles and exhort them (as he did Theodore maill^t) to
practice many things, which by the Law of Righteousness they are obliged unto,
and hereby he does more effectually deceive. Is it not strange, that he has
sometimes intimated to his most devoted servants, that if they would have
familiar Conversation with him, they must be careful to keep themselves from
enormous Sins, and pray constantly for Divine Protection? But so has he
transfarmed himself into an Angel of Light, as De secret is mag. p. 31. see
also ^^vater de Spect. Lib. 2. Ca. 18.
Boissardus shows. He has frequently appeared to men pretending to be a good
Angel, so to Anatolius of old; and the late instances of Dr. Ca^aubon: of
Spir^^s.
Dr Dee and Kellet are famously known. How many deluded Enthusiasts both in
former and latter times have bin imposed on by Satan's appeaing visibly to them,
pretending to be a good Angel. And moreover, he may be said to transform
himself into an Angel of Light because of his appearing in the Form of Holy Men
who are the Children of Light, yea in the Shape and Habit of Eminent Ministers
of God. So did he appear to Mr Earl of Colchester in the Likeness of Mr Liddal
an Holy man of God and to the Turkish Chaous Baptized at London Anno 1658
pretending to be Mr D^ry an excellent Minister of Christ. And how often has he
pretended to be the Apostle Paul Or Peter or some other celebrated Saint?
Ecclesiastical Histories abound with Instances of this nature. Yea, sometimes
he has transfigured himself into the Form of Christ. It is reported that he
appeared to Sulpitius severus in vita martini.
St Martin Gloriously arrayed as if he had been Christ. So likewise to Guac^ius
compend: mal^^ic p. 342.
Second (...), and to another Saint, who suspecting it was Satan, transforming
himself into an Angel of Light had this expression, If I may see Christ in
Heaven it is enough, I desire not to see him in this world, whereupon the
spec^re vanished. It has been related of Luther, that after he had been Fasting
and Praying in his Study, the Devil comes pretending to be Christ, but Luther
saying, away thou confounded Devil, I acknowledge no Christ but what is in my
Bible, nothing more was seen. Thus then the Devil is able (by Divine
Permission) to Change himself into what Form or Figure he pl^aseth,

Omnia transformat sese in miracula rerum.

A Third Scripture to our purpose is that, in Re^ 12 10 where the Devil is
called the Accuser of the Brethren Such is the malice and Impudence of the
Devil, as that he does accuse good men and that before God, and that not only
of such Faults as they really are guilty of, he accused Joshua with his filthy
garments, when through his Indulgence some of his Family had transgressed by
unlawful marriages. Zac: 3. 23. with Ezra: 10. 18. but also with such Crimes,
as they are altogether free from. He represented the Primitive Christians as
the vilest of men, and as if at their meetings they did commit the most
nefandous Villani^s that ever were known. And that not only innocent but
eminently Pious persons should through the malice of the Devil be accused with
the Crime of witchcraft is no new thing. Such an aff^iction did the Lord see
meet to exercise the great Athanasius with Binsfield de Confess. Sag. p. 187.
only the Divine Providene did wonderfully vindicate him from that as well as
from some other soul Aspersions. The Waldenses (although the scriptures call them
Saints, Rev: 13. 7.) have been traduced by Satan and by the world as Horrible
witches. So have others in other places, only because they have done
extraordinary things by their prayers. It is by many Authors related that a
City in France was molested with a Diabolical Spectre, which the People were
wont to call Hugon. Near that place a number of Protestants were wont to meet
to serve God. Whence the Professors of the true Reformed Religion were
nicknamed Hugonots by the Papists, who designed to render them before the
world as the servants and worshippers of that Demon, that went under the name
of Hugon. And how often have I read in Books written by Jesuits, that Luther
was a Wizza^d, and that he did himself confess that he had Familiarity with
Satan! Most impudent Untruths! nor are these things to be wondered at, since
the Holy Son of God himself was reputed a Magician, and one that had
Familiarity with the greatest of Devils. The Blaspheming Pharisees said, He
casts out the Devils through the Prince of Devils. Math. 9. 34. There is then not
the best Saint on Earth (Man or Woman) that can assure themselves that the
Devil shall not cast such an Imputation upon them. It is enough for the
Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord: If they have
called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much more them of His Household.
Math. 10. 25. It is not for men to determine how far the Holy God may permit
the wicked one to proceed in his Accusations. The sacred story of Job. gives
us to understand that the Lord whose ways are past finding out, does for Wise
and Holy Ends suffer Satan, by immediate Operation, (and consequently by
Witchcraft) greatly to afflict innocent persons, as in their Bodies and
Estates, so in their Reputations. I shall mention but one Scripture more to
confirm the Truth in hand. It is that in, Eccles. 9. 2, 3. Where it is said,
All things come alike to all, there is one event to the Righteous and to the
Wicked, as is the Good, so is the sinner, this is an evil amongst all things
under the Sun that there is one Event happenet^ to all. And in Eccles. 7. 15.
it is said, There is a just man that perishes in his Righteousness.

From hence we infer that there is no outward Affliction whatsoever but may
befall a Good Man; now to be represented by Satan as a Tormentor of Bewitched or
Possessed Persons, is a sore affliction to a Good man. To be Tormented by Satan
is a sore Affliction, yet nothing but what befell Job, and a Daughter of Abraham
whom we read of in the Gospel. To be represented by Satan, as tormenting
others, is an affliction like the former. The Lord may bring such extraordinary
Temptations on his own Children, to Afflict and Humble them, for some sin they
have been guilty of before him. A most wicked Person in St. Ives, got a Knife,
and went with it to a Ministers House; designing to stab him, but was
disappointed. Afterward Conscience being awakened, the Devil appears to this
Person in the Shape of that Minister, with a Knife in his hand exhorting to
Self-murder. Was not here a punishment suitable to the sin which that Person
had been Guilty of? Perhaps some of those, whom Satan has represented as
committing Witchcrafts, have been tampering with some foolish and Wicked
Sorceries, though not to that degree, which is Criminal and Capital by the Laws
both of God, and Men; for this Satan may be permitted so to scourge them. Or,
it may be they have misrepresented and abused others, for which cause the Holy
God may justly give Satan leave, fal^ely to represent them.

Have we not known some that have bitterly censured all that have bin
complained of by bewi^ched Persons, saying it was impossible they should not be
Guilty, soon upon which themselves or some near Relations of theirs, have to
the lasting Infamy of their Families been accused after the same Manner, and
personated by the Devil? Such* tremendous r^^ukes on a few, should make all men
to be careful how they join with Satan in Condemning the Innocent.

Arg: 2. Because it is possible for the Devil in the Shape of an innocent
person to do other mischiefs. As for those who acknowledge that Satan may
personate a Pious Person, but not to do mischief, their opinion has been
conf^ted by more than a few unhappy instances. Mr Clark Examples vol. 1.p. 510.
speaks of a man that had been an Atheist, or a Sadduce, not b^li^ving that
there are any Devils or any (to us) invi^ible world, This man was converted,
but as a Punishment of his In^idelity, evil Angels did often appear to him in
the Shape of his most intimate Friends, and would sometimes seduce him into
great inconveniences. It has bin else where and but now noted that a Doemon in
the Shape of excellent Mr. Dury appeared to the Turkish Chaous Ann. 1658 to
di^^wade him from prosecuting his desires of Baptism into the name of Christ;
Also to Mr. Earl in the likeness of his Friends, to discourage him from doing
things lawful and good. A multitude of Jews were once deluded by a person
pretending to be Moses from Heaven, and that if they would follow him they
should pass safe through the Sea (as did their Fathers of old through the red
sea) whereby great numbers of them were deceived and perished in the waters.
Socrates ^i^t P, 7. C. 38.
Learned and Judicious men have concluded that this Moses Cree^sis, was a
Demon, transforming himself into Moses. And that the Devil has frequently
appeared Lege Vill^lp^nd de Magia etc. L. 2. Cap. 27
in the shape of famous Persons to the end that he might seduce men into
Idolatry a sin equal to to that of witchcraft) no man that has made it his
concern to enquire into things of this nature can be ignorant. Many Examples of
this kind are collected by Mr. Bromhall in his Treatise of Specter, and the
cunning Devil, to strengthen men in their worshipping of Saints departed: And
by Mr Bovet in his Pandemonium. It is credibly reported that the Devil in the
likeness of a faithful Minister (at St Ives before mentioned near Boston in
Lincolnshire) came to one that was in trouble of mind, telling her the longer
she lived, the worse It would be for her, and therefore advising her to
self-murder. An eminent Person still living had the account of this matter from
Mr. Cotton (the famous Teacher of both Bostons). He was well acquainted with
that Minister, who related to him the whole Story with all the Circumstances of
it. For Mr. Cotton was so affected with the Report, as to take a Journey on
purpose to the Town where this happened, that so he might obtain a satisfactory
Account about it, which he did. Some Authors say that a Demon appeared in the
Form of Sylvanus ( Hiero^'s Friend) attempting a dishonest thing, the Devil
thereby designing to blast the Reputation of a famous Bishop. I have in another
Book mentioned that celebrated Instance concerning an honest Citizen in Zurick
(the Metropolis of Heluetia) in whose Shape the Devil appeared committing an
abominable Fact (not fit to be named) very early in the morning, seen by the
Prefect of the City, and his Servant. They were amazed to Behold a man of good
Esteem for his conversation, perpetrating a thing so vile and abominable: but
going from the Spectre in the Field, to the Citizens House in the Town, they
found him at home, and in his bed, nor had he been abroad that morning, which
convinced them that what they saw was an Illusion of the Devil. This Passage is
mentioned as a thing known and certain by Lavater in his Treatise of Specter,
Part 1. Chap. 19. Page 86.
who was a most learned and judicious Preacher in that City. Our Juel faith of
him that he must ingeniously confess, that he never understood Solomon's
Proverbes, until Lavater expounded them to him. That Book of his De Spec^ris
has been published in Latin, high and low Dutch French, Italan. The Leaned
Zanchy Epi^tol. 2.
speaks highly of it, professing that he had read it both with Pleasure and
Profit. Voetius In Dispu^^ d^ M^gia. P. 575.
takes notice of that Passage which we have quoted out of Levater as a thing
Memorable.

Some Popish Authors argue, that that Devil cannot personate an innocent man as
doing an Act of witchcraft, because then he might as well represent them as
commiting Theft, murder etc. And if so, there would be no Living in the world.
But I turn the Argument against them, He may (as the mentioned Instances prove)
personate honest men as doing other Evils. And no solid Reason can be given why
he may not as well personate them under the notion of witches as under the
notion of Thieves, Murders and Idolators. As for the Objection, that then there
would be no living in the world, we shall consider it under the next Argument.

Arg: 3. If Satan may not represent one that is not a covenant servant of his
as afflicting those that are bewitched or possessed, then it is either because
he wants Will, or Power to do this, or because God will never permit him thus
to do. No man but a Saddu^^ doubts of the ill will of Devils. Nothing is more
pleasing to the Malice of those wicked Spirits than to see Innocence wronged.
And the Power of the Enemy is such as that having once obtained a Divine
Concession to use his Art, he can do this and much more then this amounts unto.
We know by Scripture-Revelation that the Sorcerers of Egypt caused many untrue
and delusive In Mr. Coupers Mystery of Witchcraft. Page 174, 175.
Representations before Pharaoh and his Servants. Exodus 7. 11, 22 and 8. 7. And
we read of the working of Satan in all Power and Signs, and lying wonders. 2.
These. 2. 9. His ^art is beyond what the wisest of men may pretend unto. He has
perfect skill in Optics, and can therefore cause that to be visible to one,
which is not so to another; and things also to appear far otherwise then they
are. He has likewise the Art of Limning in the Perfection of it, and knows what
may be done by Colors. It is an odd Passage 6. Acta Eruditorum Anno, 1690.
Page 113.
which I find in the Acta Eruditorum Printed at Lip^ick, that about 32 years
ago an indigent Merchant in France was instructed by a Doemon that with water
of Borax he might color Taffities, so as to cause them to glister and look
very gay. He fearcheth into the Nature, Causes, and Reasons of things, whereby
he is able to produce wonderful effects. So that if he does not form the Shape
of an innocent person as afflicting others, it is not from want of either will
or power. They that affirm that God never did nor ever will permit him thus to
do, allege that it is incon^^stant with the Righteousness and Providence of
God in Governing Humane Affairs thus to suffer men to be imposed on. It must be
acknowledged In Mr. Glanvils Philosophical Considerations.
that the Divine Providence has taken care that the greatest part of mankind
shall not be left to unavoidable Deception, so as to be always abused by the
mischievous Agents of Hell, in the objects of plain ^ence. But yet it is not
for sinful and silly Mortals to prescribe Rules to the Most High in his
Government of the world, or to direct him how far he may permit Satan to use
his power: I am apt to think that there are some amongst us, who if they had
lived in Job's days, and seen the Devil tormenting of him, and heard him
complaining of being feared with Dreams and terrified with Night-visions, they
would have joined with his uncharitable friends in Censuring him as a most
guilty person. But we should consider that the Most High God does sometimes
deal with men in a way of Absolute Sovereignty, performing the thing which is
appointed for them, and many such things are with him. If he does destroy the
perfect with the wicked, and Laugh at the Trial of the innocent (Job 9. 22,
23.) who shall enter into His Counsels! who has given Him a Charge over the
Earth. or who has disposed the whole world! men are not able to give an Account
of his ordinary works much less of his secret Counsels, and the Dark
Dispensations of his Providence. They do but darken counsel by words without
knowledge when they undertake it. If we are not able to see how this or that
can stand with the Righteousness of him that Governs the world, shall woe say
that the Almighty will pervert Judgment? or that he that Governs the Earth
hates Right? shall we condemn him that is most just? But whereas it is objected
where is Providence? and how shall men live on the Earth, If the Devil may be
permitted to use such power? I demand, where was Providence, when Satan had
Power to cause sons of Belial to lie and swear away the life of innocent
Nab^th, laying such Crimes to his charge as he was never guilty of? And what an
hour of Darkness was it? How far was the power of Hell permitted to prevail,
when Christ the Son of God was Accused* Condemned, and Hanged for a Crime that
he never was guilty of? That was the strangest Provi*dence that has happened
since the world began, and yet in the Issue the most glorious. We must
therefore distinguish between what does ordinarily come to pass by the
Providence of God, and things which are extraordinary. It is not an usual thing
for a Naboth to have his life taken from him by false Accusations, or for an
Athanasi^s or a Susann^ to be Charged, and perhaps brought before Courts of
Judicature for Crimes of which they were altogether Innocent.

But if we therefore conclude that such a thing as this can never happen in the
World, we shall offend against the Generation of the just. It i^ not ordinary
for Devils to be permitted to reveal the (...) -- sins of men; yet this ha^
been done more than once or twice. Nor is it ordinary for Daemo^s to Steal
Money out of M^ns Pockets, and Purses, or Wine and Cider out of their Cellars.
Yet some such Instanc^s have there been amongst ourselv^s. It is not usual for
Providence to permit the Devil to come from Hell and to throw Fire on the Tops
of Houses, and to cause a whole Town to be burnt to Ashes thereby. There would
(it must be confessed) be no living in the world if Evil-Angels should be
permitted to do thus when they had a mind to it. Neverthless, Authors worthy of
Credit, tell us that this has sometimes happened. De s^btilita te Lib. 19.
Both Erasmus and Ca^^^us write that the Town of Schiltach in Germany, was in
the Month of April, 1533. Set on Fire by a Devil and Burnt to the Ground, in an
Hou^s space. It Is also reported by Sigibert, Aventinus and others, that some
Cottages and Barns in a Town called Bingus were Fired by a wicked Genius. That
spiteful Demon said it was for the Impieties of such a Man whom he named, that
he was sent to molest them. The poor Man to satisfy his Neighbors, who were
ready to Stone him, carried an hot Iron in his hand, but receiving no hurt
thereby, he was judged to be innocent. It is not ordinary for a Devil upon the
Dying Curse of a Servant, to have a Commission from Heaven to tear and torment
a bloody cruel master; yet such a thing may possibly come to pass. There is a
fearful Story to this purpose in the Account of the Bucaneers of America, p.
75, 76.
wherein my Author relates that a Servant, who was Spirited or Kidnapt (as they
call it) Into America, falling into the Hands of a Tyrannical Master, he ran
away from him, but being taken and brought back, the hardhearted Tyrant Lashed
him on his Naked Back, until his Body ran in an entire Stream of Blood. To make
the Torment of this Miserable Creature Intolerable, he Ano^nted his Wounds with
Juice of Lemmon mingled with Salt, and Pepper, being ground sma^l together,
with which Torture the Miserable Wretch gave up the Ghost, with these Dying
words, I beseeth the Almighty God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, that HE permit
a Wicked Spirit, to make thee feel as many Torments before thy Death, as thou
have caused me to feel before mine. Scarce four days were past after this
Horrible Fact, when the Almighty Judge, gave Permission to the father of
Wickedness to Possess the Body of that cruel Master, and to make him Lacerate
his own flesh, until he dyed, belike surrendering his Ghost into the hands of
the Infernal Spirit, who had Tormented his Body. But of this Tragical Story
enough.

To proceed, Is it not usual for Persons after their Death to appear unto the
Living. But it does not therefore follow, that the Great God will not suffer
this to be. For both in former and latter Ages, Examples thereof have not been
wanting. No longer since, than the last Winter, there was much Discourse in
London concerning a Gentlewoman, unto whom her Dead Son (and another whom she
knew not) had appeared. Being then in London, I was willing to satisfy my self,
by enquiring into the Truth of what was reported. And on Feb. 23. 1691. my
Brother (who is now a Pastor to a Congregation in that City) and I Discoursed
the Gentlewoman spoken of. She told us, that a Son of hers, who had been a very
civil young man, but more airy in his Temper than was pleasing to his serious
Mother, being Dead, she was much concerned in her Thoughts about his Condition
in the other World. But a Fortnight after his Death, he Appeared to her,
saying, Mother, you are solicitous about my eternal Welfare. Trouble your self
no more, for I am happy, and so vanished. Should there be a continual
Intercourse between the Visible and the Invisible World, it would breed
Confusion. But from thence to infer, that the Great Ruler of the Universe will
never permit any thing of this nature to be, is an inconsequent Conclusion. It
is not usual for Devils to be permitted to come and violently carry away
persons through the Air, several Miles from their Habitations. Nevertheless,
this was done in Sweedland about Twenty Years ago, by means of a cursed Knot of
Witches there. And a Learned Physician now living, gives an Account of several
Children, who by Diabolical Frauds were Stolen from their Parents, and others
left in their room: And of two, that in the nightime a Line was by Invi^^b^^
Hands put about their necks, with which they had been Strangled, but that some
near them happily prevented it. V. Germ. Ephem. Ann^ 1689. page 51. 516.

Let me further add here; It has very seldom been known that Satan has
personated Innocent Men doing an ill thing, but Providence has found out some
way for their vindication; Either they have been able to prove that they were
in another Place when that Fact was done, or the like. So that perhaps there
never was an Instance of any Innocent Person Condemned in any Court of
Judicature on Earth, only through Satan's deluding and imposing on the
Imaginations of men, when nevertheless, the Witnesses, Juries, and Judges were
all to be excused from blame.

Arg: 4. It is certain both from Scripture and History that Magicians by their
Enchantments and Hellish Conjuriati^^s may cause a false Representation of
persons, and things. An enchanted eye shall see such things as others cannot
descern. It is a thing too well known to be denied that some by rubbing there
eyes with a Bewitched water have immediately thereupon seen that which others
could not discern. And there are persons in the World, who have a strange
spectral sight. Mr Glanvil In his Sadduci^m Triumph Collection p. 201.
speaks of a Dutchman that could see Ghosts which others could perceive
nothing of. There are in Spain a sort of men whom they call Zahurs; these can
see into the Bowels of the Earth. They are able to discover Minerals and hidden
Treasures. nevertheless, they have their extraordinary sight only on Tuesdays
and fridays; and not on the other days of the week. In his Sadduci^m Triumph
Collection p. 201.
Delrio faith that when he was at Madrid Ano.Domin. 1575. He saw some of these
strange sighted Creatures. Mr. George Sinclare, in his Book enti^uled Satan's
Invisible World discovered p. 215. (Di^q. Magic. L. I. c. 3. p. 22.
has these words, I am undoubtedly informed that men and women in the
High-lands can discern Fatality approaching others by seeing them in the waters
or with winding Sheets about them. And that others can lecture in a Sheeps
shoulder bone a death within the Parish seven or eight days before it come. It
is not improbable but that such Preternatural Knowledge comes first by a
Compact with the Devil and is derived down-ward by Succession to their
Posterity. Many such I suppose are Innocent, and have this sight against their
will and Inclination. Thus Mr. Sinclare. I concur with his supposal that such
Knowledge is Originally from Satan, and perhaps the Effect of some old
Enchantment. There are some at this day in the World, that if they come into an
House where one of the Family will dye within a Fortnight, the smell of a Dead
Corpse offends them to such a degree as that they cannot stay in that House. It
is reported, that near unto the Abbey of St. Maurice in Burgundy Vairus de
Fascino Lib 2
there is a Fish Pond in which are Fishes put according to the number of the
Monks of that place. If any one of them happen to be sick there is a Fish seen
to Float and Swim above water half dead, and if the Monk shall dye, the Fish a
few days before dies. In some parts in Wales Death lights or Corpse Candles
(as they call them) are seen in the night time going from the House where some
body will shortly dye, and passing into the Churchyard. Of this, my dearly
Honored and never to be forgotten Friend Mr. Richard Baxter p. 131.
has given an Account in his Book about Witchcrafts lately Published. What to
make of such things, except they be the Effects of some old Enchantment I know
not. Nor what Natural Reason to Assign for that which I find amongst the
Observations of the Imperial Academy for the Year 1687 viz. That in an Orchard,
where are choice Damascen Plumbs, the Master of the Family being Sick of a
Quartan Ague, whilst he continued very ill, four of his Plumb-trees instead of
Damascens brought forth a vile sort of yellow Plumbs: but Recovering Health,
the next Year the Tree did (as formerly) bear Dama^cens again. But when after
that he fell into a fatal Dropsy, on those Trees were seen not Damascens, but
another sort of Fruit. The same Author. V. Germ: Ephemer: Anno 16. p. 379.
gives Instances of which he had the certain knowledge concerning Apple Trees,
and Pear Trees, that the Fruit of them would on a sudden wither as if they had
been baked in an Oven, when the Owners of them were mortally sick. It is no
less strange that in the Illustrious Electoral Henkeli^s d^ obs^ssis page 86.
House of Brandenbarg before the Death of some one of the Family, Feminine
Sp^ctres appeared. Camerar. cent. 1. c- 73 Cardan: de rerum vari^tate Lib: 16:
cap: 93
And often in the Houses of Great Men, Voices and Visions from the Invisible
World have been the Ha^bingers of Death, When any Heir in the Wo^^hipful Family
of the Br^ertons in Chesh^^e is near his Death, ther^ are seen in a Pool
adjoining, Bodies of Trees swimming ^or certain days together. On which Learned
C^mbden In his Britannia p: 609
has this note. These and such like things are done either by the Holy Tutclar
Ang^ls of men, ^r else by the Devils, who by Gods Permission might^ly show
their Power in this Inferior World. As for Mr. (...) Notion that some persons
may have a second ^ight (as it is termed) and yet be themselves Innocent, I am
satisfied that he judges right. For this is common amongst the Laplanders, who
are horribly addicted to Magical Incantations. They bequeath their Doemons to
their Children as a Legacy, by whom they are often assisted (like Bewitched
Persons, as they are) to see and do things beyond the power of Nature. An
Historian who deserves Credit, relates, See the History of Lap^and And Mr
B^rton's History of Daemo^^
that a certain Laplander gave him a true and particular Acco^^t of what had
happened to him in his Journey to Lapland. And further complained to him with
Tears, that things at a g^ea^ distance were Represented to him, and how much he
desired to be Delivered from that Diabolical Sight, but could not. This
doubtless was caused by some Enchantment. But to proceed to what I intend. The
Eyes of Persons by reason of ^^^^anting Charms, may not only see what others do
not, but be under such power of Fascination as that things which are not, shall
appear to them as real. The Apostle speaks of B^w^ched Eyes. Gal. 3. 1. And we
know from Scripture, that the Imaginations of men have by Enchantments been
imposed upon. And Histories abound with very strange Instances of this Nature.
The old Witch Circe by an ^nch^nted Cup caused Ulysses his Companions to
imagine themselves to be turned into Swine. And how many Witches have been
themselves so Bewitched by the Devil, as really to believe that they were
transformed into Wolves, or Dogs, or Cats. It is Reported of Simon Magus,
Schotten P^isic cur^os: Lib: 1: c: 16:
that by his Sorceri^s, he would so impose on the Imaginations of people, as
that they thought he had really changed himself into another sort of Creature.
Apollonius of Tyana could outdo Simon with his Magic. The great Bohemian
Conjurer Zyto See Wa^^^ of the Wonders of the World p 215
by his Enchantments caused certain Persons, whom he had a mind to try his Art
upon, to imagine that their hands were turned into the feet of an Ox, or into
the Hoofs of a Horse, so that they could not reach to the Dishes before them to
take any thing thence. He Sold Wisps of Straw to a Butcher, who bought them for
Swine That many such prestigious Pranks were played. by the unhappy Faustus, is
attested by Camerarius, Wierus, Voetius, Lavater, and Lonicer.

There is newly Published a Book (mentioned in the Acta Eruditorum) wherein the
Author Ubi supra
( Wiechard Valvassor) relates that a Venetian Jew instructed him (only he
would not attend his Instructions) how to make a Magical Glass which should
represent any person or thing according as he should desire. If a Magician by
an Enchanted Glass can do this, he may as well by the help of a Demon cause
false Idoeas of Persons and Things to be Impressed on the Imaginations of
bewitched Persons. The Blood and Spirits of a Man, that is bitten with a Mad
Dog, are so envenomed, as that strange Impressions are thereby made on his
Imagination. Let him be brought into a Room where there is a Looking-Glass, and
he will (if put upon it) not only say but swear that he sees a Dog though in
truth there is no Dog it may be within 20 Miles of him. And is it not then
possible, for the Dogs of Hell to pey^on the Imaginations of miserable
Creatures, so as that they shall believe and swear that such Persons hurt them
as never did so? I have heard of an Enchanted Pin, that has caused the
Condemnation and Death of many scores of Innocent persons. There was a
Notorious Witchfinder in Scotland, that undertook by a Pin, to make an
Infallible discovery of suspected persons, whether they were Witches or not If
when the Pin was run an Inch or two into into the Body of the Accused party, no
blood appeared, nor any sense of Pain, then he declared them to be Witches. By
means hereof my Author tells me no less then 300 persons were condemned for
witches in that Kingdom. This Bloody Jugler after he had done enough in
Scotland, came to the Town of Berwick upon Tweed. An honest man now living in
New England assures me that he saw the man thrust a great Bras^e Pin two
inches into the body of one that some would in that way try whether there was
Witchcraft in the case or no. The Accused Party was not in the least sensible
of what was done, and therefore in danger of receiving the Punishment justly
due for Witchcraft. Only it so happened, that Colonel Fenwick (that worthy
Gentleman, who many years since lived in New England) was then the Military
Governor in that Town. He sent for the Mayor and Magistrates, advising them to
be careful and cautious in their Proceedings. For he told them, it might be an
Enchanted Pin, which the Witch-finder made use of. Whereupon the Magistrates of
the place ordered that he should make his Experiment with some other Pin as
they should appoint: But that he would by no means be induced unto, which was a
sufficient Discovery of the Knavery and Witchery of the Witch-finder. There is
a strange Diabolical Energy goes along with Incantations. If Balak had not
known that, he would not have sent for Balaam to see whether he could Inchant
the Children of Israel. The Scripture intimates that Enchantments will keep a
Serpent from biting, Eccles. 10. 11. A Witch in Sweedland confessed that the
Devil gave her a wooden Knife; and that if she did but touch any living thing
with that Knife, it would die immediately. And that there is a wonderful Power
of the Devil attending things Enchanted, we have confirmed by a prodigious
Instance in Major Weir a Scotchman. That wretched man was a perfect Prodigy. A
man of great parts; esteemed a Saint; yet lived in secret Uncleanness with his
own Sister for Thirty Four Years together. After his wickedness was discovered,
he did not seem to be troubled at any of his Crimes, excepting that he had
caused a poor woman to be publicly whipped, because she reported that she had
seen him committing Beastiality: which thing was true, only the woman could not
prove it. This horrid Creature, if he had his Enchanted Staff in his hand,
could pray to Admiration, and do extraordinary things, as is more amply related
in the Postscript to Mr. Sinclares his Book before mentioned. But if he had not
his Enchanted Rod to Lean upon, he could not transform himself into an Angel of
Light. But by all these things we may conclude, that it is not impossible, but
that a guilty Conjurer, that so he may render himself the less suspected, may
by his Magical Art and Enchantment cause Innocent Persons to be Represented as
afflicting those whom the Devil and himself are the Tormentors of.

Arg. 5. The Truth we affirm is so evident, as that many Learned and Judicious
Men have freely subscribed unto it:

The Memorable Relation of the Devils assuming the Shape of an Innocent Citizen
in Zurick, is in the Judgment of that Great Divine, Lud Levater of weighty
Consideration. And he declares that he does therefore mention it, that so
Judges might be cautelous in their Proceedings in cases of this nature,
inasmuch as the Devil does often in that way entangle Innocent Persons, and
bring them into great Troubles. His words are De Spe^tris. p. 86, 87.
Hanc Historian ideo recito, ut Judices, in hujusmodi, Ca^ibus cauti ^i^^:
Diab^l^s enim hac v^a ^ape innocentibus in^idiatur. He confirms what he faith
by Reciting a Passage out of Alertus Granzius, who writes that the Devil was
seen in the Shape of a Noble man to come out of the Empress her Chamber. But to
clear her Innocence she (according to the superstitious Ordeals then in
fashion) walked blind^old over a great many of glowing hot Irons without
touching any of them. Voetius in his Disput. Select. V^^. 1. page 1008.
Disputation of Specter, proposes that Question, whether the Devil may not
untruly personate a Godly man, and answers in the Affirmative. And withal adds,
that it is a sufficient Argument ( Ad hominem) to answer the Papists with their
own Histories, which give Instances of Satan's appearing in the Figure of
Saints, nay of Christ himself. And in his Discourse concerning the Operations
of Doemons pap. 944.
he has the like Problem, whether the Devil may not possibly put on the Shape
of a true Believer, a real Saint, not only of such as are dead, but still
living, and answers, Quidni? Why not? It is true Popish Casuists Thyroeus de
Apparitionibus lib. 2. cap. 14.
do generally incline to the Negative In this Question. Neverthelese, the
Instance of Germanus who saw a company of honest people represented by the
Devil as if they had bin feasting together, when they were really asleep in
their beds, does a little puzzle them, so as that they are necessitated to take
up with this Conclusion, Binsfield de confessionibu^ sag^rum. p. 183. 191.
That by an extraordinary Permission of God, Innocent Persons may be
Represented by Satan in the Noctural Conventicles of Witches. And if so, much
more as afflicting Bewitched Persons. Delrio gives an account of an Innocent
Monk, whose Reputation was endangered by a Demons appearing in his Shape. He
writes more like a Divine than Jesuits use to do, when he ^aith that Disquis.
Magic. Lib. 2. ^. 12. p. 143.
It is not absolutely to be denied, but that the Devils may exhibit the Forms
of Innocent Persons, if God permit it, who when he does permit it, usually by
some Providen^s discovers the Fraud of the Devils, that so the Innocent may be
vindicated, or if not, it is to bring them to Repentance for some Sin, or to
try their Patience. It is rare to see such words dropping from the Pen of a
Jesuit. As for Protestant Writers, I cannot call to mind one of any note, that
does deny the possibility of the Affirmative, in the Question before us. Dr.
Henkelius has lately Printed at Frankford, Anno 1689.
Published a Learned and Elaborate Discourse concerning the right Method of
Curing such as are Obsessed with Cacodaemons, in which he asserts, that Satan
may possibly assume the Form of Innocent and Pious Persons, that so be might
thereby destroy their Reputations, and expose them to undue Punishments. As for
our English Divines, there are not many greater Casuists than Mr. Perkins. Nor
do I know any one that has written on the case of Witchcraft with more Judgment
and Clearness of Understanding. He has these words Discourse of witchcraft
chap. 7. sect. 2. p. 644.
If a man being dangerously sick and like to dye upon Suspicion, will take it
on his death, that such an one has Bewitched him, it is an allegation which may
move the Judge to Examine the Party, but it is of no moment for Conviction. The
like is asserted by In his witchcraft discovered. page 277.
Mr. Cooper, Mr. Bernard, (once a famous Minister at Batcomb in Somerset) his
Book called, A Guide to Grand-Jury-men in Cases of Witchcraft, is a solid and
wise Treatise. What his Judgment was in the Case now under Debate, we may see,
page 209, 210. Where his words are these: An Apparition of the Party suspected,
whom the Afflicted in their Fits seem to see, is a great suspicion. Yet this is
but a Presumption though a strong one, because these Apparitions are wrought by
the Devil, who can Represent to the Phantasy such as the Parties use to fear,
in which his Representation he may as well lie as in his other Witness. For if
the Devil can represent to the Witch seeming Samuel, saying, I see Gods
ascending out of the Earth, to beguile Saul, may we not think he can represent
a common ordinary Person, Man or Woman Unregenerate though no Witch to the
Phantasy of vain persons, to deceive them and others that will give Credit to
the Devil. Thus Mr. Bernard.

As for the Judgment of the Elders in New England, so far as I can learn, they
do generally concur with Mr. Perkins, and Mr. Bernard. This I know, that at a
Meeting of Ministers at Cambridge, August 1. 1692. where were present seven
Elders besides the President of the College, the Question then discoursed on,
was, Whether the Devil may not sometimes have a Permission to Represent an
Innocent Person as tormenting such as are under Diabolical Molestations? The
Answer which they all concurred in was in these words, viz. That the Devil may
sometimes have a Permission to Represent an Innocent Person as tormenting such
as are under Diabolical Molestations. But that such things are rare and
extraordiry, especially when such Matters come before Civil Judicatures. And
that some of the most Eminent Ministers in the Land, who were not at that
Meeting, are of the same Judgment, I am assured. And I am also sure, that in
Cases of this Nature, the Priests ^ips should keep Knowledge, and they should
seek the Law at his Mouth, Mal. 2. 7.

Arg. 6. Our own Experience has confirmed the Truth of what we affirm.

I have in another Book given an account concerning Eliz. Knap, of Groton, who
complained that a Woman as eminent for Piety, as any in that Town, did appear
to her, and afflict her. But afterward she was satisfied that that person
never did her any harm, but that the Devil abused them both. About two years
ago, a bewitched person in Chelmsford, in her Fitts, complained that a worthy
good man a near relation of hers, did afflict her. So did she likewise complain
of another person in that Town, of known Integrity and Piety.

I have my self known several of whom I ought to think that they are now in
Heaven, considering that they were of good Conversation, and reputed Pious by
those that had the greatest Intimacy with them, of whom nevertheless, some
complained that their Shapes appeared to them, and threatened them. Nor is this
answered by saying, we do not know but those persons might be Witches. We are
bound by the Rule of Charity to think otherwise. And they that censure any,
merely because much a sad Affliction as their being falsely represented by
Satan, has befallen them, do not do as they would be done by. I bless the Lord,
it was never the portion allotted to me, nor to any Relation of mine to be thus
abused. But no man knows what may happen to him, since There be just Men unto
whom it happens according to the work of the Wicked. Eccles. 8. 14. But what
needs more to be said, since there is one amongst ourselves whom no man, that
knows him, can think him to be a Wizzard, whom yet some bewitched persons
complained of, that they are in his Shape Tormented. And the Devils have of
late, accused some Eminent Persons.

It is an awful thing which the Lord has done to convince some amongst us of
their error. This then I Declare and Testify, that to take away the life of any
one, merely because a Spectre or Devil, in a Bewitched or Possessed person does
accuse them, will bring the Guilt of Innocent Blood on the Land, where such a
thing shall be done. Mercy forbid that it should, (and I trust that as it has
not, it never will be so) in New England. What does such an Evidence amount
unto more then this. Either such an one did afflict such an one, or the Devil
in his likeness, or his Eyes were bewitched.

The things which have been mentioned make way for, and bring us unto the
Second Case, which is to come under our Consideration,

Viz.

If one Bewitched is struck down at the Look or Cast of the Eye of another, and
after that Recovered again by a Touch from the same Person, is not this an
infallible Proof that the Person Suspected and Complained of is in League with
the Devil?

Answer; It must be owned that by such things as these Witchcrafts and Witches
have been discovered more then once or twice. And that an ill Fame or other
Circumstances attending the suspected Party, this may be a ground for
Examination; but this alone does not afford sufficient matter for Conviction.
As Specter or Devils appearing in the Shapes of men that have been murdered,
declaring that they were murdered by such persons and in such a Place, may give
just Occasion to the Magistrate for Enquiry into the matter. One great
Witch-Advocate Websters Displaying of supposed Witchcraft. Page 298. 308.
confesses that by this means Murders have been brought to Light; yet that
alone, if other Circumstances did not concur, would not by the Law of God take
away the Life of any man. If my Reader pleases, he shall hear what old Mr.
Bernard of Batcomb faith to a Case not unlike to this, and the former. His
words are these. Ubi supra. Page 207, 208.
The naming of the suspected in their Fits, and also where they have been, and
what they have done here or there, as Mr. Throgmortons Children could do, and
that often and ever found true, This is a great Presumption; yet is this but a
Presumption, because this is only the Devils Testimony, who can lie and that
more often than speak Truth. Christ would not allow his witness of him in a
point most true. Nor St. Paul in the due praises of him and Sylas. His witness
then (...) be received as sufficient (...) life. (...) may accuse an Innocent,
as I showed before in Mr. Edmunds giving over his practice to find Sto^len
Goods. And Satan we read would accuse Job to God Himself to be an Hypocrite,
and to be ready to be a Blasphemer. And he is called the Accuser of the
Brethren. Albeit I cannot deny but this has very often proved true, yet seeing
the Devil is such an one as you heard, Christian men should not take his
witness, to give in Verdict upon Oath, and so swear that the Devil has therein
spoken the Truth. Be it far from good men to confirm any word of the Devil by
Oath, if it be not an evident Truth without the Devils Testimony, who in
speaking the truth has a lying Intent, and speaks some truths ofthings done,
which may be found to be so, that he may wrap with them some pernicious Lie,
which cannot be tried to be true, but must rest upon his own Testimony to
insnar^ the Blood of the Innocent. Thus Mr. Bernard resolved the Case above
sixty years ago; and truly in my Opinion like a Wise and Orthodox Divine, what
he says, reaches both this and the former Case. Doctor Cotta (a Learned
Physician) in his Book about The Trial of Witchcraft, showing the true and
right Method of the Discovery with a Confutation of Erroneous Ways (which Book
he Dedicates to the Right Honorable Sir Edward Cook Lord Chief Justice of
England) Chap. 15. page 114, etc.
He Discourses concerning the Exploration of Witches by the Touch of the Witch
^uring the Touched Bewitched, and shows the Fallibility and Vanity of that
way of Trial, though he had often seen persons Bewitched in that way immediately
delivered from the present Fit or Agony which was upon them. But he takes it
to be be a Diabolical Miracle. He argues thus, page 121, 122.
No man can doubt but that the virtue wherewith this Touch was endued, is
supernatural. If it be so, how can man, to whom nothing is simply possible that
is not natural, be justly reputed an Agent therein? If he cannot be esteemed in
himself any possible or true Agent, then it remains that he can only be
interessed therein as an Accessory in Consent, or as a Servant unto a Superior
Power. If that Superior Power be the Devil, the least reasonable doubt
remaining, whether the Devil alone or with the Consent or Contract of the
suspected person has produced that wonderful effect; with what Religion or
Reason can any man incline rather to Credit the Devils mouth in the Bewitched,
than to pity the Accused,and believe them against the subtilty of a deceitful
Devil. If the Devil by Divine Permission may cause supernatural Concomitances
and Consequences to attend the natural Actions of men without their Allowance,
as is manifest in Possessed Persons, how is it reasonable and just that the
Impositions of the Devil should be imputed unto any man. And (says he) God
forbid that the Devils Signs and Wonders, nay his Truths should become auy
legal Allegations or Evidences in Law. We may therefore conclude it unjust that
the forenamed Miraculons Effect by the Devil wrought and imputed by the
Bewitched, should be esteemed an infallible Mark against any man, as therefore
convinced for that the Devil and the Bewitched have so dec^phered him? Thus
that Learned Man. But to the case in hand, I have several things to offer.

1. It is possible that the Persons in Question may be Possessed with
Cacodoemons. That bewitched Persons are many times really possessed with evil
Spirits, is most certain. And as Mr. Perkins observes, no man can prove but
that Witchcraft might be the cause of many of those Possessions, which we read
of in the Gospel. And that Devils have been immitted into the Bodies of
miserable Creatures by Magicians and Witches, Histories and Experience do
abundantly testify. Hierom In vita Hilarion
relates concerning a certain Virgin, that a young man, whose Amors she
despised, prevailed with a Magician to send an evil Spirit into her, by means
whereof she was strangly beforted. It Is reported Anastasius Quest. 23.
of Simon Magus that after he had used an Hellish Sacrifice, to be revenged of
some that had called him a great Witch, he caused infernal Spirits to enter
into them. Many confessing Witches have acknowledged that they were the cause
of such and such Persons being Possessed by evil Angels, as In Disput. De
Doemoniacis part 1. chap. 16. page 30.
Thyroeus and others have observed. Now no Credit ought to be given to what
Doemons in such, as are by them Obsessed, shall say. Our Savior by his own
une^ring Example has taught us not to receive the Devils Testimony in any
thing. The Papists are justly Condemned for bringing Diabolical Testimony to
confirm the Principles of their Religion. Peter Cotton the Jesuit Thuanus Lib.
130. page 1136.
enq^^red of the Devil in a Possessed. Person what was the clearest Scripture
to prove Purgatory. At the time when Luther dyed, all the possessed people in
the Netherlands were quiet. The Devils in them, said the reason was, because
Luther Thyroeus ubi supra page 16.
had been a great Friend of theirs, and they owed him that respect as to go as
far as Germany to attend his Funeral. Another time when there was a talk of
some Ministers of the reformed Religion, the Devils in the Obsessed laughed and
said they were not at all afraid of them, for the Calvinists and they were very
good Friends. The Jesuits insult with these Ti^timonie^ as if they were divine
Oracles. But the Father of Lies is never to be believed. He will uttet Twenty
great Truths to make way for one lie. He will accuse Twenty Witches, if he can
but thereby bring one Innocent Person into Trouble. He mixeth Truths with Lies,
that so those Truths giving Credit unto Lies, men may believe both, -and so be
deceived. And whereas some say that the Persons in Question are only bewitched
and not possessed, let it be Considered that possessed persons are called
Energumens from EPJOMAI Agitor. They whose Bodies are Preternaturally agitated,
so as to be in danger of being thrown into the Fire or into the Water, though
they may be bewitched, are undoubtedly possessed with Doemons. Mark 9. 22, 25.
Learned men Henkel ubi supra page 47. 50.
give it as a most certain sign of possession, when the Afflicted party can see
and hear that which no one else can discern any thing of, and when they can
discover Brockmand. Theol. page 265.
secret things. Acts 16. 16. past, or future, Melancthon Epist*.
as a possessed person in Germany foretold the War which broke out in the year
1546. And when the Limbs of miserable Creatures are bent and dis^^^ted so as
could not possible be without a Luxation of Joints, were it not done by a
preternatural hand, and yet no hurt, caused thereby, that argues Possession.
Also, when persons are by the Devil cast into Fits, in the which they speak of
things, that afterward they have no remembrance of Tostatus in Mat. 8. Quest.
114.
or, if they are by cruel Devils tortured, so as to cause horrendous Clamours
in the Distressed Sufferers, that is another sign of Obsession by evil Spirits.
If all these things concur in the persons concerning where the Question is, we
may conclude them to be Doemoniacks. And if so, no Juror can with a safe
Conscience look on the Testimony of such, as sufficient to take away the Life
of any man.

2. Falling down by the cast of an Eye proceeds not from a natural, but an
Arbitrary Cause. Not from any Poison in the Eye of the Witch, but from the
Agency of some Doemon. The Opinion of Fascination by the Eye is an old Fable.
And (says Mr. Perkins) as fond as old. Pliny Lib. 7. Cap. 2.
speaks of a people that killed Folks by looking on them, and he adds that they
had two Apples in each Eye. And Tally writes of women who had two Apples in one
Eye that always did mischief with their mere Looks. So Ovid. Pupula duplex
^ulminat. And Plutarch 5 Sympas. cap. 7.
writes that some persons have such a poison in their Eyes as that their
Friends and Familiars are fascinated thereby. Nay he speaks of one that
Bewitched himself sick by looking on his own Face in a Glass Others write of
Fascination by a mere Prolation of words. And for ought I know, there may be as
much witchery in the Tongue as there is in the Eye. Sennertus Med. precl. Lib.
6. pars 9. cap 1.
has discovered the Super^tition of these Fancies. Sight does not proceed from
an Emission of Rays from the Eye, but by a reception of the visible Species
And if it be (as Philosophers conclude) and (...) Action and not an Emission of
optic Spirits, so that sight as such, does receive something from the Object,
and not act upon it, the notion of Fascination by the Eye is unphilosophical.
It is true, that sore Eyes will affect those that look upon them. Dum spectant
Oculi Loesos, Loeduntur et ipsi, for which a natural Reason is easily to be
assigned. But if the Witches eyes are thus infected with a natural Contagion,
whence is it, that only Bewi^^^ed Persons are hurt thereby? if the vulgar
Error concerning the Basilisks killing with the Look of his poysonful eye,
were a Truth, whatever person that Serpent cast his Eye upon would be poisoned.
So if Witches had a physical Venom in their Eyess others as well as fascinated
persons would be sensible thereof. There is as much Truth in this Phansy of
Physical Venom in the Eye of a Witch, as there is in what Pliny Lib. 2. cap.
2. Wierui L. 6. C. 9. p. 683.
and others relate concerning the Thibians, viz. that they have two Apples in
one Eye, and the Effigies of an Horse in the other Eye; and that they are a
people that cannot be drowned:

3. As for that which concerns the Bewitched Persons being recovered out of
their Agonies by the Touch of the Suspected Party, it is various and fallible.

For sometimes the Afflicted Person is made sick, (instead of being made whole)
by the touch of the Accused. Sometimes the Power of Imagination is such as that
the Touch of a Person innocent and not accused shall have the same effect. It
is related in the Account of the Trials of Witches at Bury in Suffolk 1664
during the time See the Trial, page 40. 43, 45.
of the Trial there were some Experiments made with the persons afflicted, by
bringing the Accused to touch them, and it was observed that by the least Touch
of one of the supposed Witches, they that were in their Fitts, to all men's
Apprehension wholly deprived of all sense and understandings, would suddenly
shriek out and open their hand.

Mr. S^rjeant Keeling, did not think that sufficient to Convict the Prisoners,
for admitting that the Children were in Truth Bewitched, yet (says he) it
cannot be applied to the Prisoners upon the Imagination only of the Parties
Afflicted. For if that might be allowed, no Person whatsoever can be in safety,
for perhaps they might fancy another Person who might altogether be innocent in
such matters. To avoid this Scruple it was privately desired by the Judge, that
some Gentlemen there in Court, would attend one of the dist^mpered Persons in
the farther part of the Hall, whilst she was in her Fitts, and then to send for
one of the Witches to try what would happen, which they did accordingly. One of
them was conveyed from the Bar, and brought to the Afflicted Maid. They put an
Apron before her Eyes, and then another person (not the Witch) touched her,
which produced the same Effect, as the Touch of the Witch did in the Court.
Whereupon the Gentlemen returned much unsatisfyed. Bodin In Doemon^mania. See
Mr. Bromba^s History of Apparitions page 136.
relates that a Witch who was tried at Nants, was commanded by the Judges to
touch a bewitched person, a thing often practiced by the Judges of Germany in
the Imperial Chamber. The Witch was extremely unwilling, but being Compelled by
the Judges, she cried out, I am undone; and as soon as ever she touched the
Afflicted person, the Witch fell down dead, and the other recovered. That
horrid Witch of Salisbury, Ann Bodenbam See the Printed Relation page. 30, 31.
who had been Servant to the Notorious Conjurer Dr. Lamb, could not bear the
sight of one that was Bewitched by her. As Soon as ever she saw the Afflicted
Person, she ran about shrieking, and crying, and roaring, after an Hideous
manner, that the Devil would Tear her in pieces, if that Person came near her.
And whilst the Witch was in such Torment, the Bewitched was at case, By these
things we see that the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom of Darkness are not
always and in all places the same.

And it is good for men to concern themselves with them as little as may be.

I think there is weight in Dr. Cotta's ubi supra page 121.
Argument, Viz.

That the Gift of healing the Sick and Possessed was a special Grace and Favor
of God, for the Confirmation of the Truth of the Gospel, but that such a Gift
should be annexed to the Tonch of Wicked Witches, as an infallible sign of
their Guilt, is not easy to be believed. It is a thing well known, that if a
Person possessed by an Evil Spirit, is (as often it so happens) never so
outrageous whilst a good man is Praying with, and for the Afflicted, let him
lay his hand on them, and the Evil Spirit is quiet. I hope this is no evidence
of any Covenant, or voluntary Communion between the Good man that is Praying
and the Evil Spirit. No more does the Case before us, Evince any such thing.

4. There are that Question the Lawfulness of the Experiment. For it this
healing power in the Witch is not a Divine but a Diabolical Gift, it may be
dangerous to meddle too much with it. If the Witch may be ordered to Touch
Afflicted Persons in order to their healing or recovery, out of a sick Fit,
why may not the Diseased person be as well ordered to Touch the Witch for the
same cause? And if to touch him, why not to scratch him and fetch Blood out of
him, which is but an harder kind of Touch? But as for this Mr. Perkins doubts
not to call it, a Practice of Witchcraft, It is not safe to meddle with any of
the Devils Sacraments or Institutions. For My own part, I should be loath to
say to a man, that I knew or thought was a Witch, do you lock on such a Person,
and see if you can Witch them into a Fit. And there is such an Afflicted
Person do you take them by the Hand, and see if you can Witch them well again.
If it is by virtue of some Contract with the Devil, that Witches have power to
do such things it is hard to conceive how they can be bid to do them, without
being too much concerned in that Hellish Covenant. I take it to be (as
elsewhere Remarkable Providence. page 267.
I have expressed) a solid Principle, which the Learned Sennertus insists on,
Viz. That they who force another to do that which be cannot possibly do, but by
virtue of a Compact with the Devil, have themselves implicitly Communion, with
the Diab^lical Covenant. The Devil is pleased and honored, when any of his
Institutions, are made use of. This way of discovering Witches is no better
than that of putting the Urine of the Afflicted Person into a Bottel that so
the Witch may be Tormented, and Discovered. The Vanity and Superstition of
which practice I have formerly showed, and Testified against. There was a
Conjurer his Name was Edward Drake See Mr. Burtons History of Doemons page 136.
and Mr. Roberts Narrative of the Witches in Suffolk.
who taught a man to use that Experiment for the Relief of his Afflicted
Daughter, who found benefit thereby. But we ought not to practice Witchcrafts
to discover Witches, nor may we make use of a White healing Witch (as they call
them) to find out a Black and Bloody one. And how did men first come to know
that Witches would be discovered in such ways as these, which have been
mentioned? If Satan himself were the first discoverer (as there is reason to
believe) the experiment must needs have deceit in it. see Dr. Willet on Exodus:
7. Quest. 9. And such Experiments better become Pagans or Papists than
Professors in New England; whereas it is pleaded, that such things are practiced
by the Judges of the Imperial Chamber, I Reply, that those Judges (as Bodia
relates, Lib. ^. Demon. Cap. 6.) have required suspected Witches to pronounce
over the afflicted persons, these words, I Bless thee in the Name of the
Father, etc. upon which they have immediately recovered; but is the (...) day
come upon us, that such Superstitions as these shall be practiced in
New England. The Lord Jesus forbid it. See Baldwins his Testimony against the
Practice of the Camera Imperia^is. Cas. Consc. ^. 3. c. 3. page 634.

5. If the Testimony of a Bewitched or Possessed Person, is of Validity as to
what they see done to themselves, then it is so as to others, whom they see
(...) less then themselves. But what they affirm concerning others, is not to
be taken for Evidence. Whence had they this Supernatural Sight? It must needs
be either from Heaven or from Hell. If from Heaven, (as Elisha's Servant and
Balaams Ass could discern Angels) let their Testimony be received. But if they
had t^is Knowledge from Hell, though there may possibly be truth in what they
affirm, they are not leg^l Witnesses. For the Law of God allows of no
Revelation from any other Spirit but himself, Isai. 8. 19. It is a Sin against
God to make use of the Devils help to know that which cannot be otherwise
known. And I te^ti^ie against it, as a great Transgression, which may justly
provoke the Holy One of Israel, to let loose Devils on the whole Land. Luke 4.
35. See Mr. Bernards Guide to Juries in cases of Witchcraft. p. 1^6, 137, 138.
And Brochmand. Theol. de Angelis p. 227. Although the Devil Accusations may be so
far regarded as to cause an Enquiry into the Truth of things. Job 1. 11, 12.
and 2. 5, 6. yet not so as to be an Evidence or ground of Conviction. The
Persons, concerning whom the Question is, ^ee things through Diabolical
Mediums. On which account their Evidence is not mere humane Testimony. And if
it be in any part Di^bolical, it is not to be owned as Authentic. For the
Devils Testimony ought not to be receiv^d neither in whole, nor in part. ^. I
am told by credible persons, who say it is certainly true, that ^ Bewitched
Person has complained that she was ^a^t into Fits by the Look of a Dog; and
that ^he was no more able to bear the sight of that Dog, then of the person
whom she accused as Bewitching her. And that thereupon the Dog was shot to
death. This Dog was no Devil: for then they could not have killed him. I
s^ppose no one will say that Dogs are Witches. It remains then that the casting
down with the Look is no infallible sign of a Witch.

7. It has always been said, that it is a difficult thing to find out Witches.
But if the Representation of such a person as afflicting, or the Look or Touch
be an infallible proof of the guilt of Witchcraft in the persons complained of,
it is the easiest thing in the world to discover them. For it is done to our
hand, and there needs no enquiry into the matter.

8. Let them say this is an infallible Proof, produce any word out of the Law
of God which does in the least countenance that Assertion. The Word of God
instructs Jurors and Judges to proceed upon clear humane Testimony. Deuteronomy. 35.
30. But the word no where gives us the least Intimation, that every one is a
Witch, at whose Look the Bewitched person shall fall into Fits. Nor yet that
any other means should be used for the discovery of Witches, then what may be
used for the finding out of Murderers, Adulterers, and other Criminals.

9. Sometimes Antipathies in Nature have strange and unaccountable Effects. I
have read of a man that at the sight of his own Son, who was no Wizzard would
fall into Fits. There that find in their Natures an averseness to some persons
whom they never saw before, of which they -- give no better an account then he
in Martial. Concerning Sabidius.

Non Amo te Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare.

That some Persons at the sight of Bruit-Creatures Cats, Spiders, etc. Nay, at
the sight of Cheeses, Milk, Apples, will fall into Fitts, is too well known to
be denied. De^^singius in his Learned Discourse De Pulvere Sympat^^tico. P.
128. Says, there was one in the City of Groaning that could not bear the sight
of a Swines Head. And that he knew another who was not able to look on the
Picture thereof. Amatus Lusitanus speaks of one that at the sight of a Rose
would swoon away. This proves that the Falling into a Fit, at the Sight of
another is not always a sign of Witchcraft. It may proceed from Nature and the
Power of Imagination.

To conclude; judicious Casuists Ames. C^s. C^ns^.^.4. C. 23.
have determined, that to make use of those Media to come to the knowledge of
any matter, which have no such power in them by Nature, nor by Divine
Institution, is an Implicit going to the Devil to make a Discovery: Now there
is no Natural Power in the look or touch of a Person to bewitch another. Nor is
this by Divine Institution the means whereby Witchcraft is Discovered.
Therefore it is an unwarrantable practice.

We proceed now to the third Case Proposed to Consideration, If the things
which have been mentioned are not infallible Proofs of Guilt in the Accused
party, it is then Q^e^i^d, Whether there are any Discoveries of this Crime,
which Jurors and Judges may with a safe Conscience proceed upon to the
Conviction and Condemnation of the Persons under Suspicion?

Let me here premise two things,

1. The evidence in this Crime ought to be as clear as in any other Crimes of a
Capital Nature. The word of God does no where intimate, that a less clear
evidence, or that fewer or other witnesses may be taken as sufficient to
convict a man of Sorcery, which would not be enough to convict him were he
charged with another evil worthy of Death. Numb; 35. 30. if we may not take the
Oath of a distracted person or of a possessed person in a case of Murder,
Theft, Felony of any sort, then neither may we do it in the Case of witchcraft.

2. Let me premise this also, that there have been ways of trying witches long
used in many Nations, Especially in the dark times of Paganism and Popety which
the righteous God never approved of. But which as (judicious Mr. Perkins
expresses it in plain English) were invented by the Devil, that so Innocent
Persons might be condemned, and some notorious witches escape. Yea, many
superstitions and Magical experiments have been used to try witches by. Of this
sort is that of scratching the witch, or seething the urin of the Bewitched
person, or making a witch-cake with that urine. And that Trial of putting their
hands into scalding water, to see if it will not hurt them. And that of
sticking an Awle under the seat of the suspected party yea, and that way of
discovering witches by tying their hands and feet, and casting them on the
water, to try whether they will sink or swim. I did publicly bear my Testimony
against this superstition in a Book Printed at Boston Eight years past.

I hear that of late some in a Neighbor Colony have been playing with this
diabolical invention. It is to be Lamented that in such a Land of uprightness
as New England once was, a practice which Protestant writers generally condemn
as sinful, and which the more sober and I earned men amongst Papists themselves
have not only judged unlawful but (to express it in their own Terms) to be no
less than a Mortal Sin, should ever be heard of. Were it not that the Coming of
Christ to Judge tee earth draw^th near, I should think that such Practices are
an unhappy omen that the Devil and Pagans will get these dark Territories into
their Possession again. But that I may not be thought to have no Reason for my
calling the impleaded Experiment into Question, I have these these things
further to all^dge against it.

1. It has been rejected long agon, by Christian Nations as a thing
Superstitious and diabolical. In Italy and Spain it is wholly disused. And
Delrio. Disquiss. Magi^. page 642.
in the Low Countries, and in France, where the Judges are Men of Learning. In
some parts of Germany old Pag^anish Customs are observed more then in other
Countries, nevertheless all the Malderus de Magia. cap. 10. due. 11.
Accademies throughout Germany have disapproved of this way of Purgation.

2 The Devil is in it.All Superstition is from him.And when secret things, or
^atent Crimes, are discovered by Superstitious practices, some Compact and
Communion with the Devil is the Cause of it, as Austin De Doctr: christian^.
Lib. 2: Cap: 20. 22.
has truly inti^^ted. And so it is here. For if a Witch cannot be drowned, this
must proceed either from some natural cause, which it does not, for it is
against nature for humane Bodies, when hands and feet are tied, not to sink
under the water Besides, they that plead for this superstition, say that if
Witches happen to be Condemned for some other Crime and not for Witchcraft,
they will not swim like a Cork above Water, which shows that the cause of
this Natation is not Physical. And if not, then either it must proceed from a
Divine Miracle to save a Witch from Drowning; or lastly, it must be a
Diabolical Wonder. This superstitious Experiment is commonly known by the Name
of, The Vulgar Probation, because it was never appointed by any lawful
Authority, but from the Suggestion of the Devil taken up by the rude Rabble.
And some D^l^i. et ^alder^s
learned men are of Opinion, that the first Explorator (being a White Witch)
did Explicity covenant with the Devil, that he should discover ^atent Crimes in
this way: And that it is by virtue of that first Contract that the Devil goes
to work to keep his servants from sinking, when this Ceremony of his ordaining
is used. Moreover, we know that Di^bolus est Dei Simia, the Devil seeks to
imitate Divine Miracles. We read in Ecclesiastical Story, that some of the
Martyrs when they were by Persecutors ordered to be drowned, proved to be
immersible. This Miracle would the Devil imitate in causing Witches, who are
his Martyrs not to sink when they are cast into the Waters.

3. This way of Purgation is of the same nature with the old Ordeals of the
Pagans If men were accused with any crime, to clear their innocence they were
to take an hot Iron into their hands, or to suffer sc^lding water to be poured
down their throats, and if they received no hurt thereby they were acquitted.
This was the Devils invention, and many times (as the Devil Would have it) they
that submitted to these Trials, suffered no Inconvenience. Nevertheless, it is
astonishing to think what innocent Blood has been shed in the World by means of
this Satanical Device. Witches have often (as In ma^^eo malle^icarum. p. 421.
Sprenger observes) desired that they might stand or fall by this Trial by hot
Iron, and sometimes come off well. Indeed, this Ordeal was used in other Cases
and not in Cases of Witchcraft only. And so was the Vulgar Probation by casting
into the Water practiced upon persons accused (...) de purgat^^ne vidgari --
^^p. nit.
with other Crimes as well as that of Witchcraft. How it came to be restrained
to that of Witchcraft, I cannot tell. It is as Supernatural for a Body whose
hands and feet are tied to Swim above the Water, as it is for their hands not
to feel a red hot Iron. If the one of these Ordeals is lawful to be used, then
so is the other too. But as for the fiery Ordeal it is rejected and exploded
out of the World; for the same reason then the Trial by Water should be so.

4. It is a Tempting of God when men put the Innocence of their
Fellow Creatures upon such Trials. To desire the Almighty to show a Miracle to
clear the Innocent, or to Convict the guilty is a most Presumptuous Tempting of
him. Was it not a Miracle when Peter was kept from Sinking under the Water by
the Omnipotency of Christ. As for Satan, we know that his ambition is to make
his Servants believe that his Power is equal to Gods, and that therefore he can
preserve whom he pleases. I have read Caesarius ^i^. 9.
of certain Magicians, who were seen walking on the Water. If then Guilty
persons shall Float on the Waters, either it is the Devil that causes them to
do so, (as no doubt it is) and what have men to do to set the Devil on work; or
else it is a divine Miracle, like that of Peter's not Sinking, or that of the
Iron that Swam at the word of Elisha. And shall men try whether God will work a
Miracle to make a Discovery? If a Crime cannot be found out but by Miracle, it
is not for any Judge on Earth to usurp that Judgment which is reserved for the
Divine Throne.

5. This pretended Gift of Immersibility attending Witches is a most fallible
deceitful thing. For many a Witch has sunk under the water. G^delmannus De
L^mij^. ^. 3. ^. 4.
gives an account of six notorious and clearly convicted Witches, that when
they were brought to their vulgar Probation, sunk down under the water like
other persons; Althusius affirms the like concerning others in the Dubravim
Hi^t. Cohe^. Lib. ^.
Bohemian History it is related that Uratslaus the King of Bohemia, extirpated
Witches out of his Kingdom, some of which he delivered to the Ax, others of
them to the Fire, and others of t^em (...) caused to be Drowned. If Witches are
imme^sible, how came they to dye by drowning in Bohemia? Besides, it has
sometimes been known that persons who have floated on the water when the
Hangman has made the Experiment on them, have sunk down like a Stone, when
others have made the Trial.

6. The Reasons commonly alleged for this Superstition are of no moment. It is
said they hate the water; whereas they have many times desired that they might
be cast on the water in order to their purgation. It is alleged, that water is
used in Baptism, therefore Witches swim. A weak Phan^y. All the water in the
world is not consecrated Water. Cannot Witches eat Bread or drink Wine,
notwithstanding those Elements are made use of in the Blessed Sacrament. But
(say some) the Devils by sucking of them make them so light that the water
bears them. Whereas some Witches are twice as heavy as many an innocent Person.
Well, but then they are Possessed with the Devil. Suppose so; Is the Devil
afraid if they should sink, (...) he should be drowned with them? But (...)
then we (...) the Gadarens Hogs drowned when the Devil was in them?

These things being premised, I answer the Question Affirmatively. There are
Proofs for the Conviction of Witches which Jurors may with a safe Conscience
proceed upon, so as to bring them in Guilty. The Scripture which ^aith, Thou
shall not suffer a Witch to live, clearly implies, that some in the world may
be known and proved to be Witches. For until they be so, they may and must be
suffered to live. Moreover we find in Scripture that some have been convicted
and executed for Witches. For Saul cut off those that had familiar Spirits, and
the Wizzards out of the Land, 1 Samuel 28. 9.

It may be wondered that Saul who did like him that said, Flectere si nequeo
Superos Ac^eronta Movebo, should cause the Wizzards in the land to be put to
death. The Jewish Rabbis say, the reason was because those Wizzards foretold
that David should be King. It is (as Mr. Gaul In his Cases about Witchcraft p.
181.
observes) the opinion of some learned Protestants, that Saul in his Zeal did
overdo. And that under the Pretext So Doctor Willet conjectures on 2 Samuel 21. 1.
of Witches he slew the Gibeonites, for which that Judgment followed. 2 Samuel
21. 1. Neither (says Mr. Gaul) want we the storied Examples of Gods Judgments
upon those that defamed, prosecuted and executed them for Witches that indeed
were none. But we have in the Scripture the Example of a better Man than Saul
to encourage us to make Enquiry after Wizzards and Witches in order to their
Conviction and Execution. This did the rarest King that ever lived, cause to be
done, Viz. Josiah. 2* Kings 23. 24. The Workers with Familiar Spirits and the
Wizzards, that were spied in the Land of Judah, did Josiah put away, that he
might perform the words of the Law. It seems there were some that sought to
hide those Workers of Iniquity, but that incomparable King ^pied them out, and
rid the Land and the World of them.

Q. But then the Enquiry is, What is sufficient Proof?

A. This Case has been with great Judgment answered by several Divines of our
own, particularly by Mr. Perkins, and Mr. Bernard. Also Mr. John Gaul a worthy
Minister at Staughton in the County of Huntington, has published a very
Judicious Discourse, called Select Cases of Conscience touching Witches and
Witchcrafts, Printed at London A. D. 1646. wherein he does with great Prudence
and Evidence of Scripture Light handle this and other Cases. Such Jurors as can
obtain those Books, I would advise them to read and seriously as in the fear of
God to Consider them. And so far as they keep to the Law and to the Testimony,
and speak ac^ording to that Word, receive the Light which is in them. But the
Books being now rare to be had, let me express my Concurrence with them in
these two particulars.

1. That a free and Voluntary Confession of the Crime made by the Person
Suspected and Accused after Examination, is ^ sufficient ground of Conviction.

Indeed, if Persons are Distracted or under the Power of Phrenetick Melancholy
that alters the case. But the Jurors that examine them, and their Neighbors
that know them may easily determine that case. Or if Confession be v. Bodin.
Daemonomania. Lib. 4.
extorted, the Evidence is not so clear and Convictive. But if any Persons out
of Remorse of Conscience, or from a Touch of God on their Spirits, confess and
show their Deeds, as the Converted Magicians in Ephesus did Act. 19. 18, 19.
Nothing can be more clear. Suppose a man to be suspected for Murder, or for
Committing a Rape, or the like Nefandous Wickedness, if he does freely confess
the Accusation that is ground enough to condemn him. The Scripture approves of
Judging the wicked Servant out of his own Mouth. Luke 19. 22. It is by some
objected that persons in Discontent may falsely accuse themselves. I say, if
they do so, and it cannot be proved, that they are false Accusers of
themselves, they ought to dye for their Wickedness, and their Blood will be
upon their own Heads. The Jury, the Judges, and the Land is clear. I have read
a very sad and amazing and yet a true story to this purpose

There was in the Year 1649 in a Town called Lauder in Scotland a certain woman
accused and imprisoned on suspicion of witchcraft. When others in the same
prison with her, were convicted, and their Execution ordered to be on the
Monday following, she desired to speak with a Minister, to whom she declared
freely that she was guilty of Witchcraft, acknowledging, also many other Crimes
committed by her, desiring that she might dye with the Rest. She said
particularly that she had Covenanted with the Devil, and was become his
Servant, about twenty years before, and that he Kissed her, and gave her a
Name, but that since he had never owned her. Several Ministers who were jealous
that she accused herself untruly, charged it on her Conscience, telling her
that they doubted she was under a Temptation of the Devil to destroy her own
Body and Soul, and ad^juring her in the Name of God to declare the Truth.
Notwithstanding all this, she sti^ly adhered to what she had said, and was on
Monday morning Condemned and ordered to be Executed that day. When she came to
the place of Execution, she was silent until the Prayers were ended. Then going
to the Stake where she was to be Burned; she thus expressed herself, All you
that see me this Day! Know ye that I am to Dye as a Witch by my own Confession?
and I free all men, especially the Ministers, and Magistrates from the Guilt of
my Blood! I take it wholly on my self, and as I must make answer to the God of
Heaven, I declare I am as free from Witchcraft as any Child, but being accused
by a Malicious Woman, and imprisoned under the Name of a Witch, my Husband and
Friends disowned (...), and seeing no hope of ever being in Credit again,
through the Temptation of the Devil, I made that Confession to destroy my own
Life, being weary of it, and abusing rather to Dye than to Live. This her
Lamentable Speech did astonish all the Spectators, few of whom could refrain
from Tears. The Truth of this Relation (says my Mr. Sinclare invisible World.
p. 45. And B^rton History of Demons. p. 122.
Author) is certainly attested by a Worthy Divine now living, who was an Eye
and an Ear-witness of the whole matter. But thus did that Miserable Creature
suffer Death. And this was a just Execution. When the Amalekite confessed that
he killed Saul, whom he he had no legal Authority to meddle with, although it is
probable that he belied himself, David gave order for his Execution, and said
to, him, Thy Blood be upon thy head, for thy Mouth has Testified against thee.
2. Sam. 1. 16. But as for the Testimony of Confessing Witches against others,
the case is not so clear as against themselves. They are not such Credible
Witnesses, as in a Case of Life and Death is to be desired. It is beyond
dispute, that the Devil makes his Witches to dream strange things of themselves
and others which are not so. There was (as Authors beyond Exception relate) in
appearance a sumptuous feast prepared, the wine and meat set forth in Vessels
of Gold.A certain person whom an amorous young man had fallen in Love with was
represented and supposed to be really there, but Appollonius Tyanoeus Boi^^ard
in vita Apollon^i.
discovered the Witchery of the Business, and in an instant all vanished, and
nothing but dirty Coals were to be seen. The like to this is mentioned in the
Arausican Council. There were certain women that Imagined, they road upon
Beasts in the night, and that they had Diana and Herod^as in Company with them,
besides a Troop of other persons. The Council gives this sentence on it,
Satanas qui se trans^igurat in Angelum Lucis, transformat se in divers^rum
pers^narum species, et mentem quam captivam tenet, in somnis deludi^. Satan
transforms himself into the likeness of diverse persons, and deludes the Souls
that are his Captives with Dreams and Pha^sies. See Dr. Willet on 1 Samuel 28.
page 165. What Credit can be given to those that say they can turn men into
Horses? If so, they can as well turn Horses into men. But all the Witches on
earth in Conjunction with all the Devils in Hell, can never make or unmake a
rational Soul; and then they cannot transform a Bruit into a man, nor a man
into a Bruit. So that this Transmutation is Fantastical. The Devil may, and
often does impose on the Imaginations of his Witches and Vassals, that they
believe themselves to be Converted into Beasts, and reverted into men again. As
Nebucadnezzar whilst under the Power of a Doemon really imagined himself to be
an Ox, and would lie out of Doors and eat Grass. The Devil has inflicted on
many a man the Disease called Lycanthropia, from whence they have made
Lamentable Complaints of their being Wolves. In a word, there is no more
Reality in what many Witches confess of strange things seen or done by them
whilst Satan had them in his full Power, than there is in Lucian's Ridiculous
Fable of his being bewitched into an Ass, and what strange Feats he then
played. So that what such persons relate concerning Persons and Things at
Witch-meetings, ought not to be received with too much Credulity. I could
mention dismal Instances of Innocent Blood which has been shed by means of the
Lies of some confessing Witches. There is a very sad Story mentioned in the
Preface to the Relation of the Witchcrafts in Sweedland, how that in the year
1676. at Stockholm, a young woman accused her own Mother (who had indeed been a
very bad woman, but not guilty of Witchcraft, and Swore that she had carried
her to the Nocturnal meetings of Witches, upon which the Mother was burnt to
death. Soon after the Daughter came crying and howling before the Judges in
open Court, declaring that to be revenged on her Mother for an Offense
received, she had falsely accused her with a Crime which she was not guilty of:
for which she also was justly Executed. A most wicked man in (...), freely
Confessed himself to be a Magician; and accused many others whose Lives were
thereupon taken from them, and a whole Province had like to have been ruined
thereby; but the imposture was discovered. The Confessing pretended Wizzard was
burnt at Paris in the year 1668. I shall only take notice further of an awful
Example mentioned by A. B. Spotswood in his History of Scotland. p. 449. His
words are these. This Summer ( Viz. Anno. 1997.) There was a great business for
the Trial of Witches; amongst others one Margaret Atkin being apprehended on
Suspicion and threatened with Torture, did confess herself Guilty. Being
Examined touching her Associates in that Trade, she named a few, and perceiving
her Delations find Credit, made offer to detect all of that sort, and to purge
the Country of them; so she might have her Life granted. For the reason of her
Knowledge, she said, that they had a secret mark all of that sort in their
Eyes, whereby she could surely tell, how soon she Looked upon any, whether they
were Witches or not. And in this, she was so readily believed, that for the
space of 3 or 4 Months she was carried from Town to Town to make Discoveries
in that kind. Many were brought in Question by her Delations, especially at
Glasgow, where diverse Innocent women, through the Credulity of the Minister
Mr. John Cowper, were condemned and put to death. In the end she was found to
be a mere deceiver, and sent back to Fife, where she was first apprehended. At
her Trial she Affirmed all to be false that she had confessed of her self or
others, and persisted in this to her death, which made many fore-think their
too great Forwardness that way, and moved the King to recall his Commissions
given out against such persons, discharging all Proceedings against them,
except in case of Voluntary Confession, till a solid Order should be taken by
the Estates touching the form that should be kept in their Trial. Thus that
famous Historian

2 If two credible Persons shall affirm upon Oath that they have (...) the
Party accused speaking such words, or doing things which none but such as have
Familiarity with the Devil ever did or can do, that is a sufficien^ Ground for
Conviction.

Some are ready to say, that Wizzards are not so unwise as to do such things in
the Sight or Hearing of others. But it is certain that they have very often
been known to do so. How often have they been seen by others using
Inchantmen^s? Conjuring to raise Storms? And have been heard calling upon their
Familiar Spirits? And have been known to use Spells and Charms? And to show in
a Glass or in a Shew-stone persons absent? And to reveal Secrets which could
not be discovered but by the Devil? And have not men been seen to do things
which are above humane strength that no man living could do, without Diabolical
Assistances? C^audi^ was seen by witnesses enough, to draw a Ship which no
humane strength could move. Tuccia a Ve^tal Virgin was seen to carry water in a
Sieve. The Devil never assists men to do supernatural things undesired. When
therefore such like things shall be Testified against the accused party not by
Spe^t^es which are Devils in the Shape of persons either living or dead, but by
real men or women who may be cred^ted, it is proof enough that such an one has
that Conversation and Correspondence with the Devil as that he or she, whoever
they be, ought to be exterminated from amongst men. This notwithstanding, I
will add; It were better that Ten Suspected ^itches should escape, than that
one Innocent Person should beCondemned. That is an old saying and true, Prestat
reum no^^ntem absolvi, quam ^x pro^ibitis (...) and illegitima (...) condemn^^d
(...) It is better that a Guilty Person should be ABSOLVED, than that he should
without sufficient ground of Conviction be condemned. I had rather judge a
Witch to be an honest woman, than judge an honest woman as a witch. The Word of
God directs men not to proceed to the Execution of the most capital offenders,
until such time as upon searching diligently the matter is found to be a
Truth, and the thing certain. Deu. 13. 14. 15.

An Acquaintance Mr. M^rden in his Geogra. Phy. p. 577.
of mine at London in his description of New England declares, that as to their
Religion, the People there are like Mr. Perkins. It is no dishonor to us, if
that be found true. I am sorry that any amongst us begin to slight so great a
man, whom the most Voetius Biblioth. L: 2 Laecus in Compend. Histor*
Learned in Forr^ign Lands, speak of with Admiration, on the account of his
polite and acute Judgment. It is a grave and good Advice which he gives in his
Discourse of Witchcrafts. (Chap 7. Sect. 2.) wherewith I conclude. I would
therefore wish and advise all Jurors who give their Verdict upon Life and Death
in Courts of Assizes, to take good heed that as they be diligent in zeal of
Gods Glory, and the good of his Church, in detecting of Witches, by all
sufficient and lawful means, so likewise they would be careful what they do,
and not to Condemn any party Suspected upon bare Presumptions, without sound
and sufficient proofs, that they be not guilty through their own Rashness of
Shedding Innocent Blood.

Boston, New England, October, 3. 1692.
The Contents.
THe First Case proposed, Whether Satan may not appear in the Shape of an
Innocent and Pious as well as of a N^cent and Wicked person to Afflict such as
suffer by Diabolical Mol^^tations?

The Affirmative proved from Six Arguments.

1. From several Scriptures. p. 2. 2. Because it is possible for the Devil in
the Shape of Innocent Persons to do other mischiefs, proved by many Instances.
p. 11. 3. Because if Satan may not represent an Innocent Person as Afflicting
others, it must be either because he wants will, or Power to do this, or
because God will never permit him so to do it: Either of which may be affirmed.
p. 14. 4. It is certain both from Scripture and History that Magicians by their
Enchantments and Hellish Conjurations may cause a false Representation of
Persons and Things. p. 2^. 5. From the concurring Judgment of many Learned and
Judicious men. p. 28. 6. Our own Experience has confirmed the Truth of what we
affirm. p. 33.
The Second Case considered, Viz. if one bewitched be cast down with the Look
or Cast of the Eye of another Person, and after that recovered again by a Touch
from the same Person, is (...) this an infallible Proof that the Party Accused
and Complained of is in Covenant with the Devil p. 34. Answ. This may be Ground
of Suspicion and Examination, but not of Conviction p. 34. The Judgment of Mr.
Bernard, and of Dr. Cotta produced. p. 35, 36, 37. Several things offered
against the Infallibility of this (...). 1. It Is possible that the Persons in
Question may be possessed with evil Spirits. Signs of such. p. 38. 2. Falling
down with the Cast of the Eye proceeds not from a natural but an Arbitrary
Caus^. p. 41. 3. That of the bewitched Persons being recovered with a Touch is
various and fallible. p. 45. 4. There are that Question the Lawfulness of the
Experiment. p. 46. 5. The Testimony of (...) or possessed Persons is no
Evidence as to what they see concerning others, and therefore not as to
themselves. p. 48. 6. Bewitched persons have sometimes been struck down with
the Look of Dogs. p. 49. 7. If this were an infallible proof, there would be
difficulty in discovering Witches. 8. Nothing can be produced out of the Word
of God to show that this is any Proof of Witchcraft. p. 50. 9. Antipathies in
nature have strange and unaccountable effects. The Third Case considered*
whether there are any Discoveries of Witchcraft which Jurors and Judges may
with a safe Conscience proceed upon to the Conviction and Condemnation of the
Persons under Suspicion? p. 51.
Two Things premised, 1. That the Evidence in the Crime of Witchcraft ought to
be as clear as in any other Crimes of a Capital nature. p. 52. 2. That there
have been ways of Trying Witches long used, which God never approved of. More
particularly that of casting the suspected Party into the Water to try whether
they will Sink or Swim. The (...) and great Sin which is in that way of
Purgation evin^^d by six Reasons. p. 52. to 57
That there are Proofs for the Conviction of Witches, which Jurors may with a
safe Conscience proceed upon, proved from Scripture. p. 58. That a free and
Voluntary Confession is a sufficient Ground of Conviction. p. 59. That the
Testimony of confessing Witches against others is not so clear an Evidence, as
against themselves. p. 62. That if two Credible Persons shall affirm upon Oath
that they have seen the Person accused doing things which none but such as have
Familiarity with the Devil ever did or can do, that is a sufficient Ground of
Conviction: And that this has often happened. p. 65. Mr. Perkins his Solemn (...)
to Jurors. p. 67.
Postscript
THE Design of the Preceding Dis^^^tation, is not to plead for Witchcrafts, or
to appear as an Advocate for Witches. I have therefore written another
Discourse, proving that there are such horrid Creatures as Witches in the
World; and that they are to be extirpated and cut off from amongst the People
of God, which I have Thoughts and inclinations in due time to Publish. And I am
abundantly satisfied that there have been, and are still most cursed Witches in
the Land. More then one or two of those now in Prison, have freely, and
credibly acknowledged their Communion and Familiarity with the Spirits of
Darkness, and have also declared unto me the Time and Occasion, with the
particular c^^cumstances of their Hellish Obligations and Abominations.

Nor is there designed any Reflection on those Worthy Persons who have been
concerned in the late Proceedings at S alem. They are wise and good men, and
have acted with all Fidelity according to their Light, and have out of
tenderness declined the doing of some things, which in their own Judgments they
were satisfied about. Having therefore so arduous a case before them, Pi^ty and
Prayers rather than Cen^ures are their due. On which Account I am glad that
there is Published to the World (by my Son) a (...) of (...) Trials of some who
were lately Executed, whereby I hope the thinking part of mankind will be
satisfied, that there was more than that which is called S^^ctre (...) for the
Conviction of the persons Con^^^n^d. I was not my self present at any of the
Trials, excepting one, viz that of George Burre^g^s; had I been one of his
Judges, I could not have acquitted him. For several persons did upon Oath
Testify, that they saw him do such things as no man that has not a Devil to be
his Familiar could perform. And the Judges affirm that they have not Convicted
any one merely on the account of what Specter have said, or of what has been
Represented to the Eyes or Imaginations of sick bewitched persons. If what is
here exposed to public view, may be a means to prevent it for the future, I
shall not repent of my Labor in this Undertaking. I have been prevailed with
so far as I am able to discern the Truth in these dark cases, to declare my
Sentiments, with the Arguments which are of weight with me, hoping that what is
written may be of some use to discover the Depths of Satan; and to prevent
innocent ones having their Lives Endangered, or their Reputations Ruined, by
being through the subtilty and Power of the Devils, in consideration with the
Ignorance and Weakness of men, involved amongst the guilty. It becomes those of
my profession to be very tender in cases of Blood, and to imitate our Lord and
Ma^^er, Who came not to destroy the Lives of men, but to save them.

I likewise design in what I have written, to give my Testimony against these
unjustifiable wa^s of discovering Witchcrafts, which some among us have
practiced. I hear that of late there was a Witch-cake made with the Urine of
Bewitched Creatures as one ingredient by several persons in a place, which has
suffered much by the (...) of Hell upon it. This I take to be not only wicked
Superstition, but great Folly. For tho the Devil does sometimes operate with
the Experiments, yet not always, especially if a Magical Faith be wanting. I
shall here take occasion to recite some passages in a Letter, which I Received
from that Eminent Pious and Learned Man, (Mr. Samuel Cradock; during my Abode
in London. The Letter bears date February 26. 1690. (...) take it in his own
words, which are these. We have at this present one in our (...) Town, who has
a Son who has strange Fits, and such as they impute to Witchcraft. He came to
consult with me about it, but before he came, he had used a (...) which I
should never have directed him unto, viz. He took the Nails of his Sons hands
and feet, and some of his Hair, and mixed them in Rye-paste with his water, and
so set it all by the Fire till it was con^^^ned, and his Son (as he says) was
well after, and free from his Fits for a whole month, but then they came again,
and He tried that means a second time, and then it would not do. He removed his
Son into Cambridgeshire the next County, and then he was well, but as soon as
he brought him home, he was afflicted as before. The Boy says, he saw a thing
like a Mole following of him, which once spoke to him, and told him he came to
do the office he was to do. I advised his Father to make use of the Medicine
prescribed by our Savior, viz. Fasting and Prayer. Here have been others in
this Town, that though they were under Ill-handling as they call it: one Family
had their Milk so affected that they could not possibly make any Cheese, but it
hov'd and swelled and was good for nothing. They are now rid of that trouble,
but how they got rid of it I do not know. Thus my Letter. By which it is
evident that Towns in England as well as New England are molested with D
oemons, only I wish that the Supersti^^ons practiced in other places to get rid
of such troublesome Guests had never been known, much le^^ used amongst us or
them.

Some I hear have taken up a notion, that the Book newly Published by my Son,
is contradictory to this of mine. It Is strange that such Imaginations should
enter into the minds of men I peru^ed and approved of that Book before it was
Printed. And nothing but my Relation to him hindr^^ me from Recommending it to
the World. But my self and Son agreed unto the Humble Advice which twelve
Ministers concurringly presented before his Excellency and Council, respecting
the present difficulties, which let the World judge whether there be any thing
in its di^^entany from what is attested by either of us.

It was in the words following.

The Return of several Ministers Consulted by His Excellency, and the
Honorable Council, upon the present Witchcra^ts in Salem- Village. Boston,
June 15. 1692.

1. T He Afflicted State of our poor Neighbors, that are now Suffering by
Mole^tations from the Invisible World, we apprehend so deplorable, that we
think their Condition calls for the utmost Help of all persons in their several
Capacities* II. We cannot but with all Thankfulness Acknowledge, the Success
which the Merciful God has given unto the Sedulous and Assiduous Endeavors of
our Honorable Rulers, to detect the Abominable Witch^rafts which have been
Committed in the Country; Humbly praying that the Discovery of th^se Mysterious
and Mischievous Wickedness^s, may be perfected. III. We judge that in the
prosecution of th^se, and all such Witchcrafts, there is need of a very
critical and Exquisite Ca^tion, le^t by too much Credulity for Things, received
only upon the Devils Authority, there be a D oor opened for a long Train of
miserable Consequences; and S atan get an Advantage over us, for we should not
be Ignorant of his Devices. IV. As in Complaints upon Witchcrafts, there may be
matters of ^^quiry, which do not amount unto Matters of Praesumptio^, (...)
^^^re may be matters of Praesumption which yet may not be reckoned (...) of
Conviction, so it is necessary that all Proceedings there (...), be (...) with
an exceeding Tenderness toward those that may be complained of; especially if
they have been persons formerly of an unblemished Reputation. V. When the first
Enquiry is made into the Circumstances of such as may ly under any just
Suspicion of Witchcrafts, we could wish that there may be admitted as little as
is possible, of such Noise, Company, and Openness, as may too hastily expose
them that are Examined: and that there may nothing be used as a Test, for the
Trial of the Suspected, the Lawfulness whereof may be doubted among the People
of God; but that the Di^ections given by such Judicious Writers, as Perkins and
Bernard, be consulted in such a Case. VI. Presumptions whereupon persons may be
Committed, and much more, Convictions where upon persons may be Condemned as
Guilty of Witchcrafts, ought certainly to be more consid^^ (...), than barely
the Accused P ersons being Represented by a Sp^ctre unto the Afflicted;
inasmuch as it is an undoubted and a Notorious Thing, That a Doemon may, by Gods
Permission, appear even to Ill purposes, in the Shape of an Innocent, yea, and
a virtuous man. Nor can we esteem Alterations made in the Sufferers, by a Look
or Touch of the Accused to be Infallible Evidence of Guilt; but frequently
Liable to be abused by the Devils Legerdemains. VII. We know not, whether some
Remarkable Affronts given to the Devils, by our Disbelieving of those
Testimonies, whose whole Force, and Strength is from Them alone, may not put a
period, unto the progress of the dreadful Calamity begun upon us, in the
Accusation of so many persons, whereof we hope, some are yet clear from the
Great Transgression, laid unto their Charge. VIII. Nevertheless, We cannot but
humbly Recommend unto the Government, the speedy and vigorous Prosecution of
such as have rendered themselves obnoxious, according to the Direction given in
the Laws of God, and the whol^ome Statutes of the English Nation, for the
Detection of Witch^rafts.

FINIS.

