THE SPIRIT OF MAN: OR, Some Meditations (by way of Essay) on the Sense of that
Scripture.

1 These. ^. 23. And the very God of Peace Sanctify you wholly, and I pray God,
your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, be Preserved Blameless unto the Coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. By Charles Morton, Minister of the Gospel at
Charlstown in New England.

Mal. 3. 16. Take heed to your Spirit. Luke 19. ^5. Ye know not what manner of
Spirit you are of. Boston Printed by B. Harris, for Duncan Campbell, at the
Dock-Head, over against the Conduit. 1693.

ERRATA.
PAge 23. line 19. for C asual r. Equally. p. 26. l. 2. after That r. Though p.
50. l. 30. for To. read in. p. 77. l. 29. for The r. They p. 78. l. 24. for
Clears r. cleaves. p. 8^. l. 21. for whence r. where*

AS we have all manner of Demonstrations, to assure us, of what Elihu asserted
when he said, There is a Spirit in man; so we have the Eternal Spirit of God
Himself, by the Pen of His Inspired Solomon, Recommending this Blessed Oracle
of Wisdom unto us, A man of Understanding is of an Excellent S pirit. Indeed,
we have no Understanding till, believing that we have within us, a S pirit
Excellent for the first Author and Nature of it, we Endeavor above all things
to make that Spirit become yet more Excellent, by the Alterations of a New
Birth upon it. The Woeful and Rueful Degeneracy, which has befallen the Spirit
of Man, by his Fall into S in, is a matter of the most bleeding Lamentations,
unto every S pirit that in the least measure begins to Awaken out of that
Lamentable Fall. Yea, The whole Creation Groans over the vitiated Spirit of
man, and sighs, How art thou Fallen, O thou Child of the Morning! Accordingly,
when once the Symptoms of a Recovery, from, The madness in our Hearts while we
Live, do dawn in the Reflections of our S pirit, upon its own unhappy
Depravations ou^ chief Question and Study then is, What we shall do for the
Salvation of that S pirit from the Distempers of it; and we become wonderfully
Thankful unto our God, for His accommodating of Us, with such means of Grace,
as He never bestowed upon the Apostate S pirits, whom He has Reserved in
Darkness under Everlasting Chains. If we duly consider, the Natural Faculties
of that Spirit, which the Father of S pirits has Breathed into us, or the
provision which God has made for it, in the S piritual World, we shall indeed
reckon, that our Spirit is too Excellent a Thing to be neglected; yea, that
there is no Folly like that of the man, who Despises his own Soul. But if we
again consider the Moral Pollutions, which have disordered our S pirit, we may
be soon convinced, That we are in Danger of Dying without Wisdom, whereby the
Excellency that is in us then will go away: And that there had need be some
Es^ayes toward a Revival of the Primitive Excellency in our Nobler and Better
Part, in order to our Meetness for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Now,
as the whole work of Sanctification upon the Spirit, is necessary to make it
Excellent, so, there is a notable stroke of that work performed in the
Sanctification of the Humor, which is to be seen in the Temper and Biass of
that S pirit. There is a certain Air of our Complexion, which Results from some
Circumstances of the Union between our S ouls and our Bodies; and this
Disposition, we ordinarily call, The Spirit of the man. Let This be Sanctified,
and the Man will become one of, The Excellent in the Earth. It would be a
mavelous Renewal of the Divine Image in our Spirits, and it would render us
extraordinarily as well Serviceable to others, as Comfortable to our selves, if
that Inclination which our Spirits have, as they are United, and therefore very
much Conformed, unto our Bodies, were Preserved Blameless: and were this
remarkable Article of Sanctification, more considered, we should see perhaps,
far more Excellent S pirits, than are now too frequently beheld in those that
wear the Name, that began at Antioch.

To promote this Holiness and Happiness, the Reader is here blessed with the
Worthy Labors, of a Learned, Pious, and now Aged Servant of the Lord Jesus
Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel* He is a person too considerable in his
Generation, to want any of our C ommendation; and as for this his Judicious
Treatise, 'twill by its own Pertinency, and Usefulness, abundantly Commend it
self unto every sensible person, that shall peruse it with a just Attention.
All that belongs unto Us, is to follow it with our Prayers, That He who Forms
the Spirit of man within him, would by this Book assist the Readers in
Reforming whatever they may find in their own Spirits calling for that
Reformation; and in Glorifying of God, with the Spirits, which He has Made and
Bought for His own Immortal Glory.

Increase Mather James Allen Samuel Willard John Baily Cotton Mather


The CONTENTS.
T Ext Opened 1 Whole man-what 5 Expositors Differ. 6 The most proper
Interpretation thought by the Author. 9 S pirit out of Man. 9 In Man. 10
Peculiar Genius, ( in Text. 14 Scripture Distinctions of Soul and Spirit 16
Constitution of our Spirit* 18 Spirits Hot. 27 Cheerfulness. 28 Activity. 31
Courage. 34 Anger in zeal. 41 In Jealousy. 51 S pirits Cold, 54 S orrowful. 55
Dull. 63 Timorous. 65 Meek. 69 S pirits Moderate. 73 Inference, no strained
Notion. 88
THE SPIRIT of MAN. OR, Some Meditations (by way of Essay) on the sense of that
Scripture.
1 These. 5. 2^. And the very God of Peace Sanctify you wholly, and I pray God
your whole SPIRIT, and SOUL and BODY, be preserved blameless unto the Coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe Apostle, having given the Thessalonians, diverse Exhortations in the
preceding Verses, closes all with a profession of Prayer for them; as well
knowing, That all Counsels, or Charges by men, though sent from God himself,
would be of no effect, unless God by his Sanctifying Spirit do give men Grace
to Improve them.

He prays, not only that they may be Sanctified, but that they may be wholly
so; And that the fullness of the Expression [ HOLOTELEIS, wholly perfectly] may
the better appear, He Descends to all the particulars, that are in Man; he
mentions the chief Heads of them, which are either all that is in Man, or To
which All, that belongs to Mere Man, may be Referred. Your whole Spirit, and
Soul, and B ody; that they may be Sanctified or filled with Grace; and not only
so, but also preserved blameless therein to the Coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ; (that is) preserved to the End.

We shall a little Explain the words:

The very God of peace, ( Autos de O Theos) or the God of Peace himself: 'twas
a frequent Option, Benediction, Salutation or Valediction, [ Peace be to you.]
In the word Peace, all good was comprehended. So, to these same persons, 2
These. 3. 16. Now the Lord of Peace himself, give you peace always, by all
means. Here in the Text it seems to Referr to a D^ty, peace with men, v. 13. be
at peace among your selves. And a privilege, peace with God, and in your
Consciences. To both which S anctification does contribute, in the performance
of the aforementioned Duties.

[ Sanctify you] HAGIASAI, make you holy, or separate and consecrate you to
himself, (this is the Notation of the word.) The Definition of the Thing,
Sanctification, is A Renewal of the whole man, whereby we are enabled daily
more and more to Die unto S in and Live unto Righteousness according to Gods
Foreordaination.

[ Wholly] HOLOTELEIS, wholly-perfectly (as is before noted is, To Extend this
work of Grace, to all the parts of Grace, and all the parts of Man. The parts
of Grace, both Habits and Acts; and in both, the perfection of Degrees, and
persistance of Duration. In the parts of Man, that which follows.

[And I pray God your whole Spirit] HOLOCLERON TO PNEUMA. The word HOLOCLERON
signifies properly ( Haeres ex ass) a complete Heir, from whom nothing is
given away; or one that has the whole Inheritance. It therefore (I think) does
here signify all that Appertains to Man, expressed by the word S pirit, HUMON
TO PNEUMA. All the Spirit that is in you, or all that may be called your S
pirit. Your; not the S pirit of God in you; for He is not capable of
Sanctification, being already, and always in himself perfectly Holy. TO PNEUMA,
The S pirit: W hat it is, is the chief matter of our present Enquiry; and
therefore of it, more fully after; only we shall here Note, That it seems to be
a more General, and comprehensive word, in which the two that follow are
Included

[ And Soul and Body] KI HE PSUCHE KI TO SOMA. The Latin [ Et Anima, and
Corpus] I should not scruple to Translate [ Both the Soul and the Body,] and if
( et and et) in Latin signify [ Both, and And] why ( KI and KI in Greek, does
not as properly the same, I see no Reason. And then the Text would run thus. I
pray that your whole complete S pirit (as a General) Both S oul and Body (two
special Ingredients thereof, or contributers thereunto) may be preserved, etc.

[ Preserved] TERETHEIE, may be carefully watched; as those that keep Guard in
a Garrison; for this Spirit of a man, is most liable to Assaults by Temptation:
And because men are apt to be Defective in this Spiritual Watch, I pray that
God would take the charge of you, watch over you and keep you sa^e.

[B lameless] AMEMPTOS, so as M omus (the Carper) shall find no fault in you;
so is the word Rendered, Phil. 2. 15. and 3. 6. It Is supposed you are, or will
be, wholly Sanctified (according to the first Prayer in the Text,) but this
notwithstanding your peculiar S pirit is apt to ru^ out, and so be blameable,
unless you are especially protected, guided and preserved.

[ To the coming of our Lord.] that is, to the end; Till you come through Grace
to Glory. This needs no farther Explication as to the present Enquiry. The
words thus Explained, we come now to view the parts of the Text, wherein we
have.

1. Two Acts. S anctification and Preservation.

2. The Author of them, God; to whom the Prayer is Directed.

3. The Modification of them; wholly, throughout, continually.

4. The Subject, the whole man, expressed by the Whole S pirit, both S oul and
B ody. And this Last it is, with which (at present) we are mostly concerned.

The Whole Man is sometimes expressed by only two words [S oul and B ody, or S
pirit and B ody] which are the two physical, or constituent parts of Man. So 1
Cor. 6. 20. Ye are Bought with a price, therefore Glorify God in your B ody,
and in your S pirits which are Gods. Also in 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having these
promises, Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and S
pirit. In both which places S pirit is the same with S oul; and Flesh in the
latter, is the same with B o^^ in the former. But why here the whole man (for
'twas the same to be preserved that was to be S anctified) why (I say) he
should be here expressed by three particulars, is a matter wherein Expositors
do differ, and I ^ind these several Interpretations of the place.

1. Some will have S pirit and S oul to be put Exegetically; as if both
signified but one and the same thing; one being added only as Explication of
the other; so Austin.) But (indeed methinks) this here seems a little harsh,
because needless; for S oul and B ody, or S pirit and B ody (as it is in the
two forecited Scriptures) were Intelligible enough to express the two physical
constituents of a man. Besides, the particle [ Kl. And, or rather Both] seems
to connect Spirit,, And Soul, as two things that have some Distinction between
them.

2. Others will have S pirit to signify the Mind and Understanding; and Soul
the W ill and Affections ( Calvin, Marlorate, and diverse others) from whom I
would not willingly Dissent, and therefore shall not slight their Judgment; yet
I must humbly profess, however clear the Notion was to them, it is not so to
me; for that which they call S oul is as truly S pirit, as the Leading Faculty
(the Intellect.) Yea, I find the Expressions quite Transverse; As if Soul
signified the Intellectual Faculty and S pirit the Volitive) in Mary's Song.
Luke 1. 46,47. My Soul does Magnify the Lord; and my Spirit has Rejoiced in
God my S aviour. As if she had said; My S oul, (that is, my Mind and
Understanding) Does Magnify ( i. e. Has high Thoughts of God, great Estimation
of him; which are Acts of the Intellect, and the only Internal Magnification of
him) And my S pirit, ( i. e. my W ^ll and Affections) has Rejoiced (which is
their proper Act.) This to me seems more current, if in this place there be a
Distinction between S oul and S pirit. But I will not Assert it, I rather think
there is none here; only her Inward Joy of heart, being great; her Outward
Expressions thereof in words, are ^nlarged; Soul and Spirit in a Pleonasm
signifying only her Inner Man. But if S pirit here do present us with any
Distinct Notion, I should take it to be, a Cheerful Frame* of S pirit, in which
she then was; And then, it will fully fall in with our present Conceptions of
the word S pirit in our Text, as shall be shown anon.

3. Some will have S pirit (in our Text) to signify the Higher Faculties (both
Understanding and Will) the Rational part in man; and S oul, the Inferior
Faculties common to man with Bruits and Plants (S ensative, Vigetative, etc.)
This indeed is a common Interpretation. But methinks it is harsh to Denominate
Man's S oul from the Inferior Powers (contrary to that Logical Rule.
Denomination is from the better part. Nor do I find in Scripture (to my
Remembrance) the word S oul, any where else to have this signification. Nor
(Lastly) are these Lower Faculties capable of other Sanctification then that of
the Body, which is to be but Instrumental to the Soul in Holiness; and
therefore thus to separate S oul from S pirit, is but to confound it with Body
in the business of S anctification and Preservation here spoken of.

These three forementioned Interpretations I will not Absolutely deny, nor
Contend with their Authors about them; Because they all agree well enough in
the General Scope of the place, which is (be sure) that all, that is In Man be
sanctified to God, However any one part be Distinguished from the other. Yet I
am apt to think that a more Proper Interpretation may be found, which will give
a more Full and Edifying sense to the place, then is usually ascribed to it.

For the Enquiry after this we shall consider to what things the Name of Spirit
is given in Scripture besides those before mentioned: And this I find to be,
to some things Out of Man, and some things In Man.

1 O ut of Man the Word ( Spirit) is ascribed both to God and Creatures.

1. To God both Essential and Personal.

1. Essential, as in Joh. 4. 24 God is a Spirit, and they that worship him,
etc. Not that S pirit is an Univocal Genus of God and any of his Creatures; for
then there would be a Common Nature; but there is Infinite Distance between
them: Only because S pirit is the Name of the most Noble Created Nature, we
Ascribe it also to God by Analogy, for that we have no better Name to give him.

2. Personal, the Third in the Blessed Trinity, under the Title of the Holy
Ghost, or Spirit; the S pirit of the Lord; of Jesus etc. But this is not OUR
Spirit; nor is he to be Sanctified or Preserved; and so cannot be here meant.

2. To Angels, both Good and Bad; but Bad Angels cannot be Sanctified; and Good
need no Prayers in this Respect: Nor can they be called OUR S pirits, unless by
Assignation of particular Guardian Angels to particular men; which (whatever
were the Opinion of some Jews, and Gentiles of ^ld) I know no ground to
Believe. This of the Spirit Out of Man.

2. In M an, the Spirit is that, which belongs to a man in a proper and natural
sense; and of this kind there seem to be four distinct Significations of the
word. Such as.

1. When taken for the S oul (the forma hominis) Resigned up to God in Death.
So I understand David, P sa. 31. 5. Unto thee, O Lord I commit my Spirit;
(however men deal with my B ody;) And this the rather, because Christ, at his
Death using the same words, must needs be so understood. Luke 23. 46. Agreeable
to Eccles. 12. 7. The S pirit returns to God who gave it. And in the same sense
also, Chapter 11. 5. Thou know not the way of the S pirit, nor how the B ones
grow in the womb. That is, (as I take it) Thou understandest not how the S oul
does form the Body, as an Habitation for it self. It Is the Inward part of man;
so the Exegesis seems very plain, in that I sa. 26. 9. W ith my S oul have I
desired thee in the night; yea, with my S pirit within me will I seek thee
early; i. e. with my inward man I have, and will, apply my self to thee: from
whence arises a Tropical sense of Spirit, namely to signify S incerity. God is
my witness, whom I S erve in my Spirit in the Gospel, Romans 1. 9.

2 Spirit is taken for the Life, or Union of Soul and Body; or Souls being in
the S tate of Union. So I understand, Job. 10. 12. thou have granted me Life,
and thy visitation has preserved my Spirit; namely to continue in and with my
Body. And chapter 34. 14. 15 If God gather to himself man's spirit and his breath,
all flesh shall perish to gether, and man shall turn again unto Dust. Thus it is
said of the Damsel. whom our Savior Raised to Life; Her Spirit came again, and
she arose Luk 8. 55. came again ( ie) to be again United to her Body. We Read
Ecl: 3.21. of the S pirit of a man, that goes upwards; and the Spirit of a
beast that goes Downwards, If the Spirit in both parts be understood in the
same sense (as most likely it is); then either Brutes have proper Spirits
(which many are loath to admit;) or the Spirit of man must signify but the
Life, which is all (if not more, then) some will allow to Beasts. Again, Chap.
8. 8. No man has power over the Spirit, to Retain the S pirit in the Day of
Death. i. e. No man is Master of his own Life to prolong it. To the same
purpose is that Expression in Hezekiahs Prayer, Isa. 38. 16. O Lord by these
things men Live, and in all these things is the Life of my S pirit, so will thou Recover me, and make me to Live. He means not by the Life of his S pirit;
the continued Duration of his Ever-living Soul, but the continuance of its
Union with the Body, whereby the Life of his person should be prolonged.

The S pirit, in this sense taken, may indeed be S anctified. The Life may be
Devotedun* to God; according to that of the Apostle. Rom 14. 8. Whether we
Live, we Live unto the Lord; or Whother we Dye etc. But this (I think is not
the direct meaning of the Spirit in our Text.

3. S pirit is taken for some special Faculties, or particular Acts of the
mind; such as,

1. Understanding, Prove. 20. 27. The Spirit of a man is the Candle of the Lord,
searching all the Inward Parts of the Belly* not in an Anatomical, but Moral
Sense; The Understanding is set up by God in man (as a Candle) to search and
find out by its Exercise, all those Inward Acts and Inclinations which would
otherwise lie hidden and undiscovered. So that, Isa. 29. 24. They that Erred in
Spirit, shall come to Understanding, and they that Murmured, shall Learn
Doctrine. That is, they that had misapprehensions of Me, and my Ways, shall
come to Understanding (not the Faculty, but) the Rectitude thereof; and they
that Murmured, whose Wills were averse to embrace Truth shall be graciously
Inclined to Learn that which is Right.

2. The Fancy or Imagination is sometimes to be understood by S pirit. Ezekiel.
13. 3. Woe unto the Foolish Prophets, that follow their own S pirit, and have
seen nothing, or that walk after the things which they have not seen; (as in
orig.) which God has not Revealed to them, but they have fabricated to
themselves out of their Evil Hearts and Foolish Fancies or Imaginations.

3. The S pirit is also taken for the Thoughts upon, or Remembering of some
person or thing. Thus the Apostle E xpresses his Thinking of the Corinthians 1
Cor. 5. 3. I verily as absent in Body, but present in S pirit, have judged
already, as though I were present, concerning him that has done this Deed. He
thought of them and their Affairs; though at a distance from them. So of the
Colossians, Chap. 2. 5. Though I he absent in the Flesh, yet am I with you in the
S pirit, Joying and B eholding your order, and the stedfastness of your Faith
in Christ. He Rejoiced to behold their Graces by the eye of his mind, his
Cogitations of them. And thus much of the Souls Faculties or Acts, for which
sometimes the word Spirit is taken.

4. Spirit is Lastly taken for some Qualifications, or Inclinations of the mind
as United to the Body, and Conformed much thereunto.

This is the product of Nature, Acquisition and Circumstances of Life, all
which concur to form the GENIUS, Temper, or Disposition of man. Each man has
something peculiar to himself in this Respect; as he has in the Features of his
Countenance, Stature, Shape, Mien or Carriage of his Body, whereby he is
Distinguished from any other. So, if we ask, [What Spirit is he of?] we mean,
of what Temper, Inclination or Genius? How Disposed? How Qualified? And the
true Answers will be as various, as men; of whom one man is (by Nature,
Acquisition, or both) of a sober, grave Spirit. Another of a Quick, Active,
Cheerful Spirit. Another of a weak, timorous, Careful; Some are Gentiel,
Generous, Courteous, Open Hearted; Others Churlish, Clownish, Surly, Rough,
Close and Reserved, etc. All these Spirits are viciated by Corrupt Nature; and
may by the Spirit of Grace be so Sanctified, as to Render men S erviceable,
though in a different way, and of good acceptance both with God and man.

Now, This I take to be the most proper meaning of the word Spirit Here in the
Text; And then the sense of it is,

[I Pray God you may be wholly S anctifyed in every Part and Faculty; every P
ower, Natural and Acquired; and being Sanctified may be wholly also preserved;
In General your whole Spirit; All that gives any of you a Distinguishing
Character from other men; more Particularl^ your Soul (the forma hominis) the
Inn^^ part; and your Body (the materia hominis) or Outer part, Both which are
Included in the Spirit, which Results from both: The Faculties of the S oul,
with th^^^ Habituations, or Improvements; and the Temperament of the Body,
attended with Outward Circumstances, contributing thereunto.] This I think is
the Apostles meaning, i^ I rightly understand him.

Having thus laid down the Notion in General, we shall Endeavor to make it
plain, by opening some particulars* As

1. There is in Scripture such a Distinction between the Soul and Spirit, which
we shall first show by one place in the General, and after by more particularly
in their proper places.

The place in General is that of Hebr. 4. ^2, 13. The Word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any Two Edged Sword, piercing even to the Dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow; and is a Discerner of
the Thoughts, and Intents of the Heart; neither is there any Creature, that is
not manifest in his sight, etc.

This Dividing asunder of Soul and S pirit; Is it a Philosophical Distinction,
of the Powers and Faculties, into S uperiour and Inferior (as some would have
it) I pray to what purpose? Is it to show the S uperiour, as clear, and
untainted by the Fall; but that the Inferior and Bruital, or sensual part is
Vi^iated and corrupt, as some of the Heathen Philosophers have confusedly
suggested? They say in^^^^ that NOUS (the mind*) is Divina auroe particula, a
Sacred, and Divine Things not inclined to any thing Disallowed by Right Reason;
till it come to be Incarcerated in the Body: and then clogged by a Dull
Material Flesh, and yoked with a couple of other silly Souls (the Sensitive of
Brutes, and the Vegetative of Plants) It became obstructed in all virtuous
aspiring; and born down to Sensual and Inferior Acts and Objects. Thus they
Dreamt; and does the Scripture give any Countenance to such Fancies? I think
not.

I rather take it thus. The Apostle having Exhorted them to study and use
Diligence, or Labor (as we read it) to Enter into the Rest before mentioned;
Tacitly implies that this work should be done, with all Sincerity, for that
they had to do herein with a Heart-searching God; This is manifest by the
Energie of his Word, which opens to a man the Secrets of his Soul; for the
word is Living or Quick, etc. As if he had said; God, who made man, knows him
altogether, and better understands what is in man, than man does what is in
himself. Man has but Dark Apprehensions of himself, and therein often times
grossly does mistake; But God by his Word Searches intimately, and Discovers
fully to him what he else would not take notice of: His Soul and S pirit lie
close together (as do his Joints and Marrow*) But, as the Anatomists Knife lays
open the one Difference; so the piercing Two Edged Sword of the W ord, does the
other: That word shows him, How his S oul came pure out of the Hand of God; but
he has added thereto a vicious S pirit, by the perverting of what God did make
upright.

Let not man therefore charge God foolishly, and say (as Adam did concerning
Eve) From the S oul which thou gave me all my faults do arise: No, It is from
that Evil S pirit, which man has to himself Acquired: His S oul indeed has the
powers, but it is his Spirit that gives the Inclinations, which (in a natural
corrupt* State) are wholly bent unto Evil. Thus the Malady is opened and
searched by the word, and the Cure is also by the same word prescribed: As here
in the Text; Namely S anctification.

And thus much for the first particular; That there is in Scripture such a
Distinction, betwixt the S oul and Spirit.

2. That the Constitution of this S pirit or Genius, is an Aggregate or
Resultant from the Connection of diverse things in Man: As his S ouls Faculties;
his Bodies Temperament; His Acquired Habits, by Instructions, Examples, or
Customs; And Lastly, The Outward Adjacents, or Circumstances of his present
Life. A little of each of these.

1. The Faculties of the S oul, (as Understanding, Will, Sensitive Appetite or
Passions) are all Ingredients as the Substrate Matter of this S pirit in Man;
But the Modification of them is from the other Causes. Souls in themselves are
all Equal; but the S pirits are vastly Different one from another. And this is
from the particulars that follow, and in a chief manner from

2. The Temperament of the Body, which is (more or less) Different in every
Individual Man. As there are scarce Two Pebbles on the Sea Beach, or Two Chips
hewn from the same wood, exactly figured alike; Nay, As there are hardly Two
Faces, Gestures, or M^en^s of Men (which are the outward Indices of their
Inward Constitutions) But do ^n some things Differ, though some are more alike
than others: Even so it is with their Temperaments, which are a chief
Ingredient into their Spirits, whereof we now speak. That saying of
Philosophers [ Manners of the Mind follow the Temperament of the B ody] is true
if rightly understood with a due Temper, or (as we say) with a Grain of S alt:
By M anners, we must understand, not the Virtues, or Vices themselves; But the
Genius and Inclination, which leads and Disposes to them. And that is the same
with this our Spirit. Otherwise, skilful Physicians (who may perhaps have the
worst Manners) might be accounted the best (...), and they could easily mend
all the wo^ld, who cannot mend themselves.

Nor must we understand by this, our Substrate Matter (the Faculties
abovementioned) as if, The Body has an Oper^tive Influence upon the S oul to
Induce (as it were) a new form upon it; for the S oul is the Active part, in
Man, and the Body nothing so. But the thing stands thus.

The Soul, which is a True S pirit (in a Nobler Sense, than that whereof we are
now treating) being, by its Information of the Body, most Intimately conjoined
thereunto; while it is in the State of Conjunction, and Union in Man, Uses the
Parts, Humors, and Members, as its Instruments o^ Organs, in all its
Operations. Now a^ a Workman Receives nothing of his strength or skill, from
his Tools wherewith with he works; yet in the Exercise of his Abilities he will
find himself much furthered or hindered in his business, according as his Tool
is either Apt, or Unapt, for his Work. So is it in this Case: The Soul Recei^^^
no power from the Body; But in Exerting its own proper powers, is helped or
hindered by the Bodies good or ill Temperament. Thus an I^l Tempered Brain makes
that Soul Act like a Fool, or Idiot, which had it a Brain Well Tempered, would
be both prudent and sagacious. And so also the Temperament of the Heart, Blood,
and Natural S pirits, gives Help, or Impediment to the Will and Affections;
even as, The Organs of Sense do, to their proper Senses. Hence that saying [
Anima Galboe male habitat] The Brave Soul of Galba had but an Ill Lodging; He
being a brave Spirited Man, but very sickly.

3. Acquired Habits do much Alter the Genius or Spirit, from what it would be,
if men were left to their Pure Naturals. These Habits arise partly, (1) From
Instruction and Rules: so Intellectual and Moral Habits (whether good or evil)
are formed much according to the Information men meet with, especially in their
younger days. Thus (as to Advantage) every part of Philosophy contributes its
share; Logic and Metaphysics, sharpness of Judgment; Mathematics Solidness
and Sagacity; Physics good conjecture at the Reasons of things; Moral
Philosophy and History, Prudence; R^etorick, Fairness and Con^idence of
Address; Poetry, quickness of fancy, and Imagination; Any of these as they are
better studied, do accordingly Enable and Incline the mind of Man.

Didicisse fidelite^ Arts etc. And so on the Contrary (as to Disadvantage) All
vicious and erroneous Principles, foolish and vain traditions, and such like
evil Rudiments, being Instilled into Youth, do Taint and Darken the Judgment,
Debauch the Will and Affections, and Debase the whole S pirit and Genius of the
Man.

2. From Pattern. Example, and Converse, with People, make deeper impression
then Rules, and have a very great influence in forming the Genius; especially
of Youth, when they are stepping from Boy to Man, and are taking upon them to
ch^se their own way; then, (if ever) M^ltu^^ Refert quocum vixeris; it concerns
you to think where you dwell. The force of Example is set forth in that ( Prove.
22. 24. 25.) Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou
shall not go; Lest thou learn his way, and get a snare to thy soul. It Is called
a Snare; though the illfavoured humor be no plausible bait ^o allure; yet for
that, all C ustom has a secret and fascinating Insinuation, whereby, at least,
the Aversation and Abhorrence of Ill things, to which we are enured is very
much abated. So as, not only the Vices themselves under some sal^e name (such
as Gallantry of Spirit, Greatness of Soul, Scorning to take an injury, etc*)
put fair for an approbation, and are contagious; But even the Inclinations to
them, and preparation of Spirit for them, do commonly spread themselves from
one person to another.

And, so also (in some measure, though not casually) may we expect in things of a
better Character. Prove. 13* 20. He that walks with the wise shall be wise,
etc. Which place (I think) does not only intimate Gods usual Blessing upon fit
means, but also discovers those proper means, which in their own Nature are apt
to operate, in a Moral way upon the minds of men: not indeed to give the Truth
of Grace; for then all in Godly Families would be Religious, and Leave no
ground for that complaint, I n the Land of uprightness will he deal unjustly.
Isa. 26. 10. And the contrary (too often) do we find by sad experience. Nor are
those ^air Dispositions, which Conversation may work, such Preparations for
Grace, as does oblige God ( ex congruo) to give the Truth thereof; but only the
whole is this; If God please to give his Supernatural Grace, to one, that has
fair Natural Dispositions; Those Graces will the more Illustriously, appear, to
Render a Man the more Eminently Serviceable.

Add to this our daily Experience, and common observation; that men are much
what the Custom and usual practice of the place is, where they live. He that is
bred, or much conversant, in the country; gets there a simple plain
heartedness; or perhaps a Rough Rusticity: He that is much in the City, has
more of Civility, Sagacity, and Cunning. One, who lives where News is
frequently Talked, Gets somewhat of a Public Spirit: Amongst good natured
People, a Candid Spirit. Amongst Soldiers, a Bold and Boisterous one; And so
of all other Affections: which may be considered in an Indifferency; Neither
morally Good nor Bad, in themselves; but only as Sanctification or Corruption
makes the Difference.

4. Outward Circumstances do also Exceedingly vary men's spirits, and that in a
shorter space of time, then Habits use to do. Thus Prosperity, Wealth, Honor,
Health, friends etc. do commonly enlarge the mind of a man; and make him bold
and brisk: Whereas the contrary Poverty, Disgrace, Sickness, etc. do usually
Contract and Emasculate the Spirit.

If these are of a long continued Series, they do very much toward the forming
of a settled and fixed Genius. But if only Occasionally, or at certain times
they occur; then they vary and Contemperate the Settled S pirit for a season;
and perhaps become a means to Reduce it to a better Mediocrity. Thus one of a
Light and Airy Spirit, and for the most part in all good Circumstances, (may at
such times) be unmanageable by Advice; until perhaps, a particular sore
Affliction, has somewhat abated of his Gallantry, and opened his Ear to
Instruction, whereby his Spirit may be better Regulated for the future.

And thus much for the Aggregation or Resultance, of this our S pirit, from the
concurrence of diverse things, both within, and without the Man.

3. The next particular in order to the Explaining of our General Notion, shall
be the taking Notice; That all these do some way concur to Constitute and
Represent the Man, Abstracted from Grace and S in; yet the Internals and
Essentials of Soul and Body, have the principal stroke herein: And then, that
the other matters, that are External to the Essence of man; the Accidental
Inherents, and Adjacents; do but somewhat Modify and Affect the former
constitution, which will still appear in some Degree or other.

Naturam Expellas, furca licet, ipsa recurret.
Drive Nature out with Pitch forks; twill Return,
And act its part, as sure as fire will Burn.
And, because the Souls Primitive facultyes are supposed to be all Equal in
every man; it is the Bodies Temperament, that especially gives the great
Diversity in Men's S pirits; we shall therefore speak of these more Distinctly;
And that not Exactly according to the common four First Qualityes (Hot and Dry,
Cold and Moist) which are said, by their Mixture, to give the four Complexions
(Sanguine, Choleric, Melancholy, and Phlegmatic) of which Physicians do so
often speak. But I shall Treat of them, according to the Actives ( Hot, and
Cold,) with a Mean Temper between them; Taking notice of the other By the way,
only as occasion is offered. For it is not Physical composition, or Medical
Disposition of spirits, which we have now to do with; But S pirits as they
Relate to Humane and Moral Actions; into which these three ( Hot, Cold, and
Mean) have the greatest Influence. Besides, all men will admit of a Hotter, and
a Cooler Temperament; even those who Reject Elementary Mixtures; and have no
great Regard to the four Complexions. If any like better to have it expressed
by Matter, more or less, moveable or moved; They may please themselves. There
is no Difference in the Thing, however Expressions vary.

I say therefore; some men's Spirits are Hot, and they do commonly Act warmly;
Others are Cold, and they usually Act Cooly; Others have a S pirit of a fine
Mean between these two Extremes, and their Actions are participant of both
qualifications; viciously, it Unsanctified, and under natural Corruption;
virtuously, if Sanctified, and men's Spirits be guided, and acted by the Spirit
of God: All commonly according to their several Capacities: But if at any time
a man be acted contrary to his peculiar Genius, it is by a special hand of the
Good or Evil Spirit upon him; some special Instigation, and Assistance, upon a
particular occasion. And according to this Method we shall Treat of the several
Spirits; first Describing themselves, and then their S tates, both of
Unregeneracy and S anctification.

1. The more Hot S pirit Discovers it self in Cheerfulness, Activity, Courage,
and Angry Zeal or Jealousy.

1. Cheerfulness: Heat joined with a convenient Moisture (answerable to the S
anguine Complexion) Renders a man Cheerful, Vivid, Sprightly, and upon occasion
(with apt Circumstances) Joyous, Refreshed, Merry and Comfortable. It makes him
look Ruddy, and of a Beautiful Countenance (like David in the flower of his
Youth) and pleasant, like the face of all things in the Spring. David (we may
suppose) was of a Natural Cheerful (...) it: His Musical Inclination, whereby
his skill was great, seems to speak so much: for this, and his prudence in
matters (so we Read in the Text, but in the Margin prudent of S peech. 1 Samuel
16. 18.) for these things (I say) He was sent for by S aul; that so his Music
and his prudent Mirth, might Drive away S auls Evil (Melancholy) Spirit. This
Cheerful Spirit, as it was, in Young David, Natural; so it was in Old Jacob,
upon occasion; when he heard good News of Joseph, and saw the Wagons that were
sent for him, ( Genesis 45. 27.) it is said, The Spirit of Jacob their Father
Revived. Such also were the Refreshed S pirits mentioned, 1 Cor 16. 17, 18. I
am glad of the coming of Fortunatus, for they have Refreshed my Spirit and
Yours. And that of Titus his Joy, (2 Cor. 7. 13. B ecause his Spirit was
Refreshed by you all.

The meaning of all is: Their Spirits were Cheerful and Vivid, upon these
Comfortable occasions. The S pirit also signifyes Health and strength; as in
the Hunger*starved Egyptian (1. Sam: 30) who being left sick ( v 13) having now
Eaten and Drank, after the three Days fasting; it is said ( v 12. His spirit came
again to him; that is, He had now some life in him, and could do something like
himself; who before was as one Dead, with sadness and Desperation; But now
Doubtless, was glad that he was alive.

This Cheerful S pirit, If Unsanctifyed and Corrupt, is groslyabused to Levity,
froth, vanity, and foolish Jesting, which is not convenient: To Lasciviousness
in them, who make Provision for the flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof: To Pride
and Haughtiness, self co^c^it and glorying in their own strength and Beauty; to
forgetfulness of God feeding themselves without fear; yea, to wax fat and Kick
against their Maker; and Rejoice in their B oastings; But all such Rejoy^ings
are evil. James 4. 16.

But If S anctifyed, The Joy of their Spirit becomes Spiritual Joy; Like Marys
( Luke 1. 46. 47.) My S oul does Magnify the Lord, And my Spirit has Rejoiced
in God my S aviour. It Disposes them to Thankfulness, and adapts for Praising
and Glorifying of God. It fits men for Cheerful Service to him; which much
commends Religion to the World, who are apt to be frighted from it by Conceits
of nothing but Mortification and Self Denial therein. Cheerful Christianity
adds a Luster to Profession; and convinces men, That they may be merry and wise.

Now, though this does chiefly arise from the Testimony of a Good Conscience, and
the Sealings of the Comforting S pirit of Adoption; yet Subservient thereunto
is this our Natural Spirit, which Renders men more apt outwardly to express it.
David was (as is before noted) of this Sanguine and Cheerful temper; and he did
Eminently Glorify God by his Music and Psalmody; agreeable to the Apostles
Rule James 5. 13. I s any among you merry, Let him sing Psalms. This of
Cheerfulness.

2. Activity is another effect of the Hotter Spirit; it shows it self in a
willingness and readiness to be employed; as also sometimes in strong
inclinations and vigorous motions; in a great inquisitiveness and earnest
search after things that are out of common view. This Temper is very natural to
Youth, which is usually fitter for Execution then Deliberation; and because of
this Spirit it is called the Sprightliest time of men's Lives.

This Active Spirit, while Unsanctifyed is (like as in a brisk Monkey) a very
unlucky thing; It renders men Idle Busy-Bodys; Medlers with other Men's Matters;
Grievously Troublesome, both to the Church and World; Restless in themselves;
and suffering none to be quiet by them; this fruitful Soil uncultivated, brings
forth a multitude of Weeds; if set upon mischief, one such will do more then
many others; like the active Element of Fire, where it is not employed in
profitable Service, it works Destruction and Desolation. The Inquisitiveness,
that attends such unsanctified Spirits, does often make men S eekers in
Religion; never satisfied with settled Truths, but Scepticks, Rambling and
Uncomposed Sectarys, tossed about with every wind of Doctrine; or, if they hap
to be S ect-Masters, they'^ compass Sea and Land to make a Proselyte. In a
word; They are the nimblest S ervants of the Devil, and notable^t Instruments
he can find, to make use of, in the world.

But if Sanctified, Then, none so Serviceable to God, or Man. Such S pirits
will make men wi^ling to do Service. (as Exo. 35. 21.) They came every one,
whose Heart stirred him up; and every one, whose S pirit made him willing; and
they brought the Lords Offering to the work of the Tabernacle. It Is not said,
[whom Gods Spirit made willing] Though that is most true, as to the First Cause;
But [ whose Spirit made him willing, whose heart stirred him up] That is, his
own Spirit, being Sanctified by the Spirit of God: Here the Second Cause is
noted, being stirred up by the First. And indeed God often W arms and Raises up
men's Spirits for any noble Designs, in which he intends to use them. So in
those ( Ezra 1. 1.) The Lord ^tirred up the S pirit of Cyrus, and then Cyrus
communicates of his warmth, to stir up the Spirit of the poor Dispirited Jews.
( v. 3.) Who is there among you of all the People? What? Have you never a Brave
Man among you to undertake this Great and Worthy affair? Upon this Giving Fire
their Spirits were Enflamed, Then r^se up the chief of the Fathers, the Priests
and the Levites, with all them, whose S pirit God had Raised to go up ( v. 5.)
Not All the People, but some Chief men: men (its likely) that were of Large
Souls, active and Gallant Spirits in themselves, fitted for Noble designs; but
(alas;) they were so shrunk, and sunk by their long Captivity, that neither In
nate briskness, nor the Encouragement which Cyrus gave them, was sufficient to
Chirp them up, till God Sanctified their S pirits, and raised them above
themselves to this Pious and Noble undertaking. Two of them are mentioned by
Name (besides others, Hag. 1. 14.) The Lord stirred up the S pirit of
Zerubbabel, the Governor; and Joshua, the High Priest; and the Spirit of (...)
the Remnant of the People, and they came and did work in the house. Now, was it
the S ouls of the^e men? Or, the men themselves? Methinks it is more Genuine, The
Spirits of those men in the sense we now propose*

This Active Spirit, uses to discover and express it self (as is befere noted)
in a strong Inclination, and vigorous Motion. Elihu speaks of a Spirit in man (
Job 32 8.) which I suppose is the same, to which he has Reference. ( v. 18.) I
am full of matter (or words) and the Spirit within me (or of my Belly)
constrains me ( v. 20.) I will speak, that I may be refreshed. Now Elihu was
the youngest of Jobs Friends, as he himself intimates ( v. 6, 7.) and upon that
account, in part, he is more earnest, and copious, then the rest; the Ardour,
and Activity of his Spirit, caused an eager desire in him to express his mind;
which he calls the Constraining of his Spirit. But because there was somewhat
of anger in the case, (besides his Youthful Warmth) we shall have occasion to
reflect upon this instance again; and then show more of this vigorous Motion,
and strong Inclination, under the Head of Z eal, to which we shall referr it.

3. This Hotter Spirit, is a Spirit of Courage and Boldness, to address
Difficultys, and meet with Evil.

This shows it self diverse ways.

1. Sometimes in a wrath for War; which God S tirs up or Abates, as is
agreeable to his own holy purposes. Thus to Impoverish, take, and lead Captive
the Idolatrous Israelites, (1 Chronicles. 5. 26.) The God of Israel, ^tirred up the
Spirit of Pull, King of Assyria, and Tilgath P ilneser King of Assyria, and he
carried them away. The former took their Goods 2 King. 15. 19.) Menahem gave
Pull a Thousand Talents of Silver (that is an Hundred and Eighty Seven
Thousand, One Hundred pounds) And he turned back, and staid not in the Land.
This was a Vast S^m; But the other came and swept all both Goods, and Persons
too.

On the other hand, He Abates also Men's Courage, and takes down their Spirits.
He shall cut off the Spirit of Princes; He is terrible to the Kings of the
Earth (psalm. 76. 12.) Thus Moses Prophecy of the Dukes of Edom, and Inhabitants
of Canaan (Exodus 15. 16.) Fear and Dread shall fall upon them, by the greatness
of thine Arm; they shall be as still, as a stone, till thy People pass over, O
Lord. And to the same effect is that Promise, (Ex. 11: 7.) But against any of
the Children of Israel, shall not a Dog move his Tongue. The Genius and Spirit
of a Dog, is (you* know) to Bark at Strangers: This is an effect of Heat and
Boldness in that Animal, where it is but a little afraid; but if it be greatly
Terrifyed, it will then Run and hide it self in silence: So some Men, that
would in their wicked Inclinations, both Bite and Devour, may be yet so far
over awed by Gods Providence, that they dare not so much as Bark at his People.

2. Sometimes in a stout Resolvedness of Mind, that will take no
discouragement; this is to have a Heart like that of a Lion (2. Sam. 17. 16.)
Now a Lion, when a multitude of Shepherds is called forth against him, will
not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them ( Isay,
31. 4,)

The contrary hereunto is a S pirit failing (I sa. 19. 3.) The S pirit of AE
gypt shall fail (or be emptied) in the midst thereof; it is said in the Precedent
( v 2) I will set AE gyptians, against AE gyptians, and they shall fight: They
shall spend their Spirits, or Courage among themselves; but shall have no
Spirits left to defend their Country. So it is said of the Amorites and
Canaanites, that heard of the drying up of Jordan, which they accounted as
their M^ate and Fence against I srael, Their heart melted neither was there S
pirit in them any more ( Josh. 5: 1:) So that you see both ways, in the
Abundance and in the Defect, Spirit, Signifies Courage and Resolution.

Now if this Spirit be Unsanctifyed, it is a stoutness in evil: that will be
ready to say, (with Pharaoh) Who is the Lord? It Is Obstinacy and Hardening; Sihon
King of Heshbon would not let us pass; for the Lord had hardened his Spirit, and
made his Heart Obstinate ( Deuteronomy. 2. 30.) This may be also the meaning of the
perverse Spirit mingled among the Egyptians, ( Isa. 19 14.) that is, a
quarrelsome and contentious Spirit, among themselves, whereby their Councils
were Divided, and their Affairs Unsettled, as a Drunken Man staggereth in his
Vomit: They had S pirit, or Animosity, enough against one the other; but for
Publik defense, AE gypt shall be like unto Women, they shall be afraid and fear
( v 16) And this Discovers one fault more, in this Unsanctified S pirit. That
it is Unstable: Stout and Surly, were it should be Humble and Meek; Mean and
Poor; where it should be Brave, and Resolute. Such were the Rebellious
Israelites ( Ps. 78. 8.) a stubborn and rebellious Generation, that set not
their hearts aright, whose S pirit was not S tedfast with God. It follows ( v.
9.) that, how Sturdy soever they were against God; yet against their Enemies
they were very Cowards, or God, in Justice made them so, for their Stubborness
against him. The Children of Ephraim being Armed, and carrying B ows, turned
back in the day of Battle.

But, If Sanctified, it is an Excellent Spirit, and of great use. This was that
other S pirit of Caleb (Numb: 14. 24.) The Spirit of the other Spies was Base
and Cowardly, and caused the heart of the People to melt (Josh. 18. 8.) at
which God was greatly displeased; but Calebs courage was approved, and accepted
of God, though it had not its desired effect upon men; and was Rewarded with
admission into the Land of Promise, when others were excluded.

This Spirit S anctified, is a Spirit Bound Bent, and Resolved, in the service
of God whatever be the Hazards. And now b^hold (says Paul) I go bound in the
Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing the (particular) things, that shall befall me
there (Act 20. 22.) saving Bonds and Afflictions (in general) which I expect (
v. 23.) But none of these things move me ( v. 24.) Now this B ound Spirit I
take to be, the Apostles Brave Spirit Bound (that is) strongly inclined by the
Spirit of God to this special, and particular, Service, notwithstanding all
these foreseen difficulties, to break through which he was G allantly Resolved.
And this his Courage is (I think) the same, that he prays might be given to the
Ephesians, chap. 3. 16. That he would grant you, according to the Riches of his
Glory to be strengthened with might, by his S pirit, in the I nner Man. This
referrs to ( v. 13) I desire that ye faint not, at my Tribulations for you.
Some men are so Weak-Spirited, as to faint, when they see another Bleed; or
have a grievous Wound dressed, or the like; But I would not have you to be so
Feeble-Minded; I would have you more Courageous; and for that end, make this
prayer on your behalf; I should rather shrink that feel the trouble; then you,
that only behold it with your eyes.

Such another Brave S pirit was in Nehemiah, when God had raised it up. See a
taste of it ( Neh. 6: 11.) S hold such a M an as I Fly? And who is there being
as I am, would go into the Temple to save his Life? I will not go in. This
Gallantry was of the Lord; for (whatever his Naturl S pirit was) His C aptive
circumstances had rendered him but weak; as we may Guess by his Timorousness to
speak to the King (though he was in good place about him) He continually ^etch'd
his strength from God; He was fain (by Ejac^lation) to pray between a Question
and an Answer ( chap. 2. 4.) What is thy R equest? S o I Prayed= And I said
etc. He had not Courage to give the King an answer; till he had his Spirits
Revived by the God of Heaven.

4. This Hotter S pirit is an Angry S pirit i^ Ardent and Fervent in it self;
Eager and Vigorous in motion; with a vehemence in Inclinations (all which may
be better Referred to this head, then that of Activity, before mentioned) Its
chief ingredient is C hollerick Constitution though it may be also Habitually
increased, and Morally Fixed in men, by frequent occasions and provocations; as
also by much converse, with peevish and fretful persons this is intimated in
that ( Prove. 22. 24. 25,) Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a
furious man thou shall not go; Lest thou Learn his ways, and get a snare to thy
S oul. His anger will, by degrees heat thy Spirit into a Disorder; or, at least
bring it into another frame; then to what thou art naturally inclined.

This Spirit Acts, and shows it self in Z EAL, and JEALOUSY.

1. Z eal, is a Fervor of Spirit, whereby a man does Act ( Valide and Valde)
All that comes to his hand, he presently does it with his Might. Here Anger is
( Cos Fortitudinis) the Whetstone of Valor; And though Courage has its Strength
in it self, yet it commonly has the beginning, and more often the continuance
of its motion, from this Z eal. This is as the Touch*Powder, that catches the
first Fire, and as soon inflames that which has all the force in it. It Is a
Natural Passion, and therefore (in it self) neither Good nor Bad.

But if,

1. Unsanctifyed, it is a Hellish Flame, that burns unmercifully, and does
abundance of Hurt, to ones self and others. It Is KAKOZELIA, a mischievous
vehemence that spoils the comfort of Humane Society; and if it be any way
concerned in Religion, it makes Havoc of the Church as is seen in the Bigots
of a false Religion. An eminent example of which, was Paul (while he was Saul)
before his Conversion to the true Faith. They shall kill you, and think they do
God good Service ( John 16: 2:) In a word, it renders men (like the Chaldeans)
B itter and Hasty (Habbac. 1. 6.)

2: But if Sanctified, then the Warm-Spirited Paul is another Man. He now
reflects on his former course, as a Mad Hare* Brained, Wicked Business. See the
Account of it. ( Acts 26. 9, 10 11.) I verily thought (His Hot Head mistook his
way, and so ran on furiously in a Pernicious Error) That I ought (Divil^sm is
now taken for Duty) to do many things contrary etc. Many (not a few*) were
suitable to his Hot and Active Spirits; many places ( Jerusalem; every S
ynagogue; even to strange Cities) many Persons ( Many of the Saints) Many Ways
did I (shut up in Prison; put to Death; and compelled them to Blaspheme) yea,
when he was but a Stripling, when he could not hurll Mortifying Stones, he gave
his voice against them; Held the Garments of those that S toned S tephen and
was consenting to his Death All this he acknowledges to be mere madness: being
exceeding mad against them.

But being now Converted, Does his Grace quite extinguish his Fiery Nature, and
Spirit? Not at all; only directs, and exerts it, to better purposes Paul is the
same Z ealot; but in other matters. His Active S pirit Labors more abundantly
then they all. (1 Cor. 15. 10.) Z eal he commends, exhorts, and practices. He
commends Z eal in his Epistles, if it be rightly placed. It Is always good to be
Z ealous in a good thing, (Gal. 4. 18.) To be Zealous of S piritual Gifts (1
Cor. 14. 12.) of Good Works. (Titus 2. 14.) He also exhorts men to be Fervent
in Spirit, S erving the Lord. (Romans 12. 11.) And he Allowed and Practiced it
in himself; of which we have Diverse Instances.

Take a view of his Hot and Earnest S pirit in some particulars. At Athens his
Spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry. (Acts
17. 16) 'twas full of Gods, without the True God, and he was angry and ve^t to
see it. So in Corinth, at the Jews Infidelity. He was pressed in Spirit, and
Testified that Jesus was the Christ. ( chap. 18. 5.) Now (...) was this? 'Twas
(...) and (...) come from (...). H^ had a good mind to it before; even, when he
was a poor Laboring S ojourner ( v. 3.) Even then he Reasoned and persuaded
every Sabbath, ( v. 4) But, now his friends are come, by them is his
Countenance sharpened ( Prove. 27. 17.) He had good Metal before, but now is a
Keen Edg put upon it. Whether it were, that they brought him Contribution,
which bettered his Outward Condition, and so Raised his Spirit a pegg higher:
or else that they were to be his Fellow Travelers; and so, being now Ready to
Depart ( v. 7.) He was bravely resolved to out with that, which had so long
broyled in his Bosom. Some way or other (whatever it were) it had relation to
their coming, whereby his Spirit was enlarged. He had a Good S pirit before,
but ^ow a Great one His Z eal before was kindled, but now it breaks out. He
cares not now, what they said, or thought of him; he now Ruffles them; Roundly
delivers his Testimony; shakes his Raiment at them; Tells them their own; and
throws the Blood of their Obstinacy upon their own Heads. So much may Outward
Circumstances sometimes Help forward the actings of Grace and Nature, in a S
anctifyed S pirit:

It Is manifest he was of a vehement Spirit, and eager in all things. When he
missed his friend, he could not stay at Tro^s (though he might have done it to
good purpose; for there a Door was opened to him of the Lord (2 Cor. 2. 12.) B
ut he had no rest in his S pirit; because he found not Titus his Brother there,
and away he must, into Macedonia after him. ( v. 13.)

Doubtless, the Apostles Removes, were by direction of the Spirit of God; but
yet (oftentimes) they were according to Humane Affection or S pirit, Though
secretly overruled by God for his Holy ends Thus, this H^t S pirited Man was
parted from Barnabas in an anger (Acts 15: 39.) The Contention was so sharp
that they parted; one to C yprus, and the other to Syria and C ylicia; but both
about the same Evangelical Business.

Another Instance of his Z ealous, Sturdy, and Vehement Spirit, was his
Carriage to Peter: (...) withstood him to the face; (Gal. 2: 11) Peter, was
Paul's elder Brother in the Faith; another man (perhaps) in the case, would have
handled him more respectfully; but P aul cannot complement; he must do all
things like himself; he not only Preaches against his blameable Practice and
Compliance, but noses him for it in a public presence. I said unto P eter
before them all [ v. 14.] And thus much of P auls Z ealous Spirit.

The next Example shall be Apollos, who was by Nature (it is likely) as well as
Grace, a man Fervent in Spirit; and therefore S pake and Taught Diligently,
according to the Knowledge that he had in the Gospel; which as yet was not very
great, Knowing only John's Baptism; until a Tent-maker and his Wife ( Aquil^^
and Priscill^) had Expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly. He was
indeed a man of a brave Spirit and Excellent Endowments; He was Eloquent, and a
great Textuary, Mighty in the (Old Testament) Scriptures; and so, well
furnished for an Eminent Preacher; But 'twas his S pirit, his Fervent Spirit,
Subordinate to his Grace, that fitted him to S peak Boldly in the Synagogues;
and mightily to C onvince the Jews, and that publicly* ( Acts 18. 25, etc.) A
man of as much Grace, and more Knowledge, might not have been Able so well to
perform this Service. Z eal for God, which is every man's Duty, will not Comport
so well with every man's S pirit. [ Non omnia possumus omnes] All cannot do All.
When Father Paul at Venice was Discoursed by some Helvetian Ministers,
concerning the Reformation, and he had owned to them the chief principles of
the Reformed Religion; though he still continued in the Papal Communion; being
demanded by them why he did not publicly profess his Faith? He is said to have
Answered, [ profecto Deest mihi S piritus Lutheri] Alas! in Truth, I want
Luthers Spirit.

The Hearts of those Jews were so Callous and Hard, that they needed to be
warmly fomented. They needed (under the Law) The Bitterness and Heat of
Ezekiels Spirit ( Ezekiel. 3. 14.) So the Spirit Lifted me up, and took me away,
and I went in the Bitterness, in the Heat [Hebr. and Anger] of my S pirit. Gods
Spirit moved him, and then his Angry Spirit was moved; The Spirit of God made
use of a vehement Spirit in the man, to deal suitably with them.

And so [under the Gospel] They needed the Like Spirit. Therefore he sent John
as his Forerunner; that B urning as well as Shining Light, to Imitate the
Prophet Elias: He shall go before him in the S pirit of Elias. (Luke 1. 17.)
Now Elias was a Hot-spirited man, and prayed down Hot Fire to Consume the
Enemies. John (like him) Preached Repentance with Severity; Calling them
Generation of Vipers; and Laying the Ax to the Root of the Tree. He was a Rough
Man in a Rough Garment, and handled them Roughly. And indeed this Spirit was
proper in the ( pr^ecursor* the) Forerunner of Christ, who came to Preach
Peace, and Heal the Wounds of Conscience, which John's Doctrine had made.

Jesus C hrist himself, was the Meek and Holy Lamb of God, who Bare all
Injuries with an Inimitable Patience; and yet was not altogether without this
warmth of Spirit upon occasion. The Z eal of thine House has eaten me up; was
spoken of him ( Psalm. 69. 9.) And Applied to him [ John 2. 17.] When he whipped
the Buyers, and Sellers out of the Temple; and Overturned the Tables of the
Money Changers; This he did Once, but commonly his sweet Conversation, was much
otherwise. 'Twas Prophesied of him. ( Isa. 42. 2.) And Interpreted of him, (
Mat. 12. 19.) He shall not strive, nor Cry; neither shall any man hear his
Voice in the Streets. Nor does he allow the Hot and Fiery Temper an Ordinary
Indulgence in his Disciples. When James and John, would have had him Call for
Fire from Heaven, on a Village of the Samaritans ( Luke 9. 54.) He tells them,
They kn^w not, what Spirit they were of; (i. e.) either what they ought to be,
if they would ^e his Disciples: or rather, they might mistake themselves (as
men are too often apt to do) and think, That to be a Sanctified Z eal, which
more appeared, but a Corrupt and Revengeful ^ury. These two men were Brethren
(the Sons of Z ebedee) whom Christ (who knew their Spirits better, than
themselves) named (according to their Nature) And he S urnamed them B oanerges,
which is, The Sons of Thunder. (Mark 3. 17.) He was not Deceived in them, when
he chose them; But knew how to S anctify their Rough S pirit, and so make a
very good use thereof: They might make good Thundering Preachers; They might be
fitted for Tough*work (as Luther after them was) to Break through such
Difficulties, as would have likely Foiled and disheartened as good men, but of a
meeker Spirit. [ Malus Nodus, malus Cune^^s] Rugged Wedges are fittest for a
cross-grained piece of Service. Fire in men's S pirits (as well as among the
Elements) may be necessary sometimes; And Rendered very Serviceable if it be
well Governed.

But here is the Difficulty; Many good Christians, by Reason of Natural
Infirmity, are not always able to manage a Z ealous Spirit; nor can always
Distinguish betwixt Fire from Heaven, in the stronger Motions of Gods Holy
Spirit, which always ought to be Cherished; and that Fire, which arises from
Hell in the vehemence of Temptation, Enkindling the Reakings and Fumes of their
Corrupted Nature; of which the Devil never fails to take his Advantage.

Young Elibu (before mentioned) was a zealous, warm S pirited man; And not
without great Piety (as the Tenor of his Discourse does manifest.) Yet when
his Spirit constrained him, and his Belly was as Wine, which has no vent, and
ready to Burst like New Bottles, (Job 32. 18, 19.) i: e.) When his Passion was
stirred within him; He B reaks out, not only to Irreverence to his Elder
Brethren ( v. 9.) Great men are not always wise; neither do the Aged Understand
Judgment; But he also Charges Job (I think) very falsely (chapter 33. 8, 9.) I have
heard the voice of thy words saying, I am clean without Transgression; I am
Innocent, neither is there Iniquity in me. Where (I wonder) does Job so speak?
Surely if he had, God would not have Justified him, as he does ( chapter 42. 7.) Ye
have not spoken of me the thing that is Right, as my S ervant Job has. So much
do Hot Spirited Men, though Good Men, yet often overshoot themselves.

The Rightest Temper of a Sanctified Z eal, was that of S tephens; a mixture of
Meekness, Wisdom and Courage, (Acts 6. 10) They were not able to Resist the
Wisdom, and the S pirit, with which he spoke. He spoke with a S pirit, which I
take to be Z eal and Earnestness; and yet with Wisdom, so as no Exception
could be justly taken; and with Meekness too, which (after all their horrid
Injuries) is Testified by his Last and Dying Words; ( chapter 7. 6.) Lord, Lay not
this Sin to their Charge. And thus much of Z eal; near of kin to which is.

2. Jealousy, a passion, to which, some men's Spirits are, more than others,
prone; And whereby men are Inclined to Suspicion, fierce Anger, Hatred, and
Bitterness. It Is called a S pirit of Jealousy coming upon a man, (Numb. 5. 14.)
whether his Wife be Defiled, or not.

This Spirit in Unsanctifyed persons and practices, is an Odious and Bitter
Evil. It Is Declared Hateful to God, and horri^ly Injurious to man. Hateful to
God, (Mal. 2. 16.) I hate putting away says the Lord. Therefore Take Heed to
your S pirit: namely, This Jealous Spirit, that you Entertain it not. And
Injuri^us to man, as appea^s in the precedent words ( v. 15.) Take Heed to your
Spirit, Let none deal Treacherously (or Unfaithfully: marg.) Against the Wife
of his Youth. It Is a Treacherous Unfaithfulness, to Entertain groundless
Jealousies: Love is Covenanted in Marriage; and this is quite contrary
thereunto: Love thinks no Ill; Jealou^^e thinking nothing else. Love covers
Faults; Groundless Jealousy searches to Discover faults, where there are
none. And then the Repetition of the words [ Therefore take Heed to your S
pirit] ( v. 15. and again v. 16) is well to be Noted; for it is a Rule, [
Repeated words in S cripture call for special observation.] And as in Marriage,
so in other Relations; it Destroys Friendship; spo^is Humane S ociety, and
mutual Confidence; and sometimes stirs up the most bitter Enmity; for Jealousy
is the Rage of a man, That takes no Ransom for Life. ( Prove. 6. 34.) This is
the S pirit that Dwells in us, ( i. e.) our Corrupted Nature) Lusting to Envy
(James 4. 5.)

And yet, for All this Evil said of it (nor can enough be said) Abstract but a
Jealous and S uspicious S pirit, from Inbred Corruptions; Take it as a pure
Natural Temper; It Is a Basis of Great Prudence, Wisdom and Wariness. Not to
allow of that Rotten principle [S uspect every man to be Knave, with whom you
have to do] But to take care in avoiding that Character of a Fool Noted in
(Prove. 14. 15.) The Simple believes every word; But the prudent man Looks
well to his going. Not Uncharitably to Suspect, but prudently to be C
ircumspect, is becoming a wise and honest man. This pure Natural Cautious S
pirit may be the Subject of S anctification, and may become God-like, and a
Godly Jealousy. God-like, when a man so utterly Disapproves Sin and
Dishonesty; That he Dislikes the very Appearance thereof, and Tendency
thereunto. Thou shall not Bow down, for I the Lord thy God am a Jealous God.
(Exo. 20. 5.) And by Sins (however palliated) is provokt to Jealousy. (Deuteronomy.
32. 16. 21.) Every Likeness of Sin, may Deserve that name, (Ezekiel. 8.3) The
Image of Jealousy, which provokes to Jealousy. And as God-like, so it is
Godly. The Holy Prophet owned, and professed it. (1 King. 19. 10. 14.) I have
been very Jealous for the L ord God of Hosts. And so did the Holy Apostle. (2
Cor. 11: 2.) I am Jealous over you with Godly Jealousy; for I have Espoused
you to one Husband, etc. It Is Godly, when the Bent of Jealousy is only to
promote Holiness; when the Suspicion notes but care and watchfulness; and the
Bitterness ascribed to this Spirit, is but a Hatred of Sin; it may so be of
very Excellent Use, especially in those, who by Gods Order have the Oversight
of others.

And thus much of the Hotter S pirit, which is Cheerful, Active, Courageous,
Angry in zeal and Jealousy. We shall now take a view of its Opposite, and so
better Illustrate both, by comparing them together.

2. The C older Spirits, which are in some men, under the Temperaments of
Phlegm, or Melancholy; The more if Radicated by Habits, or excited and
promoted by Objects, or Outward Circumstances. These are in every point of the
contrary C haracter, to those Hotter Spirits before mentioned. As

1. Is that C hearful and Bris^; This is sorrowful and pensive: full of Grief
and Mourning; as if made up of Sighs and Tears. And whether it be from Natural
Temper, or from that concurrence (mentioned) of sad and troublesome C
ircumstances; Men's S pirits are hereby Formed and Disposed to Lamentations.
Such was weeping Jeremiah; such was our Blessed Savior in his Humiliation A
man of S orrows and acquainted, with Grief, as was Prophesied of him, ( Isa.
53. 3.)

Now if this be Unsanctified it Disposes to many Evils; especially, where the
Dogged Melancholy is prevalent therein. It Is an Evil Spirit in it self; and of
Evil Consequences.

1. In it self; probably this was the Evil S pirit from the Lord upon S aul. A
Melancholy Spirit; and perhaps sometimes even unto Fits of Distraction. I take
it so to be; for that it was Alleviated by David's Music (1 Samuel 16. 23.)
Surely David's Harp could not Conjure down Devils; Nor does give any Countenance
to Popish Bell Baptism for the same purpose: No, rather it was a Natural Evil,
an Evil Natural S pirit, sent of God in Judgment; and Helped by Natural Means,
through his Blessing. David played with his hand, so Saul was Refreshed, and was
well; and the Evil Spirit Departed from him. So; by a Natural Means prescribed
by his Doctors ( v. 16.) [ Musica Mentis Medicina M^est^e;] was well; It seems
before he was Sick, Distempered, and his Spirit was out of Order. It Is and
Evil, both Natural, Moral, and Judicial. A Natural; (P rov. 17.22.) A Merry
Heart does G ood like a Medicine; but a Broken Spirit Dries the Bones: (i. e.)
Wastes the Marrow, and Impaireth the Health. And it Tends als^ (...) Evil
Moral and Judicial too; as you may observe, in

2. Its Consequences; It Disposes to S ullen Discontent, and peevish
Frowardness; both which are very Ugly, as well as wicked Humors.

Sullen Discontent we may see in proud Haman, who, (whatever his Natural Spirit
was) had a very Jolly one upon the Kings Favor. Haman went forth that Day,
Joyful, and with a Glad Heart. (Esth. 5.9.) That Day, It seems it was not
always so; (Aspiring Pride, and Sowerness of Spirit, are frequently conjoined;
because of the many obstructions Real, and more apprehended, that cross his
Ambition) But That Day, and upon that particular Occasion, he was very Merry.
This in him was Unsanctifyed, and therefore Unstable and soon Altered to the
contrary, by a very slight matter; for after he had Boasted among his Friends
of all his Riches and Glory: yet (says he) All this avails me nothing, so
long as I see Mordecat the Jew sitting at the Kings Gate. ( v. 13.) What Remedy
now in the Case? His Wife advises him ( v. 14.) Erect a Lof^y Gallows, and get
M ordecai Hanged thereon; and Then go thou in Merrily, with the King unto the
Banquet. No Merriment, no ^ure of the Sullens, till Mordecai be Dispatched; He
was in a Desperate Case; his Bones were all Rotten, (for that is the Name of his
Disease ( Prove. 14. 30.) Envy is the Rottenness of the Bones) and it is likely,
he might have Died of Discontent, it he had not (soon after) by the Gibbet.

Another such an Instance of Sullenness was C ovetous Ahab, whose S pirit was
sad, because he was Denied Naboth's Vineyard (1 King 21. 5.) which caused him
to Loll on his Bed, turn away his face, and would not eat B read (like a
pouting Child) vexed at heart, that he could not have his Will; proud Jezebe^,
like Z eresh, (here is another Wit of the Wife) comes in with her Cursed
Contrivance, to Dry up Ahabs Tears, by the Shedding of Naboth's Blood. One
would have thought, that these Women (because of the Natural Coldness and
Moisture of their Sex) should have been Authors of milder Counsels; But their
Unsanctifyed Hearts, being filled with Devilish Pride, makes them act contrary
to that, which should be their very Nature; so virulent are Feminine Humors,
when Corruption (on occasion) turns them into Acids. Dismissing these Two, as
they are; you may (if you please) send in Jobs Wife; with her Curse God and D
ie, (Job 2. 9.) to make up the Number, All. (Tria sunt omnia.) Note only (by
the way) That Old Wives Prescriptions, are seldom good Remedies, for sad and
melancholy Husbands. And this of Sullen Discontent.

Of the Froward P eevishness, in this Colder and Mournful Spirit, we have a
Notable Instance in the Israelites; who could not hear what was Reasonable, and
might be Comfortable, to them. God by Moses had sent them a very good and
Gracious Word; A Promise of their Deliverance; of being their God, and taking
them to be his People; And Moses spoke so, unto the Children of Israel; But
they hearkened not unto Moses, for Anguish (or Shortness) of Spirit, and for
Cruel Bondage, which was the occasion thereof. ( Exodus 16. 9.) They were in
this Like weeping Rachel, who Refused, and would not be Comforted. ( Mat. 2.
18.)

From these Instances (besides frequent Experience,) we may Learn, That the
Consequents of a sad Unsanctifyed Spirit are Deplorable; All manner of Evil,
Natural, Moral and Judicial. Natural and Moral seem to be pointed at in that
Expression (2 Cor. 7. 10.) The sorrow of the world works Death. This may
referr to both; it is both a Sin and a Mischief; as appears by the Antitheta (in
the former part of the verse.) Godly Sorrow works Repentance to S alvation,
not to be Repented of; Therefore (by the Rule of contraries) Worldly Sorrow is
S in, unto Destruction, and to be Repented of by those, who would avoid those
Evils. But more expressly is it Judicial, when God pronounces it as a Curse. Ye
shall Cry for sorrow of heart, and shall Howl for vexation (or Breaking. marg.)
of Spirit. (Isa. 65. 14) This if Unsanctified.

And yet by Sanctification, a Mournful Spirit may become a Blessing; it may
Adapt, and Incite to many Graces and Duties. In that (2 Cor. 7. 10.) works
Repentance to S alvation, not to be Repented of: You Will have no cause to be
sorry, for a sorrowful Spirit, if your Tears be set to Run in a ^ight Channel.
S^e more of the ^^ssed Effects ( v. 11.) Ye Sorrowed after a godly sort; ^
ehold what C arefulness it wrought in you; what clearing of your selves; yea
what Indignation; yea what Fear; yea what vehement Desire; yea what Z eal; yea
what Revenge. Understand Indignation, Fear and Revenge, to Respect S in, and
not m^n.

A Mournful Spirit S anctified Disposes to Prayer. Hanna professes to Eli, (who
had misapprehensions of her) I am a Woman of a sorrowful Spirit, and have
poured out my S oul before the Lord (1 Samuel 1. 15.) She wept inwardly, as she
mentally prayed, and her Prayers and Tears were secretly mingled, and poured
out to her God; she was in Bitterness of Soul, and prayed unto the Lord, and
wept sore (v: 18.) David often to this purpose, ( Ps. 77. 2.) In the Day of my
Trouble I ^ought the Lord. When was that? When my Spirit was overwhelmed (v.
3.) So (Ps. 142. 2, ^.) I^ poured out my Complaint before him, I showed before
him my Tyouble, when my Spirit was overwhelmed within me. And in the next (P s.
143. 4.) His Spirit was again Overwhelmed; I stretched forth my hands unto
thee. (v. 6.) That S pirit which was wont to be full Fraught with Harmonious
Praises is now Overset, and another Service is appointed for him; He Sailed joy
^lly in pleasant Gales, but Storms find him other work.

The greatest Instance (in mee^ man) of a sorrowful S pirit, was that of Job,
in the Days of his Trial; His Complaint he Uttere^h freely, and Justi^yeth his
so doing, as of a natural Necessity: His Case was sad; His S pirit was Drunk
up, ( chapter 6. 4.) Drunk up (as he expresses it) That he had None Left to bear
his Troubles. The Spirit of a man will bear his Infirmity ( P^o. 18 14.) But
(alas) his Bearing Spirit is gone, and nothing but a Broken and Burdened one
is Left in him: In this case, he says, I will not Refrain my mouth; I will
speak in the Anguish of my Spirit; I will complain in the Bitterness of my S
oul (chapter 7. 11.) But his Complaint is To God, and not Of God. As for me, is my
Complaint to man? And if it were so, why should not my S pirit be Troubled?
(chapter 21. 4.) And yet, we may say of him in all this, as was testified of him in
the beginning, In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly (chapter 1.
22.) Although Satan expected it from him. ( v. 11 and ch: 25.) which indeed he
would have done, had not God Sanctified his sorrowful Spirit: and preserved it
Blameless.

When Nebuchadnezzar Dreamed Dreams, wherewith his S pirit was Troubled. [ Dan.
2. 1.] We find this Unsanctified Heathen fret and vex, and require unreasonable
things: The Thing is gone from me I have quite forgot it; yet, Tell me the
Dream, and the I nterpretation, or ye shall be cut in pieces, and your Houses
made a Dunghill. (v. 5.) So eager was he to be Rid of his Troubled S pirit. But
Daniel through Sanctification was of another Temper in the like case. (chapter 7.
15.) I Daniel was grieved in my Spirit, in the midst of my Body (or sheath) and
the Visions of my Head troubled me. He then seeks for satisfaction from God, by
Drawing near to his Angel ( v. 16.) And though he say; My Cogitations Troubled
me, and my C ountenance changed in me. ( v. 28:) yet he was not in haste to be
Rid of it; But I kept the matter in my heart; namely, to be farther Meditated
upon, and to wait the Issue: And indeed in all Troublesome Cases, This is the
Guise of a Gracious and S anctified S pirit.

But of all other Instances, the Great Exemplar the Lord Jesus Christ is most
to be Admired and Imitated in his Holy Mournful S pirit. His Sorrow in
Gethsemane, when he approached near his Passion, is thus set forth. He began to
be sore Amazed, and to be very Heavy; and says, My Soul is exceeding S
orrowful unto Death. ( Mat. 14. 33, 34.) And what does he, but pray? That this
Bitter Cup (as Matthew) or this Hour (of Temptation) as Mark) might pass from
him; and being in an Agony he prayed more earnestly, ( Luke 22. 44.) In this
wrestling with God, His Sweat was a^ it were, great Drops (or Clodders ( of
Blood falling down to the Ground. And yet, notwithstanding all this
Earnestness, it was with the greatest Submission. Nevertheless not as I will,
but as thou will. ( v. 39.) And thus much of the S orrowful C old S pirit.

2. Is that Hotter Spirit Active and Vigorous: This C older is dull and weak; a
dull Spirit, or Spirit of Heaviness, as it is called (I sa. 61. 3.) The Spirit
of a man is the principle of his Activity. It Disposes him Diligently to Teach,
(as is before shown) and Diligently to Learn; to make Diligent Search (as it is
expressed, Psalm. 77. 6.) But this Dull S oul (in it self) is fit for neither.

The S pirit of man, is also the principle of his Vigor, and helps to bear his
Burdens; But this Spirit is (in it self) a Burden. The S pirit of a man will
sustain his Infirmity; but a Wounded Spirit who can Bear? ( Prove. 18. 14.) It Is
a weak and fainting Spirit; much like that, which was in the Queen of Sheba,
when she saw the Effects of S^l^mons Wisdom, she was even astonished, and the^^
was no more S pirit in her. (1 Kin. 10.5.

This Unsanctifyed is a pi^tiful, base, and Useless S pirit; Inclining only to
Sotti^h Sloth and Idleness; It Renders unapt to Do, or Receive any good. When
they should Teach, they are Dumb Dogs; and when they should Learn, they have a
Spirit of S^^mber and of Deep Sleep (Isa. 29. 10.) and so proportionably in any
other worthy Affair.

But if Sanctified, Its slowness makes the surer work; takes time for good
Deliberation; and helps to prevent much Rashness and Precipitance, which
Nimbler Spirits are more liable unto. All Slowness is not Blameable; Some are
Duties; as, S low to Wrath (Prove. 14. 29.) Slow to speak. (James 1. 19.) And
where S lowness of Speech, is an Infirmity; yet this hinders not Gods making
use of such in very Eminent Service, as he did Moses (Exodus 1. 10.)

And as to the Weakness of this Spirit, It Leads to Dependence on Gods
All Sufficiency; It is often an Effect of great Sorrow, By S orrow of heart the
S pirit is Broken. ( Prove. 15. 13.) And the Cracked or Broken Spirit (as before
noted) is very weak; but S anctified it is accompanied with Faith. And then it
makes Prayerful, in Applications to God for help. Hear me speedily O Lord, my S
pirit fails; I have no strength of my own to Bear up against the Floods; I
will cry unto thee when my heart (or Spirit) is overwhelmed; Lead me to the
Rock, that is higher than I. (Ps. 61. 2.)

3. Is That S pirit Bill, Resolute and Confident; The Colder one is Timorous
and humbly yielding. It Is Little in it self; and commonly Less in its own Eyes:
It Designs no great things; nor is fit for any Great Undertaking; But is apt to
shun all things, that appear any way Dangerous.

This, if Unsanctifyed is a Base Pusilanimity; a mean, poor, cowardly and
creeping S pirit: Unfit for Doing any Notable Good; or Suffering any
Considerable Evil. Such will never be Martyrs for, or C on^^ssors of, any
valuable Truth. This Spirit (like Issachar) stoops under the Burden, of every
Imposing and Tirannical Humor, without the least opposition, or Resentment; so
as it will easily let go C hristian, or C ivil Liberty; And even Tempt the
proud to Trample on their Neck. It gives way, not only for a moment, a short
time (in matters, that will bear it) upon prudent Considerations; But gives up
for good and all (as we us^ to speak) without any consideration at all: The
former is Good Fencing; the latter is Base Cowardice, which opens a careless
Gap, that not only Suffers, but Invites Trespassers. This Spirit is a Saddled
Ass, ready to be Rid at pleasure; and is most mischievous in a Church, where
are Diotrephian Spirits, and Ruinous to a S tate, where Tyranny would be
playing pranks. Such are men Born to be Slaves, for whose Unreasonable
Yielding, their Posterity will have cause to Curse them.

As to the performance of Necessary Duties, They always imagine Lions in the
way, and in the least appearance of a Difficulty* they are ready to fancy
Insuperables, and thereby Inhance Discouragements; so that they Tremble, though
it be, but at the shaking of a Leaf, (Lev. 26. 36.) I will send a faintness
into their hearts, and the sound of a shaking Leaf shall Chase them; and they
shall flee, as fleeing from a S word; and they shall fall, when none pursues.
To Fear, where no Fear is, is not only a Judicial Misery, but it is also too
often a Sin, Derived from Unbelief, as against frequent Commands; Fear not,
neither be Dismayed: Fear not their Fear, be not afraid of their Faces, etc.
And a S in (it seems) of the worst Character, as Ushering in the Bedroul of
Abominable Wickedness, in that Denunciation ( Rev. 21. 18.) But the Fearful,
and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers and Whoremongers, and
Sorcerers, and I dolaters, and all Liars, shall have their part in the Lake
that Burns. This Spirit it self is not a Sin, so far as it Depends on Natural
Causes; It Is no Evil for a Woman to be Less Courageous, then a man; or to be
more afraid upon apparent Danger; But when Fear is Habituated, or Acted by
Unbelief; for then it Impeaches Gods Glorious Attributes; his Mercy, Truth, and
All Sufficiency

But if this Little, Low, and Timorous Spirit be Sanctified, it is Exercised in
a Gracious Humility, which Aspires not to things too high (P s. 131. 1.) A
Contrite Spirit, S anctifyed, is no Base and Contemptible Spirit. It Is
Preferred and Esteemed by Wise men, Directed by the Holy Spirit of God, who
teaches men to put a due value, upon the good of Things, and Persons. Better it
is to be of an Humble Spirit with the Lowly, then to Divide the Spoil with the
Proud. ( Prove. 6. 19.) He shall be far from Contempt: A man's pride shall bring
him Low; but Honor shall uphold the Humble in spirit ( Prove. 29. 23.) Humility
is a Lovely Grace amongst men; it avoids Quarrels, which Pride and Haughtiness
of Spirit commonly makes: It gives no Offense, and Removes the Offenses that
are Taken. Yielding pacifyeth great Offenses. (Eccl. 10. 5.) And as it is
Acceptable to men, so it is well pleasing unto God. A Broken and a C ontrite
Spirit O God thou will not Despise, ( Psa. 51. 17.) Not Despise is a MEIOSIS,
yea he Favors and Approves. The Lord is nigh to them*and S aveth such, as ^e
of a Contrite Spirit. (Ps. 34. 18.) This Favor he the more Illustrates by
setting forth his own Excellencies. The Great and High God Regards the Little
and Low Spirit; This is more than once shown by the Prophet Isai^^* For thus
says the High and Lofty One, who Inhabiteth Eternity; I Dwell in the High and
Holy Place, and with him also, that is of an Humble and Contrite S pirit; to
Revive* the Spirit of the Humble, and to Revive the Heart of the (...) (Isa.
57. 15, 16.) And (ch 66. 2.) ^^^ven and Earth has mine Hand made; (...) to
this man will I L ook, even to him that is poor, and of a Contrite S pirit, and
Trembles at my word. It Is not that poor, mean, Spirit, that Trembles at the
Shaking of a Leaf; or sinfully fear^th man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils;
but he that fears the Lord and Trembles at his Word. Such an one shall not
only be Countenanced, and Comforted by God here; but bountifully, and
graciously, be Rewarded hereafter; it is the first of the Beatitudes (Mat. 5.
3.) B lessed are the poor in S pirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. Is that Hotter S pirit an Angry Spirit, fermenting in Z eal and Jealousy:
This c^lder is meek and wholly Inclined to peace: It Is Sheepish, Lamblike, and
Inoffensive; no great Doer, and a quiet S ufferer: It Is patient and silent in
bearing Injuries, and easily overlooks Faults: It Is apt to think well of all,
and in general, all its motions are calm and soft.

This quiet, calm Temper, if Unsanctified, has its spring, only in Bodily
Temperament, and Worldly Wisdom; and then Undecently bears oftimes, what it
ought to shake off, with Indignation. It Is indeed Inclined to good Offices, but
still with Earthly Design. It does good, to Receive good, Looking for something
again contrary to our Saviors Rule. ( Luke 6. 45.) It Is not the S ubject of
Anger, because it would not be the O bject thereof; always accompanied with
self-seeking; and its greatest Design is to pass quietly through the World. It Is
utterly Indisposed for holy Z eal, so as never to contend earnestly for the
Faith. Nor will it plead Gods Cause, when Wickedness is Rampant, nor Labor to
Restrain or Rebuke Ungodliness. This Gallio-like Spirit cares for none of these
things. (Acts 18. 17.) But wholly Leaves men to their own Course, without any
Religious Control. This was El^es Sin, for which both he and his Family were
severely Dealt with; God was Angry with him, because he was not Angry ^or God.
It Is a Listless Frame for Affectionate Duty; Dead Hearted to and in, Heavenly
Service; A Professor of such a Spirit is but a Cold C hristian, and will have
but a cold Entertainment when he comes to seek his Reward. A true Christian
should be always furnished with a Spirit, though not always Use it: There is a
time for necessary Anger. And we should Use our warmth of Spirit, or forbear
it, as occasion Requires. What will you? Shall I come unto you with a Rod; or
in Love, and in the S pirit of Meekness? (1 Cor. 4. 21.)

This Unsanctified softness of S pirit, Though it be thus Useless and Blameable;
yet this must be acknowledged of it: That of all the Worldly Spirits it is one
of the best; and as it does no good, so it does Least Harm and Mischief. It may
Render a man a quiet and untroublesome Neighbor, and tolerable Member, of the
Common wealth; But still a sapless and fruitless Branch in the Church,; and is
far short of true Christianity, whatever it professes.

But if the Meek Spirit be a Sanctified one; Oh! How Excellent, How Lovely and
Desirable is it? How much does it conduce to Brethrens Living together in
Unity? How many Brawls and Factions would it prevent? It then (when Sanctified)
has another principal Rise and End then was suggested by Nature and
Circumstances. It then Arises from Conformity to the Great Exemplar (Isa. 53.
7.) Who was brought as a Lamb to the S laughter: and as a S heep before the S
hearers is Dumb, so opened not he his Mouth When he was Reviled, he Reviled not
again; when he S uffered, be Threatened not; but committed himself to him, who
Judges Righteously. (1 Pet. 2. 23.)

Again, this is a fit Spirit to Deal with Sinners. Restore such an one in the S
pirit of Meekness. (Gal. 6. 1.) It Is that which is peaceable with men, and
pleasing to God; and therefore is Honorable, as an Ornament. The Ornament of a
meek and quiet S pirit; which in the sight of God is of great price. (1 Pet. 3
4.) Surely God knows the true value of Things, who has put all Worth and
Dignity into them. This is a proper Gospel S pirit, very much for its Honor,
and promoting its Interest in the World: It ofttimes holds the Hands and stops
the Mouths of its Adversaries. That Rebuke of our Savior to those S ons of
Thunder, ( James and John) when they would have Fire from Heaven upon the S
amaritan Village. ( Luke 9. 55.) Intimates the True and Genuine Gospel Spirit;
Ye kn^w not what manner of S pirit you are of. You are not Spirited as you
should be: The S pirit you have is a Chollerick, Revengeful Spirit, and you
know it not: Or, you know not what Spirit, you should be of, as my Disciples:
The S pirit of Elias (under which you would cover your passions) Has done its
Preparatory work in John Baptist; But now the Evangelical-S pirit hence
forward, is quite another thing; It Is full of meekness, sweetness, and
gentleness of mind; which by your present talk, you seem little to understand;
You (as my Disciples) do profess to be of the Gospel Spirit; But alas, you have
it not; You kn^w not what S pirit you are of!

And thus much of the two Opposite Spirits, the Hot and the Cold. We come now
to the Mean, between them both; which of all the Natural Spirits is the most
Curious, Desirable, and best Manageable, to every good purpose. Therefore

3. Some men are of a more Temperate Spirit, which is Cool in Respect of the
Heats; and Warm, in Respect of the Chills of Spirit, in the former two
Extremes. All the Conveniences of those it has, without their Inconveniences;
This is the Well-balanced Spirit, that moves Evenly, Smoothly, and Firmly; The
Vessel of due proportion, betwixt Hull, and Sail, which usually well Arrives at
its intended Port. It Is the foelix Temperies of the Philosophers, that
naturally Disposes to, and Adapts for, General Virtue. It Is best enabled to Use
its own Abilities; and manage its own powers, whether Intellectual or Volitive
to the best Advantage.

1. Intellectual by a moderation, and order of Thoughts; of a sufficient Heat
to Excite them, and yet of Coolness enough to Govern them, and their Effects,
which otherwise might be Exorbitant. It Is not the Dull* Soul, that thinks not
Intensely of any thing; Nor the Fantastic Air, that Huddles, and is
precipitant in all things. But it is such a well composed Spirit, as indeed
Quickens a man to Act, and yet Renders him Sober, and Deliberate, in all his
Actions. Hence arises Wisdom and Prudence in Matters, and a firm Judgment, that
will not suffer it self to be Biassed or Disordered by any unruly Passions; But
Governs them by Reason; and brings and keeps them in their due Subordaination.

Whence follows

2. The Volitive Powers are well used, and ordered by such a Moderate Spirit;
The Will is Benign, and the Passions Regular. The Will, and all the powers
under its Commands are Disposed to Subjection unto Right Reason. Hence This
Spirit is apt to be well governed In the man, that has it; And thereby Renders
him more fit to Govern amongst other men in the world; from both which it may
be Denominated A Spirit of Government. Of this brave Spirit was Titus
Vespasian, who from thence was called ( Humani Generis Delicioe) The Delights
of Mankind. Faithfulness, Candor, Beneficence, and all other things that are
Excellent (so far as Nature can go) have their Derivation from this Spirit;
because it is not so liable to the Infirmity of Unruly Passions, which is the
Natural Cause of all the contrary Vices.

Yet if this Rare and Excellent Spirit, which is so very good in it self be
Unsanctify'd and Corrupt; It Is all as Bad, if not worse, then the Rest.
Corruption of the best is worst. For

1. Its Wisdom and Prudence, if Unsanctifyed, is (at best) but Worldly Wisdom,
and Employed wholly to serve Worldly Interests: But it seldom stops there; for
it commonly proceeds in a way of Enmity against God and Goodness; And becomes
too often a Devilish Policy. If the Enemies of the Church be men of this
Spirit, they are most Dangerous: It Is the men of this Temper, that are the
Achitophels for Mischievous Counsels.

The Hot S pirited Huffs, and Hectors, may have as great an Enmity, which they
often show in a storming rage; But their vehement Passions do oft-times Deprive
them, of a discreet consideration, whereby they overshoot themselves, and miss
their Designs. The Smooth-bootes that look Demure, who can think and contrive,
and are not in overgreat Haste; The Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing; (in a word)
The close and undiscerned Hypocrites (who by means of this Moderate S pirit,
may more easily so be.) These are the Dangerous Enemies; These under their
seeming Virtues, have advantage to act their secret Vices. Lions by Roaring,
may Terrific the Sheep into their Safe-folds, while the ^li^ Foxes (by
surprise) do Devour the Flock.

As to the Spirit of Judgment, and Government Unsanctified; it is that which
makes Nets and Snares, and perverteth Jugdment in the Gate. It Is not the
Bawling Solicitor, so much as the subtle Judge, that Frames Mischief by a
Law, ( Psa. 94. 20) and cover it over by a plausible pretense. Not the
Clamarou^s Multitude, so much as the Cunning Highpriests, that do violence to
the Law, and pollute the S ^nctuary. (Z ephesians. 3. 4.) It Is they, that say, We
have a L aw, and by our Law he ought to Die. ( Joh. 19. 7.) Thus they Turn
Judgment into Hemlock, and make the Ordinance of God Minister to their Lusts
and Passions.

2. Its calmness of Will, and moderation of Affections, with those seeming
Virtues, that attend it, all are nothing so, as they do appear, but are Evil,
and Subservient thereunto. Evenness of Mind Un^anctified Renders a man but a
Gallio, caring for none of these things; Not concerned about the Greatest
Interests of their own, or others Souls: This is that Odious Lukewarmness which
God will S pue out of his mouth. ( Rev. 3. 16.)

Again, Benignity, Generosity, and Candor of Spirit, if Unsanctified, is, (as
Mr. Fuller calls it) The Bad-good-nature, which is commonly, and most Abused by
Parasitical Hang-byes. Such men are Led by a Thread (not like Ariadne's Clew,
out of, But) into continual Dangers. The Gallantly follow Trappanning, and
Deceitful Guides, to do Mischief; like the men, that followed Absalom in their
simplicity, and they knew not any thing of his Designs. (2 S am. 15. 11.) These
are often Impos^d upon; and made Tools, and Implements, in mischievous and
ungodly projects, for want of Gracious Wisdom. On the same account of
Bad-good-nature, they are apt to spare and favor, even Wickedness in men; and
Indulge them in their corrupt ways. They are apt to be prodigally Bountiful, to
such as they should rather frown away. (Prove. 29. 23.) The North Wind Drives
away Rain; and so does an Angry Countenance a Backbiting Tongue.

Lastly, as to the Fidelity and Stedfastness of this Natural Spirit, if
Unsanctifyed, it fits men to keep the Devils Counsel; He Hears Cursing, and
bewrays it not. ( Pro. 29. 24.) A Thief may trust him with his Stolen Goods.
Alas he is mislead by false names and notions of things, and the Clears
Immoveably to them: As for Instance; An Oath, to which he will stick, though it
be but a B and of Iniquity, (contrary to the very nature of an Oath)

Truth and Trust he so looks upon, under the Name of Moral Virtues, That he
forgets the C hristian Duty of not being Partaker in other men's Sins. So also,
in Friendship, which (through his Candor) he often strikes with the Enemies of
God; He then thinks himself obliged to be faithful in all things to these his
friends; Tho indeed true Friendship is only in Virtue; and other Friendship
neither ought to be Begun, or C ontinued: Should thou Help the Ungodly, and
Love them, that Hate the Lord? Therefore is Wrath upon thee from the Lord. (2
Cor. 19. 2.)

These Firm S pirited, are the unhappy men, who being once Ill-engaged, are
hard to be Reclaimed: They will persist, though against the very Edge, and
prickles of Conscience, and Convictions: They scorn to forsake their C olours,
though it be to come under C hrist's Banner: There is no hope to persuade; no;
For I have Loved S trangers, and (^^e never be a base Changling or Turn-coat)
After them will I go. (Jer. 2. 25.)

Thus this Noble S pirit is abused; Thus its Silver is become Dross; and those
seeming Virtues, which use to Glitter therein, are no more than (as Austin
calls the Heathen Morals) S plendida peccata; mere Gloworms and Fire flies to
the sight of a Moon-Ey'd World.

But if S anctified, if Light and Heat be put into them by the Baptism of Fire,
How do the Excellencies of this Spirit Excel themselves? This Governable Spirit
is under a Twofold Government; That of our own, and that of God too. This
Fortified Spirit has a Double Guard; That of our Discretion, and that of Gods
Grace. Let us take a view of this Spirit, as Regulated by, and S et forth in,
the Scripture.

1. It Is a Temperate Spirit; not Cold or Lukewarm, but Governably C ool. In
(Prove. 17. 27.) we have (in this Respect) its Character, and its Commendation.
He that has Knowledge, spares his words; and a man of Understanding is of an
Excellent or (as in the Margin) a C ool Spirit. By K nowledge and Understanding
in Scripture (and frequently in this particular Book) is meant Gracious Wisdom,
and S anctified Knowledge: It Is this that truly Tempers the Spirit to be
excellently Cool; and enables it to Govern it self and its Astions; yea; and
that Unruly Little Member, the Tongue, which in Hot, and Gunpowder S pirited
men is oft-times Inflamed and Set on Fire of Hell. (James 3. 5, 6.) It Is a S
pirit of Government, both Passively and Actively.

1. Passively (or fit to be Governed) which gives Commendation to the man that
has it, beyond the Triumphs of a Conqueror. He that Rules his Spirit is
better, than he that Takes a City. (Prove. 16. 32.)

Fortior est, qui se; quam qui fortissima vincit.
That Is the brave man, that Rules his Spirit; he
Has the brave Spirit, where 'twill Ruled be.
The Cold Spirit is too slow and heavy, to follow the Dictates of Regulated
Reason, unto any considerable Effect. The Hot Spirit over-runs it, and (of the
Two) is the most Ungovernable. The Hasty and Disordered Spirit is chiefly
Denominated Unruly, which often Exposes a man to Dangers, as an Unfortify'd
City. ( Prove. 25. 28.) He that has no Rule over his (Royled and Ruffled)
Spirit, is like a City, that is Broken down, and has no Walls. The Moderate
Spirit sets Discretion in the Government of his Affairs; But the Hasty Spirit
(not taking time to consider, what is to be done upon the present Emergence)
Exalts Folly (Prove. 14. 20.) To the same Effect is that Comparison; The
patient in Spirit is better, than the proud in Spirit (Eccl. 7. 8.) which is
Explained and Applied, in that Caution. ( v. 9.) Be not Hasty in the S pirit,
to be Angry; for (proud) Anger Rests in the Bosom of Fools.

The Moderate Spirit is well compact, and firm, which keeps Folly from Breaking
in, or out; But the Immoderate both Admits, and Discovers Folly, in all its
Actions; And most easily and commonly in the Tongue. A perverse Tongue is (i.
e.) Betokens and Declares) a Breach (or Disorder) in the Spirit. ( Prove. 15. 4.)

This Cool and Temperate Spirit Inclines to Wisdom, observed in Daniel, by the
Babilonians, who Recommend him for it to Nebuchadnezzar, (Dan. 5. 12.) An
^^cellent Spirit, and Knowledge and Understanding, was found in him -- to
Dissolve Doubts (or Untie Knots.) And for this he was Advanced; Because an
Excellent S pirit was in him (chapter 6. 3.) Now here we must Remember, that in
Scripture phrase, the Excellent Spirit, is in the Margin Read, the Cool S
pirit, (as is before noted.) It seems Daniel was a man of Temper, even in their
Observation, who could not D iscern his Grace; 'Twas his P rudence, and not his
Piety, that they took notice of; And though ( chapter 4. 8, 9.) The S pirit of the
Holy Gods was by those Heathens acknowledged to be in him; yet, it was not his
S anctification by the S pirit of the True God, which they meant; But
(according to their manner) whatever Transcended the common course of men, they
were wont to Diefy. Daniel had indeed Extraordinary Assistance from God for
Revealing Secrets; But this Help was above their Cognizance; they only observed
such Excellency of his Spirit, as manifested it self in his Covers amongst
them; for which also The King thought to set him over the whole Realm. (chapter 6.
3.)

That phrase in ( Job 20. 3.) The S pirit of my Understanding causes me to
Answer. Signifies not (I think) his Understanding Faculty; but rather, That
Moderation and Government, of his Spirit, whereby he was enabled (without
Disturbance) to go on in Discourse of the Matters that were before them; as if
Z ophar had said, I have heard the check of my Reproach; But it does not so
Disturb the order of my Thoughts, that I cannot have my Wits about me; No, no,
I know well enough, what to say; I have still an Understanding; Because a
Well-governed Spirit, that is not Hurried by provocation; I can Rule my own
Spirit, though not your Tongue; and therefore I can Answer what is meet: The
Spirit, that accompanie^ another man's Understanding, might (perhaps) silence
him from any prudent Reply, but the Spirit of my Understanding, (or, that
Spirit which accompanies it) causes me to Answer. And thus it is a passive
Spirit of Government, or, a Spirit to be Governed.

2. It is also a Spirit of Government, Active; or it is most fit to Rule in the
world. So thought Darius, when he thought to set Daniel over the whole Realm.
When Moses prayed for a Successor to Lead the people into the Land of Promise (
Numb. 27.16.) He does it in these very suitable words, Let the Lord, The God of
the S pirits of all Flesh, set a man over the Congregation; The Answer to this
prayer is ( v. 18.) Take thee Joshua the S on of Nun, in whom is the S pirit,
namely, which thou Desire: He has Excellent Qualifications, as a man; But Lay
thine Hand upon him, as a Consecrating Act to the work, and I will follow it
with a special Blessing; He shall have from me somewhat above Mere Man; He has
a Brave S ptrit already; But I will give him farther Additions in and by ^he
Laying on of Hands. This is mentioned, (Deuteronomy. 34. 9.) Joshua was full of the S
pirit of Wisdom; for Moses had Laid his Hands upon him; and they hearkened to
him; It gave him Authority, as well as Qualificatious; He was before a choice
Vessel, and now a Chosen Vessel (the like as was said of Paul.) Not that God
needs any Excellencies of men; yet because it is his good pleasure, to Deal with
men after a humane manner, he commonly (in Providence) suits, and singles out,
persons, apt for the work, to which he does Design them. When God promised to
show Mercy to the Remnant of Israel; it is said ( Isa. 28. 5, 6.) I n that Day
shall the Lord of Hosts be for a C rown of Glory, and for (...) Diadem of
Beauty, to the Residue of his P eople; and for a S pirit of Judgment to him
that sits in Judgment; and for Strength to them, that Turn the Battle to the
Gate; whence the word [ for] signifies either, as much as, or Instead of, and
then it Imports, that a Spirit of Judgment is fit for Judges; as Strength and
Courage is for Soldiers: or else it signifies the same with that (chapter 1. 26.)
I will Restore thy Judges as at first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning;
that is by Raising up either in Providential Dispensations, or special
Qualifications, men, that should be Repairers of their Breaches, and Restorers
of paths to dwell in; (chapter 58. 12.) from all which it appears, that this
Moderate Spirit is not only apt to be Governed; but also it is fit to Rule and
Govern in the World; because of the Wisdom and Discretion, that is used to
accompany it; especially when it is Sanctified and Overruled by God.

As to that General Virtue, in respect to the Will, or Volitive Faculty, to
which it is Adapted, as the Philosophers ( foelix temperies) happy temperament;
by S anctification, these Moral Virtues become True Graces. In Heathens, where
is no Sanctification, yet, if God Excites their Spirits, they become eminently
Serviceable. So Cyrus, who was of a Generous Noble Temper in himself; yet how
much did he act above himself, when God stirred up his Spirit (2 Cor. 36. 22.)
The Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus King of P ersia; upon which he Issues
forth a Noble Proclamation. ( v. 23.) It was Cyrus his Spirit, though stirred by
God, and Inclined to this special Service.

But where Sanctification Renews the whole man; and gives New Principles and
Ends in all their Actions; The whole Nature of their Laudible Achievements is
also changed; so that, their Natural S pirit of Candor becomes the Character
of a Blessed man, in whose S pirit there is no Guile. (Psalm. 32. 2.) Their
Fidelity comes from that Faithful Spirit, which (on just occasion) Concea^eth
the matter, and is commended for it. (Prove. 11.13.) Their Moderation of
Affections is also from a principle, that, not only Restrains (as Heathen
Morals do) but Mortifyes the Affections and Lusts. (Gal. 5. 24. and Col. 3. 5)
Their Firmness is farther fortifyed by Might in the Inner-man; (Ephesians. 3. 16.)
whereby they are steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord. (1 Cor. 15. 18.) for, if their well-considered Reasons do fix their
purposes; Much more will their well-grounded Faith establish them. In a word;
its own Nature is Lovely; But Grace super-induced renders it most Exemplary,
Amiable, and Useful in the World.

And thus, we have done with the Diversity of Spirits that are in men. The Hot,
the Cold, and the Moderate; How they Differ in Themselves, and how they are
farther Differenced by Natural Corruption, or Sanctifying Grace.

We shall now Reflect upon what has been said; and with some few practical
Inferences conclude the present Discourse.

INFERENCE I.
And by considering well the many S criptures, that have been alleged, we may
fairly see, That it is no strained Notion, which is the Design of this present
Treatise. It must indeed be acknowledged, that in many of those Scriptures, the
word [ Spirit] may be taken in some of the common S enses put upon it. As for
Instance; it may be taken for the S oul in general; and in some, for the Inward
Part, as an Expression of S incerity: But to take it for the Higher Faculties
of Intellect and Will (as the Rational part, contradistinct from the S oul, or
from the Liver; This, though it be the most common and approved Interpretation of
this Text; I must confess I do not see sufficient Reason to allow it. I do not
find (to my Understanding) the word so taken in any other Scripture: And
therefore I take it to be, but a strained Sense, and thought of, only for this
particular place, because of some Difficulty, that appeared therein.

It Is true indeed, there is one Scripture usually alleged ( Heb. 4. 12.)
wherein S oul and Spirit are Distinguished one from the other: of which place
Dr. Smith in his P ortraiture of Old Age has Discoursed, and Labored to
Evince, That S pirit, there signifies the S uperiour Faculties of man; And S
oul, the Inferior. This Discourse of the Doctor's was Considered in a former
Draught on this Subject; which now, because that Ingenious Gentleman is some
Years since gone to his Rest, I think fit to omit, only he, that has Leisure
may compare what is there said, with what we have said of the same Scripture in
the beginning of this Discourse, and then judge as he sees meet. And as for the
many other places quoted, wherein Man's S pirit is mentioned. (on which I now
Desire you to Reflect) I suppose you will judge with me: That they may (for the
most part) be very genuinely understood in our sense; and that the
Interpretation of those Scriptures will, according to our proposed sense, be
very Current.

2. We may also hence Infer;
That it is Unjust and Unchristian to Censure and Condemn men for their Humane
Spirits: To blame the Diversity of them, is to quarrel Gods Work of Creation,
or Providence. Why have thou made me (or him) thus ( Romans 9. 20.) for Natural
Temper, and Modification of it, by Outward Circumstances is more Dependent on
his Will, then our Industry.

We should rather observe how all this variety of Spirits may be made Eminently
Serviceable; for that every Spirit has its particular Natural Excellency; Though
all have not that, wherein thou (perhaps) may peculiarly Excel. One Servant
of God is Cheerful, and Sings at his work; Another goes sadly and carefully
about it, for fear of miscarriage; yet both may be good, and Faithful Servants,
and neither shall Lose his Reward, but Enter into his Masters Joy. Surely the
Manifold Wisdom of God would not be so well made known by the C hurch in many
Respects; (as Ephesians. 3. 10.) Nor the Manifold Grace of God. (1 Pet. 4. 10.) If
every man (having Diversity of Gifts) Did not so Minister, even as he has
Received the Gift. In the (1 Cor. 12.) is a Large Discourse of Diversities of
Gifts ( v. 4.) Administrations, (v. 5.) Operations, ( v. 6.) All (...) the same
Spirit; and all Tending to the same holy Ends, Gods Glory, and the Churches
good. The following verses set forth the Church under the Parable of a Humane
Body; wherein every Member has its peculiar Ability and Use; so as the Eye
cannot say to the Hands, or the Head to the Feet, I have no need of you; ( v.
21.) But all are Serviceable in their place and kind. This (he says) he wrote,
that there should be no Schism; But the Members should have the same care or
regard, one for another. ( v. 25.) If this were well considered, and a
Charitable Estimate made, of every man's ^everal S pirit or Genius; it would
much advance Love, Unity, and Mutual Honor, among Christians; Remove that
Censorious, Offensive, and Froward Temper in many, that does so much Disturb
Peace and Tranquillity, both in Church and State; and incline every man to
think and say, if I Excel any man in some things, He may Excel me in many more.

USE 3.
We may hence also Learn, who can Reform, and (being Reformed) pres^rve the
Spirit of man; even he, and only he, that Formed it; That S tretcheth out the
Heav^^s, and Lays the Foundation of the E arth, and Form^th the S pirit of
man within him (Z each. 12. 1.) This may indeed be understood of the Soul, as
one of the Eminent Works of God, and so is here Reckoned among them. The like
may be said of that, Father of Spirits. ( Heb. 12. 9.) And that (in Isa. 57.
16.) The Spirit should fail before me, and the S ouls which I have made; Spirit
and S ouls may be taken, as put Exegetically; yet, if you consider, what
follows, (in that Z ach. 12. 2.) I will make Jerusalem a Cup of Trembling, to
all the People round about, when they shall be in the Fire. ( v. 3.) A
Burdensome S tone to all the people, gathered together against it. And ( v.
4.) Smite every Horse with Astonishment, and his Rider with madness. This (I
say) considered, seems more to favor our Sense. As if the Prophet had said;
The Malignant Spirit of Wicked Men is set against Gods People; But the Former
of Spirits can quickly confound them; can dash and break them, be they as stout
as the Horse Rushing into the Battle; he can soon fill them with Astonishment,
and promises so to do.

Now if he can thus Overruled the Spirits of the Wicked; He can as well
Regulate the Spirits of his Elect; Casting down Imaginations and every high
thing, that Exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into
Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of C hrist. ((...) Cor. 10. 5.) Thus
the High S pirits (who are like Hills) are pulled down. And the mean, Low
Spirits (like to Valleys) are lifted up; yea, the C rooked and Rough Spirits,
shall become as a straight and plain place, to prepare the way of the^ Lord,
and make (...) paths straight. (Isa. 40. 4.)

This Sense is agreeable to the Covenan^ made with C hrist for his People, (
Isa. 42. 5) where Gods Titles are much like those in Z echary; Who C reated the
Heavens, and Spread forth the Earth; He that gives Breath unto the People upon
it (There Is their Natural Life) And Spirit to them that walk therein. (This I
take to be their Moral* Life, or Conversation among men, to which the Spirit,
we now speak of, does very much conduce.) He gives the Spirit, Temper, or
Inclination not only as a Gift of Nature, but as an Eminent Gift of Sanctifying
Grace, whereby they walk Uprightly in the Earth.

INFERENCE 4.
Hence also will naturally follow the Exhortation of the Apostle, (Ephesians. 4. 23.)
Be ye Renewed in the S pirit of your minds. This means not, that you should
have New Powers, or Faculties Natural (whether Superior or Inferior) But new
Inclinations, new Dispositions; The S pirit of the mind, cannot be here new
Intellects, or new Wills (which some would have to be the Spirit of Man) But
new Light in the Understanding, new Bent in the Will; This is to have new S
pirits of the mind, by Sanctification.

In the Old man, they were Corrupt, according to Lusts ( v. 22) But in the New
Man ( v. 24) after (or according to) God, they are C reated anew in
Righteousness, and True Holiness. This Exhortation [ Be ye Renewed] Does not S
uppose in man a power of Self-Renovation; or Require of man, that which must*
be done by God, if ever done; But it Requires, that man should do, what in him
Lies, to Regulate, and Order his Spirit or Inclination: It Requires our
Endeavor (to the best of our Abilities or Means) to Reform our Spirits, where
they are apt to be Exuberant; and bring our Reasons to Act, in S ubordaination
to God in the Renovation of them. And after all; because our Endeavors in
themselves (in this matter of Governing our peculiar S pirits) we see by daily
sad Experience, they Do, and will miserably fall short of Effect, Therefore to
Invocate Divine Assistance, and Influence, That the work may be Accomplished;
(as we shall again touch in the End.)

Of these Endeavors in Subordaination to Gods Working a Chief one is,

1. To Discover and Know our own S pirits (GNOTHI SEAUSON) Know thy S elf, was
(I think, in This Respect) meant by the Ancient Morallist. In This Respect also
(as to the General) was that Caution of the Prophet; ( Mal. 2. 16.) Take heed
to your Spirit; Though it was there Applied to a particular Case* And our
Saviors Rebuke to his Disciples. Ye know not, what manner of S pirit, you are
of, ( Luke 9. 55.) Referrs to the same matter; namely, That men should be well
acquainted with their own Spirits, and Inclinations; so will they be better
Enabled, To Resist Sin, and Address to Duty, in which two, consists That
Renovation of their* Spirits, to which they are Exhorted.

1. To Resist S in; That you may keep your selves (like* David*) from your
Iniquity. ( Psalm. 18. ^^.) Know and Beway^ your Infirmity; That particular
Breach in your S pirit; (P rov. 15. 4.) where the Devil can most easily make
his Assaults and Entrance. In the S piritual Warfare of the Soul, Corruption in
General ^s (...) Treacherous Party, within the Garrison; But the most Active
and D angerous* Traitors of that Party; are (as it were) by Name Particularly
Discovered, and brought forth, by a due study of our Own Spirits. The Blameless
in ^he Text No^es, where the Blameable is usually to be found.

2. To Address to Duty, That we may be more Eminently Serviceable to God and
Men in our Generation. Then are men most Serviceable when their Spirits are
suited to their business; and therefore a fit Choice of Callings in General,
may much Depend on the Knowledge of our Spirits.

When Other men make a Choice for an Affayr, if they act prudently, they view
the S pirits of their Candidates. So the Apostle ordered the Primitive
Christians to Do. ( Acts 6. 3.) Look you out among you seven men of honest
Report, f^ll of the Holy Ghost, and Wisdom, whom we may Appoint over this
Business. Every Believer was not qualified for the Service* Every Godly
Minister was not so fit to be sent to the Phillippians, as Timothe^s; of whom
it is said, I have no man like minded, who will naturally care for your Estate.
( Phil. 2. 20.)

Now as the Electors, do Regularly mind men's Spirits, so much more should the
Elected, in their Acceptance of Employments, to which they are Chosen. The want
of this Care makes many to venture on Depths beyond their Stature* Burdens
beyond their Strength: Like the Ridiculous Aspiring of the Bramble (in Jothams
Parable, Judge. 9. 15.) to be King of the whole Forest; Come (says the silly
Shrub) and put your Trust in my Shadow.

Some are Imposed upon, by Others Hypocritical Flattery; And they again Impose
upon themselves, by their careless Self-conceit. Some are over-valued by the
Esteem, that the partial Love of their Friends do put upon them: Passions are
violent, and commonly Over*lash: Love thinks all Excellent, and Hate thinks
nothing good. A man's Own P rudence, should rather guide him than Others
Mistaking Affections. And truly, in those things wherein others may be greatly
Deceived; A man, who is well Acquainted with his Own S pirit, may rightly, and
easily Inform himself.

This is not said, that men should only Contemplate their Own Infirmities; for
then no Humble, Honest Man would ever be Employed; All such (...) would be
ready to Answer with Moses upon a Great, and Illustrious Call; I am not
Eloquent; I am slow of Speech; I pray thee send by the hand of him, whom thou will (or marg: should) send. ( Exodus 4. 10) Or with Holy, Humble Jeremiah
(chapter 1. 6.) Ah Lord -- I cannot speak, for I am a Child.

But the meaning is; every man (prudently allowing graynes for Humane
Infirmity) Does, or may (by the Study of his Own S pirit) know, what in some
measure he is good for; and should accordingly apply himself to business. As it
is true (on the one hand) what is contained in that old Proverbial Rithm.

Nemo adeo est Tusus, qui nullos S erviat Usus.
None is so good for nothing, but may be used in something
And it is as true (on the other hand) Non omnia possun^us omnes. We are not all
fit for every thing. Invit^ Minerva, a Crossed Genius will never do Noble
Exploits.

And thus much of Knowing our Spirits.

2. But when we know them, and have Labored to Govern them according to our
best Discretion and Ability; And then finding an Insufficiency in our selves,
well to manage those Headstrong, and Impetuous things: we shall see cause
(besides our own Endeavors, with our own Spirits) Humbly, Earnestly, and
continually to crave Assistance from on High; That God by his Sanctifying Grace
would do that for us, which our Natural Power will never be able to Compass for
our selves. Not to Expel our Natures; but to Order and Govern our Natural
Dispositions and Inclinations, as may be most for His Glory and Service; and so
for our own Comfort and Advantage. We should Incessantly Pray for our selves,
the same which the Apostle here does for the Thessalonians. That we may be
wholly Sanctified, and that our whole S pirit, both Soul and Body, may be
preserved Blameless to the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

I have done; and shall conclude this Discourse, with that frequent Benediction
of the same Apostle: As to Timothy, (^2 Epist. 4. 22.) The Lord Jesus Christ be
with your Spirit. Which is the same in Sense with that to the Galatians, (chapter
6. 18.) and Philemon, ( v. 25.) The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your
Spirit. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement
Some little Treatises formerly Published by this Author.
1. THe Little Peacemaker, Discovering Foolish Pride the Make-^ate; from Prove.
13. 10. Only by Pride comes C ontention; but with the well-advised is Wisdom.

2. The Way of Good Men, for Wise Men to walk in; from Prove. 2. 20. That thou
may walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the Righteous.

3. Debts Discharge, being some Considerations on Romans 13. 8. Owe nothing to
any man, but to Love one another.

4. The Gaming Humor Considered and Reproved, or, The Passion-Pleasure,
Exposing Money to Hazard, by Play, Lot, or Wager. Examined.

There are also two little things in English Meeter.

The one, Meditations on the History Recorded in the First Fourteen Chapters of
Exodus.

The other, The Ark, its Loss and Recovery; being like Meditations on the
beginning of 1 S am.


