THE GREAT BLESSING, OF PRIMITIVE Counselors.

Discoursed in a SERMON, Preached in the Audience of the GOVERNOR, COUNCIL,
and REPRESENTATIVES, of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.
May 31 st. 1693. Being the Day for the ELECTION of Counselors, in that
Province.

By Increase Mather.

President of Harvard College in Cambridge, and Teacher of a Church at Boston,
in New England.

Been agere and Male audire Regium est.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold, by Benjamin Harris, Over Against the
Old-Meeting-House. 1693.

TO THE Inhabitants Of the Province of the Massachusets-Bay, In NEW ENGLAND.
THAT this Colony was happy as to Civil Government whilst they Enjoyed their
Former Charter, is most certain. Not that that there where no imperfections
attending that First Patent. Our Neighbors in the other Colonies saw that
there were some material Defects therein, which are not in their Charters, that
were Granted after Ours. But inasmuch as by Virtue thereof, the Freeman had
full Power to Choose their own Rulers, they could not be Miserable, unless by
unhappy Elections they made themselves so.

That some great Privileges contained in the Old Charter, are not in that
which at Present we enjoy, is known to every one: Nevertheless there is that in
it which calls for great Thankfulness to God, whose Providence has Smiled as
well as Frowned upon us. By Virtue of this Charter every (...)an is Confirmed
in the Peaceable Enjoyment of his Estate and Property. Nor can any Taxes now be
imposed on you, or Laws made, without your own consent by such Representatives
as your selves shall Choose. And (which is a greater matter) you are for ever
delivered from all Impositions on Conscience, which not many years ago you were
afraid of. You may serve God with all the freedom which your hearts can desire.
Nor can there be any Judge or Justice of Peace, but such as the Counselors who
are to assist the Governor shall consent unto. Nor any Counselors Confirmed
beside (...)ch as the Representatives of the Province shall Nominate to the
Governor. These are things which if you slight or undervalue them, the Most
High will doubtless be Offended. Nor is a Murmuring Spirit the (...) (...)ay to
obtain more. When the Children of Israel Murmured against those, that had been
the Instruments of their Salvation, what did they get by it For My own part, If
I desire any thing in the World, I Wish you Prosprity, and that you were in a
Frame fit for, and might enjoy all the Privileges which your selves can Wish
for, in Order to your own Happiness And I thought I had given Demonstrations of
my great affection to you both whilst present with you, and absent from you:
which notwithstandin some ill men (Who they are I know not) have caused reports
to fly about the Country, as tho During my Negotiation for you in England,
never opened my mouth for the Vindication of New England, and nev(...)
endeavored the Restoration of ancient Privileges, but in taking up wi(...)
the present Charter (when more could not be obtained) followed (...) own
Opinion without the advice of such as were your Friends; and ac(...)ed contrary
to Instructions received from the General Court. But if I never did any thing
for the Vindication of the People in this Provinc from the Aspersions cast upon
them by their Adversaries, I desire to kno who it was that Published the
Narrative of the Miseries of New Englan and that afterward wrote a F irst,
Second, and Third, Vindication of the P(...)ple, there? If I never endeavored
the Restoration of Old Charter Priv(...)edges, by means of whose Solicitations
was it, that Votes were passed in t(...) Honorable House of Commons, that the
Old Charter should be restored, a(...) a Bill wherein the Judgment against that
Charter was Reversed, a Co(...) whereof I can produce? And who was it that
wrote and dispersed, Reas(...) for the Confirmation of that Charter? Or, that
did oftentimes Humb(...) Address Their Majesty's, and Their Principal Ministers
of State conc(...)ning that affair? Day and Night have seen, Heaven and Earth
ha(...) heard, both Worlds are Witnesses, with what Importunities I have
Solicit(...) both God and Man, for all your ancient Privileges, yea and for
Ad(...)tionals unto them, according to the Instructions which the General
Co(...)sent unto me, about my attendance to every one of which I gave to t(...)
General Assembly a Particular and Satisfactory account at my first Arriv(...).

That I did not take one step without the Advice of the Wisest and (...)
Friends which New England has in England; there are many in London (...)
attest. My Worthy Dear Friend Mr. Matthew Mead in a Letter to a (...)lation of
mine in Boston, is pleased thus to Write.

Mr. Mather, Has deserved highly of New England, for the unfainting D(...)gence
and Indefatigable Endeavors he has showed in his Agency for that Peo(...). And
whilst some with you may perhaps wonder that he has obtained no more, here,
who have the Adva^tage of a better Prospect, wonder that he has done much. And
if men Reward not his great work, and Labor of Love, I am (...) God will. What
he has done has not been without the Counsel and Advice of Best Friends that
Country has in this, b^^h Parliament Men, Lawyers and Ministers; and to be
thankful for what you have for the present is the way to get what you want
hereafter. These are the words of Mr. Mead. It were indeed improper for me to
produce a tenth part of the Testimonies wherewith no inconsiderable persons
have Spontaneously favored and furnished me to justify my integrity in this
matter; nevertheless, the Injuries done me (which I cannot be so Stoical as not
at all to resent) since my Return to New England, make it but a reasonable
piece of Justice to my self, to bring forth one or two more of them. Not only
Mr. Mead, but many other Eminent Ministers, with whom I had the Happiness of a
free Conversation in London, for the space of Three or Four Years, were so kind
as to send a Letter to the General Court in Boston, Expressing their
Approbation of my Proceedings. The Letter bears Date, October 17 th. 1691. And
is Subscribed by, Dr. Bates, Dr. Annesly, Mr. Griffith, Mr. Barker, Mr.
Woodcock, Mr. Alsop, Mr. How, Mr. Mayo, and several Other Eminent Divines in
that City. Modesty would restrain me from mentioning that respectful Character
they are pleased to impose upon me, did not the Suggestions of some Whisperers
necessitate thereunto, that so my Friends and Countrymen may be truly informed
concerning my transactions in their behalf. Their words are as follows.

We must give this true Testimony of Our much Esteemed and Beloved Brother Mr.
Increase Mather, that with Inviolate Integrity, Excellent Prudence, and (...)
Diligence, (...) managed that great Business, committed to his trust. As He is
Instructed in the School of Heaven to Minister in the affairs of the Soul, so
He is furnished with a Talent to transact affairs of state. His Proceedings
have been with that Caution and Circumspection as is Correspondent to the
weight of His Commission. He with Courage and Constancy has pursued the Noble
Scope of his Employment, and understanding the true moment of things has
preferred the Public Good to the vain conceits of some, that more might be
obtained if Peremptorily insisted on. Considering the open opposition and
secret arts that have been used to frustrate the best Endeavors for the
Interest of New England, the happy Issue of things is superior to our
Expectations.

Your present Charter secures Liberty and Property, the fairest Flowers of the
Ci(...) State, and which is incomparably more valuable, it secures, the
enjoyment of the Blessed Gospel in it is Purity and Freedom. Although there is a
restraint of your Power in some things, that were Granted in the former
Charter, yet there are more Ample Privileges in other things that may be of
Perpetual advantage to the Colony. We doubt not but your faithful Agent will
receive a Gracious Reward above; and we hope His successful S ervice will be
welcomed with your entire approbation and grateful acceptance. Thus those
Reverend and Learned Persons.

The Whisperers that have endeavored to make people believe that the Ministers
who Subscribed that Letter did afterward repent of their so doing, are Forgers
of Lies. Nor would those Worthy Persons account it any other then a Calumny to
have such a thing said of them, Four or Five of them having since that Written
Letters to some in Boston of the same Import with the Former. And so have
several Gentlemen in London, whose Sentiments and Expressions for the present I
forbear to mention.

And whereas that Right Worshipful Gentleman, Sr. Henry Ashurst, with whom I
had the Honor to be Joined in the same Agency, in behalf of this Colony, and
who did fully concur with Me in what was done for New England, has bin
unworthily reflected on by some Malcontents; for His Vindication as well as
My own, and that so the Inhabitants of this Province, both such as are now
Living, and such as shall come hereafter, may see, to whom they have (under
God) bin Beholden, for what Restor(...) Liberties, and Confirmed Properties,
they now do, and are like to possess; Judge it proper and necessary to publish
some passages in his Letter sent the General Assembly at Boston. Dated December
28 th. 1691. In which He thus Speaks.

I have not for above Twelve Months troubled you with any of my Letters,
because I knew my Worthy Friend, Mr. Mather, did not omit any opportunity of
acquainting you with every thing wherein your Interest was concerned. I shall
not much enlarge upon the Services that Mr. Mather has done, for you have His
True Character sent you by the Reverend Dr. Bates, and other the most Eminent
Ministers in and about this Town. But I am sure He has been Faithful to your
Interests, and diligent, and unwearyed in your service, with neglect of his
Health. He has lived here for You, and deserves the greatest Marks of your
Favor you can bestow on him. Mr. Mather and My self in Transacting your
affairs did not leave any way unattempted that the wisest Friends we could
consult with, could direct us to. When the King was Petitioned to make
alterations in your Settlement, and to appoint a Governor, and other General
Officers, we then joined all our interests together, and obtained the Naming of
every one of them, and other Privileges that are not granted to any other
Plantation. None have been more industrious by all possible means then Mr.
Mather, and My self to have obtained your Old Charter. I hope Mr. Mather will
do me that justice, to assure you, that I have never omitted any opportunity of
serving you to the utmost of my Power. Thus that Worthy Gentleman.

I must now do Him that Right He expects from Me, before all the World And as I
have elsewhere said, I say again, it is not in the Power of New England duly
to Reward his Endeavors. But to requite him with Censures, will not be only
Vlle*Ingratitude (the C ompendium of all Evil) but great Folly You cannot loose
His Friendship alone: and who will ever make an Interest for you again, if He
must be rewarded with Slanders for all His Care and Pains? By such things you
may soon make yourselves Friendless, and the most miserable people in the
World. Some Friends of mine in England who were very willing I should spend the
remainder of My days amongst them, told me, that they had bin informed that the
People of New England were always ungrateful to their Public Servants, and
that although they knew I had with Industry and Fidelity served them to the
utmost of my Capacity, they doubted, whether they would be sensible of it, or
no. My reply to them was, that (with the Divine Permission) I would go to N.
Engl. and see, and if I found their prognostications true, I should see (the
dear people in Boston concurring with me) my Call clear to return to England
again. And now I cannot understand but that the Inhabitants of the Province do
generally rejoice in what they at present enjoy. And their Representatives did
(the last year) not only thank me, but were so civil as to propose a Reward for
the service I had done for them, which I was not free to except, being desirous
to convince my Country that (as the Apostle said to his C orinthians) I have
sought them not theirs. And that I expect my Reward in another World.
Nevertheless inasmuch as there are some (a few are to many) ill Spirits who
make it their design, by Slanders to disaffect others, I have complied with the
advice of those who persuaded to the Publishing these things that so Credulous
persons may not be imposed on by the invented stories of a few Whisperers. I
Remember that at My departure from London, taking my leave of a Noble
Personage, and Craving His Lordships Advice what might be said to satisfy the
People of New England, now they were deprived of so great a Privilege as that
of Choosing their own Governor, His Reply to Me was.

If they will be Dissatisfyed, it is Impossible that they should be
Dissatisfyed at You, for Mankind knows that You did all that you could to
obtain that and all other Privileges which themselves can wish for. But were I
in Your Case, at my Return to New England, I would say to them, Gentlemen, I
have brought to You, the Best Charter I could get for you* It Is in Your Power,
whether you will accept of it or no; If you like it not you may if you please
send it back to the King, and send over a more Fortunate Agent! And let them
Try (said my Lord) whether they can find a man in all New England that can get
a better Charter for them, than you have obtained.

The true and plain State of the Case was this: The Colony lay a Bleeding for
want of a Settlement as to Civil Government. The General Court had in an Adress
to the King, signified, That the former Governor and Assistants did not think
it safe, to Enter on the full Exercise of their Old Charter Govern (...) gland,
there should be an Orderly Settlement. The Agents had no Instruction, from
their Principals not to submit unto whatever Settlement should in England be
concluded best for them. So that if they had refused what was offered, they
could not have answered their so doing. It is an Old Proverb, That half a L oaf
is better than no Bread. And I must confess I am not of their Opinion, who if
they cannot have every thing they desire, they will have nothing, who prefer
their Late Bondage to their present Liberty; who if they must have a Governor
Set over them by the King, had rather have a bad than a good man for such
Reasons as I am not willing to mention.

The Lord pardon their Folly. And O my Soul come not thou into their S ecret,
unto their Assembly be not thou United. If after I have done my utmost to Serve
you, my Sollicitudes, and the Difficulties that I have gone through for your
sakes, must have a Requital with that which is known in New England, by the
Infamous Name of Country-P ay, I trust the Grace of God will keep me from being
too sensible of it. I am not Conscious to my self of any hurt or wrong I have
done, unless four years hard Service, for the preservation of your Liberty and
Property, and the procuring of Gifts for you, from Royal and from other
Benefactors of greater value than all the Money I did in that Time Expend on
your account* and all this without any the least Recompense be a wrong to you.
Forgive me that wrong. You are at this day saved from Slavery and Ruin.
Whoever has been the Instruments of obtaining such Mercy for you, certainly you
will neither please God nor Honor your selves by abusing them. However you
deal with Me, be not unkind to others, who have deserved well at your Hands.
Neither Lessen Divine or Royal Favors bestowed on you. I pray God it may never
be worse with you as to Civil Government then it is at present, and then you
will be in that respect, as happy a people as any on the Face of the whole
Earth at this Day.

If the Sermon herewith Emitted, cause Praises to that God who has Restored
Counselors as at the Beginning; and Prayers for the continuance of so great a
Blessing; My Design in granting the importunate Desires of many for its
Publication, will be attained. The Lord has Tried New England with Signal
Favors once more, having put them into the hands of Rulers that seeks their
Welfare; and He waits to see whether they will be Thanful, and show themselves
fit for the continuance of so great a Blessing, but if instead of that fruit
which he expects from such a people, there shall be found amongst them many
Murmurers against God and his Servants, there is no reason to think otherwise,
but that He will very speedily change the Tenor of his Dispensations toward
us, which I Implore the Mercy of Heaven to prevent.

PRIMITIVE COUNSELORS, A Great BLESSING.
ISAI. 1. 26. I will Restore thy Counselors as at the Beginning.


WHEN Austin sent to Ambrose, craving his Advice what part of the Scripture he
should especially Read, He Commended the Prophet Isaiah to him. He continued
Prophesying a very long time; to be sure above Sixty (some think above
Fourscore) years.

In his Public Ministry, he never spared any unto whom he was sent to Deliver
Messages in the Name of the Lord. His Style is not only Heroic and Majestical,
becoming a Magnanimous Spirit, but very Evangelical. Whence some of the
Ancients have called him the Fifth Evangelist, and the Apostle of the Old
Testament. His Divine sayings (some or other of them) are Quoted no less than
Sixty Times in the New- Testament. The usual Method observed by him in his
Sermons, is with Awful Severity to threaten Judgments on the Impenitent, and to
Predict and Promise mercy to the truly Penitent. And so He does in this Text
and Context.

In the preceding Verse the Lord by the Prophet declares that the Judgments
inflicted on his People should be Sanctified to their Reformation. He would
Turn his Hand upon them, not in Wrath but in Mercy, so as purely to Purge away
their Dross. This Verse is a farther Confirmation of that Prediction, wherein
there are Two Great Blessings promised to Jerusalem.

1. That Judges, i.e. Chief Magistrates should be Restored to them as at the
first.

This was necessary in Order to their being a Reformed People. For it was by
means of the profaness of their Princes, that the City and Nation was
Corrupted. Nor could a National Reformation be expected until such time as the
great ones therein should have their hearts set for Religion, and
Righteousness.

2. The Lord does here promise His People that they shall have Counselors as
at the beginning. For although the Chief Magistrate should be for Reformation and
Holiness, if his Counselors be not so too, little good can be expected,
therefore both are promised as a Singular Favor of God unto Jerusalem. The
Doctrine before us to be insisted on, as suitable to the present Occasion. Is,

That Primitive Counselors are a singular Mercy and Blessing of God to His
People.

The Doctrine may be Confirmed in Three Propositions.

Proposition. I. Good Counselors are the Gift of God. The Lord says here I
will Restore thy Judges and thy Counselors. It is not in the Power of all the
men in the World to make a good Counselor, except God first make him to be
such an one. There are but few men in the World comparatively who are fit to
give Counsel, especially in the difficult affairs of State. And they that are,
it is God that has furnished them with gifts and Qualifications for such a
station. Who makes thee to differ (says the Apostle) and what have thou that
thou did not Receive. 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who is it that makes one man to be greater
or better then another? To be Richer or Wiser then another. It is the Lord that
makes it to be so. When John Baptists Disciples were troubled that another,
(though infinitely his Superior) was preferred before him, He said to them A man
can Receive nothing except it be given him from Heaven. Joh. 3. 27. If a man
has Reputation above another, he has Received it from Heaven, and if he has
great accomplishments in more respect then one, he is beholden to Heaven for
them all. It is said of Solomon, That God gave him Wisdom and Understanding
exceeding Much, and Largeness of Heart even as the Sand that is on the Sea
shore, because of the infinite number of Wise Conceptions that his Large soul
was able to Comprehend. 1 King 4. 29. Royal Endowments were conferred on him,
and it was God that did make him sit to be a King* so if any man has the
undeerstanding which is requisite in a Counselor, it is God that has given
him that Understanding. And it is His Proivdence that does order who shall be
such. There are some in the World who are well accomplished to be in such a
Capacity that are not made use of. There are that have this Preeminence
belonging to them as their Birthright. Noble Men are Consiliarij Nati. Others
are Chosen and Constituted by the Supreme Power. In some Places the People have
a Concurrence in the Election of Counselors. This notwithstanding, the God of
Heaven determines and overrules all. Whoever may have an hand in the Choice,
their Spirits and all their Actions are disposed of by an Invisible Power. The
Lot is cast into the Lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. Pro.
16. 33.

Moreover when any persons are qualified for, and chosen unto a Service of this
Nature, it is God that does incline their hearts, to accept of that Trouble.
Indeed the Generality of men (and especially such as are unfit) need no great
persuasion to comply with such Offers. But there are some who are as averse to
Public Employments as was Moses; when he said S end I pray thee by the Hand of
whom thou will send, only let me be excused. I have had the happiness to be
acquainted with a Great and Noble Personage, who was desired by Two Kings
Successively to be of Their Council, but declined it. The affairs of a People
may be so Perplexed, as that a wise Man may be afraid to meddle, or to be any
way interested in their Public concerns. This we see in what the Prophet
Speaks, Isai. 3. 6, 7. Be thou our Ruler, and Let this Ruin be under thy Hand,
-- I will not be an Healer, Make me not a Ruler of the People. I see (says He)
you are a Ruined People, and I have no mind that your Ruin should be under my
Hand, therefore I will not accept of your offer. Counselors (such as are so
by their place and office) do Assist in Government. Now the Work of Government
is no easy Labor. That Celebrated saying of Melancthons has a great deal of
Truth in it, that there are there hard Labors Parturientis the Labor of Child
birth, Docentis, the Labor of one that is a Teacher, Regentis, the Labor of
one that is a Ruler. They that never did, and were never fit to make trial of
it, may think it easy, but others do not find it so. One of the Kings of
England had in all the Windows of his House a Crown in a Bush of Thorns, to
signify what Cares do attend Government. If then Wise men shall be willing to
deny themselves as to their own repose, and to encounter with many difficulties
in serving the Public Interest, it is God that has made them so.

Proposition II. Primitive Counselors are men of singular Qualifications. The
Scripture mentions especially four Graces which Rulers and Counselors should
be adorned with: And they which have them being quailified according to that
Rule which is from the Beginning, are Primitive Counselors.

The first is Piety toward God. Counselors ought to be, and Counselors at
the Beginning were Godly men. So it was when the Children of Israel first began
to be a Commonwealth under Moses; and at their Beginning to be a Settled
Kingdom under David. The Judges who were Governors, were Godly, and some of
the Kings of Israel were Holy men, and then we may be sure their Counselors
were so too. Psalm. 4.3. The Lord has set apart him that is Godly for Himself.
This was spoken concerning David's being set apart to be the chief Ruler over
the People of God; so they that are set apart to assist him whom God has made
Ruler and Governor in Chief ought to be Godly. The first Counselor of State
that we read of in the Scripture was Jethro, a very pious person. He advised
Moses to choose some to assist him in Government, and shows how they should be
qualified. Provide (says he) Such as Fear God. Exodus 18. 31. such as will by
their Authority and Example Encourage others to Fear and Serve Him. That will
make the Advancement of Gods Interest their chief Design. That will so act and
so speak as men that really believe they must give an Account to the Great and
Eternal God. That will often think with themselves, is this Counsil according
to the approving Will of God, and that will not for the World advise to any
thing which they believe is contrary thereunto.

2. Fidelity toward men is another requisite in a Counselor. A Primitive
Counselor is qualified with Righteousness as well as Piety. Choose men of
Truth said Jethro. Counselors are Rulers. Now he that Rules over men must be
Just, Ruling in the Fear of God, 2 Samuel 23. 3. They ought to be men, that will
give to God the things that are Gods, and to Caesar, the things that are
Caesar's; yea, that will give to all men their due. Counselors ought to be, and
Counselors at the Beginning were, Faithful to him that is the Chief Ruler, in
advising him for the best: Such an one was Hushai the Arebite unto David, 2 Samuel 17. 15. Thus and thus did Ahitophel Counsel, and thus and thus have I
Counseled. He Saved the Life of his Prince by giving that Counsel. Men in such
a Station should moreover approve themselves faithful to the Interest of the
People, whose Welfare as Counselors they are bound to endeavor. The Prince
and the People have not opposite Interests, He that promoves the true Interest
of the one, does so of the other also. A great Emperor was wont to say, Non
mibi sed populo; I am Set in this High Station, not for my self, but for the
Nations sake. So are Counselors to advise unto such things as the People, the
Country who are Concerned in them, may have cause to Bless God for them. Such a
Counselor was Mordecai in the Court of P ersia. Esth. 10. 3. Mordecai the Jew
was next unto King Ahasuerus; He ws Advanced to be a Right Honorable Privy
Counselor, S eeking the W ealth of his P eople. It was said of one of the
Kings of France, that He was, Titularis non tutelaris Rex, defuit non praefuit
Reipublicae So may it be said of such Counselors, as do not intend and
faithfully design the Good of that people, over whom the Providence of God has
placed them, they have only the Name, but not the nature of C ounsellers in
them. True Primitive Counselors they are not.

3. It is necessary that Counselors should be Endued with the Grace of C
ourage. The Spirit of Counsel and of Might, that is to say of Courage, are
conjoined, because Counselors should be men of Courage, Isa 11. 2. And this is
implied in that of their Fearing God, h. e. they must Fear God and not men.
Moses gave it in Charge unto those whom he did Commission to be Judges, Deuteronomy.
1. 17. You shall not be afraid of the Face of man. The like is to be said unto
Counselors. S olomons Throne was supported by Lions, 2 King. 10. 20. Thus
Counselors who are the Supporters of the Government should be of Magnanimous
and Undaunted Spirits. The Pillars of a Land must not Warp either for fear or
favor. They may not Fear the Frowns of them that are above them, so as to
neglect their Duty. If they should see the Chief Ruler in danger of falling
into any Error, which would be injurious to Himself or to his People; they
ought freely though humbly to advise Him to desist. It is reported concerning the
Chines, that the Counselors of their Prince do with great Freedom admonish him
of dangerous Errors, and that if they do it not, they are not accounted worthy
of the Name of Counselors, or men of Honor. Joab did the part of a Faithful
Counselor unto David, in dissuading from his ambitious Design of Numbering the
People: W hy (said he) does my Lord the King require this? Why will he be a
cause of Trespass unto Israel. 1 Chronicles. 4. 3. And at another time, when David
was too much Transported with passion at the Death of his Son Absalom, Joab
advised him to refrain himself, and to speak kindly to the men that had
Hazzarded their Lives to Save his; and David had the Wisdom to Hearken to that
good Advice. Nor should Counselors in the Discharge of their Duty, be afraid
of the Multitude. Job says, Did I fear a great Multitude? or did the Contempt
of Families terrify me. Job 31. 34. He knew that if he did punish Vice, the
Families and Relations of such as had suffered the Law, would reproach him and
a multitude would clamor against him, but that would not deter him from a
Faithful Discharge of the Duty of his Place; such Courage becomes a Counselor.
Let a man give the best Counsel in the World, he shall never please every body:
There is such variety and Contrariety in the Opinions of men, that all cannot
be pleased; sometimes not a few only, but the major part, take in with the
wrong side, and have their unreasonable Dissatisfactions; now Counselors must
do their Duty, let the World be pleased or displeased. They may not at any time
be afraid to own Christ and his Cause, but if they see Designs on foot against
the best Interest, they ought boldly to interpose, and to oppose themselves. It
is said of Joseph of Arimathea, that he was an Honorable Counselor, Mark 15.
43 some think that he was one of the Sanedrim, the great Council of the Nation.
Others suppose him to be one of the Governors Council. Now when there was a
Consult about putting Christ to Death, this Joseph Entered his Dissent, and
after the Lord was by Forms of Law, and false Witnesses, and an Accusation of
pretended Treason, Condemned and Murdered, this H onourable Counselor, went
boldly unto Pilate who had received a Commission to be Governor over the
Province of Judea, and Craved the Body of Jesus. Thus did He with Exemplary
Courage own Christ and his Cause.

And yet more than all this is required in a Counselor. A man may be a Pious,
a Faithful, a Courageous man, and for all that not fit to be a Counselor.
Therefore 4. It is necessary that a Counselor be qualified with the Grace of
Wisdom. The Divine Wisdom is expressed by that of being Great in Counsel. Jer.
32. 19. Only God, Angels, and men are Causes by Counsel. The more Wisdom there
is in any man, the more able he is to give Counsel: It is noted concerning that
Faithful Minister of God, Z achariah, who was (as Interpreters have noted) an
Ecclesiastical Counselor, one with whom the King was wont to advise in matters
of Religion, that He was a wise Counselor, 1 Chronicles. 26. 14. So should all
Counselors be men of Wisdom. Hence it is said by the Prophet, Jer. 49. 7. Is
Wisdom no more in Teman? Is Counsel perished from the Prudent? is their Wisdom
vanished. Imprudent men are unfit to be made Counsel(...) P haraohs
Counselors of Old were wise men, but his Chief Counselor Joseph (though a young
man did Excel them all in Wisdom. P haraoh said to him, There is none so
discreet and wise as thou art. Genesis 41. 37. And the Psalmist says of him, that
He Taught Pharaohs S enators (his Counselors) Wisdom. Psalm. 105. 22. Courage
without Wisdom, in one that undertakes to be a Counselor, will do more hurt
than good. An Horse that is full of Metal, if he has no Eyes to see his way
before him, is a dangerous Creature to make use of. If rash, heady, unthinking
men are made use of for Counselors, the Public Weal of such a People is in
danger. The carnal Jews indeed depended too much on this that they had Wise men
at Helm to be their Counselors of State Jer. 18. 18. The Law shall not perish
from the Priests, nor C ounsel from the Wise. We have wiser men than Jeremy
(say they) to Sit in Council, and therefore what He advises unto is not to be
regarded; but though a Nation whose Counselors are great Politicians may
possibly be ruined (as the Jewish Nation was) if they have not such
Counselors, they are in an ill case, as we shall have occasion anon further to
declare.

Proposition III. Such Counselors as these described are a singular mercy and
Blessing of God to a P eople. I shall only mention two things that Evince the
Truth of this Proposition.

1. Civil Government is a great and necessary Blessing. Without it the World
would soon be Dissolved, and run into Confusion. As one speak(...) the World
would not then be a KOSMOS, a Beautiful Structure, but a (...), an horrid Heap
of Disorder. What would Kingdoms be were it not for Government? but (as Austin
expresses it) Magna Latrocinia, great Dens of Thieves. Let a people that have
found the benefit of Government be without it for a while, and they will
quickly be made sensible that it is a great and a necessary Blessing. I have
read that it was once a Law amongst the P ersians, that after the Death of
their King, every man should have Liberty to do what he pleased for five days;
and in these five days time there was such horrid doings, that all the people
prized Government the better all their days after. Now Government cannot well
be managed by one alone without the Assistance of Counselors. Many Eyes see
more than one. It Is possible that one man may discern that which another does
not see. Besides, the Burden will be too heavy for one alone. Hence Moses said
to the Children of Israel, I am not able to bear you my self alone. Deu^. ^ 9.
and again verse 12. How can I my self alone bear your Cumbrances, and your
Burdens, and your Strife? Where there is a great people, the Burden is too
heavy for a mortal man, though never so wise and able. Moses was a wise
Statesman, nevertheless Jethro advised him to take some to assist him, in
Ruling that numerous people, because else the Burden would be so heavy upon
him, as that he must needs sink and break under the weight of it. Exodus 18. 18.
The wisest Ruler in the World needs the assistance of Counselors. Solomon (the
wisest of men) had his Counselors about him. The truth is, the Light of Nature
has taught men not only to Erect Governments, but that there should be
Counselors to assist the Chief Ruler. The Scripture informs us that not only
the Kings of Israel, but the Kings of the Gentiles had their Counselors, with
whom they were wont to take Advice in all arduous Affairs. Ezra Blesses God,
who had extended Mercy to him before Artaxarxes the King of P ersia, and his
Counselors. Ezra 7. 28. And in the 14 verse He was sent of the King, and his
seven C ounsellers Perhaps there might be Superstition in their fixing on the
Number seven, if they did it (as some Learned Men suppose) because they would
have their Government to Resemble the Heavens, wherein there are seven Planets:
But as to the thing, that there should be C ounsellers, the Light of Nature
instructed them; and therefore it is so in all Nations and Governments.

2. The I nttrest and Influence of good Counselors is great. They have a great
Interest in the Chief Ruler. In Governments, which are more absolute, and much
more in those that are more Limited it is so, especially where the principal
Ruler cannot Act without their Consent. It cannot be expressed of how great
Concernment it is for such a People to be Blessed with Counselors as at the
Beginning. Not only whole Provinces but whole Kingdoms have Fared the better
for the Wise Counsils of one Good man. So did Egypt, because there was such a
wise Counselor as Joseph found amongst them. And the whole Kingdom of Israel
found the benefit of it, when David made the Prophet Nathan to be of his
Cabinet Council. Solomon Owed his Crown, and the People much of their Happiness
to the seasonable Advice of Nathan, which had a great influence on the Royal
Heart of King David, in causing him to Nominate Solomon to Succeed in
Government, whereby great Confusions that otherwise would have happened, were
prevented. Rehoboam had not lost ten parts in twelve of his Kingdom, if he had
followed the wise Advice of his Fathers Counselors Nor had Z edekiah Lost his
Kingdom, nor had the City and Temple been Burnt, and the whole Land made
Desolate, if the good Counsel of the Prophet Jeremiah had been hearkened unto,
whom God sent to be a Counselor to them. If I give thee Counsel (said the
Prophet to the King) will thou not hearken unto me. Jer. 38. 15. It had been
well if he had.

When there are Counselors as at the Beginning, two things usually follow,
which make a people happy.

1. There will be good Judges. Much of the Welfare of a People does consist in
their having Able and Upright Judges, that will endeavor to approve themselves
in all things like unto God, the Judge of Judges, with whom there is no
Iniquity, nor Respect of persons. Hence Moses who Loved the Lords People in the
Wilderness more than He Loved his own Life, out of Respect to their Welfare
took of the Chief of the Tribes, Wise Men, and Known, and gave them a
Commission and Instruction, to Act as Judges* solemnly charging them to acquit
themselves as became men in their places Deuteronomy. 1. 15, 16, 16. Now if there be
Counselors as at the Beginning, there will be Judges as at the First. It
cannot but be so in a Government, where no Judges are appointed but with the
consent of the Council. Good Counselors will Advise to good Judges, and good
Judges will make the Land happy.

2. Where there are good Counselors, Religion and Reformation will be
Encouraged. Primitive Counselors will concern themselves to uphold Religion in
the Truth, Purity and Power of it. In King Joash his Time, as long as Jebojadah
was his Chief Counselor, The Service of the House of the Lord was duly
attended, but when ill Counselors succeeded and were hearkened unto, they Left
the House of the Lord God of their Fathers, and S erved Groves and Idols. There
is no great fear or danger of Apostasy in Matters of Religion, as long as there
are Counselors as at the Beginning. It is in their Power to prevent it, and
they will prevent it. For a people to Enjoy the only true Religion; to have not
only Liberty, but Encouragement to Serve God in the way and after the manner
which Himself in His Holy Word has Appointed, is a mercy beyond Expression
great. And thus it will be as long as there are such Counselors as I am
speaking of. Reformers are great Blessings to the places where they Live:
Primitive Counselors are of a Reforming Spirit. The Work of Reformation uses
to go forward, when such are in Place. Besides Scripture Examples, we have seen
it in our own Nation. In the Reign of King Henry 8. When he had such
Counselors as Cromwell and Cramner, there was in some things a great
Reformation. And in several Reigns since that: Wise Counselors have made our
Nation happy, and as to many particulars more Reformed than once it was. There
is a Glorious Day a coming, (and I trust in Christ that it is not far off) when
the Church of God throughout the whole World, will be in a more Reformed State
than ever yet was known since the World began, When Judges as at the First, and
Counselors as at the Beginning, will be the Instruments in the Hands of
Christ, by whom it shall be effected. Wherefore in the next words to my Text,
it is said, afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness, the
Faithful City. Jerusalem the Church of God all the World over shall become a
City of Righteousness, but first, and that it may be so, Primitive Counselors
shall be Restored.

We come now to make some Application of the Doctrine thus far Insisted on.

USE I.
Hence the contrary unto this of a Peoples being Blessed with Primitive
Counselors is a sore Judgment. It is said that where no Counsel is, the People
fall, but in the multitude of Counselors there is safety. Prove. 11. 14. Where
there are good Counselors, and a multitude of them, we may expect good, and
much good, a multitude of Blessings will be on such a People, but where there
are none such, nothing but ruin can be hoped for. The Removal of wise
Counselors is threatened as a sore Judgment. Isai. 3. 3. When a People is
reduced unto that condition, that there are none fit for Counselors to be
found amongst them, their State is deplorable, they are either perfectly
undone, or the next door to ruin. Mic. 4 9. Why do thou cry aloud, is the
Counselor perished? There is cause enough to cry aloud if it be so. They may
well make Loud Outcries of their being an undone people amongst whom the
Counselor is perished. And thus it is where there are Counselors of
pernicious principles and inclinations: Such an one there was in Nineveh, where
the King of Assyria kept his Court. Neh. 1. 11. There is one come out of thee
that imagines Evil against the Lord, a wicked C ounsellor. Perhaps Rabshekeh
might be the Counselor whom the Prophet there reflects upon. However, one he
was that advised the King to Persecute the People of God, and to Act
Arbitrarily, without any respect to right or wrong. Such Counselors there were
in Persia, who persuaded the Emperor to Establish Iniquity by a Law, and then
to Persecute and Murder all such as could not with a good Conscience Conform to
that Law, Dan. 6. 7.

Politicians have laid it down for a Maxim, and there is a Truth in it. That a
People had better have a bad P rince with a good Council, than a good Prince
with a bad Council. For Evil Counselors will (as one expresses it) by their
poisonous Whispers and Instillations at the Ear, Corrupt the Heart, and Taint
the Spirits of the best Princes. Kings and Kingdoms have often been Ruined by
Evil Counsils. So was King Ahaziah, who would needs take some of the House of
Ahab to be of his Council, and it is noted, that they were his Counselors to
his Destruction. 2 Chronicles. 22. 4. The Kingdom of Israel was divided and so
weakened after the Death of Solomon, and unhappy Counselors were the cause of
it. And thus it has been in our Nation. Not only in former Times, but in our
Days. How came the late Abdicated King to be Deposed from his Kingly Throne,
and his Glory to be taken from him; but because instead of hearkening to
Counselors as at the Beginning, he would be Governed by Popish Counsils.

USE II.
This Informs and Directs them in whose power it is to Choose Counselors what
manner of persons they are to Elect, namely such as were at the Beginning. The
Word of the Lord does Instruct this General Assembly, whom they ought to Chose
or Confirm this Day. What manner of persons the Representatives of this people,
who are here before the Lord ought to Nominate, and what manner of Persons the
Governor of this Province is by the Word of the Lord, obliged to approve of.
Unto you that are by the several Towns throughout this Government Deputed to
Act in their stead, Let me say, you have heard from the Word of the Lord, what
kind of men Primitive Counselors were, viz. God-fearing men, faithful,
courageous, prudent, you have by the Royal Charter Granted to you Power to
Nominate such, and you will please God in so doing. And let me further add
here, that it is very meet that persons Nominated for Counselors should be men
of Estate, and of some Port in the World. Isa. 3. 7. Thou have C loathing be
thou our Ruler. Thou have an Estate to Support the place and Dignity of a
Ruler, and therefore we Choose thee. If this be not considered, Government will
be rendered contemptible, and that cannot be without Sin. Let me also say to you
who are the Representatives of his People, that it will not be prudence in you
(at this time especially) to propose such Assistants to the Governor as you
cannot but know, thatHe cannot Accept of, and so to necessitate him to make use
of his Negative Voice, when He has no desire to do it.And you cannot but know
that whoever is Governor, He will judge it necessary that many of his C ouncil
should have their Habitations near to his, that so if any sudden Emergency or
Danger to the Public should happen, his Council may be at Hand to Advise with.
And you cannot but know that no Governor will take those into his Council, who
are Malcontents, and do what in them is to make others to be Disaffected to
the Government. No Governor can take such men into his Bosom.

And as for your self Excellent Sir, whom God has made the Captain over his
People in this Wilderness, It is a very great Power which the Divine Providence
has put into your Hands, that you should have a Negative on the Elections of
this Day. A Power which I confess, neither you nor any one else should have
had, if any Interest that I was capable to make, could have prevented it. You
know Sir, that I humbly argued against it to the Kings Majesty, and to many of
His chief Ministers of State. But I now see that God has ordered it to be as it
is in Mercy to this his People; what it may be for the future, when the
Ingratitude of an unthankful Murmuring Generation of men, shall have provoked
the Most High again to say of New England, her Enemies shall prosper, and her
Adversaries shall be Chief, the Lord knows: but at present there is more good
than hurt in it, and will be so as long as there shall be a Governor whose
Heart is Engaged to seek not Himself, but the Public good. You have Sir, at
this day good men, and some of them as wise men as any this Country does (...)
to be of your Council. And not one of them can be Removed (...) consent, since
the present Counselors must continue until (...) Chosen, and no Election of a
New One is valid without (...) signified under Your Hand. And although it is
necessary (...) Ones be Elected, and perhaps convenient that there be some
further Alterations, nevertheless, no one that is Disaffected to the (...) and
highest Interest, or, to the Government of Their Majesty's in England, or, that
is an Enemy to the Government here, can be imposed on you. So that it is in
your power to make this People happy one year longer. And I earnestly pray to
God to incline your Heart to do what shall be pleasing in his sight, and most
conducing to the Welfare of His People.

USE III.
I Conclude, With a Word of Exhortation which Concerns us all.

Let us do what in us Lies that this so great a Mercy may be continued to us.

We Read in the Gospel, that when the Lord Jesus Christ had taken a Text out of
the Prophet Isaiah, He began His Sermon with saying, This Day is this Scripture
fulfilled in your Ears, Luke 4. 21. So let me conclude my Discourse with
saying, This day, is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, and before your
eyes. For God has not only Given but Restored to New England, Counselors as at
the Beginning. We are all greatly concerned to endeavor the Continuance of
such a Favor.

You will say, What shall we do that it may be so.?

Answ. 1. Let us be careful that those sins which provoke the Lord to withhold
this Mercy from his People be not found amongst us. It is sin that does provoke
God to take away Good Rulers, and to send Bad ones. It is Storied that when a
very Unworthy Person was Advanced to an High Station, a Religious Man
Expostulating with Heaven about it, Received that Answer, that it was not
because such an one was Worthy of that Place, but because that sinful people
were worthy to bePunished with having so wicked a Ruler set over them. It was
Certainly a True Confession which the Levites made on a Public Fast Day. Neh.
9. 37. The Kings whom thou have set over us because of our Sins, have dominion
over our Bodies, and over our Cattle, at their pleasure. They once had Merciful
Rulers, and those too from amongst themselves, but they sinned them away, and
were for a time in the hands of Strangers who did exercise an Arbitrary Power
over them, so that they could not say that their Cattle, or their Lands, or any
thing was their own: all was at the Will and Pleasure of Strangers.
New-Enngland has had some experience of this. Your Land Strangers did devour it
in your presence. You must give what they pleased to demand that so you might
have a pretended Confirmation of your Estates and Properties. The Counselors
which then carried all were not Counselors as at the beginning. God has
Mercifully delivered you from them. But if the sins which brought that Judgment
on the Land are still amongst us unreformed and unrepented of; what can be
expected, but that after a clear Sunshine for a while the Clouds will return
again with greater Darkness than ever? What those sins were I need not say, so
much having been spoken concerning that, many Years ago. To be sure the great
sin of this Generation is their forgetting the Errand on which their Fathers
came into this Wilderness which was not to seek great things for themselves,
but to seek the Kingdom of God and His Righteousness. Let this people recover
their Primitive Holiness, and they need not doubt but God will Bless them with
Primitive Counselors; and that they shall see that promise made to Jacob
fulfilled, Jer. 30. 8. S trangers shall no more serve themselves of him.

2. Let us be very thankful for what we enjoy. To be thankful for Mercys, is
the way to have them continued. What would not New England have given no longer
since then Five Years ago, to have been sure of what they now enjoy? And what,
though you have not some Great Privileges which once you had, and which should
have been Restored to you, if He that speaks to you this Day, could have
obtained them for you, though it be with the Expense of his own Life, and of all
that is Dear to him in this World will you be thankful for nothing: because you
have not every thing just as you would have? Do any of you say, all that you
have is nothing? I hear there are some (though not many) that say so. Let me
Reason with you before the Lord this Day? You have by the Royal Charter granted
to you, Property confirmed, so that every Man may sit under his own Vine, and
his own Figtree. And is this nothing. I am sure you would have thought it
something, and a great thing too, but a Few years since. You have all English
Liberties Restored to you, so that a Governor with a Juncto of his Council
cannot (as of late they did) make Laws, and impose Taxes on you, without your
own consent, by your Representative, And is this nothing? No Governor can now
cause you, or your Children or Servants (as not long since they might) to be
sent out of the Province. Your Present Charter Secures you against all such
Invasions. And do you now account it nothing? You have Peculiar Charter
Privileges granted to you, which no other English Plantation in the World has.
Witness your being here this Day. No other Plantation has that Privilege of
Nominating to the Governor, his Council: nor have the Kings Subjects in
England it self that Privilege; and is this nothing? Your Religion is secured
to you. Now you need not fear being sent to Prison (as some of you were under a
late Government) because you scruple Swearing by a Book. You may Worship God in
the greatest Purity, and no one may Disturb you. If you set apart Days for
Solemn Prayer or Praises, as the Divine Providence may call thereunto, you need
not fear being interrupted or Obstructed therein as it was here six year ago.
You may by Laws not only Protect, but encourage that Religion which is the
General Profession of the Country. And is all this nothing? You have at present
a Governor, and a Lieutenant Governor, (and all the Council likewise) from
amongst yourselves, who do unteignedly seek your welfare. And is this nothing?
Some of you say it will not be long thus. In which you speak more then you
know. But Suppose so. Ezra and the Lords Peole with him, thought they had great
cause to be thankful to God in that He had given them a Little reviving in
their Bondage, and extended mercy to them in the sight of the King of Persia,
who had by a Charter granted them Liberty to set up the House of God, and to
repair the Desolations thereof, as we may do this Day. But if a Change come,
and the Lord be Provoked again to set Rulers over you that will obstruct what
is Good and desirable, you that are the Murmurers will be found the Guilty
cause of it before the Lord, in the Name of the Lord be it spoken to you.

3. Prayer unto God may be a means to obtain the Continuance of this so great a
mercy. Be Earnest with God that you may still have Counselors as at the
Beginning. And you are on this (as well as on many other) accounts Concerned to
pray for the King and Queen; For as long as Their present Majesty's shall hold
the English Scepter in their Hands, we in New England may hope to see Good
days. God has Blessed Our Nation with a King in the Preservation of whom the
Fate of Europe and of the Church of God is more concerned then it has been in
the life of any one Person for these Thousand Years. A King that Fights the
Battles of the Lord. A King that when a Crown was offered to him, declared,
that nothing should Oblige him to be a Persecuter. Who that has a Spark of
Grace in his Heart, will not pray for such a King? A King that has more then
once or twice in My hearing and to me expressed a singular respect to His Good
Subjects in these Colonies.

And Pray for the Queen.

For God has blessed the Nation with a Queen (as well as with a King) the like
unto whom (without Reflection on any Predecessors) never sat on the English
Throne. A Queen that loves all people that are good, whatever their
persuasions in matters relating to Conscience may be. A Queen that is a pattern
of Virtue to the Nation. A Queen that has (to my certain knowledge) interceded
with the King, that He would be kind to New England. Pray then for the Life and
Prosperity of such a King and such a Queen. And I do the rather urge this upon
you, because I have sometimes been favored with the Liberty humbly to assure
Their Majesty's, that there are none in the World that Pray for them with more
fervency and frequency then do Their Subjects in New England. I beseech you
make it appear that I was not mistaken in what I have affirmed concerning you.

And pray for them that shall be Established as C ounsellers and Rulers over
you this Day: That the Lord Jesus whose Name is C ounseller, will be with them:
That the Lord Jesus who says, Counsel is mine and sound. W isdom, will please
to give them of his Spirit,which is the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the
Spirit of C ounsil and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge and of the Fear of the
Lord.

FINIS.
Advertisements.
THere is lately Published, a new Book Entitled, The Day and the Work of the
Day. A Brief Discourse, on What Fears we may have at This Time to quicken us;
What Hopes there are for us at this Time to comfort us: What Prayers would be
Likely to turn our Fears into Hopes. With Reflections upon Time and State, now
come upon the Church of God, and Collections of certain Prophesies relating to
the present Circumstances of New England. Uttered on a Fast kept in Boston,
July 6 th. 1693. By Mr. Cotton Mather.

Sold by Benjamin Harris, over against the Old-Meeting-House, in Boston

THere is also lately Published, The English man's Right. In a Dialogue between
a Barrister at Law, and a Jury-man. Plainly setting forth, I. The Antiquity,
II. The excellent designed use, III. The Office and just Privileges of Juries.
By the Law of England.

Sold by Benjamin Harris, over against the Old-Meeting-House in Boston.

THere is lately come over from Old-England, An Account of the Late Terrible
Earthquake in Sicily; with most of its Particulars. Done from the Italian Copy,
Printed at Rome, and afterward Printed at London, and now Printing at Boston
in New England, and will speedily be Published. Sold by Benjamin Harris,
over against the Old-Meeting-House.


