The Short History of New England. A RECAPITULATION OF Wonderful Passages Which
have Occurred, First in the PROTECTIONS, and then in the AFFLICTIONS, of
NEW ENGLAND. With A REPRESENTATION Of Certain Matters calling for the Singular
Attention of that Country.

Made at Boston Lecture, in the Audience of the Great and General Assembly of
the Province of the Massachusett-Bay, JUNE 7. 1694.

By COTTON MATHER.

1 SAMUEL 12.7 Stand Still, That I way Reason with You, before the Lord; of all
the Righteous Acts of the Lord, which he did unto You, and unto your Fathers.

Boston. Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Phillips, at the Brick Shop, at the
West End of the Exchange, 1694.

Memorable Passages, relating to NEW ENGLAND.
It is Written,
In EZEKIEL. XXII.30. -- I Sought for a MAN among them, that should make up the
HEDGE, and stand in the GAP, before me, for the Land, that I should not Destroy
it.


The Rest of what is Written in the Verse* I will not Now Read unto you, as
Wishing and Hoping, that it may Never be fulfilled in our Eyes!

IT was upon the Death of a Great Man among the Ancients* that a Famous and
Well-spok'n Orator, Addressed a General Assembly of the Neighborhood* with an
Exclamation to this purpose, What shall we do, O Citizens? Our Walls are fallen
down? Indeed, the whole World seems at This Day, under the Accomplishment of
that Commination; in Is^i. 2.15. The Day of the Lord of H^sts, it shall be upon
every Fenced Wall. But such a Dark and such a Black Day, is most particularly
come upon O^r selves. The Death, which we have seen upon our First Generation,
Administers unto us, who a^e Another, and well if not upon all Accounts
Another, Generation, a Mournful Occasion for that Lamentation, Our Walls are
Fallen down! The Death which we have therewithal seen Gradually Siezing upon
our Precious and Pleasant Things, Administers unto us yet further Occasion for
that Lamentation, Our Walls are fallen down! Yea, that our Walls are broken
down, we have seen in the doleful and woeful Effects of our own Experience, a
most Effectual Demonstration.

If our Walls had not been bro^e^ down, had the Wasting Fevers of the more
Southern Indi^s broke in upon us, as ^hey have done of late years, to render
(...) as like the other West^Indi^n ^l^ntati^ns, for our Natural ^istempers, as
we become (...) them for our Moral ones? If our Wall^ had not been broken down,
had worse things than Fevers, even I^dians, broke in upon us, as they have
newly done, to lay wh^le Cou^ties desolate, and ba^ba^ously Butcher more than a
Thousand of our Inhabi^ants? I^ our Walls had not been broken down, had worse
things than Indians, even Devils, broke in upon us, as they have sadly done, to
Confound us wi^h such Praeternatural Operations, as have been the just
Astonishment of the World? Worse yet! If our Walls had not been broken down,
had worse things things than Devils, even Di^^s, broke in upon us, as they do a
pa^e, to Complete our horrible Defection from our First Loves, and our First
Ways, and make us, as the Degenerate Plant of a Str^nge Vine before the Lord?
In Truth, We may over our Country utter that Sigh, in Psalm. 89.10. Lord, Thou
have broken down all us Hedges.

And, Wha^ shall we now do? The Word of God, by His Prophet Ezekiel, shall
Direct and Assist our Meditations upon that Important Question; and unto that
word, I now call for your Earn^st H^^d.

The Name of EZEKI^L, Signifies, The (...) of God; A Name w^ll beseeming an
Ambassador of Heaven; and, As was his Name, so was He, for his becoming
Fortitude, in his Witnessing for God against an Apostatizing People One of the
Ancients has told us, That, he was Martyred and Murdered, for his Reproving of
an uncontrouleable Sin, in some of the Rulers: And another of the Ancients has
told us How? He was Dragged upon the Stones, till his Brains were dashed out. A
Proportion of such usage must be Expected by all that will contend for God,
with a due Fortitude, and Fidelity.

Jeremiah and Ezekiel were contemporaries in several Countries; and such was
their work, that both of them needed the Encouragement of a Contemporary
Prophet. Indeed* That a Testimony for God, may be Effectually Delivered and
Entertained, there had need be more than One, concurring to the Testimony. But
now Ezekiel seems to be, both more Glorious in his Visions, and more Terrible
in his Threatenings, than Jeremiah; and both of thos^* as well Terrible
Threatenings, as Glorious Visions, do notably Occur, in the Chapter now before
us.

I Remember, Nazianzen calls our Ezekiel, A Beholder of Great things* but
^^^e-thinks, he is in our Context here, A Beholder of Sad things. For Burning
Dross in a Furnace, is here made the Type of the Consuming and Fiery
Desolations, that were coming upon a Professing People of God. Referring
hereunto, behold an Horrid Mirror here set before us.

F^^st, A Catalogue of their Sins, is offered. The Ordinances of God were
despised among them, and the Sabbaths of God profaned. They were a very
Ungoverned sort of People, and much given to Oppressing of one another.
Bloodguiltiness lay upon the Land; Adulterous and Incestuous, and most
Abominable Uncleanness were Committed in it.

Secondly, A Destruction for their Sins, is denounced. God would send Fire, and
Sword, and many Wasting Afflictions upon them. They should be Scattered as
wretched Captives in other Countries. Fearful Derision and Infamy, should from
abroad be heaped upon them. And the Lord would withold from them the Rains of
His Word and Grace, in the Day of His Indignation.

Thirdly, The Aggravations attending their Sins, are declared. And what were
they?

One Aggravation of their Sins, was, The Universal Prevalency of them. All
ranks of men, were sunk into the Corruption of Manners, now prevailing In the
Church, there were Officers more conc^rned for their Livings, than for the
Salva^ion of Souls; and the In^tituti^ns of God were p^ostituted unto the Lusts
of men, in Promis^uous Administations, which put no Difference between the H^ly
and the Profane. In the State, there were Officers who made a (...) Prey of the
Inhabi^ants, and had fetched Blood in wrongful Executions; and Self was all
they Served. Among the People of the Land, there was nothing to be seen but
Injury and Vex^tion Passing from one unto another. When, All Flesh had thus
Corrupted their way, in pleasing of the Flesh, was high time for an
Overwhelming Inundation of Calamities!

Another Aggravation of their Sins, was, The Insensibl^ Security in them. That
men were very Secure under a most Perilous Condition of Affairs, is intimated
in the Text now read unto us. Wherein,

First, We have the Peoples Enj^yment. That was, An Hedge. The Hebrew word here
notes, A Wall, made either of Stone or Wood. The Metaphor Signifies, The
Protection of God, about our Comforts; with a Defense and Shelter from
Innumerable Mischiefs, whereunto, we should, without that Protection be
Obnoxious, in this Present Evil World.

Next, We have the Peoples Misery. That was, A Gap. The Hebrew word here notes,
A Breach, at which Destroying Enemies may make their Entrance. The Metaphor
Signifies, An Obnoxiousness to wretched circumstances, by Sin forfeiting the
Protection of God; with a Loss of those things wherein we have that Protection.

Lastly, We have the Expectation of our God concerning such a People. He says,
I Sought for a man, that should make up the Hedge, and stand in the Gap. It
intimates* Not only that Some One at least, ought then to have Appeared, by his
Pious Interpositions to have diverted the Wrath of God, but also that the
Appearance of One might have done Something toward the Diversion of that Wrath.

So then, there is a most Solemn and Weighty CASE; indeed, the more Solemn and
Weighty, because it is, OUR OWN, Case: wherewith I am now to (...) you.

The CASE.
What is to be done, when the Sins of a People, have made a Gap in their Hedge,
and caused them to Loose the Protecting Presence of God?

Or,

What is to be done, to keep off Ruins, from a People, that by their Sins,
have brought themselves into Dangers to be Ruined?

That is,

What have WE to do at this Day, for the Retrieving of OUR OWN Unhappinesses?

Having advised You, That our Hedge lies in those things, wherein we have the
P^^^^cting Presence of God; and that our Gap lies in our Be^eavement of those
things wherein we have that Protecting Presence* I hope it will be no,
Untempered: Morta^ daubed upon a Broken Wall, i^ I lay Five Counsils this Day
before you.

I. What is to be done? Let Every (...) most penitently Enquire and Bewayl,
what (...) Has done, toward making a Gap in our Hedge? When the People had
l^id themselves open to many Ruins, it was Th^^ the complaint concerning them,
in Jer. 8.6. No man Repented him of his Wickedness, Saying* What have I done?
Every one turns ^o his Course, as the Horse rusheth into the Battle; and
indeed, they Break through the Hedge in doing so! As it was with Old Israel, Oh
Let it not be so with New England at this Day, for Impenitent Inadvertency.
There is no Gap, ordinarily made in an Hedge, but all the People within, have
an Hand in making it. I say then, Yea, it is the Lord of Hosts, who says it;
That all the People, upon our Earth, are to obey that Repeated call of Heaven,
in Hag. 1.5, 7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your wa^es. When the
Grove of Ophrah was cut down, there was great* Asking, Who has done this
thing? and the Answer was very particular, That it was done by such an One. If
our Hedge be Broke down, it should also be asked, Who has done this thing? but
the answer must be very Comprehensive; even like that in the Acknowledgments of
the Returning Levites, when they were making up their Wall, after their
Captivity, That all sorts of men have done wickedly. It was a Confession
frequently, and it may be Sinfully, made by the (...) in the primitive Times,
upon any notable Turn of the Times, Peccavimus Omnes; We have all mistaken! But
it becomes us all, with all the Dispositions of a Penitent Soul, to make that
Confession at this Time, We have all miscarried. For indeed, All we like Sheep,
have gone astray; [Peccare, est instar Pecudum Errare] and we have all broke
through, and broke down, the Hedge of God about us, in those our Violent
Aberrations.

But we ought especially to Reflect upon the Errors which we have committed, in
the more Critical Days of Temptation which have been upon us; when a special
Energy of Satan has been driving us, it may be first out of our Wits, and
then out of our Way. It is Written concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, He was led
into the Wilderness, to be Tempted of the Devil. Truly, the People of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Led into this Wilderness, have not only met with a continual
Temptation of the Devil here; the Wilderness has always had Serpents in it;
but also we have had in almost every New Luster of years, a New Assault of
Extraordinary Temptation upon us; a more than common Hour and Power of
Darkness. Our Hellish Adversary, has ever now and then obtained a Permission
from the God of Heaven, to give some Singular Embarassment unto our Affairs;
whereby our Lusts have been Excited and Exerted, and our Minds have been thrown
into the Disorder from whence comes Every evil Work.

What a Day of Temptation, was it, when a Flood of Antin^mian and Familistical
Opinions, cast out by the Dragon, had like to have Swallowed up the Church Fled
into this Desert, in its Infancy: and a Factious Distinction made between, Men
under a Covenant of Works, and Men under a Covenant of Grace, as it were by
some Enchantment, insinuated it self into all our Concernments, to the
producing of Works wherein there was little enough of Grace discovered?

What ^ Day of Tempta^ion, was it, when the Controversy ab^^t the Extent of
Baptism, and of Church Wa^ch, was in its warmest Agitation; and Scandalous
Divisions thereupon arose between Synodalians and Antisynodists: Wherein we
have been too like, and it may be too unlike Children, while we have been
contending about the Covenant of our Children?

What a Day [shall I say, or Night] of Temptation, have we seen, when the Evil
Angels were let loose upon us, dreadfully to Annoy our Neighborhood, not only
with Tormenting Af^lictions, but also with unheard of Delusions; and cause us
to buffet one another in as Dark a Time, as that which once Distressed Egypt
for three Days together?

Have we not had our Successive Days of Temptation, relating to the posture of
things in the Common Wealth? Sometimes, ^^e contestations about the Negative,
have made us too nigh the Denying of Reason to one another. Sometimes the
measures of Compliance with Demands from the other side of the Water, have
Occasioned those Heats among us, which we cannot justify. The Unsettlements
that we have had since the Revolution, have they not rendered us, like the Sea,
which cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Mud? And how many Days of
Temptation have been Successively in this and that Plantation of our
Wilderness? One while, the Rebuilding and Removing of Meeting Houses, has
unfitted the Neighbors, for Lifting up pure Hands without Wrath together in
those Houses. One while the Enclosing of Commons, has made Neighbors, that
should have been like Sheep, to Bite and (...) one another. One while, the
Disposal of little matters, in our Militia, has made us e'^e ready to fall
upon one another with Force of Arms. I might add; There Scarce ever was any One
Great Man Engaged much in the Service of this People, but the People have at
some time or other, made it an Extraordinary Day of Temptation for that man.
And sometimes, little Piques between some Leading men in a place, have mislead
all the Neighbors far and near into most unaccountable Party-making. Alas, How
many Massahs, and Meribahs, have we had in our Wilderness!

But, Little do we think, how much these Days of Temptation, have been Days
of Provocation, before the Lord. They have been Days, wherein all sorts of
men, have too much abandoned the conduct of that Good Spirit, which would Lead
us into the Land of Uprightness, and Gratified that Evil Spirit, which is all
for Envying, for Slande^ing, for all the Expressions of Uncharitableness. Who
can thoroughly understand the Errors, wh^^h he has committed, when he has been
D^vil-driven? Or, which is all one, when he has been Passion-driven, been
Malice-driven; Yea, or Self-driven, or, indeed* but (...) unto Himself? Let us
all then Re^ect^ upon our own Behaviors in such ^^yes ^f our Fiery Trials; in
such bitter burning Pare^ylms; and let us every where Abase our selves before
God and Man, for the wrongs we have done to our Hedge in those Evil Days.

When a man has ventured upon the Doing of any thing, that is not according to
the Known Rules of Piety, and of Charity, it may be said of him, as in Eccl.
10.8: He breaks an Hedge, and a Serpent shall (...) him. It Is by breaking the
Hedge of Gods Commandments, that we lay our selves open, for Serpents, to come
in, and Crawl and Coyl about us, and for many Troubles to fasten their direful
Stings upon us. We have All done so; and therefore, if we would not our selves
retain too much of the Serpent in us, Let us take that Counsil, in Lam. 3.40.
Let us Search and Try our Ways, and Turn again unto the Lord. Oh! What an
Humbling Thought should this be, to any man of Ingenuity, I am the man, that
have done Harm to the Hedge of my Country* my Sins have had their Sh^res in
laying (...) my Country to the Displeasure of God! And there is this to be said
for the Enforcing of this Humbling Thought; If any man do Imagine that none of
his Transgressions have (...) thing toward the Inc^mmoding of the Common
Hedge, I do, in the Name of the (...) God, Arrest That man, for one of the
Principal, in the Trespass, which has been Committed; I say, THOU art the man!

II. If we do not make much of our Hedge, we shall do Nothing to make up any
Gap in our Hedge: Werefore let us have a Great Concern, and an High Value, for
those things, which Cover us from Invasions. As there are Thousands of Saints
in this Country, who have such an Angelical Guard about them, that what we find
spoken of Job, is to be spoken of Them, in Job 1.10. Have thou not made an
Hedge about him? So the whole Country it self has been under those
Dispensations of God, which have made that Account proper to be given of us, in
Math. 21.33. There was a certain Householder, which Planted a Vineyard, and
Hedged it round about. Unto what Ruins had we lain open, if our God had not
Hedged us, with at least, a Treble Muniment? Now that which I say is, Let us
count this Threefold Hedge, worth our Thanks, worth our Cares, worth our most
Expensive Reparations!

First, A Good Government, has been the Hedge of our Land. No Persecutions did
Incommode our Civil, or our Sacred Enjoyments, while we had a Royal CHARTER, to
be an Hedge about those Enjoyments: and we could Successively, in this one
Colony Elect no less than Seven Governors, and our Brethren of the Elder
Colony now Incorporated with us could Elect no less than Four such Governors,
which were so many Nehemiahs, Men seeking the Welfare of the Children of
New England; with choice Numbers of Assistants annually chosen to be, The
Shields of our Earth. When that Hedge was broken down, we have so far seen it
made up again, as it is this Day. Though Indefatigable Intercessions with
Heaven and Earth, and some years of Sisyphaean Labor, Employed by such as have
arrived unto us with ample Testimonials of having Acted for us, with An
Inviolate Integrity, an Excellent Prudence, and an unfainting Industry, have
not procured us our Former Hedge, in all things, just as it was; yet you
happily see what is obtained, in another CHARTER for us: An Hedge, wereby all
Christian Liberties, and all English Liberties are Secured unto us; An Hedge,
whereb^ our Titles to our properties, and possessions, once questioned, are at
once Confirmed, beyond the Reach of all Intrudors; An Hedge, through which no
Judges, no Councillors, no Justices, or Sheriffs, can be Arbitrarily Imposed
upon (...) and in this our Hedge, we have a (...) upon our Governors, beyond
the re^^ (...) our Nation abroad. There is in these things yet, an Hedge about
us, in respect whereof, we are Known above all the Families of the Earth.

Well; Is there any Unfinished, or Undesired part, yet left in this Hedge? To
Prize what we have, is the way for us to Gain what we have not. Unthankfulness
to God and the King, will but bring upon us the Fate of Hypocrites, To have,
even what we seem to have, Taken away. If We shall reckon, that the maturest
and liveliest Consultations, are too painful Things, to keep up such an Hedge,
I shall take leave to say, I believe, There is not, besides Us, that People
upon the face of the whole Earth, which would be of Our Opinion. But besides
all of those Endeavors, our Anniversary Endeavors, for the Fixing of Good
Stakes in such an Hedge, are also called for; Good Stakes, I say, for which we
have this Encouraging Advantage, that when once in, they cannot without the
concurrence of our own Hands, be plucked up.

Secondly, A Good Ministry, has been the H^dge of our Land. At and For our
(...) Se^tlement, there came over the (...) Ocean, Seventy Seven Orthodox
(...), Able Ministers, in the Actual Ser^ice of the Churches; besides, Twice
Seven more, Candidates in Divinity, who quickly after were thrust forth as
Laborers, in the Harvest of the Lord: by which wonderful Secession, there were
not known to be left so many Nonconformist Ministers in England, when the
Dismal Civil Wars begun, as there were Counties in the Kingdom. And what an
Hedge have we had in those Eminent Men of God? As they were the Chariots, and
the Horsemen, so, they were the Hedge, of our Israel! It was especially by
being Isreal's, or men who had Power in Wrestling with God, that they were so.
It was foretold, and what was foretold was fulfilled, concerning some of them,
That as long as they Lived, New England should be preserved from any General
Desolations. This Peerless Hedge, has been, all, saving two or three of the
Second Lester Classis, taken away; the Hedge has been Transplanted into the
upper Eden of God. And let some Shamefully Paganizing Villages in our Borders
now intimate unto us, what woeful Inroads of Ignorance, of Wickedness, of
Barbarity, had we now, Suffered, if ou^ God, had not supplied us, with a
Blessed (...) for the Renovation of our Hedge (...) have a Well Governed
COLLEGE, (...) whence there have i^sued, it may be, upwards of Tw^-H^ndred
Preach^rs, to make Glad the City of God: Yea, many Plants of Renown have been
raised in this our Hedge. And whereas there are Perhaps, about an Hundred and
Ten Christian Congregations in this Wilderness, there is hardly One Score of
them, that are not at this Day Instructed, by Teachers, which this College
has afforded unto them. Unhappy, and Unhedged We, if at last, we should have
no Pastors any better than sorry Hedge-Priests, to Entrust with the care of our
Souls! Or, if we should come to say, To what purpose is this Wast? upon all
that should go to keep alive the Schools of New England, while our Neighbors
in Virginia are using their Laudable and Liberal Essays to Erect an University!

Well; Would we have this Hedge mentained? It is a Quick-sett Hedge; and it
must not be Sapped, it must not be Starved, there must not be witheld from it,
more than is meet; nor may we think, that it can mentain it self. Would we not
have all (...) of Soul destroyers to become rampant (...) among us? This is the
Hedge that must keep them out! If we would have our, Little Flocks guarded
against grievous Wolves, they are not severe Laws against Haeretical Pravities,
but it it a Learned, an Holy, and a Countenanced Ministry that must be our
Hedge. And of this matter I speak the more anxiously, because as I have
heretofore most Publicly declared, even when things were more quiet this way,
than it seems, they now begin to be, within a few Miles of us, I am verily
persuaded, That whenever we shall come to have a Little more of Rest, from
those mischiefs of War, and Fear, which now Embroil us, we shall have some
Storm of Heresies terribly threatening to sink our most Holy Faith. Methinks, I
feel the Breeding, I see the Gathering, of such a Storm, in some things not now
to be insisted on. Remember, I beseech you, the Humble Praemonitions, which
have this Day, been given unto you, That upon a Moral Prognostication, poor
New England will much of it be Swallowed up in Haeresy, and much in Atheism,
within a little while, if we are not in good Earnest about Sufficiently
Supporting, a Sufficient Ministry, as our Hedge, when the Blast of the Terrible
One, is as a Storm against the Wall.

Thirdly; A Good Church-Discipli^^, is an Hedge of our God about us. It Is the
Compellation of the Catholic Church, in Cant. 8.13. Thou which dwell in the
Gardens. Particular Churches are those Gardens of the Lord. And hence the
French-Protestants when they have been going to their Church-Meetings, have
some times very agreeably used that Form of Speech, Let us go to Paradise. We
have a Country full of Gardens; but, what Hedge, I Pray, about them? Our
Discipline is our Hedge; a Discipline, Detaining, Debarring, Secluding from
Ecclesiastical Privileges, those who in Works Deny God, though in words they
may Profess that they know Him; a Discipline which in a way of Just Proceeding,
shall either Keep out, or Throw out, the Roots of Bitterness, whereby many
would be defiled. All that has a Tendency to make our Churches, no longer, the
Actual and Lively Pourtraitures of Heaven, Representing to the World, Who shall
Ascend into the Hill of the Lord, and who shall stand in His Holy Place
forever; it has a Tendency to pull down our Hedge. Wisdom it self, has
branded the Folly of them that Pull down their House with their own Hands: for
us to part with our Church Discipline, would be with our own Hands, to Pull
down an Hedge, which cost our Fathe s, What a To^ls^me Husbandry! We have long
since, by our Ascended Lord, been favored, with a Plat-f^rm of such a
Discipline; whereof those Reverend Persons, of the Presbyterian P^rswasion, who
Published their Ius Divinum, about Forty years ago, do say, That they Agreed
with the Things of the greatest Conc^^n^ent in it; and that th^se things
wherein they d^ffered from it, were of lesser Consequence; whereof their
Debates were not (Contentiones) Contentions, but (Collationes) Conferences. A
Discipline, Securing the Rights of Particular Churches, as to the power of Self
Reformation; A Discipline, allowing a just Regard unto Councils upon Difficult
Emergencies; A Discipline, Admitting no Visible Unregenerates, unto those
Tremendous Mysteries, our Sacraments; This is that Hedge, which will be our
Glory; and as long as we have this Glory, we shall have a Defense on, as well
as in, the Glory.

Behold, Another Hedge, which we should Esteem too Considerable to be Deserted!
Indeed, I am far from Imagining, That our Works are perfect before God; I am
far from Imagining, That being Increased in Good Things, we have Need of
Nothing. Doubtless, we have our Def^^iencies, in sundry points, that want
either to be Corrected or Improv^^* Nevertheless, I am glad, That before my
Stepping over into that World, which I am now waiting for, I have this
Opportunity, to declare among you; If our (...) Church Discipline, or the
Essentia^s and Substantials of our Church Discipline, once come to be
Sacrificed unto the Corruptions of This World, our Hedge is gone; we may Sigh,
Ichabod, Where is the Glory? Whatever Wall shall be left unto us, will be, A
Wall with a Leprosy in it; and a Leprosy, like that, which has been so
rivetted into the Walls of the Europaean Christendom, that our Eternal
High Priest, will see it needful to take all down, e're it be quite gotten out!

This is our Hedge, and this to be the Regard of our Hedge.

III. What shall we do, when a Gap is made in our Hedge? Mind, See, Shun the
Things, that make the Gap; When th^se t^ings are Understood and Avoided, our
Hedge, will still be Flourishing.

But what things are they, that lay us open to many Romes? In one (...); ^ur
Sins against our (...) Kee^er. It is our not k^eping (...) H^dge, that is
chastised with His (...) up of Ours. What things are they that compose our
Hedge? Not our Castles, not our Frigates, not our Numbers, it is said, in Prove.
18.11. The Rich man's Wealth is an H^gh Wall in his own Conceit; and it is but
in Conceit! No it is the Favor of God, which gives us, as our Shield, so our
Hedge. So then, our Hedge is demolished, by any thing, by every thing, that
shall withdraw from us, the Favor of our God: and there is no such
mischievous Thing, but our Sin against Him. We are sometimes ready to
Expostulate with our God, as in Psalm 80.1^2. Why have Thou broken down our
Hedges? But He may Reply upon us, as in Jer. 2.17. Have thou not procured This
unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God? Or as in Jer. 4.18.
Thy away and thy Doings have procured these things unto thee; this is thy
wickedness.

There are Some Sins that Naturally* and Necessarily prejudice our Hedge; those
are, the (...) Usages of them, that God has most eminently placed there. We
find, concerning our Days, in 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. (...) Times shall come, and men
shall w^nt (...) about them, to keep off (...) Injuries; why so? For, Men shall
(...). Ingratitud^ unto useful ^^pmen, leaves a People, Friendless, and that is
to be Hedge^less within a little while. The Benefactors of an Ungrateful and
Reprochful Generation, do at last frequently grow weary of Serving their
Generation, and Resolve, I will not be an Healer, or an Hedger to such a
People! Such a People will at length see, that the Vengeance of God, will
deprive them of almost all their Accomplished men, in all orders; and as for
the Few that shall be left, either by some Enchantment there shall be an
Incureable Alienation between Them and their People; or else they will be under
Invincible Disc^uragements to do any more for a People, who when they have done
their best, will but Revile them for it. What if there sho^^d any where be a
Country of professed Christians, among whom, not only Neglect but Cruel Hatred
and Slander shall be the certain Country-Pay, of every Public Servant; and
among whom it shall be observed, That no man, though the Holiest and Exactest
Liver in the World, shall preserve a Good Name, after he has been a Public
Servant! I beseech you, what cens^^e would the true Spirit of Christianity pas^
upon such a Country? It is by the Pagans t^^mselves, mentioned as the Brand
upon Old Egypt, ^t was, Loquax et Ingeniosa, in Contumeliam Prefectorum
provincia; si quis forte vitaverit culpam, Contumeliam non eff git: In plainer
New-English, It was a Province out of measure Talkative and Ingenious, for the
Vilifying of its Public Servants; let a man be never so free from Fault, he
should not escape free of Blame, among them. I now* demand, what Men, that were
not more than Men, would offer to stand in the Hedge, for such a Nation? And
yet if our Hedge be not made of Men, we have none at all. Or, what were like to
become of a People, when once there are those Complaints daily made, in the
Ears, of the Lord God of Sabbath, against them, from one Person, I have Exposed
my Life in the High Places of the Field, for this People, but they injuriously
Defraud me of my wages! From another Person, I have almost undone my Family to
Serve this People at home and abroad, but they take little notice of it! From a
Thi^d Person, Day and Night have seen, Heaven and Earth have known, how
faithfully I have Labored many years to do this People Good, and yet they do
nothing but Stone (...) for it! Never did a Congregation in a Wilderness, abuse
their Moses's, but they direfully broke their Hedges by doing of it.

But All Sins do thi^ Damage, Morally and Meritoriously. Our Sins are those
Accursed Things, which by producing of Breaches in our Hedge, do p^ove the
T^^ublers of ou^ Land. Would we have our W^ll undisturbed? There are then
certain Heads, I mean Hearts, to be thrown over our Wall; briefly, Forego, and
Cast off our Sins which do Separate, as with an High-W^ll between God and us.

Especially, those things which do more grossly Pollute the Land, most grea^ly
^xpose it. Mark it, I pray; when the Good Spirit of God, goes away from a
People, so as to Influence them no more by His Holy Motions, but Abandon them
to the ways of their own Hearts, He makes a Broad Gap in the Hedge, at His
Going. Now this Harm is done, by more Intolerable D^filements indulged among a
People; They drive the Good Spirit of God away from among them, who says, Woe
to them, when I depart from them!

I am sure that Sorceries familiarly practiced among a People will wound their
Hedge inexpressibly. It has been ^nquired How so many People came to be
P^ss^ssed by the Devil, about the Time of our Lords Incarnation? T^^ly, 'twas
not mee^ly because an Aping Satan would be more manifest in the Flesh, when
there was going to be God manifest in the Flesh; but Learned men have told us,
that horrid Sorceries usually practiced among the Jews, were the Things that
broke the Hedge about them, and let in the Devils to Worry them amazingly.
Monstrous the Stories, in the Talmuds hereabout! I will not now recite them;
only say, If Idle Fortune Tellers, and they that by unlawful Arts, do seek
after the Forbidden Knowledge of Secret and Future things, are countenanced
among a People, or Impious Almanacks come to be therefore of more Cr^dit
perhaps, than the Infallible Praedictions of the Scriptures among them: The
Grieved Spirit of God will soon leave the Hedge for Evil Spirits to get in, as
they please, upon them.

It is also particularly noted, concerning Inces^uous Abominations, in Lev.
18.25. The Land is thereby Defiled, and it Vomits out her Inhabitants; you may
be sure, Through some formidable Gap! There are Brutish men in these days,
who object, What are we concerned in the Restraints of Marriage, by the Laws of
Leviticus? I Answer, We are obliged by those Laws, to mentain the Good Order
which God has Established in Humane Society by those Laws; and the Light of
Nature, in mankind, as now Increased, abundantly testifies thereunto: By the
same Token, That the Violation of those Laws, is declared one of those things
for which the Ancient Canaanites were spued out of the Land. Wherefore, when
Adultery, yea, when Polygamy, shall show its face in a Land, and there be no
Exemplary punishments ordered for the filthy Malefactors; and yet more, when
wicked men shall Unite themselves unto the Sisters of their Deceased Wives, or
unto the Daughters of those Sisters; and when men shall venture to Espouse,
within those Degrees of Consanguinity to their Departed Wives, and so, of
Affinity to themselves, wherein they would be afraid of Touching their own
Consanguines; but most of all, when men shall be so forsaken of Humanity, as
openly t^ Plead for such Enormities; fearfully Def^^ed is that Land. There is
no other Hedge, when men will not be Hedged up from such Defilements.

Again, Upon a Sinful Return to Vain Customs, from whence God has Required
and Begun a Separation, it is noted, in Exodus 32.25. A Church in a Wilderness
were made Naked, unto their Shame, amongst their Enemies; there was a Gap,
through which their Enemies might come at them. Suppose that God has been by
Great Wonders bringing a People into a Wilderness, that so He might Ref^rm
them, and Reclame them from all the Ill Effects of a Superstitious Education:
He then says of Them, This People have I formed for my self! and if they* Show
forth His Praise, they shall also be Fenced by Himself; He says of them, These
are to be a Peculiar People! and if they be Zealous of Good Works, He will be
so long Zealous for their Welfare. But if once they go back to those
Unwarrantable Superstitions, which they had formerly escaped, you see, (...)
become Naked presently. They shall (...) no longer Hedged, by the
Distinguishing Tutelage of Heaven, when the H^dge, of Loyalty to the pure
Institutions of the Blessed Jesus, which distinguished them from others, i^
l^id aside.

Shall I say ^urth^^: An Hedge may be Washed away. May not all the Banks of a
Country, be washed away, by a Flood of Strong D^ink? Yea, And some t^ink, it
will be w^ll if many of ours ere long be not ^o The way of Ti^ling at the
Tavern, begins to overturn ^ll sorts of Good Order, in many Towns among us; and
to Drow^ both Religion, and (...). A Flo^d (...) Impiety, both among English
and Indians, yea, and of Bloodguiltiness too, has been let in upon us, through
this way of Sinning. Shall I say more? Twould be ill indeed if the Rhum-Bottle,
should come to render any that are in a Public Capacity, incapable of Acting
with a due Application for the Public: or if ever any Sons of God, in our
Hedge, be drowned by this Flood! Stop it, I Entreat you; l^st the Breach in our
Hedge, come to that pass, in Lam. 2.13. The Breach is great like the Sea; who
can heal thee? But it cannot be Stopped, unless by severe Laws, framed, in spite
of any Worldly Interest unto the contrary, without such Ambiguities of
Expression, as may become a Snare to Officers, and a Scorn to Offenders; for
the Enacting of which Laws I make my self this Day, Your Humble Petitioner.

What need I say more? But that the Hedge is ruined by all Unfruitfulness. When
a Vineyard of our God, brings forth Wild Grapes; What follows? In Isa. 5.5. I
will take away the Hedge thereof, and it shall be Eaten up; I will break down
the Wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down. Better Fruits, than those
yielded by the Wild Heathen, are Expected from them, who have (...) Hedge of
God about them. Is there among us, that Unrighteousness, that Fraudulence, that
False-speaking, that Contempt of Superiors, that want of Good Nurture, that
Sleight of them that have the Cure of Souls, which the very Heathen have
accounted Criminal? Nay, If there be not among us, an abundance of those
Fruits, which are to the Praise of God; Then as David said once, In Vain have I
kept all that this Fellow has in the Wilderness; even so, our God will say, In
Vain have I made an Hedge, about such a People in a Wilderness; what will
signify an Hedge about such a Barren Soil?

In a word; It was said, in Zech. 2.5. The Lord will be to her, a Wall of Fire
round about, and will be the Glory in the midst of her. An Hedge, all Fire, is
one which no Wild-Beasts will dare to break thorough; but if once we come no
longer to pursue this as our chief Glory, Our Devotion to God; and our
Enjoyment of God, in His Ordinances; if we are for no other Glory, than what
the Sons of old Farmer Laban accounted so; even. The Riches of this World; the
Fiery Wall will soon be put out, and every Wild Beast will find us lying open
to their bloody Depr^dations.

IV. What shall we do for our Hedge? Note Every Gap made in the Hedge, as fast
as it is made, and observe Diligently the Gradual Decays of our Hedge. When a
People are laid open to Ruins, it is done, for the most part Pr^gressively and
Insensibly. The Gradual Removes of the Glory were strictly Observed in the
Tenth Chapter of Ezekiel; and so should be the Gradual Decays of a Glorious
Hedge. It was predicted in Isa. 17.4. The Glory of Jacob shall be made Thin;
it is done, when the Hedge becomes Thinner than it was; and when such a thing is
inflicted, we should Exactly observe the Thinnings of the Glory. Observe, what
Advantages, our worst Enemies gain, to break in upon us; and Which way, and How
far, they Gain those Advantages. Observe, How those things are Lessened among
us, whereby the Anger of God might be kept off, and so There is a way made for
His Anger; Observe, How those things are Increased among us, that Increase our
Confusions, and that make us every way truly Little. I say, Whosoever is Wise,
will Observe these things; but if we would Observe Wisely, we must make
Pr^vention the end of our Observation.

ONE THING* I would ask in the Fear of God! Is there no Hazard, that Religion
may come to be Lost, in these American Regions? It Is an old Saying, What has
been, May be; and what has been, I will now inform you. In the Days of the
Great CALVIN, under the Influences of that Admirable Hero and Martyr, Coligni
the French Admiral, a Noble Knight began to Attempt the Settlement of some
French Colonies in America, for the Propagation of the Protestant Religion.
Arriving at Brasile, they hoped they had found Quiet-Seats, where the Reformed
Churches, might be Erected, Mul^iplied, and forever sheltered from the
Annoyances, whereto they were in Europe liable. Geneva sent over a Number of
Excellent Pastors for the Churches now setting up in those desolate Corners of
the Earth, very little different from ours; but it was not long before there
happened among them, some unhappy Controversies, which drove their principal
Pastors home again, and as for the People that staid behind, no other can be
learnt, but that they are utterly lost, either in Paganism, or in Disaster.
Truly, if that Glori^ous RE^REFORMATION, which is most certainly and now
speedily, to be effected in the Church of God, should not Relieve our
Degeneracies, there would be cause to suspect, whether this French Story, might
not be Translated into English before we are aware.

Give me leave to become your Monitor, in and by This ONE Reflection. The
Devil, is more desirous to Regain poor New England, than any one American Spot
of Ground, whose Inhabitants have yet heard the Silver-Trumpets of the Gospel;
he would have more of Triumph, and of Trophy, upon such a Victory! And you need
not fo^get how Victorious the Devil sometimes has been, in Signalizing for his
Revived worship, those very Places, which had been most notably Devoted unto
the Servi^e of God. At Gilgal had been the Ark of God; but afterwa^ds, All the
Wickedness in Gilgal! At Bethel had been the House of God; but afterward,
Bethel is Bethaven! They say, where Dodanim the Grandson of Iaphet, Instructed
People in the true Knowledge of God, There came to be all the Idolatries of
Dod^na's Grove. I think, Ierom tell us, That in the place of our Lords
Crucifixion, there came to be a Statue to Venus, and in the place of our Lords
Resurrection, a Statue of Jupiter. What has be^^llen, the Renowned Churches of
Asia, has been told in America, that we may Repent, lest we likewise Perish.
And now, what if in those parts of New England, where the Lord Jesus Christ
has heretofore most Eminently Exhibited Himself unto the Souls of them that
followed Him into a Wilde^ness, there should ere long be but, The Habitations
of Owls and Dragons! I would Humbly Request my Neighbors, in Sober Sadness to
Consider, Whether the most unaccountable and unparall^llable Descent of Devils,
lately made, especially about the Center of this Province, wherein so many poor
Creatures have been Afflicted, with proposals of the most horrible Devil
Worship, Spectrally tendered unto them, were not Intended for a most Ominous
Prodigy, unto us. Consider, whether, we have not had, as it were in a Magical
Glass, fore-shown unto us, what a Kingdom the Devils may yet again have, when
the Sun of Righteousness leaves off to Shine, in these Goings down of the Sun!
And as for those Particular Churches in the Land, who are under a Sensible
Withdraw of their Ancient Glory from them, to them I will only repeat the
Solemn words of a Famous Divine, unto Old Boston, in Lincolnshire, partly upon
the Occasion of Mr. Cottons going from thence; words Printed about Forty years
ago; I have, said he, Sometimes on purpose Visited some places, where God had
before planted His Church, and a Faithful Ministry; to see, if I could discern
any Footsteps, and Remembrances, of such a Mercy; and, Lo, they were all grown
over with Thorns, and Nettles had Covered the Face thereof, and the S^one-Wall
thereof is broken down. And, which is m^re sad! In some of them Never, in
others very hardly built up again. As God Removes the Candlestick, when we
Play or Fight, by the Light of the Candle set up in it, so He is very Hardly
Induced to Light it again, in that place, where it has once been Wantonly, or
Fr^wardly put out. The Ark never did Return, to the same place, from which it
was in a way of Judgment Removed!

THIS is the Sum of what I would now say hereupon. I pray you, For the Lords
sake, I pray you, To Observe all Tendencies toward that ^orlorn State,
where-to our Sins are apace carrying of us. It is a most miserable Thing, when
a Sic^ly and Cloudy Lassitude of Spirit, shall indispose a People to take
Notice, of what may be signified unto them in their own Alterations; and when
a People shall Jog on, in a Sottish, a Stupid, an heedless Lethargy of Soul,
until they Die. This Dementation, is the ^la^k^st Mark upon a People cut out for
Desolation. In all States, let us look whereabouts we are. In our Civil State,
have we such a Variety of Prudent and Virtuous Men, to Employ for all Services
as formerly, or, to supply our Vacan^ies? In our Military State, have not our
Artillery Exercises even dwindled away to Nothing, and many other Training
Days b^come little other than Drinking Days? As to our whole Political State,
let the Fa^e and Course of Things in General Assemblies, be compared with, What
was rom the Beginning; though here I cannot so partic^la^ly sa^, What would be
the Result of that Comparison. In our Ecclesiastical State, though our
Inhabitants are more than they were many years ago, yet are not ou^
Communicants rather fewer, in many Town^? And, albeit the Generality of our
Ministers are of t^i^ Judgment, That ^uling E^ders are appointed for the
Assistance of their Past^rs, in the Government of their Churches, and the
Inpspecti^n of the Flocks; and that, although these Officers may not be
^u^nish^d with all the Attainment^ which are Necessary for a Pastor, yet i^
they are so accomplished, as that they may be H^lps to t^^i^ Pastor in the
management of the Church R^le, they may be chosen thereunto, with much Benefit,
and Advantage to the People of God: Nevertheless, How is that Off^ce almost
utterly Extinct in our Churches; and, Chi^f^y, it is said, for this cause, that
our Churches have not Numbers of men well qualified with Wisdom, Courage,
Leisure, Holiness and Gravity enough, to Visit the Distressed, Instruct the
Ignorant, Reduce the Erroneous, Comfort the Afflicted, Advise the Defective,
Rebuke the Unruly, and Promote the Growth of the Societies whereunto they do
belong? Time was, that Neighbourhoods, were filled with Private* and Pious
Meetings, for the Mutual Edification of the Neighbors in the fear of God; but
is it not now come to that pass in some Congregations, that if their Pastor lay
a Dying, there would not be one Meeting of ordinary Believers, that could come
together to Fast and Pray for his Life? And now, who is there duly
Apprehensive of these Gradual Decays in our Hedge? I have heard it observed,
concerning some Towns, among us, through whose Broken Hedge, the Destroying
Angels of Sickness, have broken in, and carried off many of the People: The
more observant Ministers of those Towns, have asked the Surviv^rs, How many,
according to their Account, have Died out of the place, in the last
Pestilential Months? To which they have Replied, It may be Ei^ht or Ten; but
these have been able to Surprise them, which showing them, That-some Scores of
their F^iends were in those few Months g^ne to the p^ace of Sil^nce. Truly,
such Unheeded things usually, are all the ^alamitous Decays which bef^ll a
People, when God is contending with them. Good Things leave us, and no bod^
takes an Accoun^, How, or When, they leave us O^ such a People it has been
said, Gray Hairs are he^e and there upon them, and they know it not!

But, Oh! do not permit all things thus In Pej^s (...), et retro (...) re^erri;
Go to R^in^, without any Bodies Mi^ding how m^tters go. It may be that we Young
Men, like those that saw the Foundations of the Second Temple, may be ready to
Rejoice that things are so w^ll wi^h us, as they are; and ind^^d, Blessed be
G^d that they are no worse ^ B^t let us Enquire of our Old Men, for a Tru^r
View of our Decays. As i^ was said* in Jo^l 1.2. Hear this, ye Old Men; Has
thi^ bee^ in you^ Da^es? Thus, my Fathers; I Pray, Do You, t^ll us; Is the
Hedge of God about Us, as it was in Your Days? Doubtless, An uncomfortabl^
Story, they have to tell us.

Minding, did I say? But that must be with a Disposition to Mending, of what is
thus Decaying in our Hedge. I remember a Proverb, in Prove. 15.19. The way of
the Slothful is as an Hedge of Thorns. Many times, when we should set our
selves to Consider the Condition of our Hedge, we are disheartened by the
Th^rns which are to be Encountered in it! The Fear of being Scratched with
Reproaches, or Scratched with Expenses, makes us too Slothful to meddle with it.

But I Renew my Addresses to You, for this piece of Discretion; Let us keep a
Watchful Eye; upon Every Spreading Breach, in our Hedge. I remember, a notable
Passage, reported in a Jewish History: That a Famous King of Portugal finding
himself unable to Sleep in the Night, went and walked on the Top of his Palace;
from whence he saw a couple of Wretches throw a Dead Corpse into the House of a
poor Jew not far off. The next morning those Wretches, made a clamor about the
^ity, that the Jew had Murdered the man who was m^ssing; and the whole People
of Jews in the City, had been Massacred, in the Tumult raised on this Occasion,
if they had not been rescued by the Justice of the King, who had been an
Ey-Witn^ss, how the Plot was managed. The King then asked the Chief Rabbi's of
the Jews, how they translated, the Fourth Verse of the Hundred and Twenty First
Psalm. They Answered, He that keeps Israel shall neither Slumber, nor Sleep:
He Replied, Nay, I translate it so, He will not Slumber, nor will He Suffer to
Sleep, the Keeper of Israel; which (he added) you have seen fulfilled, in your
Deliverance by means of my Wakefulness. That I say hereupon is this; The Keeper
of our Walls, are at this Time to be spoken unto; Well, but May the Lord now
not suffer you to Sleep. The safety of our Walls does depend upon your being
duly, Watchful, Wakeful, Heedful upon them.

And, if you would have a Rule or two, more particula^ly given, for the
Directing of this Watchfulness, you shall have it.

One Rule is this. Observe Goings out, as well as Breakings in, if you would
see where the Hedge is Deficient. Those things, are joined, in Psalm 144.14.
That there b^ n^ Breaking in, or Going out. For instance then; Do our Young
People, any of them Go out, in such a manner as to bring perhaps a Blemish upon
their whole Nation, and giv^ a Scandal unto all mankind; and procl^^e
Themselves Lost unto all Good Intents and Purposes? You may be sure, The Hedge
is not whole, if such things cannot be obstructed. Here then, Think, What is to
be done? It was a most rueful ^ight, when in 2 King. 3.27. The King of Moab,
to^k his Eldest Son, and ^ffered him, for a Burnt-^ffering upon the Wall. But,
Ah! Lord! Is there no way for us to hinder our Sons, from Going out at our
Wall, that they may among, I know not what Cursed Crues, Offer themselves a
Burnt-offering unto the Devil? God put us into a way. Again, Do our Old People,
any of them Go out from the Institutions of God, Swarming into New Settlements,
where they and their Untaught Families are like to Perish for Lack of Vision?
They that have done so, heretofore, h^ve to their Cost found, that they were
got unto the Wrong side of the Hedge, in their doing so. Think, here, Should
this be done any more? We read of Balaam, in Number. 22.23. He was to his Damage,
driven to the Wall, when he would needs make an unlawf^l Salley forth after the
Gain of this World, with a Secret Rese^ve (...) it seems, in his own Breast, of
accommo^^^ing himself to his Worldly Interest, contrary to the charge that God
had given him. Wh^, wh^^ men, for the sake of ^^rthl^ Gain, will be Going out
into the (...) drive Through the Wall, (...) the Angel of the Lord becomes
their Enemy.

Shall I add one thing mo^e? I say then, Observe the Inclinations of Good and
Great Men to be Gone. When the Hedge about the People of the Jews was just
breaking down, there was a Mavelous Cry which Mortal men overheard audibly
uttered among the Angels in the Invisible World, Migremus hinc, or, Let us be
gone. Sometimes a People have among them such men, as the Bible calls Angels;
Yea, such men as are Angels in Flesh: men that are Disposed like the Angels,
Employed like the Angels, the special Darlings of the Angels. Well, it should
be observed, Whether there be that Uneasiness in the Minds of such men, which
makes them in their more Deliberate and more Supplicating Frames before the God
of Heaven, to Wish, Oh! That I had Wings like a Dove, to flee away! When ever
such Angels come to be upon the Wing, I tell you, the Hedge is failing
horribly. Regard what I say; The Body is an Hedge to the Soul; but when the
Soul comes to talk much of Going, of Removing, of Departing, which is the usual
Talk of Dying men, it is a shr^w'd Symptom, that the Hedge ha'^ a (...) just
Siezing upon it. There are Men, that ^re the very Soul, and (...) and when
these men shall have their Thoughts all upon Going, the Hedge is mouldring
away, you may be sure of it*

I Will touch upon one thing more; Observe Whether a People are willing to be at
Necessary Charges for the Succouring of their Hedge; or, Whether to save
Charges, they do not grow almost careless what becomes of it. We are told, That
Coveteousness, is the R^ot of all Evil (A destructive Root in a Wall!) and
therefore we may be Foretold, that the Hedge will be open, for all kind of Evil
to Rush in, upon a People that shall be under the Dominion of such a Penurious,
Niggardly, Sordid, P^inciple. I remember, it is the speech of the Golden-mouthed
Ancient, The Coveteous, are as a City without Walls. I am certain, They soon
make themselves to be so. The Miserable Greeks would not be at the charge, to
pay the Watchmen upon their Beseiged Wall, and by that wi^ked Covete^usness of
theirs, their Wall was qui^kly (...) by their Adversa^i^s, who then found that
they had a Wealthy City thus fallen into their Hands. How many a fair Wall has
been ^oolishly Betrayed by the Covete^^s^ess (...) those, that yet in Loosing
of ^he (...)* have Lost an Hundred Times more than would have been enough to
have kept it up! When God sees, that men will Subordinate every thing to a
Parsimon^^us Humor, He delights in crossing them, with such a Multiplication
of Breaches in their Hedge, as will make them Spend, it may be Ten Times more
than they hoped to S^are: it may be, more than Four-s^ore thousand Pounds, when
less than Fourteen, would once have done their matters. To give one Instance;
God may make Nations of Pagans to be sometimes an Hedge about His People; and
their Liv^ly Attempts to Christianize and Civilize these Pagans, might render
the Hedge for ever Immarcescible. W^ll, Throw by such a costly underta^ing, and
you shall see, that God will turn this Hedge into Briars and Thorns, which will
tear us to Pieces with Wars, Forty Times as costly as all those means, which
might have made them, The Lords, and Our own, for ever. It is for some such
causes, as this, that whether, the rest of my Discourse have been Applicable to
my own Country, o^ no, I must so far Apply This Article of it, as to (...),
that when you find it accomplished, you will Remember, that you once had this
(...) part of New Eng^^nds Peac^ Liber^^, (...), be lost, it will be by (...) a
Coveteous Disposition to Save a (...) Occasion the (...) of all.

Might (...) have added, yet another Symptom (...) Hedge? The inspired Wise man
allows any Wise man, to reckon his Good Name, among his dearest Interests: But
what an Unhedged place will that be, where a man's Good Name can have no
Security? It was the hard measure which the Great Athanasius had from his Arian
Adversaries; that, Caedes, Adulteria, Furta, quicquid Atrox Confingi Poterat,
Sancto Viro Objiciebantur; this Great Saint had all manner of Devillism laid
unto his charge, by a Diabolical Generation: and he had no Hedge to Fend off
their Calumnies! The Hedge of Judea was gone, when a Prophet of the Lord, could
complain, in Jer. 20 10. I heard the Defaming of many, -- Report, say they, and
we will Report it. Where a man has in a most unspotted Conversation, been
Serving of God, and His People, it is all the Reason in the World, that his
Vertuou^ Life should be a Dura^le Hedge, about him, to (...) him the
Reput^^ion, of A Witness for (...) World. But what? Shall every (...) bred o^
the Corruptions in every Malicious and (...) Brain, become immediat^^^* a
^redible Report through a (...). shall the ^^st Well-deserving (...) o^
man^^nd, have the just Repute, which recommends t^^m to ^ervice among the
People of God, ly at the (...) every Passionate and Reprochful (...)? Or, shall
the most Circumspect Walkers, at once loose all the Stock of Credit with which
a course of long Piety has Enriched them, merely upon some sort of Spectral
Exhibitions, which cannot be accounted for? Our Hedges are under a most unhappy
Dissipation, if ever it come to this. It may be that some who have been
convicted of maintaining a Trade of Secret Wickedness, under the Cloak of a
Splendid and Glorious Professi^n, for many years together, may have given
dreadful Wounds, unto the Good Names, of all the best Christians, that may
happen to be spoken against; None of our Exact Living all our Days will now be
such a Vindicating Hedge about us as once it was, because of some that have
been found Ill men after they had long Enjoyed Good Names in the Church of God.
All that I shall now s^y of it, is; W^ to the World, because of the Offenses
which (...) been given by these Wretch^^ Hedge-(...) Oh! Where is the (...)
that (...) where the Heart that (...) conc^ive, (...) that belong unto them
that have ^iven those Offenses.

V. But it is Time to com^ unto the (...) of the matter. And Tha^ shall be
(...): What shall be done? Every man is to Do Something, and All are to join as
One man, in the Doing of Every Thing, that Every Gap, in our Hedge may be
repaired. As when the Sons of Jacob, had upon them, that which will Break
Through Stone Walls, it was then said, Why stand ye Looking ^ne upon another?
So, When Sins are breaking down our Walls, we may be Expostulated, Why do you
stand Looking one upon another? To work, All Hands! Every man has his Work to
do about our Hedge.

Three Things I will say; and then I shall have said.

First; One man may do very much toward the Restoration and the Preservation
of our Impaired Hedge. It is here said, I Sought for a m^n among them, that
should make up the Hedge. What? can One man then signify any thin^? Yes; Very
much. It is a very Discou^^ging Adage, Unus Vir, Nullus Vir; that i^, O^^ man
i^ as No man. But the best is* It is (...) ^lwayes True.

(...) of an Hedge; How much (...) be d^ne by One man? It Is (...). One Sinner
destroys much (...) often Occasions much (...) wa^ but One man, and yet the
(...) Host (...) the worse for him. Jonah (...) and yet the whole Ship had like
to have been Sunk by him. Thus, In Strengthening of our Hedge; How much Good
may be done by One man? Ten men would have Hedged a Sodom; and it may happen
so, that One man may Hedge a Zion. It was proffered, by the Patience of Heaven,
in Jer. 5.1. Run ye to and fro through the Streets of Jerusalem, and see now,
and know, and in the Broad places thereof, if ye can find a Man; if there be
any that Executes Judgment, and that seeks the Truth, and I will Pard^n it.
You know how the Language of Thou and Thee, was first changed into YOU, in
speaking to a Single Person. When the Roman Common Wealth became a Monarchy,
and the Power of Many came into One man's Hand, it grew common to treat Persons
of Quality, in the Plural Number, with YOU, and so by Degrees, it is descended
unto all particular men. Truly, there a^e many within these Walls at this Time,
whe^^of each One has the Power of Many in his hand^, for the Helping of all
our Walls* (...) each One of those I would say, Consider, I (...) YOU, Consider
what YOU may do.

What may be done for an (...) by One GOVERNOR? (...) One man; and yet Read
Psalm. ^06.23. He (...), That He would Destroy them, had not (...) His chosen,
stood before Him, in the (...)* to turn away His Wrath, lest He should destroy
them. Such an one* by Countenancing those things that are True, Honest, Just,
Pure, Lovely, and of Good Report, in His whole Government, and by being
Exemplary for all Self-Government, and Godliness and Righteousness in His own
Conversation, How much may He do to make all but malignant Murmurers
acknowledge, Sir. By YOU we Enjoy great Quietness, and Worthy Deeds are done
for this People by Your Providence? The Wall of Jerusalem, was well defended,
when the^e was, A Nehemiah upon the Wall: who instead of having all Good Acts
dearly Bought from him, was readier to do Go^^ Acts for his Countrymen, than
they were to Ask them. And all the unkindnesses, that had been done to Iephtah,
by his Countrymen, would not make him Abate, his doing the part of an
Indefatigable Captain General, to fortify their Hedge, against their Eastern
I^vade^s. When we appear shortly before the (...) of the Lord Je^us Christ, it
will be an (...) Recompense for all the Fatigu^s of Action for the Public,
undergone by (...) to hear Thousands of Saints (...) to the Glory of God, Lord,
we thank (...), f^r the Conveniences to Serve thee without Fe^r, which by the
Care of such a Servant of thi^^, were prolonged unto us!

What may be done for an Impaired Hedge, by One MAGISTRATE? Phinehas was but
One man; and yet Read, Number. 25.11. Phinehas has turned away my Wrath, from the
Childen of Israel, while he was Zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed
not the Children of Israel in my Iealousy. Among our Primitive Counselors, our
Honorable Judges, our Worshipful Justices, may not One man, by a well-tempered
and a well placed Zeal, do much that our Hedge may be mentained? When the
Oracle intimated, That the wrath of Heaven could not be turned aw^^, Except
some One man would so make ^^mself a Sacrifice, the noble Curtius bravely Rode
up into the Chasm of the Earth, where he perished. Is there a Chasm in our
Hedge? Truly, One man courageously carrying the Sword of Justice thit^er in his
Hand, may do a Generous Thing to mak^ all Secure. Venture thus upon the Wall,
to beat off its cursedest underminers! Israel ha^s been some^i^es called
Ieshuru^; and I do (...) the Etymology is from Shor, an Ox, r^ther than from,
Iashar, To ^e Righteo^s. Ind^ed such ^n Ox-like People, as even a^ Isr^el (...)
often is, in their Wanton and (...), will be pushing through ^^e Hedge that
h^'s been made about them. Yea, But On^ man among those that are, The Rulers in
Ies^^^run, by the Vigorous, Impartial, and Con^^ientious Execution of wholesome
Laws may befriend the Hedge, How Considerably!

What may be done for an Impaired Hedge, by One MINISTER? Aaron was but One
^an; yet we find in Number. 16.48. He stood between the Living and the Dead, and
the Plague was stayed. The Tribe of Levi, is the Ioining Tribe; you note the
Signification of the Name. Is our Hedge divuls'd? It belongs unto us to Ioin
what has been parted, and Labor for Good Terms, both with God and one with
another. In Tertullians Days the Church-Vessels had Engraven upon them, the
figure of a Shepherd carrying a Sheep upon his Back; in allu^^on to a
Well-known Parable. In our Days, the Church Members are too like unto Sheep,
that (...) the Hedge of God by their Ex^^rsions; but it i^ our Work, to bring
in and keep in our Sheep. Our God said unto one of ^^r Predecessors; If thou
take forth the Preciou^ (...) the Vile, I will make thee unto this People (...)
Wall. May We, by the Fidelity, the S^^^lity, the Watchfulness of our (...),
become ^ W^ll, not Against, but Unto our People! But by our Prayerfulness most
of all. Ou^ (...) Lord Jesus Christ has (...) bring not only Our selves, but
also all th^^ is Ours unto Himself, with Expecta^^ons of His bestowing His
Blessings thereupon. I have now thought, Will the Lord Accept, and Bless and
Heal and Save my People, as well as my own Soul, if I bring All these unto Him?
This very question I have seen Started in the Diary which one of our Greatest
Persons, long since gone to Glory, left in Manuscript behind him; and his own
Answer to it, was written in these words, Here I saw the great Privilege of it
and the Wisdom of God, in Committing some men's Souls, to the care of One Godly
man, of a Public Spirit; because He, like Moses, Commends them, Gives them,
Returns them all to the Lord again; and so a World of Good is Communicated for
His sake.

It might have been added; Among the Representatives, how much may One man do,
to prepare and propo^^ those things, which may be of Good Consequence to all
our Hedge? But I rather hasten to lay,

Secondly: If we were All as One man for the Restoration and the Preservati^^
of our Hedge, it would no longer be Impaired. It is here said, I Sought (...)
MAN among them. Indeed, if all among us were as One (...), the Lord would have
what He Seeks for. The Wall of Jerusalem went on ^omfortably, when in Neh. 4.6.
All the Wall was joined together, for the People had ^ Mind to Work. (...) when
People have a Mind rather to Ra^l, an^ Hate, and Squeeze one another, and are
not for Ioining on the Wall, then all goes on Calamitously. In Truth, we have
been too much as One man, where we should not have been so. It was Reprehended,
in Hos. 6.7. They like Adam, have Transgressed the Covenant. I have met with a
Christianized Jew, who has given me that sense of it; They as One man, have
Transgressed the Covenant. So Unanimous have we been in our Offenses against
the Institutions of our God! Yea, but now let us become as One man, in
Returning to the God, against whom we have Transgressed, and in h^lping one
another to R^turn. We All have something to do for our Hedge; but O Let it not
be said of our Treating, and our Hindering one another, as in Mic. 7.4. The best
of them i^ as a Briar, the most Upright is Sharper th^n a Thorn-Hedge. If
Divisions, Prejudices, Alienations and Animo^^ties, get into our Heart, we
shall soon have them, and the ill-frui^^ of them, in our Hedge. We have been
called upon, Mark those who c^use Divisions; what Mark shall we set upon them?
Why, This: They are Hedge-(...)! It Is r^markably Expressed, in Prove. 25.^8. He
tha^ has no Rule over his own Spir^t, (...) like a City (...) is broken (...),
and without Walls. Even (...), An Ang^y, an Hasty, a Perverse People; what are
they? But such as have their Walls broken down? I may say of all the Disasters,
which have pre^sed in, through our Broken Hedge, upon us, It Is because we have
not been Brethren dwelling together in Unity, that we have not had the
Blessing. But especially, They that are in and of the Hedge it self, will
accept of this Admonition. Distances and Estrangements, and Misunderstandings,
between those that are in High place, are of all, most out of place; and they
will be Fatal Things indeed! What shall be said of such things, but that in Isa
30.13. This Iniquity shall be to You, as a Breach ready to fall, Swelling out
in an High Wall? It was Threatened among the sorest of Judgments, I will kindle
a Fire in the Wall. I am very desirous we should Enjoy a Wall of Fire; Yea,
that we may be well Surr^^nded with the St^^es of Fire; but yet God grant,
there may never be any Fire in our Wall? Briefly, Let all ranks of men among us
wear that M^^to; the Motto once of the Low Countries, may now very we^l befit a
Country every way Low; Si (...), Frangimur: If we Clash, we Break.

Lastly. For the Restorati^n and Preservation of our Impai^^d Hedge, I (...),
there is not One man, but what can Lift up a Prayer unto the Lord! It is here
said, I Sought for a MAN among them. Why, a man truly Seeking of Him, would be
That Man. Wherefore, in our Hedge-broken Condition, Let it not be said of us,
as in Isa. 59.16. He saw that there was No man, and wondered that there was no
Intercessor. No; God forbid, it should be so said; But let it be said, as in
Isa. 62.6. I have set Watchmen upon thy Walls, that shall never hold their
P^ace, Day nor Night. It Is a Passage concerning a Great Gap man, in Psalm.
106.34. He stood up -- and the Plague (...). Some Jewish Interpreters, quote
tha^ Scripture, (and that in Genesis 19.17.) to pro^e that ^^le, Stare, nihil
aliud Signi^^^^t* (...) Ora^e. It Is as much as to say, He P^^y'd; St^nding in
Prayer was a Posture so usual, that i^ is become a P^rase for it. Well; It Is by
so Standing, that we are to Stand in the Gap. Say the^^: What can, even the
Poorest and meanest Person of us all, b^in^* for the Relief of our Wasting
Hedg^? ^ answer, A Life, if it be called for; (...), A Prayer; That is called
for. ^ Perso^^l Hedge, is by daily Prayer, kep^ (...) Repair; When the Devils
are (...) of (...), they find our dai^y Prayer, does cause us to become
Invulnerable. Well, Those very means of Daily Prayer will also do for a General
Hedge; Impenetrable the Blessedness of a People, from and for which daily
Prayer is going. I say then; Let it be our Daily Prayer, That We may not be
left unto Incurable Backslidings from the Hope of our Fathers; That we may not
by our Barrenness Provoke the God of Heaven to deprive us of all our Blessings;
That we may not be bereaved of such Well-accomplished Men in all orders, as we
have heretofore unthankfully Enjoyed; [ Ah, Lord; Say not that New England
shall be unworthy to have a MAN in it!] And that we may not be so forsaken by
the Goo^ Spirit of God, as to become, a Low-Spirite^, a Degenerous, a
Ridiculous, and at l^st, a Ruinated People. I^ our Hedge any where (...) open?
O fall in there, and fall down, upon our Knees there; but let (...) ever do it
with an Exercise of Strong Faith in our (...) Jesus Christ, the Only Medic^t^r.
We speed not, in our Supplications, That the Lord of Hosts, would Visit the
(...) are Broken down, Except we (...) R^^ard unto, The (...) of His (...) the
Son of Man, whom He (...) strong for Himself. After ^his manner* (...) that
make no Noise, or Show in the World, and not only One man, but also One
Praying. Devout, Gracious Woman; One Widow, who Trusts in the Lord, and
Continues in Supplications and Prayers, Night and Day, May be a Repairer of a
Broken Hedge; not only the Cedars of Lebanon, but even the poor little Hyssop
that Springs out of the Wall, may do the Wall a Kindness.

Pray! Said I? Yea, Let us Fast as well as Pray. The Prophet speaking not only
or chiefly about the Weekly Sabbath, but about a Fasting Sabbath, says to them
who are much in the Exact Celebration of it, as in Isa. 58.52. Thou shall be
called, the Repairer of the Breach. Sometimes One man, that has been much in
such Extraordinary Devotions, has be^^ Openly Rewarded by the God who sees in
Secre^^, with a more than Ordinary Figure in Repairing the Hedges of His
Israel. Ponder the Example of that Gre^^ Man, who in the Account which he
himself Published, of his Negotiation at the Count of Persi^ for his People,
tells us, Neh. 1.3, 4. They said (...) me, The Wall of Ier^^^lem is (...)! --
When I heard these (...) and Mourned (...) and Prayed before the (...)* Give m^
your Attention! When a People are Insensible of the Impairments befalling their
Hedges and their Interests, and perhaps, as it is commonly done, do themselves
confound their own Hedges and Interests, I conceive, there is a more proper
Enchantment therein, than men are well aware of: We need not at this time
Explain this Conception any further, than by using words near to the Apostles,
They are a Foolish People, and something has bewitched them. While a People
are thus under Enchantment, it is a Vain thing, to Advise them, to Exhort them,
to Warn them; till they are Unbewitched, things will take their course, as if
they were under a sort of Irresistible Fatality, and men will be so Exceeding
Fierce, that no man may cross them in their way. Now, if a man have, The Right
Skill of Encountering Enchantments, he may do great things for the People of
God; he may be a Glorious Instrument of bringing things to rights. And shall I
tell you, what is that Skill? Wherein lies the Strength of the Sampson, that
shall do such a Thing? I Will tell you at Once; It Is in Fasting and Prayer before
that God, who forms the Spirit of man within him.

There is Especially One Thing, wherein much Fasting and Prayer, would be of
^ingular Significancy to Repair us. All our Breaches would be R^paired, if the
Rising Generation among us, were more generally Converted unto God. I beseech
you, in the fear of God, Consider, what I say! The Impiety and Impenitence of
the Young People throughout our Land, is, that Wound of all our Hedges, which
has, of all, the dismallest Aspect upon us It would giv^ us a New Prospect of
Comfort, in all our Concerns, if we did in Good Earnest prosecute, an
Expedient, which has been sometimes Proposed and Received among the Ministers
of God. Solemn DAYS of Prayer with Fasting, Celebrated in our Churches, to
Implore the Grace of God, for the Rising Generation, would probably be of
Ble^^ed Consequence, for the Turning of our Young People unto the God of our
Fathers. The more there is this way ascribed unto Grace, the more is the Grace
of God, like to be Communicated; and there is in this way, a Natural and a
Plentiful Tendency, to awaken our Unconverted Youth, unto a Sense of their
Everlasting Interests; which, were it generally Accomplished, a Remarkable
Reformation, were therein Effected.

Consider of these things, and God give you understanding!

To Conclude; Wh^t the Prophet Samuel said unto the General Assembly of Israel,
I must say to You this Day. Stand still, that I may Reason with You, before the
Lord, of all the Righteous Acts, which He did unto You, and unto Your Fathers!

A CHARTER being once granted unto the Governor and Company of the
Massachusett-Bay, the Persecuted Puritans in the English Nation seeing that Ice
broken, which had kept them in a Sea of Fire, began to accept the American
Offers, of a Retreat for the Pure Worshippers of our Lord into a Wilderness.
Many Gentlemen of Ancient, and Worshipful Families; Many Ministers of the
Gospel, then of Great Fame at Home; and Merchants, Husbandmen, Artificers, to
the Number of some thousands, did then Remove into these Regions; though it was
indeed a Banishment, rather than a Removal which was undergone, by this
glorious Generation, Sufficiently Afflictive to men of Estate, Breeding, and
Conversation. And, as the Hazard which they ran in this undertaking, was of
such Extraor^inariness, that nothing less than a Strange and Strong I^pression
from Heaven could have thereunto moved such Persons as were in it; so the
Expense, with which they carried on the Undertaking, for Twelve years together*
was truly Extraordinary. By a Comput^tion, which I have seen; There was vastly
more than Two Hundred Thousand Pounds laid out, for the first Settlement of the
Plantation; and there were then Employed about an Hundred and Ninety Eight
Ships, in passing the Perils of the Seas, to accomplish this Renowned
Settlement, whereof by the way, but One miscarried in those Perils. Briefly,
The God of Heaven, as it were Served a Summons upon the Spirits of His People,
in the English Nation; Stirring up the Spirits of Thousands, who never saw the
Faces of eac^ other, with a most Unanimous Inclination, to leave all the
Pleasant Accommodations of their Native Country, and Go over a Terrible Ocean,
into a more Terrible Desert; and all this, for; The Pure Enjoyment of all His
Ordinances. How many Thousands of Pounds, and which is more Considerable, How
many Thousands of Lives, have since gone, to keep up the Hedges about this
Vineyard of God, I leave to Your own Enquiries* All that is now called for, is,
That we Consider with our selves, Whether the Loss of such a Country, in
Barbarous Confusions, for the want of Looking well after its Hedges, will be
found Excusable, in the Day when the Great God shall Plead with us, about the
Int^rests wherewith He has betrusted us?

That Parcel of Evil Figs which is now grown in our Land; Even, Those men, by
whose Worldliness, by whose Frowardness, by whose Littleness, by whose
Unthankfulness, by whose Disregard for Learning, and for a Learned Ministry, by
whose Forgetfulness of the Errand into the Wilderness, and by whose Prodigious
over sight of the only Season and Method for the Obtaining of those things to
Pass, which may Lengthen out our Tranquillity, before we come to a Way Hedged
up with Thorns, our Hedges are fearfully Languishing! These will doubtless be
Enraged ^t what Needful Advice has this Day been given you; and unspeakeable
will be the Satisfaction of My Soul, in my having Such a Testimony, That I
(...) a Servant of the most Glorious Lord! But as for the Good Figs; Even those
men, whom I continually hear most Sollicitously S^ying, What will ^ecome o^
this Peop^^? What will they bring themselves unto? Who are continually
trembling (...) ou^ Golden (...) be Removed; (...) continu^lly Mourning for all
our (...) from the Things that are Holy and (...) Goodpunc; And may we not hope
that we have (...) some Thousands of People thus disposed* People, for the sake
of whom, no Servic^* no Travail, no Self-denial is too much* These I am Sure,
will be Glad that a Serious Advice has been laid before You; and they will
join with me, in this ardent Supplication, O Our Lord, Let there yet be those
Men-among us, that shall make up Our Hedge, and Stand in the Gap before thee,
for the Land; and so let it not be Destroyed!

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 16. l. 1. r. Paroxysm^. p* (...). l. 4. f. which r. with. p. 44. l. 11.
r. ^eepers.


