THE LIFE and DEATH Of the Late Q. Mary.

Prefaced, with some Observations upon the TURNS of Divine Providence, now
bringing of mighty CHANGES, upon the World.

Whereto is added, The ADDRESS of Condolence, made unto His MAJESTY, by the
Nonconformist Ministers, on the DECEASE of that Illustrious QUEEN.

Boston in N.E. Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Phillips, at the Brick Shop
near the Old Meeting House. 1695.

Observable Turns OF Providence.
Ezekiel. X.13. As for the Wheels, it was cried unto them, in my Hearing, O WHEEL.


THE Prophet Ezekiel, is, by the Father Nazianzen, very justly called, A
Beholder of Great Things. But some of the Great Things that were Beheld by that
Blessed Seer, I must Invite you also, to Behold this Day; and the Great Things
at this Day happening in the World, set an Edge upon this Invitation.

Of all Scripture, the deepest is that of Prophesy; of all Prophesy, the
darkest is that of Ezekiel; of all Ezekiel, the Vision of the Wheels is not the
least significant; but I say like Moses in another case, I will now Turn aside,
and see this great Sight.

The Prophet was to Represent unto his People, That the Protection which this
People had hitherto Enjoyed, was now to be Removed: and that the Gracious and
Saving Presence of God, was not so confined unto this People, but that it
should be taken away. The Turn of Moveable Wheels, gave the Prophet, a Figure
of this doleful Thing; but at the same time, in these Wheels, the State of the
whole World, as under the Government of God, was figured out unto him. And it
seems herein to be particularly Indigitated: That how well soever a
Constitution of things in a Nation, may be established, the Angels of our Lord
Jesus Christ, are able presently to Turn it upside down. This Hieroglyphical
Vision of the Wheels had been granted unto the Prophet, once already; as you
may read, in the first Chapter of his Prophecies: But when he now comes unto a
Second View of it; he apprehends it more thoroughly, he expresses it more
positively; and there occurrs in the Text before us, a further circumstance
concerning them.

To give this Text a right posture in our Undestandings, Imagine that you see
Four most Illustrious Angels, which are called, The Chariots of God, Exhibiting
themselves under the Characters with which the Cherubim were Portrayed in the
Temple of Old. Imagine that by these Angels, you see Four, Large, High Wheels,
each of them after the fashion of a Sphaere, with others transversly so Inlaid
into them, as to intersect them with Right Angels. Unless you will imagine a
Chariot also implied in this Vision; which if so, you must not make the Wheels
to be so Spherical. However then Imagine, that you hear the voice of our
Almighty Lord Himself, making that Loud Cry unto them, O Wheel!

There you have had the Vision. It is in the Interpretation of it, a Vision of
the Turns, which the Providence of our God gives unto the World, in His
Governing the Affairs of it. For the Cry it self, O Wheel; the word is not the
same, that is used, when the Four Wheels here cried unto, are themselves
described; but this word may be rendered, O World! An Intimation, that the State
of Things in the World, is intended by the Wheels that we have now before us.

The Object of the Cry, is, The Wheels; but if you ask, Why such insensible
things as Wheels have a Cry directed unto them? I think, it is to show, that all
the Creatures, and all the Motions in the World, are under the Direction of our
Heavenly Lord; there is the Voice of the Lord; both to, and in, all Second
Causes.

The Witness of the Cry is, The Prophet himself; It was Cried, said he, in my
Ears: which teaches us, that the Ministers of God should Mind what He is a
doing in the World; and we should have our Ears open to the Voice of our Lord
in all Great Events, yea, and our Mouths open to utter it unto others that are
concerned in those Events.

Well then; I shall but Obey and Practice my Text, when I Handle it. Let me
have your Attention unto a mighty Cry, even unto that Voice, which is heard in
Heaven it self, and which the Lord from Heaven is at this Day causing to be
heard through our Earth; O WHEEL! O WHEEL!

There is this CASE, now before us, to be Considered;

What Observations are we to make upon the Observable TURNS of Divine
Providence, in the Changes that come upon the World?

In a Psalm Composed, as is justly supposed, after Ezekiels Vision of the
Wheels, and Referring to the Various Providence of God, wherein much of that
Vision was accomplished, the Psalmist has advised us, ( Psalm. 107.43) Whosoever is
Wise, will observe those things.

Now the things which we will here observe, shall be all fetched from that
Vision of the Prophet; and you shall join with me in making of these Remarks.

I. The World, with all the Persons, and all the Concerns of it, is liable to a
continual Revolution; or, The State of the World, is fitly compared unto the
Turn of a Wheel. Briefly, It Is a Changeable World; and I pray, what else would
you have of a Sublunary One? Wherever you look upon any part of this World, you
may hear the Son of God crying, O WHEEL, unto it; World, I will have thee to
Wheel about*

One thing wherein you may see the Comparison adjusted, is this;

A Wheel is a very Moveable and Voluble Thing; and oh! believe it, oh! expect
it; So is the State of this World. It is judged by good Historians, that
Pythagoras was acquainted with Ezekiel, and that from this Vision of the
Wheels, he invented that Wheel of Fortune, with which many Impious People do
play their Witch-tricks in our Days. This I will now say, That Condition of
men in the World, which they no less Foolishly, than Frequently, call, Their
Fortunes; We may cry, O Wheel, concerning it: it is, Oh! how Turnable a Thing!
Very memorable and significant, is the Story of Sesostrys, the King of Egypt;
who being a Captive, was ordered, with other Captive-princes, to draw the
Chariot of the Conqueror that made him so: In doing of this, he looked so long
and hard upon one of the Wheels, that the Conqueror demanded the cause of his
Looking; whereto he replied, Sir, I am observing that in the Turn of the Wheel,
what is undermost just now, by'nd by is uppermost: and this Reflection had a
very mortifying Operation upon the Great man, to whom it was offered. So do
things Turn in the World!

It is a famous Admonition, in Prove. 24.17, 18. Rejoice not, when thine Enemy
Falls, Lest the Lord see it, and it Displease Him, and He Turn away His Wrath
from him. Little Reason have (...) to see sad Changes come upon one another,
without a charitable and compassionate Sadness in their own Souls thereupon;
when any man shall be so wicked as to Rejoice in the Fall of a Neighbor,
probably the Wheel of the Wrath of God, will soon bring a worse Turn upon so
Unthinking, so Depraved a Creature.

Good Men, They find a Wheel in their Condition. Holy Job was once a man of
Substance, but anon, Poor to a Proverb: and yet, O WHEEL; it was not long
before it came to that, in Job 42.10. The Lord turned the Captivity of Job.

Bad Men, They too find a Wheel in their Condition. We are told, in Prove.
20.26. A Wise King Scatters the Wicked, and brings the WHEEL over them. Our
Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Heaven, is that King; His Wicked Enemies
may arrive to an Height of Wickedness and Advancement; but, O WHEEL, how
strangely will He over-sett them*

Small Men, It Is in a Wheel that They have their Condition. It is a thing
Celebrated in Psalm. 113.7, 8. He Raises up the Poor out of the Dust, and Lifts
the Needy out of the Dunghill; That He may set him with Princes, with the
Princes of his People. Thus, the Son of a Poor Potter among the Ancients, was
lifted up, from the Wheels wherein he shaped his Clay, unto a Scepter. And, O
WHEEL; The Son of a Poor Blacksmith, among the Moderns, was made One of the
Greatest Men, and the Grand Instrument of the Reformation, in the English
Nation.

And, Great Men, It Is in a Wheel that They have their Condition too. It is
mentioned, as no Unusual Thing, in Job 34.24. He shall Break in pieces mighty
men without Number, and set others in their stead. A Person may at one Time,
have the People and Riches of more than Three Kingdoms under his Command, and
yet littte while after have nothing to support him. Thus, Belisarius was one of
the most Renowned Generals that have been seen among Mortal men; But, O WHEEL;
this Renowned Person may come to Beg by the Wall-side, Your Charity, Sir, to
poor Belisarius!

Such a Vicissitude there is in Humane Affairs.

If you would see the Comparison further carried on, there is another thing to
be Remarked; Namely,

That a Wheel often Turns Apace, when once (...)t begins to Turn. And thus when
the World (...) upon any Notable Alteration, it is no Rare thing for Quick work
to be made of it. O WHEEL, What Quick Alterations do thou hasten upon the
World!

When the Lord is going to bring about any Promised and Mavelous Deliverance
for His Church, He says of it, Though it Tarry, it will surely come, it will
not Tarry; that is, when once (...) has begun to Come. When Cyrus, a Pagan
Prince, had once begun a Deliverance for the Church, by Proclaming a Liberty
for them to fall upon Building the Temple, unto That some have applied that
passage, in Cant. 2.8. My Beloved, Behold, He comes leaping upon the
Mountains! And when the Lord is going to Execute His Vengeance on His
Adversaries, He sometimes does make a Wondrous Dispatch of (...)hem; as He said
once unto the Greatest man in Israel, In that Day, I will perform all the
Things which I have spoken concerning his House; when I begin, I will also make
an End. When the Judgments of God come upon the Papacy, it is said, in Rev. 10.3.
Seven Thunders utter their Voices: there shall be the Swiftness of Rapid
Thunders in those Judgments. There is a Leap, as well as a Softly and Gentle
Walk, of Providence. On the one hand, when a Joseph was Raised up to be the
Savior of Israel, it is said, They brought him Hastily to be preferred. On the
other hand, the Plagues which were to come upon Oppressors, it is said of them,
They shall be as a Breach ready to fall, Swelling out in an high Wall, whose
breaking comes suddenly at an instant.

But will you Remark one thing more in this Comparison? If you will, it shall
be This;

That a Wheel sometimes makes a Noise in the Turning of it: as you know the
Prophet speaks of, The Noise of the Rattling of the Wheels. And thus, When any
Considerable Men, or Things, in the World are turned up-side down; a Noisy
Report accompanies it. Yea, a Considerable part of the Earth, sometimes does
ring with the Report of Important Accidents. When some sort of Persons do fall,
It Is said, The Earth is moved, at the Noise of their Fall. And shall I say it?
So does Heaven too. Eminent Men of God have so comforted themselves, If any
Extraordinary Thing befall the Church of God in the World, after that I am Dead
and Gone, the News will doubtless come to Heaven after me. However, we read, in
Isa. 17.12. Of the Multitude of many People, which make a Noise, like the Noise
of the Seas. And when the World is like the Sea, Ebbing and Flowing, and
Rolling to and again, that Multitude of many People, will make a Noise about
it. But then,

II. It is the Glorious Lord Jesus Christ upon the Throne, by whom all the
Changes of this World, are Ordered and Managed. Who is it that Cries unto the
Wheels, O WHEEL? It Is He whom we may see, in Ezekiel. 1.26. The MAN above upon the
Throne. It Is that God-Man, who Turns, who Checks, who Holds all the Wheels of
Providence.

All the Communion which the Great God now has with His Creatures, is by the
Interposition of the Messiah, between Him and Them. Wherefore, it is fit that the
Messiah so Circumstanced, should have the Government of all Creatures from and
for the Great God, put into His Alsufficient Hands. And therefore there is a
Mediatorial Kingdom which belongs unto the Lord Jesus Christ, as He is the
Vicegerent of God, by an Eternal Constitution. What the King of Egypt, said
unto Joseph, was a Type of this matter; in Genesis 41.40. There is none so
Discreet and Wise, as Thou art; Thou shall be over my House, and according to
thy Word, shall all (...) People be Ruled. Even so has the King of th(...)
whole World said unto our Jesus, There is none (...) Qualified for the
Government of the World, as th(...) art; and now I put all into thy Hands, for
Thee (...) Rule the whole World, and all the changes of it. Thy(...) is the
true meaning of that, Session at the Righ(...) Hand of God, which is all the
Bible over ascribed unto our Lord. The Right Hand both in Scripture, and in
Custom, holds the Scepter; In Sitting at the Right Hand, the Scepter comes in
divided between both of Those that are upon the Throne; even such a Share in
the Empire of the Universe, our Mediator now has with His Eternal Father. Our
Lord Jesus Christ is the Son of God and so He is, the Heir of all Things, the
Lord of all. And by the Gift of God, further strengthened by His own Purchase
and Merit on the Cross, His Title to His Throne, has further Considerations of
Establishment. All Men, yea all Things, and so, all Changes, are now, at the
Dispose of our Precious Lord Jesus Christ. And, O Holy Holy, Holy, Lord God of
Hosts, the whole Earth, in all the Changes of it, is full of thy Glory.

Behold, Christians, what a Consolation we have in the midst of all the
Changes, which the Wheels of Providence do bring upon us! All these Turns, are
Directed by our Lord Jesus Christ, who is Present every where to direct all
exactly: Who has Power enough to pull down the biggest Mountains that oppose
His Glory; Wisdom enough, to make all things work together for the Good of His
Chosen; Justice enough to Protect the Righteous, and Revenge the Sinful. Yea,
shall I speak the most Joyful Thing, that ever was heard! He that has called
himself, our Master, our Brother, our Father, our Husband; He that has called
us, The Apple of His Eye; It Is He that Sits upon the Throne; and effectually
says to every Wheel, O WHEEL, O WHEEL, Turn such a way, for my Immortal Glory.

I remember the Satisfactions of the Prophet Isaiah. There was a Time, when
there were two Princes together Sitting on the Throne of Judah; one whereof,
being Removed by the Stroke of Death, at a Time when there was a mighty party
in the Kingdom, which desired further Alterations, that man of God was very
Thoughtful, what Events the Wheels would now turn unto. But now, to satisfy
him, he tells us, in Isa. 6.1. In the year that King Uzziah died, I saw also
the LORD Sitting upon a Throne, High and Lifted up, and His Train filled the
Temple. Josephus affirms, that in the Earthquake, which, we know, happened a
little before this, an High Hill was torn down, and in (...)s Rolling down, it
spoiled the Kings House; but at the same time, it so rent the Roof of the
Temple, that the Sun shone into it. Yea* but our Prophet now sees the Sun of
Righteousness Himself come into the Temple; whatever happens, we may see our
Lord Jesus Christ, Sitting upon a Throne, High and Lifted up.

III. The Angels of the Lord Jesus Christ, those Mighty and Holy Spirits, of
the Invisible World, have a wonderful Influence upon the Changes that come to
pass in this World. This was what the Prophet here saw, in Ezekiel. 10.9. When I
looked, Behold the four Wheels by the Cherubims; one Wheel by one Cherub, and
another Wheel by another Cherub. Truly, there is an Inexpressible Agency of
those Cherubims, the Angels of the Lord, in the Turns that the World is
agitated with. As one ingeniously says, The Angels are capacious Wheels that
move in the great Clock of the world; so, the Wheels of Providence are
marvellously Turned, by the Ministry of those Angels, whom God has made
Ministering Spirits, and who wait about the Throne of our Jesus. When a Great
Prince was to be Dethroned, by the Turn of these Wheels, it was said, in Dan.
4.23. A Watcher, and an Holy One came down from Heaven, to accomplish it; but
that VVatcher was the Angel of the Lord. The Courts of Princes, are some of the
principal Wheels, according to which the Concerns of men do Turn about: yea,
but as there were Angels in the Court of Persia, to Steer the Minds, and bring
the Fates of those that had any Business there, so it is in every other Court,
unto this Day. The Living Creatures whom Ezekiel saw by the Wheels many years
ago, are Living to this Hour; and they are to be the Officers of the Lord Jesus
Christ in Turning the Wheels of this World, even until their Office be
superseded by the Succession of the World to come. What said the Angel Gabriel,
in Dan. 10.20. I will Return to fight with the Prince of Persia, and when I am
gone forth, Lo, the Prince of Grecia shall come. Alexander, the King of
Groecia, with an Army of about Thirty Thousand, Invades Darius, the King of
Persia, though he had an Army of Six Hundred Thousand to withstand him; but the
King of Graecia Conquers the King of Persia, and makes him Fly his Kingdom:
Whence was this? O WHEEL! There was the Angel Gabriel in it all. The Angel who
directed Cornelius, the Angel who Comforted Paul, the Angel who Assisted
Elijah, the Angel by whom Daniel was defended, is Living still. The Angel who
Restrained Balaam, the Angel, who Blinded the Sodomites, the Angel, who killed
the Egyptians, and the Assyrians; that Angel of Death, is Living still. Now
when such things as those, are to be done, in the Wheels of Providence; the
Angels are the Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ in the doing of them. Oh!
Those Chariots of our God, even Thousands of Angels; The Lord is among them, as
in the Holy Place: And when our dear Lord shall give the word, great will be
the Company of them that publish it: If our Lord say, O WHEEL, Turn so, or so,
there are Angels at hand, for the jogging of it.

IV. All the Quarters, yea, and all the Ages of the World, have all their
Changes Governed by the Lord, whose Kingdom Rules over all. It is said,
Behold, There were Four Wheels! How so? Truly, A Wheel for Europe, a Wheel for
Asia, a Wheel for Africa, and a Wheel for America likewise; even poor America
too, is not forgotten, or neglected, by the Providence of the Lord. We are
assured, in Prove. 15.3. The Eyes of the Lord, are in every place, Beholding the
Evil and the Good. Whether the Changes do befall the Evil or the Good, it is the
Wheel of the Lord in every place, that produces all. And America it self, though
it have seemed as if it had been intended for an Eternal Randezvous of Devils,
until some late Symptoms of the contrary, yet the Changes that come upon
America too, are by the Providence of God. It is not yet known, whether America
have any part in John's Vision of the Revelation; but I am sure it has in
Ezekiels Vision of Providence. Yea, probably there is a signal Wheel of
Providence to be Turned yet in America, with respect unto the Kingdom of God. O
WHEEL; Thou have mighty Turns to make in these Regions! But Oh! Let us consider
all the Prosperity, and all the Adversity, happening, even to the Remotest Ends
of the Earth, as not coming by Hap alone, but by the Watchful Providence of Him
that performs all things for us. And as no Quarters of the World, so neither
are any Ages of it, unconcerned in the Wheels of Providence. There are as many
Wheels, as there are to be Universal Empires before the Coming of the Lord, at
the Time of the End: A Wheel for the Assyrian, a Wheel for the Persian, a Wheel
for the Grecian, and a Wheel for the Roman. The Providence of our Lord will
reach the Circumstances of all Things, in all the Ages and Empires of the
World; until the Kingdoms of this World, shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord.

V. There is a most surprising Harmony, in those Dispensations of God, whereby
the Changes of the World are brought about. Of the Wheels it is said, As for the
Appearances, they Four had one likeness. The Wheels of Providence have a most
Harmonious Conformity and Correspondence with one another. The Promises of God
unto them who Diligenly Seek Him, are the same Now, that ever they were; The
Threatenings of God unto the Children of Disobedience, are the same Now, that
ever. It is said, in Psalm. 12.6. The words of the Lord are pure words, like
Silver, well purified seven times. Now the Dispensations of God, are still
according to this His Invariable World. Things go in the World, but as they
have done heretofore; the World Changes but as it Uses; and, There is no New
Thing under the Sun. O WHEEL, How have thou Turned hitherto? Even so will thou
still Turn. The Dispensations of Providence, in our Days, have One Likeness
with such as were in the Days of our Fathers. They that have drawn Parallels in
History, have Entertained us with a delicate Curiosity; truly, 'twould be a
curious Entertainment, for a devout Soul, to draw the Parallels in Providence!
But besides this, there is a more special Harmony, with which the Wheels of
Providence, are sometimes beautified. As now, at or nigh the same Time, there
sometimes is a Like Face of Providence, in sundry places. The same cry, O
WHEEL, is given to sundry places, at the same Time. Sometimes, All the Churches
together have Rest, and are Edified, though very distant from one another.
Sometimes, All the Nations are together to take the Wine cup of the Fury of
God, and be Intoxicated into Confusions, though far from one another in their
Distances. God Raises up Luther, a Great Reformer, in one Country; and at the
very same Time, He Raises up Zuinglius in another. God permits the Rising of an
Antichrist, in the West, namely, that of Popery; and at the very same time he
permits the rising of another Antichrist, namely, that of Mahometanism, in the
East. Yea, it may be the Revolutions in some little Countries, will have just
those very Marks imprinted upon them, which the Revolutions of Bigger, and
Mother Countries, at the very same Time, are Signalized with.

And as at the same Time, so in like periods of Time, the Wheels of Providence
that Change the World, sometimes have One Likeness in them. How amazingly was
Eighty Eight in the former Century, and Eighty Eight in this, made an, Annus
Mirabilis, a year of Wonders for the English Nation! The Dying Martyr Hus, told
the Papists, Post Centum Annos, -- just this Time Hundred years, you shall see
my Doctrine Revive among you. And in Luthers Preaching just an Hundred Years
after, it Revived accordingly. Yea, and what you saw, at Luthers Preaching,
you will see much of that, and more than That, in the Turn that is now going to
begin! Let me say it, and bestow you, as deep a Meditation, and as close an
Application, as you please upon it. When the Wheels of Providence have brought
about any Reformation, God ordinarily suffers those Wheels to Retard and Revert
for a while, but afterward, He will certainly set those Wheels a going again;
and then, they shall have One Likeness with what they had before, only meet
with no more such obstructions.

VI. The Changes that come upon the World, have a various Aspect in them, they
look more ways than one. Of the Wheels, it is said, When they went, they went
upon their Four sides: no less than Four several ways one Wheel of Providence
has its Tendencies. In one Turn of Providence, there may be what is very
Aflictive, and yet in the very same Turn, something that is very Merciful; or,
as one speaks, One and the same Providence has sometimes its Blacks and
Whites: Thus, it is said in Isa. 57.1. The Merciful are taken away, The
Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come. When Merciful and Righteous Men
are Wheeled out of the World, there is a double Aspect in it; First, there is a
Blessing unto themselves in it, they are by the Swift Chariot Wheels of Heaven,
fetched away thither, where the Weary are at Rest. But then, there is a
Judgment upon the Survivers, who are now laid open unto more unhappy Changes,
of Evil to come. The young Child of David was taken away by an Early Death: Why
so? The Wheel turned on One Side, in that thing, to Chastise the Sin of the
Relations; but on Another Side, it was to prevent a perpetual Monument of
Shame, and occasion of War in the Nation. The best Child of Jereboam was taken
away by an Early Death; why so? The Wheel turned on One Side for the
Everlasting Happiness of the Deceased; but on Another Side, for the Hastening
of Ruin on the Family. O WHEEL, How many Changes do thou bear upon! Why is
Jonah swallowed by the Fish? It was to Correct him, it was to Reform him; yea,
but, O WHEEL, there was more than this; it was to procure the Regards of the
Ninivites unto his Ministry, when they heard of the Miracle.

Hence there are also Collateral Designs of Providence, which are the Four
Sides of the WHEELS, in the Dispensations of God. Thus it is, in the most of our
Changes!

VII. When the Lord will have Changes to come, they shall be Irresistible; Who
has Resisted His will? It Is once and again said of the Wheels, They Turned not,
as they went. There is no Turning the Wheels of Providence out of their course;
no Rubs can divert them, from what the Lord will have to be performed by them.
All the Changes in the World, are Decreed by that Lord, who is Unchangeable;
When the Wheels are Turning, it is by the Order of that God, of whom it is said,
There is with Him no Shadow of Turning. Our Lord says, O WHEEL! Go, bring such
a Great Thing about! But, it may be, there are Great Mountains that ly in the
way of the Wheels: Great Persons, Great Factions, and Great Oppositions. Its no
matter: I say, as of old, Who art thou, O Great Mountain? Thou shall become a
Plain, before the Wheels of the Chariots of our God. It was said, in Zech. 6.1.
The Four Chariots came out from between the Mountains of Brass. The Firm
Decrees of God, are those Fixed, Stable, Eternal Mountains of Brass; the Four
Wheels do move according to those Decrees; and be of good cheer, none of our
Little Mountains of Earth* [Mountains! I should say, Molehills,] can stand
before them. When the Scepter of of a mighty Kingdom was to be transferred,
from a Royal Hand, into another Hand, which the Lord had Reserved in the
Obscurities of a Wilderness, how many thousands of Obstacles were there to
hinder such a Turn of the Wheel? Yea, but when once the Lord said, O WHEEL! He
also said, in 1 Samuel 15.29. He is not a man, that he should Repent. Oh! The
whirl of these Wheels! when once they are set a Turning, in a way of Grace, or
in a way of Wrath, stand clear all Opposers; there is no standing before these
all conquering Wheels. In Artificial Engines, the Mechanic Powers of Wheels,
are of a prodigious Efficacy; but the Wheels of Providence are infinitely more
Efficacious.

VIII. All the Changes of the World, have the Infinite Wisdom of Heaven, to
give Method, Guidance, Effect unto them. Of the Wheels, it is said The Wheels
were full of Eyes round about. The Wheels of Providence, do Turn as Regularly,
as if they were all full of Eyes. Things are not carried on Caeco Impetu; it is
not a Blind Chance, or Force, that brings things about. It is said, in 2 Chronicles.
16.9. The Eyes of the Lord run to and fro, throughout the Whole Earth, to show
Himself strong, in the behalf of them, whose Heart is perfect toward Him.
Whatever Wheels do Turn, there are the Eyes of the Lord upon them, still to
make them Turn for the Advantage of those that He has made His Peculiar
Treasure. O WHEEL, wast thou not out of the way, when such, or such a Disaster
happened? No, 'Twas Full of Eyes; the Mortal Wheel saw which way to go. We are
too Ready to prescribe unto the Lord; we would have Him to Turn things after
such or such a manner, for the Welfare of His People. But what need of our
Impertinent Counsels! Our Lord will do all things, According to the Counsel of
His own Will; and there needs no other Counselor; that Will is the first Rule
of all Right, for ever. Luther complained of himself, that he was too ready
thus to Interpose his own Thoughts and Cares about the Wheels of Providence;
but said he, Risit haud dubie Dominus hanc sapientiam; doubtless, He that Sat
at the great Council Table of Heaven, derided my wise Contrivancies. Never let
us vex our selves under our Changes; but think, The All-seeing Eyes of the
Lord, see which way they go!

IX. In the Changes that come upon the World, there do occurr those things that
are both Formidable and Extraordinary. There are two things noted about the
Wheels, in Ezekiel. 1.18, 19. which we may join together, in our Observation.
First, The Rings of the Wheels were so High, that they were Dreadful. And
then, The Wheels were Lifted up from the Earth. Truly so, the Wheels of
Providence are evermore so High, that we must not suppose our selves capable to
Fathom them. One says well; I know no harder Task put upon the Sons of men,
than to make a true Trutination, and a clear Calculation, of Divine
Providence. We should be very wary, what Constructions we make of
Providence, and of the Changes which the High Ring'd Wheels do bring to pass:
When we go to Construe such a Turn as a Rebuking Providence, or such a Turn as
an Inviting Providence; or such a Turn, as an Encouragement; we should
Remember, The Wheels are too High for us to take exact measures of them. And
in the Turn of these Wheels also, very Dreadful Changes are sometimes
produced. There are Dreadful Concussions, Dreadful Confusions, Dreadful
Desolations, brought about, by some Wheels of Providence; and because the
Wheels are to Turn faster toward the Latter End of Time, there will now be
more of those Dreadful Overturnings, wherein the Earth will be Removed, and the
Mountains will be carried into the midst of the Sea, and the Waters thereof
will Roar and be Troubled! The Prayers of the Saints, have long been crying, O
WHEEL; but what will be the Answer of all? Even that, in Psalm. 65.5. By
terrible things in Righteousness, will thou Answer us, O God of our Salvation.
Nor will the Wheels of Providence be confined unto the Ordinary Road of
proceeding,. The Lord will not go by Ruled Cases, in many of the Changes that
shall overtake the Children of men. The Wheels will be Lifted up, and unusual
Turns will come about. When K. Henry VIII. was Dead, the Popish Fathers, in
the Council of Trent gave Thanks, that he had left such an Insignificant
Successor, behind him; whereas, that Successor though a Child, gave the
greatest VVounds unto the Man of Sin, that ever had been given in the Nation. O
WHEEL! it so sometimes comes to pass, as the Prophet spoke, in 2 Kings 3.17.
Ye shall not see VVind, neither shall ye see Rain, and yet the Valley shall be
filled with Water.

X. Finally, There are many Intricate Things, in the Changes of the World; and
there is a Mystery of Providence. There is this Article, in the Description of
the Wheels; They were, as if a Wheel had been in the midst of a Wheel. The
Wheel within, is not always perceived, when we perceive the Wheel without,
whereby Changes are brought upon us. It is said, in Psalm. 97.1, 2. The Lord
Reigns, let the Earth Rejoice, Let the Multitudes of Isles be glad thereof;
Clouds and Darkness are round about him. The Earth in General, it seems, and
some special Islands of the Earth in particular, may meet with Changes, that
shall have much of Clouds, and of Darkness in them; the Dealings, and the
Designs of the Lord, in those Changes will be, Oh! how Inscrutable! A Jacob is
ready to say of the Changes that befall him, All these things are against me:
but, O WHEEL! How gloriously did every thing Turn to Good at the last! I do
offer you that Reading of what the Psalmist said, in Psalm. 77.18, 19. The Voice
of thy Thunder was in the WHEEL; Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the
Great Waters, and thy Footsteps are not known. Why, when the Thundering Voice of
God is crying, O WHEEL: We cannot always Guess what Way, what Path, He will take.

But shall we Exemplify some of these Intricacies?

There is that Intricacy in Providence, That our Lord is doing very Much, when
He seems to be doing Little or Nothing in the World. When Pharaohs Daughter
took first Cognizance of Moses, who dreamed of the Wheel in the midst of this
Wheel; that this Moses was to destroy Pharaoh and his Egyptians?

There is that Intricacy in Providence, That Men shall do the Lords Business
when they go on their own Errands. The King of Persia, was a Ravenous Bird, who
did but gratify his own Ambitious, Coveteous, Revengful Appetites, in Preying
upon his Neighbors; Yea, but, there was another Wheel in the midst of this
Wheel; the Lord said, It is I that have called this Ravenous Bird, from the
East; the man that Executes my Counsel, from a far Country.

There is that Intricacy in Providence, That the Lord leads men by what they
See, to what they never Thought. The Philistines commence a War against the
Israelites; Why, but only from a Disposition to oppress their Neighbors? Yea,
but there was a Wheel in the midst of this Wheel, all the while; the Lord
caused the Kingdom of His David, thereby to be promoted.

There is that Intricacy in Providence, That a Mischief shall become a
Kindness, when the Lord will have it so. The Persecution that befell the
Primitive Believers, looked like a Disaster and Injury to the Interest of the
Gospel; Yea, but there was a Wheel in the midst of this Wheel; the Scatterirg
of those Believers, proved but the Spreading of the Gospel.

There is that Intricacy in Providence, That the Enemies of God shall be
Confounded by those very means, by which they look to be Preserved. Abimeleck
accommodates himself unto the Shechemites, and that he might procure and secure
the Kingdom to himself, he gets into their Box as much as ever he can; but
there was a Wheel in the midst of this Wheel, which in the Issue carried all
another way: Abimelek perishes by those Men of Shechem.

O WHEEL! These are some of thy Intricacies; and these are indeed but Some of
them: For, Many such Things are with the Lord.

And what is now our Duty, under such Turns of Providence?

Christians, while our Lord Jesus Christ is Crying to the Wheels of Providence,
O WHEEL; He Cries unto Us also, to Behold the Turns of those Wheels. Behold
them with. Wonder, Behold them with Patience, Behold them with Profit; and
Behold them with a Profound Submission of Soul. Indeed, this is One Thing of
peculiar concernment for us, under all Changes whatsoever. Our Lord says unto
the Wheels, O WHEEL, Move! But what says He unto Us? unto us He says, Be still;
There is that Voice annexed unto the Turning of the Wheels, in Psalm. 46.10. Be
still, and know, that I am God. We are very prone to have our Spirits uneasy
about the Changes that are before us; but as Luther sent word unto his Friend,
who was too Sollicitous, how matters were like to go; Pray tell him, That I
would have him give the Lord Leave to Rule the World! Even so, I say, Stand
off; Don't you meddle; The Wheels of Providence are already in a Sufficient
Hand; Oh! Leave to that Hand, the Turning of them all! Instead of your going to
call, O WHEEL! Say rather, O LORD! Let our continual Supplications be made unto
the Lord, that every Wheel may Turn after such a Manner as is to be desired. I
assure you, The Prayers of the Faithful do give mavelous and powerful Jogs
unto the Wheels. When we are much in Crying, Awake, O Arm of the Lord; that
Omnipotent Arm which Turns all the Wheels, will Awake accordingly. And Oh!
take heed of Every Sin, that may Expose you, to be broken by any Wheel of God,
in the Turning of it. Mark what I say; The Business of the Wheels, is to Crush
those that are in Rebellion against the Lord Jesus Christ, against His Truths,
and against His Ways. When the Lord is Crying, O WHEEL! give me Leave to Cry, O
SOUL, stand clear of the Sins that will make thee Obnoxious to that Wheel. If
any of you are so Eager after this World, as to neglect the Great Salvation of
your Souls; if any of you do not Pray constantly, both with your Houses, and in
your Closets; if any of you Indulge your selves in the lewd Practices of
Profanity; and if any of you continue Strangers to a Closure and an Union with
the Lord Jesus Christ; Sirs, I am to tell you, The Wheels of the Indignation
of God, are hastening apace to overwhelm you. Oh! Consider this, ye that forget
God, Lest His Wheels tear you to pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

But, in the midst of these things, are not Men themselves to be Considered, as
those Wheels, that are to Move agreeably unto the Lord, in the Changes of His
Providence?

Truly, there is no Magistrate, but the Lord Jesus Christ cries unto him, O
WHEEL, Move as well as thou can for the Reforming of all that is amiss in thy
Province, and for the Promoting of every thing that is Holy and Just and Good.

There is no Minister, but the Lord Jesus Christ, cries unto him, O WHEEL, Move
as well as thou can, for the Instructing, and Converting of thy Flock, and
for the Warning of every Soul, against every evil Thing.

There is no Christian in any Capacity whatsoever, but the Lord Jesus Christ
cries unto him, O WHEEL, Move in thy Capacity, as Watchfully as thou can, as
Exactly as thou can, and as Usefully, as ever thou can.

Let us all be Attentive to the Voice of our Lord; and while His Wheels are
Turning, Let us in Complying with His Voice, be as Lively, as the Wheels on
Chariots of Amminadib.

Dues Paid unto the Memory of Q. MARY.
BUT there is one Mighty and Awful TURN of Divine Providence, which more
particularly this Day calls for our Observation; and that is the great CHANGE
of Death, come upon a Great QUEEN, of a most Embalmed and Immortal Memory, and
the vast CHANGE upon the State of Three Kingdoms, concerned in, and consequent
on, so Universally Deplored a Death. Alas, We see the Beauty of Great Britain,
Slain upon its High Places; How is the Mighty Fallen!

What shall we now say of thee, O WHEEL, which have Overturned a Glorious
Mountain, at the Fall whereof, The Earth is Moving, and the Waters of the Sea
do Roar, and are Troubled.

So Inexpressible a Grief, as is every where produced by this vast Occasion,
will Oblige us to Brief and Broken Expressions in our Observations thereupon;
but as well as the Season will admit of it, Let us now Observe, in the first
place, the Wonderful TURN of the WHEEL which brought this most Illustrious
LADY, unto the Throne of Three Kingdoms!

There were especially Two very Observable TURNS of Providence praeliminary to
that Revolution.

The First Observable was that which the Reverend Dr. Bates, has noted in his
Funeral Sermon on the Queen; That she was not Early Engaged in the Belief and
Practice of Popery: That her Father, being so Amorous of his Religion, did not
take the Season of Instilling it into her, before she could with Understanding
make a Choice. It increases the Wonder, in that the Priests were Attendents in
his Court, who, being deeply Struck with Superstition, are watchful to take all
Advantages to Propagate it. Now, O WHEEL; how gloriously did thou Turn the
Education of this Chosen Vessel, into such a Bias as has made all the
Protestants in Europe to Rejoice!

The Second Observable was that which all Mankind has also wondered at; namely,
That notwithstanding the Popish Inclinations both in the (...) and in the Uncle
of this Incomparable Person, she should yet be Disposed in Marriage, to a
Prince of the Reformed Religion; and the Prince Raised by the God of Heaven, to
Rescue the Nations from the Designs of those very Monarchs. Now, O WHEEL, how
gloriously did thou Turn this Match, unto the Confusion of all that Popery
has intended, all EUROPE over!

It Is time for us now to Observe, That although King JAMES, had in his public
Declaration, presumptuously promised himself, That nothing remained now to
Interrupt his peaceable Government for the future, his Mis-Government quickly
brought such an Astonishing Storm upon him, that this unhappy Son of her, who
says, I shall see no Sorrow, did, as it were in one Day, find all come to a
Dissolution. The Parliament, on, Feb. 12. 1688. (on which Day, the Princess
Arrived from Holland, to Whitehal, with all the Demonstrations of Joy that
could be given throughout the Nation,) made this Declaration, That James II.
having Endeavored to Subvert and Extirpate the Protestant Religion, Laws and
Liberties of the Kingdom, and Abdicated the Government, the Throne was thereby
become Vacant; and they thereupon made Offer of the Crown unto Their
Highnesses, William and Mary, Prince and Princess Orange. Accordingly, on Feb.
13. They were Proclaimed; and on April 11. 1689. Crowned, with the Acclamations
of a Joyful Nation; and on May 11. Ensuing, they Received, in like manner, the
Crown of Scotland, from the Estates thereof, by the Hands of their
Commissioners. Indeed, the First Essay of this matter, put the sole and full
Exercise of the Regal Power into the Hands of the Prince; but by a following
Act of Parliament, the Execution thereof was put into the Hands of the Queen,
as often as that Heroic Undertaking of Rescuing all Europe out of its Chains,
required the Presence of His Britannick Majesty abroad, as Generalissimo of the
Confederate Armies. Thus was this Renowned Lady, with the High and Mighty
WILLIAM, advanced, by wonderful Turns of Providence, into the Imperial Throne
of Great Britain; but with what a Disposition toward the Abdicated Relation,
she did accept the Scepter, was continually manifested by the Filial Tears,
wherewith She would Lament that Unhappiness of His, which made the Deliverance
of whole Nations from the Destruction of their Liberty, Property, and Religion,
impossible to be obtained by any other mean, but Her Accepting it. It could not
perhaps be more Livelily described, than in those passages of the famous
Epigram upon her Death.

Successi vivi, Solijs Invita Parentis,
Pulsa regnaret ne Pietate Dolus.
Invitam Cingi Sivi Diademate frontem,
Firmarem ut Leges, Flave, Britanne, Tuas.
Terrestrem Cepi nuper quam Invita Coronam,
Tam Laeta accipio nunc Diadema poli.
It was now a most Observable TURN upon the Kingdoms, to see a QUEEN upon the
Throne, professing the Holy Religion, to which the Queens of the Three
Foregoing Reigns had been Aliens and Enemies. But that which made a yet more
Observable TURN, was the Zeal of that Holy Religion, which rendered this Eminent
Person, an Example, as one that knew it well says, Enough to Convert a Nation.
The Return of such an Astrea to us, Raised our Thoughts of a Golden Age
approaching. The Last Lords Day that this Princess was in Holland, the
Presbyterian Minister whom She then heard, in the close of his Discourse,
addressed Her, with faithful Intimations of the Opportunities that She should
now have to Serve the Lord Jesus Christ, and His People; at the Hearing* of
which Address, She stood up, and Let fall a Flood of Tears. But what a Flood of
Tears must now gush from us, who have in a few years Lived unto the End of
those Opportunities, whereof God had made that Royal Heart so apprehensive! The
wondrous Goodness, and Sweetness, of her Temper, the Innocent Cheerfulness
which gave an Air to her whole Conversation, the obliging Tenderness wherewith
She perpetually treated all that were about her, and the Charming Sincerity
wherewith She Did and Spoke every Thing, while yet She Laid not aside the
exactest Prudence of Reservation; These were but the Lesser Strokes of Her
Character. However These made her so extremely Beloved, that, Prisca parem
nescit, aequalem postera nullam Exhibitura Dies;

No Age perhaps affords a Parallel. God in this Thing, bestowed upon Her, the
Reward of Her own Averseness to Evil Speaking, or, the Censuring others: A
Vice, that She not only did Avoid Her self, but also Reprove in others, on all
occasions. And yet, when some Reflections on this Her Happiness were made
before Her Majesty, such was Her profound Modesty, that She said, She Ascribed
thus wholly unto the Goodness of God; for She doubted not but that many fell
under hard Characters, who deserved them as little. She said also, God knew her
Weakness, that She was not able to bear some Imputations, and therefore He did
not Try Her beyond Her Strength. She added, She hoped God would still Bless Her
in her own good Name, as long as She was careful not to Hurt others. Let us
pass on to take our Observation of those more Fulgent Rays, with which this
Bright Star, of the First Magnitude, Influenced more than Three Kingdoms. Yea,
now, Like that of Cassiopaea, She is Retired into Heaven, yet Let us continue
the Observation. This Greatest LADY that ever Europe saw, was by God* Raised up
to preserve that Sacred Religion of His, which was every where, as one says, in
its Last Agonies; and She was Her self a Pattern, as well as Patron, of that
Religion.

O WHEEL! What have thou brought unto our View? ROYALTY improved by Religion,
RELIGION adorned with Royalty!

A QUEEN, Who had her Daily, Constant, Secret Retirements, for the Service of
God; from which, She would permit no Business, or Journey, to divert her; and
therefore would Rise Early, that She might not Forget, or Shorten those
Devotions, whereon She reckoned that the Blessings of the whole Day depended:
and often owned, that in Difficulties which rendered her uneasy, She felt her
Thoughts calmed, by thus carrying them to God.

A QUEEN, Who kept the Lords Day, most Conscientiously; and besides her Hours
of Privacy, was Thrice a day in the Public Worship of God; and for a great
part of the year, Four Times a day, while She Resided in the Low-Countryes*

A QUEEN, Who still once a Month, came to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper;
and in order thereunto, would Prepare Her self by the Exercises of a Solemn
FAST before the Lord, choosing after it but a Moderate and a Temperate Meal in
the Evening.

A QUEEN, Who in all her Approaches unto God, used a most Exquisite Seriousness
and Attention; and was yet careful to conceal the more Solemn Elevations of Her
mind. But hereby the like Spirit, came to be Spread among such as were about
her.

The most Reverend A. B. of Canterbury has given her this Testimony; It has
at last been Understood that Her Exercises of Devotion, which were known, were
not the Half of those which were then not known. If all were as diligent in
Examining and noting down the Condition of their Souls, and Comparing the
former, and the present Estate of them, Heaven would in some measure be upon
Earth.

A QUEEN, Who, to prevent that common, but Fatal, Mischief, The Loss of Time,
did spend much Time, in the Reading of Good Books, even those Written by
Dissenters, as well as by Conformists, for the Excitation of true Piety. Yea,
She frequently Ordered Good Books to be laid in the places of Attendence, that
such as waited, might, by Reading therein, save themselves from the Infection
of Idleness. And when She was weary of Reading Her self, (generally Aloud, for
the Benefit of them that Served Her) She would call upon another to Read, unto
the Rest; and in the mean Time She would Work, with Her own Royal Hands, as
Industriously as if She had been thereby to Earn her Bread; for She said, She
Looked on Idleness, a^ the Great Corrupter of Humane Nature! But hereby the
whole City soon came to write after this Copy; and it was become (as has been
said) as much the Fashion to Work, as it had been formerly to be Idle.

A QUEEN, Who was so Exquisitely Cautious against the Enchantments of the
Devil, FLATTERY, that She would Frequently Talk about the Danger of it; and
Fervently Ask of those about Her, To Speak the Truth Plainly to her, and with
all Freedom Tell her, if they observed any thing amiss in her, that She might
mend it. Oh! the Sincere and Pious Wisdom, of such a Caution!

A QUEEN, Who with most sensible Resentments considered all the Frowns of God,
in His Dispensations; but Especially in sad Accidents that came from the more
Immediate Hand of Heaven. Particularly, on a great loss at Sea, She said,
Though there was no Occasion for Complaint or Anger upon these, yet there was a
Juster cause of Grief, since the Hand of God was to be seen so particularly in
them. And She would set her self to Examine, whether some Secret Sins lying at
the Root, might not blast all; but She would then say, Where so much is
Visible, there is no Need of Divination concerning what may be Hidden.

A QUEEN, Of so Diffusive and Extensive (...) Charity, that all the Miserable,
on all Oppor(...)unities had Experience of it. How many Thousands of Refugees,
found Her a Liberal Mother unto them all; and this, without any Regard unto
their Different Persuasions, in the Circumstantials of Christianty! She would
Encourage all that had Access unto her, to lay before her the Necessities of
all the Good Men, that they knew, Languishing in any Needy Circumstances. And
yet She managed this her most Royal Bounty, with such a Regular Discretion, and
a Self-denying Secrecy, as was the Admiration of all that penetrated thereinto.

A QUEEN, Who yet Remembered, that She was a WIFE; and by the Raptures of
Affection, Obedience, and Resignation, wherewith She always treated that Great
Monarch, whom She made in all things her Oracle, She practically taught the
Rules of Christian Oeconomicks unto all the Families of more than Three
Nations. The Sitting of Two such Persons upon the Throne together had a
Tendency to recover the Married State, from all that Infamy, which the
Debaucheries of the Two last Reigns, had been trying to cast upon it; But the
Matchless Love which ran through the whole Behavior of Two such Persons
toward each other, did Raise the Married State unto the Just-Heighth of its
Reputation. The Tears of the King since her Death, are her most glorious Elegy
and Elogy. Her Husband Praises her, Declaring, That in her whole Conversation,
he never discovered a Fault. He, whom all the Powers of the French Empire
cannot Shake, faints at the Convulsions of this Divorce, and Professes, The
Loss is Insupportable! Indeed, as a French Divine in his Funeral Sermon for
this Illustrious Dorcas, has Expressed it, The Taking of an Hundred Cities,
and the gaining of an Hundred Battles, would not make up this loss unto our
Sovereign. Such a QUEEN, has that Happy Island seen: And the most Glorious
Island in the World justly counted this QUEEN, Her Glory!

Her Exact Conduct in the Administration of Her Government, even Then when the
Nations were more than once Trembling under a most formidable Crisis of their
Affairs, will no more be Forgotten: than that mavelous Aequality of Mind,
wherewith She both Received and Resigned it. Her Dexterity in managing the
Snarled and Arduous Affairs of the Government, and preserving the Tranquillity
of the Kingdoms in the most Critical Times that ever they saw, was an Evidence
of an Exalted and Consummate Understanding; and Her Humility, in still
Receiving Authority with Tears, but still Resigning it with Joy!

But let our Observations proceed unto the Royal Designs, with which the God of
Heaven Inspired Her Soul.

A Proposal, a Contrivance, How to do Good? was the most Welcome Thing in the
World unto her. She would call for Suggestions of, that Importance, from those
that were about her; yea, She Charged their Consciences, that they should keep
nothing of that Nature from her, which they might judge it proper for Her to
know: and when any Good Motion was offered, She would have it Repeated, until
She had fully Shaped in her own Thoughts the Notion of it. She Did Good, unto
her utmost; and then has been seen to Weep, that She could Do no more.

The Good that She was most of all desirous to Do, was, To Reform Her People of
the Evil Manners that prevailed among them. Her Heart was Extremely*
Distressed, from the Apprehensions which the multiplied Impieties of the
Nations, gave her, that the Judgments of God were Impending over them. When She
was informed of the fearful Wickednesses committed all over the Land, it struck
her with Horror, and Sorrow, and gave her a Melancholy prospect. She often
said, especially upon the Licentious and Exorbitant Lives of many, that were
the Servants of the Crown, Can a Blessing be Expected from such Hands, or on
any Thing that must pass through them? And She Longed for the Concerns of the
Kingdom to be put into the Hands of such Virtuous and Generous men, as one
might Reasonably hope for a Blessing of Heaven to accompany. The Crying Sins
that abounded in the Armies and Navies, caused her to Mourn in the presence of
God; and She gave persons in Eminent Stations, to understand, That it was
impossible for them to oblige her more, than by a care to stop those Disorders,
and Reduce Matters to the Gravity and Sobriety of the former Times.

When She heard, that Ireland before it was well got out of its late
Confusions, was returning unto its Old Iniquities, She would speak of it, as
one through Trouble, almost Unable to Speak.

The Lamentable Formality and Contention which overspread the Protestant
Churches abroad, most sensibly Afflicted her; She would, with a certain Anguish
of Heart, say upon it, Can such Dry Bones Live?

She Passionately Wished that the Church of England might be Reformed, of many
things that She saw Amiss in it; And being One that Loved the Image of the Lord
Jesus Christ, in whomsoever She saw it, without any Little Respects to
Differing parties, there was nothing more in her Wishes, than a better Union
among those that had that Image on them It was unto an Honored Rela^ion of my
own, that She uttered those words, Inasmuch as a Man cannot make himself
Believe what he will, why should we persecute one another? I wish, I could see
all Good Men of one Mind; but in the mean Time, I Pray, Let them however Love
one another. Words, worthy to be witten in Letters of Gold She was particularly
Resolved upon throwing Disgrace upon all Ministers, that should not Painfully
and Faithfully, Watch over the Souls under their Charge. But the Day before her
last Sickness arrested her, She said, She had no great Hope of Mending matters,
yet She was Resolved to go on, and never Suffer her self to be discouraged, or
loose Heart: She would still Try what could be done, and pursue her Design, how
slow or insensible soever, the Progress might be.

She would therefore Listen most Attentively, to every thing, that gave any
Hope of Things being better in the Next Generation. And when She was informed
of a Religious Disposition, beginning to spread it self among the Young People,
in the great City of London, She was mightily pleased with it, and would much
and often Enquire after it. --

But that at last, I may say something, which may more nearly Touch my Friends
in the Plantations, I will Recite, and but Recite, the Words of the most
Learned Bishop of Salisbury, who has been my Author, for some things already
spoken, in his Essay upon her Memory; She took particular Methods, to be well
informed of the State of our Plantations, and of those Colonies that we have
among the Infidels. But it was no small Grief to Her, to Her, to hear that they
were but too generally a Reproach to the Religion, by which they were Named, (I
do not say, which they professed, for many of them seem scarce to profess it.)

But as none of all the Plantations have signalized their Loyalty to Her, more
than the Country of NEW ENGLAND, so, She ever Expressed a special Regard for
that Country.

For New England She most readily Spoke unto the King at Home, and Wrote unto
Him abroad, That He would be favorable unto His Good Subjects there.

And when One of the Agents for that Country, being Introduced unto the QUEEN,
and having the Honor to Represent at large, the State of that People before
Her Majesty; said, I most Humbly pray Tour Majesty's Favor to Your Majesty's
Subjects in New England; than whom, none are more in Your Interests, nor are
there any who do with greater Devotion pray for Your Long and Happy Reign. They
only Petition, that they may be Resettled in the Enjoyment of those
Privileges, whereof they were possessed, until the Last Year of K. Charles II.
The QUEEN most graciously Replied; I would not only have Justice done to that
People, but Favor shown to them. And if any thing be yet wanting to that
Province, it was not on Her part; who showed her particular Tenderness for
their Welfare, in sending them, by that Hand, a kind supply for their Defense
against the Common Enemy.

And now, O WHEEL! what a doleful Turn have thou given, in the Removal of so
Excellent a Princess?

When She fell Sick, She set her self to take a View of DEATH; and She found
the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, Enabling Her to Encounter it, with such a
Miraculous Calm of Soul, that She said, Though She did not Pray for Death, yet
She could neither wish nor Pray against it; She left that before God, and
referred her self Entirely to the Disposal of His Providence. Unparalled
Words, for a Lady in the Flower of Youth, Surrounded with all the Temptations
and Enjoyments of this Life!

The Tidings of Her Indisposition, cast the whole English Nation, into such an
Astonishing Terror, as no Colors, are black Enough to describe: a certain
Trembling Siezed the Nation, and all things were in an Universal Agony.

She only Her self was easy, and Reaping the Fruits, the Joys, of her past
Godly Life, She found the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ Enabling Her to
Triumph over the Last-Enemy.

Among the most Satisfying and Seraphical Things then uttered by this Dying
Lady,

One was,

I know what Loose People think, of those who pretend to Religion; they think,
it is all Hypocrisy. Let them think what they Will, I may now say, and I thank
God, I can say it; I have not ^ffected to appear what I was not.

Another was,

I believe, I shall now soon Die; and I thank God, I have from my Youth Learned
a true Doctrine, That Repentance is not to be put off unto a Deathbed

Her Distemper proved the Small Pox: and of That, amidst the Sighs of an amazed
Nation, this Glorious QUEEN, filled with Internal Peace, Expired and Retired
unto Eternal; On December 28. 1694 a Quarter of an Hour before One, on Friday
morning; in the Thirty Third Year of her Age. [She was Born, April 30. 1662.]

A TURN of the WHEEL, whereon all considerate persons have made that
Reflection, which Dr. Burnet has in those Terms on this Occasion given unto us,
God seems to be making a way for His Anger, and to be Removing that
Interposition, which we have reason to believe did effectually stop the
Miseries, for which we may well fear, that we are more than Ripe.

A TURN whereof our Brethren in Scotland also have been so sensible, as to
Indict a Natinal FAST, for the Calamity befallen the Nations in so Ominous a
Death.

A TURN, which has put Three Puissant Kingdoms, and all the Navies and Armies,
and all the Plantations of both the India's thereto pertaining, into Mourning;
yea, and all the Courts of Europe, except that One, wherein, as a French Divine
on this Occasion says, It is a crime to deplore Virtue, as much as to profess
the Truth.

She was Interred on the Fifth of March following, with Solemnities
transcending what had ever been paid unto any of Her Predecessors.

The KING being, through the singular Mercy of God, at Whitehal, in the Time of
this Terrible Disaster, the Parliament immediately Expressed their Concern for
the Safety of His Royal Person, by Addressing Him with Humble Declarations of
their Fixed Resolutions to Stand by Him, and His Government.

Those Declarations were immediately followed with ADDRESSES OF CONDOLENCE,
from all parts of the Nation; among which there was One from the Non Conformist
Ministers, which, because I know it expresses but what the Ministers of New
England, (a Province to which this Relation is especially directed) would most
heartily have concurred unto, if the Extremity of their Distance in those
Remote parts of America, had not rendered them incapable of any seasonable
Consultation for it, I shall conclude this Discourse, with the Recital thereof.

THE Address of Condolence TO His MAJESTY, BY THE Dissenting Ministers.
May it please Your Majesty;
THO we come in the Rear of the Train of Mourners, to pay our Tributary Tears
for the Unvaluable Loss in the Death of Your Royal Consort, and our most
Gracious Queen, yet our Resentments of it are with as tender a Sympathy as are
in the Breasts of any of Your Subjects. This gives the sharpest Accent to our
Passions, that the Considerations which are most proper and powerful to allay
our Sorrows, exasperate them: for while we remember what She was, how general
and diffusive a Blessing to three Kingdoms, the severe Stroke of Providence in
taking Her from us, is most afflicting. Such a Concurrence of high Perfection
shined in Her Person and Actions, that would have made Her Illustrious in a low
Condition; and in Her exalted Station they were attractive of the Eyes and
Admiration of all. Her Mind was above the Temptations that attend the Throne.
Majesty was mixed with that condescending Humility, that tender and beneficent
Goodness, that She was easily accessable to all for their Relief and Support.
Her Piety and Purity were so conspicu^us, Her Affections were so comp^sed and
temperate, that the Court, that is usually the Center of Vanity and
Voluptuousness, became Virtuous by the Impression of Her Example. Her
Conversation was so regular, that Her Enemies (if Goodness in such a bright
Eminency had any) could not fasten a Taint upon Her. Her Royal Endowments for
Government, Wisdom, Magnanimity, Vigilance and Care in managing Affairs of
State (without which the highest Princes are but civil Idols, useless and
unprofitable to the World) these were in such a degree of Excellency, that in*
Your Majesty's constrained Absence, while You were defending the Interest of
Christendom, against a potent Enemy Abroad, with the Sword of War, She sweetly
ordered all things at Home with the Scepter of Peace. She is gone, and must
return no more: O astonishing Gr^ef! But it becomes us with humble Submission
to acquiesce in the Divine Disposal. The Will of God is always directed by
infinite Wisdom, and is the Rule of Goodness. We must refresh our Sorrows with
the hope that She is entered into her Savior's Joy, whom She imitated and
honored, and that She is made happy in the Love of God and the Light of His
Countenance for ever.

We humbly beseech Your Majesty to accept the renewed Assurances of our
inviolable and constant Fidelity to your Person and Government; and that we
shall influence all that are within our Compass to persevere in their Duty; We
shall earnestly pray to the blessed God to keep you in the best Protection, his
encompassing Favor, to support your Spirit with Divine Comforts, and to
continue long your precious Life, so necessary for preserving the pure
Religion, and the Civil Rights of this Kingdom.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 9. for Angels. read Angles. Page 8. l. 4. f. Who being. r. when.

POSTSCRIPT. For the Entertainment of the Reader, the Bookseller has been
willing here to add, the manner of the QUEENS Funeral.
Whitehal, March 5 th. 1694.
THis day was Solemnized the Funeral of Her late Majesty Queen Mary II. of
Blessed Memory, from the Royal Palace of Whitehall to the Collegiate Church of
St. Peter, Westminster, all the way being Boarded, Railed in, and Covered with
black Bays. The Proceeding began with the Knight-Marshals men and Deputy, three
hundred poor Women in Mourning Gowns and Hoods, after whom followed the Banner
of Union, several Classes of Their Majesty's Servants, the Children and
Gentlemen of the Chapel Royal, more of Their Majesty's Servants, Chaplains to
Their Majesty's; Aldermen of London; others of Their Majesty's Servants; The
Lord Mayor of London; The House of Commons in long Cloaks, with their Speaker,
and the Mace born before him, and his Train carried (...), and the House of
Peers in their Robes, with their Speaker the Lord Keeper, having the Mace and
Purse carried before him held up; The Banners of Chester, Cornwall and Wales,
born by the Lord Spencer, the Lord Willougby of Eresby, and the Lord Viscount
Longue ville; The Banners of Ireland and Scotland by the Earl of Montrath and
Solkirke; The Banners of England and France Quarterly, of England, and the
Great Banner born by the Earl of Denbigh, the Earl of Stamford, and the Earl of
Bridgwater and Suffolk; Then followed the Mourning Horse led by the Lord
Viscount Villers, Master of the Horse to her late Majesty, attended by two
Equerries; The Helmet and Crest, Target and Sword, and Surcoat of Arms, born by
Officers at Arms, followed by the Lord Marquess of Wenchester, Lord Chamberlain
to Her late Majesty; Then the Queens Body in a Purple Velvet Coffin, with a
rich Cloth of Gold Pall, and thereon the Crown Orb, and Scepters on a Cushion,
one of the Queens Bedchamber Women, sitting at the Feet, and another at the
Head, in an open Chariot, richly adorned, drawn by eight Horses, close covered
with Purple Velvet, and adorned with Escutcheons, and Feathers, Six Bannerolls
on each side, born by Baronets, the Pall being supported by the Earls of Derby
and Kent, Lord Marquess of Normanby, Dukes of Northumberland, Somerset and
Norfolk. The Duchess of Somerset chief Mourner, supported by the Lord Privy
Seal, and the Lord President of His Majesty's Council, the Dutchesses of St.
Albans, and Southampton supporters to the Train, assisted by the Queens
Vice-Chamberlain; Assistant of the Chief Mourner were two Duchesses twelve
Countesses and four Baronesses, then the Ladies of the Bedchamber, then the
Maids of Honor, then the Bedchamber Women, all in the deepest Mourning,
according to their several Ranks The several parts of the Proceeding were
attended by the Kings and other Officers of Arms, with Drums and Trumpets, and
the whole closed with the Band of Gentlemen Pensioners, and Yeomen of the
Guard; and when the Body was taken out of the Chariot at the Door of the Church
a Canopy of Purple Velvet was carried over it by the Gentlemen of the
Privy-Chamber, and the Crown, Orb, and Scepters on the Cushion carried by
Clarenceux King of Arms. The Dean and Prebendaries with the Quire of
Westminster attended at the Entrance of the Church, which was illuminated with
a great number of Lights, and proceeded before the Body, which was deposited
under a Magnificent Mausoleum, Erected in the middle of the Cross of the said
Church, and there remained during the Service and Sermon Preached by the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury; The Chief Mourner and the rest of the Ladies that
went in the Proceeding were placed about the Body; And the House of Peers and
the House of Commons were seated on each side. After Sermon the late Queens
Secretary and Treasurer, Master of the Horse, and Lord Chamberlain, the Dean
and Prebendaries of Westminster, and both Quires, with the Officers of Arms,
and those that bore the Achievements and Regalia, proceeded before the Body to
King Henry VII. Chapel, which was attended by the Supporters of the Pall, and
followed by the Chief Mourner, her Supporters, and Supporters of her Train, and
the Ladies, as in the former Proceeding. The Dean of Westminster performed the
Office of Burial, which ended, Garter Proclaimed the Royal Styles, and the Body
was Interred in a Vault on the Southside of the said Chapel.

The Bells were Tolled according to Order, all over the Kingdom. The Guns at
the Tower fired for three hours at a Minutes distance between every one; And
Orders were given to all His Majesty's Ships at the Buoy of the Nore and at
Blackstakes, to fire their Guns the same day from Two in the Afternoon till
Sunset, in the manner practiced at Funeral Solemnities.

FINIS.

