A NARRATIVE Of an Attempt made by the French of Canada UPON THE MOHAQUES
COUNTRY Being Indians under the Protection of their Majesty's Government of
New York.
To which is added, 1. An Account of the present State and Strength of C^^^is,
given by two Dutchmen, who have been Prisoners there, and now made their
escape. 2. The Examination of a French Prisoner. 3 His Excellency Benjamin
Fletcher's Speech to the Indians. 4. The Answer of the five Nations of the
Mohaques to his Excellency. 5. Proposals made by the four chief Sachims of the
five Nations, to his Excellency. And his Excellency's Reply thereto. 6. An
Address from the Corporation of Albany to his Excellency, returning Thanks for
his Excellency's early Assistance for their Relief, etc.


A Journal kept by Coll. Nicholas Beyard and Lieut. Coll. Charles Lodwick, who
attended his Excellency in this Expedition.
SUnday, the 12th of February, 1692. about ten a Clock at night, an express
from Lieut. Coll. Beekm^n of V^ls^er County, give his Excellency an account of
Advice from Alban^ of the French and Indians* (...) of 550 being within 20
miles of Sche^ecta^y on the 8^h instant, ^n ^o^r before day, ready to fall upon
the two first Castles of the Mohaques.

Whereupon his Excellency ordered the Collon^l of the (...) of the City of
New York to draw out his Regiment the next Mo^ning

M^nda^ the 1^th. O^ders were sent to Coll. Co^^^land (...), and Coll. W^l^^^
of Queens County, to detatch out of then (...), to be forth with re^dy to
imbarque at the Per^^.

(...) if the Regiment, demanded* (...) They unanimously threw (...) their
Hats, and cried, (...) which the Collonol was ordered to (...) 15^ of the (...)
men, to be under the Command of 3 Captains, with their (...), ready at the
f^^st Beat of Drum, an^ dismissed the Regiment, and ordered all Sloops for
Transportation to be (...). About ten a Clock his Excellency did send the
express forward to Coll* Beekma^, with orders to get all the Horses in the
County ^f V^ster together in readiness, to (...) his Excellency and the
Detachments from Kin^^ton^ to Albany by Land, in ^^se the River was not open,
and to forward any Confirmation of the News to his Excellency.

Tuesday the 14th, by break of day came an express from Major Ingoldsby,
confirming the former News, and that the two first Castles were taken by the
French and Indians. Whereupon eight Sloops were ordered, with necessary
Provisions and Ammunition to go round the Fort, and be ready to sail, and the
Detachment of the City Regiment did immediat^ly imbarque. About four a clock
afternoon the Tide offering, his Excellency attended with the Officers of the
Deta^chments, and several Volunteers, did imbarque and set sail.

Friday the 17, about 9 a clock his Excellency arrived at Albany, being 50
leagues distant from New York, with five of the Sloops, having met with much
Ice in the River, which gave some difficulty; the rest arrived toward evening.

As soon as they came on shore, his Excellency ordered Capt. Schuyler to march
50 of the men for Schenect^dy; about 11 a clock his Excellency followed, with
26 Horse, leaving Instructions with Coll Beyard to forward all the rest of the
Detachments* (...)* together with the Ammunition and Provisions.

About 3 a clock afternoon, his Excellency met Major Ingoldsby about 8 miles
from Schenectady, on his return for Albany, having gone from thence to visit
Schenectady that morning. His Excellency arrived at Schenectady, being 20 miles
from Albany, about 5 a clock. About 9 a clock at night Capt. Schuyler, with his
men arrived, and ^ound Provisions and Quarters in readiness for his men

Saturday morning the 18th, by break of day the men were ready to be
transported over the River but a violent Storm did hinder their Transportation
till afternoon, and sundry Indian Women laden with Provisions, were sent along
with them. This day about Noon Major Merit, with the rest of the City
Detachment, did arrive at Schenectady, and were immediately furnished with
Quarters, Ammunition and Provisions, ready to march next morning.

Sunday the 19th, by break of day, the rest of the Forces that were fit to
march, did attempt to get over, but great Quantities of loose ^ce did hinder,
till about ten a clock the Ice settling, they got over it on foot, which in two
hours was dispersed, and the River open again. This partly carried a further
supply of Provisions and Ammunition.

M^nday the 20th, by break of day, those of the City Detachments, who were not
able to march the day before, being refreshed, his Excellency detached from the
Garrison of Schenectady, so many of them as made 4^ who did immediately march
with 13 Horses laden with Provision and Ammunition.

About 2 a clock afternoon arrived at Schenectady Capt. Still^ell, with the
Detachment of Kings County, consisting of 50 men, who were ordered to refresh
themselves till next morning, and three Horses with Provisions ordered to be in
readyness to attend them.

Tuesday the 21st, the Horses being (...) River, and (...) to be transported,
came an express from (...) Schuyler, giving (...) being near at hand on his
Return, who arrived about 4 a clock aftern^on* upon which the men and Horse
were remanded, and sent back to their o^n (...). There marched by his
Excellency's order (to join Major Schuyler) (...) h^s arrival 208. effective
men, besides Guides and Carriers of Supplies, with considerab^e quantities of
Provisions and Amuniti^n, which are since returned.

Wednesday the 22d his Excellency returned for Albany, accompanied with Major
Schuyler, and several of the Forces come from pursuit of the Enemy, and arrived
about 3 a clock afternoon, much d^^satisfied at the Enemies escape.

His Excellency did order Major S^huyler, with some other Officers, to give the
Journal of their Action in the Woods.

At 4 a clock arrived Coll. Wille^ at Albany, with 120 men from Queens County,
who were next morning remanded home to their Habitations, together with the
rest of the Detachments. At night his Excellency sent to call those Indians
that were returned from the Fight, to meet him next morning at Albany.

Thursday the 23d, a Proclamation issued, requiring all the out Farmers to draw
themselves into Neighbourhoods, for their better security against the sculking
Enemy, and to fortify with Stockadoes.

Friday the 24th, his Excellency received an Address from the Corporation of
Albany, congratulating his safe return, and returning Thanks for his early
Assistance with his Personal Presence for their Relief, etc.

Saturday the 25th, the Indians being arrived last night, and giving their
attendance, this morning his Excellency, (...) with the Magistrates of this
City, and the Soldiers and Militia in Arms, came to the City Hall, and made
his Speech to the Indians, which was interpreted to them by the Interpretess
He^^e. In the afternoon they gave their Answer to his Excellency by the same
Interpretess.

Sunday the 26th, about 8 a clock in the morning, four of the chief Sachims
came to his Excellency, with some further Propositions, which he immediately
answered to their Satisfaction.

Monday the 27th, his Excellency caused a Proclamation to be published,
prohibiting the selling of Rum to the Indians, and did imbarque for New York,
where he arrived Thursday morning following, and was received with such
Expressions ^f Joy and Thankfulness, as the place could afford.

Nicholas Beyard, Coll.
Charles Lodwick, Lieut. Coll

IN Obedience to his Excellency's Command, Peter Schuyler Mayor, with the other
Officers under his Command, give this following Account of their proceeding^
since the first Intelligence of the Enemy's descent into the Country of the
Mohaques.
February the 8th, being Wednesday, about 2 a clock afternoon, we had the alarm
from Schenectady, that the French and their Indians had taken the Mohaques
Castles* soon after we had the News, that a young man, called I^n Baptist van
Eps, (taken at Schenectady; years a go) was run over from the French, as they
were to attack the first Castle of the Mohaques, and come to Schenectady, who
related, that the French were 350 Christians and 200 Indians. Ma^or Ingoldesby
sent forthwith his Warrants, to command in the Farmers of Capt. G^nits and
Capt. Tu^is's Companies of Militia. This night Lieut. John Schuyler and Cornet
Abeel with 55 Horse marched to Schenectady.

February 9. Cornet Abeel came express from Schenectady, and desired that Major
Schuyler or Major Wessels might be sent thither to pacify the Indians, who
were enraged that no Christians went out in pursuit of the Enemy. Upon which
Major Schuyler at his own request was permitted to go that Evening. As soon as
Major Schuyler arrived there, he sent out scouts to spy the Forts, and the
Enemies motion, and withal to go and warn the Tionondoge Indians of the Enemies
coming, but they having gone 12 miles, returned, about 12 a clock at night,
saying, they could not get over the River.

Feb. 10. Major Schuyler sent Lieut. Johannes Schuyler and Lieut. John Sanders,
and six more to view the Mohaques Fort that was possessed by the Enemy, who
brought news, that the French were in both the Forts, of all which he gave
advice to Major Ingoldsby at Albany.

Feb. 11. Major Schuyler sent 10 Christians and 40 Indians to lie near the
Enemy, and to watch their motion, who made a small Fort to retreat into, and so
spyed what the Eenemy did.

Feb. 12. News was brought to Schenectady by some of the said Scouts, that they
had heard firing at the Mohaques Forts, which was supposed the Tionondoge
Indians against the French; which News Major Schuyler sent forward to Albany.
Whereupon Ma^^r Ingoldsby detached about 200 men out of the several Companies
of the Militia Fuzileers and Troop, commanded by Capt. Peter Matthews, Capt.
Arent Schuyler, Capt. Benj. Phips, Capt. K^had van Rens^^er, and Capt Tho
Gartin, who arrived at (...) Major Schuyler: The Wagons with Bread arrived
that night. This day our Scouts brought us the News, that the French were there
still, and that they had also cut off the third Castle of the Mohaques, called,
Tionondoge, and that none of the upper Indians were come down; all which was
advertised to Major Ingoldsby forthwith, and Major Schuyler sent to him for
Orders to march.

Feb. 13. This morning having received no answer of the said Express, Major
Schuyler sent another for Orders to march, and being pressed with the Indians,
who threatened else to desert us, was forced to march the men over the River
without Orders, which came about 4 a clock in the afternoon, when most of the
men were got over the River. This very time we had News by our out Scouts, that
the French had burnt the Mohaques three Castles, and were marched away, which
Major Schuyler ordered Lieut. Young to signify to Major Ingoldsby We marched
12 miles that evening, being 273 Christians. In the night about 10 a clock one
of our Scouts came in, and told us, that 600 of our uppermost Indians were
coming down; Major Schuyl^r forthwith sent the same Messenger, that brought us
the News, to Major Ingoldsb^, and desired that Provision and Ammunition should
be sent after us, not knowing what the Indians might have occasion for.

Feb 14. About 1 or 2 a clock in the morning we decamped, and marched to the
small Fort which was made by our 50 Scouts, about six a clock in the morning,
where we had advice, that the Enemy was not above eight mile from us: upon
which Lieut. Harm^ van Slyk and two Indians were sent to discover the Enemy,
who brought us word, they were marched; two Indians came to us with News, that
there were 300 of our upper Indians within 20 mile of us, whereupon we sent two
Indians back to hasten them up, and to let them know we were there to join
them. We sent out three Mohaques to discover the Enemy; about 4 a clock in the
afternoon we decamped, and marched to the place where the Enemy had lain the
night before.

Feb. 15. (...) ^eturned (...) over to the (...)) who broug^t (...) had seen
the (...) miles. Our Ind^ans come up with (...) clock, being (...) some Armed,
and some without Arm^, a C^nsult being had, we marched at (...) 4 a clock, and
encamped all together, having marched about ten miles that a^te^noon. This
night a Consult was held, and Spies sent to discover the Enemy.

Feb. 16. We marched early in the morning, and having gone ten miles, found the
place where the Enemy had lain two nights before; we halted there, an On^^ de
Indian came from the Enemy, being sent to our Indians to debauch them over to
the French, which Messenger we did not think fit to send back, being one of the
Prisoners taken at Tionondoge. We sent an express to Ma^or Ingoldsby to
acquaint him that the Enemy had built a Fort, and were resolved to fight us,
and sent for supplies of Provision, Ammunition and Men. We marched on toward the
Enemy, and met with one of our wounded Indians, who informed, that the Enemy
stayed for us in a Fort; upon which we marched about two miles* where a
Christian Boy ( Ar^^^^ the Interpreters Son) came to us, who had been three
years a Prisoner among the French, he gave account, that the Enemy were about 6
or 700 men* and within three miles, we marched forward to find some convenient
place ^o encamp, and to fortify our selves from the Enemy that night; we had
Scouts out (Christians and Indians) all night to watch the Enemies motion, who
brought account in the morning that we were within a mile of their Fo^^.

Feb. 17. We decamped, and marched toward the Enemy, with Scouts before us, and
did not take a direct line, but went round, for fear of an Ambuscade, and came
in sight of their Fort about eight a clock in the morning, where our Scouts
came and showed us where the ^nemy lay, upon which all the Officers were
commanded to take their Posts, and make ready to engage, being 250 Christians,
and 290 Indians, the Enemy seeing us, gave (...) answered with as many, and as
lo^d as they, and made the Woods ring; our Indians went to work to f^ll Trees
and fortify, but the Enemy sallyed out immediately, we engaged them, and beat
them back into their Fort, our Indians fell to work again, and desired our
Christians to help, which they did; the Enemy sallyed out with all their
strength a second time, encouraging their men, crying, They Run, we (...) cut
them (...) off, and get their Provisions: We received them briskly, and beat
them back into their Fort, with the loss of several of their men: Our men fell
to work again about the Fort; the Enemy sallyed out the third time, but were as
well repulsed as before, and beat into their Fort, with considerable loss, our
Indians bringing several of their Heads and Scalps into our Fort; after this
the Enemy was quiet, and we f^nished our Fort; as soon as this Skirmish was
over, we sent an Express to Major Ingoldsby, to acquaint him what had passed,
praying him to hasten our Recruits with Provision and Ammunition, for that
greatest part of our men had not had any Provision in two days time; we sent
out Scouts of Christians and Indians all that night, to discover the Enemy's
motion, and lay all night in our Fort; it was extreme bad cold snowy weather.

Feb 18. Being cold stormy Weather, and Snow, insomuch that we could scarce see
any Tract, our Scouts came in this Morning, which gave account that the Enemy
were in their Fort, some being still popping at our People. About nine a clock
an Indian tha^ left the French in their Fort told us, He ^ought the Enemy would
Retreat, that they were packing up their Baggage. Upon which M^jor Schuyler
ordered the Captains to draw out their men to march (...) the Enemy's Fort to
st^p them; but the ^ame time had an account they were fled; he comm^nded the
O^fi^ers to pursue them, and to hinde^ their Retreat, till Men and Provisio^s
(...), but the Men wanting Provision, refused to march; the Officers, with 60
Christians and some Indians pursued the ^nemy till they had made a small
Fortification* but the Officers not having men to engage them, nor to make a
Fort* returned back* leaving two Officers with 40 men and 100 Indians to watch
their motion, expect^ing our Provision to come up that night.

Feb. 19. About 7 a clock in the morning we had an account, that our Provision*
were near at hand, which came up to us about nine or ten a Clock* with 80 men,
commanded by Capt. Simms; the Provisions being immediately distributed among
the men, those that were first served, were commanded away after the Enemy*
with five Biskets a man: About four a clock, the van being commanded by Capt.
Peter Matthews and Capt. Arent Schuyler, came up near the rear of the Enemy,
the Scouts telling us, the Enemy were within less than an English mile; we
desired the Indians to join with us to fall upon their Rear, till the rest of
our men came up, sending in the mean time to our People, to march up in all
haste, but the Indians halted, and could not be persuaded to march, the
Mohaques being most unwilling, because the Enemy had dropped several Prisoners,
who told them, that if they pursued them, they would kill all their Wives and
Children, whom they had Prisoners; after an hours Consultation of the Indians,
most of our men came up, we marched with all speed, thinking to overtake the
Enemy before they got to the River side, but there being a flake of Ice in one
part of the River, and all open above and below, the Enemy got over before we
got up: We encamped by the River side that Night.

Feb. 20. In the morning Major Schuyler resolved to march over the River, to
pursue the Enemy, ordering the Officers to get the men ready for that purpose,
but many of the men being wearied with fatigue, their Shoes being quite wore
out, and Provisions (...) not able to make any further pursuit. But that which
did most of all discourage us, was, that the Indians had great averseness to
pursue or fall upon the Enemy, because of their Wives and Children; whereupon
we marched back.

In this Engagement we lost four private Soldiers, and four Indians, two
Officers and twelve Christians, and Indians wounded; and we had an account by
some of our Indian Prisoners that made their escape, that we killed of the
Enemy 33* whereof we found but 27, among which was their Commandant, one
Captain, and two others Officers, with two of their commanding Indians, and 26
wounded. We rescued between forty and fifty Prisoners.

Since their Retreat we are informed by diverse of the Prisoners, who come home
daily, that all our men Prisoners except five, have made their escape, or are
set at liberty, and but few Women and Children left with them, not being able
to carry the Prisoners off, by reason of their wounded men, whereof they carry
thirteen.

As we did not hear, so we could not expect that your Excellency should in so
short time (at that season of the Year) be advanced so near us as to
Schene^^ady, and that so considerable Supplies could be so speedily got
together: And we observed it was no small encouragement to our Ind^ans to see
your Excellency at the head of 300 men, besides Volunteers, for our Relief, and
theirs; of which we are all sensible.

Peter Schuyler, Major. Peter Matthews, Capt. Are^t Schuyler, Capt. K. V.
R^us^l^er, Capt. Benj. Phipps, Capt.


The Examination of Andries Casparus and Cornelius (...) van den Bergh, both
Dutchmen, taken before his Excellency Benj. Fletcher, Governor, who have made
their escape from Canada, who were Prisoners there, and have been 32 days by
the way.
THe said Cornelius Cla^se van den Bergh was taken at Canactagiere in July
1691. a little before the Mayor, Peter Schuyler went to Canada, and Andres
Caspares who was gone out with some of our River Indians last fall to hunt, and
withal to see how the far Natians, called, the Turchtuicks lived, was taken
last March by a party of Turchtuicks and Davaganhaes, and brought to a Castle
where said Indians lived, and was there to be burnt and eat by said Indians,
from whence he run away that very day he received his cruel Sentence, and was
sixteen days in the Woods, and came to a place where Monsieur Tonty^ People
were making a Fort, and the said Mons. Tonty and Mons. La Free brought him to
Canada.

The said Prisoners say, that the French informed them, that there were ten
Ships come from France with Provision and Ammunition, but no men, scarce so many
as could sail their Ships, that they had brought 120000 pound of Flower, and
160000 pound of Pork, also some great Guns, and two Mortar Pieces.

That there is a Fort built below Quebeck, in a narrow Passage where Ships must
pass; the French spoke of two Forts (but an English man told him only of one
Fort) and twelve Guns in each Fort. They had 1600 Soldiers three year ago, of
which 1000 are killed and taken; this is besides 200 Inhabitants who are killed.

The said Corneli^ has lived all this while at the Governor of Mont. Royal his
House, called Monsieur d' Cellier, and judges there are about 400 men in Mont
Royal with Soldiers and all, although the said Monsieur d' Cellier often told
them, they had 700 men there.

The Inhabitants seem to be much wearied of the War, and cry much for Peace,
and pray that God would turn the Prince of Orange's heart, and incline him to
make Peace, for it is his fault that all these Miseries are come upon them.

There is a man come over with those Ships to be Mons. d' Cellier's Cock, who
says, that the English had fallen upon the French Fleet unawares, and done them
some damage, and pursued them to Breast, and if they had come but a quarter of
an hour sooner, they had taken Breast, and all the Province of Brittanine

The French have lost this Summer 37 French and 70 Indians at one time, going
up the Falls to Ottawawa, and at a second time they lost 30 French the same
way, and often times smaller Parties killed by our Indians.

The said Andres Casparus says further, that when he came to the French House,
after he had escaped from the Indians, the French tied him two days, but he
being so lean and mager, having had no food all that time, but 11 Eggs he found
in a Turkies Nest, and 6 Swan eggs he found in another place, so that the
French did unty him. About eight days after Monsieur Tonty came (who is in the
manner of a Governor among them) and he went down with said Tonty to Ottawawa,
which was 200 Leagues from that place; the said Tonty depatched about 25 or 30
great (...) of Beaver to Canada; and after they had been two days from
Ottawawa, they met one Monsieur de L^lle, who had been out a skulking upon the
great (...)* and had taken two Prisoners, who told that 300 of our Indians lay
at a carry^^ place on the great River, waiting for the Ottawawa Company, and
200 were near Mont Royal Island upon the same design. They stopped said Company
till M. Tonty sent for them back, and resolved to go to Canada with 200 men
Indians and French without Beavers, in which Company the said Andres Casparus
came, being reckoned 300 Leagues between Ottawawa and Canada. As soon as the
said Andries came to Mont Royal, M. Tonty delivered him to the Governor of
Mont Royal, who put him in Prison four days, and then released him to work in
his House; but as soon as he got out, consulted with his Comrade Cornelis to
run away, which they did accordingly. After they had been about a month or
five weeks together in said M. d' Celliers house, the said Andries says, he saw
a great prodigious Quantity of Beavers at Ottawawa; an Inhabitant of Canada,
called Jaques de Tallie, told him, he had 3000 Beaver of his own there, and
that there was as many Beavers now in Ottawawa as would load 200 Canows to
Canada, and each Canow generally holds nine or ten hundred Beavers; which the
said Andries does credibly believe to be true, there being none gone from
thence to Canada in a great while.

There is a Fort at Ottawawa burnt by accident this spring, where Mo^s. la Free
had the Command, wherein was great store of Beavers and Peltry, and several
Goods and Merchandise.

This is the Account the said two Prisoners g^ve at Albany the 4 th of October,
1692. and is entered down from their Mouths, by his Excellency's Command.
Robert Livingstone.

The Examination of Joachin Lebert, a French Man of Canada, and Native of Mont
Royal, taken before his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, at Albany the 4th of
October, 1692.
THat he lived at Prerie de lay Magdelain. That it is 60 Leagues from Mon^
Royal to Quebeck. That Mr. de Cellier is Governor of Mont Royal. That there is
2000 men carrying Arms in his Government, Soldiers and Inhabitants. That the
Town of Mont Royal is enclosed with Stockadoes. That there is 53 pieces of
Canon, Brass and Iron, eight Companies of Soldiers, unequal in number, 50 men
being the most.

That the Fort of Magdelaine contains 23 Families, 400 men in Arms, 2 pieces of
Canon, and 5 Patteraroes. There is 200 men in the Indian Fort, called,
Ganawague. That there is ten Men of War arrived at Quebeck, from France, laden
with Ammunition, and that he saw the said Ships. That he has been taken 43
days, and says, that the day before his being taken he being at Mr. Celliers
house, he saw a Canow arrive there from Mr Le Co^nt, sent to Mr Cellier to
demand the Collers of Beeds, which are usually presented at the concluding a
Peace, the which occasioned him to say there was Ambassadors coming to treat a
Peace.

Upon the Objection made, That there could not be so many People (...) he says,
that the two French m^n that were sent to (...) some time since, (...) at
Canada, did inform Mr. Le Count, that the English had assembled all (...), with
a design upon Canada, which obliged Mr. Le Count to raise all (...) he could
possible, which was that Number he said. And says, he knows nothi^^ more.

His Execellency Benjamin Fletcher's Speech to the Indians at the State-House
in Albany, February 25, 1692.
BRETHREN,
IT is not unknown to some of you, that I came last October into these parts
upon no other occasion than to view the F^onteers, and put them in the best
posture I could, to secure us and you, from the Attempts of the French and
their Indian our Enemies and yours. And in order to this I sent a supply of
Ammunition, Arti^lary, and Christian Soldiers, sufficient to prevent any Insult
from our Enemies, and it had the effect I expected, for they durst not face the
weakest of our Garrisons. I came now for your Relief, and have lost no time;
the same day that I had an account from hence that our Enemies were in this
Country, I put my self on board a Sloop, and brought with me 150 Christian
Soldiers, besides Volunteers, and arrived here before I could be expected; I
then immediately marched to Schen^ctady, from whence I sent you supplies of 200
and odd men, Ammunition, Provision, etc. with which those that joined you
before, under the Command of Major Schuyler, might have secured an entire
^ictory, and prevented the French and their Indians from any possibility of
getting back to their own houses, but it has pleased God to order it otherwise.
I had also 200 Christians more upon their march, who arrived here, and would
have been a considerable Reinforcement to us, but the Action being over, I
commanded them back to their former Residence, till further Orders. It is
obvious to me, and I believe to you all, that this Calamity is fallen on you by
your own faults. I could never suppose my Brethren, the Mohaques, would be so
supine and careless, as to suffer the French, and their Indians to enter their
Castles without the least Resistance. These men that have an Enemy near, must
sleep with Arms in their Hands, and one eye open, that is, they must keep
Scouts and Spies, so as never to become a prey to their Enemies, by their own
negligence. I must advise you, that for the future, you keep strict watch, so
that I may have timely notice of the Enemy's motion, and you will then see how
easily they will be defeated.

I hope it is now apparent to you, that the great of King of England is ready
to apply his Arms for your defense, when you consider, that in a very few days
I am come personally to your Assistance, with near 400 Christian Soldiers. I
have had the Honor to bear Command under the great King of England, my Master*
where I have seen the French fly before his victorious Arms; and last Summer it
pleased God to add to his Victories, by the defeat and destruction of their
Fleet, in which most of their Ships were burnt or sunk.

I came now in great haste* and brought no Presents with me, but design (by the
blessing of God) to be with you at the beginning of Summer, to give you
something to wipe off your Tears for the Brethren that are lately lost, to
renew the ancient Covenant Chain, and to give you further A^surances of the
Great King of (...) Favor, and of my own (...) to (...) Servant, ^or your
Protection against our Enemi^s (...) yours.

My p^esent care now is, to provide for the (...) Nation, about which I have
given my directions to Ma^or Sch^^l^r, who will appoint them a place for their
Residence; I have also ordered some Corn for their present support, which they
will receive from him. I must add, that it concerns your Honor and Reputation
to make some brisk attempt upon our Enemies, and this with what (...) and
expedition you can, that those People may see you retain the ancient Courage of
your Ancestors, and I do not question but God will give you success by a severe
Revenge on our ^nemies and yours.

I am informed, that your Young Men have killed the Horses of some Christian
Soldiers, who were upon the same service with you (it is not Brotherly) and I
desire for the future, you will take care to prevent such Outrage, that the
ancient Covenant Chain may be preserved inviolably on your parts, as it will be
on the part of my Master, the great King.

To conclude, I must tell you, that I doubt there is some false Brother among
us, who keeps intelligence with our Enemies, concealing their designs, and
exposing ours; if you have one French man among you, he will be true to his
Country* by betraying you. I have ordered you some Bread and Bear, and desire
you will drink the Heal^^s of my great Mr. and Mrs the Victorious King and most
Illustrous Queen of Great Britain, France and Ireland, and all their Majesty's
Territories in America; and so bid you farewell.

The Answer of the Five Nations, viz. the Mohaques, Oneydes, Onondages,
Cayouges and Sinnekes, To his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and
Governor in chief of their Majesty's Province of New York, etc. in Albany this
25th of February, 1692. Sadeganaktie, S^ch^m of the Onondages, Speaker.
Interpreted by Hille, the Interpretess.
Brother Cayenqui^^g^, which signifies a great swift Arrow, a Name the five
Nations have gives his Excellency, because of his speedy arrival here, with so
many Men for their Relief, when the Enemy had fallen upon the Mohaques Country.
WHen we arrived at Schenectady, after our march against the Enemy, you was
pleased to desire us to come hither, where we heard you, Great Swift Arro^,
speak, and participated of your Favors, we acknowledge that the Enemy, the
French of Canada have fallen upon our Brethren, the Mohaques, and destroyed
their three Castles, which we can attribute to nothing else but their not
hearkening to the great ^wift ^rrow's good Advice, which was to keep good Guard
and out Scouts.

We return you, Brother great swift Arrow, our hearty Thanks for your care in
providing for the Mohaques, that they may not starve, nor be in want in this
extremity.

Brother, great swift Arrow, You propose to us the attacking the Enemy in their
Country, to show them that we have not lost the Courage of our Ancestors; we
return you our hearty Thanks for your good Encouragement, for we are in a
manner drunk with the Blood lately shed by them. It is not usual for us, while
we are in that grief and annixity, as now we are, to proceed to revenge our
selves of the Enemy; you have lost your Blood as well as we, there ore that
Blood ought to be revenged unanimously by both sides.

Brother, Great Swift Arrow, You recommend us to go and attack the Enemy where
they (...) has (...) by the Enemy; for we are all (...) sign to go out and to
fall upon the (...) we know, that the Governor of Canada* (...) but whither we
know not.

Brother, Great Swift Arrow, While you p^ess us to go and attack the Enem^
(...) Canada by Land, we expect* according to the many P^omises and Engageme^^^
made to us, to hear of a considerable F^rce to go with great Guns by Sea, that
the Enemy might be assaulted both ways, and so overcome; we press this the
hard^^^ because a great part of our strength is n^w br^ke, and therefore take
it not amiss that we push this point of taking Canada by Sea, since its
impossible to be done by Land alone.

Brother, Great Swift Arrow, We return you our hearty Thanks, that y^u are s^
r^^dy to (...) upon any occasion, and for the good adv^ce to be watchfu^, (...)
keep our good scout and spies; it is probable* that we would have done a great
deal more damage to the Enemy had we been so well provided with all sorts of
Amunit^on, as the Indians of Canada are* but some of our men have Guns, and no
Powder nor Ball, and some but Bows and Arrows, as Major Schuyler saw, when we
came up to him; but the Go^ernour of Canada supplies his Indians with all sorts
of Arms and Ammunition, which we found now when we engaged them.

We pray you, Great Swift Arrow, to have a careful Eye over us, since this
party of the French that has destroyed the Mohaques Castles, is but part of his
strength, he is working with the Otta^awa and Do^agan^aes Indians, where he has
a great Magazeen, and supplies them with all sorts of Ammunition, and we fear
that that force will come down upon us still.

Brother, Great swift Arrow, We retu^^ you thanks for remembering our dead, and
that you will condole their death, when you come up in the beginning of Summer,
but you can expect no Return from us, being in so mean a capacity and condition.

Brother, Great Swift Arrow, You inform us of the great Victory that our Lord
of Lords (meaning the great King of England) has got upon the French, the
common Enemy at Sea, which is admirable, and all the Nations are heartily
rejoiced at it, and we hope that the great God that has his Seat above the
Heavens, will give the same success to our great Lord of Lords Arms in this
part of the World, over his and our Enemies, the French of Canada.

We pray that you would be pleased to acquaint our great Lord of Lords* who
lives over the great great Lake, of our mean Condition, and what p^^ture we are
in, and how easy it is to destroy Canada, if all our great Lord of Lords
subjects in these Collonies would unite and join together, with some Ships that
carry great Guns, which our great Lord of Lords can easily spare us, after this
late Victory over the French at Sea.

We desire that you would be pleased to order a Smith to be with us in our
Country to repair our Arms, that we may defend us from the French.

His Excellency replied, That he hoped they were sufficiently satisf^ed of his
readiness to assist them, and that the Force the French had now sent was the
most they could make; and if they would but keep out scouts, and advertise his
Excellency timely of the Enemies coming, his Excellency does not doubt, with
the strength he has in his Province, to deal with the Governor of Canada, and
all his Power.

The Governor granted their Request of the Smith to be in their Country to
repair their Arms.

Proposals made by four of the (...) Sachims of the five Nations, to his
Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, in Albany the 26th of February, 1692.
Brother, Great swift Arrow*
WE are come to acquaint you, that one of our men has last night in a drunken
fit, killed an Indian that came over from the French, at which we are much
concerned, and therefore come to see how our Brother great swift Arrow resents
it.

We desire that you would be pleased to prohibit the selling of Rum while the
War is so hot, since our Soldiers cannot be kept within Bounds, if they be
drunk.

Brother great swift Arrow, We answered your Excellency's Proposals yesterday,
but ^^d not time to consult with that deliber^tion as we ought, and if
therefore there be any thing omitted, or if we failed of our duty, we beg that
you would be pleased to pardon that omission; for we must declare in behalf of
all the Nations, that we are singularly obliged to you, Brother great swift
Arrow, for your so extraordinary dispatch and sudden arrival here for our
Relief, with so considerable a Force, the like never having been done before,
whereby we see your readiness and allacrity to help and assist us. And we do
also return you thanks for leaving your directions with Major Schuyler to take
care of the Moh^quas Nation. We are thankful for your kind expressions, to be
so ready to come for our Relief, and that you warn us to come and acquaint you
as soon as we see the Enemy a coming a far off, not doubting of your Power to
protect us, since we have seen a sufficient proof of that already by this late
Expedition.

Brother great swift (...) make a narrow enquiry as soon as we come into our
Co^ntry, about the French Prisoners, who we supect may betray us: we have had
two bouts with the Onedeys about the Priest Milet that is among them, and we
intend to try the third time.

We desire that you, Brother great swift Arrow, may come up as soon as the Bark
is loose upon the Trees, since we have a design upon the Enemy.

We forgot to answer you in that business about the Young men killing the
Horses, we acknowledge, its not Brotherly, but very ill done, and as soon as we
^^me into our Country we will take such methods that it may be prevented, by
^^nding out them that have done it, causing them to make Satisfaction.

His Excellency replied, that he was much concerned that they should exercise
their Arms one against another, while there is an Enemy in the Field, and hopes
they will for the future endeavor to prevent such Irregularities: That they
may be now sufficiently convinced how ready the Arms of the great King of
England is to succor them; and that his Excellency, for his own part will
never spare to expose his ^erson for their security. That the Rum shall be
prohibited upon their Request; and that the most he requires of them, is to be
vigilent and careful, and not suffer themselves to be surprised, and then they
need not fear the French.

To his Excellency B^njam^n ^let^her, (...) Governor in Chief of their
Majesty's (...) York, Vice Admiral of the same.
The Humble Address of the Mayor, Aldermen and (...) of the City of Albany.
May it please your Excellency;
WE are extremely sensible of your Excellency's special Care, not only set the
Safety and Security of your Excellency's Government in general, but in
particular for the extraordinary Regard taken for this City, being the utmost
Frontier thereof, seated near One Hundred and Fifty Miles up in the Country,
whilst the same was attacked by the Enemy of C^^^da, who had surprised and
burnt the three Castles of the Mo^aques, killed diverse of their fighting men,
and lead in Captivity ^pwards of 130 Women and Children, and that your
Excellency should within two days after notice received from hence, make that
dispatch as to be here so suddenly with 300 men, and sufficient Provisions and
Stores of War for our immediate Relief, which was more than ever could be
expected in this Winter Season.

We therefore out of a deep sense of your Excellency's unparralleled Affection
to and Care for us, cannot (...) esteem (...) your Excellency, and beg of you
to accept our Unfeigned Thanks, assuring your Excellency, as we shall never
forget your extraordinary care of us, so shall we ever admire and beg the
continuance of your Excellency's benign Government over us; and since the
Mohaques Nation is wholly dispersed by the Enemy's burning all their three
Castles, and our Farmers live straggling up and down the Country, in great
danger to be cut off by the skulking Indians, We pray that your Excellency in
your Wisdom will be pleased to order some convenient place where the Remnant of
said Nation may be convened together, and fortified for any attack of the
Enemy, and that the F^rmers may be ordered to fortify themselves in Companyes
together* that the Enemy may not have an advantage of them.

And we humbly beg your Excellency to believe, we are always ready to venture
our Lives and Fortunes for their Ma^esties Service, the Defense of this
Province, and with all cheerfulness and allacrity shall endeavor, whenever it
lies in our Power, to demonstrate our true Affection to your Excellency in
particular, and to approve our selves,

Your Excellency's most Dutiful, And most Obedient Servants. Peter Schuyler,
Mayor, L^vinus V^^chaick, Alderman, Rymen Barentse, Asi^^ant* Dirk Wessells,
Recorder, Evert Banker, Alderman, Johannis Roseboo^.


The House of Representatives for the Province of New York, Wednesday A. M.
March 22. 169^* Ordered,
THat the Thanks of this H^use be given unto his Excellencys for his favorable
Speech, and his Care of the Frontiers of this Province, by the great Dispatch
he made in His Personal Appearance there, upon the late Invasion of the French.

Ordered, That Mr. Wessells, Mr. Pell, Mr. K^pp, Capt. Whitehead, Mr. R^tsand,
Mr. Theun^sse^, Mr. Tuthill, and Mr. Barnes do wait upon his Excellency and
Council with this Message.

By Order of the House of Representa^ives, James Graham, Speaker.
FINIS.
Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Anno 1693.


