ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusets-Bay, in New England.

Begun at Boston the Eighth Day of June, 1692, And Continued by several
Adjournments unto Wednesday the Eighth of February following, being the Third
Sessions.

Anno Regni, Galielmi, et Mariae, Regis et Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae Quarto, et Quinto.

BOSTON Printed by Benjamin Harris, Printer to His Excellency, the Governor
and Council, 1693.

Acts and Laws, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusets-Bay in New England. etc.
An Act, For the Explaining and Altering of some Clauses, and Sentences; and
the Repealing of some others, contained in several Acts made and passed at the
Second Session of this Court in October last, 1692.
BE it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, And it is Enacted and Declared By the Authority of the Same.

THat whereas in the Act Entitled, An Act, For the Settling and Distribution of
the Estates of Intestates, amongst other things, Thereby ENACTED and PROVIDED,
there is a Saving to the (...) agrieved, at any Order, Sentence, or Decree,
made for the Settlement and Distribution of any Intestate Estate, their Right
of Appeal unto the Governor and Council.

It is now Declared and Enacted.

That such Right of Appeal, shall to all intents and purposes, extend and be
taken and construed to extend, as well to any other Order, Sentence, Decree, or
Denial, that shall at any time be made and given by the Judge of Probate,
referring to the approbation and allowance of any Will, grant of Aministration
or other matter; Any thing in said Act, to the Contrary notwithstanding.

And Further it is Enacted and Declared,

That the Judge of Probate in each County respectively, when and so often as
there shall be occasion; Be and hereby is Empowered,

To allow of Guardians, that shall be chosen by Minors of Fourteen years of
Age, and to appoint Guardians for such as shall be within that Age; taking
sufficient security of all such Guardians for the faithful Discharge of their
Trust, according to Law: and to Account either to the Judge or Minor, when such
Minor shall arrive at full Age, or at such other Time as the Judge upon
complaint to him made shall see cause.

ANd whereas in one other Act, Entitled, An Act, For Affirming of former
Judgments, and Providing for Executions. Amongst other things thereby ENACTED,
It is PROVIDED, that Appeals then depending, having not been heard, shall be
Heard and Tried at the First Superior Court. It is hereby Explained and
Declared,

To be understood and intended, and shall be construed to intend, the first
Superior Court to sit within or for that County, where the Action was
Originally and First Tried.

And for further Explanation and an Addition to the Section or Paragraph of
said last mentioned Act, wherein Provision is made, That a Scire Facias do
issue forth upon any Judgment passed in any County Court or Court of
Commissioners. It is hereby Declared,

To extend, and shall be construed and taken to extend as well to any Judgment
passed in any Court of Assistants, Superior or inferior Court at any time
whatsoever; where Execution has not been taken out or not levied for satisfying
of the same, such Writ of Scire Facias to be granted out of the Clerks Office,
of the Superior or Inferior Court respectively to be held within or for the
same County, where such Judgment was given.

And whereas by the President or Form for an Execution, the Officer is
Commanded for want of Goods, Chattels or Lands of the Debtor, to be by him
shown or found within the Precinct, to take the Body of such Debtor, and Commit
him to Prison.

It is hereby Explained, Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid

That where Judgment is granted for Money, or any particular Specie, the
Creditor shall not be compelled to take any other Specie; But in every such
case, for want thereof, the Officer shall take the Body of the Debtor, in
Execution, and Imprison him; unless such Creditor shall be content to Receive
his Satisfaction in such other Estate as may be tendered or found. And these
words, To the Acceptance of the said A. B. shall be Supplied and Inserted in
the Writ of Execution, to follow next the word Precinct.

And be it further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,

That as well Original as Judicial Writts Issuing out of the Clerks Office, of
the Inferior Courts of Judicature respectively, shall run into any County
within this Province, and be there Executed by the Officer or Officers of such
County to whom they are directed.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, That the Clause in the Act,
Entitituled, An Act, For the Regulating and Encouragement of Fishery, That
henceforth no Mackeril shall be Caught (except for spending whilst fresh)
before the first of July Annually, Be, and hereby is fully Repealed and Made
Void* Any thing therein to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND WHEREAS by one other Act, Entitled, An Act for the Settlement and Support
of Ministers and Schoolmasters amongst other things therein Enacted: It is
Ordained, That every Minister, being a person of good Conversation, Able,
Learned, and Orthodox, that shall be Chosen by the major part of the
Inhabitants in any Town, at a Town Meeting duly warned for that purpose; Notice
thereof being given to the Inhabitants fifteen days before the time for such
Meeting) shall be the Minister of such Town, and the whole Town shall be
obliged to pay toward his Settlement and Maintenance; each man his several
proportion thereof. Upon further consideration of the said Section or Paragraph
in said Act, and the Impracticableness of the method therein proposed for the
Choice of a Minister, in diverse Towns, wherein there are more Churches than
one, and Inconveniences attending the same not so well before seen. It is
Enacted and Declared, That the before Recited Section or Paragraph, and all and
every the Clauses therein contained, shall from henceforth be Repealed and
Revoked, and are hereby Repealed and utterly made void for ever: Any thing in
the said Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Declared and Ordained, That the Paragraphs and Sections
hereafter following, Be Enacted, and by the Authority aforesaid are Enacted in
Addition to the remaining part of said Act relating to Ministers. That is to
say, That each Respective Gathered Church in any Town or Place within this
Province, that at any time shall be in want of a Minister, such Church shall
have power according to the directions given in the Word of God, to Choose
their own Minister.

And the major part of such Inhabitants as do there usually attend on the
Public Worship of God, and are by Law duly Qualified for Voting in Town
Affairs, concurring with the Churches Act, the person thus Elected and
Approved, accepting thereof, and Settling with them, shall be the Minister,
toward whole Settlement and Maintenance, all the Inhabitants and Rateable
Estates lying within such Town, or part of a Town, or Place Limited by Law, for
upholding the Public Worship of God, shall be obliged (...) in proportion.
Provided, That nothing herein contained is intended or shall be construed to
extend to Abridge the Inhabitants of Boston of their accustomed way and
practice as to the Choice and Maintenance of Their Ministers.

Be it (...) Enacted, That in such Towns or Places where there is no Church
Gathered, the Rateable Inhabitants of such Town or Place, at a Meeting duly
warned for that purpose; (Notice thereof being given fifteen days before the
time of such Meeting) by the major Vote of such Assembly (...) and there met,
with the Advice of three Neighboring Ordained Ministers, shall Choose and Call
an Orthodox, Learned, and Pious Person, to Dispense the Word of God unto them;
to the Settlement and Maintenance of which Minister, all Rateable Estates, and
Inhabitants within such Town or place shall be Assessed, and Pay proportionably.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That where any Town or Place shall be negligent of their Duty by Law required,
respecting the Maintenance of the Ministry, the Court of Quarter Sessions of
the Peace within the same County, upon Complaint to them made, are Empowered and
Required effectually to provide for Remedy thereof, and by Warrant from said
Court, to Convent before them the Select-men, or others specially appointed by
the Inhabitants of such Town or place, to take care in that matter; (having
accepted such Betrustment) and upon Conviction of Neglect therein, to Impose a
Fine upon the Delinquents not exceeding Forty Shillings each person for the
first Offense: And upon a second Conviction of such Neglect, to Impose a Fine
of Four Pounds upon each person and the like Sum of Four Pounds for every after
Conviction: Such Fines to be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders
Goods, (returning the Overplus if any be) and to be disposed to the Use of the
Poor of the same Town or place, by the Select-men, or Overseers of the Poor.

An Act, For the Reviving and Continuing of the Duties upon Goods, Impost,
Excise and Tunnage of Shiping; And the Act for Granting of the same.
WHEREAS at the first Sessions of this Court begun in June last past, by an Act
then made, Entitled, An Act For Impost, Excise, and Tonnage of Shipping. There
was Granted unto Their Most Excellent MAJESTY'S Their Heirs and Successors, to
the Ends and Intents in the said Act mentioned, several Duties, Impost, and
Excise, on the Wines, Liquors, and Goods therein Enumerated. Which Act was to
Continue and Remain in Force for the Term and Space of one whole year and no
longer; which said year will expire and be ended upon the Twenty Ninth day of
June, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Three.

Upon consideration of the Continued and Growing Charges for the Management of
the War and Necessary Support of the Government of the Province; and for and
toward the Defreying thereof.

It is Enacted and Declared by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the several Duties, Impost, Excise and Tonnage in the said Act mentioned,
and in one other Additional Act for Impost and Excise, made at the second
Session of this Court: Be, and hereby are continued and further Granted unto
Their Majesty's, to the Ends and Intent aforesaid, from and after the twenty
ninth day of June next coming, unto the twenty ninth day of June, which will be
in the Year of our Lord God, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Four, and no
longer: To be Collected and paid in manner as by said Act is directed. And the
before-said Act, Entitled, An Act for Impost, Excise and Tonage of Shipping;
and all and every the Branches, Articles, Clauses and parts thereof, with the
Additions thereto, are hereby revived and continued to abide and remain in full
force and virtue unto the aforesaid Twenty Ninth Day of June, One Thousand Six
Hundred Ninety and Four, and not afterward, any thing herein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Governor and Council, Be and hereby are fully Empowered to Assign and make over
all the Profits and Revenue arising thereby, as security to such person or
persons, who shall advance and pay down any considerable Sum or Sums of Money
for a present Supply of the public Occasions, for their being Repaid the same
with the Allowance of seven per Cent per Annum Interest. Provided there be not
an exceeding in the former Grant and this the Sum of Five Thousand Pounds upon
the Interest therein Expressed. Saving notwithstanding to all persons that
formerly Lent their Bills of Credit for Supply of the Occ^^^ns of this
Government, their Discounts by a Note from the Treasure^, for all Sums which
they shall have to pay by virtue of this Act, being Bona Fide for their own
Account, according to the Proviso in the Act for making the former Bills of
Credit to pass Current; or by Consignments to be made appear by Bills of
Lading; said Discounts to be Reckoned and Out-set in part payment of said Loan.

An Act, For the Registring of Births and Deaths.
FOr preventing of great uncertainty and inconvenience that may happen, for
want of a Particular Register of Births and Deaths.

BE it enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

THat every Town Clerk within this Province, shall be, and is Hereby Empowered,
and Required; to take an account of all Persons, that shall be Born, or shall
Dye, within each Town respectively, and the Precincts thereof; and fairly to
Register in a Book, their Names and Surnames, as also the Names and Surnames of
their Parents, with the time of their Birth and Death. And the Clerk shall
demand and Receive the Fee of Threepence, and no more, for each Birth or
Death, by him so Registered; to be paid by the Parents, or others nextly related
to, or concerned with the party Born or Dying. And if any shall refuse or
neglect to give notice to the Town Clerk of the Birth or Death of any person
that they are so related to, or concerned for; or to pay for Registring as
abovesaid; by the space of Thirty Days next after such Birth or Death: every
person so refusing or Neglecting, and being (upon the complaint of any
Town-Clek) thereof Convicted before a Justice of Peace within the same County,
shall forfeit and pay unto such Clerk, the sum of Five Shillings; to be levied
by Distress, and Sale of the Offenders Goods by Warrant from such Justice; if
payment thereof be not made within four days next after Conviction as
aforesaid. And every Town Clerk shall give forth from the Registry a fair
Certificate under his hand of persons Born or Dying in the Town, to any who
shall desire the same: and he shall receive Sixpence and no more for every
Certificate so given.

FINIS.

