The Day, and the Work of the Day.

A Brief DISCOURSE, ON What Fears, we may have at THIS TIME to quicken us; What
Hopes there are for us at THIS TIME to comfort us: AND What Prayers would be
Likely to turn our FEARS into HOPES. WITH Reflections upon Time and State, now
come upon the Church OF GOD, And Collections of certain Prophesies relating to
the present Circumstances of New England. Uttered on a FAST, kept in Boston,
July 6 th: 1693.

By COTTON MATHER.

Boston Printed and Sold by B. Harris, 1693.

The Day, and the Work of the Day.
Discoursed on a Day of Prayer kept in the Old-Meeting-House, at Boston, the
6th day of the 5 m. 1693.
It is written in Job XV. 4. Thou Castest off Fear and Restrainest Prayer
before God.
IN the Dismal and the Cloudy Days, which are now come upon us, there are
especially two things exceeding Seasonable; namely, Fear and P rayer.

I. The Frame of all the most agreeable to this Awful Day, is FEAR. As F ear is
the peculiar Plague of the Unhappy Times that are now rolling over us; for we
are fallen into those Times whereof it was long since foretold, in Luc. 21. 26.
Men's hearts* will fail them for F ear, and for Looking after those things which
are coming on the Earth: So, Fear, it is to be the peculiar Grace of these
Times: these are the Times, wherein every one, that would be safe, must follow
the pattern of him, concerning whom, we are informed, in Heb. 11. 7. Being
warned of God, of things not seen as yet, moved with Fear, he prepared an Ark,
to the Saving of his House. There are, and one of the Ancients, though he saw not
all things, could yet see that there ever were, four sorts of people in the
world. There are some who, neither Hope nor Fear: Such are Atheistical
Transgressors, to whom neither the Favor of God is Comfortable, nor His Anger
Formidable. There are some who, Fear but Hope not; such are Despairing
Transgressors; to whom the Dreadful Thundrings of Mount Sinai, arrive without
the Joyful Tidings of Mount Sion. There are some who, Hope but Fear not; Such
are P resuming Transgressors, who as the Heathen usually Endued their Gods with
Vices like their own, so these may have it spoken by God unto them, Thou
thoughtest I was altogether such an one* as thy self. But there are some who
both Hope and F ear: because God is Good, therefore He is their Hope, and
because He is Just, therefore He is* their Fear; yea, They Fear the L ord and
His Goodness; and, They Hope that being a God of Righteousness, He will Hear
them. Such all people should be, and all pious people will be; especially Now
at a Time, when every David would see more than ordinar y cause to say, as in
Psa. 119. 120. Lord, my Flesh Trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments.

II. And what then should be the Work most agreeable to this Crying Day, but
PRAYER? It is the I^ter^^^ verse of that Psalm, which runs over the chief
Concernments of Humane Life, Psalm. 10^. 6, 13, 19, 28. Then they cried unto the
Lord in their Trouble, and He delivered them out of their Distresses. Truly all
our Concernments do at all Times call for such Intercalations; but especially
at these Times, when we may say, with the Dying Martyr, Pray, Pray, Pray; never
more need than Now! The Great God, is now doing of those things, whereof He
says unto us, as in Amos 4. 12. Because I will do this, prepare to meet thy
God, O Israel: But in what posture dare we meet our God, unless in Prayer upon
our Knees? There are several Ke^ of our Welfare; I do not mention the Jewish
Enumeration of them, for there are more than Fear of, those Ke^^, which the God
of Heaven still keeps in His own Hands. We have extraordinary occasions for the
^urning of those Ke^^, but it is P rayer that must Jog the (...) Hand, which
has the Turning o^ them. Briefly, we are in a Time, of Difficulties, wherein we
can have none but Refuges of Lies, except we do in Truth come unto, that
Experience, in Psalm. 34. 6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and
saved him out of all his Troubles.

Well then, To Quicken both our Godly F ear, and our Fervent P rayer, I have
now Read you a Text, which cannot be unseasonable.

One of Jobs Comforters, is here managing a Disputation against that Afflicted
Saint, wherein, methinks, he deals but roughly with him; thereunto Instigated,
no doubt, by misunderstanding certain passages in the Discourse of Job. It is
the Lot of many a good man, to have many an Ill Charge injuriously made upon
him. Defamations, the fruit of misconstructions, are among the most usual
Trials of the Innocent. Holy Job is here charged, first, with S peaking
unwisely, then, with Acting wickedly. As to the Latter, in our Text, he is
Indicted, for Neglecting both the Inward and the Outward Worship of God. Fear,
is by a Synecdoche put for all the Inward, and Prayer, by a like Synecdoche put
for all the Outward. The style of our Text, is indeed so Oriental, that we
might as lawfully as usefully, illustrate it, with a very various Paraphrase.
But we shall confine our selves to the sense most obvious in our own
Translation.

The first Article of the Charge is, Thou Castest off Fear. By that Fear is
meant Eminently, The Fear of God. When we say, The Word, we use to mean, The
Word of God; as if there were no Word but Gods; for indeed there is none so
considerable as that Word. Thus, The Fear, here spoken of, may note, The Fear
of God; inasmuch as there is no Fear to be like that, wherewith we are to Fear
Him who can Cast both B ody and S oul into Hell.

But in the mean time, what ground for this Charge? I answer, The Charge seems
grounded on those Expressions, of Job, wherein he complains, That the Righteous
are destroyed with the Wicked, and, That the Tabernacles of Robbers prosper.
Or, on those, wherein his Challenges made unto the most High God, have a sort
of peremptoriness, not agreeing to that Lowliness of mind, with which the Fear
of God would cause us to speak of all His Managements. Wherefore some of the
Ancient and Eastern Versions carry it, as if it were here intimated that Job
had been speaking to God, without the Modesty that became a poor Worm of the
Dust!

The Second Article of the Charge is, Thou Restrainest Prayer before God. What
is here Translated Prayer, is promiscuously to be Englished, either M
editation, or Supplication; and indeed, those are such Twins that the same Name
would well befit both of them; one of them would still be Insignificant without
the other; I may say of them, They are Lovely and Pleasant in their Lives, and
in their Deaths they are not Divided.

But again, What ground for this Charge? I answer, The Writers among the Jews
tell us, That the Charge is grounded on those Expressions of Job, that seemed a
Denial of Providence. To Deny Providence, is to Extinguish Prayer, for ever.
Men will not be the Diligent seekers of God, except they Believe that God is a
Rewarder of them who diligently seek him. Men will soon Leave off the seeking
of God, if they don't Believe that God will cut off them that seek Him not. Now
Jobs Assertions, as taken, yea, mistaken, would yield such Consequences, as
this, That Prayer is to be Restrained, that is, Withdrawn, and Lessened, before
God.

But let all issue then in this Lesson

That Prayer may not be Restrained, fear must not be Rejected.

When was it that Jacob set himself to Wrestle with the mighty God of Jacob? It
was when, as we read, in Genesis 32. 7. He was greatly Afraid and Distressed. When
was it that Jehoshaphat not only called upon the God of Judah himself, but
called upon all Judah to do so too? We read in 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. He Feared, and
set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast. It is written of Hezekiah,
in Jer. 26. 19. Did he not Fear the Lord, and B esought the Face of the Lord?
It is the Fear of God, which is to put men upon seeking the Face of God; for
which, there are two Propositions which now demand a room in your
Considerations.

PROPOSITION I.
PRAYER to God is a Duty to be by no means Restrained among the Children of
men. As for Prayer, it is indeed such a Moral Duty, that they who are sunk into
the deepest Abyss of Immorality, will scarce utter or mutter an Objection
against it.

There is not only the Light of Scripture, Enforcing this Duty, but there is
the Light of Nature too. It Is said, in Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy Fury on the
Heathen, that know thee not, and on the Families that call not on thy Name. So
that the Heathen themselves, who Know not God aright, yet Sin against the Light
of what Knowledge they have, when they do not Call on the Name of God. It is
the Law of our Creation, that we should pray to God as our Preserver, no less
than our Creator; and so Engraven is this Law in the Heart of every Rational
Creature, that the most Lawless Nations of men, count it the most Rational
Thing imaginable for them, to wait upon their Creator with their Devotions.

It will only be expected that we now answer two Enquiries.

The First Enquiry.
What is the Prayer that must have no Restraint?

I Answer, PRAYER, is the presenting of our Desire to God in Christ, for His
Mercy, in his Time and His Way, and His Measure, to be obtained. That we may
speak yet more distinctly.

First, The Object of Prayer, is GOD in CHRIST. It were a detestable Idolatry
to make a proper Prayer, (which is, The Acknowledgment of a first cause) unto
any besides that God, whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, the Infinite and Eternal
First Cause of all Things; a Daniel would sooner be torn to pieces with Hungry
Lions, and the Children of God would sooner broil to Death in the Furnace
heated by the Type of Antichrist, than commit such an Idolatry. It is the Rule
in Math. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and Him only thou shall
serve; and the Devil himself could not gainsay that Rule. Who should be the
Object of Prayer, but the Hearer of Prayer? Now the Hearer of Prayer, must
needs be an Omnipresent One, able at once to receive the Supplications of many
Thous^^s from all Quarters of the Universe; and He must be an Omnipotent One,
able to Rescue all, to Supply all, the miserable. But there is none besides our
God, Who fills Heaven and Earth; none besides our God, For whom nothing is too
hard; and hence This our God challenges it as His Title, in Psalm. 65. 2. O Thou
Hearer of Prayer! Why so? Because it is He alone, to whom we may say, O Thou
Helper of men! Yea, but This God is not now to be Addressed from sinful men,
but in and by and through the Lord Jesus CHRIST. He that is the Truth, has
with it said unto us, in Joh. 14. 6. I am the Way; no man comes unto the Father
but by me. As the Lord of Egypt said unto the Sons of Jacob, Ye shall not see
my Face, except ye bring your Brother with you: So does the King of Heaven say
to all the Seed of Jacob, I mean, The Generation of them that seek Him; He
says, I will not Look upon you, unless you bring your Jesus with you. What are
we to do with our Prayer? we have an Angel in Heaven, the Great Uncreated Angel
of the Covenant, unto whom we must carry and commit the Incense of our Prayer;
yea, our Prayer will be no Incense, but the rank, filthy, loathsome Nidor, of
the Flesh, which attends all our Sacrifices, will make our Prayer become an
Abomination unto Him who dwells in the Holy of Holies, except this Blessed
Angel perfume it, with his Intercessions. We read in Rev. 8. 4. The Smoke of
the Incense which came with the Prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God,
out of the Angels Hand. Prayer was of old made with an Eye toward the Temple;
Why, it is the Lord Jesus Christ who is the true Temple of God; it is in Him
that there dwells the Fullness of the Godhead Bodily.

Secondly, For the Nature of Prayer, It Is, A presenting of our Desire. In every
Prayer, there is the Desire of some Good Thing; yea, but something more than
such a Desire is also requisite; it must be a Desire some how brought forth
unto the Lord. P rayer is that, whereof it is said in Phil. 4. 6. Let your
Requests be made known unto God. Sometimes the Desire becomes a Prayer only in
our Minds: the silent outgoings of the Soul and W ill to God, are a most
speaking Prayer. A P rayer may be made with Unuttered Groans, yea, with
Unutterables. Thus it is said, in Lam. 3. 41. Let us Lift up our Heart unto God
in the Heavens. This is indeed the main Ingredient of every P rayer; it is the
most Ominous Defect of any Prayer, when the Heart shall be found wanting there.
But sometimes also the Desire becomes a Prayer in our Mouths: the Arrows of
Prayer are shot into Heaven with the Bow of the Tongue. A P rayer should often
be a Cry, and this, Going out from Unfeigned Lips. Thus it is said in Hos. 14.
2. Take with you words, and Turn unto the Lord: P rayer should frequently
become Articulate; and indeed a main part of the Homage due to God, from and
for the Organs of Speech which He has given us, is to Articulate Prayer unto
Him.

Thirdly, For the Matter of Prayer, It Is Mercy to be obtained according to the
pleasure of God. The Outcry of P rayer, is, for Mercy; the Language of it, is
that in Psalm. 51. 1. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy Loving
Kindness. But the Mercies of God for which our P rayer is to be concerned, are
more particularly what the S criptures of God have taught us to Implore. We are
to P ray by Book; but it is the Bible that is our PrayerBook. And the more
special P latform of Prayer which our Lord has given us, in this Book; that I
mean, which is commonly called, The Lords P rayer; it is that which we are to
make the more special Directory of our P rayers. We are advised in (...) John
5. 14. If we ask any thing according to his Will, He Hears us. The P
receptive W ill of God, must in all our Prayers be attended unto; about all the
Commandments of that, our Prayers are to be, O that my ways were directed to
keep them; about all the P romises and all the Threatenings which ratify those
Commandments, our P rayer is to be, That we may not miss the one, or meet the
other! But then, the P rovidential W ill of God, must also be submitted unto,
in all our Prayers. We should in our Prayers be content that God bestow His
Blessings upon us, W hen He will, and, How He will, and, In what proportion He
will: Our Prayers are to be B eggings, wherein we must own, It Is not for us to
know the Times or Seasons, nor may we Limit the Holy One of Israel!

This is PRAYER. Hac petitur Coelum via! But then,

The Second Enquiry.
W hat is the Restraint of this Prayer?

I Answer, The Restraint of Prayer, is the Omitting or Abating of such P rayer,
as we are obliged unto.

Prayer is Restrained, when it is altogether Omitted. They Restrained P rayer,
to whom it was by the Apostle said, in Jam. 4. 2. Ye Ask not. And Prayer is
Restrained when it is Abated of what it either has been, or should be. When
the People of God had so Restrained P rayer, it was by the Prophet said, in
Dan. 9. 13. W e have not made our P rayer before the Lord our God The Restraint
of Prayer, is the Neglect of such Prayer as is required in the Rule of Prayer.
Men do Restrain P rayer, when their Prayer, for the Quality of it, is not
according to that Rule, in Jam. 5. 16. The P rayer of a Righteous man, made
with an Inwrought vehemence. Men do Restrain P rayer, when their Prayer, for
the Duration of it, is not according to that Rule, in Luc. 18. 1. That men
ought always to P ray, and not to Faint. Men do Restrain P rayer, when all the
sorts and kinds of Prayer, are not performed by them, according to that Rule,
in Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always, with all P rayer, and Supplication, in the S
pirit, and watching thereunto, with all perseverance, and S upplication for all
S aints. But why is this called, A Restraint? A Restraint notes, The keeping in
of a Thing, that would fain break out. There are two Things that would cause P
rayer to break forth; namely, Gods Command, and man's Conscience. The Command of
God would fetch it out. It is the Edict of Heaven, in Isa. 55. 6. Seek the Lord
while He may be found, Call ye upon Him, while He is near. Indeed, it is the
Command lying every where, the whole Bible over; That the Eternal God should be
Eternally P rayed unto. You Will see P rayer bespoke, in the Sacred Pages, dip
where you will. But then, the Conscience of man would would also push it out.
There is mention of some, in Romans 1. 18. Who held the Truth in Unrighteousness.
Although many a man* be so Unrighteous, as to Live without Praying unto God, yet
his Conscience within him, holds this for a Truth, It should be otherwise: even
a Pagan P late, a Pagan P roclus, have written Treatises, Entitled, Concerning
P rayer. So, when P rayer is Neglected, there is a Violence done, to hinder
both of these Motives, from having of their Efficacy; thus Prayer is Restrained
in the Neglect. But,

PROPOSITION II.
There should be a Gracious and a Devout FEAR in our Soul, to be the Spur of
our P rayer to our God; a Fear that must not be Rejected. We have two things
here to Think upon.

The First Question.
W hat is that P rayer-quickning Fear, which must not be Rejected?

For Answer, What Fear, but the Fear of God? even that Fear, which is in the
Oracles of Wisdom, so often Celebrated as, The Beginning of Wisdom? We read in
Psalm. 111. 10. The Fear of the Lord, is the Beginning of Wisdom, and a good
Understanding have all they that do His Commandments. Among the Things
Commanded by our God, there is none more Notable than that of P rayer^^ now
it is the Fear of God, which help men unto the Understanding, to (...) such a
Thing. When it is here said, Thou have cast off Fear, it is by some Translated
so, Thou have cast off Religion. The Fear of God, is a^ principle of Religion
in the Heart of man; a principle of Respect unto the Commands and P raises of
the Great God. It is an Old Testament Name, for the whole of Religion; but this
Fear of God, includes a Love to God, a Faith on God, a Joy in God, as well as a
Fear of Him. This is the Fear, that must not be Rejected. More particularly,
This Fear imports, A dread of those Mischiefs that follow upon a Distance from
God. This is a thing of such universal Mixture and Figure in Religion, that all
Religion receives a Denomination from it; what said the Psalmist, in Psalm. 78.
27, 28. Lo, They that are far from thee, shall perish; but it is good for me to
draw near unto God. We should have such a Fear of Perdition, in being far from
God, as to Resolve that we will Draw Near, and Get Near, and Keep Near, unto
Him all our Days. This is the true Fear of God! Briefly, we should have a
Filial Fear of those Rods wherewith our God chastises them that break His Laws.
When the Laws of God were given unto His Israel, then Moses Hearing the
Thunders and the Trumpets, and seeing the Lightnings, and feeling the
Earthquakes, which gave a shadow of the Fiery Day, whereas God will Avenge the
Violations of those Laws, he cried out, I exceedingly Fear and Quake. We should
accordingly Entertain the Laws of God, with an Exceeding Fear of such Fiery
Plagues, as we may foresee likely to fall upon those who Transgress the Laws,
that are so Holy, and Just and Good. Here is the Fear that should Inflame our
Prayer to our God! But then,

The Second Question.
Wherein appears the Influence of this F ear, upon the Non-Restraint of Prayer?

For Answer, First, To Restrain P rayer is to Despise the End of P rayer; but
the F ear of God. will not let a man Despise a Thing so Transcendently, so
Superlatively Glorious.

I am now happily fallen upon the Discussions of that

CASE.
W hat is the END of PRAYER?

We know, It is not for the Information of Almighty God, that we Spread our
Ails before Him; nor do we plead with Him, to move in Him, any Affections or
Compassions like those which are in our selves. But then,

One End of Prayer, is, That we may Reverently Realize the Attributes of that
God, who is greatly to be had in Reverence by those that come about Him. It Is a
Veneration of God, as well as a Petition to God. Our God whose Throne is in the
Highest Heavens, would be Enthroned in the High Thoughts of our Souls; now it is
by Prayer that we are put upon the Forming of such God-Adoring Thoughts. It was
said, of a very praying man, in Heb. 11. 27. He saw Him, who is Invisible. In
Prayer it is, that we, Lift up our Eyes, and so we have a more Distinct S ight
of the Unseen God, in the serious and suitable Thoughts of Him, so Raised in
our minds.

Again, Another End of Prayer, is, That we may reduce into Christian Practice,
the chief Doctrines of Christianity. As now, to instance in one or two; There
is the Doctrine of the Trinity in the Unity of the Godhead; the Mystery of God
beholding Himself with an Essential P erception, producing ^^ence an Essential
Satisfaction and so Three Persons in one God, This is a most profound (...).
But in Prayer, this Incomp^^^ (...) (...) Mystery, becomes practically
^^^^ervable and Applicable. (...) (...) in Ephesians. 2. 18. (...), we both have
Access, by one Spirit unto the Father. Such a process of Soul-affairs there is
in our Prayers: First, God the Father as a Judge, does by the Spirit of Bondage
drive us to the Lord Jesus Christ, as our Mediator: and then, the Lord Jesus
Christ, as our Mediator, does by (...) (...) (...) Adoption carry us (...) to
God, as our Father. So the Trinity becomes as clearly manifested unto us, (...)
was on the Banks (...) (...), to ^he Spectators of our Lords (...). Thus, the
whole Mediation of the Lord Jesus Christ, with all the methods of
Reconciliation between God and us, and many more such Illustriou s M ysteries
of Godliness, are most practically Illustrated in this piece of Godliness, our
Prayer unto our God.

Moreover; A Third End of Prayer is, That we may Express and Profess our
Dependence on the God, who made us Depending Beings. What said the Psalmist? in
Psalm. 62. 8. Trust in him at all Times, ye People. Well, but how shall People
show their Trust in God? It follows, Pour out your Heart before him. Our
Out-poured Souls in Prayer, declare, That we must ascribe to God, all that we
have, all that we hope, all that we ask; that nothing is owing to any Blind
Chance at all. When we do by Prayer go to God, That He would Give us our Daily
Bread, We do thereby say, That our Bread is none of our own till He give it us.
It Is Theevery to take any thing without the Owners Leave: Wherefore it is said,
Every Thing is S anctified by Prayer; why, by Prayer for every thing, we do
say, That God is the Right Owner of that Thing; That we may not meddle with it,
except God will allow us to have it; Yea, That we cannot come at it at all,
except God confer it upon us.

Furthermore; A Fourth End of Prayer is, That we may nourish an Humble
Communion with the God who Humbles Himself to take Notice of us. It Is in Prayer
that we come to a mavelous Familiarity with the Lord our God, and arrive to
that privilege in Job. 22. 21. Acquaint now thy self with Him, and be at
peace. The Intercourse between the Great God, and the Worms of the Dust, in
this Exercise, is indeed most Inexpressible! Hence Prayer is called, A Visit
unto God; God and man becoming Friends, most Friendly Visits are in this way
mutually given to one another. And this Communion with God, not only Emboldens
our Access to Him, while we Live; of our Neighbor it is said, Withdraw thy Foot
from thy Neighbors House, Lest he be weary of thee, and so Hate thee; with our
Maker it is not* so; No, He tells us, The oftener you come, the more welcome to
me! So it Emboldens our Retreat to God, when we Die. Oh! that my Hearers would
sufficiently Lay to Heart, what I am now going to say unto them! I say unto
you, That it will be a Dreadful Thing for a Soul Departing to appear before a
God whom it has altogether been a Stranger unto. A Devout Soul going before
God, may Rejoice with a most Heavenly Triumph, saying, My God, I know thee!
This is the God, with whom I have spent many a good Hour, before my coming
hither; much Prayer does procure for us, this Felicity! O but for a wicked
Soul, at its Expiration to think, I am about meeting with a God, unto whom I
never did (...) any Life* speak one sollicitous word, about my Eternal
Interests! it is an horrible Agony that must amaze that wicked Soul.

Once more; A Fifth End of Prayer is, That we may preserve such a good Order of
Soul, at is necessary in order to our Happiness. It is said of some, in 2 Timothy
2. 22. They call on the Lord, out of a pure Heart. It is by Prayer, wherein we
Call upon the Lord, that the Heart is made pure and kept what it is made. They
that are often in the presence of Princes, must be always Trim, Neat, and in a
fit posture. By much Prayer to the Great-King, we maintain such a posture of S
pirit, as is intended when we are bidden to Pray-always. It is by our
Disorderly Walking, that we gr^w shy of God; as when Adam had sinned, he then
gat out of the way; and if we were not so shy of God, we should Walk less
Disorderly. Yea, by Prayer we Lay new and strong Engagements upon our selves
unto Well doing. We speak unto our selves, when we so speak unto our God. When
we Pray and say, Our Father which art in Heaven, we do after a sort Preach to
our selves, and say, O my Soul, do thou Love and S erve, and Rely upon Gods, as
thy Heavenly F ather! When we say, sanctified be thy Name, we say, O my Soul,
Do thou Sanctify that Holy Name! When we say, Thy Kingdom come, we say, O my S
oul, Do thou be a Loyal Subject of that Kingdom! When we say, Thy Will be done,
we say, O my S oul, Do thou never contradict that Will! Thus it is, that we
become gloriously prepared for the Favors of God: which is indeed the Thing
that He is waiting for. Lord, Thou will prepare the Heart of the Humble, cause
thine Ear to Hear them.

Finally, A Sixth End of Prayer, is, That we may Support, yea, Unload our
Hearts under our Griefs. What is Prayer, but the Disburthening of the Soul? We
are Invited, in 1 Pet. 5. 7. Cast all your care upon God: and it is Explained,
in Phil 4. 6. Be careful for nothing* but in every thing by Prayer, and
Supplication with Thanksgiving, Let your Requests be made known unto God. By
Prayer it is, that we Transmit our Care; and so we Interest our God in every
thing that were otherwise too hard for us. When was it that the sorrowful
Hannah became no more sad? It was when she had poured out her Soul unto the
Lord. All unuttered Care, is like the Imprisoned Air; it makes a grievous
Disturbance. When we have carried all our Cares unto God, by Prayer, we may
come away with Triumphant Souls from the Throne of Grace, and Leave all our
Troubles, all our Sorrows, all our Fears behind us there. Our Prayer will be
our Hearts ease; and for this cause it is that our kind God, would be the God of
our Prayer. Well. The Fear of God will never permit a man, to have a Low Esteem
of such Inestimable Benefits. But,

Secondly, If Prayer be Restrained, What good cause^ can be assigned for that
Restraint? In truth, None but such as argues that men have cast off the Fear of
God. As now,

I am sure, Men don't Fear God, if they don't feel that they W ant God. But
this may be said of all P rayerless Ones. As they of old, in Jer. 2. 3. They
said, we are Lords, we will come no more at thee; so these; They say, W e can
do well enough without the Lord. They are not sensible of their own Weakness,
their own Darkness, and their continual wretchedness without the continual
Conduct of God.

Again, I am sure, men don't Fear God, if they are not willing to Serve God.
But this also may be said of all P rayerless Ones. As it was complained, in
Isa. 43. 22. Thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but have been weary of me,
O Israel: So when men are not every Day C alling on God, they therein proclaim
themselves Weary of Him. And what an unworthy thing is this! The Lord may
demand of us, W herein have I wearied thee? W hat is there that should make
thee loath to wait upon me?

I add, It is by casting off the Fear of God, that men break their P eace with
God. Now if men's Peace with God, were not broken, their P rayer to God, would
not be remitted. The Psalmist found it so, in Psalm. 32. 3. W hen I kept
silence, my Bones waxed old, through my Roaring all the Day long. When our
Prayers are silent, there is probably some Old Roaring Guilt Lying upon us.
Many complain, They do not, they cannot P ray; a Prayerless Drowsiness has
overtaken them, and they know not what is the matter with them. Why, it is well
if there be not some unrepented Sin upon you, Grieving the Holy Spirit of God;
it is That which is a Quench-Prayer in your Souls.

Lastly, What Fear of God can there be in them, that say, There is no God at
all? But such an Atheist is the Wretch, that Lives wholly without P rayer to
God. Hence, we find those things conjoined, in Psalm. 14. 1, 4. The Fool has
said in his heart, There is no God; it follows, They call not upon the Lord.
When a man shall cast such a Contempt upon the God that made him, as to offer
no Prayers unto His Maker, it is because of a cursed Atheism Lurking and Working
in the Heart of such a Fool. The worst of Infidels, are not carried away with
so much of Infidelity. But,

Thirdly, The Fear of God, would certainly produce P rayer to God, if that Fear
were not Rejected, but maintained, manifested, Exercised. Those things go
together in Psalm. 1^5. 18, 19. The Lord is nigh to all them that call upon him,
He will fulfill the Desire of them that F ear Him. If men Fear God, they cannot
but be D^^^ous to Call upon Him. What is very Godly Man? He is a P raying man.
So we are told, in Psalm. 32. 6. Every one that is Godly shall pray unto thee. A
man does no sooner begin to have the Fear of God in his Heart, but it may be
said of that man, Behold, he prays! As for the Prayerless man, he does neither
Obey the P recept, nor Credit the P ower, nor Adore the Goodness, of God; and I
may say, How dwells the Fear of God in such a man. If men did Fear God, they
would also Love the God whom they Fear. But that would cause them to say after
the Psalmist, in Psalm. 116. 1, 2. I Love the Lord, therefore I will call upon
Him as long as I Live. Again, if men did Fear God, they would likewise Trust
the God, whom they Fear. But that would cause them again to say after the
Psalmist, in Psalm. 116. 10. I believed, therefore have I spoken; i. e. I have
prayed. To have done, The Spirit of God is in them that have the Fear of God.
Now, that Spirit is, The Spirit of Grace, and of Supplication. Men have the
Grace to be much in S upplication when that Spirit has once Renewed them, and
possessed them; they have then a Spirit for P rayer continually. Thus you see a
fair way made for our Designed

APPLICATION.
Well then, Let our Fears this Day Stimulate and Animate our Prayers; and let
us therefore Entertain just Fears, that we may thereby Enliven our P rayers.
Our Fear is this Day to deal with us, as Jonahs Master did by him; it is to come
and say unto us, What meanest thou, O Sleaper? Arise, and call upon thy God.
Fear is a passion, which the All-wise God, who Forms the S pirit of man within
him, has most wisely put into us. When that passion comes to be well placed and
well acted, we then become highly Reasonable; when Sanctified, we become
Eminently Religious. That passion is the Engine which I would Employ this
Afternoon, to fetch those P rayers wherein we now are, To pour out water before
the Lord.

I am directed in Jude 23. Some S ave with Fear. It is very certain, That we
cannot be Saved without Importunate P rayer unto our God. S aved, said I? No,
we cannot but be Destroyed, but be Ruined, (...) be Plunged into inex^^ricable
Confusions. Well, it is by the F ear of this, that our P rayer should be now
Invigorated.

We read of an Angel, in Rev. 14. 6, 7. An Angel Flying in the midst of Heaven,
having the Everlasting Gospel, and saying with a Loud Voice, Fear God, and give
Glory to Him, for the Hour of His Judgment is come; and worship Him! I shall
endeavor so far to Imitate that Angel this Afternoon; that here I Stand in the
midst of this Great Congregation, which make a little Heaven upon Earth; here I
have the Everlasting Gospel in my Hand; and with a Loud Voice, I demand of you,
to Fear God, because that Hour of his Judgment is now come upon the World; and
Oh! Fear Him so, as to give Him the Glory of the W orship, and especially of
the P rayer, that is due unto Him.

To speak more particularly,

1. Let our P ersonal Fears, Restrain us f^o^ the Sin of Restraining those P
ersonal P rayers, which God forbid, that any one P erson among us all, should
Live without. Are there no particular persons with us, who Restrain that
Prayer, which the Fear of God calls for? It Is to be Feared, that there are
many such. 'Twere well if most of us were as Innocent as for was, of the Fault
here Imputed unto Job. Alas, Here is an Indictment laid, For, that not having
the Fear of God before thine Eyes, thou have Restrained P rayer before God: But
how many are there, who cannot plead, Not Guilty, to that Indictment? Do they P
ray? I wonder, F or what it is? For Spiritual Blessings? No, they are the
profane Esau^ by whom such things are all Despised. For Temporal Blessings? No,
they feed on such Fruits, without ever giving a L ook up to the Tree from
whence they fall. Do they Pray? I wonder, W here it is? In their Closets? No,
They will S in against God in Secret, but not in Secret Seek the Face of that
God. In their Houses? No, They I Eat there, Drink there, Smoke there, and Sin
there, but not by Calling upon God there make Bethels of them. Do they Pray? I
wonder When it is? Not in the Mornings; they are then in too much Haste of
Business for it. Not in the Evenings; they are then too weary, too sleepy, too
^^^less for it. But Let them now admit of a few Expostulations with them.

First. As for P rayer in your Retirements, Let Fear drive you to it. If the
Angels of God, that are Invisibly present at this Instant here, might become
Audible to the whole Assembly, could they not point out incredibly many, one
after another of us, and say, It Is a good part of a week at least since those
persons, were upon their Knees Retired for S ecret P rayer before the Lord! How
few S olomons are there, in Retirements, plying the Throne of Grace, for Divine
Wisdom and Knowledge to be vouchsafed unto them! How few Nehemiahs are there,
in Retirements, Beseeching the God of Heaven to Bless all their Undertakings!
How few Jacobs are there, in Retirements, Crying to God, that neither they, nor
their Children, may miscarry! And how few Nathanaels! Nathanael knew what it
was to be alone under a Fig tree, conversing with God; and our Lord said, of
him, in Joh. 1. 47. Behold, An Israelite indeed, in whom is no Gu^^e. But you
that have no such a Retired Conversation with God, may then Fear, that you are
not Israelites, that you are but Hypocrites, before Him. What says our Lord? P
ray to thy Father which is in S ecret. So then, you that go without Secret
Prayer from Day to Day, may Fear, whether God be your F ather or no; but if God
be not thy Father, man, what a Black Father have thou? You are worse than
Balaam himself, of whom it is reported, That he went alone, to meet the Lord:
and you may then Fear, that you shall never have B alaams wish, To Die the Death
of the Righteous. Yea, on the Day, when you go abroad without S ecret P rayer,
you may Fear what the Righteous God may Leave you to; to what Sins, what
Plagues, the Justice of God may Leave you in that Cloudy Day. Such a Day to
poor Origin, became the Day of his Lamentable Fall, at which all Ages have been
since Amazed. That your Fear may be the more sti^^r'd, ^'l Report unto you,
That an Ancient Professor belonging to this ^^ery Church, in whose House we are
now together, after many years of good Repute with good people became a (...),
for which he was from this Holy Society Excommunicated. After the Censure, he
fell into bitter Horror and Anguish of Soul, and at length Died in astonishing
Circumstances; but some of his Dying Words were to this purpose; I often prayed
unto God, for a mercy, which He still Denied me; at Length I grew Angry at God:
whereupon I grew slack in my Secret P rayers, and abated my Acquaintance with
the Lord: ever since which, He has dreadful, forsaken me, and I know that He
has now no mercy for me. Now, Let all Hear and Fear.

Secondly* As for P rayer with your Families, Let F ear drive you to That also.
There was an Earthquake in Switzerland, that Shook down all the Houses in a
Town, except one piece of one House, wherein a good man was then at Prayer with
his Family. Suppose an Earthquake in our Boston should quickly shake down all
the Houses that have not Family P rayer constantly going in them, count me not
uncharitable for saying, I am Jealous there would be a very terrible
Desolation! How few Ohed Edoms are there, that are with their Families paving a
daily Respect unto the Ark, the Christ of God? Ho^^ few C^rnelius's are there,
that Calling their Families together more than once every day, do Pray in the
midst of their Houses? How few Parents and Masters, do Continue in P rayer,
with a frequency like that of the Continual Offering under the Law? And how few
do like those in Math. 19. 13. Bring their Little Ones unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, that He may Bless them? You that thus do say unto the Most High, Depart
from our Dwellings! may justly Fear lest by Death and Fire, He quickly Turn you
out of them. Yea, you may Fear lest the Flying R^ll of C^rses, do ^ly into
those Dwellings, where there is no Prayer for Blessings to keep them out. The
very ^^arks themselves, do uphold something of a Family Worship among them; and
what may those pretended Christians then Fear, whose Houses are upon this
Impious Account, F ar from Fear? It is an eager and a raging pursuit after, the
World, which thus Choaks the Family-Prayers of our Neighborhood: But I would
gladly be at the pains to write that Admonition, in Capitals, on the Walls of
every such Habitation, WHAT IS A MAN PROFITED IF HE GAIN THE WHOLE WORLD* AND
LOOSE HIS OWN SOUL! One would F ear to Live in the House of such a Philist^n,
whereof one may say, Surely the^^ is no Fear of God in this place. And one
would think, the Owner of such an House may Fear the Everlasting Regret that
will be upon him, when his Domestics at last shall follow him, in the Fiery
Burning Lake below, hideously Crying in his Ears, Why did you never teach us to
pray? Your never praying with us, has brought us to this horrid place of
Torment after you! But

Thirdly, Let every manner of Person be put upon all manner of Prayer, in the
Fear of God.

You might indeed upon this Topic be argued with: Let the privilege and
advantage of Prayer, inspire you with a very prayerful Disposition of Soul. The
Privilege of Prayer, how high is it! P rayer, it is, as we read in Heb. 10.
22. A Drawing Near to God. The Immortal King of Heaven, when He bids us to
pray, does hold out His Golden Scepter unto us, and say, S inners, you may Draw
Near; though you have by your S ins Forsaken me; yet you may by your P rayers
Draw Near again unto me; and ask me now far more than the Half of (...)
Kingdom, I am ready to bestow it upon you. Accordingly, The Advantage of
Prayer, how ^ich is it! Our God has Assured us, in Isa. 45. 19. I said not unto
the Seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. In vain! Truly No: most Gracious Lord;
Thou have said, S eek the Lord, and ye shall Live. There is in the Covenant of
God, and Ensurance-Office Erected; where, every one, that Ventures in the Ship
of Prayer, has the Returns of his Ventures gloriously secured unto him. I may
call you, That our Merciful God, will rather work Miracles of Mercy, than Leave
the Prayers of His Children Unanswered. Fires have bin Quenched, Lions have
been Muzzled, P risons have been Opened, Dead men have been Raised, Rains have
been fetched, and the World it self has bin stopped in its Diurnal Whi^l, at the
Prayers of men Subject unto like passions with our selves. Prayer, it is that
which gains a sort of a Victory, even over the Invisible World; the Almighty
God Himself says to Prayer, Except thou Let me alone, I cannot proceed with
Destroying Dispensations; and Prayer says to the Almighty God Himself, I will
not Let thee Go, except thou Bless me. Let our Distress be what it will, That
is the Relief, in Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me, and I will deliver thee. What
sorts of Blessings have we a value for? Why, P rayer would fetch them all.
Would we have our Souls, to be Blessed in very Deed? A P raying Soul, will be a
Thriving Soul. Much Prayer, as it were keeps the Soul in a Breathing Sweat,
which by Degrees does consume all the Distempers of it. In our Prayers, all our
Graces come to be Exercised, and so to be Strengthened, so to be Perfected.
Prayer* it is taken in 3 John 2. for the Fa^^ Wind, which will bring a
Prosperous Voyage to the Heaven-born, Heaven-bound Soul. Again, A P raying
Soul, will be a Joyful Soul When Daniels perplexities drove him to Prayer,
there was that Cheering Message brought from Heaven unto him, in Dan. 10. 23.
Thou art greatly Beloved. There is an Island in the Mediterranean, whereof they
say, The Sun will be sure to shine upon it once every every day throughout the
year. Truly if you Pray much, you will be Likely thus to have the L ight of
Gods Countenance upon you every day. Once more, A Praying Soul will be a Saved
Soul. O the vast Gains of Prayer! It is that whereof we are advised, in Rom 10.
13. Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be Saved. So then,
Salvation, Spiritual and Eternal S alvation it self is ou rs, if we^ll pray
hard for that S alvation! Yet further; would we have our Bodies, our Estates,
and all our Affayrs, under the perpetual Blessings of Heaven? Prayer would
befriend our Universal Welfare. These are the proffers of our God unto us, in
Psalm 91. 15. He shall call upon me, and I will deliver him, and Honor Him, and
with Long L ife will I satisfy him. When S aul perceived how much D avid was
in Prayer, he said, Thou shall do great Things. Thus to those of us, that are
keeping the Wheel of P rayer in a perpetual motion, it may be said, Great
Things are to be done for such a man* Finally, would we have Blessings to be
Showred from on High upon our Families? No Children are more known to be the
Blessed of the L ord, than the Children of the most Praying Parents: We cannot
Lay up a better Portion for our Children, than a Stock of Prayers. Yea, By
Prayerfulness we may not only Get Blessings, ^^at Be Blessings too. A praying
Noah, a Praying Job, a Praying Daniel, these are the Gap men of the places
where they Live; these are they who Deliver Islands.

But if none of This move you, then let Fear do it. O be Afraid of the
Miseries, the Inexpressible, the Inconceivable Miseries, whereto a Prayerless
Life Exposes you. Don't you Tremble? To such Leviathans, I would speak in the
words of Austin, Man, It should make thee Tremble, that thou have not an Heart
to Tremble. If Prayerless, then Wicked; for it is said, in Psalm. 18 4. The
Wicked, will not seek after God But are you not then Afraid of the Woes that
belong unto the Wicked? Woe to them, it shall be Ill with them.! They L ive
under the direful Curse of God all their Days; and at last, under that Curse
they Die. But what will then become of them? Read and again Tremble! We are
told, in Psalm 9. 17. The Wicked shall be Turned into Hell, and all* the Nation:
that Forget God The Prayerless to God, are the Forgetful of God. But are you
not Afraid? We are Warned, It is a Fearful Thing (...) Fall into the Hands of
the Living God. They that while they Lived, would not Lift up their Hands in
Prayer to God, shall when they Die, fall into the Hands of that Living God:
Then! They that never Prayed before, shall Pray, and Cry, and Beg, for the
Compassions of the Great God, for whom they once cared not* they shall
unsuccessfully do it, With the Groans of a Deadly Wounded Man. But will you not
Fear such a Fearful Thing as this? O be not a People, So Foolish and Unwise!
And now, I pass on to say,

II Let us not Cast off those General Fears, that should prevent the Restraint
of those General Prayers, which ought generally to be going every where among
us. I need not quote Nazianzen as my Authority for that Assertion, That there
is nothing so Fearful as to be without Fear. But I will add, That our being
without Fear, will render ^^s without Prayer, and then our Condition would be
Fearful indeed unto Extremity. Wherefore, in one word, O Let not FEARLESS and
PRAYERLESS, be the Character of New* England.

This Fearless and P rayerless Temper, (D istemper, I should rather say,) is
that SECURITY, which is the usual Forerunner of the most Horrible Desolations.
Though Job could say, The Thing which I greatly Feared is come upon me, yet with
us it is mostly otherwise; The Thing which we Least Fear is most Likely to come
upon us; and the Thing is then most Ready to come, when we do Least Fear it.
Mark what I say, You cannot in all the Book of God, pitch upon any People
Remarkably secure, but presently you will and a Remakable Stroke of Heaven, in
Judgment upon those unhappy Sleepers When the Old World was Drowned in
Security, then 'twas that their Foundation was Overflown with a Flood. And so
still it is, in Our World; That men are never so near cutting (...) pieces, as
when they sing, The Bitterness of Death (...) See (...) These. ^. 3. Indeed I
cannot easily, forbear ^he Outcry, which Honest G. Parisiensis made Long ago
(...) Security. Thou art my first Enemy, and my worst Enemy; for thou killest
way Fear, which is my best Guardian. But let me then with a just Revenge, assay
the Killing of that Enemy! For the Cure of this fatal S ecurity, and as well,
for the Directing, as for the Reviving, both of our Fears, and of our P rayers,
I have two things to Lay before you. I say first,

I. We are in such Fearful Circumstances, as may justly give Loud Alarums unto
the Blackest of our Fears, and because unto our Fears, therefore also unto our
Prayers. It Is not only the Threatening D rought now upon us, that bespeaks our
Fears and our Prayers; though that be something. As they of old once, Trembled
for the Great Rain, we are this Day, Trembling for want of Rain. The
Inhabitants of Tire and Sidon were afraid of being in Ill Terms with Herod,
because, Their Country was nourished by his Country. We seem this Day to be in
Ill Terms with that Great King, By whose Country our Country is nourished: And
are we not Afraid? But we have other things, which have an Aspect upon us very
formidable. We should be glad, of, Tokens for Good; but instead thereof it may
be said, as in Psalm. 65. 8. They who dwell in the uttermost parts, are afraid
at thy Tokens:

Particularly,

First, Let not Fear be east off: Are we not Afraid, Lest the Confusions which
are to over-set and overwhelm, the whole World, in these Latter Days, do Come
hither also. There is yet a Third Woe, wherewith Mankind is to be most horribly
plagued, for its Opposition to the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ; a Woe, in
comparison whereof, all the horrendous Desolations, brought first by the
Sar^acen Locusts, and then by the Turkish Horsemen, upon the Roman Empire, were
but easy things. And what? Is that Kingdom of our Lord so Loved, so Studied, so
Embraced among our selves, that we need not Fear being reached by that
astonishing Woe? I would to God it were so. Though it will be a Joyful D ay for
them that are to be Refreshed by the presence of the Lord, yet it will be a
woeful Day for them that Know not God, and obeynot His Gospel. The Fields will
grow loath to nourish those Rebels; T here shall be Famines. The Air will grow
Loath to let them Breathe; There shall be Pestilences. The Eyes of Heaven will
grow loath to behold them: T he Lights of Heaven shall be D arkened. The Earth
will grown under the Burden of them; There shall be Earthquakes in diverse
places. There is to be Expected indeed, a further Accomplishment of that word,
in Heb. 12. 26. Yet once more, I S hake, not the Earth only, but H eaven also.
It is a Day of Earthquakes, and should it not be a Day of Heart-quakes too?
Literal and Natural Earthquakes are like to be multiplied in the approaching
Age. The Subterranean Fires that are shortly to assist the Conflagration of
this Globe, will get head apace, and Earthquakes more stupendous than the Late
one upon our miserable Neighbors, will be thereby occasioned. As it was with a
Burning Mountain, that our God gave our His Law unto the Jewish World, so He
terrified the World, with another Burning Mountain, when He gave out His Gospel
unto the Gentile World. Throughout Europe and Asia and Africa, people were then
f^^led with Horrid Consternations, at the Fiery Eruptions of Mount Ves^vius, as
the Historians of those Times Report unto us. Why, our God is now coming to
Judge the World for the Contempt of His Law, and of His Gospel; and He will in
a more affrighting manner set the World in a Burning Fire, at His Coming: A
Fire shall devour before Him, and it shall be very Tempestuous round about Him.
Proper Earthquakes, will probably abound in the Near Advances of That Notable
Day of the L ord. But be sure, Metaphorical Earthquakes, there will be Enough;
State-quakes, Church-quakes, Nation-quakes, will now Rage at a mighty rate. As
Jonah ran through Ninive, proclaiming, Yet Forty D ays and the Great City shall
be Overthrown. So do I now run through N ew-England, and proclaim, T here is a
Great City going to be Overthrown; and yet within less than Twenty Years, the
greatest Shakes are like to be given unto the World, that ever happened from
the first Foundation of it.

Secondly. Let not Fear be cast off: Are we not Afraid, Lest when the S torms
of Divine Vengeance do burst and break upon our own Sinful Nation, some Drops
of the Storms do fall upon our Heads. The Profanity, the Debauchery, the
Superstition, wherewith our Nation has been infected, have Long been making a
Loud Cry in the Ears of the L ord God of Sabbath; So that he seems to say, as
in Jer. 5. 9. Shall not I visit for these things, says the Lord: Shall not my
S oul be avenged on such a Nation as this? And when the Holy God shall visit
for those things, it will be well, if Showers of Blood be not Rained on a Land,
where the Blood of His Dear Son has been treated as an Unholy Thing. Hence it is
that many Thinking Men, in the Nation at this Day, are Looking upon one another
with paleness in their Faces* and wishing, O that we had Wings like a Dove! But
especially, when they Look back upon the fierce Persecutions, which formerly
flamed in that Land against the Pure Worship of our Lord, they conceive that
they may see, Wrath coming unto the uttermost. And how shall a share in that
Wrath upon the Mother, be now avoided, by the most Resembling of all her D
aughters?

Thirdly. Let not F ear be cast off: Are we not Afraid, Le^t the Cup of that
Fury, which has already dissipated as Glorious Churches as any of Ours, be
likewise given unto ours. We have most Appalling Intimations given unto us, not
only in the Wasting and the Doleful Disasters that have come upon the other
Plantations of the English America; such Disasters as cause the most
considerable Personages among them, to write from thence unto us, The Divine
Providence almost seems to have forsaken this side of the World, and Left us
unto the Treasures of Wrath, which we have been Long Laying up! But also in the
S catterings, that have elsewhere befallen, The Holy People. We may value our
selves upon our Ecclesiastical S ettlements and Ornaments, and upon the
wonderful Appearances of God, in the first production of them: whereof a CHURCH
HISTORY might indeed most profitably be [and is] Endeavored Yea, but our Lord
may say unto us, I have not found thy Works perfect before God! And who can
say, How far that Holy God, may proceed in punishing us, yet seven times more
for our Iniquities? in punishing us, above the Rest of the Families of the
Earth? When we see what has befallen others, our Lord says to us, as in Luc.
13. 3, 5. Except ye Repent, ye shall all Likewise perrish. Let me then say to
you, Go to Shiloh! and again, Go to Asia! and once more, Go to the European
Churches! especially Go to France, where the greatest Scourge of the World,
more than seven years ago, coined Medals, on which 'twas bragged, That he had
then Reduced no less than twenty Hundred T housand Calvinists, from the
Protestant Religion. A worse, thing surely than the Cutting of so many Throats!
Behold, the Warnings of God unto Us in these Ends of the Earth, by the
Desolations thus made in the Earth.

Fourthly. Let not Fear be ^ast off: Are we not Afraid, Lest we come our selves
to See. The mischiefs which our Ancient S eers have often foretold unto us.
Every Wise man, is a Prophet: We have had such Wise men, on many Opportunities,
especially some Anniversary Ones, here Prophesying, I assure you, No Smooth
things unto us: in all which, it has not been a rash Enthusiasm, it has been
Scripture, it has been Reason, that has Inspired them. They have done according
to their Commission, in Isa. 58 1. L ift up thy voice like a Trumpet. And what
has been the Voice of the Trumpet? Not Uncertain, but Universally concurring in
this thing. Reformation, or Desolation! Reformation, or D esolation! and, I
pray, where do we find much of the demanded Reformation? Besides this, our Old
Men, without any vain Dreams, have made their moral Prognostications upon our
manners. We have had an Hooker, long since Prophesying unto us, T hat God would
punish the Wanton S pirit of the Professors in this Country, with a sad want of
Able men, in all Orders among them. We have had a S hepard, long since
Prophesying unto us, T hat such a Dismal Night was toward us, and (...)
Afflictions, as would fi^l our Heart with (...) Anguish equal to the worst,
(...) Days. We have had a Norton, Sighing over us, What is the (...) of the
Lord concerning the Churches of New England, is a matter of (...) and awful
Meditation. And some other persons, not inferior, have not stock to say, We
fear the Gospel will go, the Lord Jesus will depart from (...), within (...)
little while. Let thy Heart (...), O New England, Lest th^^ Day of thy Watchman
come upon thee*

Fifthily. L et not Fear he cast off: Are we not Afraid, Lest our Unreformed
Iniquities, bring down upon us, most Irret^^ievable Calamities. What are our
Iniquities? Even those very Crimes for which, it is said, The Wrath of the Lord
arose against His People of Old, until there was no Remedy You have them, in 2.
Chron. 36. 14, 16. First, The People Transgressed very much, after all the
Abominations of the Heathen. And have not we shamefully Indianized, by being
one of the most Lying (if not like the Indians, also the most Idle) People
almost in the Universe? Again, They polluted the House of the L ord. And have
not the Scandalous, Damnable, Miscarriages in multitudes of our Church Members
done so too? Or, is not the cursed Contempt cast upon the Table of the Lord by
such multitudes as Turn their Backs thereupon, a further doing so? Once more,
They misused the Prophets. And how feelingly might many of our Discouraged,
Reviled, Cheated and Starved Ministers complain of such Usage, if they Loved
Complaining? Yea, may not we Boston, even call S odom our Sister, for our
(...), our Fullness of Bread, our Abundance or Idleness, and our Oppression of
one another? See whether thy Face, O Town Once (and well if not justly still*)
(...) L o^t T own, to ^ers, be not, (...) S ororum: For my part, (...) confess,
my particular indisposition (...) moved by many things that (...) accounted,
(...) out (...) These Iniquities are the worst (...) A thousand (...) Blazing
(...), or views of ^t^mies (...) (...) of Impending Evils, man (...) I
niquities. But (...) (...) our Faults (...) most Natural^^ ^ Instruments of
Saving the Lands, the Lives, the most precious Liberties of this People, are
acknowledged but with the worst of Abuses for all their Services; cruel (...)
and Slander, is now commonly known by the Name of Country-Day for the most of
them that Lay this People under the most Eternal Obligations. What now can
follow Naturally, but this; That our Tired Benefactors, will make all the
sensible part of Mankind join with them in saying, We will never be the Healers
of such a People!

Sixthly, Let not F ear be cast off: Are we not Afraid, Lest Indian Hatchets
are to fetch yet more Blows at the Root of our Tree? When the Philistines bore
hard upon Saul, it is said, His Armor bearer was sore afraid: and what shall we
be, that are surrounded with Bloody Philistines? Our God has been doing to us
what He denounced, in Deuteronomy. 31. 25. I will move them to Jealousy with those
who are not a People. I will provoke them to Anger with a Foolish Nation. And
those Foolish Nations that yet Survive of that No People, seem Reserved for a
further Scourge unto us, who have been so Foolish, as to neglect very much of
the Gospellizing of those Nations. Had we done as much, as the French have
done, for the Proselyting of the Indians, in our East, we had not seen (...)
whole Province there Consumed by their Depredations; and God knows, how far we
may at some time or other ^e so Chastised, for our like Omissions, in some
other Quarters! A twentieth part of the Treasure spent in our Wars with the
Salvages, would have gone far toward the Civillizing, and the Christianizing
of them all: and then we had been delivered from such Wars for ever. God is to
be praised indeed that so many of His Dear Servants have Traveled so far in
that matter. But the most of our People, seem to Blow upon such Undertakings;
or at least, have no S pirit for it: So that if Good Old Gildas were alive
among us, he would threaten us, as he did his Countrymen, when he told them,
That God would make the P agan Saxons, an heavy plague unto them, for their
doing so Little toward the Conversion of those miserable P agans.

Seventhly. Let not Fear be cast off: Are we not Afraid, Lest the Great Wrath
of the Devil which has been upon us, do remain for more than a Short Time
among us. I Remember, it is affirmed by ^laber Radulphus, That about the Time,
when Antichrist was breaking in upon the World, People were scared almost out
of their Wits, with a Fiery D ragon, seen sometimes to Fly about the Air.
Truly, That Fiery Dragon, the Devil, has been most sensibly Flying about us,
within this year (...) two, in the matchless Enchantments and Possessions, that
have abounded. in our Neighborhood. But into what Passions, into what
Mistakes, into what Enormous Disorders, has this D escent of the D evil
precipitated us, instead of driving us, to a more Trembling Walk with God? The
Evil Angels being now so much rated off as they are, it is well if the next
Stroke be not that in Psalm 78 49, 59. He cast upon them the Fierceness of His
Anger, Wrath, and Indignatoon, and Trouble, by sending Evil Angels among them.
And what is the Next News? He made a way to His Anger, He spared not their S oul
from Death, but gave their Life over to the Pestilence, We have been in an
Egyptian D arkness, buffeted by Evil Angels, and buffeting one another upon the
Impulse of those Angels. God forbid, that the next Thing should be, such an
Egyptian Pestilence, as will hardly Leave an House without one Dead Person in
(...) What if the Angels of Death, should next shoot the Arrows of Death, in an
our Windows, with Epidemical Contagions? This I know; A Learned Man Writing
against the Regard of Omens, yet about Apparitions of S pectres, has this
passage; Perhaps God will have these Apollyons to be seen, as it were upon the
S tage before Execution; that men may consider into whose Hands, in likelihood,
their Iniquities have Betrayed them.

Lastly. Let not Fear be cast off: Are we not Afraid, Lest the Rising
Generation here, do Barbarously Degenerate into the Plant of a strange Vine?
There is indeed nothing to be more dreaded among us, than that thing, in Judge.
2. 10. There arose another Generation, which knew not the L ord, nor yet the
Works which He had done. Alas, Alas! What becomes of our young People? O my
God, what will thou do with my miserable Generation? As for many Hopeful
Persons, among our Youth, Such as, the Learned Shepard of Charlstown, the pious
G^^okin of Cambridge, the Excellent De^^ison of (...), God snatches the^ away
to Heaven, with a premature Mortality. But as for many Other persons among
them, they became Wild, Lewd, Mad, and every way Exorbitant; They are like the
Sons of (...) The Sin of the Young Men is very great before the Lord; and
accordingly, The Plague of the Lord upon those young men, both at home and
abroad, becomes very great! Yea, in the Edges of the Land, they begin to
Paganize: it is horrible to be spoken, but let the Regret at it, be what it
will, it must be spoken; There are Villages of New England, that have a sort of
white Pagans in them. Here then, are our Fears! But

II. Although we have these Fears upon us, yet our Fears are to be mixed with
Hopes: and if they are vented in Prayers, they may very well be mixed with
Hopes. The Uplifted Hands of our Prayers this Day, must have Hope, as well as
Fear, for the two Supporters of them As Paul said about Mourning, so would I
say about Fearing, in 1 These 4. 13. Do not as others that have no Hope. The
Kind Emperor, of old ordered it, That none should go D ejected from the
Presence of the Emperor. Nor, must I now suffer you, to Go Dejected from the
Presence of the Eternal King, upon whom we are this Day attending When Daniel
was, as we now are, Weary with Fasting, an Angel Flew from Heaven, till he was
even Weary too (as the Original has it) with the Swiftness of his Motion, to
bring him some comfortable Tidings. As Weary as I am, yet I must offer you some
Comfortable Things before we part; and I am to tell you, There are Hopes as
well as Fears for our Land.

But, what Hopes? I Reply,

First, We have Hopes in the Sovereign Grace of our most Gracious God. O what
an Heartbreaking Word is that, in Isa. 57. 17, 18. For the Iniquity of his
Coveteousness, was I wroth, and smote him: and he went on frowardly in the way
of his Heart: And what? must all now be Lost? No; There is yet Hope in Israel!
You shall see what S overaign Grace can do. It follows, I have seen his Ways
and will Heal him. And now, Lord, Be it unto thy P eople according to this thy
Gracious Word!

I Reply, Secondly; We have Hopes in the Hastening Time of Reformation, which
our God will Hasten in his Time. If the Man of S in Entered his Last Half Time!
or his last Hundred and Eighty Years, as no doubt he did, at the Reformation,
which Commenced about the Year 1517. We may then have a Lively Hope, that we
are within a very few years, of a Reformation, more Heavenly, more Extensive,
more Glorious, than the Church of God has ever yet been favored with. But
shall we be forgotten in this Time? We may presume that neither God, nor the
King, will then forget us.

I Reply, Thirdly; We have Hopes in the Yearly and Holy Fruits of our College;
that Blessed Nursery of our Israel. The Lord may say unto us, I have Raised up
of your Sons for Prophets; for which that man among us, who is not now greatly
Thankful to God, is not worthy the Name of, A New-Englandman. There is a most
Hopeful produce of S cholars arising out of that Society; Young men, admirably
Accomplished in all parts of Literature; Young men of most Enlarged Souls; and,
which is better still, Young Men, full of Piety; no Strangers to the N
ew-Birth; nor unacquainted with High Experiments in practical Religion; such as
know what it is to be continually Fasting as well as Praying for the Blessing
of God, not upon themselves alone, but upon all concerned in them. Destroy not
that P eople; says our God; is there not a Blessing among them? And as for
You, Brethren, that are thus coming on; Be Encouraged and Know, T hat the God
of your F athers has a greater work for you to do for Him, than what He has yet
Employed your Fathers in.

I Reply, Fourthly; We have Hopes in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ on
Board of our Bark. A Little Vessel could not be sunk, by all the Blast of Hell,
while our Lord was with His Disciples in it. Why, our Lord has very few
Disciples in this whole* Haemisphere of the World, but what are in this Little
Vessel. Shall we then perish? No, That we shall not; if we now do, by our
Prayers Awaken our Lord unto the Saving of us.

But after all; when the worst comes to the worst: Yet, Surely I know it shall
be well with them that fear God, that Fear before H im. Let us have much of
that Fear within us, and let that Swallow up every other Fear. Qui Deum timet,
cum omnia timent. The Fear of God will give us a Room among His Alamoth, or His
Hidden Ones; and then we may without Fear Sing the Forty S ixth Psalm, which L
uther used, when Things Looked with a bad face abroad; Sing, We will not Fear,
though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountain be carried into the midst of
the S ea. Our God, is now, I believe, upon the Resurrection of His Witnesses:
although former Attempts about that Resurrection have been Abortive, yet now,
with His Dead Body they shall arise It is therefore likely to be a Day of more
than ordinary Indignation upon an Impious World; but if we are now fitted and
acted by the Fear of God, and if that Fear carry us forth to to all due
Testimonies for His Truths and Ways, He will say unto us, Come, My P eople;
Enter thou into thy Chambers, and Shut thy D oors about thee.

FINIS.
Advertisement
THere is now in the Press, and will speedily be Published, A New Book,
Entitled, The Great Blessing of Primitive Counselors; Discoursed in a Sermon
Preached in the Audience of the Governor, Council and Representatives of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, May 31. 1693. Being the Day
for the Election of Counselors in that Province. By Increase Mather,
President of Har^ard-Colledge in Cambridge, and Teacher of a Church at Boston
in New England.

Sold by Benjamin Harris, over against the Old-Meeting-House in Boston. 1693.


