Memoria Wilsoniana OR, Some DUES Unto The MEMORY of the Truly Reverend and
Renowned Mr. JOHN WILSON, The First PASTOR of Boston: Who Expired August. 7.
1667. Aged, 79.

Paid by COTTON MATHER.

Solus Honor Merito, qui datur, ille datur. Printed for and Sold by Michael
Perry, at his Shop under the West End of the Townhouse in Boston, in N.E. 1695.

TO Edward Bromfield Esquire.
Sir,
INasmuch as it is by Your Desire and Expense, that the Monument, which I had
Prepared for the Memory of Your Grandfather WILSON, becomes Eternal, I now
Inscribe it unto You, with my Hearty Prayers, that Your Children, may Long Live
to Inherit the Blessings and Virtues, of such a Renowned Ancestor: And
Subscribe my self,

Sincerely Yours, C. Mather.

Memoria WILSONIANA. THE LIFE OF Mr. JOHN WILSON.
S. 1. SUCH is the Natural Tendency, in Humane Minds to Poetry, That, as it is
Observed, the Roman Historian, in the very first Line of his History, fell upon
a Verse, Urbem Romam, In Principio Reges habuere;


So, the Roman Orator, though a very Mean Poet, yet making an Oration for a
Good One, could not let his First Sentence pass him, without a perfect
Hexameter, In Qua me non Inficior mediocriter Esse.


If, therefore, I were not of all men the most ^^poetical, my Reader might now
Expect an Entertainment altogether in Verse; for I am going to Write the Life
of that New-English Divine; who had so nimble a Faculty of putting his Devout
thoughts into Verse, that he Signalized himself by the Greatest Frequency,
perhaps, that ever Man used, of sending Poems, to All Persons, in All Places,
on All Occasions; and upon this, as well as upon Greater Accounts, was a David
unto the Flocks of our Lord in the Wilderness: Quicquid tentabat Dicere, Versus
erat;


Wherein, if the Curious Relished the Piety sometimes rather than the Poetry,
the Capacity of the Most, therein to be accommodated, must be Considered. But I
intend no further Account of this matter, than what is given by his Worthy Son,
(Reprinting at Boston in the year, 1680 the Verses of his Father, upon the
Famous Deliverances of the English Nation, Printed at London, as long ago, as
the year 1626) Whose Words are, What Volumns has he Penned, for the help of
Others, in their several Changes of Condition? How was his Heart full of Good
Matter? And his Verses past, like to the Handkerchiefs carried from Paul, to
uphold the Disconsolate, and Heal their Wounded Souls? For indeed this is the
Least Thing, that we have to Relate of that Great Saint; and accordingly, it is
under a more Considerable Character, that I must now Exhibit him, Even, as a
Father to the Infant Colonies of New England.

S. 2. Mr. John Wilson, descending from Eminent Ancestors, was Born at Winsor
in the Wonderful Year 1588. The Third Son of Dr. William Wilson, a Prebend of
St. Paul's, of Rochester and of Winsor, and Rector of Cliff: having for his
Mother, a Niece of Dr. Edmund Grindal, the most Worthily Renowned Archbishop
of Canterbury. His exact Education under his Parents, which betimes Tinged him
with an Aversation to Vice, and above all, to the very shadow of a Lie, fitted
him to Undergo the further Education, which he received in Eaton-Colledge,
under Udal (and Langely) whom now we may Venture, after Poor Tom Tusser, to
call, The Severest of Men. Here he was most Remarkably Twice Delivered from
Drowning; but at his Book, he made such Proficiency, that while he was the
Least Boy in the School, he was made a Propositor; and when the Duke of Biron
Ambassador from the French King Henry IV, to Queen Elizabeth, Visited the
School, he made a Latin Oration, for which the Duke bestowed Three Angels upon
him. After four years Continuance at Eaton, he was Removed unto Cambridge,
between the Fourteenth and Fifteenth year of his Age; and Admitted into Kings
College in the year 1602. When he came to stand for a Fellowship in that
College, his Antipathy to some Horrid Wickednesses, whereto a Detestable
Wretch that had been Acquainted with him, would have betrayed him, caused that
Malicious Wretch by Devised and Accursed Slanders to ruin so far the Reputation
of this Chaste Youth with the other Fellows, that had not the (...), who was a
Serious and a Reverend Person, interposed for him, he had utterly lost his
Privilege; which now by the Major Vote he Obtained. But this Affliction put
him upon many Thoughts and Prayers before the Lord.

S. 3. He had hitherto been, according to his Good Education, very Civilly and
Soberly Disposed: but being by the Good Hand of God, Led unto the Ministry of
such Holy men as Mr. Bains, Dr. Tailor, Dr. Chaderton, he was by their Sermons
Enlightened and Awakened, unto more Sollicitous Enquiries after, The One Thing
yet Lacking in him. The Serious Dispositions of his Mind, were now such, that
besides his pursuance after the Works of Repentance in himself, he took no
little pains to pursue it in others; especially the Malefactors in the Prisons,
which he Visited with a Devout, Sedulous, and Successful Industry.
Nevertheless, being forestalled with Prejudices against the Puritans of those
Times, as if they had held, he knew not well what Odd Things, he Declined Their
Acquaintance; although his Good Conversarion had made him to be accounted One
of them, Himself. Until going unto a Booksellers Shop to Augment his
Well-furnisht Library, he Lit upon that Famous Book of Mr. Richard Rogers,
called, The Seven Treatises* which, when he had Read, he so Affected, not only
the Matter, but also the Author of the Book, that he took a Journey unto
Wethersfield, on purpose to hear a Sermon, from that Boanerges. When he had
heard the Heavenly Passages that fell from the Lips of that Worthy Man,
Privately, as well as Publicly, and compared therewithal the Writings of
Greenham, of Dod, and of Dent, especially The Path way to Heaven, Written by
the Author last mentioned, he saw that They who were Nicknamed, Puritans, were
like to be the Desirablest Companions, for One that intended his own
Everlasting Happiness; and pursuant unto the Advice, which he had from Dr.
Ames, he associated himself with a Pious Company in the University, who kept
their Meetings in Mr. Wilsons Chamber, for Prayer, Fasting, Holy Conference,
and the Exercises of true Devotion.

S. 4. But now, perceiving many Good men to Scruple many of the Rites,
Practiced and Imposed in the Church of England, he furnished himself with all
the Books, that he could find Written on the Case of Conformity, both Pro and
Con, and pondered with a most Conscientious Deliberation, the Arguments on both
sides produced. He was hereby so convinced of the Evil in Conformity, that at
Length, for his Observeable Omission, of certain Uninstituted Ceremonies in the
Worship of God, the Bishop of Lincoln, then Visiting the University, pronounced
upon him the Sentence of Quindenum, that is, That, besides other
Mortifications, he must within Fifteen Days, have been Expelled, if he
continued in his Offense. His Father, being hereof Advised, with all Paternal
Affection, Wrote unto him to Conform; and at the same Time, interceded with the
Bishop, that he might have a Quarter of a year allowed him; in which time, if
he could not be Reduced, he should then leave his Fellowship in the College.
Hereupon he sent him unto several Doctors of Great Fame, to get his Objections
Resolved; but when much Discourse, and much Writing, had passed between them,
he was rather the more confirmed in his Principles about Church Reformation.
Wherefore his Father, then diverting him from the Designs of the Ministry,
disposed him to the Inns of Court; where he fell into Acquaintance with some
Young Gentlemen, who associated with him in constant Exercises of Devotion; to
which Meetings the Repeated Sermons of Dr. Gouge were a continual
Entertainment: and here it was, that he came into the Advantageous Knowledge of
the Learned Scultetus, Chaplain to the Prince Palatine of the Rhine, then
making some stay in England.

S. 5. When he had continued Three years at the Inns of Court, his Father
discerning his Disposition to be a Minister of the Gospel, permitted his
Proceeding Master of Arts, in the University of Cambridge; but Advised him to
Address another College, than that, where he had formerly met with
Difficulties. Dr. Carry, who was then Vice Chancellor, understanding his former
Circumstances, would not Admit him without Subscription: but he refused to
Subscribe. In this Distress he Repaired unto his Father, at whose House there
happened then to be present, the Countess of Bedfords Chief Gentleman, (...)
had Business with the Earl of Northampton, the Chancellor of the University.
And this Noble Person upon the Information, which that Gentleman gave him of
the matter, presently Wrote a Letter to the Vice Chancellor on the Behalf of
our Young Wilson; whereupon he received his Degree, and continued a while after
this, in Emanuel-Colledge: from whence he made frequent and useful Visits unto
his Friends, in the Counties adjoining, and became further fitted for his
Intended Service. But while he was passing under these Changes, he took up a
Resolution, which he thus expressed before the Lord; That if the Lord would
Grant him a Liberty of Conscience, with Purity of Worship, he would be content,
yea, thankful, though it were at the furthermost End of the World. A most
Prophetical Resolution!

S. 6. At Length, Preaching his first Sermon at New Port; he set his Hand unto
that Plough from whence be never afterward Looked Back: not very long after
which, his Father lying on his Death Bed, he kneeled, in his Turn, before him,
for his Blessing, and brought with him for a share in that Blessing, the
Virtuous Young Gentlewoman, the Daughter of the Lady Mansfield (Widow of Sir
John Mansfield Master of the Minorys and the Queens Surveyor) whom he Designed
afterward to Marry: Whereupon the Old Gentleman said, Ah, John, I have taken
much Care about thee, such time as thou wast in the University, because thou
would not Conform; I would fain have brought thee to some higher Preferment,
then thou have yet attained unto: I see thy Conscience as very Scrupulous,
concerning some things that have been Observed and Imposed in the Church:
Nevertheless, I have Rejoiced to see the Grace and Fear of God, in thy Heart;
and seeing thou have kept a Good C^nscience hitherto, and walked according to
thy Light, So Do still; and Go by he Rules of Gods Holy Word: The Lord Bless
thee, and her, whom thou have chosen to be the Companion of thy Life! Among
other Places, where he now Preached, Moreclake was One; where his
Nonconformity exposed him to the Rage of Persecution; but by the Friendship of
the Justice, namely Sir William Bird, a Kinsman of his Wife, and by a Mistake
of the Informers, the Rage of that Storm was moderated.

S. 7. After this, he Lived as a Chaplain Successively in Honorable and
Religious Families; and, at last, was Invited unto the House of the most Pious
Lady Scudamore. Here Mr. Wilson observing the Discourse of the Gentry at the
Table, on the Lord's Day, to be too Disagreeable unto the Devout Frame to be
mentained on such a Day, at Length he Zealously stood up at the Table, with
Words to this purpose, I will make bold to Speak a Word or Two; This is the
Lords Holy Day, and we have been hearing His Word, and after the Word Preached,
every One should think, and speak about such Things, as have been Delivered in
the Name of God; and not Lavish cut the Time in Discourses about Hawks and
Hounds. Whereupon, a Gentleman then present, made this Handsome and Civil
Answer, Sir, We Deserve all of us to be thus Reproved by you; This is, indeed,
the Sabbath Day, and we should, surely, have better Discourse; I hope, it will
be a Warning to us. Notwithstanding this, the next Lord's Day, the Gentry at the
Table were at their Old Notes; which caused Mr. Wilson again to tell them, That
the Hawks which they Talked of, were the Birds, that Picked up the seed of the
Word; after the Sowing of it; and Prayed them, That their Talk might be of such
Things, as might Sanctify the Day, and Edify their own Souls; which caused the
former Gentleman to Renew his former Thankfulness for the Admonition. But Mr.
Leigh the Ladys Husband, was very angry; whereof when the Lady advised Mr.
Wilson, wishing him to say something, that might Satisfy him, he Replied, Good
Madam, I know not wherein I have given any just Offense; and therefore, I know
of no Satisfaction that I owe: Your Ladyship has Invited me to Preach the Good
Word of God among you; and so I have endeavored according to my Ability: Now
such Discourse as this, on the Lords Day, is Profane and Disorderly: If your
Husband Like we not, I will be gone. When the Lady informed her Husband how
Peremptory Mr. Wilson was, in this matter, he mended his Countenance and
Carriage; and the Effect of this Reproof was, that unsuitable Discourse, on the
Lords Day, was cured among them.

S. 8. Removing from this Family, after he had been, a while at Henly, he
continued for three years together, Preaching at Four Places, by Turns, which
lay near one another, on the Edges of Suffolk, namely Bumsted, Stoke, Clare,
and Candish. Here, some of Sudbury happening to hear him, they Invited him to
Succeed the Eminent Old Mr. Jenkins, with which Invitation, he cheerfully
complied, and the more cheerfully because of his Opportunity to be near Old Mr.
Richard Rogers, from whom afterward when Dying, he Received a Blessing among
his Children; yea, to encourage his Acceptance of this Place, the very Reader
of the Parish did Subscribe, with many Scores of others, their Desires of it;
and yet he accepted not the Pastoral Charge of the Place, without a Solemn Day
of Prayer with Fasting, (wherein the Neighboring Ministers assisted) at his
Election: Great notice was now taken of the Success, which God gave unto his
Labors, in this Famous Town; among other Instances whereof, One was this. A
Tradesman much given to Stealing, as well as other Profane and Vicious
Practices, One Day seeing People flock to Mr. Wilsons Lecture, thought with
himself, Why should I Tarry at Home to Work, when so many Go to Hear a Sermon?
Wherefore, for the sake of Company, he went unto the Lecture too; but when he
came, he found a Sermon, as it were, particularly Directed unto himself, on
Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that has Stole, Steal no more; and such was the Impression
thereof upon his Heart, that, from this Time, he became a Changed and Pious man.

S. 9. But if, they that will Live Godlily must Suffer Persecution, a Peculiar
share of it must fall upon them, who are Zealous and Useful Instruments to make
others Live so. Mr. Wilson had a share of this Persecution; and one A -- n, was
a Principal Author of it. This A -- n had formerly been an Apprentice in
London, Where the Bishops detained him some years, under an hard Imprisonment,
because he Refused the Oath ex Officio, which was pressed upon him to tell,
Whether he had never heard his Master Pray against the Bishop? The Charity of
Well Disposed People now Supported him, till he got abroad, Recommended by his
Hard Sufferings, unto the Good Affections of the Puritans, at whose Meetings he
became so Conversant, and thereupon such a forward and zealous Professor, that,
at Length he Took upon him, under the Confidence of some Latinity, whereof he
was Owner, to be a Sort of a Preacher among them. This man would Reverence Mr.
Wilson as his Father, and yet upon the Provocation of seeing Mr. Wilson more
highly Valued and Honored, than himself, he not only became a Conformist
himself, but also, as Apostates use to be, a Malignant and Violent Persecutor
of those, from whom he had Apostatized. By his means, Mr. Wilson was put unto
Trouble in the Bishops Courts; from whence his Deliverance was, at Length
Obtained by certain Powerful Mediators. And once by his Tricks the most noted
Pursevant of those Times, was employed for the Siezing of Mr. Wilson; but
though he Siezed upon many Scores of the People coming from the Lecture, he
Dismissed the rest, because he could not meet with Mr. Wilson himself, who by a
Special Providence, went out of his direct way, to Visit a Worthy Neighbor,
and so escaped this Mighty Hunter. Afterward an Eminent Lady, happening
Innocently to make some Comparison between the Preaching of Mr. Wilson, and one
Dr. B. of B. the Angry Doctor presently applied himself unto the Bishop of
London, who for a while Suspended him. And when that Storm was over; he with
several other Worthy Ministers, came to he wholly Silenced, in another, that
was Raised upon Complaints made by one Mr. Bird, unto the Bishop of Norwich
against them. Concerning this Ill Bird, there happened one passage hereupon,
which had in it something Extraordinary. Falling very Sick, he had the help of
a Famous and Skilful Physician, One Dr. Duke of Colchester; who having left his
Patient, in his Opinion, safely Recovered, gave Mr. Wilson a Visit with an
Account of it. Recovered! Says Mr. Wilson; You are mistaken Mr. Doctor, He Is a
Dead man! The Doctor answered, If ever I recovered a Sick man in my Life, that
man is Recovered: but Mr. Wilson replied, No, Mr. Doctor, He Is a Dead man, he
shall not Live; Mark my Words! The Doctor smiled; but for all that, before they
parted, the News was brought them, that the man was Dead indeed, and, The Lord
known by the Judgment, which He Executed. But at last, Mr. Wilson obtained from
the truly Noble Earl of Warwick, to Sign a Letter, which the Earl bid himself
to draw up, unto the Bishop, on his behalf; by the Operation of which Letter,
his Liberty, for the Exercise of his Ministry, was again procured. This Bishop
was the Well-known Dr. Harsnet, who a Little while after this, Traveling
Northward, upon Designs of mischief against the Reforming Pastors and
Christians there, certain Ministers of the South set apart a Day, for Solemn
Fasting and Prayer to Implore the Help of Heaven, against those Designs; and on
that very Day, he was taken with a Sore and an odd Fit, which caused him to
stop at a Blind House of Entertainment on the Road, where he suddenly Dyed.

S. 10. At Last, being Persecuted in One Country, he must Flee into another.
The Plantation of a New-English Colony was begun; And Mr. Wilson, with some of
his Neighbors, Embarked themselves in the Fleet, which came over thither in
the year 1630. Where he applied himself with all the Vigor Imaginable, to
Encourage the poor People, under the Difficulties of their New Plantation. This
Good People buried near Two Hundred of their Number, within a Quarter of a year
after their first Landing; which caused Mr. Wilson particularly to Endeavor
their Consolation; by Preaching on Jacobs not being disheartened by the Death of
his nearest Friends in the way, when God had called him to Remove. And how
Remarkably, perhaps I might say, Excessively, Liberal he was in Employing his
Estate for the Relief of the Needy, Every such One so beheld him, as to Reckon
him, The Father of them all: Yea, the poor Indians themselves also tasted of
his Bounty. If it were Celebrated, as the Glory of Bellarmine, that he would
Sell his Goods to convert them into Alms for the poor, yea, that, Quadam Die
proprium Atramentarium Argenteolum, ut ditaret Inopes, inter pignorat
obligavit, our Mr. Wilson, though a greater Disclaimer of Merit, than
Bellarmine was, not only in his Writings, but on his Deathbed it self, yet
came not behind Bellarmine for the Extension of his Charity. To give Instances
of his, even over doing Liberality, would be to do it Injuries; for indeed they
were Innumerable; He acted as if the Primitive Agreement of having All Things
in Common, had been of all things the most Agreeable unto him. I shall Sum up
all in the Lines of an Elegant Elegy, which Mr. Samuel Bache, an Ingenious
Merchant made upon him, at his Death;

When as the Poor want Succor, where is he
Can say, all can be said, Extempore?
Vie with the Lightning, and melt down to the quick
Their Souls, and make themselves their Pockets pick?
Where Is such a Leader, thus has got the Slight
To touch holy Hands to War, Fingers to Fight;
Their Arrow hit? Bowels to Bowels Meant it,
God, Christ, and Saints accept, but Wilson sent it.
Which way so ere the Propositions move,
The Ergo of his Syllogisms LOVE.
So Bountiful to all: But if the Poor
Was Christian too, All Is Money went, and more,
His Goat, Rug, Blanket, Gloves; he thought their due
Was all his Money, Garments, One of Two.
But he was most set upon the Main Business of this New Plantation; which was,
To Settle, and Enjoy the Ordinances of the Gospel, and Worship the Lord Jesus
Christ according to His own Institutions; and accordingly, He, with the
Governor, and others that came with him on the same Account, combined into a
Church State, with all Convenient Expedition.

S. 11. Mr. Wilsons Removal to New England, was rendered the more Difficult, by
the Indisposition of his Dearest Consort thereunto; but he hoping, that
according to a Dream, which he had before his coming hither, That he saw here a
little Temple, rising out of the Ground, which by Degrees increased into very
high and large Dimensions, the Lord had a Temple to build in these Regions;
Resolved never to be Discouraged from his Undertaking. Wherefore, having first
sent over an Encouraging Account of the Good Order, both Civil and Sacred,
which now began to be Established in the Plantation, he did himself Return into
England, that he might further pursue the Effect thereof; and accordingly he
made it his Business, wherever he came, to Draw as many Good men, as he could,
into this Country, with him. His Wife remained unperswadeable, till upon Prayer
with Fasting before the Almighty Turner of Hearts, he Received an Answer, in
her becoming Willing to accompany him over an Ocean into a Wilderness. A very
sorrowful Parting they now had from their Old Friends in Sudbury, but a Safe,
and a Quick Passage over the Atlantic; and whereas the Church of Boston,
observing that he Arrived not, at the Time expected, had set apart a Day, of
Humiliation on his Behalf, his Joyful Arrival before the Day, caused them to
turn it into a Day of Thanksgiving. But Mrs. Wilson being thus persuaded over,
into the Difficulties of an American Desert, I have heard, that her Kinsman,
Old Mr. Dod, for her Consolation under those Difficulties, did send her a
Present, with an Advice, which had in it, something of Curiosity. He sent her,
at the same Time, a Brass Counter, a Silver Crown, and a Gold Jacobus; all of
them severally wrapped up: With this Instruction unto the Gentleman who carried
it; That he should first of all Deliver only the Counter, and if She Received
it with any Show of Discontent he should then take no further Notice of her:
but if She gratefully Resented that Small Thing, for the sake of the Hand it
came from, he should then go on to deliver the Silver, and so the Gold: But
withal assure her, That such would be the Dispensations of God unto her, and
the other Good People of New England: If they would be Content, and Thankful,
with such Little Things, as God at first bestowed upon them, they should in
Time, have Silver and Gold Enough. Mrs. Wilson accordingly, by her Cheerful
Entertainment of the Least Remembrance from Good Old Mr. Dod, gave the
Gentleman, Occasion to go through, with his whole Present, and the annexed
Advice, which has in a Good measure been accomplished.

S. 12. It was not long before Mr. Wilsons Return to England once more, was
obliged by the Death of his Brother, whose Will, because it be queathed a
Legacy of a Thousand Pounds unto New England, gave Satisfaction unto our Mr.
Wilson, though it was otherwise Injurious unto himself. A Tedious and Winter
Voyage he now had; being Twice forced into Ireland, where first at Galloway.
then at Kingsale, afterward at Bandon Bridge, he Occasionally, but Vigorously
and Successfully Served the Kingdom of God. At last, he got safe among his Old
Friends, at Sudbury; according to the Prediction, which he had let Fall in his
Former Farewell unto them, It may be John Wilson may come and see Sudbury once
again. From whence, Visiting Mr. Nathanael Rogers at Assington, where he
Arrived before their Morning-Prayers, Mr. Rogers asked him, to say something
upon the Chapter that was Read, which happened then to be the first Chapter, in
the first Book of Chronicles: and from a Paragraph of mere Proper Names, that
seemed altogether Barren of any Edifying matter, he Raised so many Fruitful and
Useful Notes, that a Pious Person then present, amazed thereat, could have no
Rest, without going over into America after him. Having dispatched his Affairs
in England, he again Embarked for New England, in Company with Four Ministers,
and near Two Hundred Passengers, whereof some were Persons of Considerable
Quality; but they had all been lost by a Large Leak sprang in the Ship, if God
had not, on a Day of Solemn Fasting and Prayer, kept on board for that purpose,
mercifully Discovered this Dangerous Leak unto them.

S. 13. That Phoenix of his Age, Dr. Ames, would say, That if he might have his
Option of the best Condition, that he could Propound unto himself, on this side
Heaven, it would be, that he might be the Teacher of a Congregational Church,
whereof Mr. Wilson, should be the Pastor. This Happiness, this Privilege, now
had Mr. Cotton in the Church of Boston. But Satan Envious at the Prosperity of
that Flourishing Church, raised a Storm of Antinomian and Familistical Errors,
which had like to have thrown all into an Irrecoverable Confusion, if the Good
God had not Remarkably Blessed the Endeavors of a Synod; and Mr. Wilson, for a
while, met with hard measure for his Early Opposition to those Errors, until by
the Help of that Synod, the Storm was Weathered out. At the Beginning of that
Assembly, after much Discourse against the Unscriptural Enthusiasms and
Revelations, then by some contended for, Mr. Wilson proposed, You that are
against these Things, and that are for the Spirit and the Word together, hold
up your Nands! And the Multitude of Hands then held up, was a Comfortable and
Encouraging Introduction unto the other Proceedings. At the Conclusion of that
Assembly, a Catalogue of the Errors to be Condemned, was produced; Whereof,
when One asked, What shall be done with them? The wonted Zeal of Mr. Wilson
made this Blunt Answer, Let them Go to the Devil of Hell, from whence they
came! In the midst of these Temptations also, he was by a Lot, chosen to
Accompany the Forces, then sent forth upon an Expedition against the Pequod
Indians; which he did with so much Faith and Joy, that he professed himself as
fully Satisfied, that God would give the English a Victory over those Enemies,
as if he had seen the Victory already obtained. And the whole Country Quickly
shared with him in the Consolations of that Remarkable Victory!

S. 14. In the Wilderness, he met with his Difficulties; For besides the Loss
of Houses, Diverse Times by Fire, which yet he bore with such a Cheerful
Submission, that Once One that met him on the Road, informing of him, Sir, I
have sad News for you; while you have been abroad, your House is burnt! His
first Answer was, Blessed be God: He has burnt this House, because He intends
to Give me a Better! (which accordingly came to pass;) he was also put upon
Complying with the Inclinations of his Eldest Son to Travel; who accordingly
Traveled, first into Holland, then into Italy, where he proceeded a Doctor of
Physic, and so Returned into England, Excellently well Adorned with all the
Accomplishments of a most Pious and Useful Gentleman. But this Worthy Person
Dyed, about the year 1658. And this hastened the Death of His Mother, e're the
year came about; which more than Doubled the Grief of his Father. And these
Afflictions were yet further Embittered by the Death of his Eldest Daughter,
Mrs. Rogers, in Childbed with her first Child; at whose Interment, though he
could not but Express a deal of Sorrow, yet he did it with so much Patience,
that, In Token, he said, of his Grounded and Joyful Hopes, to meet her again in
the Morning of the Resurrectin, and of his Willingness to Resign her into the
Hands of Him, who would make all Things work together for Good, he himself took
the Spade, and threw in the First Shovelful of Earth upon her. And not long
after, he buried Three or Four of his Grandchildren by another Daughter Mrs.
Danforth (yet Living with her Worthy Son-in-Law Edward Bromfield Esquire. in
Boston) Whereof One Lying by the Walls, on a Day of Public Thanksgiving, this
Holy man then Preached a most Savoury Sermon, on Job 1.21. The Lord has given,
and the Lord has taken away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. The next Child,
although so Weakly, that all Despaired of it is Life, his Prophetical
Grandfather, said, Call him, John, I Believe in God, he shall Live, and be a
Prophet too, and do God Service in his Generation! Which is, at this Day,
fullfilled in Mr. John Danforth, the present Pastor to the Church of
Dorchester. Encountering with such, and many other Exercises, his years Rolled
away, till he had Served New England, Three years before Mr. Cottons Coming
over, Twenty years with him; Ten years with Mr. Norton, and Four years after
him.

S. 15. In his Younger Time, he had been used Unto a more Methodical way of
Preaching, and was therefore Admired above many, by no Less Auditors than Dr.
Goodwin, Mr. Buroughs, and Mr. Bridge, when they Traveled from Cambridge into
Essex, on purpose to observe the Ministers in that County; but after he became
a Pastor, joined with such Illuminating Teachers, he gave himself a Liberty, to
Preach more after the Primitive Manner; without any Distinct Propositions, but
Chiefly in Exhortations and Admonitions, and Good wholesome Councils, tending
to Excite Good Motions, in the Minds of his Hearers; (but upon the same Texts
that were Doctrinally handled by his Colleague instantly before:) and yet
sometimes his Pastoral Discourses had such a Spirit in them, that Mr. Shepard
would say, Methinks I hear an Apostle, when I hear this Man! Yea, even One of
his Ex Tempore Sermons, has been since his Death, counted worthy to be
Published unto the World. The Great Lecture of Boston, being disappointed of
him, that should have Preached it, Mr. Wilson Preached that Lecture, on a Text
occurring in the Chapter that had been read that Morning in his Family; Jer.
29.8. -- Neither hearken to you^ Dreams, which you cause to be Dreamed; from
whence he gave a Seasonable Warning, unto the People against the Dreams,
wherewith sundry Sorts of Opinionists, had been Endeavoring to Seduce them. It
was the Last Boston Lecture that ever he Preached (Nov. 16. 1665.) and one, who
writ after him, in Short hand, about a Dozen years after Published it. But his
Last Sermon he Preached at Roxbury Lecture, for his most Worthy Son in Law, Mr.
Danforth; and after he had read his Text, which was in the Beginnings and
Conclusions of sundry of the Last Psalms, with a Seraphical Voice, he added, If
I were sure this were the Last Sermon that ever I should Preach, and these the
Last Words that ever I should Speak, yet I would still say, Hallelujah,
Hallelujah, Praise ye the Lord! Thus he Ended his Ministry on Earth, thus he
Began his Possession of Heaven, with Hallelujahs.

S. 16. Indeed, if the Picture of this Good, and therein Great Man, were to be
exactly given, Great Zeal, with Great Love, would be the Two Principal Strokes,
that joined with Orthodoxy, should make up his Pourtraiture. He had the Zeal of
a Phineas, I had almost said, of a Seraphim, in Testifying against every Thing
that he thought Offensive unto God. The Opinionists, which attempted at any
Time, to Debase the Scripture, Confound the Order, embraced in our Churches,
underwent the most pungent Animadversions of this his Devout Zeal; whence, when
a certain Assembly of People, which he approved not, had set in Boston, he
charged all his Family, that they should never Dare, so much as Once to enter
into that Assembly; I charge you, said he, That you do not Once Go to Hear
them; for whatsoever they may pretend, they will Rob you of Ordinances, Rob you
of your Souls, Rob you of your God. But though he were thus, like John, a Son
of Thunder, against Seducers, yet he was like that Blessed, and Beloved Apostle
also, all made up of Love. He was full of Affection, and ready to help and;
Relieve, and Comfort the Distressed; His House was Renowned for Hospitality,
and his Purse was continually emptying it self into the hands of the Needy:
From which Disposition of Love in him, there once happened this Passage; When
he was Beholding a Great Muster of Soldiers, a Gentleman, then present, said
unto him, Sir, I Will tell you a Great Thing; here is a mighty body, of People, and
there is not SEVEN of them all, but what Loves Mr. Wilson; but that Gracious
man presently and pleasantly replied, Sir, I Will tell you as Good a Thing as
that, here is a mighty Body of People, and there is not so much as ONE of them
all, but Mr. Wilson Loves him. Thus he did, by his own Exemple, notably Preach
that Lenon, which a Gentleman found in the Anagram of his Name, Wish no One
Ill: And thus did he Continue, to, Do Every One Good until his Death gave the
same Gentleman Occasion thus to Elegize upon him: Now may Celestial Spirits
Sing yet Higher,
Since one more's added to their Sacred Quire;
WILSON the Holy, whose Good Name does still,
In Language Sweet, bid us [ Wish no one Ill.]


S. 17. He was One, that Consulting not only his own Edification, but the
Encouragement of the Ministry, and of Religion, with an Indefatigable Diligence
Visited the Congregations of the Neighboring Towns, at their Weekly Lectures,
until the Weaknesses of Old Age rendered him Incapable. And it was a delightful
Thing, then to see upon every Recurring Opportunity a large Company of
Christians, and even Magistrates and Ministers among them, and Mr. Wilson in
the Head of them, Visiting the Lectures in all the Vicinage, with such Heavenly
Discourses on the Road, as caused the Hearts of the Disciples, to Burn within
them: and indeed it was Remarked, That though the Christians Then Spent Less
Time, in the Shop, or Field, than they do Now, yet they did in Both prosper
more. But for Mr. Wilson, I am saying, That a Lecture was a Treasure unto him;
he Prized it, he Sought it, until Old Age at Length brought with it a Sickness,
which a Long while confined him. In this Illness, he took a Solemn Farewell of
the Ministers, who had their Weekly Meetings, at his Hospitable House, and were
now come together from all parts, at the Anniversary Election for the
Government of the Colony. They asked him, to declare Solemnly, what he thought
might be the Sins, which provoked the Displeasure of God against the Country.
Whereto his Answer was, I have long feared several Sins; Whereof, One, he said,
was Corahism; That is, when People rise up as Corah against their Ministers, as
if they took too much upon them, when indeed they do but Rule for Christ, and
according to Christ; yet it is nothing for a Brother to stand up and Oppose,
without Scripture, or Reason, the Word of an Elder, saying [ I am not
Satisfied!] And hence, if he do not like the Administration (be it Baptism or
the Like) he will turn his back upon God and His Ordinances, and Go away. And
for our Neglect of Baptising the Children of the Church, those that some call
Grandchildren, I think God is provoked by it. Another Sin ( said he) I take,
to be the making Light of, and not Subjecting to the Authority of Synods,
without which the Churches cannot long Subsist.

S. 18. Afterward, having Solemnly with Prayer, and Particularly and very
Prophetically Blessed his Relations and Attendants, he now thus comforted
himself, I shall e're Long be with my Old Friends, Dr. Preston, Dr. Sibs, Dr.
Tailor, Dr. Gouge, Dr. Ames, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Norton, my Inns of Court Friends,
and my Consort, Children, Grand children in the Kingdom of God. And when some
then present, magnified God, for making him a Man of such Use, and Lamented
themselves, in their own Loss of him, he replied, Alas, Alas; Use no such Words
concerning me; for I have been an Unprofitable Servant, not worthy to be called
a Servant of the Lord: but I must say, The Lord be merciful to me a Sinner, and
I must say, Let Thy Tender Mercies come unto me, O Lord, Even Thy Salvation
according to Thy Word. The Evening before he Dyed, his Daughter asking him,
Sir, How do you Do? he held up his Hand, and said, Vanishing Things! Vanishing
Things! But he then made a most affectionate Prayer, with and for his Friends;
and so Quietly Fell Asleep on August 7. 1667. in the Seventy ninth year of his
Age. Thus Expired that Reverend Old man: of whom, when he left England, an
Eminent Personage said, New England, shall Flourish, free from all General
Desolations, as long as that Good man Lives in it! Which was Comfortably
accomplished. He was Interred with more than Ordinary Solemnity; and his
Neighbor, Mr. Richard Mather of Dorchester, thereat Lamented the Public Loss
in his Departure, with a Sermon upon Zech. 1.5. Your Fathers where are they and
the Prophets, do they Live for ever?

S. 19. Being a Man of Prayer, he was very much a Man of God; and a certain
Prophetical Afflatus, which often directs the Speeches of such men, did
sometimes Remarkably appear in the Speeches of this Holy Man. Instances hereof
have been already given. A few more shall now be added.

Beholding a Young man, Extraordinarily Dutiful in all possible ways of being
Serviceable, unto his Aged Mother, then Weak in Body, and Poor in Estate, he,
declared unto some of his Family what he had Beheld; adding therewithal, I
charge you to take notice of what I say; God will certainly Bless that Young
man; John Hull (for that was his Name) shall grow Rich, and Live to do God good
Service in his Generation! It came to pass accordingly, That this Exemplary
Person, became a very Rich, as well as Emphatically a Good Man, and afterward
Dyed a Magistrate of the Colony.

When one Mr. Adams, who waited on him from Hartford unto Weathersfield, was
followed with the news of his Daughters being fallen suddenly and doubtfully
Sick, Mr. Wilson, looking up to Heaven, began mightily to Wrestle with God for
the Life of the Young woman: Lord* (said he) will thou now take away thy
Servants Child, when thou see he is attending on thy Poor unworthy Servant in
most Christian Kindness; Oh! do it not! And then turning himself about unto Mr.
Adams, Brother (said he) I trust your Daughter shall Live, I believe in God She
shall Recover of this Sickness! And so it marvellously came to pass, and She is
now the fruitful Mother of several desirable Children.

A Pequ^t Indian, in a Canoo, was espied by the English, within Gunshot,
carrying away an English-Maid, with a Design to Destroy her or Abuse her. The
Soldiers, fearing to kill the Maid if they shot at the Indian, asked Mr.
Wilsons Counsel; who forbad them to Fear, and assured them, God will direct the
Bullet; They Shot accordingly; and killed the Indian, though then moving
swiftly upon the Water, and saved the Maid free from all harm whatever.

Upon the Death of the first and only Child (being an Infant) of his Daughter
Mrs. Danforth, he made a Poem, wherein were these Lines among the rest, What if
they part with their beloved one,
Their first Begotten, and their Only Son?
What Is this to that which Father Abram Suffered,
When his own hands his Only Darling offered,
In whom was bound up all his joy in this
Life present, and his hope of future Bliss?
And what if God their Other Children Call,
Second, Third, Fourth, suppose it should be All?
What Is this to Holy Job, his trials sad,
Who neither these nor the other comforts had?
His Life was only given him for a Prey,
Yet all his Troubles were to Heaven the way;
Yea to far Greater Blessings on the Earth,
The Lord rewarding all his Years with Mirth.


And behold, as if that he had been a Vates, in both Senses of it, a Poet, and
a Prophet, it pleased God afterward, to give his Daughter, a Second, a Third,
and a Fourth Child, and then to take them all away at once, even in one
Fortnights Time; but afterward, happily to make up the Loss.

Once passing over the Ferry unto a Lecture, on the other side of the Water, he
took notice of a Young man in the Boat, that Worded it very unhandsomely unto
his Aged Father: whereat this Faithful Seer, being much Troubled, said unto
him, Young man, I advise you to Repent of your Undutiful Rebellious Carriage
toward your Father; I expect else to (...), that God has cut you off, before a
Twelve month come to an End! And before this time expired, it came to pass,
that this unhappy Youth, going to the Southward, was there Hacked in pieces, by
the Pequod Indians.

A Company of People in this Country, were mighty not upon a Project of
Removing to Providence, an Island in the West Indies; and a Venerable Assembly
of the Chief Magistrates, and Ministers in the Colony, was addressed for their
Counsil about this undertaking; which Assembly hid before the Company very
weighty Reasons to Dissuade them from it. A Prime Ringleader in that Business,
was One Venner a Cooper of Salem, the Mad Blade, that afterward perished in a
Nonsensical Uproar, which he, with a Crew of Bedlamites, possessed like
himself, made in London. This Venner, with some others, now stood up, and said,
That notwithstanding, what had been Offered, they were clear in their Call to
Remove: Whereupon, Mr. Wilson stood up and answered, Ay, Do you come to Ask
Counsel in so weighty a matter as this, and to have Help from an Ordinance of
God in it? and are you aforehand Resolved, that you will Go on? Well, you may
Go, if you will; but you shall not prosper. What? Do you make a Mock of Gods
Ordinance? And it came to pass accordingly; The Enterprise was, not long after,
dashed in pieces; and Venners precipitating Impulses, afterward carried him to
a miserable End.

A Council sitting at a Town, where some Ecclesiastical Differences called for
the Assistances of the Neighbors to Compose them, there was one man, observed
by Mr. Wilson, to be extremely perverse, and most Unreasonably Troublesome, and
Mischievous, to the Peace of the Church there; Whereupon Mr. Wilson told the
Council, he was confident, That the Jealousy if God would set a Mark upon that
Man, and that the Ordinary Death of men should not befall him. It happened
shortly after, that the man was barbarously Butchered by the Salvages!

While Mr. Wilson was Minister of Sudbury in England, there was a Noted Person,
who had been absent, for some while among the Papists. This man Returning Home,
Offered himself to the Communion; whereat Mr. Wilson, in the open Assembly
Spoke unto him after this manner; Brother, you, here, present your self, as if
you would partake in the Holy Supper of the Lord. You cannot be Ignorant of
what you have done in withdrawing your self from our Communion, and how you
have been much conversant, for a Considerable while, with the Papists, whose
Religion is Antichristian. Therefore, though we cannot so absolutely Charge
you, God knows, who is the Searcher of All Hearts; and if you have Defiled your
self with their Worship and Way, and not Repented of it, by offering to
partake, at this Time, in the Holy Supper with us, you will Eat, and Drink your
own Damnation; but if you are clear, and have nothing wherewith to charge your
self; you your self know; upon this Account you may Receive. The man did then
partake at the Lords Table, professing his Innocence. But as if the Devil had
entered into him, he soon went and Hanged himself.

In the Circumstances of his own Children, he saw many Effects of an
Extraordinary Faith.

His Eldest Son, Edmund, while Traveling into the Countries, which the Bloody
Popish Inquisition, has made a Clime too Torrid for a Protestant, was Extremely
Exposed: but the Prayers of the Young Gentleman's continually Distressed Father,
for him, were answered, with Signal Preservations. When he was under
Examination by the Inquisitors, a Friend of the Chief among them, suddenly
arrived; and the Inquisitor not having ^een this Friend for many years before,
was hereby so diverted and mollified, that he carried the Young Mr. Wilson to
Dinner with him; and, though he had passed hitherto Unknown by his True Name,
yet this Inquisitor could now call him, to his great Surpize, by the Name, of
Mr. Wilson, and report unto him the Character of his Father, and his Fathers
Industry in Serving the Heretics of New England. But, that which I here most
of all design, is an Account of a thing yet more Memorable and Unaccountable.
For, at another Time, his Father Dreamed himself Transported into Italy, where
he saw a Beautiful Person in the Sons Chamber, Endeavoring, with a thousand
Enchantments to debauch him; whereupon the Old Gentleman made, and was by his
Bedfellow overheard making, first, Prayers to God full of Agony, and then
Warnings unto his Tempted Son, to Beware of Defiling himself with the Daughter
of a Strange God. Now, some Considerable while after this, the Young Gentleman
Writes to his Father, that on such a Night, (which was upon Enquiry found the
very same Night,) a Gentlewoman had caressed him, thus and so (just according
to the Vision,) and that his Chastity had been Conquered, if he had not been
Strongly Possessed with a Sense of his Fathers Prayers over him, and Warnings
unto him, for his Escape from the Pits, whereinto do fall the Abhorred of the
Lord.

His other Son, John, When a Child, fell upon his Head from a Loft, Four
Stories high, into the Street; from whence he was taken up for Dead, and so
battered and bruised and bloody with his Fall, that it struck Horror into the
Beholders: but Mr. Wilson had a Wonderful Return of his Prayers, in the
Recovery of the Child, both unto Life, and unto Sense; insomuch, that he
continued unto Old Age, a Faithful, Painful, Useful Minister of the Gospel; and
but lately went from the Service of the Church in Medfield, unto the Glory of
the Church Triumphant.

After Mr. Wilsons arrival at New England, his Wife, who had Left off bearing
of Children for many years, brought him another Daughter; which Lamb, was
indeed unto him, as a Daughter; and he would present her unto other Ministers,
for their Blessing, with Great Affection, Saying, This is my New England Token!
But this Child, fell Sick of a Malignant Fever, wherein She was gone so far,
that every one despaired of her Life; Except her Father, who called in several
Ministers, with other Christians, unto a Fast, on that Occasion; and hearing
the Prayers of Mr. Cotton for he, found his Heart so Raised, that he
Confidently declared, While I heard, Mr. Cotton at Prayer, I was Confident the
Child should Live! And the Child accordingly did Live; yea, She is to this Day
alive, a very Holy Woman, Adorned, like them of Old Time, with a Spirit of
Great Price!

The Blessings Pronounced by Mr. Wilson, upon many Persons and Affayrs, were
observed so Prophetical, and especially his Deathbed Blessings upon his
Children and Grandchildren were so, that the most Considerable Persons in the
Country, thought it not much, to come from far, and bring their Children with
them, for the Enjoyment of his Patriarchal Benedictions. For which cause, Mr.
Thomas Shepard, in an Elegy upon him, at his Death, Pathetically thus Expressed
it; Whosoever of Abraham, Moses, Samuel, Reads,
Or of Elijah's or Elisha's Deeds,
Would surely say, Their Spirit and Power was his,
And think there were a Metempsychosis.
As Aged John, the Apostle used to Bless
The People, which they Judged their Happiness,
So did we count it worth our Pilgrimage
Unto him for his Blessing, in his Age.


These were Extraordinary Passages; Many of them, are Things, which Ordinary
Christians may more safely Ponder, and Wonder, than Expect, in Our Days!
Though sometimes Great Reformers, and Great Sufferers, must be Signalized with
them. I know very well, what Livy says, Datur haec Venia Antiquitati, ut
miscendo Humana Divinis, Primordia Urbium Augustiora faciat: but I have been
far from Imposing the Least Fable upon the World in Reporting such
Extraordinary Passages of Mr. Wilson, or any other Great Confessor, by whom the
Beginnings of this Country were made Illustrious; there are Witnesses Enough,
yet Living, of them.

S. 20. There is a certain Little Sport of Wit, in Anagrammatizing the Names of
Men; which was used as long ago at Least as the Days of Old Lycophron: and
which sometimes has afforded Reflections very Monitory, as Alstedius by his
just Admirers changed into Sedulitas, or very Satirical, as when, Satan Rules
me, was found in the Transposed Name of a certain Active Persecutor: and when,
Lo, a Damned Crew, was found in the Name of One that made a Figure, among the
Popish Plotters against the Nation. Yea, It Is possible, that they who affect
such Grammatical Curiosities, will be willing to plead a Prescription, of much
Higher and Elder Antiquity for them; Even the Temurah, or, Mutation, with which
the Jews do Criticize upon the Oracles of the Old Testament. There, they say,
You Will find the Anagram of our First Fathers Name Ha adam, to express Adamah,
the Name of the Earth, whence he had his Original. An Anagram, of a Good
Signification, they will show you [Gen. 6.8.] and of a Bad one [Gen. 38.7.] in
those Glorious Oracles; and they will Endeavor to persuade you, that Maleachi
in Exodus is Anagrammatically grammatically Expounded Michael, in Daniel. But
of all the Anagrammatizers that have been Trying their Fancies, for the Two
Thousand years which have Run out, since the Days of Lycophron, yea, or for
the more than Five Thousand, since the Days of our First Father, I believe
there never was Man, that made so many, or so nimbly, as our Mr. Wilson; who,
together with his Quick Turns, upon the Names of his Friends, would Ordinarily
Fetch, and rather than Lose, would even Force, Devout Instructions out of his
Anagrams. As once, upon Hearing my Father Preach a Sermon about, The Glories of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Mr. Wilson immediately gave him that Anagram upon his
Name, Crescentius Matherus, Anagr. En! Christus Merces tu^: So, there could
Scarcely occurr the Name of any Remarkable Person, at least, on any Remarkable
Occasion unto him, without an Anagram Raised thereupon; and he made this
Poetical, and Peculiar, Disposition of his Ingenuity, a Subject whereon he
Grafted Thoughts far more Solid and Solemn and Useful, than the Stock it self.
Wherefore methoughts, it Looked like a Piece of Injustice, that his Own Funeral
produced (among the many Poems afterward Printed) no more Anagrams upon his
Name, who had so often thus Handled the Names of Others; and some Thought the
Muses Looked very much Dissatisfied, when they saw these Lines upon his Hearse.

JOHN WILSON Anagr. John Wilson. Oh! Change it not; No Sweeter Name or Thing,
Throughout the World, within our Ears shall Ring.
There was a Little more of Humor, in the Fancy of Mr. Ward, the Well-known
Simple Cobbler of Agawam, as that Witty Writer Styled himself, who observing the
Great Hospitality of Mr. Wilson, in Conjunction with his Meta-grammatising
Temper, said, That the Anagram of JOHN WILSON was, I PRAY, COME IN, YOU ARE
HEARTILY WELCOME.

To make up this Want, I might conclude the Life of this Good man, with an
Anagram, which he Left on, and for himself.

Johannes Wilsonus. Anagr. In uno Jesu, nos Salvi, Vel
Non in uno Jesu Salus?
An non in Jesu, Credentum, figitur, uno,
Tota Salus? Hic est, Hic Sita Tota Salus.
S. 21. But it, is to the Last Place in our History of this Worthy Man, that I
reserve that part of his Character, which lay in his Disposition to allot unto
Himself the Last Place among all Worthy Men; for his Low Opinion of himself,
was the Top of all his other Excellencies. His Humility not only caused him, to
prefer the Meanest of his Brethren, above himself, but also to Comply with the
meanest Opportunities of being Serviceable: Hence it was, that when his Voice in
his Age did so fail him, that his Great Congregation could be no longer Edified
by his Public Labors, he Cheerfully and Painfully set himself to do all the
Good, that he could by his Private Visits; and such also, as he could not reach
with Sermons, he often found with Verses: Hence it was, that when that plea was
used with the Church of Ipswich to resign Mr. Norton unto the Church of Boston,
after the Death of Mr. Cotton; Because it was said, Let him that has two Coats
give to him that has None; and a Person of Quality replied, Boston has One,
[meaning Mr. Wilson:] this Good man answered; Who? Me! I am Nothing! Yea, Hence
it was, that when Malefactors had been openly Scourged upon the Just Sentence of
Authority, he would presently send for them to his House, and having first
expressed his Bounty to them, he would then bestow upon them such gracious
Admonitions and Exhortations, as made them to become, instead of Desperate,
remarkably Penitent. Indeed, I know not whether his Humility, might not have
some Excess, in some Instances charged upon it; at least Once, when he had
Promised unto a Neighboring Minister, to Preach a Sermon for him, and after
his Promise came in Season to that Minister, saying, Sir, I told you, that I
would Preach for you, but it was rashly done of me; I have on my knees begged
the Pardon of it, from the Lord; That I should offer thus to deprive His
People, of your Labors, which are so much better than any of mine can be:
Wherefore, Sir, I now come Seasonably to tell you, that I shall fail you! And
accordingly, there was no persuading of him to the contrary.

But from the like Humility it was, That a Good kinsman, of his, who deserves
to Live in the same Story, as he now Lives in the same Heaven with him, namely
Mr. Edward Rawson, the Honored Secretary of the Massachuset-Colony, could not
by all his Entreaties persuade him, to let his Picture be drawn; but still
refusing it, he would reply, What! Such a Poor, Vile Creature as I am! shall my
Picture be drawn? I say, No; it never shall! And when that Gentleman introduced
the Limner, with all things ready, Vehemently importuning him to gratify so far
the Desires of his Friends, as to sit a while, for the taking of his Effigies,
no Importunity could ever obtain it from him. However, being bound in Justice
to Employ my Hand, for the Memory of that Person, by whose Hand I was my self
Baptized, I have made an Essay, to draw his Picture, by this Account of his
Life; wherein if I have missed of doing to the Life, it might be made up, with
several Expressive Passages, which I find in Elegies Written and Printed upon
his Death: Whereof there were many Composed, by those, whose Opinion was well
Signified by one of them: Sure Verseless he does Mean, to's Grave to Go,
And well deserves, that now no Verse can show.


But Waving the rest, Let the following POEM, never before Printed, Offer some
ODOURS, for the Readers further Entertainment.

Some OFFERS To Embalm the MEMORY of the Truly Reverend and Renowned, JOHN
WILSON; The First Pastor of Boston, in New England; Interred (and a Great Part
of his Countries Glory with him) August. 11. 1667. Aged, 79.
MIght Aarons Rod (such Funerals mayn'the Dry)
But broach the Rock, it would gush pure Elegy,
To round the Wilderness with purling Lays,
And tell the World, the Great Saint WILSONS Praise.
Here Is ONE, ( Pearls are not in great clusters found)
Here Is ONE, the Skill of Tongues and Arts had Crowned;
Here Is ONE (by frequent Martyrdom it was Tried)
That could forego Skill, Pelf, and Life beside,
For CHRIST: Both ENGLANDS Darling, whom in Swarms
They Pressed to See, and Hear, and felt his Charms.
It Is ONE, (when will it Rise to Number Two?
The World at once can but ONE Phaenix Show:)
For Truth, a PAUL; CEPHAS, for Zeal; for Love,
A JOHN; inspired by the Celestial Dove.
ABRA'MS true Son for Faith; and in his Tent
Angels often had their Table and Content.
So Humble, that alike on's Charity,
Wrought Extract Gent: with Extract Rudij.
Pardon this Fault; his Great Excess lay there,
He Would Trade for Heaven, with all he came anear;
His Meat, Clothes, Cash, heed still for Ventures send,
Consigned, Per Brother Lazarus, his Friend.
Mighty in Prayer; his Hands Uplifted reached
Mercies High Throne, and thence strange Bounties fetched,
Once and again, and often: So felt by all,
Who Weep his Death, as a Departing Paul.
All; Yea, Baptized with Tears, Lo, Children come,
( Their Baptism he maintained!) unto his Tomb.
'T'wixt an Apostle, and Evangelist,
Let stand his Order in the Heavenly List.
Had we the Costly Alablaster Box,
What Is Left, we would spend on this New-English KNOX;
True Knox, filled with that Great Reformers Grace,
In Truths Just cause, fearing no Mortals Face.
Christ's Word, it was his Life, Christ's Church, his Care;
And so Great with him his Least Brethren were,
Not Heat, nor Cold, not Rain, or Frost, or Snow
Could hinder, but he would to their Sermons go:
Aarons Bells chim'd from far, he would Run, and then
His Ravished Soul Echoed AMEN, AMEN!
He traverst often the fierce Atlantic Sea,
But, Patmos of Confessors, it was for THEE.
This Voyage Lands him on the Wished shore,
From Whence this Father will return no more,
To sit the Moderator of thy Sages.
But, Tell his Zeal for thee, to After-Ages,
His Care to Guide his Flock, and feed his Lambs,
By Words, Works, Prayers, Psalms, Alms, and ANAGRAMS:
Those Anagrams, in which he made to Start
Out of mere Nothings, by Creating Art,
Whole Worlds of Counsil; did to Motes Unfold
Names, till they Lessons gave Richer than Gold,
And Every Angle so Exactly say,
It should outshine the brightest Solar Ray.
Sacred his Verse, Writ with a Cherubs Quill;
But those Winged Choristers of Zion-Hill,
Pleased with the Notes, called him a part to bear,
With Them, where he his Anagram did hear,
I Pray Come in, Heartily Welcome; Sir.


EPITAPHIUM,
Thinking, what EPITAPH, I should Offer unto the Grave of this Worthy Man, I
called unto Mind, the fittest in the World, which was directed for him,
immediately upon his Death, by an Honorable Person, who still Continues the
same Lover, as well as Instance, of Learning and Virtue, that he was, when he
Then advised them to give Mr. Wilson this EPITAPH.

And now Abides FAITH, HOPE, and CHARITY,
But CHARITIE'S the Greatest of the Three.
To which this might be added, from another Hand,

Aurea, quae (obstupeo referens!) Primaeva Vetustas
Condidit Arcano, Saecula Apostolica,
Officijs, Donisque itidem Sanctissimus Heroes,
WILSONUS, tacitis Protulit Ex Tenebris.

