Reformation The Great DUTY OF AN Afflicted PEOPLE. Setting forth The SIN and
DANGER there is in Neglecting of it, under the Continued and Repeated JUDGMENTS
of GOD. Being the Substance of what was Preached on a Solemn Day of HUMILIATION
kept by the Third Gathered Church in Boston, on AUGUST. 23 d. 1694.

By SAMUEL WILLARD, Teacher of the said Church.

Zech. 1. 3. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, turn unto Me says the Lord of
Hosts, and I will turn unto you says the Lord of Hosts. Boston in New England,
Printed and Sold by Bartholomew Green, 1694.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
H OW many ways Gods hand is out against this People, and that He has now for
a long time been managing a Controversy with us, in a course of awful
Afflictive Providence, is Obvious to him who is not willingly a Stranger in
our Israel. We have tried many ways for the removal of our troubles, and, among
others have kept many Fasts, both Public and Private, to seek an Atonement,
and obtain help from Heaven: many also, if not the most of our Churches have
with Solemnity revived their Covenant Obligations to God. But that after all
our Essays on this account, our distresses abide on us, and our perplexities
are growing upon us, and God seems to blast our Enterprises, to return our
Prayers with anger upon us, to hide Counsel, and take away our Spirits from us;
yea, and expose us to the Scorn of our enemies, the Language of the Providence
we are now under speaks plainly: and what may be the meaning of these things?
We are by Name and Profession a People of God; and there are great Promises
made to such, in case of their close walking with God: yea, and though they
have Sinned, and brought troubles on themselves, if they truly Repent, and
Return to Him. Doubtless if God had not been angry, we had not been thus
Afflicted; and if he had not been Provoked by our Sins, He would not have been
angry; and if we had bearkned to the voice of the Rod, it would have been
removed, and not continued, and harder strokes inflicted. That which God
expects of us is Reformation; and though this belongs to each of us personally;
and if every one would take beed to himself, and mend one, the whole would be
amended: there is a common concern lying upon us, as we are a People whose
interests are bound up together; so God treats us in his Providence as a
community. Doubtless then it is, that it is not like to be better with us as a
People, till such a Reformation be promoved; and there are the measures and
steps to be taken in it, which, it is to be feared, have hitherto been
neglected. What these are the Scriptures will inform us, and the examples of
Gods People Recorded in them, do stand for our direction in this affair.

The design of the following Discourse was only to show the Necessity of this
Duty, and to stimulate all that heard it, to do what is in their Compass
toward the furtherance of such a work. God is signifying to us, that nothing
else will content Him; and He is yet in the way of His Judgments, both giving
us Opportunity to attend it; and loudly calling upon us so to do: and if this
word added to the other manifest speakings of our God to us, may Contribute to
the awakning this People to a Serious settling about this Duty, and a vigorous
pursuance of it; God shall have the Praise. It made, throngh Mercy, some
Impression on the hearts of many hearers; if this Publication may be blessed to
the fixing of it on such, and to the rousing of others, that we may be a truly
Reforming People, and God may turn from His Anger; it will be found a Word
spoken in Season; To GODS Gracious Blessing I Commend it, Who am,

the least and most unworthy of Ministers, SAMUEL WILLARD.

Reformation the Great Duty of an Afflicted People.
Leviticus 26. 23. If ye will not be Reformed by me by these things, but will
walk Contrary unto me: Verse 24. Then will I also walk Contrary unto you, and
will Punish you yet Seven times for your Sins.
IN this Chapter, from Ver. 3. after that God had, by Moses given to the People
of Israel the several Statutes and Judgments, where unto he required their
Cordial Obedience; he declares to them the terms of the Covenant between him
and them, as he afterward did in like manner, upon the rehearsal of the Law, a
little before Moses's death, Deuteronomy. 28. which is the same for substance with
this, though in words diversely expressed. In it there are three parts
contained. 1. A declaration of those blessings which God did engage unto their
obedience, to Ver. 14. 2. A menace of such Judgments as they should be visited
withal in case of their disobedience and obstinacy: to Ver. 40. 3. A Promise
made to them of mercy, and restoration, upon their repentance after all, to
Verse. 46. He is more brief in the account given of the first and last of these,
but commorates more largely upon the second.

Before I come to a more particular discoursing upon this matter, it will be
requisite that I remove an Objection out of the way; Viz. It may be, and it is
said by some, that these terms here proposed are Legal, and therefore not
proper to be applied to us in Gospel times, who are under another Covenant, and
treated by God with other manner of dispensations toward us. To which let me
briefly reply, that, though there were many and great differences in the manner
of Gods dispensing of Himself to his People before and after the coming of
Christ in the Flesh, on the account of which diversity that is more than once
called the Old Covenant, and this a New one; the former being suited to the
Childish, the latter to the Virile Age of the Church, as the Apostle
illustrates it in, Gal 4. begin. Among which this was one, that God then
treated them more with Terrors, and now more with Promises; Children needing
more of severity to be used with them, than such as are grown to years of a
riper understanding: whence the moral Law was revived on Mount Sinai with
Thundrings and Lightnings, and amazing terrors, which put a Consternation into
the People; and Moses is usually more large in the Minatory than the Promissory
part of the Covenant. God also then more insisted on the External
Considerations of Temporary Favors and Afflictions, whereas in the Gospel such
as are Spiritual are more inculcated: yet the Covenant which God entered into
with His People then, and that which He makes with us in the days of the
Gospel, is, for the substance; one and the same. All the Covenants which ever
God made with men, are reducible to one of these two, Viz. either the Covenant
of Works, or of Grace: and it is certain, that whatsoever Transaction there
has been in a Covenant way between God and man since Adams Apostasy, is of
Grace, that of Works being by the Fall, made unable any more to give Life unto
man, Gal. 3. 21. and hence, though the Moral Law was renewed with this People,
and Solemnly proclaimed unto them, yet it was given in the hands of a
Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. and it is to be Observed, that Gods Public Transactions
with any People, considered as they are a Body, referring to Mercies and
Judgments, are restrained to this Life and World. The future Judgment of the
Great Day shall not be of Communities as such, for there will then be an end of
them, but every one there and then must personally answer for himself. But here
there are both Temporal and Spiritual Mercies and Miseries, Blessings and
Curses to be dispensed unto such according to their behavior; we read that
Godliness has the Promise of the life that now is, 1 Timothy 4. 8. and that Gods
People are Judged in this World, 1 Cor. 11. ^^. The Judgments therefore which
befell the Church in the Wilderness, are proposed to our Consideration as
Exemplary to us, and we are advised to take warning by them, that we may escape
Suffering the like, 1 Cor. 10. 11.

These things being thus premised, let us take a more particular view of the
matter before us and here, (1.) It is supposed that a People thus circumstanced
may prevaricate; they may neglect to pay their due Obedience unto God which he
requires of them, nay they may despise the Commands of God, and turn their
backs upon them, Verse 14, 15. for this is the Hypothesis upon which the
threatening is built; and if it were not a thing possible, and that of which
there was at least some danger, the threatening would be Supervacaneous, and it
is very Obvious that sometimes a People that make a great pretense to Religion,
will dare thus to do, and that notwithstanding the threatening stands as a thorn
hedge to keep them in; they will adventure upon it, although they Scratch
themselves. (2.) God threatens to bring awful Judgments upon them in case they
do so Transgress, Verse 16, 17. Their Covenant Relation, and their neerness to
God by reason of it, shall be no security to them against the Miseries
mentioned: Sin will break down this hedge, and let the wild beasts upon them,
to devour them. (3.) It is further presumed that these Judgments will not amend
them, but that they will for*all persist in their Apostasy, and proceed yet to
greater revolts: and this is supposed from one step to another, unto every one
of which there is menaced a process in the way of Judgments, and an
Augmentation of their Miseries, till they come to the height: and this is
mentioned four times, one whereof is in our Text, of which we may, at present
make some improvement for our Instruction.

The words are very Emphatical; I might Observe the various manner of
expressing this, which is used in the four several instances; but I shall
supersede that. In our Text is contained an Hypothetical Commination, in which
Observe, 1. The Hypothesis it self, Verse 23. and that is, that the Judgments
which have been inflicted on them, do not Reform them; they are not reclaimed
by them: i. e. they remain still obstinate, in which there are several things
to be Noted. 1. It is supposed that they have before sinned against the
Covenant, so as to bring the Judgments of God upon themselves: they are looked
upon as a People under the effects of Divine displeasure for their sins. 2. It
is presumed that these Judgments so brought upon them have not obtained the
proper end which was expected by them; where we have the aim or end pointed at,
Viz. to Reform them. 3. It is looked upon to be after such time as God has
been more than once trying of them in this way, and yet it has not taken
effect, or proved successful. The instance in our Text, is the third case
mentioned, after the fist trial of all had not succeeded. 4. The nature of this
Impenitence is expressed in the Hypothesis. 1. Negatively; If ye be not
Reformed. 2. Positively; but walk contrary unto me. 2. Here is the Consequent
threatening in case such be the event of former trials, Ver. 24. Where is
pointed, 1. The manner of his carriage toward them, I will walk Contrary to
you. 2. The aggravation of the Punishment, and will Punish you yet Seven times
for your Sins. I shall not here tarry to Criticize upon the words; if there be
any Occasion it may be remarked in the Sequel. There are several great
practical Truths, suitable for the present Occasion, which may be taken up from
the words, and briefly improved.

DOCT. I. The Great design of all Gods Judgments on a Professing People is to
Reform them.

The word signifies to bind, and Metaphorically to chasten, and then
Metonimically, to reform or reclaim, that being the desirable genuine effect of
it; and so it must be here understood. When I say this is the design, I do not
speak of the end of the purpose which is secret; but of the precept which
requires it, and of the Providence, which is said to bespeak it; this then is
the Revealed and Proposed end. This may be opened and cleared in a few things.

1. That Public Calamities may be the Lot of a Professing People to meet
withal. This needs no proof, in being so manifestly exemplified in the
Providence of God, in all the Ages of the Church, that we may as well question
the Suns shining at noon day in a clear sky. The true Emblem of the Militant
Church is a Bush on fire: such a People are Obnoxious to God, to Devils, and to
wicked men, and there are Occasions for their expecting to meet with trouble
from them all.

2. That usually they procure these Afflictions to themselves by some Apostasy.
God may indeed exercise them for the trial of their Obedience, and sincerity in
it: Afflictions merely probationary are not only suffered Personally, but may
be Publicly too; did not God do thus by the Kingdom of Judah under Hezekiah,
in the time of a most zealous and through Reformation? and there is an Astonism
put upon it, 2 Chronicles. 32. begin. After these things, and the establishment
thereof, etc. But, though God some times, for holy ends, thus uses his
Sovereignty; for the most part there has some great Provocation or other gone
before, which procured these troubles for them; and this is very agreeable to
the tenor of the Covenant, in which God has engaged to bestow his favors on
a People, that walk before him in the Truth, and therefore the Apostle has
such a challenge, 1 Pet. 3. 13. Who is he that will harm you, if you be
followers of that which is good? And God himself thus expostulates with his
People, when they were suffering his Judgments, Jer. 2. 17. Have thou not
procured this to thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God?

3. That hence these Judgments are Gods Testimony that he bears against that
sin They are the discoveries which he makes of the displeasure that he takes at
it; they are the Tokens of his anger by which he gives them to understand how
ill he resents it that they have broken his Laws, and gone back from his
Command: these therefore are, in Scripture language, called his Anger, his
Wrath, his Displeasure; because they are the discoveries of it. When he brings
them upon men, they feel that which bespeaks him to be offended at them; they
are such things as are wont in men to proceed from such a passion; and are
ascribed to him after the manner of men, in whom are no passions properly so
called.

4. They are of the Discipline which God, by Covenant, engages to Exercise
toward his People. It is therefore one Article mentioned in the Covenant on
this Hypothesis, Psalm. 89. 30. etc. If his Children forsake my Law, etc. then
will I visit their transgressions with the Rod, and their iniquity with
stripes. And the Apostle expresses it as so, Heb. 12. 6. He scourges every
son whom be receives. i. e. He receives him on such terms. It is therefore
called a Rod, which is used for Discipline, and not for Ruin: they are called
Corrections, which, though they have anger in them, and suppose a fault which
procures them, is yet tempered with love which manageth the anger for good. And
always Correction is Administered for Reformation of the party that undergoes
it.

5. These Judgments are to be annumerated to the long-suffering which God uses
toward a sinning People. This therefore is Attributed to him, and is to be
read in these dispensations. As he waits before he smites them, so he waits in
smiting of them, and what is this for, but to see for their amendment if it may
thus be obtained? Hence that, Hos 5. 15. I will go etc. in their Affliction
they will seek me early. And indeed there is a great deal of Mercy in it; God
corrects when he might cut off; he afflicts instead of destroying, which they
deserved, and might have suffered, if he had strained the advantage offered
him. This is the Churches acknowledgment, Lam. 3. 22, It is of the Lords mercy
that we are not consumed. And so the good man, Neh. 9. 31. For thy great
mercies sake, thou did not utterly consume them.

6. God is wont, with these Judgments, to send them invitations to Repentance,
and offers of his favors if they Repent. This is a privilege that a People in
Covenant with God do enjoy, that not only does he warn and advise them before
he smites, that so, if it might be, blows might be prevented; but whiles he is
smiting too: he calls upon them now to Consider their ways, Hag. 1. 5. i. e.
whiles they are under afflictions. He tells them that he does not thirst for
their blood, or seek opportunities to ruin them; but would have them to turn
that they may prevent it, and he declares it solemnly, Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live,
I delight not in the Death etc. Turn ye, Turn ye, why will ye Die, Oh house of
Israel? And he Declares that if they do turn he will receive them, and turn his
anger away from them, Jer. 3. 22. Return ye backsliding Children, and I will
heal your backslidings; and so Chap. 4. 1.

7. God has been wont, upon their Reformation, to avert his Judgments from his
People. This is a course that has not used to fail. How often did he do so for
his People of old! as we shall find upon Record in Scripture History: Nay such
has been the pity which he has extended to them in this regard, that when
their Reformation has been feigned, and not upright, yet he has delivered
them for-all, and that many a time, as is intimated in Psalm. 78. 34. etc. how
much more then will be do so when it is hearty, and sincere? it is a very
remarkable passage in, Judge. 10. 15, 16.

8. Hence the reason why God has at any time proceeded to Extirpate a
Professing People has been their Impenitence. When neither word nor rod,
neither warnings nor Judgments would prevail with them to return, but they have
remained obstinate under all; see an account of this, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16. He
waited till there was no remedy; no other course to be taken: all their other
Provocations, though never so many and heinous, would never have brought it to
this, if they had not added contumacy to their Apostasy; hence we have God
using of that Expostulation with them, Isai 48. 18, 19.

USE. I. Learn hence, That if a Professing People perish at last, they must
blame themselves. Well might God say to them as he did, Hos. 13. 9. Oh Israel!
thou have destroyed thy self. All the sore Judgments and Calamities, which God
brings upon a sinning People, are not in themselves any Symptom of their ruin;
are not a sure token that God has forsaken them; though sometimes Zton, when
sorely visited with them, is ready to say My God has forgotten me; but they
are on the other hand, and argument that God is loath to destroy them, and
therefore he first tries whether by such Judgments this may not be prevented.
What the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11. 32. When we are judged, we are chastened of
the Lord, that we should not be Condemned with the Oorld; is here applicable.
God by Afflicting of a sinful People, shows that he would not destroy them,
unless they themselves are resolved (...) their own destruction. There is a
Voice in the Rod, and he would have them to hear it, and him who has appointed
it, Mic. 6. 9. And he has more than once said it, that if they will hear it
shall be well with them for all: if then they will not hear, but stop their
cars at this voice, and harden their hearts against the advice of it, and so
they perish, where is the fault?

USE. II. Let this then serve to point us to our present Duty. It tells us what
it is that is now incumbent on us. We are a people whom God has taken near to
Himself, who have been privileged with his Covenant favors and blessings;
whom he has done many and great things for: but he has signally altered the
course of his Providence toward us, and brought us under his rod; his hand is
many ways out against us, and we are made low; he has wasted us by smiting us
many ways, and we are reduced to great distresses. And what is all this for but
our iniquities? if we had not revolted from him, he would not have thus
Afflicted us: our peace, and our prosperity might have continued uninterrupted,
and he would have delighted in it. What then remains, but that we set upon a
real and a through Reformation? And let us be serious in it. Are there not the
things among us that need Reforming? Is there not a fearful decay of love, and
zeal, and holiness among us? is not almost every thing that can be thought of
out of order amongst us? and is our God now manifesting of the dislike that he
takes at it. What have we to do then, but to set upon this work in good
earnest? Let all orders of men be invited to it. Let us all Search, and try,
and Turn, Lam. 3.40. And to move us, Consider,

1. God is waiting to be gracious. Whatever displays he gives us of his
righteous anger, and they are awful, yet still he is to be Sought in the way
of his Judgments, Isa. 26. 8. though he be scourging of us by his Afflictive
Providence, yet he is still hearkening to hear if there be any inclination in
us this way; if there be the least motions or stirrings in our hearts toward
it; and he will take it well of us if there be; he therefore makes that
complaint on this account; Jer. 8. 6. I hearkened and heard, but none spoke
aright, etc.

2. Hence, if we do Reform, there is hope: May not we say as he did Ezra, 10.
2, 3. We have trespassed against our God, yet now there is hope in Israel
concerning this thing, now therefore let us make a Covenant with our God. And
observe what great incouragment there is given for our so doing, Joel 2. 12.
etc. God is merciful and gracious, and ready to Repent of the evil, and he has
his end in smiting of us, if this may but be obtained, the design of Corrective
Providence is fully answered, and so the controvesy is ended when once it
arrives at this. Why then do we sit still? Why do we pine away in our
iniquities, because we do not put them away from us? let us be up and doing,
and the Lord will accept of us.

DOCT. II. A declined Professing People, may meet with sore Judgments, and yet
remain unreformed under and after them.

This is supposed and presumed in our Text, and remember, it is the fourth step
in the Process of Gods judicial dispensation toward them; and we are not to
think such things are here supposed which may not be. We shall therefore find
awful instances of this truth upon record in the word of God, giving us to
understand that it has been so in Thesi. What great pains did God afterward
take with this People for their Reformation, when they had forgotten the works
that he had done in Egypt, and in the Wilderness, and were revolted from him?
and yet what was the issue of all? although He sent all his servants the
Prophets to them, rising up early and sending them, by whom he laid evident
Convictions of their sins, before them, gave them awful warnings of his
Judgments impending, and urged upon them solemn and serious invitations to
repent, with the fairest promises of his favor in case of their compliance
therewithal: and though he laid many and severe strokes upon them, bringing of
them low for their iniquities, wasting them every way; yet to what purpose was
it? what effect did it work in them? We are told, that God would have purged
them, but they were not purged; this is the complaint that is made against them
in Ezekiel. 24. 13. They held fast their deceit, and would not let it go, Jer.
8.5.8. so it went on; nor is this at all to be wondered at, if we shall
Consider;

1. The body of a Professing People are not always truly gracious. To be sure,
in times wherein there is a decay of holiness, and increase of impiety, it is
not like to be so. All are not Israel that are of Israel. There is indeed a
bored ear in the Children of God, that does incline them to be ready to hearken
to the voice of the Rod, and to be awakened to discipline; to be of a tender*
heart, and resent the displeasure of God; this is the natural and genuine
working of Grace in the heart wherein it really planted. But all are not so who
are the People of God by exterternal denomination, and a verbal profession.
When Apostasy begings to creep upon a People, Conversion work begins to be more
rare, and men are not so frequently brought home to God by a through and saving
change wrought in them: Hypocrisy and Luke warmness begins to get head and
prevail, and the power of Godliness cease, and men rest contented in a name
to live whiles they are dead. We have the Character of such a Church fully
represented to us in that of Laodicea, in Rev. 3. 14. etc. And it is not seldom
exemplified in the world, where the name of Christ is taken up.

2. Gods own Children are sometimes judicially left under obstinate frames. It
is the mournful expostulation of the Church, Isa. 63. 17. O Lord, why have
thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear? And
though there be a Principle of saying grace in them, which enclines them to an
holy fear; yet they have a body of death too, which has it influence on them,
and that so powerful, that they are drawn by it into the sins of the times and
places they live in, and God is displeased at them for it, and so he awfully
leaves them to have their ears stopped, so as not to give ear, as they ought to
do, to the warnings he gives, and the Judgments which he inflicts. We have
instances for this in Eli, David, Asa, serving to let us understand, how far
holy men may, under desertion provoke their Father to displeasure, and thereby
open away for more temporal Judgments to come upon them.

3. Natural men have no true liking to the ways of God. They are in their sins,
and so their hearts are set for sin. Lust has Dominion in them, and all the
powers of their Souls are engaged for it; their understanding approves it,
calls evil good; their wills give it the preference, and so makes choice of it,
and their affections are set upon it. Hereupon, their close keeping to Duty,
and their abstinence from sin is a forced thing, and against the whole bent of
their natures; it is a yoke that does not sit easy on their necks, but feels
very irksome to them: and this makes them in a readiness to shake it off, and
glad of an opportunity so to do; and such opportunities, the times of
declension afford enough of to them: when many sins grow common, and not so
scandalous, and witness begins not to be born against them as sometimes, now
the before hidden corruption looks forth and shows its head: and when once they
are gotten into such a way, they are willing to hold it fast, and care not for
being disturbed in it, or turning away from it: hence that complaint, Jer. 5.
23. This People has a revolting and rebellious heart, they are revolted and
gone.

4. Afflictions, or Judgments, have not in themselves the virtue of Reforming a
backslidden People. They are indeed made use of by God for this purpose, and if
he pleases to influence them they shall be servicable to the furtherance of
it, and suitable moral arguments may be drawn from them for conviction and
awakning; but they cannot alone work any gracious effect: except Correction and
Instruction go together, there is no good like to be done. Hence that, Psalm.
94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out
of thy Law, otherwise, Bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a Pestil, yet
will not his foolishness depart from him. Prove. 27. 22. Men might indeed know,
if they would, what Afflictions come for, and that would be a step to
Reformation, if there were a through Conviction upon the Conscience; but there
is no kindly working upon the heart by this alone. Unsanctified Afflictions,
being misimproved by the native corruption that is in man, will make him worse,
and more obstinate, instead of mending him; 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. And in the time of
his distress he did yet trespass more against the Lord.

5. Sinful men are hard to be persuaded to believe that they are the guilty
causes of the Judgments that are upon Gods People. Men indeed are apt at such
times to make a fearful cry against sin, talk much of the Provocation that is
given to God, as if they had a mind to find it out and have it removed: but yet
every one is apt to put it off from himself and lay it upon others. There is a
great deal of noise made at such a time, but what is there in it? If we observe
we shall find, that it is only throwing dirt one upon another; but as for
themselves, they are clear and innocent; they have nothing to accuse themselves
of; if others would have been as careful as they, this might have been
avoided. How does God make such a complaint as this? Jer. 8. 6. I hearkened and
heard, but they spoke not aright: no man repented him of his wickedness, saying
what have I done? There is such a sottishness in men, that they cannot think
their ways are perverse, they can see no evil in them, so are they charged,
Isa. 44. 20. A deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his
own soul, not say, is there not a lie in my right hand?

6. Hence, till God powers out his Spirit upon them, men do remain thus stupid
and senseless. There must be an inward working upon the hearts of men by the
Spirit of God, if ever they are by his Judgments wrought up to Reformation.
Till he gives them eyes to see, and hearts to consider, they continue as
sottish as ever. Let one Judgment come upon them in the neck of another, let
them be broken, wasted, consumed, and almost laid desolate, and they are
obdurate still; all this will not melt down their hard hearts, or bring them to
any kindly compliance with God. It is an observation made by the Prophet, Isa.
42. 25. Therefore he has poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle: and it has set him on fire round about, yet he knew it
not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

USE. I. Learn hence, That Judgments alone, are not a sure sign that God has a
purpose of good for such a People as suffer by them. It is true, they do bear
witness for God, that he is very loath to destroy them, if it might in any other
way be prevented; they say that he is a God of great patience, and that he is
waiting for the repentance of such a People, that so he may yet be favorable to
them and establish them; else he could as easily have cut them off at a stroke
and must have been justified in his doing so. But still, we can make no certain
Judgment of the issue, till we see what influence and efficacy these Judgments
have upon them; the conclusion is still suspended. If once they appear to work
kindly, and begin to awaken them to enquire into the provocation, and seriously
to set about the work of Reformation, there is then a good hope offered us,
that all will end well at last. But if still they do not reform; nay, if
reiterated Judgments do not produce such an effect as this is on them, but they
still persist in their evil ways, and are rather hardened in them by these
Afflictions, there is abundant reason given us to be very doubtful what it
will come to at the last.

USE. II. Let it then put us upon the enquiry, What effect all the strokes of
God which we have felt, have wrought on us. And it is of no small consequence
that we do in good earnest make this enquiry, as will more evidently appear in
the following Observations. That we have been under the discipline of Gods
Judgments is not to be called in question; let us then see to it what is the
fruit of all upon us; we are here given to understand that all so treated are
not reformed; and it is not every thing that looks fair, which will amount to
the Reformation which God expects. It is not crying out of sin in general, nor
calling of Solemn Assemblies, Fasting, Praying, Confessing, Petitioning,
renewing of Covenants, making of Laws, putting away of some more gross and
enormous sins that are apparently provoking, that will answer Gods expectation,
and so put a stop to his anger, and turn away his Judgments from us. It is
another manner of thing to Reform. Let us then be very inquisitive into his
matter, and make a diligent search about it. If we think that we have done it,
or are in the way to the doing of it, when there is no such thing, we shall
miserably deceive our selves; and it will be no little damage that will arise
to us from it. And one would think that a small enquiry upon this account,
would be sufficient both to convince and condemn us: there has been so much of
notorious flightiness and neglect in this regard, that it is hard to say what
one thing has been amended: and if we shall call all that we have hitherto
been doing, a Reformation? will not God upbraidingly say to us, Is this the
Reformation, that I have required? is this the thing that you have made so much
of a talk and do about? is this all that you intend?

DOCT. III. If Gods Judgments do not reform a backslidden People, the blame
lies in their wilfulness.

Hither the Lord charge it, not if you do not, but if ye will not reform. All
the impenitency of a backslidden People is the effect of their obstinacy. This
is not to be understood so, as if they did not labor of Impotency in
themselves, or as if they had a power in themselves to reform themselves, which
is the mistaken inference which some draw from such Scriptures as charge sin
upon man's wilfulness. No, it must be granted that they cannot reform
themselves; although it is also certain that externally, or with respect to
practice, they might do a great deal more than they do; and that will
manifestly declare them inexcusable: but truly to turn from sin, and cordially
to return to God from whom they have departed, is a work above their ability,
and the Spirit of God must powerfully work it in them, if ever it be done. But
still God is wont to lay the blame of their not being Reformed, not upon their
impotency, but their wilfulness. Thus Matthew. 23. 37. How often would I have
gathered thy Children, but ye would not. Joh. 5. 40. Ye well not come unto me;
and here lies the height of the wickedness of it; and that it is so, will be
made to appear, if we consider these three things.

1. That a principal part of the natural impotency of men, lies in the pravity
of their wills. It is true, man's whole nature and all the faculties in him are
dehilitated, sin having a rooting in them all, and robbed them of the Image of
God, by which once man was fitted with ability for his work; but as the will is
the leading faculty in the man, so is the impotency of it very notorious. That
sin which men are full of, has laid fast hold on them, and engaged their
hearts to it, and they have made choice of it, and that according to the
dictates of a depraved understanding: for that being filled with crooked
principles, causing it to judge perversely of things, and quite contrary to what
they are in reality, has drawn away the will after it, into a sponteneous and
deliberate Election and Embracement of these delusions; and by their will it is
that men hold fast deceit, Jer. 8. 5. Their sins have thus gained not only
their Approbation, to prefer them before holiness, but also their Affections;
they love the ways of iniquity, and that makes them to adhere to them; Jer. 2.
25. I have loved strangers, and after them I will go. And hereby their wills
are become so impotent, that they cannot make a better choice of themselves, or
by their own power: and yet all this is voluntary; there is no outward force
laid upon them to cause them thus to do, but it is a fruit of the native
Corruption which is in them.

2. That men do wilfully shut their eyes against the Convictions which are laid
before them, by which they might be led to Reformation. The Afflictions
themselves which they suffer, are for Conviction; there is such a design in
them, God sends them for sin, and they are to bring it to remembrance; they
have a Voice in them, and it is intelligible; they say that God is angry with
such a People, and they serve to put men upon enquiry after the cause of them;
even the Philistines themselves are led by the light of nature to ask such a
question when the hand of God is upon them, acknowledging that it was from him,
and thereupon to consult how they might obtain a removal of it, 1 Samuel 6.
begin. Yea, and many times the Judgments bring light in and with them, to
discover the ground of the controversy, and point to the very sin against which
they are witnesses. Adonibezek was thus brought to a Confession of his cruelty,
and Gods just vindication, Judge. 1. 7. But besides this, when God comes to
punish a People that are in Covenant with him, he is wont, together with these
troubles, to send them matter of Conviction in his Ordinances, to awaken his
Servants in the Ministry, to touch their hearts, and suggest to them the things
that he contends for, and make them to Cry aloud and not to spare, but to show
his People the sins they are guilty of; and to do it with all evidence and
demonstration; so that if men would but listen and give ear to these cries and
Convictions, they might be thoroughly convinced and not be able to withstand.
But the reason why they do not thus do, is because they will not. What they
said plumply to the Prophet, Jer. 44. 16. As for the word that thou have spoken
to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee. These say the
same practically, which amounts to as much in the event, and is so interpreted
by God as if their tongues had uttered it: and this is to be charged on all
that do not take the warnings, and bring themselves to the light of the truth,
that they may know their sins. And what is the reason why they will not readily
receive the light, but shut their eyes against it, and do what in them lies to
keep it out? it is because they are resolved to hold on their sinful courses,
and would be quiet in it; which that they may, they would prevent the
reflections of Conscience, which is most likely be done by keeping them in the
dark; our Savior tells us how it is, and why it is so in this regard, Joh.
3.19, 20. Men's ways are evil, and they are afraid to know that they are so, and
to be reproved for them; they therefore resolve to resist all the means that
might bring them to a knowledge of themselves and their evil doings.

3. That men will not receive the help which otherwise they might have, to
remove all the other impediments of their Reformation. It is true, none can
turn themselves, till God put in his Grace and turn them, he must first draw
us, before we can run after him: it was a right Prayer which Ephraim put up,
Jer. 31. 18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. But God, in his Ordinances,
offers to his People, together with reproofs, all the Assistance and Grace that
is wanting to the doing of that which he requires of them: he uses all means
and endeavors with them, tendering them his hand, but they reject him, they
will have none of him, they had rather go without his help; they are not
willing to be rid of their sins: they are therefore said to resist his Spirit;
and hereupon, the reason rendered why God at length leaves them up to their
sinful ways, and gives them over to their vile courses to sin without any
restraints, is because they would not accept of these his gracious offers,
Psalm. 81. 11, 12. My People would not hearken to my voice, etc. So I gave them
up to their own hearts lust; etc.

USE. I. Learn hence, How inexcusable we shall be, if under all Gods Judgments
we Reform not. Men are ready to think they have a great deal to plead for
themselves by way of excuse: alas! if God do not give them Grace to repent and
reform, how should they ever do it? They have no power of themselves, and if
they should attempt it, what would it turn to? If therefore they ly in their
sins, and pine away in their iniquities, how can they help it? This seems to be
the meaning of their Language in, Ezekiel. 33. 10. But this will not stand men in
any stead. If indeed men had a heart to it, and eages desire after it; if they
were really for it, and used cordial endeavors after it; if they did truly
bewail this impotency of theirs, and cry out importunately and heartily to God
for his help against it, as those that were weary of their sins, and would fain
be rid of them, and God should refuse them his Grace, and with hold this
necessary help from them, something then were to be pleaded: But when was it
ever so? When did God withhold his Grace from such as did indeed desire it, and
ask for it? He has promised, and always practiced the contrary. No, no, the
will is in it, we are set against it, we have chosen our own ways, they best
please us, we cannot part with them; God calls us once and again, and he smites
us at one time and another, and we stop our cars at him, turn our backs upon
him, shut our eyes, and harden our hearts. And what can such a people say for
themselves, against whom it will be proved that they were wilfully set in their
own way, in despite of all courses used to reclaim them. Whoever excused such
as wilfully transgressed* this is that which all man's reason accounts a
Consideration that takes away all excuse.

USE. II. Let this then serve to convince and humble us in this regard, and
doubtless we have great Occasion for it. Has not God been using all manner of
endeavors with us, to bring us to a sight and sense of our sins, and to make
us know that it is an evil and a bitter thing that we have forsaken him to such
a degree as we have, and that feelingly by the sense of all those sharp strokes
that he has laid upon us; and there have been many of them, and no little of
his severity exercised in them: and has he not the mean while been sending as
many faithful warnings, clear Convictions, and awakning loud calls in his House
and Ordinances, and that from time to time? Have not all his Servants been
unanimously engaged in this design? Has there been any thing wanting as to
means? What more could he have done, than what he has done? Nay have we not
been convinced in our Consciences, and enforced by them to make Confessions
upon this account? Has he not also kindly invited us to lay hold on his
strength, and be at peace with him? offering us all fair terms in the treaty he
has been holding all this while with us? What is the reason then that there is
no more Reformation wrought in the midst of us? Have we been willing, and God
unwilling? He will certainly make us to know that there is no such matter ere
he has done with us. How then should this confound us, and lay us in the dust
before him? How should it fill us with shame, and cloth us in sackcloth? Let
us then see and confess the naughtiness of our own hearts; and take the blame
home to our selves; set us acknowledge as Ephraim, Jer. 31. 18. We have been as
a bullock unaccustomed to the yoke. This is the great complaint which we have
at this day to make of our selves before God, and bitterly to bewail it in his
presence, that we have hardened our hearts against him; that we have
obstinately-set our selves to withstand all the attemps which he has been
using to reclaim us. And let us be no more stiff necked, but bring these hard
hearts of ours to him to have them made tender, and beg of him to take the
stone out of them, and work them to a true compliance with his will; that we
may have a true resentment of all his Judgments and be humbled under them: and
if this may be obtained, we are in fair way to be reformed; and then there will
be a good hope that he will return and save us. And what a happy day would this
prove for us, if it might come to this issue?

DOCT. IV. An unreformed Professing People do all the while walk contrary to
God.

Thus he interprets it, Text. This is the very sense that he puts upon it; in
the Hebrew it is, shall walk with me contrarily. And the manner of expression
seems to have something observable in it, nothing, a pretense of being his
people, and making it their design to walk with him, i. e. in conformity to his
commands; and yet a carrying of it contrary, to the pretense of their practice.
And the phrase notes an Opposition, or a setting of themselves against God. And
that such a people as do not, will not reform, do thus, will appear on the
Consideration of these things.

1. All Apostasy is a revolting from God. A People that are in Covenant with
him, have acknowledged and submitted to his Sovereignty over them; they have
owned him to be their Lord, and their King, and their Lawgivers and bound
themselves to yield obedience to all his commands; promised that all that the
Lord shall speak unto them, they will do it. Now God has given them his
Orders, according to which he expects that they should regulate themselves, and
therein give a Testimony of their loyalty to him: Every professing people are
brought under this bond of the Covenant When therefore they depart from his
obedience, and turn aside to their crooked ways, they therein depart from
their Allegiance. Hence it is called a revolting, Jer. 5. 23. They are
revolted, and gone: and the name of revolters is put upon them, Chap. 6. 28.
They are all grievous (...). And what is this but a setting of themselves
against him? A Rebel is certainly, by his rebellion set against his lawful
indo.

2. (...) in this Apostasy, must needs be a maintaining of that Contrariety.
They fell into this way by their departure from him, and they walk on in it by
their impenitency; hereby they do, as it were, fortify themselves against him,
strengthen themselves in their rebellion. Every new act of disobedience to his
Commands, is a renewed actual opposing of themselves unto him; and by every
such act they do as much as say, that they are resolved to withstand him. The
life of man is compared to a walk, and every action that is done in it, is a
step in that walk; and so long as they are out of the right way, and still
going, they do but increase their revolt. Every sinner is a Rebel; he that
persists in his sin, is an hardened rebel; and this must needs be a woeful
contrariety to God. God is then only complied with when men do repent of their
sins; for that is it which he requires of them; wilful impenitence then is a
setting of themselves to oppose this will of his; and what can be more contrary
than this?

3. They do hereby set themselves against all the attempts that God is using
with them for the reclaiming of them. God always, when a people of his Covenant
begin to decline from his Precepts to apply seasonably and suitably to them for
their recovery, that so the breakings forth of his hot anger may be prevented:
on this account he tells them of their declinings, invites them to return
speedily; and not go on, warns them of the danger they lay themselves open to,
threatens them with his rods in case they hear him not, yea, and when is put to
it, he smites them with his Judgments; and all this to recover them; but they
do all they can to make void these attempts, and this is a woeful contrariety:
their neglecting to reform under such essays used with them, is to set
themselves against all the pleadings of God, to quench all the motions and
stirrings of the Spirit in them, to withstand all the calls of the Judgments
that are upon them, in which God cries aloud to them to return and to resoun:
thus they set their wills against his will; he says to them, Turn from your
evil courses, amend your ways and your doings but they do not, and that is in
effect to sly that they will not, and this interpretation God puts upon it.
Thus, as much as they can, they look to make all the pains that God takes with
them to be in vain; and what is this but to (...):

4. They do hereby provoke God to jealousy, and dare him to do his worst. In
this way such a people are found to be fighters against him. They that will not
be reformed by these things, do cast a great contempt upon his Judgments: this
is interpretatively to despise them, and speaks that such do presume: to be too
hard for God at the last; we find what a sense God himself puts upon it, Isa.
28. 15. Ye have said, we have made a Covenant with death, etc. when the
overflowing Scourge shall pass through, it shall not come nigh us, etc. And we
have the Apostle thus expostulating on the account, 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do we
provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he? God says, that if they
will not reform, he will heap his Plagues upon them, and multiply their
Calamities; and they say, their carriage speaks it, let him do it if he will,
they are not concerned about it; they are purposed to run the adventure of it,
and try whether he will do as he says: and what greater contrariety can there
be than this? This is to beat a challenge to heaven, and run up against the
thick bosses of his buckler. This shows that they are set against him; which
must needs be a very bold and daring presumption.

5. And herein they withstand his glory, and seek his dishonor. When men are
affected with the tokens of his displeasue, and are brought to confess and
forsake those sins which have procured it, and in this way address him for his
pardon and favor, they do therein give glory to God: this is to throw down
their arms, and resign themselves to him, and he reckons himself to be honored
by their so doing. But when they do wilfully maintain their sins, and will not
kindly accept of the punishment of them, they do hereby cast reproach upon him.
They do withstand the glory of his holiness, whiles they pretend to be his
people, to have his name called upon them, and yet they will live after the
manner of the heathen; and for all that, presume that he who is a God of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity, and cannot endure sin, should own them to be his,
and favor them, and patronize their abominations, like them, Jer. 7. 9. Steal,
Murder, commit Adultery etc. and come in to this house, and say we are
delivered to do all these abominations. And if this be not to dishonor him,
what can be? Moreover they slight his Power, in that they are not afraid to
irritate him to exert it, briars and thorns thus set themselves in battle
against the devouring fire; and they cast contempt upon his Justice, as if he
would connive at such sins, and would not visit them for these things. They
open the mouths of Adversaries against him, who here upon take Occasion to
Blaspheme his great name; and they slight his Authority over them, whiles they
withdraw their necks from under his yoke, and deny him the due Obedience: and
surely all this carries in it an horrible contrariety to him.

USE. I. Learn we hence, how dangerous a thing it is to live and ly in any sin
unrepented of. Does God put such an account upon it? does he reckon all such to
walk contrary to him? surely then it must stir up his anger, and provoke him to
wrath against them: it will kinddle the fire of his fury, and make it to burn
up into a fearful flame, and how terrible must this needs be? The Apostle
thought it so, Heb. 10. 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God. Surely then it is a daring adventure of those that will expose
themselves upon this hazard, and, as it were, force him to take them in hand,
and be revenged on them, and needs must it issue in the unspeakable misery of
all those that will be so bold. Observe what a challenge God makes upon this
account, Isa. 27. 4. Who would set the briars and thorns against me in battle?
I would go through them, I would burn them together; we may easily ghuess how
it is like to determine in the winding up: we have an account of the unhappy
success that is like to come of such an unequal duel, Job 15. 24, 25, 26.
Shall a Potsherd of the earth strive with his Maker, and hope to come off with
any thing less than ruin?

USE. II. Let it then be an awakning word of warning unto us. And we are not a
little concerned in it. We have out of doubt fallen by our iniquity: we have
gotten too far away from God; we have beyond dispute turned aside to things
that cannot profit. All sin is against God; and to be sure every departure from
any of these ways of his which he has enjoined us in the observance of, is so:
and there is a great deal of this to be found in the midst of us: and let me
assure you, it is not a thing to be slighted or disregarded: as light a matter
as we may make of it, and think what hurt is there in it, or what perils are we
exposed to by it? Yet God reckons it a setting our selves against him. Well,
but have we thus done through our folly? yet have a care of continuing in this
unhappy posture: take heed of walking on in this contrariety, if nothing be
done to remove it, God will charge it home upon us; and what shall we expect at
his hands if he so does? surely it will be impar congressus, the damage will
fall upon us and not upon him; we must needs be the sufferers in the end, and
not he: he will be too hard for us, there is all reason for us to lot upon this
before we begin: it is a question which he would have a sinful People study an
answer to, Ezekiel. 22. 14. Can thine heart endure? can thine hand be strong, in
the day that I shall deal with thee? Our Impotency will never make a match for
his Omnipotency. What a call then is this to our speedy and undelayed returning
to him? Are we set in opposition to the great God? let us quit this station,
and seek to be reconciled. It is the advice which is given in this regard Isa.
7. 5. Let him take hold of my strength that he may make peace with me: and our
only safety will be in following of it. Be we then advised to observe this
counsel, and we shall find it for our good.

DOCT. V. God in punishing of such a people walks contrary to them.

Thus therefore he expresses the nature of the Judgments which he brings on
them for their wilful impenitence, and by this manner of expression he
vindicates the righteousness of his proceedings against them in the way of
Judgment, it is nothing else but a Retalation; he does but pay them in their
own kind; and what can be more equal? for, if they set themselves against him,
it is but just that he should be against them; if they are the aggressours, it
is fit he vindicate himself, by withstanding of them. It is true, if; when God
brings a people into trouble, upon their provoking of him by their sinning
against him, he Sanctifies these troubles to them, they will have abundant
reason to confess it to his praise. David therefore confesses both the
goodness of the Affliction, and the faithfulness of God in inflicting it upon
him, Psa. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been Afflicted, and Verse 75.
Thou in faithfulness have Afflicted me. And God many times has such a gracious
design as this in the bottom, Isa. 27. 9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob
be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin. But as it does not
always prove so, to all that are visibly in the Covenant; many (...) made
worse instead of being bettered by their Afflictions: so it is uncertain what
shall be the event, till the providence of God determines it, and it is equally
certain that the Judgments themselves are more ways than one to be reputed
contrary to them. For,

I. Herein he accomplisheth the Covenat threatening. If we look upon the
Covenant of God as it is plighted between him and the body of a people
professing to be his, it is very evident, that there do not only belong to it
gracious promises made to their faithful Obedience unto him, but also awful
threatenings against all disobedience; and to these threatenings do belong all
the Afflictions that are denounced in the word of God against the disobedience
of a people that stand so related to him. There are some indeed who do call
these the promises of the Covenant; but it is very Catachrestically, if not a
plain Antiphrasis: for a promise always has a respect to something that is
good; whereas these things are in their own nature evil, and so the Scripture
calls them, which is the proper matter of a threatening; hence that, Jer. 11.
17. The Lord of hosts that planted thee, has pronounced evil against thee.And
although sometimes eventually they prove for good, and that according to Gods
purpose; and on this account, those that are compared to good Figs, are said to
be sent to Babylon for their good, Jer. 24. 5. Yet this is besides the nature
of them. Gods Children therefore are wont to be afraid of those Judgments, Psa.
119. 120. And God does therefore speaks of them, that he may stir up this
fear, to make them cautious against exposing of themselves to them.

2. Hence, By them God is said to do men hurt. So he expresses it, Josh. 24.
20. Then will he turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he has done
you good. They are many ways harmfull to a people that are brought under the
impressions of them: besides the misery that men do personally suffer by them,
in which some are usually more deeply concerned than others, being made the
peculiar monuments of the severity of such Judgments; there is great evil which
befalls the body of such a people. They are greatly hurt by Famines, by
Pestilences, by Sword, by Captivity and bondage, their glory is disgraced by
such disasters, their numbers are wasted, and they are made, of a great many,
to be but a few; their comforts of life are taken away from them, and they are
brought into miserable distress; they are filled with sorrows and bitter
mournings; and they are wasted, impoverished, and brought low by them, and made
to come down and sit in the dust solitary; they are made a reproach to their
enemies, a scoff and a scorn to all those that hate them, who point at them and
say, This is Zion the outcast, etc. And all this does very sensibly hurt them;
and that which does a man hurt, must needs be contrary to him.

3. These are all of them the effects and discoveries of Gods anger: and that
is certainly against them. Anger is one of the separating affections, and it
makes a distance between him that is angry, and those at whom he is so. It is
true, if there be love in the bottom of these Afflictions, (and many times
there is so, for he has said, Rev. 3. 19. As many as I love, I rebuke and
chasten; and there is a consistency between love and anger; a father may be
angry with his offending son, and beat him in anger, but love governs that
wrath) then all this is for them in the secret counsel of God. But the anger is
certain, the course of providence bears witness to that; whereas there is not a
present discovery of the love which is at work in the management of it: and
besides, this love is usually reserved but for a Remnant, for whom God has
thoughts of peace, and to put a good end to their Afflictions; whereas others
are exposed to his force indignation. But when God brings these evils upon men,
he is said to make away for his anger, Psalm. 78. 50. And how do we find in
Scripture, the History of such dispensations introduced with that preface, Viz.
That the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and therefore he did so
and so: and this tells us that God herein walks contrary to them.

4. And it is directly contrary to men's desire and hopes. As sin is opposite to
Gods Hiliness, and it grievs him, so is sorrow to men's Inclinations, and it
vexes them. Hence such expressions are used to set it forth by, 2 Chronicles. 15.
5, 6. Great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the Countries; for God
did vex them with all adversity. There is in all men naturally a disire and
craving after felicity; they would, if possible, enjoy a well being, according
to their resentments of it; and although the fall has made them ignorant of
what is their best good, yet they apprehend a goodness in Peace, Health,
Prosperity, Credit, Liberty, etc. these are agreeable to them, and therefore
they are naturally in love with them; and the hope of enjoying them, is that
which nourishes in them, these endeavors which they lay out for the
compassing and securing of them to themselves. That therefore which is contrary
to this, that undermines their peace and health, and destroys their prosperity
and liberty, etc. is that which they hate, and it perplexeth them: and hence,
when God by his providence thus deals with them, he crosses their aims, and
cravings, and expectations, and therein he walks contrary unto them.

USE. I. This may point us what interpretation to put upon these Judgments of
God, which we for a long time been laboring under. God, of his rich grace,
grant that in the winding up of all, we may find by an happy experience, that
there has been love in them all: and that will only be when they prove to be
the blessed means of our through Reformation, when by them our iniquities shall
be purged away from us. But let us know and be assured, that if we remain
impenitent under them, there is but very little sign of this for the present.
And this is certain, that as long as God is in this way with us, we have him
for our Adversary, and so the Prophet interpreted is in, Lam. 2. 4. He stood
with his right hand as an Adversary. He is setting of himself against us: he
and we are facing of one another; we by our impenitence are confronting of him,
and he by his Judgments is withstanding of us. We are Provoking him to jealousy
by our sins, and he is provoking us to jealousy by his strokes, so it is
expressed in, Deuteronomy. 32. 21. And if we do not put this sense upon the present
state of affairs, we shall deceive our selves, and be exposed to more of his
wrath; and is not this a fearful thing?

Hence,

USE. II. Let it put us upon serious and solemn thoughts of making our peace
with him. Has God been thus discovering of himself to us that he is in good
earnest? Has he begun to put his threatenings in execution upon us? And have we
felt no little part of the smart of them, in the many frowns of Providence that
we have labored under? It is high time then for us to bethink our selves, and
be in good earnest too, and trifle no longer with him. It was indeed high
presumption in us to dare him to this at first; and to stout it out so long
against his warnings with which he sought to reclaim us* that a further
proceeding against us might so have been prevented: but it will be madness to a
Paroxism for us to continue in it, when we see him up in arms, and causing the
arrows of his vengeance to fly among us, and he is Marching through our land in
his fury. It is high time then for us to enter into serious Consultation*
whether there be no way to be found in which an end may be put to such a
Controversy, and without delay to get into the way* for, if he sets himself
against us, woe unto us, we can never stand before him. Is he angry? Remember
who has said, Psa. 76. 7. Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand
in thy sight when once thou art angry? This then is our present business, the
work that the day calls us to, and let us be awakned diligently to attend upon
it. It is better for us to fall down at his feet by a true repentance, than to
fall before him by his terrible Judgments: None ever resisted him and
prospered: if his hand takes hold on vengeance, he will surely recompense
vengeance to his Adversaries.

DOCT. VI. There is a certain gradation in the Judgments of God upon an
Apostatizing People.

God here speaks of Punishing them, or smitting of them (for so the word used
in our Text firstly signifies) Seven times more, i. e. by a seven fold greater
and more terrible smiting than that which was before, and he mentions this many
times over in the Context, in every of which he still rises by Sevens. Seven
is not here to be taken strictly, but for many,or much greater; and yet, it
being a number of perfection, it denotes a very notable and observable
Augmentation of the Calamities threatened, in the progress of Gods judicial
dispensations, when he passes over from one scene of Judgments to another, and
withal it points us to the gradual progress which he is pleased to make with
men this way, and this gives us the advantage to take notice of the wonted
dealings of God with a people in Covenant with him, different from what is
usually toward those that are strangers to him* or toward particular persons.
And there are four things that we may here take notice of; only remembering,
that God uses much of his Sovereignty in the diversifying of his dispensations
on this account; as to circumstances; though for the substance this is the
ordinary course.

I. He is wont first to give them warning before he smites them. These
Judgments come for sin, and that according to the threatening. But God being
merciful, and pitiful, does not fall upon them presently upon every
prevarication of their; but, though they give him provocation, he will first
offer them admonition; tells them what they have done, how they have exposed
themselves by it; tells them he is loath to smite them if they will be reclaimed
on easier terms, and accordingly invites them to it: and these warnings are
first more gentle, and afterward more severe; and that is when he not only
cautions, but withal threatens them in case they will not presently comply
with them: and the reason of all this is, because, if they will by any fair
means, or hard words* be reclaimed, there may be a stop, and the threatenings
not take place upon them. The reason therefore why he does proceed to smite
them, is rendered to be because they did not take these warnings; what does God
himself say, Zeph. 37. I said, surely thou will fear me, thou will receive
instruction. And see how God interprets his own threatenings, Jer. 18.7, 8. At
what time I speak concerning a nation, to pluck up, and pull down and destroy;
if that nation turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought
to do to them: Repentance is here ascribed to him after the manner of men; the
meaning is, I will not do it. He limits the threatening to this Hypothesis. God
has that respect for his people, that if Chiding will do, he will not Smite;
if Words will prevail, he will not proceed to Blows. It is therefore said that
He does not afflict willingly, and this work of punishing them is called his
strange work: whereas he many times comes upon others suddenly, and they are
surprised and cut off without any fore-warning given them.

2. When he does smite, he does not do all at once. He does not cut off his
people at one stroke, though they have given him provocation enough to do it.
He does not begin and make an end at the same time, and by the same Judgment by
which he first Afflicted them: but if ever it must come to that, by reason of
their woeful obstinacy and refusing to receive Correction by his Afflictive
providence, there is a very considerable time in which that is doing; and many
leisurely steps are taken before it arrives at this. When God threatens
Niniveh, we find how it is expressed, Nah. 1. 9. He will make an utter end:
Affliction shall not rise up the second time. Whereas it is observable in our
Text, laid by the Context, that there is a process from one to another, and
from that to another, and there is a long time passes before the evil be
finished, and the last scene brought in: and if we observe, we shall find, that
it was so long, after God had begun in his Judgments with his backsliding
people of old, before they came to be extirpated, that the prophets begun to be
mocked, and the people grew into such security, that they concluded it should
never be, and begun to make bold challenges about it. Now the reason of Gods
using this method is, because he is in a way of Discipline with his people: he
is trying if they will be amended by his rods, and therefore, in wisdom, he
proves another course, when one fails of doing the work, that so, if there may
be any hope, they may not perish at last, but be led to repentance. It says
that he is very loath to destroy them, if there may be any prevention of it, by
such courses as are proper.

3. Hence he is also wont to begin with lesser, and more tolerable strokes. He
does not come to the extremity at once, he proves them first with Rods, before
he proceeds to make use of Scorpions in punishing of them. And there is a
double consideration under which this may be observed; It is either with
respect to the Judgments themselves, or to the degrees in which he does inflict
them. Hence we have such a difference mentioned, Isa. 9. 1. When at first he
lightly afflicted, etc. and afterward did more grievously afflict her. There
are some Afflictions which in themselves are far less formidable than other;
the nature of man is not so affrighted at them, and hereupon there is not so
great a discovery of the anger of God, at least as to the heat of it: we find
David chose rather to fall into the hands of God than of men, and God many
times begins with such; these are the forlorn of his army which are first sent
up to alarm a sinning people. He brings upon them Scarcity of the comforts of
this life, by cutting short the fruits of the earth, and he visits them with
Epidemical sicknesses, whereby they are brought low, and the like. There are
also several degrees in the same kinds of Afflictions, whereby they prove more
or less distressing to a people: and God uses to begin at the lower degrees;
he comes first as a mo^^ to the house of Ephraim, Hos. 5. 12. He diminishes
them, and shortens their comforts, brings difficulties and straits upon them,
before he falls upon them in the severity of these. He brings scarcity before a
killing Famine, gentler sicknesses before destroying Pestilences, etc. And the
reason of this is, because he will prove them to see if their hearts be tender,
and sensible of the easier touches of his anger, that if they so be, there may
be an end, and no further process made in the way of his wrath against them.

4. But if the more easy Corrections will not do, he then goes on to smite them
harder. If his hand may be stayed from this, well; but if it be not, he is not
wont to tarry always where he was, and do no more, but he will, in due season,
go a step further, and make them to undergo greater and more grievous
Calamities, he doubles his strokes, and pulls up the floodgates higher, and
makes the gap in the hedge wider, so that their Plagues become great and
wonderful: and this is observable in a treble respect; he does it, partly by
greatning the same strokes, and so adding to the degrees of it, partly by
bringing in of greater and more terrible Judgments, such as are more frightfull
to men, and which carry in them more of his indignation, and in their own
nature are dreadful: if scarcity and sickness will not do, if Famines, and
Pestilences prevail not, he calls for a wasting Sword upon his land, and gives
it a Commission to devour, and make it self drunk with the blood of the slain.
Partly also by heaping up of manifold Calamities at once upon them, involving
of them in all sorts of difficulties, as, Ezekiel. 14. 21. How much more when I
send my four sore Judgments upon Jerusalem, the Sword, and the Famine, and the
noisome Beasts* and the Pestilence: and these lay all wast before them, and
they that escape the one* are devoured of the other, and now they are terribly
distressed. Hence, how are all terrible miseries heaped together in the last step
of the progress in our Context? Verse 29. etc. And so it is expressed in Deuteronomy.
28. 61. Also every sickness, and every plague* etc. them will the Lord bring
upon thee, until thou be destroyed.

USE. I. We may from hence take a rule to judge our present state by. This
manner of Gods dealing has been observably exemplified upon us; such a
progress as this we have been under: and it is now a long time since God has
begun it, and it continues unto this day. How gradually has our God been going
with us? How many steps has he taken? And how are our Calamity; grown and
increased? And to this day they remain upon us, and still look if they were on
the growing hand. It is a great many years since God begun to signalize his
displeasure against this people, and, as he has been exceeding patient with
us, in that he is to this day gotten no further, notwithstanding all that we
have done to provoke him to it; so he has been progressive with us; how often
has he changed his providence? And to what an height are our perplexities
grown? Nor is there yet a cessation. May we not say as it is in, Isa. 9. 12.
For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
And what is the matter of instruction that we have to learn from it? May it not
well be that which follows, Verse. 13. For the people returns not to him
that smites them. God surely has been following the Hypothesis laid down in
our Text. It is because we are still walking contrary to him, and will not come
to a Composition with him. Let it then leave Conviction upon us, and tell us
that we are not as we should be, otherwise God would have been otherwise to us
than he is. And this should awaken us to Consider what we have to do.

USE. II. Let us then see and admire at the wonderful Patience of God expressed
to us herein. Surely, though we have cause deeply to be abased to think that it
should be so with us as it is; yet we have deserved other, and a worse manner
of dealing from him: and though there be severity to be taken notice of in
this, yet there is a great deal of lenity intermixed with it. If he had cut us
off as soon as we begun to revolt from him, and given us no advantage at all to
have made our peace with him, it had been just, and we could never have laid
any injurious dealing to his charge: that therefore he makes so many steps in
it, and that he proceeds, so slowly in them all, is to be cordially and
thankfully acknowledged by us; and we have reason to say, It is of the Lords
mercy that we are not consumed, Lam.3. 22. As then there is a great awakning in
it to put us upon diligent seeking unto him, so there is abundant encouragement
for us so to do; we may rationally argue from hence, that he who Afflicts us so
unwillingly, would very willingly have his hands held by us, and, as it were
wonders that we are so foolish that we take no more care to do it; and
therefore,

USE. III. Let it rouse us all up to this Reformation. You here see how it is;
we have an holy God to do withal, who is jealous for his great name, and
though he has a reserve of mercy for the penitent, yet will have his honor in
all his works. He has been apparently testifying his displeasure against our
ways and doings, and he is still growing upon us in it, and we cannot see to
the other end of these dark dispensations. Why then should we be so
stiff-necked and hard hearted? what good shall we get by a resolute pursuance
of our own ways, against all the endeavors that are laid out upon us to reduce
us from them? have we not felt enough already to our sorrow? And shall we force
him to lay more and heaviour Calamities upon us still? Oh let us be wise! It
was a good advice that Pharaohs servants gave to him, Exodus 10. 7. How long
shall this man be a snare to us? let the men go, etc. know thou not yet that
Egypt is destroyed? And may I not well say, how long shall our sins befool us?
how long shall we stand by them, and not part with them? do we not know that
they have already almost ruined us? Remember then, that though God has gone
far with us in his Judgments, and increased them more than once upon us, yet
there are more and more terrible ones behind, ready to be poured out upon us?
He has not shot all his arrows yet; the sharpest are still in his quiver; and
he seems to have a fearful one now upon the string: and shall we not fall down
at his feet and prevent it? Shall we yet dare him to it, and force him to make
us feel the bitterest of it? Oh let it not once be!

DOCT. VII. God is wont to use intermissions in his Afflicting of a people that
will not reform under his Judgments.

When he begins in a way of Judgment with them; when he takes his rod in hand
and smites them, and they are not bettered by these smitings, yet as he
proceeds very slowly in renewing and adding severity to his strokes, according
as was observed under the former Doctrine, so he makes many stops and delays in
his progress, although he takes them out of one fire and kindles another upon
them, as he threatens to do by them, Ezekiel. 15 7. Yet he has his intervalls
between. The manner of expression in the Text notes that God seeks, and
consequently waits for their Reformation by these things, and that signifies
such an intermission as this. And there are two things wherein it will be more
especially discovered.

I. He does not speedily pass from one Judgment to another. When he brings one
sort of Affliction upon his people, as a Testimony of his displeasure at them,
he continues them under that for a considerable time, before he goes on to
another; we read of a Famine in David's time that continued for three years
successively; and no other Judgment is recorded to intervene, though the
procuring cause of it was not presently removed; 2 Samuel 21. And so in Elisha's
time of a Famine which lasted three years, by which Israel, under Ahabs wicked
reign was distressed; 1 Kings 18.1. And of one that lasted Seven years in the
days of Elisha, in the time when Joram, Ahab's son, reigned, 2 King* 8.1. And
the reason why God does thus is, because he will wait to see what efficacy this
will have, before he takes a further course with them. He does not come to kill
them, but to cure them, if it may be; and hence he acts like a wife Physician,
who, when he has administered a proper sort of Potion, will wait for the
working of it, a competent time, not looking that it will work, as soon as it
is down, and if one potion do not do, he will give another of the same, and it
may be be a larger dose of it, before he leaves that of, and goes about to try
any other experiment: he does not presently say this will not do, though it
does not immediately appear in the desirable effects of it. God says, it may
be they will bethink themselves, and lay this Judgment to heart; and by the
continuance of it be brought to solemn Consideration, which may set them upon
Reformation; and therefore, till the Judgment comes to be notoriously despised
by them, he many times continues them under exercise of it.

2. And he sometimes gives them a present deliverance, and respite from the
troubles which they have been exercised with. There are very frequently lucid
intervals to be observed in the course of Gods providence toward a sinning
people, whom he has under the rod, and this notwithstanding they do not answer
the end of these Afflictions, but do abide in their degeneracy. He does not
always grieve them, but, though they do not hearken to him; though they do not
cease to provoke him, but are senseless, careless, and go on in their way, yet
he extends a great deal of his pity to them, He remembers their frame, and he
interposeth some great deliverance or other, and hereby tries them between with
his mercy; to see if thus he may break their hearts with kindness, and let them
experience how unwilling he is to do them hurt, if they do not force him to it.
Hence he causes the stormy clouds which hand over them, and showred trouble on
them to break, and some beams of light and comfort to dart in between; and all
to try if mercy after Judgment will do any thing with them; if his being before
hand in his kindness to them, will melt their hard hearts into a compliance
with his calls and counsels. And hereby at least he will leave them the more
inexcusable if they yet persist in their obstinancy. Thus we find that in Ahabs
reign, though the foregoing Famine had not wrought the expected Reformation,
and God brought a Sword after it; yet God gave Israel two signal Victories over
the Syrians, who had sorely distressed them, 1 Kings 20. And then in Jorams
reign, God succored that people with a strange relief in a grievous Famine and
frighted away their enemies, when they were just ready to swallow them up, 2
Kings 7. And again afterward in the days of Jeroboam the second, of which we
have that observable passage, 2 Kings 14 24, 25, 26. He did that which was
evil, etc. he restored the coast of Israel, etc. for the Lord saw the
Affliction of Israel, etc. And many a time has God done after this manner with
his people, when the entertainment they have given to his Judgments has been a
Provocation to him to do otherwise.

USE. I. Learn hence how unreasonable a thing it is for such a people to
maintain their rebellion against God. What reason can there possibly be given
for their refusing to return to him, and reform the things that give him
offense? How wonderfully does God herein show his tenderness and great
compassion toward them? And one would think it should be enough to melt hearts
of Adamant: that the hardest flint should dissolve under the influence of it.
What greater provocation can there be given to God, than to have his Word
despised, and Rod condemned, and a people under the experiment of both,
obstinately stopping their ears and hardening their hearts? This is enough to
put him upon resolving to spare them no more, to turn his Rod into a Sword, and
pass from Correction to Vengeance, and cut them off at once. And shall he, for
all this, hold back his hand when it is up, and show his great kindness to a
people that are not affected with his Judgment? Shall he endeavor thus to win
them, after he has Afflicted them to no purpose? And shall they for all, and
after this persist in their former evil courses? May he not call upon Heaven
and Earth to be astonished at this? How horrible and amazing a thing must it
needs be?

USE. II. Let it put us upon the trial in this regard. Has not our God dealt
thus by us more than once or twice? Have there not been very notable respites
which he has afforded unto us in the midst of our troubles? Has he not
mercifully given us several breathing times, and these considerable, between
one Calamity and another? And what improvement is it that we have made of them?
Did we not begin to hope that he was in the way of returning again to us? But
have there not new clouds risen again afterward, and showred down a fresh
tempest upon us? May we not use the moan which the Prophet does in the name of
his people? Jer. 8.15. We looked for peace, but behold no good; and for a time
of health, and behold trouble. And it is good for us to enquire whence this is:
surely if we had rightly understood the things of our peace, and accordingly
improved such an opportunity wisely, it would not have been thus. If, when God
looked as if he were coming toward us in away of mercy; we had cordially
returned to him in away of Repentance and Reformation; those Daunings of
deliverance, would have been the day break of our Salvations, and God would
have established us in his favor. Let the thought then of this, convince us of
our grievous folly, and lay us low before God. Alas! did we not begin
arrogantly to say, the bitterness of death is over? to think that now the
Judgments of God were at an end, and we should see no more of them? and
thereupon to grow the more confident, and secure, and remorcless, and so to
forget the obligations lying upon us, and thereupon to promise our selves to
enjoy peace, though we continued in our old way and course? yea and hereupon
have thrown by our thoughts of Reformation, supposing that all matters stood
right and well between God and us? Is it not so? and if thus it be, how
righteously has God dealt with us, in raising up of new troubles, and bringing
us into more perplexing Calamities than before? How must our mouths be stopped,
and the holiness of God be adored by us in this respect? Certainly the face of
providence calls aloud, for our putting of our selves upon such a trial; and
let us account it our interest to comply with it solemnly.

DOCT. VIII. As long as a professing people remain unreformed, God will proceed
in his Judgments against them.

This is the very sum and substance of the threatening contained in our Text:
and it is thrice besides repeated in our Context. There may be many changes in
the process which God is using with such a people, and he may see meet now and
then to give them some intermissions in that process: and herein he acts his
own Sovereign pleasure: but for all this he will not so put an end to their
troubles, nor is it to be expected. There are two things contained in this
Doctrine, Viz.

1. That there will be a proceeding in the way of Judgments. When God begins to
take such a course with them, he will hold on in it, as long as they hold on in
a course of impenitence and obstinacy: and though he has kept them never so
long under them; yet if there be no repentance, no Reformation wrought on them
by all, he will not so leave off, but will add still to Afflict them: he will
proceed in his way, as long as they proceed in theirs. We therefore find, that
when God had enumurated how many several courses he had taken with Israel to
reclaim them, and all had proved unsuccessful, and that is the remark which is
made at the foot of every one of them, yet have ye not returned unto me says
the Lord, Am. 4.6. etc. He gives them anuredly to understand that he will go
on, and therefore bids them to look and prepare for it, Verse. 12. Therefore
thus will I do unto O Israel; and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to
meet thy God, Oh Israel. q. d. Look for it, make ready; it shall certainly be.

2. That there will be an increasing or aggravating of these troubles. There
shall not only be a continuance, but an augmentation; they shall meet with more
and more severe; they shall be plagued yet deeper and deeper, and inextricably
into their Afflictions and distresses. He therefore threatens to lay aside all
pity, Jer. 13.14. I will not have pity, nor mercy, but destroy them. Ezekiel.
5.11. Neither shall mine eye spare, nor will I have any pity. And this is
intended, in his Punishing of them Seven times. And the ground of his thus
proceeding will appear, in the Consideration of these things.

1. A Professing Covenant people are under greatest Obligations to glorify God,
which is done by their faithful obedience to his Commands. It is for this that
God has formed them into a people, under such circumstances, Isa. 43.21 This
people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise. God requires
it of them, and expects it from them; he does not look for it from others to
whom he has not so revealed himself, but he says of such a people for whom he
has done so much, more than for others, surely they will serve me, and honor
me.

2. When therefore such a people degenerate, they fall from the great end,
which they were enjoined, and every way advantaged to serve to, and so they
dishonor instead of honoring him. And the truth is, there are none in the
world that reflect so much of dishonor upon God, as such do: all the sin and
wickedness of an Heathen people, does not bring so much reproach to his name,
as the backslidings of such do; his name suffers more by them, than by all the
profligate abominations of those who are strangers to the Covenant: because his
name is not so much concerned in them. And therefore, when these do the very
same things for the matter of them, which the Heathen do; they do a great deal
worse than these, and the reason of it is because it is they that do it.

3. Hence by their Apostasy they render themselves unprofitable: and there are
none more so than they. All the cost, and care, and peculiar husbandry that God
has laid out upon them is lost; he has been at a great deal more of expense
upon his Vineyard,than upon the wast wilderness; he has fenced it, cleared it,
and planted it, and afforded it a great deal of special tendance and this, as
to any fruit which they bring forth for him, is thrown away upon it. God on
this account compares his people to a vine, which is a sort of plant, that if
it bear well, and good grapes plentifully, is very excellent and useful; but
if it does not so bear, it is good for nothing but to make a fire of: Ezekiel. 15.
begin. Other trees, though they do not bear fruit, yet they may serve for many
other uses, but the vine is altogether unservicable in any other way but this.

4. God in Afflicting of them, uses means, if it may be obtained, that he may
bring them to their fruitfulness again. Whiles they enjoyed times of peace and
prosperity, and all things went according to their desire, they grew wanton and
left off to bring forth fruit to his praise; now these afflictive providence
which he brings upon them, were his pruning and cutting of them; he hereby
pares off their excrescencies, and lets them blood, and this, if any thing,
looks as if it were probable to recover them again. That this is the direct
design of these Judgments, herein appears, because God says, if they be net
reformed by these things, and that plainly intimates, that Reformation was the
thing that was looked for by them: and for this reason we shall find him so
often complaining of them, because this was not the effect following upon them,
see Isa. 1.5. Why should ye he smitten any more? ye will revolt more and more,
and, Jer. 2.30. In vain have I smiten your Children; they would not receive
Correction. Now a thing is then said to be in vain, when the end of it is
frustrated.

5. Hence, as long as they remain not bettered hereby, their benefit and his
Glory is concerned in his proceeding further in the course of his Judgments.
Their benefit is deeply interested in it: for they are no whit bettered by
these Afflictions, till they are wrought up unto Reformation. The Physic that
is Administered unto men, works not for them, as long as it does but irritate
the disease, and makes the ill humors to work more strongly, but does not
remove them* then it works kindly, when it conquers the malady. And truly, if
God leaves off Afflicting before such a people be reformed, they are apt to be
thereby the more hardened; and when God is weary of smiting of them by reason of
their obstinacy, it is a sad sign that he is about to give them up as
desperate, Isa. 1. 5. Psa. 81. 11, 12 and 95. 10, 11. And when God lays by his
Rod after he has been using it, before his People are amended, it bodes that
he intends next to take up the Sword, when he has let them alone a while
without check to fill up their measure. His Glory also is here concerned; He is
in honor bound to bear a Testimony against the Apostasies of his People; and
he must and will be at length too hard for them, one way or other his glory is
trampled upon by their impenitence, his holiness cannot endure that it be
always so: and therefore we are told that if after all endeavors, and utmost
patience drawn forth into long suffering, their returning be not obtained, at
last it must come to extirpation, and scattering of them into the corners of
the earth. The sum is, either Gods name must suffer; or else a people that are
departed from their Covenant Obligations, and will by no means be reformed,
must be cut off; and so made the monuments of his righteous revenge, because
they would not, hearken to his voice; Math. 23. 37, 38. How often would I have
gathered you, but you would not; behold your house is left unto you desolate.

USE. I. This truth gives us a sad Prognostic of a People that are left to
insensibleness and hardness of heart, under the smitings of God. It tells us
how miserable they are like to be. We are here given to understand that if they
are resolved, God is resolved too: if they say there is no hope, but we will
follow our own ways, and will not forsake them, God will also say, there is no
hope, but you must see and feel the weight of the hand of his displeasure, and
be made the monuments of his stupendous wrath. The best that is to be
concludded concerning such a People, is that they are like to be made to feel
more amazing Judgments, than heretofore, there is no hope of an end being put
to them, unless it be come to that, that he has done striving with them in
this way; and that is abundantly more formidable. And although God can, if he
will, break their hearts after all, and when no means will do it, yet his
Spirit is able to melt them down, and cast them anew; and sometimes he does
exalt his Sovereign Grace in doing of it, as, Isa. 57 18. I smote him, and he
went on frowardly; I have seen his ways and will heal him. Yet this is
Arbitrary with him; if they belong to his Election of Grace, it shall be so;
but that is a Secret thing; but as to the present posture of things, and
referring to the Articles of the Covenant between God and such a People, it
speaks sadly, and woefully bodes that their Calamities are but begun upon them.
We may count from the breaking out of his displeasure, but who shall live to
see the quenching of it, God alone knows; and whether it may at last end
graciously or no, we may expect to see God acting of fearful Tragedies among
them before he has done, and we may be sure that he will either how them, or
break them in pieces.

USE. II. Let it then Solemnly call upon us, seriously to think of, and
speedily to improve this Truth to a through Reformation. Let us take it to be a
voice from Heaven to awaken us this day to the practice of this duty. God has
now for a long time been calling us aloud to REFORMATION; and that by many ways
and courses that he has been practicing with us. How many years since he put
it into the mouths of his Servants to complain of the Degenerating of this
People, from the Spirit and design of those that were first employed in the
Planting of these Churches? How many years is it since there have been
Convincing and openly Confessed witnesses in the Providence of God, to the
displeasure he had taken at that degeneracy? And does he not continue these
tokens unto this day? But our ears have been sealed; and though we have been
under some Consternations, especially when some distressing Affliction has
broken in upon us, yet how little is there done mean while, toward the putting
an end to Gods Controversy? God is still onward in his way, and proceeding from
one step to another, and going forward to punish us more and more, and shall we
never be instructed? Oh when shall it once be? Is there nothing to be done at
such a day as this is? Are all things right? Have there been no open and
notorious declensions from God among us? Or are we recovered out of them? Is
every thing among us as it should be? Why then is his hand stretched out still?
What means the continuing and blowing up of the heat of his anger? And is it no
bodies work to begin in this matter? or is it not every ones business to set
about it in his place? If we are in a Private Capacity, and cannot actively
influence the Public so as to mend it, yet may we not mend one? Are there not
our Personal iniquities in the heap or Ephah? or have we carried it so evenly
and holily as to be altogether clear of this guilt? Who of us is there that
dares to appear, and own that we have done nothing to the continuance of these
Judgments? And if every one would do that which is to be done at home in this
regard, it would surely Contribute not a little to a general Reformation: and
we may by an holy exemplary Conversation, and earnest Prayers to God, help
forward this work. If we are in a Public station, and thereby advantaged
peculiarly to put forward such a work; shall we look one upon another, and
strain Complements, who shall begin in it? Shall we not father join hearts, and
hands, and counsels in this business? Shall any of us draw back, and refuse to
be concerned in it; or shall we withstand it? Note that man an Enemy to God and
his People. I shall not here enlarge in enumerating the Catalogue of those
things that want to be looked into and after in this Reformation, but earnestly
wish that it may be a matter of Solemn Consultation and enquiry. Only let me
say, this work must be done sooner or later: God expects it, he calls aloud for
it, he says that he will have it. And what will it advantage us to dally and
delay, till God has multiplied his Judgments upon us, and made us a by word
and an astonishment to the world? Assure we our selves it may be worse, but it
will not be really better with us, till we come roundly to this work. Why then
should we provoke a good and a gracious God to more wrath, and pull down on our
own heads more of his fearful Judgments? Stay him now; ruin else may be not
far off. We have tried our carnal policy already, and have found it nothing to
avail us, but rather to entangle us in greater perplexities, and more
inextricable: let us now essay the Spiritual policy. Resolve we, from this day
forward to make diligent search after, and utterly to renounce all our sins; to
Return as one man to the Lord; and set our selves in good earnest about this
work: and I dare say, God will be jealous for the land, and pity his People;
and then will he arise as a strong man after new wine, plead our cause for us,
and bring us forth out of darkness into the light, set our feet upon a Rock,
and put a new Song into our mouths, even Praise unto our GOD. Amen.

FINIS.

