ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of Their
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in NEW ENGLAND.

Begun at Boston, the Thirtieth Day of MAY, 1694. And Continued by Adjournment
unto Wednesday the Fifth Day of September following: Being the Second Sessions.

Anno Regni GUILIELMI, et MARIAE, Regis et Reginae, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae,
et Hiberniae, Sexto.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, Printer to His Excellency, the Governor
and Council. 1694.

Anno Regni Regis et Reginae, Gulielmi et Mariae, Sexto. AN ACT, For
Encouraging the Prosecution of the Indian Enemy and Rebels; and preserving such
as are Friends.
FOR the better securing of the Indians of the several Plantations within the
Western parts of this Province, who have put themselves under the Rule and
Protection of Their Majesty's Government, within the same: And for the
Preventing of Mischief that might happen to befall any of them by the English
in their pursuit of the Common Enemy: As also to the intent that their
Majesty's Subjects be not put in fear or exposed by any false Indians,
pretending to be Friends.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That all the Indians of the several Plantations lying to the Westward or right
hand of the Common and usual Road or highway leading from Boston to Rehoboth,
Friend Indians Circumscribed within certain Limits.
be forthwith removed unto such place or places as the Governor with the
advice of the Council shall appoint, to the Eastward of the said Road or
highway; except the Indians belonging to the Plantation of Kekamoochock near
Woodstock, who are to be under such Regulations and Circumscribed within such
Limits, as the Governor with advice of the Council shall appoint.

And that the Indians within the several Counties of Plymouth, Barnstable, and
Bristol, shall not pass out of the Bounds of the respective Counties, where
they reside; but upon special Occasion, and that Certified under the hand of a
Justice of the Peace; On pain of Forfeiting three Months Service, to whomsoever
shall apprehend and convict any of them of such Transgression, before any of
Their Majesty's Justices.

And all Indians that from and after the last day of this present Month of
September, Boundaries set to the Indians.
shall be discovered of found to the Westward of the aforesaid Road or
highway, or within half a Mile of the Easterly side of the said Road or any
part thereof; or without any other of the Limits, and Boundaries that shall be
appointed, and set them by the Governor and Council as aforesaid. Shall be
deemed and accounted as Enemies. And it shall and may be lawful to and for any
of Their Majesty's Subjects to treat and prosecute them as such: Unless they be
Indians improved in Service by the Governor, with the advice of the Council;
and have one or more Englishmen Conduct and accompany them.

This Act to be made known to the Indians of the several Plantations, by the
care of the Select men of the English Towns next Adjacent.

Saving all the Land lying within the County of Hampshire on the West side of
Connecticut River, Saving.
and Five Miles on the Easterly side of the same; Unless the Governor and
Council shall otherwise direct, and set such other boundaries for those parts,
as they shall see cause.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

For Encouragement to such as shall Voluntarily go forth, in greater or lesser
Parties, in the discovery and pursuit of the Common Enemy, That they be paid
out of the Public Treasury, Reward for Service done by Volunteers.
for every Indian great or small which they shall kill or take and bring in
Prisoner, the Sum of Fifty Pounds Per. Head: And shall likewise have and keep
(...) own use, all Plunder by them taken from the Enemy. And if any Person
happen to be Wounded in such Service, he shall be cured at the charge of the
Public: and (...) Maimed or otherwise disabled, have such meet Stipend or
Pension allowed, as this Court shall Order. And for every Indian that shall be
Slain in the defense of any House or Garrison Attacked, there shall be paid the
Sum of Five Pounds Per. Head.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

Reward for Service done by Soldiers under Pay.
That all Soldiers Detached or Impressed, and Listed in Their Majesty's
Service, shall have and receive, over and above their Stated Pay; the Sum of
Ten Pounds Per. Head, for every Indian, as aforesaid; which they or any of them
shall kill or take Prisoner; whilst they are abroad upon Service, and bring in.
And the Commissionours for the War are hereby Empowered and Ordered, upon the
producing and delivering unto them the Scalp of any Indian killed as aforesaid,
or any Indian taken and brought in Prisoner, to grant a Debenture upon the
Treasurer, for payment of the Sum herein before mentioned, as a Reward for such
Service respectively; which Reward shall be equally Shared and distributed to
and among all the Persons of any such party, as are in Company at the killing
or taking any Indian as aforesaid; be they in pursuit of the Enemy, or in the
defense of any House or Garrison. And the Plunder taken to be alike Shared and
distributed.

And further it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Person or Persons shall produce any Scalp not being an Indians
Scalp, or the Scalp of some Indian being not bona fide Slain in Service as
aforesaid; with intent to deceive, and obtain the Reward herein before granted,
and be thereof legally Convicted: Every Person and Persons so offending, shall
suffer three Months Imprisonment, and also Forfeit double the Sum that should
have accrued to him or them by Virtue of this Act for an Indian bona fiede
Slain as aforesaid: One Moiety thereof unto Their Majesty's, for and toward
the support of the Government; and the other Moiety to him or them that shall
Inform and Sue for the same, in any Court of Record within this Province.

Provided this Act shall continue in force unto the End of the Session of this
Court in May next, and no longer.

AN ACT, For the giving Succors and Assistance to the Neighboring Provinces
and Colonies, against Their Majesty's Enemies.
FORASMUCH as during the time of War, there may be Occasion for the Raising and
Sending of Soldiers to the Succors and Assistance of the Neighboring
Provinces and Colonies of New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Kings Province,
Connecticut or New York, for the defense of Their Majesty's Subjects and
Interests, and the Prosecution of the French or Indian Enemy.

It is Enacted and Ordained by the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That in the Vacancy of the General Assembly, it shall be in the Power of the
Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the Council, to transport such
part of the Militia of this Province; as they shall find needful, or oblige
them to March into any of the before named Provinces or, Colonies, for the Ends
aforesaid, at any time or times as there shall be Occasion, until the End of
the Session of this Court in May next, and at no time afterward, this present
Act or any thing therein notwithstanding.

AN ACT, For Regulation of the late Tax, and for Granting an Additional Supply
of Money.
WHEREAS in Prosecution of an Act of this Assembly made at their last Session,
begun and held at Boston, the Thirtieth day of May past, Entitled, An Act, For
granting unto Their Majesty's, A Tax of Twelve Pence a Poll, and One Penny on
the Pound for Estates; It appears by the Lists Returned, that the Assessors in
several Towns have not rightly understood, or not duly attended the Rules in
said Act prescribed; which (...) Occasioned an Inequality and disproportion
betwixt Town and Town, and the Sum thereby Raised to fall short of what was
expected, and is necessary, for a Supply of the Public Occasions. Therefore to
the intent that there may be a Regulation of the said Tax or Assessment to a
due Proportion, and (...) further supply of the Treasury.

We the Representatives of Their Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, in General Court Assembled, Do cheerfully Grant unto Their most
Excellent Majesty's, to the Ends in the before recited Act mentioned, and for
the Vigorous Prosecution of the War, An Additional sum of Six Thousand Five
Hundred Seventy One Pounds Eight Shillings Four-pence, to make up the Sum of
Nine Thousand Five Hundred and Fifty Nine Pounds in the whole, upon this and
the former Grant: One Thousand Pounds whereof out of the first Collection, to
be sequestered and set a part by the Treasurer, toward answering of the Rewards
granted by the Act of this Court, as Encouragement to the Prosecution of the
Indian Enemy.

And pray that it may be Enacted, and it is accordingly Enacted and Ordained by
the Governor, Council, and Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by
the Authority of the same,

That the said whole Sum of Nine Thousand Five Hundred and Fifty (...) Pounds,
be proportioned upon the several Towns and Precincts (...), in manner following.

(...) is to say,

In the County of Suffolk. l. s. d. Boston, Sixteen hundred sixty six Pounds
thirteen Shillings. 1666 13 00 Roxbury, One hundred sixty one Pounds eighteen
Shillings. 161 18 00 Dorchester, Two hundred fifty seven Pounds six Shillings.
257 06 00 Milton, Eighty nine Pounds eight Shillings. 89 08 00 Brantry, One
hundred thirty one Pounds thirteen Shillings. 131 13 00 Heymouth, One hundred
and twenty Pounds. 120 00 00 Hingham, One hundred and sixty Pounds. 160 00 00
Hu^t, Forty three Pounds. 43 00 00 Dedham, One hundred and three Pounds
nineteen Shillings. 103 19 00 Medfield, Seventy two Pounds five Shillings. 72
05 00 Wrentham, Twenty nine Pounds. 29 00 00 Mend^n, Twenty nine Pounds ten
Shillings. 29 10 00 Oxford, Eight Pounds six Shillings. 08 06 00 In the County
of Essex. Salem, Three hundred sixty two Pounds fourteen Shillings. 362 14 00
Ipswich, Four hundred sixty six Pounds eight Shillings. 466 08 00 Newbury,
Three hundred twenty one Pounds sixteen Shillings. 321 16 00 Rowley, One
hundred and nine Pounds fourteen Shillings. 109 14 00 Salisbury, Sixty Pounds.
60 00 00 Almsbury, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 Haverhill, Eighty six Pounds four
Shillings. 86 04 00 Andover, Ninety six Pounds nine Shillings. 96 09 00
Bradford, Thirty six Pounds three Shillings. 36 03 00 Boxford, Forty seven
Pounds two Shillings. 47 02 00 Topsfield, Eighty Pounds fifteen Shillings. 80
15 00 Marblehead, One hundred eighty three Pounds ten Shillings. 183 10 00
Lynn, One hundred eighty two Pounds thirteen Shillings, 182 13 00 Wenham,
Ninety one Pounds eleven Shillings. 91 11 00 Beverly, One hundred thirty eight
Pounds fifteen Shillings. 138 15 00 Gloucester, Seventy five Pounds five
Shillings. 75 05 00 Manchester, Twenty one Pounds five Shillings. 21 05 00 In
the County of Middlesex. Charlestown, Three hundred and four Pounds three
Shillings. 304 03 00 Waterown, Two hundred thirty three Pounds fifteen
Shillings. 233 15 00 Cambridge, One hundred and eighty Pounds three Shillings.
180 03 00 Concord, One hundred and thirty Pounds thirteen Shillings. 130 13 00
Woburn, One hundred seventy six Pounds five Shillings. 176 05 00 Marlborow,
Eighty Pounds two Shillings. 80 02 00 Groton, Fifty Pounds. 50 00 00 Reading,
One hundred and one Pounds seventeen Shillings. 101 17 00 Chelmsford, One
hundred and ten Pounds five Shillings. 110 05 00 Malden, One hundred Pounds two
Shillings. 100 02 00 Medford, Thirty three Pounds seven Shillings. 33 07 00
Bilierica, Sixty six Pounds two Shillings. 66 02 00 Lancaster, Thirty Pounds
fifteen Shillings. 30 15 00 Stow, Nineteen Pounds ten Shillings. 19 10 00
Newtown, Ninety Pounds seven Shillings. 90 07 00 Sherbourn, Fifty four Pounds
seventeen Shillings. 54 17 00 In the County of Hampshire. Springfield, One
hundred and nineteen Pounds seventeen Shillings. 119 17 00 Northampton, One
hundred and fifteen Pounds thirteen Shillings. 115 13 00 Hadley, Seventy Pounds
three Shillings. 70 03 00 Hatfield, Sixty three Pounds nine Shillings. 63 09 00
Southfield, Twenty four Pounds three Shillings. 24 03 00 Westfield, Thirty nine
Pounds fourteen Shillings. 39 14 00 Enfield, Six Pounds thirteen Shillings. 06
13 00 In the County of Plymouth. Plymouth, One hundred and six Pounds eleven
Shillings. 106 11 00 Situate, One hundred sixty seven Pounds eleven Shillings.
167 11 00 Duxburo, Sixty Six Pounds. 66 00 00 Marshfield, Eighty three Pounds
fifteen Shillings. 83 15 00 Bridgwater, Seventy Pounds. 70 00 00 Middleboro,
Thirty one Pounds thirteen Shillings. 31 13 00 In the County of Barnstable.
Barnstable, One hundred thirty two Pounds. 132 00 00 Yarmouth, Ninety Pounds.
90 00 00 Eastham, One hundred and twelve Pounds. 112 00 0(...) Sandwich, One
hundred and ten Pounds thirteen Shillings. 110 13 00 Falmouth, Twenty two
Pounds eight Shillings. 22 08 0(...) Manamoit, Twenty three Pounds twelve
Shillings. 23 12 0(...) Rochester, Eighteen Pounds one Shilling. 18 01 0(...)
In the County of Bristol. Bristol, Seventy six Pounds. 76 00 0(...) Taunton,
One hundred thirty one Pounds sixteen Shillings. 131 16 0(...) Dartmouth,
Ninety eight Pounds three Shillings. 98 03 0(...) Freetown, Twenty one Pounds
one Shilling. 21 01 0(...) Rehoboth, One hund^^d and twenty Pounds. 120 00
0(...) Swansey, Eighty four Pounds fifteen Shillings. 84 15 0(...) Little
Compton, Fifty one Pounds two Shillings. 51 02 0(...) Tiverton, Twenty five
Pounds eleven Shillings. 25 11 0(...) In the County of York. York, Twelve
Pounds. 12 00 0 Wells, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 0 Kittery, Twenty eight Pounds. 28
00 0 Isles of Sholes, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 0 Nantucket, Ninety Pounds. 90 00 0
Edgar Town, Forty four Pounds two Shillings. 44 02 00 on Martha Vineyard.
Tisbury, Thirty one Pounds three Shillings. 31 03 00 on Martha Vineyard.
Chilmark, Thirty one Pounds three Shillings. 31 03 00 on Martha Vineyard.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer do forthwith send his Warrants unto the Assessors of each
Town and Precinct aforesaid, The Treasurer forthwith to send his warrants to
the assessors:
that were lately chosen by virtue of the before recited Act, requiring them to
Assess the before mentioned Sum set and proportioned upon such Town or Precinct
respectively (Subducting therefrom the Sum Total of their List already returned
unto the Treasurer) upon the Polls and Estate lying within such Town or
Precinct, in manner following, That is to say, Two Shillings on each Poll,
qualified as in the said forerecited Act is expressed; And the remaining part
upon such Ratable Estate, as in the said Act is particularized and set down,
according to the several Rates therein mentioned, so often multiplied as to
Complete their whole Sum proportioned unto them: All Goods, Rule of the
Assessment.
Wares and Merchandises Imported, to be Assessed at One Penny on the Pound
toward this Additional Grant, any thing in the said Act for Excepting the same
notwithstanding.

And where the Assessors in any Town or Precinct have not already made and
returned the List of their Assessment unto the Treasurer, Lists of Assessment
to be transmitted unto the Treasurer at or before the last of October.
they are forthwith to attend the same according to the directions in the
Treasurers Warrant formerly sent unto them for the first part of their
proportion, and the directions in this present Act for the Remainder. And the
Lists of this whole Assessment so made and perfected as aforesaid, are to be
transmitted by the Assessors in each Town and Precinct, and delivered unto the
Treasurer at or before the last day of October next ensuing: And the Treasurer
is hereby Ordered to issue out his Warrants directed to the Constables or
Collectors of the several Towns and Precincts, requiring them forthwith to
Collect and gather the said Assessments and pay in the same unto himself, his
Successor or Order, at or before the last day of January thence next following,
Constables and Collectors to issue their Accounts at or before the last of
January.
by which time they are to make up and issue their Accounts of the whole; And
for such Towns and Places as have not yet made any return, to pay in one third
part of their respective proportion, at or before the first day of November,
the time set by the former Act, and the full remainder at or before the said
last day of January next. And if the Assessors in any Town or Precinct shall
neglect or fail of performing their duty or Trust herein committed unto them,
Penalty for Assessors neglect.
by not making or not returning of their Lists within the time before prefixed,
being thereof convicted before the Court of General Sessions of the Peace
within the same County, upon Complaint made by the Treasurer or any on his
behalf, they shall forfeit and pay unto Their Majesty's, for the ends and uses
for which this Tax is granted, the full Sum proportioned to such Town or
Precinct, to be levied by distress and Sale of such defective Assessors Goods
or Estate. And all Assessors shall be paid by the Treasurer of their respective
Towns, Two Shillings and Six pence Per. diem, Each, for every days time, they
spend in said Service.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer, the Assessors, Constables and Collectors in the several
Towns and Precincts, Penalty for default in Constables or Collectors.
be and hereby are respectively Authorized and Empowered to take, use, and
Exercise the same Methods, directions and powers contained in the several
Sections and Paragraphs in the said Act, Entitled, An Act; For granting unto
Their Majesty's a Tax of Twelve Pence a Poll, and One Penny on the Pound for
Estates, for the Collecting and gathering of the Additional Sum herein granted;
and shall lie under the same Obligation to duty, and suffer the like Penalties
in case of default, as is thereto respectively annexed.

AN ACT, For Granting a Township in the County of Barnstable, to be called
Harwich.
WHEREAS ^^ere are a Competent number of Inhabitants already sett^^d upon that
Tract of Land commonly called and known by ^he name of Satucket within the
County of Barnstable, containing a Sufficient quantity of Land and lying
convenient for a T^^^ship: Therefore for Encouragement of the said Settlement.

It is Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That all the said Lands lying betwixt the bounds of the Town of Yarm^uth upon
the West, and the Town of Estham on the East, running from the head of
Bound-brook, to the head of Namskeket, about Ten Miles in Length, and about
Seven Miles in Breadth, extending from Sea to Sea; ^e and henceforth shall be a
Township, the Town to be called Ha^^ich, and shall have and enjoy all such
Immunities, Privileges and Powers, as generally other Towns within this
Province have and do by Law enjoy. Provided, it does not Entrench upon former
Grants referring to Townships.

And that for all Arrear's of Public Taxes, and for the late Tax and Addition
thereto now granted by this Court, the Inhabitants of said Place do remain and
continue under the same Regulations, Directions, and Officers as before the
making of this Act.

AN ACT, To Restrain the Exportation of Pitch, Tar, Rozin, Plank and
Ship-Timber.
WHEREAS His Majesty has Signified His Pleasure, That a Trial be made of the
Stores Raised within these Parts of His Dominions, for the furnishing of His
Royal Navy; To the intent therefore, That Satisfaction be given unto His
Majesty herein.

Be it Enacted by the Governor, Council, and Representatives in General Court
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That from and after the first day of October next, no Persons whomsoever,
shall carry convey or transport by Land or Water, or lade and put on board any
Ship or other Vessel whatsoever, or into any Cart or other Carriage, with
intent to carry convey or transport, any Pitch, Tar, Rozin* Plank or
Ship-Timber out of this Province* other than by special License of the
Governor and Council, or for the necessary Stores of Merchants Ships of
Vessels; On pain of forfeiting all such Pitch, Tar, Rozin, Plank and Ship
Timber, and the Ship or Vessel with all the Tackling, Apparel, Furniture and
Appurtinances to her belonging, in which any Pitch, Tar, Rozin, Plank or
Ship-Timber shall be so laden and put on board for transportation; the one
Moiety thereof unto Their Majesty's for and toward the support of the
Government of the Province; and the other Moiety to him or them who shall
inform and sue for the same, in any Court of Record within this Province, by
Bill, Plaint or Information. And all Officers employed in and about the Impost,
are hereby Ordered and Authorized to take care that this Act be duly observed.

Provided, That this Act shall continue in Force unto the end of the Session of
this Court in May next, and no longer.

FINIS.

