A Good Master well Served.

A Brief Discourse On the Necessary Properties and Practices Of a Good SERVANT
In every kind of Servitude: And of the Methods that should be taken by the
HEADS of a Family, to Obtain such a SERVANT.

By Cotton Mather.

Joel 2. 29. Also upon the Servants, and upon the Handmaids in those Days,
will I Pour out my Spirit Boston in New England. Printed by B. Green, and J.
Allen 1696

WHen the Laws of Heaven were given to Israel, by the Hand of Moses, it is
Observable, that the first of the Judgments then set before them, was about
Servants: They had been Servants themselves; and it was very proper to Begin
with such things as might mind them of their late Condition, and such things
where of they might be further minded in their late Condition. Their Father
Jacob, also had been hardly used as a Servant, for whole Sevens of Years, and
in some Remembrance of it, the Lord begins His Laws with Prohibiting the
Children of Jocob, to make one of their Nation a Servant more than Six.

Reader, I have Considered, that the Second Edition of the Law, in the New
Testament likewise, made no little mention of what belongs unto a Good Servant:
and I have Considered the many Complaints which Families in all places made, of
their wanting such a Blessing. That I might in this matter, be a Servant unto
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Souls of my Neighbors, both the Bond, and the
Free, in Him, the following Essay, just as it was uttered unto my own
Congregation, is here Exposed.

A Good Master well Served
It is Written, in Tit. II. 9, 10. Exhort Servants to be obedient unto their
own Masters, and to please them well in all things, no answering again.

Not purloyning, but showing all good fidelity, tha^ they may adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

It is also Written, in 1 Timothy VI. 1, 2. Let as many Servants as are under the
yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all honor: that the Name of God, and
his Doctrine be not blasphemed.

And they that have believing Masters, let them no despise them, because they
are brethren: but rather do them Service, because they are faithful, and
beloved, partakers of the benefit. These thing teach and exhort.

It is again Written, in Ephesians. VI. 5, 6, 7, 8. Servants be obedient to them that
are your Master according to the flesh, with fear and trembling in singleness
of your heart, as unto Christ.

Not with eye service, as men pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing
the will of God from the heart.

With goed-will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men.

Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive of
the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

It is likewise Written, in Col. III. 22, 23, 24, 25. Servants obey in all
things your masters according to the flesh; not with eye service, as men
pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God.

And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men.

Knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for
ye serve the Lord Christ.

But he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has done: and
there is no respect of persons.

It was afterward Written, in 1 Pet. II. 18. Servants be subject to your
masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward.

THE Great God who Formed all things, and who particularly, Formed the Spirit
of man within him, has Formed Us with a Sociable Disposition; which
Disposition to (...), Planted by God in our Nature, has Positive Rules given
by our God in His Word, for the Regulation of it.

The First Society, which Mankind falls, and indeed Naturally falls into, is
Domestical; the Society, that makes a family. Now, by the (...) Nature it self,
it is come to pass, that in such a Society there must be a Superiority, and an
Inferiority; there must be some who are to Command, and there must be some who
are to Obey. Accordingly, The Domestical Society is of Three Sorts; There is a
Conjugal Society, or that between the Husband and the Wife; there is a Parental
Society, or that between the Parent and the Child; and there is last, and
lowest of all, an ^erile Society, or that between the Master and the Servant.

When the Providence of God, has brought a person, into any sort of Humane
Society, it is not the least Office of Religion to direct, and assist, the
person, in the Discharge of the Relation, which he bears to that Society. The
true Religion, having a due Impression upon us, will vastly amend us, and
improve us, in every Relation, wherein the Providence of God has placed us. It
has been a Maxim sometimes justly used; Be sure, that Religion cannot be
right, that a man is the worse for having. And I will add This unto it; Be
sure, if a Person seem to be Religious, but is not by Religion, made, a Better
Husband or Wife, a Better Parent or Child, a Better Master or Servant, that
persons Religion is vain.

We find therefore that the Scriptures of God often and largely insist on the
Duties of men, (...) those Relative Capacities, wherein they stand obliged unto
one another. But among the rest, ^he Duties of Masters and Servants are
pressed, with a vary frequent, fervent and pungent Inculcation; and this most
especially in the Inspi^ed Epistles of the New Testament. In the Days of
Primitive Christianity, there were Christianized Masters, who had much ado to
lay aside, the fierce, harsh, brutish and bloody Usage of their Servants,
whereto in their Paganism they had been accustomed; and there were
Christianized Servants who on the other side had much ado to maintain a due
Respect unto their Masters, after they were by Regeneration advanced unto the
privileges of the Gospel, and made the Sons and Heirs of God. For this Cause,
the Apostles, do very emphatically Demonstrate it, that Christianity will Teach
persons to be better Masters, and better Servants, than ever they were before.

Casting a careful Eye upon our Assembly, I behold here many Hundreds of
persons, which have been Stated in both of these two Orders, by the God of
Order. 'Twill therefore be but a part of our Stewardly Faithfulness, our
Pastoral Watchfulness, to Address both of these Orders, with such Admonitions
as may be agreeable unto their Circumstances.

(...) And First, I will have the Servants to star by, as it becomes them, till
their Masters a Served before them. I must in the First plac^ Exhort you that
are Masters, to Read seriou^ly those Paragraphs in the Oracles of God which lie
next unto them, wherein the Duti^^ of Servants are specified, for you will
there find your Duties also, abundantly declared: an^ when Masters are spoken
to, Let the (...) also take all that shall be spoke, unto themselves

I. But the first of those Counsils, which as proper and needful for you is;
Oh! see to (...) You that are Masters, and have Servants, I E^ treat you, see
to it, That you be not yourselv^ the Servants of the worst Masters in the
World. You do a little bear the Image of Go^ in that Government, which you have
over you Servants; but God forbid, that you should be^ at the same Time, the
Image of the Devil, an be under the Government of that Wicked One Very
Lamentable was the Curse of Canaan, (...) Ger. 9. 25. He shall be a Servant of
Servant And how lamentably Cursed then will you (...) to make your Servants, if
their Master must (...) a Servant of the Devil. Poorly sit is that man to
Command others, who shall be himself Commanded always by the Devil, and by the
Earth Sensual Devilish Inclinations of his own Hear Syrs, Do you first your
selves become the Servants of God, and then you may have Blessings in, you will
be Blessings to, those that shall become Servants unto your selves. There is
this Lesson diverse times in the Bible given you, Know that you have a Master in
Heaven. I say then, Learn this Lesson; and let every Master say, The Lord of
Heaven shall be my Master. I remember the Servant of Abraham seemed, as it were
to value himself, upon the score of his having such a Master; said he, in Genesis
24. 34. I am Abraham's Servant. Indeed, a Master that shall be like Abraham, an
Exemplary Believer, and a Religious Householder, will give Servants cause to be
ambitious of Living with him. Whereas,

Quimon obtemperas Domino, torqueris a Servo.

Our own Disobedience unto God, is often Chastised in the Disobedience, and the
Misbehaviour, of our Servants.

II. But having thus Embrace that Service, from which the biggest Master or
Monarch, is not Excused, a Second of those Counsils, wherewith you should now
be advised is, To be as Well Advised as you can in the Choice of your Servants.
It was the good Resolution of a Renowned Master, in Psalm. 101. 4, 6. I will not
know a wicked person; mine eyes shall be upon the Faithful of the Land, that
they may dwell with me; he that walks in a perfect way, he shall Serve me; He
that works Deceit shall not dwell within my House, he that tells Lies, shall
not tarry in my sight. I beseech you, do not Choose to Harbor in your Houses a
Traitor and a Rebel against the God of Heaven; but as far as may be, Choose
those to Serve you, that profess them selves willing to Serve the God, that
made both you and them. It is true, and, alas, that it is true! there is too
much Scarcity of Godly Servants, to afford a Choice, unto us all; but if we
cannot have Godly Servants, yet let it not be our Choice, to have Servants, that
shall be noted for any visible and notorious Ungodliness; you had better take a
Serpent into your Houses, than a Profane, Swearing, Cursing, Drinking, Wanton,
Thievish, Lying, Child of the Old Serpent. There are many little Ingenuities,
which are used by men, for the Trials of their Servants, before they have them;
the Trials of their Capacity, their Sedulit^y, their Fidelity; but let your
main Trials for your Servants be, Whether they can say, as he, in 1 King. 18.
12. I thy Servant fear the Lord from my Youth. Now, a good Report, of them, is
therefore to be sought for An Onesimus, a Servant Born again, will be a
profitable Servant.

III. But having Chosen your Servants, and endeavored that they may be Choice
Ones, You are now, Thirdly, to attend unto some further Counsils, about the
well treating of them.

And here, there are Three things that you owe, yea, there are four things,
that me not be denied unto them.

Even, the Moral Philosophy, of the Heathen, ^^onounced, Three Things to be due
from a Master, unto a Servant; namely, Work, and Good, and Discipline; [ Nam
Cibus sine Opere facit Servum Porcum; Opus sine Cibo, Asinum; Castigain sine
utroque Canem] and, I am sure, our Christian Theology, will not Release you,
from any of ^he Debts which thus Ly upon you. Masters indeed should be Fathers
unto their Servants. It was a most suitable word, which a Celebrated Master
once had from those that were under him, in 2 King. 5. 13. His Servants came
near, and spoke unto him, and said, My Father. Thus, you should give your
Servants reason to testify concerning you, That man has been a Father to me,
as long as I have Lived with him. Now, that it may be so,

The first Thing that you owe to your Servants, is, Work. Let them have Work to
do, and let their Work be well done; countenance them not in any Idleness,
whereof there comes no Goodness. Now in Ordering the Work of your Servants, you
must Lay no Sinful Commands upon them, nor appoint them any Evil Work. It is
your Title in the Book of God, Masters according to the Flesh. You may Command
no further than the Flesh of your Servants; they may not by any Sin wrong their
own Souls, to gratify you; nor may you Command them to do any of those things
which are, the Works of the Flesh. Your Authority over your Servants, is
Derived from God; Oh! Let not that Auth^rity he employed against Him. The
Master and the Servants did but bring Everlasting Ruin (...) on one another,
in that horrid Action, where^ we read, in a Sam. 13. 28, 29. Absalom Conmanded
his Servants to Commit a most pernicio^ Villainy, saying, Fear not, have not I
Commands you? And the Servants of Absalom, it follows, (...) as be Commanded.
Send not your Servants upon the Devils Business; make not your Servant* the
Tools of any Wickedness; Let not you Servants be bidden, like Sennackeribs, to
Reproach the Almighty Lord; No, but like another Abraham, show that you would
not have the Conscience of a Servant in any thing Imposed (...) Again, in
Ordering the Work of your Servants you must Lay no Cruel Commands upon their
not appoint them Too Hard Work. If you must be Merciful to a Beast, you must
much more (...) Merciful to a Servant, in your not Over-working of him. A
Servant must not be handled like: Beast. The Strength of your Servants must b^
considered:

Quid far valent, Humeri, quid ferve recusant.

And you must so Proportion their Work to it that they may not Complain of you,
as the over burdened, over driven Israelites did, of their Egyptian
Taskmasters. Don't put them upon Cries and Groans, which God will hear in
Heaven His Holy Habitation! There are some whole Countries in the World, against
whom the (...) the Servant, is dreadfully gone up unto the lord of Sabbath. It
was the Law in Israel in ^ev. 25. 46. Ye shall not Rule ^ver one another with
^igour. Be a Master, but be not a Tyrant: Let ^ot your Servants have their
Lives Embittered, (...) Healths Impaired, their Bodies Macerated, (...) your
Tyranny. A David once, when he was himself, would not meddle with a thing,
whereby the Blood of a Servant had been Exposed. Yea, 'Twas the Speech of a
Generous ^agan, Our Servants are as our Poor Friends, and (...) in our Houses
not merely for Servitude, but for Patronage. But this is not all you have to
do, about the Work of your Servants; You are also faithful to Death your
Servants the Work of that Calling, for the learning whereof, any of them are
bound unto you. While you use them ^or Servants, you must so use them, that in
Time ^hey may come to be Masters. If Servants are with you, to Learn, any
Mystery in your Occupation, it will be a most Complicated, Cousenage and Robbery
in you, to Conceal that Mystery from them. Hide not from them any Ingenious or
significant Part of your Trade, out of any Cove^eous, Envious, Undermining
purposes. It was Enjoined about a Servant, arriving to the Period of his
Prentice-ship, in Deuteronomy. 15. 13, 14. Thou shall not let him go away Empty; thou
shall furnish him Liberally: This was that he might not be under (...)
Necessity of becoming a Servant again. Those Masters, who by letting their
Servants go away Unfurnished with the Skill of their Trades, do necessitate
them unto the Second Service (...) Journey men, are guilty of a great Iniquity.
But, if there be any Mystery of Iniquity in any (...) your Trades, don't let
your Servants understand any of Them. Show them not any Subtle and Shuffling
Tricks, which belong to the Arts of Cheating. No, I will speak in the words of:
Witty Writer, If thou art Skilled in any Black Art keep that unto thy self, and
the Devil from whence it came. If you put them upon the doing of any Fraudulent
thing for your advantage, you will make them Incur that Threatening, in Zeph. 1.
9. I will punish them, which fill their Masters Houses, with Violence and
Deceit.

But now, having well ordered the Work of your Servants, the Second thing that
you owe to them, is, food. Let them not want their Food, nor any of that
Physic, or that Clothing, which may come under the Reckoning of, A Food
Convenient for them. This is the Demand of God, in Col. 4. 1. Masters, give
unto your Servants, that which is just and equal. It is but just and equal,
that you should Food them, and Help them, that Serve you. As for the Diet of
your Servants, when they are Well, which is one thing that belongs unto their
Food, this is to be Wholesome and Enough. It was said, in Luke 15. 17. How many
Hired Servants of my Fathers, have Bread Enough. They will not for Shame ask
for Dainties. The Proverbs of the Wise man, have Stigmatized, A Servant that is
Delicately brought up. Nevertheless, Bread they should have; and so much Meat,
and so much Drink, as may be reasonably Esteemed, Enough. Our Lord has told
(...), The Labourer is Worthy of it. Again, As for the Relief of your Servants,
when they are Ill, which is another thing that belongs unto their Food, you are
to show your Compassion on them, (...) it. He was a Detestable Amalekite, of
whom ^ was said, in 1 Samuel 30. 13. My Master left me, because Three Days
agone, I fell sick. The Neglect of them, is their Sickness, will be a sort of
Murder, in the Account of God: and a witholding of any Justice from them for
their Sickness, is as Dishonorable, as Uncharitable. The Centurion, was a
Soldier, and though the Persons of that Profession, are usually more Hard
hearted than others are, yet when he had a Servant lying Sick, how much
concerned was he!

Once more, The Clothing of your Servants, at all Times, this also is a thing,
that goes with their Food; and it should be Neat, Warm, and Modest. It is
mentioned as the Character of a good Mistress, in Prove. 31. 21. She is not
afraid of the snow, for her Household; for all her Household are Clothed [not,
with Scarlet, as it is in our Translation; but] With Double Garments. Garments
for the Winter, as well as for the Summer, and Garments for the Lords Day as
well as for the Weekday; and these Double Garments, for the Sobriety of them,
well becoming the Condition of a Servant; a Master should see that a Servant
may be supplied with such Double Garments But this also, is not all that
pertains unto the Food of the Servants; for there are some Servants, to whom
Wages are by Contract Engaged; and it will be a Crying Sin, to Withold those
Wages. When a Laban, Oppressed a Servant, either by Denying, or by Delaying, of
his Righteous Wages, the Righteous God Interposes, with a Vengeance against
such a Master There are two Sentences of Sacred Writ, which fall methinks like
Thunderbolts upon the Heads of such Oppressors; The One is that in Jer. 22. 13.
Woe to him that uses his Neighbors Service, without Wages, and gives him not
for his Work. The Other is that in Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Thou shall not Oppress, an
Hired Servant: At his Day thou shall give him his Hire, neither shall the Sun
go down upon it; for he is poor, and sets his Heart upon it; Left he Cry
against thee to the Lord, and it be come Sin unto thee.

But the Food of your Servants, being thus provided for, Discipline, is the
Third Thing that you owe unto them: and this Discipline is to have a twofold
Aspect, The punishment of Evil (...), and, The praise of them which do well.
Faulty Servants are to be Rebuked; and some Servants are so Refractory, as to
come under that Lash, in Prove. 29. 19. A Servant will not be Corrected by
words; for though be understand, he will not Answer. Servants may not be
Indulged in any ^lothful, and much less, in any Thievish, practice; and if
Servants have any Ill Haunts, Drunkenness, Wantonness, Gaming, and
Company-keeping, they are to be strictly Restrained therefrom. If Words will
not operate upon them, you know the Portion of, The Servant who knows his
Masters Will, and does it not. And, yet, even the Stripes of such a Servant,
must be so moderated with Humanity, that he may not be thereby Killed, or
Maimed: Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth, and Life for Life, will be demanded, by
the Righteous God, the Judge of the Creepled Servant. But Faithful Servants are
at the same Time, to be Rewarded: We should let such Desirable Servants
perceive, that they are to us, as his was to him, in Luc. 7. 2. The Centurions
Servants was dear unto him. There are certain Encouragements, of Liberty to be
granted unto Servants at some Seasons; and there are the Encouragements of
Preferment, whereof some Servants may be capable; we are to Encourage all the
ways that we can, the Servant that shall any way deserve it.

But are these Three Things, all that you owe unto your Servants? No, There is
a Fourth, which is of more Importance than all the Rest; And this is, Your Care
about the Souls of your Servants. It will be the Care of an Abraham, He will
Command his Household, that they shall keep the way of the Lord. It (...) be the
Care of a Joshua, As for me and my House, we will Serve the Lord. The Apostle
says of Ministers, They watch for Souls, as they that must give an Account;
Thus it may be said of Masters; They must give an Account of the Souls, that
belong unto their Houses. Masters, When any Servant comes to Live with you, the
God of Heaven does betrust you with another Precious and Immortal Soul; a (...)
to be Instructed, a Soul to be Governed a Soul to be brought home unto the
Lord. At he said, in 1 King. 20. 20, 39. Behold, one brought a man to thee, and
said, Keep this man; (...) by any means, he be missing, then shall thy Life be
for his: Even so, God has brought the Soul (...) thy Servant unto (...) Soul;
if that Soul be utterly (...) nothing for the Salvation of it, thy Soul shall
go for that Soul. May the (...) on you, cause you, to be (...) of your
Servants, that (...) ever! Jab could say, in (...) 31. 13. I despises not the
Cause of my Man servant, or my Maid servant. Have thou a Man servant, or a Maid
servant? On! Despise not the (...) Servant But you will say, What shall we Do? I
answer; Do This for your Servants; Leave them not Unacquainted with, and (...)
in, the (...) of Religion. Let your Servants be able to say of you, as in Math.
22. 16. Master, the Teach the way of God, (...) Truth; and let then not be
Ignorant of any saving Truth. Again Do This for your Servants; enquire
critically into their Spiritual Estate before God. Be prudently Inquisitive
into their Experiences, into their Temptations, into their Behaviors. Further,
Do This for your Servants; Reprove every Miscarriage that may be Discerned in
them. Show them all the Paths of the Destroyer, whereto they may be Inclining,
and Lovingly, Solemnly, Scripturally Chide them out of those Paths. Once more,
Do This for your Servants; Require them to Do the Things that will be pleasing
unto God. Charge them to Repent of Sin, Believe on Christ, and Consider their
Ways, and Prepare for their Eternity, and not Omit the Daily Devotions of a
New Creature. Especially, the Commandment Charges you, to Charge your Man
servants, and your Maid servants, That they Remember the Sabbath Day, to
Sanctify it. If you will do such Things for your Servants, it will be said of
you, as it was of Solomon, in 1 King. 10. 8. Happy are thy men, happy are these
thy Servants, that stand continually before thee. But, Oh! Do one thing more,
for the Souls of your Servants; That is, Prap for them, You, Prap with them,
continually. There was a Prophet, that had a Servant, of whom, it is reported,
in 2 King. 6. 17. He Prayed, and said, Lord, I pray thee, Open his Eyes, that
he may see; and the Lord Opened the Eyes of the Young man. A pathetick, a
pertinent Prayer of a Master, for a Servant; Lord, Open the Eyes of my Servant,
that he may not go on blinded with Sin; and, Lord, Open the Heart of my
Servant, that he may cordially Receive the Influences of thy Grace! There was a
Captain that had a Servant, of whom, it is reported, in Math 8. 7. He came,
saying, Lord, my Servant Lies at home, Sick of the Palsy, grievously
Tormented. Every Master should thus be concerned in Prayer for a Servant; Lord,
I have a Servant sick by Sin O bring him out of his grievous Maladies! and
Lord, I have a Servant under sinful Estrangements from thee, O let him not Ly
in his grievous Unregeneracy! I have known Masters who rarely have had any
Servants, but what have afterward proved the Servants of God: Why, The Secret
Prayers of those Masters, fetch the Spirit of God from Heaven, on almost all
that Live with them. Thus ought, Masters to Pray; and in the hearing of their
Servants too, they ought thus to Pray. There was a pious man, who had an House
full of Servants; but it is reported, in Acts 10. 2. He feared God with all his
House, and prayed unto God always. A Praying Master, like Abraham, will be
very like to have Servants, like unto himself. But, Woeful, Rueful, will be the
Condemnation of those Prayerless Masters, whose unhappy Servants, must bring in
this Testimony before the Judgment Seat of God, Lord, This man did never
quicken us to Pray unto thy Majesty; we seldom heard him at Prayer, for a
whole Week, or a whole Month together! Masters, Consider of these Things in the
Fear of God: and Mistresses, Consider also, what is to be your part, in the
doing thereof.

(...) But having thus fairly and fully bespoke the regards (...) your Masters
for you, and shown (...) how concerned I am, that you may have (...) Masters,
(...) to you, O Servants, that the most of our Exhortations are to be directed.
(...) although you have your Duties, most sufficiently represented, in those
Express Edict, from the King of Herven, wherein you may read Him speaking of
you; yet it will not be miss to fetch out from those Heavenly Edicts, the
particular Duties which are Incumbent on you.

There are several sorts of Servants now together, in this Congregation. A
Servant, according to the Apostolical Description, (...) 1 Timothy (...) One that
is under the Yoke; that is, One that is under the Domestical and the Despotical
Disposal of another, by Other Bonds beside those (...) Nature. Some of you, are
under the Yoke of Servitude, by a perpetual (...), to those who have by Sword
or Price purchased a Dominion over you. Others of you are under the Yoke of
Servitude, by a Temporary Agreement, which you have made with some, to be
subject unto them for a while upon such and such Considerations. And there are
of both Sexes, both Men and (...), under both of these Yokes.

But, Let as many Servants, as are under the Yoke, now hearken, with a very
great Attention, that the counsils which the words of the Ever living God,
shall set before them. It was said, in Psalm. 123. 2. behold, as the Eyes of
Servants Look into the Hand of the Masters, and as the Eye of a Maiden to the
Hand of her Mistress, so our Eyes wait upon its Lord our God. Thus, Let you
that are Servants and Maidens, give a greater Attention unto the words of the
Lord your God this Day, than ever you gave unto any Master, or Mistress what
soever.

1. This is the first Counsil that calls for your Attention; Servants, In the
first place, Become the Devoted Servants, of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is, The
Lord of all. O that you might all of you ^e able to say, as he in Psalm. 116.
16. O Lord, Truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant. It is Observable, That
the Homage which we owe unto the Heavenly Lord, is ordinarily described by
Metaphors drawn from the Service, of an Earthly Master. Among such Metaphors, I
take a special Notice of this One; That the Lords calling of a man to Serve
him, is expressed by His calling of that man, unto His Feet: In the Hebrew
Original of the Old Testament, the (...) for, A Servant, usually is, One at the
Feet of his Master. At their Tables they Lay down on Carpets, and so the
Servants that waited on them, stood at their Feet behind them. Thus among the
Roman Writers also. Ad Pedes, or, A Pedibus, is the Phrase for a Servant: he
was a, Serv^s, who, Ad Pedes steterate Well then; Servants, Do you come away
unto the Feet of the Lord Jesus Christ; and whatever Service you have to do for
your Masters, Let something analogous to that Service be done in the first
place, unto that Holy, Holy, Holy Lord Almighty. It is commanded you, in Ephesians.
6. 5. 6, 7. Servants, Be obedient unto your Masters, as unto Christ; Not with
Eye service, but as the Servants of Christ; with good will, doing service as
unto the Lord. And it is again commanded you, in Col. 3. 2, 3, 4. Servants,
whatever ye do, do it Heartily, as unto the Lord; for ye serve the Lord Christ.
So then, This is the first Thing, that is to be urged upon you; Oh! That you
would become the Sincere, and Hearty Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ! Then we
shall hope to see you, Dutiful Servants unto those Masters and Mistresses,
under whom our Common Lord has Stationed you.

To bring you into this Blessed Service of the Lord, there are these
Directions, which in the Name of that Great Lord, My Lord, and your Lord, I
Charge you to comply withal.

First, Renounce, and, Forsake, the Service of those Invisible Masters, a
Slavery to whom, is inconsistent, with the Service of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Our Lord Jesus Christ has said, in Math. 6. 24. Ye cannot Serve God and
Mammon. Thus, ye cannot Serve the Lord Jesus Christ, and Serve the World, the
Fresh, and the Devil. Joshua said unto the Idolatrous People, Ye cannot Serve
the Lord. And, I say unto all, that still make sublunary Vanities their Idols,
Ye cannot Serve the Lord. Hear this. All ye Unregenerate Servants! It Is possible
your Service, to the Houses where you Sojourn, may for some things be Irksome
Enough unto you; Oh! but you are in another Service, that would be a Million
times more Irksome, if you were not stark Dead in Trespasses and Sins. The
Fashions of the World, you must Humor, the Cravings of the Flesh, you must
Fulfill the Temptations of the Devil, you cannot Resist. It may be said of you,
as in Jer. 5. 19. Ye have served strange Gods. Wretched Servants! Oh! That you
were more sensible of your horrible Captivity; When will you be Aware, when
will you be Weary of it! I tell you, a Turkish, or a Spanish Slavery, is not a
thousandth part so miserable, as the Accursed Slavery of your Souls, to the
Invisible Destroyers of your Souls. But will you at length take a Course, for
your own Deliverance, O Wretched Servants, that you are?

If any one should Counsel you, to Run away, from the Christian Masters in
whose Houses you reside, he would be a Wicked Counselor. A Run away Servant,
is a Dishonest, and a Disgraced sort of a Creature, among all the Sober part of
Mankind. It was uttered, as at Extreme Reproach, upon those to whom it was
offered, in 1 Samuel 25. 10. There be many Servant now adays, that break away,
Every man, from (...) Master. They are not meet Prisoners of War, out by the
Providence of God brought under further Necessities and Obligations; and yet
they think of Turning Fugitives! The Devil is the Driver of those Unfaithful
Servants, who Unlawfully Defeit the Service, wherein the Good Hand of God has
fixed them; and the Unavoidable Common where unto all such Run away Servants,
do generally Run themselves, would make one think that none but the Devil
Driven would at (...). Wherefore, As when a Servant hard(...) withal, was
Running away, an Angel of the Lord appeared unto that Servant, and said, in Gen
169. Return to thy Mistress, and submit thy self unto her Hands; thus, if any
of you are Designing or Desiring to Run away from your Masters, I do bring you
a Prohibition from our Great LORD this Day, Stay with thy Master, and submit
thy self unto him; if thou would not have the plagues of God, pursue thee,
wheresoever thou (...). Hearken to me, in this thing, thou uneasy Servant, and
Poor Servant, If sinners entice thee to Run away, Consent thou act.

But yet, for those Invisible Masters, I mean, those Tempters, and those
Tempers, which Enslave your Souls, in a Distance from God, here I will make no
Scruple thus to Counsel you, O Run away from your (...) Masters; as fast as you
can, and is far as you can, Run away from those Hellish Taskmasters! and I am
certain, I am not your Counselor to your Destruction, in thus urging of you.
Draw near to the Lord Jesus Christ with such a (...) as, that, in Isa. 26. 12.
O Lord, other Lords besides thee, have had Dominion over us, but now one (...)
alone. After this manner, plead with the (...) Lord Redeemer; Lord, If (...)
make the Life, I shall be Free indeed; (...) can bear (...) the (...) of a man,
who is my Neighbor for thy sake; but Oh! I cannot bear to be (...) and of a
Devil; send me therefore, thy (...) Spirit, O Lord, and let thy Spirit (...)
Free from the Insufferable Captivity, wherein I am sold under sin, and let me
no longer be a Servant of sin, unto Death, but being made Free from sin, let me
become the Servant of Righteousness forever. And what will be the Effect of
your thus pleading with the Lord! It will be that in Rom 8. 2. Made Free from
the Law of Sin and of, Death. Indeed you shall Sin still, and you shall Die
still; but you shall not be under the Law or Sin and of Death. I Will tell you how
IN will be; Among the Romans, there were Three states of men; there were the
Slaves, and there were the Free, and there were the Enfranchised The Slaves
absolutely depended on other men; the Free were altogether their own men; The
Enfranchised were such as had been Slaves, and were become Free; but yet
partook of a Middle state, between both. Now, the old Patrons, of such as were
afterward Enfranchised, still retained some kind of Hand upon them. Quinti^ian
says, The Patron might yet lay his Hand on the Enfranchised man; he might
Seize him, he might Strike him, though he might not lay him under Chains, much
less take away his Life. Even so, when the Lord Jesus Christ has once
Enfranchised thee, Sin may vex thee, Death may smite thee, but yet thou art
rescued from Chains forever, nor shall thy Soul Die by the hands of thy old
Oppressors.

But herewithal, Secondly, Resign your selves up unto the Service of the Lord
Jesus Christ, in giving the Consent of your Souls unto the (...) Covenant; and
let this be with you, A Covenant never to be forgotten. Probably, the most of
you, have been Baptized in your Infancy, as being Servants Born in the House of
the Lord Jesus Christ. Well, your Baptism is the Livery, which you wear of your
Service to that most Illustrious Lord. But are you, by such an Early
Anticipation, become the Covenant Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ? Then,
Renew your Baptismal Covenant, and again, and again, and many Times over,
Dedicate your selves unto the Service of your Savior. And, let every one of
you, from your Hearts, make that Profession before the Lord Jesus Christ, in
Psalm. 119. 38. Lord, I am thy Servant, Devoted unto thy Fear.

Holy Apostles, have counted it their matchless Honor, to be styled, The
Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ; Yea, mighty Emperors, have worn that style,
as their Crown, The Vassals of the Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, the Brightest, and
Highest Angels in Heaven, are the Servants of that Lord. And, will you, ye mean
Servants among the worms of the Dust, be loath to come into so glorious a
Service? Behold, the way to it. Give the Consent of your Souls, unto the
Covenant of Grace; and according to the Terms of that Covenant, as Hezekiah
speaks, yield your selves unto the Lord.

There is the Tender of a New Covenant, made unto you; and even unto the
Meanest, and Vilest, and most abject Slave among you all; unto the Proposals
whereof, Let this be the Answer of your Conquered, and Converted Souls.

Thou Ever-blessed God; Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
I am Willing to abandon all the Corrupt Interests of this present Evil World,
and Return to Thee, Converse with Thee, Delight in Thee, as my best Good, and
my last End for ever.

I am Willing that the Lord Jesus Christ, the only Mediator, should as a
Priest, a Prophet, and a king, so all that for me, which he does for all his
chosen, in bringing them home unto Thy self.

I am Willing, in Gratitude unto the Lord Jesus Christ, for my Salvation freely
Purchased and Applied by him, to Serve him, in Constant Endeavors to Glorify
him according to the Rules of his Gospel (...)

Unto all of This I am Willing, and it is (...) Sovereign Grace that has made
me willing. May I now be kept and (...) by the (...) of that Grace, in all
Thankful Obedience before the Lord.

Servants, Here set your Hands with your (...) you let there be some Accom(...)
Prophecy, in Isa. 44.5. One (...) the Lords and another shall subscribe (...)
unto the Lord. Here are those (...), which when you have Religiously Sub(...)
you will become the Servants of that (...), who has Thousands of Thousands of
Angels Ministering unto Him, and Ten Thousand Times Ten Thousand that stand
before Him. I do not Ask, Whose you are. But if you truly come up to this
Transaction, the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, the Lord of Glory, will say of
(...), as in Ezekiel. 16.8. I enter into a Covenant with thee, says the Lord God,
and they becomest mine. They are no Inconsiderable Persons, I assure you, that
may be called, The Men of God!

But their, Thirdly, Carry your selves in the Service of the Lord Jesus Christ,
according to the sit Carriage of a Servant. Be studious to Know the Service
expected by the Lord Jesus Christ: Like Paul, Say before Him, Lord, what
would thou have me to do? Like Samuel, Say before Him, Speak Lord, for thy
Servant hears; like David, Say before Him, I am thy Servant, Lord give me
Understanding that I may know thy (...) Again, Be Ready to Do the Service
Expected by the ^^rd Jesus Christ; never Dispute any of His Commandments, but
say, They are all Holy and Just and Good; Esteem them not as Hard Sayings, any
things that he shall says but join with the Psalmist, in your saying, Lord, I
Esteem thy Precepts, concerning all things to be Right. Furthermore, Contrive
continually, how you may be Serviceable unto the Lord Jesus Christ; and how you
may do Service for Him, with all that you are and all that you have, and all
that you can do; and Glorify him with your Spirits and your Bodies, which are
the Lords. I add, Be satisfied, with your Allowances from the Lord Jesus
Christ. John said unto Servants, Be content with your Wages; and Paul said,
unto the Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ; Be content with (...) things as you
have. Whatever may be your Person here, prove your Godliness, by your
Contentment with your Portion. If your Carnal (...) are not in all things
gratified, Meditate Servants must not be Choosers; My (...) Master, sees it not
fit for me to have these Little Things; and why should I murmur?

But Finally; Devote your selves unto the Service of the Lord Jesus Christ
(...) We are very much provoked, when our Servants do Delay going where we in
(...) have sent them. Servants, I must (...) unto the Lord Jesus Christ (...)
and I one with (...) the Have imaginable. Your Souls are Damning every Hour,
till you have gone to the Savior of Souls; wherefore I say, Go presently; and
as Jonathan said unto his Lad, Make speed, haste, stay not! Our Servants are
most of them, yet in their youth; Oh! that they would not let their youth pass,
before they become the Servants, of that Lord, who says, They that seek Me
early shall find me. It is a Golden Sentence, in Lam. ^. 27. It is good for a
man to hear the yoke in his youth. Servants, you are under a yoke in your
youth; but that so few of you, do while you are Young, affect the Easy yoke of
the Lord Jesus Christ, This is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation.
It is the Precept, in Eccl. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy
youth; which we may render, In the Days of thy Choice. Come then, young
Servants, make your Choice this Day; I say, as he of old, Choose whom you will
Serve. Choose wisely; and say not in your Choice, I will serve the Enemies and
the Undoers of my Soul; but say, Lord, I will be thy Servant, I will desire to
Fear thy Name for ever.

And now having thus bespoke your Service unto out Common Lord, the next
Counsil, that must make you happy is,

(...) Let your Service unto the Matters [and Mistresses] of the Families,
where you are Servants, be such, that the Lord Jesus Christ may thereby be
Glorified.

It has been among the Wretchednesses of Mankind, that Servants have ordinarily
been so had, as to bring a Discredit upon the very Names, which were once
innocently and agreeably used, for all that rank of people. Some Names, that
formerly signified no more than Servants, now carry all the Dishonesties of
Knavery and Villa^y in their signification, because that Servants have so often
been Dishonest. But now may God help you, Our Servants, instead of bringing a
Blemish upon your own poor Names, to bring a Glory unto the Name of that Lord,
whose Name indeed is Exalted far above all Blessing and Praise.

It is brought, as a Great Motive to make a Good Servant, in Tit. 2. 10. That
they may Adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, in all Things: and in 1 Timothy 6.
1, 2. That the Name of God, and His Doctrine he not Blasphemed. Let me tell
you, Servants, The Glory of God your Savior, is very much concerned, in your
Conforming to the Laws, which are given for Servants, in the Doctrine of that
Lord. If Servants behave themselves holily and usefully, according to the Laws
of this Doctrine, What will Ensue upon it? Why Servants do usually carry
La^horns before us; Truly, You Servants will by a wise Carriage, have your
Light so shining before men, that others will Glorify your Master in Heaven,
upon your Account. But, if you that are Servants, professing a subjection unto
the Lord Jesus Christ, shall allow your selves In any (...) the Glory of God
your Savior will thereby suffer exceedingly. And of this, I have a very
particular Warning to give unto you, that frequent the Private Meetings of
Young People, to Pray, and Sing, and Repeat Sermons, and Confer with one
another. While such Private Meetings are not Perverted and Abused, they will
prove Real Blessings, unto the Neighborhood; and your Masters will be glad of
your going sometimes to such Nurseries of Piety. But if you give your Masters
(or Mistresses) any just cause for this Reflection, That since you have gone to
Private Meetings, you grow more slothful, and more saw^y, and that their
Business is more neglected, and that they have less Command over you; and that
you keep Unseasonable Hours, and that when you are together, you Talk and Hatch
mischievous Things, You are but so many Impious Hypocrites. Woe to you,
Servants, Hypocrites, if you make your Private Meetings the Incentives or
Occasions of any Wickedness. It Is pity that Satan should get so much (...) to
Reproach and Confound the desirable Opportunities of Soul Good, which you may
have at well regulated Private Meetings, as has been given, by some Servants,
that have been Ungodlier Servants after their being there than they were
before. I see, I mind, the Wiles of your Adversary the Devil! and therefore, I
do vehemently Admonish you, That you do not Endure any One Person, in your
Private Meetings, whose Master shall justly set the brand of Undutiful Servant
upon him.

And now, What I say unto You, I say unto All; But I say such things as these.

1. Whatsoever Service you do for your Masters (or Mistresses) do it as a
Service unto the Lord Jesus Christ. How urgently is this noble Principles for
your Service, in the Book of God set before you? You have it, in Bph. 6. 5, 6,
7 Servants, Be obedient, in singleness of Heart, as unto Christ; Not with Eye
service, as men pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, Doing the Will of God
from the Heart; with Good will, doing Service, as unto the Lord, and not unto
men. You have it again, in Col. 3. 23, 24. Servants, Whatever ye do, do it
heartily, as unto the Lord, and not unto men; Knowing that of the Lord you
shall Receive the Reward of the Inheritance; for ye Serve the Lord Christ.
Whatever Lawful Service you are set about, Consider this with your selves, The
Lord Jesus Christ, has put me into my Service, and the Lord Jesus Christ, has
now bidden me do such (...) Service; Wherefore the Service which I am now set
about, I Will do it cut of Respect unto the Lord Jesus Christ; I Will do it,
because the Lord Jesus Christ will be Dishou^ured, if do it not. An honest man
once, Cutting of Word, was asked. Who are you at Work for? and ^e piously
answered, I am Cutting of Wood for God. Whatever you do in your Service, in the
House, in the Shop, in the Field, or in the Ship, you may do it all for the
Lord Jesus Christ; You may Sanctify all your Servile Employments, by doing them
under this Consideration, The Lord Jesus Christ has Commanded me to Obey my
Master and my Mistress. It was the Speech of a Great man, The Work of a poor
Milk-Maid, if it ^e done with an Exercise of Grace, is more glorious ^han the
Triumphs of a Caesar. Truly, the meanest Work that you have to do, in your
Service, though it be in the Stable, or the Kitchen, you may thus render very
Glorious; Do it with such a Consideration as this, Though it be a mean Thing
that my Master, or my Mistress will have me to do, yet it is the Will of the
Lord Jesus Christ, that I should now do it; and therefore I will do it
cheerfully. A Great King once Expressed this thing, ^n that verse.

Nenti fila Deus mentem Conjungit Olympo. Or,
The Hand the Wheel does Ply,
The Heart's with God on High.
I say, The Favor of the Eternal King, will ^e toward so Wise a Servant. And
now, What Wonderful Consolation, may this be unto you' under all the
Difficulties of your Service! The Lord Jesus Christ is your Master; if you
cannot spend, and stoop, for a mortal man, like your selves, cannot you do it
for such a Master as the Lord of Hosts? It may be, you will have Little Pay from
any man, for what you do Yea, but the Lord Jesus Christ will be you Pay master:
He will Grant you Everlasting Recompenses, in that Blisful World, where not the
Least Thing that has been done for the Lord shall ever be forgotten!

II. Yield unto your Masters (and Mistresses) that Re^erence, which is due from
a Servant unto a Master. Since by the Ordination of God, you are made Servants,
don't think much o^ that Inferiority, which is to be confessed by you, as long
as you are Servants. It is an Apostolical Instruction, in 1 Cor. 7. 21. Art
thou called, being a Servant, Care not for That For he that is called, in the
Lord, being a Servant, is the Lords Free man. Even so, though thou should be a
Free man of the Lord Jesus Christ, count not thy self too Good therefore to be
a Servant. The Proud Hearts of many Servants, make them discontented, at the
Lowness of their present Station, and at the Lowliness which they must Express
in their Station. But I am to remind you, That this Pride was the Sin of the
Devils; the Devils could not bear to be Servants in such a Station as the
Almighty God had appointed for them. Servants, be Humble; if you would not fall
into the Condemnations of the Devil! you are sometimes Proudly Enough
concerned, (...) may be, that your Clothes are no finer, and you affect an
unsuitable Gayety and Gallantry. But i^ you would have Ornaments indeed upon
you, Then, as the Apostle speaks, you must be Clothed with Humility; that is,
Wear Humility, as a Badge, of your being Servants, unto that Blessed Lord, who
once took on Himself the Form of a Servant. Now one Discovery of your Humility,
is to be, in a Reverent or a Respectful Demeanor toward those, whom God has
made your Masters. It was said, in Mal. 1. 6. If I be a Master, where is ^y
Fear? You ought always to Observe your Masters, with a Fear of Disobliging
them; and you ought always to Obeserve in your Masters, ^n Ordinance of God,
which calls for your submissive, your Conceding, your Complying Disposition,
toward them.

If your Masters are those that have the Fear ^f God in them, You then have not
the Less, ^ut the more cause to Fear Them, with your most Awful Regards. The
more of God there in them, the more Fear you should have ^o Displease them.
Methinks, It should be a pleasant Thing, to Serve, a Servant of God! ^ea,
though your selves may be as well as they, in the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom
here is neither Bond nor Free; though your ^^lves may have the same God, and
the same race, and the same Hope, with your Masters, and may sit at the same
Table of the Lord; Yet, hear what is required in 1 Timothy 6. 2. They that have
Believing Masters, let them not Despise them, because they are Brethren; but
rather do them Service, because they are Faithful and Beloved, Partakers of the
Benefit. Nay, but what if your Masters are without the Fear of God? Still you
must not be without the Fear of them. Overlook their Failings; and be as loath
to see their Follies, as Japhet and Shem were to see their Fathers Nakedness:
but be mindful of the Charge, in 1 Pet. 2 18. Servants he subject unto your
Masters, with all Fear; not only to the Good and Gentle, but also to the
Froward; Let their base Tricks be never so many. Briefly, you should Think
Reverently of your Masters, and Speak Reverently of your Masters; Don't
Reproach your Masters, as that wicked Servant Ziba, Slandered his of old.
Preserve the Honor of your Masters Abroad, as well as at Home^; and be not a
sort of Spies, upon the Houses of your Masters, to carry Tales abroad, whereby
They may be Defamed. Instead of That, You are to Imitate your Masters in all
their Laudable Properties and Practices What? Have you discerned, that your
Masters are Praying Men, Honest Men, Laborious Men, Men that Walk with God, and
Men every way Conscientious? Learn of such Masters, or else your Masters will
rise up as terrible Witnesses against you, in the Day of Gods pleading with you.

And at the same time all Sullenness, all Sa^ciness, all Impudence, in your
Deportments toward your Masters (or Mistresses) is to be abominated, as indeed
most abominable. Sadly was that Good Man of the East, plagued with Bad
Servants, when he could say, in Job. 19. 16 I called my Servant, and he gave me
no answer. Servants that will speak Nothing, when modest Answers are Expected
from them, and Servants that will speak Too much with a malapert Answering
again, giving it may be, Two words for One, when they are Chidden for their
Faults; and Servants that must have their own way and will; these are too
Irregular Things to be Endured!

III. Let your Obedience to your Masters (and Mistresses) while you are
Servants be such, as will manifest that you are the Obedient Children of God.
You are the Animate, Separate, Active Instruments of other men. Servants, your
Tongues, your Hands, your Feet, are your Masters, and they should move
according to the Will of your Masters. It you are those Eye-servants, who will
Obey your Masters no longer than their Eye is upon you, know it, the Eye of the
All seeing, and Almighty God, is upon you, to Condemn you, for this
Disobedience. The most becoming intercourse between Masters and Servants, is
that in Math. 8. 9. I say to this man, Go, and he goes; and unto another, Come,
and he comes; and unto my servant, Do This, and he does it. You should ^y a
Ready Obedience, procure the pleasure of your Masters, to be as well Executed,
as if you Masters themselves did Execute it; and let I not be said by them, I
must Command my man and do it my self. It was said, in Romans 6. 18 His Servants
ye are, to whom you Obey. You have but the Name, the meet, the bare Name of
Servants, if you don't Obey your Masters; and, that I assure you, is not a
Little Criminal! The ju^ Commands of your Masters, cannot be broken but at the
same instant you break the Command of the most High God, whose Kingdom Rule^
over all. As it is said of Magistrates, in Romans 13 2. Whosoever Resis^eth the
Power, Resis^eth the Ordinance of God; and they that Resist, shall Receive:
themselves Damnation. So may it be said of Masters; Their Power over you is the
Ordinance O God; When you Refuse or Forget the Doing of what they have Bidden
you to do, you do so far affront the Ordinance of God. So then, the Anger of
your Masters is not all that you do by your Disobedience Expose your selves
unto; you become obnoxious to the Anger of a Dreadful God, by your
Disobedience. Think of it, Servants; When you have wilfully, yea, or though but
carelessly, transgressed, the Commands of you Masters, you may thus animadvert
upon you^ selves, I have Sinned against God, in this Miscarr^ age!

It Is true; Your Obedience unto your Master is to be Limited by that caution,
in Col. ^. 22. Servants, Obey in all Things, your Masters, according to the
Flesh, in singleness of Heart, fearing of God. If your Masters put you upon the
doing of any thing, that is contrary to the Fear of God, then, in the Fear of
God, forbear to Obey; rather Suffer than Obey. When your Masters will have you
to Cheat, or Lie, or Profane the Sabbaths, now you are to, Obey God rather than
man; there is that prohibition for you, in 1 Cor. 7. 23 Be not the Servants of
men A Joseph would Obey his Master, while he required of him nothing Ungodly or
Unrighteous; he would not Obey his Mistress, when she would have him, to do a
great Wickedness, and Sin against God.

But as long as your Masters (or, Mistresses) do give you no Commands, contrary
to those in the Word of the Lord, you are so long to Obey them in the Lord. And
you are all most of also do it, when the Commands of your Masters, are he very
same that are in the Word of the Lord. If your Masters bid you to Read, and
Hear the Word of the Lord, and Live according to the Word, and give them some
account of your proficiency by that Word; Obey them Conscientiously. Masters,
It they will not Obey you in hose things, Turn them out of Doors.

IV. Let your Diligence in the Service of our Masters (and Mistresses) be such
as to render you Profitable and Acceptable Servants. There are many slothful
Servants; and Servants, that would willingly Sleep away, or Talk away, if not
Play away, all their Time: Will you now set the Brand of such a Servant? You
shall see it in Mat. 25. 16. Thou Wicked and Slothful Servant. We are told,
Cursed will he be who does the Work of the Lord Negligently; and I will venture
to say, He who does his Masters Work Negligently, shall not be Blessed. Eliezer
had a Good Master; and such was his Diligence, that he would not Eat his
Victuals, till he had seen some Dispatch of his Masters Business. Jacob had an
hard Master, yet such was his Diligence about the Business of that Church of a
Master, that he could say, In the Day the Drought Consumed me, and the Frost by
Night, and my Sleep departed from my Eyes. If Servants were thus Diligent, they
might even then Serve their Masters, and themselves too, and get a fore hand
wonderfully; [Though it must be still with the Allowance of their Masters, if
they would honestly Do for Themselves.] It was said, in 2 These. 3. 10. This we
Commanded you, that if any would not Work, neither should be Eat. There are
Servants, of whom they say, -- Sunt Omni Tempore Tardi,
Sudant quando vorant, frigescunt quando Laborant


They Eat until they Sweat, and Work until they Freeze: But the Spirit of God,
has, you see, passed this Judgment on them, The worst Meat they can Eat, is too
good for them. Whereas there is a Notable Prophecy concerning the Diligent; you
have that Prophecy in the Proverbs of Israel; it is in Prove. 10. 4. The Hand of
the Diligent makes Rich; it is in Prove. 12. 24. The Hand of the Diligent shall
bear Rule; it is in Prove. 22. 29. See thou a man Diligent in his Business? He
shall stand before Kings, he shall not stand before mean men. So then, where
you see a Diligent Servant, you may ordinarily Prophecy concerning him; That
Servant will one Day be Preferred; yea, if it he possible, he will be a Rich and a
great Master, before he Dies.

But among many Instances of Diligence, which a Servant is to give, a more
special one is, An Expedition in these Errands which he may be sent upon. It is
one of the Proverbs, in Prove. 10. 26. As Vinegar to the Teeth, and as Smoke to
the Eyes, so is the Sluggard to them that send him. There is nothing more
offensive than a Servant that stays Loitering upon his Errands. Let Servants go
and come nimbly, and be upon the Wing in the Errands of their Masters, if they
would not have the Blemish of Hateful Sluggards ^y upon them. Thus, I Exhort
Servants to be Obedient unto their own Masters.

V. Let your faithfulness to all the Interests of your Masters (and Mistresses)
be such, that you may be, the Faithful Servants who shall a found with
Blessings. It Is of the Extremest Consequence for you, to Act according to that
Injunction of Heaven, in Tit 210. Not purloining, but showing all Good
Fidelity. The Sons of Jacob, could say, Thy Servants are True men. Our
Servants, We must have you to be the Children of Our Father Jacob. Of a
Faithful Servant, it is said, in Prove. 25. 13. He Refreshes the Soul of his
Master.

You are to be True in your Words. Oh! Never go to put off your Masters, with a
Lie, in any matter whatsoever.

Dare to be True; Nothing can need a Lie;
A Fault, that needs it most, grows Two thereby.
And, I beseech you that are Masters, to forgive in your Servants any Fault
sooner than, a Lie; but let that Fault Never, I say, Never go Unpunished. There
was once an Atheistical Servant, who would go to put a Sham upon his Master,
with a Lie; his Master called him to an account, where he had been, and he
falsely said, in 2 King 5.25. Thy Servant went no whither: but you have heard
what became of that Servant; the Liar was made a Leper for ever. If you durst
offer a Lie unto your Masters, to Excuse or Cover any thing amiss, I will say,
What shall be done to thee, thou false Tongue? False Wretch; How will thou bear
the wrath of God, when thou shall cry for a Drop of Water to Cool the
^o^menting Inflammations, of that lying Tongue?

But you are to be True in your Works also. And here, as you must beware of
Betraying the Secrets of your Masters, or injuring the Nests where you lodge,
thus you must beware of Impairing their Estates We read of a Servant in Luke
16. 6,7. Who basely Defrauded his Master, of no less then Twenty, yea, Fifty
Per Cent but however the Forecast of such a Servant, was Parabolically once
improved in a Discourse of our Lord, yet the Stealing was Damnable and
Horrible. Servants, In the Name of the God, who is of Purer Eyes than to behold
Evil, or look upon Imquity, I do Vehemently Warn every one of you, to take heed
of Wronging your Masters unto the Value of a Penny as long as you live. Never
Give to Others, Never Take to your selves, of your Masters Goods, without their
Leave, unto the Value of a Farthing. Mark what I say; By every Act of
Dishonesty toward your Masters, you do but Entail Everlasting Disasters upon
your own Assayrs. Probably your own Assayrs will afterward be so unsuccessful,
that you shall see, you have Impoverished your selves a Pound, by every
Shilling, whereof you have Rob^d your Masters in such Pranks of Dishonesty
Unsprosperous Dealers there are, that will never Thrive. Why not? Because they
have heretofore Cheated those that Em^loy'd them, and the Lasting and Wasting
Vengeance of God will still haunt them for it. Or, (...) it should not be so,
yet by this Dishonesty you will give Incredible Wounds unto your own guilty
Souls. You must, if you are able, make some Rest^ution, some Reparation, for
the Wrongs you have done, to your Masters, but, if you are not Able to do That,
you must however make a most Penitent Confession of the Wrongs: Or, else you
must unavoidably perish under the Rebukes of a Righteous, a Jealous, and
Unreconciled God, throughout Eternal Ages! Thy Soul never can see Peace until
the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, who Restored that which He took not away,
have melted thy Heart, so as to make thee Restore as much as thou can, of
what thou have thus taken away. Do, Die before this be done, and, The Tormentors
of the Pit below, will Sieze and hold thy Soul, O thou Fraudulent Servant,
until thou have Paid the utmost Farthing; but then, that cannot be until the
very Heavens be no more!

VI. Let it be your Study to be Serviceable unto your Masters (and Mistresses)
Really, Thoroughly, Universally Serviceable. There has been an old saying
sometimes used. Quot Servi (...) Hosts, A man has so many Mischiefs, as he
has Servants. Oh! Confute that Saying, by your Doing, all the Friendly Offices
that you can possibly do for your Masters, in all their Many Interests. I
cannot but set before you, the Picture of a Servant, worthy to be an Exemple
through all Ages; it is that of Joseph, in Genesis 39. 2,3,4,5. The Lord was with
Joseph, and he was a Prosperous man, and he was in the House of his Master, the
Egyptian; and his Master saw that the Lord was with him, and that the Lord made
all that he did to prosper in his Hand. And Joseph found Grace in his sight,
and he Served him, and he made him Overseer over his House, and all that he had
he put into his Hand. And the Lord Blessed the Egyptians House for Joseph's
sake; and the Blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had, in the House, and
in the Field. A Servant worth Gold! Oh! make this your daily Prayer and Care,
Lord, make me a Blessing to all the Family where I Live! Servants, Have you no
Opportunitiesto Do Good unto your Masters? Ponder and Enquire, what you have.
Often put that Question unto your selves, Which way may my Master become the
better for me? You may be Serviceable to your Masters on very many Temporal
Accounts; Examine, How? But possibly you may be Serviceable to your Masters on
Spiritual Accounts also. May not your Masters Children for ever fare the better
for you, if you will be continually Teaching of them, and Praying for them?
This would be a wondrous Thing indeed, if the Children of those, with whom you
dwell, may have cause for ever to say, Blessed be God, for sending such a
Servant into my Fathers House; God has made that Servant a Father (or a
Mother) to my Soul; Had it not been for what I saw and heard of that Servant, I
might have been undone Eternally And may not the Other Servants of your Masters
be brought home to God, by your means, if you do watchfully take Pains with
them and for them? There was once a Servant Converted unto God, by happening to
over hear his Fellow Servant, Crying to God in Secret for his Conversion Yea,
The Souls of your Masters themselves; May not you be Instrumental to Recover
them from the Snares of Death? There was once a Noted Master troubled with a
Leprosy; it was Na^man; and the Addresses of his Discreet Servants, helped him
to the Cure of his Leprosy. It may be, thy Master has a Vice like some Leprosy
cleaving unto him; and is it not possible for thee now handsomely and modestly
to come unto him; and say, Sir, I pray, that you would give me Leave to do the
part of a true Servant in this one thing; I perceive your Prosperity is very
much Endangered, by some Temptations, whereof it would be well, if you were
more aware. If I knew of any one intending to Kill you, or to Rob you, unto do
you any manner of Hurt, I were a wicked Wretch, if I did not presently inform
you of it. Sir, I do now know of something that intends and threatens more
mischief to you than I can Express. You know Sir, What the Word of God soeaks,
about the Families that call not on His Name; you know Sir, What the Word of
God speaks about those that sit with vain persons; you know it is said, Swear
not at all; and it is said, Be not Drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess. You Will
Excuse my Freedom with you, Sir, and Believe that I desire nothing in this
World, more than your Prosperity. Speak thus into him; and if you cannot Speak
it, then Write (...) If thy M aster, be not a M onster, he I thank ^hee for
such a Representation: and, What know ^hou, O Servant, but thou may Save
thy M aster? However, be sure to carry thy Master in the Arms of thy Prayers
unto the Lord, for His Blessing; Do this every Day that comes over ^hy Head, as
long as thou Live with him.

VII. Those things which may have a Tendency to make you Ill Servants. Avoid
them Carefully, Religiously, Eternally. Wherefore that you may not be Bad
Servants, Abandon all Bad Courses whatsoever. And let all Mispence of Time come
under your very particular Detestation: Divide your Time justly between your M
asters, and your Own Souls; and Squander it not away, (...) any of those
Impertinencies, which will at all cause you with unutterable Bitterness to
utter that bitter Complaint, What Fruit have I of those things whereof I am new
Ashamed! No, But Redeem all the Time, you can, to accomplish your selves, with
such points of Knowledge and of Goodness, as may render you Amiable to all the
World. There is one special Mispence of Time, whereto Servants, and others, are
commonly addicted; and that is, The Reading of (...) Romances against which,
Let me become in Adviser, this Day; neither Desided nor Despises. Those
Romances usually be get, in the unwary Readers of them, very false Notions o^
Love, Honor and Virtue; and the Images o^ Servants occurring in them, are
usually full o^ Wickedness. Besides, The most of those Romances, are such
Foolish Tales, that the Readers instead of being the Wiser, or the Better for
them, have their minds very Sensibly thereby Tainted with a Frothy Vanity. You
shall there fore find, That when you have been Reading of a Romance, you will
have little Heart after wards to Read the Bible, the Book of God, and of Life.
But indeed! Are Books of Devotion or Books of True and Good History so Scarce
that like Swine, you have only the Husks of Romances to feed upon! I say,
Distemper not your Souls, with such Venomous Papers, as will ere long leave you
wishing, Oh! that I could now Recall the Time which I (...) in Reading of Silly
Romances! Oh! That I had spent that Precious Time, in Reading these Things that
might have helped me in the Service of God and of my Generation.

But of all the Pernicious Things, which do make Ill Servants, and are
therefore to be shunned by All Servants, there is none more Pernicious than
that of Evil Company! Servants, O Remember that Caveat of Wisdom, A Companion
of Fools, shall be destroyed. There are (...), of Evil Companions, in every
Town; those (...) i^ once you are in them, they will hold you fast in the Bonds
of Iniquity. It Is in Bad Company that you will get those Vicious Cursing,
Swearing, Wanton, Lying, Scornful, Habits, which will render you Abhorred, not
only by the Holy Lord, but also by all Sober and Virtuous Men. It Is in Bad
Company, that you will come to be bewitched with the Unlawful Games, of Cards, and
of Dice which have in all Ages been Thundered against, by a Cloud of Witnesses,
as well Pagans, as Christions, and Profane the Name of God, by Playing with
Pure Lots, which are Solemn and Sacred Things. It Is in Bad Company* that you will
hear the Words and Ways and People of God, Scoffed at, until you your selves
have Learned like wise to Scoff at them, and Sit in the Seat of the Scorner.
Your Masters are never like to have any Good of you more, if you are once
fallen into the Snares of this Evil Company. Nor is this all the Lamentation
and Mourning and Woe, which I am to produce concerning you; No, This Evil
Company will carry thee down with them unto the Congregation of the Damned for
ever; and the Fiery Furnace of Hell, will be Seven Times the Hotter upon thee,
for thy having of thy Old, Lewd, Mad Companions about thee, in that hideous
Place of Torment. How many forlorn Servants, have I beheld upon their Death
Beds, Looking upon their former Companions now visiting of them, as upon so
many Toads of Egypt in their Chambers, and Crying out, with the Dimness of the
Anguish, of the Second Death upon them, Oh! These Companions have been the
undoing of my Soul! Consider of these Things, O our Servants; Depart from the
Tents of those Wicked Creatures, lest you Perish in all their Sins.

Thus have the Duties of a SERVANT been displayed before you. What can I say
more but This? Consider with your selves, Were I my self, a Master, or a
Mistress, what sort of a Servant would I desire? So, Servant, go thy way, and
be thy self Such a Servant.

Let every Prentice now among you, Resolve thus, to Do his Master Good and not
Hurt, all the Days, of his being so Related. Shall I a little Reason with the
Lads? Why, Seven years will not last always; Behave your selves Virtuously,
until the Seven years, more or less, be Expired, and so, how meanly soever you
may fare, you shall have the Continual Feast of a Good Conscience in you, all
the Time of your Prentice ship; and when your Time is out, it is likely that
God will multiply His Blessings upon you; Men will Respect you, Employ you,
Value you; and at last, when Time shall be no more, Our Lord will set open for
you, the Doors of His Heavenly Fathers House, to which you shall be welcomed,
with a, Well done, Good and Faithful Servant, Enter into Joy.

Let every Handmaid, now among you, Resolve thus to Reply unto these things,
Behold; the Handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according (...) thy Word! There
was once, A Little Maid waiting on the Wife of Naaman, who brought the (...)
where she Served, into such an Acquaintance, with the God of Israel, that they
had cause (...) praise God for ever, for such a Maiden. One Maid in a House,
that shall be a Wise V^rgin were, may gloriously Enlighten it. Will you ^hen be
such prudent, such painful, and such prayerful Maids, and so busily, so
thriftily manage the Things committed unto you, and have such a Motherly Regard
for the Children which are perhaps to be Tended by you, as that your Mistresses
may have cause to count you their Children, rather than their Servants? Even,
Maid servants may be among the Daughters, that shall be as Corner Stones in our
Houses, and polished for the Building of the Temple.

And will not the Scores of Slaves, the poor Blacks, now also in this Assembly,
Give Earnest Heed, unto these words of God? Give Ear, ye pitied Blacks, Give
Ear! It is allowed in the Scriptures, to the Gentiles, That they May keep
Slaves; although the Law of Charity requires your Owners to Use you, as those
that have Reasonable Souls within you. Yea, 'twould be against the Conscience
of any Good man, to keep you for Slaves, if he find himself unable to use you
according to that Law of Charity. But the most of you, have so little cause to
desire you being my other man slaves as you are, and where you are that it
would soon make you miserable to be otherwise. You are better Fed and better
Clothed, and better Managed by far, than you would be, if you were your Own
men. All that now remains for you, is to become first the Good Servants of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and then, of those that have purchased you. There was a
Country of Swarthy People, of whom 'twas foretold in Psalm. 68. 31. Ethiopia,
[or, more truly, Arabia] shall soon stretch out her Hands unto God. Well then,
poor Ethiopians, do you now Stretch out your Hands unto the Lord; even those
poor Black Hands of yours, the Lord calls for them. Lift those Hands of yours
in Petitions to the Lord; Pray constantly, as well as you can, That the Lord
would make you Servants unto Himself, and Pardon you, and Accept you, and Save
you, through Jesus Christ for ever. Set those Hands of yours to Engagements to
the Lord; Vow solemnly as well as you can, That you will be the Servants of the
Lord, by the Help of His Grace, as long as you Live. And be sure, that you
never Stretch forth your Hands, unto any Evil; always Keep your Hand from
doing any Evil; do not by Fornication, by (...) by Stealing, by Lying, by
Running away make your selves infinitely Black or than you are already. No, But
put yourselves into the (...) of the Lord Jesus Christ; he willing that the
Lord Jesus Christ, should make you His Own. And then, for the sake of the Lord
Jesus Christ be Good Servants, unto those that own you; Do for your Masters,
and your Mistresses, all the Service that you can; and be orderly in every
thing.

So, though your Skins are of the color of ^he Night, yet your Souls will be
washed White in the Blood of the Lamb: and be Entitled unto ^n Inheritance in
Light: Though you are in Slavery to men, yet you shall be the Free men of the
Lord, the Children of God: Though you are Fed among the Dogs, with the Orts of
our Tables, yet you shall at length, Ly down unto a Feast with Abraham himself,
in the Heaven of the Blessed. Been't you Discouraged; it will be but a Little,
a Little, a Little While, and all your pains will End in Everlasting Joys.

But if you will not be such Orderly Servants, it is a terrible thing that I
have to say unto you. All the Sorrows that you see in this World, are but the
Beginnings of Sorrows, and Little Emblems of the Sorrows that remain for you in
another. Do you meet with Hunger here? You shall there be Hungry and hardly
bestead for ever. Does the Heat Oppress you here? You shall there be Tormented
in a Flame hotter than that of Brimstone for ever. Does the Cold afflict you
here? You shall there have Gnashing of Teeth for ever? Do you here sometimes
want your Sleep? There you shall not Rest, neither Day nor Night, for ever? Are
you Beaten here? Why, the Devil will be your Overseer; and you will be Weltring
under intolerable Blows and Wounds, World without End.

Masters, These poor Negroes will hardly mind what I say; I pray, do you Repeat
it unto them.

And now, may the Lord bring us all to that Bliss, where Abraham the Master,
and Eliezer, or Lazarus the Servant, are together With the Lord for ever! Amen.

Quamvis hoc nee a Laicis videtur Exceptum, specialiter tamen Sacerdotibus
probatur Impositum, ut tales Ministros habeant qui Divinis Regulis non
repugnent.

Cassiodorus, Super Psalm. 100. FINIS.
Advertisement.
THERE is now in the Press, A Serious Discourse, Entitled, Unfruitful Hearers
Detected and Warned. Wherein the Danger of, and by, Unprofitable Hearing, is
laid open and cautioned against. As it was delivered, in the Course of his
Ministry, By Mr. Nehemiah Walter, Pastor of the Church in Roxborough. Published
by some of the Hearers.

Sold by Michael Perry, at his Shop under the West end of the Townhouse, in
Boston.


