Ecclesiastes.

The LIFE OF THE Reverend and Excellent, Jonathan Mitchel; A Pastor of the
CHURCH, AND A Glory of the COLLEGE, IN CAMBRIDGE, NEW ENGLAND.

Written by COTTON MATHER.

-- Simul et Jucunda et Idone^ dicere Vitae,
Lectorem Delectando Simul atque monendo.
MASSACHVSET; Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. Sold at the Booksellers Shops
in BOSTON. 1697.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To the Church at CAMBRIDGE in New England, AND To the
STUDENTS of the College there.
Right Worshipful, Reverend, and dearly Beloved.
THERE have been few Churches in the World so lifted up to Heaven in Respect of
a Succession of Supereminent Ministers of the Gospel, as the Church in
Cambridge has been. Hooker, Shepard, Mitchel, Oaks (all of them yours) were
Great Lights. You know that if Light has been brought into a Room, when it is
Removed, the Place becomes Darker, than if never any such Light had been there.
A Learned Pen in an Epistle Dedicatory to the Inhabitants of Boston in
Lincolnshire puts them in mind of what an Happy People they once were, Dr.
Tuckney Epistle prefixed to Mr. Cotton on Ecclesiastes.
while under the Teaching of Mr. Cotton who was from them removed to plant
Churches for Christ, in this American Desert: And pray's them to Consider, That
as Empires and Kingdoms, so particular Churches have had their Periods. Bethel
has proved a Beth-haven: In after times we find young profane Mockers in
Bethel, and scornful Neuters in Penuel. Go to Shiloh; think of the sometimes
Glorious Churches in Asia, says he. And he adds, That he had on purpose visited
some places, where God had before Planted His Church, and a Faithful Ministry,
to see, if He could Discern any Footsteps and Remembrances of such a Mercy, and
Lo, they were all overgrown with Thorns, and Nettles had over covered the Face
thereof, and the Stone-wall thereof is Broken down. And as he further well
observes, when the Lord has been provoked to remove the Candlestick, He is very
hardly induced to Restore it again. The Ark never returned to the same Place,
from whence it was in a way of Judgment removed, and the Glory of the Lord,
when after its Gradual Removes, was at last quite gone from the First Temple,
was not Restored in the Second, till Christ's First Coming, nor will it be in
this their Rejection, till His Second. Mercy forbid that such Things as these
should be verified in New England, or in Cambridge! That this may not be your
Case, it concerns you not wantonly to play or fight by the Light yet remaining,
but to make the Best Improvement of your present Advantages, giving all due
Encouragement to that Worthy Person, who is now over you in the Lord.

Concerning your Famous Pastor, Mitchel, I confess, I had the Happiness of a
special Intimacy with him, in his Life time, nor do I know any one Death (that
of natural Relations excepted) that ever has been so Grievous and Afflictive to
my Spirit, as was his (...) reason of his Eminent Parts and Piety (...) an
happy Influence on all these Churche^ Many of them fare the better at this Day,
(...) the Preachers whom they are now In^^^^cted by whilst Students at the
College lived un^^^ his Ministry. The College, Cambridge, New^^gland may
Glory, that ever such an One (...) his Education there! As for the Description
o^ ^is Life, by my SON Emitted herewith, I have nothing to say concerning the
Writer, or this Endeavor of his, because of my Relation to him; Only, that it
is what he could Collect, whet^er by Informations from those that knew that
Ex^^lent man, or from his private Manuscripts, w^^ich he had the perusal of. It
is not without (...) Providence of Christ, that it should be Committed to the
Press, at such a Time, when there are Agitations about some Disciplinary
Questions amongst your selves. What the Judgment of that Man of God was, you
have in the subsequent Relation of his Life presented to your view.

The Original Manuscript Written by Mr. Mitchel^s own Hand, I have by me.
Whether he committed his Thoughts to Writing, with any Design of Publication,
or for the satisfaction of some Persons in a more private way, I know not: but
it is now Evident, that when his Spirit was inclined thereunto, Heaven designed
his Meditations should be brought into public view. Whilst he was Living, you
that were of his Flock, had (and considering his great Worth and Wisdom, it
would have been a^ ^eproach to you, if you had not had) in high (...) of his
Judgment. Being Dead he yet speaks (...) ^ou, out of his Grave. Those of you
that (...) a ^^ving Remembrance of him, in your Hearts, will (...) discern
something of Mr. Mitchels Spirit (...) the way of his Arguing. He does therein
according to his wonted manner) express him (...) with gre^^ Caution and
Prudence, avoiding Extre^^^^ in the Controverted Subject. It cannot be denied;
but that there has been an Error in some Churches, who have made this or that
Mode to (...) Divine Institution, which Christ has not made ^o be so: And that
there has been an unjustify (...) Severity, in Imposing Circumstantials not
In^^^^ted, whereby some truly Gracious Souls have been Discouraged from
Offering themselves to join in Fellowship with such Churches. Thus it has been,
when an Oral Declaration of Faith and Repentance has been Enjoined on all
Communicants, and that before the whole Congregation; when as many an Humble
Pious Soul has not been Gifted with such Confidence. So likewise has it been,
when an Exact Account of the Time and Manner of Conversion has been Required:
Whenas there have been multitudes of true Believers (such especially as have
been advantaged with a Religious Education) that the Seed of Grace has sprung
up in their Souls, Mr. Baxter, of present Baptism. p. 129.133.
they know not how Mark 4.27. Mr. Baxter relates, that he was once at a Meeting
of many Christians as Eminent for (...) most in the Land, of (...) were
Ministers of Gr^^t ^ame; And it was desired, that every one should give an
Account of the Time and Manner of his Conversion, and there was but One of them
all, that could do it. And (says he) I A^^^r from my Heart, that I neither know
the Day (...) the Year, when I began to be s^ncere. For Churches, then to
expect an Account of that from all, that they Receive into their Fellowship, is
Unscriptural, and Unreasonable. Nevertheless, it concerns them to Beware of the
other Extreme ^f Laxness in Admission unto the Lord's Holy T^^^e. You know that
your Pastor Mitchel had a^ Latitude in his Judgment as to the Subject of
Baptism (as also Dr Ames, Mr. Cotton, and others of the Congregational
Persuasion had,) but as to Admissions to the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. I
know no man, that was more Conscientiously careful to keep unqualified persons
from partaking therein than was he. As for this or that Mode in Examining of
Persons, that offer themselves to be Communicants in our Churches, whether it
shall be by a more continued Relation of the Work of Grace, in their Hearts, or
by Questions and Answers (as was practiced in the Church at Hartford in Mr.
Hookers time, and which may possibly be as Edifying a way, as the former) or
whether the Persons designing to partake in the Lord's Supper, shall Declare
their Experiences Orally, or in Writing, are Prudentials, which (...) Lord has
left unto Churches to Determin^ (...) find most expedient for their own
Edifica^^^^. Nevertheless the Substance of the Thing (viz. ei^^^r a Relation,
as it is called, or an Equivalent) ought to be insisted on. Churches (...) bound
in Duty to Enquire, not only into the Knowledge and Ortho^^xy, but into the
Spiritual Estate of those whom (...) Receive into full Communion in all the
Ordinances of Christ. Some have thought, that such Qualifications are not to be
expected from Children born in the Church, as from Strangers; but they never
had that Opinion out of the Scripture, which says expressly concerning them that
wo^^d Eat the Passover, that, There is One Law to him that is Homeborn, and to
the Stranger. Exodus 1^ 49. Numb. 9.14. Wherefore in the P^^tform of Discipline
it is said, Capt. 12. 7.
The like Trial is to be Required of such Members of the Church as were born in
the same, or Received their Membership, and were Baptized in their Infancy, or
Minority, by virtue of the Covenant of their Parents, when being grown up to
years of Discretion, they shall desire to be made Partakers of the Lords Table,
unto which, because Holy Things are not to be given to the Unworthy, therefore
it is Requisite, that those as well as others should come to their Trial and
Examination, and manifest their Faith and Repentance by an open Profession
thereof, before they are Received to the Lord's Supper, and otherwise not to be
Admitted thereunto; These are the words, in the Platform of Discipline agreed
unto by the Elders and (...) the Churches in the Synod at Cambrid^^* (...)
which Synod, were Mr. Cotton, Mr. ^^gers, Mr. (...), Learned and Aged Divines,
b^^^des many others of Great Eminency. It is (...) the Opinion of men, but the
Scripture which (...) decide the Controversy. Nevertheless, the ^^dgment of
those Eminent Divines who had d^^ply searched into these Matters, is not to be
slighted. Nor is the Private Sentiment of this on that person, to be laid in
the Balance, with the ^udgment of a Synod, consisting of Persons, of far
^reater Authority than any younger ones pretend^d to be of a contrary Opinion.
Nor is there wei^ht in that Allegation, that when a man declares hi^ own
Experiences, he Testifies concerning himself, and therefore his Testimony is of
no validity. By (...) same reason it may be said, Churches are not to Examine
those, that Essay to Join themselves to them, about the soundness of their
Faith. For they may (as Arius did) profess, that they Believe Articles of
Faith, which God knows, they do not Believe, nor is there any thing but their
own Testimony to prove that they do believe as they profess. But above all,
their Notion is to be Rejected, as a Church corrupting Principle, who Assert
that the Sacrament is a Converting Ordinance. Papists, Erastians, and some
others, whom I forbear to mention have so taught; but their Heterodoxy has been
abundantly Refuted, not only by Congregational Writers, such as Mr. John
Beverly against Timpson, but by Worthy Authors of (...) Persuasion,
particularly by Mr. (...) his A^rons Rod, Dr. Drake in his Answer to Mr.
Hump^^s, and Mr. Vines, in his Treatis^ of the Lord's ^^pper. If the Sacrament
were appointed to be Converting Ordinance, then the most Scandalous (...) in
the World, yea, Heathen people ought to (...) it Administered unto them, for we
may not wi^^hold from them the Means appointed for their Conversion. The
Scripture says, Let a man Examine himself, and so let him Eat of that Bread. 1
Co^. 11.28. which clearly intimates, that if upon Examination, he finds himself
in a State of Sin and Unregeneracy, he ought not to Eat of that Brea^.

Blessed Mr. Mitchel would ^requently Assert, That if it should pass for
Current Doctrine in New England, That all persons ^^rthodox in Judgment, as to
matters of Faith, and not Scandalous in Life, ought to be admitted to partake
of the Lords Supper, without any Examination, concerning the Work of Saving
Grace in their Hearts, it would be a Real Apostasy from former Principles, and
a Degeneracy from the Reformation, which we had attained unto. I am willing
upon this Occasion, to bear my Testimony to the present Truth* and to Leave it
upon Record unto Posterity; not knowing how soon the Lord Jesus may by one
Providence or other (of which I have had several Warnings) remove me from my
present Station among these Churches. The Arguments which have induced me to
Believe and Testify, as now I do, are such as these.

1. Time was when (...) New England believed there was clean Scripture (...)
for the practice we plead for. Particularly that Scripture, Psalm. 40.10. I have
not hidden thy Righteousness from the great Congre^ation. And that, Psalm.
66.16. Come and hear all (...) that fear God, and I will declare what he ha^^
done for my Soul. And that Scripture, 1 Pet. ^^.15. be ready always to give an
answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, does by
just consequence intimate as much as what we assert. Some have been bold to
say* that since the Apostle in the place alleged, speaks of Believers
Apologizing for their Hope before Persecutors, it is an abuse of Scripture from
th^^ce to infer, that any thing of that nature ought ^o be done for the
satisfaction of Churches. But Renowned Mr. Hooker in a Manuscript which I have
seen, answering the Objections of some who disliked the practice of these
Churches, in Examining and Inquiring into the Spiritual Estate of their
Communicants, (especially their requiring an account from the Children of the
Church) argues Judiciously that if Christians are bound to give an account of
the grounds of their hope to Persecutors, much more to Churches that shall
desire it. So Mr. Shepard, the faithful and famous Pastor of the Church in
Cambridge, in his Answer to Mr. Ball. And to the same purpose, in the Platform
of Discipline it is inferred, that men must declare and show their Repentance,
and Faith* and Effectual Calling, because (...) reason of a well-grounded hope.
(...) any man ^o charge these Worthies of the Lord, and the Platform of
Discipline, which abusing Scripture when they made such an Inference, is a very
unbe^^ming presumption. It was formerly thought, that ^cripture Examples are
not wanting to warrant the practice of our Churches in this matter, since Jo^^
required those whom he admitted to his Baptism, to make a Confession of their
Sins. And (...) Apostles expected a Declaration of their ^epentance from such
as they admitted into the ^rimitive Church. Acts 2.38. And Philip Examin^^ the
Eunuch concerning the sincerity of his Fai^^. Acts 8.37.

2. That Principle which tends ^o bring persons not duly qualified, to partake
in Holy Things, must needs be displeasing to the Holy Lord Jesus Christ. He
would have his Servants to Distinguish betwixt the precious and the vile. Jer.
15.19. And to Turn away from such as have only the Form, and not the Power of
Godliness in them. 2 Timothy 3.5. they that have only a Doctrinal Knowledge, and
an External Conversation free from Scandal, without Regeneration. have no more
than a Form of Godliness. If Christians should not make such persons their
Familiars, certainly they ought not to Admit them to their Sacred Communion. It
is a very solemn word, which the Lord has spoken, saying, You have brought into
my Sanctuary Uncircumcised in Heart, to be in my Sanctuary to pollute it; even
in my House, when you Offer the Bread and the Blood. No Stranger Uncircumcised
in Hea^^ ^^^ll enter into my Sanctuary. Ezekiel. 44*7, 9. Tha^ man does but defile
the Sanctuary of the Lord, that has not the Water of Separation (^he Blood of
Christ through Faith) Sprinkled upon him. Numb. 19.20. But this Principle or
Position, That persons are to be admitted to the Table of the Lord, without
Enquiring into their Regeneration, tends to bring the Uncircumcised in Heart,
into the Sanctuary. If Churches should neglect all Examinations concerning the
Orthod^^y of those they Receive into their Communion; would not that have a
Natural Tendency to bring ^eterodox, and it may be Heretical persons into their
Communion! By a Parity of Reason, the Omitting all Enquiries, as to the
Spiritual Experiences of them that come to the Table of the Lord, has a
Tendency to fill the Sanctuary with those, who never had any Experimental
Knowledge of the Things of God.

3. The Church ought to know, as far as men can Judge, that the Persons whom
they Admit to the Lords Table are fit, and have a right to be there. Now none
are meet to partake of the Lords Supper, excepting such as have experienced a
Saving (...) Grace. They must be such as can and will, Examine themselves. 1
Cor. 11.28. And therefore must have the Matter of Self-Examination, which is
Faith, Repentance, and Love, and other Graces. Thus it was in the Primitive
Apostolical Church, Acts 2.47. The Lord added to the Church daily, such as
should be (...). Churches are to receive such as the Lord (...) ^^^eived (...).
14.1, 2, 3. Such as are United (...), 1 (...) 12.27. 1 These. 1.1. Living Stones
must be in that Building, 1 Pet. 2.5. Made ready by a work of Divine Grace on
and in them, before they are laid where; of which the Prepared Materials in
Solomon's Temple were a Type, 1 King. 6.7. They ought to be Saints, and
Eaithfull in Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 1.1. How shall the Churches know, that the
Persons who offer themselves to their Communion are such, unless they pass
under their Trial. Rev. 2.2. (...) a man claim Right to a Privilege, and yet
shows no sufficient Reason, he ought to be debarred u^til he can some way, or
other prove his Claim. It is true, the Judgment of Churches is fallible* Grace
being a Secret Thing, hid in the Heart* only Christ sees it: Churches cannot
always discern the Tares from the Wheat. Nevertheless, they may not willingly
receive in Hypocrites. Bellarmin himself is fain to Confess, as much as that
comes to. When such were found in Churches in the Apostolical Times, it is
said, that they crept in privily and unawares. Gal. 2.4. Jude 4. v. Which
intimates unto us, that they did not willingly admit such into their
Fellowship. When the Enemy sowed Tares in the Field, a Culpable Sleeping in
those, that should have been more Watchful was the cause of it. Math. 13.25.
They who object, that we are bound in Charity to believe, that the Persons, who
offer themselves to our Communion, are Regenerate, without ever making any
Enquiry into their Spiritual Estate, may with as good Reason affirm, that we
are bound in Charity to believe, that they are sound in the Faith, without
Examining them about that matter. A Rational Charity, grounded upon Evidence,
and not a Blind Charity is the Rule according to which Churches are to proceed.

4. That Practice, which Christ has owned with His special Blessing and
Presence, ought not to be Decryed as an Humane Invention, but rather owned as a
Divine Institution. Was not the Lord's Blessing Aaron's Rod an Effectual
Demonstration, that his Ministry had a Divine Approbation? Is not Paul's
calling to the Ministry, and Peter's also, proved from this Argument, that God
owned and Blessed them both? 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. Gal. 2.7, 8, 9. That Christ has
owned His Churches, in their Enquiries into the Spiritual Estate of such as
they admit into their Communion with His special Gracious Presence, is most
certain. Have not some been Converted by hearing others give an Account of
their Conversion! How many have been Comforted, and how many Edified thereby!
which proves, that this Practice is Lawful and Laudable, and that to
Stigmatize it so, as some have done is not pleasing to the Lord.

5. To use all Lawful means to keep Church Communion pure, is a Duty incumbent
upon all Churches, and most eminently on Churches in New England. It is known
to the World, that Church Reformation, and Purity as to all Administrations
therein, was the Thing designed by our Fathers, when they followed the Lord
into this Wilderness: And therefore Degeneracy in that Respect would be a
Greater Evil in us, than in any People. We shall not Act like Wise Children, if
we seek to pull down with our Hands, That House (or any Pillar-Principle,
whereon it is founded) which our Wise Fathers have built. The Debasing th^'
matter of Particular Churches must needs Corrupt them. A Learned and Renowned
Author has Evinced, That the Letting go this Principle, That Particular
Churches ought to Consist of Regenerate Persons* Owen. Theol. Lib. 6. cap. 8.
brought in the Great Apostasy of (...) Christian Church. The ^ay to prevent
the like Apostasy in these Churches, is to Require an Account of those, that
offer themselves to Communion therein, concerning the Work of God on their
Souls, as well as concerning their Knowledge and Belief. If once this Practice
and Principle of Truth be deserted, A World of unqualifyed Persons will soon
fill, and pester and corrupt the House of God, and cause Him to go far off from
His Sanctuary. We may then justly fear that these Golden Candlesticks, will be
no longer so, but become Dross, and Tin, and Reprobate Silver, until the Lord
has rejected them. Let us Dread to have an hand, in causing it to be so! It is
a solemn Passage which Mr. Cotton (whom Dr. Goodwin calls the Apostle of this
Age) has in his Judicious Treatise of the Holiness of Church Members. p. 60.
Methinks (says he) the Servants of God should Tremble to Erect such a State of
the visible Church, in Hypocrisy and Formal Profession, as whose very
Foundation threatens certain Dissolution and Desolation. True it is, That we
may not Do Evil, that Good may come of it. We may not Use any Unlawful Practice
to prevent Impurity, as to the matter of our Churches But no man can say, That
the Practice we plead for is Sinful. If then the Use of it may (by the Bl^ssing
of Christ) be a means to keep our Churches and Communion pure,, why should it
be laid aside? Mr. Mitchel in a Manuscript of his, which I have seen, has these
weighty words. The Over enlarging of full Communion or Admission of persons
thereunto, upon slight Qualifications without insisting upon the Practical and
Spiritual part of Religion, will not only Lose the Power of Godliness, but in a
little time, bring in Profaneness, and Ruin the Churches these two ways. 1.
Election of Ministers will soon be carried by a formal, looser sort. 2. The
Exercise of Discipline, will by this means be rendered impossible. Discipline
falling, Profaneness rises like a Flood. For the major part wanting zeal
against Sin, will foster Licentiousness. It is not setting down good Rules and
Directions, that will Salve it: For the Specification of Government, is from
men, not from Laws. Let never so good a Form of Government be agreed upon, it
will soon degenerate, if the Instruments (or men) that manage it, be not Good.
Blessed Mitchel! These are thy words; This was thy Spirit!

6. In the Primitive and Purest Times of the Church, there was great strictness
used in Examining such as were admitted to Sacraments, concerning the Sincerity
of their Repentan^^ toward God, and their Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
There are who pretend, That this is a N^w P^actice, begun by a few Separatists
in Amsterdam, not an Hundred years since. But such persons discover their
Ignorance, and that they are unacquainted and unstudied in Ecclesiastical
Story. Justin Martyr (who lived 150 years after Christ) in his Second Apology
for the Christians, writes, That they did Examine such as were Admitted to
their Communion, whether they were able to conform themselves in all things to
the Word and Will of God. If we would know what Things were practiced by the
Churches in the Primitive Times, the Writings of Tertullian, and Cyprian, (as
Learned Usher has truly observed) give us the clearest discovery thereof. It is
evident from them, that in those Days, there was rather too much Rigidity,
than too much Laxness, in their Admission to Sacraments. They would keep men,
who were Catechumens and Competentes a long time, before they did receive them
into full Communion in the Church. They Required not only a Profession of
Faith, and a Confession of Sins, but a Submission to a severe Scrutiny
concerning their Sincerity therein. Fiunt Scrutinia, ut saepius explorentur,
Alcuinu^
an post Renunciationem Satanae sacra verba datae Fidei radicitus Cord
defixerint. They were to be Examined again and again, to find out, whether the
Words of the Faith they professed, were indeed fixed in their Hearts. Cyprian
in his third Epistle says, Mihi labor est persuadere fratribus ut recipiendis
Consentiant, Vix Plebi persuadeo, ut ta^es patiantur admitti, quia nec cum vera
paenitentia venerant. That he could not easily persuade the Brethren in
Churches, to consent to the Admission of such Persons to their Communion, of
whose Sincere Repentance, there was any doubt. Origin declares, as much as that
amounts to. When in after Ages, Churches degenerated, Chrysostom complains,
that by Admitting ungodly men into the Church, they had filled the Temple with
Beasts, and he professed, that he would sooner choose to have his Right hand
cut off, than Administer the Sacrament to a Known wicked man. It is well known,
that the Waldenses, amonst whom Religion was preserved, during the Reign of
Popery, were strict in this matter. And so were the Bohemian Brethren:
Commenius testifies concerning them, that they used a Diligent Exploration,
concerning the Faith and Repentance of their Communicants, Ratio discipline.
Fratrum. Bohem p. 44. etc.
lest happily it should be only Superficiary and Fallacious. There was an Examen
Conscientiarum used amongst them. It must be acknowledged, that in the
Protestant Reformation, there has been a Great Neglect and Defect, as to what
concerns the Discipline and Government of Christ in His Church. As the Apostasy
was gradual, so has the Reformation been. And there was (as Dr. Owen well
observes) a wise Providence in ordering it to be so. Dr. Owen, of the Nature of
a Gospel Church p. 13.
For had the First Reformers set themselves to remove out of the Church all
such as were unmeet for it is Communion, and to have Reduced things to their
Primitive Institution, by Reason of the Paucity of the Number of such Church
Members, the Endeavor for a General Reformation of Doctrine and Worship would
have been obstructed. Hence it comes to pass, That the Reformation of the
Church, as unto the Matter of it, was not attempted, until Calvin set up his
Discipline in Geneva, which has filled the World with Clamours against him to
this day. In most other places the Matter or Members of Churches were, as to
their Lives and Conversation as bad as the Papists. Nevertheless, Eminent
Divines of the Reformation, in this and the last Century, have approved of that
which we are pleading for. Beza laments the Remisness of Protestant Churches in
not taking more care about the Qualifications of their Members; Beza. Epist. 14.
concluding that there will never be such a Reformation as ought to be
endeavored after, nisi a Conversione Cordium Initium Instaurationis sumatur,
except men with Converted Hearts, be laid in the Foundation. Bucer finds fault
with the English Churches for their Admitting Children who had been Baptized,
unto the Lords Supper, Bucer. Script. Anglio. Cap 17. p. 482, 483.
upon too low Terms. He says, there should be manifest Signs of Regeneration in
them first: That they should appear to be such as had upon their Hearts a sense
of the word of God, and that they did use Secret Prayer etc. But how should
such things be known concerning them without Enquiry into their Spiritual
State! Chamier commends the Strictness used in the Primitive Times, Chamier de
Baptismo L. 5. cap. 15.
in Examining those that desired to Join to the Chuch, ne quantum fieri poterit
lateant Simones, that so Simon Magus may not creep into the Church, if it were
possible to prevent it. Luther did at last sorrowfully bewail it, That he began
his Reformation with such Promiscuous Admissions to the Table of the Lord,
heartily wishing, that he had Taught and Practiced such a Church Discipline, as
that which was professed by the Bohemian Brethren. Chemnitius wishes that the
Strictness used among the Ancients in the Probation of Communicants were
restored and revived in the Churches of the Reformation. His Godly desire and
hope that in Time it will be so, is approved of by Gerhard in his common place,
de Sacra Caena.

Some of those that are called Presbyterians fully concur with us, as to the
Substance of what we plead for. When Mr. Norton in his Answer unto Apollenius,
does assert, That four things are to be required of those, that desire
Admission into Church Fellowship. 1. A Confession of Faith. 2. A Declaration of
their Experience concerning a Work of Faith. 3. A blameless Conversation. 4.
Professed Subjection to the Gospel, and the order of it. That Learned and
worthy Professor of Divinity, in the University of Leyden, Dr. Hornbeck,
declares his Concurrence with him therein, Hornbeck Epistola ad Duraum p. 299.
and that, in these Particulars, those of the Congregational way, agree with
some other Reformed Churches. To my certain knowledge, Eminent Ministers of the
Presbyterian Persuasion, in L^ndo^ Examine their Communicants (before they
admit them to partake with them, at the Lords Table) concerning their Faith and
Repentance. And so (notwithstanding what is pleaded for by the Godly Learned
Mr. Rutherford) some do in Scotland, as diverse worthy Ministers of that Nation,
have assured me.

The Difference as to this Matter, between a Presbyterian and a Congregational
man, (who are nevertheless United Brethren) is this. There is no Congregational
man, but he reports to the Church something of what the person desiring
Communion with them, has Related to him; which the Presbyterian does not, only
Declares his own satisfaction, and gives the Brethren a Liberty to object
against the Conversation of the Admittendi. I know Presbyterians, who are
stricter in their Examinations and Admissions, than some Congregational men. It
appears therefore, that such Enquiries into the Spiritual Estate of them, who
are to be Admitted unto full Communion, in all the Ordinances of the Gospel, is
no Singular or Novel Practice: Nothing but what is confirmed by Reverend
Antiquity, and has been strenuously Asserted by the Great Reformers, both of
the former, and this present Age. Whether the Brethren, as well as the Elders
should not be concerned as Judges, concerning the Qualifications of those whom
they Receive into their Communion, is another Question, which I shall not here
enlare upon. It is certain, that in the Primitive Ages of the Church, they had
that Liberty; otherwise Cyprian would never have said, Vix Plebi persuadeo ut
Tales patiantur admitti, etc. And elsewhere confessed his Obligations, and
Resolutions, Nihil sine consensu plebis, privata sententia gerere.

It is also certain, that this is an avowed principle of all who are esteemed
Congregational In the Declaration of the Faith and Order owned and practiced in
Congregational Churches in England, agreed and consented unto, by their Elders
and Messengers, in their Meeting at the Savoy, October. 12. 1658. They declare,
That the Members of Particular Churches are Saints by calling, visibly
manifesting their Obedience to the Call of Christ, who being further known to
each other by. their Confession of Faith wrought in them by the Power of God,
declared by themselves, or otherwise manifested, consent to walk together
according to the appointment of Christ. I have known many in England of that
way; but never any that did not concern the Brethren as well as themselves, to
be Judges of the fitness of those who have desired to be received into their
Communion. It is evident, that the Church, (and not the Officers only) have
power given them by Christ to Judge who are meet to be put out of their
Communion. Math. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.12 Then they must needs have the like power as
to those that are to be taken into their Communion. Ejusdem est potestatis
constituere et destituere, is a known received Axiom. If the whole Church has
power to Judge of the Repentance of one that is to be Re admitted, then of the
Repentance of one that is to have his first Admission. But the Apostle speaks
to the Church, and not to the Officers only to restore the penitent Corinthian
to their Communion. 2 Cor. 2.8. Again, If the whole multitude of Disciples have
power to Judge whether persons are qualified with that Wisdom and Grace as to
be meet for Office-Relation in the Church, then they have power to Judge
concerning the Knowledge and Grace of Communicants. The Argument is a majori ad
minus. They that are meet Judges in a greater matter, much more in that which
is less. But the former is clear from the Scripture. Acts. 6.2, 3, 4. For
further satisfaction in this point, Mr. Norton, and Mr. Shepard may be
consulted, with that man of vast Reading and Learning, Mr. Robert Parker.

These things I have supposed to be proper for me to Write to you the Church of
Christ in Cambridge; not as doubting of your Stedfastness in the Truth to this
day professed and practiced by you, but as desiring that those who shall
succeed you, may continue to walk therein; and that so I might testify, the
peculiar Respect, that I do (and ought to) bear unto you, on the account of the
Undeserved Love, which all of you have manifested toward me. Five years are
not expired, since you were pleased unanimously to Invite me to Accept of the
Pastoral Office over you. But the unwillingness of the Dear People among whom I
have been Laboring in the Gospel for the space of Thirty six years, that I
should leave them, in consideration with some other Obstacles, kept me from
complying with that your loving motion. Nevertheless, I cannot but whilst I
Live, have a Dear Affection for you, and know not how to express it more, than
by Endeavoring what in me lies, that you, and your Children after you, may be
Confirmed in those ways of the Lord, which your Fathers, and your selves too,
have experienced so much of His Presence in. And I have also considered, that
you are singularly circumstanced, in that there are Residing with you, the Sons
of the Prophets, whose Establishment in the present Truth, I am more than any
man in the World, under an Obligation to promove, and I certainly know (not
altogether without an Awful Sense of it) that the Son of God, will e're long
Enquire of me, whether I did, in this matter, Discharge my Duty, according to
his Expectation, to whom I must be accountable concerning the Improvement of
whatever Talents or Opportunities to Serve His Interests, He has or shall Trust
me with, whilst I am in this World.

A few words let me further speak to you, who belong to that Nursery, for
Religion and Learning, which has for a long time been the Glory, not of
Cambridge only, but of New England. Sixteen years will this Summer be Lapsed
since God, by His Providence, devolved the Praesidentship of that Society into
my Hands, to manage it (so far as my Insufficiencies for such a Service will
permit) for the Ends, which He (and our Fathers, as His Instruments) did at
first Erect a College in New England upon; which was chiefly, that so Scholars
might there be Educated for the special Service of Christ and His Churches, in
the Work of the Ministry, and that they might be seasoned in their Tender years
with such Principles as brought their Blessed Progenitors into this Wilderness.
What my Sollicitudes for this have been in both Englands, is known to Him, who
said to the Churches, I know your works. There is no One Thing of greater
Concernment to these Churches, in present and after times, than the Prosperity
of that Society. They cannot subsist without a College. There are at this day
not above Two or Three of our Churches but what are supplied from thence. Nor
are the Churches like to continue pure Golden Candlesticks, if the College,
which should supply them, prove Apostate. If the Fountain be corrupted, How
should the Streams be pure, which should make Glad the City of God? How should
Plants of Renown spring up from thence, if the College it self become a
Degenerate Plant? You that are Tutors there, have a Great Advantage put into
your Hands (and I Pray God give you Wisdom to know it!) to prevent it. The Lord
has made you Fathers to many Pupils. You will not deny, but that He has made
me a Father to you It was my Recommendation, that brought you into that
Station. And therefore, as my Joy will be the Greater to see you Acquit your
selves Worthily, so my earnest Sollicitudes for it must needs be the more, on
that Account. There are many (I believe, you wish you could say so of all of
them) who were once under your Tuition, that do worthily in Ephratah, and are
like to be famous in Bethlehem, for which you ought to (and I doubt not but you
do) humbly Bless the Lord, That you (and they who shall succeed you) may be yet
Greater Blessings, Let me Commend unto you the Example of this Blessed Man,
whose Life is here described. When Jerome had considered the Life of Hilarion,
he Resolved Hilarion shall be the Champion, whom I will follow! Say each of
you, Mitchel, (once a Tutor in Harvard College) shall be the Example, whom I
will Imitate! You will see in the Story of his Life, that he did not only
Instruct his Pupils in the Knowledge of the Tongues and Arts, but that he would
sometimes discourse them about the Spiritual Estate of their Immortal Souls.
Such private Personal Instructions, are many times more Effectual to Conversion
than Public Sermons. Some very worthy Persons who were once his Scholars, have
a Living Remembrance of his Words, to this Day. Others of them are now with him
in Glory, blessing God to Eternity, whose Providence disposed them under such a
Tutor. Famous Dr. Preston chose rather to Live in Cambridge, than in any place
in England, because by Reason of the University there, he had an Opportunity,
Non modo dolare Lapides sed Architectos, to prepare Builders for the House of
God. The Angels in Heaven would not think it beneath them, to be employed in so
Great a Work and Service for the Churches of Christ as that which Infinite
Grace has called you unto. If you follow those, that have gone before you (
Mitchel in particular) as they have followed Christ, your Names will be
Precious and Honorable like theirs, and you shall Live after you are Dead, as
they now do.

As for you that are the Students in the College: I have often (as you know)
in my Discourses among you, Exhorted you above all things to Study Christ, and
to be mindful of, The One Thing Necessary. Gifts without Grace will be of no
Avail unto you at last. You may excel in Knowledge, and yet be of all in the
world the most miserable, and most like to the Devils, as a Converted Indian
once said concerning some Scholars. You know that many Philosophers who were
Heathen excelled in that which is called, Humane Learning. And so have some
Popish Authors ( Jesuits especially) done, whose Books have been very Edifying
to others. I must confess, that as to that small measure of Knowledge which I
have attained unto, I have, (for some part of it) been beholden to the Divine
Providence for the Works of Ricciolus, Galtruchius, and others of that
Fraternity, who were very Learned men, though Enemies of the True Protestant
Religion. Knowledge then without Christ and Holiness, will never bring you to
Heaven. One has written a Book, De Salute Aristotelis; And another, De Animabus
Paganorum; endeavoring to prove, that the Philosophers who Knew not the Only
True God, nor Jesus Christ, have Eternal Life. Let such and all other Pelagian
and Arminian Principles be far from you. But do not think that it is enough, if
you be Orthodox, in the Fundamental Points of Religion. It was not (I can
assure you) on any such Account that your Fathers followed Christ into this
Wilderness, when it was a Land not sown. If you degenerate from the Order of
the Gospel (as well as from the Faith of the Gospel) you will justly merit the
Name of Apostates, and of Degenerate Plants. And such Degeneracy in the
Children of New England, and most of all in you will be worse, than in any
Children in the world. If any of you shall prove such, Remember that you were
told, that you take an unhappy time to Degenerate in. He whose Fan is in his
Hand, will thoroughly purge his Floor. The Day is near, when the Lord Jesus
Christ will make His Churches more pure and Reformed, than in the former Ages;
and will you at such a Time corrupt your selves with loose and large Principles
in matters relating to the House of God, Whose House Holiness becomes for ever!
How if some of you should live to see that Scripture verified, where the Lord
says, The Levites that are gone far from me, when Israel went astray, they
shall not come near unto me, to do the Office of a Priest unto me, but the Sons
of Zadok that kept the Charge of my Sanctuary, they shall enter into my
Sanctuary, and they shall come near to my Table to Minister unto me! Ezekiel.
44.10, 15. Let me Recommend unto you the weighty words of my most dear and
worthy Friend and Predecessor, Mr. Oaks, once your Learned President, which he
delivered (and afterward Printed) on a very solemn Occasion. He speaks to
you thus. Consider (says he) what will be the End of Receding or making a
Defection from the Way of Church Government established amongst us. In his
Election Sermon on Deuteronomy. 32.29. p. 44. etc.
I profess, I look upon the Discovery and Settlement of the Congregational Way,
as the Boon, the Gratuity, the largeness of Divine Bounty, which the Lord
graciously bestowed on His People that followed Him into this Wilderness; and a
great part of the Blessing on the Head of Joseph, and of them who were Separate
from their Brethren. These Good Peoplo that came over, showed more Love, Zeal,
and Affectionate Desire of Communion with God in pure Worship and Ordinances,
and did more in Order to it than others, and the Lord did more for them than
for any people in the world, in showing them the Pattern of His House, and the
true Scriptural way of Church Government and Administrations. God was certainly
in a more than ordinary way of favor present with his Servants, in laying of
our Foundations, and in settling the way of Church Order, according to the Will
and Appointment of Christ. Consider what will be the sad issue of Revolting
from the way fixed upon, to one Extreme or to another, whether it be to
Presbyterianism or Brownism; as for the Presbyterians, it must be acknowledged,
that there are among them as Pious, Learned, Sober, Orthodox men, as the World
affords; and that there is as much of the Power of Godliness among that party,
and of the Spirit of the good Old Puritans, as among any people in the World.
And for their way of Church Government, it must be confessed, that in the Day
of it, it was a very considerable step to Reformation. The Reformation in K.
Edwards days was then a Blessed Work. And the Reformation of Geneva and
Scotland, was then a larger step, and in many Respects purer than the other.
And for my part I fully believe that the Congregational way far exceeds both,
and is the Highest step that has been taken toward Reformation, and for the
Substance of it, it is the very same way, that was established and practiced in
the Primitive Times, according to the Institution of Jesus Christ. I must needs
say, that I should look upon it, as a sad Degeneracy, if we should leave the
good old way, so far as to turn Councils and Synods in^o- Classes and
Provincial Assemblies, and there should be such a Laxness in Admission of
Members to Communion, as is pleaded for, and practiced by many Presbyterians,
and Elders should manage all themselves in an Autocratorical way, to the
Subversion of the Libert^ and Privilege of the Brethren. Thus Mr. Oak^^. As
for that Excellently Learned and Holy Man Mr. C^ar^es Chauncey, who for many
years Presided over Harvard-Colledge, none of you who now belong to that
Society can remember him But you have heard what his D^ing Charge to his Sons
(who through Grace tread in their Fathers Steps) was, in his Last Will and
Testament, which you may see Published with his Life, in due time. He that is
now your President -- A long sequitur v^stigia semper adorans; yet is willing
not to Ev^r^ or undermine the Foundation, which his Blessed Predecessors, have
laid, but to Build thereon. I remember Buckanan (who was Tutor to K. James I.)
in the Preface to his Baptisies, which he Dedicates to that K. says, That the
Reason why he did so, was, That in case He should through the Influence of Evil
Counselors, or from any other Cause, be Guilty of Maladministration in His
Government, after Ages should know, that the Blame ought to be Imputed not to
His Tutor, but to Himself. So let me say, If you the Student in
Harvard-C^lledge, or any of you, shall deviate and degenerate from the Holy
Principles and Practices of your Father, the World shall know, and Posterity
shall know, That the Reason of it, is not for want of being otherwi^e
instructed by your Present, as well as by Former Presidents

M^^ 7. 1697. INCREASE MATHER.

Ecclesiastes. OR, The LIFE of Mr. Jonathan Mitchel.
Sanctorum Vitas Legere and non Vivere, frustra est;
Sanctorum Vitas Degite, non Legite.

1. IT is Reported concerning the Ancient Phrygians, that when a Priest expired
among them, they Honored him with a Pillar Ten Fathom high, whereon they
placed his Dead Body, as if he were to continue, after his Death, from thence
Instructing of the People. Nor can a Minister of the Gospel have any more
Honorable Funeral, than That, by which his Instruction of the People, may be
most continued unto the People, after his Expiration. But I may without any
Danger of Mistake, venture to affirm, That there cannot Easily be found, a
Minister of the Gospel, in our Days, more worthy to have the Story of his Life
employed for the Instruction of Mankind, after his Decease, than our Excellent
Mitchel. And therefore I shall now Endeavor to set him on as high a Pillar, as
the best History, that I can give of his Exemplary Life, can erect, for that
Worthy man; for whom Statues of Corinthian Brass, were but Inadaequate
Acknowledgments.

2. If it were counted an Honor, to the Town of Halifax in York shire, that
the famous John de Sacro Bosco, Author of the well known Treatise, De Sphaera,
was born there; this Town was no less Honored by it is being the Place of Birth
to our no less worthyly famous Jonathan Mitchel, the Author of a better
Treatise, Of Heaven, who being descended (as a Printed Account long since has
told us) of Pious and Wealthy Parents, here drew his first Breath, in the year
1624. The precise Day of his Birth is lost, nor is it worth while for us to
enquire by an Astrological Calculation, what Aspect the Stars had upon his
Birth, since the Event has proved, That God the Father was in the Horoscope,
Christ in the Mid Heaven, the Spirit in the Sixth-House, Repentance, Faith and
Love, in the Eighth: and in the Twelfth, an Eternal Happiness, where no Saturn
can dart any malignant Rays. Here, while the Father of his Flesh was
endeavoring to make him Learned by a proper Education, the Father of Spirits,
used the Methods of Grace to make him Serious; especially by a sore Feavour,
which had like to have made the Tenth year of his Life, the Last, but then
settled in his Arm, with such Troublesome Effects, that his Arm grew, and kept,
a little bent, and he could never stretch it out Right, until his Dying Day.
And upon this Accident he afterward wrote this Reflection; Thus the Lord
sought to make me Serious (Oh! when will it once be!) by steeping my first
Entrance into years of Understanding, and into the Changes of Life, and my
first motions to New England, in Eminent and Special Sorrows. Now his First
Motions to New England, mentioned in this Reflection, invite us to Hasten unto
that part of our History, which is to Relate, that his Parents were some of
those Exemplary Christians, which by the Unconscionable Impositions and
Persecutions of the English Hierarchy upon the Consciences of People, as
Remarkable for True Christianity, as any in the Realm, were driven out of it.
In the year 1635. the Ship, which brought over Mr. Richard Mather, and many
more of those Puritans, which had found the Church of England, then governed by
such an Assembly of Treacherous men, (a Faction to whom that Name, The Church
of England, never truly belonged) that they were put upon wishing with the
Persecuted Prophet, Oh! that I had in the Wilderness a Lodging place of
wayfaring men! was further enriched by having on Board our Jonathan, than a
Child about Eleven years of Age; whose Parents with much Difficulty and
Resolution carried him unto Bristol to take Shipping there, while he was not
yet Recovered of his Illness. On the Coast of New England, they were delivered
from a most eminent and amazing hazard of perishing, in a most horrible
Tempest; upon which Deliverance Mr. Mather Preached a Sermon from that
Scripture Joh. 5.14. Sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee; whereby
farther Impressions or Seriousness were made upon the Soul of this Young
Disciple.

3. The Godly Father of our Jonathan found, that America as well as Europe,
New England as well as England, was a part of Old Adam's World; well stocked
every where, with the Thorns of Worldly Vanities and Vexations; and that a
Wilderness was a Place, where Temptation was to be met withal. All his Family,
and the Jonathan of the Family, with the Rest, were visited with Sickness, the
Winter after their first Arrival at Charlstown, and the Scarcity then
afflicting the Country, added unto the Afflictions of their Sickness. Removing
to the Town of Concord, his greater matters continually became smaller there,
his Beginnings were there Consumed by Fire, and some other Losses befell him in
the Latter End of that Winter. The next Summer he Removed unto Say brook, and
the next Spring unto Weathersfield, upon Connecticut River, by which he Lost
yet more of his Possessions, and plunged himself into other Troubles. Toward
the Close of that year, he had a Son-in-law Slain by the Pequot Indians; and
the Rest of the Winter they Lived in much fear of their Lives from those
Barba^ians, and many of his Cattle were destroyed, and his Estate unto the
value of some Hundreds of Pounds was damnified. A Shallop, which he sent unto
the River's mouth was taken, and burned by the Pequots, and Three men in the
Vessel Slain, in all of whom he was nearly concerned: So that indeed the Pequot
Scourge fell more on this Family, than on any other in the Land. Afterward
there arose unhappy Differences in the place where he Lived, wherein he was an
Antagonist against some of the Principal Persons in the place, and hereby he
that had hitherto Lived in precious Esteem with Good men, wherever he came (as
a Record I have seen, testifies concerning him) now suffered much in his Esteem
among many such men, as it is usual in such Contentions, and he met with many
other Injuries: For which Causes, he transferred himself, with his Interests,
unto Stamford in the Colony of New Haven. Here his House, Barn and Goods were
again Consumed by Fire; And much Internal Distress of mind accompanied these
Humbling Dispensations. At last, that Most Horrible of Diseases, the Stone,
arrested him, and he underwent unspeakable Dolours from it, until the year
1645. when he went unto his Rest, about the Fifty Fifth Year of his Age.

4. Although the Good Spirit of God, ^ave our Jonathan to Improve much in Holy
Dispositions while he was yet a Youth, by the Calamities, which thus befell his
Father; and particularly upon Occasion of a sad thing befalling a Servant of
his Father's, who instead of Going to the Lecture at Hartford, as he had been
Allowed and Advised, would needs go fell a Tree for himself, but a broken Bough
of the Tree struck him Dead, so that he never spoke or stirred more; our
Jonathan, who was then about Fifteen years old, in one of his Papers does
Relate, This Amazing Stroke did much stir my Heart, and I spent some time in
Endeavoring the work of Repentance, according to Mr. Scudder's Directions in
his Daily Walk: nevertheless he had this Disadvantage, that he was thereby
Diverted from Study and Learning, for the first seven years after his Coming
into the Country. Had it not been for the Disadvantage of this Intermission,
we had seen some Lively Emulation of Bellarmine's open Lectures of Divinity, at
Sixteen years of Age, or Torquato Quasso's Receiving his Degrees in Philosophy
and Divinity at Seventeen, or Grotius's publishing of Commentaries, at the like
Seventeen. For he was, as the Historian observes, all that will prove
Considerable, must be, Puer, qui Seminario Vertutum Generosiore concretus,
aliquid Inclytum designasset. But after so long an Intermission, as until
September in the year 1642. and the Eighteenth year of his Age, upon the
Earnest Advice of some that had Observed his great Capacity, and especially of
Mr. Mather, with whom he came into New England, he Resumed his Designs for
Study and Learning: wherein he made so vigorous a Progress, that in the year
1645. he was upon a strict Examination, Admitted into Harvard College. Nor was
it very long before Mr. Mather, who was the Adviser of this matter, had the
Consolation of seeing the Excellent Labors of this person, in the Pulpit,
worthy of his own Constant Journeys to his monthly Lectures; yea, and the most
Considerable Fathers of the Country, with himself, treating this person, as
not Coming behind the very Chiefest of them all, and Tasting his
Communications, not as Unripe Grapes, or Wine just out of the Press.

5. But before we can fairly Arrive to that part of our Story, it will be as
profitable, as necessary for us, to Observe the Steps whereby God made him
Great. The Faculties of Mind, with which the God that Forms the Spirit of man,
enriched him, were very Notable. He had a Clear Head, a Copious Fancy, a Solid
Judgment, a Tenacious Memory, and a certain Discretion, without any Childish
Laschete, or Levity in his Behavior, which commanded Respect from all that
viewed him: So that it might be said of him, as it once was of a Great Person,
in the English Nation, They that knew him from a Child, never knew him any
other than a Man. Under these Advantages, he was an Hard Student, and he so
Prospered in his Indefatigable Studies, that he became a Scholar of
Illuminations, not far from the First Magnitude: Recommended by which
Qualifications, it was not long before he was Chosen, a Fellow of the College.
But the main Strokes of his Colledge-Life, that I shall single out for my
Readers Observation, are of yet an higher Character. Know then, that as it was
his own Counsel to his B^^ther, The Writing of sometimes your former and
present Life, would be a Thing of Endless Use, thus it was his manner, whilst
in the College, to keep a brief Diary, written in the Latin Tongue, which he
wrote indeed fluently and handsomely; and from a part of this D^^ry, by him
Entitled, Vitae Hypomnemata, happily fallen into my Hands, I shall note some
few Remarkables.

He kept a strict Eye upon his Interior State, before God; and upon the
Dispositions of his Heart, as well in Sacred, as in Civil Entertainments: but
with an Extreme Security of Reflection upon himself, when perhaps, at the same
time the Severest Spectator upon Earth besides, would have judged every thing
in him worthy to have been Admired, rather than Censured. He would Record such
Things as these.

One Time,

Inter precandum, Deus ab Insipido as Desolato Cord just ab fuit, ut me (quo
nihil magis necessarium) humiliaret; Nam aliter (si paulo meius asiquando se
haboat Cor) est in me, quod prophana Spirituali Superbia titillatur. Eram tamen
inde nonnihil ad Deum Excitatior.

At another time,

Jejunio privato interfui, ubi multo Stupore, et multa ^avitate Oppletus sum;
aligua tamen viguerant Suspiria et Deus non visus est me omnino abdicare, sed
paulo melioreon fecit; utinam te^uis^^m et fovissen Desi^^^^a, gua tunc
ac^^ndit.

At another time

Locum communem habui; vix abstinui a secreta superbia; Licet turpissima
vanitas Animi (qua nunquam non omnia mea venenantur) me coram Deo,
prostravisset, praeter alia mea peccata, quae me infra vermes ponunt, Neque
sane unquam aliquid aut facio aut dico, unde plus pudoris quam Honoris, mihi
non nascitur, si omnia mecum perpendo; et Deus solet semper aliquid relinquere,
unde me (saltem apud me) pudefacit.

At another time,

Collequiis Hilaribus, cum Sociis quibusdam nimis indusi

At another time,

Adibam Bostonium, et ibi Libertatem Civilem accepi, sed ex Oblectamentis Leve
et Insipidum Cor.

At another,

Liberius quam prudentius quaedam l^cutus sum, unde mihi pudor.

In my Prayer, God was justly withdrawn from my Unsavory and Desolate Heart,
that so He might Humble me; than which there is nothing more needful for me.
For otherwise (if my Heart be at any time in a little better frame) there is
that in me, which is tickled with Spiritual Pride. Nevertheless I was from
hence more Excited Godward.

I was present at a private Fast, where I was filled with much Sotti^hness and
Vanity: Yet I had some Lively Sigh^; and God seemed not wholly to cast me off,
but made me a little Better than I was before. I wish I had Retained and
Cherished the Desires, which He then Enkindled!

I Common-placed. I could Scarce abstain from Secret Pride; although a very base
Vanity of mind (with which every thing of mine is poisoned!) had laid me low in
the Dust before God; besides my other Sins, which lay me lower th^^ the very
Worms of the D^^t But indeed, I never Do or Say, any thine, from whence there
arises not more of Shame than of Honor to me, if I Consider all things; and
God uses in all ever to leave something, by which He makes me, at least ashamed
of my self.

I gave too much Liberty unto Merry Talk, with some of my Friends.

I went unto B^ston, and there took a Civil Liberty: But from such
Entertainments my Heart grew light and unsavory.

I discoursed some things with more Freedom than Wisdom; for which, I was
ashamed of my self.

Again; He laid up the more especial Admonitions which touched him, in the
Sermons that he heard Preached, or in other more private and useful
Conferences, and the Resolutions which he thereupon, asked the help of Heaven
to follow. He would Record such Things as these.

One time

Vix aliquid apud Deum sapui, sed excitavit me Concio Magistri Shepardi,
Tremenda plane et prae stantissima. Docuit Aliquos esse qui videntor In veniri
et Servari a Christo et tamen postea pereunt. Haec me terrebant (et uti nam
infixa haererent!) ne tantum (...) esse Christi, et ne ad mortem ^sque sic
pergerem. Rogavi Deum, ut mei Misertus totam rem ageret. Illa Nocte multo
pudore, apud me suffusus eram, quod hactenus nibil in Meditatione quotidiana
feceum, et hinc caecus et ig ^^rus in Divinis, extra meipsum, et sine Deo, per
Integras Septimanas vix uam. Jam Statui Meditandi opus, quotidie urgere, quod
ante hac aliquoties statui, sed, heu! Pro^ossta violavi; unde suc^^set Deus.
Ab, Quot et Qeanta scire potuissem de Deo, si serius et constans in Meditatione
fuissem!

At another time,

D. Shepardus utilissime doeuit. Illa Nocte Seriae instabant Cogitationes, de
infanda mea miseria, qua sine Deo, sine Redemptione, a Sabbato ad Sabbatum
miserrimus pergo. Inde Tria statuebam mihi Observanda, quae etiam Deo,
commendabam, ut in me efficeret. Primo, Non Quiet manendum in hac mea
condition; Intolerabile esse, ut sic pergerem. Secundo, Precand^m c^nstanter,
sine Languore, aut Intermissione, mane nocteque Implorandum Deum, intimis et
ineffabilibus suspiriis. Tertio, si Deus non auscultaverit, et quae opus sunt
praestarit, in Amore suo manifestando, saltem Lugeam et Lachrymem, et pergam in
Amaritudine Animae; si Consolationem et Pacem a Deo, non habuero, saltem nullam
emnino habeam!

At another time,

D. Samuel Matherus eximie concionatus est, de Immutabilitate Dei. Jude
Redarguebat mutabilitatem et Inconstantiam Hominum erga Deum. Haec me te
tigerunt: Conscius eram Inconstantiae meae; Et se rio, intimeque perculsus,
prostratus coram Deo ve^^menter Orabam Grati ^m.

I had little Savor on my Spirit before God: but a terrible and Excellent
Sermon of Mr. Shepards awakened me. He taught, that there are some who seem to
be found and Saved by Christ, and yet afterward they perish. These things
terrified me, (and I wish, they had stuck fast in me!) lest I should only seem
to belong unto Christ, and lest I should thus go on unto Death. I Begged of God,
that He would have mercy on me, and accomplish the whole work of His Grace for
me. That Night I was covered with no little shame, because I had hitherto done
in a manner, nothing at the work of DAILY MEDITATION, and hence I had lived
Blind, and Ignorant in Divine Things, a stranger to my self, and without God,
for whole Weeks together. I now Resolved, every Day to urge the work of
MEDITATION, which heretofore I have often Resolved, but alas, I have Violated
my purposes; for which cause, God is Angry with me. Ah! How many, how mighty
Things of God might I have understood, if I had been Serious and Const^nt in
MEDITATION!

Mr. Shepard Preached most profitably. That night, I was followed with Serious
Thoughts, of my Inexpressible misery, wherein I go on most miserably from
Sabbath to Sabbath, without God, and without Redemption. From hence I
determined, That there are Things which I must Observe; and I Commended these
Things unto God, that he would Effect them in me. First; That I must not remain
quietly in this my condition; but that it is Intolerable for me to proceed as I
am. Secondly; That I must pray constantly, without fainting, or any
Intermission: Day and Night I must cry unto the Lord, with Groans that cannot
be uttered. Thirdly; If God will not Hear me, nor do the Things that a^ needful
for me, in manifesting to me His Love, let me at least Mourn, and Weep, and go
on in the Bitterness of my Soul. If I shall not have Comfort, and Peace, from
God, let me have None at all!

Mr. Samuel Mather Preached Excellently, concerning, The Vncheangeableness of
God. From hence he Rebuked the Changeableness and Inconstancy of men, toward
God. These Things Touched me; for I was Conscious to my own Inconstancy; and
being Seriously and Inwardly Smitten with the sense of it, I cast my self down
at the Feet of God, with Vehement Supplications for His Favor.

Furthermore, He Acquitted himself, as One concerned for the Souls of his
Pupils, when he came to have such under his Charge; and was very desirous to
see their Hearts renewed by Grace, the (Beginning or) Head of Knowledge, as
well as their Heads furnished with other Knowledge. He would Record such things
as these.

At one Time,

Alloquehar M. W. de Salutis Negotio. Multis illem hortabar, monebam, et
dirigebam, ad illud cucandum, ne suffucaret Convictiones, et inconstantia Deum
luderet, sed precibus IIPOS KAPTERS. Utinam ips^ praestarem, quae dixi! Deus,
Ierva illum Juvenem!

At another time,

S. M. primus e Pupillis meis, me allecutus est de Animae suae statu; plura
quidem quam sperassem Laetus audivi; et (quod Deus dedit) Consili um addidi, ut
pergeret diligenter Deum sequi, Animabam ad sequendum Deum; At pudebat me
Ariditatis Animi mei.

I spoke unto M. W. about the matters of Eternal Salvation, I largely Exhorted
him, advised him, directed him to be careful of This, that he did not Stiffle
his Convictions, and mock God by Inconstancy, but be instant in Prayer. I wish
I could my self Do, what I spoke! Lord, Save that Young man!

S. M. the first of my Pupils, had some Speech with me, about the State of his
own Soul; I Gladly heard more from him, than I Expected; and (with the Help of
God) I Counseled him, that he would go on to follow hard after God. I
Encouraged him to follow the Lord; but I was ashamed of the Barrenness of my
own Soul!

Yea, How watchful he was, on all Occasions, to Observe what Occasions he might
have to Do Good among all the Scholars, I shall no more than Transcribe the
following Passage, to intimate.

Nocte, inter Scholares, multa seria dixi de Cognoscendis Rebus Pacis Nostrae,
in Die nostro. Utinam ipse mihimet Auscultarem! Die sequenti plura ego
collocutus sum cum Contubernalibus, ad probandum, esse Deum, et Scripturas esse
ipsius verbum. Ah, nimium ser pit inter nos ATEOTES, et video Satanam multos
perniciosissimos Dialogismos in Non nullorum mentes injicere! Hoc malo peribunt
multi Juvenes, ni miserearis, 0 Deus! Et sensi me ad huc in his miserrime
tenebricosum, nec magis aliquid Rogandum, ^uam ut Stabiliret me quo ad
Fundamentales istas veritates, claremque hic visionem deret! Hinc aliquando
Occasiones Capto Realitatem, TON THEOY inculcandi, et illustrandi: quod non
prorsus mane video. Utinam majori Cordis sensu, ego possem Deum praedicare. Sed
quid mirum me oppleis Tenebris, qui Oppletus sem Cupiditatibus!

At Night, among the Scholars, I uttered many Serious Things, about, Knowing
the Things of our Peace in our Day. Oh! that I could my self herein but hearken
to my self! The Day following, I discoursed more, with my Chamber-fellows, to
prove, That there is a GOD, and that the Scriptures are His Word. Alas, Atheism
creeps in too much among us, and I see that Satan does cast many most
Pernicious Reasonings into the minds of some. Many Young men, will perish by
this Mischief, Except thou, O Lord God, have Mercy on them! I found my self
also most miserably dark in these things; nor is there any thing that I have
more cause to ask, than this; That He would Establish me in these Fundamental
Truths, and give me a Clear Vision of them! From hence I sometimes do Snatch at
Occasions, to inculcate and illustrate the Reality of the Things of God: which
I see, is not altogether in vain. I wish, I could Preach God, with greater
sense upon my Heart But what wonder is it, if I that am full of Lusts, be ^lso
full of Darknes^!

Reader, see how impossible it was, for this Excellent young man to Record any
thing in this Diary, without some stroke of Humiliation and Admonition to
himself in the Close of all: The ready way of becoming Excellent!

And while he was thus a young man, residing in the College, he would
sometimes, on the Saturday, Retire into the Woods, near the Town, and there
spend a great part of the Day, in Examining of his own Heart and Life,
Bewailing the Evils, which made him want the Mercies of God, and Imploring the
Mercies which he wanted of the Lord: which Custom of spending Saturday, he had
formerly attended also at South-Hampton, while he was yet, but as a Schoolboy
there. Moreover, it was, while he thus Resided at the College, that his
Brother David, under deep Distresses of mind about his Everlasting Interests,
addressed him for Counsel; and our Jonathan then wrote unto his Brother that
Golden Letter, which was almost Thirty years after, published in London, at the
End of his Discourse of Glory; A Letter whereof the famous Collins makes this
Remark, Every Reader sensible of Spiritual Things, will see it written with an
Excellent Spirit, the Spirit of God, and drawn out of his own Experiences, and
this when but newly Entering upon his Ministry: A Letter, wherein he Discovers
that Experimental Acquaintance with the Operations of Sin, and of ^^ace, upon
the Souls of men, which may Intimate how Eminent he was in One of the
Accomplishments most necessary to the Ministry of the Gospel, before he had yet
Entered upon it. If Chrysostom, the Ancient, were sometimes called, Insignis
Animorum tractandorum Artifex, Reader, here was a young man, who effectually
proved himself, An Artist, at handling the Cases of a Son^^! I Remember, that
Alexander More judges Three certain Epistles, to be the most Consummate Pieces,
that ever the World saw* Namely, That of Calvin before his Institutions; That
of Thuanus, before his History; and That of Casaubon, bfore his Polybius. Now
though this Epistle of our young Mitchel, come not into that Class, for the
Embellishments of Literature, yet it has been Reckoned one of the most
Consummate Pieces, in the Methods of Addressing a Troubled Mind.

6. The Extraordinary Learning, Wisdom, Gravity and Piety of this Incomparable
Young man, caused several of the most Considerable Churches in the Country, to
contrive how they might become Owners of such a Treasure, even before ever he
had, by one Public Se^m^n, brought forth any of the Treasure wherewith Heaven
had Endowed him The Church of Hartford in particular, being therein
Countenanced and Encouraged by the Reverend Mr. Stone, ^ent a Man, and Horse,
above an Hund^ed miles, to obtain a visit from him, in expectation to make him
the Successor of their ever famous Hooker, and though upon the first motion to
him from Hartford, his Humble Soul, wrote these words, I had more need get
alone into a Corner, and weep, than think of Going out into the World, to Do
such Work: Darkness and Death clouds my Soul! Yet he was prevailed withal to
visit them. At Hartford he Preached his First Sermon. ( June 24. 1649.) upon
Heb. 11.27. He Endured, as seeing Him who is Invisible; On which Action, though
with his usual Humility, he wrote this Reflection in his Diary; In Preaching I
was not to seek of what I had prepared; but my own Heart was Dry, Carnal and
Unaffected, and methought I could not speak with any Evidence, or Presence of
the Spirit of God; so that when I had done, I was deeply ashamed within my
self, and could not but Loath my self, to think how miserably I had behaved my
self, in that High Employment, and how unsavory, sottish and foolish my Heart
had been therein; I thought, I, and all I did, well deserved to be Loathed by
God and man: Yet that Judicious Assembly of Christians, were so well pleased
with the Labors whereof he himself thought so meanly, that in a Meeting the
Day following, they Concluded to give him an Invitation to Settle among them:
Adding, That if he saw it his best way to continue a year longer at the
College, they would however immediately upon his Acceptance of their
Invitation advance a considerable Sum of Money, to (...) him in furnishing
himself with a Library (not unlike what the Uratislavian Senate once did for
the Hopeful young Lucas Pollio, when they saw him, Juvenem Dotibus Ornatum a
Deo, non vulgaribus:) which they said, was, No new thing unto them, having had
Mr. Hooker's Instruction for Doing so. But he durst not then Accept of their
kind Proposals: For, before his Journey to Hartford, the Renowned Mr. Shepard,
with the Principal Persons in Cambridge, had importunately prayed him, that he
would come down from Hartford, as free as he went up, insomuch as he did upon
diverse Accounts most belong to Cambridge, and Cambridge did hope, that he would
yet more belong unto them. When Mr. Shepard first mentioned this thing unto
him, he did with his constant Humility record it in his Diary, with this
Reflection, Ego mirabar hinc rem: Quid in me videt Populus Dei! Totum Negotium
Reliqui Deo agendum. I wondered at this matter! What is it that the People of
God sees in me? I left the whole Business to the Divine Management! And now
Returning to Cambridge, he no sooner came into the Pulpit ( Aug. 12. 1649.) but
Mr. Shepard, must go out of it! Mr. Shepard in the Evening told him, T^is was
the Place, where he should, by right, be all the rest of his Days: and
enquiring of some good People, How Mr. Mitchel's first Sermon was approved
among them; they told him, Very well. Th^n said he, My Work is done! And
behold, within a few Days more, that Great Man was by Death taken off, so that
the Unanimous Desire of Cambridge for Mr. Mitchel to be their Pastor was
Hastened, with several Circumstances of Necessity, for him to Comply with their
Desire. But as the Jews use to say about the Birth of R. Jehuda, on the very
same Day, that another famous Rabbi dyed, Eo die occidit Lax Israelis, et
iterum Orta est; So I may now say, The same Day was the Light of New England,
Extinguished and Revived!

7. Occubuit Sol; Nox nulla Secuta est. Upon the setting of Shepard there arose
Mitchel, in whose Light not only the Church of Cambridge, but the College, and
the whole Country, were now to Rejoice for a Season. The Eyes of all
New England were upon him, with Great Expectations; and he did more than answer
their Expectations: for he was indeed, an Extraordinary Person. But scarce a
Paragraph of his Life can be written to the Life, without some Reflection upon
that Humility, with which the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, both prepared
him for, and adorned him in, all of that Figure, whereto he Arrived in the
Service of the Churches. Just upon the Time of his Beginning his Ministry at
Cambridge, he was taken dangerously Sick of the Small Pox, but though he were
Sick nigh unto Death, God had Mercy on him, and not on him only, but on all the
Churches through this Wilderness in him. No sooner was he Recovered of that
Sickness, but this Humble Soul, wrote, October 4. 1649. in his Diary, (which
after this time, spoke English,) these among other passages: It has been of
late Weeks a special time of Adversity with me, The Lord Help me to Consider
it! I might say, My skin is Broken, and become Loathsome; and, There is no Rest
in my Bones because of my Sin, my Loins are filled with a loathsome Disease,
and there is no soundness in my flesh; By such a foul, noisome, filthy Disease,
it well appeared, what I indeed was; as the Prophet speaks, Full of putrefying
Sores. It being at this Time, I was as a City set upon an Hill; That when I was
attempting the Pure and Sacred Work of the Ministry, I should be surprised with
that Horrible Disease! Do I begin to be some Body in the world? God will make
me Vile in the Eyes of the whole Country; God will Humble me before the Sun,
and in the Sight of all Israel. He will have me begin my Ministry with this
Disease: He knows, that I have need of a Great Deal of Purifying, before I come
to that. A loathsome Sinner shall have a loathsome Sickness! And the Grace of
Heaven that made this Fit of Sickness, to be Considered thus as an Humiliation,
by this Eminent young man, then Entering upon his Ministry, did by continually
Infusing other Thoughts full of Humiliation into him, lay the Foundation of
stately Superstructures. As our Lord Jesus Christ, entering upon His Ministry,
endured the forest Conflict of Temptation, that He had ever met withal, so did
this Excellent Ambassador of that Lord; He had his Mind sorely Buffeted with
Amazing and Confounding Apprehensions. Perhaps it will be many ways profitable
unto some Candidates of the Ministry, as well as others, to see these Papers
Recite some of the sad Passages, that rolled over the Soul of a most Lovely
Preacher, when he was Beginning to Preach the Gospel of Peace. We then find him
at a Time, when every one admired the Excellencies that Beautifyed him, thus
Writing and Thinking of himself, as the Deformedest Sinner in the World. At one
time. I have Lived in this World almost Twenty five years, and unto this Day
have known little of God in Christ, made little Provision for Eternity, got
little Acquaintance with the favor and love of God. How I have Improved this
Time, Woe to me, I may be ashamed to speak, amazed to think! At another time,
Lord, I know not whether ever such a Sinner, as I, came to Thee for Mercy;
whether ever such a work was done to any poor Wretch, as the saving of my Soul
must be. At another time. I have run through all the means of Knowledge, and
yet see no Truth Really, and in the Glory of it; All Afflictions, and yet am
not Humbled nor Serious; All Mercies, and yet am not Thankful; All Means of
Good, and yet am Evil, only Evil, Transcendently Evil, in the highest Degree,
to this Day. At another time. If God do me any Good, or do any Good by me, it
must be a Creating work. Lord, I am fit for nothing; (Good for nothing at all)
neither to Live, nor Die; neither to Teach, nor Learn; neither to Think, nor
Speak; neither to Do, nor suffer; neither to Communicate Good, nor receive any;
Go through all that I am, either within, or without, what am I, but Vileness,
and Abomination? At another time. The Church will (I suppose) this day,
consider, and determine a Day for Ordination; but did there ever such a
Creature, as I am, go about such a business? I was low, and vile this time
Twelvemonth, when they first made the Motion; but I am far lower and viler
now. Great is the wrath of God that lies upon me; and the tokens of it are in
some respects increased. I cannot, with Confidence go to God, as my Father in
Jesus Christ. I know no Truth of God to any purpose. I have no Treasure of
Christian Experience: I know not what belongs to the main matters of Conversion
and Salvation. My Sin is enough to bring a Curse upon all I do, and upon the
whole place: I am under the very feet of Satan, in respect of it. Object. But
shall not my Sin then hinder me, and make me Refuse this Work of the Ministry?
Answ. That is to mend one Sin with another. The more evil, and the less good I
have done, the more need I have to give my self up to do what good I can Now;
Sure I should not choose my Sin, and leave Gods Work; and if I cast it away, and
go to God to take it away, and wait on Him, it is possible with Him, to deliver
me from it, and to help me in His Work: Though that would be the greatest
wonder, that ever was done! However, let me lie at His Feet, and leave my self
with Him. Quest. Why do I enter upon it? Answ. Because God bids me, and
Commands me? Luke 5 He will have it so, and why should my self, or Sin, or
Satan, say, What do Thou? Object. But it may be God will take no Pleasure in
me? Answ. I deserve He should not, but yet He deserves to be Honored and
Served; and let it be my Happiness and Joy to do that, whatever becomes of me
at last. At another time. My case is now such (so Dreadful, ^esperate and
Forlorn) as I think, there never was the like upon Earth, since Adam was
formed, unto this Day: There is only this place of Hope, That there is a Degree
of Mercy in God, beyond what any ever yet made use of! for no man ever came to
the End of Infinite Mercy: Lord, Honor Thy self by me, some way or other, what
ever become of me. At another time. Lord, It is the Hour and Power of Darkness
with me; I feel the Dreadful Rage of Satan, and my vile Heart, now against me,
to overturn me, and to cut off thy Name, which Thou call me to bear in this
Place. I know not what will become of me, nor what to say to Thee: but I leave
my Woeful Soul, and self to thy Disposing, Lord, I am in Hell, will thou let me
lie there? At another time. God has put this Fear into my Heart, lest this be
the Fruit, and Recompense of my Sin, that I shall never know God for mine in
Truth, but Live and Die, in an unsound and self Deceiving way; that I should
have many fears and Prayers, and Good Affections and Duties and Hopes, and
Ordinances, and Seemings, but never an Heart soundly Humbled, and soundly
Comforted unto my Dying Day, but be a Son of Perdition to the last, and never
have God's special Love Revealed and Assured to me! Lord, keep this Fear alive
in my Heart! Such Passages as these, abundantly discover the Contritions, that
laid him exceeding Low, in his own Apprehension of himself, at the Time, when
God was Raising him to High Improvements, among His People; and it was by these
Abasements, that Heaven prepared him for those Improvements. But being, after
such Preparations, called forth to the Service of the Churches, his Employments
came in so thick upon him, that he had not such liesure as heretofore to Enrich
his Diarys, with his Observations. He was at length Reduced unto this Custom,
that Ordinarily, on the Week before he Administered the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, which was once in two Months, he spent a Day in Prayer with
Fasting, before the Lord; and one of his Exercises on such a Day, was to Remind
and Record, such Passages of Divine Providence toward Himself, his House, his
Flock, the whole Country, yea, and the whole Nation, as he judged Useful to be
Remembered with him; and such especially as might Q^icken the Humiliations and
the Supplications, wherein he was engaged.

8. The Death of Mr. Shepard, was a Death-wound unto the Soul of Mr. Mitchel,
whose Veneration for the Great Holiness, Learning, and Wisdom, of his
Predecessor, caused him to Lament exceedingly the Loss of so Rich a Blessing,
and begin his own public Ministry, at Cambridge, with Sermons full of those
Lamentations. Indeed when he had Occasion to mention his own Living Four years
under Mr. Shepard's Ministry, he added, Unless it had been four years living in
Heaven, I know not how I could have more cause to Bless God wi^h wonder, than
for those Four years. Under an Affliction, which he so much Resented, the
Comf^rt which he (...) ^^ught for himself, he thus expressed: What a blessed
thing is it to have the Med^ator, the Man Christ Jesus to go unto, when I have
n^ Friend that I can fully speak to, and open all (...) and Ails into His
Bosom? I think, were Mr. Shepard now alive, I would go and entreat his Counsel
and Help, and Prayer. Why, now I may go freely into the Bosom of the Man
Christ Jesus, who is able, faithful, tender hearted above the best of mere men.
And I may Go, and tell him not only my Sorrows (and yet that is no small
matter,) but also my Sins, all my Sins; though not without shame, yet without
fearful Despair. I may Complain to Him of a strong Lust, and of an Hard Heart.
And He does not only Pity me (and that He does more than any man could do) but
is also fully able to Help me against Sorrow, yea, and against Sin too. And in
Him, I may see, and take hold of the Pity, and Love, and Grace of God the
Father, who through Him, is well-pleased. But that he might signalize his
Affection to the Memory of his Predecessor, he speedily took the pains to
peruse and publish the Sermons of that Worthy man, upon the Parable of the Ten
Virgins, which make a Volumn in Folio; with a most Excellent, and Judicious
Preface of his thereunto. Which afterward, was not without its Recompense in
the Providence of God, when after his own Death, his own Sermons upon, The
Glory to which God has called Believers by Jesus Christ (carefully
Transcribed, and so Transmitted, by Captain Laurence Hammond of Charlstown, to
whose cares about it, the Church is now beholden for this Treasure,) were by
some surviving Friends, Printed at London. And he whom I have once already
compared unto Pollio, who Dyed, when between Forty and Fifty years old, was in
this also, like that Germane Divine, who left behind him a Book of Sermons, De
vita aeterna, whereof Melchior Adam says, Non solum suae Confessionis Homines
omnium Ordinum in Deliciis habuerunt, atque habent; sed etiam Adversariorum
nonnulli, minus morosi probaverunt: Both Friends and Fees approved it. The
young Gentlewoman, whom his Predecessor had married a little before his
Decease, he now also married, upon the general Recommendations of that Widow
unto him: and the Epithalamiums, which the Students of the College then
Celebrated that Marriage withal, were expressive of the Satisfaction, which it
gave unto all the Good people in the Vicinity. Howbeit, before this, he had
addressed himself unto the Venerable old Mr. Cotton, for leave to become his
Son-in-law, and Mr. Cotton prognosticating the Eminency, which he would arrive
unto, had given Leave unto it. But the Immature Death of that Hopeful young
Gentlewoman, Mrs. Sarah Cotton, preventing so desirable a Match, made way for
his pursuing and obtaining this other Settlement. Being so settled; he wholly
gave himself up to the Services of his Ministry, with such a Disposition, as h^
ex^^essed in his Parting Advice to another, who Traveling from hence to
England, had these words from him at his Farewell; My serious Advice to you is,
That you keep out of Company, as far as Christianity and Civility will give you
leave; Take it from me; The Time spent in your Study, you will generally find
spent the most Profitably, Comfortably and Accountably.

^. Eighteen year* did he continue a Pastor to the Church of Cambridge. And as
that which Encouraged him to Accept at first the Pastoral Charge of that Flock,
was his being able to write that Character of them, That they were a Gracious,
Savoury-spirited people, principled by Mr. Shepard, liking an Humbling,
Mourning, Heartbreaking Ministry and Spirit; Living in Religion, Praying men
and women: Here (said He) I might have Occasions of many sweet Heart-breakings
before God, which I have so much need of! So the Continual Prayers of such a
People to the Lord Jesus Christ, for him, doubtless contributed more than a
little, unto his being furnished from Heaven with such Rich Treasures of Light
and Grace, as made his Ministry richly serviceable unto them all. In this his
Ministry, he Preached over a great part of the Body of Divinity. And as Paul
appealed unto his two first Chapters to the Ephesians, thus in some Degree, an
Appeal might have been made unto those Labors of this Admirable Preacher, to
Demonstrate his Knowledge of the Mystery of Christ. He made a most Entertaining
Exposition on the Book of Genesis, and part of Exodus; he made many
Incomparable Discourses on the four first Chapters of John: Occasional
Subjects, he also Handled many, with much Variety: He likewise kept a Monthly
Lecture, where he largely Handled Man's Misery by Sin, and Salvation by Christ,
and entered on the Doctrine of Obedience due thereupon; and vast Assemblies of
People from all the Neighboring Towns, reckoned it, highly worth their pains
to Repair unto that Lecture. The Sermons wherewith he fed the Church of God,
were admirably Well-Studied; they still smelt of the Lamp; and, indeed, if
there were nothing else to prove it, yet the Notes which he wrote in his
Preparations for his Public Exercises, were Proof enough of his being an
Indefatigable Student. He ordinarily meddled with no Point, but what he managed
with such an extraordinary Invention, Disposition, and Copious Application, as
if he would leave no material thing to be said of it, by any that should come
after him. And when he came to Utter what he had Prepared, his Utterance had
such a becoming Tuneableness, and Vivacity, to set it off, as was indeed
Inimitable; though many of our Eminent Preachers, that were in his Time,
Students at the College, did essay to Imitate him. It has been observed by
others, as well as Jerome, that Quae firmiter con^epimus, been loqui^^^,
siquidem Talia in Animae Substantiam quasi Concoquendo sunt Conversa: and our
Mitchel, having accordingly well Concocted what he was to Deliver, with clear
and strong Thoughts upon it, expressed it with a Natural Eloquence, which, (as
Tully says of all True Eloquence) cast the Hearers into Wonderment. Profound
Meditation having first, in his Heart got ready a well composed Meat Offering
for the House of God, his Tongue was as the Pen of a Ready Writer to bring it
forth: and his Auditories usually count^d themselves at a Feast with the
Inhabitants of Heaven, while he was thus Entertaining of them. His Preaching
was not that which Dr. Manton would justly Rebuke under the Name of
Gentleman-Preaching: or, a sort of Harangue finely Laced and gilded with such
Phalerate Stuff, as plainly Discovers the Vanity of them, that jingle with it:
but he still spoke, as reckoning, that, if Seneca's Philosopher was to
Remember, Ad miseros vocatus as; o^em laturus Naufragis, Captis, Aegris,
Intentae securi subjectum praestantibus Cap^^^: Such a thing is much more to be
Remembered by a Minister of the Lord Jesus Christ. Hence, though he had a very
Clean Style, and spoke, -- Munda, sed e medio, Consuetaque verba; -- by the
same token, that when he had once used one word, in the Pulpit, which it may
be, no body else besides himself would have so severely Criticized upon, after
he came home, he wrote a severe Animadversion upon it; I was after, in my self
Ashamed of it, (he wrote) as being a Phrase too Coarse for the Pulpit!
Nevertheless, he had also a Plain Style, for which he might have been justly
called, as Melancthon was by Keckerman, Ille, ut sie dicam, Perspicuitatis
Genius: but so pungently improved, that what he spoke, was felt by his Hearers,
as Quick and Powerful. One, that has addressed the World with a Treatise of
Ecclesiastical Rhetoric, says, Credat mihi Ministerii Candidatus; Tria sunt,
quae valde commendant Concionatorem; Vocis Amabilitas, Epithetorem Emphasis, et
Connexionis Concinnitas: Now all of these Three Commendations did belong to the
Preaching of our Mitchel. And, as it was the Remark of that then Matchless
Preacher, Bucholtzer, to whom I have often in my Thoughts Matched our Mitchel,
That a Preacher was known by his Peroration, So 'twas Remark't of our Mitchel,
that though he were all along in his Preaching, as a very Lovely Song of one that
has a pleasant Voice, yet as he drew near to the close of his Exercises, his
Comely Fervency would Rise to a Mavelous measure of Energy; He would speak
with such a Transcendent Majesty and Liveliness, that the People (more
Thunderstruck than they that heard Cicero's Oration for Ligarius) would often
Shake under his Dispensations, as if they had Heard the Sound of the Trumpets
from the Burning Mountain, and yet they would Mourn to think that they were
going presently to be Dismissed from such an Heaven upon Earth. He had indeed
an Uncommon measure of that Privilege, that is Reported of Bucholtzer, Ut,
licet nonnisi finita Hora Altera per^raret, nullum tamen Audiendi Taedium, vel
e media cuiquam plebe, Obrepserit: though he Preached Long Sermons, the People
were never weary of Hearing them. Vast was the Happiness of the Scholars at the
College, and (in them) of all the Churches in the Country, while Cambridge was
Illuminated with such a Ministry! It was a Reflection upon this matter, long
since Printed unto the World; Reason and Prudence requires, that the Minister
of that Place, be more than Ordinarily endowed with Learning, Gravity and
Wisdom, Orthodoxy, Ability, Excellent Gifts in Preaching, that so the Scholars,
which are Devoted to be Preachers of the Gospel, might be seasoned with the
Spirit of such an Elijah: In which Regards this Holy man of God, was eminently
furnished; and his Labors were abundantly blessed: For, very many of the
Scholars bred up in his time (as is observed) do savor of his Spirit, for
Grace, and a most attractive manner of Preaching. Truly, as it was no rare
thing for a German Divine to give solemn Thanks unto God, For being Born in the
Days of Melancthon; so there is many a New English Divine, who has given
Thanks to God, For their being at ths College in the Days of Mitchel. But it
must here be added, That although the chief Labors of this Exemplary Pastor,
were in the Study, and the Pulpit, yet he did not think himself thereby Excused
from those Pastoral Visits which his Flock expected from him. Herein he visited
at fit Hours, which he set apart for it, the several Families of his Flock; not
upon Trivial Designs, but with serious and solemn Addresses, to their Souls
upon the matters of their Everlasting Peace; and the Gildas Salvianus of Mr.
Baxter, was herein out Mitchel himself, as well as much Read and Prized by this
Faithful Pastor, who Watched for Souls, as one that was to give an Account.

10. What he was in his Ministry, the same he was in his Discipline, when
Offenses arose, that called for his Consideration, in the Church whereto he was
Related: Faithful, Prudent, Zealous, Holy, and like an Angel of a Church, Not
Bearing with those that are Evil. When a public Admonition was to be Dispensed
unto any One, that had offended scandalously, one could have heard nothing more
Pathetical, or more Powerful, than his Discourses, on those unwelcome
Occasions: the Hearers would be all Drowned in Tears, as if the Admonition had
been, as indeed he would with much Artifice make it be, directed unto them all:
bu^ such would be the Compassion and yet the Gravity, the Majesty, the
Scriptural and Awful Pungency of these his Dispensations, that the Conscience
of the Offender himself, could make no Resistance thereunto. But when the Lord
Jesus Christ in ends to make any Steward in His House, em^nently Prudent and
Faithful, He commonly Tries that Person, by Ordering some very Difficult
Church-Cases to arise, quickly after his first Entrance upon the Stewardship
Some such Thorny Church-Cases did soon Exercise the Thoughts of this truly Aged
young man; in all of which he conscientiously considered the Rights of the
Fraternity to Judge in their own Church Cases, as that Renowned Minister, and
Martyr, the Blessed Cyprian did, when he could say in one of his Epistles unto
his Flock, From the very Beginning of my Ministry, I determined to do nothing
without the Consent of my People: and again, All Church Affayrs, as mutual
Respect requires, [in commune tractabimus] we will manage them in common; and
again, He would Restore and Admit none but those who should plead their cause
before all the people; [Acturi apud plebem universam Causam suam:] and order
none of their matters, but [praesentibus et Judicantibus vobis,] with their
Presence and Judgment. And if Mr. Mitchel had heard any reckon the Liberty of
the Brethren thus confessed in the Days of Cyprian, to be an Apostasy from
what was in the Beginning, he would have asked them, whether they reckoned the
Loss of this Liberty afterward, in the Rise of Popery, to be any Beginning, or
Tendency toward Church-Reformation, and Recovery? Now though this Liberty of the
Brethren, which our Mitchel according to the Primitive Congregational
Church Discipline allowed, be that wherein for the most part the Repose of the
Pastors has been by the compassionate wisdom of our Lord Jesus Christ provided
for,) some Trouble sometimes has arisen to the Pastors from the Brethrens abuse
of their Liberty, which has called for much Patience and Prudence in those that
have the Rule over them. And so there did unto our Mitchel, who on this
Occasion, as on all others, was readier still to condemn himself, than any
others* and once particularly, recorded this passage in his Diary. I was
Troubled, [at some improper Cavils from the Brethren] and I fear spoke not so
Lovingly and Prudently as I should have done. I feel my Spirit ready to rise,
and forget my Principles of Lying Low in the Dust, and bearing with others
Infirmities, and becoming all Things to all men, for their Edification. Oh!
Lord Humble me, and Teach me how to carry it! Thus did this Excellent person
write, when he was Enumerating his Humbling Circumstances, in a Secret Fast
before the Lord. But there was an Harder Case than any of these, to Exercise
him. Our Mitchel, presently upon his becoming the Pastor of Cambridge, met with
a more than ordinary Trial, in that the Good Man, who was then the Praesident
of the College, and a Member of the Church, there was unaccoun^ably fallen
into the Briars of Antipaedobaptism; and being Briar^d in the Scrupl^s of that
Persuasion, he not only forbore to present an Infant of his own unto the
Baptism of the Lord, but also thought himself under some Obligation to bear his
Testimony in some Sermons, against the Administration of Baptism to any Infant
whatsoever. The Brethren of the Church were somewhat vehement and vi^lent in
their signifying of their Dissatisfaction, at the Obstruction, which the
Renitencies of that Gentleman, threatened unto the Peaceable Practice of Infant
Baptism, wherein they had hitherto walked; and judged it necessary for the
Vindication of the Churches Name abroad in the Country, and for the safety of
the Congregation at home, to desire of him, that he would cease Preaching as
formerly, until he had better satisfied himself in the Point now Doubted by
him. At these things, extreme was the Uneasiness of our Mitchel, who told the
Brethren, That more Light and less Heat would do better: but yet saw the zeal
of some against this Good Man's Error, to push this matter on so far, that
being but a Young man, he was likely now to be Embarassed in a Controversy,
with so Considerable a Person, and with one who had been his Tutor, and a
Worthy and a Godly man. He could give this Account of it, Through the Churches
being apt to Hurry on too Fast, and too Impatiently, I found my self much
Oppressed; especially Considering my own Weakness to grapple with these
Difficulties; This B^siness did lie down and rise up, sleep and wake with me:
It was a dismal thing to me, that I should Live to see Trut^ or Peace Dying or
Decaying in poor Cambridge. But while he was with a Prudence incomparably
beyond what might have been expected from a Young man, managing this Thorny
Business, he saw cause to Record a passage, which perhaps will be judged worthy
of some Remembrance. That Day (writes he, December. 24 1653.) after I came from
him, I had a strange Experience: I found Hurrying and Pressing Suggestions
against Paedobaptism, and injected Scruples and Thoughts whether the other way
might not be Right, and Infant Baptism, an Invention of men: and whether I
might with Good Conscience Baptize Children, and the like. And these Thoughts
were Darted in with some Impression, and left a strange Confusion and
Sickliness upon my Spirit. Yet methought, it was not Hard to Discern that they
were from the EVIL ONE. First, Because they were rather Injected, Hurrying
Suggestions, than any deliberate Thoughts, or bringing any Light with them.
Secondly, Because they were Unseasonable; Interrupting me in my Study for the
Sabbath, and putting my Spirit into a Confusion, so as I had much a do, to do
ought in my Sermon. It was not now a time to Study that matter; but when in the
former part of the Week, I had given my self to that Study, the more I Studied
it, the more Clear and Rational Light I saw for Paedo baptism. But now these
Suggestions Hurryed me into Scruples. But they made me cry out to God for His
Help; and He did afterward Calm and clear up my Spirit. I thought the End of
them was, First, To show me the Corruption of my Mind; How apt that was to take
in Error, even as my Heart is to take in Lust. Secondly, To make me walk in
Fear, and take hold on Jesus Christ to keep me in the Truth; and it was a check
to my former Self Confidence, and it made me fearful to go needlessly to Mr. D.
for methought I found a Venom and Poison, in his Insinuations and Discourses
against Paedo-baptism. Thirdly, That I might be Mindful of the Aptness in
others to be soon shaken in Mind, and that I might warn others thereof, and
might know how to speak to them from Experience. And indeed my former
Experience of Irreligious Injections, was some Help to me to Discover the
nature of These. I Resolved also on Mr. HOokers Principle, That I would have an
Argument, able to Remove a Mountain, before I would Recede from, or Appear
against a Truth or Practice, received among the Faithful. After the Sabbath was
over, and I had time to Reflect upon the Thoughts of those things, those
Thoughts of Doubt departed, and I Returned unto my former Frame. The Troubles
thus Impending over the Church of Cambridge, did Mr. Mitchel happily wade
through; partly by much Prayer with Fasting, in Secret, before God, for the
Good Issue of these things; partly, by getting as much Help as he could from
the Neighboring Ministers, to be Interposed in these Difficulti^s; and partly,
by using much Meekness of Wisdom toward the Erroneous Gentleman; for whom our
Mr. Mitchel continued such an Esteem, that although his Removal from the
Government of the College, and from his Dwelling place in Cambridge, had been
procured by these Differences, yet when he Dyed, He Honored him with an Elegy,
from which I will transcribe one Stanza or two, because it very truly points
out that Generous, Gracious, Catholic Spirit, which adorned that Person, who
wrote it.

Where Faith in JESUS is Sincere,
That Soul, He Saving, pardons;
What wants or Errors else be there,
That may and do Consist therewith.
And though we be Imperfect here,
And in One Mind cant often meet,
Who know in part, in part may Err,
Though Faith be One, All do not see it:
Yet may we once the Rest obtain,
In Everlasting Bliss above,
Where Christ with Perfect Saints does Reign,
In Perfect light, and perfect Love:
Then shall we all Like-minded be,
Faith's Unity is there full-grown;
There One Truth, all both Love and See,
And thence are Perfect made in One.
There Luther both and Zuinglius,
Ridley and Hooper, there agree;
There all the truly Righteous,
Sans Feud Live to Eternity.
But there was a special Design of Heaven, in Ordering these Trials to befall
our Mithel, thus in the Beginning of his Ministry. He was hereby put upon
Studying and Maintaining the Doctrine of Infant Baptism; and of Defending the
Visible Interest of the Children of the Faithful in the Covenant of Grace,
under the New Administration of it, as well as under the Old, wherein we all
know the Infants of Believers enjoyed the Seal of being made Righteous by
Faith. In the Defense of this Comfortable Truth, he not only Preached more than
half a score ungainsayable Sermons, while his own Church was in some Danger by
the Hydrophobie of Anabaptism, which was come upon the Mind of an Eminent
person in i^; but also when afterward the Rest of the Churches were Troubled
by a strong Attempt upon them from the Spirit of Anabaptism, there was a
Public Disputation appointed at Boston, two days together, for the clearing of
the Faith, in this Article, this Worthy man was he, who did most Service, in
this Disputation; whereof the Effect was, that although the Erring Brethren, as
is usual in such cases, made this their Last Answer to the Arguments, which had
cast them into much Confusion, Say what you will, We will Hold our Mind!

[Concurrat veterum licet in Te Turba, potes Tu, Hac omnes una vincere voce,
Nego:] Yet others were happily established, in the Right Ways of the Lord. Nor
was this all the Good and Great Work, for which this rare person was
marvellously prepared, by these Temptations: there is a further Stroke of our
Church History, to be here briefly Touched, though elsewhere more fully to be
(...).

11. New England was a Wilderness Planted by a People, generally so Remarkable
in their Holy Zeal, for the Ordinances belonging to the House of God, that for
the sake of Enjoying the Administrations of those Ordinances with Scriptural
Purity, they had undergone the severe Persecutions which at last Exiled them
into that American Wilderness: And hence there were few people of any
Significancy, in the Transplantation, but what at their first Coming over,
joined themselves unto the full Communi^n of the Churches, in all special
Ordinances, though many of them had (I say not, justifyably) made the Terms of
their Communion so strict, that it might justly have been Reckoned a difficult
thing for some Sincere Christians of smaller Seize in Christianity to
come up unto them. For this cause, although several of our Seers, did so far
See the State, which our Matters would e're long devolve into, that they
Labored much to have the Principles of Truth concerning, The Church State of
the Children born in the Churches, Declared and Asserted, in the Platform of
Church Discipline, among the First Principles of New England, nevertheless many
Worthy men, were slow to make any Synodical Decision of those Principles, until
there should arise more occasion for the Practices, that were to be deduced
from them. This Occasion did in Twenty or Thirty years time, come on with some
Importunity and Impetuosity, when the Country began to be filled with the
Adult Posterity of the First Planters; among which, there were Multitudes or
Persons, who by the good Effects of a pious Education under the Means of Grace,
observable upon them, in their Profession of the Faith, not contradicted by any
thing scandalous in their Life, deserved another Consideration in the Churches,
than what was allowed unto Pagans; and yet were not so far Improved, in all ^he
Points of Experimental Godliness, that they c^uld boldly Demand an Admission
unto the Mysteries, at the Table of the Lord; the Conditions whereof confined
it unto persons that were sensibly Grown in Grace, and i^ the Knowledge of the
Lord Jesus Christ. The most of the Ministers then, and before then, in the Land
were desirous to have the thus Qualified Posterity of the Faithful,
acknowledged in the Churches, a^ the Nursery, from whence a successive supply
of Communicants, was to be expected; and it wa^ their Desire, that this Nursery
might be Watered with Baptism, and Pruned with Discipline, as well as otherwise
Dressed by the Ministry of the Word. Yea, they thought, that besides the
Internal Benefits of the New Covenant unto the Elect of God, the Sealing of
that Covenant unto them, that were visibly the Right Subjects of it, would be
an Assurance from God, that when these persons grow up to years of Discretion,
He would infallibly make them the Offer of His Covenant, and so continue the
Gospel of it, among them: whereas if They and Theirs were no other accounted of
than Heathens, there would not pass many Generations, before the Sacred
Religion of Christ, would, through the just wrath of Heaven, be lost among
them, in utter Heathenism. However, all men did not then see all things! When
the Church of Roxbury particularly in the year 1653. was put upon Doing what
was their Duty in this Respect, our Mitchel was yet (he said) in the Dark about
it; he wished and wrote, That it might not yet be pressed; and added, The Lord
teach me Humility, Modesty, Wisdom in these things! Many a day did this
Excellent man spend now in Praying with Fasting before God; and when he was
thus Engaged in the Exercises of a Sacred and Secret Fast, I find him,
inserting this, as not the least cause of his being so Engaged: The Case of the
Children of the Church, in Regard of the Doctrine and Practice about it. Oh!
that God would show me His Mind, and Way clearly in those things: enable me to
Teach them convincingly, and set upon the Practice thereof: and that the whole
Country might be Guided aright therein; That Abraham's Commanding Power might
have its due Exercise, as to the Children of our Churches. And that all the
Remaining Knots, and Difficulties about Church Discipline, and the Management
of Christ's visible Kingdom, might once be clearly Resolved according to the
Word. Lord, Humble me, and prosper my poor Studies, and Teach me to know and do
thy whole Will herein! as Ezekiel. 43.11. And at another Time; The Points about
Church Discipline, I have been long aiming to look more thoroughly into. Lord,
Help and Guide me therein! and Grant that I may be kept from Extremes (the
great Undoing of the World:) both from immoderate Rigidness, on the one Hand,
either in Principles, Spirit, or Practice; and on the other hand, from wronging
either Truth, or Conscience, by any sinful Compliance. To these Devotions, he
joined indefa^ig^ble Studies upon the Great Question, then Agitated; and the
Determination of the Question at last, was more Owing unto him, than unto any
One man in the World: For He was a Great part in that Renowned Synod; that met
a^ Boston in the year 1662. The (...) of the Synod afterward published, was
chi^fly of his Composure, and when a most Elaborate Answer to that Result, was
Published by some very worthy Persons, that were then Dissenters, the Hardest
Service in the Defense was Assigned unto him. In fine, Our Lord Jesus Christ
made this Great Man, even, while he was yet a Young man, one of the Greatest
Instruments we ever had, of Explaining and Maintaining the Truths, relating to
the Church State of the Posterity in our Churches, and of the Church Care,
which our Churches owe unto their Posterity: and I have laid before the Reader,
one of the most Extensive and Expensive Labors, that exhausted his Life, when
I have mentioned, The Propositions of the Synod about the Subject of Baptism.
All that remains necessary, to Illustrate this Paragr^ph of our H^story, is to
Desc^ibe in a line or two, the Disposition which our Mitchel did prosecute this
Grand Concern withal; and I will therefore only Transcribe a Little from a
Judicious Letter of hi^, to Mr. Increase Mather, upon that Subject, which that
Reverend Person afterward Printed unto the World: with an Unanswerable
Vindication of these First Principles of New England, both from the Imputations
of Apostasy, by some ignorantly cast upon them, and from whatever other
Objections might be advanced against them. As for the Substance of the Cause
werein we have Engaged (says he) I am daily more and more Confirmed, that it
is the Cause of Truth, and of Christ, and that wherein, not a little of the
Interest of Christ's Kingdom, and of the Souls of men, is laid up. We have been
Reflected upon by some, as seeking our selves, and Driving on, I know not what
Design: though I cannot readily Imagine, what self Interest or self End, we
here should be led by in this matter; Sure I am, that for my own part, I
prejudice my self much, as to Name, Interest, and Ease, for my appearing in
this Cause: Neither was I so unsensible, as not to feel it from the First. I
know my self to be a poor, vile, sinful Creature, and I can with some feeling
say, Chief of Sinners, and Least of Saints: but in this particular matter, I
have often said, I wish my Brethren could see through me; for I know not any
Design or Desire I have in it, in all the World, but only that the Will of God
might be done among us, His Kingdom be advanced, these Churches, settled on
Right Bases, and flourish in the ways of Truth, Purity and Peace, and that the
Good of the Souls of men might be promoted, both in this, and after
Generations. Touching the matter it self, that has been in Debate, please to
consider at Leisure, these Three Propositions.

First, The whole Visible Church, under the New Testament is to be Baptized.

Secondly, If a man be one in the Church (whether admitted at Age, or in
Infancy) nothing less than Censurable-Evil, can put him out.

Thirdly, If the Parent be in the Visible Church, his Infant Child is so also.

Whether the Persons described in the Fifth Proposition of the Synod should be
Baptized, as in a Catholic, or in a Particular Church State, is another
Question: And I confess my self not altogether so peremptory in this Latter, is
I am in the Thing it self; [viz. That they ought to be Baptized,] yet still I
think, when all Stones are Turned it will come to this, That all the Baptized
are and ought to be under Discipline in particular Churches.

And now it is more than time for us to Dismiss this part of our Mitchellian
Pourtraiture, from any further Elaborations.

12. Mr. Mitchel's Desire had been, To be kept from Extremes; and indeed there
was nothing more Observable in his Temper, than such a Study of, a Temper in
all Difficult Matters, as renders a Person amiable, wherever it is Observable. I
remember, I have met with a Note of a very famous Preacher, who, in the midst
of many Temtations on both Hands, relieved himself by Interpreting, from the
Context, that Passage in Eccles 7.18. He that fears God shall come forth from
them all to be meant of ^ Deliverance out of all Extremes. The Fear of God in
our Mitchel, had this Effect, and Reward: And his wise coming forth from all
Extremes, was no where more Conspicuous, than in those points of
Church Discipline, for the clearing of which he had been, (I may say Extremely)
exercised. Had the sweet, Charitable, Amicable Spirit, that Signalized this
Good man, ^een expressed by all good men, as much as it was by him, a great
part of the Ecclesiastical Differences in the World had been evaporated, and it
had not been so long before the Names of Presbyterian and Congregational, had
been melted down into that One of United Brethren. It was the wish of our
Mitchel, to have those Two Things, in the State of the Church, livelily
Represented unto the Sense of the World. First, the Grace, and then at the same
time, the Holiness, of the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of the Church: and for
the Obtaining of such a Representation, he thought nothing more Effectual, than
the middle way; For the Cildren of the Faithful, to be taken within the Verge
of the Church, under the Wings of the Lord Jesus Christ, in his Ordinances, and
under Church care, Discipline, and Government, and to be in a State of
Initiation and Education, in the Church of God, and consequently to have
Baptism, which is the Seal of Initiation: But that they shall not come up to
the Lords Table, nor be admitted unto an equal share, with the Communicants, in
the Management of Church Affairs, peculiar to them, until, as a Fruit of the
aforesaid Helps and Means, they attain to such Qualifications, as may render
their Admission fair, safe, and comfortable, both to themselves and others. His
Words were, We make account, that if we keep Baptism within the Compass of the
Non-Excommunicable, and the Lords Supper, within the Compass of those that have
(unto Charity) somewhat of the Power of Godliness ( or, Grace in Exercise) we
shall be near about the Right Middle-way of Church-Reformation. And hence, when
he had pleaded with as Irresistible Reason, as Indefatigable Study, for the
Grace of the Kingdom of Heaven, to be exhibited in our Churches, by
Administering the Baptism of the Lord unto the Persons, and Infants of all, who
understand the Doctrine of Faith, and publicly profess their Assent thereunto,
and are not Scandalous in Life, and Solemnly own the Covenant of Grace before
the Church, and Subject themselves, and theirs unto the Government of the Lord
in His Church: He then set himself to plead for the Holiness of that Kingdom,
to be exhibited in the Churches, not only by Censuring the Baptized, when they
fell into Scandalous Evils, but also by Requiring further degrees of
Preparation, in those that they received unto the Supper of the Lord. Nothing
was more agreeable unto him, than such a Notion of Things, as Polanus had, when
Writing of the Lord's Supper, he had these words; Nec ad eam admittendi sunt
(...), nisi prius Pastoribus Ecclesiae exploratum sit, eos veram Fidei
Doctrinam recte tenere et profiteri, ac intelligere quid in sacra caena agatur,
quove fine, et seipsos probare possent, an si^t in Fide. -- Quocirca etiam
Catechumeni aut Imperiti, e vulgo; tamdiu differendi donec de Fide, et vita
eorum Pastoribus probe constet. Now, because it may be a singular Service unto
the Churches, to lay before them the Judgment of so Eminent a Person, upon a
Concern of some Curious and Critical Contestation in them, I shall Reckon it no
Digression from the Story of his Life, to Recite the Result of those
Meditations, in the Digesting of which, no little part of his Life did Roll
away. He thus wrote for his own satisfaction, on Januar. 4. 1664. And I shall
be glad, if it may now be for my Reader's.

PROPOSITIONS.
I. It is a Necessary Qualification, in Worthy Receivers of the Lord's Supper,
that they Examine themselves, and Discern the Lords Body. 1 Cor. 11 28, 29.

II. Those whom the Church Admits to the Lord's Supper, must be such as she in
Charity judges, that they can and will Examine themselves, and Discern the
Lord's Body; Because she must Admit none, but such as are in Charity (or
visibly) Worthy Receivers; and they only are in Charity Worthy Receivers, who
in Charity have the necessary Qualifications of such. Either she must give it
only to visibly Worthy Receivers, or she may give it to visibly Unworthy
Receivers, which were to profane and pollute it. We must Dispense Ordinances,
unto fit and proper Subjects, as Christ's faithful Stewards. 1 Cor. 4* 1, 2.

III. None can be such Self-Examining and Discerning Christians without some
Experience of a Work of Grace, (or without Grace in Exercise) so as to have in
Experimental Savoury Acquaintance, with the Essentials of Effectual Calling,
viz. Conviction of Sin and Misery by Nature, Illumination in the Knowledge of
the Gospel, and Conversion of Heart, by Repentance toward God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Self-Examination implies both, that there is
the Grace of Faith and Repentance (or of Vocation) the Matter to be Examined:
And also an Ability to Reflect upon that Grace, that is and has been wrought
in us; to Prove it, and find it to be Approved, at least by a praeponderating
Hope. 2. Discerning the Lord's Body, the showing forth or Annunciation of His
Death, imports some Acquaintance with, and Actual Eying of the main and most
Spiritual Mysteries of the Gospel, concerning Christ, His Death, Righteousness,
Redemption, and all the Benefits thereof; and thos^ as exhibited in this
Ordinance of the Supper. 3. That a lively or special Exercise of Grace, (by
Reviving and Renewing our Faith, Repentance and Love) is required in
Preparation for, and Participation of the Lord's Table, is abundantly evident,
both by the Sense of the Expressions aforesaid, and by the Scope of this
Ordinance, which is to Seal not only Union, but Actual Communion and Fruition.
1 Cor. 10.16. By the Active Use of all the Outward Senses, in Receiving the
Sacrament, implying that there must be an Actual, and Active Use of Exercised
Senses, in Reference to the Inward Part of it.

IV. None can appear unto Rational Charity to have the Qualifications
aforesaid, without Holding forth, the same in some way or other. Man can judge
of Internal Qualifications, no way, but by External Signs. Invisible Grace is
made visible to us by some Outward Tokens and Manifestations. Here, Esse, et
Apparere, Non Esse, et Non Apparere, are all One.

V. Besides a Doctrinal Knowledge of the Principles of Religion, there are Two
Things Required to the Holding forth of Grace in Exercise (or of an
Experimental Savoury Acquaintance with the Essentials of Effectual Calling)
viz. 1. A Gracious Conversation. 2. Gracious Expressions. By a Gracious
Conversation, I mean, not only Freedom from Notorious Scandal and Obstinacy
therein, but a Conversation wherein ^he positive Fruits of Piety ^o appear, so
as they that know the Parties, can give a positive Testimony for them. Gal.
5.6. Jam. 2.18.26. Gracious Expressions, or Words are, when a Person can so
speak of the Essentials of Effectual Calling, as does signify, not only a
Doctrinal, but a Practical or Spiritual Acquaintance therewithal. That these
are Necssary to show Grace in Exercise, appears; Because 1. Good Words are in
Scripture made the great Sign of a Good Heart. Mat 12.34, 35, 37. Prove. 10.20.
And if it be so, in Ordinary Conversion, much more may this Sign be expected,
when a man comes to Hold forth, and give Evidence of the Grace that God has
bestowed upon him, in Order to Partaking of the Lord's Table. 2. Confession
with the mouth, is that by which Faith Evidences it self to be Saving and
Effectual. Romans 10.9, 10. 3. It cannot be imagined, how a person can have had
Experience of a Work of Grace, and that unto a Comfortable Discerning thereof
in himself, but that he can speak of it, in some way or other, after a savoury
manner.

VI. Hence, either a Relation of the work of Conversion, such as has been
ordinarily used, in most of our Churches, or Somewhat Equivalent thereunto, is
necessary in order unto Full Communion, or, to Admission unto the Lords Table.
There is an Equivalent thereunto. 1. When an Account of the Essentials of
Conversion is given in way of Answers, unto Questions propounded thereabouts.
2* In a Serious, Solemn and Savoury Profession, or Confession, De Praesenti, i.
e. when a Person does with Understanding and Affection, express and declare
himself sensible of his Sin and Misery, and Absolute need of Christ, his
Believing, or Casting himself on Christ, in the Promise, for Righteousness and
Life, and his unfaigned Purpose and Desire, through the Grace and Strength of
Christ, to Renounce every Evil way, and walk with God, in the ways of New
Obedience; pointing also to some special Truths, Considerations or Scriptures,
that have or do affect his Soul with Reference to these Things, though he do
not Relate the Series of former Passages and Experiences. 3. When a Person is
eminently known to Excel in Gifts and Grace, (as a long approved Minister of
the Gospel, or other eminently Holy Christian;) This, is more than Equivalent
to such a Relation.

The Sum is, The Modus Agendi, may be various and mutable, and much therein
left unto the Prudence of Church Officers; But the Thing is necessary; viz. To
Hold forth in one way or other, Experience of a Work of Grace, or a practical
Acquaintance with the Essentials of Effectual Calling. The Reason is, Because
without This, they cannot show themselves, able to Examine themselves, and
Discern the Lords Body, which is essentially Necessary to Worthy Receiving, and
hence the Appearance of it Necessary, in a Subject of orderly Admission to the
Lords Table. A man must make a Relation to himself; viz. By Reviewing of his
Faith and Repentance, or at least an Equivalent present Renewing thereof, in
Preparation for the Lords Table; i. e. To give himself a Comfortable Regular
Admission thereunto. And should he not Declare and Manifest such a Thing to the
Church or Officers thereof, to give them a Comfortable Ground to Admit him?

Object. But why may it not Suffice, for a man publicly to say, I Believe on
Christ, or do unfeignedly Repent of my Sins? or to Consent to such Expressions
being Read, or propounded unto him, without any more ado?

Answ. 1. He that can Groundedly so say, or profess before God, Angels and Men,
that he has, (yea, knows that he has) unfeigned Faith and Repentance, can say
somewhat more particularly to show the Reality of his Acquaintance with those
things. And if he cannot say it, Groundedly, it is not meet to put him so to
say.

2. He that either Cannot, or Will not say any more than so, (especially in
Times of such Light and Means, as we live in) he renders the Truth of his Faith
and Repentance, Suspicious, so as that Rational Charity, cannot acquiesce in
it. For all men know, that Faith is not dropped into men's Hearts out of the
Clouds, with praevious, concomitant, and Subsequent Operations; or* if it was
first wrought in Infancy, yet it will (especially when grown to such a Lively
Exercise, as fits for the Lords Supper) show it self in Effects; Renewings, and
Increasings, by the Word and Ordinances, so as a man will be able to hold forth
some Experience of the Operations of Grace.

3. That Mode of Profession, which the Objection mentions, has been found by
plentiful Experience, to be a Nurse of Formality, and Irreligion. Now it is a
Rule concerning the Modus Agendi, or such like circumstances, That when by
Experience a thing proves Inconvenient, and subject to Abuse, there ought to be
an Alteration thereof.

VII. Besides this, from the Qualifications Requisite to the Lords Supper,
there be other Reasons Serving to confirm the Necessity of Fractical
Confessions (viz. by Relations, or otherways, as was before said) in those that
are Admitted to full Communion.

As 1. Let those Scripture Examples be considered, wherein the Grace wrought in
the faithful, is Evidenced, or Collected, from the Lords Dealings with them in
the Work of Conversion, and Experiences relating thereto, or to the Fruits
thereof. See 1 These. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10. -- Let those words be paraphrased
according to their obvious Sense, they will make up a full Relation. And if
Paul knew, or gathered the Grace that was in the Thessalonians, from such
things as those, does it not show, that such things are a proper and rational
Ground for us to gather Grace from? If they be famously known otherwise (as
they were in that case to Paul) it suffices, as was above said; but otherwise
how should they be known, but from the parties own Mouth? So Col. 1.4 -- 8. --
Is there not a kind of Relation, of the work, and manner of the Conversion of
those 3000. in Act. 2. Set down in that Chapter? And Consequently, the
Substance of such a Relation, or Work, was then de facto, obvious to the
Apostles And so, of the Conversion of Paul. Chap. 9. and of Cornelius, Chap.
10. Yea, if we look into most of the Examples in the Acts, Consider, if they be
not more immediately Reducible to [ A manifestation of a Work of Grace] than to
that of knowledge, and a Blameless Life? Paul had little to say, for a
foregoing Blameless Life, to the Disciples of Damascus; but a work of
Conversion he could hold forth to them, and a Profession, de praesenti,
thereupon. So Act. 9.26, 27.

2. Ministers, in giving the Lords Supper to Persons, do give a Great and
Solemn Testimony to them, [ Take, Eat, This is Christ's Body, that was broken
for you;] therefore surely they may take, and require a Solemn Testimony from
them, and had not need to be Slight therein.

3. The Power of Godliness will soon be lost, if only Doctrinal knowledge, and
Outward Blamelesness be accounted sufficient, for all Church Priviledges, and
Practical Confessions, (or, Examinations of men's Spiritual Estate) be laid
aside. For that which People see to be Publicly Required, and Held in
Reputation, that will they look after, and usually no more, but content
themselves with That. Consider; if this has not been a reason of the Formality
and Deadness, that has overgrown many Churches.

January 4. 1664.
Thus did a Manuscript of this Worthy Man's, now in my Hands, Harmonize with a
Notable passage about the Bohemian Churches.

Demum, quia Objiciebatur, Fratres non habere Ecclesiam apertam cum plena
Sanctorum Communione, sed Administrare Sacramenta Quibusdam tantum sibi
addictis: Responsum fuit, Sancta dare non Sanctis, prohibuisse Christum;
Christianismumque a panitentia, auspicandum, non a Sacramentis; neque Secundum
Instituta Christi Absolutionem nunciandam nisi Resipiscentibus et Credentibus,
quod utrumque (Paenitentiam and Fidem) ne Superficiarium sit et fallax,
Exploratione Indigere; Exploratione vero Tempore Justo: et quia Nudis
Sacramentis Salutis Vim adscribere, ex Opere Operato, Errorum in Papatu, Basis
est, Errorem hunc corrigi non posse aliter, quam ut certa probatione, nec illae
Subitanea, Cordium Arcana Revelentur, Novitiique diu and caute tum Informentur,
tum Explorentur.

Ratio Discipl. Fatr. Bohem p. 4, 5.

Because it was objected, That the Brethren have not an open Church, with the
full Communion of Saints, but admininister the Sacraments only to some of their
own party; It was Answered, That Christ has forbid our Giving of Holy Things
unto Unholy Persons; and that Christianity is to be Begun, with Repentance, and
not with the Sacraments; and that according to the Institutions of our Lord,
Absolution is not to be pronounced upon any but those that Repent and Believe;
both of which ( Repentance and Faith) that it may not be Superficiary, and
Fallacious, it must have some Exploration; and this Exploration, must have a
Sufficient Time for it. And because to ascribe a Saving Virtue, unto the bare
Sacraments Ex Opere Operato, is the Bottom of the Errors of Popery, this Error
cannot otherwise be Corrected, than by this means; That by a certain, and no
sudden Trial, the Secrets of men's Hearts may be laid open, and Novices may be,
with a long Caution, both Instructed and Examined.

Reader, If the Beating out of Truth in Controversies, that have Risen among
us, relating to our Church Discipline had not been the special Service, wherein
all our Churches beheld the Lord Jesus Christ making use of this our Learned,
Able Holy, and no less Considerate, than Considerable Mitchel, I had not given
thee so long an Entertainment, as that of these Propositions; Propositions*
which if they should in the Opinion of any, fall short of Demonstrations, and
Contribute nothing to Unite and Settle the various Apprehensions of some very
Worthy men among us, about an Important Point in our Church Government, yet
they will in the Opinion of all serve to express the Dispositions of Mind,
which the rare Spirited Author of them did both Live and Dye withal. They show
how much ^e was Against that Rigi^ Unscriptural, Uninstituted, and
Unwarrantable Insisting upon Modes, wherein some of our Churches, had sinned
sometimes against the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ; and yet how much he was
For all Scriptural and Rational Methods to preserve the Churches from sinning
against the Holiness, which does Become those Houses of God for ever.

13. I have said, that the Life of our Mitchel was in a special manner
Engrossed, by the Services of Explaining, Maintaining and Perfecting those
Principles, whereby the Christian Religion* must be preserved, with a True and
Pure Church State among us, and Conveyed and Secured unto Posterity: and this
Leads me to that part of his Character, which Distinguished him, as much as any
One whatsoever; Namely, A Care of all the Churches. Our Lord Jesus Christ
complains, That the Children of this World are (for so I read it) wiser for
their own Generation, than the Children of Light. But our Mitchel was Wise for
his Generation, and Exercised his Wit with much Contrivance, and much
Diligence, that his Generation, even the Faithful People of God in the World,
might be accommodated in all their Interests. He was Endued with a certain
soaring and serious Greatness of Soul, which rendered Fly-catching too low a
Business for him; though he were One of a very Lowly Spirit In his Disposition
to be always Condemning of himself, yet he nourished in himself a Generous
Disdain of Low, Little, Trifling Matters, and was of a Leading Spirit where
hard Service was called for, and of a Public Spirit, for Doing of Service to
as many as he could: His Thoughts moved in a large Sphere of Usefulness, and he
was continually projecting how to Do good, in the most extensive manner unto
more than an whole Country. The Bucholtzerian Expression of the Apostolical
PANTAOYSIA might be transferred into our Account of Mr. Mitchel: He was a
Circle, whereof the Center was at Cambridge, and the Circumference took in more
than all New England. Hence, when he set apart his Days for Secret Prayer with
Fasting before God, he would Recapitulate in his private Papers, the Humbling
Occasions for Supplication, which he saw, not only in Afflictive Things on his
own particular Flock, but also in all the sad Sights, which in Disasters either
upon the Civil or Sacred Concerns throughout all our Three Colonies, and all
Gradual Decays of our Glory, occurred unto him; yea, and he would then Travel
so far, as to Observe the Condition of the Church throughout Great Britain, and
the Nations of the Europaean World: and all these Occasions of Distress and
Request, he would enumerate before the Lord, with the Matters of his own
Everlasting Welfare. From the same Heroic Virtue (as I may properly call it)
in him it was, that in the Weekly Meetings of the Neighboring Pastors, after
the Weekly Lectures in the Towns which he could visit; and at all other such
Meetings, he would with a most becoming Discretion and Modesty, be still
putting forward something or other, that might be for General Advantage: And
when the Ministers met at any time so much without Advantageous Effects of
their Discourses, that it could be said, The Time had been Smoaked away to no
purpose, he would be Troubled at it; It caused him once to write this
Lamentation; Little done! I have begun to feel the sadness of the present time,
and the Lord's withdrawing from us and our Chariot wheels taken off: I find
that in all Societies, where I have any thing to Do, Common wealth, and Church
and College, things stick, and we draw Heavily, and Nothing can be gotten
forward: All things, and all the Spirits of men, seem to be off the Hinges: Oh!
Lord, Affect my Heart therewithal! In this Lamentation, the Reader finds the
College mentioned, and indeed the College was nearer unto his Heart, than it
was to his House, though next adjoining to it. He was himself an Accomplished
Scholar, and he loved a Scholar dearly; but his Heart was fervently set upon
having the Land all over Illuminated with the Fruits of a Learned Education. To
this End, he became a Father to the College, which had been his Mother, and
sought the Prosperity of that Society, with a very singular Solicitude: but
among other Contrivances which he had for the Prosperity of the College, One
was, A Model for the Education of Hopeful Students at the College in
Cambridge. His Proposals were, for Septennial Subscriptions by the more Worthy
and Wealthy Persons, in this poor Wilderness; to be Disposed of by Trustees
(namely, the Magistrates and Ministers of the six next Towns, for the time
being, with seven other Gentlemen by them Chosen out of the said Towns, of
which any Seven to be a Quorum, if three Ministers were among them,) who should
single out Scholars eminently pregnant and pious, and out of this Bounty
support them in such Studies, as they should by these Trustees be directed
unto, until they had either performed such profitable Services, as were Imposed
on them in the College it self, or prepared themselves for other Services
abroad in the World. He was mightily affected with a Passage of Luther's, If
ever there be any Considerable Blow given to the Devils Kingdom, it must be by
Youth excellently Educated. And therefore, Res seria est, Ingens est, It is a
serious Thing, a Weighty Thing, and a Thing that has much of the Interest of
Christ, and of Christianity in it, that Youth be well Trained up, and want no
Helps for that end; that Schools, and School Masters, and poor Scholars be
mentained. It is the Flourishing of a Common Wealth, to be well furnished with
Learned, Worthy and Able men for all Purposes. And God will not give us such
men by Miracle, seeing He has vouchsafed us other ways, and means to obtain
them. Learning is an Unwelcome Guest to the Devil, and therefore he would fain
Starve it out. But we shall never long retain the Gospel, without the Help of
Learning. And, if we should have no Regard unto Religion, even the Outward
Prosperity of a People in this World, would necessary Require Schools and
Learned men. Alas, that none are carried with Alacrity and Seriousness to take
care for the Education of Youth, and to Help the World with Eminent and Able
men. 'Twas from Considerations, like these of Luther's, that he did with an
Accurate and judicious Pen, shape these Proposals. But, if New England then had
not many Persons in it, of the same Inclination with Pope Paul 2. who
pronounced them, Heretics, that should mention the Name of an Academy, and
exhorted People, that they would not put their Children to Learning, inasmuch,
as it was enough if they could but Read and Write; yet, through the
Discouragements of Poverty and Selfishness, the Proposals came to nothing.
Moreover, the Remarkable Acuteness joined with an Extraordinary Holiness, in
this Renowned man, caused the Churches, in all Quarters far and near, when
their Difficult Church-Cases called for the Help of Councils, to make their
Applications unto Cambridge, for Mr. Mitchel to come and Help them in their
Difficulties. And in these Councils, as well as when Weighty Cases have been
laid before the Elders of the Churches, by the the General Courts, though
usually most of the Ministers present were Elder than he, yet the Sense and
Hand of no Man, was relied more upon than His, for the Exact Result of all.
With so much humble Wisdom and Caution, did he Temper the Significant
Forwardness at Well-Doing which he still carried about him, that the
Disproportion of Age, hindered not the most Aged, and Able, and Venerable
Angels in our Churches, from their Paying a very strange Respect unto him.
However he Encountered with such Temptations as must Buffet all that have in
them, any thing of Significancy; For which cause, Once particularly, when (...)
had been Admirably Acquitting himself in an Undertaking of Great Consequence to
the Churches, he came home, and wrote these words. My Spirit was carried out in
too much forwardness: I see cause to be deeply abased and Loath my self, and
hang down my Head before God and Men. How do I mar Gods Work, and mar what He
gives me therein, by my own Folly! Sometimes (...) am ready to Resolve to put
forth my self no more in public Work, but keep my self Silent, and uningaged,
as I see others do. But then I perceive, that this Tastes of Forwardness and
Pride. Lord, Give me more Wisdom to manage and demean my self! But if thy
Service and Honor may be promoted by my Weakness and Folly, Let me be willing
to be Vile, that God may be Exalted. 2 Samuel 6.21, 22. Upon the whole, he was
unwilling to affect such an Unserviceable Privacy, that they who passed by his
House, might say, Hic situs est Mitchellus,

14. I know not how far that Learned Frenchman, who Writes, The Conformity of
the Congregational Church Government unto that of the Ancient Primitive
Christians, has seen verified his Observation, All Disinterested persons may
easily be persuaded that the Congregational Communion, retains most of the
Apostolic, because it is not only the Cream and Best of the others, but also
because it has more Charity. It Is very rarely seen (says he) that any One of
the Congregational Way, does not Love all Good men of what Communion soever
they be, and that they do not speak of them, as of the True Churches of Jesus
Christ: whereas even the most Sober and honest party of the Episcopal men, and
some of the Presbyterians, are so strongly possessed with Prejudices against
those of Congregations, that they are in their Account, no better than
Hypocrites, Schismatics, and men of strange Enthusiasms. If any of the
Congregational way do not answer this Character, Let these Words Condemn them;
as I know those of the Presbyterian way in this Country, have by their
Charitable Temper, much Confuted that part of the Discourse, by which they are
here Characterized. But the Observation I am sure, was verifyed in our Mitchel;
who was one fully Satisfied and Established in the Congregational way of Church
Government, and yet had a Spirit of Communion for all Godly men in other Forms,
and was far from Confining of Godliness unto his own. It was a frequent Speech
with him, The Spirit of Christ, is a Spirit of Communion! And I can tell, what
he would have said, if he had lived to see the Books of so Ridiculous a
Schismatic, as he that has made himself Infamous by attempting to prove, That
where there is no Episcopal Ordination, there is no True Church, Minister,
Sacrament, or Salvation. His Great worth caused him to be called, forth several
times, with an Early and Special Respect form the General Court of the Colony,
to Preach on the Greatest Solemnity that the Colony afforded; Namely, The
Anniversary Election of Governor and Magistrates: And one of the Sermons which
he Preached on those Occasions, was after his Death, published unto the World,
under the Title of, Nehemiah upon the Wall. In that Sermon, Reader, Take notice
of the Discovery which he gave of his own Chatholick Charity, when he says, Do
not wrong and mar an Excellent work, and Profession, by Mixing and Weaving in
Spurions Principles, or Practices; as those of Separation, Anabaptism,
Morellian (Anarchical) Confusion. If any would secretly 'twist in, and espouse
such things as those, and make them part of our Interest, we must needs
Renounce it as none of our Cause, no part of the End, and Design of the Lords
faithful Servants, when they followed him into this Land, that was (...) sown.
Separation and Anabaptism, are wonted Intruders, and seeming Friends, but
secret fatal Enemies, to Reformation. Do not, on pretense of avoiding
Corruption, run into Sinful Separation from any True Churches of God, and that
is Good therein; and yet it is our Errand into the Wilderness to Study and
Practice True Scripture-Reformation, and it will be our Crown, in the Sight of
God and Man, if we find it and hold if, without Adulterating deviations. Thus,
though he were a Reformer, yet he had nothing in him of a Donatist: For which
cause Mr. Baxter hearing of him, said, If an Ecumenical Council could be
obtained, Mr. Mitchel were worthy to be it is Moderator. And this Disposition of
Charity, in him, was Rewarded, with the Respects, which he found from Learned
and Pious men, that were in many things not of his own persuasion: Such
Holiness, and Patience, and sweet Condescension, were his Incomparable
Abilities accompanied withal, that Good men, who otherwise distered from him
would still speak of him with Reverence. To give one Particular Instance: It Is
well known that the Reverend Charles Chancey, Praesident of the College, and a
Neighbor in the Town and Church, with our much younger Mitchel, at the Time of
the Synod, zealously and publicly, by Pen as well as by Speech, opposed the
Synodalian Principles whereof Mr. Mitchel was no small Defender: But so far was
the Dissent between them, in the very Heat and Height of all the Controversy,
from causing the Reverend Old Man to Handle his Antagonist, ^n any measure as
the Angry Dioscorus did the Dissenting Flavian, in the Council of Ephesus, that
he would commonly say of him, I know no man in this World, that I could Envy so
much, as Worthy Mr. Mitchel, for the Great Holiness, Learning, Wisdom and
Meekness, and other Qualities of an Excellent Spirit, with which the Lord Jesus
Christ has Adorned him.

15. And shall we a little more particularly Describe that Holiness, of this
Excellent Man, which we have so often mentioned? It is an Aphorism of a
Machiavel, [and, Rea^er, was it not worthy of a Machiavel!] That he who Writes
an History, must be a man of no Religion. By that profane Rule, the first and
the best Historian in the World, the most Religious MOSES, was ill accomplished
for a Writer of History. But the History, which we are now Writing, does
Professedly intend nothing so much as the Service of Religion, even of that
Religion, whereof our MITCHEL made an Exemplary Profession. Wherefore we go on,
to say; Know, Reader, That he was a Great Example of a Walk with God. He was
much in Prayer, much in Fasting, Sometimes taking his Virtuous Wife, therein to
make a Consort with him; and sometimes also he kept, whole Days of
Thanksgiving privately with his Family, besides what he did more publicly;
Devoting himself, as a Thank Offering to God, for his Mercies, with a
Reasonable Service. In his Diary, He betimes laid that Rule upon himself, Oh!
that I could Remember this Rule, never to go to Bed, until I have had some
Renewed special Communion with God! He kept a strict watch, over not only his
Words, but also his very Thoughts; and if by the Reflections, which he was
continually making on himself, he judged that his Mind had not been always full
of Heaven, that his Heart had been, what he called, hard and slight, that he
had been Formal, in his Devotions, that he had not profited abundantly by the
Sermons of other men, that he had not made Conscience of Doing all the Good he
could, when he had been in any Company; he would put Stings into his
Reflections, and Rebuke and Reproach himself with an Holy Indignation. Severe
might seem the Rule of R. Hanina. If two sit together and there be no Discourse
of the Law, it is the Seat of the Scornful: Severe might seem the Rule of R.
Simeon, If Three do Eat at one Table, and say nothing about the Law, they are
as if they Eat the Sacrifices of the Dead: And severe might be the Rule of R.
Hananiah, He that wakes in the Night or walks by the way, and let us his Heart
lie Idle, sins against his own Soul: But our Mitchel reckoned it no Severity
unto himself, to impose upon himself such Rules as these for his Conversation.
I have Read, That Five Devout persons being together, there was this Question
started among them, How, In what ways, By what means, they strengthened
themselves in Abstaining from Sin against the God of Heaven? The First
Answered, I frequently, meditate on the Certainty of Death, and the Uncertainty
of the Time for my Death, and this makes me Live in the Fear of Sin, every Day
as my Last. The Second Answered, I frequently meditate on the strict Account of
Sin that I am to give at the Day of Judgment, and the Everlasting Torments in
Hell, to be inflicted on them that can give no Good Account. The Third
Answered, I frequently meditate on the vileness, and filthiness, and
loathsomeness of Sin, and the Excellency of Grace, which is contrary unto so
vile a Thing. The Fourth Answered, I frequently meditate on the Eternal Rewards
and Pleasures Reserved in Heaven, for them that avoid the pleasures of Sin,
which are but for a moment. The Fifth Answered, I frequently meditate on the
Lord JESUS CHRIST, and His wondrous Love to miserable Sinners, in Dying a
Cursed and a Bitter Death for our Sin; and this Helps me to Abstain from Sin,
more than any other consideration whatsoever; And the Answer of this last was
indeed the greatest of all. Now all these were the Subjects, which our Holy
Mitchel, obliged himself to an assiduous Meditation upon; and by Meditating on
these it was, that he became very Holy. Moreover, he was as Holy men use to be,
very solicitous to make a due Improvement of all Afflictions, that the
Providence of Heaven dispensed unto him. He would say, When God personally
Afflicts a man, it is as if He called unto the man by Name, and jogged him, and
said, Oh! Repent, be Humbled, be Serious, be Awakened: Yea, he could not so
much as be kept a little from the Labors of his Ministry, by an Hoarse Cold
arresting him, without writing down this Improvement of it; My Sin is Legible
in the Chastisement: cold Duties, cold Prayers (my voice in Prayer, i. e. my
Spirit of Prayer fearfully gone) my Coldness in my whole Conversation,
chastised with a Cold; I fear that I have not Improved my voice for God
formerly as I might have done, and therefore He now takes it from me. But the
Affliction which most of all Exercised him, seems to have been in the
successive Death of many and Lovely Children, though all of them, in their
Infancy. It Is an Observation made by some, upon several Passages in the
Scripture concerning that Generous and Grac^^us man, David, that he was
Liberorum Amantissimus, full of Affections to his Children; and that was to be
Observed in our Mr. Jonathan Mitchel; for which cause, when his Children were
Sick, his Paternal Bowels felt more than ordinary wounds; and when they were
Dead, his Humil^^^ions thereupon were extraordinary. He (...) whole Pages of
Lamentations on these Occasions; and one of his Infants particularly Expiring
before it could be brought forth to an orderly Baptism, I cannot but Recite a
little of the Meditations then written by him: It was a further sad Hand of the
Lord (says he) that it should Die Unbaptised. Though I do not think they are
Orthodox, that hang Salvation upon Baptism, and not rather upon the Covenant,
yet as it is appointed to be a Confirming Sign, and as it is an Ordinance of
Grace, so to be Deprived of it, is a great Frown, and a sad Intimation of the
Lord's Anger: And though it may be well with with the Child notwithstanding
(that it becomes me to leave unto the Lord!) yet it is to us a Token of
Displeasure. And what Constructions or Thoughts tending to the Lord's
Dishonor, it may Occasion, I know not: That after my Labors in Public about
Infant Baptism, the Lord should take away my Child without and before Baptism!
Hereby the Lord does again and again make me an Example of His Displeasure
before all men, as if He did say openly, that He has a special Controversy
with me; Thus (...) taking (...) One after another. The Lord brings me forth,
and makes me go up and down, as one smitten of God: The Lord spits in my Face
by this Thing. See 2 Samuel 12.12. Numb. 12.12. Deuteronomy. 28.45, 46, 58, 59. Such,
and many more were the workings of his Tender Soul under his Repeated
Afflictions. And such were the Unsearchable Dealings of God, that besides the
Children which he sent unto Heaven before him, when he went unto Heaven
himself, he left behind him Three Sons, and Two Daughters, all of which Lived
unto somewhat of Youth, yet they have all of them since dyed in their Youth:
except only a Virtuous Young Gentlewoman, married unto Captain Stephen Sewal of
Salem; unto whom (with her Offspring, the only Posterity of this Great man) may
the Lord multiply all the Blessings of that Covenant, for which their
Progenitor proved so Serviceable a Pleader in his Generation!

The last Thing that ever he wrote in his Reserved Papers, after he had
Bitterly Reproached, The Sinful Deadness, Straitness, Enmity, and Unsa^ouriness
(as he called it) upon his own Heart, upon which he added this Pathetical
Expression, I feel I shall fall, and tumble down into the Pit of Hell, if left
unto my self; It was June 7. 1668. To quicken his Cares of Daily Meditation.

First. Far Younger than I, some of them now got to Heaven, have done much this
way. Nulla Dies sine linea.

Secondly. Meditation, yea, Daily Meditation, in general, is an Indispensable
Duty. Psalm. 1.2. and Psalm. 119.97. And because it is so, there may be something
of Meditation in Prayer, in Reading the Word; Josh. 1.8. with Deuteronomy. 19 19. and
in Occasional Transient Thoughts: yet surely some set Meditation daily besides
these, is at least to me a Duty, who am set apart, for the Holy Work of the
Ministry, wherein it would be Helpful, as well as to my own Soul.

Thirdly. Heaven is here begun upon Earth: shall I be Thinking on, and Talking
with, Christ, to all Eternity, and not Discourse with Him, one quarter of an
Hour in a Day now?

Fourthly. The Great Enemies of all Good, Flesh, Satan, and World, do of all
other things, most oppose Meditation which shows that there is much Good in
it. Flesh, by Awkness, Giddiness; World, by Distractions; Satan, by stirring up
both. Lord, Awaken me, and keep me Awake!

16. But what and when, was the End of this Holy Walk? The Incongruities, and
Inconsistences, of Historians, are not more notorious in anyone Article, than
in that of, the Deaths of the Hero's, whose Lives they have Eternized. With
what Varieties are the Deaths of Cyrus, of Antiochus, of Alexander, of
Hannibal, of Romulus, of Scipio, of Plato, of Aristotle, reported? There is
hardly any Philosopher, but he Dies Twice or Thrice over in Laertius; and there
is hardly one of Plutarchs Worthies, but he Dies as many ways, The Dea^^ of
our Mitchel, remains now to be Related, with more of Certainty. Though Bodily
Exercise does profit a little, as the Apostle concedes, namely, to the Health
of the Body; and Mr. Mitchel had from a Principle of Godliness, used himself to
Bodily Exercise; nevertheless he found it would not wholly free him from an Ill
Habit of Body. Of extreme Lean, he soon grew extreme Fat; and at last, in an
extreme Hot Season, a Fever arrested him, just after he had been Preaching on
those words, I know that thou will bring me to Death and unto the House
appointed for all the Living. The Fever did not seem to Threaten his Death;
however in his Illness, to them, that visited him, he said, If the Lord Jesus
Christ have any Service for me to Do for Him, and His Dear People, I am willing
to Do it; but if my Work be Done, His Will be done! But the Distemper suddenly
assaulting him, with a Mortal Malignity, and Summoning him to the House
appointed for all the Living, he fell to Admiring the manifold Grace of God
unto him, and broke forth into these words, Lord, Thou call me away to Thee;
I know not why, if I look to my self; but at thy Bidding, I come! which were
some of the Last words, that he spoke in the World: For his Friends, who had
not, for many Hours, Entertained the Expectation of any such dismal Event, were
compelled in Floods of Tears, to see him Die, on July 9. 1668. in the Forty
Third Year of his Age: When (as one expresses that matter.) he left his Body to
be dipped in the (...) of Jordan, that afterward in its Resurrectio^^ passing
into Canaan, it may, beyond the Story of Achilles, become Impenetrable and
Invulne^able. Wonderful were the Lamentations, which this Deplorable Death
filled the Churches of New England withal; For as the Jewish Rabbi's Lamented
the Death of R. Jose, with saying, That after his Death, Cessarunt Botri, i. e.
Viri tales, in quibus omnes, tum Eruditionis, cum Virtutis, o^^uli erant: So,
after the Departure of our Mitchel, it was feared there would be few more such
Rich Grapes to be seen growing in this Unthankful Wilderness. Yea, they Speak
of this Great man in their Lamentations to this Day: and what they speak is
briefly the same, that One of our most Eminent Persons has Writ, in those
Terms, All New England shook, when that Pillar fell to the Ground.

EPITAPH.
AND now, Reader, Let us go to the best of Poets in the English Nation, for
those Lines, which may, without the least wrong to Truth be applied as an
EPITAPH, to this best of Preachers, in our little New English Nation. The
Incomparable Dr. Blackmores Orator Tylon, shall, now be our MITCHEL.

IT IS the Great Mitchel, whose Immortal worth,
Raises to Heav^n the Isle that gave him Birth.
A Sacred Man, a Venerable Priest,
Who never spoke, and Admiration mist.
Of Good and Kind, he the just Standard seemed,
Dear to the Best, and by the Worst Esteemed.
A Generous Love, diffused to Humane kind,
Divine Compassion, Mercy unconfined,
Still Reigned Triumphant, in his Godlike Mind.
Greatness and Modesty their Wars Compose,
Between them here a perfect Friendship grows.
His Wit, His Judgment, Learning, Equal rise;
Divinely Humble, yet Divinely Wise:
He seemed Express, on Heavens High Errand sent,
As Moses Meek, As Aaron Eloquent.
Nectar divine flows from his Heavenly Tongue*
And on his Lips, charming Persuasion hung.
When he the Sacred Oracles Revealed,
Our Ravished Souls in blessed Enchantments held,
Seemed lost in Transports of Immortal Bliss;
No Simple Man could ever speak like This!
Armed with Caelestial Fire, his Sacred Darts
Glide through our Breasts, and melt our yielding Hearts.
So Southern Breezes, and the Springs mild Ray,
Unbind the Glebe, and thaw the Frozen clay.
He Triumphed over our Souls, and at his Will,
Bid this Touched Passion rise, and that be still.
Lord of our Passions, he, with wondrous Art,
Could strike the Secret Movements of our Heart;
Release our Souls, and make them soar above,
(...) with Divine Desires, and Flames of Heavenly Love.
But what need I travel, as far as Europe for an Elegy upon this Worthy Man?
Let it be known, that America can Embalm Great Persons, as well as Produce
them, and New England can bestow, an Elegy, as well as an Education upon its
Hero's. Let this Attempt at Poetry, now find a Room in our Pages.

To the MEMORY of the REVEREND JONATHAN MITCHEL Qucquid Agimus, quicquid
Patimur, venit ex Alto.
THE Countries Tears, be ye my Spring; my Hill
A General Grave; Let Groans inspire my Quill.
By a warm Sympathy, Let Feverish Heat
Roam through my Verse unseen: And a Cold Sweat
Limning Despair, attend me: Sighs disfuse
Convulsions through my Language, such as use
To Type a Gasping Fancy; lastly, Shroud
Religions Splendour in a Mourning Cloud,
Replete with Vengeance, for Succeeding (...)
Fertile in Woes, more Fertile in their Crimes.
These are my Muses; These Inspire the S^ils
Of Fancy, with their Sighs, instead of Gales.
Reader, Read Reverend Mitchels Life and then
Confess the World a Gordian knot again.
Read his Tear deluged Grave, and then decree,
Our present Woe, and future Misery.
Stars Falling speak a Storm; when Samuel dies,
Saul may Expect Philistia's cruelties.
So when Jehovahs Brighter Glory fled
The Temple, Israel soon was Captive led.
Geneva's Triple light made one Divine:
But here that vast Triumvirate combine
By a blessed Metempsychosis, to take
One Person for their larger Zodiac.
In Sacred Censures, Farels dreadful Scrol
Of Words, broke from the Pulpit to the Soul.
In Balmy Comforts, Virets Genius came
From the Wrinkled Alps, to Woo the Western Dame;
And Courting Cambridge, quickly took from thence
Her Last Degrees of Rhetoric and Sense.
Calv^ns ^aconicks through his Doctrine Spread,
And Childrens Children with their Manna fed.
His Exposition Genesis begun,
And fatal Exodus Eclipsed his Sun.
Some say, that Souls often sad Praesages give:
Death breathing Sermons taught us last to Live.
His System of Religion, half unheard,
Full Double, in his Preaching Life appeared.
He Is gone, to whom his Country owes a Love,
W^^thy the Prudent Serpent, and the Dove.
Religions Panoply, the Sinners Terror,
Death ^^mmon'd hence; Sure by a Writ of Error!
The Quaker Trembling at his Thunder, fled;
And with Caligula resumed his Bed.
He, by the Motions of a Nobler Spirit,
Cleared Men, and made their Notions Swine inherit.
The Munster Goblin, by his Holy Flood
Exorcis'd, like a Thin Phantasma stood.
Browns Babel, shattered by his Lightning, fell
And with Confused Horror packed to Hell.
The Scripture, with a Commentary bound,
(Like a Lost Calice) in his Heart was found.
When he was Sick, the Air, a Fever took,
And Thirsty Phoebus quaff'd the Silver brook:
When Dead, the Sphaeres in Thunder, Clouds, and Rain
Groaned his Elegium, mourned and wept our pain.
Let not the Brazen Schismatic aspire;
Lots leaving Sodom, left them to the Fire.
It Is true, the Bee's now dead; but yet his sting
Death's to their Dronish Doctrines yet may bring.
EPITAPHIUM.
Here Lies within this Comprehensive Span,
The Churches, Courts, and Countries Jonathan.
He that speaks Mitchell, gives the Schools the Lie;
Friendship in him gained an Ubiquity.
F. D.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Preface. p. 7. in the Margin, ^^ Infa^^ Baptism. p. 12. l. 13 for
which, r. with p. 19. l. 19. dole the. p. 23. l. 22. r. Enlarge p. 30. l. 28.
r. Largest.

Page 62. l. 20. f. as, r. es. p. 86. l. 19. f. with. r. without.

Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, a small Book, Entitled, Humiliations followed with
Deliverances. Or, a brief Discourse on the Matt^^ and Method of that
Humiliation, which would (...) an Hopeful Symptom of our Deliverance from
Calamity. Accompanied and Accommodated* with a Narrative of a Notable
Deliverance lat^^ Re^eived, by some English Captives, from the ^^nds of Cruel
Indians; and some Improvemen^ of that Narrative. As also a Relation of one
Hannah Swarton, Containing many Wonderful Passages, concerning her Captivity,
and her Deliverance.

Printed for, and Sold by Samuel Phillip., (...) the Brick-Shop, near the Old
Meeting House in Boston. 1697.


