London September. 27. Yesterday Morning arrived Three Holland Mails, which bring
the following Advices. Vienna, September 18.
WE have received several Expresses from the Imperial Army, which bring us the
welcome News of a glorious Victory obtained on the Ottoman Army, with these
particulars, viz. That the Turks having a design to surprise Segedin, and
afterward to take up their Winter Quarters in Upper Hungary and Trinsilvania,
the Imperial Army marched to Tom^sw^er Bridge, and fell on, and defeated some
Thousands of Turks who had set that Bridge in Fire, but it being soon
extinguished, the Imperial Army passed over it, and advanced in 12 Columns to
the Moras Bridge by Syreck, which the Enemy also had set on Fire; where, in the
5th instant they again fell on the Enemy, and many were killed on both sides:
On the 6th, our Army advanced to Peter Waradin, where with the Front toward
the Enemy, the Right Wing to the R^mer Schans, we charged the Turks so
unexpectedly, that we killed (...) of them: On (...) 7th, our Army rested, and
Advice was brought, that a great part of the Ottoman Army was decamped, and
marched to Lenta, and another part to Cobita: upon which Prince E^^en^ of Savoy
followed them: where being come, we found they had made three Retrenchments to
defend a Bridge which they were possessed of; but our Forces drove them out of
all their Entrenchments, notwithstanding the desperate Resistance of 20000
Janisa^ies: And we then fell on their Army, and putting them into confusion,
they endeavored to escape over the Bridge; but we ki^led so many of them, that
the Passage of it was stopped. Since which the Prince of (...) is come to
Eb^rsdorf with 7 Turkish Calashes, 86 Colors, 7 Horse. T^is and the Sultans
great Tent, and does assure the Imperial Court, That above 20000 Turks have
been Slain on the Spot, and about 10000 taken Prisoners and drowned, besides
15000 Turkish Horse, which were sent by the Grand Seignior to support the
Rebels in Upper Hungary, and were commanded to Swim the Theysse, were most of
them drowned, He add^ that we have taken 120 pieces of Cannon, and have found
6000 Wagons in their Entrenchments, with Warlike Instruments: That the Grand
Vizier and the Aga of the Jan^i^^a^ies were in the number of the Slain. P. S. A
Major is also come to the Court Diedrigstein from the Camp, who advises, that
Prince Eugene of Savoy had sent him an Express, to give an (...), That the
Imperial Army marching toward Temeswaer, and met 4000 and some say, 6000
Jannisa^ies, and had totally defeated them. This Major adds, That the Turks
have been so totally defeated, that it will be hardly possible for them to form
any Army again (...). We have advice, that in the late Battle with the
Muscovi^^s, the Tartars have ^ost above 15000 Men.

Cracow, Sept 16 The late King of Poland being Buried two days ago, the Elector
of Saxony was yesterday Crowned King of Poland in the Church at the Castle,
with the usual Ceremonies, where the Bishop of Cujavia and other Bishops
assisted, and this was done without any opposition from the Prince of Conti 's
Party, he himself not being yet arrived, and the Cardinal Primate hearing that
the Muscovites designed to assist the Elector with 40000 Men, declined making
any obstruction to the Coronation. His Majesty has made 6 Knights since his
accession to the Crown. There were great Rejoycings on this occasion, as the
Conduits running with Wine, etc Several Medals have been dispersed among the
People.

Hague, Sept. 29. On Friday last between 4 and 5 in the Afternoon, the 3
Muscovite Ambassadors were received here by the Deputies of the States: They
had many Gentlemen to attend them, as also diverse Trumpeters on Horseback, many
Pages and Lacquies with costly Liveries, also a great number of Heydukes, and a
Train of about 50 Coaches, Their Excellencies came to their Apartments about 7
this Evening, where they were Complemented and Treated Splendidly by the
Deputies: and it is said they will have an audience on Wednesday or Thursday
next. Yesterday a Conferrence was held at Reswick, and it is said these
Conferences will continue till the Plenipotentiaries of the Emperor have Signed
the Peace. Yesterday all the French Ambassadors made a visit to the English
Ambassadors. Mr. Prior, Secretary to the English Ambass^^e is returned hither
from England. They write from Germany, That the Prince of Baden had taken the
Town of Eberenburg, and had made a Breach in the Castle, which he hoped soon to
be Master of, but he having received an account, That the Emperor had agreed to
a Cessation of Arms, it was thought he would soon abandon that Enterprise

London, Printed by J. Dawks, Reprinted at Boston in N.E. by B. Green, and J.
Allen, 1697


