By His Excellency Colonel Benjamin Fletcher Captain General and Governor in
Chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, etc. A PROCLAMATION
WHereas there is of late great Scarcity of Br^^d in the City of New York
amongst the Inhabitants thereof. For Prevention whereof it wa^ ^rdered by me in
Council, That all the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Council for this Province
Inhabiting in the said City, or the Major part of them, together with the Mayor
and Aldermen ther^^^, should meet together and consider of some proper method
for (...) thereof. And Whereas, (...) thereunto, the said Committee do report
unto (...) the Inhabitants of this City, it is ^^^olutely necessary (...) the
Exportation of Wheat in (...) throughout the Province, be prohibited, without
limitation; That the Exportation of all Cornel, cou^^ Meal and Course Bread be
likewise prohibited until the first day of November next ensuing. Which ^^port
was approved of.

I have therefore, by and with the Advice and ^onsent of the said Council
issued forth my Proclamation, and I do by these Presents Prohibit the
Exportation of any Wheat in Grain throughout the whole Province, without
limitation of time, and the Exportation of Corneel and Course Meal and Bread
until the first day of November next ensuing. Provided that no Ship or other
Vessel bound on any Voyage to Sea, or on the Coast be debarred from shipping
such Quantity of Bread and Course Flower as will be necessary for the supply of
the Mariners and Passengers on Board the same, during their said Voyage, and
that the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York do ascertain the Quantity
of Bread and Flower that will be necessary for the supply of each Ship or
Vessel bound on any Voyage. And his Majesty's Collectors and Receiver General,
and the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City, and all other Officers whom it may
concern, are to take care that this Order be strictly observed, and all Persons
whatsoever Residing, or that may hereafter reside or pass through this
Province, are required to be Conformable hereunto, as they will answer the
contrary at their Peril.

Given at Fort William Henry the 31 th Day of May, in the Nineth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord, WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque
Domini 1697. Ben. Fletcher.

God Save the KING
Printed by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty in
the City of New York, 1697.


