Henry Bernhard Koster, William Davis, (...) and Thomas (...). FOUR Boast^ng
D^sputers Of this (...) briefly REBU^^D.
And Answered according to their Folly, which (...) themselves have manifested
in a late Pamphlet, entit^led, Advice (...) all Professors and Writers.
(...) this their (...) Pamphlet does (...) where it was printed, (...)
mentioning so many things of Babylon^* for Example, The Coun^ils, and Clergy,
and Universities of Babylon, page ^* The Baylonian Churches, page 4. The
Babylonia^ Beasts, page 7. The four chief Quarters of Babylon, page 8 And being
it self thoroughly full of ^abel, or Confusion, it thereby plainly discloseth,
that it was hatched in the very (enter of that great City, whose wise and
learned m^n* most able (...) their own Conceit) to advise others, can not write
but thus sinisterly, (...) with their right hands. ^at present not ^^^^ending
to touch all the fond and un^ound ^^^pressions, occuring almost in every
Paragraph of the said Pamphlet, leaving it to such as by the poor dark Devil
without a Body, page 1 etc. are or may be concerned, to make their own Apology
^ shall only take a little Notice,

I Of some (...) words of these vain Braggard^.

II. O^ the Unreasonableness of their Challenge;

III Of their abusing and traducing W. P. (...) particular.

IV. Of their slandering and mis-representing the People called Quakers in
general;

V. Of their self guiltiness of what they charge us with (...).

. 1.
Page 1. They style themselves, The Brethren in America; page 7 The true Church
of Philadelphia or Brotherly Love, etc.

This sounds mightily afar off, and some silly Women in Germany, who may happen
to see their Pamphlet, which probably for that end and p^^pose was Printed in
the ^igh Du^ch tongu^, besides the English) will be ready to think this Church
or Brotherhood something real and considerable. But to undeceive those, who
prefer Truth before Fictions and Falsehood, I herewith must inform them that all
these ^pecious Names and Epithets in the pages above quo^ed, and more others,
are a mere Kost^^ian Chime^a, an idle fancy. He the said H. B. Koster arriving
here in Pensilvania, his heart and head fi^led with Whi^^sical and ^^isterious
Imaginations, but his Hands and Purse em^^ied of the Money, which (...) beyond
Sea imparted unto him, and some (...), was as cunning as to in^ice and (...)
^^ve to a Commonalty of good, and so (...) a Plantation near German Town, upon
a Track of Land given unto them, calling the same IRENIA, that is to say, The
Home of Peace, which not long after became ERINNIA, The House of raging
Contention, and now returned to the Donour, the Brethren in America being gone
and dispersed, and the Church of Philadelphia (falsely so called) proving
momentary, and ^f no moment, Mark 3, 25.

Page 3. They ^all, how they entered the 22 th day of September, 1696. into our
yearly Meeting at Burlington, and there lifted up their Voices like Trumpet^,
and broke our Friends voices in the air, etc.

That at such a time and place (we being Assembled not to quarrel with any
Brawle^s, but to worship the living God in Spirit and in Truth, waiting for the
enjoyment of his Comfortable-presence* H. ^. Koster, with some not much unlike
unto himself, came into our Meeting House, and there as Trumpets of an
uncert^in sound, were blown by the Prince of the Power of the Air, who rules
and operateth in the Children of Unbelief, we do not deny. Neither i^ the
Impudency of these our ^dversaries a New thing unto us; For several others
before them, ^^^ed likewise by him, who made bold to appear in the midst of the
Sons of God when they came to present themselves before the Lord, Job 1.6.
entered into Friends Meeting Houses, and by their ill behavior and disorderly
Interruptings, attempted to disturb the People religiously therein gathered.
With these troublesome men of Belial, H. B. K. W. D. T. R. T. B. and the rest
of their Fraternity, in whose behalf they have signed their Pamphlet, may some
out their own shame as they will. We, measurably quickened with Christ, are set
down in a safe and heavenly hiding place, viz. his powerful Name, having that
satisfactory assurance, that there the Enemy and his wicked Instruments cannot
approach nor hurt us, Praises to the Lord our God for ever.

Page ^ They challenge every opposing Writer or Professor, but with this
Proviso, That none who ^^ll not be accounted by them as a vagabond Egyptian,
and his answer at a railing Pamphlet, must write again, unless he hat^ first
appeared upon the public Theater and ^^age (...) the Church and of the world
unto a dispu^^, a^ Philadelphia, etc. or ^n the Houses of the ^our Sub^cribers
aforementioned, and of others.

The Church of these disputers and the World are very close one by the o^^er,
and if the ignorant Babes, Pierists and (...) will take the Counsel given them
by these advisers, p. 8. and s^^k this Church, they need not to travel f^rther
than toward this Theater of the World, where they may be sure to find her. But
ours being in God, and the members thereof chosen out of the world, and
redeemed from the Contentiousness and other vain Customs of the same, will
never engage in such a stage play or Theatrical Jangling and Wrangling with
these Bablers and Mountebanks of Babylon; In whose four chief Quarters we are
not so well acquainted as to find out their respective houses and lodgings*
where they like Milstones having no grist to grind, set themselves on fire; on
fire of hell, Jam. ^ 6. and ^o as Egyptians against Egyptians, Isa. 19.2. with
divided Tongues work and promote their own Destruction, Psalm 55.9. what reason
they had to huff and hector in their Cartel, p. 1. and 2. with a Let it be
known to all the World, and (...) it be known unto all the Nations, etc. And
yet to suppress and s^other this their monstrous Produc^* after it came from
the Press, communicating only a few Copies to those who went out from ^s,
because they were not of us, (...) also some to a Maryland Doctor, delivering
^o^e to the Parties challenged, nor to any of the People called Quakers who
they therein most soully ^^p^rse and def^m^, the Ingenuous and Impartial Reader
may judge. If they have written (and printed) in haste, and now repent by
leisure, as the Proverb says, they will confess and forsake; which is the
worst I wish them, and unto ^ll Ga^^-sayers of Truth, as at the cont^a^y hand I
heartily should pity their Condition, in case they or any of them hereafter
should go on in their Wrath, Lies and Cl^morous barking against Gods
everlasting Truth, and the Possessors, as well as Professors thereof, which the
Lord as certainly has determined to exalt in this the day of his great Power,
as the unbelieving, the abominable and all Liars shall be cast down in the lake
and bottom less Pit.

. III.
The railing and scandalous Reproaches, wherewith they endeavor to render W.
P. odious in the ^ars of all the Nations of the world (...) thereunto they
direct their advice, as ^^oresaid) are a base and detestable perverting and
misconstruction of his words, fully answered by our Friend Thomas Ellwood, in
his Book, called, Truth defended, from page 113. to page 123. If these
detr^^t^rs, especially W. P's old servant The. Rutter (cujus anno spirant
menda^^a folles) be able to reply something thereat, let them forge as
opprobrious weapons as ever they can, and Truth will be further defended by it
self, against all their peevish and malicious objections. I a^ this time am not
to enlarge about a passage so amply and sollidly refuted. This only I would put
Tho. Rutter in mind, that Ingratitude is one of the blackest Crimes among
honest men, and an hard matter to have his words wrested, and to be required
with Slanders for kindness, or to f^el a Sting, wherein good reason, Honey
might be expected* Concerning Solomon Ec^le^s expression, I here (loathing
needless repetitions, or actum agere) additionally refer our doting Opposers
likewise to the 112th page of the above cited Treatise, and proceed to

. IV.
Page 2. They say, That the root of Anti-christianity, that is to say, the
Denial of Jesus in the flesh, is to be found among the Quakers. And at the
bottom of the same p. 2. That the Quakers deny Jesus to be properly the Son of
God, (...), page 4. That the Quakers say, Christ has offered that which is not
himself, but only a Garment, etc. And in the said 4th pag^, That the Quakers
deny God in his most high Spirits and Godheads Power to be the Father of
Christ's Body, and Mary the Mother.

All this I declare to be down right Calumnies and an absolute untruth in the
whole and every part of it, as to all unprejudiced persons, who but cursorily
(for he that runs may read here) will view or inspect the several solemn
Confessions published from time to time by the said People concerning their
Faith, and what they believe of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, both as he
is true God and Perfect Man, must needs most conspicuously appear. For this
despised People (by those Scorners called Quakerian Spirits, page 7.) alwa^s
sincerely believed in their hearts, and confessed with their Mouths, that
Christ Jesus is the OWN AND ONLY BEGO^TEN Son of God, the express Image (or
Character) of his Substance; He in the Father, and the Father in him; He and
the Father ONE, in essence, goodness, will and works; EQUAL in Power, Glory and
Majesty; the same individed and indivisible Jehovah; that therefore the
Evangelical Prophet ^sa. 7 14. and ^.6. did right well say, His Name should be
IMMANUEL (God with ^s) the Mighty God, the everlasting Father, etc.

And a^ the Quakers constantly owned and earnestly contended for Christ's
Divinity or Godhead, as part of the precious Faith delivered to them. So they
in like manner upon all occasions professed and still do prof^^s, that Christ
Jesus, the Word of God, when the ful^ness of (...) was come* (whereof Jacob;
prophec^ed many ages before, Gen 49 0) viz, under Caesar August^s, in the days
of He^od was made flesh, took upon him the Nature of Man, the form of a
Servant, partaking of Flesh and Blood, as Children do, made of a Woman, born of
that blessed Virgin Mary, in Bethlehem of Judea, after he was conceived in her
by the over^^adowing of the holy Ghost, etc. So that they in uprightness of
their ^earts acknowledge God Almighty to be most properly the Father of Jesus
Christ, both in respect of his eternal Generation, and also of this his
Conception in the appointed Time But Mary to be his Mother only in relation to
the last, and not to the former.

For inasmuch as Christ Jesus is the true ^nchangeable God, having neither
beginning of days nor end of Life, he was before Mary, Abraham, or any thing
that was made, visible and invisible, Jo^. 1^^. and 8.58. Col. ^.16. He was
before John (...) fore runner, although he name after him, Jo^. 1.^^. He was
the Lord of David, as well as of the fruit of his Loy^^* Mat. 22.45. Acts 2.30.
Both the Roo^ and of God according to the Spirit of holiness, Romans 1.4. He was
before any of Fathers were, the firstborn of every Creature* Col. 1.15. but
concerning the flesh Romans 9.5. He came of the Fathers of the seed of Abraham,
and of the stock of David; He himself being David our Prince, the Prince of our
Peace, blessed forever. Ezekiel. 37.24, 25.

Moreover it is the unanimous Faith and Confession of the called Quakers, That
Christ Jesus, as God, or according to his Godhead, is IMMORTAL, and never was
nor can be killed; and that by reason he through death might destroy him, that
had the power of death, i. e. the Devil, he took part of Flesh and Blood Heb.
2.14. He the glorious Messenger of the Covenant (fulfilling the Prophecy of
Malachi ^.1.) came to his Temple, the prepared Body, which the Jews did
destroy, but could never destroy him, who by his own Omnipotency was able to
raise it up again in three days, Joh. 2.19. He suffered for us in the flesh,
and was put to death in the flesh, 1. Pet 3.18, 4* 1. Consecrating thereby, as
through the VAIL* to ^s a n^w and living way, freely to enter in to the
hollest, Heb. 10.^9. All which (if we ^earken to the Sophistry of these
del^ding Seducers* page 3.) would be a direct Opposition to the words, Heb.
9.16. Having offere^ himself, or by the Sacrifice of himself. But we know,
their inference to be naught, and by far not so tolerable, as if one should
conclude* that because H. B. K's Body was newly baptized or plunged in water,
therefore he himself was not. The Apostle Peter was quite ignorant of such an
inconsiderate Consequence, saying in his first Epistle chap. 2.24. That Christ
his own self bare our sins in his own Body on the Tree. This the Quakers
believe, and is (I am certain) sound Doctrine, parrallel with that of Heb. 9.2^.

Page 5. They say, That many of the Quakers in Preachings and writings revile
the Baptism and Supper of Christ, etc desiring us, to show them, by what second
Decree and Message of Christ and his Apostles the Union of the Spirit with the
out^ard Creature, as Water, Bread, Wine, and the (...), has been abrogated.

I wonder, that men so forward to dispute upon the public Theater of ^hu^ch
and World should be so unskilled in disputing, as to require us to prove the
abolishing of an Union, we all along denied. They holding the affirmative,
ought first to evince, that Christ Jesus united himself, the Quickening Spirit
with Water, Bread, Wine, and the like outward Creatures. John the Baptist who
was (...) to prepare the way before Christ, told his hear^^^ in the Wilderness,
I indeed have baptized you with Water, BUT He (Christ Jesus) shall baptiz^
(...) the holy Ghost, Mark 1* ^. by which (...) he did not intimate an Union of
the Spirit with the outward Water, but rather thereby contra-distinguish them
both from each other. Christ in the days of his flesh made the s^m^ difference,
Acts 11.16. and Peter well remembering the words of his Lord and Master,
excludes that corruptible Element of Water, and the outward Washing, from
Christ's Baptism, 1 (...) ^.23. and 3.21. Paul knowing only one (...) of the one
Lord, Ephesians. 4.5 says* I (...) ^ade by the one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. Not by
the one Spirit united with the outward Creature And (...) 9*^0. That the Rite^
or Ordinances imp^sed (...) those under the Law, consisting in Meats, Drink*
and diverse Baptisms* were only until the time of Reformation, pur^suing verse
11. But Christ being come, etc. Th^^ the People called Quakers proc^aim, and
say, Christ* the desire of all Nations is come; The Refiner and Purifier of the
Sons of Levi is come: The Repairer of the Breach, and Restorer of Paths to
dwell in, is come: Christ, the SUBSTANCE is come. The Day of the Lords
Redemption (...) dawned; all Figures, Types and Shadows are vanished away; and
it is not them that vili^^e the Baptism and Supper of our Lord Jesus, who
sensibly can witness their sins thereby washed off, and their inward Man
nourished by the living ^read which comes down from Heaven; but it i^ those
Anabaptists themselves, who (like Si^^^ Magus^ rather defile the Waters, than
that the Waters should cleanse their Souls; and who (though dipped over head
and ears, yet as filthy Dreamers, Jude v. 8) do dream as (...) they did (...),
but when they awake^, are empty. They fain would persuade others, that the
b^^ad which they break, is the Communion of the Body of Christ, and
nevertheless are so infatuated as to asse^t, page 7. That the body of Christ i^
absent from the Saints on Earth; and ^o they must eat, (or rather fancy to ea^)
what the^ have not.

. V.
That these our false Accusers are themselv^^ guilty of what they blame the
People called Quakers withal, (I hope) by the foregoing (...) partly evident,
to such whose Eyes are not blinded by Partiality. Yet seeing they stigmatize us
with ^piritual Babylon and Anti-christianity, page 2. I here, in short (though
not obscure) Arguments shall demonstrate, that these our Assaulters themselves
are both Babylonians and (...) Christ's.

Babylonians, 1. Because of the Babylonia^^ Nature they are in; grievous
Revolters* Slanderers, Corrupters, Jer. 6.28.

2. Because of the confusedness of their I (...), some not understanding the
Spee^^ of (...), who cried for Water to be plunged (...) ^o that they were
scattered before they (...) the Tower of their ^maginary Church.

Antichrists, Because they set themselves against the Lords anointed, under a
fair pretense to be for him. Christ in the greek signifies Anointed, and the
Preposition A^t, as well for as against (see Mat. 17.27. Luke 2.34.) The very
Papists make a great show for Christ's coming in the flesh, dishonouring all
their Temples, Cloisters and Chapels, yea, and many of their (...) Highways
with the Images of a Woman holding a Child in her Arms, which they call Jesus
and Mariae his Mother: Before these statuary or painted Deities they bow their
Knees, and commit Idolatry. Antichrists in a high degree, in a gross and most
Palpable manner.

But our present Adversaries H. B. K. W. D. T. R. and T. B. are more subtle;
they impudently charge ^s with the Denial of Christ's coming in the flesh, and
would have the World have that good Opinion of them, as if they did confess him
so to be come, alleging 1 John 4 3. when in the mean time they combine and
take part with our old Adversaries, owning* in their carnal Mind, Christ no
otherwise but after the flesh, denying Christ, as Christ, to have had any
^xistence before that Body, which was born of the Virgin Mary, arguing thus for
that Body of flesh, to call it strictly and simply Christ Jesus. Now if this
their Po^ition be true, then Christ had his beginning and original about 1697
years ago, and his goings forth were not from the days of Eternity, contrary to
Mica 5.2. Then these American Brethren (when one day or another they should be
willing to put forth a Confession of their Faith and Principles, which the
World is still wanting) can only say, Christ the flesh is come, but not Christ
is come in the flesh, which to deny, is according to 1 John 4.3. to be that
ANTICHRIST. The People called Quakers can and do truly say, That He wh^ is
come in the flesh is Christ; and that he who was manifest in the flesh, and
purchased us with his own Blood, is God above all, praised and Magnified
forever and forever, Amen.

Francis Daniel Pastorius.

THE END.
Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Bible in New York, 1697.


