The Thoughts of a Dying Man.

A Faithful REPORT Of Matters uttered by many, in the Last Minutes of their
Lives.

And, a Solemn Warning Unto ALL, To Conform their Lives, unto the Belief of
such Unquestionable Matters.

Let us now take Advice from Death; It Is Faithful, it will not Deceive us. While
we Live we are Deceived by Appearances; at our Death we shall see Things as
they are.

Pensees Chretiennes. Boston, in N. E. Printed by B. Green and J. Allen, for J.
Wheeler. at his Shop at the Dock head. 1697.

Reader,
THE Author of the Ensuing Discourse, have Been (he Wishes, he could say,
Lived,) in the World, above Three and Thirty Years, and, Not Knowing the Day,
when he may be called out of it; was desirous, not only to give unto his
Hearers, The Thoughts of a Dying Man, in a Plain, and a Short, Sermon, but
also, by the Help of the Press, to furnish himself, with so many Copies of the
Sermon, that in his Pastoral Visas from House to House, he may Convey it unto
the Hands of those, to whose Consideration ^e would most of all Recommend it
Thi^ is all I have to say of it: Farewell; Enjoy, and Improve, these Admonitions.

The Thoughts of a Dying Man.
It is the Admonition of Wisdom, unto the Foolish, in Prove. V.11. Thou shall
Mourn AT THE LAST.
THAT Great Question, being once put unto a Wise Person, How may I most wisely
Order my Life? It was a Wise Answer then given thereunto, So Think, so ^o, so
Live, as you would have Chosen to have done, when a while ago, you thought your
self a Dying. It Is very certain, That the Follies of Mankind, appear in this
One Thing, and proceed from this One Thing, as much as any One Thing
whatsoever; Men will not Entertain, the same Appre^^nsions, and the same
Dispositions, while they Live, that they will have when they come to Dye. A
Dying Man ordinarily has other and better Notions of things (...) had, while
he was Living under the Enchantments of the Flesh. When the Dimness of Death
sits upon the Eye lids of a man, and his Eyes are g^ing to be closed upon all
Earthly Obje^ts for ever* he then commonly has a Truer Sight of Things, than
the Hurries of Life would allow unto him.

What greater Service can I now do, for you, My Neighbors, than to set before
you, the Resentments of Things, which I am fully sure, will come upon you, in
the Minutes of your Departur^ ^^om this Bewitching World? And (...), I can
pretend, the more sensible, to set before you those Resentments, because I
have, not only by the State of my own Health, been placed many a time on the
Brink of Eternity, but also, I have hundreds, it may be, thousands of Times had
my sad opportunities, to Behold the (...) of others, that have been passing
through the Dark Valley of the Shadow of Death. Wherefore, I have nothing to do,
in the Hour that I have now to spend among you, but only to make you a Faithful
and an Awful Report, of what I have been daily observing in my Dying Friends,
to whose Assistences I have been continually called for now Seven more than Ten
years together: Experience enough sure, to afford such Assertions, and such
As^urances, as I am now, from Thence, to address you withal. But a Text of
Scripture, must (...) the Admonitions, which are to be (...) out of this (...)

We are n^w (...) in S^^mons ^o^ch: Even in (...)* that stan^s (...) Solomon.
The (...) a^^i^ing his own (...) every Young man like (...) Youth is (...) to
say, the Folly of, (...). And the (...) this Advice is (...) Concern* which
(...) the Fool by Si^ning (...) God (...) have upon the^ Spirit, (...),
concerning this their Sinful Folly. At the Last; That is, When Death makes near
Approaches unto them; THEN! Then it is, that men come to call themselves Fools,
with Furious Reflections of Conscience, upon the Exorbitances, which they once
pleased themselves withal. Hear the Sum of the matter.

When the Sinful Children of men, see themselves likely to Live no longer, they
are commonly sensible of the many Sinful Errors, with which their Lives, have
been Disordered.

This Observation, supposes, that men have been Illuminated, with the Truths,
and Rules, of the Gospel; and that these men have some Exercise of Rational
Faculties, when they see their Death advancing upon them. Upon such a
Supposition, we say, That men are commonly Guilty of much Disorder in their
Lives, while they Live in Prosperity, and while they Dream of having (...) many
a fair Day to Live: But, at the Last! At the Last! they see the Gross Errors of
this Disorder, and they see them with ho^rible Regret. What is it that
ordinarily betrays men, into much Disorder of Life? One cause of it, is, their
thinking, like the Rich Fool, in Luke 12.20. That there will be many years,
before their Souls be required of them: One cause of it, is, their doing like
the Ill men, in Amos 6.3. Put far away the Evil Day. But when men come to see,
their Souls just going to be Required of them, and the Evil Day just laying its
Arrest upon them; Then! even at the Last, they see, that all their Disobedience
against God has been an unaccountable Folly. The most of men, when they are
just Going to the Dead they see that Madness has been in their Hearts, while
they have Lived: and they see it, with wonderful Agonies of Astonishment.

The CASE, wherewith I am now to treat you, is;

What are the main Instances, wherein men usually, when they come to Die, do
with changed Sentiments, Reflect upon the Errors, wherein they Lived!

The Thoughts of men in Health, and in Ease, and under Temptation, are commonly
vain enough: The Lord knows that they are very vain. But it is well worth the
while for us to be informed, what will be our Thoughts at the Last! and I am
very sure, that I can give you a through Information. When men are a Dying, we
usually see, and say, They are Changing: yea, but a Change of mind, is not the
least part of the Change, which then comes upon them. And the thing, after
which we now make, I hope, our Profitable Enquiry, is, Wherein do men usually
Change their minds, when they feel the Changes of Death, hastening upon them? I
will now give you, ^one but, Faithful Sayings, and such therefore, as are
Worthy of all Acceptance, in Answer to this Enquiry.

I. At the Last, When we see our selves likely to Live no longer in the World,
We shall see and say, That it is a Miserable Thing to be put off with a Portion
in the World. While men think, of continuing yet many a long Summers Day in the
World, they are strangly and strongly, Fascinated with Worldly Accommodations;
and they Scarce pursue any other Portion, than what this World affords; Rem,
Rem, quocunque Modo Rem! But, at the Last! When men see themselves just leaving
of the World; Then, they cry out, with Words, not unlike those of the Psalmist,
in Psalm. 17.14. O deliver me from (ever being like) the Men of the World, that
have their Portion in this Life! It Is very certain, that at the Last, when you
are taking your leave of this World, you will be full of Disdainful Exp^essions
concerning it, and Express your selves to this purpose; Vain World! False
World! Oh! that I had minded this World Less, and my own Soul more, than I have
done! When the Jubilee drew near, the People set but a Little Price on their
P^ssessions: In allusion whereunto it is, that the Apostle says, in 1 Cor.
7.29. This I say, Brethren; The Time is Short; It remains that they who buy* be
as though they possessed not. Well, And This I say, Brethren; When we perceive
our Time is now but Short, we then say of all that we have in this World, Alas,
If this be all that I have, then I have just nothing at all. At the Last, on
the Curtains of our Death bed, we shall see Written, (as a MEAN TEKEL, upon all
Worldly Enjoyments,) those very Significant Words, in Matthew. 16.26. What is a
man profited, if he Gain the whole World, and Loose his own Soul? The
Uneasiness of a Death bed, will, at the Last, Effectually Teach us, if no
Afflicton in our Life, have, with Briers and Thorns, taught it unto us, That no
Rest may in this World be hoped for, At the Last, how shall we Slight our fine
Houses here, when we are going into the small, dark, and Cold House* of the
Grave, appointed for all the Living? How shall we despise our Lands, when we
are going to be Covered with the Clods of the Earth, and Confined within Six
Foot of Earth? How shall we despi^e our Clothes, when we are going to be
Shrouded in our Winding-Sheets, and have our Fallen Jaws Muffled up? What will
our Chests of Treasure be unto us, when we are our selves going to be Nailed up
in the Black Chest, of a Coffen? We may now fondly Bless the Coveteous, and
Commend the Prudence of them, whose chief concern it is to get as much as ever
they can of this Earth into their Hands; though the God of Heaven, do Abhor
such a man, as much as he does the Vilest Sinner upon Earth. But how will it
be, At the Last? Then, the True Estate of such a man, will appear to be That,
in Jer. 17.11. He shall Leave his Riches in the midst of his Days, and at his
End he shall be a Fool: Yea, and at that End, he shall most bitterly call
himself a Fool, for his looking after none but such Deceitful Riches. There are
some who so read those Passages, in Job 22.24* Make no more of thy Gold, than
Dust, Esteem the Gold of Ophir, no better than the Stones of the Brook; So the
Almighty shall be unto thee, both Gold, and Plenty of Silver. Truly, when men
are going to appear before the Almighty, all their Gold will be of no more
account unto them. It has been an Observation sometimes made, That Solenne est
in confinio mortis posi^is, re^ Humanas ex ignota et Supernaturali causa fastid
re. Men do a little before they Die, contract from some supernatural and
unaccountable, Impression upon them, a strange Distaste for the Affairs of this
World. Sy^s, This World, will become a Distastful, and an Insufficient and an
Insignificant sort of a Thing unto us, when we see our selves going out of it.
Some Greater Good, even something that is not Mortal, for an Immortal Soul,
will then be desired, with a more Ardent Rage of Soul, than what is in the
Thirst of the Heart after the Waterbrooks.

II. At the Last, When we see our selves Likely to Live no longer in our Sin,
we shall see and say, That there is no Evil so Odious, or Dangerous, or
Damnable, a our Sin. It Is a saying, which the Jews ascribe to our Father Adam,
No man would Sin if he sa^ from the Beginning to the End. Alas, The Children of
Adam, when they come to the End, their Sin does not seem such a Trivial, and
such an Harmless (...) as it might, at the Beginning. I (...) to tell some of
you, That the Sin, whereof you now say, The Stolen Waters are sweet, At the
Last, when you come to D^, you will say, I am sure, Solomon said so; It Is more
bitter than Death it self. It is remarked of a Wicked man, in Psa. 36 2. He
flatters himself, in his own Eyes, until his Iniquity, be found to be Hateful.
While men are wallowing in the Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a Season,
they Flatter themselves with vain Conceits, That Sin is not such an Evil, as
indeed it is. They please themselves in Sin, as having some Delight, or Profit,
attending of it, and they Sp^r^ themselves in their own Delusions. But, at the
Last, when that Short Season of Enjoying the Pleasures of Sin, Things not
worthy to be called Enjoyments, is out, Oh! Then, SIN appears in its own
hateful and horrid hue, unto their awakened Souls. If we do Now make Light of
Transgressing the Law of God, in any Commission, or in any Omission,
whatsoever, the Transgression will not appear a Light matter unto us, at the
Last, when we are just going to make our Appearance, before God the Judge of
all. Let any Friend, then ask us, What is the heaviest Load that now Lies upon
you? I know, what Answer we shall make, because I have often heard That Answer
made; We shall not say, The Losses, and the Reproaches, and the Sicknesses,
that we have met withal; but we shall say, My SIN, my SIN! my Iniquities, They
are as an heavy Burden, too heavy for me! When Malefactors have been going to
their Execution among us, they have solemnly, even with the Groans of Deadly
Wounded men, professed unto me, That they had rather go on to the Terrible
Death before them, than go back to Drink, and Whore, and Game, and Profane the
Lords Day, as they did use to do. What says a Solomon, about the Sin of
Drunkenness? in Prove. 23.32. At the Last, it bites like a Serpent, and Stings
like an Adder. Some write of that Snake, that when it first fastens on a man,
the poison seems a pleasure to him, it so tickles him that he can hardly
forbear Laughter at the Titillation; but when the poison has fully insinuated
it self into him, Then Intolerable is the Torment of it. Such will be the
Torment, of them whom this Loathsome Sin, has Envenomed, at the Last! So have
they found it, from whose Dying mouths, I have heard those woeful cries, Ale
houses are Hell houses! Truly, At the Last, men will say, The Juice of T^ads,
were not a more venomous Liquor, than that with which they have been heretofore
Intoxicated. At the Last, men will say, They had better have taken Burning
Coals into their B^some, than have Lodged in their Heart the Burning Thoughts
of Wantonness. At the Last, Men will say, They had better have had their
Tongues bored through with Hot Irons* than have Sworn, and Curs^d, and Ly'd,
with their Dishonorable Tongues. At the Last, Men will say, They had better
have Starved, and Died, or begged their Bread from Door to Door, than have done
one Dishonest Thing for Bread. Those Vain Companions, even those Knots of Evil
Company, which now, O Young man, keep thee Tied fast in the Bond of Iniquity;
certainly, 'twill be thy Lively Cry in a Dying Hour, Lord, Gather not my Soul
with such Sinners! And be it now known unto thee, O vain Young man, that if
some of these Lewd Companions may come into thy Chamber, when thou art Lying on
a Deathbed, the sight of them will smite thee with more Horror, than if so
many Rattle Snakes were then horribly crawling about thee. How often have I
heard the Groans of young people, when the Anguish of Death has been upon them,
and their quivering Souls have sat upon their pale and cold Lips, ready to take
(as one said) A great Leap in the Dark; Lamenting, Oh! my vain Company, it has
undone me: I wish I had never seen the face of such and such young people;
Their Company has been the Damnation of my Soul! And shall I add yet one thing
more: The Sin of Contention must have this Mark particularly set upon it. If a
Swarm of Bees are Fighting, the way to part them, is to throw Dust upon them.
Truly, Men, even Good men, will keep v^xing and stinging one another; but at
the Last, when they see the Grave Dust, is quickly to be thrown upon them, then
(like the Blessed Ridley and Hooper) they are sorry for those Contentions; they
will ask Forgiveness from all the World, and they will have Charity for all the
World. If the ground of Difference, be then put unto the Contending Parties,
and their Advice be required, whether the Contention shall be carried on, after
they are Dead? They Will Reply, Oh! by no means; but let the Contention Die before
us, if it be possible; and unite all Hearts and all Hands as fast as you can.

III. At the Last, When we see our selves likely to Live no longer, under the
Offers of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall see and say, That a CHRIST is the
most precious Thing imaginable. When David was drawing near his End, his mind
ran much upon a Christ. Thus we read, (for so I read it) in 2 Samuel 23.3, 5. Now
these be the last words of David; There shall be a Ruler over men, Just, Ruling
in the Fear of God; [namely the Messiah.] This is all my Salvation, and all my
Desire, although as yet He make Him not to Spring up Even so, a CHRIST; That will
be all our Salvation, and all our Desire, when we are uttering our Last Words
before the Lord. Men hear the Report of the Lord Jesus Christ, from Day to Day;
but, Lord, Who has Believed the Report! The Prince of Life, is every Day
Preached unto the Children of Death; but as long as they Live at Ease, they
undervalue all the Offers of that Prince, and of His Life. Do, Madmen, Do! Go
on to do so! But I can tell you, when you will cease to do it. At the Last,
When you Ly a Dying, Then, this Prince of Life, will be esteemed with you, The
Pearl of great Price; and you will Prize Him, above whole Rocks of Diamonds,
and whole Mountains of Gold. It is said of the Faithful, in 1 Pet. 2.7. To you
that Believe, Christ is precious. Well, and it may be said of the Dying too;
You will believe then that a Christ is precious! The Dying, do in some sort set
their Seal, to that Esteem of a CHRIST, which all the Faithful have of Him.
THEY are the Folks, that somewhat feel the circumstances of their Departing
Souls, which call for a CHRIST. At the Last, the Wisdom of a Christ, for an
Ignorant Soul, the Righteousness of a Christ, for a Guilty Soul, the
Sanctification of a Christ, for a Filthy Soul, and the Redemption of a Christ,
for an Enslaved Soul, will be with Inexpressible Ardors called for. Men
oftentimes don't judge aright, of the One Thing Needful, till they are going
away from the Many Things, whereof they had been careful. But then, at the
Last, their voice is that, in Luke 10.42. One Thing is Needful; And, a CHRIST,
is that Thing which they reckon so: The Salvation of the Lord Jesus Christ, Oh!
we shall call it a Great Salvation, when we are taking our Leave of the Little
Things, which we have here been taken up withal. When we are going from every
Temporal Fruition, there will be nothing so valuable unto us, as that Eternal
Salvation, whereof the Lord Jesus Christ is the Author, unto as many as Obey
Him. At the Last, the Atonement of such a Priest, as a CHRIST; At the Last, the
Instruction of such a Prophet, as a CHRIST; at the Last, the Protection of such
a King, as a CHRIST; This will be the One Thing, that we shall count, of all,
the most Needful for us. E're Long, if that Thing be put unto us, What is it,
that will now give you most of Satisfaction? What shall we wish for, and pray
for, on your behalf? I know what you will say, for I have many and many a Time
heard it said, A CHRIST, Oh! A CHRIST, for a Perishing Soul!

Our Justification through the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, by the
Free Grace of God Reckoned Ours, we shall particularly then reckon, to be
infinitely Needful for us. At the Last, We shall see, that there is a Law of
Righteousness, wherein the Great God, has denounced the Extremest Wretchedness
unto us upon the least Failure of our Obedience unto Him; and that our Sins
against this Law, have been so Innumerable, that, If thou, Lord, should mark
our Iniquities, O Lord, who could stand! We shall then count it a Blessed
Thing, for the God of Heaven to Release us, from the Sentence, wherein the Law
has Doomed us, to suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, for our Sins, and
clear us from our Obligations to Endure Endless and Easeless Plagues: And for
the God of Heaven to pronounce us, not merely Innocent, but also Righteous,
before His Tribunal, and possess us of such a Righteousness, as the Law has
annexed and adjudg'd Life Eternal, to be a Reward unto. With the Psalmist, we
shall Exclame, Oh! the Blessedness of the man thus dealt withal! But where
shall we have such a Righteousness? While men are Living, and perhaps Writing
and Fighting against one another, they will oftentimes advance their own
Evangelical Obedience, to be farther than it is, the Matter of their Justifying
Righteousness. But, as Bellarmine, the Goliath of the Romish Philistines, having
argued, a Great while, for the Interest of our own Merit in this Matter, he
came at the Last unto that memorable Issue, [Tutissimum est,] By reason of the
uncertainty of our own Righteousness, and the Danger of Vain glory, it is the
safest course, to Repose our whole Trust, in the Mercy and Grace of God alone:
So, there are Multitudes, even of Good men, who at the Last, will Die, upon
other Principles, of Justification, than those which in the Blind Heats of
Life, they often Disputed for. If (like that Infamous and Fiery Bishop
Gardener) men do not relish this Justification by Faith, as a Good Breakfast,
for ^em to Live upon, they will have a Relish for it, as a Good Supper, for
them to Die withal. Briefly, The Son of God, assuming our Nature, became a
Mediator, particularly Exercising a Priestly Office* in the yet more particular
Capacity of a Surety, for us. This our Surety, did both Endure the Penalty of
the Law, and Fulfill the Precept of it, in our stead; according to the Covenant
of Redemption, wherein both God the Father and the Son, consented unto such a
Dispensation. There was in our Lord Jesus Christ, an Habitual Rectitude of
Nature, which He was Born withal; Our Lord Jesus Christ Walked most Holily,
Blamelessly, Exactly, for many years together; Finally, our Lord Jesus Christ,
underwent the sad Pain, and Shame, and Horror, that are the Essentials of the
Punishment, whereto our Sins made us Obnoxious. God, in the Justification of
His chosen, Imputes all of this Righteousness unto them; that is, He graciously
Looks on it, as Theirs; as belonging to Them, in order to their being
Judicially dealt withal, according to the Merit thereof. Thus, even Thus to be
Justified, will be a Thing marvellously agreeable unto us, when at the Last, we
shall see our selves chargeable with Original and Actual Sins, and Numberless
Provocations. Man, If thou Die, with the Guilt of so much as One Sin, lying upon
thy Soul, what will become of Thee, and of thy Soul, throughout Eternal Ages!
Alas, Thou will be a Vessel, for the dreadful Justice of Heaven, to make its
direful Impressions upon forever. When you see This at the Last, you will then
see, That you cannot Supply your selves with a Righteousness, wherein you may
dare to appear before that God, who is of Purer Eyes, than to Behold Iniquity.
As Jerome speaks, All Hands will then be dissolved because nothing done by our
Hands, will be found to answer the Righteousness of God If your Good Works were
never so perfect, according to Law, you will see, that they can be no Expiation
for your former Evil ones; for they are no more than you should have owed unto
God, if you had never Sinned against Him at all. Yea, but you will also see,
That you can here have no Good Works at all of your own personal Performance,
and that when you have done your best, the Broad Law of our God is far from
answered. The Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, will Then be unto you,
your only City of Refuge: You Will see, there is no Direction, like that in the
Ancient Directories for the Visitation of the Sick; Even, For the Sick man to
say, O my God, I now place the Death of the Lord Jesus Christ, between me, and
my Sins! And you will say, at the Last, Lord, I will make mention of thy
Righteousness, even of thine only!

IV. At the Last, When we see our selves likely to Live no Longer Time, we
s^all see and say, That Inexpressible is the worth of a Little Time. They that
fancy, they have a deal of Time to Live, how Little do they often Value their
Time! A Moral Heathen complained of it, Quem mihi dab^s, qui Diem aestimet!
Where will, you find a man, that sets upon his Time, any convenient
Aestimation? Hence it is, that a certain Thing they call, Pastime, has been.
Invented: Men have their weary Inventions, for no other Intentions than this,
To pass the Time away* A most prodigious piece of Nonsense! But, at the Last,
when a man sees, the Last Sands of his Time to be running; Oh! Then he cries
out for more Time; and his Cry is that, in Psalm. 39.11. O Spare me, that I may
Recover Strength, (and have a Little more Time,) before I go hence, and be no
more. A Little more Time, how much would the most of Dying men give to purchase
it! They had a Tradition, among the Ancients, that the Last Words of Nimrod
were, Oh: for one year more! Oh! for one year more! Whether it were so, or no,
These are among the Last Words of the most of men on the Earth, especially of
those that have been the most Mighty Hunters, after the Earth, Oh! for a Little
more Time! Yea, at the Last, that Cry, has been some times heard, from the
Mouth of a Dying man, A World of Wealth, for an Inch of Time! and that Cry,
has been horribly roared out, Call Time again, Call Time again! All the Time
of Y^uth, not given to the Service of the Lord Jesus Christ, with what Anguish
of Soul, at the Last, shall we say, Oh! If I could fetch it back! And all the
Time that we have misspent in Excessive Recreations, how shall we, at the Last,
with an Exceeding bitter Cry, like that of Poor Esau^s, when he Slip't his
Time, wish for the Revocation of it! At the Last, men will say, The Time that I
Lost in Diversions, Oh! if I had it again, I would now spend it in Devotions!
The Time that I lost in Romances, I would now spend it in the Scriptures! The
Time that I lost at the Tavern, I would now spend it in my Closet; Endeavoring
to make my Vocation and Election Sure! As Good a man as John Hus, Extremely
Laments his former loss of Time, even at that Innocent and Ingenious Game of
Chess, when he perceives his Death going to cut off all the remainder of his
Time. It was said, in Ephesians. 5.16. Walk, not as Fools, but as Wise, Redeeming the
Time. And when men come to the Period of the Time, which they have not
Redeemed, they will Scourge themselves with furious Rebukes, What a Fool was I,
to throw away whole Days and Weeks of the Time, whereof One Minute cannot now
be fetch^d back, by all the Angels in Heaven! When the most Learned Salmasius
drew near the End of his Time, he went out of the World, with these words in
his Mouth, Oh! I have Lost a World of Time! Time, the most Precious Thing in
the World; whereof, if I had but one year longer, it should be spent in the
Psalms of David, and the Epistles of Paul. O Sirs, Mind the World Less, and God
More; all the Learning in the World, without the Fear of God, is nothing worth,
Shall I tell you? It Is no rare Thing* for eminent Saints, when they ly a Dying,
to profess, as we find in the History of their Lives, that some of them have
done; The Loss of Time, is a Thing, that now Sits heavy on this Poor Soul of
mine! And therefore, we had need, all of us, make as Good an Use of our present
Opportunities, in our several Capacities, to do Good, as ever we can. One that
has Sustained any Public Station, whether Sacred, or Civil, will, at the
Last, when he comes to Die, be very Uneasy to think, That he did so Little for
the Lord Jesus Christ, in his former Station. The Talen^s of men are Weighty
Things; and they will feel the Weight of them, when they are just called away,
to give an Account of those Talents. What shall I say; Men ordinarily Die, with
words, like those of that Great Person, Sir Henry Wotten, uttered with Tears,
How much Time have I to Repent of! and how Little Time to do it in!

V. At the Last, When we see our selves likely to Live no longer Naturally, we
shall see and say, That there is all manner of Reason to applaud the Wisdom of
them that have Lived Religiously, All men, while they are Living, do say with
him, in Numb. 25.10. Let me Die the Death of the Righteous, and let my last End
be Like his. Yea, but they that never said it before, will, at the Last, when
they are Dying, say, Oh! It Is a good Thing to Live the Life of the Righteous!
When Grotius, that Great Scholar, and Great Statesman, drew near his End, he
professed, That he would Gladly now give all his Learning and Honor, for the
Religion of a poor Mechanic in the Neighborhood, that spent Eight Hours every
Day in Prayer, Eight Hours in Labor, and Eight in Sleep, and other
Necessaries: And unto some that were commending the wonderful Diligence of his
Life, he replied, Ah, vitam perdidi, Operose, nibil agendo, Alas, I have spent
my Life Diligently, in the Doing of Nothing! But unto some that asked the best
Counsel, which a man of his Seize could give, he only said, Be Serious!
Truly, To be (...) Religious, will, when you are Dying, appear to you a thing
Infinitely Reasonable. What is Religion! Religion is a man's Consecration of
himself unto the business of paying perpetual Acknowledgments unto the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, and God in Him. Now, if we have not Acknowledged, the Lord Jesus
Christ, in all our wa^es, when we come to the End of our Wa^es, 'twill Trouble
us exceedingly: I am very c^rtain, At the Last, it will t^ou (...) us
exc^^dingly. It Is an Express^^n concerning Wisdom, in Job 28.22. D^struction
and Death say, we have heard the (...) thereof with our Ears. I suppose, the
meaning to be, That the Wisdom of God is displayed wonderfully in that Law of
the Creation, whereby De^truction and Death comes, in a (...) period, upon
every thing that is Generated. But by Destruction and Death, some suppose to be
meant, men that are Nigh unto Destruction and Death; and it is very sure, that
such men will give a good Report of Religion; even this will be the Fame of it,
with them, The Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to Depart from Evil is
Understanding. There is ordinarily, no Scoffing at Religion, in the mouth of a
Dying man* Man, Death will make thee Serious, and in thy Dying Day, at the
Last, thou will wish, Oh! that I had been more Serious in my Life! and, Oh!
that I had more seriously pondered and pursued, that serious Errand, which I
came into the World upon! An Eminent French Minister of State, unto whom the
General Embroilment of Europe, at this Day, is in a great measure owing, when
his Life was near its End, one Day grew very sad; and being asked the cause of
his being so sad, he said, O the Soul is a Serious Thing; it must either be sad
here for a moment, or be sad for ever. A Renowned Privy Counselor, to several
Monarchs in the English Nation, at the End of his Life, gave this as the Result
of all his many years Experience, I find, That Seriousness is the greatest
wisdom, Temperance is the best Physic, and a good Conscience is the best
Estate. Syrs, If you will not Pray without Ceasing, while you Live, you shall
Pray when you are Ceasing to Live; and when you Die, you shall wish that you had
Prayed more, while you Lived. At the Last, men will wish, That in their shut
Closets, they had every Day Prayed unto the Heavenly Father, whom, through
their wanting the Filial Spirit of Prayer, they dare not now call their Father.
At the Last, men will wish, That they had made the daily Offerings of continual
Prayers, with their Families, which they are now Leaving under the Fury of God,
for their not therein calling on His Name. The Word of God, at the Last, when
you come to Die, you will wish, Oh! that I had more studied this Word of Life; It Is
more to be desired than that of Gold, which I spent my Life in hunting after!
The five last verses in the Second Chapter to Titus, were then unto the
Incomp^rable Seldom, of more account, than all the Volumns of his mighty
Library, The House of God, when you come to Die, and Go into the House for all
the Living, you will say, An Hour in that House was better than a Thousand
elsewhere: Oh! that I had not been so frequently, and so needlessly absent, from
the Gates of Wisdom, while I was not so near as I now am to the Gates of Death!
Church Fellowship, How many are loath to be at the pains, and in the V^wes,
which are therein called for! But, at the Last, when men are going to be
Enrolled among the Dead, they will wish, that they had been Written among the
Living, in the Ecclesiastical Catalogues of Communican^s, at the Table of the
Lord; and they then often say, Well, if the Lord will now Recover me, the first
thing I Will do, after I come abroad, shall be to join my self unto some Society
of His People. Among all our Expenses of Estates, which, at the Last, shall we
Review, with most of Comfort? Verily, That which we have Expended, in Pious
Uses, our Almsgiving, and our Charity, will most of all comfort us, when we are
just going to Leave all that we have, unto others, that cannot Help us, and
perhaps will not Thank us.

VI. At the Last, When we see our selves Likely to Live no Longer on Earth, we
shall see and say, That a Promise of Heaven is more Desirable than any
Possession on Earth. Earthly Things are like, a Bird in the Hand, unto men that
apprehe^^* they have a Great while to stay on Earth: For Heaven, they are
inclined as the unbelieving Israelites were for Canaan, When they despised the
pleasant Land, and believed not the Word of God. But now, Spiritual Blessings
in Heavenly places, Enquire of a Dying man concerning them, and He will tell
you, Oh! Nothing like 'em! The Promises of the New Covenant are, as they are
called in 2 Pet. 1.4. Exceeding Great and Precious Promises, But men do rarely
count them so, till they can Promise themselves no longer continuance here
among the Vanities, which cause them to despise the pleasant Land. Then! At the
Last, what will be the best Cordial that can be on a Deathbed provided for
you? When the Damp Sweats of (...) are upon you, Oh! no such Cordial, as a
Promise in (...) Covenant of Grace. At the Last, one such Promise as This* I
will be thy God! At the Last, one such Promise as This, Be of Good cheer, thy
Sins are forgiven thee! At the Last, one such Promise as This, Thou poor
Spirit, thine is the Kingdom of Heaven; Thou Mourning Soul, Thou shall be
Comforted; Thou Pure Heart, Thou shall see God! Any one such Promise, of the
New Covenant, Oh! Twill then be reckoned a Richer Thing, than a Massy Ingot of
Gold. Will Not you Believe so? Then observe the next man [and what if it should be
Thy self, O Man?] whom thou shall see with the Shadow of Death Sitting on his
Eyelids, -- When his Breath is Failing, and his Heart is Fainting, and his
Hands and Feet are Chilling, and his Aff^ighted Soul is just Ready to be gone
into an astonishing Eternity; Ask of that man, What is a Promise of Pardon, and
of Glory, now to be Valued at? Surely, At the Last, he will say, No Earthly
Riches are to be compared unto so Rich an Heritage; Let this be my Heritage,
and it will be the Rejoicing of my Heart!

VII. At the Last, When we see our selves Likely to Live no Longer on Earth, we
shall see and say, That the Wrath of God in Hell, is of all things the most
Formidable and Astonishing. The Wrath of God, seems not very Terrible, unto
ungodly men, while they are by a Life of Ungodliness Exposing themselves unto
that Wrath; Perhaps, They Mock at the Fear of it. But when they are near to the
Death, which Ensues upon such a Life, they are terribly Surprised, with the
Terrors of that Wrath, which they formerly and foolishly Despised. Then, even,
at the Last, it will be with Sinful men, as it was when the horrendous Thunder
storm, was rending the Sky, over the Assyrian Armies, in Isa. 33.14. The
Sinners are afraid, and Fearfulness does Surprise the Hypocrites; they Cry out,
Who amongst us shall dwell with the Devouring Fire? who amongst us shall dwell
with Everlasting Burnings? I knew, a very stout man, who, as he was going to
Die, said, I have been among Drawn Swords, and Armed men; I have stood before
the mouths of Roaring Canons, and where the Bullets have come as Thick as Hail
about me; and yet I never knew what it was to be afraid: But now I am
apprehensive of my being Exposed unto the Anger of the Almighty God, my Heart
is overwhelmed with the Dread of it, my Heart even Dies within me, at the
Thought of That! At the Last, When the Departing Soul of a man, sees himself
ready to be Seized by the Vengeance of God, it strikes him with an Horrible
Amazement, and, as Job speaks, he would fain flee out of the Hand of the
Almighty: and he makes a Cry, like that of Corah going down into the devouring
Pit, Oh! must I be swallowed up! Examine an Expiring Sinner, at the Last, what
he thinks, of the Worm that never dies, of the Fire that never shall be
quenched, of Lingering through an Eternity of Wretchedness that never can be
Lingered through, and of Lying under the Blows of Exa^perated Holiness in the
Lowest Hell, until the very Heavens be no more? With Inexpressible Anguish, he
will then cry out, Oh! It Is a fearful Thing thus to fall into the Hands of the
Living God! Or, as a miserable man, when he was passing into a doleful
Eternity, said, If I were to Endure the Wrath of God, for ten Thousand years,
Perhaps, I could think of Enduring it; but, when I think of Eternity, That,
That amazes me! Conscience, wilt not thou then Whisper unto unhappy men, these
Intimations of A Judgment to come, at which they will Tremble, when they feel
their Summons unto that Judgment? I have seen Persons Quaking on their
Deathbeds, and their very Beds therewith Shaking under them; From whence their
first Shriek unto me, has been. Oh! Sir, The wrath of a Dreadful God, makes me
Tremble; I Tremble, I Tremble, at that Wrath! And with such Horrors upon them,
will the Unregenerate, at the Last, go Trembling out of the World.

Upon the whole then; What better Improvement can be made of these things, than
in that Sigh, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were Wise, that they understood this,
that they would Consider their Latter End! Possibly that Passage, may more
immediately Refer to the Blessedness, whereto the Jewish Nation shall be
brought, in the Latter End, when the Long Tribulation, which is now upon them,
shall come unto an End. But the Thing that is now to be propounded is This; O
that we were now so Wise, as to understand Now, what we shall understand at our
Latter End! Repentance, is a Thing to be urged upon us; and a speedy
Repentance* a present Repentance. What is Repentance? It Is for a man to Change
his Mind, as one of the Greek words for it, in the New Testament Signifies.
Well then, Let us now so Change our Mind, as to be now of the Mind, that we
shall be of when we come to Die. A Prudent man, will Die Daily; and This is one
Thing in our Doing so: It Is to Live Daily under the Power of such Impressions,
as we shall have upon us, when we come to Die. Oh! Don't put off our Change of
Mind* until the Last; but Repent Speedily, Repent Presently, if you would have
any Hopes that you Repent Sincerely.

Attend unto a Threefold Admonition.

First, Know, That it will not, it cannot, be Long, before we come unto our
Last. We are not only by Scripture, but also, by Repeated and Continual
Experiments, advised, as in Jam. 4.14. What is your Life? It is even a Vapor
that appears for a Little while, and then it Vanishes away. When there is a
Little Vapor spent, even that Little Vapor, of our Animal, or our Vital
Spirits, we shall then see our Last: And this Little Vapor may not be Long i^
Spending. How swiftly does our Last Hour advance upon us? Every Time the Clock
Strikes, it may Strike upon our Hearts, to think, Thus I am one Hour nearer to
my Last! But, O mark what I say; That Hour is probably Nearer to None than to
such as Least Think of it.

Secondly, Know, That as our Last, will come upon us very Speedily, so it may
come upon us very Suddenly. What says the Preacher? in Eccl. 9.12. Man Knows
not his Time. Even this is the Thing, that I must Preach to you, if I would not
forget, and forfeit the Name of a Preacher; but this is the Thing that we are
all of us, most of all, to Preach unto our selves. We see Sudden Disasters,
ever now and then overtaking our Neighbors; Now, I say unto you, Except we
Repent, we may all of us Perish Likewise in such Disasters. When we go Out in a
Morning, we are not certain, that ever we shall Come Home; when we come Home,
in an Evening, we are not certain, that ever we shall Go Out again. Think we, I
know not how soon I may come to my Last; or, Whether at my Last, I shall have
any Time for Deliberation.

Know, Finally, That a Repentance at the Last, if there be any Space for it, is
mostly an Insincere, but always a Suspiti^us Repentance. Dying Penstents, for
the most part, can have no better Account given of them, than that, in Psalm.
78.34, 36. When He slew them, then they sought Him; and they Returned and
Enquired Early after God: Nevertheless, they did flatter Him with their mouth,
and they Lied unto Him with their Tongue. The Change of Mind, which takes men
upon a Death bed, is usually no more than a Conviction upon them; there is no
Real Conversion in it. Men are then only like Iron softened in the Fire; they
soon Return to their former Hardness if God spare them from going down into the
Unquenchable Fire. We have generally seen it so; and it has been an Observation
particularly heretofore published unto the World; I have known many Condemned
Malefactors, under the Expectation of their Execution, to have such mavelous
Expressions of Repentance, that one could not have imagined mere Hypocr^sie in
the bottom of all; and yet I m^st freely say it, of those pretended ^e^ven^s,
who have been Rep^i^ved and Pa^doned, I cannot Remember Two, but what have
afterward proved P^odigies or Wickedness. In an History of no less than Four
Thousand years, there is but One Instance of a true Repentance at the Last, and
he so circumstanced, as never any Sinner can be after him. What says the
Apostle, in Phil 2 12, 13. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling;
For it is God which works in you, both to will and to do of His own good
pleasure. Sy^s, The Repentance to Salvation, you cannot give it unto your
selves, at your own pleasure; Then Fear, Then Tremble, to Delay your Compliance
with the motions of the Holy Spirit of God, now inviting you unto Repentance.
Madman, will thou drink a Draught of Deadly Poison, because thou have heard,
that there is one Antidote for the poison, though thou art not sure of
obtaining that Antidote? Every Sinful Error of thy Life, is a Draught of Deadly
Poison* Oh! Don't Forecast a Repentance, at the Last! No, you have had the
fairest Warning, that it is possible any persons Living, should have, to amend
the Errors of your Lives; and there is cause to be Afraid, [Let me speak such a
solemn and awful word!] that God will never give a Death bed Repentance, unto
many of you that have had such a Warning. Indeed the Grace of God, is Infinite,
and may not be limited: But if you go on still in your Errors, it is willingly,
it is wil^^^lly, it is in Defiance of the Holy God: The Spirit of God, and of
Repentance, is hideously D^fi'd, by this procrastination of Repentance: You do
all that you can, to make your selves Incapable of the Gift of Repentance, and
you Treasure up for your selves Wrath against the Day of Wrath.

Wherefore, Let us come unto a sound mind, and Resign our selves up unto the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, that we may, even with a Good Principle
infused into us, be Renewed in the Spirit of our mind; and so be able to say
with him, in Psalm. 119: 59, 60. Lord, I thought on my ways, and I turned my
Feet unto thy Testimonies; I made haste, and I delayed not to keep thy
Commandments.

And now, having been thus ungainsayably Reasoned withal, and having had such
Reasonable Things, with such plain and fair Warnings, now set before you, what
remains but that a most Particular Effect hereof should be obtained!

The Effect most particularly to be desired is, That you Turn these Warnings
into so many Prayers. Do it, Syrs, lest the Almighty God at length turn them
into so many Torments! Many Stripes, will be the Fruit of these Admonitions, if
you do not now make your Seasonable Supplications to the God of Heaven, That
you may Now Think, and Now Do, as you have been Admonished. Look back, I say,
upon the Warnings that you have had, and suitably to every One of them, Let
your Petitions be now spread before the Lord, That you may Now Believe, and Now
Practice, and Now Avoid, and Now Pursue, and Now Enjoy, all things according to
those Apprehensions, which at the Last, will come upon you. But that which is
above all Now to be Endeavored, is, that you may immediately give such an
Answer unto the Strivings of the Holy Spirit with you, as may Settle your
Eternal Peace, and give you to find your selves at the Last, provided of Peace,
yea, of Joy Unspeakable and full of Glory. I am verily persuaded that the Holy
Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, is from what you have heard, now Striving with
you. Those Devout Motions, which are now Stirring in your minds, are the
Motions of that Holy Spirit, so Striving with you. If you Resist them, Deny
them, Divert them, it may be, that Grieved Spirit will withdraw from you, for
ever; Then, this will prove but a Funeral Sermon for that unhappy Soul of
thine, O man; and at the Last, the Omnipotent Spirit of God, will Smite thy
Soul, with Endless, and Easeless Tortures, as with flashes of hot Lightning for
ever. But, Oh! being thus Warned, of What is to come at the Last! I beseech
you, to make, [and yet own at the Foot of Sovereign Grace, that without His
altogether Undeserved Help you cannot make!] Such a Return unto the proposals
of the Holy Spirit, as may assure your Safety, and your Comfort, at the Last.

Retire, I beseech you, and bestow a Distinct Pause on each of those Proposals,
pausing on them, till with a Consenting Soul, you say, Amen, unto them.

The Holy Spirit of Christ, now demands of you;

Shall I bring thee out of that Sinful, and Cursed Estate, which by Sin thou
art fallen into?

He demands of you;

Shall I Carry, and Unite, thy Sinful Soul, unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and
assist thee to accept that Righteousness of His, by the Imputation whereof,
thou shall stand perfectly Righteous before the Throne of God?

He demands of you;

Shall I help thee, in Thankfulness unto the Lord Jesus Christ for His
Righteousness, to Serve Him, in Constant Endeavors to Glorify Him, according
to the Rules of His Gospel, all thy Days?

He demands of you;

Shall I Save thee from all the Snares of the Flesh, and the World, and the
Devil, which would keep thee, at a distance from thy Lord Jesus Christ, and
cause thee, that Renouncing of Them, and their Corrupt Interests, thou shall
Return to God, and Converse with God, and Place thy whole Delight in the Lord
JEHOVAH, as thy Best Good, and thy Last End for ever?

All This, is the Holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, now offering to Do for
you. Refuse His Offer, and you unavoidably Perish at the Last! Souls, You Will
Mourn at the Last, and say, How have I slighted the best offer that ever was
made unto a Miserable Sinner! Embrace this Offer, and at the Last, you shall
Triumph, in the Glad Consequences of it. Yea, You and I, shall wonderfully
Rejoice at the Last, that ever you had of me, A Faithful Report of Matters
uttered by Many in the Last Minutes of their Lives, and a Solemn Warning unto
all to Conform their Lives unto the Belief of such Unquestionable Matters.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
SEven Select Lectures, of Mr. Cotton Mather of New England: Or Seasonable
Discourses upon some Common but Woeful Distempers, wherein men gratify the Grand
Enemy of their Salvation; And upon the Remedies of those Distempers. By a
Singular Providence of God, Preserved from the Hands of the French, whereinto
they were fallen, and now Published by an English Gentleman who providentially
li^t upon them.

Printed at London, for Nath. Hiller, at the Princes Arms, in Leaden Hall
Street, over against St. Mary Axe. 1695. And now to be Sold by Joseph Wheeler,
at his Shop near the Head of the Dock, At Boston in New England. 1697.


