The SAINTS Victory and Triumph OVER SIN and DEATH.

As it was Recommended in a Sermon, Preached to the Artillery Company at
Boston, on their day for Election of Officers.

By Mr. PETER THACHER, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Milton.

Romans 8.37. Nay in all these things we are more than Conquerors, through him
that Loved us.

Boston in New England, Printed by B. Green and J. Allen. Sold by Joseph
Wheeler, at the head of the Dock. 1696.

Christian READER,
THE life of a Believer is in nothing more expressed to the life, than in that of
a Soldier. There is therefore advantage for a Minister of the Gospel, when
called to speak to that Order of men, to improve the Metaphor, for the common
benefit of all that profess themselves to be of the Church Militant: and herein
to imitate Christ himself, who took all opportunities to Spiritualize every
thing that he had Occasion to discourse of: and were it not for this, there
would be small encouragement to appear in this work at such a day, wherein the
ancient Military Spirit is well nigh lost, as if there were no farther use for
it: whereas, if it be thus also with Christians in regard of their Spiritual
Warfare, there is need of taking all Opportunities to rouse them up, lest they
rue it for ever.

The great encouragement of a Soldier, to be valiant, is the hope of Victory,
and a Triumph following upon it: and herein is the true Christian Priviledged'
that he is not left at Uncertainty, to the Chance of War, wherein the Battle is
not always to the Strong, but the issue is secured, and the Triumph making
ready to be Solemnized with the greatest state.

The Reverend Author of the Ensuing Sermon, has in it, according to the Grace
of God given him, in Military Terms, suitably represented this Glorious Victory
and Triumph, for the Directing, quickening, and encouraging all the Soldiers of
Christ, in their Warfare. It will therefore be of Universal profit to all that
Read it with a serious Consideration, to help them in their Fighting the good
fight of Faith, unto perseverance, in prospect of the Crown of Life, which
Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, who is eye witness of all the resolution
we express herein against our Souls Adversaries, will set upon their heads ere
long, in the view of Angels and men; to whose Blessing I Commend it for the
happy Success:

who am, Less than the least of all Saints, Samuel Williard.

The Saints Victory and Triumph over Sin and Death.
1 Cor. 15.57. Thanks be to God which gives us the Victory; through our Lord
Jesus Christ.


THE Emperor Valentinian, when He was Dying, had his Friends comforting of him
with the Remembrance of his past Victories: He told them that he Gloryed in one
Victory above all the rest; Inimicorum nequissimum vici (said he) carnem meam:
I have had a Victory over my Flesh, the worst Enemy in the World. Now my Text
presents us with a Glorious Victory, and Eternal Triumph, not only over one,
but over all Evils and Enemies; and gives the Dying Christian ground to say,
with the Blessed Apostle, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the Faith: Hence forth there is Laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day;
and he may Triumphantly add, O Death where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy
Victory? Of all terrible Enemies, Death the King of Terrors is most terrible;
and of all Houses, the Grave, The House for all Living, is the most dark and
dismal to the Eye of Nature; but yet the Truths of the (...) concerning both,
are much more comfortable: As appears by this glorious Triumph of Faith over
both, arising from the consideration of the Resurrection of the Dead, and
Change of the Living; which is expressed in the 55, 56, 57. verses of this
Chapter.

Oh Death where is thy Sting? Oh Grave where is thy Victory? the sting of Death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law; but thanks be to God which gives
us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ: which the Apostle interprets
thus. The sting of Death [that is, that whereby Death is rendered terrible and
destructive] is Sin, that is, the Transgression of the first man Adam, in whom
all dye; yet made more deadly by our Actual Transgressions: but it is that
which is the Condemning Sin.

And what is the strength of Sin, whereby it prevails thus unto death? Why, it
is the Law: In the Day that thou Eatest thereof, thou shall dye the Death; and
the Soul that sins, it shall dye. Thus, By one man Sin Entered into the
World, and Death by Sin; and so Death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned, Romans 5.12. Now God's Truth and Justice is engaged to punish Sin with
Death; and here is the strength of sin to punish the Sinner; that is, the
demerit of Sin is appointed by the Law.

But whence then is this Triumph? God has given us the Victory] God that
appointed the Law for man's rule, and Death for the punishment of man's
Transgression [ has given us the Victory] by taking away Sin, and so our
obligation to suffer the punishment; and so changing the very Nature of Death,
that now it cease to be deadly, and becomes salutiterous.

But how did the Lord effect this? It was, [ through Jesus Christ our Lord]
that is, by the Death, and Obedience unto Death of that one man Christ Jesus
our Lord: In which there was Satisfaction to the Law, Justification to the
Sinner, Merit of Life and Glory. Christ by his Resurrection and Ascension took
possession of all for us, and makes way for the Effectual Application of all to
us.

The Sum is,

That whereas Death and the Grave are most terrible Enemies, by reason of the
demerit of sin, binding over the Sinner to answer the Law in suffering the
punishment by Law due to Sin; yet God of his Grace having given Jesus Christ
for our Surety, and so for our Savior from Sin and Death, has by taking away
Sin, and rendering Death unable to do us any hurt, given us cause, whilst we
look at Death as terrible through Sin, to Triumph over it, as Captivated to our
Service, by Jesus Christ our Lord: And as Christ has given us an Eternal
Triumph over Death the Last Enemy; so has therein given us a Happy Victory,
and Holy Triumph over all Evils and Enemies; Temporal, Spiritual, Eternal.

Hence Observe:

DOCTRINE.

That the true Christian Soldier shall at last obtain a complete Victory, and
Eternal Triumph over all Evils and Enemies, is matter of Thanksgiving unto God
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Christiani (says Cyprian) mori possunt, vinci non possunt. Christians may
Dye, but cannot be Overcome. Death may Kill them, but cannot Conquer them: The
Victory of Christian Soldiers over their Enemies, is very Glorious in this
respect.

To clear up this Doctrine, take two Propositions.

PROPOSITION I.

That the true Christian Soldier shall at last obtain a complete Victory and
an Eternal Triumph over all Evils and Enemies.

PROPOSITION II.

That this is matter of Thanksgiving unto God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

PROPOSITION I.
That the true Christian Soldier shall at last obtain a complete victory and
an Eternal Triumph over all Evils and Enemies.

For the clearing up of this Proposition, take a few Conclusions as
Praeliminary.

Conclusion I. Christ Jesus is the Captain General of Salvation. Heb. 2.10. For
it became Him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things; in bringing
many Sons unto Glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through
Sufferings. The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does here evidently
compare Christ to Joshua, the Captain and Leader of the People into Canaan; and
all true Christians are put under his Conduct and Guidance to bring them safe
to Glory.

Christ is called their [ARCHEGOS] Prince, Ruler and Captain of their
Salvation, in respect of his Authority and Right to Rule over them, in order
unto their Salvation. Hence He appeared unto Joshua, as the Captain of the
Lords Host, Josh. 5.14. Christ is the Captain of Salvation in respect of this
actual Leading and Conduct of them, by his Example, Spirit and Grace, through
all the Difficulties of their way, and warfare: he is therefore called, a
Leader and Commander to the People, Isa. 55.4. Behold I have given him for a
witness to the people, a Leader and Commander to the People^ So He is their [
PRODROMOS] their Forerunners Heb. ^ 20. Whether the Forerunner is for us
Entered, even Jesus, made an High Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchizedek. Or as Daniel calls Him, the Messiah, the Prince or Guide. Dan.
9.25. know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the
Commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince shall
be seven weeks, etc.

Yea, Christ is the Captain of Salvation, as he is to them the Author or Cause
of Eternal Salvation; he procured and purchased it for them, and gives them
safe conduct unto the full Enjoyment of it. The way in which God will bring the
Christian Soldier to Glory, is full of Intricacy, Difficulty, Perplexity and
Opposition; so that he has need of a Captain, Leader and Guide, to carry him
through it; but yet all is rendered safe and secure to him, through the power,
grace and faithfulness of his Leader.

Conclusion 2. This Captain has his Soldiers and Followers. Every true
Christian is a Soldier under the Command and Conduct of Christ as his General.
2 Timothy 2.3. Thou therefore endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ.
Every Christian when he is new Born, is Born a Soldier. It is said of Goliath.
that He was a man of War from his Youth; 1 Samuel 17.23. but it may be truly said
of the true Christian, that he is a man of War from his Birth; he has at his
first Conversion given himself up unto Christ, as the Captain of his Salvation,
Listed himself under Christ's Banner, and has engaged to Fight under his
Command and Conduct: He is on Christ's side, Christ's Enemies are his Enemies,
and Christ's Friends and Followers, are his Brethren, Companions and
Fellow Soldiers: as Paul calls Archippus his Fellow-Souldier; not only as a
Minister, but as a Christian. Philemon verse 2. Aphia and Archippus our Fellow
Soldiers.

And as Christians are Soldiers, so Congregational Churches, are particular
Companies, to which Christians (that walk orderly, and have opportunity) do
join in Fellowship; and the Visible Catholic Church, is as an Army with
Banners. Cant. 6.4. Thou art beautiful, O my Love, as Tirzah comely as
Jerusalem, terrible as an Army with Banners: This Army has the Captain of the
Lords Host for their General.

Conclusion 3. These Soldiers are complete in Arms. Truth is their Girdle,
Righteousness their Breast Plate, Preparation of the Gospel, their Shoes; Faith
their Shield, Hope their Helmet, the Word of God their Sword: and Prayer, if
not a distinct piece of Armor, yet very necessary to the fastening on, and
improvement of those Weapons of their Spiritual Warfare: Hereby they engage the
Lord of Hosts, the God of Arm^^^ to be with them: Hence it is annexed to the
^^^istians Panoply, Ephesians. 6. from 11. to the 18th ^erse.

Conclusion 4. This Captain General Leads his Soldiers into the Field, and
teaches them their Military Skill. This World is the Field of War, and this
Captain orders the time when, the place where, and means by which, the true
Christian in Saving Conversion, and Religious Profession, shall enter into the
Field, and the time how long he shall continue in the Field, and the several
Engagements he shall be called to, and the variety of Entertainment he shall
meet with here, and his Passage out of it: It is true in a Metaphorical, as
well as in a Literal Sense, That our Times are in Gods Hands, Psalm. 31.15. He
also teaches their hands to War, and their fingers to fight, Psalm. 144.1. He
bestows upon them all their Warlike Accomplishments; he gives them Skill and
Will to Improve all their Spiritual Weapons Offensive and Defensive.

Conclusion 5. This Captain of the Lords Host gives a Banner to his Soldiers
and Followers, to be Displayed for their Safety in the worst times, Psalm. 60.4,
5. Thou have given a Banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed
because of the Truth.

I. A Banner was of old (as now it is) a Warlike Ensign set up or displayed for
the Soldiers, under the Conduct of such a Chieftain for Military Ends; the
civil use of it was commended and commanded to Israel, Numb. second Chapter and
every man must pitch by his own Standard, and by the Ensign of his Fathers
House. It signifies the Throne of God amongst them; which was not amongst any
of the rest of the Nations: Therefore this was the Warlike Motto of the Jews,
Who is like to thee amongst the Gods O Lord? Under this as a Displayed Banner
David Marched against the Philistine Champion, 1 Samuel 17.45. I come against
thee in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of Isreal's Armies It had a
special signification of the Messiah that was to be Lift up as a Banner. Isa.
10.12. In that day there shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall stand for an
Ensign of the People, to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his Rest shall be
Glorious.

This Banner signifies the Love of God, and Christ to his People, Cant. 2.4.
His Banner over me was Love: This Love is manifested in their Preservation and
Salvation from all their Enemies. Hence it is said, Isa. 62.10, 11. Lift up a
Standard for the People, say, behold thy Salvation comes.

A Banner is put for all the manifest tokens of Gods Favor to, and gracious
Presence with his People, Isa. 31.9. The Princes shall be afraid of the Ensign,
says the Lord: that is, they shall see the Love and Faithfulness of God to his
People and be afraid.

II. This Banner is of great use to the Soldiers. The Standard, the Banner
does distinguish one Army from another: so does the presence of God in Christ
manifested by the signs thereof, distinguish Gods People from all others, Exodus
33.16. Numb. 23.21. Deuteronomy. 33.29. A Banner is for honor; the Ensign carrys with
it the honor of the Company: the visible Tokens of Gods presence are the Glory
of a People, Jer. 2.11. Isa. 60.19. Thy God, thy Glory.

The Banner is for direction to the whole band, and the Standard to the whole
Army: so is Gods presence and conduct to His People; both in the March:
Soldiers must follow their Colors, and in their Rest, when the Standard is
pitched that's the place of Rest, Numb. 10.9.17, 18, 23* Yea when Scattered
abroad by the violence of any temptation, the Colors show whether the Soldier
must repair: To Christ held forth shall the gathering of the People be, Genesis
49.10. Hence David calls back his Soul to God as his resting place. Psalm.
116.7. Return unto thy rest O my Soul.

The Banner is for Encouragement to the Soldier and his deeper Engagement to
fight; he must not leave his Colors in the greatest hazard, but rather choose
to die: so the Christian Soldier, must never forsake his God, Christ, his
House, his Ordinances etc. Josh. 5.13, 14, 15. Romans 8.29.

The Banner was for defense and shelter and deliverance; it was the safest
place in all the Camp: so is the Spiritual Banner. Hence says the Psalmist, he
shall in the time of trouble hide me in his pavilion, in the secret of his
tabernacle. Thus the Pillar of Cloud, was a defense to Israel.

The Banner is for Assurance and Confidence: as long as the Colors are flying
the Army is not Ruined. As long as God Lives, and Christ is upon the throne,
all is safe, for Gods People they may Triumph in Him over all their Enemies,
and say, Oh! Death where is thy Sting etc. Who shall separate us from the Love
of God?

III. The Displaying of the Banner is the whole Military Improvement of it for
the advantage of the Soldier, and the detriment of the Enemy. Therefore it is
the flourishing of the Colors (as we call it) before the whole Army, and in
sight of the Enemy. It is ascribed to God when he shines forth that dwells
between the Cherubims and leads Joseph like a flock: when he Stirs up his
strength before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh, Psalm. 80.1, 2, 3 Causing his
face to shine that they may be Saved.

This Banner is displayed by the Leaders of the People, when they give them
Military encouragement: from hence that God is their God; Christ upon the
Throne, that he guides to the War by his Word and Providence, and that he has
engaged to be with them, and to fight for them, and that he commands them not
to fear but to play the men, for their God and the cause of God. Thus Moses
displayed the Banner before Israel, Ezod. 14.13, 14. Fear ye not, stand still,
and see the Salvation of the Lord, the Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall
hold your peace.

Conclusion 6. Christ calls those that are under his Banner to Encounter the
Enemy. True Christians have many Enemies to dispute with at the Swords point.

I. They have a Body of Sin and Death in them which makes them many times to
cry out with the Apostle: Oh wretched persons that we are, wh^ shall deliver
us, etc. Romans 7.24. there is a Law in their Members warring against the Law of
their minds, and bringing them into Captivity to the Law of Sin which is in
their Members, Romans 7.23* They have Fleshly Lusts that war against their Soul,
1 Pet. 2.11. The Flesh Lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
Flesh, and these are contray one to the other.

II. They must have a elose Combat with Sinful Self; they must deny
themselves, Mat. 16.24* Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, if any man will
come after me, let him deny himself and take up his Cross and follow me. They
must deny their own Self-sufficiency, they must uncloath themselves o^
themselves; they must have no root of their own, but be all in Christ, and have
their all from Christ, and improve their all for Christ. Col. 3.11. Christ is
ALL and in ALL: They must den^ their own Self-sufficiency to Believe in Christ,
o^ to yield Evangelical Obedience unto God through Christ, Ephesians. 2.8. For by
Grace are ye Saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift
of God, Joh. 15.5. Christ says, He that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit; for without me ye can do nothing: they must deny
their own Self-sufficiency to Worship God in their Closets, in their Families,
or in Public, with Soul-Devotion, and so as may be to Divine Acceptance
through Christ, without suitable supplies of Divine Grace.

They must deny Self-Dependency: this Hos. 10.1. Self-Dependence is when a man
thinks he has in himself Isa. 53.3. a Magazene of Supply sufficient for
himself; and so lives on himself, and in dependence upon himself; thus Peter
depends upon himself for power to stand: if all forsake thee, (says Peter) yet
wiil not I. Self-dependency emptieth us of the strength by which we should
stand; it is only Christ we should depend upon, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. Christ's Strength is
made perfect in weakness: Hence says the Apostle, When I am weak, then am I
strong.

They must deny Self-security, Isa. 47.7, 8 Self-security is a man's making
himself his own hiding place or refuge; it is the Souls standing upon his own
legs, Psalm. 30.6, 7. This makes God hide his face, and that is a sore Evil
indeed, Job 23.1, 2, 3.

They must deny Self-Custody, they must not think they can antidote themselves
against the Infection of Sins, and Sinful Times, and Compapanies, or can arm
themselves against the Infection of things, whether Profits or Pleasures, Mat.
26.33.40. Who knows what the sight of the Forbidden Fruit may do even as it did
with Eve, Genesis 3.6. Who knows what the sight of a Wedge of Gold may do, Josh
7.21. Who knows what the sight of a Bathsheba may do? 2 Samuel 11.2. Christians
must take heed of arming themselves with their own Armor; true indeed, He that
is Born of God, keeps himself, 1 John 5.18. but a man may be too much self in
it; you little know what you may be drawn to do, if you do depend upon
Self-Custody, Romans 7.15. 2 King. 8.13 And Hasael said, But what is thy Servant
a Dog, that he should do this great thing? and Elisha answered, The Lord has
showed me that thou shall be King over Syria: It is He that keeps your Graces,
must keep you; if God keep you not, all the power you have beside, cannot keep
you, 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto
Salvation: Hence the Saints have prayed God to keep them, Psalm. 17.8. Keep me
as the Apple of thine Eye, hide me under the shadow of thy Wings, Psalm 127.1.

They must deny all inordinate Self-Love, Est. 4.16.

III. They have the Prince of Darkness to Combat with; they must Fight against
Principalities and Powers, and against the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, against Spiritual Wickednesses in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. There are
Devils enough to Beleaguer the whole Earth: not a place under Heaven where
Satan has not his Troops; not a person without some of these cursed Spirits
haunting and watching of him, where ever he goes; yea, for some special
Service, he can send a Legion to a Garrison, in one single person, as Mar. 5.9.
and if so many can be spared to attend one; to what a number would the Master
R^le of Satan's whole Army amount, if known? and now tell me, if we are not like
to find our March difficult to Heaven, that are to pass through the very
Quarters of these Multitudes, who are scattered over the face of all the Earth:
And the Black Regiment of Hell are ready Armed; they have Warlike Provision, or
Weapons they use in Fight against the Souls of men; they have darts, and those
of the worse kind, Fiery Darts The Devils Temptations are the Darts he uses
against the Souls of men and women: and they may be fitly resembled to Darts.

In respect of Swiftness: Satan's Temptations fly like a Flash of Lightning, not
long a coming; he needs no more time than the cast of an Eye, for the dispatch
of a Temptation.

Darts or Arrows Fly secretly, and so do Temptations, Psalm. 64.4.

Darts are of a Wounding Killing nature, especially when well headed, and shot
out of a strong Bow, by one that is able to draw it. Such are Satan's
Temptations, headed with desperate Malice, and drawn by a strength, not less
than Angelical.

And these Darts are Fiery, in respect of the Fiery Wrath with which Satan
shoots them; they are the Fire this great Red Dragon spits, full of Indignation
against God and his Saints.

They are Fiery Darts, in respect of the End they lead to, if not quenched, and
that is Hellfire; there is a Spark of Hell in evey Temptation.

They are Fiery in regard of their malignant quality, they have on the Spirits
of men, and that is to Enkindle a Fire in the Hearts and Consciences of poor
Creatures: but Faith quenches the Fiery Darts, Ephesians. 6.16.

Moreover Christ's Soldiers and Followers have the World to Overcome, and the
Worlds Trinity, to Encounter with: There are the Lusts of the Flesh, Sensual
Delights. The Lust of the Eye, those Temptations which are drawn from the
Worlds Pelf and Treasures, the Golden Apple of Prosit. And there is the Pride
of Life; an ^^ch of pride in man's heart after the gaudy Honors of the World.
All these the Christian Soldier is to Fight with, 1 Job. 2.15, 16. Love not
the World, neither the things that are in the World; if any man love the World,
the Love of the Father is not in him; for all that is in the World, the Lust of
the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is not of the
Father, but is of the World.

Conclusion 7. Their General is with them in all their Engagements. Psalm. 23.4.
Yea though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of death etc. He is with
them in all their Encounters by his care and watchfulness, Psalm. 121.4. Behold
he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep: He will never suffer
any of his Soldiers to be Surprised through any neglect or regardlesness in
him: His eyes are always open upon them. They are never out of his heart or
thoughts: They are Engraven upon the palms of his hands, and their walls are
continually before him: Or as he expresses it, Isa 27.3. I the Lord do keep my
Vineyard, I will water it every moment lest any hurt it, and will keep it night
and day. This puts life into Soldiers, and gives them security when they know
that their Commander is continually careful for them. He is with them by his
Tenderness and Love, His care and compassion. Isa. 40.11. He shall feed his
flock like a Shephard, he shall gather the Lambs with his Arm, and carry them
in his besome, and shall gently lead those that are with young. In tender
compassion he condescends unto all their conditions; He gathers in his Arms
and bears in his bosom those that otherwise by their infirmity would be cast
behind and le^t unto danger. He is with them when they go through the fire and
through the water, Isa. 43.1, 2. He will sit by them when they are in the fire
and furnace, as their Refiner and Purifier, Mal. 3.3. He is so with them in all
their Engagements, as to go before them in the whole way and war unto the end.
This is a principal end of a Captain or Leader to go before his Soldiers: The
Captain of the Lords host goes before his People in their whole way, not
putting them on any thing, nor calling them to any thing which himself passes
not before them in: whether we consider their Obedience their Suffering, or
their Entrance into Glory Job. 3.15. 1 Cor. 11.5. Heb. 12.2, 3. Heb. 6.20

Conclusion 8. Christ our General, does in the iss^^ of the War, make His
Soldiers completely Victorious, and gives them an Eternal Triumph over all
Evils and Enemies.

It is true indeed they meet with many hot Engagements, and are ready by
despondency to say as David, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, the
Sons of Zerviab will be too hard for me.

1. Christ guides and directs them in their way and w^^^^re. They know not the
way that leads to hapiiness and glory, and they want ability to discern it
aright, when it is showed unto them, and in both, they are relieved and asisted
by their Leader. In the first by his Word, in the latter by his Spirit: In his
Word he has declared the Name and revealed the whole Counsel of God; and
brought Life and Immortality to Light, 2 Timothy 1.10. Whatever is any way needful,
useful, helpful in their Warfare in their Obedience, in their Worship of God,
in their Sufferings, in their Expectation of Glory; the Credenda, the Facienda,
the things to be believed and to be done, are made known to them in the Word.
Again, their way and warfare being discovered to them in the Word, Christ
enables them by his Spirit to fight the good fight, and finish their course
with joy; Christ is to them, a Pillar of Fire and Pillar of Cloud: The Spirit
accomplisheth their whole Work, and brings them safe to Eternal happiness.

2. Christ Supplies with strength by His Grace, that they may be able to pass
on in their way and warfare: they have a great Work and a great Warfare that
they are Engaged in; they have much to do and much to suffer, and without him
they can do nothing, Job. 15.5. He watches over them, to Succor them that are
tempted, Heb. 2.18. and to give out Help unto them in a time of need, Heb.
4.16. Hence they can do all things through Christ strengthening of them, Phil.
4.13. nothing is too hard for them, not^ing can prevail against them, because
of the constant supplies of Grace, which the Captain of their Salvation
communicates unto them: their Life is hid with God in Christ, Col. 3 3. and He
has Engaged to continue their Lives; hence he says, Because I Live, ye shall
Live also.

3. He subdues their Enemies for them, and in them: Sin, Satan, the World, and
Death, he subdues these Enemies for them in his own Person; for they all
attempted him, and failed in their Enterprise, Joh. 14.30. He bruised the
Serpents head, Gen 3 15, and destroyed him that had the power of Death, that is
the Devil, Heb. 2.14. He spoiled Principalities and Powers, and made show of
them openly, triumphing over them in his Cross. And He overcame the World, Job.
16.33. Be of good cheer (says he) I have overcome the World. Death also was
subdued by him; He swallowed it up in victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. And Christ has
thus overcome their Enemies for them, as their Representative; declaring in his
person, who is the Head, what should be accomplished in every one of his
Members; yea, by his personal Conquest over these Enemies, he has left them
weak, maimed, disarmed, and utterly deprived of that power they had to hurt and
destroy, before he Engaged with them.

Moreover, he subdues these Enemies in them; he inables true Christians in
their own Persons to Conquer all these Enemies. They have Overcome the Wicked
One, 1 John 2.13. The World also is subdued in them, and by them, 1 John 5.4.
Whosoever is Born of God, overcomes the World; and this is the Victory that
overcomes the World, even our Faith. He that believes shall overcome: the
whole strength of Christ Engaged unto his assistance. Hence the true Christian
manageth a successful War, and is sure of Victory: I speak of the certainty of
the Object, not of the certainty of the Subject: A true Christian shall
certainly win the day, and have victory over all Opposers whatsoever his
unbelieving heart may at any time suggest to the contrary: A true Christian
gets in this Life many signal Victories: He is not able indeed utterly to drive
out the Canaanites, they will abide in his Land, and be rebelling and vexing of
him frequently; but the Lord gives him many remarkable Victories over them.

Yea, if the true Christian be for a time overcome, yet he recovers himself at
last, and gets the day: if he be foiled, and laid on his Back for a time, yet
it is not long before be recovers himself, and gets up again by Godly Sorrow,
Humiliation and Repentance; and renews the Combat, and is too hard for his
Enemies: If he be Routed, he Rallyes again, and never leaves Fighting till he
carries the day, and goes out of the Field Conqueror; If God be for him, who
shall be against him? Moreover, his Enemies Lose Ground by all their partial
Conquests of him. A true Christian gets good by his foils and falls; yea, gets
ground insensibly of his Corruptions, and other Enemies thereby; All things
work together for good to those that Love God, etc. Si omnia cur non peccata,
(says one of the Fathers:) Romans 8.28. So that may be said to the true
Christian, as in 1 Cor. 3.22, 23, 24. All things are yours, whether Paul or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or things present or things to come, all are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's. This is good news for
Christian Soldiers.

PROPOSITION II.
That this is matter of Thanksgiving unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord!
True Christians must acknowledge God in all their Victories: he gives them
their Armor, he gives Skill and Dexterity to manage their Weapons, he Crowns
them with Success in their War, he overcomes their Enemies, and makes them
Victors and Conquerors: It is not their Bow or Sword, but God that gives the
Victory; and God gives them Victory through Christ, and for the sake of Christ,
He has purchased it for them* and prepares Victory for them, by his foederal
transaction with the Father in the Covenant of Redemption, and by the
Application of Redemption to them by his Spirit. Christ's whole Mediatorial
Sufficiency is Engaged to be all to them, and his whole Mediatorial Efficiency
to work all in and do all for the Christian Soldiers that is necessary, in
order to this complete Victory.

USE. I. Of Instruction.
I. When Death and the Grave appear in their most formidable aspect, then Faith
finds matter of Triumph over both in our Lord Jesus Christ. Whilst nature
justly laments mortality, and Grace makes us tenderly affected with the Death
of others; Especially the Death of those that were in highest place and
improvement, yet Faith represents cause of Triumph over both Death and the
Grave: though nature and Grace teaches us bitterly to lament and lay to heart
the astonishing breaches which the king of Terrors has made upon us,
concerning which we may with the Prophet Jeremiah, say as Lam. 4.20. The breath
of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits, of whom we
said, under their shadow we shall live among the heathen: yet neither Natural
nor Spiritual affection must be such as hinders the Triumph of Faith over Death
and the Grave. Isa. 25.8. He will swallow up Death in Victory, and the Lord our
God will wipe away tears from all faces: Christ has overcome Death, Hos.
13.14. Christ says, Oh! Death, I will be thy Plague, Oh! Grave, I will be thy
destruction.

Instruction. II.
God never gives any the Victory over Sin and Death, but through our Lord
Jesus. He first gives Christ and in him the Victory: Except you have Christ you
must needs die: those that would have Victory, must have Union to Christ,
Conformity to him, He that has not the Son has not Life. You must receive him
therefore, or die for ever; there is no other Name, no other Mediator; he is an
alsufficient Savior, able to save to the utmost all those that come unto God
by him, Heb. 7.25. He has in a readiness for our Salvation to the utmost, Luke
14.17. All things are ready; why will you not come to him that you may have
life: remember Christ's gracious invitation, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me and be ye
Saved all the ends of the Earth, for I am God and there is none else: how then
shall we think to Escape if we neglect so great Salvation, Heb. 2.3.

Instruction. III.
Learn hence, That Christ will give the Christian Soldier a complete Victory
over Death the last Enemy, 1 Cor. 15.26. The Last Enemy that shall be destroyed
is Death: Here consider two or three things.

1. Death is an Enemy, a formidable Enemy, Job 18.14. Heb. 2.15. Now Death will
appear to be an Enemy. if we consider that it deals with men as an Enemy, 1. In
matters Outward, Temporal, and of this Life; here Death is the great Bereaver,
and the great Tormentor. Death robbs our Bodies of all perfection; Death
forces a man from his Wealth, and whole outward Estate without hope of
recovery, Eccl. 5.15. As he came forth of his Mothers Womb, naked shall he
return, to go as he came, and shall take nothing of his Labor, which he may
carry away in his hand, Job 1.21. Death spoils a man of his Name, Honors, and
power in the World, Psalm. 31.12. I am forgotten as a Dead man out of mind, I am
like a broken vessel, Eccl. 3.18, 19, 20. Death separates dearest Friends, and
nearest Relation. 2. Death deals with men as an Enemy, in matters Internal and
Spiritual: Death deprives of all Spiritual good enjoyed in this Life: It cuts
down the Tree that it stands no longer in the Vineyard; there is no Soul-saving
Work to be done in the Grave whether we are all going, no opportunity to pray,
hear, read believe or repent when once arrived at that House prepared for all
Living: Death bereaves of the time, day, and season of Grace: when Death comes,
God swears, Time shall be no more, his Spirit shall no longer strive; Death
bereaves us of all opportunity to lay up for Eternity. 3. Death deals with men
that dye in their Sins as an Enemy in matters Eternal and Everlasting. It
bereaves of Eternal Good: all that dye under the power of Death, it proves an
Eternal Bereavement to them; they lose God, Christ, the Spirit, Mercy, Grace,
Glory, Heaven and Happiness. As Death is a great Bereaver, so he is a great
Tormentor; all pain, sorrow, anguish and trouble, is but the working of Death
in this Life; yea, it makes way for Eternal Misery in the Life to come.

2. Death is a cruel Enemy; Death is an Enemy that will show no pity, Cant.
8.6. it is cruel as appears by the Racks, Torments, Strapadoes, and Wounds that
it inflicts; it is cruel in that it spares none for his Age, Rank or Quality,
but is pittiless to all sorts of persons; it neither regards the person of the
old, nor shows favor to the young; it regards no Cries, Prayers, Tears, admits
no ransom, is not moved with any moans, sighs or groans, is deaf to all
Entreaties. Death is an Enemy that cannot be avoided; you may fear Death, but
cannot escape it, you may fly from it, but cannot get out of its reach; there
is no safety from the Enemy, but in the bosom of Christ.

3. Death is a Vanquished Enemy; it is under the Keys of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Rev. 1.18. Christ has overcome Death, and abolished it, 2 Timothy 1.10. Christ
has done this by his Death, meritoriously, by his Resurrection, victoriously;
and by the powerful Efficacy of his Death and Resurrection, he has and will
overcome Death for all those for whom he does become the Resurrection and the
Life: So that you shall not see Death, no not Death it self.

Instruction IV.
Learn hence, To whom we owe all the Glory of those Victories, Temporal and
Spiritual, which we are, or hope to be Crowned with; it is unto God through
Jesus Christ our Lord: God is the absolute first cause and supreme Lord of all:
Of him, and to him, and through him are all things, Romans 11.36. God gives his
Creatures power to act, furnishes them with a sufficiency for their
operations; he gives skill and strength and courage to the Soldier, and he
continues the active power of the Creature, if he withdraw, all is gone. He
does by a praevious influx, excite and (...) up the active power of the
Creatures, and set all the Wheels a going, Act. 17.28. yea he determines and
applies second causes to the Objects of their Actions; he leads them forth and
determines them unto this or that Object; he cooperates and works jointly with
second causes, in producing of Effects: As he praedetermines second causes, so
he concurs with them in their Operations, though he has given Creatures power
to act, and man to act as a cause by Counsel, and has furnished him with
active abilities, yet he has not made any Creature Master of Events, but
reserves the disposal of Issues and Events to himself. He has a Negative Voice
upon all the Counsels and Endeavors, and active power of the Creature (as is
well observed by a good Divine) he can break the Ranks of the most orderly
Soldiers, take away Courage from the stoutest Hearts, send a Pannick fear into
a mighty Host, and defeat the Counsels of the mightiest Leaders and Conducters.
He can blow upon and blast the likeliest undertakings of all the ablest men;
much of the greatness and glory of God appears in his divine Efficiency,
whereby he works all in all, Ephesians. 1.11. As he is himself gloriously
independent, so all things have an absolute dependence on him: the race is not
to the Swift, the battle is not to the Strong, Eccl. 9.11. So that men are
wholly beholden to him for all the good they enjoy for skill, for courage, for
success, for victory and triumph over Evils and Enemies.

Instruction. V.
Learn hence, That the Conquest and Victory which God bestows upon and Crowns
Christian Soldiers with, is exceeding glorious. Their Conflicts are very
bitter, but Alas! What is the bitterness of their Conflict to the glory of
their Victory: They are Prevailers with God, Genesis 32.28. As a Prince thou have
power with God, and with men, and have prevailed, Hos. 12 4. Cant. 6.5. Hence
says Christ, turn away thine Eyes from me, for they have over come me; they
overcome not until they are over come of Christ, and then they over come
themselves, which is a great Victory, Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to anger is
better than the mighty: and he that rules (...) Spirit, then he that takes a
City. They over com^ not only men, but Devils and Death, prosperity and
adversity, 1 John 2, 13, 14, 15. Yea, in Death they overcome more than
throughout their Lives, as Christ did, as Sampson did. They overcome by
Standing still, and looking to God, Exodus 14.13, 14. They overcome by flying
for refuge to Christ that hope set before them: they over come Evil with Good,
Romans 12.21. The greatest Victories of the Saints are attended with the deepest
sense of their own insufficiency to overcome, and humble holy dependence upon
Christ's Meditorial Sufficiency: in a word, the insufficiency of the Saints,
makes way for the manifestation of the Sufficiency of Christ in his Effectual
Victory, it opens Glory to him, that is Crowned with it.

Instruction VI.
Learn hence then Not to despair of the cause of Religion, how few soever in
the World stand by it. For the Lamb shall overcome; it is not the Beast nor the
Image of the Beast, nor the Mark of the Beast, nor the Number of his Name, but
all these must at the last be fully subdued to the Lamb and his Followers, Rev.
17.13, 14. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto
the Beast* these shall make War with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them; for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and they that are with him
and called, and chosen, and faithful.

Oh therefore know your day, and the great concernments of your time: It is a
day of War and Battle against the Beast, with and for the Lamb: Have you a care
to be Listed one of his Soldiers, to give up your Names to him; remember, who
calls once and again, Cant. 2.10. Rise up my Love, my Fair One, and come away;
13, 14. verses. See that you be on Christ's side, against His Enemies: Know the
Cause, and Promote the Interest of Christ, in Church, Commonwealth and Family;
the Building Zion, is the way to Babels Ruin: Christ is saying to us, Who is
on the Lords Side? Who? Let every one of us be for Christ, his Interest and
Glory, in the respective Stations wherein God has set us, whether Civil,
Sacred, or Military. Let us Exalt Christ the Lamb, in our Hearts, Lips, Lives,
Persons, Families, Courts, Churches: Let it not seem enough to us outwardly to
Prosess him, but let Him be the Alpha and Omega of our Hearts, our First and
Last. Let the Merchant Consecrate his Gain to the Lord, Isa. 23.18. Her
Merchandise and her Hire, shall be Gain to the Lord: Let the Gain of Soldiers
be Consecrated to the Lord, Mich. 4.13. Let the Husbandman and House-wife
Consecrate their Labors and Vessels to the Lord, Zach. 14.20, 21. In that day
shall there be upon the Bells of the Horses, Holiness unto the Lord, and the
Pots in the Lords House shall be like the Bowls before the Altar; yea, every
Pot in Jerusalem and in Judah, shall be Holiness unto the Lord of Hosts.

USE II. Is a Word of Awakening to all Unreguerate Sinners: They are in open
Hostility with Heaven, they are by their Sins Fighting against that God that
can speak them into the Grave, and into Hell, when he pleases.

They are Fighting under the Banner of the Prince of Darkness, and therefore
are in utmost hazard of Eternal Ruin, except they speedily turn to the other
Side. God is angry with the Wicked every day; if he turn net, he will Whet His
Sword, he has bent his Bow, and made it ready; he has also prepared for him
the Instruments of Death Psalm. 7.11, 12. Isa. 27.4, 5. Psalm. 68.21. God will
wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such an one as goes on
still in his Trespasses: There can be no peace between God and thy Soul, while
thou art going on in a way of Sin: There is no peace says my God, to the
Wicked, Isa. 57.21. Do you provoke the Lord to Jealousy? Are you stronger than
He? Psalm. 76.7. Who can stand when once God is angry.

USE III. Of Exhortation.

I. To Sinners, to Lay down your Arms, whereby you have been Fighting against
the Almighty, and Cry Quarter; yea, Cry for Pardon, and Agree quickly with your
matchless Adversary while you are in the way, before the Executioner of Divine
Justice overtake you: Oh! Fly speedily to the City of Refuge, before the
Avenger of Blood, that is pursuing of you, overtake you. Now Christ is calling
of you, Rev. 3.20. Cant. 5. beg. Now the Spirit is striving, now Grace is
tendered, now a Pardon is offered; but alas! Gods Spirit shall not always
strive, Genesis 6.3. it will quickly be too late, the Door of Mercy will quickly
be shut; when once the shadow of Death comes to be shut upon your Eyelids,
etc. it will then be too late, and how can you think to Escape if you neglect
so great Salvation? Heb. 2.3. Oh! then now List your selves under His Banner,
make Choice of Christ as the Captain of your Salvation; as your Prophet to
teach you, and cause you to learn his Statutes; as your Priest, to intercede
and make Atonement for you, as your King, to Rule and Govern you, as she said,
Give me Children or else I dye; so do you say, Give me Christ, or else I dye.
Oh! see that you must have Christ, or perish everlastingly: O therefore Choose
Him to be your Soul satisfying, Soul solacing, and Soul ravishing Portion; and
give up your selves and yours to him, to be his wholly, only, and for ever.

II. Branch of Exhortation. To true Christians.

Maintain a constant War with your Spiritual Enemies: All men living are
Warriors; they are either Fighting against God, under the Command and Conduct
of the Prince of Darkness, or they are Fighting for God against Sin, Satan, and
the World, under the Conduct of Christ as the Captain of their Salvation; now
you are among the number of those that have given up themselves to Christ, and
have Listed under his Banner: Oh! therefore continue your Combat with those
Enemies of your Souls, knowing that you shall be Victors and Conquerors at
last. Fight against Sin, all Sin, every Sin, especially against your own
Iniquities, Psa. 18.23. Be upright before God, and keep your selves from your
own Iniquities, etc. Fight against sin in your selves, in your Families, in
your respective Stations and Capacities, engage against sin; especially fight
against the growing, prevailing Sins of the Times, Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Sabbath breaking, Incest, etc. Fight against all Omissions of Duty, and
Commission of Sin, both in your selves and others; all sins against the Law,
and all sins against the Gospel. Oh! take heed of the neglect of Secret Prayer,
of Family Prayer; be much with God in your Closets and Families: Resolve with
good Joshua, That you and your Houses will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. In a
word, maintain an unwearied War with all your Spiritual (...) Cleave to, keep
with, and constantly follow your General; observe his Words of Command: Put
(...) whole Armor of God, and Learn skill to (...) every piece of Armor: List
your selves (...) some particular Company that is Engaged in the same Warfare.
Join your selves to some Church of Christ; do not Fight alone, but get into
some particular Body of Saints.

III. Exhortation. Is to those Worthy and much Honored Gentlemen, that have
pressed me, and called me unto the Service of this Day: You have heard, that we
owe all due Acknowledgment to God through our Lord Jesus Christ, for all those
Victories which he gives us, whether Temporal, or Spiritual. I am now to Exhort
you.

1. To give God the Glory of all those Military Accomplishments, wherewith the
God of Heaven has Crowned you. It is He that Teaches your Hands to War, and
your Fingers to Fight, Psalm. 144.1. Military Skill is such a piece of Divine
Wisdom, that the Lord will not lose the Honor of it. God is the Author of it:
The Lord is a man of War, the Lord is his Name; he gives a Military Spirit, and
Warlike Prowess, Jer. 51.11. Make bright the Arrows, gather the Shields, the
Lord has Raised the Spirit of the Kings of the Medes. He Teaches to make
Weapons of War, and the use of them, Isa. 54.16, 17. It is the Lord of Hosts
that Mustereth the Host of the Battle, Isa. 13.4, 5: Otherwise the help of your
Expert Officers, and your own Endeavors to Learn War, will signify nothing.

Indeed men of Martial Spirits and Skill ought to be Encouraged. These
Trainings and Exercises are very commendable, and by all means to be Supported
and Countenanced: and it is pity that as in other things, so in this, the good
old Spirit is so much gone: these are not times wherein the Nations, beat their
Swords into Plough shears, and their Spears into Pruning hooks. War in some
cases is Lawful, and at some times Necessary, and sure then Learning of War is
so also; Military (...) is necessary in Military times, and Martial daye^ and
such are the days we live in; and these Military Exercises are not only lawful
and allowable* but laudable, yea and necessary also; and the Persons by whom
they are supported and carried (...) deserve singular commendation and
encouragement.

2. Be Sons of Valor, 1 Cor. 12.8. Get you^ Consciences purged with the Blood
of Christ that your hearts may be full of Courage for the cause of Christ. True
Courage arises from the Assurance of Faith, that God in Christ is yours, the^
Death is yours, and all that you can fear is you^^ for good: So that you may
trust in God and not in Bow nor Sword, nor multitude, etc. Then look on the
Justice of the Cause; let it be for God and for the City of our God: then, One
shall chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, Deuteronomy. 30.30.

3. Let your Study of Expertness in Military Discipline, put you in mind of
your Spiritual Warfare. Oh maintain a close fight with your Spiritual Enemies
Endeavor to choose Christ for your General, and in all things seek to please
him: become his faithful followers; follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes;
approve your selves his good Soldiers; put on the whole Spiritual Armor, and
become his Scholars; beg him to be your Tutor, and to instruct you in the whole
Mystery of your Spiritual Warfare: Especially prepare for your great and last
encounter with the King of Terrors; remembering, that it is appointed unto men
once to dye, but after this, the Judgment, Heb 9 27. There is no discharge in
that War, Eccl. 8.8. There is no Mission nor Dismission in that War; as the
Septuagint renders it: there is no Apparatus bellicus, against such an
adversary, no arrow or javlin that a man can let fly in this Combat; there is
no protection or deliverance from the hand of Death. Oh! therefore live always
in the full, firm belief of the other World, so as to dispatch all your work
while it is day, Psa. 90.12. Psalm. 39.4. Eccl. 7.2. Live in an instant,
continual, constant Expectation of your Dissolution and Translation; this
should be much upon your thoughts: Oh! remember Death is most certain; and when
Death comes, things Temporal will take their final and Eternal farewell of
you, Friends, Relations, Riches, Honor, etc. Prove. 3.5. 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. 1 Timothy 6.7. The delights of Sin will be gone, that only which is Eternal will
stand you in stead, when you come to Die: It Is nothing else but Saving Grace,
Union to Christ, Communion with Christ etc. that will be comfortable. Eternity
is just before you, either an Eternity of Weal or an Eternity of Woe; yea,
there will be no alteration of your State, when once arrived in Eternity etc.
Now therefore is the only time for preparation for Death and Eternity; and if
we would be prepared, we must fight against our Spiritual Enemies, both in our
private and public Capacities; as Christians, as Magistrates, as Ministers, as
Soldiers* etc. depending upon Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, for Grace,
Courage, Conduct and Conquest; and then shall we at last obtain a Complete
Victory, and Eternal Triumph over all Evils and Enemies; and be able in the
Words of our Text, to say, Thanks be to God which gives us the Victory,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom be Glory for Ever, and Ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

