Unfruitful HEARERS Detected and Warned: OR A Discourse Wherein the Danger of,
and by, Unprofitable Hearing, is laid open and Cautioned against. As it was
delivered, in the Course of his Ministry; By Mr. Nehemiah Walter, Pastor of the
Church in Roxborough.

Published by some of the Hearers.

Ezekiel. 2.7. And thou shall speak my words unto them, whether they will Hear, or
whether they will forbear. Luk 8.18 Take heed therefore how you hear. Boston,
Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. Sold by Michael Perry, at his Shop under the
West End of the Town House. 1696.

Christian READER,
A S it is the greatest, and most Distinguishing outward favor, that God
bestows on any People, to give them his Word and Ordinances, Psalm. 147. 19,20.
So it must needs be the most Heinous Provocation offered to the God of Heaven,
to slight or despise this Privilege, and Consequently will procure for them
that so do, the sorest Punishments, according to, Joh. 15 22. Math. 11. 21.
etc. That all, who enjoy the best and clearest dispensation of the Gospel, do
not Profit by it, is evident, both by the Parable of the Sower, Math. 13.
begin. In which there are four sorts of hearers, and but one of them is the
better by it; and by the frequent Observation of the Apostasy and Degeneracy of
men, though the Ordinances continue in their Light and Purity among them, as it
was with Ephesus, Rev. 2. begin. And no wonder, since there is an imbred
Unbelief of, and Prejudice at the word of God, in all men naturally, which
nothing but his mighty Grace can subdue. And it is observable, that this
Unprofitableness is wont to steal upon men by degrees, and they are not aware
of it, whiles they make a great noise, and flourishing show of a plausible
Profession, having a name to live, any yet are dead, as Sardis, Rev. 3. 1.
There is therefore great need for Gods faithful Servants, to be often by way of
Caution, and frequently by way of Conviction, calling upon their Hearers, to
see to themselves, and rouse them up from their sloth on this Account And
doubtless, these Churches in N. E. have as much need as any in the World, of
being closely (...) this Account. How rich a Price we have had (...) our Hands
to get Wisdom, by Occasion of the free and faithful Preaching of the Word among
us, must be Confessed, with admiration at the singular kindness of God in it:
but if the frame of Spirit, and Conversation of this People be observed, it
will too notoriously say, that we have too generally been those fools that have
not an heart to it. And is it not time to rouse up to the Consideration of it,
when God is walking through the Land in a course of Judgment, to the procuring
of which this Sin has had a great Share.

The Reverend Author of the ensuing Sermons, had this much upon his heart, and
was accordingly stirred up by God, to do the part of a Faithful Watchman, in
giving his Flock Solemn warning of it; which it pleased the Lord of the Harvest
to follow so with his Blessing, as to affect the hearts of diverse of his
Hearers therewith, and to excite some of them to desire the Publication of
them, for the more Common benefit of a People equally concerned; which they
obtained, though not without reluctance of Spirit in him, who entertained a
Modest and Undervaluing Opinion of himself, and his own Labors. For my part, I
must Profess, that I took upon it to be a Word in Season, and never more
needed, than in this day of carnal security, and vain confidence in the Temple
of the Lord, while men little regard how they live up to the Truths that are
constantly urged on them; and do heartily bless God, that he raisieth up such
Laborers in his Vineyard, and pray that he will still go on to bless us with
such Plants, that may be for a Succession in the room of those whom he is
Transplanting into his Heavenly Kingdom. And that the Following Discourse may
he one help to recover us to our First Love and help us to Strengthen the
things that are ready to die, and accordingly be Words of Life to all that Read
them, I commend both it and you to his Blessing, who Teaches us to Profit, Who
am, The least, and most Unworthy of Ministers,

S. WILLARD.

Unfruitful HEARERS Detected and Warned:
Heb. 4. 2. The Word Preached did not Profit them.
THE Scriptures are not only Doctrinal, but also Historical; they contain
matters of Fact, as well as Articles of Faith. Amongst the many matters of Fact
Recorded, the Evils Committed, and the Evils Suffered by the People of God, are
none of the fewest; their sins and punishments stand upon Record, and are
handed down to Succeeding Generations: One great Design of God in Transmitting
them to After ages is, that men might be Warned against falling into the like
sins, least they fall under a like Dispensation of Wrath; this is the declared
end of God in penning down the Sin and Destruction of the Israelites in the
Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10. 11. All these things happened unto them for Ensamples
and they are written for our Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are
come. The Apostle Paul, in compliance with this Design of God, makes a
Practical Improvement of the Israelites Unbelief and Exclusion from the Rest of
God, in this Chapter, wherein is our Text, and the preceding; he tells us that
the People of Israel had a Promise of Rest given unto them, but by reason of
their Unbelief, they Entered not thereinto: He also tells us, That the same
Promise of Rest given to them, is likewise given to us; and therefore cautions
us against falling after their Example of Unbelief. That we have the Promise of
Gods Rest remaining to us under the New Testament, the Apostle proves, from our
being Gospelized as well as they; the same Gospel that was Preached unto them,
is Preached unto us; and consequently all the Promises of Spiritual and Eternal
Rest appertaining thereunto, are given unto us.

In the managing of this Argument, the Apostle takes occasion, for our solemn
Admonition, to set before us the ineffectualness of the Gospel Preached unto
the Israelites, but says he, The Word Preached did not Profit them.

In the Text two things are asserted concerning the Israelites in the
Wilderness.

1. That the Word was Preached unto them. In the Greek it is, The Word of
Hearing; that is, the Word Dispensed unto the Sense of Hearing, besides a
Typical Declaration of the Word to the Eye; they had also an Oral Declaration
of it to the Ear; The Word was Preached unto them. This Word, was the Word of
Reconciliation and Salvation, the Gospel of Grace. Moses was not only a Law
giver, but an Evangelist; he Preached the Gospel to them as well as the Law;
both were tempered together, although the Law was the chief Ingredient. In the
Prophecies of Moses, and his other Occasional Discourses, Jesus Christ and his
Doctrines of the Gospel are very obvious and manifest. Christ and his Apostles
Preached no new Doctrines, but the very same which were of old Preached by
Moses and the Prophets, unto whose Writings they do always appeal for the
vindicating their Doctrines from the Charge of Novelty; the same Gospel as to
the Substance, was Preached to them, which is Preached to us; indeed it is more
clearly, distinctly and fully Dispensed to us, then to them: however they heard
the glad tidings and joyful sound as well as we: the way in which we go to
Heaven, was the good old way, in which the Saints formerly went to Glory.

2. That this Word Preached did not Profit them: this is not to be understood
concerning them all, but a very great part of them; some did profit by it,
Chap. 3. 16. but the generality did Reap no saving benefit thereby; the Word
Preached did not become The power of God unto Salvation: They heard it, but to
no Spiritual Advantage.

DOCTRINE.
Many that Hear the Word Preached are not Profited thereby.

TWO PROPOSITIONS.
PROPOSITION I. The Word Preached is an Ordinance for Spiritual Profit. Some
look upon Preaching as a needless work, and the occasion of more mischief than
benefit. God however in his Infinite Wisdom has seen it needful to Establish
the Ministry in his Church through all Ages: under the Old Testament, God
appointed men to Expound and Apply the Law unto the People: Under the
New Testament, Jesus Christ has appointed the Ministry of the Word, to be a
Standing Ordinance in his Church unto the End of the World, and therefore has
given a Promise of his perpetual Presence with it, Math. 28. 19,20. Go Teach
all Nations -- And lo I am with you to the End of the World. God and Christ
have counted the Preaching the Word useful; and experience shows how needful
it is to preserve, not only the life and power, but also the very being of
Religion in a place; without Controversy, the Word of God purely and faithfully
Dispensed in the Ministry, is very Soul profiting.

It is Profitable to Sinners and so Saints.

1. To Sinners. Unto them it is many ways profitable.

1. It is Profitable for Instruction.

The Ignorant are hereby Instructed in what they are to know, believe, expect
and do. Many Blind Eyes have been opened, many Dark Minds Englightned, many
Foolish Souls made wise to Salvation by the Ministry; the Apostle Paul as a
Preacher, was sent to Open men's eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light,
Acts 26. 17,18. and how wonderfully was the knowledge of Christ spread over the
face of the Earth by the Ministry of the Apostles? through their Preaching, the
Clouds of thick Darkness which hung over the Gentile World, were soon dispelled
and scattered: and ever since the Apostles, God in his Providence has
ordinarily brought Light into the World by Gospel Ministers; by them he usually
propagates and maintains the knowledge of Salvation' Hence in Scripture,
Ministers are called Teachers, because they are appointed to teach the good
knowledge of God: They are also called Lights, because they are set up by God
to Enlighten the Dark World.

2. It is Profitable for Conviction. The Spirit of God by the Preaching of the
Word convinces Sinners both of their Sinfulness and Misery.

(1.) Of their Sinfulness. Sinners are great Self-flatterers, and therefore
it is one of the hardest things in the World to Convince them of their
Sinfulness and guiltiness before God. The Word of God however, when closely
applied, and set home upon Consciences, has a convincing power, which many
times the Sinner cannot resist; he is constrained to fall before the force of
Gods Word, and to cry out, Guilty, Guilty! The Word is therefore compared to a
Sword, which opens the Ulcer, and lets out the Corruption, that the Sinner is
sensibly convinced of his filthiness: many have thought themselves whole and
clean, until the Word Preached has shown them their great unsoundness and
pollution; the Jews thought they had committed no fault in Crucifying Christ;
but when Peter in his Sermon, charged this Sin upon their Consciences, They
were pricked at the heart, and cried out, What shall we do? Acts 2. 37. The
Spear with which they pierced Christ, now pierced their very Souls; they
acknowledge themselves guilty of his blood; many times in a Sermon the Minister
lays his finger upon the Sore, and the Sinner is touched to the quick, and
says, I am the man.

(2.) Of their Misery They Natural Estate of Sinners, is a lost, undone and
perishing Estate; and yet it is seldom they are sensible of it. Oftentimes they
think themselves in a good and safe Estate, when they are in a very sad and
dangerous condition. Now, it pleases God, by the Word Preached, to come in upon
their Hearts, and show them their danger: As they are really Lost, so he makes
them sensibly Lost, that they cry out, What must we do to be Saved? They are
brought to see their need of a Savior*

3. It is Profitable for Awakening. Security is the general frame of Sinners:
They Sleep quietly in their Sins, without any fear of Wrath, or care about
their Salvation. Many times, God by the Hammer of his Word, raps at the door of
their Hearts, and awakes them out of their Sleep; the Voice of God by the
Preacher, rouzes them out of their Security; they cannot lie still upon their
Bed of Sloth as before; the Threatenings of the Lord solemnly Denounced in their
Hearing, and the Flashes of Sinai before their eyes, strike a dread upon their
Consciences. When Paul Preached to Faelix, about Temperance, Righteousness, and
Judgment to come, that Intemperate and Unjust Person, Trembled, Acts 24. 25.
His Soul was startled, in a very fright and agony. How often are Secure, Drowzy
Sinners Alarmed by the Word, so far as to look about, and bestir themselves in
the business of their Salvation? Conscience Awakened by the Word, oftentimes
works an External and Partial Reformation.

4. It Is Profitable for Conversion. The Word Preached is the usual means of
Conversion; by that God commonly Softens the hard Hearts, and Changes the
Natures of Sinners: Three Thousand were Converted by one Sermon which Petter
Preached, Acts 2. 41. This was a more notable and illustrious work, than all
the Miracles wrought by the Apostles: The Converting of three thousand Souls,
is more than the Healing of three thousand Million of Lame, Blind, Deaf and
Dumb; and yet this was the effect of Preaching the Word. The Word is the great
Instrument used, in the Turning men from the Power of Sin and Satan, unto God,
Acts 26. 18. The Word Preached, is that Immortal Seed, whereby Sinners are
begotten unto Christ; it is that which is the general means of Faith, Romans 10.
14, 17. Faith comes by Hearing. Hence the Ministers of the Gospel are called
Fathers, because they usually beget many to God, by the Preaching of the Word.

Thus it is Profitable to Sinners.

2. The Word Preached is Profitable to Saints. The most holy men on Earth, are
not past benefit by the Word; none are so perfect, as to be above the use of
this Ordinance: The Word Preached is Soul-food for the strong, as well as for
the weak Christian.

It is Profitable to Saints

1. For Sanctification, Preaching not only Begins, but Carries on the Work of
Grace in (...) heart: The Gospel Ministry is appointed for Edification, as well
as Conversion, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. He gave some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ. The Word is the Spiritual Food, by which the Regenerate are
nourished and promoted in their Spiritual Growth in Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Hence
Ministers are called Pastors, because they are to Feed the Flock of Christ,
that they may grow thereby: They are also called Builders, because they are not
only to lay the Foundation in a work of Grace, but also to Superstruct and Rear
up the Spiritual Building of Christ: They are likewise called Vine-Dressers,
because they are to dress and tend the Trees Planted in Gods Vineyard; that so
they may thrive and flourish in Fruitfulness. Once more, they are compared to
Clouds, which drop Rain, in order to Fruit bearing.

2. For quickening. The Saints are many times dull and drowzy; the Wise Virgins
have their slumbring and sleeping fits, as well as the Foolish; they move very
heavily and slowly in the ways of God; their Spirit of Liveliness may, and
sometimes does much abate: their Graces may not be so vigorously exercised, nor
duties so conscientiously attended, as they ought to be, and sometimes have
been: Saints may greatly Decay as to the Power of Godliness in their hearts,
and the Practice of it in their Lives: Now God by his Faithful Messengers
oftentimes Excites their Graces, and stirs them up to the Practice of Neglected
Duties. David Lived several months without any inward Exercise of Godly Sorrow,
or outward Expressions of Repentance, for his Notorious Sins of Murder and
Adultery; but God sent his Servant Nathan the Prophet to him, and he Awakened
him to a speedy and sincere Repentance, Psalm. 51. the Title: That Penitent
Psalm was Penned when Nathan came unto him, which was after the Birth of the
unlawfully begotten Child: So long did he lie in Sin Unrepented. Sluggish,
Loytering Christians are quickened in their pace and motion, by a zealous,
lively and powerful Ministry.

3. For Consolation. The dear Children of God are many times Disconsolate and
Dejected; their Spirits are full of heaviness and sorrow, almost to
overwhelming, through the malicious Suggestions of Satan, through their own falls
into some Sin, through the workings of Unbelief in the heart, and through
divine withdrawments, their inward state of Soul may be very sorrowfully
circumstanced. When the case is thus with them, God oftentimes by the Preaching
of the Word, lets fall some Crumbs of Comfort unto them; the opening and
applying the Promises in the Ministry, yield great spiritual refreshing and
consolation to their drooping Spirits; many a chearing Cordial is given to a
fainting Soul, in and by the Word of Hearing; they have come to a Sermon with a
sad and heavy heart, but have gone away with a glad and light heart; their
doubts have been satisfied, their fears removed, and that joy created in their
Souls, which they would not part with for a World. The Gospel Ministry, is one
of the Wells of Salvation, out of which the Saints Draw Waters with Joy.
Ministers are therefore said to be Helpers of the Saints Joy, 2 Cor. 1. 24.

4. For Confirmation and Establishment in Grace and Godliness. The Perseverance
of Saints is most certain; they shall never wholly lose Grace, as to its
Principles or Exercise; the Immutable Election of God, and the standing
powerful Intercession of Jesus Christ, together with many other things, do
infallibly secure them against any such Apostasy: A Child of God shall never
become graceless and ungodly; one of those means which God makes use of for the
confirming them in their Spiritual State and Life, is the Ministry of the Word*
Supplies of strengthening Grace are communicated by Ministerial Exhortations;
it is therefore said of Paul and Barnabas, that by their Exhortations, they
Confirmed the Souls of the Disciples, Acts 14. 22.

PROPOSITION II. Many however are not Profited by the Word Preached unto them
Although the Ministry of the Word be an Ordinance exceedingly suited and adapted
to Soul good, yet few there be that get good thereby: How few are awakened by
the terrible Threatenings of God denounced and solemnly urged? How few are won
by the sweet and gracious Promises opened and applied? How few follow the
wholesome Counsels and Directions that are given* them? How few are Converted,
or Reformed, or Live up to the Truths that they hear? The Gospel in the
Preaching of it, has from the Beginning been a very unsuccessful Word: Noah was
a Preacher of Righteousness; Christ by him Preached the Gospel to the First
World; but what little good did he among that loose and corrupt Generation? The
Prophets have often complained of the unsuccessfulness of their Labors among
the Professing People of God, Isa. 53. 1. Who has Believed our Report? Our
Lord Jesus was a Preacher, and the best of Preachers; for no man ever spoke as
he did, with that sweetness, clearness, gravity, majesty and authority; and yet
how few profited by his Ministry? He himself complains, That He had labored in
vain, and spent his strength for naught and in vain; Isa. 49. 4. The Apostles,
although they were great Instruments of Conversion, yet the generality of their
Hearers, especially among the Jews, rejected and opposed their Ministry. And
all the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel ever since, have seen but little fruit
of their Labors. Although we set before men the sufficiency, excellency and
glory of Christ, yet few do prize him, or are ravished with him. Although we
present men with a prospect of Heavens Blessedness, and Hells Torments, yet few
Fly from the Wrath that is to come, or Seek the Kingdom of Heaven. Our Lord has
given us a Parable, on purpose to show us how few of our Hearers are Profited
by the Word which we Preach, Math. 13. begin. Among four sorts of Hearers, only
one is good; the odds is three to one: the generality of men* remain ignorant,
unconvinced, secure, unconverted, under our Ministry. Some are profane Hearers,
some negligent, some unbelieving, some unpractical; but very few that are good.

APPLICATION.
USE. I. Of Information. The bare Hearing the Word is not sufficient to Save.

Hearing may be without Soul saving benefit. The Hypocrite and Moralist may
toil in the External part of Religious Duties, and yet Lose their Souls, and
Heaven at the last. Men may be much in Frequenting both the public and private
Preaching of the Word, and yet miss of Salvation after all: Although we may be
able in the Day of Judgment, to say, Lord, have thou not Taught in our Streets?
Yet 'twill be no Saving Plea alone; Christ will notwithstanding that, bid us to
Depart from him, Luke 13. 26, 27. Outward Attendance on the Word in a
constancy, is but a Sandy Foundation to build the hopes of Salvation upon,
Math. 7. 26. to the end. Persons do but delude themselves, that think to get to
heaven by hearing only, Jam. 1. 22. Be ye Doers of the Word, not Hearers only,
deceiving your selves. O be more than Hearers now, or else you will be nothing
less then Damned hereafter.

USE II. Of Exhortation. Labor to Profit by the Word of God Preached unto you:
Be not content with the bare Hearing, but endeavor to feel the power of it,
and to gain the good of it; do what you can, that the Word of God, may be a
good Word to you.

Heads of Motive.
1. The first Head of Motives may be taken From the Preachers of the Word
themselves. In three or four particulars.

1. If you do not Profit by the Word Preached, you will make them labeur in
vain as to you. Indeed toward God we shall not labor in vain, Isa. 49. 4.
Then said I, verily I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for
naught, and in vain, [yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with
my God. ] How much soever we labor in vain as to man, yet not as to God; He
will reward us according to our faithfulness, and not according to our success.
If Ministers be diligent and faithful in the discharge of their Duty, they
shall be honorably Recompensed, although none of their Hearers profit by them:
If we solemnly warn Sinners, and they will not take the warning, we shall
however Deliver our own Souls, Ezekiel. 3. 19. It Is not in our power to Convert
Sinners; our teaching is only subservient to the effectual teachings of the
Spirit; God therefore will not cut us short in our reward, because Sinners
remain Unconverted and perish. In the great Day, Christ will say unto us, Well
done, if we have been Good and Faithful Servants, although unsuccessful, Mat.
25. 21 If Sinners do not profit by us, it will be their loss, not ours; we are
a sweet Savor to Christ in them that perish, as well as them that are Saved, 2
Cor. 2. 15. God will accept our Labors, though men be not advantaged by them.

But although we do not Labor in vain as to God, yet we shall as to you, if
you be not profited by us: Unprofiting Hearers make us take pains to no
purpose. O Sirs! will you support us? Will you set us on work? Will you call us
to spend our time and strength? and all at last in vain? shall we beseech,
entreat, command, charge, exhort, and in the issue lose our Labor! The Service
of your Souls is one great end of our Ministry, and to lose this end, to miss
of attaining it, is a most uncomfortable Disappointment and Frustration.

2. If you do not profit, you will damp their Spirits, and weaken their Hands
in their work: There is not a more heartbreaking thing, to Holy and Faithful
Ministers, then to see the unprofitableness of their Labors with a People: Our
dear Lord was Grieved for the hardness of his Hearers hearts, Mar. 3. 5. He
shed tears over Jerusalem, because of their Impenitence and Unbelief under his
public Ministry, Luke 19. 41,42. Godly, Painful Ministers go up and down with
an heavy heart, when they do little or no good to their Hearers: And when their
Spirits are sunk, their hands grow weak in their work. It Is a great
strengthening to a Preacher in his Ministry, when he perceives that he is
useful, and a Blessing in his place; when those that are under his care do
thrive and flourish: O how cheerfully does he go on in his work! but when he
sees that few or none are the better for him, he moves heavily, and waxes weary
of his work. Jeremy was ready to throw up his Ministry, and resolve against
Preaching any more, because the Word of the Lord was despised, Jer. 20. 9. The
Word of the Lord was made a reproach to me, and a derision daily: Then I said,
I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his Name.

3. If you do not Profit, you will provoke God to Silence them by Sickness,
Persecution or Death. God usually shuts the Preachers mouth, when Hearers shuts
their Hearts: Sometimes by Persecution God drives Ministers into Corners,
because of a Peoples Unprofitableness* Sometimes God casts them upon Beds of
Languishing, and sometimes he shuts them up in the Grave, because those that
hoard them, did not Profit by them: God calls them home, and will not suffer
them to Labor in vain any longer. One of the most ready ways to provoke God to
put out a Light, is to play about it, and not to work by it: Many an excellent
Preacher Dies before his time, because of the unworthiness and unfruitfulness
of a People. Are you minded to have God dismiss them from their work? Are you
willing to be rid of them? would you have them speak no more to you in the Name
of the Lord? If so, do not mind their Preaching, do not live according to their
Directions. If Good be not gotten by a Faithful Ministry, God will soon put an
end to it, or show a miracle of Patience, or continue it in Judgment.

4. If you do not Profit, you will put them upon very unpleasing work: A work
unpleasing both to them and you.

1. You will put them upon complaining to God of you. It Is very undesirable to
Affectionate Ministers, to carry Complaints to God against their Hearers; they
would more gladly commend them to God, then complain of them; yet this they are
many times constrained to do. Jeremiah cries out to God of his being despised
and abused by those to whom he was sent, Chap. 20. 8. The Prophet Ezekiel
complains of his profane Hearers, who Scoffed at his Prophecies, and called
them Riddles and Dreams, Ezekiel. 20. 49. Ah Lord God! they say of me, does he not
speak Parables? Dark Unintelligible Notions.

2. You will put them upon hearing witness against you in the Day of Judgment.
Ministers and their Hearers must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ,
and then Ministers must give an Account to Christ, not only of themselves, but
also of those that have been under their Care, Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have
the Rule [Ministerial Rule] over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give account: that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you. They will be called to
give their Testimony for, or against you. Ministers Sent by Christ, are not
only Officers, but Witnesses, Acts 26. 16. They do now bear Witness of Christ
and his Doctrine, and will hereafter be Witnesses for Christ, against such as
Disobey him. Ministers are Christ's Ambassadors, that are sent to offer and
propound Terms of Peace to Sinners, and they must at the Great Day of Hearing,
give an Account of their Embassy. Alas! How unwilling are they to be your
Accusers? And yet they will be constrained in the Judgment, to say, Lord, We
did according to the best of our Ability, declare thy whole Counsel and Mind
unto them: We did earnestly Beseech them, faithfully Warn them, sharply Reprove
them, seriously Exhort them; but they Regarded us not. Those very mouths that
are opened unto you in the way of an Ordinance, will then be opened against you
in way of Accusation.

5. If you do Profit, you will be a rejoicing to them now, and a Crown of
Rejoicing to them at that Day.

You will Rejoice them now. Ministers that unfeignedly Love the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Souls of men, do rejoice in nothing more, than the good success
of the Gospel. The Apostle John had no greater joy, than to see his Children
walking in the Truth, 3 Epistle v. 3, 4. Barnabas, an holy man of God, was glad
when he saw the Grace of God in the Faith and Conversion of the People at
Antiech, Acts 11 23. when Sinners are Converted, and Converts Edifyed under a
man's Ministry, it is the greatest joy and comfort that he has in the whole
World. When Timothy brought to Paul the tidings of the Faith and Charity of the
Thessalonians, (who were Converted by him) his Soul was greatly comforted,
revived and rejoiced, 1 These. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. The Charity of Philemon, whom Paul
Converted, was a great Joy and Consolation to him, Philem. v. 7. It Is matter of
abundant satisfaction to Christ's Servants in the Work of the Gospel, to see
the Travel of their Souls; to see that they have not Labored in vain.

You will also be a Crown of Rejoicing to them at that Day, 1 These. 2 19, 20.
What is our Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing? are not even ye in the Presence of our
Lord Jesus Christ at his Coming? so 2 Cor. 1. 14. What an Honor and a Joy will
it be to Ministers when they shall be able to say, Lord there are we, and the
Children which thou have given us? Your Piety will be their Honor, your
Holiness their Crown at the Great Day: This very thing the Apostle uses as an
argument to quicken his Philippians, to an holy and blameless life, Phil. 3.
15, 16. Be blameless, be harmless, that I may Rejoice in the Day of Christ,
that I have not run in vain, nor labored in vain.

This is the first Head of Motives.
2. A Second Head of Motives is, The Awfulness of our Standing under the
Ministry. Bethel is a dreadful place, Genesis 28. 17. Such as Live under the
Gospel Ministry, have their Standing in the House and Vineyard of God, which is
a matter of most awful Consideration. For,

1. The Ax lies at the Root of every tree: So John the Baptist told those that
came to his Ministry, Math. 3. 10. Wherever there are the means of Salvation,
wherever the Word of God is Preached, at that very time, there is an Ax, an
Instrument of Vengeance laid to the Root of every Tree. God stands ready to cut
down every one that is Unfruitful under* the Means* of Grace: A Tree that is
barren, in God's Enclosed and Well tended Vineyard, is in far greater danger,
than one that is barren in the open, neglected Wilderness of the World. If we
do not thrive and profit under profiting means, we stand in continual jeopardy,
and may expect the fatal blow to be given every moment; did men more frequently
and seriously think of this, they would undoubtedly give more diligent heed
unto the things which they hear; they would be more careful about profiting,
then commonly they are. Remember, That while the Word of God is Preaching, God
is walking in the midst of us, with his Ax in his Hand, threatening to hew down
every careless fruitless Hearer.

2. We are upon our Trial for Eternity. The time of the Gospel Dispensation, is
our Probation-time for Eternity. Certainly we shall Live in Eternity, and
certainly our Eternity will be blessed or miserable; and as certain also it is,
that the Everlasting Well or Ill fare of our Souls depends upon our present
Well or Ill improving the Gospel-Administration. If we Profit by the Word of
God now, we shall be Blessed for ever; but if we Live and Dye Unfruitful, we
shall be accursed for ever, while God is using means with us, he puts us upon
our great and last Trial for Eternity: Now is our Day of Grace and Salvation,
and if this present Season be let slip without Soul profit, God-will try us no
more, we shall have no further opportunity wherein to Secure a blessed
Eternity; there will be no coming back from the Grave to mend what has been
amiss. Nor will God send a Messenger after us to the Grave to continue the
Treaty of Peace: No, no, The Grave is a place of Silence, and they that go down
to it, hear not the Voice of the Charmer: Men must stand or fall to Eternity,
as they accept or refuse the Message of Christ. Would Persons duly and
seriously think hereon, their care of profiting would unquestionably be much
greater than it is.

3. A Third Head of Motives, may be taken from The Evil Consequents of not
Profiting by the Word of God. Many awful and dismal things do follow hereupon.

1. Temporal Judgments. In time, in this present World, God usually punishes
Unprofitableness. He many times visits them, both with Out ward and Spiritual
Judgments.

1. Outward Judgments. Unfruitfulness is sometimes punished with sore External
Calamities; because a People do not comply with the Gospel Treaty of Peace: God
visits them with Wars, because they do not Flourish in Fruitfulness, under
Gospel influences. God blasts and blows upon the Fruits of the Earth, because
they do not Feed upon their Spiritual Food: God brings upon them, A Famine of
Bread and Water, because their Souls are not healthful and prospering under
Soul-prospering means; God visits them with Bodily Sicknesses. The People of
Israel in the Days of Zedekiah, mocked the Messengers of God, despised the
Word of God spoken by them; and what was the event of it? Why, God flew
multitudes of them by the Sword, and the rest he carried Captives into Babylon;
the Temple was plundered and burnt, the Walls of Jerusalem were Demolished, and
a dismal Destruction was brought upon them; 2 Chronicles. 36. 16, 17, etc. In the
Days of our Lord Jesus, and his Apostles, the People of the Jews profited not
by their Ministry; and for this they were made Desolate. The Romans Destroyed
their City and Temple a second time, and laid their whole Country waste; and
they are to this Day a banished, scattered People in the Earth.

2. Spiritual Judgments. These are most Awful, and yet very usual Dispensations
of God; they are indeed of a Spiritual nature, and so more secret and less
discernable, but never the less common. It Is an ordinary thing with God in
these Gospel times, to Lay Unprofiting Hearers under Spiritual Plagues.

1. God sometimes puts a Period to the Efficacy of the Word Preached. Though
the Gospel may be continued as to the Outward Dispensation of it, yet it is
without any Inward and Saving Efficacy upon their hearts: Unprofitable Hearers
may have the Ministry of the Word continued to them, but no Blessing goes along
with it, to the good of their Souls; the Ordinance abides, but its Efficacy and
Power upon the heart ceases: thus it was as to the Jews of old, Isa. 6. 9, 10.
and this is the case of many barren Hearers under the Gospel. God suffers the
Word to be Preached to them, but he does not work with it; the Word Preached is
judicially made a Lifeless word unto them; it is to be feared, that many have
Lived so long unprofitably under the Gospel, as that God has said in Judgment,
Let the Word Preached never profit them more, as God said of the barren Fig
tree, Let no Fruit grow on thee hence forward for ever, Math. 21. 19. and how
many are there that once felt something of the power of the Word, who are now
altogether unaffected, unawakened, unhumbled, unreformed by it? It may be, the
Seats under them are as much benefited and moved as they.

2. God gives them over to wax worse and worse. It Is a certain truth (as one
says) That Barrenness under the Gospel is always accompanied with an increase
of Sin. If men do not grow better, they will grow worse under the Means of
Grace. If the Word be not a Savor of Life, unto Life, it will be, a Savor of
Death, unto Death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Men are either softened or hardened, made better
or worse by the Word: Believe it, the ground upon which the Rain of
Gospel-Doctrines often falls, if it bring not sorth good fruits, it will bring
forth Briars and Thorns, and Trash of all sorts. God in just judgment leaves
barren Christians to abound and ripen in Sin; he says of them, Let them be
unjust, let them be filthy still; let them go on in their Sins, and Filthiness
without Restraint. O fear and tremble, least this should be your case; if it
once come to this, it will be as easy for the very Devils, as for you, to
escape the Damnation of Hell. And remember, that there is scarce a more ready
way to provoke God to take off all Restraints from your Lusts, then to be
regardless and careless about Profiting by the Word of God Preached unto you,
Psa. 81. 11, 12. My People would not hearken to my voice, so I gave them up to
their own hearts lusts.

3. God sometimes brings upon them a Famine of the Word Preached. When the
Ministry of the Word is not attended to, with suitable Profiting, God deprives
a People of it, Amos 8. 11. Behold, the Days come, says the Lord God, that I
will send a Famine in the Land, not a Famine of Bread, nor a Thirst for Water,
but of Hearing the Words of the Lord. The cause of this Judgment was, their
growing weary of Sabbaths, and Sabbath Ordinances, through an inordinate love
to the World, verse 5. This Judgment is more terrible than a Famine of Bread;
for as much as the Soul is better than the Body, so much worse is a Spiritual,
than a Bodily Famine; ten thousand times better it is, that our Bodies should
starve, than our Souls: And yet sometimes God takes away Soul-food from a
People, because of their Leanness of Soul under the Enjoyment of it. God
threatened the Church of Ephesus, to Remove the Candlestick out of its place,
Rev. 2. 5. and so he did. In this way God punished the Unfruitfulness of the
Jews, according to the threatening solemnly denounced by our Lord, Mat. 21. 43.
God Let out this Vineyard unto other Husbandmen. He Unchurched the Nation of
the Jews, and sent the Gospel unto the Gentile World; and out of them gathered
Evangelical Churches: The Kingdom was taken from the Jews, because of their
Unfruitfulness, and Given to a Nation that should bring forth the Fruits
thereof, Math. 21. 43. If therefore we would not have the Gospel take its leave
of us, if we would not be without the joyful sound, if we would not have God
remove his Tabernacle from amongst us, Let us Labor to Profit by the Word.

Thus for the First Evil that follows upon not Profiting.

2. A Second Evil Consequent is, A Bitter Lamentation at the last. The time
will come, when we shall with tears bewail our present Unprofiting. We may
little regard or lay it to heart now, but in the End it will be Bitterness unto
us. When we are going out of this World, or at the furthest, when we are gotten
into the other World, we shall with heart piercing Cries, Lament our not
minding the Word of God more: Then shall we remember all the Instructions,
Warnings, Reproofs, Counsels that have been seriously given to us, and shall
with bleeding Souls bewail our disregard of them, Prove. 5. 11, 12, 13. And thou
mourn at the last, and say, How have I hated Instruction, and my heart despised
Reproof? and have not Obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine ear to
them that Instructed me? Then shall we say, Oh! If we had hearkened to such and
such of God's Faithful Servants, it had never been with us as it is; they told
of this before hand, and besought and entreated us, but we would not hear: Had
we lent an ear to them, and been obedient, we had never come to this pass. Thus
shall we, when it is to late, repent of our present Felly.

3. A third evil Consequent is, A sad Reckoning in the Day of the Lord.
Certainly there will a day come, wherein God will call us to an account: The
Judgment day will be a Reckoning day; then will Christ Reckon with us about the
Talents we are entrusted withal. Among the many Talents which are now committed
to us, our Gospel enjoyments are none of the least. Verily, every Sermon which
we have heard we must be accountable to God for: the hearing the Word is not
only a Duty and Privilege, but a Talent; Christ will inquire, what Good we
have gotten by the many Sermons which we have heard; and Oh! what a poor,
miserable account will they be able to give, who have nothing profited thereby!
Did men believe that they must especially be accountable to God for their
having opportunities, they would be more concerned about an useful improvement
of them.

4. A most dreadful Damnation. If the Word of God do not become the Instrument
of men's Salvation, it will be an occasion of their greatest Damnation. The
enjoyment of the Gospel will be an aggravation of men's Sin and Punishment,
where it is not (...) unto with profit. No Sinners shall be so miserably
destroyed as those that remain fruitless under the Gospel dispensation: their
Sins are incomparably greater than the sins of others; other men's sins are
comparatively no sins to theirs. John 15. 22. If I had not come, and spoken
unto them, they had not bad sin. The Public Ministry of Christ among them made
their sins greater by many degrees, than otherwise they would have been. And as
their sins are incomparably greater than others, so will their punishments be:
God will proportion men's Punishment to their Sins; the greatest Sinners shall
be the greatest sufferers. The degrees of wrath will be according to the
degrees of Sin. None therefore shall lie under so heavy a burden of Divine
Vengeance, as those that go down to the Grave in their Sins, from under the
clear and faithful dispensation of the Gospel. The People of Sodom and
Gomorrah, although they were Monsters and Prodigies of wickedness, shall
however fare better in the day of the Lord's wrath, than those that do not with
Faith and Obedience entertain the Gospel of Christ Preached by his
Ambassadors, Math 10. 14,15. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your
words; when you depart out of that House, or City, shake off the dust of your
feet. Verily, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom
and Gomorrah, in the day of Judgment, than for that City. How little is this
believed or considered by the generality of Hearers?

4. A fourth head of Motives may be taken from the Benefits of Profiting by the
Word. I shall mention but two of the most comprehensive and principal of them.

1. An Increase of Spiritual Blessings in this Life. Spiritual Blessings are
the best and most excellent blessings, incomparably better than all outward
blessings; Spiritual blessings are Soul blessings, others are only Bodily:
Spiritual blessings are always the fruits of Gods special Love, others may
proceed only from his common Love: Spiritual blessings make us amiable in the
sight of God, others do not: Spiritual blessings have a sure and inseparable
Connection with Glory, others have not. -- Now profiting by the Word of God will
cause us to abound in these blessings. God will increase the graces and fruits
of a profiting hearer.

God will increase the Graces of such an one A larger stock of knowledge, love,
humility, meekness, patience, faith etc. shall be given to him, Mark 4. 24.
Unto you that bear shall more be given. It Is the wonted course of God to reward
Grace with Grace: Such as exercise their Graces under an Ordinance, shall
experience a growth in Grace.

God will also multiply the fruits of a profiting hearer. Every tree that
bears fruit, the Heavenly Husbandman will purge it, that it may bring forth
more fruit, Joh: 15. 2. Fruitfulness shall be blessed with Fruitfulness. The
earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth
Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God, Heb. 6.
7. A blessing of increase shall be upon it.

O what a powerful Motive is this to look well to our profiting! To a true
Child of God, to one that knows the real worth of Spiritual, blessings; there
can scarce a more forcible consideration be propounded. A Saint indeed does
most ardently desire a growth in every Grace and Good Work: the Weakness of his
Graces and the Barrenness of his Conversation are things which do mostly
trouble him: It Is the longing desire of his Soul that he may be more holy in
heart and life; that he may be more strengthened in the inward man, and more
filled with the fruits of Righteousness.

2. A Reward of Infinite, Eternal blessing in the Life to come. Such as hear
the Voice of Christ, to them he will give Eternal life, Jon. 10. 27,28. Every
tree that is fruitful in Gods Vineyard, shall, when it is removed from hence,
he transplanted into the Garden of God above. The Promise is, Hear, and your
Souls shall live. Christ has assured retentive, practical hearers of
blessedness, Luke 11. 28. Those that profit by the Word shall find it a Word of
eternal Salvation unto their Souls. Of a certainty, those that thrive under the
Ministry of Christ by men, shall at Death be placed under the immediate,
personal Ministry of Christ in Heaven. And that which the Queen of Sheba said
concerning them that stood before Solomon: may much more be said of them that
stand before our glorious Solomon above, Happy are thy men, and happy are these
thy Servants, which stand continually before thee, and hear thy Wisdom. -- Well
then, if either the blessings of the Kingdom of Grace or of Glory be of any
Consideration with you, be careful that the Word Preached be profiting to you.

Directions for Heairng the Word to Profit.
DIRECTION. I.
Do not Harbor in your Hearts any Prejudices against the Preachers of the
Word. The Devil is very buisy to fill men's minds with Prejudices against Gospel
Ministers. There is no Profession in the World so directly subversive of the
Devils kingdom, as that of the Ministry: the proper work and business of
Ministers is to destroy the interest of Satan, and to promote the interest of
Christ; they are sent to turn men from Satan unto God, Acts 26. 18. The Devil
therefore has a peculiar spite against their Persons and Ministry: and if it
be possible he will create in the hearts of men ill will to, and prejudices
against them; he knows that there is Scarce a more ready way to make the Word
unsuccessfull, than for men to be prejudiced against the Preachers of it. If
men are illwillers or disaffected to a Minister, there is little likelihood of
their getting good by his labors: See then that you watch against this.

Sometimes Persons are prejudiced against them because of their meanness as to
parentage or outward Circumstances. It pleases God oftentimes to call those to
the Ministry, that are of a low descent, and that make but a very little figure
in the eyes of the World, 1 Cor. 1. 26,27,28. And although God consults his own
greater Glory by putting the Gospel treasure into Earthen Vessels, yet on the
account hereof, Persons, especially those that are of an Higher rank in the
World, do not and cannot stand so well affected unto them. It was the outward
meanest of Christ's Person and Parentage which in a great measure prejudiced the
Jews against him, and made them slight his Doctrine.

Sometimes men are prejudiced against them because of their Infirmities. God
will not speak to us immediately himself, nor will he speak to us by Angels,
but by men that have degrees of darkness and corruption in them. Elijah a great
Prophet of the Lord, was a man subject to like Passions with our selves, Jam.
5. 17. Ministers are liable to miss it in their Administrations and
Conversations. Don't let your hears hereupon be prejudiced against them; let no
contempt of them or ill will unto them, be hereupon entertained. We do not
plead for an allowance in any thing that is wicked, God forbid: We only ask a
charitable covering of such Infirmities as are common to the best: and that
there may be no heart burnings against us, because of weaknesses. If you be not
careful in this matter, we cannot expect to be instrumental of Saving Good unto
you. Let us Preach never so well, yet we shall be of little use, as long as
men's hearts are against us and not toward us. It Is true, we should like the
Word though we do not love the Man; we should entertain the Truth by whomsoever
it is brought unto us: but experience shows, that Serious Reproofs, Prudent
Counsels, and friendly Admonitions are little regarded, when Administered to us
by such as we do not honor, esteem or love. If the Person that speaks to us be
not much regarded by us, we shall little mind what he says unto us.

DIRECTION II.
Make Profiting the end of your coming to Hear the Word; desire to hear, that
you may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Make this your aim and design: One reason
why men profit not by the Word, is, because they do not propound this unto
themselves, as their end; Spiritual Profit is not what they intend, but
something else.

Some come to Hear that they may Carp and Espy Faults; it is not their own good,
but the Preachers hurt which they aim at; Malice makes them present at a
Sermon: For this end many were sent, and came to hear Christ, even, That they
might find somewhat whereof to accuse him, Mark 12. 13.

Others come to hear, That they may Sport themselves, and make merry with what
is delivered; this is the end which profane Scoffers propound. Let us hear, say
they, What this Babbler will say, Acts 17,18.

Others come merely to Please their Fancies* expecting that some curious
Discourse will be made, some quaint Notions started, or some Elegant Style
used: Curiosity and Pleasure of mind bring them to a Sermon. Ezekiels Hearers
called upon one another to come and hear him, only be cause he was a sweet and
skilful Preacher he had a Pleasant Voice, and could Play well upon an
Instrument, Ezekiel 30. 32.

Others come to Hear in complyancewith the Custom of the Times and Places,
wherein they Live: It Is the fashion and mode of the Age, and they will not be
singular, to go to a Sermon is in common usage, and they do as others do, Ezekiel.
33. 31. They came as my People use to do.

Others come to Save their Credit. Non-Attendance upon the Ministry of the
Word, would hurt them in their Reputation; they would suffer in their Name,
Disgrace would befall them, they would become the common talk of the World, if
they should neglect the Public Preaching of the Word.

Others come only to Furnish their minds with Knowledge: It Is the Enriching
their Heads with Gifts, and not their Hearts with Graces which they aim at.

Others come To see and be seen, to show their Fine Apparel, to observe the
Fashions, or lasciviously to gaze upon Lust-pleasing Objects; it is the
satisfaction of their Lusts, and not the Salvation of their Souls that they aim
at.

Finally, Others come merely to Quiet Conscience. Conscience will not let them
alone in the neglect of a known Ordinance, therefore to appease Conscience, and
calm the rage of it, they do sometimes attend upon the Word.

While men come only with such ends as these, what reason can there be to
expect a Blessing upon the Word? Indeed, God in Sovereign Grace may sometimes
extraordinarily set home the Word Preached upon their Souls, to their Awakening
and Saving Conversion: but in an ordinary way, this is not to be looked for: We
must come to the Word with earnest desires and designs of Profiting by it, and
then we may expect to find benefit, if we come to Get Good, it is very probable,
God will Do us Good by the Word: Good Designs God is ready to close in with,
and succeed.

DIRECTION III.
Give Diligent Attention to the Word Preached. It Is said, That the People were
very Attentive to hear Christ, Luke 19. 48. Unprofitableness comes of
Unattentiveness. How can good be gotten, when what is said is not minded?
Attention implies an Outward Listening of the Ear, and an Inward Application of
the mind, unto what is spoken.

There must be a Listening of the Ear unto what is spoken in Order to
Benefiting by it. If truths be not received in at the ear, how can they reach
the heart by any Saving influence? Unto this outward Attention a Drowziness and
Sleep of body is directly opposite, and therefore to be striven against. In
sleep the Senses are locked up; the door of hearing, is shut against the Word,
that it can have no entrance to the Soul. Shake off therefore a Slumbring and
Sleepy frame, and stir up your selves unto wakefulness. Do not be such drowzy
Disciples, as not to be able to watch with Christ one hour. Besides the
unbecoming Irreverence and visible contempt of God in Sleeping at a Sermon;
there is also very great Soul loss sustained: It Is Shameful, Sinful and
Damnifying: To a Sleeper, a Sermon is of a certainty lost in whole or in part,
as to any good gotten by it; they might as well have been absent as present. If
therefore we would not lose the blessing of this Ordinance it concerns us
carefully to avoid whatsoever may dispose to Sleep. Do not run into the house
of God from the toils of the World, or from a full Table: A wearied body and a
Stomach charged with meats or drinks, dispose to Sleep; moderation is an help
to Wakefulness; Be Sober, be Vigilant, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

Besides this Outward Listening of the Ear, there must also be an Inward
Application of the mind to what is spoken: Not only must the Sound sink into
the Ear, but the Sense into the Soul, in order to Profiting, Prove. 2. 2,5. My
Son, Incline thine Ear unto Wisdom, and apply thine Heart to understanding;
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord. The Soul must be Bound to the
Horns of the Altar, the mind be intent upon what is delivered, or else the Word
Preached will signify no more than water spilt upon the Rock. Unto this Inward
Attention, Destruction of mind, is directly opposite, and therefore to be
striven against; call in your hearts, and keep them closely applied unto the
Word Preached. How can you Profit, if you are thinking of one thing, and the
Minister speaking of another thing? if men's Hearts go after their
Coveteousness; if their minds are running upon their Farms and Merchandise; how
can Divine Truths Delivered sink deep into their Souls? It is therefore
necessary in order unto an Hearing to Profit; that a strict Watch be kept over
the heart; nothing is so vain and shifting as the mind of man; the very
Quicksilver does not scatter and ramble more than the thoughts of the mind;
insomuch that it is one of the hardest things in the World to keep our minds
fixed to Spiritual Duties: Do not therefore of choice run into the House of
God, from an hurry of Worldly Business. Give your minds some Diversion from
Secular Affairs, that of you may leave the World behind you, when you come to
the Worship of God.

These things are spoken, as having their reference to the Word of God
Dispensed Out of Season, as well as In Season, on our own Days as well as the
Lord's.

As a farther standing help to this Duty of diligent Attention to the Word of
God at all times, it will be good for us to Realize the Authority of God in a
Sermon, and His Presence with it.

Gods Authority in a Sermon. If it be asked by what Authority Ministers
lawfully Called, do Preach? It is answered, by the Authority of Christ, God in
the Flesh. It Is he sends them; they Receive a Commission from him; it is in his
Name that they speak unto men. In their Work they Represent Christ, 2 Cor. 5.
20. Now then, we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God [Incarnate] did
beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled to God. When
therefore Christ sent forth his Disciples to Preach, he says unto them, He that
hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, despises me, Luke 10. 16.
Remember then, when Christ's Ministers speak to you in the Discharge of their
Office, it is as if Christ Himself spoke unto you, they represent him in his
Prophetical Office; the Words which they speak according to the mind and will
of Christ, are not the words of man, but indeed the words of God* This duly
and believingly thought on, would command and quicken our Attention.

Again, Realize Gods Presence with a Sermon. God in an especial manner is
present at a Sermon, Acts 10. 33. We are all here present before God, to hear
all things that are Commanded thee of God. In all parts of Worship, God looks
upon us with a Jealous Eye. Let this be Realized, and it will help our
Attention: Say to your selves, Of a truth, God is in this place, the Lord is in
the midst of the Congregation of his People. Did we often in a Sermon put our
hearts in mind of this, we should not be so Sleepy of Body, and roving in Mind,
as we ordinarily are: Forgetfulness of God, is a main cause of carelessness in
Worship.

DIRECTION IV.
Make a particular Applicarion of the Word unto your selves. Self Application
is necessary unto Profiting by the Word. The most excellent Plaster can do no
good, unless applied to the Sore. Men must look upon themselves as concerned in
what is delivered, and bring it home to their own Souls, or else it will be of
no use unto them: There is no Truth insisted upon, but it is of present, or may
be of after Concernment unto us; some way or other it is belonging to us, and
we should take it to our selves, as that which we do or may need. The misery of
many Hearers is, that they hear for others, not for themselves; they are
continually applying what is spoken, unto others, and put it away from
themselves as not concerned therein? When any Sin is reproved or censured, and
when any Duty is required or urged, they say, such and such persons will do
well to mind what is said; not looking upon it as in any sort appertaining to
them. Alas! if we do not take the Spiritual Food into our own mouths, if we
don't lay our own lips unto the breasts of the Gospel, we can draw no
nourishment from it. What Ministers Preach to all, every one should impartially
apply to his own Soul, Job 5. 27. Hear, thou, and know it for thy good. Say of
every Doctrine, this is my Lesson, I must Learn it: Of every Command, this is
my Duty, I must Practice it: Of every Admonition, this is a Warning to me, I
must take it: Of every Caution, this is a Watchword to me, I must give heed
unto it: Of every Direction, this is my Rule, I must follow it: And of every
Promise, this is my Encouragement, I must live upon it. Such close Applications
of things will much further their Saving Impression and Influence upon our
Souls.

DIRECTION V.
Mix the Word with Faith. In our Context, it is given as a reason why the Word
Preached did not Profit the Israelites namely, Because it was not mixed mith
Faith in them that heard it. Their Unbelief rendered the Word of God ineffectual
and unprofiting. Without Faith the Word of God will not become Soul saving;
Believers only are Saved in Hearing the Word: The Gospel of Christ is the power
of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes, Romans 16. By the foolishness
of Preaching it please^ God to save them that Believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. In
Believers, and in them only it is, that the Word of God becomes a Living,
Operative Principle of Holy Obedience and Fruitfulness, 1 These. 2. 13. Ye
Received the Word of God which ye heard of us; which works also effectually
in you that Believes. The Word thus becomes a Soulpuritying, Fruit bearing, and
Soul saving Principle, from its mixture with Faith: Faith brings into the Soul
the Ideas or Images of good things held forth in the Promises; and incorporates
it self therewith, and thereby carries out the Soul in earnest desires, and
diligent endeavors after them: The Glory of Christ and his Kingdom, which have
a real Subsistence without us, are by Faith made to have a mental Subsistence
within us; which is not a mere Conception or Apprehension of them, but such a
lively Impression and Representation of them, as darkens the glory of this
World, takes off the Affections from Earthly Things, and works up the Heart to
a satisfying delight in, longing desires after, and a rejoicing expectation of,
beholding this Glory of Christ and his Kingdom: This is at large described in
the Eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews. By Faith's thus mixing it self with the
Promise, as holding forth such great and glorious things, the Word of Promise
becomes a Word of Salvation.

Faith also mixing it self with the Word of Threatening, apprehends the Terrors
of the Lord, and realizes them to the Soul, whereby a person is awakened to
Repentance, hastened to Christ, the great Reconciler; and excited to a careful
watchfulness against, and abstinence from Sin.

Faith likewise mixing it self with the Word of Precept, apprehends the
reasonableness, equity, purity and goodness there^^ whereby a Believer is
quickened unto an holy care of universal conformity unto the Commandments of God.

Thus Faith as the Active Principle, and the Word Preached as the Moral
Instrument of Salvation, mixing themselves together in Hearing, the Word
becomes Soul saving.

Indeed, we must come to the Word Preached, as the way appointed for the
Spirits Working; that so Faith may be wrought in us, in the exercise of which
alone it is, that the Word will issue in our Eternal Salvation. It Is not Faith
in the Habit, but Faith in Actual Exercise, that makes the Word Saving.

DIRECTION. VI.
Receive the Truth in the Love of it. This is necessary to Soul Saving benefit
by it, 2 These. 2. 10. They received not the Love of the truth, that they might
be saved. Want of affection to Divine Truth hinders, their impression upon the
heart. Some there be that hate the light, Joh. 3. 20. They cannot endure to
have the light of some truths reflected upon them. The Proud person hates the
lessons of Humility; the Earthly-minded man hates the doctrines of
Mortification to the World, and Heavenly mindedness; the Hypocrite hates the
doctrines of Sincerity; and the Revengful person the doctrines of Patient
hearing of injuries, and requiting evil with good. Such an inward antipathy and
detestation of truths, makes men reject them with indignation or derision. The
Scribes and Pharisees, and People of the Jews hated the close, home and plain
doctrines of Christ and his Apostles, insomuch that the Word Preached did not
profit them, but on the other hand, enraged their lusts and corruptions. If men
cannot bear to have their sins pointed at and reproved; if they hate to be
roundly told their duty and danger, the Word cannot advantage them: Every Truth
without exception ought to be entertained with Love. We should not love to be
soothed up, flattered or let alone in our sins, but take it well when our evil
ways are publicly bor'n witness against. Let sharp and close doctrines be
esteemed, as well as, yea, rather more, than soft and smooth words.

DIRECTION. VII.
Be much in Prayer. Praying is a principal help to Profiting: the Word is
Sanctified by Prayer. Men are generally Fruitless because Prayerless. O then
Pray!

In general,

Pray to God to Teach you to Profit. It Is God alone can give us this Spiritual
Skill of getting good by the Word. It Is not in the power of the Preacher or
hearer to make the Word effectual; the power of making wise to Salvation is
Gods Prerogative only: Isa. 48. 17. I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee
to profit. It Is the Lord only that can make us to profit by Providence or
Ordinances. God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ do instruct by the Holy
Spirit, whose special Office it is to give a principle of spiritual discerning,
so as to know and understand Divine things unto Salvation, Neh. 9. 20. Thou
gave also thy good Spirit, to instruct them. Look up therefore to God in
Prayer that he would send the Holy Ghost to Sanctify and Save you by his truths.

More Particularly. 1. Pray before Hearing.
Pray, that God would Assist and Direct the Preacher, unto the Providing some
suitable word for your Souls. The hearts of Ministers are in the hands of the
Lord, and many times he does secretly and powerfully direct their thoughts from
one Subject and fix them upon another, in answer unto the Prayers of some
particular Persons. Prayer, although it cannot change the purpose of God, yet
it may prevail with God to change the purpose of a Preacher, and send him with
a Portion to us which he intended not.

Pray also, that God would Put your hearts into, and keep them in a good frame:
The Preparation and Fixation of the heart are both from the Lord. It Is he must
raise and keep up the flame of Devotion in our Souls, or else it will soon dye
and go out; nothing is so deceitful as our hearts: When we have been laboring
with God and them, to bring them into some suitable frame for Religious
Worship, and are ready to think, that we are sure of their lively engagement
therein; yet we often find, that the bow is presently unbent, and the good
frame strangely lost before we come into the House of God; we had need
therefore to beg of God, not only to Set our hearts right, but also to Keep
them so.

Pray also, that God would Meet you and Bless you in the Ordinance of
Preaching. Turn God's Promises into Prayer, and plead them with God. Say to
him, Lord thou have said, Where two or three are met together in thy Name, thou will be in the midst of them. Thou have said, That wheresoever thou have
Recorded thy Name thou will come unto me, and bless me. O Lord! Be it unto thy
Servant according to thy Word.

II. Pray in Hearing.
In the time of Hearing you should have your short Ejaculatory Prayers; these
are no hindrances, but exceeding helps unto a Profitable Hearing the WORD.
When any Duty is Pressed, say, Lord, help me to Practice this Duty! When any
Sin is cautioned against, say, Lord help me to abstain from this Sin! When any
Promise is opened and applied, say, Lord help me to receive it, and live upon
it!

It Is exceeding useful thus to mix Prayer with Hearing the Word.

III. Pray after Hearing.
Follow every Sermon with your Prayers to God for a Blessing on it. Pray, That
God would cause his Word to dwell richly in you; that he would help you to Lay
it up in your hearts, and to bring forth the fruits of it in your Lives. Pray
God to forgive all your deadness, dullness and distraction in Hearing. Do thus
seriously, and not in formality, and you will find a Blessing by the Word.

Were this method of Prayer duly prosecuted and attended, it would bring in a
great stock of Spiritual Riches by Hearing the Word. See then that you do not
neglect this great Duty of Prayer, which has such a general influence into all
acceptable and useful Religion, If you do not Pray, Ministers had almost as
good never Preach. If God do not hear from you, there is little ground to think
that you should be benefited by Hearing from them.

DIRECTION VIII.
Labor to retain as much as you can of what you hear. It can hardly be
supposed, that any can carry away the whole of a Sermon; but yet there is none
who may not carry away some of it. The scope and drift of it we may remember,
or something peculiarly proper for us to retain. Divine Things are the best
things, and of greatest importance; therefore we should be careful to charge
our Memories principally with them.

Indeed our Memories are corrupt as well as the other Faculties of the Soul,
and therefore are more ready to let slip good things, and retain evil things:
This however should not satisfy us in our forgetfulness of Divine Things; but
rather beget in us a greater care of retaining them. The Apostle Paul calls
upon us to Give a very earnest heed unto the things which we hear, loast at any
time we should let them slip, Heb. 2. 1. and the Apostle James, charges us not
to be Forgetful Hearers of the Word, Jam. 1. 25. It Is said of Mary, that she
kept the glad tidings of a Savior, Luke 2. 19. Without something of this
retentive faculty, we cannot profit by the WORD Preached. If Food be not kept
in the Stomach it nourishes not; and if the Spiritual Food of the Word be not
retained, but lost through forgetfulness, it will not nourish the Soul. If we
go from a Sermon, and carry nothing at all of it away with us, but perfectly
forget it, how is it possible it should be of any use unto us?

DIRECTION. IX.
Meditate upon what you have Heard, and Expostulate with your Souls about it.
Dwell in your thoughts upon a Sermon: This is, as Chewing the Cud, which helps
an easier Digestion, and more wholesome nourishment. Ponder upon the great
Truths which have been spoken unto you; this will be a Preaching over again a
Sermon unto your own Souls; by doing of which, the Truths delivered will be
more fixed in your memories, and your hearts affected anew, and a more lasting
Impression left upon them. It Is said of Mary, That She Pondered those Sayings
in her heart, Luke 2. 19. See then that you do after a Sermon seriously
consider of what has been said; by thus musing, your hearts will be Warmed a
second time: And in Meditating upon them, Debate with your hearts about them.

To help you here:

Suppose you had heard in a Sermon, That Persons by neglecting Prayer, and the
Lord's Supper, did greatly Sin against God, and wrong their own Souls.

Now when you go Home, you should seriously ponder hereon, and Discourse your
Souls about it after this manner: Surely, What I have heard this Day is true; I
cannot Live Prayerless, I cannot Live Supperless, without giving great offense
to God: while I live in the daily neglect of those Duties, I live in a course
of daily provocation to God; nay, and not only do I sin against God, but I also
wrong my own Soul infinitely. How many a Blessing have I lost, by going so
seldom to the Throne of Grace, and never at all to the Table of the Lord?

Again, Suppose you had heard in a Sermon, That Christ is of all things the
most Precious, Then think with your selves, and say to this effect. Verily,
Jesus Christ is the Chief of ten thousand; he is the Fairest of the Sons of
men; he is altogether Lovely. In himself he is the most excellent, but is he so
to me? Do I prize him more than any Lust? more than the World? more than
Relations? more than life it self? Do I so esteem him as to long to see him
face to face, and count it my unhappiness to be absent from him?

Once more, Suppose you had heard in a Sermon, That Indwelling Sin is a
Believers greatest burden. Then say, Can I affirm this concerning my self? Do I
groan more under the burden of inward Corruption, then the burden of outward
affliction? Am I weary of my life because of my lusts? Do I Long to be
dissolved, that I may totally and eternally be delivered from this body of Sin
and Death? Is there nothing which so troubles and grieves me, as the experience
of an indwelling principle of enmity against God, inclination to evil, and
indisposition to that which is good?

Did we thus think and discourse with our selves about what we hear, how great
an influence would the word of God in an ordinary way have upon us? 1 Timothy 4.
15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them; that thy
profiting may appear to all. Jer. 15. 16. Thy words were found, and I did eat
them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart, for I am
called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts. Psalm. 1. 2,3. But his delight is in
the law of the Lord, and in his law does he meditate day and night. And he
shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water that brings forth his
fruit in his season his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he does
shall prosper.

DIRECTION. X.
Give God all the Glory of whatever Good you receive by the Word. Ascribe the
praise of all good experienced (...). Have you been any thing awakened, or
convinced or reformed by the Word? If so, render the praise to God alone: Have
you been Savingly Converted or Sanctified by the Word? Give God all the Glory.
Don't Sacrifice to your own (...); Don't set the Crown upon the head of
Instruments, but upon the head of Christ, Ministers say in this case, Not unto
us, not (...) us, but unto God be the Glory. (...) Plant and Apollos Water, but
it is God that gives the increase: They are no more than Instruments, it is God
who is the Efficient of all Spiritual, Saving Good. To God alone you must Pray
for a Blessing; and if you receive it, to God alone you must ascribe the
Praise. If you thus Bless God, he will give you further cause to Bless him. A
thankful receiver shall have more to be thankful for. The ^^^ouncing the power
of Moral Persuasions (...) the Ministry, and the power of Free Will in our own
natures, together with an acknowledging the Sole efficiency of the Spirit of
God in our Salvation, is one of the most effectual courses for the obtaining
Spiritual and Saving Good by the Word of God Preached. Say unto God, Lord!
Ministers can, do nothing, Ordinances can do nothing, I can do nothing, in
point of Saving Communications; It Is thou that must do all, and all that has
hitherto been done, it is, thou that have done it. Say thus humbly and
seriously, and God will make thee to feel more of the power of His Spirit in
the Ministry of His Word.

Consider what is said, and the Lord give you Understanding in all things, 2 Timothy 2. 7.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THERE is now in the Press, and will speedily be Published, A Discourse
concerning the Nature, and Power of the Holy Angels, and the great benefit
which the True Fearers of God Receive by their Ministry, delivered in several
Sermons: To which is added, A Sermon concerning the Sin and Misery of the
Fallen Angels: Also a Disquisition concerning Angelical Apparitions, in answer
to a Case of Conscience, showing that Demons often appear like Angels of Light,
and what is the best and only way to prevent deception by them: All considered
according to the Scripture, Reason, Experience, and approved History. By the
Reverend and Learned Mr. Increase Mather, Praesident of Harvard College in
Cambridge, in N.E.

There is also ready for the Press, The Saints Victory and Triumph over Sin and
Death. As it was Recommended in a Sermon, Preached to the Artillery Company at
Boston: On their Day for Election of Officers. By Mr. Peter Thacher, Pastor of
the Church of Christ in Milton.


