Kneeling to GOD, A Parting with Friends: OR THE FRATERNAL Intercessory CRY Of
Faith and Love:

Setting forth and Recommending the Primitive Mode of taking Leave

By I. Danforth, Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Dorchester.

1 These 5.25. Brethren Pray for Us.

Col. 1.9. We -- do not cease to Pray for You.

1 Samuel 12.23. Moreover, as for Me, GOD forbid that I should SIN against the
LORD, in CEASING to Pray for You, etc.

Boston, Printed by B. Green, and J Allen. Sold by S. Phillips, at the Brick
Shop 1697.

The Dedication.
TO THE RELIGIOUS, CANDID, AND FAVORABLE ACCEPTANCE, AND PATRONAGE, OF THE
VERY HONORABLE WILLIAM STOVGHTON, ESQUIRE, LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND COMMANDER
IN CHIEF etc.

AS ALSO, OF THE HONORABLE THOMAS DANFORTH, Esquire. ONE OF THE CHIEF JUDGES etc.
AND OF THE REST OF HIS MAJESTY'S HONORABLE JUDGES, COUNCILLORS, AND JUSTICES,
IN THIS PROVINCE: AS ALSO, OF HIS FATHERS, AND BRETHREN, IN CHRIST JESUS, THE
REVEREND (...) OF THE GOSPEL, IN THE CHURCHES IN NEW ENGLAND: AND LIKEWISE, OF
OTHER LIVING AND LATELY SIGNALIZED INSTANCES, YEA PATTERNS, OF A TRUE,
GENEROUS, PUBLIC SPIRIT, THAT HAVE ALSO APPEARED, AND ARE YET TO ^E FOUND,
AMONG OUR WORTHY MERCHANTS, GENTLEMEN, AND OTHER CHRISTIANS; [ WHOSE ZEALOUS
OBLATIONS OF PRAYERS, CARES, PAINS, COUNTENANCE, AND INFLUENCE, UNTO THE
SPREADING OF THE GOSPEL, AND ENLARGEMENT OF THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST; AND OF
ADDITIONAL MAINTENANCE, TO SOME GODLY PREACHERS, IN SOME POORER PLACE^, IS GONE
UP FOR A MEMORIAL BEFORE GOD;] THE UNWORTHY AUTHOR [A SENSIBLE AND DUTIFUL
OBSERVER OF THE WORTHY DEEDS, THAT THE SOVEREIGN, AND EFFECTUAL GRACE OF GOD,
HAS ENABLED YOU TO DO, BOTH FOR GOD, AND ^OR HIS HOUSE; BEING BY THE CALL OF
THE DIVINE PROVIDENCE, UPON A SUBJECT, THAT CALLS FOR SUCH PATRONS, AS STAND
NEAREST TO HIS THRONE OF GRACE; AND BEING BROUGHT UPON THE PUBLIC STAGE, IN A
DIFFICULT TIME, BY UNGAINSAYABLE IMPORTUNITY;] HUMBLY, AND PROPERLY, RECOMMENDS
AND DEDICATES THE FOLLOWING MEMORIAL FOR PRAYER.

Licensed by AUTHORITY.

Published by T. Tilestone, Senior, H. Leadbetter, N. Clap Senior, W Prat, D.
Preston, N. Glover; and Diverse Others. Anno Dom. MDCXCVII.

Kneeling to GOD at Parting with Friends
ACTS 21.4, 5, 6. And finding Disciples, we tarryed there seven days, Who said
to Paul, through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem. And when We
had accomplished those days, we departed, and went our Way, and They all
brought us on our Way, with Wives and Children, till we were out of the City:
And we KNEELED DOWN ON THE SHORE AND PRAYED. And when We had taken our Leave,
one of another, We took Ship, and They returned home again.


Honorable, Reverend and Beloved, in our Lord Jesus Christ.

A Great part of Sacred Scripture is H^storical: No part Unprofitable:
P^aecepta D^cent; Exempla Movent: Examples are Powerful Preac^ers. The
barrenest Ground in Scripture bears the richest Mines; Nor can a Child of GOD
fall into such a Case or Strait, as for a plentiful Relief whereof, this
wonderful Treasury and Storehouse is unprovided; So Adorable is the Fullness of
the Scriptures.

To make an Experiment hereof, I have produced this Text at this Time, when we
are upon taking our Leave of sundry of our dear Brethren, Ministers and other
Christians, now ready to depart from us, unto diverse Places, upon the Service
of the Kingdom of CHRIST; Nor am I altogether without hope, that it may prove a
Word in Season, and useful, at least, to instruct us in some considerable part
of our present Duty; although between our Case, and the Case in the Text, in
some particulars, there be no Comparison, or Parallel.

Our Text is a small Paragraph of the History of Paul's Adventures: He had been
a Persecutor, Acts 9 1. but now is a Propagat^r of the Gospel: and through
Sovereign Goodness He is chosen and made a First Rate Vess^l to bear Christ's
Name before the Gentiles far and near. Yet Rectoral Paternal Holiness will show
Him how great things he must suffer, himself, not from Others only, but from
Christians also, whom He had made before, the Subjects of Sufferings. 'Twas no^
enough that (...) Uncomfortable Contention had parted Him, and his Comfortable
Companion, Barnabas, that Son of Consolation, [Acts 11* 1, 2. and 15.39, 40.]
But, when, after a large Circuit, (being called by the Spirit from one place to
another) He is now bound, in the Spirit, to go to Jerusalem, (Acts 20.16, 22,
23.) Behold! the Disciples at Tire, said to Paul, by the Spirit, that He should
not go up (...) Jerusalem. What a perplexing exercise was this to the mind of
Paul! And does the Spirit indeed first Bid, and then Forbid? Does he say one
thing at Miletum, and another thing at Tire? I suppose it not: But that when
the Holy Spirit certifyed Them of the Bonds and Afflictions which Paul must
endure at Jerusalem, [as He had beforehand, and did afterward also certify
Paul and other Saints of the same, Acts 20.23* and 21.11.] then the Disciples
at Tire did [as did the Disciples at Cesarea, Acts 21.12.] by their own Spirits
endeavor to dissuade Him from this Adventure. Thus, as our Blessed LORD
Suffered affliction from the irregular fondness of Peter* Mat. 16 22, 23. So
Paul suffers no small perplexity from his Christian Friends, who having a
clearer sight and discerning of his Danger, than of his Duty, and knowing but
in part, did very ill to entangle the Sacred Text of the SPIRIT, with their
ignorant and fallible, though well meant Commentarys.

Our Text shows us the Renowned Apostle of the Gentiles at the famous Seaport
City of Tire: And in this short History, we may Consider,

[1.] His Arrival at Tire: Amplifyed with the Narrative of some Rarities that
He met with there? [ And finding Disciples] The best of men in the worst of
places; Lo! the good Seed, long since sprinkled upon (...) Tyrians by the LORD
Jesus, is sprung up unto a comfortable Harvest: Disciples that cannot find out
one another, nor consort together, have Shipwreckt and lost (...) noble facu^ty
and property of Disciples of CHRIST.

[2] His Continuance there. He stays long enough to enjoy one Sabbath with
them* His other Work wo^ld allow no more; Their Desires could be satisfied with
no less: When the Spirit urges to hasten to Jerusalem, Paul cannot be content
to linger at Tire

[3] His Departure thence: Illustrated.

[1] From the Aversion of the Tyrians, on account of the Suffering which the
Holy Spirit had showed them that Paul would be exposed to at Jerusalem* [They
said to him, by the Spirit, that He should not go up to Jerusalem; [that is]
except he would hazard his Life.] An Elliptical Expression; But, to be
interpreted by Clauses, in this History of Paul's Travails, pr^ceding and
followin^, (...) as other E^^iptical Sentences (of which both Testaments have
good store) usually are: so 1 Samuel 23.12 They will deliver thee up: it is to be
understood, with a Subauditur, [If thou continuest there.] Genesis 30.27. I pray
Thee: his meaning is; I pray thee, Tarry with me. Psalm. 109.4* I prayer, Our
Translation reads it with a supply of the Verb, I give my self unto Prayer. So
in many other places.

[2] From the Resolution of blessed Paul and his Companions, manifested by the
Effect of it; (And we Departed.)

[3.] From the Admirable Concession, Submission and Condescension of those
Exemplary Christians manifested in their most affectionate and encouraging
Attendance and Assistance afforded to the Apostle, all along his way through
the City, and until he went Aboard the Ship. [ They all brought us on our way,
with Wives and Children, till we were out of the City.] Thus,

When our Brethren see their Call clear, to adventure upon any hazardous
Designs for the Gospel; It Is but a Christian Duty to further them, and help
them, in the best way we can: Yea, suppose some particular Enterprises, upon
which they are resolvedly, and by Advise of many, bound forth, and their
Removals, on the account thereof, may not be, at the present, perfectly in all
points agreeable to the opinion and inclination even of some of their Brethren
that have the Spirit of God; yet All that have the Spirit of God, Men, Women
and Children, will, and ought unanimously to strengthen their Hearts and Hands
in their God, and to promote the Work of the Lord that is under their Hands.

[4] It is illustrated and set forth by their Prayers at Parting. [ And we
kneeled down on the Shore, and Prayed, etc.] Behold! the very place wh^re, and
Posture wherein they made their Applications to the Great God of the Sea, and
of the Dry Land, taken notice of by the Holy Ghost, and put upon Everlasting
Record! Verily, now, unto the Believer that Realizeth the Omnipresence of the
LORD, all the World is God's House, and every Place as an House of Prayer, a
Temple for Spiritual Worship: And in every Place, if his Heart has but a
Sacrifice ready, he has a Glorious Sanctifying A^tar at Hand, and a GOD too,
that ha^h respect to Him and to His Offering His humble Heart is not nice or
squeamish at all about the place, and he can Kneel on the Sand, as well as
Stand in the Temple, before the Lord his Maker. He knows, God* looks for
outward Profession, as well as inward Subj^ction, and Devotion; outward signs,
as well as inward sense; the KNEE as well as the HEART; and by the Mercies of
God, He is engaged to present his Body, together with his Soul and Spirit, an
Holy Sacrifice to the Lord. Romans 12.1.

But from their Affectionate and Devout Prayers at their last Parting, we may
gather this DOCTRINE.

That the very best thing that Disciples of Christ, at taking leave one of
another, can do one for another, is to turn their Cases into Prayers.

I shall endeavor by the Lords Help, to demonstrate this Doctrine from these
three Considerations

1. That it is the best we can do, in that it is most highly Lawful, and always
possible and practicable.

2 In that it is as Needful as Lawful.

3. In that it is the most powerful and successful of any thing that we can do.

First of all, It is most Lawful and Possible. We have Precept, Promise and
Example to convince us, that we may Lawfully as well as Possibly turn one
another Cases into Prayers. I exhort says Paul, by the Spirit, 1 Timothy 2.1.
that Intercessions be made for all men, [He intends not the Damned, nor such as
have Sinned against the Holy Ghost:] All men that Christ Offers His Blood and
Benefits unto, we ought to offer our Prayers for them; see verse 4, and 8. But
especially, we may and must Pray, with and for the Brethren. Jam. 14, 16. Pray
one for another. Although we are unworthy of liberty to make Petition for our
selves, yet the Grace of God allows, yea injoyns us to put in requests for
others also: Moses, and Samuel, and Daniel, may speak a good word for all
Israel: and the Debt of Love to Jerusalem is to be discharged in the lawful and
current Coin of Prayers. Psalm. 122 6* Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, They
shall prosper that Love Her. If we are for Examples; Look we to our Father
Abraham, The first thoughts of Parting with his Son, are ful^ of Prayer; Oh!
that he may Live i^ The Sight. Genesis 17.18. Isaac and Jacob part with Prayers.
Gen 28.3, 4, 5. So Israel and His Sons. Genesis 43.14. God Almighty give you
mercy. So Job and his Friends part friendly with Prayers and Sacrifices offered
up at their Parting. Job 42 8, 9. And this was Paul^ Custom. The Shore of
Mile^um was Sancti^fyed (...) Knees and Tears, before the Shore (...) Tire was;
The Elders of Ephesu^ being Witnesses; whom, at parting, as a choice part of
his dear Charge, He Surrendered and Commended, unto the Tuition of Heaven* Not
expecting to see them or do for them, any more, upon the Earth. Acts 20.32, 36,
38. But Our Lord Jesus is an Example with^out Exception: And we have His
Farewel^ Prayer in the 17 th. Chap. of John as well as His Farewell Sermon in
the foregoing Chapters; Moreover, unto the Warranty of His own Pattern and
Precept He has graciously added the further Encouragements of His Promises,
That He will even Pardon our Sins to us in answer to our Prayers one for
another, 1 John 5.16. Yea, that if we join together in desiring and requesting
of Him, any thing whatsoever, that it shall be done for us by His Father which
is in Heaven, Mat. 18.19, 20.

Thus we have proved, that this Way is highly warrantable; and very Possible
and Practicable also; for Ab Esse ad Pos^^^ valet consequentia, That that has
actually been done, is possible to be done; Coelius [lib. 20* cap. 25.]
Relates, that when Themistocles, upon a severe demand of Moneys from the
Inhabitants of Andrios, told them that he brought two Gods with him unto them,
viz. Persuasion and Force: They replied, that they had two great Gods among
themselves, that hindered them, to wit, Poverty, and Impossibility. But as to
the case in hand, the Saints are delivered from them both. But it is the best we
can do, for (1.) It Is All that we can do, many times (2) It may Always be done.
It Is (1) Only, (2) Constantly Possible. True Christians, Disciples, do belong
to Christ; Now had they not the Spirit of Christ, they were ^one of His. Romans
8.9. They have therefore His Spirit, and He teaches and helps them to Pray,
Romans 8 15, 26. And there is no Chosen Vessel but upon his Conversion, it may be
said, Behold he prays. Acts 9.11. If Nathanael be an Israelite indeed, Christ
has seen him Kneeling under the Fig Tree. John 1.47, 48. And in Prayer Jacob
gets the name of Israel. Genesis 32.28. This therefore they can do for their
Brethren, they can Pray for them, to the LORD; and many times they can do
nothing else for them; their Wit, Strength, Purse, cannot reach to Help them.
The swelling Ocean may swallow up, or Enemies s^^k them, or Sickness make an
end of them long before we can hear of it, or reach them Help with our other
Talents: But now, so long as they do but keep within the compass of THIS World,
let them go as far as ever they can, they can never get out of the reach of
Prayer. Would we have frequent Intelligence of their Welfare, we may in a New
and Living way, draw near to Him, that is always near to them, and have it:
Hannah's Son Samuel was very Remote, when she had her first satisfactory
Intelligence concerning him, after which her face was no more sad 1 Samuel 1.11,
17, 18. Nor was that the only case wherein Prayer has condescended to become
an Informer Many Holy m^n of God in later Times, and some of them in
New England ^o, have obtained upon their Knees, happy Tidings from Remote
Countries, and strange Assurances of things to come. They perceived well the
Information, beholding no Informer, but Prayer in Faith. King Edward the Sixth
asking news concerning one, that he highly Respected, was told, that there was
no hope of his Life; but he instantly replied, that he was well assured he
would recover, for he had that morning begged his Life of God: and he recovered
accordingly. Daniel indeed had swift Information from an Angel, but it was
obtained by Prayer. Dan 9.21, 22. Are some of our dear Brethren Removing to a
great and wide Distance from us, of many hundreds of miles; yet I do not see
what should hinder, but that, if the fault be not our own, we and they may
daily meet at the same Throne of Grace, and interchange some comfortable
Intelligence. Why should we not trust Faith in Prayer, when it has been making
Friends with Gods Name and Promise for Information? [ Luk 16.7, 8] What though
the Holy SPIRIT do more rarely afford the strong Pleadings of Faith, and mighty
Assurances of particular Audience, as to outward Specialties of Persons and
Cases, (notwithstanding it is not Enthysiastical to say, that the LORD is not
wont, powerfully to bear in such persuasions of Audience after strong Cries,
where he means to deny the Request,) yet could we not double the Cape of Good
Hope, although they were beyond Hercules Pillars? And when the Wings of Faith
and Prayer have mounted our Souls to the top of the Promontory of Sacred and
Surest Prospect, I mean the Promise, without doubt, the Eye of Hope, will have
a mighty advantage for the making of its most unashaming and most comfortable
Observations. Truly, if the means used, have a kindly operation, it is a
promising sign, to a sick Patient. And if the Decree have joined ^e^vent
Prayers and gracious Answers together, as the appointed means to the appointed
and desired End, woe be to that Unbelief, that shall put them asunder. I
remember, when (Attending on the College) I had been absent long from my
nearest Relations, That HONORABLE PERSON, (with whom I Sojourned diverse years,
and from whom I my self, [as well as others, alike devoted to, and in Education
for the Service of the Sanctuary] received much of the kindness of GOD; which
the LORD of His Grace, reward with Everlasting Kindness;) He was pleased to ask
me, whether my Friends at Home were in good Health or no? And when I answered,
that I could not tell; he seemed to wonder at it, inqui^ing whether I had not,
that morning been fervent in Prayers of Faith on their behalf: signifying
further, that although other ways of Intelligence were shut up, yet some
comfortable satisfaction concerning them, might be obtained in such a way; Oh!
may we All now prove the Experiment by that Excellent man of Prayer, suggested
seasonably unto One! We shall neither mistake the Paradox, nor miss of the
Consolation: May our Spiritual Experience, be but the Interpreter. This is
indeed considerable, but this is not All; For we may Save their Lives, and
Assist their Glorious Design, by our Prayers on their behalf: Luther s^ake it
by Experience, Est quaedam Praecum Omnipotentia: Nothing is too hard for the
Prayer of Faith: Jobs Prayers were able to break the Ice, to clear the Passage
for his three Friends: Job 4.2.1 -- 8. Who can tell or think how much Good that
man may do, for his Absent Friend, that is himself an honest Favorite with an
Earthly Prince, and that is unweariedly improving all Opportunities for his
Friends advantage? Brethren! we also may help our Brethren, if we bestir our
selves to take hold on God for them in this way of Prayer. And as often it is
the only thing, so always, it is the most constant thing that we can do, one
for another: If other help may seldom reach them, (yet by the Assistance of the
Spirit of God) we may afford them the Help of Prayer every day, and often in a
Day. Thus did Paul to the Saints in Rome. Romans 1.9. God is my witness whom I
Serve in the Gospel of His Son, with my very Spirit, that without ceasing I
make mention of you always in my prayers; And thus also to Philemon, Phil verse
4 I thank my GOD, making mention of thee always in my prayers: And I verily
believe that those Holy Persons found the benefit of Paul's Prayers every Day.
Thus it is Best, because most Lawful and Possible.

Secondly: Because it is as Needful as Lawful, that Parting or Parted Disciples
should turn their several Cases into Prayers. Such as stay at Home have Need to
Pray for Them that go abroad: Yea, a nec^ssity lies on them; and Woe unto Them
if they do it not: They cannot Prove the Sincerity of their Obedience to God,
or Love to the Saints, or obtain any comfortable Token and Evidence of their
own future Prosperity, that do not Pray for their Brethren who make a part of
the Church; in Praying for whom, they Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, Psalm
122.6. And suppose, their Brethren should miscarry through the weakness or for
the want of their Prayers, what horrible Guilt will unavoidably be incurred.
And they need One another Prayers, in that, The Divine Order has so Linked
Men together, as that the one (under Heaven) must be beholden to (because,
dependent on) the other, for Preservation: None but a Cain will make it a
Question, Am I my Brothers Keeper? How often does the Lord permit the Devil to
execute the Curses of Witches on their Neighbors, although, blessed be GOD,
Balaam cannot Curse, nor yet Satan Execute when and where they sometimes could
rejoice to do it. Micah 6 5. How often does the Lord fulfill the Blessings of
the Saints? They that are blessed of the Godly man, shall inherit the Earth.
Psalm. 37.22. It Is Promised, that, One day, the Saints shall be inthroned as
Co^ss^ssors with the Lord Jesus Christ, to Judge the World; And verily He seems
loath to do any great thing without their Sufferage now: They Bless and then He
Blesses. Jobs Friends must be beholding to Jobs Prayers for their acceptance
with the Lord, as has been said. And Abimeleck to Abraham's, Genesis 20.7. [ He
shall Pray for thee, and thou shall Live] And Peter to the Churches Prayers
Acts 12 5, 12. And Paul to Philemon's Prayers, Philem. v.22. And to the Prayers
of Others.

And the Benedictory Options of such Saints as stand near the Gate of Heaven,
have been allowed by the Lord, to have a more peculiar hand in the Distribution
of Divine Benefits. As Elijah's to Elisha 2 King. 2 9. Elisha's to King Joash;
2 King. 13.17. So Isaac's to Jacob of Old; Genesis 28.1, 3. Jacobs to His Sons,
Genesis 49.1. And Moses's to Israel Deuteronomy. 33.1. Yet Our own Single Prayers for our
selves, have not so great and extensive an Efficacy as the Prayers of Many
others for us may have, in which more Grace is Exercised, by more Subjects, the
Lord being also more Glorified when after the Prayers, He receives the Praises,
nor of One but of Many Saints, for the Mercys which He has bestowed.

But more particularly to accommodate this Article to the Case of our now
Parting Brethren. It will evidently appear that Our jo^^t Prayers are Needful
for them, if we duly weigh these following Considerations. As Namely:

[1.] Our Prayers are Needful to them, in regard of Those by Whom they are
sent forth upon the Work of the Lord, and Wh^m they are departing from: They
are of Us. We and They are of One People of God; They and we are likely to
stand and fall together. Now, One Achan may trouble all Israel. A man not long
since in a Neighboring Colony had one Leg cut off: and when, in another Room*
the Surgeons slashed the Leg that was cut off, to make a more perfect
discovery, The poor man felt the Pains of the Gashes, and Roared dreadfully for
Anguish, until they left off: Even so, if it should fare ill with them, we
should Cry out, and if we should Desert them and Sin in Ceasing to Pray for
them, they would feel it bitterly. Brethren! Our Sins, are their Danger, and
our Holy Devotion, may concur and conduce, not a little to their Safety and
Prosperity. It may fare with the Host Abroad, even as the People that send
them do demean themselves at Home: Hence the Lord gives a strict Caution, Deuteronomy.
23.9. When thine Host goes forth -- then keep thee from every Wicked thing.
Some Parents have had so strange a Sympathy with their Children, many Scores
yea Hundreds of Miles* distant from them; and some Veruous Wives, with their
Husbands; as that no considerable danger or distress has happened to their
Husbands or Children, but they have been distressed and in Agonys themselves,
with a strange fear on their Spirits, concerning their Relations, that were in
distress at the same Moments of Time. Some such Instances are recorded in
faithful History, and more are ready at hand to be produced. Even so our
Prayerlessness, as it will Endanger our selves and State, so we may fear, they,
that may be Abroad, may Feel it and Rue it.

They therefore have no small Need, that we duly seek the Lord on their behal^.
There were some of whom the Apostle John Writes 1 John 2.19. They went out from
us, but they were not of us: But of these our Beloved Brethren, it will rather
be spoken, They were of us and went, as they were sent forth by us* 2 Cor. 8 23
All Extraordinary Calling unto the Service of the Kingdom of Christ, was not so
immediately from God, as ever, to exclude the Ministry of Man; as appears in
the History o^ the Calling of E^izeus and Matthias. Wickliff^ Luther,
Zwinglius, and other Reformers an^ Restorers of the Church, were neither
Prophets* Apostles, nor Evangelists, to speak properly but having received
singular Gifts from God such as the Lord saw His Church stood in need of, and
living in the time when all good Order was disturbed and so being Necessi^tated
and Spirited, to act some things besid^ and beyond the Common Order; their
Action and Successes somewhat, though but a little resembling what was
performed by Prophet^ and Apostles of old; therefore we find them by some Godly
Writers Metonimically called Extraordinary and Apostolical Ministers o^ the
Church of God: Truly they had some Uncommon Seals set unto their Ministry, bu^
neither were Miracles necessary to attend Their Ministry, nor yet the Ministry
of all such o^ old as had a Proper Extraordinary Calling, a^ the Examples of
many Old Testament Prophets and of John the Baptist do show. And although the
Church Militant, is now without the Apostles Cares to spread and Propagate the
Gospel, all over the World; Yet it is not the will of Christ, that that Work
should fall to the Ground: But as there is an Ordinary Ministry, which has its
whole Direction from the will of God revealed in the Scriptures, and from those
Media which God has appointed in His Church, one deriving Power of
administering Divine things alone immedi^tely from God, though their Call is by
man, from ^he Lord, who also (not without good Education by men for the most
part) has qualified and fitted them for their Calling: I say, as ^here is such
a Ministry for the building up of ^he Church Catholic in the several similary
Visible particular Parts of it, viz. Particular Congregational Churches, so
there is an Incum^ency of Duty on this Ministry and these ^hurches to expend
and bestow both Pray^rs and Pains for the stretching forth the Curtains of
their increa^ed Solomon, and the ^athering of others, ^ven of Strangers, into
the ^heep fold of Jesus Christ, and Settlement of Gospel Order and Ordinances
among them. It was meet that first the Law should go forth of ^ion, and the
Word of the Lord from Jeru^^lem, by the Ministry of the Apostles; but ^fterward
the Gentiles must Call one another, and spread it from Nation to Nation; Isai.
2.1 -- 5. and from Neighborhood to Neighborhood. As Leaven is first laid in,
and then it diffuseth, and spreads it self gradually* Mat. 13.33. And as from
one grain of Mustard Seed, a whole Field of it is propagated at length: So it is
as to the Glorious City of God; time was, when it had but one House in it, but
Zerubbabel holds the Plummet till it b^ fully Built to the very Suburbs: The
World is carried on by Him that gives Gifts unto men, and Pastors and Teachers
to build up the Body of Christ, till we all come, etc. Ephesians. 4 10 -- 13. And the
Word is to be committed to faithful men, who are to transmit it further, ^ Tim.
2.2. Thus, the Temple is often built even in Troublous Times; Dan. 9 25. and i^
the Church begin to neglect to disperse the Gos^pel abroad, in comes
Persecution, and disperseth the Church, to the wonderful Increase of Believers
in the World. Acts 8.4, 5, 6. (...) Candle may serve to light up many more* and
One Church may lend materials to the fur^nishing of Another. Cant. 8.8, 9, 10.
The Candlestick that holds the Candle must no^ Monopolize its light and
influence: Our Le^banon is not for our selves only, but to enclos^ others with
Doors of Cedar. Our Mines and Treasures must stand open to our Solomon t^ Build
more Palaces of Silver with. The Church that is already Organized, is with
Christ, of Common Council, Care and Endeavor, for the Communication of what
may tend to the New Up-springing and Maturity of Sister Churches. Yea every
Believer has some degree of a Catholic Spirit in him, wishing that all the
World, and striving to the utmost of his Influence, that all that are near him,
may become altogether such as he is [except his Bonds,] Acts 26 29.

And, as for New England, Let our ancient Charter speak, what our Fathers
Professed Intention and Design was in coming hither, Viz Not only purely and
peaceably to Enjoy, but also generously and charitably to Spread and Propagate
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to direct the blind Pagans in the way to
blessedness for ever. Some that have seen our first Times, can Remember, how
much the Indian Work was then in the Hea^ts and Prayers of the Saints, and how
it Flourished, and how many of those American Converts have had a Triumphant
Passage into Glory; but since that Work is grown out of our Hearts and Prayers,
it is doleful to observe what dark and deadly Symptoms, in most places, do
appear upon the face thereof. When Gods Times to favor a People are come: His
Saints do greatly pity their Stones and Dust, Psalm. 102, 13, 14. But when the
Lords Remembrancers hold their peace, The Lord Himself also holds His Hand, as
if He had forgotten His Work; for, His stated Order, He will observe, and
stands upon His Honor and Glory, of being sought unto by the House of Israel
to do it for them, Ezekiel. 36.37. The Lord recover and revive that work, and our
Prayers for it, for His Holy Name sake. Amen. But to proceed, were not our
Fathers a Generation of Witnesses and Confessors of the Lord Jesus Christ? Did
not God the Father of Christ, put His Son into Possession of these Ends of the
Earth, by livery and seizin, when He cast out many of the Heathen, and planted
His People here, in their stead? And were not these Churches of Christ Jesus to
be Pillars for the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.15? When Israel Apostatized to Idolatry,
many of Asher, forsook their Inheritances, and came and dwelt in Judah for
Religions sake, and when Prophecy was restored to Israel, behold a Prophetess
of the D^ughters of Phanuel of that Tribe: Luke 2.36. And are the Days near for
the Illumination of the Dark Parts of the World? May we not humbly Hope, that
New England (though Sinful) shall have an hand therein? What if the Lord will
have His Word go forth along into this America, from His Jerusalem here? and
that too, whilst our Sins and His Judgments are upon us, that so no flesh may
glory in His sight? And if the Lord have designed these Churches unto such
work* Suppose, we should be ^l^ck and negligent herein, Quere, whether God may
not find out ways to scatter and disperse us abroad, and compel us to Attend
it? Acts 8.4, 6

And I will add this further, Has the Lord made the Offers of the Gospel by
the Ministers of these Churches, Acceptable unto any Considerable Places
[sometimes deeply prejudiced against us and our way of Worshipping the Lord, by
occasion of Ancient Severities] and opened a Door unto us, to show them the
Kindness of God, for their Everlasting Good? And has the Lord Inclined some
other Places more remote, to send hither for Spiritual Help, rather than to
other Lands? And has the Lord Inclined the Hearts of sundry of our Dear
Brethren, both Ministers and other Christians, to accept of Missi^n unto such
Service; and are they now going ^orth, [One of them having been lately
Separated to the Pastoral Office, over a Little Church, with Fasting and
Prayer, by the Reverend E^ders and Messengers of diverse of our Churches] And
shall we not Kneel for them before the Lord? What we All owe to God and to His
Kingdom, we have Separated them to discharge it for us, and they are New
Englands Offering to the LORD JESUS CHRIST, for the Service of His Kingdom: and
how shall we Sanctify them otherwise, than by Prayer? 1 Timothy 4 5. And are we
not more peculiarly obliged to be much in fervent Supplications for them, than
the Churches of God in other Countries are, since they are peculiarly Ours, and
our Offering to the LORD? Do we not yet know that we stand but in ill Terms
with the Lord our God, and that an Offering will not be easily Accepted from
declined and provoking New England? And have we not the greater need to use
what humble Importunity we can? Paul desires the Brethren to pray for Him, that
his Charitable Offerings and Services might be accepted of the Saints; Romans 15
31. But verily we have need also to pray hard, that our poor Oblations may be
accepted of the Lord: For if our hearts be not much in, and our Prayers with
our Gratulatory Sacrifice to the Lord, how can we expect, that he should regard
it at all? Qui frigide orat, docet negare. Our dear Brethren, now going forth
from us, have a greater dependence (under Christ) upon our poor Prayers for
them, than we can easily apprehend, for, if we desert them, considering their
relation to us, they may fear, that the Lord will also; But His Ways and His
Thoughts are high above ours, as the Heavens are above the Earth, which is,
through Christ Jesus, our only hope and stay, when we see the Glory of His
Paternal Holiness and Severity, and our own Vileness. Well, I will be humbly
bold to say, that a Price is this day put into our Hands, may we have Hearts to
improve it. It Is too sadly evident, to be concealed or dissemb^^d, that we have
lost much of our wonted frequency and ancient intimacy with the Lord, and that
a lamentable estrangedness of Spirit is grown between the Lord and New England;
Now, as wise Courtiers when under a Cloud, seek, and make much of some
Ingratiating Errand into the presence of their Prince, especially some matter
of mighty Consequence to the Realm and State; So were we wise Christians, we
should prize highly any good Errand, into the Presence of the Lord, especially
such an Important Errand as this, wherein the Great Affairs of His Kingdom and
Glory and o^ the Souls of men are concerned. May we obtain such Grace, that the
Lord may see our hearts once purely and thoroughly concerned, and warmly engaged
ab^u^ such things as are chiefly in the Lords Eye and Heart; as ^hereby,
Religion may begin to be Revived within us, so a fair way will be pa^ed for us,
by His Infinite Grace, for our Returning into His Favor and Acquaintance
again. Our Brethren then, that have so earnestly desired our Prayers this Day,
might use the words of the Apostle in another case, and say, We ask Your
Prayers, not only, or not so much, that we desire and need the Gift, and the
Help thereof, but, that FRUIT may abound unto YOUR account, both now, and in
the day of Christ. Your Applications to the Throne of Grace for us, shall
further Your Own We come at that Throne, as well as Ours; and moreover,
whatsoever we shall obtain and prevail to do, by the force of your Prayers
(next under CHRIST) and by the force of New Englands Prayers 'twill be accepted
as if New England and you had done it your selves.

[2] As our Prayers are needful for them in Regard of Our selves that send
them, so also (...) Regard of Themselves that are sent; The Places they are
sent unto, The Work they are sent upon, and the great dependence that will be
upon their Success therein.

As for some of the Plantations which they are sent unto, is not their Mode of
Settlement an high Provocation to the Lord? Who can justify their laying out
of, and s^parate Settling upon such large, Scattered, distant Plantations, and
Farms, as Bid Defiance unto Civil Cohabitation in convenient Vicinity, and so
not only to Religion and the Worship of God, not so to be attended and
maintained, but even to Civility it self? And who then can much wonder if many
of the Rising Generation should grow Atheistical, Ignorant, Erroneous, Profane,
Profligate, and Abominable, having no such Public Spiritual Means to restrain
them from Vice, and to have promoted their Conversion, as in other Places is
Enjoyed? Is not Worldliness a Reigning Sin among them? Now the Friendship of
the World is Enmity to God; and he that Loves the World, the Love of the
Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. And how many are grown Old in a custom of
Sinning? and can they change? Can they learn to do well, who are accustomed to
do evil? And how inveterate have some been in their Prejudices against even
Godliness it self, because of the Vices of some, that have made a Profession
thereof! As if Christ and His Family were to be abhorred because there was one
Horrible Judas there. Such Great Sins will not be Pardoned, without Great Suit
at the Throne of Grace. One, that was meditating in the Field in one of those
Places, was much surprised and affected, when he suddenly met with a great
Parcel of milk white Dry Bones, an Emblem of the Dead Souls that Ezekiel was
Commanded to Prophecy over, that they might live. Verily their Spiritual
Resurrection will not be obtained without Prayer. The Lord will be sought to
for the Life of such ^ouls, Ezekiel. 36.26, 37. Yet at the Faith and Prayer of
others for them, God can Pardon mighty Sins, Mat 9 2. And cast out Monstrous
Devils and Lusts, that will not otherwise be ejected but by Fasting and Prayer,
Mark 9.29. Oh! Can we endure to see the Destruction of so many English People,
and not make an Outcry of Prayer to the Lord on their behalf? [Esther 8.6.]

And now that the Gospel in the pure and powerful Dispensation of it, is
advancing to them, and their Eternal State is put upon the Turning Point; What
a Precipice of Infandous Ruin stand they upon; and how shall they escape if
they neglect so great Salvation? and when the Lord once puts them thus upon the
Wheel, (and God knows whether as to many of them, it may not be the last
probation time, that ever they shall have) our hearts should tremble for them,
least that they be M^rred in the hands of the Potter: and now that they are
Brought to the Birth, why should Precious Immortal Souls perish, in any part,
for want of the Sacred Midwifery of Prayer* Do not some Fields among them
promise well, and seem white already for the Harvest; But then also our Duty
remains upon us, Luke 10.2. To Pray to the Lord of the Harvest, etc.

Dares any man presume to say or think, that he has one spark of true Grace in
his Heart, that can forbear to pray now?

Again, the weakness of these our Dear Brethren that are Sent does bespeak our
Prayers on their behalf. Though the Lord has signally preserved them from
Spots, (Blessed be His Holy Name! yet Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? Have they not been born and bred in the very depth of the Apostacies
of these Churches? However, it is with them personally, yet does not Public
Guilt involve them as well as others? As for Satan (whose Kingdom they are sent
to destroy, in the Name of Christ) He will stand at theirs (as He did at
Joshua's) Right Hand, to resist them: Not only with cursed Temptations; but
also with cruel Accusations; May He but see them Clothed with filthy Raiment
before the Angel: Now, If the Lord mark Iniquity, they cannot stand: And oh!
how much Faith and Holiness do they and we want? The Babe wants of the Stature
of Manhood, much more than He has already atteined: So it is with the New
Creature at first: Oh! How much is lacking in Faith, hope, love, zeal, purity;
and what is wanting of Perfection of Sanctification, is doubtless made up with
Imperfection and Corruption: But they ought to be extraordinarily holy,
abstaining, not from Evil only, but even from all appearance of Evil, that
adventure upon such Extraordinary Service, and most strictly must they walk,
that (...) and so many E^es upon them, that will judge of (...) Religion,
wholly by their Conversations? If Satan should trip them (and he will be sure
to do the utmost that he shall be permitted toward it) what a scandal would
arise to Religion, what an incurable ruin to that Work under their hands! Say
then uprightly, Do not they stand in need of Prayers? Again, the D^vil bearing
them such a cruel spite: Though there be an open Door, yet they must expect
many Adversaries: The many monstrous Militant Members of Satan Mystical will be
rallyed up against them, if God restrain them not; and do not they need Prayers
then, that must do well and h^ar ill, and must adventure all for Jesus Christ?
and so more than Figh^ with Beasts at Ephesus. Besides, they are young and
inexperienced, and in that respect have this principally to comfort them: Judge.
7.2, 4. That It may be they are not to^ many for God to work by Prayers o^
Saints were most needful to the Apostles themselves, much more unto These Our
Brethren* For,

1. Then, the Spirit was more plentifully poured out, but l^ss now.

2. They had Miracles to confirm their Office and Doctrine, which are not
ordinarily to be expected now* And

3. Souls are as sorely prejudiced, blinded, and hardened now, as ever in the
Apostles Days: Do we indeed understand the Perils and Toils and Trials that
the Work will unavoidably expose them unto, that we do our part to engage them
in, and can we find in our hearts to leave them in the lu^ch now, and so sin
against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for them? God forbid it should be so.

Thus we have seen that it is most needful. Consider we in the last place, that
it is the most powerful and successful thing that we can do for our Brethren, to
put in daily for them at the Throne of Mercy. When did the Lord say unto the
Seed of Jacob, that they should seek his Face in vain! Are not fervent
Suppliants such Favorites, as cannot possibly miscarry in their well grounded
Suits for Grace? ^ Joh* 5 14, 15 If King David stood so much upon His Honor,
that H^ would not recall His banished (though his Heart was set upon it) until
one of his most noble Peers, did supplicate Him for it: Well may the Lord do so
too; But God is of one mind: Can Prayer turn Him? Verily His invariable mind
and d^^ree is, that His outward Works shall turn upon the Wheel of Prayer, Mat.
6.6. and that our hearts and desires within us shall bear the Counter part unto
His Will and Designs without us, referring to what desirable good shall come to
pass, and be wrought in the World. The Holy Spirit helps our infirmities, and
teaches us to Pray, Romans 8. The Lord therefore can no more be out of Love with
Evangelical Prayer, than with His own Will and Work* And if the Spirit helps
our infirmities, Our infirmities (no more than El^as his Passions) shall no^
hinder the Success of our Prayers, any more than the acceptance of our Persons
in Christ Jesus. 'Though we have Dross in our most golden Prayers, yet we have
a curious and careful Refiner at the Altar of Incense into whose Golden Censer
they must pass, before they pass unto the Father. We are Intercessours, but not
of Mediation, we are Priests unto God, yet (says Judicious Ames,) not so much
as Subordinate to Christ in His Priestly Office He offers, He presents and
pleads His own Blood and Merits in the holiest of all; w^ stand without, and
desire to receive His be^nefits; we open our Mouths wide (by H^^ Spirit) and
stand in the capacity of Reciever^* whereas He stands alone in the high Quality
of a Mediatorial Procurer of Blessings. Bu^ how is the Grace and Blessing in
the Ne^ Covenant most Free, when as it is not to (...) attained without much
Pains in Prayer? Yet what can be more free and easy than to Ask and Receive?
How can we take in much Mercy, if we don't open our Mouths wide? If we open
them wide, what does God gain by it? If He fills them, Is it not of Grace? What
is this mite of Duty, and Acknowledgment, to the Millions Per Annum, that it is
repayed withal? And whence have we this poor mite also? Does not the same
bountiful Hand that bestows the consequent Blessings, Create and Assist the
antecedent Prayers for them? Is not Gospel^Prayer a part of Salvation, and a
good step into it, making way for further steps and degrees of Salvation. Gods
Decrees are Absolute, His Gifts free and absolute, without the Scientia Media,
and the moral conditionateing Terms on which the first Grace and all Salvation
some say is to be had, and without the wonderful Merits of Condignity and
Supererrogation or of Congruity and the other Paradoxes of the Jesuits. You
will say then, wherein consists the Efficacy of Prayer? Since if we do but what
is duty to do, what thanks do we deserve; and what Obligations in any wise can
we lay the Lord under thereby? Yea in our best Prayers we come short of our
Duty? I Answer, In that, the Grace and Exercise also of Prayer in the up grown,
is given in Con^unction with other Mercys inseparably, for the Jewel of
Salvation is set in the Gold-Ring of Prayer: He that calls on the Name of the
Lord shall be Saved: Hold fast the Ring and you secure the Jewel. In the bails
and bundle of Life and Blessings; the Covering that all is bound up in, is
Prayer. If you come not a^ that to lay it open, you can come at no other
particulars of the Invoice of Salvation. The Lord Jesus has sent us the
Treasures of His Goodness Locked up in the Glorious Cabinet of the New Covenant
and Promise, and in the Lock thereof is put the Key of Prayer; now God has
Ordained such an Order and Method in the Application of the benefits, that we
shall first take and use the Key and thereby come at further Mercys: and the
Eternal Decree is so Absolute, that we can no more fail of the means set down
in that decree, than we can fail of the end; and therefore they speak what is
not meet to be spoken of God* that say, They and their Brethren shall do well
enough, if it be so decreed, whether they Pray or no; as if God had certainly
decreed the End without the Means. And they Blaspheme the Lord Jesus Christ,
who look to Prayer, more than unto Christ Himself; when as Prayer without
Christ is worse than nothing. It Is CHRIST'S NAME mainly and not our Prayers that
has Power wi^h God and with Christ Joh. 14 23. Whatever ye Ask in MY NAME, I
will do it. Christians! If when you stand in need of Atonement, Pardon and
other Blessings, you fly to your Prayers, but neglect Christ, His Blood and
Inter^^ssion, and free Promise of Grace to Sinners; God may break your Prayers
to pieces and make them Nehush^ans, and you shall be so shut up, that you shall
not be able to Pray, till you mend that Great Fault. But if you carry Christ
and His Name, in the Vessel of your Prayers, you shall arrive at your desired
Port in Safety. The Promises Assure us of the Prevalency of Prayer, and
Innumerable Experiences of Saints are so many Seals to the Assurance. What
frequency and fervency of Prayer was used by the Fathers of New England, and Oh
with what Glorious Successes! Time would fail to mention other Instances,
faithfully Recorded by one of our Reverend ^eers, in his precious Book,
Entitled, The Pre^a^ency of Prayer, to which I refer you.

So much shall suffice for the Demonstration of the DOCTRINE.

I Proceed to the APPLICATION.
And omitting what might be spoken by way of In^erence, for Information,
Humiliation, Caution, Reproof, Trial and Comfort, least I should be too Prolix,
I shall only add somewhat, by way of Exhortation unto the great Duty of Prayer;
and particularly, Let us from what we have now had of the Word of the Lord, be
effectually moved to turn our Brethrens Cases into Prayers* Two Sorts of Prayer
Let me Urge upon you, in the Name of the Lord, the God that Hears Prayer; viz.

[1.] Proper Prayer. And [2.] Practical Prayer, as some Distinguish them.

Firstly; Proper Prayer, both Mental and Vocal, not Public only, but also
Private and Secret. Make daily most Religious Representations of your Wills and
Desires as to these Matters, unto the Lord, and Pour out your Hearts before
Him: We have proved that it is not needless: GOD Will have Our Good Will to His
Doing of our Neighbors Good. Yea, (as Proud as we are, and prone to despise
our sinful Brethren and their Prayers) the Most High will make us stoop to
them, to beg their Prayers, before He will stoop down to us, with such Mercies
and Bounties as only can li^t us up. I add, He is a Stranger in Israel that
has not heard of the deplorable Estate of Religion (not to mention Morality)
^n some of the English Plantations in thi^ America; and for what an astonishing
Number of years, Ignorance, Atheism, Profaneness and Confusion have prevailed,
not only to the amazement of their Neighbors, but also unto the Grief and
Lamentation of all Good and Wise men, among themselves, who still found their
Essaye and Motions for general Reformation, without the desired success. And in
truth, we are swallowed up, when we venture to wade into the deep Mysteries of
the hidden Counsels of the Wisdom, Sovereignty, and Holiness of God; and the
Interpreter had need be One of a Thousand [ Job 33.23, 24] Who shall only
declare so much thereof, as must be Heard and Understood, before the Lord will
alter the Course and Tenor of His Dispensations; The Good Lord give every of
Them to have such an Interpreter among them, for His Mercies sake, Amen. But if
any Thunders have uttered the Voice of God, yet I must confess and bewail my
dullness of Hearing, and Apprehension, and U^fitness to declare and expound the
same* Only One thing has been so plainly spoken, and is so agreeable to our
present Subject, and to the like Discoveries of Gods Mind and Way, that are
made and exhibited to us in His Written Oracles, as that I cannot forbear to
give an hint thereof: And what is the Voice of the Lord unto some of the
Plantations* Among many other Things, does not the Lord say, Oh my poor People,
whom I have permitted to spread abroad in the Wilderness, and to labor under
Spiritual Difficulties! I know the Prejudices you have long had, against your
Neighbors the Churches of New England, especially for some of their
Strictnesses and Severities in their Excess of Zeal for My Name: I am not
ignorant, how fast your hearts have been shut against them, and how incapable
of receiving any Spiritual Advantage from them. I also have seen all their
Transgressions and Declensions, and have variously Punished them, using both
ordinary and extraordinary Means for their Recovery; and many of you, for your
part, have (as Jobs three Friends) reputed them, Wicked Hypocrites, and their
strict Profession to be nothing but a vile Formality, for which the Divine
Vengeance comes down upon Them; yet although the Distance between you is so
wide, I that have Mercies in store for you both, am absolutely resolved, that
they shall not be bestowed, until the difference be made up, yea, I am
resolved, that your Offerings to the Lord, shall be put into Their Hands, and
that you shall be much in Their Hearts and Prayers, before you be Accepted to
highest Favors, and B^essings, to become a Name, a Praise, and a G^ory to Me
in the Earth; and they shall express their most aff^ctionate R^gards, (for My
sake) Unto you with Christian Sollicitudes for your everlasting Wefare, before
I shall turn Their Captivity. See Job 42.7, 8, 9, 10.

I proceed to say, that to me, it is no Wonder that the ^ho^^est Blessings are
but sparingly bestowed upon particular Persons and Families and Churches too,
since (while Iniquity abounds) Love and Zeal, Wax cold, and there are so few
Church Fastings and Prayers, and Family Fastings and Prayers, and the Private
Meetings of the Upright, are by so many laid aside. Oh sensible Believer! Art
thou under the Frowns of the Lord, and is He sparing of His B^essings? Thus
says the Lord God unto thee [Isa. 50 2. and 59 1] It Is not, because My Hand is
shortened; It Is not, because Mine Ear is grown Heavy; It Is not, because My
Goodness is Exhausted; I certainly intend to give you the Bl^ssings which you
need, in great Abundance; but, First of all, I must have more of your own
hearty Good Will and Desires for it, than Yet I have seen: You must come to see
that they are Gifts Worthy and Fit for a GOD of I^finite Power, Riches, and
Goodn^ss, to give; and to you most Needful, and such as you will Glorify Me
for: So must you Open your Mouths wide, that I may (...) them [Psal 81 10] And
Urge Me, wi^h your restless Importunity, And I will not say you Nay; But this
is not all, for Secondly, There are several dear Friends and Children of Mine,
whom I must and will Honor, and Gratify, in the same Matter, at the same Time;
Go and acquaint them with your Case, Get them together, before Me, that I may
take their Sufferage, Consent, Request* If they do not pity you, the Set Time
for My Favor in your Case, is not yet fully come. Psalm. 102.13, 14. But Know,
for your Comfort, that I have Decreed it, that both They shall will, and I
Work, for My Glory, and your Comfort. Well, we are now before God, and our
Brethren have begged our Prayers, and under God and Christ, have a great
Confidence of them, Let us not say them Nay; Or be willing that God should say
us* Nay. Stir we up our selves to take hold of God with the Effectual Fervent
Prayers, that avail much Help them to Work the Engine that turns about the
Hearts of men and the Face of God; and hold out to the End: Be above Guilt,
Fears, Faintings, in the Name of Christ! Let us not be Out done, by Women that
have done great things in this way! See that Gentile Woman in Matt 1^ 22* 28
How Modestly Impudent and Invincible she is; [to use the Words of Nazianzen,
concerning that Heavenly Heroesse and Powerful Amazon, his Sister] Not her Sex,
not her Nation, not her Sins, not her Misery, nor yet her Delays, from the
LORD, can discourage her: Will Christ give No Answer? I Will at it again, (thinks
she) Here Is no Denial yet: Does He give a Discouraging, Chiding, Vpbraiding
Answer? It Is well (thinks she) His Majesty Vouchsafes, at all, to Reply; that
He condescends to Argue the Case, and Capitulate, as having taken it into
Consideration: Calls He her, Dog? Here Is Encouragement; May she be of the
number of H^ushold Animals, she is content, and puts in hard for Crumbs and
Scraps: She will not take a Denial; Well, the Lord at length allows her to be
Her own Carver; She is Humble in Asking, but have it, she Will* And instantly,
and fully, she has even What she will. Was there ever Faith and Courage more
Magnanimous and Masculine.

If God has made us Kings and Priests, Rev. 5 10. and if ever we Reign with
God over Heaven and Earth, while we are on this side Heaven; it is at least
partly Spiritually by Importunate Prayer. The Lord admires that Champion Jacob,
and H^nours Him to all G^nerations: What is thy Name? Says He: ^t is ( as a
Learned Author expresses it) as if he should have said, I never met with such
a Fellow: Now as the Infants Cries and Tears can do any thing with the Parents,
so Jacob, He wept and made Supplication to the Angel, (that is) CHRIST, and
Prevailed [Gen. 32.24, 27. Hos. 12.4.] [Like as He Commanded Athens of old,
that could do any thing with Her, who could do every thing with Him that Swayed
that State.] But on the other hand consider, He that Prays coldly, begs a
Denial. Now shall not these things move us? Do not our Brethrens urgent
Necessities, urge our urgent and fervent Supplications? Inasmuch as, if we turn
their Cases into instant Prayers to God, He will, and perhaps instantly too,
turn their Cases into Blessings. And if this Branch of the Exhortation Laden
with the full ripe Clusters of Esch^l, fall chiefly to our Share, that Stay at
Home; Let the other Branch be especially for such a^ More Abroad, to carry with
them: It Urges upon YOU the Wise Merchandise of Practical Prayer. There is in
every act of Gospel Obedience, a certain Power to Impetrate Blessings at the
Hands of God. [ Ames. Medul p. 266. Amst.] This is figuratively denominated
Prayer: yet is it so necessary, as that no Prayers are, with the Lord
acceptable and prevalent without it. Obedience is better than Sacrifice [1 Samuel
15.22.] If we separate Prayer from Obedience, we maim the Sacrifice, and shall
offer a blind, lame, corrupt unacceptable, abominable thing. But one point of
Obedience, I would take leave to Recommend especially unto you, and leave it
with you, before we take our Leave; and that is the Obedience of Endeavor; You
must Watch as well as Pray against Temptation; [Mat. 26.41.] You must Work for,
as well as Pray for, the Salvation of Souls, and the Enlargement of the Kingdom
of Christ Jesus. Up and be Doing, and the Lord will be with you. The Use and
Application of Means Natural, for this or that End, what is it, but an
Application to the God of Nature for that End. God is said to Hearken to it, as
if it were a Prayer unto Him [Gen. 30.17] In vain does Balaam desire the End of
the Righteous, that would not Use their Wa^. The Child of Grace, when he
desires the Breast of Blessing, you shall see his Eyes, Lips, Tongue, Hands,
Feet, all move together: The Sluggard desires: and has nothing, Prove. 13.4.
but Hunger and Nakedness, Prove. 23.21. because his hands refuse to labor.
Prove. 21.25. Is^ael bound for Canaan must Stand still from Diffidence and
Distraction, but not from Endeavor, Exodus 14.13, 15 -- And the Lord said unto
Moses, wherefore Cryest thou unto me: ^peak thou unto the Children of Israel,
that they Go FORWARD

Now that nothing may Discourage your and our Faith in Prayer, and Courage in
Endeavor, Let me remove some Objections out of the way and so Conclude.

The Objections that I suspect, refer chiefly to these Four Heads.

[1] The Work. [2.] The Call. [3.] The Times. [4] The Events
1. The Work it self: It Is unreasonable that any Doubt should arise, whether it
be the Lords or no. Truly, the SIGNS of the Work of the Lord, are to be seen
upon it. (...) it not for the Glory of G^d, and Good of men? Do not both Piety
and Charity constrain unto it? Or was it set about without thoughts, cares,
counsels, prayers, ^ears? Is not the O^pen Door that is afforded, an Answer of
many Public Prayers? Does it not begin Low? hat^ it not occasioned some
Commotion in some Places? Has it no Adversaries? Is it (...) contrary to the
Interests of the World, the Flesh and the Devil? Has it not been strange^ly
forwarded by Oppositions? Has not the Progress of it exceeded our rational
Expectation* How many Divine Commands and Premise^ refer unto such Work to be
done in the Lat^^ Days, whereof some have been already men^tioned. Although I
well remember what (...) said of old, viz. Careat succ^ssibus (...) ab Eventu,
Facta notanda Putet: Yet I (...) say, is it not Encouraging to recognize and
consider, what smiles of Heaven have been thus Early upon it? (If it must
indeed be put to the test of present appearances of Providence) ^s there any
one Person living, that knew the former wide Distances, Deep Prejudices,
Jealousys and Animosities, that admites not, with what a Temper (agreeable to
Christianity) Our Godly Ministers, in their several Turns, Waiting upon them,
and Christ's Gospel with them have been Received and Entertained; and how many
Worthy Gentlemen in the place which is referred unto, have appeared to forward
the Work? ( One of whom being present at a Town Meeting, wherein many appeared,
very desirous to hinder it) stood up, and had Wisdom and Courage enough to say,
Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this Counsel and this Work
be of men, it will come to naught; but (...) it be of God, ye cannot overthrow
it, least happily (...) be found even to fight against God [as (...) Acts 5.38,
39.] I will be bold then to suppose, yea conclude, That such and so many Signs,
may be sufficient to create some Hope, at least, That this Work is of the Lord;
And you may therefore adventure upon it, with Cheerfulness and Confidence.

[^] Perhaps, your Call unto the Work, will be Objected against, on account of
your (...), Unworthiness* Want of Ordination, as to some of you; Absence from
the Ordinances of God, Absence from Friends, Straitness as to Temporals, etc.
But,

1. If you complain, how much you fall short of the sufficient Abilities of
others for so great a Work. Then I reply; The Apostolical Question remains
still to be Answered, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16. Yet
remember* If there be not Gifts, if there be not Grace, sufficient in you, yet
there is Grace sufficient for you; and you know, in and with (...) 2 Cor. 12.9.
Paul's presence was thought mean and speech contemptible. 2 Cor. 10.10* Yet he
acknowledges the Grace of GOD, that he was, what he was. 1 Cor. 15 10. He was
not too Great for God to Work by* He could hold the earthen Vessels and Lamps
while the Lord fulfilled the Work, to allude to Judge. 7.^, 20 Yet he that
undertakes the Work of God, in the Strength and Abilities of a Man, will but
Shame the Work and Break himself. Jeremys insufficiency would not Avail, as a
sufficient excuse, to exempt him from the Work of God. Jere. 1 6, 7, 8 Then
said I, Ah Lord GOD! I cannot speak, for I am a Child* But the Lord said unto
me, say not I am a Child: For thou SHALL GO to All, to whom I shall send thee,
and whatsoever I command thee, thou SHALL SPEAK: -- For I AM WITH THEE, etc.
Hearken to the Conference of GOD and Moses: Exodus 4.10, 11, 12. Moses said, I
am not Eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have sp^ken unto thy
Servant, but I am ^^ew of speech, etc. And the LORD said unto him, WHO has
MADE Man's mouth? -- Have not I the LORD? Now therefore GO* And I will BE WITH
thy Mouth, and TEACH thee, what thou shall say. And the Lord was Angry, Verse
14. when he demurred after this.

2 If against the Divine Validity of your Call, you Object your own
Unworthiness* you must give me leave to Answer, That this Objection would not
be accepted in Joshua's case, who was before the Ange^, Clothed with fi^thy
Garments, Zech. 3.3. but was most happily removed and so (I trust in God
through Christ) shall yours. It Is not unusual for the Lord to bring. His
Servants unto a deep and most Soul ^umbling Sense of their Vileness just upon
their Entrance into His Work, which wonderfully prepares them, for it, and His
M^rcy in it. So in Isa. 6.5 The Prophet Cries out, Woe is me! I am undone! A man
of Unclean Lips etc. I shall not therefore go about to diminish your
apprehensions, and sense of greatest Unwor^hiness of any part of the Lords
W^rk, and much more of so great and extraordinary a part of it; but Instructing
you unto highest adm^rations at His Gr^^e to you therein, shall only; Remember
you of what the Great Apostle of the Gentiles said in his own case: Ephesians. 3.8.
Unto me, who am LESS THAN THE LEAST of all Saints, is this Grace given, that I
should Preach among the Gentiles the Unsearchable Riches of CHRIST.

3 But, you will say, some Object against the Divine and Orderly Call and
Mission of One of you, because he carries Brethren with him. Unto which I might
Answer, that we find not only Evangelists, but also Messengers of Churches, of
the Fraternity, attending such as were sent forth upon such Work of old, and
that the Fathers of New England did so much in England, in order to the Work of
Christ here, as may allow me to say in this Case, that that man now varys a
large point from the wisdom of the Wisest, that Sets his Heart to every word
that is spoken. Eccles. 7.21. YOU well know, what Importunity was used with our
Ministers, by Letters, and otherwise* that both a Minister should be Sent to
those Remote Places, and that He should be here Ordained also: Sundry Godly
Christians there, being both prepared for, and longing after the Enjoyment of
All the Edifying Ordinances of God; there being withal in all that Country
neither Ordained Minister, nor any Church, in full Gospel Order, and so neither
Imposition of the Hands of the Presbytery, nor Donation of the Right Hand of
Fellowship to be expected there, or from any Place, much nearer to them tha^
our selves. And some of YOU can tell, how often, our Reverend Brother was
offered Ordination to this Work of Christ, in f^ro Ecclesiastico, in a Way, not
disagreeable to what we find in Acts 13.2, 3. whereunto many Churches in the
Neighborhood, might also have been Concurring and Assisting. But this being a
Rarity, not easily to be justified from preceding Examples in New England,
where there has been seldom any Occasion to think of the Ordination of a
Minister, until by some time of Preaching, and Conversing with Them, His
Doctrine, Abilities and Conversation, (besides good Testimony from Ministers
and Christians, in the Vicinity) come to be Approved by the Congregation
themselves, over whom He is to be the Overseer, and He be by Them, or the most
of Them, E^ected ^o be their Pastor or Teacher. A Practice Warranted by Acts 6
^ -- 6. As also by Acts 14.23. The Original word there used, signifying
O^dination not without but by and with the Suff^age of many, manifested by
lifting up of Hands; Authors, both Sacred and Profane among the Graecians,
always using that word ^n such a Sense (as the Learned Cartwright has
Elaborately and Unanswerably Evinced*) according to the proper N^tation
thereof: This (I say) being a (...) here, our Brother modestly Declined it,
though the Extraordinariness of the Case seemed to allow, yea, require the
same. And his Aversion to it being known unto Sundry Brethren of our Churches,
[(...) when they were in those Remote Parts met with such Solicitations from
some Godly Inhabitants there (whose Souls longed for more Communion of Saints,
and for all Gods Holy Ordinances, but were loath to remove from that Place, if
they might obtain the same there) as prevailed upon them to resolve to return
to them, and take up their settled Abo^d among them] They being now Bound
thither, desired to Gather into a Church, that so a Minister might be Ordained
in the ordinary Way, whom they might carry with them thither: But these being
too Few, some Others Influenced (as I cannot but believe) by the Holy Spirit of
God, with a deep Concernment of Spirit, least That which they though^^ to be
the Work of God, should fall to the Ground, for want of two or three Hands
more, offered their Conjunction and Assi^tance, All of them obtaining Letters
of Dismission from their respective Churches unto so good a work, full of
Complacency and Benedicti^n. These therefore having improved what advantages
the time would allow, for the proving of one another both Gifts and Graces, and
peculiarly their intended Pastors, etc It is come to this, That a Godly
Minister has been by most Public and Solemn Ordination Separated to, and Sent
forth upon the Service of the Gospel and Kingdom of the Son of God, advantaged
with the Attendance, Submission and Assistance of sundry Godly Brethren, who
acknowledge Him as their Pastor in the Lord. What is there, abating Humane
Weakness, in all this, that the Godly will condemn, or that is Disagreeable to
the Holy Word of God? But it is Objected, that the Brethren aim not at the
promoting of Christ's Glory and Kingdom, but only or mainly at Secular
Advantages. To this I Reply: If Suspicion may make Guilty, who can be Innocent?
not to say how Improbable the Suspicion is as to some of them who are not
likely to mend their Estates in diverse years by their Removal, they being so
comfortably Seated here. Moreover, if men must ^ver be Discouraged from doing
what they are well satisfied is Right and Good, because they have deceitful
Hearts, and because irregular aims and thoughts (notwithstanding all their
watchfulness) will sometimes (to their sorrow and self-loathing for them) crowd
in: Then farewell all well Doing in the World: For with Rust, and Dross
sufficien^ to employ our own (...), and GODS Furnace too, all our Lives long,
is our most Golden Sincerity in this World alloyed; and, Who can understand his
own Errors? Besides that, they have solemnly Professed, that Religion is chief
in their Eye, which they would not lose for all the World, but would firstly
promote in their Removal, and not their own Estates, except subordinately,
subserviently, and secondarily thereunto: And as far as they can understand
their own deceitful hearts (that though renewed, yet in this World, can be so
but in part) contrary and sinister Designs, and Desires, they Know of none,
they A^low of none* Nor have they yet been Left of God, (so great has been His
M^rcy toward Them) to Forfeit their Credit, so as to deserve that they should
not be Believed. I beseech you therefore, My Brethren, to Suspect your own
Hearts, and to Charge and Judge your selves, as much as you can, yet (...)
^iscouraged, if by others you chance to be Overcharged.

4 But you will say, Others of Us are not Ordained, Is Our Ca^^ clear? Answ If
God furnish men with Ministerial Gifts and Grace discerned and approved by the
Spirits of the Prophets, and with an Holy Propensity of Mind, and an humble
self-dedication unto the Work of the Ministry in general, and if the best
advice that can be had after solemn seeking of God, carry them to such a People
in particular, who accept them in the Lord, and desire the Continuance of their
Godly Labors among Them, I believe such men are Sent of God and Christ to such
a People; and as I never yet saw, so I am apt to think I never shall, any solid
Confutation of the Scriptures and Arguments produced by my Predecessor in this
Church, viz Your Judicious Teacher now with God, the very Reverend and Aged,
Mr. Richard Mather, in his Printed Answer to Mr. Rutherford. Now all this may
be said concerning You, and something more, namely that you being present at
Private Meetings of Ministers, for Fasting and Prayers (not to mention the
frequent Public Prayers that are made on your behalf) have been most solemnly
Presented before the Lord for this Service of His Kingdom in many ardent
Supplications for His Assistance, and Acceptance therein. Obj* But do we not
rea^ in the Works of the Learned Clarkson, that Laborious Searcher into
Antiquity, that for the first Three Hundred Years after Christ's Ascension,
every single Congregation though consisting but of twenty Souls, or under, had
an Ordained Bishop, then so called more usually than Pastor, and among the
copious Instances given, few or none of Ministers any where in all the World
that were not Ordained Bishops, though in the Smallest Places. Answ. If in the
Primitive Times, Deacons must first be proved before Their Installment into,
and Instatement in their Office and Work, then much more Ministers, and
doubtless the Primitive Church allowed some to Preach as Probationers; though
we meet not with multitudes of Instances: I know the extreme strictness and
caution of the Churches of the Reformation in France, in this matter, who allow
not an Unordained Probationer to Preach, except an Ordained Minister be present
to give a word of Exhortation after he has Done, which is needless as to your
selves; yet notwithstanding what has been mentioned, I could rejoice, if some
further steps were taken, and I hope in Gods good time it shall be so. If you
find Converts in the Places you are going un^o* I hope you will hasten them
into Church Estate as fast as you can, that You may (if God incline your hearts
to settle with them) or some Others, be Ordained to the Work of Christ among
Them.

Yet again, If you say, are any of us Called of God to live without any of the
Ordinances of God, and so to Jeopard our own Souls: I pray Read, Rom 9.3. Ezekiel.
11.16. Dan. 12 3. Jam 5 19. Or, if you say, we want our Friends, look upon Mark
10.29, 30.

III. But the Times are Apostatick rather than Apostolic; Pride budding,
Faction in Fashion, Strife Rife, with Stoutness, Rashness, Harshness, Slander,
Scorning among too many; once Holiness was on Tavern Pots and Trooping Bridles,
Z^ch. 14 20, 21. Now, how much Lewdness! Most are sound in Profession, yet as
to Practice of Godliness with not a few; the very Form is going after the
Power, etc. For Answer, Read Hag. 2.13, 14. with Hag. 1.13. All Is Unclean, yet
Work, and I Will be with you: Read also Romans 11.1^.

Obj. But we should have been Earlier.

Answ. Beware of Further Guilt, by letting slip the Present Time: Take the
Night, if the Day be lost: Luke ^1.5 -- 8. In the Night we have seen the Bow in
the Cloud. Object. But Discontented People will Remove if we Go. Answ So if you
Stay also: But Woe to us, if we ^lack for this Peril. Esther 4.11.14. Because
some Crumbs go awry, shall we Lose the whole Meal of Mercy? But the Times are
Troublous* Yet see Dan 9 25. The Apostles also put forth in a Tempest, having
Wind and Tide against them. Lastly, Object not Events; to Paul and You alike
Uncertain, Acts 20.22. Run the 'venture. 2 Samuel 10*12. Know, There is something
worth the Seeking, if GOD Lights the Candle Luke 15 8. Your Pains is well Paid,
with the Gain of One Soul* Jam. 5.20. If you Convert None that are Fallen, you
have your Hire, If you Confirm those that Stand* Ephesians 4.12, 13. However, Your
Work will Retu^^ into Your own Bosom. Psalm. 35.13. And Despair not of Supply.
GOD, not Man, maintains His Ministers, though by Man Read Luke 22.^5. Psalm.
34.9, 10. Obj. How shall we do, if Sincere Saints of other Persuasions offer
themselves? Ans. If found in main Points and if they will not disturb you in
your way, Recei^^ them, Romans 14.1. Luke 9 49, 50. Did not Godly Father (...)
live and die in the Communion of this Church of Dorchester: although an
Episcopal m^n invariably? And was it not (...) his and our Edification.

Obj. But the Gospel like the Sea, what (...) Gains in one place, it loses in
another: Are you in New England, willing to part with the Gospel?

Answ. This was the Objection and Scandal of the Jews of old. But we rather
hope for lift from the Dead by the Emulation, Romans 11.14, 15

Obj. We would desire to be Lions, if the Glory of God called us so to be* and
nescit remeare* Loc. Prove. 30* 30^ But it is not in us, we are born as the wild
Ass Colt, Job 11.12.

Answ. Your Humility is to be Commended, yet (in a sense) The Lord may have
NEED of you, Luke 19.30 -- 33. and may Honor you if you will let him Ride you
whither He pleases. Yea, the weak and foolish shall be as David also Zech.
12.8.

Obj. But had not God raised up of the Sons of Israel [and of New-England] to
be Prophets [ Amos 2.11.] In the Schools of the Prophets at Bethel, and
Jericho, (2 King. 2.3, 5. 1 King 18.4. 1 Samuel 19.20. He had not had Seven
Thousand Knees that had not Bowed to Baal there, notwithstanding all the Sons
of the Prophets in Judah hardby. And so Uninviting unto Strangers should your
poor Maintenance in New England have been, that One Fifty of your Congregations
would have been without a Learned, Able, Godly Ministry, had you depended
wholly on Other Countries for Supply, and so would have soon Degenerated, and
so we fear Our Children will do. Ans. Be Content to Creep before you F^y: Yet
Lay Foundations for Great Matters in your day of Small things. Less than Eighty
Pounds Per Annum, in Money, would have more than bought New England Presidents
Salary, allowed him by ^he Country for many years; yet God gave us an
Invaluable Man, and Oh what a Blessing with Him! You that go to Remote Parts
will be most happily Situated to spread Religion in the American Islands and
Continent. If Schools of Learning fundamentally nec^ssary, to the Proparation
of Godliness forward to the Nations and down-ward to Posterity, will not agree
with the Government and People there; I charge you in the Name of God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, and as you have any regard to the Souls of your Posterity
(after that you have labored with them, what you can for their Good) ^o Return
to us again. However, Despair not, 'ti^l you have made the Trial. To Conclude
then, Trust GOD; Urge Man, and at it again and again; Watch much; Guard well;
Pray hard and never give in; Work hard and never be Weary; Ly Low, and look
High; be upright though you hear Hypocrites for it; rather Die in Gods cause,
than hear Cowards; Walk Closely with CHRIST; Sow your s^ed in Tears: Look hard
for Trials; and Hope to the End; Propagate what Good you have seen or gotten
with Us, but leave Our Vices, behind you. Provoke not the Spaniard; Debauch not
the Indians with Drink; be Just to all men; and be sure you Divide not one from
another, or from your Worthy Pastor. Sacrifice the World to Religion evermore;
and be of Public Spirits: Eye Christ's Second Coming, as much as Ancient
Believers did His First, and long for it: Do all you do, humbly and valiantly
in the Name of the Son of God: and often say one to another as Joab to his
Brother: 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of Good courage and let us play the men, for our
Pe^p^e, and for the Citys of our God; and the LORD do that which seems Him
Good.

Now the LORD the G^d of our Fathers, and New Englands God be with you for
Ever. Farewell Dear Brethren in the Lord, and be sure you Pray for us: and God
forbid that we should SIN against the LORD in Ceasing to Pray for You, 1 Samuel
12.23. Man is nothing in GODS Work, and of himself can do Nothing, but what is
worse than Nothing and will come to Nothing or worse: Set we then the LORD on
work, by humble Prayer, that the LORD may be All in All. Now the Good Lord do
away with His own most Precious Blood, the Imperfections and Infirmities in
this present Service, attending a poor Sinful Worm, that knows but in part and
Prophecys but in part, and in a very small part too; and make His own Word
however, the Power of God to Your Salvations; for His own Names Sake. AMEN.

Errata. P. 14. l. 31. r. too p 43. l. 23. r. for them

Memorandum. Unto the Discourse, uttered in Public, upon this Text, some what
above a year ago, some Addition in these Printed Sheets, is made out of a
Sermon Preached in Private some time since, unto a Society of Christians,
keeping a Day of Prayer on the behalf of some of their Society, that were at
that time, upon their Removal from them.

To fill up the Vacant Pages the following POEMS, formerly Composed, are here
suffixed*

A POEM. Upon the Triumphant TRANSLATION of a Mother in Our ISRAEL, Viz. Mrs.
ANNE ELIOT. From This Life to a Better. on March 24 th 1687. Aetatis Suae. 84*
ALL Hallelujahs, Oh ye Heavenly Quires,
Ye Powers, ye Winged and Immortal Fires!
Redouble to the Highest ONE:
Here Is Joy, to your Eternal Jubilee
Advanced, by th'New come welcome Company
Of a B^ight Soul, but lately flown.
Congratulate
Eternally,
With Sacred Symphony,
Her happy State
Hail! Happy S^ul* In Luster excellent
Transcending far the Starry Firmament,
Which is thy Footstool now become:
With all the World, America shall We,
For to Produce thy Peer: Now cast thine Eye
All round about that Spacious Room,
None shall thou see
Of Best Women,
Much more Triumphant than
Thy self to be
Hail! Thou Sagacious and Adventurous Soul!
Hail, (...)! Created to Control
Weak Nature's Foes, and t'take her part,
The King of Terrors, Thou, ('till the Command
Irrevocable came to Stay thy Hand,)
Did often Repel, by thy Choice Art:
By High Decree,
Long did thou stand
An Atlas, in Heaven's Hand
To the World to be.
All Halle^ujahs to His bounteous Care,
That such a Peerless Consort did Prepare
For HIM, whom Sacred Things with^held
From Seculars; Who was to Gospellize,
And Preach Redemption to GODS Enemies
Beyound all Memory, Rebelled:
For his sake, sure,
Thine Aged Life
It did with Death in Strife
So long endure.
Heaven's Richest Spices, Choicest Graces were*
[ Queen Esther like,] allotted to Thy Share,
For to Prepare Thee for thy KING:
Thee, to Pay Tab^e, for Full Recompense,
With Interest, for all thy Vast Expense,
Angels, on Wings of Grace, strait, bring:
As Pha^tiel,
Thy CONSORT Dear
Mourning, Thee follow'th near,
To bid FAREWELL.
I. D.

A POEM. To the Blessed MEMORY of the Venerable Mr. JOHN ELIOT, TEACHER to the
Church of CHRIST in Roxbury, and a PROPAGATOR of the Gospel to the Indians in
N-England. Who rested from his Labors, May, 20. Anno Dom. 1690. Aetatis Suae.
86.
SHall ELIOT slip away? and not his Sons
Spy and Regret it, with Athletick Groans?
None Cry Alarm, when Horse and Chariots taken?
None Feel, when Israel's weal's Foundation's shaken?
Lately, a stately Stone plucked out; n^ne 'spy it?
Nor run to stop the woeful Breach made by it?
Where Is sweet Tongue'd David, sad Song'd Jeremiah,
Jon'than to 'wail, to Elegize Josiah?
Where Is matchless Moses's Muse? Had I his Staff,
I Would find one Grave, and 'Grave one Epitaph.
English and Indian Work, he did so well,
Define we cannot, which did which excel*
Pagans, This Paul converts; Peter does use
His Talents chiefly to confirm the Jews.
Paul to Barbarians, own's Himself a Debtor;
Our John a brave Divine, T'Himself, no better
Dares supererrogate, in the vast Cost
And Pains, expended to Reduce the lost.
A brave Divine, said I? I had not mist,
Sure, had I Styled Him an Evangelist.
To Trace their Pagan Genealogies
Was not his Task, yet would his curious Eyes
Maugre oblivions Dust, 'ven^ure to scan
At least by guess, These hideous Wrecks of Man:
And thought, he trackt, to Palestina's Strand*
How e're; He was resolved, to the Holy Land
Them to reduce; [might Heaven a Moses make him]
Nor did their barbarous Heathenism shake him.
The Eternal Mind in Mortal Airs, never blew
Unformed Blast; His Sovereign Sha^ms yet flew
On Syri^c Wings; His Gentleness ^quips
His Sacred Chariot with Chaldean Chips:
Three Other, His own Mother Tongue b^side*
Upon His Pascal Cross, He Sanctified*
His Tharsian-bred Apostle don't refuse
To sharp his Tools with Philistines, to use
Greek Po^ts, cited to the Sacred Bar,
TO wait on Effata's more Oracular.
Like Hercules toils ELIOT, lest that He
Should to Barbarians, a Barbarian be.
Since Babel's Traitorous Tower was Thundersmit,
By Heavens In^aged Ire, and fell, and split
One Tongue into a Thousand Shivers, none
Can tell the Wounds, which this one W^ alone,
Has more than scarr'd the World with; next the Expulsion
At first from Paradise, and the next Convulsion
In Grandsire Japheth's Time, no Storm before,
The Universal World e're deluged more:
But now, through matchless Grace, to Eliot's given
The Key t'expel what locked men out of Heaven.
His Tongue sails right, with Indian Tempest tossed;
Puts in for Peter's Plea, at Pentecost.
The Ambassador unto Them dares prefer
Offers of CHRIST, without Interpreter.
The Incarnate Furys, straitway from the Pit
Of Darkness worse than Egypts, Rise, and Spit
On all their Demons, whilst their Breast and Brow
They to the LORD, and to His Baptist vow.
One Testament Seventy Interpreters
Translate to Greek Antiquity avers;
Both Testaments, yet ELIOT alone
Converts into the Indian Tongue and Tone;
Abel, though dead, yet speaks, in one Tongue more;
Isa^s, Apollo's Eloquence, before,
Never Rode in such a Chariot: Luke Physician,
('Though skilled in Pulse,) would scarce tell the Condition
Of His own Gospel: Pau^, with his much Learning
Would here be Posed: --
For 'though to many Regions He did pass,
Yet no West-Indian Antiquary was.
Sir Thomas Eliot was Great Britains Glory:
Our Saint shall have a Chronicle in Ages Story:
Great XAVIER brings the Crucifix and Libel,
To Indian Souls, of Masses; Ours, the Bible.
Sanctius, for this, owns Him a Tutelary:
Calls on him and him joins with GOD and Mary:
Eliot before such cursed Adoration,
Would choose much rather, an Annihilation.
Yet made His Works before men's Eyes to shine,
That they might Glorify the Name Divine,
The Indian-Work lay greatly on his Heart;
Until the Last, when He and That mu^^ part.
They parted not without most solemn Blessing,
While Clouds thereon were to his Soul Distressing*
He dies; His Work, when Time Dies shall survive;
'Tho' Dead, yet speaks, that the Indian Work may Live,
And ^o's Sucessors does good Counsel give*
'Address (I pray) our (...) for good Orders,
'To Civilize the Heathen in our Borders*
' Virtue must turn into Necessity;
'O^ this brave Work, will in its Urn still lie.
''Till Agriculture, and Cohabitation,
'Come under full Constrain^ and Regulation,
'Much you would do, you will find Impracticable,
'And much you do will prove Unprofitable*
'In common Lands that lie unfenc'd you know
'The Husbandman, in vain does plow and sow:
'We hope in vain, the Pla^^ of Grace shall thrive
'In Forests, where Civi^i^y cannot Live.
'In English Towns, when they their Months do spend,
'Make Them, Gods Worship with us, to attend.
'Whilst I used (as you must) sharp Discipline,
'The saving Gains were Theirs, the Pains were mine*
'Their Tender Sons to Sacred Learnings Throne
'None can advance, but such Divines alone,
'As are most Expert in their Dialect,
'If Teaching in their own Tongue we respect:
'Such Youths, (if GOD vouchsafe to Sanctify
'The^^ ^tudious minds) the sacred Ours may Ply,
'Each ^^^bath too, through Starry Arches bring,
' Their C^mmon Homage to our Mighty King.
'Look well to the Vprising Nursery:
'You know full well, none more for Schools than I
'To drown their Woes, some drown their Wits, and All
'Their Common Grace: Correct that Fault you shall.
'If you be Instant, only out of Season,
'Your Hope soars out of sight of all my Reason,
'If you expect, (while Lords Days hold their Station)
'To Lecture them, on Weekdays, to Salvation.
'Is it Impossible to make a Purse,
'T' Invite a Lecturer, in Turns, to Nurse
'Your English Flocks, That those may have good Dressing
'That have most need, upon the Day of Blessing
'Their Indian Teachers are but Weak; I Wiss;
'Their Preaching, by their Hearers, slighted is:
'Take then this Way, to readvance the Standard
Of H^liness, by late backslidings Slandered.
'Let fire-hot Zeal, boil in your thirsty Veins,
'To save poor Cai^iffs from E^ernal Pains
'Our Ancient Heroes, with their English Prayers
'Did edify Their Souls; yet then, such Airs
'Were Unintelligible, more by far,
'Than now adays, (si^ce long Converse) they are
'Call many English Suppliants: Let the^ Kneel,
'With Them and for Them; for their saving Weal.
'Joyn hand in hand: Help up the Weak, Heavens Stairs:
' Salvation, serves in pay of Joined Prayers
'The Friends of Christ, and Souls, Let (...) mute
'In any Tongue, that can GODS Throne salute:
'FAST with and for Them also twice a Year,
''Twill show, and bring their Resurrection near.
'May GOD in Heaven, and may poor Heathens see
'That much affected, and concerned All be:
' Christ's Intercessions may they have rebound,
'Echo'd from hence, 'Twill to their Weal redound
'(Grand Usurer) I, never gave Heaven a Mite
'But gained, and gathered, Thousand Mil^ions by it
'Never Regret ( Brave Hearts!) your vast Expense
'Of Time and Pains: Mark well the Difference
''Twixt Indian Trade^s and their Teachers made;
'What Blessings These, what Blastings Those Inv^de
' Those often are annoyed with mischiefs, whiles
' These do enjoy most sw^et Celestial smiles.
His Counsels, we have done with; And return,
'^o close the Ashes of his Sacred Vrn.
When Pious Grandsir lately came to visit
This Saint, then at Heaven's Gate, And said, How is it?
^uch was his sense, he sagely made reply,
I am Afraid: But not afraid to Die:
Sir! Thankful Joy, My Motto is, (Quoth He)
Unto Another; And I Joy to see
What Lights Christ sets in's Churches, and that still
GOD has His Folk, that do His Temples fill.
How solemnly He Blessed 'em, some can tell;
Like Paul; Begging, mean while; their Prayers as well:
And may they Blessed be! May they inherit,
A Double Portion of Elijah's Spirit.
On ^olden Letters of His Name I mused;
JOHN, distilled Honey; ELIOT, Toil produced:
Pains bring in gains; for sweets, be sweats: thus frau't
With richest Lading, To His Port, He Is brought.
This Vessel yet of Honor, had not been
So soon seen under Sail, Had not our Sin
Deserved and Provoked such a sign
Of Woe descending from the Wrath Divine.
This b^urs the Trophy^ of our New Elections,
With Interlinements o^ sad Interjections.
Indians! Your Hearts are Marble, if Distress*
Seize you not, for Unprofitableness.
Fear you not Wrath poo^ Souls! will you not grieve
The Ambassador of Peace ha^ taken his Leave.
He Loved your Nation dearly; did He not?
(Adding your Language to the Polyglott;)
In ways unpar^llell'd, his strange Compassion
Drew Soul and Substance out, for your Salvation.
Heavens Fiery Balls, Flames, Smoke and Thundering Shot
And Bloody D^ops, (late Prodigies) are not
More signal than this Death, at such a seaso^d
Such was Meth^selah's: and we have Reason,
May we have Grace, to repent the Provocation,
With speed, that cries aloud for D^solation.
Yet Muse! Don't overgroan^ thy Fathers Glee
In's reimbraced Colleague should with Thee,
Advance new Sonnets to His Jubilee
Indulcify'd, sweet ELIOT by Thee.
I. D.

FINIS.

