By His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same, etc. A PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS Several of his Majesty's Subjects have of late years departed from the
Allegiance they owe unto His M^je^ty, and have thereupon Confederated together,
and in Hostile manner have fitted out Ships and Vessels of War, under pretense
of going against the French, His Majesty's late Enemies, but instead thereof
they have Roved in their said Vessels unto the Seas beyond the Cape of Good
Hope, and upon the said Seas have Committed several Pyracyes and Robberies upon
the Subjects of Foreign Princes and States in Amity with His Majesty, to the
great Discouragement of Trade, and to the open breach of such Treaties of Peace
as have been made between His Majesty and his Allies. And whereas his most
Excellent Majesty, upon the Consideration of the good of His Subjects, and for
the Security of Trade, has thought fit to signify unto me his Royal Will and
Pleasure, by his Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury, His Majesty's Principal
Secretary of State, That all Pirates and Sea Rovers that shall come within the
Jurisdiction of this Province, should be Suppressed, and that Effectual care
might be taken to Arrest, Seize and secure the Ships, Persons and Effects of
all such Pirates and Sea Rovers, in order to the bringing of them to due
punishment, as the Laws in such Cases do direct. And to the End that H^s
Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure may be the better and the more
Effectually Executed, I have therefore thought fit, by and with the Advice of
His Majesty's Council, strictly to Charge and Command all Ju^tices, Sheriffs
and other Commission Officers, in their several Precincts within this Province,
upon his or their Knowledge or Notice given, That any Privateer, Pyrate or
other Persons suspected to be upon any Unlawful Design, are kept and concealed
in any place within their respective Precincts, that they thereupon issue their
Warrants to se^ze, apprehend and carry such Persons to the common Goal of their
respective Precincts, where they are to rema^n until they be from thence
d^scharged by due course of Law. And all others His Majesty's Liege Subjects
are hereby strictly Required to be aiding and assisting to the Justices,
Sheriffs, and other Commi^sion Officers in their several Precincts acc^rdingly,
as they will answer the contrary at their Peril.

Provided always, That nothing herein mentioned shall be construed to extend
unto any Person or Persons that have surrendered themselves and obtained
Protections from the late Governor, until His Majesty's Pleasure be further
known, any thing contained herein to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Given at Fort William Henry the Nineth Day of May, School. and in the Tenth Year
of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord, WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Bellomont.

God Save the KING.
Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, in the City of New York, School.


